Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 953?960,
MIT, Massachusetts, USA, 9-11 October 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
 An approach for generating personalized views from normalized 
electronic dictionaries : A practical experiment on                      
Arabic language 
 
Aida Khemakhem  
MIRACL Laboratory            
FSEGS, B.P. 1088,                     
3018 Sfax, Tunisia 
khemakhem.aida@ 
gmail.com 
Bilel Gargouri 
MIRACL Laboratory         
FSEGS, B.P. 1088,      
3018 Sfax, Tunisia 
bilel.gargouri@ 
fsegs.rnu.tn 
Abdelmajid Ben Hamadou 
MIRACL Laboratory  
ISIMS, Cit? Ons,                                     
3021 Sfax, Tunisia 
abdelmajid.benhamadou 
@isimsf.rnu.tn 
  
     
 
 
Abstract 
Electronic dictionaries covering all natural 
language levels are very relevant for the hu-
man use as well as for the automatic 
processing use, namely those constructed 
with respect to international standards. Such 
dictionaries are characterized by a complex 
structure and an important access time when 
using a querying system. However, the need 
of a user is generally limited to a part of such 
a dictionary according to his domain and ex-
pertise level which corresponds to a specia-
lized dictionary. Given the importance of 
managing a unified dictionary and consider-
ing the personalized needs of users, we pro-
pose an approach for generating personalized 
views starting from a normalized dictionary 
with respect to Lexical Markup Framework 
LMF-ISO 24613 norm. This approach pro-
vides the re-use of already defined views for 
a community of users by managing their pro-
files information and promoting the materia-
lization of the generated views. It is com-
posed of four main steps: (i) the projection of 
data categories controlled by a set of con-
straints (related to the user?s profiles), (ii) the 
selection of values with consistency check-
ing, (iii) the automatic generation of the 
query?s model and finally, (iv) the refinement 
of the view. The proposed approach was con-
solidated by carrying out an experiment on an 
LMF normalized Arabic dictionary. 
1 Introduction 
Electronic dictionaries are very useful in nowa-
days society, with the globalization and the in-
crease of world communication and exchanges. 
There are clearly identified needs of dictionaries 
for human use as well as for automatic processing 
use.  
Given the importance of having recourse to 
standards when constructing such lexical re-
sources in order to promote the reuse and the fu-
sion, the standardization committee ISO 
TC37/SC4 has recently validated the Lexical 
Markup Framework norm (LMF) project under 
the standard ISO 24 613 (Francopoulo and George 
2008). LMF provides a common and shared repre-
sentation of lexical objects that allows for the en-
coding of rich linguistic information, including 
among others morphological, syntactic, and se-
mantic aspects. The LMF proposal is distin-
guished by the separate management of the hierar-
chical data structure (meta-model) and elementary 
linguistic descriptors (data categories) which pro-
motes to cover several languages. 
A normalized dictionary covers wide areas that 
include all lexical information of a given language 
and which are useful both for human use and for 
Natural Language Processing use in accordance 
with the kind of the user (linguist, lexicographer, 
developer,  etc.),  the level of the user (learner, 
expert, etc.) and the domain of the use (linguistic, 
medicine, biology, etc.).  These dictionaries are 
characterized by a complex structure that supports 
the richness of natural languages. Therefore, deal-
ing with a unique and complete dictionary is well 
for the manage task.  However, such dictionaries 
are large and can be time consuming when query-
ing their contents especially on the web.  Moreo-
ver, displaying all details when some of which are 
not useful for the field of the query research is a 
953
nuisance for the user. So, it will be interesting to 
reduce the displayed details according to the do-
main or to the expertise level of the user by gene-
rating personalized views (virtual or materialized) 
in order to appropriate the use of such dictionaries 
to the user needs. 
The idea of creating document views is not a 
new concept but applying it on LMF normalized 
dictionaries is a new one. Indeed, it has been some 
attempts for dictionary creating in accordance to 
the TEI consortium (V?ronis and Ide 1996) but the 
problem was the fact that created textual views 
(corresponding to the surface structure) or data 
base views (corresponding to the deep structure) 
were not customized. Others propositions are very 
interesting but they concern the ontology domain 
when dealing with the concept of point of view 
(Corby and al 2005).   
In this paper, we propose an approach that favors 
the use of normalized dictionaries by generating 
virtual/materialized personalized views. This ap-
proach is based on the profiles information asso-
ciated to user?s community which helps to retrieve 
already defined views stored in a library of views. 
For the illustration, we use an Arabic LMF norma-
lized dictionary (Baccar and al. 2008, Khemak-
hem and al., 2009) developed in the framework of 
an Arabic project supervised by the ALECSO 
(The Arab League Educational, Cultural and 
Scientific Organization) and founded by the Uni-
versity of King Abdul-Aziz in the Kingdom of 
Saudi Arabia1 . An environment supporting the 
proposed approach was implemented. At present, 
it concerns the Arabic language.   
The present paper is outlined as follows. We will 
start by giving an overview of projects that use 
LMF notably for the construction and the exploi-
tation of electronic dictionaries. Then, we will 
present the foundation of the proposed approach 
related to the profile and the view concepts. After 
that, we will explain the different steps of the 
view?s generating approach. Finally, we will bring 
back the experimentation that we carried out on a 
normalized Arabic dictionary using the proposed 
approach. 
2 State of the art of projects using LMF 
After the emergence of LMF, some projects were 
launched in order to construct or exploit electronic 
                                                   
1 www.almuajam.org 
dictionaries in accordance with this norm. Among 
others we note LEXUS (Kirsch 2005) (Kemps-
Snijders and al 2006), LIRICS (LIRICS 2005) and 
LMF-QL (Ben Abderrahmen and al 2007). All 
these labors have been recourse to Web service 
technology that favors to invoke, locally or afar, 
appropriate services for the management or the 
exploitation of a normalized dictionary. 
LEXUS offers an interface permitting to the user 
to define formats of lexical bases with a perspec-
tive to enable the construction of lexical bases ac-
cording to the LMF model. However, it does not 
allow the verification of the compliance between 
the model and the norm. 
LIRICS proposes some APIs that focus especial-
ly on the management of lexical data base. These 
APIs offer the possibility to work on the structure 
of the LMF base by adding, modifying or deleting 
components of LMF model. However, there is no 
interface which facilitates the use of these APIs. 
LMF-QL provides Web services to be used 
while developing lingware systems. These servic-
es offer the exploitation of a normalized lexical 
base without having any piece of information 
about its content and its structure. The results of 
these services may be personalized dictionaries 
given in an XML format. However, it covers only 
the morphological level.   
Concerning the construction of personalized dic-
tionaries using the works mentioned above, we 
can notice that the user must have an idea about 
the content of the desired dictionary and its struc-
ture. He must also have acquaintances with que-
ries generation to satisfy his requirements. 
Finally, we note an absence of works dealing 
with the generation of views starting from LMF 
standardized dictionary. 
3 Foundation of the approach 
An electronic dictionary can be used by many us-
ers who have different requirements. Indeed, by 
being a language learner, a researcher in linguis-
tics or a teacher?s, needs and uses are not the 
same. Therefore, it will be better to have a tool 
(editor) allowing generating a suitable view. The 
making of a view of the dictionary might be diffi-
cult for some kinds of users, so the recourse to 
user profiles may facilitate this task. One can note 
that the user profile is very important to guide the 
user through the retrieval and the reuse of existent 
views corresponding to his profile. 
954
3.1 A user profile definition 
Generally, all features characterizing a user or a 
group of users can be grouped under the term of a 
user profile. For electronic dictionaries, a user 
profile is a dataset that concerns a community of 
users of the dictionary. 
Every profile is characterized by a category, a lev-
el of expertise and a field. Indeed, we classify the 
views of the dictionary according to a profile that 
is based on a selection of these three criteria. The 
formal representation of a profile is the following: 
       P : < K, L, F> 
K: the kind of user: lexicographer, linguist, ling-
ware system developer, etc. 
L: the level of the expertise: beginner, student, 
expert, etc. 
F: the field of user: medicine, sport, biology, gen-
eral, etc.   
3.2 A View definition 
A view of a dictionary is a synthesis of a dictio-
nary interrogation query. We can consider it as a 
specialized or lexical dictionary, supported by a 
query. 
A dictionary view allows to filter some lexico-
graphic information and to hide others that are 
useless for some users. 
The formal representation of a view: 
       View : < D, P, C > 
D: dictionary: each view is specific to a norma-
lized dictionary.  
P: profile of the view (see previous section). 
C: it is a set of properties which characterizes the 
model of the view. Each property has the follow-
ing representation:  
            C : <A, V, W> 
A: attribute is a simple representation of a charac-
teristic model. This characteristic may be a class 
(Lemma, Sense?), a feature (definition, pos, ge-
nre,?) or a relationship (RelatedForm, SenseRe-
lation?) as indicated in Figure 3. 
V: value: each attribute can have a set of values. 
For example, the values verb and noun for the 
attribute POS (Part Of Speech). 
W: weight of a property. It may take the values 0 
or 1. 
? If the weight equals to 0, then this proper-
ty is mandatory only for part of the lexical 
entry. 
? If the weight equals to 1, then this proper-
ty is mandatory for each lexical entry of this 
view. 
3.3 Different types of views 
There are two types of views: 
? Virtual view: the results of this view are 
calculated upon request. In this case, inter-
rogating queries of this view might generate 
a composed query that interrogates directly 
the principal dictionary (underlying). 
? Materialized view (physical): a physical 
copy faithful to the view definition which is 
stored and maintained. 
4 Proposed approach 
In this section we describe the proposed approach 
through the detail that we will give for each one of 
its four steps. These steps are illustrated in Figure 
1.   
? Projection of the view model: includes the 
specification of data categories (linguistic in-
formation), controlled by constraints in order 
to build a suitable normalized and valid mod-
el. It can be started by already existing pro-
files. 
? Selection and checkout of the coherence: 
concerns the specification of some values for 
data categories (DC) already specified. We 
use coherence rules to check the constancy 
knowing that there are strong dependencies 
between some DCs and values of other DCs 
(see section 4.2). 
? Automatic generation of the model and the 
query: includes the model refinement and the 
checking of constraints by priority. 
? Refinement of the view: involves the valida-
tion of a new view of dictionary, by adding 
the elements that are related to the lexical en-
tries of this view. 
  
 
955
      
Figure 1.The approach for generating personalized dictionary views. 
4.1 Projection of the view model 
The UML model of the dictionary is difficult to 
understand. So, we suggest a simpler represen-
tation which is more abstract. The choice can be 
started by already existing profiles in order to 
avoid views redundancy by the reuse of the pre-
vious ones and help users. 
a.   The specification of a profile  
A user profile is a description that corresponds 
to a user community. We use the features of 
profile to filter the DCs. Indeed, we offer to the 
user only DCs that correspond to its field and its 
level based on the weight assigned to each DC. 
We assigned these weights according to a study 
on the needs of each user level. This study is 
based on the specific documents and dictiona-
ries for each user level. By example for begin-
ner level, we studied the school books to extract 
the information (root, schema,?) needed at this 
level. 
It also facilitates and accelerates the task of 
needs specification and permits to avoid views 
redundancy. The projection phase is started by 
the specification of the user profile that requires 
the choice of its category, its level and its field. 
Then, if the user wants to consult the previous 
views of his profile, we display all the views 
associated to this profile. Otherwise, we offer 
the DCs specific to its field and its level. 
b.   Constraints    
The abstraction of the model can hides relations 
between DCs. Indeed, during their specification 
there is a risk of having views with a non valid 
R
efin
em
en
t o
f th
e 
v
iew
 
no yes 
Specification of a profile 
 
Specification of the view model 
 
Automatic generation of the DTD and 
the query 
View creation 
request 
 
virtual view 
Filter storage 
 
Generation of the new ver-
sion of the dictionary 
View filter 
 
Materialized view 
Dictionary 
Profiles 
Constraints 
Coherence 
rules 
S
electio
n
 a
n
d
   
ch
eck
 o
u
t o
f th
e           
co
h
eren
ce
 
P
ro
jectio
n
 
O
f th
e
 v
iew
 m
o
d
el 
v
iew
 
Specification of values 
 
Coherence checkout 
 
956
model. So, the DC specification must be con-
trolled by constraints rules such as: 
? If we select the field, the semantic class or 
the nature then the definition must be se-
lected. 
? If the relation between syntactic behaviors 
and senses is selected then the definition 
must be selected.  
4.2 Selection and checkout of the cohe-
rence 
Most of data categories use a list of values such 
as part-of-speech (pos), scheme, field, etc. Val-
ues specification of some DCs might influence 
the presence or the absence of the other DCs. 
For example, if the user has chosen DCs: pos, 
root, scheme, gender and number; then, he has 
fixed the value du pos =?particle? (it means that 
he needs only particles) and the value of the 
number =?singular?. In this case, we note an 
incoherence problem since the DC ?number? is 
among particles characteristics but it concerns 
nouns. In this case, we must request the user to 
rectify the specifications. The selection must 
contain a checkout phase of coherence of DCs 
specified with the already existing data in the 
dictionary. This phase is based on coherence 
rules which ensure consistency between DCs 
and the specified values. 
4.3 Automatic generation of the DTD and 
the query 
We use the Document Type Definition (DTD) 
of the LMF norm and DC specifications of the 
model to automatically generate the DTD of the 
view. We use algorithms to generate DTD ele-
ments, respecting the order of the participating 
classes and ensuring classes relations.   
The automatic generation of the query (i.e. us-
ing XQuery) involves two steps: the first one 
concern the specification of conditions for the 
selection of a lexical entry and its related infor-
mation (i.e., semantic, syntactic). The second 
step permits the definition of an XML represen-
tation of a lexical entry. This step is based on 
the projection specified by the user and the 
priority order of DCs. There are DCs that influ-
ence the presence of the lexical entry and others 
that only influence the presence of the sense. 
4.4 Refinement of the view 
The steps of this phase depend on the type of 
the view. If it?s a virtual one, then it?s necessary 
to save the query already generated. This query 
will be used during the operation of this view. If 
it?s a materialized one, then query results are a 
part of the dictionary and must be saved for the 
operation of the view. The second case may 
give us a non valid XML base, especially when 
there are two lexical entries in relation and our 
query will select one of them that have an iden-
tifier of the other entry that is not selected. We 
recall that the lexical entries may have morpho-
logical links with other lexical entries and se-
mantic links with other senses.  
Indeed, after recording query?s results, we 
move to the step of refinement. This step con-
sists to valid the new personalized dictionary, 
adding lexical entries, senses and syntactic 
frame in relation with these results. 
5 Experimentation 
5.1 The normalized Arabic dictionary 
In order to experiment our approach, we are 
going to use the normalized Arabic interactive 
dictionary containing more than 38000 lexical 
entries and developed in the framework of an 
Arabic project 2  supervised by the ALECSO. 
This dictionary is modeled according to the me-
ta-model proposed by LMF3 (ISO 24613) and 
uses data categories generated by the DCR 4 
norm (ISO 12620). The dictionary pattern is 
composed of classes selected from the kernel or 
from one of its extensions (morphological, se-
mantic, syntactic, MRD) in order to see a dic-
tionary covering most of new dictionary?s needs 
(Baccar and al 2008). Since there are many in-
formation that can be classified in multi exten-
sions in the same time, the norm?s editor have 
chosen to put them in one of these extensions. 
For this reason, we did not use only Machine 
Readable Dictionary (MRD) extension. This 
pattern valorizes derivation phenomenon in 
Arabic language and neutralizes the differences 
between lexicographical schools, ensuring lan-
guage evolution. In fact, we have considered 
                                                   
2 www.almuajam.org/ 
3 www.lexicalmarkupframework.org/ 
4 www.isocat.org/ 
957
roots (? ? ? ?k t b?), derived forms (  ????? ?kata-
ba? (write), ?????? ?k?tib? (writer)), invariable 
words ( ??? ?inna? (indeed), ????? ?hatt?? (in order)) 
and non-Arab origin words (??????????? ?computer?, 
???????????? ?internet?) as lexical entries that can have 
morphological relations (i.e., RelatedForm rela-
tion). 
In addition, this dictionary is rich with seman-
tic information (i.e., definitions, examples, sub-
ject field, semantic class) and syntactic informa-
tion (i.e., subcategorisation frame). It ensures 
the link between senses and their possible syn-
tactic behaviors. 
The Figure 2, given below, shows a part of the 
lexical entry ? ?????? ?kataba? (write) which gives 
an idea about the structure of this dictionary.
 
 
Figure 2. Example of a lexical entry of the normalized Arabic dictionary.  
In this Figure, we highlight some properties of 
the used dictionary such as: 
? The diversity of information: morphology, 
semantics, syntax, image, video, etc.  
? The sense relations (i.e., synonym) link two 
senses and not two lexical entries 
? The precision of the syntactic behavior. In-
deed, each syntactic behavior has a type; the 
particles needed an example and its defini-
tion. 
? The structure of a lexical entry varies ac-
cording to its part of speech 
5.2 Experiment of the approach 
We illustrate in this section the generation 
process of a personalized dictionary view. We 
have setup a computing system online, that al-
lows the user to make his view of the dictionary 
in the format of an interactive Web page (so 
independent of all material or software owner) 
in which he will be able to define, create and 
enhance his personal view.  
Before starting the generation of the view, the 
user must specify his profile. If the views are 
associated with this profile, we will display their 
description to reuse the existing views and to 
avoid redundancy. 
pos : part of speech 
nat : nature      inf Morp : Morphlogical piece of information 
class : class      def : definition     
field : field       expSyn : example of using a type 
exp : example for a sense    type : type of a syntactic frame 
 
 
 def 
 nat 
class 
root pos inf Morp scheme 
field 
exp 
type 
expSyn 
 
particule 
 
lemma 
958
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                             
Figure 3. Specification of the user profile.  
 
The user must set its category, its level and its 
field.  
He can select an existing view corresponding 
to its needs or he can specify its purpose with-
out using the existing. Then, he chooses the cat-
egories of data needed. Next, he can set their 
values. 
                                         
Figure 4. Representation of some categories of data and the list of values for selected DCs 
In the following Figure 5, we present the key 
information in the dictionary. We give an ex-
ample of view that includes only the schema, 
the derivational relations, sense, examples of all 
the Arabic verbs (pos = verb). Then from 38000 
lexical entries, our view has 7000 verbs and 
3000 roots i.e. only 10,000 entries. 
 
 
Figure 5. Interface for creating a view. 
In the Figure 5, the user has selected the lem-
ma, pos, schema, the derivational relations, 
etymology, sense, definition and example. For 
pos, he fixed the value of ??????? (verb). Accord-
ing to the specification of requirements, the user 
clicks the save button. The system checks the 
 
category level field 
 lemma 
 pos 
 scheme 
 related form     
 etymology 
 phonetic 
 list of pos 
 scheme 
 types of related form 
 language list  
 
959
consistency of the chosen data categories and 
values, then, it generates a query in the XQuery 
language (see Figure 6). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Example of a generated query   
 
If the user chooses a materialized view, the 
system must save the query result in the user's 
computer after refinement (add missing infor-
mation to validate the XML document). 
For the verification of results, the user must 
choose the view before starting the search in the 
dictionary. In the following Figure 7, we present 
the results of research in the view already speci-
fied in Figure 5. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Displayed results of query applied 
on a generated view. 
6 Conclusion 
The construction of specialized dictionaries is 
an old concept. However, it has not been used 
after the publication of LMF standard in spite of 
the complexity and the richness of normalized 
dictionaries. In this paper, we proposed an ap-
proach allowing the generation of specialized 
and personalized views of dictionaries accord-
ing to users? profiles in order to benefit from the 
management of a unique dictionary and give 
appropriate services.  
A Practical experiment was carried out on a 
normalized Arabic dictionary using an appro-
priate tool that permits to manage users? profiles 
and views? generation. We successfully per-
formed some empirical illustrations starting 
from the normalized dictionary.   
In the future, we will consider the experimen-
tation of the developed tool in the generation of 
various personalized views both in virtual and 
materialized versions. Also, we plan to put up 
our system on the Web. Also, we plan to expe-
riment our approach on others languages.   
References 
Baccar, F., Khemakhem, A., Gargouri, B., Haddar, 
K. and Hamadou, A.B.. 2008. LMF Standardized 
Model for the Editorial Electronic Dictionaries of 
Arabic. In Proceedings of NLPCS?08, pp. 64?73. 
Barcelona, Spain. 
Ben Abderrahmen M., Gargouri B. and Jmaiel M. 
2007. LMF-QL: A Graphical Tool to Query LMF 
Databases for NLP and Editorial Use. Book 
Chapter In: Human Language Technology. Chal-
lenges of the Information Society, Third Lan-
guage and Technology Conference, LTC 2007, 
Poznan, Poland.  
Corby O., Dieng-Kuntz R., Faron-Zucker C., Gan-
don F., Giboin A. 2005. Le moteur de recherche 
s?mantique Corese. In Proc. of the Workshop 
Raisonner le web s?mantique avec des graphes, 
AFIA platform. Nice. 
Francopoulo G. and George M. 2008. ISO/TC 37/SC 
4 N453 (N330 Rev.16), Language resource mana-
gement- Lexical markup framework (LMF). 
Kemps-Snijders M., Nederhof M.-J. and Wittenburg 
P. 2006. LEXUS, ?A web-based tool for manipu-
lating lexical resources?. In LREC 2006.  
Kirsch K. 2005. LEXUS Manual. LEXUS version 
1.0.  
LIRICS (Linguistic Infrastructure for Interoperable 
Resource and Systems). 2005. ?Guidelines and 
tools for producing standards, test-suites and 
API(s)?.  
V?ronis, J. and Ide, N.1996. Encodage des diction-
naires ?lectroniques: probl?mes et propositions 
de la TEI. In D. Piotrowsky (Ed.), Lexicograpbie 
et informatique - Autour de l'informatisation du 
Tr?sor de la Langue Fran?aise. Actes du Colloque 
International de Nancy (1996) (pp. 239-261). Pa-
ris: Didier Erudition. 
 
 
 
960
Proceedings of SSST-4, Fourth Workshop on Syntax and Structure in Statistical Translation, pages 61?65,
COLING 2010, Beijing, August 2010.
Arabic morpho-syntactic feature disambiguation in            
a translation context 
Ines Turki Khemakhem, Salma Jamoussi, Abdelmajid Ben Hamadou 
MIRACL Laboratory, ISIM Sfax, P?le Technologique
ines_turki@yahoo.fr, salma.jammoussi@isimsf.rnu.tn, 
abdelmajid.benhamadou@isimsf.rnu.tn 
 
Abstract 
Morphological analysis and disambigua-
tion are crucial stages in a variety of nat-
ural language processing applications 
such as machine translation, especially 
when languages with complex morphol-
ogy are concerned such as Arabic. Arab-
ic is a highly flexional language, in that, 
the same root can lead to various forms 
according to its context. In this paper, we 
present a system which disambiguates 
the output of a morphological analyzer 
for Arabic. The Arabic morphological 
analyzer used consists of a set of all 
possible morphological analyses for each 
word, with the unique correct syntactic 
feature. We want to choose the correct 
features using the features generated by 
the morphological analyzer for the 
French language in the other side. To ob-
tain this data, we used the results of the 
alignment of word trained with GIZA++ 
(Och and Ney, 2003). 
1 Introduction 
Arabic is characterized by a rich morphology. 
Due to the fact that the Arabic script usually 
does not encode short vowels, the degree of 
morphological ambiguity is very high. In addi-
tion to being inflected for gender, number, 
words can be attached to various clitics for con-
junction "?" (and), the definite article "??" (the), 
prepositions (e.g. "?" (by/with), "?" (for), "?" 
(as)), object pronouns (e.g. "??" (their/them)). 
The morphological analysis of a word consists 
of determining morphological information about 
each word, such as part-of-speech (i.e., noun, 
verb, particle, etc), voice, gender, number, in-
formation about the clitics, etc. Morphological 
analysis and disambiguation are crucial pre-
processing steps for a variety of natural language 
processing applications, from search and infor-
mation extraction to machine translation. For 
languages with complex morphology these are 
nontrivial processes. 
Arabic words are often ambiguous in their 
morphological analysis. This is due to Arabic?s 
rich system of affixation and clitics and the 
omission of disambiguating short vowels. The 
problem is that many words have different 
meanings depending on their diacritization. This 
leads to ambiguity when processing data for nat-
ural language processing applications such as 
machine translation. This propriety has an im-
portant implication for statistical modeling of the 
Arabic language. 
In this paper, we present a novel morphology 
preprocessing technique for Arabic. We exploit 
the Arabic morphology-French alignment to 
choose a correct morpho-syntactic feature pro-
duced by a morphological analyzer. 
This paper is organized as follows: section 2 
gives a brief description of some related works 
to the introduction of morphological disambigu-
ation. Section 3 presents the used morphological 
analyzer Morph2 for Arabic texts, able to recog-
nize word composition and to provide more spe-
cific morphological information about it. We 
present in section 4 some problems in context 
morpho-syntactic feature choice; in the remaind-
er of this section we discuss the complexity of 
Arabic morphology and the challenge of mor-
phological disambiguation. Section 5 gives a 
short overview of the data and tools used for our 
Arabic word Morpho-syntactic feature disam-
biguation and shows the experimental details of 
our system. Finally, section 6 presents some 
conclusions. 
61
2 Related work 
Morphological analysis and disambiguation are 
crucial pre-processing steps for a variety of 
natural language processing applications. 
Previous research has focused on 
disambiguating the output of a morphological 
analyzer. Hajic (2000) is the first to use a 
dictionary as a source of possible morphological 
analyses (and hence tags) for an inflected word 
form. He convincingly shows that for five 
Eastern European languages with complex 
inflection plus English, using a morphological 
analyzer improves performance of a tagger. He 
concludes that for highly inflectional languages 
?the use of an independent morphological 
dictionary is the preferred choice more annotated 
data?. He redefines the tagging task as a choice 
among the tags proposed by the dictionary, using 
a log-linear model trained on specific ambiguity 
classes for individual morphological features. 
Hajic (2000) demonstrates convincingly that 
morphological disambiguation can be aided by a 
morphological analyzer, which, given a word 
without any context, gives us the set of all 
possible morphological tags.  
The only work on Arabic tagging that uses a 
corpus for training and evaluation, (Diab et al, 
2004), does not use a morphological analyzer. 
Diab et al (2004) perform tokenization, POS 
tagging and base phrase chunking using a SVM 
based learner.  
The Morphological Analysis and 
Disambiguation of Arabic (MADA) system is 
described in (Habash and Rambow, 2005). The 
basic approach used in MADA is inspired by the 
work of Hajic (2000) for tagging 
morphologically rich languages, which was 
extended to Arabic. Habash and Rambow (2005) 
use SVM-classifiers for individual 
morphological features and a simple combining 
scheme for choosing among competing analyses 
proposed by the dictionary. 
3 Arabic word  segmenter 
Arabic is a morphologically complex language. 
Compared with French, an Arabic word can 
sometimes correspond to a whole French sen-
tence (Example : the Arabic word "???????????" cor-
responds in French to the sentence "Est-ce que 
vous vous souvenez de nous", in English: "Do 
you remember us").  
The aim of a morphological analysis step is to 
recognize word composition and to provide spe-
cific morphological information about it. For 
Example : the word "??????" (in French: con-
na?ssent, in English: they know) is the result of 
the concatenation of the prefix "?" indicating the 
present and suffix "??" indicating the plural 
masculine of the verb "???" (in French: con-
na?tre, in English: to know). The morphological 
analyzer determines for each word the list of all 
its possible morphological features.  
In Arabic language, some conjugated verbs or 
inflected nouns can have the same orthographic 
form due to absence of vowels (Example : non-
voweled Arabic word "???" can be a verb in the 
past "??????" (He dismissed), or a masculine noun 
"??????" (chapter / season), or a concatenation of 
the coordinating conjunction "  ?? " (then) with the 
verb "??": imperative of the verb (bind)). 
In this work, In order to handle the morpho-
logical ambiguities, we decide to use MORPH2 
(Belguith et al, 2006), an Arabic morphological 
analyzer developed at the Miracl laboratory1. 
MORPH2 is based on a knowledge-based com-
putational method. It accepts as input an Arabic 
text, a sentence or a word. Its morphological dis-
ambiguation and analysis method is based on 
five steps: 
? A tokenization process is applied in a 
first step. It consists of two sub-steps. 
First, the text is divided into sentences, 
using the system Star (Belguith et al, 
2005), an Arabic text tokenizer based on 
contextual exploration of punctuation 
marks and conjunctions of coordination. 
The second sub-step detects the different 
words in each sentence. 
? A morphological preprocessing step 
which aims to extract clitics agglutinated 
to the word. A filtering process is then 
applied to check out if the remaining 
word is a particle, a number, a date, or a 
proper noun. 
? An affixal analysis is then applied to de-
termine all possible affixes and roots. It 
aims to identify basic elements belonging 
                                                 
1 http://www.miracl.rnu.tn 
62
to the constitution of a word (the root and 
affixes i.e. prefix, infix and suffix). 
? The morphological analysis step consists 
of determining for each word, all its 
possible morpho-syntactic features (i.e, 
part of speech, gender, number, time, 
person, etc.). Morpho-syntactic features 
detection is made up on three stages. The 
first stage identifies the part-of-speech of 
the word (i.e. verb "???", noun "???", par-
ticle "????" and proper noun "??? ???"). The 
second stage extracts for each part-of-
speech a list of its morpho-syntactic fea-
tures. A filtering of these feature lists is 
made in the third stage. 
? Vocalization and validation step : each 
handled word is fully vocalized accord-
ing to its morpho-syntactic features de-
termined in the previous step.  
 
In our method, each Arabic word, from Arab-
ic data, is replaced by its segmented form, where 
stem, clitic and affix are featured with their 
morphological classes (e.g. proclitic, prefix, 
stem, suffix and enclitic). For example: the word 
"????????" (in French: "et nous les avons connu", 
in English: "and we have known them") is the 
result of the concatenation of the proclitic "??" 
(then): coordinating conjunction, the suffix "??" 
for the present masculine plural, enclitic "??" (for 
the masculine plural possession pronoun), and 
the rest of the word "???" indicating the stem. 
So, the word "????????" will be replaced by: 
 
"enclitic   ??_ suffix_  ?? Stem_  ??? proclitic ?_ " 
4 Problems in context Morpho-
syntactic feature choice 
As mentioned in section 1, ambiguities in Arabic 
word are mainly caused by the absence of the 
short vowels. Thus, a word can have different 
meanings. There are also the usual homographs 
of uninflected words with/without the same pro-
nunciation, which have different meanings and 
usually different POS?s. For example: the word 
"???", in English: "gold" and "???", in English: 
"go". In Arabic there are four categories of 
words: noun, proper noun, verbs and particles. 
The absence of short vowels can cause ambigui-
ties within the same category or across different 
categories. For example: the word "???" corres-
ponds to many categories (table 1). 
meanings of a word "???" Categories 
after Particule 
remoteness Noun 
remove Verb 
go away Verb 
 
Table 1. Different meanings of a word "???" 
 
Arabic uses a diverse system of prefixes, suf-
fixes, and pronouns that are attached to the 
words (Soudi, 2007). 
In fact, in Arabic language, the word: "???" 
can be a verb in the past (He filed), or a mascu-
line noun (state), or a concatenation of the coor-
dinating conjunction "?" (and) with the verb 
"??": imperative of the verb (filed). For this rea-
son, correct morphological analysis is required 
to resolve structural ambiguities among Arabic 
sentence. 
5 Word Morpho-syntactic feature dis-
ambiguation 
5.1 Training corpus 
The training corpus used in this work is an 
Arabic-French bitext aligned at the sentence 
level. Each Arabic word, from Arabic data, is 
replaced by its segmented form. In the other 
side, the French corpus is part-of-speech (POS) 
tagged by using treetagger tool (Schmid, 1994) 
for annotating text with part-of-speech and 
lemma information. 
5.2 Alignment model 
The aligned model was trained with GIZA++ 
(Och and Ney, 2003), which implements the 
most typical IBM and HMM alignment models. 
The alignment model used consists of IBM-1, 
HMM, IBM-3 and IBM-4. 
5.3 Using treetagger for Arabic Word 
Morpho-syntactic feature disambigua-
tion 
To pre-process the Arabic data, we use the 
MORPH2 morphological analyzer (Belguith et 
al., 2006).  A sample output of the morphologi-
cal analyzer is shown in Figure 1.  
 
63
 
Figure 1. Possible analyses for the word "???" 
 
The obtained output consists of a set of all 
possible morphological analyses for each word, 
with the unique correct analysis. One needs to 
select the right meaning by looking at the con-
text. Given the highly inflection nature of Arab-
ic, resolving ambiguities is syntactically harder 
within the same category. We want to choose the 
correct output using the features generated by 
TreeTagger applied to the French corpus.  
To obtain this correct feature, we needed to 
match data in the segmented Arabic corpus to 
the lexeme and feature representation output by 
TreeTagger. The matching included the results 
of the alignment of word between the segmented 
Arabic corpus and the part-of-speech tagged 
French corpus. 
Example : the word "????????" (in French: "et 
nous les avons connu", in English: "and we have 
known them") is segmented by: 
"?_ proclitic ???_ stem ??_ suffix ??_ "enclitic 
 
The part-of-speech tagged of the French sen-
tence is: 
 
"et_KON nous_PRO:PER les_PRO:PER 
avons_VER:pres connu_VER:pper" 
 
The result of the alignment between these two 
sentences is: 
 
(a) ?_     proclitic ???_      stem ??_   suffix ??_ enclitic 
 
 
 
 
(b) Et nous les avons Connu 
 KON PRO:PER PRO:PER VER:pres VER:pper 
 
Figure 2. (a) Output of morphological analysis 
MORPH2: segmented Arabic sentence, (b) 
French translation and its alignment with seg-
mented morphological analysis 
 
The stem "???" is aligned with the word: 
"connu" : the past participle of the verb "con-
na?tre" (in English : "known"). We can deduce 
that the part of speech of the stem "???" is a 
verb.  
Morpho-syntactic features provided by Tree-
Tagger are verb, proper noun, noun, adjective, 
adverb, conjunction, pronoun, preposition, etc. 
The morpho-syntactic feature of Arabic words 
aligned with French words tagged by adjective 
or noun will be replaced by the morpho-
syntactic feature : noun: "???". While, the mor-
pho-syntactic feature : adverb, conjunction, or 
prepostion will be replaced by the Arabic mor-
pho-syntactic feature : particle : "????".  
We can attest that the use of morpho-syntactic 
features provided by the part-of-speech tagged 
corpus in the other side can remove disambigua-
tion of morpho-syntactic feature of the Arabic 
word provided by a morphological analyser, es-
pecially for agglutinative and inflectional lan-
guages. 
5.4 Experimental results 
In our experiments, on the entire corpus, the 
MORPH2 morphological analyzer makes 1152 
errors (27%). Table 2 shows the results obtained 
with the morphological analyzer MORPH2, 
BASELINE, and the results obtained with the 
Arabic morphology-French alignment, treetag-
ger-to-morph2, where Arabic morphology-
French alignment is used to choose a correct 
64
morpho-syntactic feature produced by a morpho-
logical analyzer  MORPH2. 
 
System Accuracy (%) 
BASELINE 73% 
treetagger-to-
morph2 
88% 
 
Table 2. Results of treetagger-to-morph2 com-
pared against BASELINE on the task of POS 
tagging of Arabic text 
 
Thus one can observe that, for Arabic, the 
treetagger-to-morph2 outperforms the BASE-
LINE tagger with a significant absolute differ-
ence of 15% in tagging accuracy. 
The performance of treetagger-to-morph2 is 
better than the baseline BASELINE. The errors 
encountered result from confusing nouns with 
verbs, particles or vice versa. This is to be 
caused by the presence of homographs of Arabic 
words, which have different meanings and dif-
ferent POS?s. 
6 Conclusion 
Morphological disambiguation of Arabic is a 
difficult task which involves, in theory, thou-
sands of possible tags. 
In this paper, we present a system which dis-
ambiguates the output of a morphological ana-
lyzer for Arabic. Arabic is a morphologically 
rich language, and Morphological analysis and 
disambiguation are crucial stages in a variety of 
natural language processing applications.  
We first applied an Arabic word segmentation 
step, to improve the alignments models. So we 
use the Arabic morphological analyzer 
MORPH2. Then, we proposed to use TreeTag-
ger tool, able to annotate text with part-of-
speech and lemma information, where each 
word from French corpus is agglutinated to its 
part-of-speech (POS). The sentence alignment 
between Arabic and French corpus was trained 
with GIZA++. The core idea is to avoid morpho-
syntactic ambiguity of the Arabic words ob-
tained in the MORPH2 output by using the part 
of speech of corresponding aligned French word. 
We showed that imposing Arabic-French align-
ment dependent constraints on possible se-
quences of analyses improves the morphological 
disambiguation.  
Future work will focus on taking advantage of 
our efficient technique. We are very interested to 
use Word Morpho-syntactic feature disambigua-
tion to build up an efficient French-Arabic trans-
lation system.  
References 
Belguith L., and Cha?ben N. 2006. Analyse et d?-
sambigu?sation morphologiques de textes    arabes    
non voyell?s, Actes de la 13?me confrence sur le 
Traitement Automatique des Langues Naturelles, 
Leuven Belgique, 493-501. 
Belguith L., Baccour L. and Mourad G. 2005. Seg-
mentation des textes arabes bas?e sur l'analyse 
contextuelle des signes de ponctuations et de cer-
taines particules. Actes de la 12?me Conf?rence 
annuelle sur le Traitement Automatique des 
Langues Naturelles, 451-456. 
Diab M., Hacioglu K., and Jurafsky D. 2004. Auto-
matic tagging of Arabic text: From raw text to 
base phrase chunks. In 5th Meeting of the North 
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics/Human Language Technologies 
Conference (HLT-NAACL04), Boston, MA. 
Habash N. and Rambow O.. 2005. Arabic tokeniza-
tion, part-of-speech tagging and morphological 
disambiguation in one fell swoop. In Proceedings 
of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics (ACL?05), Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, June. Association for Computational 
Linguistics. 573?580 
Hajic J. 2000. Morphological tagging: Data vs. dic-
tionaries. In 1st Meeting of the North American 
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (NAACL?00), Seattle, WA. 
Och F. J., and Ney H. 2003. A Systematic compari-
son of various statistical alignment models, Com-
putational Linguistics, 29(1): 19-51. 
Och F. J., Ney H. 2004. The alignment template ap-
proach to statistical machine translation, Computa-
tional Linguistics, 30(4): 417-449. 
Schmid H. 1994. Probabilistic Part-of-speech Tag-
ging Using Decision Trees. In Proceedings of In-
ternational Conference on New Methods in Lan-
guage Processing, Manchester. 44-49. 
Soudi A., Bosch A. and Neumann G. Arabic Compu-
tational Morphology: Knowledge-based and Em-
pirical Methods. Springer, 2007. 
65
