Proceedings of the 12th Conference of the European Chapter of the ACL, pages 345?353,
Athens, Greece, 30 March ? 3 April 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
End-to-End Evaluation in Simultaneous Translation
Olivier Hamon1,2, Christian F?gen3, Djamel Mostefa1, Victoria Arranz1,
Muntsin Kolss3, Alex Waibel3,4 and Khalid Choukri1
1Evaluations and Language Resources Distribution Agency (ELDA), Paris, France
2 LIPN (UMR 7030) ? Universit? Paris 13 & CNRS, Villetaneuse, France
3 Univerit?t Karlsruhe (TH), Germany
4 Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
{hamon|mostefa|arranz|choukri}@elda.org,
{fuegen|kolss|waibel}@ira.uka.de
Abstract
This paper presents the end-to-end evalu-
ation of an automatic simultaneous trans-
lation system, built with state-of-the-art
components. It shows whether, and for
which situations, such a system might be
advantageous when compared to a human
interpreter. Using speeches in English
translated into Spanish, we present the
evaluation procedure and we discuss the
results both for the recognition and trans-
lation components as well as for the over-
all system. Even if the translation process
remains the Achilles? heel of the system,
the results show that the system can keep
at least half of the information, becoming
potentially useful for final users.
1 Introduction
Anyone speaking at least two different languages
knows that translation and especially simultaneous
interpretation are very challenging tasks. A human
translator has to cope with the special nature of
different languages, comprising phenomena like
terminology, compound words, idioms, dialect
terms or neologisms, unexplained acronyms or ab-
breviations, proper names, as well as stylistic and
punctuation differences. Further, translation or in-
terpretation are not a word-by-word rendition of
what was said or written in a source language. In-
stead, the meaning and intention of a given sen-
tence have to be reexpressed in a natural and fluent
way in another language.
Most professional full-time conference inter-
preters work for international organizations like
the United Nations, the European Union, or the
African Union, whereas the world?s largest em-
ployer of translators and interpreters is currently
the European Commission. In 2006, the European
Parliament spent about 300 million Euros, 30% of
its budget, on the interpretation and translation of
the parliament speeches and EU documents. Gen-
erally, about 1.1 billion Euros are spent per year
on the translating and interpreting services within
the European Union, which is around 1% of the
total EU-Budget (Volker Steinbiss, 2006).
This paper presents the end-to-end evaluation
of an automatic simultaneous translation system,
built with state-of-the-art components. It shows
whether, and in which cases, such a system might
be advantageous compared to human interpreters.
2 Challenges in Human Interpretation
According to Al-Khanji et al (2000), researchers
in the field of psychology, linguistics and interpre-
tation seem to agree that simultaneous interpre-
tation (SI) is a highly demanding cognitive task
involving a basic psycholinguistic process. This
process requires the interpreter to monitor, store
and retrieve the input of the source language in
a continuous manner in order to produce the oral
rendition of this input in the target language. It is
clear that this type of difficult linguistic and cog-
nitive operation will force even professional in-
terpreters to elaborate lexical or synthetic search
strategies.
Fatigue and stress have a negative effect on the
interpreter, leading to a decrease in simultaneous
interpretation quality. In a study by Moser-Mercer
et al (1998), in which professional speakers were
asked to work until they could no longer provide
acceptable quality, it was shown that (1) during
the first 20 minutes the frequency of errors rose
steadily, (2) the interpreters, however, seemed to
be unaware of this decline in quality, (3) after 60
minutes, all subjects made a total of 32.5 mean-
ing errors, and (4) in the category of nonsense the
number of errors almost doubled after 30 minutes
on the task.
Since the audience is only able to evaluate the
simultaneously interpreted discourse by its form,
345
the fluency of an interpretation is of utmost im-
portance. According to a study by Kopczynski
(1994), fluency and style were third on a list of
priorities (after content and terminology) of el-
ements rated by speakers and attendees as con-
tributing to quality. Following the overview in
(Yagi, 2000), an interpretation should be as natu-
ral and as authentic as possible, which means that
artificial pauses in the middle of a sentence, hes-
itations, and false-starts should be avoided, and
tempo and intensity of the speaker?s voice should
be imitated.
Another point to mention is the time span be-
tween a source language chunk and its target lan-
guage chunk, which is often referred to as ear-
voice-span. Following the summary in (Yagi,
2000), the ear-voice-span is variable in duration
depending on some source and target language
variables, like speech delivery rate, information
density, redundancy, word order, syntactic charac-
teristics, etc. Short delays are usually preferred for
several reasons. For example, the audience is irri-
tated when the delay is too large and is soon asking
whether there is a problem with the interpretation.
3 Automatic Simultaneous Translation
Given the explanations above on human interpre-
tation, one has to weigh two factors when consid-
ering the use of simultaneous translation systems:
translation quality and cost.
The major disadvantage of an automatic system
compared to human interpretation is its translation
quality, as we will see in the following sections.
Current state-of-the-art systems may reach satis-
factory quality for people not understanding the
lecturer at all, but are still worse than human inter-
pretation. Nevertheless, an automatic system may
have considerable advantages.
One such advantage is its considerable short-
term memory: storing long sequences of words is
not a problem for a computer system. Therefore,
compensatory strategies are not necessary, regard-
less of the speaking rate of the speaker. However,
depending on the system?s translation speed, la-
tency may increase. While it is possible for hu-
mans to compress the length of an utterance with-
out changing its meaning (summarization), it is
still a challenging task for automatic systems.
Human simultaneous interpretation is quite ex-
pensive, especially due to the fact that usually two
interpreters are necessary. In addition, human in-
terpreters require preparation time to become fa-
miliar with the topic. Moreover, simultaneous in-
terpretation requires a soundproof booth with au-
dio equipment, which adds an overall cost that is
unacceptable for all but the most elaborate multi-
lingual events. On the other hand, a simultaneous
translation system also needs time and effort for
preparation and adaptation towards the target ap-
plication, language and domain. However, once
adapted, it can be easily re-used in the same do-
main, language, etc. Another advantage is that the
transcript of a speech or lecture is produced for
free by using an automatic system in the source
and target languages.
3.1 The Simultaneous Translation System
Figure 1 shows a schematic overview of the si-
multaneous translation system developed at Uni-
versit?t Karlsruhe (TH) (F?gen et al, 2006b). The
speech of the lecturer is recorded with the help
of a close-talk microphone and processed by the
speech recognition component (ASR). The par-
tial hypotheses produced by the ASR module are
collected in the resegmentation component, for
merging and re-splitting at appropriate ?seman-
tic? boundaries. The resegmented hypotheses are
then transferred to one or more machine transla-
tion components (MT), at least one per language
pair. Different output technologies may be used
for presenting the translations to the audience. For
a detailed description of the components as well
as the client-server framework used for connect-
ing the components please refer to (F?gen et al,
2006b; F?gen et al, 2006a; Kolss et al, 2006; F?-
gen and Kolss, 2007; F?gen et al, 2001).
3.2 End-to-End Evaluation
The evaluation in speech-to-speech translation
jeopardises many concepts and implies a lot of
subjectivity. Three components are involved and
an overall system may grow the difficulty of esti-
mating the output quality. However, two criteria
are mainly accepted in the community: measuring
the information preservation and determining how
much of the translation is understandable.
Several end-to-end evaluations in speech-to-
speech translation have been carried out in the last
few years, in projects such as JANUS (Gates et
al., 1996), Verbmobil (N?bel, 1997) or TC-STAR
(Hamon et al, 2007). Those projects use the
main criteria depicted above, and protocols differ
in terms of data preparation, rating, procedure, etc.
346
Dictionary
Source
Hypothesis Translatable
Segment
Model
Source Boundary
Resegmen?
tationRecognition
Speech
Translation
Model Model
Target Language
Machine
Translation
Model
Source Acoustic
Model
Source Language
Output
Translated
Translation
Vocabulary
Audio Stream
Text
Output
(Subtitles)(Synthesis)
Spoken
Figure 1: Schematic overview and information flow of the simultaneous translation system. The main
components of the system are represented by cornered boxes and the models used for theses components
by ellipses. The different output forms are represented by rounded boxes.
To our opinion, to evaluate the performance of a
complete speech-to-speech translation system, we
need to compare the source speech used as input to
the translated output speech in the target language.
To that aim, we reused a large part of the evalua-
tion protocol from the TC-STAR project(Hamon
et al, 2007).
4 Evaluation Tasks
The evaluation is carried out on the simultaneously
translated speech of a single speaker?s talks and
lectures in the field of speech processing, given in
English, and translated into Spanish.
4.1 Data used
Two data sets were selected from the talks and
lectures. Each set contained three excerpts, no
longer than 6 minutes each and focusing on dif-
ferent topics. The former set deals with speech
recognition and the latter with the descriptions of
European speech research projects, both from the
same speaker. This represents around 7,200 En-
glish words. The excerpts were manually tran-
scribed to produce the reference for the ASR eval-
uation. Then, these transcriptions were manually
translated into Spanish by two different transla-
tors. Two reference translations were thus avail-
able for the spoken language translation (SLT)
evaluation. Finally, one human interpretation was
produced from the excerpts as reference for the
end-to-end evaluation. It should be noted that for
the translation system, speech synthesis was used
to produce the spoken output.
4.2 Evaluation Protocol
The system is evaluated as a whole (black box
evaluation) and component by component (glass
box evaluation):
ASR evaluation. The ASR module is evaluated
by computing the Word Error Rate (WER) in case
insensitive mode.
SLT evaluation. For the SLT evaluation, the au-
tomatically translated text from the ASR output is
compared with two manual reference translations
by means of automatic and human metrics. Two
automatic metrics are used: BLEU (Papineni et
al., 2001) and mWER (Niessen et al, 2000).
For the human evaluation, each segment is eval-
uated in relation to adequacy and fluency (White
and O?Connell, 1994). For the evaluation of ad-
equacy, the target segment is compared to a ref-
erence segment. For the evaluation of fluency,
the quality of the language is evaluated. The two
types of evaluation are done independently, but
each evaluator did both evaluations (first that of
fluency, then that of adequacy) for a certain num-
ber of segments. For the evaluation of fluency,
evaluators had to answer the question: ?Is the text
written in good Spanish??. For the evaluation of
adequacy, evaluators had to answer the question:
?How much of the meaning expressed in the ref-
erence translation is also expressed in the target
translation??.
For both evaluations, a five-point scale is pro-
posed to the evaluators, where only extreme val-
ues are explicitly defined. Three evaluations are
carried out per segment, done by three different
evaluators, and segments are divided randomly,
because evaluators must not recreate a ?story?
347
and thus be influenced by the context. The total
number of judges was 10, with around 100 seg-
ments per judge. Furthermore, the same number
of judges was recruited for both categories: ex-
perts, from the domain with a knowledge of the
technology, and non-experts, without that knowl-
edge.
End-to-End evaluation. The End-to-End eval-
uation consists in comparing the speech in the
source language to the output speech in the tar-
get language. Two important aspects should be
taken into account when assessing the quality of
a speech-to-speech system.
First, the information preservation is measured
by using ?comprehension questionnaires?. Ques-
tions are created from the source texts (the En-
glish excerpts), then questions and answers are
translated into Spanish by professional translators.
These questions are asked to human judges after
they have listened to the output speech in the tar-
get language (Spanish). At a second stage, the an-
swers are analysed: for each answer a Spanish val-
idator gives a score according to a binary scale (the
information is either correct or incorrect). This al-
lows us to measure the information preservation.
Three types of questions are used in order to di-
versify the difficulty of the questions and test the
system at different levels: simple Factual (70%),
yes/no (20%) and list (10%) questions. For in-
stance, questions were: What is the larynx respon-
sible for?, Have all sites participating in CHIL
built a CHIL room?, Which types of knowledge
sources are used by the decoder?, respectively.
The second important aspect of a speech-to-
speech system is the quality of the speech output
(hereafter quality evaluation). For assessing the
quality of the speech output one question is asked
to the judges at the end of each comprehension
questionnaire: ?Rate the overall quality of this au-
dio sample?, and values go from 1 (?1: Very bad,
unusable?) to 5 (?It is very useful?). Both auto-
matic system and interpreter outputs were evalu-
ated with the same methodology.
Human judges are real users and native Span-
ish speakers, experts and non-experts, but different
from those of the SLT evaluation. Twenty judges
were involved (12 excerpts, 10 evaluations per ex-
cerpt and 6 evaluations per judge) and each judge
evaluated both automatic and human excerpts on a
50/50 percent basis.
5 Components Results
5.1 Automatic Speech Recognition
The ASR output has been evaluated using the
manual transcriptions of the excerpts. The overall
Word Error Rate (WER) is 11.9%. Table 1 shows
the WER level for each excerpt.
Excerpts WER [%]
L043-1 14.5
L043-2 14.5
L043-3 9.6
T036-1 11.3
T036-2 11.7
T036-3 9.2
Overall 11.9
Table 1: Evaluation results for ASR.
T036 excerpts seem to be easier to recognize au-
tomatically than L043 ones, probably due to the
more general language of the former.
5.2 Machine Translation
5.2.1 Human Evaluation
Each segment within the human evaluation is eval-
uated 4 times, each by a different judge. This aims
at having a significant number of judgments and
measuring the consistency of the human evalua-
tions. The consistency is measured by computing
the Cohen?s Kappa coefficient (Cohen, 1960).
Results show a substantial agreement for flu-
ency (kappa of 0.64) and a moderate agreement
for adequacy (0.52).The overall results of the hu-
man evaluation are presented in Table 2. Regard-
ing both experts? and non-experts? details, agree-
ment is very similar (0.30 and 0.28, respectively).
All judges Experts Non experts
Fluency 3.13 2.84 3.42
Adequacy 3.26 3.21 3.31
Table 2: Average rating of human evalua-
tions [1<5].
Both fluency and adequacy results are over the
mean. They are lower for experts than for non-
experts. This may be due to the fact that experts
are more familiar with the domain and therefore
more demanding than non experts. Regarding the
detailed evaluation per judge, scores are generally
lower for non-experts than for experts.
348
5.2.2 Automatic Evaluation
Scores are computed using case-sensitive metrics.
Table 3 shows the detailed results per excerpt.
Excerpts BLEU [%] mWER [%]
L043-1 25.62 58.46
L043-2 22.60 62.47
L043-3 28.73 62.64
T036-1 34.46 55.13
T036-2 29.41 59.91
T036-3 35.17 50.77
Overall 28.94 58.66
Table 3: Automatic Evaluation results for SLT.
Scores are rather low, with a mWER of 58.66%,
meaning that more than half of the translation is
correct. According to the scoring, the T036 ex-
cerpts seem to be easier to translate than the L043
ones, the latter being of a more technical nature.
6 End-to-End Results
6.1 Evaluators Agreement
In this study, ten judges carried out the evaluation
for each excerpt. In order to observe the inter-
judges agreement, the global Fleiss?s Kappa co-
efficient was computed, which allows to measure
the agreement between m judges with r criteria of
judgment. This coefficient shows a global agree-
ment between all the judges, which goes beyond
Cohen?s Kappa coefficient. However, a low co-
efficient requires a more detailed analysis, for in-
stance, by using Kappa for each pair of judges.
Indeed, this allows to see how deviant judges are
from the typical judge behaviour. For m judges,
n evaluations and r criteria, the global Kappa is
defined as follows:
? = 1 ?
nm2 ?
?n
i=1
?r
j=1 X
2
ij
nm(m? 1) ?rj=1 Pj(1 ? Pj)
where:
Pj =
?n
i=1 Xij
nm
and: Xij is the number of judgments for the ith
evaluation and the jth criteria.
Regarding quality evaluation (n = 6, m = 10,
r = 5), Kappa values are low for both human in-
terpreters (? = 0.07) and the automatic system
(? = 0.01), meaning that judges agree poorly
(Landis and Koch, 1977). This is explained by
the extreme subjectivity of the evaluation and the
small number of evaluated excerpts. Looking at
each pair of judges and the Kappa coefficients
themselves, there is no real agreement, since most
of the Kappa values are around zero. However,
some judge pairs show fair agreement, and some
others show moderate or substantial agreement. It
is observed, though, that some criteria are not fre-
quently selected by the judges, which limits the
statistical significance of the Kappa coefficient.
The limitations are not the same for the com-
prehension evaluation (n = 60, m = 10, r = 2),
since the criteria are binary (i.e. true or false). Re-
garding the evaluated excerpts, Kappa values are
0.28 for the automatic system and 0.30 for the in-
terpreter. According to Landis and Koch (1977),
those values mean that judges agree fairly. In
order to go further, the Kappa coefficients were
computed for each pair of judges. Results were
slightly better for the interpreter than for the au-
tomatic system. Most of them were between 0.20
and 0.40, implying a fair agreement. Some judges
agreed moderately.
Furthermore, it was also observed that for the
120 available questions, 20 had been answered
correctly by all the judges (16 for the interpreter
evaluation and 4 for the automatic system one)
and 6 had been answered wrongly by all judges (1
for the former and 5 for the latter). That shows a
trend where the interpreter comprehension would
be easier than that of the automatic system, or at
least where the judgements are less questionable.
6.2 Quality Evaluation
Table 4 compares the quality evaluation results of
the interpreter to those of the automatic system.
Samples Interpreter Automatic system
L043-1 3.1 1.6
L043-2 2.9 2.3
L043-3 2.4 2.1
T036-1 3.6 3.1
T036-2 2.7 2.5
T036-3 3.5 2.5
Mean 3.03 2.35
Table 4: Quality evaluation results for the inter-
preter and the automatic system [1<5].
As can be seen, with a mean score of 3.03 even
for the interpreter, the excerpts were difficult to
interpret and translate. This is particularly so for
349
L043, which is more technical than T036. The
L043-3 excerpt is particularly technical, with for-
mulae and algorithm descriptions, and even a com-
plex description of the human articulatory system.
In fact, L043 provides a typical presentation with
an introduction, followed by a deeper description
of the topic. This increasing complexity is re-
flected on the quality scores of the three excerpts,
going from 3.1 to 2.4.
T036 is more fluent due to the less technical na-
ture of the speech and the more general vocabu-
lary used. However, the T036-2 and T036-3 ex-
cerpts get a lower quality score, due to the descrip-
tion of data collections or institutions, and thus the
use of named entities. The interpreter does not
seem to be at ease with them and is mispronounc-
ing some of them, such as ?Grenoble? pronounced
like in English instead of in Spanish. The inter-
preter seems to be influenced by the speaker, as
can also be seen in his use of the neologism ?el ce-
nario? (?the scenario?) instead of ?el escenario?.
Likewise, ?Karlsruhe? is pronounced three times
differently, showing some inconsistency of the in-
terpreter.
The general trend in quality errors is similar to
those of previous evaluations: lengthening words
(?seeee?ales?), hesitations, pauses between syl-
lables and catching breath (?caracter?s...ticas?),
careless mistakes (?probibilidad? instead of ?prob-
abilidad?), self-correction of wrong interpreting
(?reconocien-/reconocimiento?), etc.
An important issue concerns gender and num-
ber agreement. Those errors are explained by
the presence of morphological gender in Spanish,
like in ?estos se?ales? instead of ?estas se?ales?
(?these signals?) together with the speaker?s speed
of speech. The speaker seems to start by default
with a masculine determiner (which has no gen-
der in English), adjusting the gender afterward de-
pending on the noun following. A quick transla-
tion may also be the cause for this kind of errors,
like ?del se?al acustico? (?of the acoustic signal?)
with a masculine determiner, a feminine substan-
tive and ending in a masculine adjective. Some
translation errors are also present, for instance
?computerizar? instead of ?calcular? (?compute?).
The errors made by the interpreter help to un-
derstand how difficult oral translation is. This
should be taken into account for the evaluation of
the automatic system.
The automatic system results, like those of
the interpreter, are higher for T036 than for L043.
However, scores are lower, especially for the
L043-1 excerpt. This seems to be due to the
type of lexicon used by the speaker for this ex-
cerpt, more medical, since the speaker describes
the articulatory system. Moreover, his description
is sometimes metaphorical and uses a rather col-
loquial register. Therefore, while the interpreter
finds it easier to deal with these excerpts (known
vocabulary among others) and L043-3 seems to be
more complicated (domain-specific, technical as-
pect), the automatic system finds it more compli-
cated with the former and less with the latter. In
other words, the interpreter has to ?understand?
what is said in L043-3, contrary to the automatic
system, in order to translate.
Scores are higher for the T036 excerpts. In-
deed, there is a high lexical repetition, a large
number of named entities, and the quality of the
excerpt is very training-dependant. However, the
system runs into trouble to process foreign names,
which are very often not understandable. Differ-
ences between T036-1 and the other T036 excerpts
are mainly due to the change in topic. While the
former deals with a general vocabulary (i.e. de-
scription of projects), the other two excerpts de-
scribe the data collection, the evaluation metrics,
etc., thus increasing the complexity of translation.
Generally speaking, quality scores of the au-
tomatic system are mainly due to the transla-
tion component, and to a lesser extent to the
recognition component. Many English words are
not translated (?bush?, ?keyboards?, ?squeaking?,
etc.), and word ordering is not always correct.
This is the case for the sentence ?how we solve
it?, translated into ?c?mo nos resolvers lo? instead
of ?c?mo lo resolvemos?. Funnily enough, the
problems of gender (?maravillosos aplicaciones?
- masc. vs fem.) and number (?pueden real-
mente ser aplicado? - plu. vs sing.) the in-
terpreter has, are also found for the automatic
system. Moreover, the translation of compound
nouns often shows wrong word ordering, in partic-
ular when they are long, i.e. up to three words (e.g.
?reconocimiento de habla sistemas? for ?speech
recognition system? instead of ?sistemas de re-
conocimiento de habla?).
Finally, some error combinations result in fully
non-understandable sentences, such as:
?usted tramo se en emacs es squeaking
ruido y dries todos demencial?
350
where the following errors take place:
? tramo: this translation of ?stretch? results
from the choice of a substantive instead of a
verb, giving rise to two choices due to the lex-
ical ambiguity: ?estiramiento? and ?tramo?,
which is more a linear distance than a stretch
in that context;
? se: the pronoun ?it? becomes the reflexive
?se? instead of the personal pronoun ?lo?;
? emacs: the recognition module transcribed
the couple of words ?it makes? into ?emacs?,
not translated by the translation module;
? squeaking: the word is not translated by the
translation module;
? dries: again, two successive errors are made:
the word ?drives? is transcribed into ?dries?
by the recognition module, which is then left
untranslated.
The TTS component also contributes to decreas-
ing the output quality. The prosody module finds it
hard to make the sentences sound natural. Pauses
between words are not very frequent, but they do
not sound natural (i.e. like catching breath) and
they are not placed at specific points, as it would
be done by a human. For instance, the prosody
module does not link the noun and its determiner
(e.g. ?otros aplicaciones?). Finally, a not user-
friendly aspect of the TTS component is the rep-
etition of the same words always pronounced in
the same manner, what is quite disturbing for the
listener.
6.3 Comprehension Evaluation
Tables 5 and 6 present the results of the compre-
hension evaluation, for the interpreter and for the
automatic system, respectively. They provide the
following information:
identifiers of the excerpt: Source data are the
same for the interpreter and the automatic
system, namely the English speech;
subj. E2E: The subjective results of the end-to-
end evaluation are done by the same assessors
who did the quality evaluation. This shows
the percentage of good answers;
fair E2E: The objective verification of the an-
swers. The audio files are validated to check
whether they contain the answers to the ques-
tions or not (as the questions were created
from the English source). This shows the
maximum percentage of answers an evalua-
tor managed to find from either the interpreter
(speaker audio) or the automatic system out-
put (TTS) in Spanish. For instance, informa-
tion in English could have been missed by
the interpreter because he/she felt that this in-
formation was meaningless and could be dis-
carded. We consider those results as an ob-
jective evaluation.
SLT, ASR: Verification of the answers in each
component of the end-to-end process. In or-
der to determine where the information for
the automatic system is lost, files from each
component (recognised files for ASR, trans-
lated files for SLT, and synthesised files for
TTS in the ?fair E2E? column) are checked.
Excerpts subj. E2E fair E2E
L043-1 69 90
L043-2 75 80
L043-3 72 60
T036-1 80 100
T036-2 73 80
T036-3 76 100
Mean 74 85
Table 5: Comprehension evaluation results for the
interpreter [%].
Regarding Table 5, the interpreter loses 15%
of the information (i.e. 15% of the answers were
incorrect or not present in the interpreter?s trans-
lation) and judges correctly answered 74% of the
questions. Five documents get above 80% of cor-
rect results, while judges find almost above 70%
of the answers for the six documents.
Regarding the automatic system results (Table
6), the information rate found by judges is just
above 50% since, by extension, more than half the
questions were correctly answered. The lowest
excerpt, L043-1, gets a rate of 25%, the highest,
T036-1, a rate of 76%, which is in agreement with
the observation for the quality evaluation. Infor-
mation loss can be found in each component, es-
pecially for the SLT module (35% of the informa-
tion is lost here). It should be noticed that the TTS
module made also errors which prevented judges
351
Excerpts subj. E2E fair E2E SLT ASR
L043-1 25 30 30 70
L043-2 62 70 80 70
L043-3 43 40 60 100
T036-1 76 80 90 100
T036-2 61 70 60 80
T036-3 47 60 70 80
Mean 52 58 65 83
Table 6: Comprehension evaluation results for the
automatic system [%].
from answering related questions. Moreover, the
ASR module loses 17% of the information. Those
results are certainly due to the specific vocabulary
used in this experiment.
So as to objectively compare the interpreter with
the automatic system, we selected the questions
for which the answers were included in the inter-
preter files (i.e. those in the ?fair E2E? column
of Table 5). The goal was to compare the overall
quality of the speech-to-speech translation to in-
terpreters? quality, without the noise factor of the
information missing. The assumption is that the
interpreter translates the ?important information?
and skips the useless parts of the original speech.
This experiment is to measure the level of this in-
formation that is preserved by the automatic sys-
tem. So a new subset of results was obtained, on
the information kept by the interpreter. The same
study was repeated for the three components and
the results are shown in Tables 7 and 8.
Excerpts subj. E2E fair E2E SLT ASR
L043-1 27 33 33 78
L043-2 65 75 88 75
L043-3 37 67 83 100
T036-1 76 80 90 100
T036-2 69 88 75 100
T036-3 47 60 70 80
Mean 53 60 70 80
Table 7: Evaluation results for the automatic sys-
tem restricted to the questions for which answers
can be found in the interpreter speech [%].
Comparing the automatic system to the inter-
preter, the automatic system keeps 40% of the in-
formation where the interpreter translates the doc-
uments correctly. Those results confirm that ASR
loses a lot of information (20%), while SLT loses
10% further, and so does the TTS. Judges are quite
close to the objective validation and found most of
the answers they could possibly do.
Excerpts subj. E2E
L043-1 66
L043-2 90
L043-3 88
T036-1 80
T036-2 81
T036-3 76
Mean 80
Table 8: Evaluation results for interpreter, re-
stricted to the questions for which answers can be
found in the interpreter speech [%].
Subjective results for the restricted evaluation
are similar to the previous results, on the full data
(80% vs 74% of the information found by the
judges). Performance is good for the interpreter:
98% of the information correctly translated by the
automatic system is also correctly interpreted by
the human. Although we can not compare the
performance of the restricted automatic system to
that of the restricted interpreter (since data sets of
questions are different), it seems that of the inter-
preter is better. However, the loss due to subjective
evaluation seems to be higher for the interpreter
than for the automatic system.
7 Conclusions
Regarding the SLT evaluation, the results achieved
with the simultaneous translation system are still
rather low compared to the results achieved with
offline systems for translating European parlia-
ment speeches in TC-STAR. However, the offline
systems had almost no latency constraints, and
parliament speeches are much easier to recognize
and translate when compared to the more spon-
taneous talks and lectures focused in this paper.
This clearly shows the difficulty of the whole task.
However, the human end-to-end evaluation of the
system in which the system is compared with hu-
man interpretation shows that the current transla-
tion quality allows for understanding of at least
half of the content, and therefore, may be already
quite helpful for people not understanding the lan-
guage of the lecturer at all.
352
References
Rajai Al-Khanji, Said El-Shiyab, and Riyadh Hussein.
2000. On the Use of Compensatory Strategies in Si-
multaneous Interpretation. Meta : Journal des tra-
ducteurs, 45(3):544?557.
Jacob Cohen. 1960. A coefficient of agreement for
nominal scales. In Educational and Psychological
Measurement, volume 20, pages 37?46.
Christian F?gen and Muntsin Kolss. 2007. The influ-
ence of utterance chunking on machine translation
performance. In Proc. of the European Conference
on Speech Communication and Technology (INTER-
SPEECH), Antwerp, Belgium, August. ISCA.
Christian F?gen, Martin Westphal, Mike Schneider,
Tanja Schultz, and Alex Waibel. 2001. LingWear:
A Mobile Tourist Information System. In Proc. of
the Human Language Technology Conf. (HLT), San
Diego, California, March. NIST.
Christian F?gen, Shajith Ikbal, Florian Kraft, Kenichi
Kumatani, Kornel Laskowski, John W. McDonough,
Mari Ostendorf, Sebastian St?ker, and Matthias
W?lfel. 2006a. The isl rt-06s speech-to-text system.
In Steve Renals, Samy Bengio, and Jonathan Fiskus,
editors, Machine Learning for Multimodal Interac-
tion: Third International Workshop, MLMI 2006,
Bethesda, MD, USA, volume 4299 of Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, pages 407?418. Springer Ver-
lag Berlin/ Heidelberg.
Christian F?gen, Muntsin Kolss, Matthias Paulik, and
Alex Waibel. 2006b. Open Domain Speech Trans-
lation: From Seminars and Speeches to Lectures.
In TC-Star Speech to Speech Translation Workshop,
Barcelona, Spain, June.
Donna Gates, Alon Lavie, Lori Levin, Alex. Waibel,
Marsal Gavalda, Laura Mayfield, and Monika Wosz-
cyna. 1996. End-to-end evaluation in janus: A
speech-to-speech translation system. In Proceed-
ings of the 6th ECAI, Budapest.
Olivier Hamon, Djamel Mostefa, and Khalid Choukri.
2007. End-to-end evaluation of a speech-to-speech
translation system in tc-star. In Proceedings of the
MT Summit XI, Copenhagen, Denmark, September.
Muntsin Kolss, Bing Zhao, Stephan Vogel, Ashish
Venugopal, and Ying Zhang. 2006. The ISL Statis-
tical Machine Translation System for the TC-STAR
Spring 2006 Evaluations. In TC-Star Workshop
on Speech-to-Speech Translation, Barcelona, Spain,
December.
Andrzej Kopczynski, 1994. Bridging the Gap: Empiri-
cal Research in Simultaneous Interpretation, chapter
Quality in Conference Interpreting: Some Pragmatic
Problems, pages 87?100. John Benjamins, Amster-
dam/ Philadelphia.
J. Richard Landis and Gary G. Koch. 1977. The mea-
surement of observer agreement for categorical data.
In Biometrics, Vol. 33, No. 1 (Mar., 1977), pp. 159-
174.
Barbara Moser-Mercer, Alexander Kunzli, and Ma-
rina Korac. 1998. Prolonged turns in interpreting:
Effects on quality, physiological and psychological
stress (pilot study). Interpreting: International jour-
nal of research and practice in interpreting, 3(1):47?
64.
Sonja Niessen, Franz Josef Och, Gregor Leusch, and
Hermann Ney. 2000. An evaluation tool for ma-
chine translation: Fast evaluation for mt research.
In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation, Athens,
Greece.
Rita N?bel. 1997. End-to-end Evaluation in Verb-
mobil I. In Proceedings of the MT Summit VI, San
Diego.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2001. Bleu: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. Technical Report
RC22176 (W0109-022), Research Report, Com-
puter Science IBM Research Division, T.J.Watson
Research Center.
Accipio Consulting Volker Steinbiss. 2006.
Sprachtechnologien f?r Europa. www.tc-star.
org/pubblicazioni/D17_HLT_DE.pdf.
John S. White and Theresa A. O?Connell. 1994.
Evaluation in the arpa machine translation program:
1993 methodology. In HLT ?94: Proceedings of the
workshop on Human Language Technology, pages
135?140, Morristown, NJ, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Sane M. Yagi. 2000. Studying Style in Simultane-
ous Interpretation. Meta : Journal des traducteurs,
45(3):520?547.
353
Coling 2008: Companion volume ? Posters and Demonstrations, pages 39?42
Manchester, August 2008
The Impact of Reference Quality on Automatic MT Evaluation 
Olivier Hamon1,2 and Djamel Mostefa1 
(1) Evaluation and Language Resources Distribution Agency (ELDA) 
55-57 rue Brillat-Savarin, 75013 Paris, France 
(2) LIPN (UMR 7030) ? Universit? Paris 13 & CNRS 
99 av. J.-B. Cl?ment, 93430 Villetaneuse, France 
{hamon,mostefa}@elda.org 
 
Abstract 
Language resource quality is crucial in 
NLP. Many of the resources used are de-
rived from data created by human beings 
out of an NLP context, especially regard-
ing MT and reference translations. In-
deed, automatic evaluations need high-
quality data that allow the comparison of 
both automatic and human translations. 
The validation of these resources is 
widely recommended before being used. 
This paper describes the impact of using 
different-quality references on evalua-
tion. Surprisingly enough, similar scores 
are obtained in many cases regardless of 
the quality. Thus, the limitations of the 
automatic metrics used within MT are 
also discussed in this regard.  
1 Introduction 
Language resources (LRs) are essential compo-
nents in research and development of NLP sys-
tems. However, the production of most LRs is 
done by human beings and is therefore subject to 
errors or imperfections. The creation of LRs re-
quires a quality assurance procedure that helps 
control their quality and make sure that they 
comply with the specifications. 
The importance of validation criteria is even 
higher when it comes to evaluation, as reference 
LRs are used to measure system performance and, 
thus, quality. An evaluation must be done in a 
suitable qualitative framework and data used 
should be as good-quality as possible. Bearing 
                                                 
 
 ? 2008. Licensed under the Creative Commons At-
tribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported 
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-
sa/3.0/). Some rights reserved. 
that in mind, validation standards have been de-
fined (Van den Heuvel et al, 2003) and re-
sources should follow the specifications as close 
as possible for that purpose. 
The problem also applies to reference transla-
tions in MT. Most of the automatic metrics used 
compare human reference translations to the out-
put obtained from MT systems. Generally, more 
than one reference is used to get multiple transla-
tion possibilities (Papineni et al, 2001), but the 
evaluation of sentences depends highly on the 
human reference(s) translation(s) used. However, 
only a few studies have gone deeper into a defi-
nition of quality and have tried to detail how to 
evaluate it (Van den Heuvel & Sanders, 2006). 
N-gram metrics give scores that strongly depend 
on the reference and, thus, we wonder how much 
scores computed with a poor reference transla-
tion diverge from the ones computed with a high 
quality reference translation. This paper focuses 
on two issues: 1) how to validate the quality of a 
human translation; 2) study of the impact of the 
quality of reference translations on MT evalua-
tions. The final objective behind this work is to 
find out to what an extent a validation is useful 
within the evaluation protocol. The building of 
reference translations is very time and money 
consuming, but the cost of validation should not 
be underestimated either (Fers?e et al, 2006). 
2 Context 
In our experiments, we used the material from 
the TC-STAR 1  second evaluation campaign 
(Mostefa et al, 2006) and the third one (Mostefa 
et al, 2007). For both campaigns, three language 
directions were used: English-to-Spanish (EnEs), 
Spanish-to-English (EsEn) and Chinese-to-
English (ZhEn). Data came from European Par-
liament Plenary Sessions (EPPS) for EnES and 
                                                 
1
 http://www.tc-star.org 
39
EsEn, Spanish Parliament Sessions (Cortes) for 
EsEn, and Voice of America (VoA) for ZhEn. 
Three kinds of input were considered: automatic 
transcriptions from Automatic Speech Recogni-
tion (ASR) systems, manual transcriptions (Ver-
batim) and Final Text Editions (FTE) provided 
by the European Parliament. This represents 14 
sets consisting of source documents, reference 
translations translated twice by two different 
agencies, and translations obtained from MT sys-
tems. Each set contains around 25,000 words. 
Therefore, we had an overall set of 28 reference 
translations on the evaluations, directions and 
inputs from both years. During the campaigns, 
MT systems have been evaluated with automatic 
metrics such as BLEU (Papineni et al, 2001). 
3 Validation 
3.1 Guidelines 
The quality of reference translations is consid-
ered in two ways. First, translation guidelines are 
given to the translators. Then, translated files are 
sent to a validation agency in order to check their 
quality according to the defined criteria. 
Guidelines were produced within the TC-
STAR project. They were discussed internally 
but also with the Linguistic Data Consortium 
(LDC) who has had the experience of producing 
many reference translations. 
Translation agencies are informed about the 
quality control and extra attention is paid to the 
recommendations given for translation quality: 
meaning and style should remain as close to the 
original source documents as possible; no addi-
tional annotations should be added to the transla-
tion; capitalization has to be carefully respected; 
the translation of neologisms and unknown 
words should take into account the speaker?s in-
tention; date format should also follow the estab-
lished conventions, etc. 
3.2 Criteria and Procedure 
For each reference translation of the three 
language directions, the Speech Processing 
EXpertise centre (SPEX)2  validated 600 words 
from contiguous segments randomly selected. 
Translations were checked by professional 
translators, who classified errors into categories. 
Points are given to references, according to the 
penalty scheme presented in Table 1. 
 
 
                                                 
2
 http://www.spex.nl 
Penalty points Error category 
Year 2 Year 3 
Syntactical 4 3 
Deviation from guidelines 3 - 
Lexical 2 3 
Poor usage 1 1 
Capitalization - 1 
Punctuation / spelling (max.10) 0.5 0.5 
Table 1. Translation errors penalties. 
 
In order to be considered valid, a reference 
translation must have less than 40 penalty points. 
A non-valid reference translation is sent back to 
the translation agency/ies to be proofread and 
improved with the help of an errors report. 
3.3 Typical Errors 
Most errors are lexical ones, followed by poor 
usage of the language. Syntactic and spelling 
category errors are considerably fewer. In terms 
on input type, the number of lexical, spelling and 
syntactic errors is higher for FTE than Verbatim. 
On the other hand, the number of errors for usage 
and deviation from guidelines (including global 
translation quality) is higher for Verbatim. 
Likewise, general errors are more frequent for 
English-to-Spanish than for Spanish-to-English. 
Chinese-to-English produces many more errors, 
in particular lexical ones. Syntactic errors could 
be wrong placement of adjective, wrong choice 
of person for pronouns, wrong use of verb tense 
or use of adjective as noun. Deviations from 
guidelines do not offer a wide variety: word/part 
of sentence omission, proper nouns mistransla-
tion or translation quality/odd sentence problems. 
Thus, they have been regrouped under the others 
for the 3rd year evaluation. Lexical errors show 
the widest variety, probably due to the specificity 
of the vocabulary: mistranslation of acronyms, 
wrong word order, missing plural, literal transla-
tion, bad terminology or approximation, wrong 
preposition or translation inconsistencies. Other 
errors are wrong punctuation or spelling errors. 
All these errors will lower the quality of the 
reference translations, which would imply a bi-
ased evaluation. The aim of the validation is then 
to reduce, as much as possible, the impact of 
mistranslation in order to improve a priori the 
assessment of the automatic translations. 
4 Results 
The following format is adopted for each set: 
?Year/Data-Input_Direction?, e.g. ?3/EPPS-FTE 
_EsEn? refers to the third-year set on Spanish-to-
English using the FTE input on EPPS data. 
40
4.1 Results of the Validation 
On the overall 14 sets, 10 sets have been trans-
lated again and revalidated at least once (for ei-
ther one or the two reference translations). Table 
2 gives the scores of validation for each of these 
sets together with the Word Error Rate with its 
respective validated reference. The left-hand side 
number gives the result for the first reference and 
the right-hand side one gives the result for the 
second reference. The different lines for each set 
give results for the different types of reference 
(from intermediate to final), thus showing the 
evolution of their validation. 
Validation score WER / final 
reference Set 
Ref 1 Ref 2 Ref 1 Ref 2 
3/EPPS-
FTE_EsEn 
59.5 
18 
18 
104.5 
73.5 
38 
12.5 
- 
8.2 
1.3 
3/Cortes-
FTE_EsEn 
43.5 
34 
34 
120.5 
70.5 
35 
6.2 
- 
5.1 
1.2 
3/Cortes-
Verb_EsEn 
54 
26.5 
67 
22.5 
0.5 0.3 
3/VoA-
Verb_ZhEn 
130 
53.5 
27 
129 
37 
37 
24.2 
6.3 
15.3 
- 
2/EPPS-
FTE_EnEs 
23 
23 
31 
23.5 
- 0.9 
2/EPPS-
FTE_EsEn 
18.5 
18.5 
33 
17 
- 2.6 
2/EPPS-
Verb_EnEs 
59.5 
11.5 
17 
17 
0.7 - 
2/Cortes-
FTE_EsEn 
42 
6 
61.5 
9 
0.2 5.3 
2/Cortes-
Verb_EsEn 
69 
18.5 
54 
0 
20.7 4.7 
2/VoA-
Verb_ZhEn 
84 
39.5 
38 
38 
17.0 - 
Table 2. Validation scores of reference translations 
and WER between intermediate (upper line) and 
final references (bottom line) for the first reference 
(Ref 1) and the second one (Ref 2). 
 
The mean score for the reference translations 
before any correction takes place is around 71, 
while after correction this is around 23. Thus, 
final translations are not perfect but their quality 
is sufficient to serve as reference. However, a 
maximum of 130 is obtained from the translation 
for Chinese-to-English, which seems to be more 
difficult than the other directions. WER was also 
computed between the non-validated translations 
and their corresponding validated versions. As it 
can be observed, are not necessarily very high 
and many WER values are below 1%. 
4.2 Intermediate vs. Final Reference 
When comparing the differences between the 
validation scores and WER for each translation, 
no correlation is found. The correlation coeffi-
cient between the score differences and the WER 
is around 58%. For instance, a score difference 
of 36 between non-validated and validated refer-
ences corresponds to a WER of 0.2, while an-
other difference of 26.5 corresponds to a WER of 
6.3. There is no direct correlation between the 
quality of the references and the WER scores. 
Thus, a priori, the quality of reference transla-
tions has no impact on the WER, which could be 
extended to the scoring of MT systems. Indeed, 
if WER does not reflect in a precise manner the 
quality increase of a human translation, how can 
it be useful/reliable for scoring MT systems? 
Figure 1 presents the correlation between these 
score differences and WER. It shows that quality 
is not necessarily well correlated with WER. The 
explanation is twofold: firstly, the improvement 
of a human translation does not necessarily imply 
many changes; secondly, WER does not reflect 
the quality of a translation accurately, as it does 
not seem to focus on essential language issues. 
0
5
10
15
20
25
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
Score difference
W
ER
 
Figure 1. Correlation of score difference  and WER 
between non-validated and validated references. 
4.3 BLEU Results of MT Systems 
BLEU scores have been computed for MT sys-
tem output, using each set and each reference 
(whether validated or not). Then, either scores 
are quite identical or scores are slightly diver-
gent. With the aim of studying this in detail, we 
assembled together the mean difference BLEU 
scores and the WER (against the final reference) 
for all the intermediate reference translations, as 
shown in Table 3. 
The correlation coefficient between the abso-
lute value of the mean difference score and mean 
of the WER is around 80%. Thus, the changes 
made into the references seem to have an impact 
on BLEU scores. However, given that quality is 
not correlated with WER, the absolute variation 
of the BLEU scores cannot be interpreted as a 
41
difference in MT system quality. It rather shows 
that comparing systems is the only plausible 
thing with BLEU, instead of evaluating systems 
in an absolute way. 
Set Mean diff. BLEU score 
WER / final 
reference 
3/EPPS-FTE_EsEn 1.18 
-0.08 
12.5 / 8.2 
- / 1.3 
3/Cortes-FTE_EsEn 0.67 0.035 
6.2 / 5.1 
- / 1.2 
3/Cortes-Verb_EsEn 0.021 0.5 / 0.3 
3/VoA-Verb_ZhEn -1.71 0.001 
24.2 / 15.3 
6.3 / - 
2/EPPS-FTE_EnEs 0.02 - / 0.9 
2/EPPS-FTE_EsEn 0.24 - / 2.6 
2/EPPS-Verb_EnEs -0.05 0.7 / - 
2/Cortes-FTE_EsEn 1.152 0.2 / 5.3 
2/Cortes-Verb_EsEn -2.21 20.7 / 4.7 
2/VoA-Verb_ZhEn 0.08 17.0 / - 
Table 3. Mean difference BLEU scores for each 
reference translation and WER between interme-
diate and final references. 
4.4 Correlations of systems? evaluations 
Correlations for BLEU scores were computed 
between 2 different-quality references. This al-
lowed us to obtain 2 correlation coefficients for 2 
non-validated references. For the correlation on 
scores, all coefficients are over 99%, so that even 
if scores increase or decrease, the distance be-
tween systems does not change. This is con-
firmed by the correlation on ranks, since the co-
efficients are between 96% and 100%. Thus, bet-
ter reference translations could hardly distinguish 
MT systems in an easier way during evaluation. 
5 Discussion and Conclusions 
This work has used the BLEU metric to score 
MT system output and has demonstrated that the 
quality of reference translations does not have a 
clear impact on WER, also using n-grams. Even 
when using lower-quality translations, scores 
remain similar from one reference to another and 
important modifications of the human translation  
do not affect strongly the scores of the MT sys-
tems. This behaviour concerns all the languages 
tested, and remains the same regardless of the 
input or language used. However, we should not 
forget that the context of this experiment con-
cerns actual automatic metrics. When reference 
translations have been modified, the impact on 
scores is not that clear, and even worse, this im-
pact could be argued, to a certain extent, when 
the aim is to compare systems. Indeed, we also 
observed changes into scores when references 
were modified. Moreover, the quality of MT sys-
tems should not be ignored: if the overall quality 
of a system output is low, changes in reference 
translation will certainly have a lower impact on 
their scores. 
Over the modification of the scores, the vali-
dation of the reference translation leads up to the 
validation criteria (although they are rigorously 
defined they are sometimes not very easy to ap-
ply by the validation team), the consistencies 
between agencies and translators (differences 
between reference translations show how the 
human translation quality may vary according to 
the translator) and some errors made by agencies 
(could be argued and validation can be difficult 
depending on the context, input, etc). Those 
points have to be carefully checked during a 
validation procedure and scores given by auto-
matic metrics should be studied in agreement 
with the variation of the quality and validation. 
Acknowledgements 
This work was supported by the TC-STAR pro-
ject (grant number IST-506738). We would like 
to thank SPEX, especially Henk Van den Heuvel 
and Eric Sanders, for the validation work. Our 
thanks also to Victoria Arranz for her help. 
References 
Fers?e H., Van den Heuvel H., Olsen S. 2006. Valida-
tion of third party Spoken and Written Language 
Resources Methods for performing Quick Quality 
Checks. Proceedings of Workshop ?Quality assur-
ance and quality measurement for language and 
speech resources?, LREC 2006, Genoa, Italy. 
Mostefa D., Garcia M-N., Hamon O. and Moreau N. 
2006. Evaluation report, Technology and Corpora 
for Speech to Speech Translation (TC-STAR) pro-
ject. Deliverable D16. 
Mostefa D., Hamon O., Moreau N. and Choukri K. 
2007. Evaluation report, Technology and Corpora 
for Speech to Speech Translation (TC-STAR) pro-
ject. Deliverable D30. 
Papineni K, Roukos S, Ward T, and Wei-Jing Z. 
2001. BLEU: A Method for Automatic Evaluation 
of Machine Translation. IBM Research Division, 
Thomas J. Watson Research Center. 
Van den Heuvel H., Choukri K., H?ge H., Maegaard 
B., Odijk J., Mapelli V. 2003. Quality Control of 
Language Resources at ELRA. Proceedings of Eu-
rospeech, Geneva, Switzerland, pp. 1541-1544. 
42
Coling 2008: Proceedings of the workshop on Cross-Framework and Cross-Domain Parser Evaluation, pages 36?43
Manchester, August 2008
Large Scale Production of Syntactic Annotations to Move Forward
Patrick Paroubek, Anne Vilnat, Sylvain Loiseau
LIMSI-CNRS
BP 133 91403 Orsay Cedex
France
prenom.nom@limsi.fr
Gil Francopoulo
Tagmatica
126 rue de Picpus 75012 Paris
France
gil.francopoulo@tagmatica.com
Olivier Hamon
ELDA and LIPN-P13
55-57 rue Brillat-Savarin 75013 Paris,
France
hamon@elda.org
Eric Villemonte de la Clergerie
Alpage-INRIA
Dom. de Voluceau Rocquencourt,
B.P. 105, 78153 Le Chesnay, France
Eric.De La Clergerie@inria.fr
Abstract
This article presents the methodology of
the PASSAGE project, aiming at syntacti-
cally annotating large corpora by compos-
ing annotations. It introduces the anno-
tation format and the syntactic annotation
specifications. It describes an important
component of the methodolgy, namely an
WEB-based evaluation service, deployed
in the context of the first PASSAGE parser
evaluation campaign.
1 Introduction
The last decade has seen, at the international level,
the emergence of a very strong trend of researches
on statistical methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing. In our opinion, one of its origins, in
particular for English, is the availability of large
annotated corpora, such as the Penn Treebank
(1M words extracted from the Wall Street journal,
with syntactic annotations; 2
nd
release in 1995
1
,
the British National Corpus (100M words cover-
ing various styles annotated with parts of speech
2
),
or the Brown Corpus (1M words with morpho-
syntactic annotations). Such annotated corpora
were very valuable to extract stochastic grammars
or to parametrize disambiguation algorithms. For
instance (Miyao et al, 2004) report an experiment
where an HPSG grammar is semi-automatically
aquired from the Penn Treebank, by first annotat-
ing the treebank with partially specified derivation
c
? 2008. Licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported li-
cense (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/).
Some rights reserved.
1
http://www.cis.upenn.edu/
?
treebank/
2
http://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk/
trees using heuristic rules , then by extracting lex-
ical entries with the application of inverse gram-
mar rules. (Cahill et al, 2004) managed to ex-
tract LFG subcategorisation frames and paths link-
ing long distance dependencies reentrancies from
f-structures generated automatically for the Penn-
II treebank trees and used them in an long distance
dependency resolution algorithm to parse new text.
They achieved around 80% f-score for fstructures
parsing on the WSJ part of the Penn-II treebank,
a score comparable to the ones of the state-of-
the-art hand-crafted grammars. With similar re-
sults, (Hockenmaier and Steedman, 2007) trans-
lated the Penn Treebank into a corpus of Combina-
tory Categorial Grammar (CCG) derivations aug-
mented with local and long-range word to word
dependencies and used it to train wide-coverage
statistical parsers. The development of the Penn
Treebank have led to many similar proposals of
corpus annotations
3
. However, the development of
such treebanks is very costly from an human point
of view and represents a long standing effort, in
particular for getting of rid of the annotation errors
or inconsistencies, unavoidable for any kind of hu-
man annotation. Despite the growing number of
annotated corpora, the volume of data that can be
manually annotated remains limited thus restrict-
ing the experiments that can be tried on automatic
grammar acquisition. Furthermore, designing an
annotated corpus involves choices that may block
future experiments from acquiring new kinds of
linguistic knowledge because they necessitate an-
notation incompatible or difficult to produce from
the existing ones.
With PASSAGE (de la Clergerie et al, 2008b),
we believe that a new option becomes possible.
3
http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de/
projekte/TIGER/related/links.shtml
36
Funded by the French ANR program on Data
Warehouses and Knowledge, PASSAGE is a 3-
year project (2007?2009), coordinated by INRIA
project-team Alpage. It builds up on the re-
sults of the EASy French parsing evaluation cam-
paign, funded by the French Technolangue pro-
gram, which has shown that French parsing sys-
tems are now available, ranging from shallow to
deep parsing. Some of these systems were nei-
ther based on statistics, nor extracted from a tree-
bank. While needing to be improved in robustness,
coverage, and accuracy, these systems has nev-
ertheless proved the feasibility to parse medium
amount of data (1M words). Preliminary experi-
ments made by some of the participants with deep
parsers (Sagot and Boullier, 2006) indicate that
processing more than 10 M words is not a prob-
lem, especially by relying on clusters of machines.
These figures can even be increased for shallow
parsers. In other words, there now exists sev-
eral French parsing systems that could parse (and
re-parse if needed) large corpora between 10 to
100 M words.
Passage aims at pursuing and extending the
line of research initiated by the EASy campaign
by using jointly 10 of the parsing systems that
have participated to EASy. They will be used to
parse and re-parse a French corpus of more than
100 M words along the following feedback loop
between parsing and resource creation as follows
(de la Clergerie et al, 2008a):
1. Parsing creates syntactic annotations;
2. Syntactic annotations create or enrich linguis-
tic resources such as lexicons, grammars or
annotated corpora;
3. Linguistic resources created or enriched on
the basis of the syntactic annotations are then
integrated into the existing parsers;
4. The enriched parsers are used to create richer
(e.g., syntactico-semantic) annotations;
5. etc. going back to step 1
In order to improve the set of parameters of
the parse combination algorithm (inspired from
the Recognizer Output Voting Error Reduction,
i.e. ROVER, experiments), two parsing evalu-
ation campaigns are planned during PASSAGE,
the first of these already took place at the end of
2007 (de la Clergerie et al, 2008b). In the follow-
ing, we present the annotation format specification
and the syntactic annotation specifications of PAS-
SAGE, then give an account of how the syntactic
annotations were compared in the first evaluation
campaign, by first describing the evaluation met-
rics and the web server infrastructure that was de-
ployed to process them. We conclude by showing
how the results so far achieved in PASSAGE will
contribute to the second part of the project, extract-
ing and refining enriched linguistic annotations.
2 PASSAGE Annotation Format
The aim is to allow an explicit representation of
syntactic annotations for French, whether such an-
notations come from human annotators or parsers.
The representation format is intended to be used
both in the evaluation of different parsers, so the
parses? representations should be easily compara-
ble, and in the construction of a large scale anno-
tation treebank which requires that all French con-
structions can be represented with enough details.
The format is based on three distinct specifica-
tions and requirements:
1. MAF (ISO 24611)
4
and SynAF (ISO 24615)
5
which are the ISO TC37 specifications for
morpho-syntactic and syntactic annotation
(Ide and Romary, 2002) (Declerck, 2006)
(Francopoulo, 2008). Let us note that these
specifications cannot be called ?standards?
because they are work in progress and these
documents do not yet have the status Pub-
lished Standard. Currently, their official sta-
tus is only Committee Draft.
2. The format used during the previous TECH-
NOLANGUE/EASY evaluation campaign
in order to minimize porting effort for the ex-
isting tools and corpora.
3. The degree of legibility of the XML tagging.
From a technical point of view, the format is a
compromise between ?standoff? and ?embedded?
notation. The fine grain level of tokens and words
is standoff (wrt the primary document) but higher
levels use embedded annotations. A standoff nota-
tion is usually considered more powerful but less
4
http://lirics.loria.fr/doc pub/maf.pdf
5
http://lirics.loria.fr/doc pub/
N421 SynAF CD ISO 24615.pdf
37
Figure 1: UML diagram of the structure of an an-
notated document
readable and not needed when the annotations fol-
low a (unambiguous) tree-like structure. Let us
add that, at all levels, great care has been taken to
ensure that the format is mappable onto MAF and
SynAF, which are basically standoff notations.
The structure of a PASSAGE annotated docu-
ment may be summarized with the UML diagram
in Figure1. The document begins by the declara-
tion of all the morpho-syntactic tagsets (MSTAG)
that will be used within the document. These dec-
larations respect the ISO Standard Feature Struc-
ture Representation (ISO 24610-1). Then, tokens
are declared. They are the smallest unit address-
able by other annotations. A token is unsplittable
and holds an identifier, a character range, and a
content made of the original character string. A
word form is an element referencing one or sev-
eral tokens. It has has two mandatory attributes:
an identifier and a list of tokens. Some optional at-
tributes are allowed like a part of speech, a lemma,
an inflected form (possibly after spelling correc-
tion or case normalization) and morpho-syntactic
tags. The following XML fragment shows how
the original fragment ?Les chaises? can be repre-
sented with all the optional attributes offered by
the PASSAGE annotation format :
<T id="t0" start="0" end="3">
Les
</T>
<W id="w0" tokens="t0"
pos="definiteArticle"
lemma="le"
form="les"
mstag="nP"/>
<T id="t1" start="4" end="11">
chaises
</T>
<W id="w1" tokens="t1"
pos="commonNoun"
lemma="chaise"
form="chaises"
mstag="nP gF"/>
Note that all parts of speech are taken from the
ISO registry
6
(Francopoulo et al, 2008). As in
MAF, a word may refer to several tokens in or-
der to represent multi-word units like ?pomme de
terre?. Conversely, a unique token may be refered
by two different words in order to represent results
of split based spelling correction like when ?un-
etable? is smartly separated into the words ?une?
and ?table?. The same configuration is required to
represent correctly agglutination in fused preposi-
tions like the token ?au? that may be rewritten into
the sequence of two words ?`a? ?le?. On the con-
trary of MAF, cross-reference in token-word links
for discontiguous spans is not allowed for the sake
of simplicity. Let us add that one of our require-
ment is to have PASSAGE annotations mappable
onto the MAF model and not to map all MAF an-
notations onto PASSAGE model. A G element de-
notes a syntactic group or a constituent (see details
in section 3). It may be recursive or non-recursive
and has an identifier, a type, and a content made of
word forms or groups, if recursive. All group type
values are taken from the ISO registry. Here is an
example :
<T id="t0" start="0" end="3">
Les
</T>
<T id="t1" start="4" end="11">
chaises
</T>
<G id="g0" type="GN">
<W id="w0" tokens="t0"/>
<W id="w1" tokens="t1"/>
</G>
A group may also hold optional attributes like syn-
tactic tagsets of MSTAG type. The syntactic re-
lations are represented with a standoff annotations
which refer to groups and word forms. A relation
is defined by an identifier, a type, a source, and a
target (see details in section 3. All relation types,
like ?subject? or ?direct object? are mappable onto
the ISO registry. An unrestricted number of com-
ments may be added to any element by means of
the mark element (i.e. M). Finally, a ?Sentence?
6
Data Category Registry, see http://syntax.
inist.fr
38
element gathers tokens, word forms, groups, rela-
tions and marks and all sentences are included in-
side a ?Document? element.
3 PASSAGE Syntactic Annotation
Specification
3.1 Introduction
The annotation formalism used in PASSAGE
7
is
based on the EASY one(Vilnat et al, 2004) which
whose first version was crafted in an experimental
project PEAS (Gendner et al, 2003), with inspira-
tion taken from the propositions of (Carroll et al,
2002). The definition has been completed with the
input of all the actors involved in the EASY evalu-
ation campaign (both parsers? developers and cor-
pus providers) and refined with the input of PAS-
SAGE participants. This formalism aims at mak-
ing possible the comparison of all kinds of syn-
tactic annotation (shallow or deep parsing, com-
plete or partial analysis), without giving any ad-
vantage to any particular approach. It has six
kinds of syntactic ?chunks?, we call constituents
and 14 kinds of relations The annotation formal-
ism allows the annotation of minimal, continuous
and non recursive constituents, as well as the en-
coding of relations wich represent syntactic func-
tions. These relations (all of them being binary, ex-
cept for the ternary coordination) have sources and
targets which may be either forms or constituents
(grouping several forms). Note that the PASSAGE
annotation formalism does not postulate any ex-
plicit lexical head.
3.2 Constituent annotations
For the PASSAGE campaigns, 6 kinds of con-
stituents (syntactic ?chunks?) have been consid-
ered and are illustrated in Table 3.2:
? the Noun Phrase (GN for Groupe Nominal)
may be made of a noun preceded by a de-
terminer and/or by an adjective with its own
modifiers, a proper noun or a pronoun;
? the prepositional phrase (GP, for groupe
pr?epositionnel ) may be made of a preposi-
tion and the GN it introduces, a contracted
determiner and preposition, followed by the
introduced GN, a preposition followed by an
adverb or a relative pronoun replacing a GP;
7
Annotation guide: http://www.limsi.fr/
Recherche/CORVAL/PASSAGE/eval 1/2007 10
05PEAS reference annotations v11.12.html
? the verb kernel (NV for noyau verbal ) in-
cludes a verb, the clitic pronouns and possible
particles attached to it. Verb kernels may have
different forms: conjugated tense, present or
past participle, or infinitive. When the con-
jugation produces compound forms, distinct
NVs are identified;
? the adjective phrase (GA for groupe adjec-
tival) contains an adjective when it is not
placed before the noun, or past or present par-
ticiples when they are used as adjectives;
? the adverb phrase (GR for groupe adverbial )
contains an adverb;
? the verb phrase introduced by a preposition
(PV) is a verb kernel with a verb not inflected
(infinitive, present participle,...), introduced
by a preposition. Some modifiers or adverbs
may also be included in PVs.
GN - la tr`es grande porte
8
(the very big door);
- Rouletabille
- eux (they), qui (who)
GP - de la chambre (from the bedroom),
- du pavillon (from the lodge)
- de l`a (from there), dont (whose)
NV - j?entendais (I heared)
- [on ne l?entendait]
9
plus
(we could no more hear her)
- Jean [viendra] (Jean will come)
- [d?esob?eissant] `a leurs parents
(disobeying their parents),
- [ferm?ee] `a clef (key closed)
- Il [ne veut] pas [venir]
(He doesn?t want to come),
- [ils n??etaient] pas [ferm?es]
(they were not closed),
GA - les barreaux [intacts] (the intact bars)
- la solution [retenue] fut...
(the chosen solution has been...),
- les enfants [d?esob?eissants]
(the disobeying children)
GR - aussi (also)
- vous n?auriez [pas] (you would not)
PV - [pour aller] `a Paris (for going to Paris),
- de vraiment bouger (to really move)
Table 1: Constituent examples
39
3.2.1 Syntactic Relation annotations
The dependencies establish all the links between
the minimal constituents described above. All par-
ticipants, corpus providers and campaign organiz-
ers agreed on a list of 14 kinds of dependencies
listed below:
1. subject-verb (SUJ V): may be inside the
same NV as between elle and ?etait in elle
?etait (she was), or between a GN and a NV as
between mademoiselle and appelait in Made-
moiselle appelait (Miss was calling);
2. auxiliary-verb (AUX V), between two NVs
as between a and construit in: on a construit
une maison (we have built a house);
3. direct object-verb (COD V): the relation is
annotated between a main verb (NV) and a
noun phrase (GN), as between construit and
la premi`ere automobile in: on a construit la
premi`ere automobile (we have built the first
car);
4. complement-verb (CPL V): to link to the
verb the complements expressed as GP or PV
which may be adjuncts or indirect objects, as
between en quelle ann?ee and construit in en
quelle ann?ee a-t on construit la premi`ere au-
tomobile (In which year did we build the first
car);
5. modifier-verb (MOD V): concerns the con-
stituants which certainly modify the verb,
and are not mandatory, as adverbs or adjunct
clauses, as between profond?ement or quand
la nuit tombe and dort in Jean dort pro-
fond?ement quand la nuit tombe (Jean deeply
sleeps when the night falls);
6. complementor (COMP): to link the intro-
ducer and the verb kernel of a subordinate
clause, as between qu? and viendra in Je
pense qu?il viendra (I think that he will
come); it is also used to link a preposition and
a noun phrase when they are not contiguous,
preventing us to annotate them as GP;
7. attribute-subject/object (ATB SO): between
the attribute and the verb kernel, and precis-
ing that the attribute is relative to (a) the sub-
ject as between grand and est in il est grand
), or (b) the object as between ?etrange and
trouve in il trouve cette explication ?etrange;
8. modifier-noun (MOD N): to link to the noun
all the constituents which modify it, as the ad-
jective, the genitive, the relative clause... This
dependency is annotated between unique and
fen?etre in l?unique fen?etre (the unique win-
dow) or between de la chambre and la porte
in la porte de la chambre (the bedroom door);
9. modifier-adjective (MOD A): to relate to the
adjective the constituents which modify it, as
between tr`es et belle in ?la tr`es belle collec-
tion (the very impressive collection) or be-
tween de son fils and fi`ere in elle est fi`ere de
son fils (she is proud of her son);
10. modifier-adverb (MOD R): the same kind of
dependency than MOD A for the adverbs, as
between tr`es and gentiment in elle vient tr`es
gentiment (she comes very kindly);
11. modifier-preposition (MOD P): to relate to
a preposition what modifies it, as between
peu and avant in elle vient peu avant lui (she
comes just before him);
12. coordination (COORD): to relate the coor-
dinate and the coordinated elements, as be-
tween Pierre, Paul and et in Pierre et Paul
arrivent (Paul and Pierre are arriving);
13. apposition (APP): to link the elements which
are placed side by side, when they refer to the
same object, as between le d?eput?e and Yves
Tavernier in Le d?eput?e Yves Tavernier ... (the
Deputy Yves Tavernier...);
14. juxtaposition (JUXT): to link constituents
which are neither coordinate nor in an appo-
sition relation, as in enumeration. It also links
clauses as on ne l?entendait et elle ?etait in
on ne l? entendait plus ... elle ?etait peut-?etre
morte (we did not hear her any more... per-
haps she was dead).
Some dependencies are illustrated in the two an-
notated sentences illutrated in figure . These anno-
tations have been made using EasyRef, a specific
Web annotation tool developed by INRIA.
4 PASSAGE First Evaluation Campaign
4.1 Evalution Service
The first PASSAGE evaluation campaign was
carried out in two steps. During the ini-
tial one-month development phase, a develop-
ment corpus was used to improve the quality of
40
Figure 2: Example of two sentences annotations
parsers. This development corpus from the TECH-
NOLANGUE/EASY is composed of 40,000 sen-
tences, out of which 4,000 sentences have been
manually annotated for the gold standard. Based
on these annotated sentences, an automatic WEB-
based evaluation server provides fast performance
feedback to the parsers? developers. At the end
of this first phase, each participant indicated what
he thought was his best parser run and got evalu-
ated on a new set of 400 sentences selected from
another part of the developement corpus which
meanwhile had been manually annotated for the
purpose and kept undisclosed.
The two phases represent a strong effort for the
evaluators. To avoid adding the cost of managing
the distribution and installation of the evaluation
package at each developer?s site, the solution of the
WEB evaluation service was chosen. A few infras-
tructures have been already experimented in NLP,
like GATE (Cunningham et al, 2002) infrastruc-
tures, but to our knowledge none has been used to
provide an WEB-based evaluation service as PAS-
SAGE did. The server was designed to manage
two categories of users: parser developers and or-
ganizers. To the developers, it provides, almost in
real time, confidential and secure access to the au-
tomatic evaluation of their submitted parses. To
the organizers, it give access to statistics enabling
them to follow the progress made by the develop-
ers, and easy management of the test phase. The
evaluation server provides, through a simple WEB
browser, access to both coarse and fine grain statis-
tics to a developer?s performance evaluation, glob-
ally for the whole corpus, at the level of a partic-
ular syntactic annotation or of a particular genre
specific subcorpus, and also at the level of a single
annotation for a particular word form.
Figure 3: Overall functional relations results
4.2 Performance Results
Ten systems participated to the constituents anno-
tation task. For most of the systems, F-measure is
up to 90% and only three systems are between 80%
and 90%. The trend is quite the same for Recall
and Precision. Around 96.5% of the constituents
returned by the best system are correct and it found
95.5% of the constituents present in gold standard.
Figure 3 shows the results of the seven systems that
participated to the functional relations annotation
task. Performance is lower than for constituents
and differences between systems are larger, an evi-
dence that the task remains more difficult. No sys-
tems gets a performance above 70% in F-measure,
three are above 60% and two above 50%. The last
two systems are above 40%.
4.3 Systems Improvements
The higher system gets increasing results from the
beginning of the development phase to the test
phase for both constituents and relations. How-
ever, although the increase for relations is rather
continuous, constituents results grow during the
first few development evaluations, then reach a
threshold from which results do not vary. This
can be explained by the fact that the constituent
scores are rather high, while for relations, scores
are lower and starting from low scores.
Using the evaluation server, system improves
its performance by 50% for the constituents and
600% for the relations, although performance vary
according to the type of relation or constituent.
Moreover, in repeating development evaluations,
another consequence was the convergence of pre-
cision and recall.
41
5 Parser?s outputs combination
The idea to combine the output of systems partic-
ipating to an evalauation campaign in order to ob-
tain a combination with better performance than
the best one was invented to our knowledge by J.
Fiscus (Fiscus, 1997) in a DARPA/NIST speech
recognition evaluation (ROVER/Reduced Output
Voting Error Reduction). By aligning the out-
put of the participating speech transcription sys-
tems and by selecting the hypothesis which was
proposed by the majority of the systems, he ob-
tained better performances than these of the best
system. The idea gained support in the speech pro-
cessing community(L?o?of et al, 2007) and in gen-
eral better results are obtained with keeping only
the output of the two or three best performing sys-
tems, in which case the relative improvement can
go up to 20% with respect to the best performance
(Schwenk and Gauvain, 2000). For text process-
ing, the ROVER procedure was applied to POS
tagging (Paroubek, 2000) and machine translation
(Matusov et al, 2006).
In our case, we will use the text itself to realign
the annotations provided by the various parser be-
fore computing their combination, as we did for
our first experiments with the EASY evaluation
campaign data (Paroubek et al, 2008). Since it
is very likely taht the different parsers do not use
the same word and sentence segmentation, we will
realign all the data along a common word and sen-
tence segmentation obtained by majority vote from
the different outputs.
But our motivation for using such procedure
is not only concerned with performance improve-
ment but also with the obtention of a confidence
measure for the annotation since if all systems
agree on a particular annotation, then it is very
likely to be true.
At this stage many options are open for the way
we want to apply the ROVER algorithm, since we
have both constituents and relations in our anno-
tations. We could vary the selection order (be-
tween constituents and relations), or use differ-
ent comparison functions for the sources/targets of
constituents/relations(Patrick Paroubek, 2006), or
perform incremental/global merging of the annoa-
tions, or explore different weightings/thresholding
strategies etc. In passage, ROVER experiments
are only beginning and we have yet to determine
which is the best strategy before applying it to
word and sentence free segmentation data. In the
early experiment we did with the ?EASy classic?
PASSAGE track which uses a fixed word and sen-
tence segmentation, we measured an improvement
in precision for some specific subcorpora and an-
notations but improvement in recall was harder to
get.
6 Conclusion
The definition of a common interchange syntactic
annotation format is an essential element of any
methodology aiming at the creation of large an-
notated corpora from the cooperation of parsing
systems to acquire new linguistic knowledge. But
the formalism aquires all of its value when backed-
up by the deployment of a WEB-based evaluation
service as the PASSAGE examples shows. 167
experiments were carried out during the develop-
ment phase (around 17 experiments per participant
in one month). The results of the test phase were
available less than one hour after the end of the de-
velopment phase. The service proved so success-
ful that the participants asked after the evaluation,
that the evaluation service be extended to support
evaluation as a perennial service
References
Cahill, Aoife, Michael Burke, Ruth O?Donovan, Josef
Van Genabith, and Andy Way. 2004. Long-distance
dependency resolution in automatically acquired
wide-coverage pcfg-based lfg approximations. In
Proceedings of the 42nd Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (ACL?04), Main Vol-
ume, pages 319?326, Barcelona, Spain, July.
Carroll, J., D. Lin, D. Prescher, and H. Uszkoreit.
2002. Proceedings of the workshop beyond parse-
val - toward improved evaluation measures for pars-
ing systems. In Proceedings of the 3rd International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC), Las Palmas, Spain.
Cunningham, Hamish, Diana Maynard, Kalina
Bontcheva, and Valentin Tablan. 2002. Gate:
an architecture for development of robust hlt ap-
plications. In ACL ?02: Proceedings of the 40th
Annual Meeting on Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 168?175, Morristown, NJ, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Declerck, T. 2006. Synaf: towards a standard for syn-
tactic annotation. In In proceedings of the fifth in-
ternational conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2006), Genoa, Italy, May. ELRA.
Fiscus, Jonathan G. 1997. A post-processing system
to yield reduced word error rates: recognizer output
voting error reduction (rover). In In proceedings of
42
the IEEE Workshop on Automatic Speech Recogni-
tion and Understanding, pages 347?357, Santa Bar-
bara, CA.
Francopoulo, G., T. Declerck, V. Sornlertlamvanich,
E. de la Clergerie, and M. Monachini. 2008. Data
category registry: Morpho-syntactic and syntactic
profiles. Marrakech. LREC.
Francopoulo, Gil. 2008. Tagparser: Well on the way
to iso-tc37 conformance. In In proceedings of the
International Conference on Global Interoperability
for Language Resources (ICGL), pages 82?88, Hong
Kong, January.
Gendner, V?eronique, Gabriel Illouz, Mich`ele Jardino,
Laura Monceaux, Patrick Paroubek, Isabelle Robba,
and Anne Vilnat. 2003. Peas the first instanciation
of a comparative framework for evaluating parsers of
french. In Proceedings of the 10
th
Conference of the
European Chapter fo the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 95?98, Budapest, Hungary,
April. ACL. Companion Volume.
Hockenmaier, Julia and Mark Steedman. 2007. Ccg-
bank: A corpus of ccg derivations and dependency
structures extracted from the penn treebank. Com-
putational Linguistics, 33(3):355?396.
Ide, N. and L. Romary. 2002. Standards for language
ressources. Las Palmas. LREC.
L?o?of, J., C. Gollan, S. Hahn, G. Heigold, B. Hoffmeis-
ter, C. Plahl, D. Rybach, R. Schl?uter, , and H. Ney.
2007. The rwth 2007 tc-star evaluation system for
european english and spanish. In In proceedings of
the Interspeech Conference, pages 2145?2148.
Matusov, Evgeny, N. Ueffing, and Herman Ney. 2006.
Automatic sentence segmentation and punctuation
prediction for spoken language translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Workshop on Spo-
ken Language Translation (IWSLT), pages 158?165,
Trento, Italy.
de la Clergerie, Eric, Christelle Ayache, Ga?el de Chal-
endar, Gil Francopoulo, Claire Gardent, and Patrick
Paroubek. 2008a. Large scale production of syntac-
tic annotations for french. In In proceedings of the
First Workshop on Automated Syntactic Annotations
for Interoperable Language Resources at IGCL?08,
pages 45?52, Hong Kong, January.
de la Clergerie, Eric, Olivier Hamon, Djamel Mostefa,
Christelle Ayache, Patrick Paroubek, and Anne Vil-
nat. 2008b. Passage: from french parser evalua-
tion to large sized treebank. In ELRA, editor, In
proceedings of the sixth international conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC), Mar-
rakech, Morroco, May. ELRA.
Miyao, Yusuke, Takashi Ninomiya, and Jun?ichi Tsu-
jii. 2004. Corpus-oriented grammar development
for acquiring a head-driven phrase structure gram-
mar from the penn treebank. In In Proceedings of
the First International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing (IJCNLP-04).
Paroubek, Patrick, Isabelle Robba, Anne Vilnat, and
Christelle Ayache. 2008. Easy, evaluation of parsers
of french: what are the results? In Proceedings of
the 6
th
International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC), Marrakech, Mor-
roco.
Paroubek, Patrick. 2000. Language resources as by-
product of evaluation: the multitag example. In
In proceedings of the Second International Con-
ference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC2000), volume 1, pages 151?154.
Patrick Paroubek, Isabelle Robba, Anne Vilnat Chris-
telle Ayache. 2006. Data, annotations and mea-
sures in easy - the evaluation campaign for parsers
of french. In ELRA, editor, In proceedings of
the fifth international conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC 2006), pages 315?
320, Genoa, Italy, May. ELRA.
Sagot, Beno??t and Pierre Boullier. 2006. Efficient
parsing of large corpora with a deep lfg parser. In
In proceedings of the sixth international conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC),
Genoa, Italy, May. ELDA.
Schwenk, Holger and Jean-Luc Gauvain. 2000. Im-
proved rover using language model information. In
In proceedings of the ISCA ITRW Workshop on Au-
tomatic Speech Recognition: Challenges for the new
Millenium, pages 47?52, Paris, September.
Vilnat, A., P. Paroubek, L. Monceaux, I. Robba,
V. Gendner, G. Illouz, and M. Jardino. 2004. The
ongoing evaluation campaign of syntactic parsing of
french: Easy. In Proceedings of the 4
th
International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC), pages 2023?2026, Lisbonne, Portugal.
43
