Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 382?390,
Honolulu, October 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Casual Conversation System Using Modality and Word Associations
Retrieved from the Web
Shinsuke Higuchi Rafal Rzepka
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology
Hokkaido University , Sapporo Japan 060-0814
{shin h,kabura,araki}@media.eng.hokudai.ac.jp
Kenji Araki
Abstract
In this paper we present a textual dialogue
system that uses word associations retrieved
from the Web to create propositions. We also
show experiment results for the role of modal-
ity generation. The proposed system automat-
ically extracts sets of words related to a con-
versation topic set freely by a user. After the
extraction process, it generates an utterance,
adds a modality and verifies the semantic re-
liability of the proposed sentence. We evalu-
ate word associations extracted form the Web,
and the results of adding modality. Over 80%
of the extracted word associations were evalu-
ated as correct. Adding modality improved the
system significantly for all evaluation criteria.
We also show how our system can be used as
a simple and expandable platform for almost
any kind of experiment with human-computer
textual conversation in Japanese. Two exam-
ples with affect analysis and humor generation
are given.
1 Introduction
Many task-oriented dialogue systems (Liu et al,
2003; Reitter et al, 2006) have been developped.
Research on non-task-oriented dialogue systems like
casual conversation dialogue systems (?chatbots?) is
on the other hand not very common, perhaps due to
the many amateurs who try to build naturally talking
systems using sometimes very clever, but rather un-
scientific methods although there are systems with
chatting abilities as (Bickmore and Cassell, 2001)
but concentrate on applying strategies to casual con-
versation rather than their automatic generation of
those conversations. However, we believe that the
main reason is that an unrestricted domain is dispro-
portionately difficult compared to the possible use
such a system could have. It is for example very hard
to predict the contents and topics of user utterances,
and therefore it is almost impossible to prepare con-
versational scenarios. Furthermore, scenarios need
more or less specific goals to be useful. However
in our opinion, sooner or later non-task-oriented di-
alogue systems will have to be combined with task
oriented systems and used after recognizing that the
user?s utterance does not belong to a given task. This
would lead to more natural interfaces for e.g. infor-
mation kiosks or automatic guides placed in public
places where anyone can talk to them about anything
(Gustafson and Bell, 2000; Kopp et al, 2005) re-
gardless of the role the developers intended. For this
reason we have also started implementing emotive-
ness recognition and joke generation modules that
are presented later in the paper.
Well-known examples of non-task-oriented dia-
logue systems are ELIZA (Weizenbaum, 1966) and
A.L.I.C.E 1, though the former was built to parody a
Rogerian therapist which can be regarded as a task.
Both systems and their countless imitators 2 use a
lot of rules coded by hand. ELIZA is able to make
a response to any input, but these responses are only
information requests without providing any new in-
formation to the user. In the case of A.L.I.C.E,
1Wallace, R. The Anatomy of A.L.I.C.E.
http://www.alicebot.org/anatomy.html.
2Many of them have been quite successful in the Loeb-
ner Prize and the Chatterbox Challenge (competitions only for
English-speaking bots) but explanations of their algorithms are
not available.
382
the knowledge resource is limited to the existing
database. Creating such databases is costly and
a programmer must learn the AIML mark-up lan-
guage to build it. Although there have been attempts
at updating AIML databases automatically (Pietro et
al., 2005), the scale was rather limited.
As mentioned above, these examples and many
other ?chatbots? need hand-crafted rules, and are
thus often ignored by computer scientists and rarely
become a research topic. However, they have proved
to be useful for e-learning (Pietro et al, 2005) and
machine learning (Araki and Kuroda, 2006) support.
Building a system using automatic methods, like
we do, seems to be the most realistic way for unre-
stricted domains. Considering the large cost of de-
veloping a program that can talk about any topic, it
is appealing to turn to the huge and cheap textual
source that is the Internet.
In this very moment millions of people (Kumar et
al, 2003) are updating their blogs and writing articles
on every possible topic. These are available on the
Web which we can access any time, and in a faster
and faster manner, the search engines grow more and
more efficient. Thus, the Web is well suited to ex-
tracting word associations triggered by words from
user utterances made in a topic-free dialogue sys-
tem.. We present a system making use of this type
of information. It automatically extracts word asso-
ciation lists using all keywords in a given utterance
without choosing a specific one (which most other
systems that ignore the context do) then generates a
reply using the only one strongest association from
the nouns, verbs and adjectives association groups.
Modality is then added to the reply, and then it is
output.
Our system is built upon the idea that human utter-
ances consist of a proposition and a modality (Nitta
et al, 1989). In this paper we present an algorithm
for extracting word associations from the Web and
a method for adding modality to statements. We
evaluate both the word associations and the use of
modality. We also suggest some future possible ex-
tensions of the system and show a small experiment
with adding humor to the system.
In this paper, the system described works for
Japanese and uses text as input and output. Though
the final goal of our research is to help developing
freely talking car navigation systems that by their
chatting abilities can help to avoid drowsiness while
driving and so on. in this part of the development we
concentrate on proposition generation and modality
processing. Therefore, we work only with text now.
We plan to combine this project with research on in
car voice recognition and generation.
2 Extracting Word Associations
In this chapter, we present a method for automatic
extraction of word associations based on keywords
from user utterances. We use the Google3 search
engine snippets to extract word associations in real
time without using earlier prepared resources, such
as off-line databases.
2.1 Extracting Word Associations from the
Web
In the first step, the system analyzed user utterances
using the morphological analyzer MeCab4 in order
to spot query keywords for extracting word associ-
ations lists. We define nouns, verbs, adjectives, and
unknown words as query keywords. The reason we
chose these word classes is that these word classes
can be treated as important and, to some extent, de-
scribe the context. We define a noun as the longest
set of nouns in a compound noun. For example,
the compound noun shizen gengo shori5 (natural
language processing) is treated by MeCab as three
words: (shizen - natural), (gengo - language) and
(shori - processing). Our system, however, threats
it as one noun.
In the next step, the system uses these keywords
as query words for the Google search engine. The
system extracts the nouns from the search results and
sorts them in frequency order. This process is based
on the idea that words which co-occur frequently
with the input words are of high relevance to them.
The number of extracted snippets is 500. This value
was set experimentally, taking the processing time
and output quality into account. The top ten words
of a list are treated as word associations, see Table 1
for an example.
3Google, http://www.google.co.jp/
4MeCab: Yet Another Part-of-Speech and Morphological
Analyzer, http://mecab.sourceforge.jp/
5All Japanese transcriptions will be written in italics.
383
Table 1: Examples of noun associations triggered by a
user utterance
Sapporo wa samui. (Sapporo city is cold.)
Association frequency ranking:
1 yuki (snow) 52
2 fuyu (winter) 50
3 kion (temperature) 16
4 jiki (season) 12
5 Tokyo (Tokyo) 12
6 tenki (weather) 11
7 chiiki (area) 10
8 heya (room) 10
2.2 Evaluation
We asked volunteers to use our system and to eval-
uate the correctness of word lists generated by the
system. First, a participant freely inputs an utter-
ance, for which the system retrieves ten association
words. Next, a participant rated these words using a
scale of one to three with 3 meaning ?perfectly cor-
rect?, 2 -?partially correct? and 1 - ?incorrect?. In
this experiment we consider words that receive a 2
or 3 as usable. The reason associations rated 2 or 3
are considered as usable is that the definition of what
makes a good word association here is difficult to
specify. When it comes to topic-free conversations
we have observed that associations have an effect
on a certain context. Three volunteers repeated the
experiment ten times, so the final amount of evalu-
ated words was 300. Table 2 shows the results of the
top 10 words, sorted by the frequency of appearance.
Table 3 shows the results of the top 5 words.
What constitutes a correct word association was
left to each volunteer to decide subjectively since in
a casual conversation setting associations are hard to
define strictly.
Table 2: Top 10 word associations
score participant(A?B?C) total
3 40?52?57 149
2 37?17?27 81
1 23?31?16 70
usability (%) 77?69?84 77
As shown in Table 2 approximately 77% of the
word associations were judged as usable but there
Table 3: Top 5 word associations
score participant?A?B?C? total
3 20?29?36 85
2 17?9?10 36
1 13?12?4 29
usability (%) 74?76?92 81
were individual differences between the evaluators.
This shows that the definition of word associations
is different for each participant. Table 3 shows that
approximately 80% of the word associations were
judged as usable. It is thus highly likely that the top
words from the frequency lists are correct associa-
tions. The results show that automatic extracting of
word associations using a Web search engine is fea-
sible. The main reason for extracting word associa-
tions from the Web is that thanks to this method, the
system can handle new information, proper names,
technical terms and so on. by using only the snip-
pets from the search engine. The word association
extraction takes no more than few seconds. For the
evaluation we used only nouns but we expect al-
though verbs and adjectives are often more abstract
than nouns, the word associations for them will im-
prove the results.
3 General Description of the System
The system generates replies in the following way:
? extraction of keywords from user utterance
? extraction of word associations from the Web
? generation of sentence proposition using the
extracted associations
? addition of modality to the sentence proposi-
tion
3.1 Extraction of Keywords from User
Utterances
The system applies morphological analysis to the
use utterances in the same way as described in sec-
tion 2.1 and extracts keywords based on part of
speech.
384
 
	 

 