Automatic Extraction of Fixed Multiword
Expressions
Campbell Hore, Masayuki Asahara, and Yu?ji Matsumoto
Graduate School of Information Science,
Nara Institute of Science and Technology,
8916-5 Takayama, Ikoma, Nara 630-0192, Japan
{campbe-h, masayu-a, matsu}@is.naist.jp
http://cl.naist.jp
Abstract. Fixed multiword expressions are strings of words which to-
gether behave like a single word. This research establishes a method for
the automatic extraction of such expressions. Our method involves three
stages. In the first, a statistical measure is used to extract candidate bi-
grams. In the second, we use this list to select occurrences of candidate
expressions in a corpus, together with their surrounding contexts. These
examples are used as training data for supervised machine learning, re-
sulting in a classifier which can identify target multiword expressions.
The final stage is the estimation of the part of speech of each extracted
expression based on its context of occurence. Evaluation demonstrated
that collocation measures alone are not effective in identifying target ex-
pressions. However, when trained on one million examples, the classifier
identified target multiword expressions with precision greater than 90%.
Part of speech estimation had precision and recall of over 95%.
1 Introduction
1.1 Multiword Expressions
For natural language processing purposes, a naive definition of a word in English
is ?a sequence of letters delimited by spaces ?. By this definition, the expression
ad hoc, which originally came from Latin, consists of two ?words?, ad and hoc.
However, in isolation hoc is not a meaningful English word. It is always preceded
by ad. This suggests that treating these two words as if they together form
a single ?word with spaces? more closely models their behaviour in text. A
sequence of words which for one reason or another is more sensibly treated as a
single lexical item, rather than as individual words, is known as a multiword
expression (MWE). In other words, an MWE is a sequence of words which
together behave as though they were a single word.
MWEs are not limited to imported foreign phrases such as ad hoc. They cover
a large range of expression types including proper nouns such as New York, verb-
particle constructions such as to call up (i.e. to telephone someone), and light
 Supported by the Japanese government?s MEXT scholarship programme.
R. Dale et al (Eds.): IJCNLP 2005, LNAI 3651, pp. 565?575, 2005.
c
? Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005
566 C. Hore, M. Asahara, and Y. Matsumoto
verbs such as to make a mistake. The justification for treating such expressions
as MWEs is that their linguistic properties are odd in some way as compared
to ?normal? expressions: either their part of speech or their meaning is unpre-
dictable despite full knowledge about the parts of speech or meanings of their
constituent words.
1.2 Fixed Multiword Expressions
By fixed, we mean that this particular type of MWE consists of a contiguous se-
quence of words. Other MWE types can consist of discontinuous word sequences.
For example, the verb-particle construction to call up takes an indirect object,
the person who receives the telephone call. This person can appear after the
verb-particle construction (e.g. ?I called up Mohammad?) but it can also ap-
pear in the middle of the verb-particle construction, (e.g. ?I called Mohammad
up?). In contrast, fixed MWEs consist of contiguous word sequences. For exam-
ple, by and large cannot be modified by insertion of other words (e.g. *?by and
very large?).
1.3 Multiword Expressions in Parsing
The aim of our research is the development of a method for the automatic extrac-
tion and part of speech estimation of fixed MWEs. The ability to identify this
type of MWE in texts is of potential use in a wide variety of natural language
processing tasks because it should enable an improvement in the precision of sen-
tence parsing. Sentence parsing is frequently the first step in more sophisticated
language processing tasks, so an increase in parsing precision should improve
results in a large number of natural language processing applications.
A parser generally takes a sentence as input, together with the parts of speech
of the tokens1 in the sentence. The parser then attempts to estimate the most
probable syntactic structure for the sentence. Some kinds of MWE have the
potential to disrupt this process because the part of speech of the MWE as a
whole, cannot be predicted on the basis of the parts of speech of its constituent
words. For example, the part of speech sequence for the expression by and large
is Preposition + Conjunction + Adjective, which is a sequence almost certainly
unique to this expression. A parser which is not explicitly informed about by
and large will therefore struggle to cope with this part of speech sequence, and
may incorrectly try to group one or more parts of the expression with words in
the surrounding context.
The solution to this problem of syntactically unpredictable MWEs is to add
them to the dictionary used by the parser. When the parser comes across a
sequence of words that matches an MWE in its dictionary, it can use the MWE?s
part of speech to parse the sentence treating the MWE as a single lexical item.
1 We use the term tokens here rather than words because texts actually contain many
space delimited character strings which are not normally thought of as words, such
as numbers and punctuation. In addition, some purely alphabetic character strings
are not words in their own right, as is the case for hoc, mentioned above.
Automatic Extraction of Fixed Multiword Expressions 567
In reality, some sequences of words are an MWE only in specific contexts.
For example, in the main is an MWE when it means ?overall? or ?mostly? as
seen in the sentence ?In the main, the biggest improvements have been in child
health?. In contrast, in a sentence such as ?Village hotels ought to be in the main
square, not at the outskirts of a village? the word sequence in the main is not an
MWE, and can therefore be treated normally by the parser as separate words.
1.4 Target Problems
We approach the task of extracting fixed MWEs by decomposing it into three
sub-problems, as illustrated in Fig. 1. The first (?3.1, described in Section 3.1) is
simple collocation extraction. We use a standard collocation measure to extract
as many candidate bigram MWEs from the corpus as possible.
Fig. 1. Flowchart of processing
The second problem (?3.2) is refinement of the list of candidate MWEs.
Many of the candidates are not target multiword expressions. Distinguishing
between word sequences that are MWEs, and those that never are, represents
one sub-task. Hereafter, we refer to word sequences which are never MWEs as
non-MWEs. Some word sequences have dual identities. In one context a word
568 C. Hore, M. Asahara, and Y. Matsumoto
sequence may be an MWE, but in another, it may be just a normal, literal word
sequence. For example, a child forced to help wash the family car, and acting
petulantly, might be scolded ?Don?t kick the bucket!?. In this case kick the
bucket is a normal, compositional phrase; its meaning can be understood based
on the literal meaning of its constituent words. When kick the bucket is used as a
euphemism for ?to die? however, its meaning is non-compositional, and thus in
this context it is an MWE. In this paper we refer to occurrences of literal word
sequences which have the appearance of being an MWE as pseudo-MWEs. We
deal with these two sub-tasks simultaneously, using supervised machine learning.
The third problem we tackle (?3.3) is estimation of the part of speech of
MWEs. This problem is also solved using supervised machine learning. In this
research we limit ourselves to MWEs containing only two words (i.e. bigrams).
In the future, we plan to generalize the method so that it works with MWEs of
arbitrary length.
2 Related Work
Collocation extraction has been covered extensively in the literature. One of
the earliest attempts to automatically extract collocations from a corpus was
undertaken by Church and Hanks [1]. The statistical measure they used to iden-
tify collocations was based on mutual information. Smadja [2] developed a tool
called Xtract for the extraction of collocations. His definition of a collocation
differed slightly from that of Church and Hanks because he claimed expressions
such as doctors and nurses are not real collocations, just words related by virtue
of their shared domain or semantics. Thanopoulos, Fakotakis and Kokkinakis
in [3] reviewed the statistical measures most frequently used for collocation ex-
traction, and evaluated them by comparing their performance with that of two
new measures of their own. Their first novel measure, Mutual Dependency (MD)
is pointwise mutual information minus self-information. The second measure at-
tempts to introduce a slight frequency bias by combining the t-score with mutual
dependency. Although frequency alone is not sufficient evidence of collocational
status, they argue that candidate collocations that have a high frequency are
more likely to be valid than those that are very rare.
While collocations have received attention over a number of years, MWEs
have only relatively recently emerged as a research topic within natural lan-
guage processing. In consequence, there are relatively few articles specifically
about MWEs. Sag et al in [4] gave a linguistic categorisation of the differ-
ent types of MWE, and described ways of representing them efficiently within
a computational framework2. Although MWEs as a whole have yet to receive
widespread investigation, attention has been paid to specific types of MWE. For
example, verb-particle constructions have been the subject of several studies (see
for example [5] and [6]).
2 Head-driven Phrase Structure Grammar (HPSG).
Automatic Extraction of Fixed Multiword Expressions 569
3 Method
In order to extract information about fixed MWEs from a corpus, we use a three
stage process. In the first stage we identify a list of candidate MWEs based on the
statistical behaviour of the tokens in the corpus. Two words whose probability of
appearing together is greater than that which would be expected based on their
individual frequencies, are considered to constitute a potential MWE and are
extracted for later processing. In other words, stage one is collocation extraction.
In the second stage, we use this list of candidate MWEs as the basis for
extracting from the corpus examples of candidates together with their contexts.
These examples are then used as training data for supervised machine learning
resulting in a classifier capable of distinguishing between, on the one hand, true
MWEs, and on the other, non-MWEs and pseudo-MWEs.
In the final stage we use supervised machine learning to train a classifier to
perform MWE part of speech assignment. By examining the context surrounding
an MWE, it is possible for the classifier to determine the most likely part of
speech for the MWE in that context.
3.1 Collocation Extraction
Collocation extraction was performed using one of the statistical measures dis-
cussed in [3]. The measures we experimented with were: frequency, ?-square [7],
log-likelihood ratio [8], t-score [7], mutual information (MI) [1], mutual depen-
dency (MD ? mutual information minus self-information) [3], and log-frequency
biased mutual dependency (LFMD ? a combination of the t-score and mutual
dependency) [3]. The equations of these measures are shown in Fig. 2.
We compared the resulting ranked lists of bigrams with a list of target MWEs
extracted from the British National Corpus (BNC)3. The target list was pro-
duced by starting with a list of all MWEs tagged as such in the BNC, and
removing MWEs with a frequency of less than five, and MWEs with a part
of speech of noun, or adjective. This reduction was performed for two reasons.
Firstly, many MWE instances in the BNC can be considered noise in that they
contain spelling variants, and features of spoken language. Secondly, a colloca-
tion consisting entirely of a combination of one or more nouns and adjectives is
almost certainly a noun phrase, or part of a noun phrase. Noun phrases tend to
be easily identifiable as such by parsers, and so are not relevant to our research
aim. By removing the above MWEs we were able to reduce computational costs
at later stages of processing.
3.2 Verification
Verification was performed with the aim of extracting a much higher quality list
of candidate MWEs from the list of candidate MWEs produced in the collocation
stage.
3 http://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk/
570 C. Hore, M. Asahara, and Y. Matsumoto
t-score
t =
x ? ?
?
s2
N
Where x is the sample mean, s2 is the sample variance, N is the sample size and ? is
the distribution?s mean.
?-square
?2 =
(fw1w2 ? fw1fw2 )2
fw1fw2
+
(fw1w2 ? fw1fw2)2
fw1fw2
+
(fw1w2 ? fw1fw2)2
fw1fw2
+
(fw1w2 ? fw1fw2)2
fw1fw2
Where f is the frequency of an event, w1w2 is the sequence of events (in this case
words) w1 then w2, and w1 is the negation of the event w1.
log-likelihood ratio
?2 log ? = 2 ? log L(H1)
L(H0)
Where L(H) is the likelihood of hypothesis H assuming a binomial distribution.
pointwise mutual information (PMI)
I(w1, w2) = log2
P (w1w2)
P (w1) ? P (w2)
Where P (w) is the probability of a given word.
mutual dependency (MD)
D(w1, w2) = log2
P 2(w1w2)
P (w1) ? P (w2)
Where P (w) is the probability of a given word.
log-frequency biased mutual dependency (LFMD)
DLF (w1, w2) = D(w1, w2) + log2P (w1w2)
Where P (w) is the probability of a given word.
Fig. 2. Collocation measures
Features. In order to train a classifier, a decision must be made about which
features to include in the training data. We decided to use the tokens and their
parts of speech from a context window of three tokens to the left and three tokens
to the right of each candidate MWE. We also used the tokens in the candidate
MWE itself and their parts of speech. The cutoff value of three is somewhat
arbitrary, but most lexical dependencies can be assumed to be relatively local,
so we can assume that it is large enough to capture the most useful information
available from the context.
Automatic Extraction of Fixed Multiword Expressions 571
Contexts were not allowed to cross sentence boundaries. In cases where the
available context surrounding a candidate MWE was shorter than the three token
window, we inserted the appropriate number of dummy tokens and dummy parts
of speech to fill up the deficit: ?BOS? (Beginning Of Sentence) tokens in the left
context, and ?EOS? (End Of Sentence) tokens in the right context.
Part of Speech Tagging. The part of speech information was provided by
tagging the corpus using the part of speech tagger TnT4. The BNC is a part of
speech tagged corpus, but retagging was necessary because although each MWE
in the BNC is tagged with a part of speech, its constituent tokens are not. The
tokens which make up each MWE must therefore be tagged with individual parts
of speech. It might be argued that combining the original BNC tagging with the
TnT tagging of the words in the MWEs would have produced more accurate
training data, but in a real world application, the part of speech information in
the classifier?s input data will be produced entirely using a tagger such as TnT.
By using the same part of speech tagger at both the training, and application
stages, any systematic tagging mistakes will hopefully (at least in part) be learnt
and compensated for by the classifier. The tagger was trained on a subset of BNC
files containing just under 5.5 million tokens. It was then tested on a different
set of files, containing approximately 5.3 million tokens. The tagger?s precision
when tested on this data was 94.7%.
Training. The corpus used for training the classifier was a sub-corpus of the
BNC containing approximately ninety million tokens covering all domains in the
corpus. Examples used for training were the occurrences in the training corpus
of the top 10,000 bigrams identified using the t-score and LFMD collocation
measures. Most of the bigrams in the corpus were negative examples, either
non-MWEs, or pseudo-MWEs.
We used TinySVM5 to create a binary classifier. Training was performed
(using the software?s default settings) on the training corpus. Several training
runs were performed using different amounts of data in order to investigate the
relationship between volume of training data and the resulting model?s perfor-
mance.
Testing. Another sub-corpus of the BNC, independent of that used in training,
was used for testing the classifier. This testing corpus contained approximately
six million tokens and included texts from each domain in the corpus.
3.3 Part of Speech Estimation of Multiword Expressions
We treated the estimation of the part of speech of a given MWE as a classification
task using the same approach as we used for the classification of true and false
MWEs. We trained a separate classifier for each target part of speech. A positive
4 http://www.coli.uni-sb.de/?thorsten/tnt/
5 http://chasen.org/?taku/software/TinySVM/
572 C. Hore, M. Asahara, and Y. Matsumoto
training example was an occurrence of an MWE with the target part of speech.
A negative example was an occurrence of any MWE with a non-target part of
speech. The features used were the token and part of speech of three tokens to
the left and to the right of the target MWE, as well as the tokens and parts of
speech of the words in the MWE itself. The training and testing corpora were
the same as used at the verification stage described above (Section 3.2). This
was acceptable because the two tasks are independent of each other.
We chose the target parts of speech (adverbs, prepositions and conjunctions)
because these relatively closed class, high frequency types are expected to be
most useful in applications like parsing. We also experimented with an open
class type (nouns) for comparison. Verbs could not be tested because there were
insufficient numbers of them in the testing corpus. There are few fixed MWE
verbs, so a scarcity of data was not surprising.
4 Results and Discussion
4.1 Collocation Extraction
Results for collocation extraction (Table 1) show that standard collocation mea-
sures perform poorly in the task of extracting the target MWEs. Even when
Table 1. Precision and recall for top 100, 1,000 and 10,000 candidate multiword ex-
pressions extracted using different collocation measures
Measure Cutoff Precision Recall F-measure
10,000 0.009 0.251 0.017
freq 1,000 0.032 0.091 0.047
100 0.010 0.003 0.004
10,000 0.009 0.257 0.017
t-score 1,000 0.037 0.106 0.055
100 0.030 0.009 0.013
10,000 0.006 0.169 0.011
?2 1,000 0.013 0.037 0.019
100 0.020 0.006 0.009
10,000 0.004 0.117 0.008
log-like 1,000 0.008 0.023 0.012
100 0.000 0.000 0.000
10,000 0.003 0.083 0.006
MI 1,000 0.002 0.006 0.003
100 0.000 0.000 0.000
10,000 0.003 0.091 0.006
MD 1,000 0.003 0.009 0.004
100 0.000 0.000 0.000
10,000 0.008 0.229 0.015
LFMD 1,000 0.017 0.049 0.025
100 0.080 0.023 0.036
Automatic Extraction of Fixed Multiword Expressions 573
calculated based on the top 10,000 candidate collocations, recall is only 26%
(using the t-score).
A limitation in our approach to measuring collocation extraction may be
partly to blame for the poor results in this task. Our target list consisted of all
target MWEs, irrespective of their length. Since the collocations extracted were
limited to bigrams, some of these may in fact be only part of a larger MWE in
our target list.
Nevertheless, it may be that collocation measures are relatively ineffective at
extracting fixed MWEs. Collocation measures are most effective when applied
to expressions such as noun compounds. Many of the target MWEs contain high
frequency function words such as prepositions, and thus are atypical of the types
of expressions for which collocation measures were originally developed.
4.2 Verification
Verification of candidate MWEs produced better results (Table 2). For example,
a classifier trained using one million examples, had precision of 96.56%, and
recall of 89.11% giving an F-measure of 92.69.
Table 2. Performance of verifier using models trained on different quantities of data
Measure Examples Precision (%) Recall (%) F-measure
LFMD 1,000,000 96.56 89.11 92.69
100,000 96.35 79.87 87.34
10,000 93.66 56.04 70.12
1,000 92.83 11.56 20.56
Initial review of classification results suggests a number of sources of error.
Tagging errors seem to cause many of the false negative results. Proper nouns
tend to be tagged as ?unclassified words? which is intelligent in as much as
it bundles all unusual words the tagger is unsure of together, but it results in
incorrect tagging which prevents the classifier identifying true MWEs. Similarly,
capitalisation of words in titles results in incorrect tagging of ordinary words as
proper nouns. One title in particular Sport in Short occurs multiple times in the
corpus, resulting in numerous errors.
False positives seem to be caused by proper nouns (e.g. Kuala Lumpur) and
foreign words (e.g. Vive L?Empereur). Both false positives and false negatives
seem to occur often in the context of punctuation, suggesting that this presents
a particular difficulty for the classifier.
Interestingly, some false positives are in fact substrings of longer MWEs.
Because we focused on bigrams in this paper, MWEs of longer than two tokens
were ignored when assessing whether a candidate MWE was a true or false
MWE. However, some of these candidate MWEs were in fact substrings of a
longer MWE. The classifier may therefore be recognising that a given substring
574 C. Hore, M. Asahara, and Y. Matsumoto
occurs in a context typical of MWEs, and is identifying the MWE substring as
being a MWE in its own right. A fuller implementation which extracts MWEs
longer than two tokens might therefore be expected to eliminate this source
of error.
In spite of the occasional error, applying a classifier to the context surround-
ing a candidate MWE seems to offer an effective means of distinguishing true
MWEs from non-MWEs and pseudo-MWEs.
4.3 Part of Speech Estimation
Evaluation of the part of speech classifiers shows them to be an effective means of
estimating an MWE?s part of speech based on its context of occurrence (Table 3).
As we might expect, the classifier for nouns performed best, with near perfect
recall and high precision. The conjunctions classifier performed least well with
recall in particular being lower than that achieved for other parts of speech.
This may reflect a greater variability in the contexts surrounding conjunctive
MWEs. Conjunctions often play a discursive role in sentences, so evidence of
an expression being a conjunction or not might be found at a higher level of
linguistic analysis than the immediate lexical context used in our experiment.
Table 3. Part of speech estimation results
Part of speech Precision (%) Recall (%) F-measure
Prepositions 98.06 98.40 98.23
Conjunctions 97.10 95.37 96.23
Adverbs 98.73 98.72 98.72
Nouns 98.88 99.25 99.07
5 Future Work
In this work we have focused on bigrams. We hope to generalise our approach,
so that MWEs of length greater than two can be extracted and assigned a part
of speech.
We plan to evaluate the performance of the BNC models described above
on another corpus to determine their flexibility. Specifically, we plan to use a
corpus of North American English such as the Penn Treebank, in the hope of
demonstrating the models? ability to handle American as well as British English.
We also plan to check the effect on parsing accuracy of using the extracted
multiword expressions in the input to a parser such as Collins? [9] or
Yamada?s [10].
6 Conclusion
In this research we aimed to identify a method for the automatic extraction and
part of speech estimation of fixed MWEs. Knowledge about fixed MWEs has
Automatic Extraction of Fixed Multiword Expressions 575
the potential to improve the accuracy of numerous natural language processing
applications. Generating such a list therefore represents an important natural
language processing task.
Our method uses a collocation measure to produce a list of candidate bigrams.
These candidates are then used to select training data for a classifier. The trained
classifier was successfully able to distinguish between contexts containing a true
MWE, from contexts containing a pseudo-MWE or no MWE at all. The classifier
trained on one million example candidates identified using LFMD had precision
of 96.56%, and recall of 89.11%, giving an F-measure of 92.69%. Part of speech
classifiers were then trained and tested. The classifiers were able to identify the
correct part of speech for an MWE with a precision and recall of over 95%.
These results show that the local context surrounding an MWE contains
sufficient information to identify its presence, and estimate its part of speech.
If this information is detailed enough, we may be able to perform additional
processing steps. For example, it may be possible to distinguish between specific
sub-types of fixed MWE. The present method needs to be generalised so it can
deal with MWEs of any length, not just bigrams. We plan to explore these issues
in future research.
References
1. Church, K., Hanks, P.: Word association norms, mutual information, and lexicog-
raphy. Computational Linguistics 16 (1990) 22?29
2. Smadja, F.: Retrieving collocations from text: Xtract. Computational Linguistics
19 (1993) 143?177 *Special Issue on Using Large Corpora: I.
3. Thanopoulos, A., Fakotakis, N., Kokkinakis, G.: Comparative evaluation of col-
location extraction metrics. In: International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC-2002). (2002) 620?625
4. Sag, I., Baldwin, T., Bond, F., Copestake, A., Flickinger, D.: Multiword expres-
sions: A pain in the neck for NLP. In: Proceedings of the Third International Con-
ference on Intelligent Text Processing and Computational Linguistics (CICLING
2002), Mexico City, Mexico, CICLING (2002) 1?15
5. Baldwin, T., Villavicencio, A.: Extracting the unextractable: A case study on verb-
particles. In Roth, D., van den Bosch, A., eds.: Proceedings of the 6th Conference
on Natural Language Learning (CoNLL-2002), Taipei, Taiwan (2002) 98?104
6. Villavicencio, A.: Verb-particle constructions and lexical resources. In Bond, F.,
Korhonen, A., McCarthy, D., Villavicencio, A., eds.: Proceedings of the ACL 2003
Workshop on Multiword Expressions: Analysis, Acquisition and Treatment, ACL
(2003) 57?64
7. Manning, C.D., Schu?tze, H.: Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Process-
ing. The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts (1999)
8. Dunning, T.: Accurate methods for the statistics of surprise and coincidence.
Computational Linguistics 19 (1993) 61?74
9. Collins, M.: Head-Driven Statistical Models for Natural Language Parsing. PhD
thesis, University of Pennsylvania (1999)
10. Yamada, H., Matsumoto, Y.: Statistical dependency analysis with support vector
machines. In: IWPT 2003: 8th International Workshop on Parsing Technologies.
(2003) 195?206
