A Basic framework to Build a Test Collection for the Vietnamese Text 
Catergorization 
Viet Hoang-Anh, Thu Dinh-Thi-Phuong, Thang Huynh-Quyet 
Hanoi University of Technology, Vietnam 
vietha-fit@mail.hut.edu.vn, thanghq-fit@mail.hut.edu.vn 
Abstract 
The aim of this paper is to present a basic 
framework to build a test collection for a 
Vietnamese text categorization. The pre-
sented content includes our evaluations of 
some popular text categorization test col-
lections, our researches on the require-
ments, the proposed model and the tech-
niques to build the BKTexts - test collec-
tion for a Vietnamese text categorization. 
The XML specification of both text and 
metadata of Vietnamese documents in the 
BKTexts also is presented. Our BKTexts 
test collection is built with the XML speci-
fication and currently has more than 17100 
Vietnamese text documents collected from 
e-newspapers. 
1 Introduction 
Natural Language Processing (NLP) for such 
popular languages as English, French, etc. has been 
well studied with many achievements. In contrast, 
NLP for unpopular languages, such as Vietnamese, 
has only been researched recently. It means that 
expecting international scientists to care about our 
problems is not feasible in the near future. In this 
paper, we present our research results on that field, 
especially on Vietnamese test collections for 
Vietnamese text categorization. This paper will be 
organized as follows. Section 2 proposes our 
research on the requirements, models and 
techniques to build a Vietnamese test collection for 
researches and experiments on Vietnamese text 
categorization. Section 3 presents our results with 
BKTexts test collection. Lastly, the focus of our 
ongoing research will be presented in section. 
2 Model of building a test collection for 
the Vietnamese text categorization 
Until now, there has not been a Vietnamese stan-
dard test collection for Vietnamese text categoriza-
tion. Vietnamese documents used in previous stud-
ies of Vietnamese researchers are gathered by 
themselves and were not thoroughly checked. 
Moreover,  all over the world, there have been a lot 
of test collections in many different languages, es-
pecially in English such as the Reuters-21578, the 
RCV1 and the 20NewsGroup1. Therefore, we in-
tend to build a Vietnamese standard test collection 
for the Vietnamese text categorization. We defined 
a framework for building Vietnamese test collec-
tions as follows. Basic requirements for a Viet-
namese test collection text categorization  
 
Figure1.  The system architecture to build a Vietnamese test collection for text categorization 
Our model to build a Vietnamese test collection 
for text categorization is accomplished in four 
stages: collecting, auto coding, manual editing, and 
testing (Figure 1). 
                                                 
1 Available from http://kdd.ics.uci.edu/ 
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
103
From available resources, we gather Vietnam-
ese documents for the test collection in accordance 
with the scope and the structure of categories. Re-
searchers usually use documents collected from e-
newspapers because these documents are pre-
processed and less ambiguous. Then an auto sys-
tem tags documents in the XML (or SGML) for-
matting specification. 
After being coded, documents are manual edited 
by editors. The editors would assign the categories 
they felt applicable. They also edit specification 
tags of formatted documents in order to completely 
and more precisely describe attributes of docu-
ments. Lastly, to assess the accuracy of the test 
collection, we use some famous categorization al-
gorithms such as SVM, k-NN, etc. Performing the 
test and correction several times, we will gradually 
obtain a finer and more precise test collection. The 
process ends when errors are below a permitted 
threshold. 
3 The BKTexts test collection for Viet-
namese text categorization 
With the model mentioned above, we are con-
structing the BKTexts test collection for the first 
version. We collected about 17100 documents for 
the BKTexts from two e-newspapers 
http://www.vnexpress.net and http://www.vnn.vn. 
Categories are organized in a hierarchical structure 
of 10 main classifications and 37 sub-classes. 
Documents are marked up with XML tags and 
given unique ID numbers. The XML specification 
of a document in the BKTexts test collection is 
described in Figure 2. Building a successful Viet-
namese test collection for text categorization has a 
significant meaning. It will be a useful material for 
any study on text categorization and Vietnamese 
processing in the future because it reduces a lot of 
manual work and time, as well as increases the ac-
curacy of experimental results. 
4 Conclusion and future work  
We have presented our research results on defining 
requirements, the model and techniques to build a 
Vietnamese test collection for researches and ex-
periments on Vietnamese text categorization. Cur-
rently, we continue building the BKTexts on a lar-
ger scale for publishing widely in the near future. 
This test collection enables researchers to test ideas 
and to objectively compare results with published 
studies.  
Fig.2. The XML specification of the BKTexts 
References 
David D. Lewis, Reuters-21578 Text Categorization 
Test Collection, www.daviddlewis.com, 1997. 
David D. Lewis, Yiming Yang, Tony G.Rose, Fan Li, 
?RCV1: A new Benchmark Collection for Text Cate-
gorization Research?, in: Journal of Machine Learn-
ing Research 5, pp.361-397, 2004. 
Huynh Quyet Thang, Dinh Thi Phuong Thu. Vietnam-
ese text categorization based on unsupervised learn-
ing method and applying extended evaluating formu-
las for calculating the document similarity. Proceed-
ings of The Second Vietnam National Symposium on 
ICT.RDA, Hanoi 24-25/9/2004, pp. 251-261 (in Viet-
namese) 
Dinh Thi Ph?ong Thu, Hoang Vinh Son, Huynh Quyet 
Thang. Proposed modifications of the CYK algo-
rithm for the Vietnamese parsing. Journal of Com-
puter Science and Cybernetics, Volume 21, No. 4, 
2005, pp. 323-336 (in Vietnamese) 
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
104
