Japanese Effort Toward Sharing Text and Speech Corpora 
Shucihi Itahashi*+ 
*National Institute of Informatics 
2-1-1 Hitotsubashi, Chiyoda-ku, 
Tokyo, Japan 101-8430 
itabashi@nii.ac.jp 
Koiti Hasida+ 
+National Institute of Advanced  
Industrial Science and Technology 
1-1-1 Umezono, Tsukuba, Ibaraki,  
Japan 305-8568 
Hasida.k@aist.go.jp 
 
 
Abstract 
This report introduces the activities of the 
two organizations related to collection 
and distribution of text and speech cor-
pora in Japan. One is the Language Re-
source Association (GSK) and the other 
is NII-Speech Resources Consortium 
(NII-SRC).  
1 Introduction 
Although the need for shared speech and text 
data has long been acknowledged, its realization 
has been slow to develop in Japan. The Language 
Resource Association (GSK) was established in 
1999 in order to share and distribute text and 
speech corpora. It was renovated as an NPO in 
2003 with an emphasis on text corpora. The Na-
tional Institute of Informatics (NII) has decided 
to initiate the Speech Resources Consortium 
(SRC) in 2006, with the goal of creating future 
value in information media, particularly speech 
media.  
2 NII-Speech Resources Consortium 
The National Institute of Informatics (NII) was 
founded in Tokyo, Japan in April 2000 as an in-
ter-university research institute organized to con-
duct comprehensive research on informatics and 
to develop an advanced infrastructure for dis-
seminating scientific information. As a part of 
promoting the missions, NII decided in 2006 to 
initiate the Speech Resources Consortium (SRC) 
for creating future value in information media, 
particularly speech media. NII is promoting this 
consortium together with GSK (Itahashi and Oh-
suga, 2006). 
2.1  SRC objective and activities 
The SRC aims at the collection, distribution, in-
vestigation, research, and standardization of elec-
tronic data and software tools that are necessary 
for the development of science, education, and 
industry concerning speech. The consortium will 
contribute to the development of the information 
society through these activities.  
The SRC investigates the existing speech re-
sources, catalogues them, and shows them on its 
homepage in order to promote the research and 
development of speech information processing. It 
also requests research institutions to offer their 
speech resources to the SRC. Based on these ac-
tivities, it urges the distribution, promotion, and 
publicity of speech resources. The consortium 
will conduct the additional production and distri-
bution of the speech resources that are frequently 
requested. It also conducts investigations and re-
search on speech resources. Users will be able to 
obtain the speech resources or data they need and 
use them through simple processes offered by the 
SRC.  SRC distributes 23 speech corpora.  
2.2 Organization 
The SRC is made up of a chairperson, a re-
searcher, an adviser, a secretary, and a Speech 
Corpora Promotion Committee. The committee 
works to promote the development of the SRC. 
Around 15 members have been invited to join the 
committee from the fields of speech processing, 
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
107
linguistics, acoustics, speech and language corpus 
creation, and speech and language resource pro-
vision. The committee meets a few times a year. 
3 Language Resource Association (GSK) 
The GSK was renovated as an NPO in 2003 and 
is qualified as a corporate body and can mediate 
between the producer and users of a language 
corpora (Hasida and Tanaka, 2006).  
3.1 GSK objective and activities 
The GSK aims at almost the same objectives as 
those of the NII-SRC mentioned in the preceding 
section, including both the text and speech 
corpora, but the text corpora are the main concern 
of GSK at present.  
Prof. Y. Mikami of Nagaoka University of 
Technology proposed a project on the ?Construc-
tion of Networks for Asian Linguistic Informa-
tion Technology Resources? together with GSK. 
This proposal was adopted as a three-year project 
starting from fiscal 2005. It is supported by the 
Science and Technology Promotion & Coordina-
tion Fund, and Yen15 million ($125,000) is 
available for GSK. The mission of the project is 
to create a network of qualified Asian partners to 
specify and support the development of high pri-
ority language resources for Asian languages. As 
a part of this project, the GSK organized the 
?Asian Language Resources Workshop 2007? in 
March.  Twenty one people from 13 countries 
participated in the workshop.  
The GSK activities are almost the same as 
those of the NII-SRC. The GSK is made up of a 
president, two vice presidents, 11 board members, 
25 steering committee members, a secretary, and 
two office clerks. GSK supplies two text corpora 
and a speech corpus; it plans to distribute seven 
more text corpora soon.  
3.2 Corpora distribution system 
We have three systems of corpora distribution to 
be conducted by the NII-SRC and GSK. (1) No-
fee distribution: As a rule, the cost of handling 
the corpora is to fall on the user, although the cor-
pus itself is free of charge. (2) Agency: The pro-
ducers of the corpora entrust the SRC/GSK with 
receiving requests from the users. The SRC/GSK 
advertises the corpora to speech researchers 
through the homepage. It mediates the user?s re-
quests to the producer or provider of the corpora. 
(3) Fee-based distribution: Making speech cor-
pora usually requires some money, including roy-
alties. Some corpora cost users a certain amount 
of money to obtain, although they are not so ex-
pensive.  
4 Present Issues 
So far, we have established the GSK and NII-
SRC for the text and speech corpora, respectively, 
while the LDC and ELRA distributes both the 
speech and text corpora.  
The GSK is supported by a project until the 
end of this fiscal year, but it will loose its finan-
cial support at that point. The GSK has a rela-
tively small amount of corpora to be distributed, 
so it is still too early to stand on its own feet. The 
NII-SRC activities will be supported by a project 
for a few more years, but it can not gain profit 
from distributing the corpora created by the re-
searchers outside of NII. We will search for better 
ways by which both the NII-SRC and GSK will 
be able to act as corpora agents like the LDC or 
ELRA. There are some more organizations re-
lated to language resources such as ATR, NICT, 
and NIJL. We need much more collaboration and 
coordination among these. 
5 Conclusion 
This report explained the activities of the GSK 
and the NII?Speech Resources Consortium (NII-
SRC).  GSK and NII-SRC will facilitate the dis-
tribution, promotion, and publicity of the lan-
guage resources, and in so doing, will contribute 
to the information society in Japan and in Asia. 
For further information, please refer to the fol-
lowing URLs.  
http://research.nii.ac.jp/src/eng/index.html 
http://www.gsk.or.jp/index_e.html 
References 
S. Itahashi, T. Ohsuga. 2006. Introduction of NII-
Speech resources Consortium, Proc. Oriental 
COCOSDA-2006, Penang, Malaysia: 38-43. 
K. Hasida, H. Tanaka. 2006. Nonprofit Organiza-
tion ?Language Resource Association (GSK)?, 
(in Japanese) Japanese Linguistics, 20:107-110. 
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
108
