A Punjabi Grammar Checker 
 
 
Abstract 
This article provides description about the 
grammar checking software developed for 
detecting the grammatical errors in Punjabi 
texts and providing suggestions wherever 
appropriate to rectify those errors. This 
system utilizes a full-form lexicon for 
morphology analysis and rule-based 
systems for part of speech tagging and 
phrase chunking. The system supported by 
a set of carefully devised error detection 
rules can detect and suggest rectifications 
for a number of grammatical errors, 
resulting from lack of agreement, order of 
words in various phrases etc., in literary 
style Punjabi texts.  
1 Introduction 
Grammar checking is one of the most widely used 
tools within natural language engineering 
applications. Most of the word processing systems 
available in the market incorporate spelling, 
grammar, and style-checking systems for English 
and other foreign languages, one such rule-based 
grammar checking system for English is discussed 
in (Naber, 2003). However, when it comes to the 
smaller languages, specifically the Indian 
languages, most of such advanced tools have been 
lacking. Spell checking has been addressed for 
most of the Indian languages but still grammar and 
style checking systems are lacking. In this article a 
grammar checking system for Punjabi, a member 
of the Modern Indo-Aryan family of languages, is 
provided. The grammar checker uses a rule-based 
system to detect grammatical errors in the text and 
if possible generates suggestions to correct those 
errors.  
To the best of our knowledge the grammar 
checking provided here will be the first such 
system for Indian languages. There is n-gram 
based grammar checking system for Bangla (Alam 
et al 2006). The authors admit its accuracy is very 
low and there is no description about whether the 
system provides any suggestions to correct errors 
or not. It is mentioned that it was tested to identify 
correct sentences from the set of sentences 
provided as input but nothing is mentioned as far 
as correcting those errors is concerned. However, 
the system that we discuss here for Punjabi detects 
errors and suggests corrections as well. In doing 
so, provides enough information for the user to 
understand the error reason and supports the 
suggestions provided, if any. 
2 System Overview 
The input Punjabi text is given to the preprocessing 
system that performs tokenization and detects any 
phrases etc. After that morphological analysis is 
performed, this returns possible tags for all the 
words in the given text, based on the full-form 
lexicon that it is using. Then a rule-based part of 
speech tagger is engaged to disambiguate the tags 
based on the context information. After that, the 
text is grouped into various phrases accordingly to 
the pre-defined phrase chunking rules. In the final 
phase, rules to check for various grammatical 
errors internal to phrases and agreement on the 
sentence level, are applied. If any error is found in 
a sentence then based on the context information 
corrections are suggested (generated) for that.  
Mandeep Singh Gill 
Department of Computer 
Science 
Punjabi University 
 Patiala -147002, India 
msgill_in@yahoo.com 
Tel.: +91-9888165971 
Gurpreet Singh Lehal 
Department of Computer 
Science 
Punjabi University  
Patiala -147002, India 
gslehal@yahoo.com 
Tel.: +91-175-3046171 
Shiv Sharma Joshi 
Department of 
Anthropological Linguistics 
& Punjabi Lexicography 
Punjabi University 
Patiala -147002, India 
Tel.: +91-175-3046292 
940
 For the purpose of morphological analysis we 
have divided the Punjabi words into 22 word 
classes like noun, adjective (inflected and 
uninflected), pronoun (personal, demonstrative, 
reflexive, interrogative, relative, and indefinite), 
verb (main verb, operator verb, and auxiliary verb), 
cardinals, ordinals, adverb, postposition, 
conjunction, interjection etc., depending on the 
grammatical information required for the words of 
these word classes. The information that is in the 
database depends upon the word class, like for 
noun and inflected adjective, it is gender, number, 
and case. For personal pronouns, person is also 
required. For main verbs gender, number, person, 
tense, phase, transitivity etc. is required. As 
mentioned earlier the lexicon of this morphological 
analyzer is full form based i.e. all the word forms 
of all the commonly used Punjabi words are kept 
in the lexicon along with their root and other 
grammatical information. 
 For part of speech tagging, we have devised a 
tag set keeping into mind all the grammatical 
categories that can be helpful for agreement 
checking. At present, there are more than 600 tags 
in the tag set. In addition to this, some word-
specific tags are also there. The tag set is very user 
friendly and while choosing tag names existing tag 
sets for English and other such languages were 
taken into consideration, like NNMSD ?  
masculine, singular, and direct case noun, 
PNPMPOF ? masculine, plural, oblique case, and 
first person personal pronoun. The approach 
followed for part of speech tagging is rule-based, 
as there is no tagged corpus for Punjabi available 
at present. As the text we are processing may have 
grammatical agreement errors, so the part of 
speech tagging rules are devised considering this. 
The rules are applied in sequential order with each 
rule having an attached priority to control its order 
in this sequence. 
 For phrase chunking, again a rule-based 
approach was selected mainly due to the similar 
reasons as for part of speech tagging. The tag set 
that is being used for phrase chunking includes 
tags like NPD ? noun phrase in direct case, NPNE 
? noun phrase followed by ? ne etc. The rules for 
phrase chunking also take into account the 
potential errors in the text, like lack of agreement 
in words of a potential phrase. However, as would 
be expected there is no way to take the misplaced 
words of a phrase into account, like if words of a 
phrase are separated (having some other phrase in 
between) then that cannot be taken as a single 
phrase, even though this may be a potential error. 
 In the last phase i.e. grammar checking, there 
are again manually designed error detection rules 
to detect potential errors in the text and provide 
corrections to resolve those errors. For example, 
rule to check modifier and noun agreement, will go 
through all the noun phrases in a sentence to check 
if the modifiers of those sentences agree with their 
respective head words (noun/pronoun) in terms of 
gender, number, and case or not. For this matching, 
the grammatical information from the tags of those 
words is used. In simple terms, it will compare the 
grammatical information (gender, number, and 
case) of modifier with the headword 
(noun/pronoun) and displays an error message if 
some grammatical information fails to match. To 
resolve this error, the grammar checking module 
will use morphological generator, to generate the 
correct form (based on headword?s gender, 
number, and case) for that modifier from its root 
word.  
 For example, consider the grammatically 
incorrect sentence  	
   sohne larka 
janda hai ?handsome boy goes?. In this sentence in 
the noun phrase,  	
 sohne larka ?handsome 
boy?, the modifier  sohne ?handsome? (root 
word ?  sohna ?handsome?), with masculine 
gender, plural number, and direct case, is not in 
accordance with the gender, number, case of its 
head word. It should be in singular number instead 
of plural. The grammar checking module will 
detect this as an error as ?number? for modifier and 
headword is not same, then it will use 
morphological generator to generate the ?singular 
number form? from its root word, which is same as 
root form i.e.  sohna ?handsome? (masculine 
gender, singular number, and direct case). So, the 
input sentence will be corrected as  	
  
 sohna larka janda hai ?handsome boy goes?. 
 The error detection rules in grammar checking 
module are again applied in sequential order with 
priority field to control the sequence. This is done 
to resolve phrase level errors before going on to 
the clause level errors, and then to sentence level 
agreement errors. 
941
3 Grammar Errors 
At present, this grammar checking system for 
Punjabi detects and provides corrections for 
following grammatical errors, based on the study 
of Punjabi grammar related texts (Chander, 1964; 
Gill and Gleason, 1986; Puar, 1990): 
Modifier and noun agreement 
The modifier of a noun must agree with the noun 
in terms of gender, number, and case. Modifiers of 
a noun include adjectives, pronouns, cardinals, 
ordinals, some forms of verbs etc. 
 
Subject and verb agreement 
In Punjabi text, the verb must agree with the 
subject of the sentence in terms of gender, number, 
and person. There are some special forms of verbs 
like transitive past tense verbs, which need some 
specific postpositions with their subject, like the 
use of ? ne with transitive verbs in perfect form 
etc. 
 
Noun and adjective (in attributive form) 
agreement 
This is different from ?modifier and noun 
agreement? as described above in the sense that 
adjective is not preceding noun but can be virtually 
anywhere in the sentence, usually preceding verb 
phrase acting as a complement for it. It must still 
agree with the noun for which it is used in that 
sentence. 
 
Order of the modifiers of a noun in noun phrase 
If a noun has more than one modifier, then those 
modifiers should be in a certain order such that 
phrase modifiers precede single word modifiers but 
pronouns and numerals precede all other. 
 
Order of the words in a verb phrase 
There are certain future tense forms of Punjabi 
verbs that should occur towards the end of verb 
phrase without any auxiliary. In addition, if 
negative and emphatic particles are used in a verb 
phrase then the latter must precede the former. 
 
 da postposition and following noun phrase 
agreement 
All the forms of  da postposition must agree in 
terms of gender, number, and case with the 
following noun phrase that it is connecting with the 
preceding noun phrase. 
 
Some other options covered include noun phrase 
must be in oblique form before a postposition, all 
the noun phrases joined by connectives must have 
same case, main verb should be in root form if 
preceding  ke etc. 
4 Sample Input and Output 
This section provides some sample Punjabi 
sentences that were given as input to the Punjabi 
grammar checking system along with the output 
generated by this system. 
 
Sentence 1 
Shows the grammatical errors related to ?Modifier 
and noun agreement? and ?Order of the modifiers 
of a noun in noun phrase?. In this sentence noun is 
	
 larka ?boy? and its modifiers are   
  sohni ek bhajji janda ?handsome one 
running?. 
Input:     	
  
Input1: sohni ek bhajji janda larka aaeya 
Input2: Handsome one running boy came 
Output:     	
  
Output1: ek bhajjia janda sohna larka aaeya 
Output2: One running handsome boy came 
 
Sentence 2 
Covers the grammatical error related to ?Subject 
and verb agreement?. Subject is  barish ?rain? 
and verb phrase is    ho riha han ?is 
raining?.  
Input:      
Input1: bahr barish ho riha han 
Input2: It is raining outside 
Output:      
Output1: bahr barish ho rahi hai 
Output2: It is raining outside 
 
Sentence 3 
For grammatical errors related to ? da 
postposition and following noun phrase agreement? 
and ?Noun phrase in oblique form before a post 
position?. Noun phrase preceding  dee 
942
(possessive marker) is 