A Comparative Study for Query Translation using 
Linear Combination and Confidence Measure 
Youssef Kadri 
Laboratoire RALI, DIRO 
Universit? de Montr?al 
CP 6128, Montr?al, Canada, H3C3J7 
kadriyou@iro.umontreal.ca
Jian-Yun Nie 
Laboratoire RALI, DIRO 
Universit? de Montr?al 
CP 6128, Montr?al, Canada, H3C3J7 
nie@iro.umontreal.ca 
 
 
Abstract 
In Cross Language Information Retrieval 
(CLIR), query terms can be translated to 
the document language using Bilingual 
Dictionaries (BDs) or Statistical Transla-
tion Models (STMs). Combining different 
translation resources can also be used to 
improve the performance. Unfortunately, 
the most studies on combining multiple re-
sources use simple methods such as linear 
combination. In this paper, we drew up a 
comparative study between linear combina-
tion and confidence measures to combine 
multiple translation resources for the pur-
pose of CLIR. We show that the linear 
combination method is unable to combine 
correctly different types of resources such 
as BDs and STMs. While the confidence 
measure method is able to re-weight the 
translation candidate more radically than in 
linear combination. It reconsiders each 
translation candidate proposed by different 
resources with respect to additional fea-
tures. We tested the two methods on differ-
ent test CLIR collections and the results 
show that the confidence measure outper-
forms the linear combination method. 
1 Introduction 
Cross Language Information Retrieval (CLIR) tries 
to determine documents written in a language from 
a query written in another language. Query transla-
tion is widely considered as the key problem in this 
task (Oard, 1998). In previous researches, various 
approaches have been proposed for query transla-
tion: using a bilingual dictionary, using an off-the-
shelf machine translation system or using a parallel 
corpus. It is also found that when multiple transla-
tion resources are used, the translation quality can 
be improved, comparing to using only one transla-
tion resource (Xu, 2005). Indeed, every translation 
tool or resource has its own limitations. For exam-
ple, a bilingual dictionary can suggest common 
translations, but they remain ambiguous ? transla-
tions for different senses of the source word are 
mixed up. Machine translation systems usually 
employ sophisticated methods to determine the 
best translation sentence, for example, syntactic 
analysis and some semantic analysis. However, it 
usually output only one translation for a source 
word, while it is usually preferred that a source 
query word be translated by multiple words in or-
der to produce a desired query expansion effect. In 
addition, the only word choice made by a machine 
translation system can be wrong. Finally, parallel 
corpora contain useful information about word 
translation in particular areas. One can use such a 
corpus to train a statistical translation model, 
which can then be used to translate a query. This 
approach has the advantage that few manual inter-
ventions are required to produce the statistical 
translation model. In addition, each source word 
can be translated by several related target words 
and the latter being weighted. However, among the 
proposed translation words, there may be irrelevant 
ones. 
Therefore, one can take advantage of several 
translation resources and tools in order to produce 
better query translations. The key problem is the 
way to combine the resources.  
A common method used in previous studies is to 
assign a weight to each resource. Then all the 
translation candidates are weighted and then com-
bined linearly (Nie, 2000). However, this kind of 
combination assigns a single confidence score to 
181
all the translations from the same translation re-
source. In reality, a translation resource does not 
cover all the words with equal confidence. For 
some words, its translations can be accurate, while 
for some others, they are inappropriate. By using a 
linear combination, the relative order among the 
translation candidates is not changed. In practice, a 
translation with a low score can turn out to be a 
better translation when other information becomes 
available. 
For example, the English word ?nutritional? is 
translated into French by a statistical translation 
model trained on a set of parallel texts as follows: 
{nutritive 0.32 (nutritious), alimentaire 0.21 (food)}. 
We observe that the most common translation 
word ?alimentaire? only takes the second place 
with lower probability than ?nutritive?. If these 
translations are combined linearly with another 
resource (say a BD), it is unlikely that the correct 
translation word ?alimentaire? gain larger weight 
than ?nutritive?.  
This example shows that we have to reconsider 
the relative weights of the translation candidates 
when another translation resource is available. The 
purpose of this reconsideration is to determine how 
reasonable a translation candidate is given all the 
information now available. In so doing, the initial 
ranking of translation candidates can be changed. 
As a matter of fact using the method of confidence 
measures that we propose in this paper, we are able 
to reorder the translation candidates as follows:  
  {alimentaire 0.38, nutritive 0.23, valeur 0.11 (value)}. 
The weight of the correct translation ?alimen-
taire? is considerably increased.  
In this paper, we will propose to use a new 
method based on confidence measure to re-weight 
the translation candidates. In the re-weighting, the 
original weight according to each translation re-
source is only considered as one factor. The final 
weight is determined by combining all the avail-
able factors. In our implementation, the factors are 
combined in neural networks, which produce a fi-
nal confidence measure for each of the translation 
candidates. This final weight is not a simple linear 
combination of the original weights, but a re-
calculation according to all the information avail-
able, which is not when each translation resource is 
estimated separately. 
The advantages of this approach are twofold. On 
one hand, the confidence measure allows us to ad-
just the original weights of the translations and to 
select the best translation terms according to all the 
information. On the other hand, the confidence 
measures also provide us with a new weighting for 
the translation candidates that are comparable 
across different translation resources. Indeed, when 
we try to combine a statistical translation model 
with a bilingual dictionary, we had to assign a 
weight to a candidate from the bilingual dictionary. 
This weight is not directly compatible with the 
probability assigned in the former. 
In the remaining sections of this paper, we will 
first describe the principle of confidence measure 
in section 2. In section 3, we will compare two 
methods to combine different translation resources: 
linear combination and confidence measure. Sec-
tion 4 provides a description on how the parame-
ters are tuned. Section 5 outlines the different steps 
for computing confidence measures. Finally, we 
present the results of our experiments on both Eng-
lish-French and English-Arabic CLIR. Our ex-
periments will show that the method using confi-
dence measure significantly outperforms the tradi-
tional approach using linear combination. 
2 Confidence measure 
Confidence measure is often used to re-rank or re-
weight some outputs produced by separate means. 
For example, in speech recognition and under-
standing (Hazen et  al., 2002), one tries to re-rank 
the result of speech recognition according to addi-
tional information using confidence measure. Gan-
drabur et al (2003) used confidence measures in a 
translation prediction task. The goal is to re-rank 
the translation candidates according to additional 
information. Confidence measure is defined as the 
probability of correctness of a candidate. In the 
case of translation, given a candidate translation tE 
for a source word tF, the confidence measure is 
),,|( FttcorrectP EF , where F is a set of other fea-
tures of the translation context (e.g. the POS-tag of 
the word, the previous translations words, etc.). In 
both applications, significant gains have been ob-
served when using a confidence estimation layer 
within the translation models. 
The problem of query translation is similar to 
general translation described in (Gandrabur et al 
2003). We are presented with several translation 
resources, each being built separately. Our goal 
now is to use all of them together. As we discussed 
earlier, we want to take advantage of the additional 
information (other translation resources as well as 
182
additional linguistic analysis on the query) in order 
to re-weight each of the translation candidates. 
In previous studies, neural networks have been 
commonly used to produce confidence measures. 
The inputs to the neural networks are translation 
candidates from different resources, their original 
weights and various other properties of them (e.g. 
POS-tag, probability in a language model, etc.). 
The output of the neural networks is a confidence 
measure assigned to a translation candidate from a 
translation resource. This confidence measure is 
used to re-rank the whole set of candidates from all 
the resources. 
In this study, we will use the same approach to 
combine different translation resources and to pro-
duce confidence measures. 
The neural networks need to be trained on a set 
of training data. Such data are available in both 
speech recognition and machine translation. How-
ever, in the case of CLIR, the goal of query transla-
tion is not strictly equivalent to machine transla-
tion. Indeed, in query translation, we are not lim-
ited to the correct literal translations. Not literal 
translation words that are strongly related to the 
query are also highly useful. These latter related 
words can produce a desired query expansion ef-
fect in IR.  
Given this situation, we can no longer use a par-
allel corpus as our training data as in the case of 
machine translation. Modifications are necessary. 
We will describe the modified way we use to cre-
ate the training data in section 4. The informative 
features we use will be described n section 5.2. 
3 General CLIR Problem 
Assume a query QE written in a source language E 
and a document DF written in a target language F, 
we would like to determine a score of relevance of 
DF to QE. However, as they are not directly compa-
rable, a form of translation is needed. Let us de-
scribe the model that we will use to determine its 
score. 
Various theoretical models have been developed 
for IR, including vector space model, Boolean 
model and probabilistic model. Recently, language 
modeling is widely used in IR, and it has been 
show to produce very good experimental results. In 
addition, language modeling also provides a solid 
theoretical framework for integrating more aspects 
in IR such as query translation. Therefore, we will 
use it as our basic framework in this study. 
In language modeling framework, the relevance 
score of the document DF to the query QE is deter-
mined as the negative KL-divergence between the 
query?s language model and the document?s lan-
guage model (Zhai, 2001a). It is defined as fol-
lows: 
??
Ft
FFEFFE DtpQtpDQR )|(log)|(),(             (1) 
To avoid the problem of attributing zero prob-
ability to query terms not occurring in document 
DF, smoothing techniques are used to estimate 
p(tF|DF). One can use the Jelinek-Mercer smooth-
ing technique which is a method of interpolating 
between the document and collection language 
models (Zhai, 2001b). The smoothed p(tF|DF) is 
calculated as follows: 
)|()|()1()|( FFMLFFMLFF CtpDtpDtp ?? +?=         (2) 
where
||
),(
)|(
F
FF
FFML D
Dttf
Dtp = and
||
),(
)|(
F
FF
FFML C
Cttf
Ctp =  
are the maximum likelihood estimates of a uni-
gram language model based on respectively the 
given document DF and the collection of docu-
ments CF. ? is a parameter that controls the influ-
ence of each model. 
In CLIR, the term )|( EF Qtp in equation (1) rep-
resenting the query model can be estimated as fol-
lows: ?? ==
EE q
EEEEF
q
EEFEF QqpQqtpQqtpQtp )|(),|()|,()|(  
                       ??
Eq
EEMLEF Qqpqtp )|()|(             (3) 
where )|( EEML Qqp  is the maximum likelihood 
estimation:
||
),(
)|(
E
EE
EEML Q
Qqtf
Qqp = and )|( EF qtp is 
the translation model. Putting (3) in (1), we obtain 
the general CLIR score formula: ???
F Et
FF
q
EEMLEFFE DtpQqpqtpDQR )|(log)|()|(),(  (4) 
In our work, we do not change the document 
model )|( FF Dtp  from monolingual IR. Our focus 
will be put on the estimation of the translation 
model )|( EF qtp - the translation probability from a 
source query term qE to a target word tF, in particu-
lar, when several translation resources are avail-
able.  
Let us now describe two different ways to com-
bine different translation resources for the estima-
tion of )|( EF qtp : by linear combination and by con-
fidence measure.  
183
4 Linear Combination 
The first intuitive method to combine different 
translation resources is by a linear combination. 
This means that the final translation model is esti-
mated as follows:  
?=
i
EFiiqEF qtpzqtp E )|()|( ?                  (5) 
where ?i is the parameter assigned to the transla-
tion resource i and 
Eq
z is a normalization factor so 
that 1)|( =?
Ft
EF qtp . )|( EFi qtp is the probability 
of translating the source word qE to the target word 
tF  by the resource i. 
In order to determine the appropriate parameter 
for each translation resource, we use the EM algo-
rithm to find values which maximize the log-
likelihood LL of a set C of training data according 
to the combined model, i.e.: 
)()|(log),()(
),(
||
1 1
||
1
iijk
Cef
f
j
n
k
e
i
k epeftefpCLL ? ? ??
? = = =
= ?  (6) 
Where (f, e)?C is a pair of parallel sentences; 
||
),(#
),(
C
ef
efp = is the prior probability of the pair of 
sentences (f, e) in the corpus C, |f| is the length of 
the target sentence f and |e| is the length of the 
source sentence e. ?k is the coefficient related to 
resource k that we want to optimize and n is the 
number of resources. tk(fj|ei) is the probability of 
translating the source word ei with the target word 
fj with each resource. p(ei) is the prior probability 
of the source word ei in the corpus C. Note that the 
validation data set C on which we optimize the 
parameters must be different from the one used to 
train our baseline models.  
The training corpora are as follows: For English-
Arabic, we use the Arabic-English parallel news 
corpus1. This corpus consists of around 83 K pairs 
of aligned sentences. For English-French, we use a 
bitext extracted from two parallel corpora: The 
Hansard 2  corpus and the Web corpus (Kadri, 
2004). It consists of around 60 K pairs of aligned 
sentences.  
                                                 
1 http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/ 
Arabic-English Parallel News Part 1 (LDC2004T18) 
2 LDC provides a version of this corpus: 
http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/. 
The component models for English-Arabic 
CLIR are: a STM built on a set of parallel Web 
pages (Kadri, 2004), another STM built on the 
English-Arabic United Nations corpus (Fraser, 
2002), Ajeeb3 bilingual dictionary and Almisbar4 
bilingual dictionary. For English-French CLIR, we 
use three component models: a STM built on Han-
sard corpus, another STM built on parallel Web 
pages and the Freedict5 bilingual dictionary.  
5 Using Confidence Measures 
The question considered in confidence measure is: 
Given a translation candidate, is it correct and how 
confident are we on its correctness? 
Confidence measure aims to answer this ques-
tion. Given a translation candidate tF for a source 
term qE and a set F of other features, confidence 
measure corresponds to ),,|1( FqtCp EFi = . We can 
use this measure as an estimate of )|( EF qtp , i.e.: ? ==
i
EFiqEF FqtCpzqtp E ),,|1()|(        (7) 
where F is the set of features that we use. We will 
see several features to help determine the confi-
dence measure of a translation candidate, for ex-
ample, the translation probability, the reverse 
translation probability, language model features, 
and so on. We will describe these features in more 
detail in section 5.2. 
In general, we can consider confidence measure 
as P(C=1|X), given X? the source word, a transla-
tion and a set of features. We use a Multi Layer 
Perceptron (MLP) to estimate the probability of 
correctness P(C=1|X) of a translation. Neural net-
works have the ability to use input data of different 
natures and they are well-suited for classification 
tasks.  
Our training data can be viewed as a set of pairs 
(X,C), where X is a vector of features relative to a 
translation6 used as the input of the network, and C 
is the desired output (the correctness of the transla-
tion 0/1). The MLP implements a non-linear map-
ping of the input features by combining layers of 
linear transformation and non-linear transfer func-
tion. Formally, the MLP implements a discriminant 
function for an input X of the form: 
                                                 
3 http://www.ajeeb.com/ 
4 http://www.almisbar.com/ 
5 http://www.freedict.com/ 
6 By translation, we mean the pair of source word and its 
translation. 
184
     ))(();( XWhVoXg ??=?                             (8) 
where ? ={W,V}, W is a matrix of weights be-
tween input and hidden layers and V is a vector of 
weights between hidden and output layers; h is an 
activation function for the hidden units which non-
linearly transforms the linear combination of in-
puts XW ? ; o is also a non-linear activation func-
tion but for the output unit, that transforms the 
MLP output to the probability estimate P(C=1|X). 
Under these conditions, our MLP was trained to 
minimize an objective function of error rate (Sec-
tion 4.1).  
In our experiments, we used a batch gradient de-
scent optimizer. During the test stage, the confi-
dence of a translation X is estimated with the 
above discriminant function g(X; ?); where ? is the 
set of weights optimized during the learning stage. 
These parameters are expected to correlate with the 
true probability of correctness P(C=1|X).  
5.1 The objective function to minimize 
A natural metric for evaluating probability esti-
mates is the negative log-likelihood (or cross en-
tropy CE) assigned to the test corpus by the model 
normalized by the number of examples in the test 
corpus (Blatz et al, 2003). This metric evaluates 
the probabilities of correctness. It measures the 
cross entropy between the empirical distribution on 
the two classes (correct/incorrect) and the confi-
dence model distribution across all the examples 
X(i) in the corpus. Cross entropy is defined as fol-
lows: 
     ??=
i
ii
n XCPCE )|(log
)()(1                     (9) 
where C(i) is 1 if the translation X(i) is correct, 0 
otherwise. To remove dependence on the prior 
probability of correctness, Normalized Cross En-
tropy (NCE) is used: 
bb CECECENCE )( ?=                              (10) 
The baseline CEb is a model that assigns fixed 
probabilities of correctness based on the empirical 
class frequencies: 
)/log()/()/log()/( 1100 nnnnnnnnCEb ??=         (11) 
where n0 and n1 are the numbers of correct and in-
correct translations among n test cases. 
5.2 Features 
The MLP tends to capture the relationship between 
the correctness of the translation and the features, 
and its performance depends on the selection of 
informative features.  
We selected intuitively seven classes of features 
hypothesized to be informative for the correctness 
of a translation.  
Translation model index: an index represent-
ing the resource of translation that produced the 
translation candidate. 
Translation probabilities: the probability of 
translating a source word with a target word. These 
probabilities are estimated with IBM model 1 
(Brown et al, 1993) on parallel corpora. For trans-
lations from bilingual dictionaries, as no probabil-
ity is provided, we carry out the following process 
to assign a probability to each translation pair (e, f) 
in a bilingual dictionary: We trained a statistical 
translation model on a parallel corpus. Then for 
each translation pair (e,f) of the bilingual diction-
ary, we looked up the resulting translation model 
and extracted the probability assigned by this 
translation model to the translation pair in ques-
tion. Finally, the probability is normalized by the 
Laplace smoothing method: 
?
=
+
+= n
i
iSTM
STM
BD
efp
efp
efp
1
1)|(
1)|(
)|(
                     (12) 
Where n is the number of translations proposed by 
the bilingual dictionary to the word e. 
Translation ranking: This class of features in-
cludes two features: The rank of the translation 
provided by each resource and the probability dif-
ference between the translation and the highest 
probability translation. 
Reverse translation information: This in-
cludes the probability of translation of a target 
word to a source word. Other features measure the 
rank of source word in the list of translations of the 
target word and if the source word holds in the best 
translations of the target word. 
Translation ?Voting?: This feature aims to 
know whether the translation is voted by more than 
one resource. The more a same translation is voted 
the more likely it may be correct. 
Source sentence-related features: One feature 
measures the frequency of the source word in the 
source sentence. Another feature measures the 
number of source words in the source sentence that 
have a translation relation with the translation in 
question. 
185
Language model features: We use the uni-
gram, the bigram and the trigram language models 
for source and target words on the training data. 
5.3 Training for confidence measures 
The corpus used for training confidence is the 
same as the corpus for tuning parameters for the 
linear combination. It is a set of aligned sentences. 
Source sentences are translated to the target lan-
guage word by word using baseline models. We 
translated each source word with the most prob-
able7 translations for the translation models and the 
best five translations provided by the bilingual dic-
tionaries. Translations are then compared to the 
reference sentence to build a labeled corpus: a 
translation of a source word is considered to be 
correct if it occurs in the reference sentence. The 
word order is ignored, but the number of occur-
rences is taken into account. This metric fits well 
our context of IR: IR models are based on ?bag of 
words? principle and the order of words is not con-
sidered. 
We test with various numbers of hidden units 
(from 5 to 100). We used the NCE metric to com-
pare the performance of different architectures. 
The MLP with 50 hidden units gave the best per-
formance. 
To test the performance of individual features, 
we experimented with each class of features alone. 
The best features are the translation ?voting?, lan-
guage model features and the translation probabili-
ties. The translation ?voting? is very informative 
because it presents the translation probability at-
tributed by each resource to the translation in ques-
tion. The translation ranking, the reverse transla-
tion information, the translation model index and 
the source sentence-related features provide some 
marginally useful information. 
6 CLIR experiments 
The experiments are designed to test whether the 
confidence measure approach is effective for query 
translation, and how it compares with the tradi-
tional linear combination. We will conduct two 
series of experiments, one for English-French 
CLIR and another for English-Arabic CLIR. 
                                                 
7 The translations with the probability p(f|e)?0.1 
6.1 Experimental setup 
English-French CLIR: We use English queries 
to retrieve French documents. In our experiments, 
we use two document collections: one from TREC8 
and another from CLEF9 (SDA). Both collections 
contain newspaper articles. TREC collection con-
tains 141 656 documents and CLEF collection 
44 013 documents. We use 4 query sets: 3 from 
TREC (TREC6 (25 queries), TREC7 (28 queries), 
TREC8 (28 queries)) and one from CLEF (40 que-
ries). 
English-Arabic CLIR: For these experiments, 
we use English queries to retrieve Arabic docu-
ments. The test corpus is the Arabic TREC collec-
tion which contains 383 872 documents. For top-
ics, we use two sets: TREC2001 (25 queries) and 
TREC2002 (50 queries). 
Documents and queries are stemmed and stop-
words are removed. The Porter stemming is used 
to stem English queries and French documents. 
Arabic documents are stemmed using linguistic-
based stemming method (Kadri, 2006). The query 
terms are translated with the baseline models (Sec-
tion 4). The resulting translations are then submit-
ted to the information retrieval process. We tested 
with different ways to assign weights to translation 
candidates: translations from each resource, linear 
combination and confidence measures. 
When using each resource separately, we attrib-
ute the IBM 1 translation probabilities to our trans-
lations. For each query term, we take only transla-
tions with the probability p(f|e)?0.1 when using 
translation models and the five best translations 
when using bilingual dictionaries.  
6.2 Linear combination (LC) 
The tuned parameters assigned to each transla-
tion resource are as follows: 
English-Arabic CLR:  
STM-Web: 0.29, STM-UN: 0.34,  
Ajeeb BD: 0.14, Almisbar BD: 0.22. 
English-French CLR:  
STM-Web: 0.3588, STM-Hansard: 0.6408, 
Freedict BD: 0.0003. 
These weights produced the best log-likelihood 
of the training data. 
                                                 
8 http://trec.nist.gov/ 
9 http://www.clef-campaign.org/ 
186
For CLIR, the above combinations are used to 
combine translation candidates from different re-
sources. The tables below show the CLIR effec-
tiveness (mean average precision - MAP) of indi-
vidual models and the linear combination.  
Translation 
Model 
TREC 
2001 
TREC 
2002 
Merged 
TREC 
2001/2002 
Monolingual IR (0.33) (0.28) (0.31) 
STM-Web 0.14 (42%) 0.04 (17%) 0.07 (25%) 
STM-UN 0.11 (33%) 0.09 (34%) 0.10 (33%) 
Ajeeb BD 0.27 (81%) 0.19 (70%) 0.22 (70%) 
Almisbar BD 0.17 (51%) 0.16 (58%) 0.16 (54%) 
Linear Comb. 0.24 (72%) 0.20 (71%) 0.21 (67%) 
Table1. English-Arabic CLIR performance (MAP) 
with individual models and linear combination 
Trans. Model TREC6 TREC7 TREC8 CLEF 
Monolingual IR 0.39 0.34 0.44 0.40 
STM-Web 0.22 (56%) 0.17 (50%) 0.22 (50%) 0.29 (72%)
STM-Hansard 0.25 (64%) 0.24 (70%) 0.33 (75%) 0.30 (75%)
Freedict BD 0.17 (43%) 0.11 (32%) 0.13 (29%) 0.14 (35%)
Linear Comb. 0.26 (66%) 0.26 (76%) 0.36 (81%) 0.30 (75%)
Table2. English-French CLIR performance (MAP) with 
individual models and linear combination 
We observe that the performance is quite differ-
ent from one model to another. The low score re-
corded by the STMs for English-Arabic CLIR 
compared to the score of STMs for English-French 
CLIR is possibly due to the small data set on which 
the English-Arabic STMs are trained. A set of 
2816 English-Arabic pairs of documents is not 
enough to build a reasonable STM. For English-
Arabic CLIR, BDs present better performance than 
STMs because they cover almost all query terms 
and they provide multiple good translations to each 
query term. When combining all the resources, the 
performance is supposed to be better because we 
would like to take advantage of each of the models. 
However, we see that the combined model per-
forms even worse than one of the models - Ajeeb 
BD for English-Arabic CLIR. This shows that the 
linear combination is not necessarily a good way to 
combine different translation resources. 
An example of English queries is shown in Ta-
ble 3: ?What measures are being taken to develop 
tourism in Cairo??. The Arabic translation pro-
vided by TREC to the word ?measures? is: 
?????????. We see clearly that translations with dif-
ferent resources are different. Some resources pro-
pose inappropriate translations such as ??????? or 
???????. Even if two resources suggest the same 
translations, the weights are different. For this 
query, the linear combination produces better 
query translation terms than every resource taken 
alone: The most probable translations are selected 
from the combined list. However, this method is 
unable to attribute an appropriate weight to the best 
translation ?????????; it is selected but ranked at 
third position with a weak weight.  
Trans. model Translation(s) of word ?measures? 
Ajeeb BD 0.05 ????? (measure), 0.05 ???? (caliber), ???? 
0.05 (measurement), 0.05 ????? (measure-
ment), 0.05 ????? (standard), 0.05 ????? 
(standard), 0.05 ????? (balance) 
Almisbar BD 0.05 ??????? (procedures), 0.03 ??? ,0.03 ????? 
(measurement), 0.03 ????? (amount) 
STM-UN 0.69 ?????? (measures) 
STM-Web 0.09 ??????? 
Linear Comb, ???? ,0.029 ??????? ,0.037 ????? ,0.61 ?????? 
0.020  
Table3. Translation examples 
6.3 CLIR with Confidence Measures (CM) 
In these experiments, we use confidence meas-
ures as weights for translations. According to these 
confidence measures, we select the translations 
with the best confidences for each query term. The 
following tables show the results: 
Collection TREC 2001 TREC 2002 TREC01-02 
MAP of LC 0.2426 0.2032 0.2163 
MAP of CM 0.2775(14.35%) 0.2052 (1%) 0.2290 (5.87 %)
Table4. Comparison of English-Arabic CLIR between 
linear combination and confidence measures 
Collection TREC6 TREC7 TREC8 CLEF 
MAP of LC 0.2692 0.2630 0.3605 0.3071 
MAP of CM 0.2988 
(10.99%) 
0.2699 
(2.62%) 
0.3761 
(4.32%) 
0.3230 
(5.17 %) 
Table5. Comparison of English-French CLIR be-
tween linear combination and confidence measures 
In terms of MAP, we see clearly that the results 
using confidence measures are better than those 
obtained with the linear combination. The two-
tailed t-test shows that the improvement brought 
by confidence measure over linear combination is 
statistically significant at the level P<0.05. This 
improvement in CLIR performance is attributed to 
the ability of confidence measure to re-weight each 
translation candidate. The final sets of translations 
(and their probabilities) are more reasonable than 
in linear combination. The tables below show some 
examples where we get a large improvement in 
average precision when using confidence measures 
to combine resources. The first example is the 
TREC 2001 query ?What measures are being taken 
to develop tourism in Cairo??. The translation of 
the query term ?measures? to Arabic using the two 
187
methods is presented in table 6. The second exam-
ple is the TREC6 query ?Acupuncture?. Table 7 
presents the translation of this query term is to 
French using the two techniques: 
Trans.Model Translation(s) of term ?measures? 
Linear Comb. ???? ,0.029 ??????? ,0.037 ????? ,0.61 ?????? 
0.020 
Conf. meas. 0.06 ???? ,0.10 ??? ,0.51 ??????? 
Table6. Translation examples to Arabic  
Trans.model Translation(s) of term ?Acupuncture? 
Linear Comb. Acupuncture 0.13 (acupuncture), sevrage 
0.13 (severing), hypnose 0.13 (hypnosis) 
Conf. meas. Acupuncture 0.21, sevrage 0.17, hypnose 
0.14 
Table7. Translation examples to French  
In the example of table 6, confidence measure 
has been able to redeem the best translation 
????????? and rescore it with a stronger weight than 
the other incorrect or inappropriate ones. The same 
effect is observed in the example of table 7. Confi-
dence measure has been able to increase the correct 
translation ?acupuncture? to a higher level than the 
other incorrect ones. These examples show the po-
tential advantage of confidence measure over lin-
ear combination: The confidence measure does not 
blindly trust all the translations from different re-
sources. It tests their validity on new validation 
data. Thus, the translation candidates are rescored 
and filtered according to a more reliable weight.  
7 Conclusion 
Multiple translation resources are believed to con-
tribute in improving the quality of query transla-
tion. However, in most previous studies, only lin-
ear combination has been used. In this study, we 
propose a new method based on confidence meas-
ure to combine different translation resources. The 
confidence measure estimates the probability of 
correctness of a translation, given a set of features 
available. The measure is used to weight the trans-
lation candidates in a unified manner. It is also ex-
pected that the new measure is more reasonable 
than the original measures because of the use of 
additional features. Our experiments on both Eng-
lish-Arabic and English-French CLIR have shown 
that confidence measure is a better way to combine 
translation resources than linear combination. This 
shows that confidence measure is a promising ap-
proach to combine non homogenous resources and 
can be further improved on several aspects. For 
example, we can optimize this technique by identi-
fying other informative features. Other techniques 
for computing confidence estimates can also be 
used in order to improve the performance of CLIR. 
References 
J. Blatz, E. Fitzgerald, G. Foster, S. Gandrabur, C. 
Goutte, A. Kulesza, A. Sanchis and N. Ueffing. 2003. 
Confidence estimation for machine translation. 
Technical Report, CLSP/JHU 2003 Summer Work-
shop, Baltimore MD. 
P. F. Brown, S. A. Pietra, V. J. Pietra and R. L. Mercer. 
1993. The mathematics of statistical machine transla-
tion: Parameter estimation. Computational Linguis-
tics, 19(2):263?311. 
A. Fraser, J. Xu and R. Weischedel. 2002. TREC 
2002 Cross-lingual Retrieval at BBN. TREC11 
conference. 
S. Gandrabur and G. Foster. 2003. Confidence Estima-
tion for Text Prediction. Proceedings of the CoNLL 
2003 Conference, Edmonton. 
T. J. Hazen, T. Burianek, J. Polifroni and S. Seneff. 
2002. Recognition confidence scoring for use in 
speech understanding systems. Computer Speech and 
Language, 16:49-67. 
Y. Kadri and J. Y. Nie. 2004. Query translation for 
English-Arabic cross language information retrieval. 
Proceedings of the TALN conference. 
Y. Kadri and J. Y. Nie. 2006. Effective stemming for 
Arabic information retrieval. The challenge of Ara-
bic for NLP/MT Conference. The British Computer 
Society. London, UK. 
J. Y. Nie, M. Simard and G Foster. 2000. Multilingual 
information retrieval based on parallel texts from the 
Web. In LNCS 2069, C. Peters editor, 
CLEF2000:188-201, Lisbon. 
D. W. Oard and A. Diekema. 1998. Cross-Language 
Information Retrieval. In M. Williams (ed.), Annual 
review of Information science, 1998:223-256. 
J. Xu and R. Weischedel. 2005. Empirical studies on the 
impact of lexical resources on CLIR performance. In-
formation processing & management, 41(3):475-487. 
C. Zhai and J. Lafferty. 2001a. Model-based feedback in 
the language modeling approach to information re-
trieval. CIKM 2001 Conference. 
C. Zhai and J. Lafferty. 2001b. A study of smoothing 
methods for language models applied to ad hoc in-
formation retrieval. Proceedings of the ACM-SIGIR. 
188
