Conversational inferences: the hard way and the easy way 
Yukiko Kawaguchi 
Graduate School of Science and Technology 
Chiba University 
1-33, Yayoi-cho, Inage-ku, Chiba-shi, Chiba, 263-8522 Japan 
yukiko@cogsci.l.chiba-u.ac.jp
 
Key words: conversational implicature, 
conversational maxims, the Cooperative 
Principle, relrevance, conversational inferences,  
rationality 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper proposes a general theory of conversational 
inferences which distinguishes two kinds of inferences: 
the hard way and the easy way.  The theory accounts for 
a wider range of non-literal utterance meanings than 
Gricean and relevance theories and is motivated by the 
types of utterances in which the hearer fails to infer non-
literal meanings. 
 
1 Introduction 
This paper first characterizes the kinds of utterance 
meanings in the sense of Grice and Levinson 
which have not been consistently discussed in the 
existing theories but are important in respect of 
management of dialog, secondly analyzes the types 
of inference invoked by the hearer that derive those 
utterance meanings, and thirdly proposes a general 
theory of conversational inferences that accounts 
for a wider range of non-literal utterance meanings 
than Gricean and relevance theories. We will first 
outline Gricean theory of conversational implica-
ture and relevance theory in order to give a general 
understanding of how inferences are supposed to 
work in the hearer?s understanding of utterance 
meanings, and to characterize the kinds of utter-
ance meanings we are interested in. Those utter-
ance meanings are either what I call a case of 
capricious transition or a case of misplaced topics. 
Grice and his followers explain the first case but 
they are not sure of what this type really is.  They 
do not explain the second case.  In discussing 
Gricean theory as regards those cases, I stress the 
importance of Grice?s concept of ?rationality.? The 
relevance theorists, on the other hand, have also 
explained the first case to some extent, but are 
awkward in dealing with this case in terms of the 
principle of relevance. Although they seem to have 
noticed the second case, they have not stipulated a 
good enough explanation for it.  
To fill these lacunae in the existing theories, I 
propose to look at the conversational inferences in 
terms of two major categories: the hard way and 
the easy way.  The hard way inference is done by 
the hearer, using the Cooperative Principle given 
the fact that one or more maxims are violated. The 
easy way inference gives the hearer an output of 
non-literal meaning given the utterance of a certain 
kind in a certain context. To understand the latter 
kind of inferences, we need the concept of ade-
quacy. 
I extend Gricean theory by adding the concept 
of adequacy of observance of the maxims, in order 
to analyze those inexplicable cases. When maxims 
are observed, they are observed adequately. When 
we say maxims are not observed, we mean they are 
not observed in either of the two senses: namely 
failing to observe adequately or being observed 
beyond the adequate level of observance. The 
hearer needs to know, for example, to what extent 
the utterance is informative, relevant or perspicu-
ous. I suppose the hearer has to have a criterion 
with which to judge whether the utterance observes 
a maxim or not, just because the judgment that it 
triggers an inference needed to derive what is 
meant from what is said. This criterion cannot be 
absolute but relative to what the hearer expects to 
be adequate for the utterance to be observant of the 
maxim. 
If an observance of a maxim does not reach 
the adequacy expected, the hearer can derive im-
plicatures by the hard way. But if the topic focused 
on by the speaker is different from the one the 
hearer expected, maxims would be observed be-
yond the adequate level. In this case, the hearer 
fails to derive implicatures by the hard way, or de-
rives implicatures by the easy way. What is new in 
this theory is that a failure of derivation by the 
hearer can be explained by stipulating the two 
kinds of inferences. The notion of a failure of deri-
vation is necessary. In the case where the hearer 
fails to derive useful implicatures, the hearer 
should first notice that the derivation breaks down, 
and then the hearer will decide to resume the con-
versation again. I analyze the case of capricious 
transition as a case of the easy way inference, and 
the case of misplaced topics as a failure of the hard 
way inference. 
In this paper I describe the overall mechanism 
of how the hearer understands utterance meanings.  
The hearer may understand the literal meaning of 
an utterance, but there are cases where she has to 
infer or derive non-literal meanings.  Sometimes 
she infers by what I call the hard way, and reach 
particularized or generalized conversational impli-
catures.  Sometimes she understands non-literally 
by using the easy way inference, either getting to 
conventional implicatures, which I do not look into 
in this paper, or particularized conversational im-
plicatures. One part of the particularized conversa-
tional implicatures have been discussed and 
analyzed by relevance theory. The other part are 
the cases of misplaced topics and capriciously 
transition, which I pay special attention in this pa-
per. 
 
2 Gricean theory and relevance theory 
2.1 Gricean theory 
In Grice?s program, we derive what is unsaid when 
it is unnatural to understand what is literally said, 
on the assumption that observance of the Coopera-
tive Principle and maxims is reasonable. There are 
several ways in which the hearer understands an 
utterance non-literally. I focus on one subtype of 
what is unsaid, which Grice calls ?conversational 
implicatures?. The typical case of deriving conver-
sational implicatures in Gricean theory is the case 
where the Cooperative Principle is observed, and 
one or more of maxims is not observed*1. 
 
(1)  H: What time is it? 
S: Some of the guests are already leaving. 
 
The gloss can be that the speaker doesn?t know the 
exact time, or doesn?t want to tell the hearer di-
rectly, and that the speaker thinks that saying 
?Some of the guests are already leaving? gives the 
hearer a clue to know what time it is. In this case, 
the maxims of quantity and relation are not ob-
served, and an inference that leads to the implica-
ture gets involved. 
In some cases, the speaker?s utterance cannot ob-
serve one or more of the maxims because of the 
?clash? of the maxims. 
 
(2)   H: Where does X lives? 
S: Somewhere in the south of France. 
 
In (2), the speaker cannot observe one or two of 
the maxims of Quantity because she doesn?t say 
enough. But if she tried to observe the maxims of 
Quantity by saying exactly where X lives, she 
would violate the maxims of Quality in the sense 
that she said what she didn?t know. 
Grice says, in his lectures ?Logic and Con-
versation,? that he would like to conclude that 
observance of the Cooperative Principle and 
maxims is reasonable, without defining what 
?being reasonable? means. After that he discussed 
rational acceptance in his book ?Aspects of 
Reason.? I take for the discussion in this paper that 
being reasonable means speaking with justifiable 
grounds. If we suppose that observance of the 
Cooperative Principle and maxims is reasonable, 
the content which the hearer expects to be the 
implicature of the speaker?s utterance may be 
derived in the way that the utterance satisfies the 
maxim which is violated or at least gives the 
reason for violation, in typical cases where the                                                            
1 Grice and Levinson admit the case where the Coopera-
tive Principle and all the maxims are observed to the 
theory of conversational implicatures. I have refuted this 
analysis by showing the counterexamples in my paper 
2001 (in Japanese). The violation of a maxim should be 
noticed at the literal level. In my opinion, the utterances 
in their examples violate the maxims actually. So I cate-
gorized the cases which they regard as the case of utter-
ance observing all the maxims as the case of violation of 
the maxims at the literal level. 
cases where the Cooperative Principle is observed 
and at least one maxim is not observed. What is 
implicated in the case (1) is, for example, that the 
speaker doesn?t know the exact time. So this im-
plicature satisfies the maxim of relation, for it 
makes the utterance relevant and acceptable by the 
hearer. In the case (2), the speaker?s utterance im-
plicates the reason that the speaker doesn?t say 
enough. The speaker cannot observe one maxim of 
quantity, because if the speaker tried to observe 
one maxim of quantity by giving enough informa-
tion, she would violate the maxims of quality, in 
the sense that she said what she didn?t know. This 
case was called the case of ?clash? of the maxims 
by Grice. 
2.2 Relevance theory 
Sperber and Wilson?s relevance theory follows up 
Gricean theory, but is different from Gricean the-
ory in the following two senses: first, they don?t 
need strong heuristics such as Gricean maxims and 
the Cooperative Principle, so they do not have to 
assume the violation of the speaker?s utterance 
which triggers the inference needed in Grice?s pro-
gram to derive what is unsaid from what is literally 
said. Second, their theory, allegedly, can be ap-
plied to all kinds of the ostensive inferences. They 
introduced the principle of relevance, which is to 
be always observed by participants. In relevance 
theory, they treat relevance as a relation between a 
proposition P and a set of contextual assumption 
{C}. A proposition P is relevant in a context {C} if 
and only if P has at least one contextual implica-
tion in {C}. The hearer always assumes that there 
is relevance, and tends to extract the maximal in-
ferential effects for the minimal cognitive effort. 
 
3 Capricious transition and misplaced 
topics 
Nevertheless, there are types of utterances which 
are neither explained by the theory of Gricean con-
versational implicature nor by the relevance theo-
retic mechanism. We sometimes fail to derive 
implicatures, and repeat the utterance to the 
speaker or start the conversation over again. These 
are the cases of what I name capricious transition 
and misplaced topics*2. Illustrations follow: 
 
(3)   H: Mrs. X is an old bag. 
S: The weather has been delightful this  
summer, hasn?t it? 
 
In this Grice?s case, the speaker capriciously 
changes the topic. I call this case the case of capri-
cious transition. Both Gricean and relevance theo-
ries have proposed theoretical mechanisms with 
which to derive the implicature that the speaker 
doesn?t want to talk about the matter. But I don?t 
think either theory is successful in explaining this 
case, because it is possible for the hearer to inter-
pret the utterance differently, for example, as im-
plicating that the speaker doesn?t hear the utterance, 
or that she thinks the talk of Mrs. X is over and just 
starts the new conversation.  
What the speaker says could be interpreted 
to observe the Cooperative Principle and all the 
maxims, if the hearer doesn?t want the reply to her 
utterance ?Mrs. X is an old bag.? It may be the 
case that the speaker just started a new conversa-
tion, or that the speaker didn?t hear the hearer?s 
utterance. Such interpretations are perfectly normal. 
In our daily conversations, we hear utterances 
made with unexpected change of topics or a new 
chunk of conversation starting with a totally new 
topic.  Apparently, we simply do not derive, in 
such cases, implicatures from what is literally said. 
This case was explained by Grice as a case 
of violation of the maxim of relation. In Gricean 
theory, the hearer?s inference is to be triggered by 
the violation of the maxim of relation. But this case 
of violation of the maxim of relation is different 
from the case of violation of other maxims in the 
sense that the content of the non-literal meaning 
derived by the hearer in this case is neither the fact 
                                                           
2 In the two cases I present here, the speaker's intention doesn't 
seem important. In Grice's original theory of meaning, the 
speaker's intention plays an important role in deriving non-
literal meanings. But the hearer cannot know that the non-
literal meaning derived by herself is exactly what the speaker 
intends to convey. So it is unneccesary to assume what the 
speaker wants to convey for deriving non-literal meanings. In 
the actual course of conversations, there is no difference be-
tween the case where the hearer assumes the speaker's inten-
tion and the case where the hearer doesn't assume the speaker's 
intention in deriving non-literal meanings. I suspect the con-
cept of the speaker's intention might be spurious in the theory 
of conversational inference. 
that the utterance satisfies that maxim which is 
violated as in (1), nor the fact that it gives the rea-
son that the speaker?s utterance cannot observe that 
maxim which is violated as in (2). This case is 
puzzling giving Gricean theory alone. 
In relevance theory, on the other hand, it is 
by assuming that the proposition expressed or at 
least the content of the speaker?s utterance is rele-
vant in the context that the hearer will derive the 
non-literal meaning that the speaker doesn?t want 
to talk about the subject. But their theory is not 
successful in explaining cases where the hearer 
interpret that the speaker doesn?t hear the hearer?s 
utterance. In relevance theory, the hearer is ex-
pected to tend to extract the maximal effect by the 
minimal effort. The hearer, in this case, should 
spend more effort until she extracts positive cogni-
tive effects, but when she understands that the 
speaker has not heard her utterance, she has to give 
up the efforts and extracting effects from what the 
speaker literally says, finally to understand that 
what the speaker has said has no relevance to the 
previous utterance. What is missed in relevance 
theoretical mechanism is the criteria that allow the 
hearer to stop the effort. If the hearer tried to get 
the implicature which is relevant to the previous 
utterance at all cost, she could by no means inter-
pret that the speaker didn?t hear the utterance. 
The other case which is neither explained 
by Gricean theory nor by relevance theory is a case 
where we decide not to derive implicature from 
what is literally said in the course of conversation. 
 
(4)   H1: Have you done it? 
S: I?ve made a reservation for you. 
H2: What? Oh no, I?m talking about the book. 
 
I call this case the case of misplaced topics. In this 
case, the hearer thinks that the speaker misplaces 
the topic. The hearer stops deriving implicatures 
from what is literally said. There is no sense in de-
riving implicatures from what is literally said in 
this case because the hearer judges that the topic 
the speaker is talking about is different from the 
one that the hearer expected. The hearer doesn?t 
?infer? the non-literal meanings in terms of 
Gricean theory, because she doesn?t suppose any 
violation of a maxim. She just tries to let the 
speaker focus on the topic she wanted to talk about 
by saying H2.  
Relevance theory also cannot explain this 
case, because there is no relevance in terms of the 
principle of relevance. In relevance theory, a 
hearer derives utterance meanings assuming that 
the proposition expressed is relevant to the context.  
But in this case, the hearer can only know that the 
speaker is talking about a reservation by the prin-
ciple of relevance. However the hearer may spend 
effort to extract the utterance meaning by enriching 
or loosening the term a reservation, it is impossi-
ble for the hearer to know that what the speaker 
says is out of the context and that the speaker mis-
places the topic. We cannot derive the meaning 
that the speaker misplaces the topic from the mean-
ing that the speaker is talking about the reservation. 
The relevance theoretic mechanism cannot bridge 
the gap between these two meanings. In the case 
(4), how can the hearer know that the speaker mis-
places the topic in terms of relevance theory? The 
context is given in relevance theory. But in order to 
understand that the speaker misplaces the topic in 
this case, the hearer has to alter the context.  
Moreover, if the hearer?s interpretation in (3) 
can be that the speaker doesn?t want to talk about 
the subject, then it also can be the hearer?s inter-
pretation in (4). But we don?t think that the inter-
pretation is more appropriate than the 
interpretation in which the speaker misplaces the 
topic. Even if we take the possibility of contextual 
dependence into consideration, the hearer must 
give up deriving implicatures at some stage so as 
to understand that the speaker has misplaced the 
topic. Relevance theorists would say that the hearer 
stops conversational inferences when her expecta-
tions of relevance are satisfied. But in the case (4), 
the hearer?s expectations of relevance will never be 
satisfied, because the hearer has to notice the utter-
ance?s irrelevance to the context so that the hearer 
may infer the utterance meaning that the speaker is 
saying quite another thing.  
The problem in the cases (3) and (4) is how 
and why the hearer fails to derive implicatures. As 
previously mentioned, there are roughly two types 
of implicatures in view of Grice?s notion of ration-
ality. One is telling the hearer something else by 
violation; the other is giving the reason that the 
speaker cannot observe a certain maxim. But what 
the hearer understands in the two cases in question 
is neither the satisfying of a maxim nor the giving 
of the reason for violation. Rather there is no sense 
in assuming what the speaker says observes the 
maxims, since what the speaker says in these cases 
is beyond the hearer?s expectations. So we have to 
examine the mechanism the hearer utilizes in esti-
mating and judging the observance of the maxims. 
 
4 The observance adequacy of the max-
ims 
I propose to extend Gricean theory by adding the 
concept of adequacy of observance of the maxims. 
It is beneficial to extend Gricean theory in the fol-
lowing two reasons: firstly, we often need reasons 
to explain why we derive a certain implicature. We 
have to leave the door open for the possibility of 
describing the process of derivation conducted by 
the hearer herself, even if the reasons are after-
thoughts and if the process is not exactly what she 
has done in her mind at that time. We have to be 
responsible for implicatures. Further, relevance 
theoretical inferences have the potential of devel-
oping to Gricean theoretical inferences which need 
the violation of maxims to be invoked. In the case 
(2), the implicature that the speaker doesn?t know 
exactly where X lives can be drawn both in 
Gricean theory and in relevance theory. So the two 
theories are equally able to explain this case. But if 
you are asked why you think that the speaker 
doesn?t know exactly where X lives, you will ex-
plain the reason in the following manner: the 
speaker would say exactly where X lives, if she 
knew it, so I infer the meaning that she did not 
know. This explanation is based on the hearer?s 
assumption that the speaker?s utterance observes 
the maxims, in which the conversational inference 
is triggered by the violation of a certain maxim at 
the literal level. We might not need to assume the 
maxims in the course of actual derivation, but we 
have to develop the Gricean process which seems 
reasonable when we describe it to others. 
Secondly, as discussed in Levinson?s work, 
there must be the generality of implicatures, that is, 
what Grice calls the generalized implicatures. For 
example, we generally think that ?some? means 
?not all? in conversations. Similarly, we generally 
think that a certain utterance implicates a certain 
implicature, other things being equal. It is plausible, 
for example, that ?somewhere in the south of 
France? in (2) implicates that the speaker doesn?t 
know exactly where, unless we assume the context 
in which the speaker is not going to cooperate with 
the hearer. This assumption of being uncooperative 
is not general. Therefore, I would like to construct 
my theory on the ground of Gricean theory. 
Gricean theory has importance to know what we 
think is inference conceptually. 
The hearer fails to derive implicatures in the 
cases of capricious transition and misplaced topics, 
because the hearer doesn?t judge whether the utter-
ance observes the maxims or not, in the same way 
as in (1) or (2). What the hearer understands in (3) 
and (4) seems to be some sort of implicatures, but 
that neither satisfies the maxims nor gives the rea-
son for violation. This kind of utterance meanings 
is puzzling, because Gricean maxims are scarcely 
able to contribute to the derivation. Therefore, we 
have to clarify how we assume the observance of 
the maxims.  
In the Grice?s program, even in the typical 
cases such as (1) and (2), the adequacy of obser-
vance of the maxims is not clear. It is not clear, for 
example, to what extent the utterance is informa-
tive, or perspicuous*3. We think that what the 
speaker says in (1) is not relevant and not informa-
tive enough intuitively. However, in the case of the 
maxims of quantity for example, there is no meas-
ure of ?being as informative as is required? and 
?not being more informative than is required?. By 
whom is it requires to be informative? Of course 
by the hearer. The hearer has to have some crite-
rion with which to judge whether the utterance ob-
serves a maxim or not. 
According to this criterion of adequacy, the 
hearer can notice that there is no sense in assuming 
observance of the maxims in (3) and (4). I distin-
guish the two kinds of inferences in relation to this 
concept of adequacy of observance of the maxims. 
The utterance observes the maxims less adequately, 
and the hearer can make use of literal information 
and derive implicatures, which satisfies the maxim 
that is violated or gives the reason for the violation 
by the Gricean way of inferences.  I call this type 
of inference the hard way. The utterance observes 
the maxims beyond the adequate level, the hearer 
                                                           
3 Regarding the adequacy of observance of the maxims, I ha-
ven?t mentioned the observance adequacy of the maxims of 
quality because it seems incomprehensible how the hearer 
?tries to make her contribution one that is true? adequately, 
because we don?t have the notion of being adequately true. 
The observance of maxims of quality, however, must have 
some connection to that of maxims of quantity. The hearer 
wouldn?t care whether surplus information is true or not, for it 
is not necessary. We need more detailed argument on this 
issue, so I refrain from discussing it in this paper. 
cannot make use of literal information for deriva-
tion, so the inference by the hard way will break 
down. Then the hearer will suppose that the 
speaker doesn?t participate in the conversation, or 
that she has not heard the hearer?s utterance. This 
type of inference I call the easy way. After I ex-
plain the hard way and the easy way inferences, I 
will show the connection between the adequacy of 
observance of the maxims and the two ways of 
inferences. 
5 The hard way and the easy way 
I introduce the dichotomy of conversational infer-
ences: the hard way and the easy way. The dichot-
omy is justified by Grice?s discussion in ?Aspects 
of reason,? where he distinguishes ?the hard way? 
from ?the quick way.?  The dichotomy proposed 
here is not the same as the distinction between 
Grice?s two types of inference, and, in particular, 
the easy way described below is different from 
what Grice called the quick way.  Grice?s quick 
way is ?a substitute for the hard way, which is 
made possible by the habituation and intention?. 
But my easy way is not a substitute for the hard 
way but it is a different kind of inference than the 
hard way. The best part of the non-literal meanings 
Grice explained successfully is the inference by the 
hard way, namely the inference that derives con-
versational implicature.  Part of the easy way in-
ferences are those inferences discussed 
successfully by relevance theory, which fails to 
describe the important subset of the easy way in-
ference that take place in the cases of misplaced 
topics and capricious transition. 
5.1 The hard way 
The inference by the hard way is to make the utter-
ance acceptable and understandable by the hearer 
by deriving utterance meanings from what the 
speaker literally says.  This type of inference has 
been familiar to us since Grice?s Harvard lectures. 
I view this way of inference as derivation by way 
of literal input. In other words, the hearer makes 
use of the proposition expressed at the literal level 
in order to derive implicatures. The hearer judges 
that the utterance doesn?t observe a certain maxim, 
and starts to infer non-literal meanings. In the 
cases of the maxims of quantity or the maxim of 
relation, the utterance gives the hearer less infor-
mation, or less great relevance than the hearer re-
quires, but there remains something that the hearer 
can make use of. The cases (1) and (2) exemplify 
this type. The hearer derives implicatures that it 
satisfies the maxim which is violated, or gives the 
reason for the violation at the literal level. 
In the cases (3) and (4), the hearer cannot 
derive implicatures by the hard way. When the lit-
eral meanings are useless for derivation, or when 
the hearer can get only useless consequences, the 
hearer fails to derive implicatures by the hard way. 
For instance, the hearer will say ?What?? to the 
previous speaker to indicate that she has failed to 
derive useful implicatures, or she will start the 
conversation over again. The case of misplaced 
topics is explained as a failure of the hard way, 
when the hearer says ?what?? to indicate that she 
did hear what the speaker says but couldn?t under-
stand it. In the case (4), the hearer cannot derive 
useful implicature, so she indicates that she hasn?t 
understood what the speaker says on the assump-
tion that the utterance observes the maxims. Then 
she retries conversation. Thus, given the notion of 
a failure of the hard way, the case of non-
understandings can be explained in the theory of 
conversational inferences. In the case (4), the 
hearer starts to envisage why she doesn?t under-
stand the speaker?s utterance. I would say that the 
non-literal meaning that the speaker must have 
misplaced the topic is derived by the easy way. 
5.2 The easy way 
The easy way inferences are less effort demanding, 
need fewer steps than the hard way inferences. In 
the easy way inferences, we normally have two 
steps alone: the literal input and the non-literal 
output, and that?s it. Even the speaker?s emotions 
could be taken as utterance meanings, as in the 
case where the speaker doesn?t want to talk about 
the subject.  The typical example is the case of ca-
pricious transition. The following example beauti-
fully illustrates the easy way inference: 
 
(5)  H: I finished writing that story and it?s going  
to be published. 
S: When? 
 
The gloss of what the speaker says could be either 
of the following two interpretations: ?when did 
you finish writing that story?? or ?when is it going 
to be published?? The selection one of these two 
interpretations is by the easy way. The hearer uses 
the literal input, ?when,? in the process of extract-
ing the potential interpretations, but the literal in-
put is not informative enough to justify the 
selection of one or the other.  There is no decisive 
factor so that the hearer is free to take whichever 
she likes. The hearer doesn?t need to have reasons 
for deriving utterance meanings on the ground of 
the violation of a certain maxim, but just connects 
what the speaker says with whatever the hearer 
understands. The hearer can derive what is sup-
posed to be implicated from what is literally said 
directly without using the literal input as indicates 
the violation of a maxim. 
5.3 The connection between the adequacy and 
the two ways of inferences 
There is a reason for having two kinds of inference 
rather than one uniform kind.  It depends on the 
observance adequacy which the hearer expects. If 
what the speaker says observes the Cooperative 
Principle and some of the maxims, her contribution 
is, for example, less informative, or less relevant. 
But there remains something we can make use of 
for derivation, because the information or the rele-
vance is not zero. If what the speaker says doesn?t 
seem to observe any of the maxims, or what the 
speaker says doesn?t seem to have any connection 
with the previous utterance, then the speaker?s con-
tribution conveys no information, or bears no rele-
vance. So we cannot make inferential steps using 
the literal input in the same way as the hard way. 
Then we connect the input with the output directly. 
But we should note that a failure of the hard way 
doesn?t always make us shift to the easy way. It is 
likely, in some cases, first to fail by the hard way 
and then to try deriving an utterance meaning by 
the easy way. But the hard way process doesn?t 
precede the easy way process theoretically, and 
vice versa. The choice of process depends on the 
hearer, and thus the theory has to be based on the 
dichotomy of conversational inferences. 
Now there are five cases an inference-
based theory of language understanding has to give 
an account of.  They are  
 
[1] the case of the literal meaning understood liter-
ally 
[2] the case of the typical Gricean conversational 
implicature 
[3] the case of regular relevance theoretic inference 
[4] the case of capricious transition 
[5] the case of misplaced topic 
 
The inferential process for the regular 
Gricean conversational implicature can be de-
scribed as follows: The hearer gets what is literally 
said, and measures the adequacy of observance, 
and if the utterance observes the maxims less than 
adequately, then the hearer starts the hard way in-
ference on the assumption that the speaker?s con-
tribution is rationally acceptable, and derives 
implicatures. 
The inferential process for the regular rele-
vance theoretical mechanism can be described as 
follows: the hearer gets what is literally said, and 
measures the adequacy of observance of the max-
ims. If the hearer wants to derive utterance mean-
ings further by enriching what is literally said, on 
the assumption that the utterance is relevant in the 
context, in spite of the utterance observing the Co-
operative Principle and all the maxims*4, then the 
hearer starts the easy way inference and derives 
implicatures. In a case which is similar to (5) but 
which offers only one option on condition that the 
utterance is relevant to the given context, the 
hearer derives utterance meanings by the same way 
as the relevance theoretic inference which I sub-
sume under the category that is I call the easy way. 
Now when the hearer fails to derive impli-
catures by the hard way, she will start the conver-
sation over again. It is the case of a failure of the 
hard way inference when the hearer doesn?t notice 
that the topic of the speaker?s utterance is different 
from the one the hearer expected and says ?what?? 
to the speaker. That is the case (5) of misplaced 
topics. 
And it is by the easy way that the hearer 
comes to know that the speaker misplaces the topic. 
The hearer gets what is literally said, and measures 
the adequacy of observance of the maxims, and if 
the utterance is far from being adequately obser-
vant of the maxims, then the hearer starts the easy 
way inference and derives implicatures. The infer-
ences in this case can be based on anything, for 
example, the hearer?s frame of mind. The case of 
capricious transition (4) is of this type. Utterances 
to start and to change the topic are classified in this 
type, though the existent theories have not given 
                                                           
4 I suppose that what the hearer understands in the case where 
the utterance observes the Cooperative Principle and all the 
maxims includes explicatures in the sense of relevance theory. 
any theoretical status to this type of utterances. 
 
6 Conclusion 
On the basis of the concept of rational acceptance 
in conversations, I have extended Gricean theory 
by adding the concept of observance adequacy of 
the maxims, and have defined two distinct types of 
inference in terms of the concept of observance 
adequacy. Hearers derive utterance meanings in 
different ways based on the different level of ade-
quacy of observance of the maxims measured.  The 
extended Gricean theory now can describe all ways 
the hearer derives utterance meanings in all cases.  
The relations between different kind of inferences 
and their coverage are shown in Fig 1. 
We still have four more problems to really 
complete the theory of conversational inferences. 
1) We need to give more consideration to the na-
ture of those inferences. Specifically, we have to 
justify the assertion that the easy way inference is 
an inference, because it seems to be different in 
nature from inferences Gricean theorists have 
thought of. 
2) I have not distinguished implicatures from what 
the hearer understands explicitly. I surmise that, at 
the level of derivation, failing to understand the 
speaker and assuming the reason for non-
understanding are different (such as assuming that 
the speaker misplaces the topic, which would make 
the hearer retry the conversation). I suspect the 
latter will be explained as a kind of meta-level in-
ference, but we need more arguments and evidence. 
3) The notion of ?being rational? should be studied 
further. It is not clear what Grice meant by saying 
that the derivation in interpreting utterance mean-
ings is a rational activity. We have to know a sort 
of measure or extent of being rational. Theoreti-
cally, anything goes by the easy way inference. But 
we would reject some interpretation because it be-
ing too hard to justify. It would be an important 
issue in the general theory of conversational infer-
ence to characterize the mechanism the hearer uses 
in keeping herself from not drawing too inappro-
priate utterance meanings. 
4) The solution I provide in this argument is not 
fully formalized yet. I suspect one possible formal-
ization can be given by using the DRT by treating 
the cases of misplaced topics and capricious transi-
tion in terms of inaccessibility in the DRT, al-
though further independently motivated 
elaboration is necessary in the theory to formalize 
the case of being inaccessible. As far as I know, I 
don't know that the DRT can formalize the case of 
being inaccessible well, for example, when a pro-
noun has no referent in any previous discourses. In 
such cases the sentence in question might seem to 
be ungrammatical, or at least not understandable 
unanimously, but in the two cases I have presented, 
the hearer notices that the speaker refers to the 
other referent than the one the hearer wants to refer 
to. 
 
References 
Asher, N., and A. Lascarides. (1998) Questions in Dia-
logue. Linguistics and Philosophy, 23.2, pp.237-309, 
Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
Davies, B. (2000) Grice?s Cooperative Principle: Get-
ting the meaning across. Leeds Working Papers in Lin-
guistics and Phonetics 8. 
Davis, S., Ed. (1991) Pragmatics: A Reader. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.  
Grice, H. P. (1989) Studies in the Way of Words. Cam-
bridge: Harvard University Press.  
Grice, H. P. (2001) Aspects of Reason, Ed. R. O. War-
ner, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Kawaguchi, Y. (2001)  The logical relation between the 
Cooperative Principle and the maxims in Grice. Journal 
of the Philosophy of Science Society, Japan 34-2. 
pp.101-116 
Levinson, S. C. (1983) Pragmatics. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.  
Levinson, S. C. (2000) Presumptive Meanings. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Sperber, D., and D. Wilson. (1986). Relevance: Com-
munication and Cognition. Oxford: Blackwell. (2nd ed. 
1995). 
Fig. 1 
 
 
  understanding meaning 
 
 
 
 
understanding literally ?[1]   understanding non-literally, i.e., inferentially 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
gen
con
imp
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  inferen
eralized        
versational 
licature  
  
  
Grice, 
Levinson ce by the hard way  inference by the easy way  
 particularized               particularized 
    conversational        conversational 
 implicature     implicature(?) 
    relevant ?[3]         irrelevant 
             ?[4] [5] 
Grice 
Grice 
relevance 
theory 
?[2] 
conventional 
implicature 
