Statistical Machine Translation based Passage Retrieval
for Cross-Lingual Question Answering
Tomoyosi Akiba Kei Shimizu
Dept. of Information and Computer Sciences,
Toyohashi University of Technology
1-1 Hibarigaoka, Tenpaku-cho, Toyohashi-shi,
441-8580, JAPAN
akiba@cl.ics.tut.ac.jp
Atsushi Fujii
Graduate School of Library,
Information and Media Studies,
University of Tsukuba
1-2 Kasuga, Tsukuba, 305-8550, JAPAN
fujii@slis.tsukuba.ac.jp
Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel ap-
proach for Cross-Lingual Question Answer-
ing (CLQA). In the proposed method, the
statistical machine translation (SMT) is
deeply incorporated into the question an-
swering process, instead of using it as the
pre-processing of the mono-lingual QA pro-
cess as in the previous work. The proposed
method can be considered as exploiting the
SMT-based passage retrieval for CLQA task.
We applied our method to the English-to-
Japanese CLQA system and evaluated the
performance by using NTCIR CLQA 1 and
2 test collections. The result showed that the
proposed method outperformed the previous
pre-translation approach.
1 Introduction
Open-domain Question Answering (QA) was first
evaluated extensively at TREC-8 (Voorhees and
Tice, 1999). The goal in the factoid QA task is to
extract words or phrases as the answer to a question
from an unorganized document collection, rather
than the document lists obtained by traditional infor-
mation retrieval (IR) systems. The cross-lingual QA
task, which has been evaluated at CLEF (Magnini et
al., 2003) and NTCIR (Sasaki et al, 2005), gener-
alizes the factoid QA task by allowing the different
languages pair between the question and the answer.
Basically, the CLQA system can be constructed
simply by translating either the question sentence
or the target documents into the language of the
other side, and applying a mono-lingual QA system.
For example, after the English question sentence is
translated into Japanese, a Japanese mono-lingual
QA system can be applied to extract the answer from
the Japanese target documents. Depending on the
translation techniques used for the pre-processing,
the previous CLQA approach can be classified into
the machine translation based approach (Shimizu et
al., 2005; Mori and Kawagishi, 2005) and the dic-
tionary based approach (Isozaki et al, 2005).
In this paper, we propose a novel approach for
CLQA task. In the proposed method, the statisti-
cal machine translation (SMT) (Brown et al, 1993)
is deeply incorporated into the question answer-
ing process, instead of using the SMT as the pre-
processing before the mono-lingual QA process as
in the previous work. Though the proposed method
can be applied to any language pairs in principle, we
focus on the English-to-Japanese (EJ) CLQA task,
where a question sentence is given in English and its
answer is extracted from a document collection in
Japanese.
Recently, language modeling approach for infor-
mation retrieval has been widely studied (Croft and
Lafferty, 2003). Among them, statistical transla-
tion model has been applied for mono-lingual IR
(Berger and Lafferty, 1999), cross-lingual IR (Xu
et al, 2001), and mono-lingual QA (Murdock and
Croft, 2004). Our method can be considered as that
applying the translation model to cross-lingual QA.
In the rest of this paper, Section 2 summarizes the
previous approach for CLQA. Section 3 describes
our proposed method in detail. Section 4 describes
the experimental evaluation conducted to see the
performance of the proposed method by comparing
it to some reference methods. Section 5 describes
our conclusion and future works.
2 Previous CLQA Systems
Figure 1 shows the configuration of our previ-
ous English-to-Japanese cross-lingual QA system,
which has almost the same configuration to the con-
ventional CLQA systems. Firstly, the input En-
glish question is translated into the corresponding
Japanese question by using a machine translation.
Alternatively, the machine translation can be re-
751
English
Question
Japanese
Question
Document Retrieval
Japanese
Documents
Answer Extraction
Answer
Candidates
Passage Similarity
Calculation
Type Matching Score
Calculation
Answer Rescoring
Japanese
Answer
Japanese
Document
Collection
Expected Answer
Type Detection
Expected
Answer Type
Machine Translation
(or Dictionary-based
Translation)
Figure 1: The configuration of the conventional
CLQA system.
placed by the dictionary-based term-by-term transla-
tion. Then, either the English question or the trans-
lated Japanese question is analyzed to get the ex-
pected answer type.
After that, the mono-lingual QA process is in-
voked. The translated Japanese question is used as
the query of the document retrieval to get the doc-
uments that include the query terms. From the re-
trieved documents, the answer candidates that match
with the expected answer type are extracted with
their location in the documents. Next, the extracted
candidates are rescored by the two points of views;
the passage similarity and the type matching. The
passage similarity is calculated between the trans-
lated Japanese question and the Japanese passage
that surrounds the answer candidate, while the type
matching score is calculated as the likelihood that
the candidate is matched with the expected answer
type. Finally the reordered candidates are outputted
as the answers of the given question.
3 Proposed CLQA System
On the other hand, Figure 2 shows the configuration
of our proposed cross-lingual QA system. It does
not use the machine translation (nor the dictionary-
based translation) as the pre-processing of the input
English question. The original English question is
English
Question
Document Retrieval
Japanese
Documents
Answer Extraction
Answer
Candidates
Passage Similarity
Calculation
Type Matching Score
Calculation
Answer Rescoring
Japanese
Answer
Japanese
Document
Collection
Expected Answer
Type Detection
Expected
Answer Type
Figure 2: The configuration of the proposed CLQA
system.
used directly in the QA process. In order to make
this approach possible, the two subsystems, the doc-
ument retrieval subsystem and the passage similar-
ity calculation subsystem, which are pointed by the
direct arrow from the English question and are em-
phasized by the thick frames in Figure 2, are cross-
lingualized to accept the English question directly
instead of the Japanese question, by means of incor-
porating the statistical machine translation (SMT)
process deeply into them.
In the following two subsections, we will explain
how these two subsystems can deal with the En-
glish question directly. The document retrieval sub-
system is modified so that the Japanese documents
are indexed by English terms. The word transla-
tion probability used in the SMT is used to index the
Japanese document with the corresponding English
terms without losing the consistency. The passage
similarity calculation subsystem calculates the sim-
ilarity between an English question and a Japanese
passage in terms of the probability that the Japanese
passage is translated into the English question.
3.1 Document Retrieval
Given an English question sentence, the document
retrieval subsystem of our proposed CLQA system
retrieves Japanese documents directly. In order to do
so, each Japanese document in the target collection
752
How much did the Japan Bank for International Cooperation
decide to loan to the Taiwan High-Speed Corporation?
Q
?????????? ??????????????
???????????
...?????????????????????? ?
?????????? ?????????
???????????????????????
?????? ???????????????????
??????????????????????
??????????????? ?...
????
article
headline
previous sentence
target sentence (including an answer candidate)
next sentence
an answer candidate
H(S) = S{ } SHS{ } S?1S{ } SS+1{ } SHS?1S{ } SHSS+1{ } S?1SS+1{ } SHS?1SS+1{ }{ }
SH
S
?1
S
S+1
Figure 3: An examples of a question and the corre-
sponding passage candidates.
has been indexed by English terms by using the word
translation probability used in the SMT framework.
The expected term frequency tf(e,D) of an En-
glish term e that would be used as an index to a
Japanese document D can be estimated by the fol-
lowing equation.
tf(e,D) =
?
j?D
t(e|j)tf(j,D) (1)
where tf(j,D) is the term frequency of a Japanese
term j in D and t(e|j) is the word translation prob-
ability that j is translated into e. The probability
t(e|j) is trained by using a large parallel corpus as
the SMT framework. Because the expected term fre-
quency tf(e,D) is consistent with tf(j,D) that is
calculated from the statistics of D, the conventional
vector space IR model based on the TF-IDF term
weighting can be used for implementing our IR sub-
system. We used GETA 1 as the IR engine in our
CLQA system.
3.2 SMT based Passage Retrieval
In order to enable the direct passage retrieval, where
the query and the passage are in different languages,
the statistical machine translation is utilized to cal-
culate the similarity between them. In order words,
we calculate the similarity between them as the
probability that the Japanese passage is translated
into the English question.
The similarity sim(Q,S|A) between a question
Q and a sentence S including an answer candidate
A is calculated by the following equation.
sim(Q,S|A) = max
D?H(S)
P (Q|D ? A) (2)
1http://geta.ex.nii.ac.jp
where P (Q|D ? A) is the probability that a word
sequence D except A is translated into a question
sentence Q, and H(S) is the set of the candidate
passage (term sequences) that are related to a sen-
tence S. The set consists of S and the power set of
S
H
, S
?1
, and S
+1
, where S
H
is the headline of the
article that S belongs, S
?1
is the previous sentence
of S, and S
+1
is the next sentence of S (Figure 3).
In this paper, we use IBM model 1 (Brown et al,
1993) in order to get the probability P (Q|D?A) as
follows.
P (Q|D ? A) =
1
(n+ 1)
m
m
?
j=1
?
i=1,???,k?1,k+l+1,???,n
t(q
j
|d
i
)(3)
where q
1
? ? ? q
m
is a English term sequence of
a question Q, d
1
? ? ? d
n
is a Japanese term se-
quence of a candidate passage D, d
k
? ? ? d
k+l
is
a Japanese term sequence of an answer candi-
date A. Therefore, the Japanese term sequence
d
1
, ? ? ? , d
k?1
, d
k+l+1
, ? ? ? , d
n
(= D - A) is just D ex-
cept A. We exclude the answer term sequence A
from the calculation of the translation probability,
because the English terms that corresponds to the
answer should not be appeared in the question sen-
tence as the nature of question answering.
4 Experimental Evaluation
The experimental evaluation was conducted to see
the total performance of cross language question an-
swering by using our proposed method.
4.1 Test collections
The NTCIR-5 CLQA1 test collection (Sasaki et
al., 2005) and the NTCIR-6 CLQA2 test collection
(Sasaki et al, 2007) for English-to-Japanese task
were used for the evaluation. Each collection con-
tains 200 factoid questions in English. The target
documents for CLQA1 are two years newspaper ar-
ticles from ?YOMIURI SHINBUN? (2000-2001),
while those for CLQA2 are two years articles from
?MAINICHI SHINBUN? (1998-1999).
In the test collections, the answer candidates are
judged with three categories; Right, Unsupported,
and Wrong. The answer labeled Right is correct
and supported by the document that it is from. The
answer labeled Unsupported is correct but not sup-
ported by the document that it is from. The answer
labeled Wrong is incorrect. We used two kind of
golden set for our evaluation: the set including only
753
Right answers (referred as to R) and the set includ-
ing Right and Unsupported answers (referred as to
R+U).
Note that the evaluation results obtained from
CLQA2 are more reliable than that from CLQA1,
because we participated in CLQA2 formal run with
our proposed method (and our reference method la-
beled DICT) and most of the answers by the system
were manually checked for the pooling.
4.2 Translation Model
The translation model used for our method was
trained from the following English-Japanese paral-
lel corpus.
? 170,379 example sentence pairs from the
Japanese-English and English-Japanese dictio-
naries.
? 171,186 sentence pairs from newspaper articles
obtained by the automatic sentence alignment
(Utiyama and hitoshi Isahara, 2003).
A part of the latter sentence pairs were ob-
tained from the paired newspapers that are ?YOMI-
URI SHINBUN? and its English translation ?Daily
Yomiuri?. Because the target documents of CLQA1
are the articles from ?YOMIURI SHINBUN? as
described above, the corresponding sentence pairs,
which are extracted from the articles from 2000 to
2001, were removed from the training corpus for
CLQA1.
Before training the translation model, both En-
glish and Japanese sides of the sentence pairs in par-
allel corpus were normalized. For the sentences of
Japanese side, the inflectional words were normal-
ized to their basic forms by using a Japanese mor-
phological analyzer. For the sentences of English
side, the inflectional words were also normalized
to their basic forms by using a Part-of-Speech tag-
ger and all the words were lowercased. GIZA++
(Och and Ney, 2003) was used for training the IBM
model 4 from the normalized parallel corpus. The
vocabulary sizes were about 58K words for Japanese
side and 74K words for English side. The trained
Japanese-to-English word translation model t(e|j)
was used for our proposed document retrieval (Sec-
tion 3.1) and passage similarity calculation (Section
3.2).
4.3 Compared methods
The proposed method was compared with the sev-
eral reference methods. As the methods from pre-
vious works, three pre-translation methods were in-
vestigated.
The first two methods translate the question by us-
ing machine translation. One of them used a com-
mercial off-the-shell machine translation software 2
(referred to as RMT). The other used the statisti-
cal machine translation that had been created by us-
ing the IBM model 4 obtained from the same par-
allel corpus and tools described in Section 4.2, the
tri-gram language model constructed by using the
target documents of CLQA1, and the existing SMT
decoder (Germann, 2003) (referred to as SMT).
The two methods, RMT and SMT, differ only in
the translation methods, while their backend mono-
lingual QA systems are common.
The third method translates the question by us-
ing translation dictionary (referred to as DICT).
The cross-lingual IR system described in (Fujii and
Ishikawa, 2001) was used for our ?document re-
trieval? subsystem in Figure 2. The CLIR system
enhances the basic translation dictionary, which has
about 1,000,000 entries, with the compound words
obtained by using the statistics of the target doc-
uments and with the borrowed words by using the
transliteration method. Note that, as the other parts
of the system than the document retrieval, includ-
ing proposed SMT based passage retrieval, are all
identical to the proposed method, this comparison is
focused only on the difference in the document re-
trieval methods.
In order to investigate the performance if the ideal
translation is made, the reference Japanese transla-
tions of the English questions included in the test
collections were used as the input of the mono-
lingual QA system (referred to as JJ).
As the variations of the proposed method, the fol-
lowing four methods were compared.
Proposed The same method as described in Section
3.
Proposed +r The document retrieval score is also
used to rescore the answer candidates in
?Rescoring? subsystem in Figure 2, in addi-
tion to the passage similarity score and the type
matching score.
Proposed -p For the passage similarity calculation,
the passage is always fixed only the central sen-
tence S, i.e. the equation (2) is replaced by the
following.
sim(Q,S|A) = P (Q|S ? A) (4)
Proposed -p+r Combination of above two modifi-
cations.
2?IBM Japan, honyaku-no-oosama ver. 5?
754
Table 1: Comparison of the JJ results between the test collections.
test collection R R+U
Top1 Acc. Top5 Acc. MRR Top1 Acc. Top5 Acc. MRR
CLQA1 0.140 0.300 0.196 0.260 0.535 0.354
CLQA2 0.245 0.410 0.307 0.270 0.530 0.366
Table 2: The performances of the proposed and ref-
erence CLQA systems with respect to CLQA1 test
collection.
method Top1 Acc. Top5 Acc. MRR
RMT 0.065 0.175 0.099
SMT 0.060 0.175 0.098
Dict 0.095 0.195 0.134
Proposed 0.090 0.225 0.146
Table 3: The performances among the proposed
methods with respect to CLQA1 test collection.
method Top1 Acc. Top5 Acc. MRR
Proposed 0.090 0.225 0.146
Proposed +r 0.105 0.285 0.173
Proposed -p 0.105 0.245 0.155
Proposed -p+r 0.120 0.280 0.178
JJ 0.260 0.535 0.354
4.4 Evaluation Metrics
Each system outputted five ranked answers a
1
? ? ? a
5
for each question q. We investigated the perfor-
mance of the systems in terms of three evaluation
metrics that are obtained by averaging over all the
questions: the accuracy of the top ranked answers
(referred to as Top 1 Acc.), the accuracy of up-to
fifth ranked answers (referred to as Top 5 Acc.), and
the reciprocal rank (referred to asMRR)RR(q) cal-
culated by the following equation.
rr(a
i
) =
{
1/i if a
i
is a correct answer
0 otherwise (5)
RR(q) = max
ai
rr(a
i
) (6)
4.5 Results
Firstly, we compared the results obtained by using
CLQA1 test collection with that obtained by using
CLQA2. Table 1 shows the results for JJ system.
By using the R judgment, the JJ results of CLQA1
was much worse than that of CLQA2, while the re-
sults were almost same by using the R+U judgment.
Because the difference with respect to the difficul-
ties between the two test collections seems small and
the results from CLQA2 are more reliable, we con-
cluded that the R judgment of CLQA1 was unreli-
able. Therefore, for CLQA1 test collection, we only
investigated the result by using R+U judgment.
Secondly, we compared the proposed method
(Proposed) with the previous methods (RMT,
SMT, and Dict). Table 2 shows the results with re-
spect to CLQA1 test collection. The two methods
based on the machine translation (RMT and SMT)
indicated almost same performance, while the per-
formance of the proposed method was about 1.3 to
1.5 times better for CLQA1. Especially, because the
same training data was used to build the translation
models both in SMT and Proposed, it was shown
that the method to build the SMT model in the QA
process was better than that to use the same SMT
model for pre-processing (pre-translating) the input
sentence.
The DICT performed almost same as the Pro-
posed for CLQA1, while Proposed was 1.7 to 1.9
times better than DICT for CLQA2 as shown in Ta-
ble 4. Note again that this comparison was focused
on the document retrieval subsystem, because the
passage retrieval subsystems of these two methods
were same.
Thirdly, the variations between the proposed
methods were compared. Table 3 shows the results
with respect to CLQA1 test collection. For CLQA1,
both the additional use of the document retrieval
score (+r) and the use of the fixed central sentence
for passage similarity calculation (-p) improved the
performance. However, for CLQA2, the document
retrieval score (+r) did not contribute to improve the
performance, as shown in Table 4.
Finally, seeing from the comparison between JJ
and Proposed, it was shown that the performance of
the proposed CLQA system was about half of that of
the ideal CLQA system.
755
Table 4: The performances of the proposed and reference CLQA systems with respect to CLQA2 test
collection.
methods R R+U
Top1 Acc. Top5 Acc. MRR Top1 Acc. Top5 Acc. MRR
Dict 0.070 0.155 0.102 0.100 0.275 0.163
Proposed 0.130 0.200 0.155 0.165 0.295 0.210
Proposed +r 0.120 0.220 0.153 0.155 0.325 0.211
JJ 0.245 0.410 0.307 0.270 0.530 0.366
5 Conclusion
In this paper, a novel approach for CLQA was pro-
posed. The proposed method did not translate the
input question in source language into the target
language as the preprocessing of QA process. In-
stead, the statistical machine translation was deeply
incorporated into the two QA subsystems in order
to deal with the question in source language directly
in the QA process. Especially, SMT-based passage
retrieval was explored.
For the passage similarity calculation in this pa-
per, the simple IBM model 1 was used. In the future
work, we will investigate if the more sophisticated
translation model or that specialized for CLQA task
can improve the performance further.
References
Adam Berger and John Lafferty. 1999. Information retrieval as
statistical translation. In Proceedings of the 22nd Annual
Conference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval (ACM SIGIR), pages 222?229.
Peter F. Brown, Stephen A. Della Pietra, Vincent J. Della Pietra,
and Robert L. Mercer. 1993. The mathematics of statistical
machine translation: Parameter estimation. Computational
Linguistics, 18(4):263?311.
W. Bruce Croft and John Lafferty, editors. 2003. Language
Modeling for Information Retrieval. Kluwer Academic Pub-
lishers.
Atsushi Fujii and Tetsuya Ishikawa. 2001. Japanese/english
cross-language information retrieval: Exploration of query
translation and transliteration. Computers and the Humani-
ties, 35(4):389?420.
Ulrich Germann. 2003. Greedy decoding for statistical ma-
chine translatioin in slmost linear time. In Proceedings of
HLT-NAACL.
Hideki Isozaki, Katsuhito Sudoh, and Hajime Tsukada. 2005.
NTT?s japanese-english cross-language question answering
system. In Proceedings of The Fifth NTCIRWorkshop, pages
186?193.
Bernardo Magnini, Alessandro Vallin, Christelle Ayache, Gre-
gor Erbach, Anselmo Pe nas, Maarten de Rijke, Paulo
Rocha, Kiril Simov, and Richard Sutcliffe. 2003. Overview
of the CLEF 2004 multilingual question answering track. In
Multilingual Information Access for Text, Speech and Im-
ages, pages 371?391.
Tatsunori Mori and Masami Kawagishi. 2005. A method of
cross language question-answering based on machine trans-
lation and transliteration. In Proceedings of The Fifth NTCIR
Workshop, pages 215?222.
Vanessa Murdock and W. Bruce Croft. 2004. Simple trans-
lation models for sentence retrieval in factoid question an-
swering. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Information
Retrieval for Question Answering.
Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A systematic com-
parison of various statistical alignment models. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 29(1):19?51.
Yutaka Sasaki, Hsin-Hsi Chen, Kuang hua Chen, and Chuan-Jie
Lin. 2005. Overview of the NTCIR-5 cross-lingual question
answering task (clqa1). In Proceedings of The Fifth NTCIR
Workshop, pages 175?185.
Yutaka Sasaki, Chuan-Jie Lin, Kuang hua Chen, and Hsin-Hsi
Chen. 2007. Overview of the NTCIR-6 cross-lingual ques-
tion answering (clqa) task. In Proceedings of The NTCIR-6
Workshop Meeting.
Kei Shimizu, Tomoyosi Akiba, Atsushi Fujii, and Katunobu
Itou. 2005. Bi-directional cross language question answer-
ing using a single monolingual QA system. In Proceedings
of The Fifth NTCIR Workshop, pages 236?237.
Masao Utiyama and hitoshi Isahara. 2003. Reliable measures
for aligning japanese-english news articles and sentences. In
Proceedings of Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 72?79.
E. Voorhees and D. Tice. 1999. The TREC-8 question answer-
ing track evaluation. In Proceedings of the 8th Text Retrieval
Conference, pages 83?106, Gaithersburg, Maryland.
Jinxi Xu, Ralph Weischedel, and Chanh Nguyen. 2001. Evalu-
ating a probabilistic model for cross-lingual information re-
trieval. In Proceedings of the 24th Annual Conference on
Research and Development in Information Retrieval (ACM
SIGIR), pages 105?110.
756
