Development of Indonesian Large Vocabulary Continuous Speech
Recognition System within A-STAR Project
Sakriani Sakti1,2, Eka Kelana3, Hammam Riza4, Shinsuke Sakai1,2
Konstantin Markov1,2, Satoshi Nakamura1,2
1National Institute of Information and Communications Technology, Japan
2ATR Spoken Language Communication Research Laboratories, Japan
3R&D Division, PT Telekomunikasi Indonesia, Indonesia
4Agency for the Assessment and Application of Technology, BPPT, Indonesia
{sakriani.sakti,shinsuke.sakai,konstantin.markov,satoshi.nakamura}@atr.jp,
eka k@telkom.co.id, hammam@iptek.net.id
Abstract
The paper outlines the development of a
large vocabulary continuous speech recog-
nition (LVCSR) system for the Indonesian
language within the Asian speech transla-
tion (A-STAR) project. An overview of the
A-STAR project and Indonesian language
characteristics will be briefly described. We
then focus on a discussion of the develop-
ment of Indonesian LVCSR, including data
resources issues, acoustic modeling, lan-
guage modeling, the lexicon, and accuracy
of recognition. There are three types of In-
donesian data resources: daily news, tele-
phone application, and BTEC tasks, which
are used in this project. They are available in
both text and speech forms. The Indonesian
speech recognition engine was trained using
the clean speech of both daily news and tele-
phone application tasks. The optimum per-
formance achieved on the BTEC task was
92.47% word accuracy.
1 A-STAR Project Overview
The A-STAR project is an Asian consortium that
is expected to advance the state-of-the-art in multi-
lingual man-machine interfaces in the Asian region.
This basic infrastructure will accelerate the devel-
opment of large-scale spoken language corpora in
Asia and also facilitate the development of related
fundamental information communication technolo-
gies (ICT), such as multi-lingual speech translation,
Figure 1: Outline of future speech-technology ser-
vices connecting each area in the Asian region
through network.
multi-lingual speech transcription, and multi-lingual
information retrieval.
These fundamental technologies can be applied to
the human-machine interfaces of various telecom-
munication devices and services connecting Asian
countries through the network using standardized
communication protocols as outlined in Fig. 1. They
are expected to create digital opportunities, improve
our digital capabilities, and eliminate the digital di-
vide resulting from the differences in ICT levels in
each area. The improvements to borderless commu-
nication in the Asian region are expected to result
in many benefits in everyday life including tourism,
business, education, and social security.
The project was coordinated together by the Ad-
vanced Telecommunication Research (ATR) and the
National Institute of Information and Communica-
tions Technology (NICT) Japan in cooperation with
several research institutes in Asia, such as the Na-
tional Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR) in
China, the Electronics and Telecommunication Re-
search Institute (ETRI) in Korea, the Agency for the
Assessment and Application Technology (BPPT)
in Indonesia, the National Electronics and Com-
puter Technology Center (NECTEC) in Thailand,
the Center for Development of Advanced Comput-
ing (CDAC) in India, the National Taiwan Univer-
sity (NTU) in Taiwan. Partners are still being sought
for other languages in Asia.
More details about the A-STAR project can be
found in (Nakamura et al, 2007).
2 Indonesian Language Characteristic
The Indonesian language, or so-called Bahasa In-
donesia, is a unified language formed from hun-
dreds of languages spoken throughout the Indone-
sian archipelago. Compared to other languages,
which have a high density of native speakers, In-
donesian is spoken as a mother tongue by only 7%
of the population, and more than 195 million people
speak it as a second language with varying degrees
of proficiency. There are approximately 300 eth-
nic groups living throughout 17,508 islands, speak-
ing 365 native languages or no less than 669 di-
alects (Tan, 2004). At home, people speak their own
language, such as Javanese, Sundanese or Balinese,
even though almost everybody has a good under-
standing of Indonesian as they learn it in school.
Although the Indonesian language is infused with
highly distinctive accents from different ethnic lan-
guages, there are many similarities in patterns across
the archipelago. Modern Indonesian is derived from
the literary of the Malay dialect. Thus, it is closely
related to the Malay spoken in Malaysia, Singapore,
Brunei, and some other areas.
Unlike the Chinese language, it is not a tonal
language. Compared with European languages, In-
donesian has a strikingly small use of gendered
words. Plurals are often expressed by means of word
repetition. It is also a member of the agglutina-
tive language family, meaning that it has a complex
range of prefixes and suffixes, which are attached to
base words. Consequently, a word can become very
long.
More details on Indonesian characteristics can be
found in (Sakti et al, 2004).
3 Indonesian Phoneme Set
The Indonesian phoneme set is defined based on In-
donesian grammar described in (Alwi et al, 2003).
A full phoneme set contains 33 phoneme symbols in
total, which consists of 10 vowels (including diph-
thongs), 22 consonants, and one silent symbol. The
vowel articulation pattern of the Indonesian lan-
guage, which indicates the first two resonances of
the vocal tract, F1 (height) and F2 (backness), is
shown in Fig. 2.
 
 
High
 
 
 
          
Mid
 
 
                     
Low
 
i
 
Front        Central      Back 
e
 
e2
 
u
 
o 
a
 
Figure 2: Articulatory pattern of Indonesian vowels.
It consists of vowels, i.e., /a/ (like ?a? in ?father?),
/i/ (like ?ee? in ?screen?), /u/ (like ?oo? in ?soon?),
/e/ (like ?e? in ?bed?), /e2/ (a schwa sound, like ?e?
in ?learn?), /o/ (like ?o? in ?boss?), and four diph-
thongs, /ay/, /aw/, /oy/ and /ey/. The articulatory pat-
tern for Indonesian consonants can be seen in Table
1.
4 Indonesian Data Resources
Three types of Indonesian data resources available
in both text and speech forms were used here. The
first two resources were developed or processed by
the R&D Division of PT Telekomunikasi Indone-
sia (R&D TELKOM) in collaboration with ATR as
continuation of the APT project (Sakti et al, 2004),
while the third one was developed by ATR under the
A-STAR project in collaboration with BPPT. They
are described in the following.
Table 1: Articulatory pattern of Indonesian consonants.
Bilabial Labiodental Dental/Alveolar Palatal Velar Glotal
Plosives p, b t, d k, g
Affricates c, j
Fricatives f s, z sy kh h
Nasal m n ny ng
Trill r
Lateral l
Semivowel w y
4.1 Text Data
The three text corpora are:
1. Daily News Task
There is already a raw source of Indonesian
text data, which has been generated by an In-
donesian student (Tala, 2003). The source is a
compilation from ?KOMPAS? and ?TEMPO?,
which are currently the largest and most widely
read Indonesian newspaper and magazine. It
consists of more than 3160 articles with about
600,000 sentences. R&D TELKOM then fur-
ther processed them to generate a clean text
corpus.
2. Telephone Application Task
About 2500 sentences from the telephone
application domain were also generated by
R&D TELKOM, and were derived from some
daily dialogs from telephone services, includ-
ing tele-home security, billing information ser-
vices, reservation services, status tracking of
e-Government services, and also hearing im-
paired telecommunication services (HITSs).
3. BTEC Task
The ATR basic travel expression corpus
(BTEC) has served as the primary source
for developing broad-coverage speech transla-
tion systems (Kikui et al, 2003). The sen-
tences were collected by bilingual travel ex-
perts from Japanese/English sentence pairs in
travel domain ?phrasebooks?. BTEC has also
been translated into several languages includ-
ing French, German, Italian, Chinese and Ko-
rean. Under the A-STAR project, there are also
plans to collect synonymous sentences from the
different languages of the Asian region. ATR
has currently successfully collected an Indone-
sian version of BTEC tasks, which consists of
160,000 sentences (with about 20,000 unique
words) of a training set and 510 sentences of a
test set with 16 references per sentence. There
are examples of BTEC English sentences and
synonymous Indonesian sentences in Table 2.
Table 2: Examples of English-Indonesian bilingual
BTEC sentences.
English Indonesian
Good Evening Selamat Malam
I like strong coffee Saya suka kopi yang kental
Where is the boarding Di manakah pintu
gate? keberangkatan berada?
How much is this? Harganya berapa?
Thank you Terima kasih
4.2 Speech Data
The three speech corpora are:
1. Daily News Task
From the text data of the news task described
above, we selected phonetically-balanced sen-
tences, then recorded the speech utterances.
Details on the phonetically-balanced sentences,
the recording set-up, speaker criteria, and
speech utterances are described in what fol-
lows:
? Phonetically-Balanced Sentences
We selected phonetically-balanced sen-
tences using the greedy search algorithm
(Zhang and S.Nakamura, 2003), resulting
in 3168 sentences in total (see Table 3).
Table 3: Number of phonetically-balanced sentences
resulting from greedy search algorithm.
Phone # Units # Sentences
Monophones 33 6
Left Biphones 809 240
Right Biphones 809 242
Triphones 9667 2978
Total 3168
? Recording Set-Up
Speech recording was done by R&D
TELKOM in Bandung, Java, Indonesia. It
was conducted in parallel for both clean
and telephone speech, recorded at respec-
tive sampling frequency of 16 kHz and 8
kHz. The system configuration is outlined
in Fig. 3.
Sennheizer
microphone
Microphone
pre-amplifier
& ADC
PC
Phone
PABX
R&D TELKOM
building
Phone USB
Microphone
pre-amplifier
& ADC
USB
Sound-proofed room
Figure 3: Recording set-up.
? Speaker Criteria
The project will require a lot of time,
money, and resources to collect all of
the possible languages and dialects of
the tribes recognized in Indonesia. In
this case, R&D TELKOM only focused
on the major ethnic accents in Bandung
area where the actual telecommunication
services will be implemented. Four
main accents were selected, including:
Batak, Javanese, Sundanese, and standard
Indonesian (no accent) with appropriate
distributions as outlined in Fig. 4. Both
genders are evenly distributed and the
speakers? ages are also distributed as out-
lined in Fig. 5. The largest percentage is
those aged 20-35 years who are expected
to use the telecommunication services
more often.
Figure 4: Accent distribution of 400 speakers in
daily news and telephone application tasks.
Figure 5: Age distribution of 400 speakers in daily
news and telephone application tasks.
? Speech Utterances
The total number of speakers was 400
(200 males and 200 females). Each
speaker uttered 110 sentences resulting
in a total of 44,000 speech utterances or
about 43.35 hours of speech.
2. Telephone Application Task
The utterances in speech of 2500 telephone
application sentences were recorded by R&D
TELKOM in Bandung, Indonesia using the
same recording set-up as that for the news task
corpus. The total number of speakers, as well
as appropriate distributions for age and accent,
were also kept the same. Each speaker uttered
100 sentences resulting in a total of 40,000 ut-
terances (36.15 hours of speech).
3. BTEC Task
From the test set of the BTEC text data pre-
viously described, 510 sentences of one refer-
ence were selected and the recordings of speech
were then done by ATR in Jakarta, Indone-
sia. BPPT helped to evaluate the preliminary
recordings. For this first version, we only se-
lected speakers who spoke standard Indonesian
(no accent). There were 42 speakers (20 males
and 22 females) and each speaker uttered the
same 510 BTEC sentences, resulting in a total
of 21,420 utterances (23.4 hours of speech).
5 Indonesian Speech Recognizer
The Indonesian LVCSR system was developed us-
ing the ATR speech recognition engine. The clean
speech of both daily news and telephone applica-
tion tasks were used as the training data, while the
BTEC task was used as an evaluation test set. More
details on the parameter set-up, acoustic modeling,
language modeling, pronunciation dictionary and
recognition accuracy will be described in the follow-
ing.
5.1 Parameter Set-up
The experiments were conducted using feature ex-
traction parameters, which were a sampling fre-
quency of 16 kHz, a frame length of a 20-ms Ham-
ming window, a frame shift of 10 ms, and 25 dimen-
sional MFCC features (12-order MFCC, ? MFCC
and ? log power).
5.2 Segmentation Utterances
Segmented utterances according to labels are usu-
ally used as a starting point in speech recognition
systems for training speech models. Automatic seg-
mentation is mostly used since it is efficient and less
time consuming. It is basically produced by forced
alignment given the transcriptions. In this case, we
used an available Indonesian phoneme-based acous-
tic model developed using the English-Indonesian
cross language approach (Sakti et al, 2005).
5.3 Acoustic Modeling
Three states were used as the initial HMM for each
phoneme. A shared state HMnet topology was then
obtained using a successive state splitting (SSS)
training algorithm based on the minimum descrip-
tion length (MDL) optimization criterion (Jitsuhiro
et al, 2004). Various MDL parameters were eval-
uated, resulting in context-dependent triphone sys-
tems having different version of total states. i.e.,
1,277 states, 1,944 states and 2,928 states. All tri-
phone HMnets were also generated with three dif-
ferent versions of Gaussian mixture components per
state, i.e., 5, 10, and 15 mixtures.
5.4 Language Modeling
Word bigram and trigram language models were
trained using the 160,000 sentences of the BTEC
training set, yielding a trigram perplexity of 67.0 and
an out-of-vocabulary (OOV) rate of 0.78% on the
510 sentences of the BTEC test set. This high per-
plexity could be due to agglutinative words in the
Indonesian language.
5.5 Pronunciation Dictionary
About 40,000 words from an Indonesian pronun-
ciation dictionary were manually developed by In-
donesian linguists and this was owned by R&D
TELKOM. This was derived from the daily news
and telephone application text corpora, which con-
sisted of 30,000 original Indonesian words plus
8,000 person and place names and also 2,000 of for-
eign words. Based on these pronunciations, we then
included additional words derived from the BTEC
sentences.
5.6 Recognition Accuracy
The performance of the Indonesian speech recog-
nizer with different versions of total states and Gaus-
sian mixture components per state is graphically
depicted in Fig. 6. On average, they achieved
92.22% word accuracy. The optimum performance
was 92.47% word accuracy at RTF=0.97 (XEON 3.2
GHz), which was obtained by the model with 1.277
total states and 15 Gaussian mixture components per
state.
Figure 6: Recognition accuracy of Indonesian
LVCSR on BTEC test set.
6 Conclusion
We have presented the results obtained from the pre-
liminary stages of an Indonesian LVCSR system.
The optimum performance achieved was 92.47%
word accuracy at RTF=0.97. A future development
will be to implement it on a real speech-to-speech
translation system using computer terminals (tablet
PCs). To further refine the system, speaker adap-
tation as well as environmental or noise adaptation
needs to be done in the near future.
References
H. Alwi, S. Dardjowidjojo, H. Lapoliwa, and A.M. Moe-
liono. 2003. Tata Bahasa Baku Bahasa Indonesia (In-
donesian Grammar). Balai Pustaka, Jakarta, Indone-
sia.
T. Jitsuhiro, T. Matsui, and S. Nakamura. 2004. Au-
tomatic generation of non-uniform HMM topologies
based on the MDL criterion. IEICE Trans. Inf. & Syst.,
E87-D(8):2121?2129.
G. Kikui, E. Sumita, T. Takezawa, and S. Yamamoto.
2003. Creating corpora for speech-to-speech trans-
lation. In Proc. EUROSPEECH, pages 381?384,
Geneva, Switzerland.
S. Nakamura, E. Sumita, T. Shimizu, S. Sakti, S. Sakai,
J. Zhang, A. Finch, N. Kimura, and Y. Ashikari. 2007.
A-star: Asia speech translation consortium. In Proc.
ASJ Autumn Meeting, page to appear, Yamanashi,
Japan.
S. Sakti, P. Hutagaol, A. Arman, and S. Nakamura. 2004.
Indonesian speech recognition for hearing and speak-
ing impaired people. In Proc. ICSLP, pages 1037?
1040, Jeju, Korea.
S. Sakti, K. Markov, and S.Nakamura. 2005. Rapid de-
velopment of initial indonesian phoneme-based speech
recognition using cross-language approach. In Proc.
Oriental COCOSDA, pages 38?43, Jakarta, Indonesia.
F. Tala. 2003. A Study of Stemming Effects on Infor-
mation Retrieval in Bahasa Indonesia. Ph.D. thesis,
The Information and Language System (ILPS) Group,
Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam, Ams-
terdam, Netherland.
J. Tan. 2004. Bahasa indonesia: Between faqs and facts.
http://www.indotransnet.com/article1.html.
J. Zhang and S.Nakamura. 2003. An efficient algorithm
to search for a minimum sentence set for collecting
speech database. In Proc. ICPhS, pages 3145?3148,
Barcelona, Spain.
