Supporting temporal question answering:
strategies for offline data collection
David Ahn
ISLA, University of Amsterdam
ahn@ science. uva. nl
Steven Schockaert, Martine De Cock, and Etienne Kerre
Ghent University
Steven. Schockaert,Martine. DeCock,Etienne. Kerre@ UGent. be
Abstract
We pursue two strategies for offline data collection for a temporal question answering
system that uses both quantitative methods and fuzzy methods to reason about time
and events. The first strategy extracts event descriptions from the structured year
entries in the online encyclopedia Wikipedia, yielding clean quantitative temporal
information about a range of events. The second strategy mines the web using
patterns indicating temporal relations between events and times and between events.
Web mining leverages the volume of data available on the web to find qualitative
temporal relations between known events and new, related events and to build fuzzy
time spans for events for which we lack crisp metric temporal information.
1 Introduction
Time structures our world, and the questions we ask reflect that. Not only
do we want to know quantitative information?when did some event happen
or how long did some state of affairs persist?but we also want qualitative
information?what was going on before or during major events, or what hap-
pened afterwards. While the amount of information available to answer such
questions continues to increase, the temporal information needed is not always
fully specified. No information source is obliged to timestamp every referenced
event, so while evidence for qualitative temporal relations abounds, there is
often no quantitative information to verify it. Furthermore, many events, such
as the Cold War or the Great Depression, are inherently vague?with gradual
beginnings or endings?or ill-defined aggregations of smaller events.
In order for a temporal QA system to be able to make use of such limited,
incomplete temporal information, careful consideration must be given both to
the extraction of temporal information it needs and to the temporal reasoning
mechanisms it employs. We are presently at work on a temporal QA system
that provides access to events extracted from Wikipedia and satellite events
mined from the web and that models the time span of vague events as fuzzy sets
and qualitative temporal relations as fuzzy relations. In this paper, we focus
on the creation of the knowledge base of events and temporal information,
which takes place offline, prior to any user interaction. A separate paper [10]
describes the fuzzy reasoning mechanisms the system uses.
In ?2 and ?3, we introduce temporal questions and sketch the architec-
ture of our temporal QA system. In ?4, we describe event extraction from
Wikipedia, an online encyclopedia. In ?5, we describe web mining for fuzzy
and qualitative temporal information. Note that the work described here is
still in progress, so while our extraction methods are in use, we are still ex-
perimenting with them, and the QA system is not yet complete.
2 Temporal questions
There are a variety of question types that fall under the umbrella of temporal
questions, including questions that ask for times as answers, those that ask for
temporal relations, and those that ask for information restricted to a certain
time period [6]. The degree of explicitness of temporal reference in a temporal
question also varies significantly: some temporal questions refer explicitly to a
date or time, while others refer to times only implicitly, by reference to events
or states. Here, we focus on temporally restricted questions, and in particular,
those restricted by events, such as these (from the CLEF 2005 QA track):
(1) Who played the role of Superman before he was paralyzed?
(2) What disease did many American soldiers get after the Gulf War?
The data collection we describe, though, can be used to support the answering
of other types of temporal questions, as well.
Temporally restricted questions consist of two parts: the main clause,
which indicates the information request, and the temporal restriction, which
is a subordinate clause or PP headed by a temporal preposition or connective,
such as before, after, during, etc., which we refer to as temporal signals [7]. The
temporal signal that connects the two parts of a temporally restricted ques-
tion indicates the temporal relation that must hold between the time spans
of the restricting event and the requested events. Since much of the tempo-
ral information we have access to regarding events is vague and incomplete,
we explore the use of fuzzy temporal reasoning for temporal QA, instead of
the standard Allen algebra of temporal interval relations [1]. The model we
use is a generalization of Allen?s algebra that is suitable for vague events and
relations. For crisp events, our reasoning algorithm is equivalent to Allen?s
path-consistency algorithm. For vague events, fuzzy relations can express that
a given qualitative relation is only satisfied to a certain degree [11].
3 Architecture of a temporal QA system
Our temporal QA system follows a strategy of extracting information likely to
be useful in answering questions?in our case, a knowledge base of events and
temporal relations?in a pre-processing stage, before any questions are asked
[3,4]. The system consists of several components: a question analysis module,
the knowledge base, and an answer selection module.
Question analysis: Since we are focusing on temporal questions in which
a temporal relation restricts the information being queried, our question anal-
ysis module must separate the non-temporal part of the question?the actual
information request?from the temporal restriction. Our question analysis
module parses the question and extracts phrases headed by temporal signals
as potential temporal restrictions. It then uses standard pattern-based tech-
niques to extract keyword queries and the expected answer type.
Knowledge base: The knowledge base (KB) consists of two parts: an
XML database containing descriptions of individual events and a temporal
relation network containing inclusion and before/after relations for events in
the KB. Quantitative temporal information about events (i.e., starting and
ending dates for crisp events and fuzzy sets for vague ones) is contained in the
XML database. The rest of this paper describes the construction of the KB.
Answer selection: To answer a temporally restricted question, we must
find events that match the non-temporal part of the question and filter out
those that do not satisfy the restriction. We treat the problem of finding the
events as a retrieval problem, using the keyword queries from question analy-
sis, with event descriptions as target documents. Checking whether an event
satisfies the restriction is a matter of inferring whether an appropriate qualita-
tive temporal relation holds between the event and a time or event matching
the restriction. We use IR techniques to find events matching the restriction,
and we use both quantitative and fuzzy temporal reasoning to make the infer-
ence [10]. From the remaining event descriptions, we use standard techniques
to extract an answer. Typically, the information request is mapped to a named
entity type by the question analysis module, so appropriate named entities are
harvested and scored and the top-scoring entity is returned.
4 Extracting events from Wikipedia
Wikipedia is a free, open-domain, web-based encyclopedia [12]. In addition
to traditional encyclopedia entries, it also has entries for a variety of time
periods, which contain lists of historical and/or current events. We extract
events from the entries for years. The standardized formatting of year entries
in Wikipedia, together with the wiki markup used for this formatting, makes
extracting event descriptions straightforward. A typical year entry contains
sections delimited by the second-level headings ==Events==, ==Births==, and
==Deaths==. Each of these sections is optionally split into subsections de-
limited by third-level headings indicating months (e.g., ===May===) or the
lack of a date (===Unknown date===). Within these subsections are asterisk-
delimited lists, each item of which corresponds to an event (or a date with a
list of events). Event descriptions begin with a date or a date range, if known,
and then continue with one or two sentences describing the event. This text
contains phrases marked up as wiki links (pointers to Wikipedia entries):
(3) [[March 10]] - The [[New Hampshire]] primary is won by [[Henry Cabot
Lodge]], Ambassador to [[South Vietnam]].
Sometimes, an event description begins with a wiki link, set off with a colon,
indicating a larger event (which we call a super-event) of which it is a part:
(4) [[August 8]] - [[Watergate scandal]]: US President [[Richard Nixon]]
announces his resignation (effective [[August 9]])
Given the structured nature of year entries, simple hand-built patterns
can be used to perform what amounts to shallow semantic interpretation,
extracting event descriptions from the entries, including temporal location
information and limited participant and mereological information (via wiki
links and super-events, when present). For each extracted event description,
the date(s) and any embedded wiki links are extracted, using simple pattern-
matching, and the text of the description is parsed. This information is added
to our XML database as an event element with the following sub-elements:
date/start date/end date (normalized dates; which one(s) depends on what
is given in the entry), super event (wiki link to super event, if present),
description (text of the description), and parse (converted to XML).
From the entries for the years from 1600 to 2005, we have extracted about
33,000 events, somewhat over half (about 19,000) birth and death events.
5 Web mining for fuzzy and qualitative information
The basic idea behind web mining is that there is enough information on the
web that if there is a significant connection between two events, we should be
able to find this connection by searching for patterns that typically express it.
We use web mining to build representations of the time span of vague events
and to find both additional events related to events already in the KB and for
qualitative temporal relations between events in the KB.
While most of the smaller-scale events extracted from Wikipedia come
with quantitative temporal information, it is not always fully specified. Fur-
thermore, many of the super-events from Wikipedia, as well as the new events
we mine from the web, lack such information. We cope with this by search-
ing the web for beginning and ending dates using a simple pattern-based
approach?sending patterns to Google and extracting information from the
returned snippets. The patterns we use include, e.g., ?event? began on ?date?
and ?event? lasted until ?date?. If there is sufficient agreement among different
web pages about the beginning and ending date of an event, we represent the
time span of this event as an interval. If not, we use the techniques described
in [9] to construct a suitable fuzzy set [13] to represent the time span, which
is stored in the XML database as part of the event representation. Of course,
for some events, we may fail to find sufficient information about beginning or
ending dates, in which case they remain undated, or ungrounded, events.
We also use a pattern-based approach to mine the web both for new events
and for temporal relations relating ungrounded events to grounded events. Be-
cause new events are only usable if they can be temporally connected to events
already in the KB, we can use a uniform set of hand-crafted patterns that in-
dicate a temporal relation between events. The patterns we use include, e.g.,
?NP1? gave way to ?NP2? and ?NP2? took place after ?NP1?, for before/after
relations, and ?NP1? and other events during ?NP2? and ?NP1? took place
during ?NP2?, for inclusion relations. All our patterns relate NP descriptions
of events, which means that they can only be used with known events that
have NP descriptions. Fortunately, this includes all super-events and newly
mined events, which make up most of the ungrounded events in the KB.
Since we can use the same patterns to mine for new events and for tempo-
ral relations for ungrounded events, we combine the tasks. Our basic proce-
dure for mining with these patterns is as follows. Substitute either ?NP1? or
?NP2? with the NP description of a known event, send the resulting pattern to
Google, and parse and tag the returned snippets with named entities. Extract
NPs in the other NP position, discarding those tagged as person, location,
or organization. For each remaining NP, if it refers to a known event in the
KB, add to the temporal relation network a link between the original known
event and the event referred to by the mined NP. Otherwise, add a new event
for the mined NP and a link between the original event and the new event.
The hardest step is determining whether a mined NP refers to an event
already in the KB. Coreference resolution is clearly necessary to temporal
constraints on coreferring event descriptions, but to maintain consistency in
the KB, we must be careful in asserting coreference. We do not try to solve
the cross-document coreference task completely but instead split mined NPs
into two groups. The first group, which includes all indefinite, demonstrative,
quantificational, and pronominal NPs, is added to the temporal network but is
never considered for coreference. The second group contains NPs that we are
confident refer to a unique event and that are thus candidates for coreference.
To find these NPs, we are experimenting with heuristics to determine
unique reference. Some heuristics are capitalization-based, while others are
based on collocation measures using web hit counts [5,8], such as the ratio
between the number of hits for the entire NP and the product of the hits
for each of the individual words in the NP (similar to pointwise mutual in-
formation [2]). When an NP is determined to be uniquely referring, we use
string matching to determine whether it is coreferent with an existing event
description. If it is, the temporal relation mined is added to the KB for this
existing event. Otherwise, a new event and relation are added to the KB.
6 Conclusion
We have described the construction of a knowledge base of events and temporal
relations for a temporal QA system. We take advantage of a freely available,
structured resource?Wikipedia?to obtain relatively accurate quantitative in-
formation about events. We also mine the web to build fuzzy sets for vague
events and to find events for which we can only get qualitative information.
Acknowledgements The first author was supported by the Netherlands
Organization for Scientific Research (NWO), under project number 612.066.302.
The second author was supported by a PhD grant from the Research Foun-
dation ? Flanders.
References
[1] Allen, J., Maintaining knowledge about temporal intervals, Communications of
the ACM 26 (1983), pp. 832?843.
[2] Church, K. et al, Using statistics in lexical analysis, in: Lexical Acquisition:
Exploiting On-Line Resources to Build a Lexicon, Lawrence Erlbaum, 1991 .
[3] Fleischman, M., E. Hovy and A. Echihabi, Offline strategies for online question
answering: Answering questions before they are asked, in: ACL 2003, 2003.
[4] Jijkoun, V., G. Mishne and M. de Rijke, Preprocessing documents to answer
Dutch questions, in: BNAIC?03, 2003.
[5] Magnini, B., M. Negri, R. Prevete and H. Tanev, Is it the right answer?
Exploiting web redundancy for answer validation, in: ACL-02, 2002.
[6] Pustejovsky, J. et al, TERQAS final report, http://www.cs.brandeis.edu/
?jamesp/arda/time/readings/TERQAS-FINAL-REPORT.pdf (2002).
[7] Saur??, R. et al, TimeML annotation guidelines, http://www.cs.brandeis.
edu/?jamesp/arda/time/timeMLdocs/annguide12wp.pdf (2004).
[8] Schlobach, S., D. Ahn, M. de Rijke and V. Jijkoun, Data-driven type checking
in open domain question answering, Journal of Applied Logic (to appear).
[9] Schockaert, S., Construction of membership functions for fuzzy time periods, in:
J. Gervain, editor, ESSLLI 2005 Student Session, 2005.
[10] Schockaert, S., D. Ahn, M. De Cock and E. E. Kerre, Question answering with
imperfect temporal information, in: FQAS-2006, to appear.
[11] Schockaert, S., M. De Cock and E. E. Kerre, Imprecise temporal interval
relations, in: LNCS 3849, Springer, 2006 .
[12] Wikipedia, Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia, http://en.wikipedia.org/w/
index.php?title=Wikipedia&oldid=35397363, [Accessed 16-January-2006].
[13] Zadeh, L. A., Fuzzy sets, Information and Control 8 (1965), pp. 338?353.
