BioNLP 2008: Current Trends in Biomedical Natural Language Processing, pages 96?97,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Using Natural Language Processing to Classify Suicide Notes
John P. Pestian*, Pawel Matykiewicz, Jacqueline Grupp-Phelan,
Sarah Arszman Lavanier, Jennifer Combs, and Robert Kowatch
Cincinnati Children?s Hospital Medical Center
Cincinnati, OH 45220, USA
john.pestian@cchmc.org
Abstract
We hypothesize that machine-learning algo-
rithms (MLA) can classify completer and
simulated suicide notes as well as mental
health professionals (MHP). Five MHPs
classified 66 simulated or completer notes;
MLAs were used for the same task. Results:
MHPs were accurate 71% of the time; using
the sequential minimization optimization
algorithm (SMO) MLAs were accurate 78%
of the time. There was no significant differ-
ence between the MLA and MPH classifiers.
This is an important first step in developing
an evidence based suicide predictor for
emergency department use.
1 Problem
Suicide is the third leading cause of death in
adolescents and a leading cause of death in the
United States1. Those who attempt suicide usually
arrive at the Emergency Department seeking help.
These individuals are at risk for a repeated attempt,
that may lead to a completed suicide2. We know
of no evidence-based risk assessment tool for pre-
dicting repeated suicide attempts. Thus, Emergency
Medicine clinicians are often left to manage suicidal
patients by clinical judgment alone. This research
focuses on the initial stage for constructing such
an evidence based tool, the Psychache3 Index.
Our efforts herein posit that suicide notes are an
artifact of a victim?s thoughts and that the thoughts
between completers and attempters are different.
Using natural language processing we attempt to
distinguish between completer notes and notes that
have been simulated by individuals who match the
profile of the completer. Understanding how to
optimize classification methods between these types
of notes prepares us for future work that can include
clinical and biological factors.
2 Methods
Suicidal patients are classified into three categories:
ideators ?those who think about committing sui-
cide, attempters ?those who attempt suicide, and
completers ?those who complete suicide. This re-
search focuses on the completers and a group of in-
dividuals called simulators. These simulators were
matched to completers by age, gender and socioe-
conomic status and asked to write a suicide note4.
Suicide notes from 33 completers and 33 simulators
were annotated with linguistic characteristics using
a perl-program with the EN:Lingua:Tagger module.
Emotional characteristics were annotated by assign-
ing terms in the note to a suicide-emotion ontology
that was developed from a meta analysis of 2,166
suicide related manuscripts and validated with ex-
pert opinion. This ontology includes such classes
as: affection, anger, depression, and worthlessness.
Each class had multiple concepts, i.e, affection?
love, concern for others, and gratitude. Three MHPs
read each note and tagged emotion-words found in
the notes with the appropriate classes and concepts.
Analysis of variance between structures was con-
ducted to insure that there actually was a difference
that could be detected. Emotional annotations were
used for machine-learning.
96
We then tested the hypothesis that MLAs could
distinguish between completer and simulated notes
as well as MHPs. Copies of the notes were given
to five MHPs who classified them as either written
by a completer or an simulator. MLA feature space
was defined by matrix of selected characteristics
from four sources: words, parts of speech, concepts,
and readability indexes. Collinearity was eliminated
by removing highly correlated features. The final
feature space included: specific words (such as
?love?, ?life?, ?no?), specific parts of speech (such
as, personal pronouns, verbs) Kincaid readability
index and emotional concepts (such as anger,
and hopelessness). We then tested the following
algorithms? ability to distinguish between completer
and simulator notes: decision trees - J48, C4.5,
LMT, DecisionStump, M5P; classification rules -
JRip, M5, OneR, PART; function models - SMO,
logistic builds, multinomial logistic regression,
linear regression; lazy learners and meta learners5.
3 Results
A significant difference was found between the
linguistic and emotional characteristics of the notes.
Linguistic differences (completer/simulated): word
count 120/66 p=0.007, verbs 25/13 p=0.012, nouns
28/12 p=0.0001, and prepositions 20/10 p=0.005.
This difference justified testing the classification
hypothesis. Emotionally, completers gave away
their possessions 20% of the time, simulators, never
did. Mental health experts accurately classified the
notes 71% of the time. The MLAs were accurate
60-79% of the time with SMO giving the highest
results when the word count, part-of-speech, and
readability vectors were included. Performance
weakened when the emotional vector was included,
yet the emotional vector was the primary source of
data for the MHPs.
4 Conclusion
Machine learning methods for classifying suicide
and non-suicide notes are promising. Future efforts
to represent the thoughts of the suicidal patient will
require larger sample sizes, inclusion of attempters
response to open-ended questions, biological and
clinical characteristics.
5 Acknowledgements
We acknowledge Drs. AA Leenaars, ES Shneidman,
the divisions of Biomedical Informatics, Emergency
Medicine and Psychiatry at Cincinnati Children?s
Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati
and Ohio Third Frontier program for their generous
support of this work.
References:
[1] Jeffrey A Bridge, Tina R Goldstein, and David A Brent.
Adolescent suicide and suicidal behavior. J Child Psychol
Psychiatry, 47(3-4):372?394, 2006.
[2] P M Lewinsohn, P Rohde, and J R Seeley. Psychosocial
risk factors for future adolescent suicide attempts. J
Consult Clin Psychol, 62(2):297?305, 1994.
[3] E S Shneidman. Suicide as psychache. J Nerv Ment Dis,
181(3):145?147, 1993.
[4] ES Shneidman and NL Farberow. Clues to Suicide.
McGraw Hill Paperbacks, 1957.
[5] I.H. Witten and E. Frank. Data Mining: Practical
Machine Learning Tools ad Techniques. Morgan
Kaufman, 2nd edition, 2005.
97
