Proceedings of the 9th SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 190?197,
Columbus, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
The Effect of Dialogue System Output Style Variation
on Users? Evaluation Judgments and Input Style
Ivana Kruijff-Korbayova? and Olga Kukina
Department of Computational Linguistics
Saarland University, Germany
{korbay|olgak}@coli.uni-sb.de
Abstract
A dialogue system can present itself and/or
address the user as an active agent by means
of linguistic constructions in personal style, or
suppress agentivity by using impersonal style.
We compare system evaluation judgments and
input style alignment of users interacting with
an in-car dialogue system generating output in
personal vs. impersonal style. Although our
results are consistent with earlier findings ob-
tained with simulated systems, the effects are
weaker.
1 Introduction
One of the goals in developing dialogue systems that
users find appealing and natural is to endow the sys-
tems with natural and contextually appropriate out-
put. This encompasses a broad range of research
issues. The one we address in this paper pertains
to style in the interpersonal dimension: does using
personal vs. impersonal style of system output have
an effect on dialogue system users, in particular, on
their judgments about the system and on the way
they formulate their input to the system?
We define the personal/impersonal style di-
chotomy as reflecting primarily a distinction with
respect to agentivity: personal style involves the ex-
plicit realization of an agent, whereas impersonal
style avoids it. In the simplest way it is manifested
by the presence of explicit reference to the dialogue
participants (typically by means of personal pro-
nouns) vs. its absence, respectively. More generally,
active voice and finite verb forms are typical for per-
sonal style, whereas impersonal style often, though
not exclusively, employs passive constructions or in-
finite verb forms:
(1) Typical personal style constructions:
a. I found 20 albums.
b. You have 20 albums.
c. Please search for albums by The Beatles.
(2) Typical impersonal style constructions:
a. 20 albums have been found.
b. There are 20 albums.
c. The database contains 20 albums.
d. 20 albums found.
The designer of a dialogue system has the choice
to make it manifest (its own and the user?s) agen-
tivity linguistically through the use of personal con-
structions or not.
Previous experiments with simulated systems
have shown that a natural language interface with
a synthesized voice should not say ?I? (Nass and
Brave, 2005) and that users align the style of their
input to that of the system output (Brennan and
Ohaeri, 1994). (See Section 2 for more detail.)
The dialogue system SAMMIE developed in the
TALK project (Becker et al, 2007) can use either per-
sonal or impersonal output style. In personal style, it
generates constructions making explicit reference to
the agent (both the user and the system itself), such
as (1a?1c); in impersonal style, it avoids explicit ref-
erence to any agent, as in (2a?2d). The system can
be set either to use one style consistently throughout
a dialogue session, or to align to the user?s style, i.e.,
mimic the user?s style on a turn-by-turn basis.
Inspired by the earlier results obtained with sim-
ulated systems (Nass and Brave, 2005; Brennan and
190
Ohaeri, 1994), we ran an experiment to test the ef-
fects of style manipulation in the SAMMIE system.
In this paper, we compare two versions of the sys-
tem, one using consistently the personal output style
and the other the impersonal style. We designed
our experiment to test (i) whether the users? judg-
ments of the system?s usability and performance dif-
fer among the system versions using the personal vs.
impersonal style, and (ii) whether users align to the
system style.
In Section 2 we review previous experiments con-
cerning the effect of system output style on users?
judgments and style. We describe our own experi-
ment in Section 3, present the results in Section 4,
and provide a discussion and conclusions in Sec-
tion 5.
2 Previous Work
(Nass and Brave, 2005) address the issue whether a
voice interface should say ?I? by investigating sev-
eral dimensions of user attitudes to their simulated
system with a synthetic vs. recorded voice. Gen-
erally, agents that use ?I? are perceived more like
a person than those that do not. However, systems
tend to be more positively rated when consistent
with respect to such parameters as personality, gen-
der, ontology (human vs. machine), etc. A system
with a recorded voice is perceived as more human-
like and thus entitled to the use of ?I?, whereas a
synthetic-voice interface is not perceived as human
enough to use ?I? to refer to itself (Nass et al, 2006).
Another question is whether system output style
influences users? input formulation, as would be ex-
pected due to the phenomenon of alignment, which
is generally considered a basic principle in natural
language dialogue (Garrod and Pickering, 2004).1
Experiments targeting human-human conversa-
tion show that in spite of the variety of linguistic
expressions available, speakers in spontaneous dia-
logues tend to express themselves in similar ways at
lexical and syntactic levels. For example, the sur-
face form of a question can affect the format of the
answer: the question ?What time do you close?? will
more likely get the response ?Five o?clock? than?At
1This dialogue phenomenon goes under a variety of terms in
the literature, besides alignment, e.g., accommodation, adapta-
tion, convergence, entrainment or shaping (used, e.g., by (Bren-
nan and Ohaeri, 1994)).
five o?clock?. On the other hand, ?At five o?clock?
is a more probable answer to ?At what time do you
close?? (Levelt and Kelter, 1982). There is evi-
dence that alignment happens automatically as a re-
sult of priming, e.g., (Hadelich et al, 2004) for lexi-
cal alignment.
Lexical and syntactic alignment is present in
human-computer interaction, too. (Brennan, 1996)
suggested that users adopt system?s terms to avoid
errors, expecting the system to be inflexible. How-
ever, recent experiments show that alignment in
human-computer interaction is also automatic and
its strength is comparable to that in human-human
communication (Branigan et al, 2003; Pearson et
al., 2006).
Early results concerning users? alignment to sys-
tem output style in the interpersonal dimension are
reported in (Brennan and Ohaeri, 1994): They dis-
tinguish three styles: anthropomorphic (the system
refers to itself using first person pronouns, like in
(1a) above, fluent (complete sentences, but no self-
reference) and telegraphic, like (2d). They found no
difference in users? perception of the system?s in-
telligence across the different conditions. However,
they observed that the anthropomorphic group was
more than twice as likely to refer to the computer
using the second person pronoun ?you? and it used
more indirect requests and conventional politeness
then the other groups. They concluded that the an-
thropomorphic style is undesirable for dialogue sys-
tems because it encourages more complex user input
which is harder to recognize and interpret.
The described experiments used either the
Wizard-of-Oz paradigm (Brennan, 1996) or prepro-
grammed system output (Branigan et al, 2003; Nass
and Brave, 2005) and involved written communica-
tion. Such methods allow one to test assumptions
about idealized human-computer interaction. The
purpose of our experiment was to test whether sim-
ilar effects arise in an interaction with an actual di-
alogue system, which may be plagued, among other
factors, by speech recognition problems.
3 Experiment
Dialogue System We used the SAMMIE in-car sys-
tem developed in the TALK project (Becker et al,
2006; Becker et al, 2007). SAMMIE provides a mul-
191
timodal interface to an MP3 player through speech
and haptic input with a button which can be turned,
pushed down and pushed sideways in four direc-
tions. System output is by speech and a graphical
display. The user can perform a range of tasks: con-
trol the MP3 player (play/stop/pause playing song,
next/previous/go-to track, turn shuffle mode on/off),
search and browse by looking for various fields in
the MP3 database (song, artist, album, etc.), search
and select playlists, edit them or construct new ones.
The SAMMIE system was designed with the aim
to support natural, intuitive mixed-initiative interac-
tion. Input can be given through any modality at
any point and is not restricted to answers to sys-
tem queries: the user can initiate new tasks as well
as give any information relevant to the current task
at any time. A sample interaction is shown below
(Becker et al, 2006).
(3) U: Show me the Beatles albums.
S: I have these four Beatles albums. [shows a list
of album names]
U: Which songs are on this one? [selects the Red
Album]
S: The Red Album contains these songs [shows a
list of the songs]
U: Play the third one.
S: [song ?From Me To You? plays]
The SAMMIE system has a German and an En-
glish version which both provide the same function-
ality. The experiment employed the German ver-
sion. See (Kruijff-Korbayova? et al, 2008) for a de-
scription of the natural language generation module.
Setup Figure 1 shows a picture of the experiment
setup. To simulate the driving situation, we used
the ?3D-Fahrschule? software.2 The driving simu-
lator visuals were projected on a wall-sized back-
projection screen. The graphical interface of the
SAMMIE system was shown on a display next to the
steering wheel. Participants wore headphones with
a microphone for the spoken input and output. The
button for manual input was positioned to the right
of their chair. The experimenter was sitting in an ad-
jacent room and could see and hear everything hap-
pening in the experiment lab. The subjects could not
2http://www.3d-fahrschule.de/index.htm
Figure 1: Experiment setup
see the experimenter, but heard her instructions, in-
cluding the task assignments, from loudspeakers. If
necessary, the subjects were able to talk to the ex-
perimenter.
Participants A total of 28 participants were paid
to take part in the experiment. All were native Ger-
man speakers, 22 female and 6 male, 22 students of
the Saarland University and 6 employees. All but
two participants had a driver?s license and 20 partic-
ipants reported driving more than 500km a year. 10
participants had previous experience with a driving
simulation and 6 had used a dialogue system before.
Each participant was assigned to one style condition,
14 to personal and 14 to impersonal style. To ensure
as even a distribution as possible, there were 11 fe-
male and 3 male participants in each style condition,
one of whom was a non-driver. There were 4 em-
ployees in impersonal style condition and 2 in the
personal one.
Procedure Each participant was welcomed by the
experimenter, seated in the experiment lab, and
given brief written instructions concerning the driv-
ing simulator, the SAMMIE system and the evalua-
tion procedure. The participants were instructed to
use mainly spoken input to accomplish the tasks, al-
though they were allowed to use manual input, too.
The participants first made a ca. 2-minute drive
to get familiar with the driving simulator. Then they
were asked to chose a destination city (Amsterdam,
Madrid or London) and drive there on a highway.
During the driving, the experimenter successively
192
read to the participant 2 trial tasks and 11 experi-
mental tasks to be solved using the SAMMIE system.
The tasks involved exploring the contents of a
database of about 25 music albums and were of four
types: (1) finding some specified title(s); (2) select-
ing some title(s) satisfying certain constraints; (3)
manipulating the playlists by adding or removing
songs and (4) free-use of the system.
The experimental tasks were presented to each
participant in randomized order apart from the free
use of the system, which was always the last task.
To avoid priming by the style of the task formula-
tion, and to help the participants memorize the task,
the experimenter (E) repeated each task assignment
twice to the participant, once in personal and once
in impersonal style, as shown in the example below.
(4) E: Bitte frage das System nach den Liedern von
?Pur?. Du willst also wissen welche Lieder von
?Pur? es gibt.
E: Please ask the the system about the songs by
?Pur?. You would like to know which songs by
?Pur? there are.
The time the participants spent completing the in-
dividual tasks was not constrained. It took them
about 40 minutes to complete all the tasks.
Afterwards, each participant was asked to fill in a
questionnaire about their attitudes towards the sys-
tem, consisting of questions with a 6-point scale
ranging from 1 (low grade) to 6 (high grade). The
questions were a subset of those used in (Nass and
Brave, 2005) and (Mutschler et al, 2007), for ex-
ample: How do you assess the system in general:
technical (1) ? human-like (6); Communication with
the system seemed to you: boring (1) ? exciting (6);
In terms of usability, the system is: inefficient (1)
?efficient(6).
Upon completing the questionnaire, the partici-
pant was paid and discharged.
Collected data The questionnaire responses have
been tabulated and the dialogues of the subjects with
the system have been recorded and transcribed.3
The utterances of the participants (on average 95
per session) were subsequently manually anno-
tated with the following features for further analysis:
3We did not record the data from the driving simulator.
? Construction type:
Personal (+/-) Is the utterance a complete sen-
tence in active voice or imperative form
Impersonal (+/-) Is the utterance expressed
by passive voice, infinite verb form (e.g.,
?Lied abspielen? (lit. ?song play?)), or ex-
pletive ?es-gibt? (?there-is?) construction
Telegraphic (+/-) Is the utterance expressed
by a phrase, e.g., ?weiter? (?next?)
? Personal pronouns: (+/-) Does the utterance
contain a first or second person pronoun
? Politeness marking: (+/-) Does the utterance
contain a politeness marker, such as ?bitte?
(?please?), ?danke? (?thanks?) and verbs in
subjunctive mood (eg. ?ich ha?tte gerne?)
4 Results
4.1 Style and Users? Attitudes
The first issue addressed in the experiment was
whether the users have different judgments of the
personal vs. impersonal version of the system. Since
the system used a synthetic voice, the judgments
were expected to be more positive in the impersonal
style condition (Nass and Brave, 2005). Based on
factor analysis performed on attitudinal data from
the user questionnaires we created the six indices
listed below. All indices were meaningful and re-
liable
1. General satisfaction with the communication
with the system was composed of 3 pairs of
adjectives describing communication with the
system: disappointing/motivating, uninterest-
ing/interesting and boring/exciting (Cronbach?s
?=0.86; t(26)=0.29, p=0.39 (one-tailed))
2. Ease of communication with the system com-
prised 5 parameters: naturalness of the commu-
nication with the system, formality/informality
and indifference/sympathy of the system?s
communicative style, participants feelings dur-
ing the conversation: tensed/relaxed and pleas-
ant/unpleasant (?=0.83; t(26)=0.00, p=0.5
(one-tailed))
3. Usability of the system consisted of 1
pair of adjectives referring to the success
193
Figure 2: Perceived humanness of the system depending
on system output style
of communication with the system: un-
successful/successful, and 4 pairs of adjec-
tives describing the usability of the sys-
tem: unpractical/practical, inefficient/efficient,
complicated/simple, inconvenient/convenient
(?=0.76; t(26)=0.08, p=0.47 (one-tailed))
4. Clarity of the system?s speech comprised 2
pairs of adjectives describing the system?s
speech: unpredictable/predictable and confus-
ing/clear (?=0.88; t(25)=0.87, p=0.2 (one-
tailed))
5. Perceived ?humanness? of the system was
composed of 3 parameters: perceived tech-
nicality/humanness, perceived unfriend-
liness/friendliness and attributed conser-
vatism/innovation (?=0.69; t(25)=1.64, p=0.06
(one-tailed))
6. System?s perceived flexibility and creativity
comprised 3 parameters: rigidness/flexibility
of system?s speech, perceived creativity of the
system and intelligence attributed to the system
(?=0.78; t(26)=0.40, p=0.35 (one-tailed))
We did not find any significant influence of sys-
tem output style on users? attitudes. The only in-
dex with a weak tendency in the predicted direction
is perceived humanness of the system (t(25)=1.64,
p=.06 (one-tailed); see Figure 2). This goes in line
with the earlier observation that an interface that
refers to itself by means of a personal pronoun is
perceived to be more human-like than one that does
Figure 3: Distribution chart for syntactic construction
types in user utterances depending on system output style
not (Nass and Brave, 2005).
4.2 Style and Alignment
The next issue we investigated was whether the users
formulated their input differently with the personal
vs. impersonal system version. For each dialogue
session, we calculated the percentage of utterances
containing the feature of interest relative to the total
number of user utterances in the session.
First we analyzed the distribution of personal,
impersonal and telegraphic constructions across the
personal and impersonal style conditions. (The rea-
son we separated telegraphic constructions is be-
cause they seem to be neutral with respect to style.)
We compared the means of the obtained numbers be-
tween the two style conditions. Figure 3 shows the
distribution of the types of syntactic constructions
across the system output style conditions.
1. We expected the participants to use more per-
sonal constructions with the personal style ver-
sion of the system. Independent samples t-
test showed a significant result in the predicted
direction (t(19)=1.8, p=0.05 (one-tailed); see
Figure 3).
2. We expected to find the reverse effect with
regard to the proportion of impersonal verb
forms: participants using the personal style
194
version of the system were expected to have
less infinite, passive and ?es-gibt? forms than
those in the impersonal style condition. How-
ever, we did not find any significant difference
between the two style conditions (t(26)=1.0,
p=0.17 (one-tailed)).
3. According to expectation we also did not find
any significant difference in the proportion of
telegraphic constructions per style condition
(t(26)=1.4, p=0.09 (one-tailed)).
4. In the impersonal style condition we found
a significantly lower proportion of verb-
containing utterances than utterances in tele-
graphic form (t(13)=3.5, p=0.00 (one-tailed)).
But in the personal style condition there was no
statistically significant difference (t(13)=0.7,
p=0.25 (one-tailed)).
Next we analyzed the distribution of first and sec-
ond person pronouns across style conditions. We ex-
pected to find more personal pronouns in personal
than in impersonal style condition (Brennan and
Ohaeri, 1994). However, the results showed no sta-
tistically significant difference (t(26)=0.67, p=0.25
(one-tailed)).
Another prediction based on (Brennan and
Ohaeri, 1994) was to find more politeness markers
in the personal style. However, the analysis showed
that participants in the personal style condition did
not use significantly more politeness markers than
those in the impersonal style condition (t(20)=1.06,
p=0.15 (one-tailed)).
Finally, (Brennan and Ohaeri, 1994) predicted
that personal style, being more flexible, might cause
more speech recognition problems than input in im-
personal style. We checked whether participants in
the personal style condition had a higher rate of un-
recognized utterances than those in the impersonal
style condition and found no significant difference
(t(26)=0.60, p = 0.28 (one-tailed)).
To summarize, we observed a significant differ-
ence in the number of personal constructions across
style conditions, in accordance with the expectation
based on style alignment in terms of agentivity. But
we did not find a significant difference in the distri-
bution of impersonal constructions across style con-
ditions. Not surprisingly, there was also no signifi-
cant difference in the distribution of telegraphic con-
structions. An unexpected finding was the higher
proportion of telegraphic constructions than verb-
containing ones within the impersonal style condi-
tion. However, the personal style condition showed
no significant effect. Contrary to expectations, we
also did not find any significant effect of style-
manipulation on the number of personal pronouns,
nor on the number of politeness markers.
4.3 Style Alignment over Time
Since alignment can also be seen as a process of
gradual adjustment among dialogue participants in
the course of their interaction, we were interested
in whether participants tended to converge to using
particular constructions as their session with the sys-
tem progressed. For each participant we divided the
transcribed conversation in two halves. Using paired
samples t-test, we compared the proportion of per-
sonal, impersonal and telegraphic constructions in
the first and second halves of the conversations for
both style conditions.
In the personal style condition, we found no sig-
nificant change in the usage of construction types
between the first and the second half of the dialogue.
In the impersonal style condition, we did not find
any significant difference in the distribution of im-
personal and telegraphic constructions either. How-
ever, we found a significant change in the number
of personal constructions (t(13)=2.5, p=0.02 (one-
tailed)): The participants cut down on the use of per-
sonal constructions in the second half.
5 Discussion and Conclusions
We presented the results of an experiment with the
in-car multimodal dialogue system SAMMIE, aimed
to test whether we obtain effects similar to earlier
findings concerning the influence of system output
style in the interpersonal dimension on the users?
subjective judgments of a system (Nass and Brave,
2005) as well as their formulation of input (Bren-
nan and Ohaeri, 1994). Although our results are not
conclusive, they point at a range of issues for further
research.
Regarding users? attitudes to the system, we
found no significant difference among the styles.
This is similar to (Brennan and Ohaeri, 1994) who
195
found no difference in intelligence attributed to the
system by the users, but it is at odds with the earlier
finding that a synthetic voice interface was judged
to be more useful when avoiding self-reference by
personal pronouns (Nass and Brave, 2005).
Whereas (Brennan and Ohaeri, 1994) used a flight
reservation dialogue system, (Nass and Brave, 2005)
used a phone-based auction system which read out
an introduction and five object descriptions. There
are two points to note: First, the subjects were ex-
posed to system output that was a read out contin-
uous text rather than turns in an interaction. This
may have reinforced the activation of particular style
features. Second, the auction task may have sensi-
bilized the subjects to the distinction between sub-
jective (the system?s) vs. objective information pre-
sentation, and thus make them more sensitive to
whether the system presents itself as an active agent
or not.
Regarding the question whether users align their
style to that of the system, where previous experi-
ments showed strong effects of alignment (Brennan
and Ohaeri, 1994), our experiment shows some ef-
fects, but some of the results seem conflicting. On
the one hand, subjects interacting with the personal
style version of the system used more personal con-
structions than those interacting with the impersonal
style version. However, subjects in either condi-
tion did not show any significant difference with re-
spect to the use of impersonal constructions or tele-
graphic forms. We also found a higher proportion of
telegraphic constructions than verb-containing ones
within the impersonal style condition, but no such
difference in the personal style. Finally, when we
consider alignment over time, we find no change in
construction usage in the personal style, whereas we
find a decrease in the use of personal constructions
in the impersonal style.
That there is no difference in the use of tele-
graphic constructions across conditions is not sur-
prising. Being just phrasal sentence fragments, these
constructions are neutral with respect to style. But
why does there seem to be an alignment effect for
personal constructions and not for others? One way
of explaining this is that (some of) the constructions
that we counted as impersonal are common in both
styles. Besides their deliberate use as means to avoid
explicit reference to oneself, the constructions typi-
cal for impersonal style also have their normal, neu-
tral usage, and therefore, some of the utterances that
we have classified as impersonal style might just be
neutral formulations, rather than cases of distancing
or ?de-agentivization?. However, we could not test
this hypothesis, because we have not found a way
to reliably distinguish between neutral and marked,
truly impersonal utterances. This is an issue requir-
ing further work.
The difference between our results concerning
alignment and those of (Brennan and Ohaeri, 1994)
is not likely to be due to a difference in the degree
of interactivity (as with (Nass and Brave, 2005)).
We now comment on other differences between our
systems, which might have contributed to the differ-
ences in results.
One aspect where we differ concerns our distinc-
tion between personal and impersonal style, both in
the implementation of the SAMMIE system and in
the experiment: We include the presence/absence
of agentivity not only in the system?s reference to
itself (akin to (Nass and Brave, 2005) and (Bren-
nan and Ohaeri, 1994)), but also in addressing the
user. This concept of the personal/impersonal dis-
tinction was inspired by such differences observed
in a study of instructional texts in several languages
(Kruijff et al, 1999), where the latter dimension is
predominant. The present experiment results make
it pertinent that more research into the motives be-
hind expressing or suppressing agentivity in both di-
mensions is needed.
Apart from the linguistic design of the system?s
output, other factors influence users? behavior and
perception of the system, and thus might confound
experiment results, e.g., functionality, design, er-
gonomics, speech synthesis and speech recognition.
Earlier experiments reported in (Nass and Brave,
2005) suggest that a system with synthesized speech
should be more positively rated when it does not
refer to itself as an active agent by personal con-
structions. Whereas the system used by (Brennan
and Ohaeri, 1994) used written interaction, we used
the MARY text-to-speech synthesis system (Schro?der
and Trouvain, 2003) with an MBROLA diphone
synthesizer, which produces an acceptable though
not outstanding output quality. But as discussed ear-
lier, contrary to (Nass and Brave, 2005) we have not
observed a difference in the users? attitudes depend-
196
ing on style. It thus remains an open issue what ef-
fect speech output quality has on on the users? atti-
tudes and alignment behavior.
Regarding a possible influence of speech recogni-
tion on our results, we performed a post-hoc analysis
(Kruijff-Korbayova? et al, 2008), which did not re-
veal significant differences in user attitudes or align-
ment behavior depending on better or worse speech
recognition performance experienced by the users.
A future experiment should address the possibility
of an interaction between system style and speech
recognition performance as both factors might be in-
fluencing the user simultaneously.
One radical difference between our experiment
and the earlier ones is that the users of our system
are occupied by the driving task, and therefore only
have a limited cognitive capacity left to devote to the
interaction with the system. This may make them
less susceptible to the subtleties of style manipula-
tion than would be the case if they were free of other
tasks. A possible future experiment could address
this issue by including a non-driving condition.
Finally, as we pointed out in the introduction,
the SAMMIE system can also be used in an style-
alignment mode, where it mimics the user?s style on
turn-to-turn basis. We plan to present experimental
results comparing the alignment-mode with the fixed
personal/impersonal style in a future publication.
Acknowledgments
This work was carried out in the TALK project
(www.talk-project.org) funded by the EU as project
No. IST-507802 within the 6th Framework Program.
References
T. Becker, N. Blaylock, C. Gerstenberger, I. Kruijff-
Korbayova?, A. Korthauer, M. Pinkal, M. Pitz, P. Poller,
and J. Schehl. 2006. Natural and intuitive multimodal
dialogue for in-car applications: The SAMMIE system.
In Proceedings of ECAI, PAIS Special section.
T. Becker, N. Blaylock, C. Gerstenberger, A. Korthauer,
M. Pitz, P. Poller, J. Schehl, F. Steffens, R. Stegmann,
and J. Steigner. 2007. Deliverable D5.3: In-car
showcase based on TALK libraries. Technical report,
TALK Project, EU FP6, IST-507802.
H. Branigan, M. Pickering, J. Pearson, J. F. McLean, and
C. Nass. 2003. Syntactic alignment between com-
puter and people: the role of belief about mental states.
In Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the Cog-
nitive Science Society.
S. Brennan and J.O. Ohaeri. 1994. Effects of mes-
sage style on user?s attribution toward agents. In Pro-
ceedings of CHI?94 Conference Companion Human
Factors in Computing Systems, pages 281?282. ACM
Press.
S. Brennan. 1996. Lexical entrainment in spontaneous
dialogue. In Proceedings of the International Sympo-
sium on Spoken Dialogue (ISSD-96), pages 41?44.
S. Garrod and M. Pickering. 2004. Why is conversation
so easy? TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences, 8.
K. Hadelich, H. Branigan, M. Pickering, and M. Crocker.
2004. Alignment in dialogue: Effects of feedback
on lexical overlap within and between participants.
In Proceedings of the AMLaP Conference. Aix en
Provence, France.
G.J.M. Kruijff, I. Kruijff-Korbayova?, J. Bateman,
D. Dochev, N. Gromova, T. Hartley, E. Teich,
S. Sharoff, L. Sokolova, and K. Staykova. 1999.
Deliverable TEXS2: Specification of elaborated text
structures. Technical report, AGILE Project, EU
INCO COPERNICUS PL961104.
I. Kruijff-Korbayova?, C. Gerstenberger, O. Kukina, and
J. Schehl. 2008. Generation of output style variation
in the SAMMIE dialogue system. In Proceedings of
INLG?08, Salt Fork Resort, Ohio.
W.J.M. Levelt and S. Kelter. 1982. Surface form and
memory in question answering. Cognitive Psychol-
ogy, 14:78?106.
H. Mutschler, F. Steffens, and A. Korthauer. 2007. De-
liverable D6.4: Final report on multimodal experi-
ments Part I: Evaluation of the SAMMIE system. Tech-
nical report, TALK Project, EU FP6, IST-507802.
C. Nass and S. Brave, 2005. Should voice interfaces say
?I?? Recorded and synthetic voice interfaces? claims
to humanity, chapter 10, pages 113?124. The MIT
Press, Cambridge.
C. Nass, S. Brave, and L. Takayama. 2006. Socializing
consistency: from technical homogeneity to human
epitome. In P. Zhang & D. Galletta (Eds.), Human-
computer interaction in management information sys-
tems: Foundations, pages 373?390. Armonk, NY: M.
E. Sharpe.
J. Pearson, J. Hu, H. Branigan, M. J. Pickering, and C. I.
Nass. 2006. Adaptive language behavior in HCI: how
expectations and beliefs about a system affect users?
word choice. In CHI ?06: Proceedings of the SIGCHI
conference on Human Factors in computing systems,
pages 1177?1180, New York, NY, USA. ACM.
M. Schro?der and J. Trouvain. 2003. The German text-to-
speech synthesis system MARY: A tool for research,
development and teaching. International Journal of
Speech Technology, 6:365?377.
197
Generation of Output Style Variation in the SAMMIE Dialogue System
Ivana Kruijff-Korbayova?, Ciprian Gerstenberger
Olga Kukina
Saarland University, Germany
{korbay|gerstenb|olgak}@coli.uni-sb.de
Jan Schehl
DFKI, Germany
jan.schehl@dfki.de
Abstract
A dialogue system can present itself and/or
address the user as an active agent by means
of linguistic constructions in personal style, or
suppress agentivity by using impersonal style.
We describe how we generate and control per-
sonal and impersonal style variation in the out-
put of SAMMIE, a multimodal in-car dialogue
system for an MP3 player. We carried out an
experiment to compare subjective evaluation
judgments and input style alignment behavior
of users interacting with versions of the sys-
tem generating output in personal vs. imper-
sonal style. Although our results are consis-
tent with earlier findings obtained with simu-
lated systems, the effects are weaker.
1 Introduction
One of the goals in developing dialogue systems that
users find appealing and natural is to endow the sys-
tems with contextually appropriate output. This en-
compasses a broad range of research issues. Our
present contribution concerns the generation of per-
sonal and impersonal style.
We define the personal/impersonal style di-
chotomy as reflecting primarily a distinction with
respect to agentivity: personal style involves the ex-
plicit realization of an agent, whereas impersonal
style avoids it. In the simplest way this is mani-
fested by the presence of explicit reference to the di-
alogue participants (typically by means of personal
pronouns) vs. its absence, respectively. More gen-
erally, active voice and finite verb forms are typical
for personal style, whereas impersonal style often,
though not exclusively, employs passive construc-
tions or infinite verb forms:
(1) Typical personal style constructions:
a. I found 20 albums.
b. You have 20 albums.
c. Please search for albums by The Beatles.
(2) Typical impersonal style constructions:
a. 20 albums have been found.
b. There are 20 albums.
c. The database contains 20 albums.
d. 20 albums found.
The dialogue system SAMMIE developed in the
TALK project uses either personal or impersonal out-
put style, employing constructions such as (1a?1c)
and (2a?2d), respectively, to manifest its own and
the user?s agentivity linguistically. We ran an ex-
periment to assess the effects of the system output
style on users? judgments of the system?s usability
and performance and on their input formulation.
In Section 2 we review related work on system
output adaptation and previous experiments con-
cerning the effect of system output style on users?
judgments and style. We describe the SAMMIE sys-
tem and the generation of style variation in Sec-
tion 3. In Section 4 we describe our experiment and
in Section 5 present the results. In Section 6 we pro-
vide a discussion and conclusions.
2 Previous Work
Although recently developed dialogue systems
adapt their output to the users in various ways, this
129
usually concerns content selection rather than sur-
face realization. There is to our knowledge no sys-
tem that varies the style of its output in the in-
terpersonal dimension as we have done in SAM-
MIE. Work on animated conversational agents has
addressed various issues concerning agents display-
ing their personality, but this usually concerns emo-
tional states and personality traits, rather than the
personal/impersonal alteration. (Isard et al, 2006)
model personality and alignment in generated dia-
logues between pairs of agents using OpenCCG and
an over-generation and ranking approach, guided by
a set of language models. Their approach probably
could produce the personal/impersonal style varia-
tion as an effect of personality or a side-effect of
syntactic alignment.
The question whether a system should generate
output in personal or impersonal style has been ad-
dressed by (Nass and Brave, 2005): They observe
that agents that use ?I? are generally perceived more
like a person than those that do not. However, sys-
tems tend to be more positively rated when consis-
tent with respect to such parameters as personality,
gender, ontology (human vs. machine), etc. On
the basis of an investigation of a range of user atti-
tudes to their simulated system with a synthetic vs. a
recorded voice, they conclude that a recorded voice
system is perceived as more human-like and thus en-
titled to use ?I?, whereas a synthetic-voice system is
not perceived as human enough to use ?I? to refer to
itself (Nass et al, 2006).
Another question is whether system output style
influences users? input formulation, as would be ex-
pected due to the phenomenon of alignment, which
is generally considered a basic principle in natural
language dialogue (Garrod and Pickering, 2004).1
Experiments targeting human-human conversa-
tion show that speakers in spontaneous dialogues
tend to express themselves in similar ways at lexi-
cal and syntactic levels (e.g., (Hadelich et al, 2004;
Garrod and Pickering, 2004). Lexical and syntactic
alignment is present in human-computer interaction,
too. (Brennan, 1996) suggested that users adopt
system?s terms to avoid errors, expecting the sys-
1This dialogue phenomenon goes under a variety of terms in
the literature, besides alignment, e.g., accommodation, adapta-
tion, convergence, entrainment or shaping (used, e.g., by (Bren-
nan and Ohaeri, 1994)).
tem to be inflexible. However, recent experiments
show that alignment in human-computer interaction
is also automatic and its strength is comparable to
that in human-human communication (Branigan et
al., 2003; Pearson et al, 2006).
Early results concerning users? alignment to sys-
tem output style in the interpersonal dimension are
reported in (Brennan and Ohaeri, 1994): They dis-
tinguish three styles: anthropomorphic (the system
refers to itself using first person pronouns, like in
(1a) above, fluent (complete sentences, but no self-
reference) and telegraphic, like (2d). They found no
difference in users? perception of the system?s in-
telligence across the different conditions. However,
they observed that the anthropomorphic group was
more than twice as likely to refer to the computer
using the second person pronoun ?you? and it used
more indirect requests and conventional politeness
than the other groups. They conclude that the an-
thropomorphic style is undesirable for dialogue sys-
tems because it encourages more complex user input
which is harder to recognize and interpret.
The described experiments used either the
Wizard-of-Oz paradigm (Brennan and Ohaeri, 1994)
or preprogrammed system output (Branigan et al,
2003; Nass and Brave, 2005) and involved written
communication. Such methods allow one to test as-
sumptions about idealized human-computer interac-
tion. Experimenting with the SAMMIE system al-
lows us to test whether similar effects arise in an in-
teraction with an actual dialogue system, which is
plagued, among other factors, by speech recognition
problems.
3 The SAMMIE System
SAMMIE is a multimodal dialogue system developed
in the TALK project with particular emphasis on mul-
timodal turn-planning and natural language genera-
tion to support intuitive mixed-initiative interaction.
The SAMMIE system provides a multimodal in-
terface to an in-car MP3 player through speech and
haptic input with a BMW iDrive input device, a but-
ton which can be turned, pushed down and sideways
in four directions. System output is by speech and a
graphical display integrated into the car?s dashboard.
SAMMIE has a German and an English version with
the same functionality.
130
The MP3 player application offers a wide range
of tasks: The user can control the currently playing
song, search and browse by looking for fields in the
MP3 database (song, artist, album, etc.), search and
select playlists and construct and edit them. A sam-
ple interaction is shown below (Becker et al, 2006).
(3) U: Show me the Beatles albums.
S: I have these four Beatles albums. [shows a list
of album names]
U: Which songs are on this one? [selects the Red
Album]
S: The Red Album contains these songs [shows a
list of the songs]
U: Play the third one.
S: [song ?From Me To You? plays]
The system puts the user in control of the inter-
action. Input can be given through any modality
and is not restricted to answers to system queries.
On the contrary, the user can provide new tasks as
well as any information relevant to the current task
at any time. This is achieved through modeling the
interaction as a collaborative problem solving (CPS)
process, modeling the tasks and their progression as
recipes and a multimodal interpretation that fits any
user input into the context of the current task (Blay-
lock and Allen, 2005). To support dialogue flexibil-
ity, we model discourse context, the CPS state and
the driver?s attention state by an enriched informa-
tion state (Kruijff-Korbayova? et al, 2006a).
3.1 System Architecture
The SAMMIE system architecture follows the classi-
cal approach of a pipelined architecture with mul-
timodal fusion and fission modules encapsulating
the dialogue manager (Bunt et al, 2005). Figure 1
shows the modules and their interaction: Modality-
specific recognizers and analysers provide seman-
tically interpreted input to the multimodal fusion
module (interpretation manager in Figure 1), that in-
terprets them in the context of the other modalities
and the current dialog context. The dialogue man-
ager decides on the next system move, based on its
CPS encoded task model, on the current context and
also on the results from calls to the MP3 database.
The multimodal fission component then generates
the system reaction on a modality-dependent level
Figure 1: SAMMIE system architecture.
by selecting the content to present, distributing it ap-
propriately over the available output modalities and
finally co-ordinating and synchronizing the output.
Modality-specific output modules generate spoken
output and an update of the graphical display. All
modules interact with the extended information state
in which all context information is stored.
Many tasks in the SAMMIE system are modeled by
a rule-based approach. Discourse modeling, inter-
pretation management, dialogue management, turn
planning and linguistic planning are all based on
the production rule system PATE (Pfleger, 2004;
Kempe, 2004). For speech recognition, we use Nu-
ance. The spoken output is synthesized with the
Mary TTS (Schro?der and Trouvain, 2003).2
3.2 Generation of Natural Language Output
with Variation
To generate natural language output in SAMMIE, we
developed a template-based generator. It is imple-
mented by a set of sentence planning rules in PATE
to build the templates, and a set of XSLT transforma-
tions for sentence realization, which yield the out-
put strings. German and English output is produced
by accessing different dictionaries in a uniform way.
The output is either plain text, if it is to be displayed
in the graphical user interface (e.g., captions in ta-
bles, written messages to the user) or it is text with
mark-up for speech synthesis using the MaryXML
format (Schro?der and Trouvain, 2003), if it is to be
spoken by a speech synthesizer.
2http://mary.dfki.de/
131
The SAMMIE generator can produce alternative
realizations for a given content that it receives as in-
put from the turn planner. The implemented range
of system output variation involves the following as-
pects, which have been determined by an analysis
of a corpus of dialogues collected in a Wizard-of-
Oz experiment using several wizards who were free
to formulate their responses to the users (Kruijff-
Korbayova? et al, 2006b):
1. Personal vs. impersonal style: Ich habe 3 Lieder ge-
funden (I?ve found three songs) vs. 3 Lieder wurden
gefunden (Three songs have been found);
2. Telegraphic vs. non-telegraphic style: 23 Alben ge-
funden (23 albums found) vs. Ich habe 23 Alben
gefunden (I found 23 albums)
3. Reduced vs. non-reduced referring expressions: der
Song ?Kinder An Die Macht? (the song ?Kinder An
Die Macht?) vs. der Song (the song) vs. ?Kinder
An Die Macht? (?Kinder An Die Macht?);
4. Lexical choice for (quasi-)synonyms: Song vs. Lied
vs. Titel (song vs. track)
5. Presence vs. absence of adverbs/adverbials: Ich
spiele jetzt den Song (I?ll now play the song) vs. Ich
spiele den Song (I?ll play the song).
The generation of alternatives is achieved by con-
ditioning the sentence planning and realization de-
cisions. The system can be set either to use one
style consistently throughout a dialogue, or to align
to the user, i.e., mimic the user?s style on a turn-
by-turn basis. For the purpose of experimenting
with system output variation, the generator supports
three sources of control for the available choices:
(a) global (default) parameter settings (resulting in
no variation); (b) random selection (resulting in ran-
dom variation); (c) contextual information (resulting
in variation based on the dialogue context).
The contextual information used by the genera-
tor to control realization includes (i) the grounding
status of the content to be communicated (e.g., to
decide for vs. against reducing a referring expres-
sion); and (ii) linguistic features extracted from the
recognized user input (e.g., to make the correspond-
ing syntactic and lexical choices in the output).
3.3 Personal/Impersonal Style Variation
The style variation in SAMMIE amounts to varying
between active voice for personal style and passive
voice or the ?es-gibt? (?there is?) construction for
impersonal style whenever applicable, as illustrated
for several typical dialogue moves below (where (i)
always shows the impersonal, and (ii) the personal
version).
(4) Search result:3
i. Es gibt 20 Alben.
There are 20 albums.
ii. Ich habe 20 Alben gefunden.
I found 20 albums.
Sie haben 20 Alben. / Du hast 20 Alben.
You have 20 albums
Wir haben 20 Alben.
We have 20 albums.
(5) Song addition:
i. Der Titel Bittersweet Symphony wurde zu
der Playliste 2 hinzugefu?gt.
The track Bittersweet Symphony has been
added to Playlist 2.
ii. Ich habe den Titel Bittersweet Symphony zu
der Playliste 2 hinzugefu?gt.
I added the track Bittersweer Symphony to
Playlist 2.
(6) Song playback:
i. Der Titel Ma?nner von Herbert Gro?nemeyer
wird gespielt.
The track Ma?nner by Herbert Gro?nemeyer is
playing.
ii. Ich spiele den Titel Ma?nner von Herbert
Gro?nemeyer.
I am playing the track Ma?nner by Herbert
Gro?nemeyer.
(7) Non-understanding:
i. Das wurde leider nicht verstanden.
That has unfortunately not been understood.
ii. Das habe ich leider nicht verstanden.
I have unfortunately not understood that.
(8) Clarification request:
i. Welches von diesen acht Liedern?/Welches
von diesen acht Liedern wird gewu?nscht?
Which of these eight songs? / Which of these
eight songs is desired?
ii. Welches von diesen acht Liedern mo?chtest du
/ mo?chten Sie ho?ren?
Which of these eight songs would you like to
hear?
3When referring to the user, personal style has several vari-
ants which differ in formality (formal and informal address) and
first vs. second person reference.
132
Figure 2: Experiment setup
The personal/impersonal style variation is not ap-
plicable for some dialogue moves, e.g., (9), and for
output in telegraphic style.
(9) Song interpreter:
Der Titel Bongo Girl ist von Nena.
The track Bongo Girl is by Nena.
4 Experiment
In order to assess the effects of style manipulation in
the SAMMIE system, we ran an experiment in simu-
lated driving conditions, comparing two versions of
the system: one consistently using personal and the
other impersonal style output.4 The experiment em-
ployed the German version of SAMMIE. The setup
(see Figure 2), participants, procedure and collected
data are described in detail in (Kruijff-Korbayova?
and Kukina, 2008), and summarized below.
There were 28 participants, all native speakers
of German. We balanced gender and background
when assigning them to the style conditions. The
experiment followed a fixed script for each partici-
pant: welcome, instruction, warm-up driving, 2 trial
and 11 experimental tasks, evaluation questionnaire,
payment and farewell. The participants were in-
structed to use mainly spoken input, although they
could also use the iDrive button. It took them about
40 minutes to complete all the tasks. The tasks in-
volved exploring the contents of a database of about
25 music albums and were of four types: (1) find-
ing some specified title(s); (2) selecting some title(s)
4For the time being we have not evaluated the version of the
system aligning to the user?s style.
satisfying certain constraints; (3) manipulating the
playlists by adding or removing songs and (4) free-
use of the system.
The experimental tasks were presented to each
participant in randomized order apart from the free
use of the system, which was always the last task.
The experimenter (E) repeated each task assignment
twice to the participant, once in personal and once
in impersonal style, as shown in the example below.
(10) E: Bitte frage das System nach den Liedern von
?Pur?. Du willst also wissen welche Lieder von
?Pur? es gibt.
E: Please ask the the system about the songs by
?Pur?. You would like to know which songs by
?Pur? there are.
The questionnaire was based on (Nass and Brave,
2005) and (Mutschler et al, 2007). It contained
questions with a 6-point scale ranging from 1 (low
grade) to 6 (high grade), such as How do you assess
the system in general: technical (1) ? human-like
(6); Communication with the system seemed to you:
boring (1) ? exciting (6); In terms of usability, the
system is: inefficient (1) ?efficient(6).
The recorded dialogues have been transcribed, the
questionnaire responses tabulated. We manually an-
notated the participants? utterances (on average 95
per session) with the following features for further
analysis:
? Construction type:
Personal (+/-) Is the utterance a complete sen-
tence in active voice or imperative form
Impersonal (+/-) Is the utterance expressed
by passive voice, infinite verb form (e.g.,
?Lied abspielen? (lit. ?song play?)), or ex-
pletive ?es-gibt? (?there-is?) construction
Telegraphic (+/-) Is the utterance expressed
by a phrase, e.g., ?weiter? (?next?)
? Personal pronouns: (+/-) Does the utterance
contain a first or second person pronoun
? Politeness marking: (+/-) Does the utterance
contain a politeness marker, such as ?bitte?
(?please?), ?danke? (?thanks?) and verbs in
subjunctive mood (eg. ?ich ha?tte gerne?)
133
5 Results
The results concerning users? attitudes and align-
ment are presented in detail in (Kruijff-Korbayova?
and Kukina, 2008). Here we summarize the signif-
icant findings and provide an additional analysis of
the influence of speech recognition problems.
5.1 Style and Users? Attitudes
The first issue addressed in the experiment was
whether the users have different judgments of the
personal vs. impersonal version of the system. Since
the system used a synthetic voice, the judgments
were expected to be more positive in the impersonal
style condition (Nass and Brave, 2005). Based on
factor analysis performed on attitudinal data from
the user questionnaires we created the six indices
listed below. All indices were meaningful and reli-
able. (A detailed description of the indices including
the contributing factors from the questionnaires can
be found in (Kruijff-Korbayova? and Kukina, 2008).)
1. General satisfaction with the communication
with the system (Cronbach?s ?=0.86)
2. Easiness of communication with the system
(?=0.83)
3. Usability of the system (?=0.76)
4. Clarity of the system?s speech (?=0.88)
5. Perceived ?humanness? of the system (?=0.69)
6. System?s perceived flexibility and creativity
(?=0.78)
We did not find any significant influence of sys-
tem output style on users? attitudes. Only for per-
ceived humanness of the system we found a weak
tendency in the predicted direction (independent
samples test: t(25)=1.64, p=0.06 (one-tailed)), in
line with the earlier observation that an interface that
refers to itself by a personal pronoun is perceived to
be more human-like than one that does not (Nass and
Brave, 2005).
5.2 Style and Alignment
The next issue we investigated was whether the users
formulated their input differently in the personal vs.
impersonal system version. For each dialogue ses-
sion, we calculated the percentage of utterances con-
taining the feature of interest relative to the total
number of user utterances in the session.
In accordance with the expectation based on style
alignment in terms of agentivity, we observed a sig-
nificant difference in the number of personal con-
structions across style conditions (t(19)=1.8, p=0.05
(one-tailed)). But we did not find a significant dif-
ference in the distribution of impersonal construc-
tions. Not surprisingly, there was also no signifi-
cant difference in the distribution of telegraphic con-
structions. An unexpected finding was the higher
proportion of telegraphic constructions than verb-
containing ones within the impersonal style condi-
tion (t(13)=3.5, p<0.001 (one-tailed)). However, no
such difference was found in the personal style con-
dition. Contrary to expectations, we also did not find
any significant effect of style-manipulation on the
number of personal pronouns, nor on the number of
politeness markers.
Since alignment can also be seen as a process
of gradual adjustment among dialogue participants
over time we compared the proportion of personal,
impersonal and telegraphic constructions in the first
and second halves of the conversations for both style
conditions. The only significant effect we found was
a decrease in the number of personal constructions
in the second halves of the impersonal style interac-
tions (t(13)=2.5, p=0.02 (one-tailed)).
5.3 Influence of Speech Recognition Problems
Unlike an interaction in a Wizard-of-Oz simulation
or similar, an interaction with a real system is bound
to suffer from speech recognition problems. There-
fore, we made a post-hoc analysis with respect to
how much speech recognition difficulty the partici-
pants experienced, in terms of the proportion of par-
ticipant utterances not recognized by the system rel-
ative to the total number of participant utterances in
a session.
On average, around 33% of participant utterances
were not understood by the system.5 We classi-
fied the participants into three groups according to
the performance of speech recognition they expe-
rienced: the good group with less than 27% of in-
put not understood (7 participants); the poor group
5This is admittedly rather bad performance, nevertheless it
mostly does not prevent the participants from getting their tasks
successfully completed within a reasonable time, as was shown
in an rigorous usability evaluation of the system in normal driv-
ing conditions (Mutschler et al, 2007).
134
Figure 3: Judgments of the system by the ?good? and ?poor? speech recognition group
with more than 37% of input not uderstood (7 par-
ticipants); the average group (the remaining 14 par-
ticipants).
Speech Recognition and Attitudinal Data We
suspected that speech recognition problems might
be neutralizing a potential influence of style. There-
fore we contrasted the judgments on all six factors
between the good and the poor speech recognition
group (see Figure 3). The ?good? speech recognition
group showed higher satisfaction with the communi-
cation (t(16)=1.9, p=0.04 (one-tailed)) and evaluated
the clarity of the system?s speech better (t(16)= 2.0,
p=0.03 (one-tailed)). The good speech recognition
group also showed a tendency to assess the usabil-
ity and flexibility of the system higher than the poor
speech recognition group (t(16)=1.71, p=0.05 and
t(16)=1.61, p=0.06, respectively (marginally signif-
icant results)). The two groups did not differ with
respect to their judgments of the ease of commu-
nication and perceived humanness of the system
(t(16)=0.45, p=0.66 and t(16)=0.90, p=0.38). These
results are not surprising. They confirm that speech
recognition does have an effect on the user?s percep-
tion of the system.
Speech Recognition and Style Alignment We
also checked post-hoc whether differences in the ex-
perienced speech recognition performance had an
influence on the style employed by the participants,
again in terms of the proportion of utterances with
personal, impersonal and telegraphic constructions,
personal pronouns and politeness marking. How-
ever, we found no significant effect on the linguistic
structure of the participant input across the groups
(politeness marking: F(2)=1.5, p=0.24; all other
Fs<1 (ANOVA)).
6 Discussion and Conclusions
We presented the generation of personal/impersonal
style variation in the SAMMIE multimodal dialogue
system, and the results of an experiment evaluating
the influence of the system output style on the users?
subjective judgments and their formulation of input.
Although our results are not conclusive, they point
at a range of issues for further research.
Regarding users? attitudes to the system, we
found no significant difference among the styles.
This is similar to (Brennan and Ohaeri, 1994) who
found no difference in intelligence attributed to the
system by the users, but it is at odds with the earlier
finding that a synthetic voice interface was judged
to be more useful when avoiding self-reference by
personal pronouns (Nass and Brave, 2005).
Whereas (Brennan and Ohaeri, 1994) used a flight
reservation dialogue system, (Nass and Brave, 2005)
used a phone-based auction system which read out
an introduction and five object descriptions. There
are two points to note: First, the subjects heard
system output that was a read out continuous text
rather than turns in an interaction. This may have
reinforced the activation of particular style features.
Second, the auction task may have sensibilized the
subjects to the distinction between subjective (the
system?s) vs. objective information presentation,
and thus make them more sensitive to whether the
system presents itself as an active agent or not.
Regarding the question whether users align their
style to that of the system, where previous experi-
ments showed strong effects of alignment (Brennan
and Ohaeri, 1994), our experiment shows some ef-
fects, but some of the results are conflicting. On
the one hand, subjects interacting with the personal
style version of the system used more personal con-
structions than those interacting with the impersonal
style version. However, subjects in either condi-
135
tion did not show any significant difference with re-
spect to the use of impersonal constructions or tele-
graphic forms. We also found a higher proportion of
telegraphic constructions than verb-containing ones
within the impersonal style condition, but no such
difference in the personal style. Finally, when we
considered alignment over time, we found no change
in construction use in the personal style, whereas we
found a decrease in the use of personal constructions
in the impersonal style. It is possible that divid-
ing the interactions into three parts and comparing
alignment in the first and the last part might lead to
stronger results.
That there is no difference in the use of tele-
graphic constructions across conditions is not sur-
prising. Being just phrasal sentence fragments, these
constructions are neutral with respect to style. But
why does there seem to be an alignment effect for
personal constructions and not for others? One way
of explaining this is that (some of) the construc-
tions that we counted as impersonal are common in
both styles. Besides their deliberate use as means
to avoid explicit reference to oneself, they also have
their normal, neutral usage, and therefore, some of
the utterances that we classified as impersonal style
may just be neutral formulations, rather than cases
of distancing or ?de-agentivization?. However, we
could not test this hypothesis, because we have not
found a way to reliably distinguish between neutral
and marked, truly impersonal utterances. This is an
issue for future work.
The difference between our results concerning
alignment and those of (Brennan and Ohaeri, 1994)
is not likely to be due to a difference in the degree
of interactivity (as with (Nass and Brave, 2005)).
We now comment on other differences between our
systems, which might have contributed to the differ-
ences in results.
One aspect where we differ concerns our distinc-
tion between personal and impersonal style, both in
the implementation of the SAMMIE system and in
the experiment: We include the presence/absence
of agentivity not only in the system?s reference to
itself (akin to (Nass and Brave, 2005) and (Bren-
nan and Ohaeri, 1994)), but also in addressing the
user. This concept of the personal/impersonal dis-
tinction was inspired by such differences observed
in a study of instructional texts in several languages
(Kruijff et al, 1999), where the latter dimension is
predominant. The present experiment results make
it pertinent that more research into the motives be-
hind expressing or suppressing agentivity in both di-
mensions is needed.
Apart from the linguistic design of the system?s
output, other factors influence users? behavior and
perception of the system, and thus might confound
experiment results, e.g., functionality, design, er-
gonomics, speech synthesis and speech recognition.
A system with synthesized speech should be more
positively rated when it does not refer to itself as an
active agent by personal pronouns (Nass and Brave,
2005). (Brennan and Ohaeri, 1994) used a sys-
tem with written interaction, the SAMMIE system
employs the MARY text-to-speech synthesis system
(Schro?der and Trouvain, 2003) with an MBROLA
diphone synthesiser, which produces an acceptable
though not outstanding output quality. Our post-hoc
analysis showed a tendency towards better judge-
ments of the system by the participants experienc-
ing less speech recognition problems. This is as
expected. We did not find any statistically signif-
icant effect regarding the style-related features we
analyzed. A future experiment should address the
possibility of an interaction between system style
and speech recognition performance as both factors
might be influencing the user simultaneously.
One radical difference between our experiment
and the earlier ones is that the users of the SAMMIE
system are occupied by the driving task, and thus
only have a limited cognitive capacity left for the
interaction with the system. This may make them
less susceptible to the subtleties of style manipula-
tion than would be the case if they were free of other
tasks. A possible future experiment could address
this issue by including a non-driving condition.
Finally, the SAMMIE system has also the style-
alignment mode, where it mimics the user?s style on
turn-to-turn basis. We plan to present experimental
results comparing the alignment-mode with the fixed
personal/impersonal style in a future publication.
Acknowledgments
This work was carried out in the TALK project
(www.talk-project.org) funded by the EU as project
No. IST-507802 within the 6th Framework Program.
136
References
T. Becker, N. Blaylock, C. Gerstenberger, I. Kruijff-
Korbayova?, A. Korthauer, M. Pinkal, M. Pitz, P. Poller,
and J. Schehl. 2006. Natural and intuitive multimodal
dialogue for in-car applications: The SAMMIE system.
In Proceedings of ECAI, PAIS Special section.
N. Blaylock and J. Allen. 2005. A collaborative
problem-solving model of dialogue. In L. Dybkj?r
and W. Minker, editors, Proceedings of the 6th SIGdial
Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 200?211,
Lisbon, September 2?3.
H. Branigan, M. Pickering, J. Pearson, J. F. McLean, and
C. Nass. 2003. Syntactic alignment between com-
puter and people: the role of belief about mental states.
In Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the Cog-
nitive Science Society.
S. Brennan and J.O. Ohaeri. 1994. Effects of mes-
sage style on user?s attribution toward agents. In Pro-
ceedings of CHI?94 Conference Companion Human
Factors in Computing Systems, pages 281?282. ACM
Press.
S. Brennan. 1996. Lexical entrainment in spontaneous
dialogue. In Proceedings of the International Sympo-
sium on Spoken Dialogue (ISSD-96), pages 41?44.
H. Bunt, M. Kipp, M. Maybury, and W. Wahlster. 2005.
Fusion and coordination for multimodal interactive in-
formation presentation: Roadmap, architecture, tools,
semantics. In O. Stock and M. Zancanaro, editors,
Multimodal Intelligent Information Presentation, vol-
ume 27 of Text, Speech and Language Technology,
pages 325?340. Kluwer Academic.
S. Garrod and M. Pickering. 2004. Why is conversation
so easy? TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences, 8.
K. Hadelich, H. Branigan, M. Pickering, and M. Crocker.
2004. Alignment in dialogue: Effects of feedback
on lexical overlap within and between participants.
In Proceedings of the AMLaP Conference. Aix en
Provence, France.
Amy Isard, Carsten Brockmann, and Jon Oberlander.
2006. Individuality and alignment in generated di-
alogues. In Proceedings of the 4th International
Natural Language Generation Conference (INLG-06),
pages 22?29, Sydney, Australia.
Benjamin Kempe. 2004. PATE a production rule sys-
tem based on activation and typed feature structure ele-
ments. Bachelor Thesis, Saarland University, August.
G.J.M. Kruijff, I. Kruijff-Korbayova?, J. Bateman,
D. Dochev, N. Gromova, T. Hartley, E. Teich,
S. Sharoff, L. Sokolova, and K. Staykova. 1999.
Deliverable TEXS2: Specification of elaborated text
structures. Technical report, AGILE Project, EU
INCO COPERNICUS PL961104.
I. Kruijff-Korbayova? and O. Kukina. 2008. The effect of
dialogue system output style variation on users? eval-
uation judgements and input style. In Proceedings of
SigDial?08, Columbus, Ohio.
I. Kruijff-Korbayova?, G. Amores, N. Blaylock, S. Eric-
sson, G. Pe?rez, K. Georgila, M. Kaisser, S. Larsson,
O. Lemon, P. Mancho?n, and J. Schehl. 2006a. De-
liverable D3.1: Extended information state modeling.
Technical report, TALK Project, EU FP6, IST-507802.
Ivana Kruijff-Korbayova?, Tilman Becker, Nate Blaylock,
Ciprian Gerstenberger, Michael Kaisser, Peter Poller,
Verena Rieser, and Jan Schehl. 2006b. The SAMMIE
corpus of multimodal dialogues with an MP3 player.
In Proceedings of LREC, Genova, Italy.
H. Mutschler, F. Steffens, and A. Korthauer. 2007. De-
liverable D6.4: Final report on multimodal experi-
ments Part I: Evaluation of the SAMMIE system. Tech-
nical report, TALK Project, EU FP6, IST-507802.
C. Nass and S. Brave, 2005. Should voice interfaces say
?I?? Recorded and synthetic voice interfaces? claims
to humanity, chapter 10, pages 113?124. The MIT
Press, Cambridge.
C. Nass, S. Brave, and L. Takayama. 2006. Socializing
consistency: from technical homogeneity to human
epitome. In P. Zhang & D. Galletta (Eds.), Human-
computer interaction in management information sys-
tems: Foundations, pages 373?390. Armonk, NY: M.
E. Sharpe.
J. Pearson, J. Hu, H. Branigan, M. J. Pickering, and C. I.
Nass. 2006. Adaptive language behavior in HCI: how
expectations and beliefs about a system affect users?
word choice. In CHI ?06: Proceedings of the SIGCHI
conference on Human Factors in computing systems,
pages 1177?1180, New York, NY, USA. ACM.
N. Pfleger. 2004. Context based multimodal fusion. In
ICMI ?04: Proceedings of the 6th international confer-
ence on Multimodal interfaces, pages 265?272, New
York, NY, USA. ACM Press.
M. Schro?der and J. Trouvain. 2003. The German text-to-
speech synthesis system MARY: A tool for research,
development and teaching. International Journal of
Speech Technology, 6:365?377.
137
