Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis, pages 19?28,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 12 July 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
SAMAR: A System for Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis of Arabic Social
Media
Muhammad Abdul-Mageed, Sandra Ku?bler
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN, USA
{mabdulma,skuebler}@indiana.edu
Mona Diab
Columbia University
New York, NY, USA
mdiab@ccls.columbia.edu
Abstract
In this work, we present SAMAR, a sys-
tem for Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis
(SSA) for Arabic social media genres. We
investigate: how to best represent lexical in-
formation; whether standard features are use-
ful; how to treat Arabic dialects; and, whether
genre specific features have a measurable im-
pact on performance. Our results suggest that
we need individualized solutions for each do-
main and task, but that lemmatization is a fea-
ture in all the best approaches.
1 Introduction
In natural language, subjectivity refers to aspects of
language used to express opinions, feelings, eval-
uations, and speculations (Banfield, 1982) and, as
such, it incorporates sentiment. The process of sub-
jectivity classification refers to the task of classify-
ing texts as either objective (e.g., The new iPhone
was released.) or subjective. Subjective text can
further be classified with sentiment or polarity. For
sentiment classification, the task consists of iden-
tifying whether a subjective text is positive (e.g.,
The Syrians continue to inspire the world with their
courage!), negative (e.g., The bloodbaths in Syria
are horrifying!), neutral (e.g., Obama may sign the
bill.), or, sometimes, mixed (e.g., The iPad is cool,
but way too expensive).
In this work, we address two main issues in Sub-
jectivity and Sentiment Analysis (SSA): First, SSA
has mainly been conducted on a small number of
genres such as newspaper text, customer reports,
and blogs. This excludes, for example, social me-
dia genres (such as Wikipedia Talk Pages). Second,
despite increased interest in the area of SSA, only
few attempts have been made to build SSA systems
for morphologically-rich languages (Abbasi et al,
2008; Abdul-Mageed et al, 2011b), i.e. languages
in which a significant amount of information con-
cerning syntactic units and relations is expressed at
the word-level, such as Finnish or Arabic. We thus
aim at partially bridging these two gaps in research
by developing an SSA system for Arabic, a mor-
phologically highly complex languages (Diab et al,
2007; Habash et al, 2009). We present SAMAR, a
sentence-level SSA system for Arabic social media
texts. We explore the SSA task on four different gen-
res: chat, Twitter, Web forums, and Wikipedia Talk
Pages. These genres vary considerably in terms of
their functions and the language variety employed.
While the chat genre is overridingly in dialectal Ara-
bic (DA), the other genres are mixed between Mod-
ern Standard Arabic (MSA) and DA in varying de-
grees. In addition to working on multiple genres,
SAMAR handles Arabic that goes beyond MSA.
1.1 Research Questions
In the current work, we focus on investigating four
main research questions:
? RQ1: How can morphological richness be
treated in the context of Arabic SSA?
? RQ2: Can standard features be used for SSA
for social media despite the inherently short
texts typically used in these genres?
? RQ3: How do we treat dialects?
19
? RQ4: Which features specific to social media
can we leverage?
RQ1 is concerned with the fact that SSA has
mainly been conducted for English, which has lit-
tle morphological variation. Since the features used
in machine learning experiments for SSA are highly
lexicalized, a direct application of these methods is
not possible for a language such as Arabic, in which
one lemma can be associated with thousands of sur-
face forms. For this reason, we need to investigate
how to avoid data sparseness resulting from using
lexical features without losing information that is
important for SSA. More specifically, we concen-
trate on two questions: Since we need to reduce
word forms to base forms to combat data sparseness,
is it more useful to use tokenization or lemmatiza-
tion? And given that the part-of-speech (POS) tagset
for Arabic contains a fair amount of morphological
information, how much of this information is useful
for SSA? More specifically, we investigate two dif-
ferent reduced tagsets, the RTS and the ERTS. For
more detailed information see section 4.
RQ2 addresses the impact of using two stan-
dard features, frequently employed in SSA studies
(Wiebe et al, 2004; Turney, 2002), on social media
data, which exhibit DA usage and text length vari-
ations, e.g. in twitter data. First, we investigate the
utility of applying a UNIQUE feature (Wiebe et al,
2004) where low frequency words below a thresh-
old are replaced with the token ?UNIQUE?. Given
that our data includes very short posts (e.g., twitter
data has a limit of only 140 characters per tweet),
it is questionable whether the UNIQUE feature will
be useful or whether it replaces too many content
words. Second, we test whether a polarity lexicon
extracted in a standard domain using Modern Stan-
dard Arabic (MSA) transfers to social media data.
Third, given the inherent lack of a standardized or-
thography for DA, the problem of replacing content
words is expected to be increased since many DA
content words would be spelled in different ways.
RQ3 is concerned with the fact that for Arabic,
there are significant differences between dialects.
However, existing NLP tools such as tokenizers and
POS taggers are exclusively trained on and for MSA.
We thus investigate whether using an explicit feature
that identifies the dialect of the text improves SSA
performance.
RQ4 is concerned with attempting to improve
SSA performance, which suffers from the problems
described above, by leveraging information that is
typical for social media genres, such as author or
gender information.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In
Section 2, we review related work. Section 3 de-
scribes the social media corpora and the polarity lex-
icon used in the experiments, Section 4 describes
SAMAR, the SSA system and the features used in
the experiments. Section 5 describes the experi-
ments and discusses the results. In Section 6, we
give an overview of the best settings for the differ-
ent corpora, followed by a conclusion in Section 7.
2 Related Work
The bulk of SSA work has focused on movie and
product reviews (Dave et al, 2003; Hu and Liu,
2004; Turney, 2002). A number of sentence- and
phrase-level classifiers have been built: For exam-
ple, whereas Yi et al (2003) present a system that
detects sentiment toward a given subject, Kim and
Hovy?s (2004) system detects sentiment towards a
specific, predefined topic. Our work is similar to Yu
and Hatzivassiloglou (2003) and Wiebe et al (1999)
in that we use lexical and POS features.
Only few studies have been performed on Arabic.
Abbasi et al (2008) use a genetic algorithm for both
English and Arabic Web forums sentiment detection
on the document level. They exploit both syntactic
and stylistic features, but do not use morphological
features. Their system is not directly comparable to
ours due to the difference in data sets.More related to
our work is our previous effort (2011b) in which we
built an SSA system that exploits newswire data. We
report a slight system improvement using the gold-
labeled morphological features and a significant im-
provement when we use features based on a polarity
lexicon from the news domain. In that work, our
system performs at 71.54% F for subjectivity classi-
fication and 95.52% F for sentiment detection. This
current work is an extension on our previous work
however it differs in that we use automatically pre-
dicted morphological features and work on data be-
longing to more genres and DA varieties, hence ad-
dressing a more challenging task.
20
3 Data Sets and Annotation
To our knowledge, no gold-labeled social media
SSA data exist. Thereby, we create annotated data
comprising a variety of data sets:
DARDASHA (DAR): (Arabic for ?chat?) com-
prises the first 2798 chat turns collected from a ran-
domly selected chat session from ?Egypt?s room? in
Maktoob chat chat.mymaktoob.com. Maktoob
is a popular Arabic portal. DAR is an Egyptian Ara-
bic subset of a larger chat corpus that was harvested
between December 2008 and February 2010.
TAGREED (TGRD): (?tweeting?) is a corpus
of 3015 Arabic tweets collected during May 2010.
TRGD has a mixture of MSA and DA. The MSA
part (TRGD-MSA) has 1466 tweets, and the dialec-
tal part (TRGD-DA) has 1549 tweets.
TAHRIR (THR): (?editing?) is a corpus of 3008
sentences sampled from a larger pool of 30 MSA
Wikipedia Talk Pages that we harvested.
MONTADA (MONT): (?forum?) comprises of
3097 Web forum sentences collected from a larger
pool of threaded conversations pertaining to differ-
ent varieties of Arabic, including both MSA and DA,
from the COLABA data set (Diab et al, 2010). The
discussions covered in the forums pertain to social
issues, religion or politics. The sentences were au-
tomatically filtered to exclude non-MSA threads.
Each of the data sets was labeled at the sentence
level by two college-educated native speakers of
Arabic. For each sentence, the annotators assigned
one of 3 possible labels: (1) objective (OBJ), (2)
subjective-positive (S-POS), (3) subjective-negative
(S-NEG), and (3) subjective-mixed (S-MIXED).
Following (Wiebe et al, 1999), if the primary goal
of a sentence is judged as the objective reporting
of information, it was labeled as OBJ. Otherwise, a
sentence was a candidate for one of the three SUBJ
classes. We also labeled the data with a number of
other metadata1 tags. Metadata labels included the
user gender (GEN), the user identity (UID) (e.g. the
user could be a person or an organization), and the
source document ID (DID). We also mark the lan-
guage variety (LV) (i.e., MSA or DA) used, tagged
at the level of each unit of analysis (i.e., sentence,
tweet, etc.). Annotators were instructed to label a
1We use the term ?metadata? as an approximation, as some
features are more related to social interaction phenomena.
Data set SUBJ GEN LV UID DID
DAR X X
MONT X X X
TRGD X X X X
THR X X
Table 1: Types of annotation labels (features) manually
assigned to the data.
tweet as MSA if it mainly employs MSA words and
adheres syntactically to MSA rules, otherwise it is
treated as dialectal. Table 1 shows the annotations
for each data set. Data statistics, distribution of
classes, and inter-annotator agreement in terms of
Kappa (K) are provided in Table 2.
Polarity Lexicon: We manually created a lexicon
of 3982 adjectives labeled with one of the following
tags {positive, negative, neutral}, as is reported in
our previous work (2011b). We focus on adjectives
since they are primary sentiment bearers. The ad-
jectives pertain to the newswire domain, and were
extracted from the first four parts of the Penn Arabic
Treebank (Maamouri et al, 2004).
4 SAMAR
4.1 Automatic Classification
SAMAR is a machine learning system for Arabic
SSA. For classification, we use SVMlight (Joachims,
2008). In our experiments, we found that linear ker-
nels yield the best performance. We perform all ex-
periments with presence vectors: In each sentence
vector, the value of each dimension is binary, regard-
less of how many times a feature occurs.
In the current study, we adopt a two-stage clas-
sification approach. In the first stage (i.e., Subjec-
tivity), we build a binary classifier to separate objec-
tive from subjective cases. For the second stage (i.e.,
Sentiment) we apply binary classification that distin-
guishes S-POS from S-NEG cases. We disregard the
neutral and mixed classes for this study. SAMAR
uses different feature sets, each of which is designed
to address an individual research question:
4.2 Morphological Features
Word forms: In order to minimize data sparse-
ness as a result of the morphological richness of
Arabic, we tokenize the text automatically. We
use AMIRA (Diab, 2009), a suite for automatic
21
Data set # instances # types # tokens # OBJ # S-POS # S-NEG # S-MIXED Kappa (K)
DAR 2,798 11,810 3,133 328 1647 726 97 0.89
MONT 3,097 82,545 20,003 576 1,101 1,027 393 0.88
TRGD 3,015 63,383 16,894 1,428 483 759 345 0.85
TRGD-MSA 1,466 31,771 9,802 960 226 186 94 0.85
TRGD-DIA 1,549 31,940 10,398 468 257 573 251 0.82
THR 3,008 49,425 10,489 1,206 652 1,014 136 0.85
Table 2: Data and inter-annotator agreement statistics.
processing of MSA, trained on Penn Arabic Tree-
bank (Maamouri et al, 2004) data, which consists
of newswire text. We experiment with two different
configurations to extract base forms of words: (1)
Token (TOK), where the stems are left as is with no
further processing of the morpho-tactics that result
from the segmentation of clitics; (2) Lemma (LEM),
where the words are reduced to their lemma forms,
(citation forms): for verbs, this is the 3rd person
masculine singular perfective form and for nouns,
this corresponds to the singular default form (typi-
cally masculine). For example, the word ??EA 	J?mProceedings of the Workshop on Language in Social Media (LASM 2013), pages 1?10,
Atlanta, Georgia, June 13 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Does Size Matter?
Text and Grammar Revision for Parsing Social Media Data
Mohammad Khan
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN USA
khanms@indiana.edu
Markus Dickinson
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN USA
md7@indiana.edu
Sandra Ku?bler
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN USA
skuebler@indiana.edu
Abstract
We explore improving parsing social media
and other web data by altering the input data,
namely by normalizing web text, and by revis-
ing output parses. We find that text normal-
ization improves performance, though spell
checking has more of a mixed impact. We also
find that a very simple tree reviser based on
grammar comparisons performs slightly but
significantly better than the baseline and well
outperforms a machine learning model. The
results also demonstrate that, more than the
size of the training data, the goodness of fit
of the data has a great impact on the parser.
1 Introduction and Motivation
Parsing data from social media data, as well as other
data from the web, is notoriously difficult, as parsers
are generally trained on news data (Petrov and Mc-
Donald, 2012), which is not a good fit for social me-
dia data. The language used in social media does not
follow standard conventions (e.g., containing many
sentence fragments), is largely unedited, and tends
to be on different topics than standard NLP technol-
ogy is trained for. At the same time, there is a clear
need to develop even basic NLP technology for a
variety of types of social media and contexts (e.g.,
Twitter, Facebook, YouTube comments, discussion
forums, blogs, etc.). To perform tasks such as sen-
timent analysis (Nakagawa et al, 2010) or informa-
tion extraction (McClosky et al, 2011), it helps to
perform tagging and parsing, with an eye towards
providing a shallow semantic analysis.
We advance this line of research by investigating
adapting parsing to social media and other web data.
Specifically, we focus on two areas: 1) We compare
the impact of various text normalization techniques
on parsing web data; and 2) we explore parse revi-
sion techniques for dependency parsing web data to
improve the fit of the grammar learned by the parser.
One of the major problems in processing social
media data is the common usage of non-standard
terms (e.g., kawaii, a Japanese-borrowed net term
for ?cute?), ungrammatical and (intentionally) mis-
spelled text (e.g., cuttie), emoticons, and short posts
with little contextual information, as exemplified in
(1).1
(1) Awww cuttie little kitten, so Kawaii <3
To process such data, with its non-standard words,
we first develop techniques for normalizing the text,
so as to be able to accommodate the wide range of
realizations of a given token, e.g., all the different
spellings and intentional misspellings of cute. While
previous research has shown the benefit of text nor-
malization (Foster et al, 2011; Gadde et al, 2011;
Foster, 2010), it has not teased apart which parts
of the normalization are beneficial under which cir-
cumstances.
A second problem with parsing social media data
is the data situation: parsers can be trained on the
standard training set, the Penn Treebank (Marcus
et al, 1993), which has a sufficient size for train-
ing a statistical parser, but has the distinct down-
side of modeling language that is very dissimilar
1Taken from: http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=eHSpHCprXLA
1
from the target. Or one can train parsers on the En-
glish Web Treebank (Bies et al, 2012), which cov-
ers web language, including social media data, but
is rather small. Our focus on improving parsing for
such data is on exploring parse revision techniques
for dependency parsers. As far as we know, de-
spite being efficient and trainable on a small amount
of data, parse revision (Henestroza Anguiano and
Candito, 2011; Cetinoglu et al, 2011; Attardi and
Dell?Orletta, 2009; Attardi and Ciaramita, 2007)
has not been used for web data, or more generally
for adapting a parser to out-of-domain data; an in-
vestigation of its strengths and weaknesses is thus
needed.
We describe the data sets used in our experiments
in section 2 and the process of normalization in sec-
tion 3 before turning to the main task of parsing in
section 4. Within this section, we discuss our main
parser as well as two different parse revision meth-
ods (sections 4.2 and 4.3). In the evaluation in sec-
tion 5, we will find that normalization has a positive
impact, although spell checking has mixed results,
and that a simple tree anomaly detection method
(Dickinson and Smith, 2011) outperforms a machine
learning reviser (Attardi and Ciaramita, 2007), espe-
cially when integrated with confidence scores from
the parser itself. In addition to the machine learner
requiring a weak baseline parser, some of the main
differences include the higher recall of the simple
method at positing revisions and the fact that it de-
tects odd structures, which parser confidence can
then sort out as incorrect or not.
2 Data
For our experiments, we use two main resources, the
Wall Street Journal (WSJ) portion of the Penn Tree-
bank (PTB) (Marcus et al, 1993) and the English
Web Treebank (EWT) (Bies et al, 2012). The two
corpora were converted from PTB constituency trees
into dependency trees using the Stanford depen-
dency converter (de Marneffe and Manning, 2008).2
The EWT is comprised of approximately 16,000
sentences from weblogs, newsgroups, emails, re-
views, and question-answers. Instead of examining
each group individually, we chose to treat all web
2http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/
stanford-dependencies.shtml
1 <<_ -LRB--LRB-_ 2 punct _ _
2 File _ NN NN _ 0 root _ _
3 : _ : : _ 2 punct _ _
4 220b _ GW GW _ 11 dep _ _
5 -_ GW GW _ 11 dep _ _
6 dg _ GW GW _ 11 dep _ _
7 -_ GW GW _ 11 dep _ _
8 Agreement _ GW GW _ 11 dep _ _
9 for _ GW GW _ 11 dep _ _
10 Recruiting _ GW GW _ 11 dep _ _
11 Services.doc _ NN NN _ 2 dep _ _
12 >>_ -RRB--RRB-_ 2 punct _ _
13 <<_ -LRB--LRB-_ 14 punct _ _
14 File _ NN NN _ 2 dep _ _
15 : _ : : _ 14 punct _ _
16 220a _ GW GW _ 22 dep _ _
17 DG _ GW GW _ 22 dep _ _
18 -_ GW GW _ 22 dep _ _
19 Agreement _ GW GW _ 22 dep _ _
20 for _ GW GW _ 22 dep _ _
21 Contract _ GW GW _ 22 dep _ _
22 Services.DOC _ NN NN _ 14 dep _ _
23 >>_ -RRB--RRB-_ 14 punct _ _
Figure 1: A sentence with GW POS tags.
data equally, pulling from each type of data in the
training/testing split.
Additionally, for our experiments, we deleted the
212 sentences from EWT that contain the POS tags
AFX and GW tags. EWT uses the POS tag AFX for
cases where a prefix is written as a separate word
from its root, e.g., semi/AFX automatic/JJ. Such
segmentation and tagging would interfere with our
normalization process. The POS tag GW is used for
other non-standard words, such as document names.
Such ?sentences? are often difficult to analyze and
do not correspond to phenomena found in the PTB
(cf., figure 1).
To create training and test sets, we broke the data
into the following sets:
? WSJ training: sections 02-22 (42,009 sen-
tences)
? WSJ testing: section 23 (2,416 sentences)
? EWT training: 80% of the data, taking the first
four out of every five sentences (13,130 sen-
tences)
? EWT testing: 20% of the data, taking every
fifth sentence (3,282 sentences)
2
3 Text normalization
Previous work has shown that accounting for vari-
ability in form (e.g., misspellings) on the web, e.g.,
by mapping each form to a normalized form (Fos-
ter, 2010; Gadde et al, 2011) or by delexicaliz-
ing the parser to reduce the impact of unknown
words (?vrelid and Skj?rholt, 2012), leads to some
parser or tagger improvement. Foster (2010), for
example, lists adapting the parser?s unknown word
model to handle capitalization and misspellings of
function words as a possibility for improvement.
Gadde et al (2011) find that a model which posits
a corrected sentence and then is POS-tagged?their
tagging after correction (TAC) model?outperforms
one which cleans POS tags in a postprocessing step.
We follow this line of inquiry by developing text
normalization techniques prior to parsing.
3.1 Basic text normalization
Machine learning algorithms and parsers are sensi-
tive to the surface form of words, and different forms
of a word can mislead the learner/parser. Our ba-
sic text normalization is centered around the idea
that reducing unnecessary variation will lead to im-
proved parsing performance.
For basic text normalization, we reduce all web
URLs to a single token, i.e., each web URL is re-
placed with a uniform place-holder in the entire
EWT, marking it as a URL. Similarly, all emoticons
are replaced by a single marker indicating an emoti-
con. Repeated use of punctuation, e.g., !!!, is re-
duced to a single punctuation token.
We also have a module to shorten words with con-
secutive sequences of the same character: Any char-
acter that occurs more than twice in sequence will
be shortened to one character, unless they appear in
a dictionary, including the internet and slang dictio-
naries discussed below, in which case they map to
the dictionary form. Thus, the word Awww in ex-
ample (1) is shortened to Aw, and cooool maps to
the dictionary form cool. However, since we use
gold POS tags for our experiments, this module is
not used in the experiments reported here.
3.2 Spell checking
Next, we run a spell checker to normalize mis-
spellings, as online data often contains spelling
errors (e.g. cuttie in example (1)). Various sys-
tems for parsing web data (e.g., from the SANCL
shared task) have thus also explored spelling cor-
rection; McClosky et al (2012), for example, used
1,057 autocorrect rules, though?since these did
not make many changes?the system was not ex-
plored after that. Spell checking web data, such as
YouTube comments or blog data, is a challenge be-
cause it contains non-standard orthography, as well
as acronyms and other short-hand forms unknown
to a standard spelling dictionary. Therefore, be-
fore mapping to a corrected spelling, it is vital to
differentiate between a misspelled word and a non-
standard one.
We use Aspell3 as our spell checker to recognize
and correct misspelled words. If asked to correct
non-standard words, the spell checker would choose
the closest standard English word, inappropriate to
the context. For example, Aspell suggests Lil for
lol. Thus, before correcting, we first check whether
a word is an instance of internet speech, i.e., an ab-
breviation or a slang term.
We use a list of more than 3,000 acronyms to
identify acronyms and other abbreviations not used
commonly in formal registers of language. The list
was obtained from NetLingo, restricted to the en-
tries listed as chat acronyms and text message short-
hand.4 To identify slang terminology, we use the
Urban Dictionary5. In a last step, we combine both
lists with the list of words extracted from the WSJ.
If a word is not found in these lists, Aspell is used
to suggest a correct spelling. In order to restrict As-
pell from suggesting spellings that are too different
from the word in question, we use Levenshtein dis-
tance (Levenshtein, 1966) to measure the degree of
similarity between the original form and the sug-
gested spelling; only words with small distances
are accepted as spelling corrections. Since we have
words of varying length, the Levenshtein distance is
normalized by the length of the suggested spelling
(i.e., number of characters). In non-exhaustive tests
on a subset of the test set, we found that a normal-
ized score of 0.301, i.e., a relatively low score ac-
cepting only conservative changes, achieves the best
results when used as a threshold for accepting a sug-
3www.aspell.net
4http://www.netlingo.com/acronyms.php
5www.urbandictionary.com
3
gested spelling. The utilization of the threshold re-
stricts Aspell from suggesting wrong spellings for
a majority of the cases. For example, for the word
mujahidin, Aspell suggested Mukden, which has a
score of 1.0 and is thus rejected. Since we do not
consider context or any other information besides
edit distance, spell checking is not perfect and is
subject to making errors, but the number of errors
is considerably smaller than the number of correct
revisions. For example, lol would be changed into
Lil if it were not listed in the extended lexicon. Ad-
ditionally, since the errors are consistent throughout
the data, they result in normalization even when the
spelling is wrong.
4 Parser revision
We use a state of the art dependency parser, MST-
Parser (McDonald and Pereira, 2006), as our main
parser; and we use two parse revision methods: a
machine learning model and a simple tree anomaly
model. The goal is to be able to learn where the
parser errs and to adjust the parses to be more appro-
priate given the target domain of social media texts.
4.1 Basic parser
MSTParser (McDonald and Pereira, 2006)6 is a
freely available parser which reaches state-of-the-art
accuracy in dependency parsing for English. MST is
a graph-based parser which optimizes its parse tree
globally (McDonald et al, 2005), using a variety of
feature sets, i.e., edge, sibling, context, and non-
local features, employing information from words
and POS tags. We use its default settings for all ex-
periments.
We use MST as our base parser, training it in dif-
ferent conditions on the WSJ and the EWT. Also,
MST offers the possibility to retrieve confidence
scores for each dependency edge: We use the KD-
Fix edge confidence scores discussed by Mejer and
Crammer (2012) to assist in parse revision. As de-
scribed in section 4.4, the scores are used to limit
which dependencies are candidates for revision: if
a dependency has a low confidence score, it may be
revised, while high confidence dependencies are not
considered for revision.
6http://sourceforge.net/projects/
mstparser/
4.2 Reviser #1: machine learning model
We use DeSR (Attardi and Ciaramita, 2007) as a ma-
chine learning model of parse revision. DeSR uses a
tree revision method based on decomposing revision
actions into basic graph movements and learning se-
quences of such movements, referred to as a revision
rule. For example, the rule -1u indicates that the
reviser should change a dependent?s head one word
to the left (-1) and then up one element in the tree
(u). Note that DeSR only changes the heads of de-
pendencies, but not their labels. Such revision rules
are learned for a base parser by comparing the base
parser output and the gold-standard of some unseen
data, based on a maximum entropy model.
In experiments, DeSR generally only considers
the most frequent rules (e.g., 20), as these cover
most of the errors. For best results, the reviser
should: a) be trained on extra data other than the
data the base parser is trained on, and b) begin with
a relatively poor base parsing model. As we will see,
using a fairly strong base parser presents difficulties
for DeSR.
4.3 Reviser #2: simple tree anomaly model
Another method we use for building parse revisions
is based on a method to detect anomalies in parse
structures (APS) using n-gram sequences of depen-
dency structures (Dickinson and Smith, 2011; Dick-
inson, 2010). The method checks whether the same
head category (e.g., verb) has a set of dependents
similar to others of the same category (Dickinson,
2010).
To see this, consider the partial tree in figure 2,
from the dependency-converted EWT.7 This tree is
converted to a rule as in (2), where all dependents of
a head are realized.
... DT NN IN ...
dobj
det prep
Figure 2: A sketch of a basic dependency tree
(2) dobj? det:DT NN prep:IN
7DT/det=determiner, NN=noun, IN/prep=preposition,
dobj=direct object
4
This rule is then broken down into its component
n-grams and compared to other rules, using the for-
mula for scoring an element (ei) in (3). N -gram
counts (C(ngrm)) come from a training corpus; an
instantiation for this rule is in (4).
(3) s(ei) =
?
ngrm:ei?ngrm?n?3
C(ngrm)
(4) s(prep:IN) = C(det:DT NN prep:IN)
+ C(NN prep:IN END)
+ C(START det:DT NN prep:IN)
+ C(det:DT NN prep:IN END)
+ C(START det:DT NN prep:IN END)
We modify the scoring slightly, incorporating bi-
grams (n ? 2), but weighing them as 0.01 of a count
(C(ngrm)); this handles the issue that bigrams are
not very informative, yet having some bigrams is
better than none (Dickinson and Smith, 2011).
The method detects non-standard parses which
may result from parser error or because the text
is unusual in some other way, e.g., ungrammatical
(Dickinson, 2011). The structures deemed atypical
depend upon the corpus used for obtaining the gram-
mar that parser output is compared to.
With a method of scoring the quality of individual
dependents in a tree, one can compare the score of
a dependent to the score obtaining by hypothesizing
a revision. For error detection, this ameliorates the
effect of odd structures for which no better parse is
available. The revision checking algorithm in Dick-
inson and Smith (2011) posits new labelings and
attachments?maintaining projectivity and acyclic-
ity, to consider only reasonable candidates8?and
checks whether any have a higher score.9 If so, the
token is flagged as having a better revision and is
more likely to be an error.
In other words, the method checks revisions for
error detection. With a simple modification of the
code,10 one can also keep track of the best revision
8We remove the cyclicity check, in order to be able to detect
errors where the head and dependent are flipped.
9We actually check whether a new score is greater than or
equal to twice the original score, to account for meaningless
differences for large values, e.g., 1001 vs. 1000. We do not
expect our minor modifications to have a huge impact, though
more robust testing is surely required.
10http://cl.indiana.edu/?md7/papers/
dickinson-smith11.html
for each token and actually change the tree structure.
This is precisely what we do. Because the method
relies upon very coarse scores, it can suggest too
many revisions; in tandem with parser confidence,
though, this can filter the set of revisions to a rea-
sonable amount, as discussed next.
4.4 Pinpointing erroneous parses
The parse revision methods rely both on being able
to detect errors and on being able to correct them.
We can assist the methods by using MST confidence
scores (Mejer and Crammer, 2012) to pinpoint can-
didates for revision, and only pass these candidates
on to the parse revisers. For example, since APS
(anomaly detection) detects atypical structures (sec-
tion 4.3), some of which may not be errors, it will
find many strange parses and revise many positions
on its own, though some be questionable revisions.
By using a confidence filter, though, we only con-
sider ones flagged below a certain MST confidence
score. We follow Mejer and Crammer (2012) and
use confidence?0.5 as our threshold for identifying
errors. Non-exhaustive tests on a subset of the test
set show good performance with this threshold.
In the experiments reported in section 5, if we use
the revision methods to revise everything, we refer
to this as the DeSR and the APS models; if we fil-
ter out high confidence cases and restrict revisions
to low confidence scoring cases, we refer to this as
DeSR restricted and APS restricted.
Before using the MST confidence scores as part
of the revision process, then, we first report on using
the scores for error detection at the ?0.5 threshold,
as shown in table 1. As we can see, using confi-
dence scores allows us to pinpoint errors with high
precision. With a recall around 40?50%, we find er-
rors with upwards of 90% precision, meaning that
these cases are in need of revision. Interestingly, the
highest error detection precision comes with WSJ
as part of the training data and EWT as the test-
ing. This could be related to the great difference be-
tween the WSJ and EWT grammatical models and
the greater number of unknown words in this ex-
periment, though more investigation is needed. Al-
though data sets are hard to compare, the precision
seems to outperform that of more generic (i.e., non-
parser-specific) error detection methods (Dickinson
and Smith, 2011).
5
Normalization Attach. Label. Total
Train Test (on test) Tokens Errors Errors Errors Precision Recall
WSJ WSJ none 4,621 2,452 1,297 3,749 0.81 0.40
WSJ EWT none 5,855 3,621 2,169 5,790 0.99 0.38
WSJ EWT full 5,617 3,484 1,959 5,443 0.97 0.37
EWT EWT none 7,268 4,083 2,202 6,285 0.86 0.51
EWT EWT full 7,131 3,905 2,147 6,052 0.85 0.50
WSJ+EWT EWT none 5,622 3,338 1,849 5,187 0.92 0.40
WSJ+EWT EWT full 5,640 3,379 1,862 5,241 0.93 0.41
Table 1: Error detection results for MST confidence scores (? 0.5) for different conditions and normalization settings.
Number of tokens and errors below the threshold are reported.
5 Experiments
We report three major sets of experiments: the first
set compares the two parse revision strategies; the
second looks into text normalization strategies; and
the third set investigates whether the size of the
training set or its similarity to the target domain is
more important. Since we are interested in parsing
in these experiments, we use gold POS tags as in-
put for the parser, in order to exclude any unwanted
interaction between POS tagging and parsing.
5.1 Parser revision
In this experiment, we are interested in comparing a
machine learning method to a simple n-gram revi-
sion model. For all experiments, we use the original
version of the EWT data, without any normalization.
The results of this set of experiments are shown
in table 2. The first row reports MST?s performance
on the standard WSJ data split, giving an idea of an
upper bound for these experiments. The second part
shows MST?s performance on the EWT data, when
trained on WSJ or the combination of the WSJ and
EWT training sets. Note that there is considerable
decrease for both settings in terms of unlabeled ac-
curacy (UAS) and labeled accuracy (LAS), of ap-
proximately 8% when trained on WSJ and 5.5% on
WSJ+EWT. This drop in score is consistent with
previous work on non-canonical data, e.g., web data
(Foster et al, 2011) and learner language (Krivanek
and Meurers, 2011). It is difficult to compare these
results, due to different training and testing condi-
tions, but MST (without any modifications) reaches
results that are in the mid-high range of results re-
ported by Petrov and McDonald (2012, table 4) in
their overview of the SANCL shared task using the
EWT data: 80.10?87.62% UAS; 71.04%?83.46%
LAS.
Next, we look at the performance of the two re-
visers on the same data sets. Note that since DeSR
requires training data for the revision part that is dif-
ferent from the training set of the base parser, we
conduct parsing and revision in DeSR with two dif-
ferent data sets. Thus, for the WSJ experiment, we
split the WSJ training set into two parts, WSJ02-
11 and WSJ12-2, instead of training on the whole
WSJ. For the EWT training set, we split this set into
two parts and use 25% of it for training the parser
(EWTs) and the rest for training the reviser (EWTr).
In contrast, APS does not need extra data for train-
ing and thus was trained on the same data as the
base parser. While this means that the base parser
for DeSR has a smaller training set, note that DeSR
works best with a weak base parser (Attardi, p.c.).
The results show that DeSR?s performance is be-
low MST?s on the same data. In other words,
adding DeSRs revisions decreases accuracy. APS
also shows a deterioration in the results, but the dif-
ference is much smaller. Also, training on a combi-
nation of WSJ and EWT data increases the perfor-
mance of both revisers by 2-3% over training solely
on WSJ.
Since these results show that the revisions are
harmful, we decided to restrict the revisions further
by using MST?s KD-Fix edge confidence scores, as
described in section 4.4. We apply the revisions only
if MST?s confidence in this dependency is low (i.e.,
below or equal to 0.5). The results of this experiment
are shown in the last section of table 2. We can see
6
Method Parser Train Reviser Train Test UAS LAS
MST WSJ n/a WSJ 89.94 87.24
MST WSJ n/a EWT 81.98 78.65
MST WSJ+EWT n/a EWT 84.50 81.61
DeSR WSJ02-11 WSJ12-22 EWT 80.63 77.33
DeSR WSJ+EWTs EWTr EWT 82.68 79.77
APS WSJ WSJ EWT 81.96 78.40
APS WSJ+EWT WSJ+EWT EWT 84.45 81.29
DeSR restricted WSJ+EWTs EWTr EWT 84.40 81.50
APS restricted WSJ+EWT WSJ+EWT EWT 84.53 *81.66
Table 2: Results of comparing a machine learning reviser (DeSR) with a tree anomaly model (APS), with base parser
MST (* = sig. at the 0.05 level, as compared to row 2).
that both revisers improve over their non-restricted
versions. However, while DeSR?s results are still
below MST?s baseline results, APS shows slight im-
provements over the MST baseline, significant in the
LAS. Significance was tested using the CoNLL-X
evaluation script in combination with Dan Bikel?s
Randomized Parsing Evaluation Comparator, which
is based on sampling.11
For the original experiment, APS changes 1,402
labels and 272 attachments of the MST output. In
the restricted version, label changes are reduced to
610, and attachment to 167. In contrast, DeSR
changes 1,509 attachments but only 303 in the re-
stricted version. The small numbers, given that
we have more than 3,000 sentences in the test set,
show that finding reliable revisions is a difficult task.
Since both revisers are used more or less off the
shelf, there is much room to improve.
Based on these results and other results based on
different settings, which, for DeSR, resulted in low
accuracy, we decided to concentrate on APS in the
following experiments, and more specifically focus
on the restricted version of APS to see whether there
are significant improvements under different data
conditions.
5.2 Text normalization
In this set of experiments, we investigate the influ-
ence of the text normalization strategies presented
in section 3 on parsing and more specifically on our
parse revision strategy. Thus, we first apply a par-
tial normalization, using only the basic text normal-
11http://ilk.uvt.nl/conll/software.html
ization. For the full normalization, we combine the
basic text normalization with the spell checker. For
these experiments, we use the restricted APS reviser
and the EWT treebank for training and testing.
The results are shown in table 3. Note that since
we also normalize the training set, MST will also
profit from the normalizations. For this reason, we
present MST and APS (restricted) results for each
type of normalization. The first part of the table
shows the results for MST and APS without any nor-
malization; the numbers here are higher than in ta-
ble 2 because we now train only on EWT?an issue
we take up in section 5.3. The second part shows the
results for partial normalization. These results show
that both approaches profit from the normalization
to the same degree: both UAS and LAS increase by
approximately 0.25 percent points. When we look at
the full normalization, including spell checking, we
can see that it does not have a positive effect on MST
but that APS?s results increase, especially unlabeled
accuracy. Note that all APS versions significantly
outperform the MST versions but also that both nor-
malized MST versions significantly outperform the
non-normalized MST.
5.3 WSJ versus domain data
In these experiments, we are interested in which type
of training data allows us to reach the highest accu-
racy in parsing. Is it more useful to use a large, out-
of-domain training set (WSJ in our case), a small,
in-domain training set, or a combination of both?
Our assumption was that the largest data set, con-
sisting of the WSJ and the EWT training sets, would
7
Norm. Method UAS LAS
Train:no; Test:no MST 84.87 82.21
Train:no; Test:no APS restr. **84.90 *82.23
Train:part; Test:part MST *85.12 *82.45
Train:part; Test:part APS restr. **85.18 *82.50
Train:full; Test:full MST **85.20 *82.45
Train:full; Test:full APS restr. **85.24 **82.52
Table 3: Results of comparing different types of text normalization, training and testing on EWT sets. (Significance
tested for APS versions as compared to the corresponding MST version and for each MST with the non-normalized
MST: * = sig. at the 0.05 level, ** = significance at the 0.01 level).
give the best results. For these experiments, we use
the EWT test set and different combinations of text
normalization, and the results are shown in table 4.
The first three sections in the table show the re-
sults of training on the WSJ and testing on the EWT.
The results show that both MST and APS profit from
text normalization. Surprisingly, the best results are
gained by using the partial normalization; adding the
spell checker (for full normalization) is detrimental,
because the spell checker introduces additional er-
rors that result in extra, non-standard words in EWT.
Such additional variation in words is not present in
the original training model of the base parser.
For the experiments with the EWT and the com-
bined WSJ+EWT training sets, spell checking does
help, and we report only the results with full normal-
ization since this setting gave us the best results. To
our surprise, results with only the EWT as training
set surpass those of using the full WSJ+EWT train-
ing sets (a UAS of 85.24% and a LAS of 82.52% for
EWT vs. a UAS of 82.34% and a LAS of 79.31%).
Note, however, that when we reduce the size of the
WSJ data such that it matches the size of the EWT
data, performance increases to the highest results,
a UAS of 86.41% and a LAS of 83.67%. Taken
together, these results seem to indicate that quality
(i.e., in-domain data) is more important than mere
(out-of-domain) quantity, but also that more out-of-
domain data can help if it does not overwhelm the
in-domain data. It is also obvious that MST per
se profits the most from normalization, but that the
APS consistently provides small but significant im-
provements over the MST baseline.
6 Summary and Outlook
We examined ways to improve parsing social me-
dia and other web data by altering the input data,
namely by normalizing such texts, and by revis-
ing output parses. We found that normalization im-
proves performance, though spell checking has more
of a mixed impact. We also found that a very sim-
ple tree reviser based on grammar comparisons per-
forms slightly but significantly better than the base-
line, across different experimental conditions, and
well outperforms a machine learning model. The re-
sults also demonstrated that, more than the size of
the training data, the goodness of fit of the data has
a great impact on the parser. Perhaps surprisingly,
adding the entire WSJ training data to web training
data leads to a deteriment in performance, whereas
balancing it with web data has the best performance.
There are many ways to take this work in the
future. The small, significant improvements from
the APS restricted reviser indicate that there is po-
tential for improvement in pursuing such grammar-
corrective models for parse revision. The model we
use relies on a simplistic notion of revisions, nei-
ther checking the resulting well-formedness of the
tree nor how one correction influences other cor-
rections. One could also, for example, treat gram-
mars from different domains in different ways to
improve scoring and revision. Another possibility
would be to apply the parse revisions also to the out-
of-domain training data, to make it more similar to
the in-domain data.
For text normalization, the module could benefit
from a few different improvements. For example,
non-contracted words such as well to mean we?ll
require a more complicated normalization step, in-
8
Train Test Normalization Method UAS LAS
WSJ EWT train:no; test:no MST 81.98 78.65
WSJ EWT train:no; test:no APS 81.96 78.40
WSJ EWT train:no; test:no APS restr 82.02 **78.71
WSJ EWT train:no; test:part MST 82.31 79.27
WSJ EWT train:no; test:part APS restr. *82.36 *79.32
WSJ EWT train:no; test:full MST 82.30 79.26
WSJ EWT train:no; test:full APS restr. 82.34 *79.31
EWT EWT train:full; test:full MST 85.20 82.45
EWT EWT train:full; test:full APS restr. **85.24 **82.52
WSJ+EWT EWT train:full; test:full MST 84.59 81.68
WSJ+EWT EWT train:full; test:full APS restr. **84.63 *81.73
Balanced WSJ+EWT EWT train:full; test:full MST 86.38 83.62
Balanced WSJ+EWT EWT train:full; test:full APS restr. *86.41 **83.67
Table 4: Results of different training data sets and normalization patterns on parsing the EWT test data. (Significance
tested for APS versions as compared to the corresponding MST: * = sig. at the 0.05 level, ** = sig. at the 0.01 level)
volving machine learning or n-gram language mod-
els. In general, language models could be used for
more context-sensitive spelling correction. Given
the preponderance of terms on the web, using a
named entity recognizer (e.g., Finkel et al, 2005)
for preprocessing may also provide benefits.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Giuseppe Attardi for his help
in using DeSR; Can Liu, Shoshana Berleant, and the
IU CL discussion group for discussion; and the three
anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments.
References
Giuseppe Attardi and Massimiliano Ciaramita.
2007. Tree revision learning for dependency pars-
ing. In Proceedings of HLT-NAACL-07, pages
388?395. Rochester, NY.
Giuseppe Attardi and Felice Dell?Orletta. 2009. Re-
verse revision and linear tree combination for
dependency parsing. In Proceedings of HLT-
NAACL-09, Short Papers, pages 261?264. Boul-
der, CO.
Ann Bies, Justin Mott, Colin Warner, and Seth
Kulick. 2012. English Web Treebank. Linguis-
tic Data Consortium, Philadelphia, PA.
Ozlem Cetinoglu, Anton Bryl, Jennifer Foster, and
Josef Van Genabith. 2011. Improving dependency
label accuracy using statistical post-editing: A
cross-framework study. In Proceedings of the In-
ternational Conference on Dependency Linguis-
tics, pages 300?309. Barcelona, Spain.
Marie-Catherine de Marneffe and Christopher D.
Manning. 2008. The Stanford typed dependencies
representation. In COLING 2008 Workshop on
Cross-framework and Cross-domain Parser Eval-
uation. Manchester, England.
Markus Dickinson. 2010. Detecting errors in
automatically-parsed dependency relations. In
Proceedings of ACL-10. Uppsala, Sweden.
Markus Dickinson. 2011. Detecting ad hoc rules for
treebank development. Linguistic Issues in Lan-
guage Technology, 4(3).
Markus Dickinson and Amber Smith. 2011. De-
tecting dependency parse errors with minimal re-
sources. In Proceedings of IWPT-11, pages 241?
252. Dublin, Ireland.
Jenny Rose Finkel, Trond Grenager, and Christopher
Manning. 2005. Incorporating non-local informa-
tion into information extraction systems by gibbs
sampling. In Proceedings of ACL?05, pages 363?
370. Ann Arbor, MI.
Jennifer Foster. 2010. ?cba to check the spelling?:
Investigating parser performance on discussion
forum posts. In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT
2010, pages 381?384. Los Angeles, CA.
9
Jennifer Foster, Ozlem Cetinoglu, Joachim Wagner,
Joseph Le Roux, Joakim Nivre, Deirdre Hogan,
and Josef van Genabith. 2011. From news to com-
ment: Resources and benchmarks for parsing the
language of web 2.0. In Proceedings of IJCNLP-
11, pages 893?901. Chiang Mai, Thailand.
Phani Gadde, L. V. Subramaniam, and Tanveer A.
Faruquie. 2011. Adapting a WSJ trained part-of-
speech tagger to noisy text: Preliminary results.
In Proceedings of Joint Workshop on Multilingual
OCR and Analytics for Noisy Unstructured Text
Data. Beijing, China.
Enrique Henestroza Anguiano and Marie Candito.
2011. Parse correction with specialized models
for difficult attachment types. In Proceedings of
EMNLP-11, pages 1222?1233. Edinburgh, UK.
Julia Krivanek and Detmar Meurers. 2011. Compar-
ing rule-based and data-driven dependency pars-
ing of learner language. In Proceedings of the Int.
Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling
2011), pages 310?317. Barcelona.
Vladimir I. Levenshtein. 1966. Binary codes capable
of correcting deletions, insertions, and reversals.
Cybernetics and Control Theory, 10(8):707?710.
Mitchell Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a large annotated
corpus of English: The Penn Treebank. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 19(2):313?330.
David McClosky, Wanxiang Che, Marta Recasens,
Mengqiu Wang, Richard Socher, and Christopher
Manning. 2012. Stanford?s system for parsing the
English web. In Workshop on the Syntactic Anal-
ysis of Non-Canonical Language (SANCL 2012).
Montreal, Canada.
David McClosky, Mihai Surdeanu, and Christopher
Manning. 2011. Event extraction as dependency
parsing. In Proceedings of ACL-HLT-11, pages
1626?1635. Portland, OR.
Ryan McDonald, Koby Crammer, and Fernando
Pereira. 2005. Online large-margin training of
dependency parsers. In Proceedings of ACL-05,
pages 91?98. Ann Arbor, MI.
Ryan McDonald and Fernando Pereira. 2006. On-
line learning of approximate dependency parsing
algorithms. In Proceedings of EACL-06. Trento,
Italy.
Avihai Mejer and Koby Crammer. 2012. Are you
sure? Confidence in prediction of dependency
tree edges. In Proceedings of the NAACL-HTL
2012, pages 573?576. Montre?al, Canada.
Tetsuji Nakagawa, Kentaro Inui, and Sadao Kuro-
hashi. 2010. Dependency tree-based sentiment
classification using CRFs with hidden variables.
In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2010, pages 786?
794. Los Angeles, CA.
Lilja ?vrelid and Arne Skj?rholt. 2012. Lexical
categories for improved parsing of web data. In
Proceedings of the 24th International Conference
on Computational Linguistics (COLING 2012),
pages 903?912. Mumbai, India.
Slav Petrov and Ryan McDonald. 2012. Overview
of the 2012 shared task on parsing the web.
In Workshop on the Syntactic Analysis of Non-
Canonical Language (SANCL 2012). Montreal,
Canada.
10
