Proceedings of the IJCNLP-08 Workshop on NLP for Less Privileged Languages, pages 59?64,
Hyderabad, India, January 2008. c?2008 Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing
Strategies for sustainable MT for Basque:  
incremental design, reusability, standardization and open-source 
 I. Alegria, X. Arregi, X. Artola, A. Diaz de Ilarraza, G. Labaka,  
M. Lersundi, A. Mayor, K. Sarasola 
Ixa taldea.  
University of the Basque Country. 
i.alegria@ehu.es 
 
 
 
Abstract 
We present some Language Technology 
applications that have proven to be effec-
tive tools to promote the use of Basque, a 
European less privileged language. We also 
present the strategy we have followed for 
almost twenty years to develop those appli-
cations as the top of an integrated environ-
ment of language resources, language 
foundations, language tools and other ap-
plications. When we have faced a difficult 
task such as Machine Translation to 
Basque, our strategy has worked well. We 
have had good results in a short time just 
reusing previous works for Basque, reusing 
other open-source tools, and developing 
just a few new modules in collaboration 
with other groups. In addition, new reus-
able tools and formats have been produced.  
1 Introduction and Basque Language 
Basque is a highly inflected minority language 
with free order of sentence constituents. Machine 
Translation for Basque is thus both, a real need and 
a test bed for our strategy to develop NLP tools for 
Basque.          
Basque is an isolate language, and little is 
known of its origins. It is likely that an early form 
of the Basque language was already present in 
Western Europe before the arrival of the Indo-
European languages. 
Basque is an agglutinative language, with a rich 
flexional morphology. In fact for nouns, for 
example, at least 360 word forms are possible for 
each lemma. Each of the declension cases such as 
absolutive, dative, associative? has four different 
suffixes to be added to the last word of the noun 
phrase. These four suffix variants correspond to 
undetermined, determined singular, determined 
plural and ?close? determined plural.  
Basque is also an ergative-absolutive language. 
The subject of an intransitive verb is in the 
absolutive case (which is unmarked), and the same 
case is used for the direct object of a transitive 
verb. The subject of the transitive verb (that is, the 
agent) is marked differently, with the ergative case 
(shown by the suffix -k). This also triggers main 
and auxiliary verbal agreement. 
The auxiliary verb, which accompanies most 
main verbs, agrees not only with the subject, but 
with the direct object and the indirect object, if 
present. Among European languages, this 
polypersonal system (multiple verb agreement) is 
only found in Basque, some Caucasian languages, 
and Hungarian. The ergative-absolutive alignment 
is rare among European languages, but not 
worldwide. 
Although in last centuries Basque suffered 
continuous regression it still remains alive. The 
region in which Basque is spoken is smaller than 
what is known as the Basque Country, and the 
distribution of Basque speakers is not 
homogeneous there. The main reasons of this 
regression (Amorrortu, 2002) are that Basque was 
not an official language, and that it was out of 
educational system, out of media and out of 
industrial environments. Besides, the fact of being 
six different dialects made the wide development 
of written Basque difficult.  
However, after 1980, some of those features 
changed and many citizens and some local 
59
governments promote recovering of Basque 
Language.  
Today, Basque holds co-official language status 
in the Basque regions of Spain: the whole 
autonomous community of the Basque Country 
and some parts of Navarre. Basque has no official 
standing in the Northern Basque Country.   
In the past, Basque was associated with lack of 
education, stigmatized as uneducated, rural, or 
holding low economic and power resources. There 
is not such an association today; Basque speakers 
do not differ from Spanish or French monolinguals 
in any of these characteristics.  
Standard Basque, called Batua (unified) in 
Basque, was defined by the Academy of Basque 
Language (Euskaltzaindia) in 1968. At present, its 
morphology is completely standardized, but the 
lexical standardization process is still underway. 
Now this is the language model taught in most 
schools and used on some media and official 
papers published in Basque.  
Basque speakers are about 700,000, about 25% 
of the total population of the Basque Country, but 
they are not evenly distributed. Still the use of 
Basque in industry and specially in Information 
and Communication Technology is not 
widespread. A language that seeks to survive in the 
modern information society has to be present also 
in such field and this requires language technology 
products. Basque, as other minority languages, has 
to make a great effort to face this challenge (Petek, 
2000; Williams et al, 2001).  
2 Strategy to develop Human Language 
Technology (HLT) in Basque 
IXA group is a research Group created in 1986 by 
5 university lecturers in the computer science fac-
ulty of the University of the Basque Country with 
the aim of laying foundations for research and de-
velopment of NLP software mainly for Basque. 
We wanted to face the challenge of adapting 
Basque to language technology. 
Twenty one years later, now IXA is a group 
composed of 28 computer scientists, 13 linguists 
and 2 research assistants. It works in cooperation 
with more than 7 companies from Basque Country 
and 5 from abroad; it has been involved in the birth 
of two new spin-off companies; and it has devel-
oped more than seven language technology prod-
ucts. 
In recent years, several private companies and 
technology centers in the Basque Country have 
begun to get interested and to invest in this area. At 
the same time, more agents have come to be aware 
of the fact that collaboration is essential to the de-
velopment of language technologies for minority 
languages. One of the fruits of this collaboration 
are HIZKING21 (2002-2005) and ANHITZ (2006-
2008) projects. Both projects were accepted by the 
Government of the Basque Country in a new 
strategical research line called ?Language Infoen-
gineering?. 
At the very beginning, twenty years ago, our 
first goal was just to create a Spanish-Basque 
translation system, but after some preliminary 
work we realized that instead of wasting our time 
in creating an ad hoc MT system with small accu-
racy, we had to invest our effort in creating basic 
tools such as a morphological analyzer/generator 
for Basque, that could later be used to build not 
only a more robust MT system but also other ap-
plications. 
This thought was the seed to design our strategy 
to make progress in the adaptation of Basque to 
Language Technology. Basque language had to 
face up scarcity of resources and tools that could 
make possible its development in Language Tech-
nology at a reasonable and competitive rate. 
We presented an open proposal for making pro-
gress in Human Language Technology (Aduriz et 
al., 1998). Anyway, the steps proposed did not cor-
respond exactly with those observed in the history 
of the processing of English, because the high ca-
pacity and computational power of new computers 
allowed facing problems in a different way.  
Our strategy may be described in two points: 
1) The need for standardization of resources to 
be useful in different researches, tools and applica-
tions 
2) The need for incremental design and devel-
opment of language foundations, tools, and appli-
cations in a parallel and coordinated way in order 
to get the best benefit from them. Language foun-
dations and research are essential to create any tool 
or application; but in the same way tools and ap-
plications will be very helpful in the research and 
improvement of language foundations. 
Following this strategy, our steps on standardi-
zation of resources led us to adopt TEI and XML 
standards and also to define a methodology for 
60
stand-off corpus tagging based on TEI, feature 
structures and XML (Artola et al, 2005). 
In the same way, taking as reference our experi-
ence in incremental design and development we 
proposed four phases as a general strategy for lan-
guage processing. These are the phases defined 
with the products to be developed in each of them. 
1. Initial phase: Foundations. Corpus I (collection 
of raw text with no tagging mark). Lexical da-
tabase I (the first version could be a list of 
lemmas and affixes). Machine-readable dic-
tionaries. Morphological description.  
2. Second phase: Basic tools and applications. 
Statistical tools for the treatment of corpora. 
Morphological analyzer/generator. Lemma-
tizer/tagger. Spelling checker and corrector (al-
though in morphologically simple languages a 
word list could be enough). Speech processing 
at word level. Corpus II (word-forms are 
tagged with their part of speech and lemma). 
Lexical database II (lexical support for the con-
struction of general applications, including part 
of speech and morphological information). 
3. Third phase: Advanced tools and applications. 
An environment for tool integration. Web 
search engine.  A traditional search machine 
that integrates lemmatization and language 
identification. Surface syntax. Corpus III (syn-
tactically tagged text). Grammar and style 
checkers. Structured versions of dictionaries 
(they allow enhanced functionality not avail-
able for printed or raw electronic versions). 
Lexical database III (the previous version is en-
riched with multiword lexical units. Integration 
of dictionaries in text editors). Lexical-
semantic knowledge base. Creation of a con-
cept taxonomy (e.g.: Wordnet). Word-sense 
disambiguation. Speech processing at sentence 
level. Basic Computer Aided Language Learn-
ing (CALL) systems 
4. Fourth phase: Multilingualism and general 
applications. Information extraction. Transla-
tion aids (integrated use of multiple on-line 
dictionaries, translation of noun phrases and 
simple sentences). Corpus IV (semantically 
tagged text after word-sense disambiguation). 
Dialog systems. Knowledge base on multilin-
gual lexico-semantic relations and its applica-
tions.  
We will complete this strategy with some sug-
gestions about what shouldn?t be done when work-
ing on the treatment of minority languages. a) Do 
not start developing applications if linguistic foun-
dations are not defined previously; we recommend 
following the above given sequence: foundations, 
tools and applications. b) When a new system has 
to be planned, do not create ad hoc lexical or syn-
tactic resources; you should design those resources 
in a way that they could be easily extended to full 
coverage and reusable by any other tool or applica-
tion. c) If you complete a new resource or tool, do 
not keep it to yourself; there are many researchers 
working on English, but only a few on each minor-
ity language; thus, the few results should be public 
and shared for research purposes, for it is desirable 
to avoid needless and costly repetition of work. 
3 Machine Translation for Basque 
After years working on basic resources and tools 
we decided it was time to face  the MT task (Hut-
chins and Somers, 1992). Our general strategy was 
more specifically for Machine Translation defined 
bearing in mind the following concepts:  
? reusability of previous resources, specially 
lexical resources and morphology of Basque 
? standardization and collaboration: using a 
more general framework in collaboration 
with other groups working in NLP 
? open-source: this means that anyone having 
the necessary computational and linguistic 
skills will be able to adapt or enhance it to 
produce a new MT system,  
Due to the real necessity for translation in our 
environment the involved languages would be 
Basque, Spanish and English. 
From the beginning we wanted to combine the 
two basic approaches for MT (rule-based and cor-
pus-based) in order to build a hybrid system, be-
cause it is generally agreed that there are not 
enough corpora for a good corpus-based system in 
minority languages like Basque.  
Data-driven Machine Translation (example-
based or statistical) is nowadays the most prevalent 
trend in Machine Translation research. Translation 
results obtained with this approach have already 
reached a high level of accuracy, especially when 
the target language is English. But these Data-
driven MT systems base their knowledge on 
aligned bilingual corpora, and the accuracy of their 
61
output depends heavily on the quality and the size 
of these corpora. Large and reliable bilingual cor-
pora are unavailable for many language pairs. 
3.1 The rule-based approach 
First, we present the main architecture and the pro-
posed standards of an open source MT engine, the 
first implementation of which translates from 
Spanish into Basque using the traditional transfer 
model and based on shallow and dependency pars-
ing. 
The design and the programs are independent 
from the languages, so the software can be used for 
other projects in MT. Depending on the languages 
included in the adaptation, it will be necessary to 
add, reorder and change some modules, but this 
will not be difficult because a unique XML format 
is used for the communication among all the mod-
ules. 
The project has been integrated in the OpenTrad 
initiative (www.opentrad.com), a government-
funded project shared among different universities 
and small companies, which also include MT en-
gines for translation among the main languages in 
Spain. The main objective of this initiative is the 
construction of an open, reusable and interoperable 
framework. 
In the OpenTrad project, two different but coor-
dinated designs have been carried out: 
? A shallow-transfer machine translation en-
gine for similar languages (Spanish, Catalan 
and Galician by the the time being). The 
MT architecture uses finite-state transducers 
for lexical processing, hidden Markov mod-
els for part-of-speech tagging, and chunking 
based on finite-state for structural transfer. 
It is named Apertium and it can be 
downloaded from apertium.sourceforge.net. 
(Armentano-Oller et al, 2004) 
? A deeper-transfer engine for the Spanish-
Basque pair. It is named Matxin (Alegria et 
al., 2007) and it is stored in 
matxin.sourceforge.net. It is an extension of 
previous work in our group. In order to re-
use resources in this Spanish-Basque system 
the analysis module for similar languages 
was not included in Matxin; another open 
source engine, FreeLing (Carreras et al, 
2004), was used here, of course, and its out-
put had to be converted to the proposed in-
terchange format. 
Some of the components (modules, data formats 
and compilers) from the first architecture in Open-
Trad were used in the second one. Indeed, an im-
portant additional goal of this work was testing 
which modules from the first architecture could be 
integrated in deeper-transfer architectures for more 
difficult language pairs. 
The transfer module is also based on three main 
objects in the translation process: words or nodes, 
chunks or phrases, and sentences.  
? First, lexical transfer is carried out using a 
bilingual dictionary compiled into a finite-
state transducer. We use the XML specifica-
tion of Apertium engine.  
? Then, structural transfer at the sentence 
level is applied, and some information is 
transferred from some chunks to others, and 
some chunks may disappear. Grammars 
based on regular expressions are used to 
specify these changes. For example, in the 
Spanish-Basque transfer, the person and 
number information of the object and the 
type of subordination are imported from 
other chunks to the chunk corresponding to 
the verb chain. 
? Finally the structural transfer at the chunk 
level is carried out. This process can be 
quite simple (e.g. noun chains between 
Spanish and Basque) or more complex (e.g. 
verb chains between these same languages). 
The XML file coming from the transfer module 
is passed on the generation module. 
? In the first step, syntactic generation is per-
formed in order to decide the order of 
chunks in the sentence and the order of 
words in the chunks. Several grammars are 
used for this purpose.  
? Morphological generation is carried out in 
the last step. In the generation of Basque, 
the main inflection is added to the last word 
in the phrase (in Basque: the declension 
case, the article and other features are added 
to the whole noun phrase at the end of the 
last word), but in verb chains other words 
need morphological generation. A previous 
morphological analyzer/generator for 
Basque (Alegria et al, 1996) has been 
adapted and transformed to the format used 
in Apertium. 
The results for the Spanish/Basque system using 
FreeLing and Matxin are promising. The quantita-
62
tive evaluation uses the open source evaluation 
tool IQMT and figures are given using Bleu and 
NIST measures (Gim?nez et al, 2005). An user 
based evaluation has been carried out too. 
3.2 The corpus-based approach 
The corpus-based approach has been carried out in 
collaboration with the National Center for Lan-
guage Technology in Dublin.  
The system exploits both EBMT and SMT tech-
niques to extract a dataset of aligned chunks. We 
conducted Basque to English and Spanish to 
Basque translation experiments, evaluated on a 
large corpus (270, 000 sentence pairs).  
Some tools have been reused for this purpose: 
? GIZA++: for word/morpheme alignment we 
used the GIZA++ statistical word alignment 
toolkit, and following the ?refined? method 
of (Och and Ney, 2003), extracted a set of 
high-quality word/ morpheme alignments 
from the original unidirectional alignment 
sets. These along with the extracted chunk 
alignments were passed to the translation 
decoder.                                         
? Pharaoh/Moses decoder: the decoder is also 
a hybrid system which integrates EBMT 
and SMT. It is capable of retrieving already 
translated sentences and also provides a 
wrapper around the PHARAOH SMT de-
coder (Koehn, 2004). 
? MaTrEx: the MATREX (Machine Transla-
tion using Examples) system used in our 
experiments is a data-driven MT engine, 
built following an extremely modular de-
sign. It consists of a number of extensible 
and re-implementable modules (Way and 
Gough, 2005). 
   For this engine, we reuse a toolkit to chunk the 
Basque sentences. After this processing stage, a 
sentence is treated as a sequence of morphemes, in 
which chunk boundaries are clearly visible. Mor-
phemes denoting morphosyntactic features are re-
placed by conventional symbolic strings. After 
some adaptation, the chunks obtained in this man-
ner are actually very comparable to the English 
chunks obtained with the marker-based chunker. 
The experimental results have shown that our 
system significantly outperforms state-of-the-art 
approaches according to several common auto-
matic evaluation metrics: WER, Bleu and PER 
(Stroppa et al, 2006; Labaka et al, 2007). 
4 Conclusions 
A language that seeks to survive in the modern 
information society requires language technology 
products. "Minority" languages have to do a great 
effort to face this challenge. The Ixa group has 
been working since 1986 on adapting Basque to 
language technology, having developed several 
applications that are effective tools to promote the 
use of Basque. Now we are planning to define the 
BLARK for Basque (Krauwer, 2003).  
From our experience, we defend that research 
and development for a minority language should to 
be faced following these points: high standardiza-
tion,  reusing language foundations, tools, and ap-
plications, and their incremental design and devel-
opment. We know that any HLT project related to 
a less privileged language should follow those 
guidelines, but from our experience we know that 
in most cases they do not. We think that if Basque 
is now in an good position in HLT is because those 
guidelines have been applied even  when it was 
easier to define "toy" resources and tools useful to 
get good short term academic results, but not reus-
able in future developments.  
This strategy has been completely useful when 
we have created MT systems for Basque. Reusing 
previous works for Basque (that were defined fol-
lowing XML and TEI standards) and reusing other 
open-source tools have been the key to get satisfac-
tory results in a short time.  
Two results produced in the MT track are pub-
licly available:  
? matxin.sourceforge.net for the free code for 
the Spanish-Basque RBMT system 
? www.opentrad.org for the on-line demo  
Acknowledgments 
This work has been partially funded by the Spanish 
Ministry of Education and Science (OpenMT: 
Open Source Machine Translation using hybrid 
methods,TIN2006-15307-C03-01) and the Local 
Government of the Basque Country (AnHITZ 
2006: Language Technologies for Multingual In-
teraction in Intelligent Environments., IE06-185). 
Andy Way, Declan Groves and Nicolas Stroppa 
from National Centre for Language Technology in 
Dublin are kindly acknowledged for providing 
their expertise on the Matrex system and the 
evaluation of the output. 
63
References 
I. Aduriz, E. Agirre, I. Aldezabal, I. Alegria, O. Ansa, 
X. Arregi, J. Arriola, X. Artola, A. D?az de Ilarraza, 
N. Ezeiza, K.Gojenola, M. Maritxalar, M. Oronoz, K. 
Sarasola, A. Soroa, R. Urizar. 1998. A framework for 
the automatic processing of Basque. Proceedings of 
Workshop on Lexical Resources for Minority Lan-
guages.  
I. Alegria, X. Artola, K. Sarasola. 1996.Automatic mor-
phological analysis of Basque. Literary & Linguistic 
Computing Vol. 11, No. 4, 193-203. Oxford Univer-
sity Press. Oxford. 1996. 
I. Alegria, A. D?az de Ilarraza, G. Labaka, M Lersundi, 
A. Mayor, K. Sarasola.  2007. Transfer-based MT 
from Spanish into Basque: reusability, standardiza-
tion and open source. LNCS 4394. 374-384. Cicling 
2007.  
E. Amorrortu. 2002. Bilingual Education in the Basque 
Country: Achievements and Challenges after Four 
Decades of Acquisition Planning. Journal of Iberian 
and Latin American Literary and Cultural Stud-
ies.Volume 2 Number 2 (2002) 
C. Armentano-Oller, A. Corb?-Bellot, M. L. Forcada, 
M. Ginest?-Rosell, B. Bonev, S. Ortiz-Rojas, J. A. 
P?rez-Ortiz, G. Ram?rez-S?nchez, F. S?nchez-
Mart?nez, 2005. An open-source shallow-transfer 
machine translation toolbox: consequences of its re-
lease and availability. Proceedings of OSMaTran: 
Open-Source Machine Translation workshop, MT 
Summit X. 
X. Artola, A. D?az de Ilarraza, N. Ezeiza, K. Gojenola, 
G. Labaka, A. Sologaistoa, A. Soroa.  2005. A 
framework for representing and managing linguistic 
annotations based on typed feature structures. Proc. 
of RANLP 2005. 
X. Carreras,, I. Chao, L. Padr? and M. Padr?. 2004. 
FreeLing: An open source Suite of Language Ana-
lyzers, in  Proceedings of the 4th International Con-
ference on Language Resources and Evaluation 
(LREC'04).  
J. Gim?nez, E. Amig?, C. Hori. 2005. Machine 
Translation Evaluation Inside QARLA. In Proceed-
ings of the International Workshop on Spoken Lan-
guage Technology (IWSLT'05) 
W. Hutchins and H. Somers. 1992. An Introduction to 
Machine Translation. Academic Press. 
P. Koehn. 2004. Pharaoh: A Beam Search Decoder for 
Phrase-Based Statistical Machine Translation Mod-
els.  In Proceedings of AMTA-04, pages 115?124, 
Washington, District of Columbia. 
S. Krauwer. 2003. The Basic Language Resource Kit 
(BLARK) as the First Milestone for the Language 
Resources Roadmap. Proc. of the International 
Workshop  Speech and Computer. Moscow, Russia. 
G. Labaka, N. Stroppa, A. Way, K. Sarasola  2007 
Comparing Rule-Based and Data-Driven Approaches 
to Spanish-to-Basque Machine Translation Proc. of 
MT-Summit XI, Copenhagen 
F. Och and H. Ney. 2003. A Systematic Comparison of 
Various Statistical Alignment Models. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 29(1): 19?51. 
B. Petek. 2000. Funding for research into human lan-
guage technologies for less prevalent languages, Sec-
ond International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC 2000). Athens, 
Greece. 
N. Stroppa, D. Groves, A. Way, K. Sarasola K. 2006. 
Example-Based Machine Translation of the Basque 
Language. AMTA. 7th conference of the Association 
for Machine Translation in the Americas.. 
A. Way and N. Gough. 2005. Comparing Example-
Based and Statistical Machine Translation. Natural 
Language Engineering, 11(3):295?309. 
B. Williams, K. Sarasola, D. ??Cr?inin, B. Petek. 2001. 
Speech and Language Technology for Minority Lan-
guages. Proceedings of Eurospeech 2001 
 
 
64
