Tutorial Abstracts of ACL-08: HLT, page 2,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Building Practical Spoken Dialog Systems 
Antoine Raux1, Brian Langner2, Alan W Black3, Maxine Eskenazi4 Language Technologies Institute Carnegie Mellon University Pittsburgh, PA, USA {antoine,blangner,awb,max}@cs.cmu.edu 
                                                           1 http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~antoine 2 http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~blangner 3 http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~awb 4 http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~max 
 
 
1 Abstract This tutorial will give a practical description of the free software Carnegie Mellon Olympus 2 Spoken Dialog Architecture. Building real working dialog systems that are robust enough for the general pub-lic to use is difficult. Most frequently, the func-tionality of the conversations is severely limited - down to simple question-answer pairs. While off-the-shelf toolkits help the development of such simple systems, they do not support more ad-vanced, natural dialogs nor do they offer the trans-parency and flexibility required by computational linguistic researchers.  However, Olympus 2 offers a complete dialog system with automatic speech recognition (Sphinx) and synthesis (SAPI, Festi-val) and has been used, along with previous ver-sions of Olympus, for teaching and research at Carnegie Mellon and elsewhere for some 5 years. Overall, a dozen dialog systems have been built using various versions of Olympus, handling tasks ranging from providing bus schedule information to guidance through maintenance procedures for complex machinery, to personal calendar manage-ment. In addition to simplifying the development of dialog systems, Olympus provides a transparent platform for teaching and conducting research on all aspects of dialog systems, including speech rec-ognition and synthesis, natural language under-standing and generation, and dialog and interaction management. The tutorial will give a brief introduction to spoken dialog systems before going into detail 
about how to create your own dialog system within Olympus 2, using the Let's Go bus information system as an example. Further, we will provide guidelines on how to use an actual deployed spo-ken dialog system such as Let's Go to validate re-search results in the real world. As a possible testbed for such research, we will describe Let's Go Lab, which provides access to both the Let's Go system and its genuine user population for research experiments. 2 Outline Part 1 1.1 Introduction 1.2 Overview of current spoken dialog  system architectures 1.3 Description of the Olympus2 dialog  architecture 1.4 How to build an Olympus2 spoken  dialog system Part 2 2.1 Advanced Topics a. Improving ASR b. Improving TTS c. Dealing with ASR Errors d. Logs and Tools 2.2 Using Olympus2 for research and  applications 2.3 Final summary 
2
