Unsupervised Relation Extraction from Web Documents
Kathrin Eichler, Holmer Hemsen and Gu?nter Neumann
DFKI GmbH, LT-Lab, Stuhlsatzenhausweg 3 (Building D3 2), D-66123 Saarbru?cken
{FirstName.SecondName}@dfki.de
Abstract
The IDEX system is a prototype of an interactive dynamic Information Extraction (IE) system. A user of the system
expresses an information request in the form of a topic description, which is used for an initial search in order to retrieve
a relevant set of documents. On basis of this set of documents, unsupervised relation extraction and clustering is done by
the system. The results of these operations can then be interactively inspected by the user. In this paper we describe the
relation extraction and clustering components of the IDEX system. Preliminary evaluation results of these components are
presented and an overview is given of possible enhancements to improve the relation extraction and clustering components.
1. Introduction
Information extraction (IE) involves the process of au-
tomatically identifying instances of certain relations of
interest, e.g., produce(<company>, <product>, <lo-
cation>), in some document collection and the con-
struction of a database with information about each
individual instance (e.g., the participants of a meet-
ing, the date and time of the meeting). Currently, IE
systems are usually domain-dependent and adapting
the system to a new domain requires a high amount
of manual labour, such as specifying and implement-
ing relation?specific extraction patterns manually (cf.
Fig. 1) or annotating large amounts of training cor-
pora (cf. Fig. 2). These adaptations have to be made
offline, i.e., before the specific IE system is actually
made. Consequently, current IE technology is highly
statical and inflexible with respect to a timely adapta-
tion to new requirements in the form of new topics.
Figure 1: A hand-coded rule?based IE?system (schemat-
ically): A topic expert implements manually task?specific
extraction rules on the basis of her manual analysis of a
representative corpus.
1.1. Our goal
The goal of our IE research is the conception and im-
plementation of core IE technology to produce a new
Figure 2: A data?oriented IE system (schematically): The
task?specific extraction rules are automatically acquired by
means of Machine Learning algorithms, which are using
a sufficiently large enough corpus of topic?relevant docu-
ments. These documents have to be collected and costly
annotated by a topic?expert.
IE system automatically for a given topic. Here, the
pre?knowledge about the information request is given
by a user online to the IE core system (called IDEX)
in the form of a topic description (cf. Fig. 3). This
initial information source is used to retrieve relevant
documents and extract and cluster relations in an un-
supervised way. In this way, IDEX is able to adapt
much better to the dynamic information space, in par-
ticular because no predefined patterns of relevant re-
lations have to be specified, but relevant patterns are
determined online. Our system consists of a front-end,
which provides the user with a GUI for interactively in-
specting information extracted from topic-related web
documents, and a back-end, which contains the rela-
tion extraction and clustering component. In this pa-
per, we describe the back-end component and present
preliminary evaluation results.
1.2. Application potential
However, before doing so we would like to motivate
the application potential and impact of the IDEX ap-
Figure 3: The dynamic IE system IDEX (schematically):
a user of the IDEX IE system expresses her information
request in the form of a topic description which is used for
an initial search in order to retrieve a relevant set of doc-
uments. From this set of documents, the system extracts
and collects (using the IE core components of IDEX) a set
of tables of instances of possibly relevant relations. These
tables are presented to the user (who is assumed to be the
topic?expert), who will analyse the data further for her in-
formation research. The whole IE process is dynamic, since
no offline data is required, and the IE process is interactive,
since the topic expert is able to specify new topic descrip-
tions, which express her new attention triggered by a novel
relationship she was not aware of beforehand.
proach by an example application. Consider, e.g., the
case of the exploration and the exposure of corruptions
or the risk analysis of mega construction projects. Via
the Internet, a large pool of information resources of
such mega construction projects is available. These
information resources are rich in quantity, but also
in quality, e.g., business reports, company profiles,
blogs, reports by tourists, who visited these construc-
tion projects, but also web documents, which only
mention the project name and nothing else. One of
the challenges for the risk analysis of mega construc-
tion projects is the efficient exploration of the possibly
relevant search space. Developing manually an IE sys-
tem is often not possible because of the timely need
of the information, and, more importantly, is proba-
bly not useful, because the needed (hidden) informa-
tion is actually not known. In contrast, an unsuper-
vised and dynamic IE system like IDEX can be used
to support the expert in the exploration of the search
space through pro?active identification and clustering
of structured entities. Named entities like for example
person names and locations, are often useful indicators
of relevant text passages, in particular, if the names are
in some relationship. Furthermore, because the found
relationships are visualized using an advanced graph-
ical user interface, the user can select specific names
and find associated relationships to other names, the
documents they occur in or she can search for para-
phrases of sentences.
2. System architecture
The back-end component, visualized in Figure 4, con-
sists of three parts, which are described in detail in this
section: preprocessing, relation extraction and relation
clustering.
2.1. Preprocessing
In the first step, for a specific search task, a topic of
interest has to be defined in the form of a query. For
this topic, documents are automatically retrieved from
the web using the Google search engine. HTML and
PDF documents are converted into plain text files. As
the tools used for linguistic processing (NE recogni-
tion, parsing, etc.) are language-specific, we use the
Google language filter option when downloading the
documents. However, this does not prevent some doc-
uments written in a language other than our target
language (English) from entering our corpus. In ad-
dition, some web sites contain text written in several
languages. In order to restrict the processing to sen-
tences written in English, we apply a language guesser
tool, lc4j (Lc4j, 2007) and remove sentences not clas-
sified as written in English. This reduces errors on
the following levels of processing. We also remove sen-
tences that only contain non-alphanumeric characters.
To all remaining sentences, we apply LingPipe (Ling-
Pipe, 2007) for sentence boundary detection, named
entity recognition (NER) and coreference resolution.
As a result of this step database tables are created,
containing references to the original document, sen-
tences and detected named entities (NEs).
2.2. Relation extraction
Relation extraction is done on the basis of parsing po-
tentially relevant sentences. We define a sentence to be
of potential relevance if it at least contains two NEs.
In the first step, so-called skeletons (simplified depen-
dency trees) are extracted. To build the skeletons, the
Stanford parser (Stanford Parser, 2007) is used to gen-
erate dependency trees for the potentially relevant sen-
tences. For each NE pair in a sentence, the common
root element in the corresponding tree is identified and
the elements from each of the NEs to the root are col-
lected. An example of a skeleton is shown in Figure 5.
In the second step, information based on dependency
types is extracted for the potentially relevant sen-
tences. Focusing on verb relations (this can be ex-
tended to other types of relations), we collect for each
verb its subject(s), object(s), preposition(s) with ar-
guments and auxiliary verb(s). We can now extract
verb relations using a simple algorithm: We define a
verb relation to be a verb together with its arguments
(subject(s), object(s) and prepositional phrases) and
consider only those relations to be of interest where at
least the subject or the object is an NE. We filter out
relations with only one argument.
2.3. Relation clustering
Relation clusters are generated by grouping relation
instances based on their similarity.
web documents document
retrieval
topic specific documents plain text documents
sentence/documents+
 NE tables
languagefiltering
syntactic +typed dependencyparsing 
sov?relationsskeletons +
clustering
conversion
Preprocessing
Relation extraction
Relation clustering
sentencesrelevant
filtering of
relationfiltering
table of clustered relations
sentence boundary
resolutioncoreference
detection,NE recognition,
Figure 4: System architecture
Figure 5: Skeleton for the NE pair ?Hohenzollern? and ?Brandenburg? in the sentence ?Subsequent members of
the Hohenzollern family ruled until 1918 in Berlin, first as electors of Brandenburg.?
The comparably large amount of data in the corpus
requires the use of an efficient clustering algorithm.
Standard ML clustering algorithms such as k-means
and EM (as provided by the Weka toolbox (Witten
and Frank, 2005)) have been tested for clustering the
relations at hand but were not able to deal with the
large number of features and instances required for an
adequate representation of our dataset. We thus de-
cided to use a scoring algorithm that compares a re-
lation to other relations based on certain aspects and
calculates a similarity score. If this similarity score ex-
ceeds a predefined threshold, two relations are grouped
together.
Similarity is measured based on the output from the
different preprocessing steps as well as lexical informa-
tion from WordNet (WordNet, 2007):
? WordNet: WordNet information is used to deter-
mine if two verb infinitives match or if they are in
the same synonym set.
? Parsing: The extracted dependency information is
used to measure the token overlap of the two sub-
jects and objects, respectively. We also compare
the subject of the first relation with the object of
the second relation and vice versa. In addition,
we compare the auxiliary verbs, prepositions and
preposition arguments found in the relation.
? NE recognition: The information from this step
is used to count how many of the NEs occurring
in the contexts, i.e., the sentences in which the
two relations are found, match and whether the
NE types of the subjects and objects, respectively,
match.
? Coreference resolution: This type of information
is used to compare the NE subject (or object) of
one relation to strings that appear in the same
coreference set as the subject (or object) of the
second relation.
Manually analyzing a set of extracted relation in-
stances, we defined weights for the different similarity
measures and calculated a similarity score for each re-
lation pair. We then defined a score threshold and clus-
tered relations by putting two relations into the same
cluster if their similarity score exceeded this threshold
value.
3. Experiments and results
For our experiments, we built a test corpus of doc-
uments related to the topic ?Berlin Hauptbahnhof?
by sending queries describing the topic (e.g., ?Berlin
Hauptbahnhof?, ?Berlin central station?) to Google
and downloading the retrieved documents specifying
English as the target language. After preprocessing
these documents as described in 2.1., our corpus con-
sisted of 55,255 sentences from 1,068 web pages, from
which 10773 relations were automatically extracted
and clustered.
3.1. Clustering
From the extracted relations, the system built 306 clus-
ters of two or more instances, which were manually
evaluated by two authors of this paper. 81 of our clus-
ters contain two or more instances of exactly the same
relation, mostly due to the same sentence appearing in
several documents of the corpus. Of the remaining 225
clusters, 121 were marked as consistent, 35 as partly
consistent, 69 as not consistent. We defined consis-
tency based on the potential usefulness of a cluster to
the user and identified three major types of potentially
useful clusters:
? Relation paraphrases, e.g.,
accused (Mr Moore, Disney, In letter)
accused (Michael Moore, Walt Disney
Company)
? Different instances of the same pattern, e.g.,
operates (Delta, flights, from New York)
offers (Lufthansa, flights, from DC)
? Relations about the same topic (NE), e.g.,
rejected (Mr Blair, pressure, from Labour
MPs)
reiterated (Mr Blair, ideas, in speech, on
March)
created (Mr Blair, doctrine)
...
Of our 121 consistent clusters, 76 were classified as be-
ing of the type ?same pattern?, 27 as being of the type
?same topic? and 18 as being of the type ?relation para-
phrases?. As many of our clusters contain two instances
only, we are planning to analyze whether some clusters
should be merged and how this could be achieved.
3.2. Relation extraction
In order to evaluate the performance of the relation ex-
traction component, we manually annotated 550 sen-
tences of the test corpus by tagging all NEs and verbs
and manually extracting potentially interesting verb
relations. We define ?potentially interesting verb rela-
tion? as a verb together with its arguments (i.e., sub-
ject, objects and PP arguments), where at least two
of the arguments are NEs and at least one of them
is the subject or an object. On the basis of this crite-
rion, we found 15 potentially interesting verb relations.
For the same sentences, the IDEX system extracted 27
relations, 11 of them corresponding to the manually
extracted ones. This yields a recall value of 73% and
a precision value of 41%.
There were two types of recall errors: First, errors in
sentence boundary detection, mainly due to noisy in-
put data (e.g., missing periods), which lead to parsing
errors, and second, NER errors, i.e., NEs that were
not recognised as such. Precision errors could mostly
be traced back to the NER component (sequences of
words were wrongly identified as NEs).
In the 550 manually annotated sentences, 1300 NEs
were identified as NEs by the NER component. 402
NEs were recognised correctly by the NER, 588
wrongly and in 310 cases only parts of an NE were
recognised. These 310 cases can be divided into three
groups of errors. First, NEs recognised correctly, but
labeled with the wrong NE type. Second, only parts
of the NE were recognised correctly, e.g., ?Touris-
mus Marketing GmbH? instead of ?Berlin Tourismus
Marketing GmbH?. Third, NEs containing additional
words, such as ?the? in ?the Brandenburg Gate?.
To judge the usefulness of the extracted relations, we
applied the following soft criterion: A relation is con-
sidered useful if it expresses the main information given
by the sentence or clause, in which the relation was
found. According to this criterion, six of the eleven
relations could be considered useful. The remaining
five relations lacked some relevant part of the sen-
tence/clause (e.g., a crucial part of an NE, like the
?ICC? in ?ICC Berlin?).
4. Possible enhancements
With only 15 manually extracted relations out of 550
sentences, we assume that our definition of ?potentially
interesting relation? is too strict, and that more inter-
esting relations could be extracted by loosening the ex-
traction criterion. To investigate on how the criterion
could be loosened, we analysed all those sentences in
the test corpus that contained at least two NEs in order
to find out whether some interesting relations were lost
by the definition and how the definition would have to
be changed in order to detect these relations. The ta-
ble in Figure 6 lists some suggestions of how this could
be achieved, together with example relations and the
number of additional relations that could be extracted
from the 550 test sentences.
In addition, more interesting relations could be
found with an NER component extended by more
types, e.g., DATE and EVENT. Open domain NER
may be useful in order to extract NEs of additional
types. Also, other types of relations could be inter-
esting, such as relations between coordinated NEs,
option example additional relations
extraction of relations,
where the NE is not the
complete subject, object or
PP argument, but only part
of it
Co-operation with <ORG>M.A.X.
2001<\ORG> <V>is<\V> clearly of
benefit to <ORG>BTM<\ORG>.
25
extraction of relations with
a complex VP
<ORG>BTM<\ORG> <V>invited and or
supported<\V> more than 1,000 media rep-
resentatives in <LOC>Berlin<\LOC>.
7
resolution of relative pro-
nouns
The <ORG>Oxford Centre for Maritime
Archaeology<\ORG> [...] which will
<V>conduct<\V> a scientific symposium in
<LOC>Berlin<\LOC>.
2
combination of several of the
options mentioned above
<LOC>Berlin<\LOC> has <V>developed to
become<\V> the entertainment capital of
<LOC>Germany<\LOC>.
7
Figure 6: Table illustrating different options according to which the definition of ?potentially interesting relation?
could be loosened. For each option, an example sentence from the test corpus is given, together with the number
of relations that could be extracted additionally from the test corpus.
e.g., in a sentence like The exhibition [...] shows
<PER>Clemens Brentano<\PER>, <PER>Achim
von Arnim<\PER> and <PER>Heinrich von
Kleist<\PER>, and between NEs occurring in the
same (complex) argument, e.g., <PER>Hanns Peter
Nerger<\PER>, CEO of <ORG>Berlin Tourismus
Marketing GmbH (BTM) <\ORG>, sums it up [...].
5. Related work
Our work is related to previous work on domain-
independent unsupervised relation extraction, in par-
ticular Sekine (2006), Shinyama and Sekine (2006) and
Banko et al (2007).
Sekine (2006) introduces On-demand information ex-
traction, which aims at automatically identifying
salient patterns and extracting relations based on these
patterns. He retrieves relevant documents from a
newspaper corpus based on a query and applies a POS
tagger, a dependency analyzer and an extended NE
tagger. Using the information from the taggers, he ex-
tracts patterns and applies paraphrase recognition to
create sets of semantically similar patterns. Shinyama
and Sekine (2006) apply NER, coreference resolution
and parsing to a corpus of newspaper articles to ex-
tract two-place relations between NEs. The extracted
relations are grouped into pattern tables of NE pairs
expressing the same relation, e.g., hurricanes and their
locations. Clustering is performed in two steps: they
first cluster all documents and use this information to
cluster the relations. However, only relations among
the five most highly-weighted entities in a cluster are
extracted and only the first ten sentences of each arti-
cle are taken into account.
Banko et al (2007) use a much larger corpus, namely
9 million web pages, to extract all relations between
noun phrases. Due to the large amount of data, they
apply POS tagging only. Their output consists of mil-
lions of relations, most of them being abstract asser-
tions such as (executive, hired by, company) rather
than concrete facts.
Our approach can be regarded as a combination of
these approaches: Like Banko et al (2007), we extract
relations from noisy web documents rather than com-
parably homogeneous news articles. However, rather
than extracting relations from millions of pages we re-
duce the size of our corpus beforehand using a query in
order to be able to apply more linguistic preprocessing.
Like Sekine (2006) and Shinyama and Sekine (2006),
we concentrate on relations involving NEs, the assump-
tion being that these relations are the potentially in-
teresting ones. The relation clustering step allows us
to group similar relations, which can, for example, be
useful for the generation of answers in a Question An-
swering system.
6. Future work
Since many errors were due to the noisiness of the ar-
bitrarily downloaded web documents, a more sophisti-
cated filtering step for extracting relevant textual infor-
mation from web sites before applying NE recognition,
parsing, etc. is likely to improve the performance of
the system.
The NER component plays a crucial role for the qual-
ity of the whole system, because the relation extraction
component depends heavily on the NER quality, and
thereby the NER quality influences also the results of
the clustering process. A possible solution to improve
NER in the IDEX System is to integrate a MetaNER
component, combining the results of several NER com-
ponents. Within the framework of the IDEX project
a MetaNER component already has been developed
(Heyl, to appear 2008), but not yet integrated into the
prototype. The MetaNER component developed uses
the results from three different NER systems. The out-
put of each NER component is weighted depending on
the component and if the sum of these values for a pos-
sible NE exceeds a certain threshold it is accepted as
NE otherwise it is rejected.
The clustering step returns many clusters containing
two instances only. A task for future work is to in-
vestigate, whether it is possible to build larger clus-
ters, which are still meaningful. One way of enlarging
cluster size is to extract more relations. This could
be achieved by loosening the extraction criteria as de-
scribed in section 4. Also, it would be interesting to see
whether clusters could be merged. This would require
a manual analysis of the created clusters.
Acknowledgement
The work presented here was partially supported by a
research grant from the?Programm zur Fo?rderung von
Forschung, Innovationen und Technologien (ProFIT)?
(FKZ: 10135984) and the European Regional Develop-
ment Fund (ERDF).
7. References
Michele Banko, Michael J. Cafarella, Stephen Soder-
land, Matthew Broadhead, and Oren Etzioni. 2007.
Open information extraction from the web. In Proc.
of the International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (IJCAI).
Andrea Heyl. to appear 2008. Unsupervised relation
extraction. Master?s thesis, Saarland University.
Lc4j. 2007. Language categorization library for Java.
http://www.olivo.net/software/lc4j/.
LingPipe. 2007. http://www.alias-i.com/lingpipe/.
Satoshi Sekine. 2006. On-demand information extrac-
tion. In ACL. The Association for Computer Lin-
guistics.
Yusuke Shinyama and Satoshi Sekine. 2006. Preemp-
tive information extraction using unrestricted re-
lation discovery. In Proc. of the main conference
on Human Language Technology Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association of Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 304?311. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Stanford Parser. 2007. http://nlp.stanford.edu/
downloads/lex-parser.shtml.
Ian H. Witten and Eibe Frank. 2005. Data Min-
ing: Practical machine learning tools and techniques.
Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, 2nd edition.
WordNet. 2007. http://wordnet.princeton.edu/.
Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 1180?1189,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
ImpAr: A Deterministic Algorithm for Implicit Semantic Role Labelling
Egoitz Laparra
IXA Group
University of the Basque Country
San Sebastian, Spain
egoitz.laparra@ehu.es
German Rigau
IXA Group
University of the Basque Country
San Sebastian, Spain
german.rigau@ehu.es
Abstract
This paper presents a novel deterministic
algorithm for implicit Semantic Role La-
beling. The system exploits a very sim-
ple but relevant discursive property, the ar-
gument coherence over different instances
of a predicate. The algorithm solves the
implicit arguments sequentially, exploit-
ing not only explicit but also the implicit
arguments previously solved. In addition,
we empirically demonstrate that the algo-
rithm obtains very competitive and robust
performances with respect to supervised
approaches that require large amounts of
costly training data.
1 Introduction
Traditionally, Semantic Role Labeling (SRL) sys-
tems have focused in searching the fillers of those
explicit roles appearing within sentence bound-
aries (Gildea and Jurafsky, 2000, 2002; Carreras
and Ma`rquez, 2005; Surdeanu et al, 2008; Hajic?
et al, 2009). These systems limited their search-
space to the elements that share a syntactical re-
lation with the predicate. However, when the par-
ticipants of a predicate are implicit this approach
obtains incomplete predicative structures with null
arguments. The following example includes the
gold-standard annotations for a traditional SRL
process:
(1) [arg0 The network] had been expected to have [np
losses] [arg1 of as much as $20 million] [arg3 on base-
ball this year]. It isn?t clear how much those [np losses]
may widen because of the short Series.
The previous analysis includes annotations for
the nominal predicate loss based on the NomBank
structure (Meyers et al, 2004). In this case the
annotator identifies, in the first sentence, the argu-
ments arg0, the entity losing something, arg1, the
thing lost, and arg3, the source of that loss. How-
ever, in the second sentence there is another in-
stance of the same predicate, loss, but in this case
no argument has been associated with it. Tradi-
tional SRL systems facing this type of examples
are not able to fill the arguments of a predicate
because their fillers are not in the same sentence
of the predicate. Moreover, these systems also let
unfilled arguments occurring in the same sentence,
like in the following example:
(2) Quest Medical Inc said it adopted [arg1 a sharehold-
ers? rights] [np plan] in which rights to purchase shares
of common stock will be distributed as a dividend to
shareholders of record as of Oct 23.
For the predicate plan in the previous sentence,
a traditional SRL process only returns the filler for
the argument arg1, the theme of the plan.
However, in both examples, a reader could eas-
ily infer the missing arguments from the surround-
ing context of the predicate, and determine that
in (1) both instances of the predicate share the
same arguments and in (2) the missing argument
corresponds to the subject of the verb that domi-
nates the predicate, Quest Medical Inc. Obviously,
this additional annotations could contribute posi-
tively to its semantic analysis. In fact, Gerber and
Chai (2010) pointed out that implicit arguments
can increase the coverage of argument structures
in NomBank by 71%. However, current automatic
systems require large amounts of manually anno-
tated training data for each predicate. The effort
required for this manual annotation explains the
absence of generally applicable tools. This prob-
lem has become a main concern for many NLP
tasks. This fact explains a new trend to develop
accurate unsupervised systems that exploit sim-
ple but robust linguistic principles (Raghunathan
et al, 2010).
In this work, we study the coherence of the
predicate and argument realization in discourse. In
particular, we have followed a similar approach to
1180
the one proposed by Dahl et al (1987) who filled
the arguments of anaphoric mentions of nominal
predicates using previous mentions of the same
predicate. We present an extension of this idea
assuming that in a coherent document the differ-
ent ocurrences of a predicate, including both ver-
bal and nominal forms, tend to be mentions of
the same event, and thus, they share the same
argument fillers. Following this approach, we
have developed a deterministic algorithm that ob-
tains competitive results with respect to supervised
methods. That is, our system can be applied to any
predicate without training data.
The main contributions of this work are the fol-
lowing:
? We empirically prove that there exists a
strong discourse relationship between the im-
plicit and explicit argument fillers of the same
predicates.
? We propose a deterministic approach that ex-
ploits this discoursive property in order to ob-
tain the fillers of implicit arguments.
? We adapt to the implicit SRL problem a clas-
sic algorithm for pronoun resolution.
? We develop a robust algorithm, ImpAr, that
obtains very competitive results with respect
to existing supervised systems. We release
an open source prototype implementing this
algorithm1.
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2
discusses the related work. Section 3 presents in
detail the data used in our experiments. Section
4 describes our algorithm for implicit argument
resolution. Section 5 presents some experiments
we have carried out to test the algorithm. Section
6 discusses the results obtained. Finally, section
7 offers some concluding remarks and presents
some future research lines.
2 Related Work
The first attempt for the automatic annotation of
implicit semantic roles was proposed by Palmer
et al (1986). This work applied selectional restric-
tions together with coreference chains, in a very
specific domain. In a similar approach, Whitte-
more et al (1991) also attempted to solve implicit
1http://adimen.si.ehu.es/web/ImpAr
arguments using some manually described seman-
tic constraints for each thematic role they tried to
cover. Another early approach was presented by
Tetreault (2002). Studying another specific do-
main, they obtained some probabilistic relations
between some roles. These early works agree that
the problem is, in fact, a special case of anaphora
or coreference resolution.
Recently, the task has been taken up again
around two different proposals. On the one
hand, Ruppenhofer et al (2010) presented a task
in SemEval-2010 that included an implicit argu-
ment identification challenge based on FrameNet
(Baker et al, 1998). The corpus for this task
consisted in some novel chapters. They covered
a wide variety of nominal and verbal predicates,
each one having only a small number of instances.
Only two systems were presented for this sub-
task obtaining quite poor results (F1 below 0,02).
VENSES++ (Tonelli and Delmonte, 2010) applied
a rule based anaphora resolution procedure and se-
mantic similarity between candidates and thematic
roles using WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998). The sys-
tem was tuned in (Tonelli and Delmonte, 2011)
improving slightly its performance. SEMAFOR
(Chen et al, 2010) is a supervised system that
extended an existing semantic role labeler to en-
large the search window to other sentences, replac-
ing the features defined for regular arguments with
two new semantic features. Although this system
obtained the best performance in the task, data
sparseness strongly affected the results. Besides
the two systems presented to the task, some other
systems have used the same dataset and evaluation
metrics. Ruppenhofer et al (2011), Laparra and
Rigau (2012), Gorinski et al (2013) and Laparra
and Rigau (2013) explore alternative linguistic and
semantic strategies. These works obtained signifi-
cant gains over previous approaches. Silberer and
Frank (2012) adapted an entity-based coreference
resolution model to extend automatically the train-
ing corpus. Exploiting this additional data, their
system was able to improve previous results. Fol-
lowing this approach Moor et al (2013) present a
corpus of predicate-specific annotations for verbs
in the FrameNet paradigm that are aligned with
PropBank and VerbNet.
On the other hand, Gerber and Chai (2010,
2012) studied the implicit argument resolution on
NomBank. They uses a set of syntactic, semantic
and coreferential features to train a logistic regres-
1181
sion classifier. Unlike the dataset from SemEval-
2010 (Ruppenhofer et al, 2010), in this work the
authors focused on a small set of ten predicates.
But for those predicates, they annotated a large
amount of instances in the documents from the
Wall Street Journal that were already annotated
for PropBank (Palmer et al, 2005) and NomBank.
This allowed them to avoid the sparseness prob-
lems and generalize properly from the training
set. The results of this system were far better
than those obtained by the systems that faced the
SemEval-2010 dataset. This works represent the
deepest study so far of the features that charac-
terizes the implicit arguments 2. However, many
of the most important features are lexically depen-
dent on the predicate and cannot been generalized.
Thus, specific annotations are required for each
new predicate to be analyzed.
All the works presented in this section agree that
implicit arguments must be modeled as a particu-
lar case of coreference together with features that
include lexical-semantic information, to build se-
lectional preferences. Another common point is
the fact that these works try to solve each instance
of the implicit arguments independently, without
taking into account the previous realizations of
the same implicit argument in the document. We
propose that these realizations, together with the
explicit ones, must maintain a certain coherence
along the document and, in consequence, the filler
of an argument remains the same along the fol-
lowing instances of that argument until a stronger
evidence indicates a change. We also propose that
this feature can be exploited independently from
the predicate.
3 Datasets
In our experiments, we have focused on the dataset
developed in Gerber and Chai (2010, 2012). This
dataset (hereinafter BNB which stands for ?Be-
yond NomBank?) extends existing predicate an-
notations for NomBank and ProbBank.
BNB presented the first annotation work of im-
plicit arguments based on PropBank and Nom-
Bank frames. This annotation was an extension
of the standard training, development and testing
sections of Penn TreeBank that have been typi-
cally used for SRL evaluation and were already
annotated with PropBank and NomBank predicate
2Gerber and Chai (2012) includes a set of 81 different fea-
tures.
structures. The authors selected a limited set of
predicates. These predicates are all nominaliza-
tions of other verbal predicates, without sense am-
biguity, that appear frequently in the corpus and
tend to have implicit arguments associated with
their instances. These constraints allowed them to
model enough occurrences of each implicit argu-
ment in order to cover adequately all the possible
cases appearing in a test document. For each miss-
ing argument position they went over all the pre-
ceding sentences and annotated all mentions of the
filler of that argument. In tables 3 and 4 we show
the list of predicates and the resulting figures of
this annotation.
In this work we also use the corpus provided
for the CoNLL-2008 task. These corpora cover
the same BNB documents and include annotated
predictions for syntactic dependencies and Super-
Sense labels as semantic tags. Unlike Gerber and
Chai (2010, 2012) we do not use the constituent
analysis from the Penn TreeBank.
4 ImpAr algorithm
4.1 Discoursive coherence of predicates
Exploring the training dataset of BNB, we ob-
served a very strong discourse effect on the im-
plicit and explicit argument fillers of the predi-
cates. That is, if several instances of the same
predicate appear in a well-written discourse, it is
very likely that they maintain the same argument
fillers. This property holds when joining the dif-
ferent parts-of-speech of the predicates (nominal
or verbal) and the explicit or implicit realizations
of the argument fillers. For instance, we observed
that 46% of all implicit arguments share the same
filler with the previous instance of the same predi-
cate while only 14% of them have a different filler.
The remaining 40% of all implicit arguments cor-
respond to first occurrences of their predicates.
That is, these fillers can not be recovered from pre-
vious instances of their predicates.
The rationale behind this phenomena seems to
be simple. When referring to different aspects of
the same event, the writer of a coherent document
does not repeat redundant information. They re-
fer to previous predicate instances assuming that
the reader already recalls the involved participants.
That is, the filler of the different instances of a
predicate argument maintain a certain discourse
coherence. For instance, in example (1), all the ar-
gument positions of the second occurrence of the
1182
predicate loss are missing, but they can be easily
inferred from the previous instance of the same
predicate.
(1) [arg0 The network] had been expected to have [np
losses] [arg1 of as much as $20 million] [arg3 on base-
ball this year]. It isn?t clear how much those [np losses]
may widen because of the short Series.
Therefore, we propose to exploit this property
in order to capture correctly how the fillers of all
predicate arguments evolve through a document.
Our algorithm, ImpAr, processes the docu-
ments sentence by sentence, assuming that se-
quences of the same predicate (in its nominal or
verbal form) share the same argument fillers (ex-
plicit or implicit)3. Thus, for every core argument
argn of a predicate, ImpAr stores its previous
known filler as a default value. If the arguments
of a predicate are explicit, they always replace de-
fault fillers previously captured. When there is no
antecedent for a particular implicit argument argn,
the algorithm tries to find in the surrounding con-
text which participant is the most likely to be the
filler according to some salience factors (see Sec-
tion 4.2). For the following instances, without an
explicit filler for a particular argument position,
the algorithm repeats the same selection process
and compares the new implicit candidate with the
default one. That is, the default implicit argument
of a predicate with no antecedent can change ev-
ery time the algorithm finds a filler with a greater
salience. A damping factor is applied to reduce the
salience of distant predicates.
4.2 Filling arguments without explicit
antecedents
Filling the implicit arguments of a predicate has
been identified as a particular case of corefer-
ence, very close to pronoun resolution (Silberer
and Frank, 2012). Consequently, for those implicit
arguments that have not explicit antecedents, we
propose an adaptation of a classic algorithm for
deterministic pronoun resolution. This component
of our algorithm follows the RAP approach (Lap-
pin and Leass, 1994). When our algorithm needs
to fill an implicit predicate argument without an
explicit antecedent it considers a set of candidates
within a window formed by the sentence of the
predicate and the two previous sentences. Then,
the algorithm performs the following steps:
3Note that the algorithm could also consider sequences of
closely related predicates.
1. Apply two constraints to the candidate list:
(a) All candidates that are already explicit arguments
of the predicate are ruled out.
(b) All candidates commanded by the predicate in
the dependency tree are ruled out.
2. Select those candidates that are semantically consistent
with the semantic category of the implicit argument.
3. Assign a salience score to each candidate.
4. Sort the candidates by their proximity to the predicate
of the implicit argument.
5. Select the candidate with the highest salience value.
As a result, the candidate with the highest
salience value is selected as the filler of the im-
plicit argument. Thus, this filler with its corre-
sponding salience weight will be also considered
in subsequent instances of the same predicate.
Now, we explain each step in more detail using
example (2). In this example, arg0 is missing for
the predicate plan:
(2) Quest Medical Inc said it adopted [arg1 a sharehold-
ers? rights] [np plan] in which rights to purchase shares
of common stock will be distributed as a dividend to
shareholders of record as of Oct 23.
Filtering. In the first step, the algorithm fil-
ters out the candidates that are actual explicit argu-
ments of the predicate or have a syntactic depen-
dency with the predicate, and therefore, they are in
the search space of a traditional SRL system.
In our example, the filtering process would re-
move [a shareholders? rights] because it is already
the explicit argument arg1, and [in which rights
to purchase shares of common stock will be dis-
tributed as a dividend to shareholders of record as
of Oct 23] because it is syntactically commanded
by the predicate plan.
Semantic consistency. To determine the se-
mantic coherence between the potential candidates
and a predicate argument argn, we have exploited
the selectional preferences in the same way as
in previous SRL and implicit argument resolution
works. First, we have designed a list of very
general semantic categories. Second, we have
semi-automatically assigned one of them to every
predicate argument argn in PropBank and Nom-
Bank. For this, we have used the semantic an-
notation provided by the training documents of
the CoNLL-2008 dataset. This annotation was
performed automatically using the SuperSense-
Tagger (Ciaramita and Altun, 2006) and includes
1183
named-entities and WordNet Super-Senses4. We
have also defined a mapping between the semantic
classes provided by the SuperSenseTagger and our
seven semantic categories (see Table 1 for more
details). Then, we have acquired the most com-
mon categories of each predicate argument argn.
ImpAr algorithm also uses the SuperSenseTagger
over the documents to be processed from BNB
to check if the candidate belongs to the expected
semantic category of the implicit argument to be
filled.
Following the example above, [Quest Medi-
cal Inc] is tagged as an ORGANIZATION by the
SuperSenseTagger. Therefore, it belongs to our
semantic category COGNITIVE. As the seman-
tic category for the implicit argument arg0 for
the predicate plan has been recognized to be also
COGNITIVE, [Quest Medical Inc] remains in the
list of candidates as a possible filler.
Semantic category Name-entities Super-Senses
COGNITIVE
PERSON noun.personORGANIZATION noun.groupANIMAL noun.animal... ...
TANGIBLE PRODUCT noun.artifactSUBSTANCE noun.object... ...
EVENTIVE GAME noun.actDISEASE noun.communication... ...
RELATIVE noun.shapenoun.attribute...LOCATIVE LOCATION noun.locationTIME DATE noun.time
MESURABLE QUANTITY noun.quantityPERCENT...
Table 1: Links between the semantic categories and some
name-entities and super-senses.
Salience weighting. In this process, the algo-
rithm assigns to each candidate a set of salience
factors that scores its prominence. The sentence
recency factor prioritizes the candidates that oc-
cur close to the same sentence of the predicate.
The subject, direct object, indirect object and non-
adverbial factors weight the salience of the candi-
date depending on the syntactic role they belong
to. Additionally, the head of these syntactic roles
are prioritized by the head factor. We have used
the same weights, listed in table 2, proposed by
Lappin and Leass (1994).
In the example, candidate [Quest Medical Inc]
is in the same sentence as the predicate plan, it
4Lexicographic files according to WordNet terminology.
Factor type weight
Sentence recency 100
Subject 80
Direct object 50
Indirect object 40
Head 80
Non-adverbial 50
Table 2: Weights assigned to each salience factor.
belongs to a subject, and, indeed, it is the head
of that subject. Hence, the salience score for this
candidate is: 100 + 80 + 80 = 260.
4.3 Damping the salience of the default
candidate
As the algorithm maintains the default candidate
until an explicit filler appears, potential errors pro-
duced in the automatic selection process explained
above can spread to distant implicit instances, spe-
cially when the salience score of the default can-
didate is high. In order to reduce the impact of
these errors we have included a damping factor
that is applied sentence by sentence to the salience
value of the default candidate. ImpAr applies that
damping factor, r, as follows. It assumes that, in-
dependently of the initial salience assigned, 100
points of the salience score came from the sen-
tence recency factor. Then, the algorithm changes
this value multiplying it by r. So, given a salience
score s, the value of the score in a following sen-
tence, s?, is:
s? = s? 100 + 100 ? r
Obviously, the value of r must be defined with-
out harming excessively those cases where the de-
fault candidate has been correctly identified. For
this, we studied in the training dataset the cases
of implicit arguments filled with the default can-
didate. Figure 1 shows that the influence of the
default filler is much higher in near sentences that
in more distance ones.
We tried to mimic a damping factor following
this distribution. That is, to maintain high score
salience for the near sentences while strongly de-
creasing them in the subsequent ones. In this way,
if the filler of the implicit argument is wrongly
identified, the error only spreads to the nearest in-
stances. If the identification is correct, a lower
score for more distance sentences is not too harm-
ful. The distribution shown in figure 1 follows
an exponential decay, therefore we have described
the damping factor as a curve like the following,
where ? must be a value within 0 and 1:
1184
Figure 1: Distances between the implicit argument and the
default candidate. The y axis indicate the percentage of cases
occurring in each sentence distance, expressed in x
r = ?d
In this function, d stands for the sentence dis-
tance and r for the damping factor to apply in that
sentence. In this paper, we have decided to set the
value of ? to 0.5.
r = 0.5d
This value maintains the influence of the default
fillers with high salience in near sentences. But it
decreases that influence strongly in the following.
In order to illustrate the whole process we will
use the previous example. In that case, [Quest
Medical Inc] is selected as the arg0 of plan with
a salience score of 260. Therefore [Quest Medi-
cal Inc] becomes the default arg0 of plan. In the
following sentence the damping factor is:
0.5 = 0.51
Therefore, its salience score changes to 260 ?
100+100?0.5 = 210. Then, the algorithm changes
the default filler for arg0 only if it finds a candi-
date that scores higher in their current context. At
two sentence distance, the resulting score for the
default filler is 260 ? 100 + 100 ? 0.25 = 185. In
this way, at more distance sentences, the influence
of the default filler of arg0 becomes smaller.
5 Evaluation
In order to evaluate the performance of the Im-
pAr algorithm, we have followed the evaluation
method presented by Gerber and Chai (2010,
2012). For every argument position in the gold-
standard the scorer expects a single predicted con-
stituent to fill in. In order to evaluate the correct
span of a constituent, a prediction is scored using
the Dice coefficient:
2|Predicted ? True|
|Predicted| + |True|
The function above relates the set of tokens that
form a predicted constituent, Predicted, and the
set of tokens that are part of an annotated con-
stituent in the gold-standard, True. For each
missing argument, the gold-standard includes the
whole coreference chain of the filler. Therefore,
the scorer selects from all coreferent mentions the
highest Dice value. If the predicted span does not
cover the head of the annotated filler, the scorer re-
turns zero. Then, Precision is calculated by the
sum of all prediction scores divided by the number
of attempts carried out by the system. Recall is
equal to the sum of the prediction scores divided
by the number of actual annotations in the gold-
standard. F-measure is calculated as the harmonic
mean of recall and precision.
Traditionally, there have been two approaches
to develop SRL systems, one based on constituent
trees and the other one based on syntactic depen-
dencies. Additionally, the evaluation of both types
of systems has been performed differently. For
constituent based SRL systems the scorers eval-
uate the correct span of the filler, while for depen-
dency based systems the scorer just check if the
systems are able to capture the head token of the
filler. As shown above, previous works in implicit
argument resolution proposed a metric that in-
volves the correct identification of the whole span
of the filler. ImpAr algorithm works with syntac-
tic dependencies and therefore it only returns the
head token of the filler. In order to compare our
results with previous works, we had to apply some
simple heuristics to guess the correct span of the
filler. Obviously, this process inserts some noise
in the final evaluation.
We have performed a first evaluation over the
test set used in (Gerber and Chai, 2010). This
dataset contains 437 predicate instances but just
246 argument positions are implicitly filled. Table
3 includes the results obtained by ImpAr, the re-
sults of the system presented by Gerber and Chai
(2010) and the baseline proposed for the task. Best
results are marked in bold5. For all predicates,
ImpAr improves over the baseline (19.3 points
higher in the overall F1). Our system also out-
performs the one presented by Gerber and Chai
(2010). Interestingly, both systems present very
different performances predicate by predicate. For
5No proper significance test can be carried out without the
the full predictions of all systems involved.
1185
Baseline Gerber & Chai ImpAr
#Inst. #Imp. F1 P R F1 P R F1
sale 64 65 36.2 47.2 41.7 44.2 41.2 39.4 40.3
price 121 53 15.4 36.0 32.6 34.2 53.3 53.3 53.3
investor 78 35 9.8 36.8 40.0 38.4 43.0 39.5 41.2
bid 19 26 32.3 23.8 19.2 21.3 52.9 51.0 52.0
plan 25 20 38.5 78.6 55.0 64.7 40.7 40.7 40.7
cost 25 17 34.8 61.1 64.7 62.9 56.1 50.2 53.0
loss 30 12 52.6 83.3 83.3 83.3 68.4 63.5 65.8
loan 11 9 18.2 42.9 33.3 37.5 25.0 20.0 22.2
investment 21 8 0.0 40.0 25.0 30.8 47.6 35.7 40.8
fund 43 6 0.0 14.3 16.7 15.4 66.7 33.3 44.4
Overall 437 246 26.5 44.5 40.4 42.3 47.9 43.8 45.8
Table 3: Evaluation with the test. The results from (Gerber and Chai, 2010) are included.
Baseline Gerber & Chai ImpAr
#Inst. #Imp. F1 P R F1 P R F1
sale 184 181 37.3 59.2 44.8 51.0 44.3 43.3 43.8
price 216 138 34.6 56.0 48.7 52.1 55.0 54.5 54.7
investor 160 108 5.1 46.7 39.8 43.0 28.2 27.0 27.6
bid 88 124 23.8 60.0 36.3 45.2 48.4 41.8 45.0
plan 100 77 32.3 59.6 44.1 50.7 47.0 47.0 47.0
cost 101 86 17.8 62.5 50.9 56.1 49.2 43.7 46.2
loss 104 62 54.7 72.5 59.7 65.5 63.0 58.2 60.5
loan 84 82 31.2 67.2 50.0 57.3 56.4 45.6 50.6
investment 102 52 15.5 32.9 34.2 33.6 41.2 30.9 35.4
fund 108 56 15.5 80.0 35.7 49.4 55.6 44.6 49.5
Overall 1,247 966 28.9 57.9 44.5 50.3 47.7 43.0 45.3
Table 4: Evaluation with the full dataset. The results from (Gerber and Chai, 2012) are included.
instance, our system obtains much higher results
for the predicates bid and fund, while much lower
for loss and loan. In general, ImpAr seems to be
more robust since it obtains similar performances
for all predicates. In fact, the standard deviation,
? , of F1 measure is 10.98 for ImpAr while this
value for the (Gerber and Chai, 2010) system is
20.00.
In a more recent work, Gerber and Chai (2012)
presented some improvements of their previous
results. In this work, they extended the evalua-
tion of their model using the whole dataset and
not just the testing documents. Applying a cross-
validated approach they tried to solve some prob-
lems that they found in the previous evaluation,
like the small size of the testing set. For this work,
they also studied a wider set of features, specially,
they experimented with some statistics learnt from
parts of GigaWord automatically annotated. Table
4 shows that the improvement over their previous
system was remarkable. The system also seems
to be more stable across predicates. For compar-
ison purposes, we also included the performance
of ImpAr applied over the whole dataset.
The results in table 4 show that, although ImpAr
still achieves the best results in some cases, this
time, it cannot beat the overall results obtained by
the supervised model. In fact, both systems obtain
a very similar recall, but the system from (Gerber
and Chai, 2012) obtains much higher precision.
In both cases, the ? value of F1 is reduced, 8.81
for ImpAr and 8.21 for (Gerber and Chai, 2012).
However, ImpAr obtains very similar performance
independently of the testing dataset what proves
the robustness of the algorithm. This suggests
that our algorithm can obtain strong results also
for other corpus and predicates. Instead, the su-
pervised approach would need a large amount of
manual annotations for every predicate to be pro-
cessed.
6 Discussion
6.1 Component Analysis
In order to assess the contribution of each sys-
tem component, we also tested the performance
of ImpAr algorithm when disabling only one of
its components. With this evaluations we pretend
to sight the particular contribution of each compo-
nent. In table 5 we present the results obtained in
the following experiments for the two testing sets
explained in section 5:
? Exp1: The damping factor is disabled. All se-
lected fillers maintain the same salience over
1186
all sentences.
? Exp2: Only explicit fillers are considered as
candidates6.
? Exp3: No default fillers are considered as
candidates.
As expected, we observe a very similar perfor-
mances in both datasets. Additionally, the high-
est loss appears when the default fillers are ruled
out (Exp3). In particular, it also seems that the
explicit information from previous predicates pro-
vides the most correct evidence (Exp2). Also note
that for Exp2, the system obtains the highest preci-
sion. This means that the most accurate cases are
obtained by previous explicit antecedents.
test full
P R F1 P R F1
full 47.9 43.8 45.8 47.7 43.0 45.3
Exp1 45.7 41.8 43.6 47.1 42.5 44.8
Exp2 51.2 24.6 33.2 55.3 25.5 34.9
Exp3 34.6 29.7 31.9 34.8 28.9 31.5
Exp4 42.6 37.9 40.1 37.5 31.2 34.1
Exp5 38.8 34.5 36.5 35.7 29.7 32.4
Exp6 53.3 48.7 50.9 52.4 47.2 49.6
Table 5: Exp1, Exp2 and Exp3 correspond to ablations of the
components. Exp3 and Exp4 are experiments over the cases
that are not solved by explicit antecedents. Exp6 evaluates
the system capturing just the head tokens of the constituents.
As Exp1 also includes instances with explicit
antecedents, and for these cases the damping fac-
tor component has no effect, we have designed two
additional experiments:
? Exp4: Full system for the cases not solved by
explicit antecedents.
? Exp5: As in Exp4 but with the damping fac-
tor disabled.
As expected, now the contribution of the dump-
ing factor seems to be more relevant, in particular,
for the test dataset.
6.2 Correct span of the fillers
As explained in Section 5, our algorithm works
with syntactic dependencies and its predictions
only return the head token of the filler. Obtaining
the correct constituents from syntactic dependen-
cies is not trivial. In this work we have applied
a simple heuristic that returns all the descendant
6That is, implicit arguments without explicit antecedents
are not filled.
tokens of the predicted head token. This naive
process inserts some noise to the evaluation of the
system. For example, from the following sentence
our system gives the following prediction for an
implicit arg1 of an instance of the predicate sale:
Ports of Call Inc. reached agreements to sell its re-
maining seven aircraft [arg1 to buyers] that weren?t
disclosed.
But the actual gold-standard annotation is:
[arg1 buyers that weren?t disclosed]. Although the
head of the constituent, buyers, is correctly cap-
tured by ImpAr, the final prediction is heavily pe-
nalized by the scoring method. Table 5 presents
the results of ImpAr when evaluating the head to-
kens of the constituents only (Exp6). These results
show that the current performance of our system
can be easily improved applying a more accurate
process for capturing the correct span.
7 Conclusions and Future Work
In this work we have presented a robust determin-
istic approach for implicit Semantic Role Label-
ing. The method exploits a very simple but rel-
evant discoursive coherence property that holds
over explicit and implicit arguments of closely re-
lated nominal and verbal predicates. This prop-
erty states that if several instances of the same
predicate appear in a well-written discourse, it is
very likely that they maintain the same argument
fillers. We have shown the importance of this phe-
nomenon for recovering the implicit information
about semantic roles. To our knowledge, this is the
first empirical study that proves this phenomenon.
Based on these observations, we have devel-
oped a new deterministic algorithm, ImpAr, that
obtains very competitive and robust performances
with respect to supervised approaches. That is, it
can be applied where there is no available manual
annotations to train. The code of this algorithm is
publicly available and can be applied to any docu-
ment. As input it only needs the document with
explicit semantic role labeling and Super-Sense
annotations. These annotations can be easily ob-
tained from plain text using available tools7, what
makes this algorithm the first effective tool avail-
able for implicit SRL.
As it can be easily seen, ImpAr has a large
margin for improvement. For instance, providing
more accurate spans for the fillers. We also plan
7We recommend mate-tools (Bjo?rkelund et al, 2009) and
SuperSenseTagger (Ciaramita and Altun, 2006).
1187
to test alternative approaches to solve the argu-
ments without explicit antecedents. For instance,
our system can also profit from additional annota-
tions like coreference, that has proved its utility in
previous works. Finally, we also plan to study our
approach on different languages and datasets (for
instance, the SemEval-2010 dataset).
8 Acknowledgment
We are grateful to the anonymous reviewers
for their insightful comments. This work has
been partially funded by SKaTer (TIN2012-
38584-C06-02), OpeNER (FP7-ICT-2011-SME-
DCL-296451) and NewsReader (FP7-ICT-2011-
8-316404), as well as the READERS project
with the financial support of MINECO, ANR
(convention ANR-12-CHRI-0004-03) and EPSRC
(EP/K017845/1) in the framework of ERA-NET
CHIST-ERA (UE FP7/2007-2013).
References
Baker, C. F., C. J. Fillmore, and J. B. Lowe (1998).
The berkeley framenet project. In Proceedings
of the 36th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics and 17th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics, ACL ?98, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, pp.
86?90.
Bjo?rkelund, A., L. Hafdell, and P. Nugues (2009).
Multilingual semantic role labeling. In Pro-
ceedings of the Thirteenth Conference on Com-
putational Natural Language Learning: Shared
Task, CoNLL ?09, Boulder, Colorado, USA, pp.
43?48.
Carreras, X. and L. Ma`rquez (2005). Introduction
to the conll-2005 shared task: Semantic role la-
beling. In Proceedings of the 9th Conference
on Computational Natural Language Learning,
CoNLL ?05, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA, pp.
152?164.
Chen, D., N. Schneider, D. Das, and N. A. Smith
(2010). Semafor: Frame argument resolution
with log-linear models. In Proceedings of the
5th International Workshop on Semantic Eval-
uation, SemEval ?10, Los Angeles, California,
USA, pp. 264?267.
Ciaramita, M. and Y. Altun (2006). Broad-
coverage sense disambiguation and information
extraction with a supersense sequence tagger. In
Proceedings of the 2006 Conference on Empir-
ical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
EMNLP ?06, Sydney, Australia, pp. 594?602.
Dahl, D. A., M. S. Palmer, and R. J. Passonneau
(1987). Nominalizations in pundit. In In Pro-
ceedings of the 25th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, ACL
?87, Stanford, California, USA, pp. 131?139.
Fellbaum, C. (1998). WordNet: an electronic lexi-
cal database. MIT Press.
Gerber, M. and J. Chai (2012, December). Se-
mantic role labeling of implicit arguments for
nominal predicates. Computational Linguis-
tics 38(4), 755?798.
Gerber, M. and J. Y. Chai (2010). Beyond nom-
bank: a study of implicit arguments for nomi-
nal predicates. In Proceedings of the 48th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, ACL ?10, Uppsala, Sweden,
pp. 1583?1592.
Gildea, D. and D. Jurafsky (2000). Automatic la-
beling of semantic roles. In Proceedings of the
38th Annual Meeting on Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, ACL ?00, Hong Kong,
pp. 512?520.
Gildea, D. and D. Jurafsky (2002, September).
Automatic labeling of semantic roles. Compu-
tational Linguistics 28(3), 245?288.
Gorinski, P., J. Ruppenhofer, and C. Sporleder
(2013). Towards weakly supervised resolution
of null instantiations. In Proceedings of the 10th
International Conference on Computational Se-
mantics, IWCS ?13, Potsdam, Germany, pp.
119?130.
Hajic?, J., M. Ciaramita, R. Johansson, D. Kawa-
hara, M. A. Mart??, L. Ma`rquez, A. Meyers,
J. Nivre, S. Pado?, J. S?te?pa?nek, P. Stran?a?k,
M. Surdeanu, N. Xue, and Y. Zhang (2009).
The CoNLL-2009 shared task: Syntactic and
semantic dependencies in multiple languages.
In Proceedings of the Thirteenth Conference
on Computational Natural Language Learning:
Shared Task, CoNLL ?09, Boulder, Colorado,
USA, pp. 1?18.
Laparra, E. and G. Rigau (2012). Exploiting ex-
plicit annotations and semantic types for im-
plicit argument resolution. In 6th IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Semantic Computing,
ICSC ?12, Palermo, Italy, pp. 75?78.
1188
Laparra, E. and G. Rigau (2013). Sources of evi-
dence for implicit argument resolution. In Pro-
ceedings of the 10th International Conference
on Computational Semantics, IWCS ?13, Pots-
dam, Germany, pp. 155?166.
Lappin, S. and H. J. Leass (1994, December). An
algorithm for pronominal anaphora resolution.
Computational Linguistics 20(4), 535?561.
Meyers, A., R. Reeves, C. Macleod, R. Szekely,
V. Zielinska, B. Young, and R. Grishman
(2004). The nombank project: An interim re-
port. In In Proceedings of the NAACL/HLT
Workshop on Frontiers in Corpus Annota-
tion, HLT-NAACL ?04, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA, pp. 24?31.
Moor, T., M. Roth, and A. Frank (2013).
Predicate-specific annotations for implicit role
binding: Corpus annotation, data analysis and
evaluation experiments. In Proceedings of
the 10th International Conference on Compu-
tational Semantics, IWCS ?13, Potsdam, Ger-
many, pp. 369?375.
Palmer, M., D. Gildea, and P. Kingsbury (2005,
March). The proposition bank: An annotated
corpus of semantic roles. Computational Lin-
guistics 31(1), 71?106.
Palmer, M. S., D. A. Dahl, R. J. Schiffman,
L. Hirschman, M. Linebarger, and J. Dowding
(1986). Recovering implicit information. In
Proceedings of the 24th annual meeting on As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, ACL
?86, New York, New York, USA, pp. 10?19.
Raghunathan, K., H. Lee, S. Rangarajan,
N. Chambers, M. Surdeanu, D. Jurafsky, and
C. Manning (2010). A multi-pass sieve for
coreference resolution. In Proceedings of the
2010 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing, EMNLP ?10, Cam-
bridge, Massachusetts, USA, pp. 492?501.
Ruppenhofer, J., P. Gorinski, and C. Sporleder
(2011). In search of missing arguments: A lin-
guistic approach. In Proceedings of the Inter-
national Conference Recent Advances in Nat-
ural Language Processing 2011, RANLP ?11,
Hissar, Bulgaria, pp. 331?338.
Ruppenhofer, J., C. Sporleder, R. Morante,
C. Baker, and M. Palmer (2010). Semeval-2010
task 10: Linking events and their participants
in discourse. In Proceedings of the 5th Inter-
national Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, Se-
mEval ?10, Los Angeles, California, USA, pp.
45?50.
Silberer, C. and A. Frank (2012). Casting implicit
role linking as an anaphora resolution task. In
Proceedings of the First Joint Conference on
Lexical and Computational Semantics, *SEM
?12, Montre?al, Canada, pp. 1?10.
Surdeanu, M., R. Johansson, A. Meyers,
L. Ma`rquez, and J. Nivre (2008). The CoNLL-
2008 shared task on joint parsing of syntactic
and semantic dependencies. In Proceedings of
the Twelfth Conference on Natural Language
Learning, CoNLL ?08, Manchester, United
Kingdom, pp. 159?177.
Tetreault, J. R. (2002). Implicit role reference.
In International Symposium on Reference Res-
olution for Natural Language Processing, Ali-
cante, Spain, pp. 109?115.
Tonelli, S. and R. Delmonte (2010). Venses++:
Adapting a deep semantic processing system to
the identification of null instantiations. In Pro-
ceedings of the 5th International Workshop on
Semantic Evaluation, SemEval ?10, Los Ange-
les, California, USA, pp. 296?299.
Tonelli, S. and R. Delmonte (2011). Desperately
seeking implicit arguments in text. In Proceed-
ings of the ACL 2011 Workshop on Relational
Models of Semantics, RELMS ?11, Portland,
Oregon, USA, pp. 54?62.
Whittemore, G., M. Macpherson, and G. Carlson
(1991). Event-building through role-filling and
anaphora resolution. In Proceedings of the 29th
annual meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, ACL ?91, Berkeley, Califor-
nia, USA, pp. 17?24.
1189
