Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT, Short Papers (Companion Volume), pages 229?232,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Speakers? Intention Prediction Using Statistics of Multi-level Features in 
a Schedule Management Domain 
Donghyun Kim Hyunjung Lee Choong-Nyoung Seon 
Diquest Research Center Computer Science & Engineering Computer Science & Engineering 
Diquest Inc. Sogang University Sogang University 
Seoul, Korea Seoul, Korea Seoul, Korea 
kdh2007@sogang.ac.kr juvenile@sogang.ac.kr wilowisp@gmail.com 
   
Harksoo Kim Jungyun Seo 
Computer & Communications Engineering Computer Science & Engineering 
Kangwon National University Sogang University 
Chuncheon, Korea Seoul, Korea 
nlpdrkim@kangwon.ac.kr seojy@sogang.ac.kr 
 
Abstract 
Speaker?s intention prediction modules can be 
widely used as a pre-processor for reducing 
the search space of an automatic speech re-
cognizer. They also can be used as a pre-
processor for generating a proper sentence in a 
dialogue system. We propose a statistical 
model to predict speakers? intentions by using 
multi-level features. Using the multi-level fea-
tures (morpheme-level features, discourse-
level features, and domain knowledge-level 
features), the proposed model predicts speak-
ers? intentions that may be implicated in next 
utterances. In the experiments, the proposed 
model showed better performances (about 
29% higher accuracies) than the previous 
model. Based on the experiments, we found 
that the proposed multi-level features are very 
effective in speaker?s intention prediction. 
1 Introduction 
A dialogue system is a program in which a user 
and system communicate in natural language. To 
understand user?s utterance, the dialogue system 
should identify his/her intention. To respond 
his/her question, the dialogue system should gen-
erate the counterpart of his/her intention by refer-
ring to dialogue history and domain knowledge. 
Most previous researches on speakers? intentions 
have been focused on intention identification tech-
niques. On the contrary, intention prediction tech-
niques have been not studied enough although 
there are many practical needs, as shown in Figure 
1. 
 
When is the changed date?
Response, Timetable-update-dateAsk-ref, Timetable-update-date
It is changed into 4 May.
It is changed into 14 May.
?
Prediction of
user?s intention
Identification of
system?s intention
Reducing the search space 
of an ASR
It is changed into 12:40.
The date is changed.
Is it changed into 4 May?
?
It is changed into 4 May.
The result of
speech recognition
Example 1: Prediction of user?s intention
Example 2: Prediction of system?s intention
It is 706-8954.
Ask-confirm, Timetable-insert-phonenumResponse, Timetable-insert-phonenum
Response generation
Is it 706-8954?
Identification of
user?s intention
Prediction of
system?s intention
 
Figure 1. Motivational example 
 
In Figure 1, the first example shows that an inten-
tion prediction module can be used as a pre-
processor for reducing the search space of an ASR 
(automatic speech recognizer). The second exam-
ple shows that an intention prediction module can 
be used as a pre-processor for generating a proper 
sentence based on dialogue history. 
There are some researches on user?s intention 
prediction (Ronnie, 1995; Reithinger, 1995). Rei-
thinger?s model used n-grams of speech acts as 
input features. Reithinger showed that his model 
can reduce the searching complexity of an ASR to 
19~60%. However, his model did not achieve good 
performances because the input features were not 
rich enough to predict next speech acts. The re-
searches on system?s intention prediction have 
been treated as a part of researches on dialogue 
models such as a finite-state model, a frame-based 
229
model (Goddeau, 1996), and a plan-based model 
(Litman, 1987). However, a finite-state model has 
a weak point that dialogue flows should be prede-
fined. Although a plan-based model can manage 
complex dialogue phenomena using plan inference, 
a plan-based model is not easy to be applied to the 
real world applications because it is difficult to 
maintain plan recipes. In this paper, we propose a 
statistical model to reliably predict both user?s in-
tention and system?s intention in a schedule man-
agement domain. The proposed model determines 
speakers? intentions by using various levels of lin-
guistic features such as clue words, previous inten-
tions, and a current state of a domain frame.  
2 Statistical prediction of speakers? inten-
tions 
2.1 Generalization of speakers? intentions 
In a goal-oriented dialogue, speaker?s intention can 
be represented by a semantic form that consists of 
a speech act and a concept sequence (Levin, 2003). 
In the semantic form, the speech act represents the 
general intention expressed in an utterance, and the 
concept sequence captures the semantic focus of 
the utterance.  
 
Table 1. Speech acts and their meanings 
Speech act Description 
Greeting The opening greeting of a dialogue 
Expressive The closing greeting of a dialogue 
Opening Sentences for opening a goal-oriented dialogue 
Ask-ref WH-questions 
Ask-if YN-questions 
Response Responses of questions or requesting actions 
Request Declarative sentences for requesting actions 
Ask-
confirm Questions for confirming the previous actions 
Confirm Reponses of ask-confirm 
Inform Declarative sentences for giving some information 
Accept Agreement 
 
Table 2. Basic concepts in a schedule management 
domain. 
Table name Operation name Field name 
Timetable Insert, Delete, Select, Update 
Agent, Date, Day-of-week, 
Time, Person, Place 
Alarm Insert, Delete, Select, Update Date, Time 
 
Based on these assumptions, we define 11 domain-
independent speech acts, as shown in Table 1, and 
53 domain-dependent concept sequences according 
to a three-layer annotation scheme (i.e. Fully con-
necting basic concepts with bar symbols) (Kim, 
2007) based on Table 2. Then, we generalize 
speaker?s intention into a pair of a speech act and a 
concept sequence. In the remains of this paper, we 
call a pair of a speech act and a concept sequence) 
an intention. 
2.2 Intention prediction model 
Given n utterances 
nU ,1  in a dialogue, let 1+nSI  de-
note speaker?s intention of the n+1th utterance. 
Then, the intention prediction model can be for-
mally defined as the following equation: 
 
)|,(maxarg)|(
,111
,
,11
11
nnn
CSSA
nn UCSSAPUSIP
nn
+++
++
?       (1) 
 
In Equation (1), 1+nSA  and 1+nCS  are the speech act 
and the concept sequence of the n+1th utterance, 
respectively. Based on the assumption that the 
concept sequences are independent of the speech 
acts, we can rewrite Equation (1) as Equation (2). 
 
)|()|(maxarg)|(
,11,11
,
,11
11
nnnn
CSSA
nn UCSPUSAPUSIP
nn
+++
++
?
   (2) 
 
In Equation (2), it is impossible to directly com-
pute )|(
,11 nn USAP +  and )|( ,11 nn UCSP +  because a speaker 
expresses identical contents with various surface 
forms of n sentences according to a personal lin-
guistic sense in a real dialogue. To overcome this 
problem, we assume that n utterances in a dialogue 
can be generalized by a set of linguistic features 
containing various observations from the first ut-
terance to the nth utterance. Therefore, we simplify 
Equation (2) by using a linguistic feature set 1+nFS  
(a set of features that are accumulated from the 
first utterance to nth utterance) for predicting the 
n+1th intention, as shown in Equation (3). 
 
)|()|(maxarg)|( 1111
,
,11
11
+++++
++
? nnnn
CSSA
nn FSCSPFSSAPUSIP
nn
     (3) 
 
All terms of the right hand side in Equation (3) are 
represented by conditional probabilities given a 
various feature values. These conditional probabili-
ties can be effectively evaluated by CRFs (condi-
tional random fields) (Lafferty, 2001) that globally 
consider transition probabilities from the first ut-
230
terance to the n+1th utterance, as shown in Equa-
tion (4). 
 
)),(exp()(
1)|(
)),(exp()(
1)|(
1
11,1
1,11,1
1
11,1
1,11,1


+
=+
++
+
=+
++
=
=
n
i j
iijj
n
nnCRF
n
i j
iijj
n
nnCRF
FSCSF
FSZ
FSCSP
FSSAF
FSZ
FSSAP
?
?
 (4) 
 
In Equation (4), ),( iij FSSAF and ),( iij FSCSF  are fea-
ture functions for predicting the speech act and the 
concept sequence of the ith utterance, respectively. 
)(FSZ  is a normalization factor. The feature func-
tions receive binary values (i.e. zero or one) ac-
cording to absence or existence of each feature.  
2.3 Multi-level features 
The proposed model uses multi-level features as 
input values of the feature functions in Equation 
(4). The followings give the details of the proposed 
multi-level features. 
? Morpheme-level feature: Sometimes a few 
words in a current utterance give important 
clues to predict an intention of a next utterance. 
We propose two types of morpheme-level fea-
tures that are extracted from a current utterance: 
One is lexical features (content words annotated 
with parts-of-speech) and the other is POS fea-
tures (part-of-speech bi-grams of all words in 
an utterance). To obtain the morpheme-level 
features, we use a conventional morphological 
analyzer. Then, we remove non-informative 
feature values by using a well-known 2?  statis-
tic because the previous works in document 
classification have shown that effective feature 
selection can increase precisions (Yang, 1997). 
? Discourse-level feature: An intention of a cur-
rent utterance affects that dialogue participants 
determine intentions of next utterances because 
a dialogue consists of utterances that are se-
quentially associated with each other. We pro-
pose discourse-level features (bigrams of 
speakers? intentions; a pair of a current inten-
tion and a next intention) that are extracted 
from a sequence of utterances in a current di-
alogue. 
? Domain knowledge-level feature: In a goal-
oriented dialogue, dialogue participants accom-
plish a given task by using shared domain 
knowledge. Since a frame-based model is more 
flexible than a finite-state model and is more 
easy-implementable than a plan-based model, 
we adopt the frame-based model in order to de-
scribe domain knowledge. We propose two 
types of domain knowledge-level features; slot-
modification features and slot-retrieval features. 
The slot-modification features represent which 
slots are filled with suitable items, and the slot-
retrieval features represent which slots are 
looked up. The slot-modification features and 
the slot-retrieval features are represented by bi-
nary notation. In the slot-modification features, 
?1? means that the slot is filled with a proper 
item, and ?0? means that the slot is empty. In 
the slot-retrieval features, ?1? means that the 
slot is looked up one or more times. To obtain 
domain knowledge-level features, we prede-
fined speakers? intentions associated with slot 
modification (e.g. ?response & timetable-
update-date?) and slot retrieval (e.g. ?request & 
timetable-select-date?), respectively. Then, we 
automatically generated domain knowledge-
level features by looking up the predefined in-
tentions at each dialogue step. 
3 Evaluation 
3.1 Data sets and experimental settings 
We collected a Korean dialogue corpus simulated 
in a schedule management domain such as ap-
pointment scheduling and alarm setting. The dialo-
gue corpus consists of 956 dialogues, 21,336 
utterances (22.3 utterances per dialogue). Each 
utterance in dialogues was manually annotated 
with speech acts and concept sequences. The ma-
nual tagging of speech acts and concept sequences 
was done by five graduate students with the know-
ledge of a dialogue analysis and post-processed by 
a student in a doctoral course for consistency. To 
experiment the proposed model, we divided the 
annotated messages into the training corpus and 
the testing corpus by a ratio of four (764 dialogues) 
to one (192 dialogues). Then, we performed 5-fold 
cross validation. We used training factors of CRFs 
as L-BGFS and Gaussian Prior. 
3.2 Experimental results 
Table 3 and Table 4 show the accuracies of the 
proposed model in speech act prediction and con-
cept sequence prediction, respectively. 
231
 Table 3. The accuracies of speech act prediction 
Features Accuracy-S (%) Accuracy-U (%) 
Morpheme-level 
features 76.51 72.01 
Discourse-level 
features 87.31 72.80 
Domain know-
ledge-level feature 63.44 49.03 
All features 88.11 76.25 
 
Table 4. The accuracies of concept sequence pre-
diction 
Features Accuracy-S (%) Accuracy-U (%) 
Morpheme-level 
features 66.35 59.40 
Discourse-level 
features 86.56 62.62 
Domain know-
ledge-level feature 37.68 49.03 
All features 87.19 64.21 
 
In Table 3 and Table 4, Accuracy-S means the ac-
curacy of system?s intention prediction, and Accu-
racy-U means the accuracy of user?s intention 
prediction. Based on these experimental results, we 
found that multi-level features include different 
types of information and cooperation of the multi-
level features brings synergy effect. We also found 
the degree of feature importance in intention pre-
diction (i.e. discourse level features > morpheme-
level features > domain knowledge-level features). 
To evaluate the proposed model, we compare 
the accuracies of the proposed model with those of 
Reithinger?s model (Reithinger, 1995) by using the 
same training and test corpus, as shown in Table 5. 
 
Table 5. The comparison of accuracies 
Speaker Type Reithinger?s 
model 
The proposed 
model 
System 
Speech act 43.37 88.11 
Concept sequence 68.06 87.19 
User Speech act 37.59 76.25 Concept sequence 49.48 64.21 
 
As shown in Table 5, the proposed model outper-
formed Reithinger?s model in all kinds of predic-
tions. We think that the differences between 
accuracies were mainly caused by input features: 
The proposed model showed similar accuracies to 
Reithinger?s model when it used only domain 
knowledge-level features. 
4 Conclusion 
We proposed a statistical prediction model of 
speakers? intentions using multi-level features. The 
model uses three levels (a morpheme level, a dis-
course level, and a domain knowledge level) of 
features as input features of the statistical model 
based on CRFs. In the experiments, the proposed 
model showed better performances than the pre-
vious model. Based on the experiments, we found 
that the proposed multi-level features are very ef-
fective in speaker?s intention prediction. 
Acknowledgments 
This research (paper) was performed for the Intel-
ligent Robotics Development Program, one of the 
21st Century Frontier R&D Programs funded by 
the Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Energy of 
Korea. 
References  
D. Goddeau, H. Meng, J. Polifroni, S. Seneff, and S. 
Busayapongchai. 1996. ?A Form-Based Dialogue 
Manager for Spoken Language Applications?, Pro-
ceedings of International Conference on Spoken 
Language Processing, 701-704. 
D. Litman and J. Allen. 1987. A Plan Recognition Mod-
el for Subdialogues in Conversations, Cognitive 
Science, 11:163-200. 
H. Kim. 2007. A Dialogue-based NLIDB System in a 
Schedule Management Domain: About the method to 
Find User?s Intentions, Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science, 4362:869-877. 
J. Lafferty, A. McCallum, and F. Pereira. 2001. ?Condi-
tional Random Fields: Probabilistic Models for Seg-
menting And Labeling Sequence Data?, Proceedings 
of ICML, 282-289. 
L. Levin, C. Langley, A. Lavie, D. Gates, D. Wallace, 
and K. Peterson. 2003. ?Domain Specific Speech 
Acts for Spoken Language Translation?, Proceedings 
of the 4th SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Di-
alogue. 
N. Reithinger and E. Maier. 1995. ?Utilizing Statistical 
Dialog Act Processing in VerbMobil?, Proceedings 
of ACL, 116-121. 
R. W. Smith and D. R. Hipp, 1995. Spoken Natural 
Language Dialogue Systems: A Practical Approach, 
Oxford University Press. 
Y. Yang and J. Pedersen. 1997. ?A Comparative Study 
on Feature Selection in Text Categorization?, Pro-
ceedings of the 14th International Conference on 
Machine Learning. 
232
