Search Result Clustering Using Label Language Model
Yeha Lee Seung-Hoon Na Jong-Hyeok Lee
Div. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH)
Advanced Information Technology Research Center (AITrc)
San 31, Hyoja-Dong, Pohang, Republic of Korea, 790-784
{sion,nsh1979,jhlee}@postech.ac.kr
Abstract
Search results clustering helps users to
browse the search results and locate what
they are looking for. In the search result
clustering, the label selection which anno-
tates a meaningful phrase for each cluster
becomes the most fundamental issue. In this
paper, we present a new method of using
the language modeling approach over Dmoz
for label selection, namely label language
model. Experimental results show that our
method is helpful to obtain meaningful clus-
tering labels of search results.
1 Introduction
Most contemporary search engines generate a long
flat list in response to a user query. This result can
be ranked by using criteria such as PageRank (Brin
and Page, 1998) or relevancy to the query. However,
this long flat list is uncomfortable to users, since it
forces users to examine each page one by one, and
to spend significant time and effort for finding the
really relevant information. Most users only look
into top 10 web pages in the list (Kummamuru et al,
2004). Thus many other relevant information can be
missed out as a result. Clustering method is pro-
posed in order to remedy the problem. Instead of
the flat list, it groups the search results to clusters,
and annotates a label with a representative words or
phrases to each cluster. Then, these labeled clusters
of search results are presented to users. Users can
benefit from labeled clusters because the size of in-
formation presented is significantly reduced.
Search result clustering has several specific re-
quirements that may not be required by other cluster
algorithms. First, search result clustering should al-
low fast clustering and fast generation of a label on
the fly, since it is an online process. This require-
ment can be met by adopting ?snippets? 1 rather than
entire documents of a search result set. Second, la-
bels annotated for clusters should be meaningful to
users because they are presented to users as a general
view of results. For this reason, recent search result
clustering researches focus on selecting meaningful
labels. This differs from general clustering which
focuses on the similarity of documents. In Zamir
and Etzioni (Zamir and Etzioni, 1998), a few other
key requirements of search result clustering are pre-
sented.
In this paper, we present a language modeling
approach with Dmoz for search result clustering.
Dmoz 2 is an Open Directory Project, and contains
manually tagged categories for web-sites. Since
these categories are built by human, they provide a
good basis to build labels for clusters. We can view
the problem of label selection for clusters as a prob-
lem of label generation by Dmoz.
We define a language model for each Dmoz-
category and select labels for clusters according to
the probability that this language model would gen-
erate candidate labels.
Thus, our method can select more meaningful la-
bels for clusters because we use labels generated by
human-tagged categories of Dmoz. The selected la-
1The term ?snippet? is used here to denote fragment of a
Web page returned by certain search engines
2Open Directory Project, http://www.dmoz.com/
637
bels enable users to quickly identify the desired in-
formation.
The paper is organized as follows. The next sec-
tion introduces related works. In Section 3, we for-
mulate the problem and show the detail of our ap-
proach. The experiment results and evaluations are
presented in Section 4. Finally, we conclude the
paper and discuss future works in Section 5.
2 RELATED WORKS
Many approaches have been suggested for organiz-
ing search results to improve browsing effectiveness.
Previous researches such as scatter/Gather (Hearst
and Pedersen, 1996) and Leuski (Leuski and Allan,
2000), Leouski (Leouski and Croft, 1996), cluster
documents using document-similarity, and generate
representative terms or phrases as labels. However,
these labels are often not meaningful, which compli-
cates user relevance judgment. They are also slow
in generating clusters and labels because they use
entire document contents in the process. Thus it is
difficult to apply these approaches to search engine
applications.
Due to the problems mentioned above, research
in search result clustering has focused on choosing
meaningful labels which is not usually addressed
in general document clustering. Zeng et al pre-
sented salient phrase ranking problem for label se-
lection, which ranks labels scored by a combination
of some properties of labels and documents (Zeng
et al, 2004). Kummamuru regarded label se-
lection as a problem making a taxonomy of the
search result, and proposed a label selecting crite-
rion based on taxonomy likelihood (Kummamuru et
al., 2004). Zamir presented a Suffix Tree Cluster-
ing (STC) which identifies sets of documents that
share common phrases, and clusters according to
these phrases (Zamir and Etzioni, 1998). Maarek
et al and Osinski presented a singular value de-
composition of the term-document matrix for search
result clustering (Maarek et al, 2000), (Osinski
and Weiss, 2004). The problem of these methods
is that SVD is extremely time-consuming when ap-
plied to a large number of snippets. Ferragina pro-
posed a method for generating hierarchical labels by
which entire search results are hierarchically clus-
tered (Ferragina and Gulli, 2005). This method pro-
duces a hierarchy of labeled clusters by constructing
a sequence of labeled and weighted bipartite graphs
representing the individual snippets on one side and
a set of labeled clusters on the other side.
3 LABEL LANGUAGE MODEL
The main purpose of Label Language Model(LLM)
is to generate meaningful labels on-the-fly from
search results, specifically snippets, for web-users.
The generated labels provide a view of the search re-
sult to users, and allow the users to navigate through
them for their search needs.
Our algorithm is composed of the four phases:
1. Search result fetching
2. Candidate Labels Generation
3. Label Score Calculation
4. Post-processing
Search result fetching. LLM operates as a meta-
search engine on top of established search engines.
Our engine first retrieves results from dedicated
search engines in response to user queries. The
search results are parsed through HTML parser,
and snippets are obtained as a result. We assume
that these snippets contain enough information
to provide user-relevance judgment. Hence, we
can generate meaningful labels using only those
snippets rather than the entire document contents of
the search result set.
Candidate Labels Generation. Candidate labels
are generated using the snippets obtained by search
result fetching. Snippets are processed by Porter?s
algorithm for stemming and stopword removing,
then every n-grams becomes a candidate label. Each
candidate label is tagged with a score calculated
by the Label Language Model. Finally, top N
candidate labels with highest scores are displayed
to users as labels for clusters of search result.
Label Score Calculation. Our model utilizes
Dmoz to select meaningful labels. Dmoz is the
largest, most comprehensive human-edited directory
of the Web and classifies more than 3,500,000 sites
in more than 460,000 categories. It is used for rank-
ing and retrieval by many search engines, such as
638
Google (Rerragina and Gulli, 2005).
Language model ranks documents according to
the probability that the language model of each doc-
ument would generate the user query.
Dmoz is a human-edited directory, which contains
meaningful categories. We can use the probability
that categories of Dmoz would generate candidate
labels as criteria to rank labels.
In our approach, the user query and the document
correspond to the candidate label and the Dmoz?s
category, respectively. We can obtain the probability
that LLM of each category would generate a label by
language model. We assume that the probability of
certain candidate label being generated can be esti-
mated by the maximum value of the probability that
LLM of each category would generate the candidate
label.
Let labeli be ith label, wij be jth word of labeli,
and Ck be kth category of Dmoz, respectively. If we
assume that the labels are drawn independently from
the distribution, then we can express the probability
that Dmoz generates labels as follows:
p(labeli|Dmoz) = max
k
p(labeli|Ck) (1)
p(labeli|Ck) =
?
p(wij |Ck) (2)
We use two smoothing methods, Jelinek-Mercer
smoothing and Dirichlet Priors smoothing (Zhai and
Lafferty, 2001), in order to handle unseen words.
The score of labeli is calculated as follows:
Si = max
k
?
j
log
(
1 + ?p(wij |Ck)
(1 ? ?)p(wij |Call)
)
(3)
Si = max
k
?
j
log
#(wkij) + ?p(wij |Call)
#(Ck) + ?
(4)
To solve the equation, p(wij |Ck) and p(wij |Call)
should be estimated. Let #(Ck) and #(Call)3 be
the number of words in kth category and the number
of words in Dmoz. Further, let #(wkij) and #(wallij )
be the number of word, wij , in kth category and the
number of word, wij , in Dmoz. Then p(wij |Ck) is
estimated as #(w
k
ij)
#(Ck) , and p(wij |Call) as
#(wallij )
#(Call) .
3Call denotes all categories of Dmoz
In Candidate Labels Generation phase, all can-
didate labels are scored. After post-processing,
candidate labels are shown in a descending order.
Post-processing. In post processing phase, labels
are refined through several rules. First, labels com-
posed of only query words are removed because they
do not provide better clues for users. Second, la-
bels that are contained in another label are removed.
Since every possible n gram is eligible for candidate
labels, multiple labels that differ only at the either
ends, i.e., one label contained in another, can be as-
signed a high score. In such cases, longer labels
are more specific and meaningful than shorter ones,
therefore shorter ones are removed. Users can ben-
efit from a more specific and meaningful label that
clarifies what a cluster contains. Finally, Top N La-
bels with highest scores produced by post processing
are presented to users.
4 EXPERIMENTS
We conducted several experiments with varying
smoothing parameter values, ?, ?. We investigated
the influence of the smoothing parameter on the la-
bel selection procedure.
4.1 Experiment Setup
Despite heavy researches on search result cluster-
ing, a standard test-set or evaluation measurement
does not exist. This paper adopts the methodology
of (Zeng et al, 2004) in order to evaluate the ex-
pressiveness of selected label and LLM
4.1.1 Test Data Set
We obtained Google?s search results that corre-
spond to fifty queries. The fifty queries are com-
prised of top 25 queries to Google and 25 from
(Zeng et al, 2004). For each query of the fifty, 200
snippets from Google are obtained. Table 1 summa-
rizes the query used in our experiment.
Search results obtained from Google are parsed
to remove html-tag and stopword, and stemming is
applied to obtain the snippets. Every n-gram of the
snippets, where n ? 3, becomes candidate labels.
Labels that do not occur more than 3 times are re-
moved from candidate set in order to reduce noise.
639
Type Queries
2005 Google
Top query
Myspace, Ares, Baidu, orkut,
iTumes, Sky News, World of War-
craft, Green Day, Leonardo da
Vinci, Janet Jackson, Hurricane
Katrina, tsunami, xbox 360, Brad
Pitt, Michael Jackson, American
Idol, Britney Spears, Angelina
Jolie, Harry Potter, ipod, digi-
tal camera, psp, laptop, computer
desk
(Zeng et al,
2004) query
jaguar, apple, saturn, jobs, jordan,
tiger, trec, ups, quotes, matrix, su-
san dumais, clinton, iraq, dell, dis-
ney, world war 2, ford, health, yel-
low pages, maps, flower, music,
chat, games, radio, jokes, graphic
design, resume, time zones, travel
Table 1: Queries used in experiment
4.1.2 Answer Label Set for Evaluation
In order to evaluate LLM, we manually created
labels for each query which are desired as outputs of
our test, and we refer them as answer labels. There
might be a case where an answer label and label se-
lected by our model are semantically equivalent but
lexically different; for example, car and automobile.
To mitigate the problem, we used Wordnet to han-
dle two different words with the same semantic. We
explain the use of Wordnet further in section 4.1.3.
4.1.3 Evaluation Measure & Method
We used precision at top N labels to evaluate the
model. Precision at top N is defined as P@N =
M@N
N , where is M@N is the number of relevant la-
bels among the top N generated labels to the answer
set. As explained in section 4.1.2, the labels gen-
erated by our model might not be equal to answer
labels even when they have the same semantic mean-
ing. It might be very time consuming for a human
to manually compare the two label set where one set
can vary due to the varying smoothing parameter if
semantic meaning also has to be considered.
We used WordNet?s synonyms and hypernyms
relationships in order to mitigate the problem ad-
dressed above. We regard a test label to be equal
to an answer label when WordNet?s synonyms or
hypernyms relationship allows them. Only the first
listed sense in Wordnet is used to prevent over-
generation.
We evaluated the overall effectiveness of LLM
with P@N and the effect of smoothing parameter
on P@N .
4.2 Experimental Result
We used P@5, P@10 and P@20 to evaluate the ef-
fectiveness of our model because most users disre-
gard snippets beyond 20.
First, for each query, we obtained each label?s
MAP4 for two smoothing methods. Figures 1 and
2 depicts MAP of Jelinke-Mercer smoothing and
Dirichlet Priors smoothing.
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 10.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
Lambda
Prec
ision
 
 
P@5P@10P@20
Figure 1: Jelinek-Mercer Smoothing
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 50000.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Mu
Prec
ision
 
 
P@5P@10P@20
Figure 2: Dirichlet priors Smoothing
In figures 1 and 2, X-axis denotes smoothing pa-
rameter, and Y -axis denotes MAP. The figures show
that the smaller the value of the smoothing is , the
4Mean Average Precision
640
higher the precision is. This indicates that a better
label is selected when the probability that a specific
category would generate the label is high. In our
test result, when using Dirichlet smoothing, the pre-
cision of top 5 and 10 labels are 82% and 80%, thus
users can benefit in browsing from our model using
5 or 10 labels. However, the precision rapidly drops
to 60% at P@20. The low precision at P@20 shows
the vulnerability of our model, indicating that our
model needs a refinement.
Figure 3 shows individual precisions of labels for
randomly selected five queries. The labels were gen-
erated by using Dirichlet priors smoothing.
Baidu tiger apple jaguar travel
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Queries
Prec
ision
 
 P@20P@5P@10
Figure 3: Using Dirichlet priors Smoothing
As shown in figure 1 and 2, the general order of
result precisions is as follows: P@20 ? P@10 ?
P@5. However, figure 3 shows that the precision
for query ?travel? is the lowest at P@5. This re-
sult indicates that words that appear many times in a
specific category of Dmoz might have higher proba-
bility regardless of snippet?s contents.
Average Baidu apple jaguar tiger travel0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Queries
Cov
erag
e
 
 
Top 5Top 10Top 20
Figure 4: Coverage
Figure 4 shows the average coverage of labels
generated by our model. The coverage of the labels
is about 0.32%, 0.51% and 0.66% at top 5, 10 and 20
labels respectively. This means that the labels allow
browsing over only 60% of the entire search results.
The lack of coverage is another pitfall of our model,
and further refining is needed.
Finally, in Table 2, we list top 10 labels for five
queries.
5 CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORKS
We proposed a LLM for label selection of search re-
sults, and analyzed the smoothing parameter?s effect
on the label selection. Experimental results showed
that LLM can pick up meaningful labels, and aid
users in browsing web search results. Experimental
results also validated our assumption that the high
probability that Dmoz categories generate a label in-
dicates meaningful labels. Further research direc-
tions remain as future works.
Our model is sensitive to Dmoz because we use
the language model based on Dmoz. Our model may
result in poor performance for labels that are not rep-
resented or over-represented in Dmoz. Therefore, it
is meaningful to study how sensitive to Dmoz the
performance of the LLM is, and how to mitigate sen-
sitivity. We used Google?s search results as an input
to our system. However, multiple engines offer a
better coverage of the web because of the low over-
lap of current search engines (Bharat and Broder,
1998). Further work can utilize multiple engines to
generate input to our system. In our test, snippet?s
title and content were assigned the same weight, and
titles and descriptions of Dmoz?s category were also
assigned the same weight. Future work might bene-
fit from varying the weights to them. We did not uti-
lize the information buried in the documents, such
as tf ? idf , but used only knowledge provided by the
external system, Dmoz. We believe that this also af-
fected LLM?s poor performance on over-represented
terms. Future work will benefit from incorporating
the information derivable from the documents.
6 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Korea Science
and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF) through the
Advanced Information Technology Research Center
641
Queries Labels
Baidu language search set, Chinese
search engine, search engine com-
pany, Baidu.com, MP3 Search,
Baidu engine, Japanese Search
Engine, IPO, search market,
Mobile
apple Mac OS X, iPod, Apple Mac-
intosh, Apple products, language
character set, Music Store, Apple
develops, Apple Support, informa-
tion, San Francisco
jaguar Mac OS X, Jaguar Cars, Land
Rover, Jaguar XJ, Jaguar XK,
largest cat, Leopard, Photos
tagged jaguar, Jaguar dealer,
Jaguar Clubs
tiger Mac OS X, Tiger Woods, Tiger
Cats, Detroit Tigers, Security
tool, Parts PC Components, Paper
Tiger, Adventure Tour, National
Zoo, Tiger Beat
travel Car Rental, airline tickets, dis-
count hotels, Plan trip, Airfares,
package holidays, Visa, Travel
Cheap, Destination guides, Travel
news
Table 2: Queries used in experiment
(AITrc), also in part by the BK 21 Project and MIC
& IITA through IT Leading R&D Support Project in
2007.
References
P. Rerragina and A. Gulli. 2005. A personalized search
engine based on web-snippet hierarchical clustering.
In Special Interest Tracks and Poster Proceedings
of WWW-05, International Conference on the World
Wide Web, 801-810
H. Zeng, Q. He, Z. Chen, W. Ma and J. Ma 2004. Learn-
ing to cluster web search results. In Proceedings of the
27th ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Devel-
opment of Information Retrieval
M. A. Hearst and J. O. Pedersen. 1996. Reexamining the
cluster hypothesis: Scatter/Gather on retrieval results.
In Proceedings of 19th ACM SIGIR Conference on Re-
search and Development in Information Retrieval, 76-
84
K. Kummamuru, R. Lotlikar, S. Roy, K. Signal and R.
Krishnapuram 2004. A hierarchical monothetic docu-
ment clustering algorithm for summarization browsing
search results. In Proceedings of 13th International
Conference on World Wide Web, 658-665
A. Leuski and J. Allan. 2000. Improving Interactive Re-
trieval by Combining Ranked List and Clustering. In
Proceedings of RIAOI, College de France, 665-681
A. V. Leouski and W. B. Croft. 1996. An Evaluation
of Techniques for Clustering Search Results. In Tech-
nical Report IR-76, Department of Computer Science,
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
O. Zamir and O. Etzioni. 1998. Web Document Clus-
tering: A Feasibility Demonstration. In Proceedings
of the 21th ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and
Development of Information Retrieval, 46-54
Y. Maarek, R. Fagin, I. Ben-Shaul and D. Pelleg. 2000.
Ephemeral document clustering for Web applications.
Technical Report RJ 10186, IBM, San Jose, US
S. Osinski and D. Weiss. 2004. Conceptual clustering
using Lingo algorithm: Evaluation on Open Directory
Project data In Proceedings of IIPWM-04, 5th Confer-
ence on Intelligent Information Processing and Web
Mining, 369-377
P. Ferragina and A. Gulli. 2005. A personalized search
engine based on Web-snippet hierarchical clustering.
In Special Interest Tracks and Poster Proceedings of
WWW-05, International conference on the World Wide
Web, 801-810
S. Brin and L. Page 1998. The anatomy of a large-scale
hypertextual(Web) Search Engine. In Proceedings of
the 7th International Conference on World Wide Web,
107-117
C. Zhai and J. Lafferty 2001. A study of smoothing
methods for language models applied to ad hoc infor-
mation retrieval. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM SI-
GIR Conference on Research and Development of In-
formation Retrieval, 334-342
K. Bharat and A. Broder. 1998. A technique for measur-
ing the relative size and overlap of public web search
engines. In Proceedings of the 7th International Con-
ference on World Wide Web
642
