Using Confidence Vector in Multi-Stage Speech Recognition 
Hyungbae Jeon, Kyuwoong Hwang, Hoon Chung, Seunghi Kim, Jun Park, Yunkeun Lee  
Speech/Language Information Research Center 
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI) 
161 Gajeong-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 305-350, Korea 
{hbjeon, kyuwoong, hchung, seunghi, junpark, yklee}@etri.re.kr 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper presents a new method of using 
confidence vector as an intermediate input 
feature for the multi-stage based speech 
recognition. The multi-stage based speech 
recognition is a method to reduce the com-
putational complexity of the decoding pro-
cedure and thus accomplish faster speech 
recognition. In the multi-stage speech rec-
ognition, however, the error of previous 
stage is transferred to the next stage. This 
tends to cause the deterioration of the over-
all performance. We focus on improving 
the accuracy by introducing confidence 
vector instead of phoneme which typically 
used as an intermediate feature between the 
acoustic decoder and the lexical decoder, 
the first two stages in the multi-stage 
speech recognition. The experimental re-
sults show up to 16.4% error reduction 
rate(ERR) of word accuracy for  220k Ko-
rean Point-of-Interest (POI) domain and 
29.6% ERR of word accuracy for hotel res-
ervation dialog domain.  
1 Introduction 
Recently, demand of fast and small size speech 
recognition engine is increasing. One example is 
the mobile automatic speech translation device. To 
implement the speech translation function, we need 
to integrate the speech recognition, the text transla-
tion, and the speech synthesis modules all together 
into a single device. Another example is recogni-
tion of Point-of-Interests (POIs) on navigation de-
vice. The number of POIs used in a commercial 
navigation system is about several hundreds of 
thousands to one million. To make a fast and more 
efficient speech recognition engine, many compu-
tationally efficient methods were reported and mul-
ti-stage speech recognition is one of competitive 
approaches [1][2]. 
The multi-stage speech recognition completes 
recognition procedure through sequential two stage 
decoding, the acoustic decoding and the lexical 
decoding. The optional rescoring stage can follow 
the lexical decoding, depending on the application. 
In the acoustic decoding stage, we find the pho-
neme sequence which has the maximum likelihood 
for a sequence of input acoustic feature vector. In 
the lexical decoding, we recover the optimal word 
sequence whose phone sequence has a minimal 
edit distance from an input phoneme sequence 
from the acoustic decoding stage.  
Comparing to the one-stage speech recognition, 
the multi-stage speech recognition can significant-
ly reduce computation load. This is because the 
lexical decoding stage in the multi-stage speech 
recognition is repeated for every phoneme in the 
input phoneme sequence, while the lexical decod-
ing stage in the one-stage speech recognition is 
repeated for typically every ten milliseconds.  
Since the duration of a phoneme is up to several 
hundred milliseconds, this computational saving is 
quite big, especially for cases with a large lexical 
search space. However, the multi-stage speech rec-
ognition has a shortcoming that the overall perfor-
mance is highly affected by accuracy level of the 
phoneme recognizer. Moreover, the performance 
of the phoneme recognizer is generally poor since 
it depends only on the acoustic feature without us-
ing any higher level of information like a language 
model. 
In this paper, we propose a new method of using 
a confidence vector as an input feature for lexical 
decoding stage to improve performance of multi-
stage speech recognition system. For a phoneme 
segment, we introduce a confidence vector in 
which each element is defined as the likelihood of 
each phoneme for the given segment. And, we use 
this confidence vector as the input feature for the 
lexical decoder rather than just the phoneme se-
quence as in the conventional multi-stage speech 
recognition. This means that more information is 
transferred from acoustic decoder to lexical decod-
er.  
This paper is organized as follows. At first, we 
present the structure of multi-stage speech recogni-
tion in section 2. In section 3, we describe the pro-
posed method that uses confidence vector as an 
input feature of lexical decoding. In section 4, we 
explain the experiment environment and results. 
Finally, we summarize our work in section 5. 
2 Multi-Stage Speech Recognition 
Multi-stage speech recognition system is com-
posed of acoustic decoder, lexical decoder and op-
tional n-best rescoring [2][3]. 
The purpose of acoustic decoding is to convert 
an input acoustic feature sequence into a corres-
ponding phoneme sequence as correctly as possible 
while minimizing the consumption of computa-
tional power. In most cases, CDHMM-based au-
tomatic phone recognizer is used for acoustic de-
coding. In this work, we also used automatic phone 
recognizer for the acoustic decoding, in which 
CDHMMs corresponding to 46 Korean phonemes 
including silence are used and a finite state net-
work representing Korean syllable composition 
structure is used for pronunciation model.  
The purpose of the lexical decoding is to recover 
an optimal word sequence from input phoneme 
sequence given as a result of acoustic decoding. 
Acoustic decoder may generate three types of 
phone errors, substitution, insertion and deletion 
for a reference phoneme due to inaccurate acoustic 
modeling, surrounding noises and so on. We model 
these error patterns in the form of probabilistic edit 
cost. For each speech utterance in training DB, the 
lexical decoder aligns phoneme sequence from the 
acoustic decoder with the phoneme sequence of 
reference words by dynamic time warping (DTW). 
By accumulating the alignment results for all the 
utterances in training DB, we obtain the substitu-
tion probability of each phoneme. While decoding, 
the cost at each node is derived from the substitu-
tion probability of each phoneme.  
3 Confidence Vector Based Approach 
In this paper, we introduce a phoneme confidence 
vector as an input feature for lexical decoding. 
This confidence vector based approach comprises 
four stages, phoneme segmentation, confidence 
vector extraction, lexical decoding, n-best 
rescoring. Figure 1 illustrates a block diagram of 
the multi-stage speech recognition using 
confidence vector. 
 
    
  
Figure 1. Block diagram of multi-stage speech 
recognition using confidence vector. 
 
Firstly, the automatic phoneme recognizer finds 
optimal phoneme boundary information for an 
input utterance and then every acoustic likelihood 
corresponding to each of 46 Korean phoneme units 
is calculated for each segment, according to the 
phone segmentation result. Secondly, we define the 
confidence value for each phoneme at a given 
phoneme segment as follows, 
 
?
=
=
N
j
jlikelihood
ilikelihood
iconfidence
1
)(
)(
)(     (1) 
 
where confidence(i) means confidence value of i?th 
phoneme and N is the number of phonemes. 
Because lexical decoding is a sort of dynamic 
programming, we need to define a local match cost 
to weight distance between two phonemes. For 
confidence vector approach, we defined lexical 
model as mean of confidence vectors of each pho-
neme. The cost of DTW is defined with mean of 
confidence vectors of reference phoneme and con-
fidence vectors of input speech segment. We use 
three cost definitions that represent distance be-
tween two confidence vectors.  
 
 
 
Figure 2. An input feature for lexical decoding, 
phoneme sequence and confidence vectors 
3.1 Kullback-Leibler Divergence 
Kullback-Leibler divergence measures a difference 
between two probability distributions. If we regard 
the confidence vector as a probability distribution, 
we can define the difference as cost. Equation 2 is 
a cost definition by Kullback-Leibler divergence 
for reference phoneme ?p?.  
 
( ) ( )
( )?= ?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?=
N
i p im
if
ifpft
1
log)|(cos   (2) 
 
In equation 2, f(i) is confidence value of i?th 
phoneme and mp(i) is i?th value of mean vector of 
phoneme ?p?. 
3.2 Weighted Sum of Confidence 
The second definition of cost is weighted sum of 
confidence. As weight values, mean of confidence 
vector that was previously trained is used. This 
weighted sum of confidence corresponds to substi-
tution probability with consideration of prior prob-
ability distribution. It takes ?log to make cost value 
from probability. Equation 3 is a cost definition by 
weighted sum of confidence. 
( ) ( )( )?
?
?
?
?
?
?-= ?
=
N
i
p ifimpft
1
log)|(cos   (3) 
In equation 3, weight term can be considered as 
loss term of minimum risk decoding [4]. If the 
weight value is loss quantity of decision to pho-
neme ?p? with confidence f(i), decision for mini-
mum cost is identical to decision for minimum risk. 
3.3 Smoothing of Confidence 
Even though we use weighted sum of confidence 
instead of substitution probability of best phone 
sequence, the cost is highly sensitive to the result 
of acoustic decoder. To prevent extreme decision 
of phoneme recognizer, we add smoothing parame-
ters, ? and ?, like equation 4. ? and ? are assigned 
to be less then 1 and this gives effect to emphasize 
small values of probability. 
 
( ) ( )( )?
?
?
?
?
?
?-= ?
=
N
i
p ifimpft
1
log)|(cos
ba
  (4) 
4 Experiment Results 
4.1 Experiment on POI domain 
To evaluate the performance of the proposed algo-
rithm, we performed experiments on Korean POI 
task domain which is an isolate word recognition 
composed of 220k POI entries.  Test set comprises 
with 7 speakers, each speaker makes 99 utterances, 
so total test set is 693 utterances.  
The speech signal was sampled at 16kHz, and 
the frame length was 20ms with 10ms shift. Each 
speech frame was parameterized as a 39-
dimentional feature vector containing 12 Mel-
Frequency Cepstral Coefficients (MFCCs), C0 
energy, their delta and delta-delta coefficients. In 
order to evaluate the robustness of the proposed 
algorithm on acoustically, lexically mismatched 
condition, we took the experiments in two different 
test environment where N-fold test means the test 
is done in lexically matched condition and open 
test in acoustically and lexically mismatched con-
dition. 
N-fold Test 
In order to reflect phoneme error patterns to the 
lexical decoding, we used the phoneme result of 6 
speaker?s utterance to train lexical model. We per-
formed test for remained one speaker data, and we 
did 7 times with different test speakers. Each case 
training data of lexical model is 594 utterances and 
test data is 99 utterances. Lexical model is substi-
tution probability or mean of confidence vector for 
reference phoneme. 
 Because training data of lexical model has the 
same vocabulary with test data and the same chan-
nel condition, training of lexical model in N-fold 
test can train error pattern of same vocabulary and 
environment condition. Table 1 shows the result of 
N-fold test experiment. Conventional multi-stage 
speech recognition method uses phoneme sequence 
as an input feature for lexical decoding, and its per-
formance is the lowest among the rest methods. 
Because the phoneme accuracy of acoustic decoder 
is about 60~70% for this open test set, the perfor-
mance of conventional method is degraded. If we 
use confidence vector as input feature for lexical 
decoding, the performance is increased by almost 
10%. This performance enhancement proves that 
the confidence vector contains more useful infor-
mation at lexical decoding. The cost definition 
with weighted sum of confidence has a similar per-
formance with Kullback-Leibler divergence that is 
a well known distance measure. Especially with 
smoothing of confidence we get the best perfor-
mance, but smoothing makes the search network 
enlarge and slow down a little because smoothing 
reduces the differences between confidence vectors. 
 
Lexical 
Feature 
Cost Definition 
N-best Word Recog-
nition Rate (%) 
1 5 10 
Phoneme 
Sequence Substitution Prob. 64.5 75.6 78.6 
Confi-
dence 
Vector 
KL Divergence 74.5 88.7 91.8 
Weighted sum of 
Confidence 74.5 88.5 92.4 
Smoothing of 
Confidence 78.8 90.9 93.8 
Table 1. Word Recognition Rate of N-fold test 
Lexical Model Training with Open set 
In N-fold test, environment condition and error 
pattern of certain vocabulary is trained although 
we do not intend to do so. For an open test, we 
trained lexical model using word DB. We used 
ETRI phonetically optimized word (POW) DB 
which has 92k utterances. 
Table 2 shows the results of open test experi-
ments. If we use phoneme sequence as input fea-
ture for lexical decoder, performance is better than 
N-fold test. Because training DB for lexical model 
is enlarged to 92k, substitution probability might 
be modeled correctly. But confidence vector ap-
proach shows some performance degradations 
from N-fold test. In N-fold test, the performance is 
highly affected by the training of error pattern of 
certain vocabulary. In open test, KL divergence 
has better performance than cost definition by 
weighted sum of confidence in n-best aspect. And 
smoothing method has the best performance. 
 
Lexical 
Feature Cost Definition 
N-best Word Recog-
nition Rate (%) 
1 5 10 
Phoneme 
Sequence Substitution Prob. 68.4 83.6 86.0 
Confi-
dence 
Vector 
KL Divergence 71.4 86.6 90.9 
Weighted sum of 
Confidence 71.3 83.8 87.2 
Smoothing of 
Confidence 73.6 88.0 91.9 
Table 2. Word Recognition Rate of Open test 
N-best Rescoring 
N-best rescoring stage does one-pass search among 
N-best result words. We used 500-best result for 
N-best rescoring. Table 3 shows the result of N-
best rescoring. In the N-best rescoring test we used 
the lexical model from POW DB. 
500-best performance of conventional multi-
stage speech recognition system is 97.3%, and 
when we use confidence vector as input feature for 
lexical decoding with Kullback-Leibler divergence 
cost, our 500-best performance is 98.8% and 98.9% 
when we use weighted sum of confidence vector as 
cost. When we use smoothing method, 500-best 
performance is 99.1%. Since the performance of 
N-best rescoring is highly dependent with 500-best 
performance, conventional multi-stage method has 
the worst rescoring performance. Because 500-best 
performance of weighted sum of confidence and 
smoothing method are similar, the performance of 
N-best rescoring is almost same for these two cost 
definitions. If we use conventional one-pass de-
coder, word recognition rate is 82.9%. By N-best 
rescoring we can achieves the same level of per-
formance with the one-pass decoder. 
 
Lexical 
Feature 
Cost Definition 
N-best Word Recog-
nition Rate (%) 
1 5 10 
Phoneme 
Sequence Substitution Prob. 81.2 92.4 94.2 
Confi-
dence 
Vector 
KL Divergence 82.0 94.2 95.5 
Weighted sum of 
Confidence 83.2 94.5 95.9 
Smoothing of Con-
fidence 82.0 94.5 95.8 
Table 3. Word Recognition Rate of N-best Rescor-
ing 
Speed Improvement 
By dividing search procedure into acoustic and 
lexical parts, we can have the advantage of speed. 
In the acoustic decoder we used context-dependent 
model and a real-time factor of acoustic decoder is 
0.03 on 3G Hz Dual-core CPU machine.  Table 4 
shows the recognition speed of multi-stage speech 
recognition system. Multi-stage approach is about 
4-times faster than conventional one-pass decoder. 
If we use confidence vector as input feature for 
lexical decoding, we need additional amount of 
computation to extract confidence values. But the 
total speed is faster than conventional phoneme 
sequence feature. Since confidence vector feature 
makes more discriminative cost in lexical decoding, 
the total number of active nodes of search network 
is decreased and we can avoid increasing time. 
 
Decoder/Lexical Feature Real Time Factor 
One-pass 1.16 
Multi-
pass 
Phoneme Sequence 0.29 
Confidence Vector 0.27 
Table 4. Speed of multi-stage speech recognition 
system 
4.2 Experiment on hotel reservation domain 
We applied the proposed method to the dialog 
speech recognition. The acoustic decoder is same 
as in the POI domain experiment. The lexical de-
coder searches the finite state network with class as 
its node which covers the 25,000 sentence tem-
plates in the hotel reservation domain. The test 
speech data is composed of 2,161 sentences uttered 
by 50 speakers, which is covered by the sentence 
templates. Table 5 shows that the use of the confi-
dence vector is shown to be very effective, show-
ing 29.6% error reduction rate to the conventional 
multi-stage method. Also, the proposed approach is 
shown to be competitive to the one-stage speech 
recognition while the execution speed is improved 
more than five times.  
Decoder/Lexical Feature 
Real Time 
Factor 
Word Accu-
racy(%) 
One-Pass 1.17 95.90 
Multi-
pass 
Substitution Prob. 0.33 95.71 
KL Divergence - 96.18 
Weighted sum of 
Confidence 0.22 96.39 
Smoothing of  
Confidence - 96.98 
Table 5. Word accuracy and speed of multi-stage 
speech recognition for hotel reservation domain 
5 Conclusion 
In this paper, we proposed a new method of using 
the confidence vector as an input feature for lexical 
decoding in the multi-stage speech recognition. We 
also introduced diverse cost definitions to measure 
the difference between confidence vector and ref-
erence vector. By transferring more information in 
the form of confidence vector to the lexical decod-
ing, we can achieve better performance than the 
conventional method. The experiment results show 
up to 16.4% ERR of word accuracy for  220k Ko-
rean Point-of-Interest (POI) domain and 29.6% 
ERR of word accuracy for hotel reservation dialog 
domain. 
Also, comparing to the one-pass decoder, the 
proposed method is shown to be far faster while 
maintaining competitive performance. Thus, this 
method is appropriate to build an embedded speech 
recognition engine on a mobile device. 
As a future research, we will investigate the pos-
sibility of integrating the confidence vector ap-
proach with a phoneme lattice as an input feature 
for lexical decoding. A plain phoneme lattice can 
convey more information to lexical decoding, but 
mmay increase the computational complexity 
without any performance gain. We expect its ad-
vantage is maximized with combining the confi-
dence vector approach. 
 
References 
[1] Victor Zue, James Glass, David Goodine, Michael 
Phillips, and Stephanie Seneff. The SUMMIT Speech 
Recognition System: Phonological Modeling and 
Lexical Access. In Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoustics, 
Speech, Signal Processing, pp. 49-52, 1990. 
 [2] Hoon Chung, Ikjoo Chung.  Memory efficient and 
fast speech recognition system for low resource mo-
bile devices. In IEEE Transactions on Consumer 
Electronics, Volume: 52, Issue: 3, pages 792 ? 796, 
2006. 
[3] Hyungbae Jeon, Kyuwoong Hwang, Hoon Chung, 
Seunghi Kim, Jun Park, and Yunkeun Lee. Multi-
stage Speech Recognition for POI. In Proc. Confe-
rence of Korean Society of Phonetic Sciences and 
Speech Technology, pp. 131-134, 2007. 
[4] Vaibhava Goel, Shankar Kuman, and William Byrne. 
Confidence Based Lattice Segmentation and Mini-
mum Bayes-Risk Decoding. In Proc. Conference of 
Eurospeech, 2001. 
