Chinese Word Sense Disambiguation with PageRank and HowNet 
Jinghua Wang 
Beijing University of Posts  
and  Telecommunications 
Beijing, China 
wjh_smile@163.com 
Jianyi Liu 
Beijing University of Posts 
and Telecommunications 
Beijing, China 
jianyilui@sohu.com 
Ping Zhang 
Shenyang Normal  
University 
Shenyang, China 
pinney58@163.com 
 
 
Abstract 
Word sense disambiguation is a basic 
problem in natural language processing. 
This paper proposed an unsupervised word 
sense disambiguation method based 
PageRank and HowNet. In the method, a 
free text is firstly represented as a sememe 
graph with sememes as vertices and 
relatedness of sememes as weighted edges 
based on HowNet. Then UW-PageRank is 
applied on the sememe graph to score the 
importance of sememes. Score of each 
definition of one word can be computed 
from the score of sememes it contains. 
Finally, the highest scored definition is 
assigned to the word. This approach is 
tested on SENSEVAL-3 and the 
experimental results prove practical and 
effective. 
1 Introduction 
Word sense disambiguation, whose purpose is to 
identify the correct sense of a word in context, is 
one of the most important problems in natural 
language processing. There are two different 
approaches: knowledge-based and corpus-based 
(Montoyo, 2005). Knowledge-based method 
disambiguates words by matching context with 
information from a prescribed knowledge source, 
such as WordNet and HowNet. Corpus-based 
methods are also divided into two kinds: 
unsupervised and supervised (Lu Z, 2007). 
Unsupervised methods cluster words into some 
sets which indicate the same meaning, but they can 
not give an exact explanation. Supervised 
machine-learning method learns from annotated 
sense examples. Though corpus-based approach 
usually has better performance, the mount of words 
it can disambiguate essentially relies on the size of 
training corpus, while knowledge-based approach 
has the advantage of providing larger coverage. 
Knowledge-based methods for word sense 
disambiguation are usually applicable to all words 
in the text, while corpus-based techniques usually 
target only few selected word for which large 
corpora are made available (Mihalcea, 2004). 
This paper presents an unsupervised word sense 
disambiguation algorithm based on HowNet. 
Words? definition in HowNet is composed of some 
sememes which are the smallest, unambiguous 
sense unit. First, a free text is represented as a 
sememe graph, in which sememes are defined as 
vertices and relatedness of sememes are defined as 
weighted edges. Then UW-PageRank is applied on 
this graph to score the importance of sememes. 
Score of each definition of one word can be 
deduced from the score of sememes it contains. 
Finally, the highest scored definition is assigned to 
the word. This algorithm needs no corpus, and is 
able to disambiguate all the words in the text at one 
time. The experiment result shows that our 
algorithm is effective and practical. 
2 HowNet 
HowNet (Dong, Z. D, 2000) is not only a machine 
readable dictionary, but also a knowledge base 
which organizes words or concepts as they 
represent in the object world. It has been widely 
used in word sense disambiguation and pruning, 
text categorization, text clustering, text retrieval, 
machine translation, etc (Dong, Z. D, 2007). 
39
Sixth SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Processing
2.1 The content and structure of HowNet 
HowNet is an online common-sense knowledge 
based unveiling inter-conceptual relations and 
inter-attribute relations of concepts as connoting in 
lexicons of the Chinese and English equivalents. 
There are over 16000 word records in the 
dictionary. This is an example 
 
No.=017625 No.=017630 
W_C=? W_C=? 
G_C=V G_C=V 
E_C=?? E_C=??? 
W_E=hit W_E=buy 
G_E=V G_E=V 
DEF=beat|? DEF=buy|??
commercial|? 
 
This is two of the concepts of word ???: ?No.? 
is the entry number of the concept in the dictionary; 
?G_C? is the part of speech of this concept in 
Chinese, and ?G_E? is that in English; ?E_C? is 
the example of the concept; ?W_E? is the concept 
in English; ?DEF? is the definition. 
Definitions of words are composed of a series of 
sememes (usually more than one ? like DEF 
No.017630 contains ?buy|? ? and ?commercial|
? ?) ? like ?beat|? ? which is the smallest 
unambiguous unit of concept. First sememe of the 
definition like ?buy|?? of DEF No.017630 is the 
main attribution of the definition. Sememes have 
been classified into 8 categories, such as attribute, 
entity, event role and feature, event, quantity value, 
quantity, secondary feature and syntax. Sememes 
in one category form a tree structure with 
hypernymy / hyponymy relation. Sememes 
construct concepts, e.g. definition, so the word 
sense disambiguation task of assigning definition 
to word can be done through the computation of 
sememes. 
2.2 The similarity of sememes 
The tree structure of sememes makes it possible to 
judge the relatedness of them with a precision 
mathematical method. Rada (Rada, R, 1989) 
defined the conceptual distance between any two 
concepts as the shortest path through a semantic 
network. The shortest path is the one which 
includes the fewest number of intermediate 
concepts. With Rada?s algorithm, the more similar 
two concepts are, the smaller their shortest path is, 
and so we use the reciprocal of the length of 
shortest path as the similarity. Leacock and 
Chodorow (Leacock, C, 1998) define it as follows: 
1 2 1 2( , ) max[ log( ( , ) /(2 ))lchsim c c length c c D= ?  
where length(c1, c2) is the shortest path length 
between the two concepts and D is the maximum 
depth of the taxonomy. 
Wu and Palmer (Wu, Z., 1994) define another 
formula to measure the similarity 
)()(
)),((2
),(
21
21
21 cdepthcdepth
cclcsdepth
ccsimwup +
?=
                                 
depth is the distance from the concept node to the 
root of the hierarchy. lcs(c1,c2) is the most specific 
concept that two concepts have in common, that is 
the lowest common subsumer. 
3 PageRank on Sememe Graph 
PageRank is an algorithm of deciding the 
importance of vertices in a graph. Sememes from 
HowNet can be viewed as an undirected weighted 
graph, which defines sememes as vertices, 
relations of sememes as edges and the relatedness 
of connected sememes as the weights of edges. 
Because PageRank formula is defined for directed 
graph, a modified PageRank formula is applied to 
use on the undirected weighted graph from 
HowNet. 
3.1 PageRank 
PageRank (Page, L., 1998) which is widely used 
by search engines for ranking web pages based on 
the importance of the pages on the web is an 
algorithm essentially for deciding the importance 
of vertices within a graph. The main idea is that: in 
a directed graph, when one vertex links to another 
one, it is casting a vote for that other vertex. The 
more votes one vertex gets, the more important this 
vertex is. PageRank also takes account the voter: 
the more important the voter is, the more important 
the vote itself is. In one word, the score associated 
with a vertex is determined based on the votes that 
are cast for it, and the score of the vertex casting 
these votes. So this is the definition: 
Let G=(V,E) be a directed graph with the set of 
vertices V and set of edges E, when E is a subset of 
V?V. For a given vertex Vi, let In(Vi) be the set of 
vertices that point to it, and let Out(Vi) be the set of 
edges going out of vertex Vi. The PageRank score 
of vertex Vi is 
40
Sixth SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Processing
?
?
+?=
)( )(
)(
*)1()(
iVInj j
j
i
VOut
VS
ddVS
                                  
d is a damping factor that can be set between 0 and 
1,and usually set at 0.85 which is the value we use 
in this paper (Mihalcea, R., 2004). 
PageRank starts from arbitrary values assigned 
to each vertex in the graph, and ends when the 
convergence below a given threshold is achieved. 
Experiments proved that it usually stops computing 
within 30 iterations (Mihalcea, R., 2004). 
PageRank can be also applied on undirected 
graph, in which case the out-degree of a vertex is 
equal to the in-degree of the vertex. 
3.2 PageRank on sememe graph 
Sememes from HowNet can be organized in a 
graph, in which sememes are defined as vertices, 
and similarity of connected sememes are defined 
as weight of edges. The graph can be constructed 
as an undirected weighted graph.  
We applied PageRank on the graph with a 
modified formula 
?
?
?+?=
)( )(
)()(
*)1()(
iVCj j
jij
i
VD
VSEweight
ddVS                         
C(Vi)is the set of edges connecting with Vj, 
weight(Eij)is the weight of edge Eij connecting 
vertex Vi and Vj, and D(Vj) is the degree of Vj. 
This formula is named UW-PageRank. In sememe 
graph, we define sememes as vertices, relations of 
sememes as edges and the relatedness of connected 
sememes as the weights of edges. UW-PageRank 
is applied on this graph to measure the importance 
of the sememes. The higher score one sememe 
gets, the more important it is. 
4 Word sense disambiguation based on 
PageRank 
To disambiguate words in the text, firstly the text 
is converted to an undirected weighted sememe 
graph based on HowNet. The sememes which are 
from all the definitions for all the words in the text 
form the vertices of the graph and they are 
connected by edges whose weight is the similarity 
of the two sememes. Then, we use UW-PageRank 
to measure the importance of the vertex in the 
graph, so all the sememes are scored. So each 
definition of one word can be scored based on the 
score of the sememes it contains. Finally, the 
highest scored definition is assigned to the word as 
its meaning. 
4.1 Text representation as a graph 
To use PageRank algorithm to do disambiguation, 
a graph which represents the text and interconnects 
the words with meaningful relations should be 
built first. All the words in the text should be POS 
tagged first, and then find all the definitions 
pertaining to the word in HowNet with its POS. 
Different sememes from these definitions form the 
vertices of the graph. Edges are added between the 
vertices whose weights are the similarity of the 
sememes. The similarity can be measured by the 
algorithm in Section 2.2. As mentioned in Section 
2.1, all the sememes in HowNet are divided into 
eight categories, and in each category, sememes 
are connected in a tree structure. So based on the 
algorithms in Section 2.2, each two sememes in 
one category, i.e. in one tree, have a similarity 
more than 0, but if they are in different category, 
they will have a similarity equal to 0. As a result, a 
text will be represented in a sememe graph that is 
composed of several small separate fully connected 
graphs.
Assumed that a text containing ?word1 word2 
word3? is to be represented in a graph. The 
definition (DEF) and sememes for each word are 
listed in Table 1. 
 
Table 1. ? Word1 Word2Word3? 
Word Definition Sememes 
DEF11 S1,S5 
DEF12 S2 Word1
DEF13 S8 
DEF21 S6 Word2
DEF22 S7,S9 
DEF31 S3 Word3
DEF32 S4 
 
Sememes are linked together with the weight of 
relatedness. For example, S1 and S2 are connected 
with an edge weighted 0.3.The relation of word, 
DEF and sememes is represented in Figure1, and 
sememe graph is in Figure 2. 
41
Sixth SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Processing
 
Figure 1. Word-DEF-Sememe Relation 
 
 
Figure 2. Sememe Graph 
4.2 Word sense disambiguation based on 
PageRank 
Text has been represented in a sememe graph with 
sememes as vertices and similarity of sememes as 
the weight of the edges. Then, UW-PageRank is 
used to measure the importance of the vertex, i.e. 
sememes in the graph. The score of all the vertices 
in Figure 1 is in Table 2. 
 
Table 2. Score of Sememes 
Vertex S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 
UW-PageRank Score 0.179 0.175 0.170 0.165 0.202
Vertex S6 S7 S8 S9  
UW-PageRank Score 0.208 0.176 0.181 0.181  
Each definition of the words is scored based on 
the score of the sememes it contains.  
))((maxarg)(
1
i
mi
DEFScoreWordSense
??
=   
WordDEFi ? ,    DEFi is the i sense of the word. 
We use two methods to score the definition: 
Mean method 
HowNet uses sememes to construct definitions, 
so the score of the definition can be measured 
through an average score of all the sememes it 
contains. And we chose the definition of the 
highest score as the result.  
?
??
=
ni
iSScoren
DEFScore
1
)(
1
)(    
DEFSi ? , Si is the i sememe of DEF. 
First Sememe method 
First sememe of one DEF is defined as the most 
important meaning of the DEF. So we use another 
method to assign one DEF to one word taking first 
sememe into consideration. For all the DEF of one 
word, if one first sememe of one DEF gets the 
highest score, the DEF is assigned to the word. 
)()( eFirstSememScoreDEFScore =                                     
If several DEFs have the same first sememe or 
have the same score, we sort all the other sememes 
are from high score to low score, then comparison 
is made among this sememes from the beginning to 
the end until one of the sememes has the highest 
score among them, and finally the DEF containing 
this sememe is assigned to the word. 
The performance of the two methods will be 
tested and compared in Section5. 
With the ?Means? (M) and ?First Sememe? (FS) 
methods, text in Section 4.1 gets the result in Table 
3. 
 
Table3. Result of ?Word1 Word2 Word3? 
Word Definition Score (M) Result(M) Result(FS)
DEF11 0.191
DEF12 0.175Word1
DEF13 0.181
DEF11 DEF13 
DEF21 0.208Word2
DEF22 0.179
DEF21 DEF21 
DEF31 0.170Word3
DEF32 0.165
DEF31 DEF31 
 
42
Sixth SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Processing
 
Table 4. Experimental Result 
Word Baseline R+M L +M W+M R+FS L +FS W+FS Li 
?? 0.25 0.53 0.53 0.53 0.53 0.53 0.53 0.32 
?? 0.33 0.6 0.5 0.6 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.74 
? 0.1 0.42 0.42 0.46 0.35 0.35 0.38 0.26 
?? 0.25 0.73 0.75 0.56 0.67 0.75 0.56 0.39 
?? 0.17 0.5 0.57 0.64 0.43 0.5 0.64 0.67 
?? 0.33 0.47 0.27 0.13 0.47 0.27 0.13 0.27 
Average 
Precision 
0.24 0.54 0.51 0.49 0.48 0.47 0.42 0.44 
 
5 Experiment and evaluation 
We chose 96 instances of six words from 
SENSEVAl-3 Chinese corpus as the test corpus. 
Words are POS tagged. We use precision as the 
measure of performance and random tagging as the 
baseline. We crossly use Rada?s (R), Leacock & 
Chodorowp?s (L), and Wu and Palmer?s (W) 
methods to measure the similarity of sememes with 
mean method (M) and first sememe (FS) scoring 
the DEF. The precision of the combination 
algorithm is listed in Table 4. 
Li (Li W., 2005) used naive bayes classifier with 
features extracted from People?s Daily News to do 
word sense disambiguation on SENSEVAL-3. The 
precision is listed in line ?Li? of table as a 
comparison. 
The average precision of our algorithm is around 
two times higher than the baseline, and 5 of the 6 
combination algorithm gets better performance 
than Li. And for 5/6 word case, our algorithm gets 
the best performance. Among the three methods of 
measure the similarity of sememes, Rada?s method 
gets the best performance. And between the two 
methods of scoring definition, ?Mean method? 
works better, which indicates that although the first 
sememe is the most important meaning of one 
definition, the other sememes are also very 
important, and the importance of other sememes 
also should be taken into consideration while 
scoring the definition. Of all the combination of 
algorithms, ?Rada + Mean? gets the best 
performance, which takes a reasonable way to 
measure the similarity of two sememes and 
comprehensively scores the definition based on the 
importance of its sememes in the sememe graph 
from the whole text. 
6 Related works 
Many works in Chinese word sense 
disambiguation with HowNet. Chen Hao (Chen 
Hao, 2005) brought up a k-means cluster method 
base on HowNet, which firstly convert contexts 
that include ambiguous words into context vectors; 
then, the definitions of ambiguous words in 
Hownet can be determined by calculating the 
similarity between these context vectors. To do 
disambiguation, Yan Rong (Yan Rong, 2006) first 
extracted some most relative words from the text 
based on the co-occurrence, then calculate the 
similarity between each definition of ambiguous 
word and its relative words, and finally find the 
most similar definition as its meaning. The 
similarity of definitions is measured by the 
weighted mean of the similarity of sememes, and 
the similarity of sememes is measured by a 
modified Rada?s formula. Gong YongEn (Gong 
YongEn, 2006) used a similar method with Yan, 
and more over, he took recurrence of sememes into 
consideration. Compare with those methods, our 
method has a more precious sememes? similarity 
measure method, and make full use of the structure 
of its tree structure by representing text in graph 
and use UW-PageRank to judge sememes? 
importance in the whole text, that is the most 
obvious difference from them. Mihalceal 
(Mihalceal, 2004) first provide the semantic graph 
method to do word sense disambiguation, but her 
work is totally on English with WordNet, which is 
definitely different in meaning representation from 
HowNet. WordNet uses synsets to group similar 
concepts together and differentiate them, while 
HowNet use a close set of sememes to construct 
concept definitions. In Mihalceal?s method, the 
43
Sixth SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Processing
vertexes of graph are synsets, and in ours are 
sememes. And after measure the importance of 
sememes, an additional strategy is used to judge 
the score of definition based on the sememes. 
7 Conclusion 
An unsupervised method is applied to word sense 
disambiguation based on HowNet. First, a free text 
is represented as a sememe graph with sememes as 
vertices and relatedness of sememes as weighted 
edges. Then UW-PageRank is applied on this 
graph to score the importance of sememes. Score 
of each definition of one word can be deduced 
from the score of sememes it contains. Finally, the 
highest scored definition is assigned to the word. 
Our algorithm is tested on SENSEVAL-3 and the 
experimental results prove our algorithm to be 
practical and effective. 
Acknowledgment 
This study is supported by Beijing 
Natural Science Foundation of (4073037) and 
Ministry of Education Doctor 
Foundation (20060013007). 
References 
Chen hao, He Tingting, Ji Donghong, Quan Changqing, 
2005. An Unsupervised Approach to Chinese Word 
Sense Disambiguation Based on Hownet, 
Computational Linguistics and Chinese Language 
Processing, Vol. 10, No. 4, pp. 473-482 
Dong, Z.D., Dong, Q.2000. ?Hownet,? 
http://keenage.com. 
Dong Zhendong, Dong Qiang, Hao Changling, 2007. 
Theoretical Findings of HowNet, Journal of Chinese 
Information Processing, Vol. 21, No. 4, P3-9 
Gong Y., Yuan C., Wu G., 2006. Word Sense 
Disambiguation Algorithm Based on Semantic 
Information, Application Research of Computers, 41-
43. 
Leacock, C., Chodorow, M., 1998.Combing local 
context and WordNet Similarity for word sense 
identification, in: C.Fellbaum (Ed.), WordNet: An 
electronic lexical database, MIT Press, 305-332 
Li W., Lu Q., Li W., 2005. Integrating Collocation 
Features in Chinese Word Sense Disambiguation, 
Integrating Collocation Features in Chinese Word 
Sense Disambiguation. In Proceedings of the Fourth 
Sighan Workshop on Chinese Language Processing, 
87-94. 
Lu Z., Liu T., Li, S., 2007. Chinese word sense 
disambiguation based on extension theory, Journal of 
Harbin Institute of Technology, Vol.38 No.12, 2026-
2035 
Mihalcea, R., Tarau, P., Figa, E., 2004. PageRank on 
Semantic Networks, with application to Word Sense 
Disambiguation, in Proceedings of The 20st 
International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics  
Montoyo, A., Suarez, A., Rigau, G. and Palomar, M. 
2005. Combining Knowledge- and Corpus-based 
Word-Sense-Disambiguation Methods, Volume 23, 
Journal of Machine learning research , 299-330.  
Page, L., Brin, S., Motwani, R., and wingorad, T., 1998. 
The pagerank citation ranking: Bringing order to the 
web Technical report, Stanford Digital Library 
Technologies Project. 
Rada, R., Mili,E,.Bicknell, Blettner, M., 1989. 
Development and application of a metric on semantic 
nets, IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and 
Cybernetics 19(1) 17-30 
Wu, Z., Plamer, M., 1994. Verb semantics and lexical 
selection, in 32nd Annual Meeting of the Association 
for Computational Linguistics, Las Cruces, New 
Mexico, 133-138 
Yan R., Zhang L., 2006. New Chinese Word Sense 
Disambiguation Method, Computer Technology and 
Development, Vol. 16 No.3, 22-25 
44
Sixth SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Processing
