Mining Chinese-English Parallel Corpora from the Web 
Bo Li 
School of Computer Science 
Wuhan University 
Wuhan, 430072, China 
whulibo@gmail.com 
Juan Liu 
School of Computer Science 
Wuhan University 
Wuhan, 430072, China 
liujuan@whu.edu.cn 
 
 
Abstract 
Parallel corpora are a crucial resource in 
research fields such as cross-lingual infor-
mation retrieval and statistical machine 
translation, but only a few parallel corpora 
with high quality are publicly available 
nowadays. In this paper, we try to solve the 
problem by developing a system that can 
automatically mine high quality parallel 
corpora from the World Wide Web. The 
system contains a three-step process. The 
system uses a web spider to crawl certain 
hosts at first. Then candidate parallel web 
page pairs are prepared from the 
downloaded page set. At last, each candi-
date pair is examined based on multiple 
standards. We develop novel strategies for 
the implementation of the system, which 
are then proved to be rather effective by the 
experiments towards a multilingual website. 
1 Introduction 
Parallel corpora consisting of text in parallel trans-
lation plays an important role in data-driven natu-
ral language processing technologies such as statis-
tical machine translation (Brown et al, 1990) and 
cross-lingual information retrieval (Landauer and 
Littman, 1990; Oard, 1997). But the fact is that 
only a few parallel corpora with high quality are 
publicly available such as the United Nations pro-
ceedings and the Canadian Parliament proceedings 
(LDC, 1999). These corpora are usually small in 
size, specializing in narrow areas, usually with fees 
and licensing restrictions, or sometimes out-of-date. 
For language pairs such as Chinese and English, 
the lack of parallel corpora is more severe. The 
lack of such kind of resource has been an obstacle 
in the development of the data-driven natural lan-
guage processing technologies. But the intense 
human labor involved in the development of paral-
lel corpora will still make it very hard to change 
the current situation by hand. 
The number of websites containing web pages in 
parallel translation increases considerably these 
years, which gives hope that we can construct par-
allel corpora with high quality in a big scale more 
easily. In this paper, we present a system named 
Parallel Corpus Mining System (PCMS) which can 
automatically collect Chinese-English parallel web 
corpora from the Web. Similar with previous work, 
PCMS uses a three-step process. First, the web 
spider WebZip1 is used to crawl the hosts specified 
by users. In the second step, candidate parallel web 
page pairs are prepared from the raw web page set 
fetched based on some outer features of the web 
pages. A novel strategy is designed to utilize all 
these features to construct high quality candidate 
parallel page pairs, which can raise the perform-
ance and reduce the time complexity of the system. 
In the third step, candidate page pairs are evaluated 
based on multiple standards in which page struc-
ture and content are both considered. The actually 
parallel page pairs are saved. 
The content-based strategy in the PCMS system 
is implemented mainly based on the vector space 
model (VSM). We design a novel implementation 
of VSM to bilingual text, which is called bilingual 
vector space model (BVSM). In previous content-
based work, they usually use coarse criterions to 
measure the similarity of bilingual text. For exam-
                                                 
1 http://www.spidersoft.com/webzip/default.asp 
847
ple, Ma and Liberman (1999) measured the content 
similarity by the count of parallel token pairs in the 
text which are weak at representing the actual con-
tent of the text. VSM was considered for evaluat-
ing the similarity of bilingual text in (Chen et al, 
2004), but unfortunately the particular description 
of the implementation which was a bit complex 
was not mentioned in their work, and the time 
complexity of their system was rather high. Be-
sides, there are also some other types of methods 
for mining parallel corpora from the web such as 
the work in (Resnik, 1998), (Resnik and Smith, 
2003) and (Zhang et al, 2006). Most of these 
methods are unbalanced between precision and 
recall or computationally too complex. We detail 
the implementation of BVSM in the PCMS system 
in this paper. The experiments conducted to a spe-
cific website show that PCMS can achieve a better 
overall result than relative work reported. 
The structure of the paper is as follows. The sys-
tem architecture of PCMS is introduced in Section 
2. We introduce the details of the step for prepar-
ing candidate web page pairs in Section 3. The 
next step, candidate page pair evaluation, is de-
scribed in Section 4. We discuss the results of the 
experiments and conclude the paper in the last two 
sections. 
2 The PCMS System 
The PCMS system is designed to mine parallel 
corpora automatically from the web. As has been 
clarified above, the system employs a three-step 
process. The first is a web page fetching step. 
There are some tools to do the job and the PCMS 
system uses WebZip to fetch all the web pages 
from specific hosts. We usually choose some sites 
which probably contain high quality parallel web 
pages such as the site of the ministry of foreign 
affairs of China. After the web pages are obtained 
from the servers, the web pages which are too 
small, for example smaller than 5k bytes, are ex-
cluded from the page set. Then for each page in the 
page set, the HTML source of the web page is 
parsed and the noise such as the advertisement is 
excluded from the raw web page. The second is the 
candidate parallel page pair preparation step. The 
web pages are paired according to the URL simi-
larity and some other features of the web pages. 
The third is the candidate parallel page pair evalua-
tion step which is the key section of the PCMS 
system. Both web page structure and content are 
considered in this step. The candidate parallel page 
pairs prepared by the second step are first filtered 
by the structure-based criterion and then evaluated 
by the content-based criterion. We develop novel 
strategies for the third step and describe it in detail 
in the following sections.  
3 Candidate Parallel Pair Preparation 
The web spider can fetch a great many web pages 
in different languages from certain hosts. Usually 
the language of a web page can be identified by 
some feature strings of the URL. For example, the 
URLs of many English web pages contain strings 
such as e, en, eng and english which are called 
language identification strings. The language iden-
tification strings are usually attached to the other 
part of the URL with symbols such as ???, ?/? and 
?_?. The number of web pages downloaded by the 
web spider is very large, so the pairs produced will 
be a huge amount if we treat each web page in lan-
guage A and each in language B as a candidate pair, 
which will then make the third step of the system 
computationally infeasible. Parallel web pages 
usually have similar URLs. For example, the web 
page P1 in Chinese and P2 in English are parallel: 
Web page P1  URL2:  
www.fmprc.gov.cn/chn/wjdt/wshd/t358904.htm 
Web page P2  URL:  
www.fmprc.gov.cn/eng/wjdt/wshd/t358905.htm 
We can see that the URL of page P1 and the URL 
of page P2 share most of the strings such as 
www.fmprc.gov.cn, wjdt, and wshd. In some other 
cases, the similarity between the URLs of parallel 
web pages may be not that direct but should still be 
obvious.  
In PCMS, a novel strategy is designed to meas-
ure the URL similarity of the candidate web page 
pair. Before the URL similarity evaluation process, 
the language identification strings of the URLs 
should be substituted by a uniform string which 
seldom occurs in normal URLs. For example, the 
language identification strings such as en, eng, cn 
and chn are substituted by the string *** which 
seldom occurs in normal URLs. For example, the 
above page P1 after the URL substitution process 
is www.fmprc.gov.cn/***/wjdt/wshd/t358904.htm. 
After the substitution process, the similarity of the 
                                                 
2 The protocol string HTTP is omitted here. 
848
new URLs is evaluated. For evaluating the URL 
similarity of web page PA in language A and web 
page PB in language B, the following criterions are 
considered. 
Criterion 1: URL length difference. 
It can be found that the length of the URLs of 
parallel web pages is usually similar. The length of 
the URL here refers to the number of directories in 
the URL string. For example, the URL of the 
above web page P1 contains the directories ***3, 
wjdt and wshd, and then the URL length of P1 is 3. 
If two web pages PA and PB are parallel, the URL 
length of PA and PB should be similar. The URL 
length difference criterion is define as 
( ) ( )
 ( , )=
( ) ( )
len PA len PB
URL diff PA PB
len PA len PB
?
+        (1) 
where URL diff(PA,PB) is the URL length differ-
ence between PA and PB, len(PA) is the URL 
length of page PA and len(PB) is the URL length 
of PB. The value of URL length difference is be-
tween 0 and 1, and the more similar two URLs are, 
the smaller the value is. If the URL lengths of PA 
and PB are the same, the URL length difference 
between PA and PB should be 0. 
Criterion 2: URL directory similarity. 
Besides URL length, URL directory information 
is also considered in the candidate page pair prepa-
ration step. It can be observed that the URLs of 
parallel web pages usually share similar directory 
structure which can be represented by the common 
directories in the URLs. For example, the above 
web page P1 and web page P2 share the directories 
***, wjdt and wshd. To measure the URL directory 
similarity of the web page PA and the web page PB, 
a criterion is defined as  
2* ( , )
 ( , )
( ) ( )
comdir PA PB
URL dirsim PA PB
len PA len PB
= +   (2) 
where URL dirsim(PA,PB) is the URL directory 
similarity of page PA and page PB, comdir(PA,PB) 
is the number of common directories PA and PB 
share, len(PA) and len(PB) are the same as above. 
The value of URL directory similarity is between 0 
and 1. The bigger the value is, the more similar the 
two pages are. When two web pages have the same 
URLs, the URL directory similarity should be 1. 
                                                 
3 The language identification strings of the URL have been 
substituted by the uniform string ***. 
Criterion 3: Similarity of some other features. 
Some other features such as the file size of the 
web page and the time the page created can help to 
filter the nonparallel web page pairs with low cost. 
Based on the combination of the above criteri-
ons, the web page pairs of which the similarity ex-
cesses certain threshold are treated as the candidate 
parallel pairs, which are then to be processed by 
the following evaluation step. 
4 Candidate Parallel Pair  Evaluation 
It is the key section of the system to evaluate the 
candidate parallel web page pairs. Though content-
based methods are what the candidate parallel page 
pair evaluation step mainly relies on, the structure 
of the web pages is also considered in the evalua-
tion step of the PCMS system for it can help to 
filter out some page pairs that are obviously non-
parallel at low cost. The candidate parallel page 
pair set is first filtered by the structure-based strat-
egy which is similar with the one in (Resnik, 1998), 
and we consider some more structure relative fea-
tures such as color and font. A loose constrain is 
set on the structure similarity criterion, because it 
is merely a preliminary filter step to reduce the 
scale of the problem. 
After the structure-based filter stage, the page 
pairs left are then to be evaluated by the content-
based stage which is the key of the candidate paral-
lel page pair evaluation step. The performance of 
the PCMS system relies mainly on this module. In 
the content-based stage, the candidate page pairs 
are first filtered based on some content related fea-
tures and then the page pairs left are evaluated by 
the BVSM model. 
4.1 The Content Related Feature-based Filter 
In the first part of the content-based strategy, some 
content related features such as time stamp and 
navigation text are combined to construct a pre-
liminary step to filter the candidate page pair set 
and reduce the number of pairs to be processed by 
BVSM. Many web pages contain time stamps 
which identify the time when the web pages were 
constructed. If two pages are parallel, the time 
when they are constructed should be similar. Navi-
gation text usually demonstrates the type informa-
tion of the content of the web page. For example, a 
web page with anchor text Home-News-China is 
probable about the news which happened in China. 
849
So if two web pages are parallel, their navigation 
text if there is any should be similar. To evaluate 
the similarity of two pieces of navigation text in 
two languages, we need a bilingual navigation text 
wordlist. For each layer, for example news, in one 
navigation text, if its translation ?? xin-wen ap-
pears in the other navigation text, the similarity 
count will be added by 1. The similarity between 
two pieces of navigation text is defined as 
         
2 *
NC NE
count
similarity
layer layer
= +                  (3) 
where layerNC demonstrates the layer count of the 
navigation text of the Chinese web page and 
layerNE is that of the English web page. For exam-
ple, the layerNE of the navigation text Home-News-
China is 3. If the similarity gotten from formula (3) 
is below certain threshold, the corresponding web 
page pair will not be considered as parallel. 
4.2 The BVSM Model 
In the second part of the content-based strategy, 
BVSM is implemented to evaluate the similarity of 
candidate parallel page pairs. VSM is an important 
technology for representing text and has been ap-
plied to some other research areas. But this model 
is usually applicable to monolingual text process-
ing problem. For bilingual text processing, we 
should design a new strategy to use VSM for the 
new problem. A bilingual dictionary is a must for 
importing VSM to bilingual problem. We give a 
brief introduction to the bilingual dictionary we 
use first. Each entry line of the dictionary consists 
of three parts. The first part is the English word, 
the middle is a list separator and the last is the cor-
responding Chinese word. A sample of the diction-
ary can be found in Appendix A. For each English 
word, there may be some Chinese words serving as 
its translations. The same conclusion can be gotten 
for each Chinese word. 
Based on the bilingual dictionary, we can repre-
sent the Chinese and English web pages as vectors 
respectively. First, we give every English word in 
the bilingual dictionary a unique ID according to 
its position in the dictionary beginning from 1. For 
example, the ID of the English word in the first 
row is 1, and the ID of the next new English word 
in the dictionary is 2 and so forth. For convenience, 
we denote the Chinese web page as C and the Eng-
lish web page as E in each web page pair. We then 
can represent each web page as follows. 
For E, we extract all the words from the web 
page and stem them first. The length of the vector 
of E equals the length of the bilingual dictionary 
which is the number of the different English words 
in the dictionary. For each dimension of the vector, 
for example k, we assign the number of the words 
with ID k occurring in all the words extracted to it. 
If certain words in the bilingual dictionary never 
occur in E, we assign the value 0 to the corre-
sponding dimensions which are identified by the 
IDs of those words. If some words in E haven?t 
occurred in the dictionary, we just ignore them. 
For C, the procedure to construct a vector is 
more complex. In the PCMS system, the proce-
dures of word segmentation and POS for Chinese 
are finished in a single run. The length of the vec-
tor of C equals to that of the vector of E. As has 
been pointed out, one Chinese word may corre-
spond to more than one English word in the bilin-
gual dictionary. For example in Appendix A, the 
Chinese word ?? fang-qi corresponds to aban-
don, depart and leave. In the vector of E, each di-
mension strands for the count of a single English 
word with a unique ID occurring in the English 
text. In order to construct a vector for C which is 
comparable to the vector of E, a single Chinese 
word in C should contribute to more than one di-
mension of the vector of C. In order to distribute 
the count/weight of each Chinese word to the cor-
responding dimensions of the vector of C, we first 
count the number of each entry which is a Chinese 
word with a specific POS, for example (?? , 
Verb), in C. Then for each entry, we distribute its 
count to all the dimensions identified by the IDs of 
the English words which the Chinese word in the 
entry corresponds to. The count distribution proc-
ess is detailed below. 
If the Chinese word in the entry Cent is a con-
tent word which we call here to mean that it carries 
the main content of a language including noun, 
verb and adjective, we will divide the correspond-
ing English words in the bilingual dictionary into 
four separate classes: the words that haven?t ap-
peared in the English text (C4), the words that have 
the same POS with the entry (C1), the words that 
have similar POS with the entry (C2) and the other 
words (C3). For convenience, the count of the entry 
Cent in C is denoted as N1234. If the capacity of C4 
is 0 which means there are no words belonging to 
the class C4, then N1234 is all devoted to the words 
850
in C1, C2 and C3, else a certain proportion, for ex-
ample 10%, of N1234 is assigned to all the words in 
C4 averagely and the left of N1234 is assigned to the 
words in C1, C2 and C3. Similarly, we denote the 
count left to words in C1, C2 and C3 as N123, and 
then if the capacity of C3 is 0, N123 is all denoted to 
the words in C1 and C2, else a certain proportion of 
N123 is denoted to all the words in C3 averagely and 
the left of N123 is devoted to the words in C1 and C2. 
For words in C1 and C2, the count distribution 
strategy is similar. 
If the Chinese word in the entry Cent is not a 
content word, we classify the corresponding Eng-
lish words into two classes: the words that haven?t 
appeared in the English text (C2) and the other 
words (C1). The same method as above is used to 
distribute the count. 
4.3 Similarity Evaluation Criterions 
Based on the above strategies, the two web pages 
can be represented by their vectors respectively. 
Then the next step is to calculate the similarity of 
the two vectors, which is also the similarity of the 
two web pages. Some comments were given on 
different similarity measures such as Euclidence 
distance, Inner product, Cosine coefficient, Dice 
coefficient and Jaccard coefficient in (Chen et al, 
2004). It was suggested that for a pair of docu-
ments to be considered parallel, we could expect 
that these two documents contained the two corre-
sponding sets of translated terms and each corre-
sponding term was carrying an identical contextual 
significance in each of the document respectively. 
For that, the Jaccard coefficient is more appropri-
ate for the calculation of the similarity score. 
While in our experiments, we find that Cosine co-
efficient is more suitable. Because the size of the 
bilingual dictionary is small and we exclude all the 
words which are not in the dictionary from the text 
of the web pages when we construct the vectors, it 
is possible that the counterparts of some words in 
one web page can not be found in its correspond-
ing web page. Though we have done some smooth 
work in the BVSM model, there is still a gap be-
tween the assumptions by Chen et al (2004) and 
the situation of our problem. The second reason we 
think is that the translation process by human is 
almost sentence to sentence, but not word to word. 
As a result, it is normal that there are no words in 
one language serving as the translation for certain 
words in the other language. Based on the Cosine 
coefficient criterion, the similarity between two 
vectors which are represented by (x1, x2, x3, ?, xp) 
and (y1, y2, y3, ?, yp) respectively is 
1
2 2
1 1
*
cos
p
i i
i
p p
i i
i i
x y
inecoefficient
x y
=
= =
=
?
? ?
       (4) 
The similarity measure is between 0 and 1, and 
the bigger the value is, the more similar the two 
vectors are. We set a certain threshold for the simi-
larity measure based on our experience in PCMS. 
5 Experiments and Discussion 
In this section, we practice the experiments de-
signed to evaluate the performance of the PCMS 
system and compare it with similar work earlier. 
5.1 Evaluation Standards 
Precision and recall are two widely used evalua-
tion standards in the area of natural language proc-
essing. In our experiments, we define precision as 
the proportion of page pairs in parallel translation 
to the total page pairs produced by the PCMS sys-
tem. Recall is defined as the proportion of page 
pairs in parallel translation produced by the PCMS 
system to the total parallel page pairs in the whole 
web page set. 
The number of pairs in parallel translation 
should be calculated from the human annotated 
page pairs. We ask a native Chinese speaker who 
has a fluent English tongue to annotate these page 
pairs. To calculate the recall, we need to know the 
number of parallel pairs in the web page set. It is 
hard to count out the actual number of the parallel 
pairs in the page set because the web page set is 
really too big. We build a relatively smaller test set 
to test the recall of the PCMS system. 
5.2 Parallel Corpus Construction 
In order to construct a high quality parallel corpus 
in the experiments, the website of the ministry of 
foreign affairs of China (http://www.fmprc.gov.cn) 
is chosen to be crawled. After the rough observa-
tion, it is found that a huge number of web pages 
fetched are in parallel translation. We get a web 
page set consisting of 40262 Chinese web pages 
and 17324 English web pages by the tool WebZip. 
After the preprocess step, the web pages left are to 
851
be examined by the core modules of PCMS. It 
takes nearly 3 hours to finish the task on a PC with 
a P4 2.0G CPU and 512MB RAM, which is faster 
than the early systems. To evaluate the precision of 
the system, we randomly choose a subset of the 
web page pairs which PCMS gives as output, and 
get a web page set of 500 web page pairs. We 
manually annotate it and find that there are 479 
truly parallel page pairs among them. Then the 
precision is about 96%. We analysis the 21 non-
parallel pairs the PCMS system gives and find that 
most of these web pages are short web pages con-
taining limited text. To obtain the recall of the 
PCMS system, we construct a test page set consist-
ing of 350 parallel page pairs and 150 nonparallel 
page pairs. The ratio 350/150 is decided based on 
rough estimation of the whole page set. The PCMS 
system is examined on the test set, which produces 
337 page pairs which are truly parallel, thus a re-
call of 96%. We analysis the 13 parallel pages 
which are recognized as nonparallel by the PCMS 
system and find that most of them are short web 
pages. We then come to the conclusion that the 
drawback that BVSM is weak at representing short 
text leads to the system?s failure to identify the 
parallel web page pairs. Though the model has 
some drawbacks, the overall result consisting of 
performance and time complexity is much better 
than the former similar work. 
6 Conclusion 
The paper presents a web-based parallel corpus 
construction system PCMS. The system first 
fetches all the web pages from specific hosts, and 
then prepares candidate parallel web page pairs 
based on features such as URL and web page file 
size. At last the candidate pairs are examined by a 
two-stage similarity evaluation process in which 
the structure and content of the web pages are both 
considered. To enhance the performance of the 
PCMS system, we design some novel strategies for 
the implementation of these steps. The results of 
the experiments show the high performance and 
low time complexity of the PCMS system. All in 
all, the PCMS system is a reliable and effective 
tool for mining parallel corpora from the web. 
References 
Brown, P. F., Cocke, J., Pietra, S. D., Pietra, V. J. D., 
Jelinek, F., Lafferty, J. D., et al (1990). A statistical 
approach to machine translation. Computational Lin-
guistics, 16(2), 79-85. 
Chen, J., Chau, R., and Yeh, C. H. (2004). Discovering 
parallel text from the World Wide Web. In Proc. of 
DMWI-04, Dunedin, New Zealand. 
Landauer, T. K. and Littman, M. L. (1990). Fully auto-
matic cross-language document retrieval using latent 
semantic indexing. In Proc. of the 6th Annual Con-
ference of the UW Centre for the New Oxford English 
Dictionary and Text Research, Waterloo, Ontario. 
LDC. (1999). Linguistic Data Consortium (LDC) home 
page. http://www.ldc.upenn.edu 
Ma, X. and Liberman, M. Y. (1999). BITS: A method 
for bilingual text search over the web. In Proc. of the 
Machine Translation Summit VII. 
Oard, D. W. (1997). Cross-language text retrieval re-
search in the USA. In Proc. of the 3rd ERCIM 
DELOS Workshop, Zurich, Switzerland. 
Resnik, P. (1998). Parallel strands: A preliminary inves-
tigation into mining the web for bilingual text. In 
Proc. of AMTA-98, Langhorne, PA. 
Resnik, P. and Smith, N. A. (2003). The web as a paral-
lel corpus. Computational Linguistics, 29(3), 349-
380. 
Zhang, Y., Wu, K., Gao, J., and Vines, P. (2006). 
Automatic acquisition of Chinese-English parallel 
corpus from the web. In Proceedings of ECIR-06, 
London. 
Appendix A: A Sample Bilingual Dictionary 
abandon --- ?? 
abandon --- ?? 
abandon --- ?? 
abandon --- ?? 
abc --- ?? 
abc --- ?? 
abc --- ?? 
abc --- ?? 
?? 
depart --- ?? 
depart --- ?? 
depart --- ?? 
depart --- ?? 
?? 
leave --- ?? 
leave --- ?? 
leave --- ?? 
leave --- ?? 
?? 
852
