Analyzing Chinese Synthetic Words with Tree-based Information
and a Survey on Chinese Morphologically Derived Words
Jia Lu
Nara Institute of
Science and Technology
jia-l@is.naist.jp
Masayuki Asahara
Nara Institute of
Science and Technology
masayu-a@is.naist.jp
Yuji Matsumoto
Nara Institute of
Science and Technology
matsu@is.naist.jp
Abstract
The lack of internal information of Chinese
synthetic words has become a crucial prob-
lem for Chinese morphological analysis sys-
tems which will face various needs of seg-
mentation standards for upper NLP applica-
tions in the future. In this paper, we first
categorize Chinese synthetic words into sev-
eral types according to their inside semantic
and syntactic structure, and then propose a
method to represent these inside information
of word by applying a tree-based structure.
Then we try to automatically identify the in-
ner morphological structure of 3-character
synthetic words by using a large corpus and
try to add syntactic tags to their internal
structure. We believe that this tree-based
word internal information could be useful
in specifying a Chinese synthetic word seg-
mentation standard.
1 Introduction
Chinese word segmentation has always been a diffi-
cult and challenging task in Chinese language pro-
cessing. Several Chinese morphological analysis
systems have been developed by different research
groups and they all have quite good performance
when doing segmentation of written Chinese. But
there still remain some problems. The biggest one is
that each research group has its own segmentation
standard for their system, which means that there
is no single segmentation standard for all tagged
corpora which can be agreeable across different re-
search groups. And we believe that this situation
slows down the progress of Chinese NLP research.
Among all the differences of segmentation stan-
dards, the segmentation method for Chinese syn-
thetic words is the most controversial part because
Chinese synthetic words have a quite complex struc-
ture and should be represented by several segmen-
tion levels according to the needs of upper applica-
tions such as MT, IR and IME.
For instance, a long(upper level) segmentation
unit may simplify syntactic analysis and IME ap-
plication but a small(lower level) segmentation unit
might be better for information retrieval or word-
based statistical summarization. But for now, no
Chinese morphological analysis system can do all
kinds of these workwith only one segmentation stan-
dard.
Furthermore, although every segmentation system
has good performance, in the analysis of real world
text, there are still many out-of-vocabulary words
which could not be easily recognized because of the
flexibility of Chinese synthetic word construction,
especially proper names that could always appear as
synthetic words.
In order to make our Chinese morphological anal-
ysis system to recognize more out-of-vocabulary
words and to fit different kinds of NLP applications,
we try to analyze the structure of the internal infor-
mation of Chinese synthetic words, categorize them
into semantic and syntactic types and store these in-
formation into a synthetic word dictionary by repre-
senting themwith a kind of tree structure built on our
system dictionary.
In this paper, we first make the definition of Chi-
53
Sixth SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Processing
nese synthetic words and classify them into several
categories in Section 2. In Section 3, two previous
researches on Chinese synthetic words will be intro-
duced. Then we propose a tree-based method for
analyzing Chinese synthetic words and make a sur-
vey focused on 3-character morphological derived
words to get the features for future machine learning
process. In Section 4, we do an experiment by us-
ing SVM classifier to annotate 3-character morpho-
logically derived words. Finally, Section 5 shows
how this method could benefit Chinese morphologi-
cal analysis and our future work.
2 Detailed study of Chinese synthetic
words
2.1 Definition of Chinese words
There has always been a common belief that Chi-
nese 'doesn't have words', but instead has 'charac-
ters', or that Chinese 'has no morphology' and so is
'morphologically impoverished', because in Chinese
a 'word' is by no means a clear and intuitive notion.
But actually for native Chinese speakers, they know
that words are those lexical entries which represent
a complete concept and occur innately in the form of
specific language rules based on the speaker's mental
lexicon.
Though there are a lot of ways to classify Chinese
words, we believe that Chinese words should be first
divided into single-morpheme words and synthetic
words according to the way of construction of their
internal parts.
Single-morpheme words are those that could not
be divided into smaller parts when representing as
the whole concept. In other words, if we divide sin-
gle morpheme words into characters or parts, the
meaning of individual parts become independent and
does not indicate any connectionwith themeaning of
the original word. Following are the three different
types of single-morpheme words:
?one-character words:
?[human],?[horse],?[vehicle]
?one-morpheme words:
??[quail],??[jadeite]
??[mandarin duck]
?transliteration words:
??[pizza],???[Kentucky]
????[aspirin]
The first kind is obvious single words in that an
ordinary character in Chinese stands for an indepen-
dent morpheme with one or several senses. The sec-
ond kind shows those words which are composed of
several characters and always used as a whole. For
the last kind, as can be seen from the above exam-
ples, if we divide ???[Kentucky] into '?[can]',
'?[moral]' and '?[base]', it definitely can not indi-
cate the meaning of the well-known fried chicken
restaurant chain from those three characters. So
these three kinds of single-morpheme words should
be segmented as one word in any morphological
analysis systems.
However, it becomes much more complicated
when dealing with synthetic words. Generally, syn-
thetic words are the type of words which are com-
posed of single-morpheme words and represent a
new entity or meaning which can be indicated from
the internal constituents. According to this defini-
tion, if we divide synthetic words into smaller parts,
we could still somehow guess the original meaning
from the meaning of internal parts despite the fact
that it may not be a very precise one. For example the
word??[driver]. If we don't know the meaning of
'??', but we do know themeaning of '?' is 'control'
and the meaning of '?' is 'machine'. Then we can
guess the meaning of '??' may be connected with
'control' and 'machine', and actually the real meaning
is the person who drives(controls) a car(machine).
In Chinese language, according to the encoding
standard of GB2312, there are about 6,763 com-
monly used characters. And in our own system dic-
tionary which has about 129,440 word entries, the
number of one-character words is only 6,188 (about
4.78%). From these figures, we know that most Chi-
nese words belong to synthetic words and a deep
analysis for synthetic words is necessary for Chinese
language processing.
2.2 Classification of Chinese synthetic words
The Synthetic words may be understood as the re-
sult or 'output' of a word-formation rule in Chi-
nese language. Classification of these Chinese syn-
thetic words is a difficult task because the 'formation
rule' is not so obvious and sometimes even a native
speaker can not determine which category a word
54
Sixth SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Processing
Figure 1: Types of Chinese synthetic words
should belong to. However, since it is quite impor-
tant to understand the structure of Chinese words,
there have been a lot of research on classification
of Chinese synthetic words from both linguistic and
computational points of view until now. Each of
them has divided synthetic words into different cat-
egories according to their own criteria. In our re-
search, based on our experience on Chinese morpho-
logical analysis and unknown word detection, we di-
vide Chinese synthetic words into the categories as
shown in Figure 1 to help us understand the inner
constituents of them.
2.3 Compound words
Compound words, whose internal constituents have
some syntactic relations with each other, can be
divided into the following six kinds according to
(Yuanjian He, 2004).
? Subject-predicate[???]
words that only have subject and predicate
parts. This type is subdivided into two types:
SV and VS.
VS:??/?[porter],??/?[referee]
SV:?/??[gastroptosia],?/?[earthquake]
? Verb-object[???]
words that have verb and object parts, which
contains two types: VO and OV.
OV:?/??[representative of party]
VO:?/?[haircut],?/??[anti-government]
? Verb-modification[?????]
words that have a verb part and an adjunct part
which are neither subject nor object of the verb.
The adjunct part always shows the property of
the verb part or be the media of the verb's ac-
tion.This type contains VX and XV.
VX:??/?[amplifier],??/?[print shop]
XV:??/??[automatic control]
?/?[wholesale]
? Predicate-complement[???]
words that have a verb part and a complement
part, which shows the result, direction or aspect
of the action. This type also have two kinds:
VV and VA.
VV:?/??[running out of]
??/?[get rid of]
VA:?/?[dyeing red]
? Parallel-combination[???]
words that have a coordinate structure where
the meanings of constituents are same, similar,
related or opposite.
Example: ?/?[switch],?/?[learning]
?/?[nation],?/?[brother]
?/?/?[China, Japan and Korea]
? Noun-modification[?????]
words that have a noun part which is the root of
the word, and a modification part which shows
the property of the noun part.
Example: ?/?[computer],?/?[book shelf]
??/?[bus stop]
Here we have made some compromises with these
categories mentioned above based on the simplic-
ity of machine learning process and our experience
on tagging compund words. For example, we only
55
Sixth SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Processing
define SV and VS as the subject-predicate type be-
cause it will make machine learning process much
easier when it comes to those words with a struc-
ture like SVO or SVX. Futhermore, in the case that
a word with an internal constituent which has both
NN and VV parts of speech, even human annota-
tors can not easily tell which type this word should
be categarized into between noun-modification and
verb-modification. So we tagged all these words to
verb-modification when they have an internal part
with both NN and VV parts of speech.
2.4 Morphologically derived words
Morphologically derived words are those which
have specific word formation. It can be categoried
into the following types:
? Merging
words that are composed of two adjacent and
semantically related words, which have some
characters in common. It could be seen as a
kind of abbreviation.
Example: ??+??????
[middle and preliminary school]
??+??????[context]
???+???????
[mayer of Beijing city]
? Reduplication
words that contain some reduplicated charac-
ters. There are eight main patterns of redu-
plication: AA, ABAB, AABB, AXA, AXAY,
XAYA, AAB and ABB.
Example: ?/?[listen],?/??[valiantly]
??/??[research]
? Affixation
words that are composed of a word and an af-
fix(either a prefix, a suffix or an infix).
Example: ???[vice president]
????[Executive Engineer]
???[can't see]
???[can hear]
???[bureau of investigation]
???[security agency]
2.5 Exceptions
Apart from compound words and morphologically
derived words, there still exist some types of words
which need discussion about whether they belong
to synthetic words or not. However, we can use
some other methods like time expression extraction
or named entity recognition to deal with these kinds
of words.
? Abbreviations
expressions that have a short appearance, but
stand for a long term.
Example: ????????
[Communist Party of China]
? Factoids
expressions that indicate date, time, number,
money, score or range. This kind of expressions
have a large variation in their appearance.
Example: 2007.1.30
???[five thirty]
?????[3.56 yuan]
? Idioms, proverbs, sayings and poems
expressions that usually consist of more than
three characters and always have a special
meaning.
Example: ????[sparsely visited]
???????
[be the First to bear hardships]
3 Previous research and tree-based
method
3.1 Previous research
Until now, there is little specific research on Chi-
nese synthetic words. However, every institution has
its own way of dealing with synthetic words in their
segmentation standard when doing Chinese morpho-
logical analysis. There are two main previous re-
searches on the analysis of Chinese synthetic words.
The first one is done by Microsoft (Andi Wu,
2003) by creating a customizable segmentation sys-
tem of Chinesemorphologically derivedwords. This
system uses a parameter driven method which can
divide synthetic words into different levels of word
56
Sixth SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Processing
components based on some pre-defined rules, ac-
cording to the needs of different NLP application.
For instance, in machine translation, we will trans-
late '????' into 'toaster' if our system dictio-
nary has this kind of information. But if we do
not have this entry in our dictionary, we have to
split '????[toaster]' into lower level such as
'?[bake] / ??[bread] / ?[machine]', the transla-
tion of whichwill probably give us some information
about the original meaning of the whole word. Al-
though this system achieves higher score than other
systems that do not have synthetic analysis, it only
takes morphologically derived words into account,
which means it does not contain information about
internal syntactic relations.
The second one (C. Huang, 1997) is actually a
proposal of segmentation standard rather than a de-
tailed synthetic word analysis research. It is first
used by Sinica when doing the tagging task of Chi-
nese word segmentation. If the tagging object is
a synthetic word, one tag among w0, w1 and w2,
which stand for 'faithful', 'truthful' and 'graceful', will
be selected for it. For example, if we have a syn-
thetic word '??????[security agency of Bei-
jing city]', this tagging method will divide the word
as follows:
<w2>
<w1><w0>??</w0><w0>?</w0></w1>
<w1><w0>??</w0><w0>?</w0></w1>
</w2>
Again, this kind of method does not take word in-
ternal syntactic relations into account either. Fur-
thermore, it even does not have the POS information
of different levels of word, thus can not be used to
construct a customizable system.
3.2 Synthetic word analysis with tree-based
structure information
For specifying consistent Chinese segmentation
standard for our morphological analysis system and
fertilizing the information of our dictionary, we pro-
pose a synthetic word analysis method with tree-
based structure information.
We assume that words which are already in our
current system dictionary could be word components
of other out-of-vocabulary synthetic words. So the
first thing to do is to classify all synthetic words
in our current dictionary into the categories defined
in section 2.2. Because intuitively most 2-character
words, though they could have internal syntactic re-
lations, are often used as single words by native
speakers and have already been registered as lexical
entries in our Chinese dictionary, we can first clas-
sify all 3-character words into those categories and
link their internal components to 1-character words
and 2-character words which are already in our dic-
tionary.
After finishing the internal structure annotation
for 3-character words, we can easily construct 4-
character or 5-character words' structure by using
3-character and 2-character words' information and
store these structure information into synthetic word
dictionary.
Finally, when we get a long synthetic word, we
can build a tree structure recursively like in Figure
2 by using the constituent words' internal structures,
which have already been stored in our synthetic word
dictionary.
Figure 2: Synthetic word tree of '???????
[vice spokesman of State Department]'
When constructing this kind of tree, we can use
some rules which have the following form:
A + B? Category
or A + B + C? Category
where A, B and C are parts of speech, affixation
or other properties of word components.
3.3 Annotation of morphologically derived
words in system dictionary
Usually, in Chinese, 2-character words are thought
and used as single words by native speakers. And
words which have more than two characters are of-
ten synthetic words which can be categorized into
57
Sixth SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Processing
compound words or morphologically derived words.
So during our work of analyzing Chinese synthetic
words, we first choose 3-character words as ourmain
target in that starting from 3-character words will
give us a good chain effect when analyzing words
which have more than three characters.
At first, there is no other resource at hand ex-
cept for the morphological analysis system dictio-
nary with 129440 entries. Because a standard set
with all category information of Chinese synthetic
words is needed in further research, we first ex-
tracted 1000 3-character words from our dictionary
and annotated them by hand according to the cate-
gories introduced in section 2. As the result of hu-
subject-predicate 4.8%
verb-object 2.0%
verb-modification 21.3%
predicate-complement 3.2%
parallel-combination 0.2%
noun-modification 62.9%
single-morpheme word 5.4%
Table 1: Compound words in 1000 words
man annotation, Table 1 and 2 show the distribution
of compound words and morphologically derived
words. In Table 1, although about 6% of the 1000
words are single-morpheme words, we still can see
that noun-modification words occupy the largest part
(62.9%) in synthetic words from a syntactic point of
view. Table 2 gives us the information that most syn-
prefix infix suffix merging reduplication
9.0% 0.5% 83.0% 1.5% 0.2%
Table 2: Morphologically derived words in 1000
words
thetic words (83%) have an internal structure with a
suffix.
Since most 3-character Chinese words have the
structure such as 'two+one' or 'one+two' character
formation, it is obvious that we should first look at
noun-modification words with frequently used suf-
fixes as the beginning of our analysis. We could get
a list of characters of possible affixation from this
process too. Furthermore, we also find that parallel-
combination words and reduplication words tend to
have some fixed structures which makes them easy
to recognize.
4 Experiment on Morphologically derived
words
In order to apply our proposed tree-based analysis
method, we first have to annotate all 3-character
words in our dictionary with their internal parts
linked to 2-character and 1-character words. Be-
cause most Chinese 3-character words have prefix or
suffix structure, we assume that it will be much effi-
cient for us to annotate 3-character words if we can
classify them from the aspect of morphologically de-
rived words.
Because we don't have any other useful resources
except ChineseGigaword(CGW),We first computed
mutual information for all 3-character words in two
ways by referencing the CGW. For example, if we
have a word ABC and we assume that A, C, AB and
BC are all independent entries in our dictionary, we
compute the mutual information Mi-pre for A and
BC, and the mutual information Mi-suf for AB and
C.
Since A, C, AB and BC are all independent words,
if the result showsMi-pre<Mi-suf, we could say that
the relation between A and BC is more independent
than the relation between AB and C, which means it
is more possible that A and some other 2-character
word XY cound form the word AXY. So the possi-
bility of A being a prefix is greater than the possibil-
ity of C being a suffix. Then we could conclude that
the word ABC has a prefix internal structure. Other-
wise, we could say it has suffix internal structure.
After this process, we got a Mi(Mi-pre or Mi-suf)
and a possible internal structure(prefix or suffix) for
every 3-character word in system dictionary. By
comparing these results to the 1000 extracted words
whose internal structure has been already known, we
can easily get the correct ones whose possible inter-
nal structure is the same as the ones annotated by
hand.
Except for the ones which have infix, merging
or redplication structure, there are 920 words in the
1000 extracted words which are tagged as prefix or
suffix structure by hand. After comparing, we got
58
Sixth SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Processing
676 out of 920 words(73.48%), which was divided
correctly by only looking at the internal mutual in-
formation in a large corpus(Chinese Gigaword).
The above result shows that overall accuracy is
quite low by only taking account the internal mutual
information when classifying prefix and suffix struc-
ture. Some examples of wrongly classifiedwords are
shown in Table 3.
words Mi-pre Mi-suf result
??? 7.024e-07 9.981e-07 ? /??
??? 1.084e-06 1.171e-05 ? /??
??? 1.384e-05 1.978e-05 ? /??
??? 1.993e-06 2.440e-06 ? /??
??? 8.971e-08 6.762e-08 ?? /?
Table 3: Examples of wrongly dividedwords by only
using mutual information
As shown in Table 3, most uncorrect ones are
words having suffix internal structure but wrongly
classified to have prefix internal structure. This is
because we only counted the frequencies of internal
parts of words without considerring their properties
such as parts of speech and the frequencies that the
internal parts show out at a particular position, etc.
In order to improve the whole accuracy when rec-
ognizing prefix or suffix internal structure automati-
cally, we used an SVM classifier with the following
features(in the case of 3-character string ABC):
1.internal part: A, C, BC, AB, ABC
2.pos of each internal part:
pos(A), pos(C), pos(BC), pos(AB), pos(ABC)
3.frequency of each part in Chinese Gigaword:
fre(A), fre(C), fre(BC), fre(AB), fre(ABC)
4.mutual information of internal part:
Mi-pre(A-BC), Mi-suf(AB-C)
(In the actual classification process, we set the fre-
quency range by 2000 and the mutual information
range by log10)
After dividing 80% of 920 words into traning set
and 20% into testing set, the accuracy of SVM clas-
sifier is 94.02%. The precision and recall are shown
in the first row of Table 4. Because the above ex-
periment(A) did not take the existence of 2-character
words in system dictionary into account, we then add
these features and run the SVM classifier again. Fi-
Exp Acc. F Prefix(%) Suffix(%)
(%) Rec. Pre. Rec. Pre.
A 94.02 0.56 38.89 100.0 100.0 93.79
B 94.57 0.67 55.56 83.33 98.80 95.35
Table 4: Results of Recall and Precision for words
which have prefix or suffix structure
nally we get the result of experiment(B) shown in the
second row of Table 4.
This result is quite unbalanced because there
are only a few intances of prefixes both in
training(72/736=9.78%) and testing(18/184=9.78%)
sets. This is the reason of low recall in classifying
instances of prefixes. The following words are the
ones which were wrongly classified.
???????????????????
???????????????????
It turns out that these words contains mainly two
types: the first type contains word like '???', a
prefix structure word whose last character has a quite
high probability to be a suffix. This makes it difficult
for SVM to determine to which class the whole word
should be classified; an example of the second type
is suffix structure word like '???', whose front
part '??' does not appear in the Chinese Gigaword
independently, which in the end make it unsure for
SVM to classify it into suffix structure word.
Though there are some words that were wrongly
categorized, we still got a overall accuracy of
94.57% which would be much higher if we recur-
sively use SVMs for classification. We believe that
this method could classify morphologically derived
words quite efficiently if we add somemore rules for
recognizing merging and reduplication words. And
by applying the tree-based method, we could use this
method on words with more than 3 characters in fu-
ture.
5 Conclusion and future work
This paper proposed a tree-based method for analyz-
ing Chinese synthetic words by constructing a Chi-
nese synthetic word dictionary. This method is based
on the classification of Chinese synthetic words both
from syntactic and morphological ways. After anno-
tating and investigating the distribution of one thou-
sand 3-character words, we used frequencies and
59
Sixth SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Processing
mutual information as features from Chinese Giga-
word for machine learning. With these features, we
tried to classify morphologically derived words into
prefix or suffix internal structure by using SVM clas-
sifier.
For future work, we have to take other morpholog-
ical internal structures into account and try to clas-
sify all synthetic words intomorphologically derived
word categories. Then, we should also find some
thesaurus that contain syntactic information ofwords
or characters to help us analyze the compoundwords'
internal structure. Finally, after gathering the infor-
mation of Chinese synthetic words from both syn-
tactic and morphological aspect, we will build a Chi-
nese synthetic word dictionary and try to use it to im-
prove the performance of ourmorphological analysis
system and unknown word extraction.
References
[Andi Wu2003] Andi Wu. 2003. Customizable Segmen-
tation of Morphologically Derived Words in Chinese.
Vol.8, No.1, February 2003, pp. 1-28 Computational
Linguistics and Chinese Language Processing
[C. Huang1997] C. Huang, K. Chen and L. Chang 1997.
Segmentation standard for Chinese natural language
processing. International Journal of Computational
Linguistics and Chinese Language Processing
[Chooi-Ling Goh2006] Chooi-Ling Goh, Jia Lu, Yuchang
Cheng, Masayuki Asahara and Yuji Matsumoto 2006.
The Construction of a Dictionary for a Two-layer Chi-
nese Morphological Analyzer. PACLIC 2006
[Hiroshi Nakagawa, Hiroyuki Kojima, Akira Maeda2004]
Hiroshi Nakagawa, Hiroyuki Kojima, Akira Maeda
2004. Chinese Term Extraction fromWeb Pages Based
on Compound word Productivity. Third SIGHAN
Workshop on Chinese Language Processing, ACL
2004
[Huihsin Tseng and Keh-Jiann Chen2002] Huihsin Tseng
and Keh-Jiann Chen 2002. Design of Chinese Mor-
phological Analyzer. First SIGHAN Workshop 2002
[Jerome L. Packard2000] Jerome L. Packard 2000. The
Morphology of Chinese-A Linguistic and Cognitive
Approach.
[Keh-Jiann Chen, Chao-jan Chen2000] Keh-Jiann Chen,
Chao-jan Chen 2000. Automatic Semantic Classifi-
cation for Chinese Unknown Compound Nouns. ACL
2000
[Shengfen Luo and Maosong Sun2003] Shengfen Luo
and Maosong Sun 2003. Two-character Chinese
Word Extraction Based on Hybrid of Internal and
Contextual Measures. ACL 2003
[Yuanjian He2004] Yuanjian He 2004. ???????
-??????????????????????.
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
60
Sixth SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Processing
