Balanced Corpus of Contemporary Written Japanese 
Kikuo Maekawa 
Dept. Language Research, National Institute for Japanese Language 
10-2, Midori-cho, Tachikawa-shi, Tokyo 190-8561 JAPAN 
kikuo@kokken.go.jp 
 
 
Abstract 
Construction of 100 million words bal-
anced corpus of contemporary written 
Japanese is underway at the National Insti-
tute for Japanese Language. The unique 
property of the corpus consists in that the 
majority of its sample texts are selected 
randomly from well-defined statistical 
populations covering wide range of written 
texts. 
1 Introduction 
A serious problem in corpus-based analysis of the 
Japanese language is the lack of reliable balanced 
corpus. Most of the corpus-based studies of 
contemporary Japanese are based upon the 
analyses of text archive of newspaper articles, 
archive of copyright-expired literary work (Aozora 
Bunko), or crawling of the Internet text.  
Putting aside the problems of the copyright-
expired literary works, which are definitely too old 
to be the material for the study of the contempo-
rary Japanese, lack of balanced corpus imposes 
two mutually related problems on linguistic studies. 
Most of newspaper articles are written by newspa-
per writers who are very much aware of the estab-
lished writing style (and orthography) of newspa-
per articles. Accordingly, it is the genre of text 
where variations of all sorts are suppressed to the 
minimum level.  
On the other hand, the results of internet crawl-
ing using search engines like Google are very 
much likely to include texts covering wide range of 
texts. It is also expected that considerable amount 
of linguistic variations are to be observed. 
 It is, however, very difficult, if not impossible, 
to conduct analyses of style difference and/or lin-
guistic variations using the results of internet 
crawling, because the information about the genre 
of texts and/or the writers are usually missing. 
Moreover, the amount of retrieved texts can often 
be too large to be classified by hand.  
There is also a problem of skewed distribution 
of texts caused by copyright protection. Copyright-
protected materials, especially literary works, will 
not usually show up in the Internet.  
To solve these problems in Japanese corpus lin-
guistics, National Institute for Japanese Language 
(NIJL, hereafter) has launched a corpus compila-
tion project in the spring of 2006, aiming at public 
release of Japan?s first 100 million words balanced 
corpus in the year of 2011. The corpus is named 
the Balanced Corpus of Contemporary Written 
Japanese, or BCCWJ.  
Figure 1. The three components of the BCCWJ. 
2 Design of the BCCWJ 
As shown in the figure 1, the BCCWJ consists of 3 
component sub-corpora, viz., ?publication?, ?li-
brary?, and ?special purpose? sub-corpora.  
2.1 Publication sub-corpus 
The upper left-hand sub-corpus of the figure 1 is 
called ?publication? sub-corpus. This is also called 
PUBLICATION 
(PRODUCTION) 
SUB-CORPUS 
Books, Magazines, and 
Newspapers, 35 million 
words. 2001-2005 
LIBRARY 
(CIRCULATION) 
SUB-CORPUS 
Books 
30 million words. 
1986-2005 
SPECIAL PURPOSE SUB-CORPUS 
Whitepaper, Diet minute, Web text, Textbooks, etc. 35 
million words. 1975-2005 
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
101
?production? sub-corpus. As the name suggests, 
this sub-corpus represents the production, as op-
posed to the reception aspect of contemporary 
written Japanese. The sub-corpus consists of sam-
ples extracted randomly from the statistical popula-
tion covering the whole body of books, magazines, 
and newspapers published during 2001-2005.  
The population was constructed using the 
sources that are publicly available; J-BISC (Japan 
Biblio Disc) and Periodicals in Print in Japan 
were used as the sources for books and magazines 
respectively. The data for newspapers was avail-
able from the association of newspaper companies 
(Nihon Shinbun Kyoukai). The total number of 
characters involved in the population was esti-
mated and samples for the BCCWJ were drawn in 
the way that each character in the population had 
the same chance of being sampled.  
It is to be noted at this point that the composition 
ratios among text genres (i.e. the ratio among sam-
ples of books, magazines, and newspapers) were 
determined on the basis of publicly available data 
mentioned above. This makes crucial difference 
from the designs of corpora like the Brown Corpus 
and the BNC, where the composition ratios of vari-
ous genres were determined subjectively by spe-
cialists of the English language without making 
reference to any objective data. 
The total size of the sub-corpus is supposed to be 
about 34.7 million words; and, 74.1, 16.1, and 
9.8% of the sub-corpus are to be devoted to the 
samples of books, magazines, and newspapers re-
spectively.  
2.2 Library sub-corpus 
The second sub-corpus is called ?library? or ?circu-
lation? sub-corpus. The sampling population for 
this sub-corpus was the whole books registered in 
at least 13 public libraries in the Tokyo Metropolis. 
The population thus defined contains about 
335,000 books. According to our estimation, more 
than 48 billion characters are included in this popu-
lation, which is nearly the same amount as the 
population of the book part of the publication sub-
corpus.  
There are two important differences between the 
publication and library sub-corpora. Firstly, the 
texts of the library sub-corpora represent those 
books that were accepted by a certain number of 
readers, while the texts in the publication sub-
corpora have no guarantee of the sort.  
Secondly, the library sub-corpus covers the pe-
riod of time 1986-2005 (1986 was the year when 
the ISBN book classification system was adopted 
by most of major publishing companies), while the 
period of time covered by the publication sub-
corpus is 2001-2005.  
2.3 Special-purpose sub-corpus 
The last sub-corpus is called ?special purpose? or 
?out-of-population? sub-corpus. This is the aggre-
gate of various special purpose mini corpora, and, 
unlike the former two sub-corpora, some of the 
mini corpora are not sampled using the technique 
of random sampling (because the populations can 
not be defined).  
The mini corpora currently include texts of gov-
ernmental white papers, Internet text (Yahoo! Ja-
pan?s bulletin board Chiebukuro), minutes of the 
national diet, school textbooks, and best-selling 
books of the past 30 years. Laws and academic 
papers will also be included.  
Most of these mini corpora contain about 5 mil-
lion words, and will be utilized in the language 
policy oriented activities of the NIJL, including the 
revision of the National list of Chinese Characters 
for Daily Usage (Jouyou kanji hyou). 
3 Funds and the current status 
The compilation of the BCCWJ is supported by the 
budget of the NIJL and the MEXT (ministry of 
education) Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research 
Priority Area Program ?Japanese Corpus? (2006-
2010) [1].  
As of September 2007, texts containing about 30 
million words have been sampled and stored in the 
NIJL server, and, the full-text query of the 10 mil-
lion words texts that are copyright cleared are pub-
licly available on the web [2].  
Upon its completion, the BCCWJ will be the 
world?s first balanced corpus that is designed and 
compiled based upon rigid statistical sampling. 
This will open up a new possibility in Japanese 
linguistics, and the design of language corpora in 
general.  
References 
[1] http://www.tokuteicorpus.jp/ 
[2] http://www.kotonoha.gr.jp/demo/ 
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
102
