Building a New Internet Chat System for Sharing Timing Information  
Kanayo Ogura 
 
School of 
knowledge Science, 
Japan Advanced Institute of 
Science and Technology 
 
1-1 Asahidai,Tatsunokuchi, 
Nomi, Ishikawa, 
923-1292, Japan 
 
k-ogura@jaist.ac.jp 
Takeshi Masuda 
 
NEC Informatec Systems, 
Ltd. 
 
2561,Shinohara, 
Kohoku, Yokohama, 
 Kanagawa, 
222-0026, Japan 
 
t-masuda@ 
qg.jp.nec.com 
Masato Ishizaki 
 
Institute Socio-Information 
and Communication Studies, 
The Univ. of Tokyo 
 
 
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, 
Tokyo,  
113-0033, Japan 
 
ishizaki@isics.u-
tokyo.ac.jp 
Abstract 
Chat system has gained popularity as a 
tool for real-time conversation. How-
ever, standard chat systems have prob-
lems due to lack of timing information. 
To tackle this problem, we have built a 
system which has the following func-
tions: 1) function of making typing state 
visible; 2) floor holding function at the 
start of typing. The evaluation results 
show that the sys-tem with each new 
function significantly increases the 
number of turns, which indicates the ef-
fectiveness of the new functions for 
smooth communication. The survey re-
sults showed that the system with the 
function of making typing state visible 
significantly different from that without 
them concerning 1) easiness of adjust-
ing the timing of utterances and 
smoothness of conversations, and 2) 
easiness of using the system. 
1 Introduction 
2 
2.1 
Use of computer communication tools is now 
indispensable to our everyday life because of the 
proliferation of computer network. These com-
munication tools include E-mail, BBS (Bulletin 
Board System) and chat systems. Among all, 
chat system users have been increasing dramati-
cally for its real  time nature. Despite of its popu-
larity, standard chat systems do not allow users 
to share timing information, which is thought to 
be necessary for smooth communication. This 
often makes chat conversations confusing such 
as ones with a lot of repetitions and corrections. 
To tackle the problem of lack of timing in-
formation, we have implemented a system which 
has the following functions: 1) function of mak-
ing typing state visible; 2) floor holding function 
at the start of typing.  
To evaluate the effectiveness of the system, 
the length of utterance and the number of utter-
ances are used as quantitative index for smooth 
communication. We also conducted question-
naire surveys of users' evaluation of the system 
from effective-ness of the new functions to easi-
ness of using the system. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. 
Section two explains the problems of standard 
chat systems and related studies to tackle them. 
Section three describes our implemented new 
system with explanatory examples. Section four 
shows the effectiveness of our new system by 
quantitative evaluation results. Section five con-
cludes with some final remarks and our further 
attempt to improve the system. 
 
Previous Work 
Problems of standard chat systems 
In chat conversations, even if no message ap-
pears on the screen, this does not mean other us-
ers are typing a message. Other users might be 
reading or waiting for the others' message or be 
leaving the computer. This is due to the mecha-
nism of standard chat systems. In standard chat 
systems, a user sends a message by pressing the 
return key. This means that what users know is 
only complete utterances, without the informa-
tion on how the utterances are made: In face-to-
face conversation, the participants sometimes 
signal the difficulty of making utterances by in-
serting fillers and pauses, but in chat conversa-
tion, the participants cannot send such kind of 
information. The lack of this process information 
has been known to cause phenomena similar to 
overlap in face-to-face conversation and interrup-
tion [1,2]. Figure 1 shows an example of this 
overlap-like phenomenon. 
 
----------------------------------------------------------- 
1:A>I?m going to visit a company tomorrow. 
2:B>You are going to Osaka, aren?t you? 
3:A>So, how is the Job interview of T Com-
pany going? 
4:A>Yes, I?m going to Osaka. 
5:B>I have to submit data. So ? 
----------------------------------------------------------- 
Figure 1: Example of overlap-like phenomena 
 
In Figure 1, Speaker A talked about the visit to 
some company (utterance 1) and speaker B 
checked where A would go in response to utter-
ance 1. At almost the same time of B's response, 
A sent his message about the job interview (ut-
terance 3), which made adjacent turns semanti-
cally irrelevant. This overlap-like phenomenon 
can be escaped if at least A knows B is typing a 
response to A. 
 
2.2 
2.3 
Communicating the information on how 
the utterances are made 
MSN messenger [3] shows whether the partici-
pants are typing at the bottom of the system win-
dow. Tangible Chat [5] communicates the state 
of the other user's typing using vibration of the 
cushions. When a user starts to type, the other 
user's chair cushion vibrates, which enables users 
to share typing information without distracting 
their attention to the messages. In UNIX talk pro-
gram (a little old chat system), users can send a 
message character by character, which allows 
them to know what the others are doing. 
Alternative Interfaces for Chat realized two 
proto-type systems; Status Client for sharing 
status information; Flow Client for sharing time 
sequence information [4]. Status client imple-
mented the following functions for sharing user?s 
status information. 
 
? When a user presses a key, his or her name in 
the participants list is highlighted. 
? A user?s last utterance appears next to his or 
her name in the participants list. 
? When a user starts to write a message, it ap-
pears in gray color next to his or her name in 
the participants list. 
 
Flow Client improved the following floor hold-
ing function so that slow typists can easily join 
conversation. 
 
? A user has own track on screen 
?  Visualization of participants' character and 
timing information 
? Auto scrolling of the message history 
 
The design concept of our new system 
 
- User interface 
Many people have already used the current chat 
systems and got accustomed to the interface of 
the current system. This observation was con-
firmed in the evaluation of Status Clients and 
Flow clients [4]. Thus, we decided to make the 
interface of our new system similar to that of the 
current system. 
 
- The information the proposed system communi-
cates 
Our preliminary experiments confirmed that the 
information about whether the other participants 
are writing does not improve easiness of using 
the system. Based on this result, we decided to 
examine two approaches: one is to increase the 
information to be communicated. That is, as in 
the UNIX talk program, the system communi-
cates what the participants write in real time; The 
other is to focus on the floor holding function. In 
face-to-face conversation, the information on 
how the utterances are made is used for taking or 
holding the floor. Thus if the chat system users 
can take or hold the floor easily, this might con-
tribute to improving easiness of using the system. 
     With respect to the function of the floor hold-
ing, the former function might subsume the latter. 
However, this does not mean both functions are 
the same. Some users do not want to show the 
process of utterance making and even think it 
distracts their attention. If this is true, and the 
system can support the floor holding function 
effectively, then system does not have to com-
municate what the participants writes character 
by character, which will be examined in Section 
four. 
3 
3.1 
3.2 
The Implemented New Chat System 
We implemented a new system in which users 
can share the process information. An example 
of the system display is shown in Figure 2 and 3. 
A user sends messages and read conversation 
history in the main window (Figure 2), and rec-
ognizes the typing state of other users in the sub 
window (Figure 3). 
 
Function of making the typing state visi-
ble 
The new system can show the typing state of 
other users for all the time. When a user connects 
to the system, his or her nicknames appear in the 
sub window. Figure 3 shows the display where 
'miho' and 'yo' connected to the system and 
'miho' sent a message  "?? (Ishikawa)". Each 
time a user starts to write a message, a new text 
appears next to his or her name in the sub win-
dow. 
 
Floor holding function at the start of 
typing 
In face-to-face conversation, people monitor 
each other's behavior, which helps them take 
turns smoothly. But in the standard chat systems, 
a user cannot know each other's states, since s/he 
see only complete utterances without the infor-
mation on how the utterances are made. A user 
sometimes misses his or her turn because of this. 
The first user is writing a message in response to 
the second's, while the second user sends another 
message which is accepted by the system before 
the first user's response. To deal with this prob-
lem, the new system implemented a floor holding 
function at the start of writing a message. 
When a user starts to write a message, the system 
holds the place or turn in advance for the user, 
displaying [--- start to write a message ---] in the 
main window. Thus, utterances are displayed in 
the order of the time when a user starts to type. 
Users can send their messages without consider-
ing their typing speed. 
The system also allows users to stop sending 
a message in the middle. In this case, the system 
holds a line with the message [stop writing a 
message without sending] in gray color in the 
main window. This function is for showing the 
status or the activity of a user even when s/he 
does not send a message. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure2: Main window of the system 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure3: Sub window of the system 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
----------------------------------------------------------- 
1:???????? 
take           hello 
 
2:???????? 
miho         hello 
 
3:?????????ALL 
yo               hello         ALL 
 
4:???????????? 
take     it is cold today, isn?t it? 
  
5:?????????????????
miho    [stop writing a message] 
 
6:????????? 
 yo            Yeah 
 
7:???????????????? 
miho   Where are you all come from ? 
 
8:???????????????? 
take   [--- start writing a message ---] 
 
9:??????? 
yo       I'm from Ishikawa 
 
10: ???????????????? 
miho  [--- start writing a message ---] 
 
11: ????????????????  
yo      [--- start writing a message ---] 
----------------------------------------------------------- 
Figure 4: English translation of the chat dialogue 
in the main window (Figure 2)  
 
 
4 
4.1 
Evaluation of the System 
Experimental Design 
Four experimental systems were built to evaluate 
the effectiveness of the system (Table 1) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Function  System 
 Typing state  Floor holding 
system1 invisible at the end of typing 
system2 visible at the end of typing 
system3 invisible at the start of typing 
system4 visible at the start of typing 
Table1: Experimental systems 
 
 
In the experiments, eight groups, each of which 
consists of three subjects, engage in chat conver-
sation. All subjects are computer users at the in-
ter-mediate level or higher: they have 
experiences of using chat systems and no prob-
lems of typing. The task of the experiments is 
just to chat with each other about any topics for 
twenty minutes. 
 
4.2 Chat logs 
The average and the standard deviation of the 
number and the length of turns are shown in Ta-
ble 3 and 4, respectively. 
 
 
Ave.(SD)  B1 B2 
A1 16.83 (6.32)  25.33 (10.01)  
A2 24.42 (10.4)  22.00 (8.61)  
Table 2: Average number of the turns and its SD 
 
 
 
Ave. (SD)  B1 B2 
A1 17.82 (5.97) 16.48 (4.71) 
A2 17.70 (6.04) 17.98 (4.09) 
Table 3: Average length of the turns and its SD  
 
 
ble 4. 
 
We examined the effects of the functions by 
applying two-way ANOVA to the number and 
the length of turns. Factors and levels are 
summarized in Ta
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Level 1 Level 2 
Factor A? 
(typing state ) 
visible 
(A1) 
invisible 
(A2) 
Factor B? 
(floor holding) 
at the end 
of typing 
(B1) 
at the start 
of typing 
(B2) 
Table 4: Factor and Level for ANOVA 
 
 
Table 5 and 6 shows that main effects concerning 
both the number and the length of turns are not 
significant. But interaction effects concerning the 
number of turns are significant. The detailed 
analysis of the interaction effects showed that the 
system with each new function significantly in-
creases the number of turns. 
The previous work suggested two hypothe-
ses about the number and the length of turns 
[4][5]. 
 
 
(1) If users share the process information, this 
will prompt smoothness of communication 
which results in the increase of the number of   
turns. 
 
(2) If users use the function of floor holding at 
the start of writing a message, they will be able 
to write what they really want without consider-
ing time pressure. This makes the length of turns 
longer than that without using the function. 
 
Adopting these assumptions, the results here 
might indicate the effectiveness of the new func-
tions for smooth communication. The number of 
turns didn't increase when participants used the 
system with both functions. These functions are 
displayed on different windows and might dis-
tract user's attention. 
However, these assumptions can be said to be 
rather na?ve, since the number and the length of 
turns can be affected by many other factors like 
the familiarity between the participants and kinds 
of topics the participants happen to choose. Still 
we do not have good evaluation criteria for the 
functions of chat systems in general and thus the 
interpretation of our data against these assump-
tions should be used as corroboration to show the 
effectiveness of our system, but apparently not 
enough to prove it. Therefore, we conducted 
questionnaire survey to examine the usability of 
the system. 
 
 
 SS  d.f.  MS  F  
Factor A 54.19 1 54.19 0.62 
  Level B1 345.04 1 345.04. 3.92* 
  Level B2 66.67 1 66.67 0.76 
Factor B 111.02 1 111.02 1.26 
  Level A1 433.05 1 433.05 4.93** 
  Level A2 35.04 1 35.04 0.40 
Interaction 357.52 1 357.52 4.07** 
Error 87.95 44      1.99  
Total  47   
(*: level of significance 10% **: 5%) 
Table 5: ANOVA for the number of turns 
 
 
  SS d.f. MS F   
Factor A   5.70 1   5.70 0.19   
Factor B   3.38   1   3.38 0.11   
Interaction   7.48   1   7.84 0.26   
    Error 1332.47   44  30.28  1.00 
 Total     47   
Table 6: ANOVA for the length of turns 
 
 
4.3 Questionnaire survey 
 
 Item 1      Item  2    Item 3 
System 1 
System 2 
System 3 
System 4 
2.58           2.67        3.50 
1.92           3.67        3.75 
2.17           3.00        3.00 
1.58           3.92         4.00 
Item 1: smoothness of conversation 
Item 2: Easiness of adjusting the timing of 
making utterances 
Item 3: Easiness of using the system 
 
Table 7: Evaluation results of questionnaire sur-
vey 
 
Experimental subjects were asked to answer the 
questions such as effectiveness of the new func-
tions and the easiness of using the system on 
five-point scale. Table 7 shows the part of the 
results. 
The results showed that the system with the 
function of making typing state visible (factor A) 
gains significantly higher score than that without 
them concerning the smoothness of conversa-
tions, the easiness of adjusting the timing of ut-
terances and the easiness of using the system 
(Table 8,9 and 10). This suggests that the func-
tion of making typing state visible is effective in 
chat systems. 
 
 
  SS d.f. MS F 
Factor A 4.69 1 4.69 3.90* 
Factor B 1.69 1 1.69 1.41 
Interaction 0.02 1 0.02 0.02 
Error 1.20 44 0.03  
Total  47    
There are no great differences for all the sys-
tems and the ratio of system 4 is the lowest. The 
combination of functions might raise awareness 
for others' behavior, but the combination effects 
should be examined more thoroughly as future 
work 
 
 
(*: level of significance 10% ) 
Table 8: " The smoothness of conversations? 
 
 
  SS d.f. MS F 
Factor A 11.02 1 11.02 8.38** 
Factor B 1.02 1 1.02 0.78 
Interaction 0.02 1 0.02 0.02 
Error 1.32 44 0.03  
Total  47    
4.3%
6.4%
8.3%
2.7%
System1 4.3%
System2 6.4%
System3 8.3%
System4 2.7%
 Figure5: The ratio of overlap-like phenomena 
 
4.5 Semantically irrelevant turns in adjacent 
positions (**: level of significance 5%) 
Table 9: " Easiness of adjusting the timing of 
utterances " Table 11 shows examples of sequence change of 
turns. In the normal sequence of turns example, 
speaker A was able to respond to speaker B?s 
utterance 40, while in the sequence change of the 
turns example, speaker B?s utterance 42 wrongly 
preceded A?s response 41 to B?s utterance 40, 
which makes adjacent utterances 40 and 41 dis-
rupted. 
 
  SS d.f. MS F 
Factor A 4.69 1 4.69 5.83** 
Factor B 0.19 1 0.19 0.23 
Interaction 1.69 1 1.69 2.09 
Error 0.81 44 0.02  
Total  47    
 
[Sequence change of turns] 
(**:level of significance 5%) 
Table 10: " The easiness of using the system " 
4.4 The number of overlap-like phenomena 
The new system enables users to share the proc-
ess information. Theoretically this should de-
crease overlap-like phenomena observed in 
conversations using the standard chat systems.  
Uttr.No.   
40 B Smother the sliced meat and the 
flour separately 
41 B So it's difficult to cook it by my-
self 
42 A Ah I'm getting hungry somehow 
 
 
[Normal sequence of turns] Figure 5 shows the ratio of the overlap-like 
phenomena. It is difficult to find overlap-like 
phenomena from chat logs. Here we counted the 
number of the places which satisfies the follow-
ing  conditions: one is that the interval of utter-
ances should be short (three seconds here); The 
other is that the topic threads should be parallel. 
We used an algorithm proposed in [6] to extract 
topic threads.  
Uttr.No.   
40 B Smother the sliced meat and the 
flour separately 
42 A Ah I'm getting hungry some-
how 
41 B So it's difficult to cook it by 
myself 
 
Table 11: Examples of sequence change of turns 
5 
sign. 
Conclusion and Further Study  
 
We built a new system for sharing the process in-
formation. The system has the following func-
tions: 1) function of making typing state visible; 
2) floor holding function at the start of typing. 
The evaluation results showed that the system 
with each function significantly increases the 
number of turns, which might indicate the effec-
tiveness of the new functions for smooth com-
munication. The survey results showed that the 
system with the function of making typing state 
visible gained significantly higher score than the 
system without it concerning easiness of adjust-
ing the timing of making utterances, smoothness 
of conversations, and easiness of using the sys-
tem.  
S ystem3
17.3%
82.7%
changing
other
 
S ystem4
13.%
86.7%
changing
other
 
This system was confirmed to be effective to 
the problems caused by the lack of time informa-
tion, but did not solve it completely. We tried 
another approach to solve one of the problems, 
semantically irrelevant turns in adjacent position. 
We implemented a function by which users ex-
plicitly specify a semantically relevant turn with 
its number and those relevant turns are displayed 
in the same color (Figure 8). We conducted 
questionnaire survey to verify the effectiveness 
of this function, but the results confirmed the 
usefulness of this function, but also the need for 
the improvement of the interface de
 Figure 7: The ratio of changing sequence of turns 
for system 3 and 4    
 
 
The number of sequence change of turns is ex-
pected to decrease when the system has the floor 
holding function. Based on the method proposed 
in [6], these turns were examined and their ratio 
was calculated shown in Figure 7. The results 
indicated that there are no great differences for 
both systems (changing sequence of turns existed 
at least 10% in both systems). The ratio of sys-
tem 4 is a little lower than that of system 3. This 
might be able to be interpreted that visibility of 
typing information can be one of the factors to 
decrease sequence of change of turns, but this 
need s to be examined in future work. 
 
 
 
Please type the number of a semantically
relevant turn to the current. 
 
Figure 8: Example of the Dialog Box for a new 
function 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
References 
[1] Hosoma, H. (2000) What do people presup-
pose in chat conversations -Timing Structure 
of chat and speech conversations?in Okada, 
M., Mishima, H.and Sasaki, M. (eds.) Em-
bodiment and Computers, bit magazine, Kyo-
ritsu Publisher, Japan, pp.339-349. 
[2] Mizukami, E. and Migita, M. (2002) Order of 
Chat Conversations ? Study of Conversation 
Structure by Interval Analysis, Cognitive 
Studies: Bulletin of the Japanese Cognitive 
Science Society, Vol.9?No.1, pp.77-88? 
[3] MSN messenger ?
http://messenger.microsoft.com/? 
[4] Vronay, D., Smith, M., and Drucker, S. 
(1999) Alternative Interfaces for Chat, Proc. 
of the 12th Annual ACM Symposium on User 
Interface Software and Technology
?UIST99?? 
[5] Yamada, Y. Hirano, T. and Nishimoto, K. 
(2002) Tangible Chat: Communication of con-
versation situation awareness using a sense of 
touch in a key-board chat system, Tech. 
Report SIG-GW-43-18?Information Process-
ing Society of Japan, pp.103-108? 
[6] Ogura, K. and Ishizaki, M. (2002) The char-
acteristics analysis about the topic change in 
Chat Conversations ? Tech. Report SIG-
SLUD-A202-3, Japan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
