Proceedings of NAACL HLT 2009: Short Papers, pages 173?176,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Classifying Factored Genres with Part-of-Speech Histograms
S. Feldman, M. Marin, J. Medero, and M. Ostendorf
Dept. of Electrical Engineering
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195
{sergeyf,amarin,jmedero,ostendor}@u.washington.edu
Abstract
This work addresses the problem of genre
classification of text and speech transcripts,
with the goal of handling genres not seen in
training. Two frameworks employing differ-
ent statistics on word/POS histograms with a
PCA transform are examined: a single model
for each genre and a factored representation
of genre. The impact of the two frameworks
on the classification of training-matched and
new genres is discussed. Results show that the
factored models allow for a finer-grained rep-
resentation of genre and can more accurately
characterize genres not seen in training.
1 Introduction
With increasing quantities of text and transcribed
speech available online, the ability to categorize
documents based on characteristics beyond topic be-
comes ever more important. In particular, the genre
of a document ? whether it is a news report or an
editorial, a speech transcript or a weblog ? may be
relevant for many human tasks. For example, one
might want to find ?speeches on ethanol? or ?we-
blog entries on Fannie Mae, sorted by most formal
first.? Genre classification is also of growing im-
portance for human language technologies, such as
speech recognition, parsing, and translation, because
of the potentially large differences in language as-
sociated with genre. Researchers find that genre-
dependent models lead to improved performance on
these tasks, e.g. (Wang, 2008). Since text harvested
from the web is increasingly used to address prob-
lems due to sparse training data, genre classifica-
tion can be useful for sampling such text sources to
obtain a better match to the target domain for of-
fline language model training. Prior work on genre-
dependent web text filtering for language modeling
relied on standard search engine methods, design-
ing queries based on frequent n-grams in the do-
main, e.g. (Bulyko et al, 2007). However, as the
variety of genres online has grown, this method has
become less reliable. This work addresses explicit
genre classification, with the assumption that genre
representation in the training data is incomplete.
In prior work on genre classification, an impor-
tant question has been the definition of ?genre.?
For many studies, genre has been associated with
categories of text, such as research article, novel,
news report, editorial, advertisement, etc. In par-
ticular, several studies use classes identified in the
Brown corpus or the British National Corpus. Spo-
ken genres, including conversation, interview, de-
bate, and planned speech are considered in (Santini,
2004). Examples of spoken and written genres, rep-
resented in several corpora available from the Lin-
guistics Data Consortium, are explored in (Feldman
et al, 2009). Yet another study focuses on internet-
specific document types, including different types of
home pages (personal, public, commercial), bulletin
boards, and link lists (Lim et al, 2004). A limita-
tion of all of this work is that only a small, fixed set
of different genres are explored, with performance
assessed on matched data. In this paper, we assess
classification results of texts that come from new
genres, as well as those matching the training set.
In addressing new genres, we have two main
contributions: new features and factored coding.
173
The standard features for genre classification mod-
els include words, part-of-speech (POS) tags, and
punctuation (Kessler et al, 1997; Stamatatos et
al., 2000; Lee and Myaeng, 2002; Biber, 1993),
but constituent-based syntactic categories have also
been explored (Karlgren and Cutting, 1994). (Feld-
man et al, 2009) used mixed word and POS his-
togram mean and variance as features for genre clas-
sification. In this work, we augment those his-
togram statistics with higher-order ones, as well as
add new word features aimed at capturing online
genres. Further, we propose a factored genre model,
and demonstrate its effect on genre classification of
out-of-domain documents.
2 Methods
2.1 Corpora
To train our algorithm, we use eight different gen-
res: broadcast news (bn, 671 docs), broadcast con-
versations (bc, 698 docs), meetings (mt, 493 docs),
newswire (nw, 471 docs), conversational telephone
speech (sb, 890 docs), weblogs (wl, 543 docs), Ama-
zon reviews of books, videogames and films (az
train, 218 docs), and chat data (chat, 187 docs). To
test our algorithm, we add six additional genres:
Amazon reviews of appliances (az test, 27 docs),
Wikipedia entries (wiki, 254 docs), Wikipedia dis-
cussion entries (wiki talk, 1792 docs), European Par-
liament transcripts (europarl, 1423 docs), a web col-
lection obtained from Google searches for common
conversational n-grams (web, 18540 docs), and tran-
scribed McCain and Obama speeches (speeches, 20
docs). With the exception of the chat data, Ama-
zon reviews, and a subset of the Europarl transcripts,
the training corpora are from standard published
datasets. The reviews, chat, Wikipedia, and web
data were all collected from websites and cleaned
locally. The documents average 600-1000 words in
length, except for smaller corpora like Amazon re-
views, whose documents average about 200 words.
For training factored models, we assume that all the
documents within a corpus share the same class.
2.2 Features and Classifier
The features used in (Feldman et al, 2009) were de-
rived from a union of POS tags and a set of hand-
picked, informative words. A similar approach is
used here, including a collapsed version of the Tree-
bank POS tag set (Marcus et al, 1993), with addi-
tions for specific words (e.g. personal pronouns and
filled pause markers), compound punctuation (e.g.
multiple exclamation marks), and a general emoti-
con tag, resulting in a total of 41 tags. Histograms
are computed for a sliding window of length w = 5
over the tag sequence, and then statistics of each
histogram bin are extracted. In the previous work,
mean and standard deviation were extracted from the
histogram bins. To this, we add skewness and kurto-
sis, which we will show are necessary for increased
differentiation of unseen genres. For feature reduc-
tion, we used Principal Components Analysis and
retained all PC dimensions with variance above 1%
of the maximum PC variance.
Different approaches have been explored for com-
putational modeling, including naive Bayes, linear
discriminant modeling, and neural networks (San-
tini, 2004; Kessler et al, 1997; Stamatatos et al,
2000; Lee and Myaeng, 2002). Since (Feldman et
al., 2009) found that quadratic discriminant analysis
(QDA) outperforms naive Bayes, we use it here with
full covariance matrices estimated by maximum
likelihood, and trained on the reduced-dimension
POS histogram features.
2.3 Factors
Linguistic research has tended to look at attributes
of language rather than defining genre in terms of
task domains. Since the number of task domains ap-
pears to be growing with new uses of the internet, we
conjecture that an attribute approach is more practi-
cal for web-based text. We introduce the notion of a
factored model for genre. The genre of each docu-
ment can encoded as a vector of factors. Given data
limits, the set of factors explored so far are:
? number of speakers/authors (1,2,3+),
? level of formality (low, medium, high),
? intended audience (personal, broadcast), and
? intent (inform, persuade).
Assuming factor independence, we train four sepa-
rate QDA classifiers, one per factor. Using factors
increases the richness of the space represented by
the training set, in that it is possible to identify gen-
res with factor combinations not seen in training.
174
3 Experiments and Discussion
3.1 Within-Domain Validation
As a preliminary step, and to ensure that the addition
of skewness and kurtosis, as well as extra syntactic
features, does not significantly impact the within-
domain classification accuracy, we performed ex-
periments with both the features in (Feldman et al,
2009) and our expanded features. For this, we split
the training data 75/25 into training/test sets, and re-
peated the random split 50 times. We ran the experi-
ments for both the original genre classification prob-
lem and the individual factors. We found that the ad-
dition of new moments and features decreased per-
formance by less than 1% on average. We hypoth-
esize that this small deterioration in performance is
likely due to overtuning to the original training set.
3.2 New Features with Unseen Genres
To assess the use of our new features (added punctu-
ation and emoticons) and the higher-order moments,
we classified the web data with different processing
configurations. In addition to the eight training gen-
res, we introduced an ?undetermined? genre or class
for documents with a uniform posterior probability
across all genres, which occurs when there is a large
mismatch to all training genres. The distribution of
labels is shown in Figure 1. While we do not have
hand-labeled categories for this data, we thought it
highly unlikely that the vast majority is bn, as pre-
dicted by the models using only mean and variance
moments.
To validate our hypothesis that the spread of la-
bels was more appropriate for the data, we randomly
selected 100 documents and hand-labeled these us-
ing the eight classes plus ?undetermined.? The unde-
termined class was used for new genres (play scripts,
lectures, newsgroups, congressional records). We
found that it was difficult to annotate the data, since
many samples had characteristics of more than one
genre; this finding motivates the factor representa-
tion. The main difference between the various fea-
ture extraction configurations was in the detection
of the undetermined cases. For the subset of un-
determined documents that we labeled (34), none
were detected using only 2 moments, but 35-40%
were detected with the higher-order moments. Of
the false detections, roughly 25-30% were associ-
ated with documents with characteristics of multiple
classes. The effect of adding more detailed punctua-
tion and emoticons to the tag set was not significant.
It should be noted that the web collection was
based on queries designed to extract BC-style text,
yet only 3 of 100 hand-labeled samples were in that
category, none of which were accurately classified.
Roughly 16 of the 100 documents are labeled as very
informal and another 55 include some informal text
or are moderately informal. This finding, combined
with the observation that many documents reflect a
mix of genres, suggests that a factored representa-
tion of genre (with formality as one ?factor?) may
be more useful than explicit modeling of genres.
2, old 4, old 2, new 4, new0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
number of moments, old/new features 
 bc bn mt nw sb wl az chat undetermined
Figure 1: Fraction of web data classified as each genre.
3.3 Unseen Genre Factor Results
We trained a set of models for each factor and ob-
tained posterior estimates for unseen classes. Figure
2 shows the class of out-of-domain documents for
the formality factor, using 3 categories of formal-
ity: low (conversational, unprofessional), medium
(casual but coherent), high (formal). We have not
hand-labeled individual documents in all of these
sets, but the resulting class proportions match our
intuition for these genres. The Wikipedia data is
labeled as highly formal, and most web data is la-
beled as medium. Examining the 100 hand-labeled
web documents, we find that adding the higher-order
moments improves classifier accuracy from 23% to
55%. The effect of the added tag set features was
once again not significant.
Figure 3 shows the class of out-of-domain doc-
uments for the factor indicating number of speak-
ers/authors. This factor appears difficult to detect.
175
We hypothesize that there is an unaccounted-for de-
pendence on audience. When there is a listener,
speakers may use the term ?you,? as in conversa-
tions and internet chat. An interesting observation
is that the ten Obama speeches all appear to exhibit
this behavior. McCain speeches, on the other hand,
display some variation, and about a third are (cor-
rectly) characterized as single speaker.
az test wiki wiki talk europarl web speeches0
0.20.4
0.60.8
1
 
 low medium high undetermined
Figure 2: Test corpora classification, formality.
az test wiki wiki talk europarl web speeches0
0.20.4
0.60.8
1
 
 1 2 3+ undetermined
Figure 3: Test corpora classification, number of speakers.
The audience factor results are very skewed to-
wards broadcast data, but this matches our intuition,
and the scarcity of data meant for private consump-
tion, so they are not included. However, further
study is needed, since 3-dimensional projections of
the training data suggest a Gaussian mixture (or
other more complex model) may fit better.
The intent factor results are also mixed. The
classifier labels most of the Wikipedia, europarl,
web, and speeches data as ?report,? and most re-
views as ?persuade.? While the ?report? category fits
Wikipedia, it is not clear that europarl should also be
classified as ?report,? since parliamentary proceed-
ings are notoriously argumentative. With this factor,
the noise inherent in using genre-level labels is sig-
nificant. It is not always clear what is reportage and
what is persuasion, and we expect some genres (e.g.
reviews) to be a mixture of both.
4 Summary
We have introduced new features that are more ro-
bust for handling domains unseen in training, and
presented a factored genre framework that allows for
a finer-grained representation of genre. Many open
questions remain, including which other factors can
or cannot be captured by our current feature set and
classifier, and whether noisy label learning methods
could address the problem of uncertainty in the la-
bels for particular features and genres.
References
D. Biber. 1993. Using register-diversified corpora for
general language studies. Computational Linguistics,
19(2):219?242.
I. Bulyko et al 2007. Web resources for language model-
ing in conversational speech recognition. ACM Trans.
on Speech and Language Processing, 5(1):1?25.
S. Feldman et al 2009. Part-of-speech histograms for
genre classification of text. Proc. ICASSP.
W. Wang. 2008. Weakly supervised training for parsing
mandarin broadcast transcripts. Proc. Interspeech.
J. Karlgren and D. Cutting. 1994. Recognizing text gen-
res with simple metrics using discriminant analysis.
Proc. Computational Linguistics, pages 1071?1075.
B. Kessler, G. Numberg, and H. Schu?tze. 1997. Auto-
matic detection of text genre. ACL-35, pages 32?38.
Y.-B. Lee and S. H. Myaeng. 2002. Text genre classifi-
cation with genre-revealing and subject-revealing fea-
tures. ACM SIGIR, pages 145?150.
C. S. Lim, K. J. Lee, and G. C. Kim. 2004. Automatic
genre detection of web documents. IJCNLP.
M. P. Marcus et al 1993. Building a large annotated
corpus of English: the Penn Treebank. Computational
Linguistics, 19(2):313?330.
M. Santini. 2004. A shallow approach to syntactic fea-
ture extraction for genre classification. CLUK 7: UK
special-interest group for computational linguistics.
E. Stamatatos, N. Fakotakis, and G. Kokkinakis. 2000.
Text genre detection using common word frequencies.
Proc. Computational Linguistics, pages 808?814.
176
Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2013, pages 715?720,
Atlanta, Georgia, 9?14 June 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Atypical Prosodic Structure as an Indicator of Reading Level
and Text Difficulty
Julie Medero and Mari Ostendorf
Electrical Engineering Department
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195 USA
{jmedero,ostendor}@uw.edu
Abstract
Automatic assessment of reading ability
builds on applying speech recognition tools
to oral reading, measuring words correct per
minute. This work looks at more fine-grained
analysis that accounts for effects of prosodic
context using a large corpus of read speech
from a literacy study. Experiments show that
lower-level readers tend to produce relatively
more lengthening on words that are not likely
to be final in a prosodic phrase, i.e. in less
appropriate locations. The results have impli-
cations for automatic assessment of text dif-
ficulty in that locations of atypical prosodic
lengthening are indicative of difficult lexical
items and syntactic constructions.
1 Introduction
Fluent reading is known to be a good indicator of
reading comprehension, especially for early readers
(Rasinski, 2006), so oral reading is often used to
evaluate a student?s reading level. One method that
can be automated with speech recognition technol-
ogy is the number of words that a student can read
correctly of a normed passage, or Words Correct
Per Minute (WCPM) (Downey et al, 2011). Since
WCPM depends on speaking rate as well as liter-
acy, we are interested in identifying new measures
that can be automatically computed for use in com-
bination with WCPM to provide a better assessment
of reading level. In particular, we investigate fine-
grained measures that, if useful in identifying points
of difficulty for readers, can lead to new approaches
for assessing text difficulty.
The WCPM is reduced when a person repeats or
incorrectly reads a word, but also when they in-
troduce pauses and articulate words more slowly.
Pauses and lengthened articulation can be an indi-
cator of uncertainty for a low-level reader, but these
phenomena are also used by skilled readers to mark
prosodic phrase structure, facilitating comprehen-
sion in listeners. Since prosodic phrase boundaries
tend to occur in locations that coincide with certain
syntactic constituent boundaries, it is possible to au-
tomatically predict prosodic phrase boundary loca-
tions from part-of-speech labels and syntactic struc-
ture with fairly high reliability for read news stories
(Ananthakrishnan and Narayanan, 2008). Thus, we
hypothesize that we can more effectively leverage
word-level articulation and pause information by fo-
cusing on words that are less likely to be associ-
ated with prosodic phrase boundaries. By compar-
ing average statistics of articulation rate and paus-
ing for words at boundary vs. non-boundary loca-
tions, we hope to obtain a measure that could aug-
ment reading rate for evaluating reading ability. We
also hypothesize that the specific locations of hesita-
tion phenomena (word lengthening and pausing) ob-
served for multiple readers will be indicative of par-
ticular points of difficulty in a text, either because a
word is difficult or because a syntactic construction
is difficult. Detecting these regions and analyzing
the associated lexical and syntactic correlates is po-
tentially useful for automatically characterizing text
difficulty.
Our study of hesitation phenomena involves em-
pirical analysis of the oral reading data from the Flu-
ency Addition to the National Assessment of Adult
715
Literacy (FAN), which collected oral readings from
roughly 12,000 adults, reading short (150-200 word)
fourth- and eighth grade passages (Baer et al, 2009).
The participants in that study were chosen to re-
flect the demographics of adults in the United States;
thus, speakers of varying reading levels and non-
native speakers were included. For our study, we
had access to time alignments of automatic tran-
scriptions, but not the original audio files.
2 Related Work
For low-level readers, reading rate and fluency are
good indicators of reading comprehension (Miller
and Schwanenflugel, 2006; Spear-Swerling, 2006).
Zhang and colleagues found that features of chil-
dren?s oral readings, along with their interactions
with an automated tutor, could predict a single stu-
dent?s comprehension question performance over
the course of a document (2007). Using oral read-
ings is appealing because it avoids the difficulty of
separating question difficulty from passage difficulty
(Ozuru et al, 2008) and of questions that can be an-
swered through world knowledge (Keenan and Bet-
jemann, 2006).
WCPM is generally used as a tool for assessing
reading level by averaging across one or more pas-
sages. It is more noisy when comparing the read-
ability of different texts, especially when the reading
level is measured at a fine-grained (e.g. word) level.
If longer words take longer to read orally, it may
be merely a consequence of having more phonemes,
and not of additional reading difficulty. Further,
for communication reasons, pauses and slow aver-
age articulation rates tend to coincide with major
phrase boundaries. In our work, we would like to ac-
count for prosodic context in using articulation rate
to identify difficult words and constructions.
Much of the previous work on using automatic
speech recognition (ASR) output for reading level
or readability analysis has focused on assessing the
reading level of children (Downey et al, 2011;
Duchateau et al, 2007). Similar success has been
seen in predicting fluency scores in oral reading
tests for L2 learners of English (Balogh et al, 2012;
Bernstein et al, 2011). Project LISTEN has a read-
ing tutor for children that gives real-time feedback,
and has used orthographic and phonemic features
of individual words to predict the likelihood of real
word subsitutions (Mostow et al, 2002).
3 FAN Literacy Scores
To examine the utility of word-level pause and ar-
ticulation rate features for predicting reading level
when controlled for prosodic context, we use the Ba-
sic Reading Skills (BRS) score available for each
reader in the FAN data. The BRS score measures
an individual?s average reading rate in WCPM. Each
participant read three word lists, three pseudo-word
lists, one easy text passage, and one harder text pas-
sage, and the BRS is the average WCPM over the
eight different readings. Specifically, the WCPM
for each case is computed automatically using Ordi-
nate?s VersaReader system to transcribe the speech
given the target text (Balogh et al, 2005). The sys-
tem output is then automatically aligned to the tar-
get texts using the track-the-reader method of Ras-
mussen et al (2011), which defines weights for re-
gressions and skipped words and then identifies a
least-cost alignment between the ASR output and a
text. Automatic calculation of WCPM has high cor-
relation (.96-1.0) with human judgment of WCPM
(Balogh et al, 2012), so it has the advantage of be-
ing easy to automate.
Word Error Rate (WER) for the the ASR compo-
nent in Ordinate?s prototype reading tracker (Balogh
et al, 2012) may be estimated to be between 6% and
10%. In a sample of 960 passage readings, where
various sets of two passages were read by each of
480 adults (160 native Spanish speakers, 160 native
English-speaking African Americans, and 160 other
native English speakers), the Ordinate ASR system
exhibited a 6.9% WER on the 595 passages that con-
tained no spoken material that was unintelligible to
human transcribers. On the complete set of 960 pas-
sages, the system exhibited a 9.9% WER, with each
unintelligible length of speech contributing one or
more errors to the word error count.
The greatest problem with speech recognition er-
rors is for very low-level readers (Balogh et al,
2012). In order to have more reliable time align-
ments and BRS scores, approximately 15% of the
FAN participants were excluded from the current
analysis. This 15% were those participants whose
BRS score was labeled ?Below Basic? in the NAAL
716
reading scale. Additional participants were elimi-
nated because of missing or incomplete (less than a
few seconds) recordings. With these exclusions, the
number of speakers in our study was 7587.
4 Prosodic Boundary Prediction
We trained a regression tree1 on hand-annotated
data from the Boston University Radio News Cor-
pus (Ostendorf et al, 1995) to predict the locations
where we expect to see prosodic boundaries. Each
word in the Radio News Corpus is labeled with a
prosodic boundary score from 0 (clitic, no bound-
ary) to 6 (sentence boundary). For each word, we
use features based on parse depth and structure and
POS bigrams to predict the prosodic boundary value.
For evaluation, the break labels are grouped into:
0-2 (no intonational boundary marker), 3 (intermedi-
ate phrase), and 4-6 (intonational phrase boundary).
Words with 0-2 breaks are considered non-boundary
words; 4-6 are boundary words. We expect that, for
fluent readers, lengthening and possibly pausing will
be observed after boundary words but not after non-
boundary words. Since the intermediate boundaries
are the most difficult to classify, and may be can-
didates for both boundaries and non-boundaries for
fluent readers, we omit them in our analyses. Our
model achieves 87% accuracy in predicting ? in-
tonational phrase boundaries and 83% accuracy in
predicting ? no intonational boundary, treating in-
termediate phrase boundaries as negative instances
in both cases.
Note that our 3-way prosodic boundary predic-
tion is aimed at identifying locations where fluent
readers are likely to place boundaries (or not), i.e.,
reliable locations for feature extraction, vs. accept-
able locations for text-to-speech synthesis. Because
of this goal and because work on prosodic bound-
ary prediction labels varies in its treatment of inter-
mediate phrase boundaries, our results are not di-
rectly comparable to prior studies. However, per-
formance is in the range reported in recent studies
predicting prosodic breaks from text features only.
Treating intermediate phrase boundaries as positive
examples, Ananthakrishnan and Narayanan (2008)
1Our approach differs slightly from previous work in the use
of a regression (vs. classification) model; this gave a small per-
formance gain.
achieve 88% accuracy. Treating them as negative
examples, Margolis and Ostendorf (2010) achieve
similar results. Both report results on a single held-
out test set, while our results are based on 10-fold
cross validation.
5 Experiments with Prosodic Context
5.1 Word-level Rate Features
We looked at two acoustic cues related to hesitation
or uncertainty: pause duration and word lengthen-
ing. While pause duration is straightforward to ex-
tract (and not typically normalized), various meth-
ods have been used for word lengthening. We ex-
plore two measures of word lengthening: i) the
longest normalized vowel, and ii) the average nor-
malized length of word-final phones (the last vowel
and all following consonants). Word-final length-
ening is known to be a correlate of fluent prosodic
phrase boundaries (Wightman et al, 1992), and
we hypothesized that the longest normalized vowel
might be useful for hesitations though it can also in-
dicate prosodic prominence.
For word-level measures of lengthening, it is stan-
dard to normalize to account for inherent phoneme
durations. We use a z-score: measured duration mi-
nus phone mean divided by phone standard devia-
tion. In addition, Wightman et al (1992) found it
useful to account for speaking rate in normalizing
phone duration. We adopt the same model, which
assumes that phone durations can be characterized
by a Gamma distribution and that speaker variabil-
ity is characterized by a linear scaling of the phone-
dependent mean parameters, where the scaling term
is shared by all phones. The linear scale factor ? for
a speaker is estimated as:
? =
1
N
N?
i=1
di
?p(i)
(1)
where di is the duration of the i-th phone which has
label p(i) and where ?p is the speaker-independent
mean of phone p. Here, we use a speaker-
independent phone mean computed from the TIMIT
Corpus,2 which has hand-marked phonetic labels
and times. We make use of the speaking rate model
2Available from the Linguistic Data Consortium.
717
to adjust the speaker-independent TIMIT phone du-
rations to the speakers in the FAN corpus by cal-
culating the linear scale factor ? for each speaker.
Thus, the phone mean and standard deviation used
in the z-score normalization is ??pi and ??pi , re-
spectively.
From the many readings of the eight passages, we
identified roughly 777K spoken word instances at
predicted phrase boundaries and 2.0M spoken words
at predicted non-boundaries. For each uttered word,
we calculated three features: the length of the fol-
lowing pause, the length of the longest normalized
vowel, and the averaged normed length of all phones
from the last vowel to the end of the word, as de-
scribed above. The word-level features can be av-
eraged across instances from a speaker for assessing
reading level or across instances of a particular word
in a text uttered by many speakers to assess local text
difficulty.
The phone and pause durations are based on rec-
ognizer output, so they will be somewhat noisy.
The fact that the recognizer is biased towards the
intended word sequence and the omission of the
lowest-level readers from this study together con-
tribute to reducing the error rate (< 10%) and in-
creasing the reliability of the features. In addition,
noise is reduced by averaging over multiple words
or multiple speakers.
5.2 Reading Level Analysis
To assess the potential for prosodic context to im-
prove the utility of word-level features for assessing
reading difficulty, we looked at duration lengthening
and pauses at boundary and non-boundary locations,
where the boundary labels are predicted using the
text-based algorithm and 3-class grouping described
in section 4.
First, for each speaker, we averaged each fea-
ture across all boundary words read by that person
and across all non-boundary words read by that per-
son. We hypothesized that skilled readers would
have shorter averages for all three features at non-
boundary words compared to at boundary words,
while the differences for lower-level readers would
be smaller because of lengthening due to uncertainty
at non-boundary words. The difference between the
boundary and non-boudnary word averages for nor-
malized duration of end-of-word phones is plotted in
Figure 1: Mean end-of-word normalized phone duration
(+/- standard deviation) as a function of BRS score
Figure 1 as a function of reading level. As expected,
the difference increases with reading skill, as mea-
sured by BRS. A similar trend is observed for the
longest normalized vowel in the word.
We also looked at pause duration, finding that the
average pause duration decreases as reading skill in-
creases for both boundary and non-boundary words.
Since pauses are not always present at intonational
phrase boundaries, but are more likely at sentence
boundaries, we investigated dividing the cases by
punctuation rather than prosodic context. Table 1
shows that for both the top 20% of readers and the
bottom 20% of readers, sentence boundaries had
much longer pauses on average, followed by comma
boundaries, and unpunctuated word boundaries. The
drop in both pause frequency and average pause du-
ration is much greater for the more skilled readers.
Looking at all speakers, the unpunctuated words
had an average pause duration that scaled with the
speaking rate estimate for that passage, with high
correlation (0.94). The correlation was much lower
for sentence boundaries (0.44). Thus, we conclude
that the length of pauses at non-boundary locations
is related to the speaker?s reading ability.
5.3 Identifying Difficult Texts
Instead of averaging over multiple words in a pas-
sage, we can average over multiple readings of a
particular word. We identified difficult regions in
texts by sorting all tokens by the average normalized
length of their end-of-word phones for the lowest
718
Top 20% Bottom 20%
Pause Rate Avg. Pause Duration Pause Rate Avg. Pause Duration
Sentence-final 81.0% 177 ms 84.7% 283 ms
Comma 26.1% 94 ms 47.0% 168 ms
No punctuation 4.6% 77 ms 16.6% 139 ms
Table 1: Frequency of occurrence and average duration of pauses at sentence boundaries, comma boundaries, and
unpunctuated word boundaries for the top and bottom 20% of all readers, as sorted by BRS score
20% of readers. The examples suggest that length-
ening may coincide with reading difficulty caused
by syntactic ambiguity. Two sentences, with the
lengthened word in bold, illustrate representative
ambiguities:
? She was there for me the whole time my
grandfather was in the hospital.
? Since dogs are gentler when raised by a fam-
ily the dogs are given to children when the dogs
are about fourteen months old.
In the first example, ?me? could be the end of the
sentence, while in the second example, readers may
expect ?gentler? to be the end of the subordinate
clause started by ?since?. The lengthening on these
words is much smaller for the top 20% of readers,
suggesting that the extra lengthening is associated
with points of difficulty for the less skilled readers.
Similarly, we identified sentences with non-
boundary locations where readers commonly
paused, with the word after the pause in bold:
? We have always been able to share our es-
capades and humor with our friends.
? Check with your doctor first if you are a man
over forty or a woman over fifty and you plan
to do vigorous activity instead of moderate ac-
tivity.
We observe a wider variety of potential difficulties
here. Some are associated with difficult words, as in
the first example, while others involve syntactic am-
biguities similar to the ones seen in the lengthening
cases.
6 Summary
We have shown that duration lengthening and pause
cues align with expected prosodic structure (pre-
dicted from syntactic features) more for skilled read-
ers than for low-level readers, which we hope may
lead to a richer assessment of individual reading dif-
ficulties. In addition, we have proposed a method
of characterizing text difficulty at a fine grain based
on these features using multiple oral readings. In or-
der to better understand the information provided by
the different features, we are conducting eye track-
ing experiments on these passages, and future work
will include an analysis of readers? gaze during read-
ing of these constructions that have been categorized
in terms of their likely prosodic context.
In this work, where the original recordings were
not available, the study was restricted to duration
features. However, other work has suggested that
other prosodic cues, particularly pitch and energy
features, are useful for detecting speaker uncertainty
(Litman et al, 2009; Litman et al, 2012; Pon-Barry
and Shieber, 2011). Incorporating these cues may
increase the reliability of detecting points of read-
ing difficulty and/or offer complementary informa-
tion for characterizing text difficulties.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the anonymous reviewers for their
feedback, and to our colleagues at Pearson Knowl-
edge Technologies for their insights and data pro-
cessing assistance. This material is based upon
work supported by the National Science Founda-
tion Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant No.
DGE-0718124 and by the National Science Founda-
tion under Grant No. IIS-0916951. Any opinions,
findings, and conclusions or recommendations ex-
pressed in this material are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Science Foundation.
References
S. Ananthakrishnan and S.S. Narayanan. 2008. Auto-
matic Prosodic Event Detection Using Acoustic, Lex-
ical, and Syntactic Evidence. IEEE Trans. Audio,
Speech, and Language Processing, 16(1):216?228.
719
J. Baer, M. Kutner, J. Sabatini, and S. White. 2009. Basic
Reading Skills and the Literacy of Americas Least Lit-
erate Adults: Results from the 2003 National Assess-
ment of Adult Literacy (NAAL) Supplemental Stud-
ies. Technical report, NCES.
J. Balogh, J. Bernstein, J. Cheng, and B. Townshend.
2005. Final Report Ordinates Scoring of FAN NAAL
Phase III: Accuracy Analysis. Technical report, Ordi-
nate.
J. Balogh, J. Bernstein, J. Cheng, A. Van Moere,
B. Townshend, and M. Suzuki. 2012. Validation of
Automated Scoring of Oral Reading. Educational and
Psychological Measurement, 72:435?452.
J. Bernstein, J. Cheng, and M. Suzuki. 2011. Fluency
Changes with General Progress in L2 Proficiency. In
Proc. Interspeech, number August, pages 877?880.
R. Downey, D. Rubin, J. Cheng, and J. Bernstein.
2011. Performance of Automated Scoring for Chil-
dren?s Oral Reading. Proc. Workshop on Innovative
Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications,
(June):46?55, June.
J. Duchateau, L. Cleuren, H. Van, and P. Ghesqui. 2007.
Automatic Assessment of Childrens Reading Level.
Proc. Interspeech, pages 1210?1213.
J.M. Keenan and R. Betjemann. 2006. Comprehending
the Gray Oral Reading Test Without Reading It: Why
Comprehension Tests Should Not Include Passage-
Independent Items. Scientific Studies of Reading,
10(4):363?380.
D. Litman, M. Rotaru, and G. Nicholas. 2009. Classi-
fying turn-level uncertainty using word-level prosody.
In Proc. Interspeech.
D. Litman, H. Friedberg, and K. Forbes-Riley. 2012.
Prosodic cues to disengagement and uncertainty in
physics tutorial dialogues. In Proc. Interspeech.
A. Margolis, M. Ostendorf, and K. Livescu. 2010. Cross-
genre training for automatic prosody classification. In
Proc. Speech Prosody Conference.
J. Miller and P.J. Schwanenflugel. 2006. Prosody of Syn-
tactically Complex Sentences in the Oral Reading of
Young Children. Journal of Educational Psychology,
98(4):839?843.
J. Mostow, J. Beck, S. Winter, S. Wang, and B. Tobin.
2002. Predicting Oral Reading Miscues. In Proc. IC-
SLP.
M. Ostendorf, P.J. Price, and S. Shattuck-Hufnagel.
1995. The Boston University Radio News Corpus.
Technical report, Boston University, March.
Y. Ozuru, M. Rowe, T. O?Reilly, and D.S. McNamara.
2008. Where?s the difficulty in standardized reading
tests: the passage or the question? Behavior Research
Methods, 40(4):1001?1015.
H. Pon-Barry and S.M. Shieber. 2011. Recognizing un-
certainty in speech. CoRR, abs/1103.1898.
T. Rasinski. 2006. Reading fluency instruction: Mov-
ing beyond accuracy, automaticity, and prosody. The
Reading Teacher, 59(7):704?706, April.
M.H. Rasmussen, J. Mostow, Z. Tan, B. Lindberg, and
Y. Li. 2011. Evaluating Tracking Accuracy of an Au-
tomatic Reading Tutor. In Proc. Speech and Language
Technology in Education Workshop.
L. Spear-Swerling. 2006. Childrens Reading Com-
prehension and Oral Reading Fluency in Easy Text.
Reading and Writing, 19(2):199?220.
C.W. Wightman, S. Shattuck-Hufnagel, M. Ostendorf,
and P.J. Price. 1992. Segmental durations in the vicin-
ity of prosodic phrase boundaries. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 91(3):1707?-1717.
X.N. Zhang, J. Mostow, and J.E. Beck. 2007. Can a
Computer Listen for Fluctuations in Reading Com-
prehension? Artificial Intelligence in Education,
158:495?502.
720
