Proceedings of NAACL HLT 2009: Short Papers, pages 61?64,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Learning Bayesian Networks for Semantic Frame Composition
in a Spoken Dialog System
Marie-Jean Meurs, Fabrice Lefe`vre and Renato de Mori
Universite? d?Avignon et des Pays de Vaucluse
Laboratoire Informatique d?Avignon (EA 931), F-84911 Avignon, France.
{marie-jean.meurs,fabrice.lefevre,renato.demori}@univ-avignon.fr
Abstract
A stochastic approach based on Dynamic
Bayesian Networks (DBNs) is introduced for
spoken language understanding. DBN-based
models allow to infer and then to compose
semantic frame-based tree structures from
speech transcriptions. Experimental results on
the French MEDIA dialog corpus show the
appropriateness of the technique which both
lead to good tree identification results and can
provide the dialog system with n-best lists of
scored hypotheses.
1 Introduction
Recent developments in Spoken Dialog Systems
(SDSs) have renewed the interest for the extrac-
tion of rich and high-level semantics from users?
utterances. Shifting every SDS component from
hand-crafted to stochastic is foreseen as a good op-
tion to improve their overall performance by an in-
creased robustness to speech variabilities. For in-
stance stochastic methods are now efficient alter-
natives to rule-based techniques for Spoken Lan-
guage Understanding (SLU) (He and Young, 2005;
Lefe`vre, 2007).
The SLU module links up the automatic speech
recognition (ASR) module and the dialog manager.
From the user?s utterance analysis, it derives a repre-
sentation of its semantic content upon which the di-
alog manager can decide the next best action to per-
form, taking into account the current dialog context.
In this work, the overall objective is to increase the
relevancy of the semantic information used by the
system. Generally the internal meaning representa-
tion is based on flat concept sets obtained by either
keyword spotting or conceptual decoding. In some
cases a dialog act can be added on top of the concept
set. Here we intend to consider an additional se-
mantic composition step which will capture the ab-
stract semantic structures conveyed by the basic con-
cept representation. A frame formalism is applied to
specify these nested structures. As such structures
do not rely on sequential constraints, pure left-right
branching semantic parser (such as (He and Young,
2005)) will not apply in this case.
To derive automatically such frame meaning rep-
resentations we propose a system based on a two
decoding step process using dynamic Bayesian net-
works (DBNs) (Bilmes and Zweig, 2002): first ba-
sic concepts are derived from the user?s utterance
transcriptions, then inferences are made on sequen-
tial semantic frame structures, considering all the
available previous annotation levels (words and con-
cepts). The inference process extracts all possible
sub-trees (branches) according to lower level infor-
mation (generation) and composes the hypothesized
branches into a single utterance-span tree (composi-
tion). A hand-craft rule-based approach is used to
derive the seed annotated training data. So both ap-
proaches are not competing and the stochastic ap-
proach is justified as only the DBN system is able
to provide n-best lists of tree hypotheses with confi-
dence scores to a stochastic dialog manager (such as
the very promising POMDP-based approaches).
The paper is organized as follows. The next sec-
tion presents the semantic frame annotation on the
MEDIA corpus. Then Section 3 introduces the DBN-
based models for semantic composition and finally
Section 4 reports on the experiments.
61
HOTEL LOCATION
location_event
LODGING
lodging_hotel lodging_location
frame
frame frame
FE FE
FE
Figure 1: Frames, FEs and relations associated to the se-
quence ?staying in a hotel near the Festival de Cannes?
2 Semantic Frames on the MEDIA corpus
MEDIA is a French corpus of negotiation di-
alogs among users and a tourist information phone
server (Bonneau-Maynard et al, 2005). The corpus
contains 1,257 dialogs recorded using a Wizard of
Oz system. The semantic corpus is annotated with
concept-value pairs corresponding to word segments
with the addition of specifier tags representing some
relations between concepts. The annotation utilizes
83 basic concepts and 19 specifiers.
Amongst the available semantic representations,
the semantic frames (Lowe et al, 1997) are probably
the most suited to the task, mostly because of their
ability to represent negotiation dialogs. Semantic
frames are computational models describing com-
mon or abstract situations involving roles, the frame
elements (FEs). The FrameNet project (Fillmore et
al., 2003) provides a large frame database for En-
glish. As no such resource exists for French, we
elaborated a frame ontology to describe the semantic
knowledge of the MEDIA domain. The MEDIA on-
tology is composed of 21 frames and 86 FEs. All are
described by a set of manually defined patterns made
of lexical units and conceptual units (frame and FE
evoking words and concepts). Figure 1 gives the an-
notation of word sequence ?staying in a hotel near
the Festival de Cannes?. The training data are auto-
matically annotated by a rule-based process. Pattern
matching triggers the instantiation of frames and
FEs which are composed using a set of logical rules.
Composition may involve creation, modification or
deletion of frame and FE instances. About 70 rules
are currently used. This process is task-oriented and
is progressively enriched with new rules to improve
its accuracy. A reference frame annotation for the
training corpus is established in this way and used
for learning the parameters of the stochastic models
introduced in the next section.
concept concept
conecone
concepttrans concepttrans
FrameFEFrameFE
Frame-FE transFrame-FE trans
Frame trans Frame trans
concept concept
pntrapntra
conecone
concepttrans concepttrans
psps
FE transFE trans
Figure 2: Frames, FEs as one or 2 unobserved variables
concept concept
conecone
conceptrtasnF concepttasnF
masEemasEe
masEertasnFmasEertasnF
concept concept
pntrapntra
conecone
concepttasnF
concepttasnF
masEertasnF masEertasnF
psps
m-rtasnFm-rtasnF
Figure 3: 2-level decoding of frames and FEs
3 DBN-based Frame Models
The generative DBN models used in the system are
depicted on two time slices (two words) in figures 2
and 3. In practice, a regular pattern is repeated suffi-
ciently to fit the entire word sequence. Shaded nodes
are observed variables whereas empty nodes are hid-
den. Plain lines represent conditional dependencies
between variables and dashed lines indicate switch-
ing parents (variables modifying the conditional re-
lationship between others). An example of a switch-
ing parent is given by the trans nodes which in-
fluence the frame and FE nodes: when trans node
is null the frame or FE stays the same from slice to
slice, when trans is 1 a new frame or FE value is
predicted based on the values of its parent nodes in
the word sequence using frame (or FE) n-grams.
In the left DBN model of Figure 2 frames and FEs
are merged in a single compound variable. They
are factorized in the right model using two variables
jointly decoded. Figure 3 shows the 2-level model
where frames are first decoded then used as observed
values in the FE decoding step. Merging frames and
FEs into a variable reduces the decoding complex-
ity but leads to deterministic links between frames
62
and FEs. With their factorization, on the contrary, it
is possible to deal with the ambiguities in the frame
and FE links. During the decoding step, every com-
bination is tested, even not encountered in the train-
ing data, by means of a back-off technique. Due
to the increase in model complexity, a sub-optimal
beam search is applied for decoding. In this way,
the 2-level approach reduces the complexity of the
factored approach while preserving model general-
ization.
Because all variables are observed at training
time, the edge?s conditional probability tables are
directly derived from observation counts. To im-
prove their estimates, factored language models
(FLMs) are used along with generalized parallel
backoff (Bilmes and Kirchhoff, 2003). Several FLM
implementations of the joint distributions are used
in the DBN models, corresponding to the arrows in
Figures 2 and 3. In the FLMs given below, n is the
history length (n = 1 for bigrams), the uppercase
and lowercase letters FFE, F , FE, C and W re-
spectively stand for frame/FE (one variable), frame,
FE, concept and word variables:
? Frame/FE compound variable:
P (FFE) '?nk=0 P (ffek|ffek?1);
P (C|FFE) '?nk=0 P (ck|ck?1, ffek);
P (W |C,FFE) '?nk=0 P (wk|wk?1, ck, ffek).
? Frame and FE variables, joint decoding:
P (F ) '?nk=0 P (fk|fk?1);
P (FE|F ) '?nk=0 P (fek|fek?1, fk);
P (C|FE,F ) '?nk=0 P (ck|ck?1, fek, fk);
P (W |C,FE, F ) '?nk=0 P (wk|wk?1, ck, fek, fk).
? Frame and FE variables, 2-level decoding:
? First stage: same as frame/FE compound variables
but only decoding frames
? Second stage: same as joint decodind but frames are
observed
P (F? ) '?nk=0 P (f?k|f?k?1);
P (FE|F? ) '?nk=0 P (fek|fek?1, f?k);
P (C|F? , FE) '?nk=0 P (ck|ck?1, f?k, fek);
P (W |C, F? , FE) '?nk=0 P (wk|wk?1, ck, f?k, fek).
Variables with hat have observed values.
Due to the frame hierarchical representation,
some overlapping situations can occurred when de-
termining the frame and FE associated to a concept.
To address this difficulty, a tree-projection algorithm
is performed on the utterance tree-structured frame
annotation and allows to derive sub-branches associ-
ated to a concept (possibly more than one). Starting
from a leaf of the tree, a compound frame/FE class
is obtained by aggregating the father vertices (either
frames or FEs) as long as they are associated to the
same concept (or none). The edges are defined both
by the frame?FE attachments and the FE?frame
sub-frame relations.
Thereafter, either the branches are considered di-
rectly as compound classes or the frame and FE in-
terleaved components are separated to produce two
class sets. These compound classes are considered
in the decoding process then projected back after-
wards to recover the two types of frame?FE con-
nections. However, some links are lost because de-
coding is sequential. A set of manually defined rules
is used to retrieve the missing connections from the
set of hypothesized branches. Theses rules are sim-
ilar to those used in the semi-automatic annotation
of the training data but differ mostly because the
available information is different. For instance, the
frames cannot anymore be associated to a particular
word inside a concept but rather to the whole seg-
ment. The training corpus provides the set of frame
and FE class sequences on which the DBN parame-
ters are estimated.
4 Experiments and Results
The DBN-based composition systems were evalu-
ated on a test set of 225 speakers? turns manually
annotated in terms of frames and FEs. The rule-
based system was used to perform a frame annota-
tion of the MEDIA data. On the test set, an aver-
age F-measure of 0.95 for frame identification con-
firms the good reliability of the process. The DBN
model parameters were trained on the training data
using jointly the manual transcriptions, the manual
concept annotations and the rule-based frame anno-
tations.
Experiments were carried out on the test set under
three conditions varying the input noise level:
? REF (reference): speaker turns manually tran-
scribed and annotated;
? SLU: concepts decoded from manual transcrip-
tions using a DBN-based SLU model comparable
to (Lefe`vre, 2007) (10.6% concept error rate);
? ASR+SLU: 1-best hypotheses of transcriptions
63
Inputs REF SLU ASR + SLU
DBN models Frames FE Links Frames FE Links Frames FE Links
frame/FEs p?/r? 0.91/0.93 0.91/0.86 0.93/0.98 0.87/0.82 0.91/0.83 0.93/0.98 0.86/0.80 0.90/0.86 0.92/0.98
(compound) F?-m 0.89 0.86 0.92 0.81 0.82 0.92 0.78 0.84 0.92
frames and FEs p?/r? 0.92/0.92 0.92/0.85 0.94/0.98 0.88/0.81 0.92/0.83 0.93/0.97 0.87/0.79 0.90/0.86 0.94/0.97
(2 variables) F?-m 0.90 0.86 0.94 0.80 0.83 0.91 0.78 0.84 0.93
frames then FEs p?/r? 0.92/0.94 0.91/0.82 0.92/0.98 0.88/0.86 0.91/0.80 0.92/0.97 0.87/0.81 0.89/0.82 0.93/0.98
(2-level) F?-m 0.91 0.83 0.93 0.83 0.80 0.90 0.79 0.80 0.92
Table 1: Precision (p?), Recall (r?) and F-measure (F?-m) on the MEDIA test set for the DBN-based frame composition
systems.
generated by an ASR system and concepts decoded
using them (14.8% word error rate, 24.3% concept
error rate).
All the experiments reported in the paper were per-
formed using GMTK (Bilmes and Zweig, 2002),
a general purpose graphical model toolkit and
SRILM (Stolcke, 2002), a language modeling
toolkit.
Table 1 is populated with the results on the test
set for the DBN-based frame composition systems
in terms of precision, recall and F-measure. For the
FE figures, only the reference FEs corresponding to
correctly identified frames are considered. Only the
frame and FE names are considered, neither their
constituents nor their order matter. Finally, results
are given for the sub-frame links between frames
and FEs. Table 1 shows that the performances of the
3 DBN-based systems are quite comparable. Any-
how the 2-level system can be considered the best
as besides its good F-measure results, it is also the
most efficient model in terms of decoding complex-
ity. The good results obtained for the sub-frame
links confirm that the DBN models combined with a
small rule set can be used to generate consistent hi-
erarchical structures. Moreover, as they can provide
hypotheses with confidence scores they can be used
in a multiple input/output context (lattices and n-best
lists) or in a validation process (evaluating and rank-
ing hypotheses from other systems).
5 Conclusion
This work investigates a stochastic process for gen-
erating and composing semantic frames using dy-
namic Bayesian networks. The proposed approach
offers a convenient way to automatically derive se-
mantic annotations of speech utterances based on
a complete frame and frame element hierarchical
structure. Experimental results, obtained on the ME-
DIA dialog corpus, show that the performance of the
DBN-based models are definitely good enough to be
used in a dialog system in order to supply the dialog
manager with a rich and thorough representation of
the user?s request semantics. Though this can also
be obtained using a rule-based approach, the DBN
models alone are able to derive n-best lists of se-
mantic tree hypotheses with confidence scores. The
incidence of such outputs on the dialog manager de-
cision accuracy needs to be asserted.
Acknowledgment
This work is supported by the 6th Framework Re-
search Program of the European Union (EU), LUNA
Project, IST contract no 33549,www.ist-luna.eu
References
J. Bilmes and K. Kirchhoff. 2003. Factored language
models and generalized parallel backoff. In NAACL
HLT.
J. Bilmes and G. Zweig. 2002. The graphical models
toolkit: An open source software system for speech
and time-series processing. In IEEE ICASSP.
H. Bonneau-Maynard, S. Rosset, C. Ayache, A. Kuhn,
D. Mostefa, and the Media consortium. 2005. Seman-
tic annotation of the MEDIA corpus for spoken dialog.
In ISCA Eurospeech.
C.J. Fillmore, C.R. Johnson, and M.R.L. Petruck. 2003.
Background to framenet. International Journal of
Lexicography, 16.3:235?250.
Y. He and S. Young. 2005. Spoken language understand-
ing using the hidden vector state model. Speech Com-
munication, 48(3-4):262?275.
F. Lefe`vre. 2007. Dynamic bayesian networks and dis-
criminative classifiers for multi-stage semantic inter-
pretation. In IEEE ICASSP.
J.B. Lowe, C.F. Baker, and C.J. Fillmore. 1997. A frame-
semantic approach to semantic annotation. In SIGLEX
Workshop: Why, What, and How?
A. Stolcke. 2002. Srilm an extensible language model-
ing toolkit. In IEEE ICASSP.
64
Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Short Papers), pages 476?481,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, June 23-25 2014.
c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
Mutual Disambiguation for Entity Linking
Eric Charton
Polytechnique Montr?eal
Montr?eal, QC, Canada
eric.charton@polymtl.ca
Marie-Jean Meurs
Concordia University
Montr?eal, QC, Canada
marie-jean.meurs@concordia.ca
Ludovic Jean-Louis
Polytechnique Montr?eal
ludovic.jean-louis@polymtl.ca
Michel Gagnon
Polytechnique Montr?eal
michel.gagnon@polymtl.ca
Abstract
The disambiguation algorithm presented in
this paper is implemented in SemLinker, an
entity linking system. First, named entities
are linked to candidate Wikipedia pages by
a generic annotation engine. Then, the al-
gorithm re-ranks candidate links according to
mutual relations between all the named enti-
ties found in the document. The evaluation
is based on experiments conducted on the test
corpus of the TAC-KBP 2012 entity linking
task.
1 Introduction
The Entity Linking (EL) task consists in linking
name mentions of named entities (NEs) found in a
document to their corresponding entities in a ref-
erence Knowledge Base (KB). These NEs can be
of type person (PER), organization (ORG), etc.,
and they are usually represented in the KB by a
Uniform Resource Identifier (URI). Dealing with
ambiguity is one of the key difficulties in this task,
since mentions are often highly polysemous, and
potentially related to many different KB entries.
Various approaches have been proposed to solve
the named entity disambiguation (NED) problem.
Most of them involve the use of surface forms ex-
tracted from Wikipedia. Surface forms consist of
a word or a group of words that match lexical units
like Paris or New York City. They are used as
matching sequences to locate corresponding can-
didate entries in the KB, and then to disambiguate
those candidates using similarity measures.
The NED problem is related to the Word Sense
Disambiguation (WSD) problem (Navigli, 2009),
and is often more challenging since mentions of
NEs can be highly ambiguous. For instance,
names of places can be very common as is Paris,
which refers to 26 different places in Wikipedia.
Hence, systems that attempt to address the NED
problem must include disambiguation resources.
In the context of the Named Entity Recognition
(NER) task, such resources can be generic and
generative. This generative approach does not ap-
ply to the EL task where each entity to be linked to
a semantic description has a specific word context,
marker of its exact identity.
One of the classical approach to conduct the
disambiguation process in NED applications is to
consider the context of the mention to be mapped,
and compare this context with contextual informa-
tion about the potential target entities (see for in-
stance the KIM system (Popov et al, 2003)). This
is usually done using similarity measures (such as
cosine similarity, weighted Jaccard distance, KL
divergence...) that evaluate the distance between
a bag of words related to a candidate annotation,
and the words surrounding the entity to annotate
in the text.
In more recent approaches, it is suggested that
annotation processes based on similarity distance
measures can be improved by making use of other
annotations present in the same document. Such
techniques are referred to as semantic related-
ness (Strube and Ponzetto, 2006), collective dis-
ambiguation (Hoffart et al, 2011b), or joint dis-
ambiguation (Fahrni et al, 2012). The idea is to
evaluate in a set of candidate links which one is
the most likely to be correct by taking the other
links contained in the document into account. For
example, if a NE describes a city name like Paris,
it is more probable that the correct link for this
city name designates Paris (France) rather than
Paris (Texas) if a neighbor entity offers candidate
links semantically related to Paris (France) like
the Seine river or the Champs-Elys?ees. Such tech-
niques mostly involve exploration of graphs result-
ing of all the candidate annotations proposed for a
given document, and try to rank the best candi-
dates for each annotation using an ontology. The
ontology (like YAGO or DBPedia) provides a pre-
476
existing set of potential relations between the enti-
ties to link (like for instance, in our previous exam-
ple, Paris (France) has river Seine) that will
be used to rank the best candidates according to
their mutual presence in the document.
In this paper we explore the capabilities of a dis-
ambiguation algorithm using all the available an-
notation layers of NEs to improve their links. The
paper makes the following novel propositions: 1)
the ontology used to evaluate the relatedness of
candidates is replaced by internal links and cate-
gories from the Wikipedia corpus; 2) the coher-
ence of entities is improved prior to the calcula-
tion of semantic relatedness using a co-reference
resolution algorithm, and a NE label correction
method; 3) the proposed method is robust enough
to improve the performance of existing entity link-
ing annotation engines, which are capable of pro-
viding a set of ranked candidates for each annota-
tion in a document.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2
describes related works. The proposed method is
presented in Section 3 where we explain how our
SemLinker system prepares documents that con-
tain mentions to disambiguate, then we detail the
disambiguation algorithm. The evaluation of the
complete system is provided in Section 4. Finally,
we discuss the obtained results, and conclude.
2 Related Work
Entity annotation and linking in natural language
text has been extensively studied in NLP research.
A strong effort has been conducted recently by the
TAC-KBP evaluation task (Ji et al, 2010) to cre-
ate standardized corpus, and annotation standards
based on Wikipedia for evaluation and comparison
of EL systems. In this paper, we consider the TAC-
KBP framework. We describe below some recent
approaches proposed for solving the EL task.
2.1 Wikipedia-based Disambiguation Methods
The use of Wikipedia for explicit disambiguation
dates back to (Bunescu and Pasca, 2006) who built
a system that compared the context of a mention
to the Wikipedia categories of an entity candidate.
Lately, (Cucerzan, 2007; Milne and Witten, 2008;
Nguyen and Cao, 2008) extended this framework
by using richer features for similarity comparison.
Some authors like Milne and Witten (2008) uti-
lized machine learning methods rather than a sim-
ilarity function to map mentions to entities. They
also introduced the notion of semantic relatedness.
Alternative propositions were suggested in other
works like (Han and Zhao, 2009) that considered
the relatedness of common noun phrases in a men-
tion context with Wikipedia article names. While
all these approaches focus on semantic relation be-
tween entities, their potential is limited by the sep-
arate mapping of candidate links for each mention.
2.2 Semantic Web Compliant Methods
More recently, several systems have been
launched as web services dedicated to EL tasks.
Most of them are compliant with new emergent
semantic web standards like LinkedData network.
DBPedia Spotlight (Mendes et al, 2011) is a
system that finds mentions of DBpedia (Auer
et al, 2007) resources in a textual document.
Wikimeta (Charton and Gagnon, 2012) is another
system relying on DBpedia. It uses bags of words
to disambiguate semantic entities according to
a cosine similarity algorithm. Those systems
have been compared with commercial ones
like AlchemyAPI, Zemanta, or Open Calais
in (Gangemi, 2013). The study showed that
they perform differently on various essential
aspects of EL tasks (mention detection, linking,
disambiguation). This suggests a wide range of
potential improvements on many aspects of the
EL task. Only some of these systems introduce
the semantic relatedness in their methods like
the AIDA (Hoffart et al, 2011b) system. It
proposes a disambiguation method that combines
popularity-based priors, similarity measures, and
coherence. It relies on the Wikipedia-derived
YAGO2 (Hoffart et al, 2011a) knowledge base.
3 Proposed Algorithm
We propose a mutual disambiguation algorithm
that improves the accuracy of entity links in a doc-
ument by using successive corrections applied to
an annotation object representing this document.
The annotation object is composed of information
extracted from the document along with linguistic
and semantic annotations as described hereafter.
3.1 Annotation Object
Documents are processed by an annotator capable
of producing POS tags for each word, as well as
spans, NE surface forms, NE labels and ranked
candidate Wikipedia URIs for each candidate NE.
For each document D, this knowledge is gathered
477
in an array called annotation object, which has ini-
tially one row per document lexical unit. Since the
system focuses on NEs, rows with lexical units
that do not belong to a NE SF are dropped from
the annotation object, and NE SF are refined as de-
scribed in (Charton et al, 2014). When NE SF are
spanned over several rows, these rows are merged
into a single one. Thus, we consider an annotation
object A
D
, which is an array with a row for each
NE, and columns storing related knowledge.
If n NEs were annotated in D, then A
D
has n
rows. If l candidate URIs are provided for each
NE, then A
D
has (l + 4) columns c
u,u?{1,l+4}
.
Columns c
1
to c
l
store Wikipedia URIs associated
with NEs, ordered by decreasing values of likeli-
hood. Column c
l+1
stores the offset of the NEs,
c
l+2
stores their surface forms, c
l+3
stores the NE
labels (PER, ORG, ...), and c
l+4
stores the (vec-
tors of) POS tags associated with the NE surface
forms. A
D
contains all the available knowledge
about the NEs found inD. Before being processed
by the disambiguation module,A
D
is dynamically
updated by correction processes.
3.2 Named Entity Label Correction
To support the correction process based on co-
reference chains, the system tries to correct NE
labels for all the NEs listed in the annotation ob-
ject. The NE label correction process assigns the
same NE label to all the NEs associated with the
same first rank URI. For all the rows inA
D
, sets of
rows with identical first rank URIs are considered.
Then, for each set, NE labels are counted per type,
and all the rows in a same set are updated with the
most frequent NE label found in the set, i.e. all the
NEs in this set are tagged with this label.
3.3 Correction Based on Co-reference Chains
First rank candidate URIs are corrected by a pro-
cess that relies on co-reference chains found in
the document. The co-reference detection is con-
ducted using the information recorded in the anno-
tation object. Among the NEs present in the docu-
ment, the ones that co-refer are identified and clus-
tered by logical rules applied to the content of the
annotation object. When a co-reference chain of
NEs is detected, the system assigns the same URI
to all the members of the chain. This URI is se-
lected through a decision process that gives more
weight to longer surface forms and frequent URIs.
The following example illustrates an application
of this correction process:
Three sentences are extracted from a document
about Paris, the French capital. NEs are indicated
in brackets, first rank URIs and surface forms are
added below the content of each sentence.
- [Paris] is famous around the world.
URI
1
: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paris Hilton
NE surface form: Paris
- The [city of Paris] attracts millions of tourists.
URI
1
: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paris
NE surface form: city of Paris
- The [capital of France] is easy to reach by train.
URI
1
: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paris
NE surface form: capital of France
The three NEs found in these sentences com-
pose a co-reference chain. The second NE has
a longer surface form than the first one, and
its associated first rank URI is the most fre-
quent. Hence, the co-reference correction pro-
cess will assign the right URI to the first NE
(URI
1
: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paris), which
was wrongly linked to the actress Paris Hilton.
3.4 Mutual Disambiguation Process
The extraction of an accurate link is a process oc-
curring after the URI annotation of NEs in the
whole document. The system makes use of all
the semantic content stored in A
D
to locally im-
prove the precision of each URI annotation in the
document. The Mutual Disambiguation Process
(MDP) relies on the graph of all the relations (in-
ternal links, categories) between Wikipedia con-
tent related to the document annotations.
A basic example of semantic relatedness that
should be captured is explained hereafter. Let us
consider the mention IBM in a given document.
Candidate NE annotations for this mention can be
International Business Machine or International
Brotherhood of Magicians. But if the IBM men-
tion co-occurs with a Thomas Watson, Jr mention
in the document, there will probably be more links
between the International Business Machine and
Thomas Watson, Jr related Wikipedia pages than
between the International Brotherhood of Magi-
cians and Thomas Watson, Jr related Wikipedia
pages. The purpose of the MDP is to capture this
semantic relatedness information contained in the
graph of links extracted from Wikipedia pages re-
lated to each candidate annotation.
In MDP, for each Wikipedia URI candidate an-
notation, all the internal links and categories con-
tained in the source Wikipedia document related
478
to this URI are collected. This information will be
used to calculate a weight for each of the l can-
didate URI annotations of each mention. For a
given NE, this weight is expected to measure the
mutual relations of a candidate annotation with all
the other candidate annotations of NEs in the doc-
ument. The input of the MDP is an annotation
object A
D
with n rows, obtained as explained in
Section 3.1. For all i ? [[1, n]], k ? [[1, l]], we build
the set S
k
i
, composed of the Wikipedia URIs and
categories contained in the source Wikipedia doc-
ument related to the URI stored in A
D
[i][k] that
we will refer to as URI
k
i
to ease the reading.
Scoring:
For all i, j ? [[1, n]], k ? [[1, l]], we want to cal-
culate the weight of mutual relations between the
candidate URI
k
i
and all the first rank candidates
URI
1
j
for j 6= i. The calculation combines two
scores that we called direct semantic relation score
(dsr score) and common semantic relation score
(csr score):
- the dsr score for URI
k
i
sums up the number of
occurrences of URI
k
i
in S
1
j
for all j ? [[1, n]]?{i}.
- the csr score for URI
k
i
sums up the number of
common URIs and categories between S
k
i
and S
1
j
for all j ? [[1, n]]? {i}.
We assumed the dsr score was much more
semantically significant than the csr score, and
translated this assumption in the weight calcula-
tion by introducing two correction parameters ?
and ? used in the final scoring calculation.
Re-ranking:
For all i ? [[1, n]], for each set of URIs {URI
k
i
, k ?
[[1, l]]}, the re-ranking process is conducted ac-
cording to the following steps:
For all i ? I ,
1. ?k ? [[1, l]], calculate dsr score(URI
k
i
)
2. ?k ? [[1, l]], calculate csr score(URI
k
i
)
3. ?k ? [[1, l]], calculate
mutual relation score(URI
k
i
) =
?.dsr score(URI
k
i
)+?.csr score(URI
k
i
)
4. re-order {URI
k
i
, k ? [[1, l]]}, by
decreasing order of mutual relation score.
In the following, we detail the MDP in the con-
text of a toy example to illustrate how it works.
The document contains two sentences, NE men-
tions are in bold:
IBM has 12 research laboratories
worldwide. Thomas J. Watson, Jr.
became president of the company.
For the first NE mention [IBM], A
D
contains
two candidate URIs identifying two different re-
sources:
[IBM] URI
1
1
? International Brotherhood of Magicians
URI
2
1
? International Business Machines Corporation
For the second NE mention [Thomas J.
Watson, Jr.], A
D
contains the following can-
didate URI, which is ranked first:
[Thomas J. Watson, Jr.] URI
1
2
? Thomas Watson, Jr.
S
1
1
gathers URIs and categories contained in the
International Brotherhood of Magicians Wikipedia
page. S
2
1
is associated to the International Business
Machines Corporation, and S
1
2
to the Thomas Watson,
Jr. page. dsr score(URI
1
1
) sums up the number of
occurrences of URI
1
1
in S
1
j
for all j ? [[1, n]]?{1}.
Hence, in the current example, dsr score(URI
1
1
) is
the number of occurrences of URI
1
1
in S
1
2
, namely
the number of times the International Brotherhood
of Magicians are cited in the Thomas Watson, Jr.
page. Similarly, dsr score(URI
2
1
) is equal to the
number of times the International Business Machines
Corporation is cited in the Thomas Watson, Jr. page.
csr score(URI
1
1
) sums up the number of common
URIs and categories between S
1
1
and S
1
2
, i.e. the
number of URIs and categories appearing in both
International Brotherhood of Magicians and Thomas
Watson, Jr. pages. csr score(URI
2
1
) counts the
number of URIs and categories appearing in both
International Business Machines Corporation and
Thomas Watson, Jr. pages.
After calculation, we have:
mutual relation score(URI
1
1
) < mutual relation score(URI
2
1
)
The candidate URIs for [IBM] are re-ranked
accordingly, and International Business Machines
Corporation becomes its first rank candidate.
4 Experiments and Results
SemLinker has been evaluated on the TAC-KBP
2012 EL task (Charton et al, 2013). In this task,
mentions of entities found in a document collec-
tion must be linked to entities in a reference KB, or
to new named entities discovered in the collection.
The document collection built for KBP 2012 con-
tains a combination of newswire articles (News),
479
SemLinker TAC-KBP2012 systems
modules no disambiguation MDP only all modules 1
st
2
nd
3
rd
median
Category B
3+
P B
3+
R B
3+
F1 B
3+
P B
3+
R B
3+
F1 B
3+
P B
3+
R B
3+
F1 B
3+
F1 B
3+
F1 B
3+
F1 B
3+
F1
Overall 0.620 0.633 0.626 0.675 0.681 0.678 0.694 0.695 0.695 0.730 0.699 0.689 0.536
PER 0.771 0.791 0.781 0.785 0.795 0.790 0.828 0.838 0.833 0.809 0.840 0.714 0.645
ORG 0.600 0.571 0.585 0.622 0.578 0.599 0.621 0.569 0.594 0.715 0.615 0.717 0.485
GPE 0.412 0.465 0.437 0.570 0.628 0.598 0.574 0.626 0.599 0.627 0.579 0.614 0.428
News 0.663 0.691 0.677 0.728 0.748 0.738 0.750 0.767 0.758 0.782 0.759 0.710 0.574
Web 0.536 0.520 0.528 0.572 0.550 0.561 0.585 0.556 0.570 0.630 0.580 0.508 0.491
Table 1: SemLinker results on the TAC-KBP 2012 test corpus with/out disambiguation modules, and
three best results and median from TAC-KBP 2012 systems.
posts to blogs and newsgroups (Web). Given a
query that consists of a document with a specified
name mention of an entity, the task is to determine
the correct node in the reference KB for the entity,
adding a new node for the entity if it is not already
in the reference KB. Entities can be of type person
(PER), organization (ORG), or geopolitical entity
(GPE). The reference knowledge base is derived
from an October 2008 dump of English Wikipedia,
which includes 818,741 nodes. Table 2 provides a
breakdown of the queries per categories of entities,
and per type of documents.
Category All PER ORG GPE News Web
# queries 2226 918 706 602 1471 755
Table 2: Breakdown of the TAC-KBP 2012 test
corpus queries according to entity types, and doc-
ument categories.
A complete description of these linguistic re-
sources can be found in (Ellis et al, 2011). For
the sake of reproducibility, we applied the KBP
scoring metric (B
3
+ F ) described in (TAC-KBP,
2012), and we used the KBP scorer
1
.
The evaluated system makes use of the
Wikimeta annotation engine. The maximum num-
ber of candidate URIs is l = 15. The MDP correc-
tion parameters ? and ? described in Section 3.4
have been experimentally set to ? = 10, ? = 2.
Table 1 presents the results obtained by the sys-
tem in three configurations. In the first column,
the system is evaluated without the disambigua-
tion module. In the second column, we applied
the MDP without correction processes. The sys-
tem with the complete disambiguation module ob-
tained the results provided in the third column.
The three best results and the median from TAC-
KBP 2012 systems are shown in the remaining
columns for the sake of comparison.
1
http://www.nist.gov/tac/2013/KBP/
EntityLinking/tools.html
We observe that the complete algorithm (co-
references, named entity labels and MDP) pro-
vides the best results on PER NE links. On GPE
and ORG entities, the simple application of MDP
without prior corrections obtains the best results.
A slight loss of accuracy is observed on ORG NEs
when the MDP is applied with corrections. For
those three categories of entities, we show that the
complete system improves the performance of a
simple algorithm using distance measures. Results
on categories News and Web show that the best
performance on the whole KBP corpus (without
distinction of NE categories) is obtained with the
complete algorithm.
5 Conclusion
The presented system provides a robust seman-
tic disambiguation method, based on mutual re-
lation of entities inside a document, using a stan-
dard annotation engine. It uses co-reference, NE
normalization methods, and Wikipedia internal
links as mutual disambiguation resource to im-
prove the annotations. We show that our propo-
sition improves the performance of a standard an-
notation engine applied to the TAC-KBP evalua-
tion framework. SemLinker is fully implemented,
and publicly released as an open source toolkit
(http://code.google.com/p/semlinker). It
has been deployed in the TAC-KBP 2013 evalu-
ation campaign. Our future work will integrate
other annotation engines in the system architecture
in a collaborative approach.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported as part of Dr Eric
Charton?s Mitacs Elevate Grant sponsored by
3CE. Participation of Dr Marie-Jean Meurs was
supported by the Genozymes Project funded by
Genome Canada & G?enome Qu?ebec. The Con-
cordia Tsang Lab provided computing resources.
480
References
S?oren Auer, Christian Bizer, Georgi Kobilarov, Jens
Lehmann, Richard Cyganiak, and Zachary Ives.
2007. Dbpedia: A nucleus for a web of open data.
In The semantic web, pages 722?735. Springer.
Razvan C. Bunescu and Marius Pasca. 2006. Us-
ing encyclopedic knowledge for named entity dis-
ambiguation. In Proceedings of the Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (EACL). ACL.
Eric Charton and Michel Gagnon. 2012. A disam-
biguation resource extracted from Wikipedia for se-
mantic annotation. In Proceedings of LREC 2012.
Eric Charton, Marie-Jean Meurs, Ludovic Jean-Louis,
and Michel Gagnon. 2013. SemLinker system
for KBP2013: A disambiguation algorithm based
on mutual relations of semantic annotations inside
a document. In Text Analysis Conference KBP.
U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST).
Eric Charton, Marie-Jean Meurs, Ludovic Jean-Louis,
and Michel Gagnon. 2014. Improving Entity Link-
ing using Surface Form Refinement. In Proceedings
of LREC 2014.
Silviu Cucerzan. 2007. Large-scale named entity dis-
ambiguation based on wikipedia data. In Proceed-
ings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing EMNLP-CoNLL. ACL.
Joe Ellis, Xuansong Li, Kira Griffitt, Stephanie M
Strassel, and Jonathan Wright. 2011. Linguistic re-
sources for 2012 knowledge base population evalu-
ations. In Proceedings of TAC-KBP 2012.
Angela Fahrni, Thierry G?ockel, and Michael Strube.
2012. Hitsmonolingual and cross-lingual entity
linking system at tac 2012: A joint approach. In
TAC (Text Analysis Conference) 2012 Workshop.
Aldo Gangemi. 2013. A Comparison of Knowledge
Extraction Tools for the Semantic Web. In The 10th
Extended Semantic Web Conference (ESWC) 2013.
Xianpei Han and Jun Zhao. 2009. Named entity
disambiguation by leveraging wikipedia semantic
knowledge. In Proceedings of the Conference on
Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM).
ACM.
Johannes Hoffart, Fabian M Suchanek, Klaus
Berberich, Edwin Lewis-Kelham, Gerard De Melo,
and Gerhard Weikum. 2011a. Yago2: exploring and
querying world knowledge in time, space, context,
and many languages. In Proceedings of the 20th
international conference companion on World wide
web, pages 229?232. ACM.
Johannes Hoffart, Mohamed Amir Yosef, Ilaria Bor-
dino, Hagen F?urstenau, Manfred Pinkal, Marc Span-
iol, Bilyana Taneva, Stefan Thater, and Gerhard
Weikum. 2011b. Robust disambiguation of named
entities in text. In Proceedings of the Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 782?792. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Heng Ji, Ralph Grishman, HT Dang, and K Griffitt.
2010. Overview of the TAC 2010 knowledge base
population track. Proceedings of TAC 2010.
Pablo N Mendes, Max Jakob, Andr?es Garc??a-Silva, and
Christian Bizer. 2011. DBpedia Spotlight: Shed-
ding Light on the Web of Documents. In The 7th
International Conference on Semantic Systems (I-
Semantics) 2011, pages 1?8.
David N. Milne and Ian H. Witten. 2008. Named en-
tity disambiguation by leveraging wikipedia seman-
tic knowledge. In Proceedings of the Conference on
Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM).
ACM.
Roberto Navigli. 2009. Word sense disambiguation: A
survey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 41(2):10.
Hien T. Nguyen and Tru H. Cao. 2008. Named
entity disambiguation on an ontology enriched by
wikipedia. In Research, Innovation and Vision for
the Future, 2008. RIVF 2008. IEEE International
Conference on, pages 247?254. IEEE.
Borislav Popov, Atanas Kiryakov, Angel Kirilov, Dimi-
tar Manov, Damyan Ognyanoff, and Miroslav Gora-
nov. 2003. KIM ? Semantic annotation platform.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 834?849.
Michael Strube and Simone Paolo Ponzetto. 2006.
WikiRelate! Computing Semantic Relatedness Us-
ing Wikipedia. In AAAI, volume 6, pages 1419?
1424.
TAC-KBP. 2012. Proposed Task Description for
Knowledge-Base Population at TAC 2012. In Pro-
ceedings of TAC-KBP 2012. National Institute of
Standards and Technology.
481
