Software Engineering, Testing, and Quality Assurance for Natural Language Processing, pages 66?67,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Buckwalter-based Lookup Tool as Language Resource
for Arabic Language Learners
Jeffrey Micher Clare R. Voss
Multilingual Computing Branch Multilingual Computing Branch
Army Research Laboratory Army Research Laboratory
Adelphi, MD 20783 USA Adelphi, MD 20783 USA
jmicher@arl.army.mil voss@arl.army.mil
     The morphology of the Arabic language is rich
and complex; words are inflected to express varia-
tions in tense-aspect, person, number, and gender,
while they may also appear with clitics attached to
express possession on nouns, objects on verbs and
prepositions, and conjunctions. Furthermore, Ara-
bic script allows the omission of short vowel dia-
critics. For the Arabic language learner trying to
understand non-diacritized text, the challenge
when reading new vocabulary is first to isolate in-
dividual words within text tokens and then to de-
termine the underlying lemma and root forms to
look up the word in an Arabic dictionary.
     Buckwalter (2005)?s morphological analyzer
(BMA) provides an exhaustive enumeration of the
possible internal structures for individual Arabic
strings in XML, spelling out all possible vocaliza-
tions (diacritics added back in), parts of speech on
each token identified within the string, lemma ids,
and English glosses for each tokenized substring.
     The version of our Buckwalter-based Lookup
Tool (BBLT) that we describe in this poster pro-
vides an interactive interface for language learners
to copy and paste, or type in, single or multiple
Arabic strings for analysis by BMA (see Fig. 1)
Figure 1.  BBLT Input Screen
     We originally developed BBLT for ourselves as
machine translation (MT) developers and evaluat-
ors, to rapidly see the meanings of Arabic strings
that were not being translated by our Arabic-
English (MT) engines (Voss et al 2006), while we
were also testing synonym lookup capabilities in
Arabic WordNet tool (Elkateb et al 2006). While
BBLT allows users to see the ?raw? BMA XML
(see Fig. 2), the look-up capability that sorts the
entries by distinct lemma and presents by English
gloss has proved the most useful to English-
speaking users who cannot simply lookup Arabic
words in the Hans Wehr dictionary (considered the
most complete source of Arabic words with about
13,000 entries, but requires the user to be able to
?know? the underlying form to search for).
Figure 2.  BBLT Output for single token with option
 ?meanings with clitics and person inflections? on
The BBLT user can opt to see the glosses with or
without the clitics or inflections, with their
diacritized forms either transliterated or rewritten
66
Figure 3.  BBLT Output for single token with additional
option ?Buckwalter encoded vocalizations? on
in Arabic script (see Fig. 3) or in full table form for
full sentence glossing (see Fig. 4).
The web application is written as a Java webapp
to be run in a tomcat web server. It makes use of
wevlets written as both standalone sevlets, ex-
tending HttpServlet, and .jsp pages. One servlet
handles running BMA as a socket-server process
and another servlet handles request from the input
.jsp page, retrieves the raw output from the former,
process the output according to input page pa-
rameters, and redirects the output to the appropri-
ate .jsp page for display.
References
Buckwalter Arabic Morphological Analyzer (BAMA),
Version 2.0, LDC Catalog number LDC2004L02,
www.ldc.upenn.edu/Catalog.
Buckwalter,T. (2005) www.qamus.org/morphology.htm
Elkateb, S., Black, W., Rodriguez, H, Alkhalifa, M.,
Vossen, P., Pease, A. and Fellbaum, C., (2006).
Building a WordNet for Arabic, in Proceedings of
The fifth international conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC 2006).
Voss, C., J. Micher, J. Laoudi, C. Tate (2006) ?Ongoing
Machine Translation Evaluation at ARL,? Presenta-
tion, In Proceedings of the NIST Machine Transla-
tion Workshop, Washington, DC.
Wehr, Hans (1979) Arabic-English Dictionary:: The
Hans Wehr Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic.
Edited by J. M. Cowan. 4th ed..Wiesbaden, Harras-
sowitz.
Figure 4.  BBLT Output for Full Sentence with option ?meanings with clitics & person inflections?
67
