Synset Assignment for Bi-lingual Dictionary with Limited Resource 
 
       Virach Sornlertlamvanich  
Thatsanee Charoenporn  
Chumpol Mokarat 
Thai Computational Linguistics Lab.  
NICT Asia Research Center, 
Thailand Science Park,  
Pathumthani, Thailand 
{virach,thatsanee,chumpol}@tcllab.org 
Hitoshi Isahara 
National Institute of Information 
and Communications Technology 
3-5 Hikaridai, Seika-cho, soraku-gaun, 
Kyoto, Japan 619-0289 
isahara@nict.go.jp 
 
Hammam Riza  
IPTEKNET, Agency for the Assess-
ment and Application of Technology,     
Jakarta Pusat 10340, Indonesia  
hammam@iptek.net.id 
 
Purev Jaimai  
Center for Research on Language 
Processing, National University of 
Mongolia, Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia  
purev@num.edu.mn 
 
Abstract 
This paper explores an automatic WordNet 
synset assignment to the bi-lingual diction-
aries of languages having limited lexicon 
information. Generally, a term in a bi-
lingual dictionary is provided with very 
limited information such as part-of-speech, 
a set of synonyms, and a set of English 
equivalents. This type of dictionary is 
comparatively reliable and can be found in 
an electronic form from various publishers. 
In this paper, we propose an algorithm for 
applying a set of criteria to assign a synset 
with an appropriate degree of confidence to 
the existing bi-lingual dictionary. We show 
the efficiency in nominating the synset 
candidate by using the most common lexi-
cal information. The algorithm is evaluated 
against the implementation of Thai-
English, Indonesian-English, and Mongo-
lian-English bi-lingual dictionaries. The 
experiment also shows the effectiveness of 
using the same type of dictionary from dif-
ferent sources.  
1 Introduction 
The Princeton WordNet (PWN) (Fellbaum, 1998) 
is one of the most semantically rich English lexical 
databases that are widely used as a lexical knowl-
edge resource in many research and development 
topics. The database is divided by part of speech 
into noun, verb, adjective and adverb, organized in 
sets of synonyms, called synset, each of which 
represents ?meaning? of the word entry.  
Though WordNet was already used as a starting 
resource for developing many language WordNets, 
the construction of the WordNet for any languages 
can be varied according to the availability of the 
language resources. Some were developed from 
scratch, and some were developed from the combi-
nation of various existing lexical resources. Span-
ish and Catalan WordNets, for instance, are auto-
matically constructed using hyponym relation, 
monolingual dictionary, bilingual dictionary and 
taxonomy (Atserias et al, 1997). Italian WordNet 
(Magnini et al, 1994) is semi-automatically con-
structed from definition in monolingual dictionary, 
bilingual dictionary, and WordNet glosses. Hun-
garian WordNet uses bilingual dictionary, mono-
lingual explanatory dictionary, and Hungarian the-
saurus in the construction (Proszeky et al, 2002), 
etc. 
673
This paper presents a new method particularly to 
facilitate the WordNet construction by using the 
existing resources having only English equivalents 
and the lexical synonyms. Our proposed criteria 
and algorithm for application are evaluated by im-
plementing to Asian languages which occupy quite 
different language phenomena in terms of gram-
mars and word unit. 
To evaluate our criteria and algorithm, we use 
the PWN version 2.1 containing 207,010 senses 
classified into adjective, adverb, verb, and noun. 
The basic building block is a ?synset? which is 
essentially a context-sensitive grouping of syno-
nyms which are linked by various types of relation 
such as hyponym, hypernymy, meronymy, anto-
nym, attributes, and modification. Our approach is 
conducted to assign a synset to a lexical entry by 
considering its English equivalent and lexical 
synonyms. The degree of reliability of the assign-
ment is defined in terms of confidence score (CS) 
based on our assumption of the membership of the 
English equivalent in the synset. A dictionary from 
different source is also a reliable source to increase 
the accuracy of the assignment because it can ful-
fill the thoroughness of the list of English equiva-
lent and the lexical synonyms. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: 
Section 2 describes our criteria for synset assign-
ment. Section 3 provides the results of the experi-
ments and error analysis on Thai, Indonesian, and 
Mongolian. Section 4 evaluates the accuracy of the 
assignment result, and the effectiveness of the 
complimentary use of a dictionary from different 
sources. Section 5 shows a collaborative interface 
for revising the result of synset assignment. And 
Section 6 concludes our work. 
2 Synset Assignment 
A set of synonyms determines the meaning of a 
concept. Under the situation of limited resources 
on a language, English equivalent word in a bi-
lingual dictionary is a crucial key to find an 
appropriate synset for the entry word in question. 
The synset assignment criteria described in this 
Section relies on the information of English 
equivalent and synonym of a lexical entry, which 
is most commonly encoded in a bi-lingual 
dictionary. 
Synset Assignment Criteria 
Applying the nature of WordNet which introduces 
a set of synonyms to define the concept, we set up 
four criteria for assigning a synset to a lexical entry. 
The confidence score (CS) is introduced to 
annotate the likelihood of the assignment. The 
highest score, CS=4, is assigned to the synset that 
is evident to include more than one English 
equivalent of the lexical entry in question. On the 
contrary, the lowest score, CS=1, is assigned to 
any synset that occupies only one of the English 
equivalents of the lexical entry in question when 
multiple English equivalents exist. 
The details of assignment criteria are elaborated 
as in the followings. Li denotes the lexical entry, Ej 
denotes the English equivalent, Sk denotes the syn-
set, and ? denotes the member of a set: 
Case 1: Accept the synset that includes more 
than one English equivalent with confidence score 
of 4. 
Figure 1 simulates that a lexical entry L0 has two 
English equivalents of E0 and E1. Both E0 and E1 
are included in a synset of S1. The criterion implies 
that both E0 and E1 are the synset for L0 which can 
be defined by a greater set of synonyms in S1. 
Therefore the relatively high confidence score, 
CS=4, is assigned for this synset to the lexical en-
try. 
 
Figure 1. Synset assignment with SC=4 
Example: 
L0:  
E0: aim  E1: target 
S0: purpose, intent, intention, aim, design 
S1: aim, object, objective, target 
S2: aim 
In the above example, the synset, S1, is assigned 
to the lexical entry, L0, with CS=4. 
Case 2: Accept the synset that includes more 
than one English equivalent of the synonym of the 
lexical entry in question with confidence score of 3.  
In case that Case 1 fails in finding a synset that 
includes more than one English equivalent, the 
English equivalent of a synonym of the lexical en-
try is picked up to investigate. 
L0 
E0 
S0 ?
 
S1 
?
 
E1 
?
 
S2 
?
 
674
 Figure 2. Synset assignment with SC=3 
Figure 2 simulates that an English equivalent of 
a lexical entry L0 and its synonym L1 are included 
in a synset S1. In this case the synset S1 is assigned 
to both L0 and L1 with CS=3. The score in this case 
is lower than the one assigned in Case 1 because 
the synonym of the English equivalent of the lexi-
cal entry is indirectly implied from the English 
equivalent of the synonym of the lexical entry. The 
newly retrieved English equivalent may not be dis-
torted. 
Example: 
L0: 	
  L1: 
 
E0: stare  E1: gaze 
S0: gaze, stare S1: stare 
In the above example, the synset, S0, is assigned 
to the lexical entry, L0, with CS=3. 
Case 3: Accept the only synset that includes the 
only one English equivalent with confidence score 
of 2. 
 
Figure 3. Synset assignment with SC=2 
Figure 3 simulates the assignment of CS-2 when 
there is only one English equivalent and there is no 
synonym of the lexical entry. Though there is no 
any English equivalent to increase the reliability of 
the assignment, in the same time there is no 
synonym of the lexical entry to distort the relation. 
In this case, the only one English equivalent shows 
it uniqueness in the translation that can maintain a 
degree of the confidence. 
Example: 
L0:           E0: obstetrician     
S0: obstetrician, accoucheur 
In the above example, the synset, S0, is assigned 
to the lexical entry, L0, with CS=2. 
Case 4: Accept more than one synset that in-
cludes each of the English Equivalent with confi-
dence score of 1. 
Case 4 is the most relax rule to provide some re-
lation information between the lexical entry and a 
synset. Figure 4 simulates the assignment of CS=1 
to any relations that do not meet the previous crite-
ria but the synsets that include one of the English 
equivalent of the lexical entry. 
 
Figure 4. Synset assignment with SC=1 
Example: 
L0: 
 
E0: hole  E1: canal 
S0: hole, hollow   
S1: hole, trap, cakehole, maw, yap, gop 
S2: canal, duct, epithelial duct, channel 
In the above example, each synset, S0, S1, and S2 
is assigned to lexical entry L0, with CS=1. 
3 Experiment results 
We applied the synset assignment criteria to a 
Thai-English dictionary (MMT dictionary) (CICC, 
1995) with the synset from WordNet 2.1. To com-
pare the ratio of assignment for Thai-English dic-
tionary, we also investigate the synset assignment 
of Indonesian-English and Mongolian-English dic-
tionaries. 
 WordNet (synset) T-E Dict (entry) 
 total assigned total assigned 
Noun 145,103 18,353 (13%) 43,072
11,867 
(28%)
Verb 24,884 1,333 (5%) 17,669
2,298 
(13%)
Adjective 31,302 4,034 (13%) 18,448
3,722 
(20%)
Adverb 5,721 737 (13%) 3,008
1,519 
(51%)
total 207,010 24,457 (12%) 82,197
19,406 
(24%)
Table 1. Synset assignment to T-E dictionary 
In our experiment, there are only 24,457 synsets 
from 207,010 synsets, which is 12% of the total 
number of the synset that can be assigned to Thai 
lexical entries. Table 1 shows the successful rate in 
assigning synset to Thai-English dictionary. About 
24 % of Thai lexical entries are found with the 
English equivalents that meet one of our criteria.  
Going through the list of unmapped lexical en-
try, we can classify the errors into three groups:- 
1. Compound 
The English equivalent is assigned in a com-
L0 E0 
S0 ?
 
S1 
?
 
E1 
?
 
S2 
?
 
L1 
L0 E0 S0 
?
 
L0 
E0 
S0 ?
 
S1 
?
 
E1 
S2 
?
 
675
pound, especially in case that there is no an 
appropriate translation to represent exactly 
the same sense. For example, 
L: 		Enhanced Tools for Online Collaborative Language Resource  
Development 
Virach Sornlertlamvanich  
Thatsanee Charoenporn  
Suphanut Thayaboon 
Chumpol Mokarat 
Thai Computational Linguistics Lab.  
NICT Asia Research Center, 
Pathumthani, Thailand 
{virach, thatsanee, suphanut,  
chumpol}@tcllab.org 
Hitoshi Isahara 
National Institute of Information 
and Communications Technology 
3-5 Hikaridai, Seika-cho, soraku-gaun, 
Kyoto, Japan 619-0289 
isahara@nict.go.jp 
 
Abstract 
This paper reports our recent work of tool 
development for language resource con-
struction. To make a revision of Asian 
WordNet which is automatically generated 
by using the existing English translation 
dictionary, we propose an online collabora-
tive tool which can organize multiple trans-
lations. To support the work of syntactic 
dependency tree annotation, we develop an 
editing suite which integrates the utilities 
for word segmentation, POS tagging and 
dependency tree into a sequence of editing. 
1 Introduction 
Though WordNet was already used as a starting 
resource for developing many language WordNets, 
the constructions of the WordNet for languages 
can be varied according to the availability of the 
language resources. Some were developed from 
scratch, and some were developed from the combi-
nation of various existing lexical resources. 
This paper presents an online collaborative tool 
particularly to facilitate the construction of the 
Asian WordNet which is automatically generated 
by using the existing resources having only Eng-
lish equivalents and the lexical synonyms. 
In addition, to support the work of syntactic de-
pendency tree annotation, we develop an editing 
suite which integrates the utilities for word seg-
mentation, POS tagging and dependency tree. The 
tool is organized in 4 steps, namely, sentence se-
lection, word segmentation, POS tagging, and syn-
tactic dependency tree annotation. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: 
Section 2 describes the collaborative interface for 
revising the result of synset translation. Section 3 
describes the tool for annotating Thai syntactic 
dependency tree corpus. And, Section 4 concludes 
our work. 
2 Collaborative Tools for Asian WordNet 
Construction 
There are some efforts in developing Wordnets for 
some of Asian languages, e.g. Chinese, Japanese, 
Korean, and Hindi. The number of languages that 
have been successfully developed their Wordnets 
is still limited to some active research in the area. 
However, the extensive development of Wordnet 
in other languages is of the efforts to support the 
NLP research and implementation. It is not only to 
facilitate the implementation of NLP applications 
for the language, but also provide an inter-linkage 
among the Wordnets for different languages to de-
velop multi-lingual applications. 
We adopt the proposed criteria for automatic 
synset assignment for Asian languages which has 
limited language resources. Based on the result 
from the above synset assignment algorithm, we 
introduce KUI (Knowledge Unifying Initiator), 
(Sornlertlamvanich et al, 2007) to establish an 
online collaborative work in refining the WorNets. 
KUI is a community software tool which allows 
registered members including language experts to 
revise and vote for the synset assignment. The sys-
tem manages the synset assignment according to 
the preferred score obtained from the revision 
process. As a result, the community-based Word-
Nets will be accomplished and exported into the 
original form of WordNet database. Via the synset 
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
105
ID assigned in the WordNet, the system can gener-
ate a cross language WordNet. Through this effort, 
a translated version of Asian WordNet can be es-
tablished. 
Table 1 shows a record of WordNet displayed 
for translation in KUI interface. English entry to-
gether with its part-of-speech, synset, and gloss are 
provided if exists. The members will examine the 
assigned lexical entry and decide whether to vote 
for it or propose a new translation. 
Car 
[Options] 
POS : NOUN 
Synset : auto, automobile, machine, motorcar 
Gloss : a motor vehicle with four wheels; usually propelled 
by an internal combustion engine; 
Table 1. A record for a synset 
 
Figure 1. KUI interface (www.tcllab.org/kui) 
Figure 1 illustrates the translation page of KUI 
In the working area, the login member can partici-
pate in proposing a new translation or voting for 
the preferred translation to revise the synset as-
signment. Statistics of the progress as well as many 
useful functions such as item search, chat, and list 
of online participants are also provided to under-
stand the progress of work and to work online with 
other members. 
3 Tool for Constructing a Syntactic De-
pendency Tree Annotated Corpus 
The tool is organized in 4 steps, namely, sentence 
selection, word segmentation, POS tagging, and 
syntactic dependency tree annotation, shown in 
Figure 2. Sentence segmentation is yet another 
crucial issue for the Thai language. We, however, 
will not discuss about the issue in this work. The 
input is already a list of sentences provided for an-
notator to select. 
 
Figure 2. Syntactic Dependency Tree Annotation 
3.1 POS Annotation 
The result from the automatic word segmentation 
and POS tagging program is generated with alter-
native POSs for revision. A dropdown list of POSs 
is provided for annotator to correct the POS. Since 
word segmentation is processed together with POS 
tagging, the annotator is also provided a GUI to 
merge or to divide the proposed word unit. 
 
3.2 Syntactic Dependency Tree Annotation 
The result from POS annotation in Section 3.1 is 
passed to define the syntactic dependency between 
words. The dependency is assigned to form a 
phrase and a sentence respectively. The final out-
put will be marked in the XML manner and shown 
as a tree for confirmation. 
 
4 Conclusion 
Our current work on the web-based collaborative 
tool for Asian WordNet construction and tool for 
Syntactic Dependency Tree Annotation are devel-
oped as an open platform for online contribution. 
A user-friendly interface and self-organizing utili-
ties are intentionally prepared to support the online 
collaborative work. 
References 
Virach Sornlertlamvanich, Thatsanee Charoenporn, 
Kergit Robkop, and Hitoshi Isahara. 2007. Collabo-
rative Platform for Multilingual Resource Develop-
ment and Intercultural Communication, IWIC2007, 
Springer, LNCS4568:91-102.
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
106
Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 139?144,
Suntec, Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Thai WordNet Construction 
 
 
Sareewan Thoongsup1 
Kergrit Robkop1 
Chumpol Mokarat1 
Tan Sinthurahat1 
1 Thai Computational Linguistics Lab. 
NICT Asia Research Center, Thailand 
{sareewan, kergrit,   
Chumpol, tan, thatsanee, 
virach}@tcllab.org 
Thatsanee Charoenporn 1,2 
Virach Sornlertlamvanich 1,2 
Hitoshi Isahara 3 
2National Electronics and Computer 
Technology Center Thailand, Thailand 
3National Institute of Information and 
Communications Technology, Japan 
isahara@nict.go.jp 
 
  
 
Abstract 
This paper describes semi-automatic construc-
tion of Thai WordNet and the applied method 
for Asian wordNet. Based on the Princeton 
WordNet, we develop a method in generating 
a WordNet by using an existing bi-lingual dic-
tionary. We align the PWN synset to a bi-
lingual dictionary through the English equiva-
lent and its part-of-speech (POS), automati-
cally. Manual translation is also employed af-
ter the alignment. We also develop a web-
based collaborative workbench, called KUI 
(Knowledge Unifying Initiator), for revising 
the result of synset assignment and provide a 
framework to create Asian WordNet via the 
linkage through PWN synset.     
1 Introduction 
The Princeton WordNet (PWN) (Fellbuam, 
1998) is one of the most semantically rich Eng-
lish lexical banks widely used as a resource in 
many research and development. WordNet is a 
great inspiration in the extensive development of 
this kind of lexical database in other languages. 
It is not only an important resource in imple-
menting NLP applications in each language, but 
also in inter-linking WordNets of different lan-
guages to develop multi-lingual applications to 
overcome the language barrier. There are some 
efforts in developing WordNets of some lan-
guages (Atserias and et al, 1997; Vossen, 1997; 
Farrers and et al, 1998; Balkova and et al, 2004; 
Isahara and et al, 2008). But the number of lan-
guages that have been successfully developed  
 
 
 
their WordNets is still limited to some active 
research in this area. This paper, however, is the 
one of that attempt.  
This paper describes semi-automatic construc-
tion of Thai WordNet and the applied method for 
Asian WordNet. Based on the Princeton Word-
Net, we develop a method in generating a 
WordNet by using an existing bi-lingual diction-
ary. We align the PWN synset to a bi-lingual 
dictionary through the English equivalent and its 
part-of-speech (POS), automatically. Manual 
translation is also employed after the alignment. 
We also develop a web-based collaborative 
workbench, called KUI (Knowledge Unifying 
Initiator), for revising the result of synset as-
signment and provide a framework to create 
Asian WordNet via the linkage through PWN 
synset. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: 
Section 2 describes how we construct the Thai 
WordNet, including approaches, methods, and 
some significant language dependent issues ex-
perienced along the construction. Section 3 pro-
vides the information on Asian WordNet con-
struction and progress. And Section 4 concludes 
our work.  
2 Thai WordNet Construction Proce-
dure 
Different approaches and methods have been 
applied in constructing WordNet of many lan-
guages according to the existing lexical re-
sources. This section describes how Thai Word-
Net is constructed either approach or method. 
139
2.1 Approaches 
To build language WordNet from scratch, two 
approaches were brought up into the discussion: 
the merge approach and the expand approach.  
The merge approach is to build the taxonomies 
of the language; synsets and relations, and then 
map to the PWN by using the English equivalent 
words from existing bilingual dictionaries.  
The expand approach is to map or translate lo-
cal words directly to the PWN's synsets by using 
the existing bilingual dictionaries. 
Employing the merge approach, for Thai as an 
example, we will completely get synsets and re-
lations for the Thai language. But it is time and 
budget consuming task and require a lot of 
skilled lexicographers as well, while less time 
and budget is used when employing the expand 
approach to get a translated version of WordNet. 
But some particular Thai concepts which do not 
occur in PWN will not exist in this lexicon. 
Comparing between these two approaches, the 
Thai WordNet construction intended to follow 
the expand approach by this following reasons; 
 
z Many languages have developed their 
own WordNet using the PWN as a 
model, so we can link Thai lexical data-
base to those languages.  
z The interface for collaboration for other 
languages can be easily developed. 
2.2 Methods 
As presented above, we follow the expand ap-
proach to construct the Thai WordNet by trans-
lating the synsets in the PWN to the Thai lan-
guage. Both automatic and manual methods are 
applied in the process.  
2.2.1 Automatic Synset Alignment  
Following the objective to translate the PWN to 
Thai, we attempted to use the existing lexical 
resources to facilitate the construction. We pro-
posed an automatic method to assign an appro-
priate synset to a lexical entry by considering its 
English equivalent and lexical synonyms which 
are most commonly encoded in a bi-lingual dic-
tionary. (Charoenporn 2008; Sornlertlamvanich, 
2008).    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 WordNet (synset) TE Dict (entry)
 total Assigned total assigned 
Noun 145,103 18,353 
(13%) 
43,072 11,867 
(28%)
Verb 24,884 1,333 
(5%) 
17,669 2,298 
(13%)
Adjective 31,302 4,034 
(13%) 
18,448 3,722 
(20%)
Adverb 5,721 737 
(13%) 
3,008 1,519 
(51%)
Total 207,010 24,457 
(12%) 
82,197 19,406 
(24%)
 
Table 1. Synset assignment to entries in 
Thai-English dictionary 
 
For the result, there is only 12% of the total 
number of the synsets that were able to be as-
signed to Thai lexical entries. And about 24% of 
Thai lexical entries were found with the English 
equivalents that meet one of our criteria. Table 1 
shows the successful rate in assigning synsets to 
the lexical entry in the Thai-English Dictionary.  
Considering the list of unmapped lexical entry, 
the errors can be classified into three groups, as 
the following. 
1. The English equivalent is assigned in a 
compound, especially in case that there 
is no an appropriate translation to repre-
sent exactly the same sense. For exam-
ple, 
L: ??????????? raan3-khaa3-pleek1 
E: retail shop 
2. Some particular words culturally used I 
one language may not be simply trans-
lated into one single word sense in Eng-
lish. In this case, we found it explained 
in a phrase. For example,  
L: ???????? kan0-jeak1 
E: bouquet worn over the ear  
3. Inflected forms i.e. plural, past partici-
ple, are used to express an appropriate 
sense of a lexical entry. This can be 
found in non-inflection languages such 
as Thai and most of Asian languages, 
For example,  
L: ???????? raaw3-ra0-thom0 
E: greived 
By using this method, a little part of PWN has 
been translated into Thai. About 88% of the total 
number of the synsets still cannot be assigned.   
Manual step is therefore applied.   
140
2.2.2 Manual Construction 
Human translation is our next step for synset 
translation. Two important issues were taken into 
discussion, when starting the translation process.  
Those are; 
? How to assign or translate new concepts 
that still do not occur in the Thai lexicon. 
Compound word or phrase is acceptable 
or not. 
? Which equivalent do we need to consider, 
synset-to-synset equivalent or word-to-
word equivalent? 
For the first issue, we actually intend to trans-
late the PWN synsets into single Thai word only. 
But problems occurred when we faced with con-
cept that has not its equivalent word. For exam-
ple, 
  
filly#1 -- (a young female horse under the age 
of four) 
colt2#1 ? (a young male horse under the age 
of four) 
hog2#2, hogget#1, hogg#2 ? (a sheep up to 
the age of one year: one yet to be sheared) 
 
There is not any word that conveys the mean-
ing of the above concepts. That is because of the 
difference of the culture. In this case, phrase or 
compound word will be introduced to use as the 
equivalent word of the concept. This phenome-
non always occurs with cultural dependent con-
cept, technical terms and new concepts.  
As for the second issue, considering between 
(1) synset-to-synset equivalent assignment or (2) 
word-to-word equivalent assignment has to be 
discussed. Let consider the following concept of 
?dog? in the PWN. 
 
dog#1, domestic dog#1, Canis familiaris#1 -- 
(a member of the genus Canis (probably de-
scended from the common wolf) that has been 
domesticated by man since prehistoric times; 
occurs in many breeds; "the dog barked all 
night")  
 
The above synset consists of three words; dog, 
domestic dog, and Canis familiaris. The set of 
Thai synonyms that is equivalent to this English 
synset is the following. 
 
Thai synset of ?dog? 
{T1 ??? maa4 ?dog? (normal word),  
  T2 ????? su1-nak3 ?dog? (polite word),  
  T3 ????????? su1-nak3-baan0 ?domestic dog?,  
  T4 ????? ??????????? kha0-nis3-fae0-mi0-lia0-ris3 
?Canis familiaris?} 
These words have the same concepts but are 
different in usage. How do we choose the right 
Thai word for the right equivalent English word? 
It is a crucial problem. In the paragraph below, 
three English words which represent the concept 
?dog? are used in the different context and can-
not be interchanged. Similarly, T1, T2 and T3 
cannot be used substitutionally. Because it con-
veys different meaning. Therefore, word-to-word 
is our solution.   
 
?...Dog usually means the domestic dog, 
Canis lupus familiaris (or "Canis familiaris" in 
binomial nomenclature)....? 
 
Dog  T1 ??? maa4 ?dog?,  
T2 ????? su1-nak3 ?dog?   
Domestic dog  T3 ????????? 
su1-nak4-baan0  
?domestic dog? 
Canis familiaris T4 ????? ???????????  
kha0-nis3-fae0-mi0-
lia0-ris3 
?Canis familiaris? 
 
    Consequently, word-to-word equivalent is 
very useful for choosing the right synonyms with 
the right context. 
     In conclusion, the main principle for the Eng-
lish to Thai translation includes 
(1) ?Single word? is lexicalized the existence 
of concepts in Thai.  
(2) ?Compound? or ?Phrase? is represented 
some concepts that are not lexicalized in 
Thai. 
(3) Synset-to-synset equivalent is used for 
finding Thai synset that is compatible 
with PWN synset. 
(4) Word-to-word equivalent is used for find-
ing the right Thai word that is compatible 
with PWN word in each synset.  
2.3 Language Issues  
This section describes some significant charac-
teristics of Thai that we have to consider care-
fully during the translation process.    
 
141
2.3.1 Out of concepts in PWN 
There are some Thai words/concepts that do not 
exist in the PWN, especially cultural-related 
words. This is the major problem we have to 
solve during the translation.  
One of our future plans is to add synsets that 
do not exist into the PWN.  
2.3.2 Concept differentiation 
Some concepts in the PWN are not equal to Thai 
concepts. For example, a synset {appear, come 
out} represents one concept ?be issued or pub-
lished? in English, but meanwhile, it represents 
two concepts in Thai, the concept of printed mat-
ter, and the concept of film or movie, respec-
tively.   
2.3.3 Concept Structure differentiation 
In some cases, the level of the concept relation 
between English and Thai is not equal. For ex-
ample, {hair} in the PWN represents a concept 
of ?a covering for the body (or parts of it) con-
sisting of a dense growth of threadlike structures 
(as on the human head); helps to prevent heat 
loss; ?? but in Thai, it is divided into two con-
cepts;  
 
T1 ?? khon4 ?hair? 
= ?hair? that cover the body  
T2 ?? phom4 ?hair? 
= ?hair? that cover on the human head  
 
This shows the nonequivalent of concept. 
Moreover, it also differs in the relation of con-
cept. In PWN ?hair? is a more general concept 
and ?body hair? is more specific concepts. But in 
Thai T1 ?? khon4 ?hair? (hair that covers the 
body) is more general concept and T2 ?? phom5 
?hair? (hair that covers on the human head) is 
more specific one.  
2.3.4 Grammar and usage differentiation  
? Part of speech  
? ?Classifier? is one of Thai POS 
which indicates the semantic 
class to which an item belongs. 
It's widely use in quantitative 
expression. For example, ??? 
knon? used with 'person', ????? 
lang? used with house. 
? Some adjectives in English, such 
as ?beautiful?, 'red' and so on can 
function as the adjective and at-
tribute verb in Thai.  
? Social factors determining language us-
age 
? In Thai, some social factors, 
such as social status, age, or sex 
play an important role to deter-
mine the usage of language. For 
example, these following three 
words ??? kin0, ??? chan4 and ???? 
sa0-waey4, having the same 
meaning ?eat?, are used for dif-
ferent social status of the listener 
or referent. These words cannot 
be grouped in the same synset 
because of their usage. 
3 From Thai to Asian WordNet  
AWN, or Asian WordNet, is the result of the col-
laborative effort in creating an interconnected 
WordNet for Asian languages. Starting with the 
automatic synset assignment as shown in section 
2, we provide KUI (Knowledge Unifying Initia-
tor) (Sornlertlamvanich, 2006), (Sornlertlam-
vanich et al, 2007) to establish an online col-
laborative work in refining the WorNets. KUI is 
community software which allows registered 
members including language experts revise and 
vote for the synset assignment. The system man-
ages the synset assignment according to the pre-
ferred score obtained from the revision process. 
As a result, the community WordNets will be 
accomplished and exported into the original form 
of WordNet database. Via the synset ID assigned 
in the WordNet, the system can generate a cross 
language WordNet result. Through this effort, an 
initial version of Asian WordNet can be fulfilled.  
3.1 Collaboration on Asian WordNet 
Followings are our pilot partners in putting 
things together to make KUI work for AWN. 
? Thai Computational Linguistics Labora-
tory TCL), Thailand  
? National Institute of Information and 
Communications Technology (NICT), 
Japan  
? National Electronics and Computer Tech-
nology Center (NECTEC), Thailand 
? Agency for the Assessment and Applica-
tion of Technology (BPPT), Indonesia 
142
? National University of Mongolia (NUM), 
Mongolia 
? Myanmar Computer Federation (MCF), 
Myanmar 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Collaboration on Asian WordNet 
 
3.2 How words are linked 
In our language WordNet construction, lexical 
entry of each language will be mapped with the 
PWN via its English equivalent. On the process 
of mapping, a unique ID will be generated for 
every lexical entry which contains unique 
sense_key and synset_offset from PWN. Exam-
ples of the generated ID show in Table 2. When 
a word with a unique ID is translated into any 
language, the same unique ID will be attached to 
that word automatically. By this way, the lexicon 
entry in the community can be linked to the each 
other using this unique ID.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2. Examples of the unique index with 
sense_key and synset_offset 
3.3 Progress on Thai WordNet and Asian 
WordNet 
This section presents the progress on Asian 
WordNet and Thai WordNet construction. 
3.3.1 Current Asian WordNet 
At present, there are ten Asian languages in the 
community. The amount of the translated synsets 
has been continuously increased. The current 
amount is shown in the table 3. As shown in the 
table, for example, 28,735 senses from 117,659 
senses have been translated into Thai. 
 
Language Synset (s) % of total 
117,659 
senses 
Thai 28,735 24.422 
Korean 23,411 19.897 
Japanese 21,810 18.537 
Myanmar 5,701 4.845 
Vietnamese 3,710 3.153 
Indonesian 3,522 2.993 
Bengali 584 0.496 
Mongolian 424 0.360 
Nepali 13 0.011 
Sudanese 11 0.009 
Assamese 2 0.008 
Khmer 2 0.002 
 
Table 3. Amount of senses translated in  
each language 
3.3.2 Sense Sharing 
Table 4 shows the amount of senses that have 
been conjointly translated in the group of lan-
guage. For example, there are 6 languages that 
found of the same 540 senses.   
 
Language Sense (s) %  
1-Language 27,413 55.598 
2-Language 11,769 23.869 
3-Language 5,903 11.972 
4-Language 2,501 5.072 
5-Language 1,120 2.272 
6-Language 540 1.095 
7-Language 53 0.107 
8-Language 4 0.008 
9-Language 2 0.004 
10-Language 1 0.002 
Total 49,306 100.000 
 
Table 4. Amount of senses translated  
in each language 
3.3.3 Amount of Words in Thai synsets  
From the synset in Thai WordNet, there are the 
minimum of one word (W1) in a synset and the 
maximum of six words (W6) in a synset. The 
percentage shown in Table 5 presents that 
89.78% of Thai synset contain only one word.  
 
 
 
 
143
Amount of word 
in Thai Synset 
Sense (s) %  
W1 19,164 89.78 
W2 1,930 9.04 
W3 211 0.99 
W4 27 0.13  
W5 4 0.02 
W6 8 0.04 
Total 21,344 100.00 
 
Table 5. Amount of Word in Thai synsets 
4 Conclusion  
In this paper we have described the methods of 
Thai WordNet construction. The semi-auto 
alignment method constructed the database by 
using the electronic bilingual dictionary. The 
manual method has constructed by experts and 
the collaborative builders who works on the web 
interface at www.asianwordnet.org.  
References  
Christiane Fellbuam. (ed.). 1998. WordNet: An 
Electronic Lexical Database. MIT Press, 
Cambridge, Mass. 
Xavier Farreres, German Rigau and Horacio 
Rodriguez. 1998. Using WordNet for building 
WordNets. In: Proceedings of the COL-
ING/ACL Workshop on Usage of WordNet in 
Natural Language Processing Systems, Mont-
real. 
Hitoshi Isahara, Francis Bond, Kiyotaka Uchi-
moto, Masao Utiyama and Kyoko Kanzaki. 
2008. Development of the Japanese WordNet. 
In LREC-2008, Marrakech. 
Jordi Atserias, Salvador Climent, Xavier Far-
reres, German Rigau and Horacio Rodriguez. 
1997. Combinding multiple Methods for the 
automatic Construction of Multilingual 
WordNets. In proceedings of International 
Conference ?Recent Advances in Natural 
Language Processing? (RANLP?97). Tzigov 
Chark, Bulgaria. 
Piek Vossen, 1997. EuroWordNet: a multilingual 
database for information retrieval. In proceed-
ings of DELOS workshop on Cross-language 
Information Retrieval, March 5-7, 1997, Zu-
rich. 
Thatsanee Charoenporn, Virach Sornlertlam-
vanich, Chumpol Mokarat, and Hitoshi Isa-
hara. 2008. Semi-automatic Compilation of 
Asian WordNet, In proceedings of the 14th 
NLP2008, University of Tokyo, Komaba 
Campus, Japan, March 18-20, 2008. 
Valenina Balkova, Andrey Suhonogov, Sergey  
Yablonsky. 2004. Rusian WordNet: From 
UML-notation to Internet/Infranet Database 
Implementation. In Porceedings of the Second 
International WordNet Conference (GWC 
2004), pp.31-38. 
Virach Sornlertlamvanich, Thatsanee Charoen-
porn, Chumpol Mokarat, Hitoshi Isahara, 
Hammam Riza, and Purev Jaimai. 2008. 
Synset Assignment for Bi-lingual Dictionary 
with Limited Resource. In proceedings of the 
Third International Joint Conference on Natu-
ral Language Processing (IJCNLP2008), Hy-
derabad, India, January 7-12, 2008. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
144
