Coling 2008: Companion volume ? Posters and Demonstrations, pages 71?74
Manchester, August 2008
Quantification and Implication in Semantic Calendar Expressions
Represented with Finite-State Transducers
Jyrki Niemi and Kimmo Koskenniemi
Department of General Linguistics, University of Helsinki
PO Box 9, FI?00014 University of Helsinki, Finland
{jyrki.niemi, kimmo.koskenniemi}@helsinki.fi
Abstract
This paper elaborates a model for rep-
resenting semantic calendar expressions
(SCEs), which correspond to the inten-
sional meanings of natural-language calen-
dar phrases. The model uses finite-state
transducers (FSTs) to mark denoted peri-
ods of time on a set of timelines repre-
sented as a finite-state automaton (FSA).
We present a treatment of SCEs corre-
sponding to quantified phrases (any Mon-
day; every May) and an implication oper-
ation for requiring the denotation of one
SCE to contain completely that of another.
1 Introduction
This paper elaborates the temporal representation
model proposed in Niemi and Koskenniemi (2007)
and developed in Niemi and Koskenniemi (2008).
This bracketing FST model covers temporal infor-
mation ranging from simple dates to such mean-
ings as 6?8 pm on every Monday in April, except
on Easter Monday. The model represents seman-
tic calendar expressions (SCEs) using finite-state
transducers (FSTs) that bracket periods of time on
timelines represented as a finite-state automaton
(FSA). Motivations for a finite-state representation
include an efficient treatment of periodicity and
certain kinds of sparse sets of sets common in cal-
endar information, as well as a well-known theory.
In this paper, we treat SCEs corresponding to
quantified calendar phrases, such as any Monday
and every May. We also present implication for
representing such cases as a course with compul-
sory attendance, whose all class times should co-
incide with the free slots of time of a student.
c
? 2008. Licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported li-
cense (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/).
Some rights reserved.
2 Semantic Calendar Expressions (SCEs)
and the Bracketing FST Model
We use the semi-formal SCEs as the basic repre-
sentation. An SCE typically corresponds to the
disambiguated intensional meaning of a natural-
language calendar phrase. An SCE may denote ei-
ther a specific period of time or a set of periods.
An SCE is compiled to a sequence of bracketing
FSTs through regular (relation) expressions.
Table 1 lists some implemented SCE constructs
and the corresponding calendar phrases. Most con-
structs can be combined with each other.
Construct SCE example; calendar phrase
calendar period may; fri; calday
May; Friday; (calendar) day
list (union) union (mon, fri, sun)
Monday, Friday and Sunday
common part
(intersection)
intersect (aug, y2008)
August 2008
interval interval (may, jun)
May to June
anchored nth_following (3, mon, easter)
the third Monday after Easter
quantified any_n (1, mon)
any (single) Monday
Table 1: Examples of SCE constructs and the cor-
responding calendar phrases
The bracketing FST model represents the deno-
tations of an SCE as an acyclic timeline FSA defin-
ing a finite timeline string for each alternative de-
notation.1 A basic timeline FSA defines a single
timeline consisting of brackets and labels for cal-
endar periods, with no denotations marked. The
following is a (simplified) timeline for the year
2008 at month level (spaces separate symbols):
1Timeline FSAs are equivalent to the timeline FSTs of
Niemi and Koskenniemi (2008).
71
[y y2008 [m Jan ]m [m Feb ]m . . . [m Dec ]m ]y
To represent the denotation of an SCE s, a basic
timeline FSA is composed with a bracketing FST
(sequence) representing s. The result is a time-
line FSA with the denotation marked with marker
brackets {in . . . }in. The following timeline corre-
sponds to union (jan, mar) (January and March):
[y y2008 {i3 {i1 [m Jan ]m }i1 }i3 [m Feb ]m {i3 {i2
[m Mar ]m }i2 }i3 [m Apr ]m . . . [m Dec ]m ]y
First, January is marked with i1 and March with i2.
Then the bracketing FST for union marks each pe-
riod i1 and i2 with i3, the denotation of the whole.
3 Representing Quantified SCEs
A natural-language calendar phrase may be un-
quantified, such as Monday, or it may contain dif-
ferent kinds of quantification, such as all Mondays,
any Monday, three Mondays and all Mondays in
some May.2 We treat any Monday, some Monday
and one Monday as meaning any single Monday,
and we equate all Mondays, each Monday and ev-
ery Monday. Numerical quantification can be gen-
eralized to intervals, possibly open-ended, such as
two to five Mondays and at most four Mondays.
3.1 Collective Representation (All)
The meaning all Mondays is represented simply as
the SCE mon, which is represented as a timeline
FSA with each Monday marked on the same time-
line, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (simplified).3 We call
this the collective representation of an SCE.
Su {Mo} Tu Su {Mo} Tu Su {Mo} Tu
Figure 1: A timeline FSA for the SCE mon (all
Mondays); ?{Mo}? denotes a marked Monday
The denotation can be interpreted in several
ways: as the union of all Mondays, as all the parts
of a timeline that are part of a Monday, as the re-
curring ?event? of Monday, or as a disconnected
(non-convex) interval of all Mondays.
3.2 Distributive Representation (Any)
The meaning any Monday is represented as the
SCE any_n (1, mon) and as a timeline FSA with
2All could be regarded as universal quantification, and any
resembles existential quantification, but because of some dif-
ferences, we avoid using these logical terms.
3Each transition in the figures corresponds to a number
of states and transitions between them in the actual timeline
FSA, as the representation of each day consists of the calendar
day brackets, symbols for the day of the week and the day of
the month, and possibly finer granularities inside.
each Monday marked on a separate, alternative
timeline of its own, as illustrated in Fig. 2. We call
this the distributive representation of an SCE.4
Su
{Mo}
Mo Tu Su
{Mo}
Mo Tu Su
{Mo}
Tu Su Mo Tu Su Mo Tu
Figure 2: A timeline FSA representing the SCE
any_n (1, mon) denoting any single Monday
For numerical quantification, we combine col-
lective and distributive representation. For exam-
ple, any_n (3, mon) (three Mondays) is represented
as a timeline FSA defining a set of timelines, each
with three Mondays marked, so that the set covers
all possible combinations. A collective representa-
tion alone would not suffice: a single timeline with
all periods of three Mondays marked would in ef-
fect represent all Mondays.
3.3 Collective Representation as Primary
In natural language, an unquantified calendar
phrase, such as Monday, is typically underspeci-
fied and refers to the closest preceding or follow-
ing Monday relevant in the context. In the brack-
eting FST model, however, we represent unquanti-
fied expressions collectively: the SCE mon repre-
sents both Monday and all Mondays.
A major practical reason for preferring the col-
lective representation is that it is easy to construct
a bracketing FST that splits a single timeline with
each Monday marked to a set of alternative time-
lines, each with only one of the Mondays marked,
whereas the converse operation is not possible. In
effect, a bracketing FST can only refer to symbols
on a single timeline at a time.
A single timeline with all Mondays marked
can also be used as a basis for such an SCE as
nth_following (3, mon, easter) (the third Monday
after Easter). The bracketing FST correspond-
ing to nth_following gets as its input a timeline
with each Monday and each Easter marked. It
then counts the third Monday after each Easter and
marks it. This would be much more difficult with
each Monday marked on a timeline of its own.
3.4 Combining Quantified SCEs
Multiple SCEs with quantification can be com-
bined appropriately. For example, all Mondays in
4We deviate from the common terminology that uses col-
lective for all Mondays and distributive for each Monday.
72
any (single) May is represented by a timeline FSA
defining a set of timelines, each with all Mondays
of a single May marked, and any (single) Monday
in every May by one with a single Monday marked
in each May, covering all possible combinations.
Combinations of quantified SCEs can often be
represented compositionally with intersection. For
example, all Mondays in every May is represented
as intersect (mon, may), all Mondays in any May
as intersect (mon, any_n (1, may)) and any Mon-
day in any May as intersect (any_n (1, mon), any_n
(1, may)).
However, any Monday in every May cannot be
represented simply with intersection, since inter-
secting a set of timelines, each with only one
Monday marked, and a timeline with every May
marked would result in timelines with one Mon-
day marked in (at most) one May. For this case,
we have defined the SCE operation n_within_each
(n, period, frame), which marks n periods within
each frame. Any Monday in every May is then rep-
resented as n_within_each (1, mon, may).
3.5 Other Uses of Distributive Representation
A distributive representation is obligatory for an
SCE denoting possibly overlapping periods of
time, although each alternative timeline may con-
tain several non-overlapping periods.
For example, we represent n_consecutive (3,
calday) (three consecutive days) as a set of time-
lines, each with one possible combination of non-
overlapping periods of three consecutive days
marked.5 If each timeline had only a single period
marked, it would complicate representing such an
SCE as union (intersect (n_consecutive (3, cal-
day), may), intersect (n_consecutive (3, calday),
jun)) (three consecutive days in May and in June)
so that the periods of consecutive days in May and
June are marked on the same timeline. In contrast,
a single timeline with all possible non-overlapping
periods marked would not cover the periods over-
lapping with the marked ones.
A distributive representation is also used for
SCEs containing a distributive union operation to
represent a disjunctive meaning. For example,
distr_union (union (mon, fri), union (tue, sun))
5Since consecutive days are adjacent, they can be enclosed
in marker brackets and treated as a single connected period,
with several periods on a single timeline. In contrast, the mul-
tiple disconnected periods of three consecutive Mondays can-
not be represented in a general way on the same timeline in the
bracketing FST model, but only by having a different marker
bracket index for each period of three Mondays.
(Monday and Friday or Tuesday and Sunday) is
represented as a timeline FSA defining two time-
lines, one with every Monday and Friday marked
and the other with every Tuesday and Sunday.
3.6 Distributive Representation and First
Distributive representation requires special consid-
erations in conjunction with some SCE operations,
most notably nth_within (n, period, frame), which
marks the nth period within each longer period
frame. Although a period might be the nth marked
one within a frame on one timeline, alternative
timelines might contain earlier occurrences.
As an example, we consider nth_within (1,
n_consecutive (3, workday), jun) (the first period
of three consecutive working days in June).6 For
a June beginning on a Sunday, we have alterna-
tive timelines with the first period of three working
days beginning on Monday, Tuesday and Wednes-
day, but we would like to mark only the one be-
ginning on Monday. However, a bracketing FST
cannot refer to the alternative timelines to test if
any of them contains an earlier applicable period.
As a solution, we have such operations as
n_consecutive insert an alternative marker bracket
(denoted by [. . . ] below) on each timeline into each
position in which it adds a marker bracket ({. . . })
on another timeline. The following simplified al-
ternative timelines illustrate the example above:
Su { Mo [ Tu [ We } Th ] Fr ] Sa
Su [ Mo { Tu [ We ] Th } Fr ] Sa
Su [ Mo [ Tu { We ] Th ] Fr } Sa
The operation nth_within seeks the first marked pe-
riod in June with no opening alternative marker
bracket between it and the beginning of June.
4 Implication: All or Nothing
In some applications, an SCE may denote a set of
periods of times all of which should be contained
in those denoted by another SCE, or if impossi-
ble, none of them should be. For example, all the
class times of a course with compulsory attendance
should coincide with the free slots of time in the
calendar of a student wishing to attend the course.
An intersection of the class times and the student?s
free slots of time would also contain partial results
if he or she could attend only some of the classes.
6The SCE nth_within (1, n_consecutive (3, calday), jun)
(the first period of three consecutive (calendar) days in June)
denotes the same as first_n_within (3, calday, jun) (the first
three days in June). A similar rephrasing would not be correct
for working days, however.
73
To obtain the desired result, we use the opera-
tion impl (a, b) to mark all the periods a if and only
if they all are fully contained in the periods b. If a
point of time is in a, it must also be in b for a to
be marked, so the operation can be regarded of as
a kind of an implication a? b. Above, we would
compute impl (course, student_free).
A course with alternative instances would be
represented with a timeline FSA defining an alter-
native timeline for each instance. The bracketing
FST corresponding to the above implication would
then mark the class times of each instance that is
completely within the student?s free slots of time.
5 Related Work
We briefly mention the approaches to quantifica-
tion of some research related to the bracketing
FST model in purpose or coverage. TEL (En-
driss, 1998) represents universally quantified ex-
pressions like unquantified ones. TEL has numer-
ical quantification and quantifier negation. TCNL
(Han and Lavie, 2004) represents universal quan-
tification as an enumeration. An unquantified ex-
pression denotes an underspecified time. Like
TEL, TCNL has no explicit existential quantifica-
tion. Ohlbach and Gabbay (1998) represent uni-
versal quantification with a parametrized modal
operator ?always within a period? and existential
with ?sometime within a period?. Cukierman and
Delgrande (1998) represent quantified expressions
in a way resembling that of ours but unquantified
expressions effectively as existentially quantified.
TimeML (Saur? et al, 2006) represents quantifica-
tion by quantifier and frequency attributes. OWL-
Time (Pan and Hobbs, 2005) uses temporal aggre-
gates for universal and numerical quantification.
6 Discussion and Further Work
In our view, SCEs corresponding to typical quan-
tified calendar phrases can be represented in the
bracketing FST model fairly naturally, although
the naturalness of representing unquantified, un-
derspecified phrases collectively can be disputed,
and the representation of any Monday in every May
is not compositional. Implication, in turn, would
seem useful for representing a set of periods of
time fully contained in another set of periods.
Although some types of calendar information
are impossible to represent exactly or naturally
with finite-state methods, we find the bracketing
FST model a promising representation for many
common types. However, to be usable in practice,
the model needs further work in both coverage and
efficiency. Moreover, applications would benefit
from a component to parse a (restricted) natural-
language calendar phrase to an SCE and another
one to generate the former from the latter.
Acknowledgements
This paper represents independent work by the first
author based on the suggestions of the second au-
thor and funded by the Graduate School of Lan-
guage Technology in Finland. We thank the anony-
mous reviewers for their valuable comments.
References
Cukierman, Diana and James P. Delgrande. 1998.
Expressing time intervals and repetition within a
formalization of calendars. Computational Intelli-
gence, 14(4):563?597.
Endriss, Ulrich. 1998. Semantik zeitlicher Ausdr?cke
in Terminvereinbarungsdialogen. Verbmobil Report
227, Technische Universit?t Berlin, Fachbereich In-
formatik, Berlin, August.
Han, Benjamin and Alon Lavie. 2004. A framework
for resolution of time in natural language. ACM
Transactions on Asian Language Information Pro-
cessing (TALIP), 3(1):11?32, March.
Niemi, Jyrki and Kimmo Koskenniemi. 2007. Repre-
senting calendar expressions with finite-state trans-
ducers that bracket periods of time on a hierarchi-
cal timeline. In Nivre, Joakim, Heiki-Jaan Kaalep,
Kadri Muischnek, and Mare Koit, editors, Pro-
ceedings of the 16th Nordic Conference of Compu-
tational Linguistics NODALIDA-2007, pages 355?
362, Tartu, Estonia. University of Tartu.
Niemi, Jyrki and Kimmo Koskenniemi. 2008. Rep-
resenting and combining calendar information by
using finite-state transducers. In Proceedings
of the Seventh International Workshop on Finite-
State Methods and Natural Language Processing
(FSMNLP) 2008. To appear.
Ohlbach, Hans J?rgen and Dov Gabbay. 1998. Calen-
dar logic. Journal of Applied Non-classical Logics,
8(4):291?324.
Pan, Feng and Jerry R. Hobbs. 2005. Temporal aggre-
gates in OWL-Time. In Proceedings of the 18th In-
ternational Florida Artificial Intelligence Research
Society Conference (FLAIRS-2005), pages 560?565,
Clearwater Beach, Florida. AAAI Press.
Saur?, Roser, Jessica Littman, Bob Knippen, Robert
Gaizauskas, Andrea Setzer, and James Pustejovsky.
2006. TimeML annotation guidelines, version 1.2.1.
http://timeml.org/site/publications/timeMLdocs/
annguide_1.2.1.pdf, January.
74
