Proceedings of the ACL-08: HLT Workshop on Mobile Language Processing, pages 25?26,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Assistive Mobile Communication Support 
 
Sonya Nikolova and Xiaojuan Ma 
Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08540, USA 
{nikolova, xm}@cs.princeton.edu 
 
Abstract 
This paper reflects on our work in providing 
communication support for people with 
speech and language disabilities. We discuss 
the role of mobile technologies in assistive 
systems and share ongoing research efforts. 
1 Introduction 
Designing assistive communication technologies 
for people with speech and language disabilities 
involves a number of challenges including address-
ing stigma and portability concerns. Mobile de-
vices have the potential to resolve some of these 
issues if disadvantages such as small screen size 
and difficult interaction techniques are tackled. 
Our experience shows that a mobile device and 
a desktop computer can serve in synergy as an ef-
fective communication support for people with 
aphasia, a disability that impairs the language mo-
dalities. Our work has also showed that assisting 
the user effectively is interlaced with the ability to 
provide flexible and personalizable support.   
2 Mobile Support for Communication  
Being able to communicate is essential to leading a 
self-sufficient and satisfying life. Individuals who 
suffer from aphasia experience many challenges, 
including social isolation (Kauhanen et al, 2000). 
Technology has the potential to help such indi-
viduals, but to enhance the users? daily communi-
cation effectively, tools need to be portable and 
usable outside of the home. 
Our research focuses on designing multimodal 
communication systems for people with aphasia. 
We are interested in small and light-weight devices 
because their use is inconspicuous in public which 
addresses stigma issues prevalent among users 
with disabilities. Mobile devices have obvious 
shortcomings such as limited screen size and inter-
action techniques, and relatively small memory. 
However, if they assume the role of an extension 
instead of a replacement of traditional desktop and 
laptop assistive systems, we can easily take advan-
tage of their positive characteristics?portability 
being the most important one. In addition, mobile 
devices which have embedded camera, microphone, 
and speaker are convenient for taking photos, re-
cording videos and sounds which can enhance 
communication. To compensate for the loss of lan-
guage, visual and audio representations are essen-
tial support for information comprehension and 
speech production. 
There has been consistently increasing interest in 
using mobile platforms for applications that support 
communication. For example, Davies et al (2004) 
extensively studied one individual with aphasia who 
incorporated a personal digital assistant (PDA) into 
his daily communication strategies and demonstrated 
the device?s potential. Moffatt et al (2004) imple-
mented an electronic daily planner enhanced with 
images and sounds, running on a PDA. Even though 
it received positive feedback when evaluated with 
aphasic individuals, the prevalently elderly subjects 
had difficulty in composing and editing appointments 
directly on the PDA. 
Considering the advantages and disadvantages 
of a personal digital assistant, we combined a PDA 
and a desktop computer into a hybrid communica-
tion system for people with aphasia. 
3 Hybrid Communication System 
The desktop component of the hybrid communica-
tion system is used to compose and edit sentences 
and the PDA is used as a portable extension for 
conversations outside of home. A multimodal ap-
proach is used to compensate for the considerable 
variability in language impairments among indi-
viduals with aphasia. In the system?s vocabulary, 
nouns are represented by text, sound and an image 
while verbs are represented by text, sound and an 
animation depicting the action. Users enjoyed and 
were able to work with the system, and they incor-
porated multiple photographs taken with the PDA 
into their communication (Boyd-Graber et al, 
2006). The evaluation also revealed certain weak-
nesses and confirmed the need for flexibility and 
25
customization in assistive technology outlined in 
previous work (Moffatt et al, 2004 and van de 
Sandt-Koenderman et al, 2005).     
4 Work-in-Progress 
We are currently redesigning the system and im-
proving its flexibility by introducing some adaptive 
and adaptable features.  
4.1 Web-based System 
The fact that most mobile devices nowadays can 
access and browse the Internet relatively easily 
encourages us to explore a web-based system. By 
having the desktop and mobile components com-
municate online, we circumvent the time and loca-
tion constraints of traditional synchronization 
methods. Even though data can be transferred eas-
ily between the two components of our system, the 
need for physical contact is a drawback if multiple 
parties are involved in the information sharing (for 
example, when the aphasia patient, her speech-
language pathologist and her caregiver need to ac-
cess and modify information on different desktops 
at different locations).  
A web-based system will also eliminate the de-
pendence on the mobile device?s limited storage, 
which dictates the quantity and quality of the mul-
timedia data available to the user. The user will 
have access to more pictures, videos, and audio 
clips stored on the server. A web-based system will 
also allow for sharing of resources online among 
users within the aphasic community which could 
forge new social connections. 
4.2 Building an Adaptable Vocabulary 
An essential component of a communication sys-
tem that attempts to be flexible, extensible, and 
expressive is the vocabulary that it offers to the 
users. Vocabulary depth, breadth, organization and 
management are major challenges in existing assis-
tive technologies including our own.  
We are addressing these problems by designing 
a vocabulary application enhanced with adaptive 
and adaptable features. The goal is to enable apha-
sic users to build phrases quickly by browsing 
through a smart network of words represented by a 
triplet of image, sound and text. The links between 
words are based on the individual?s vocabulary 
profile (frequently used words, personal interests 
and communication context) as well as word simi-
larity and evocation measures derived from Word-
Net (Miller, 1990). The system?s adaptability will 
let the user add and remove words, group the 
words in a personalized manner by creating their 
own categories (such as a ?Favorites? folder) and 
enhance them with images and sounds. The adap-
tive part will study the usage frequency of each 
word, make context relevant suggestions, and 
adapt the vocabulary organization automatically.  
Thus, frequently used words and words relevant to 
the user?s interests or the context of the communi-
cation will surface faster. Naturally, the challenge 
is balancing the adaptive and adaptable aspects of 
the system to best benefit the user. 
5 Conclusion 
Even though small screen size and challenging in-
teraction techniques make most existing mobile 
devices unusable for persons with aphasia, they 
hold a significant potential to assist daily commu-
nication effectively. We envision that a web-based 
communication system with a mobile and a desk-
top component will be an effective support because 
it will eliminate constraints related to data transfer 
and information updating. We are also working on 
creating adaptive and adaptable techniques that 
allow the vocabulary used for communication to be 
tailored to the user?s needs. We are interested in 
discussing effective design strategies and interac-
tion technique for language application for mobile 
devices as well as methods to make them serve as 
better communication support.  
References  
Boyd-Graber, J., Nikolova, S., Moffatt, K., Kin, K., Lee, J., 
Mackey, L., Tremaine, M. and Klawe, M. 2006. Participa-
tory design with proxies: developing a desktop-PDA sys-
tem to support people with aphasia. In Proceedings CHI 
?06, 151?160. 
Davies, R., Marcella, S., McGrenere, J. and Purves, B. 2004. 
The ethnographically informed participatory design of a 
PDA application to support communication. In Proceed-
ings of ASSETS ?04, 153?160. 
Kauhanen, M.L., Korpelainen, J. T., Hiltunen, P., M??tt?, R., 
Mononen, H., Brusin, E., et al 2000. Aphasia, depression, 
and non-verbal cognitive impairment in ischaemic stroke. 
Cerebrovascular Diseases, 10(6): 455?461. 
Miller, G. A. 1990. Nouns in WordNet: A lexical inheritance 
system. International Journal of Lexicography, 3(4): 245?
264. 
Moffatt, K., McGrenere, J., Purves, B., and Klawe, M. 2004. 
The participatory design of a sound and image enhanced 
daily planner for people with aphasia. In Proceedings of 
CHI ?04, 407?414. 
van de Sandt-Koenderman, M., Wiegers, J., and Hardy, P. 
2005. A computerized communication aid for people with 
aphasia. Disability and Rehabilitation, 27: 529?533. 
26
