A Natural Language Processing Infrastructure for Turkish 
A. C. Cem SAY 
Department of Computer Engineering, 
Bogazi?i University,  
Bebek,stanbul 
say@boun.edu.tr 
 
?zlem ?ETNOLU 
Faculty of Engineering and Natural Sciences, 
Sabanc? University,  
Tuzla,stanbul 
ozlemc@sabanciuniv.edu 
eniz DEMR 
Department of Computer Engineering, 
Bogazi?i University 
Bebek,stanbul 
sdemir@cse.yeditepe.edu.tr 
Fatih ??N 
Department of Computer Engineering, 
Bogazi?i University 
Bebek,stanbul 
fatih_ogun@yahoo.com 
 
Abstract 
We built an open-source software platform in-
tended to serve as a common infrastructure that 
can be of use in the development of new applica-
tions involving the processing of Turkish. The 
platform incorporates a lexicon, a morphological 
analyzer/generator, and a DCG parser/generator 
that translates Turkish sentences to predicate 
logic formulas, and a knowledge base frame-
work. Several developers have already utilized 
the platform for a variety of applications, includ-
ing conversation programs and an artificial per-
sonal assistant, tools for automatic analysis of 
rhyme and meter in Turkish folk poems, a proto-
type sentence-level translator between Albanian, 
Turkish, and English, natural language interfaces 
for generating SQL queries and JAVA code, as 
well as a text tagger used for collecting statistics 
about Turkish morpheme order for a speech rec-
ognition algorithm. The results indicate the 
adaptability of the infrastructure to different 
kinds of applications and how it facilitates im-
provements and modifications.  
Introduction 
The obvious potential of natural language processing 
technology for economic, social and cultural pro-
gress can be realized more comprehensively if NLP 
techniques applicable to a wider selection of the lan-
guages of the world are developed. Before the full-
scale treatment of a new language can start, a con-
siderable amount of effort has to be invested to 
computerize the lexical, morphological and syntactic 
specifics of that language, which would be required 
by any nontrivial application.  
We built an open-source software platform in-
tended to serve as a common infrastructure that can 
be of use in the development of new applications 
involving the processing of Turkish. The platform, 
named TOY (?etinolu 2001), is essentially a big 
set of predicates in the logic programming language 
Prolog. The choice of Prolog, which was designed 
specifically with computational linguistics applica-
tions in mind, as the implementation language for 
our software has natural consequences for the 
knowledge representation setup to be used by other 
programs built on our platform. Prolog is based on 
first-order predicate calculus, it allows knowledge 
items to be represented in terms of logic-style facts 
and rules, and a built-in theorem prover drives the 
execution of Prolog queries. 
The TOY program?s internal organization into 
source files reflects the three different levels (see 
Figure 1) on which text-based NLP applications can 
be based. In terms of that figure, processing at a 
?deeper? level necessitates all components of ?shal-
lower? levels.  
In this paper, we describe this infrastructure and 
how it was adapted to a variety of applications. Sec-
tion 2 gives a brief overview of the infrastructure. 
Section 3 presents the applications based on it. 
1 Infrastructure 
The TOY platform is formed of a lexicon that con-
tains most of the Turkish morphemes (either root or 
suffix), a Turkish morphological analyzer/generator, 
a DCG parser/generator for Turkish, and a semantic 
processor which interfaces the aforementioned sub-
units with the underlying knowledge base for 
knowledge addition and extraction. 
 
 Figure 1.  TOY?s Internal Organization. 
1.1    Lexicon 
A complete lexicon is supposed to contain entries 
for all morphemes (meaningful units that make up 
words) for the language in question. There are two 
kinds of morphemes: roots and affixes. In Turkish, 
all affixes follow the root, that is, they are suffixes. 
Our lexicon contains entries for over 29000 roots 
and 157 suffixes. A single morpheme may have 
more than one entry, corresponding to its different 
allomorphs. A morpheme definition example for the 
word ??ocuk? (?child?) is shown in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2. Morpheme Definition. 
 
The semantic representation slot gives a descrip-
tion of the contribution of the morpheme to the 
meaning of full-size sentences in which it appears: 
Since the meanings of sentences are represented by 
predicate logic formulas in our setup, roots contrib-
ute ?partial? versions of such formulas, with ?holes? 
to be filled by the contributions of the other words of 
the sentence. For instance, the semantic representa-
tion entry of the noun ??ocuk? is ?ocuk(_). In the 
sentence ?Ali ?ocuktur? (?Ali is a child?), the value 
of the missing argument is supplied by the name Ali, 
resulting in the formula ?ocuk('Ali') for the overall 
sentence. 
For noun entries, the commonsense knowledge 
slot contains a pointer to the location of the thing 
described by this noun in the taxonomy tree (see 
Figure 4) used by the program. (The entry for 
??ocuk?, for instance, indicates that it can be 
reached by descending from the root along the ?con-
crete entity?-?animate-?human being? arcs.) For 
verbs, this slot contains a set of restrictions on the 
various argument slots of the verb. As an example, 
the agent of the verb ?ye-? (?eat?) is restricted to be 
a living thing, and its theme is restricted to be a 
solid.  
 
1.2    Morphological Analyzer/ Generator 
In the infrastructure, possible legal orderings of 
Turkish morphemes are represented by a large finite 
state diagram, a small part of which can be seen in 
Figure 3. The morphological component of the plat-
form is a finite state transducer that makes use of the 
lexicon for traversing the arcs of the diagram 
(adopted, with changes, from Kemal Oflazer?s work 
on Turkish morphology (Oflazer 1993)) to associate 
a character string with the list of meaning contribu-
tions of its morphemes. This traversal is complicated 
by the vowel harmony constraint of Turkish mor-
phology. This rule means that, when adding a suffix 
to a word, the allomorph to be added is a function of 
the last vowel of the word to be extended. For in-
stance, the plural suffix has the two allomorphs ?-
ler? and ?-lar?. The Turkish word for ?children? is 
??ocuklar?, while ?olives? is ?zeytinler?, since 
?back vowels? like ?a? and ?u? require a back vowel 
in the suffix, whereas ?front vowels? like ?e? and ?i? 
require a front vowel there. The program keeps track 
of the vowels during the transduction to enforce 
these constraints. Words of foreign origin which vio-
late vowel harmony are flagged appropriately in the 
lexicon. 
 
Figure 3. A Subgraph of the Morphological FST 
Employed by TOY. 
 
Like most Prolog predicates the morphological 
component is reversible, that is, the same piece of 
code can be used both to analyze a given word to 
obtain its underlying constituents, and to generate a 
word when given a list of such constituents. Another 
built-in feature of Prolog makes it very easy for the 
program to compute all results associated with a par-
ticular input when more than one legal output is 
possible, as in the case of the analysis of the 
morphologically ambiguous word ?yedi?, where our 
morphological parser produces, through backtrack-
ing, two alternative analyses: the third-
person/singular past tense inflection of the verb ?ye-
? (?eat?), and the Turkish number word for ?seven?. 
1.3    DCG Parser/Generator 
We encoded a subset of the syntax rules of Turkish 
in Prolog?s DCG notation. The DCG formalism al-
lows the computation of the meaning formula of a 
constituent to be performed in parallel with its syn-
tactic parsing; each DCG rule is written to indicate 
how the partial meanings of the elements on its 
right-hand side fit together to produce the semantic 
expression for the constituent on the left-hand side.  
Certain language constructs correspond naturally 
to the notion of quantification in predicate calculus. 
For instance, the sentence ?Bir ?ocuk zeytin yedi.? 
(?A child ate (an/some) olive(s)?) can be represented 
by the logical formula  
?X?Y( ?ocuk(X) ? zeytin(Y)  ? ye(Event, X,Y, Loca-
tion, Time, Goal, Source, Instrument, defi-
nite_past, none, positive) ). 
In the Prolog program, existentially quantified 
expressions like this one have the form 
some(X,Restrictor,Scope), where X is the quantified 
variable, and Restrictor and Scope are the two sides 
of the conjunction (Covington, 1994) 
some(X,?ocuk(X),some(Y,zeytin(Y),ye(EventMarker,
X,Y,Location,Time,Goal,Source,Instrument, 
definite_past,none,positive))) 
The successful DCG parsing of a sentence also re-
sults in a field being instantiated to a symbol repre-
senting the sentence?s mood. Possible values for the 
mood field are ?statement,? ?yes_no_question,? and 
?wh_question.? 
This component of the program is also designed 
to be reversible, that is, it can produce the corre-
sponding sentence when given a logical formula, but 
yet another peculiarity of the language complicates 
the solution: Turkish word order is (almost) free, 
which basically means that the sentence constituents 
can be shuffled around without changing the mean-
ing. Therefore, a single semantic formula usually 
corresponds to several different sentences, even 
without taking synonymity of words into account. 
Our software has the capability of producing multi-
ple alternative sentences as output in such cases. 
1.4    Anaphora Resolver 
In general, the full-scale processing of all but very 
simple sentences necessitates information that is not 
present in the sentence itself, the most obvious ex-
amples being question sentences. This additional 
information is either pre-encoded in the knowledge 
base as part of a big store of commonsense knowl-
edge, or, when the agent is involved in a dialogue or 
a story understanding task, it is gleaned from the 
other sentences in the input. 
One example where the computation of the mean-
ing of a declarative sentence requires access to 
knowledge obtained from previous sentences is the 
process of anaphora resolution. Resolving an ana-
phor is the job of finding out which discourse 
marker (unique internal name) to use for the entity 
referred to by this phrase in the knowledge base. 
There is no ?correct? algorithm for this task because 
of the inherent ambiguity of natural language (Lenat 
1995). Our resolver selects a discourse marker for an 
anaphoric reference making use of the taxonomy 
tree (see Figure 4), semantic type information in its 
dictionary, pointers to the locations in this tree, and 
the positions of the original referents in their sen-
tences.  
Our resolver treats only definite clauses as ana-
phors and resolves direct anaphors. Gelbukh and 
Sidorov (1999) propose ways of solving indirect 
anaphors. 
Figure 4. TOY?s Taxonomy Tree. 
 
An anaphor and its antecedent can be related if 
semantic type of the anaphor contains the semantic 
type of the antecedent or vice versa or their types 
intersect. Resolution of indirect anaphors will be 
added to TOY?s anaphora resolver in the future. This 
taxonomy tree will also be used for this purpose.   
1.5    Knowledge Base Interface 
This module translates predicate logic formulas cre-
ated by the DCG parser to Prolog facts and rules. As 
an example, the sentence ?Ali ?ocuktur? (?Ali is a 
child?) is eventually translated to the Prolog fact 
?ocuk('Ali'), whose form enables it to take part in 
automatic proofs involving this knowledge item 
when necessary. In general, nouns and adjectives are 
represented as single-argument predicates standing 
for the invoked property. 
Verbs other than ?to be? have a considerably 
more complicated representation. The Prolog 
equivalent of the sentence ?Ali gitti? (?Ali left?) is 
 
Figure 5. Prolog Representation Example. 
Of course, from the point of view of the com-
puter, (or, for that matter, of anybody who cannot 
speak Turkish,) a formula like ?ocuk('Ali') is just as 
opaque as ?Ali ?ocuktur?. When we look up a 
strange word in the dictionary, we comprehend its 
meaning by mentally linking it in appropriate ways 
to the words appearing in its description. If a suffi-
ciently large subgraph of this network of concepts 
that exists in our minds is replicated in the computer, 
it would be able to give the same response to an in-
put sentence as a human utilizing the same network. 
For instance, the Prolog rule 
?ocuk(X):- insan(X), k???k(X). 
(where ?insan? means ?human? and ?k???k? means 
?small? in Turkish) relates these three concepts in a 
way similar to the picture in most people?s minds. 
The translation of a Turkish sentence to the corre-
sponding predicate logic formula by the DCG rules 
is just an intermediate step in the processing of that 
sentence. ?Understanding? a sentence necessitates a 
computation involving both this formula and the 
current contents of the knowledge base, possibly 
resulting in a change to the knowledge base, and the 
generation of an appropriate response. 
Skolemization is used in the automatic transfor-
mation of the logical formulas of declarative sen-
tences to actual Prolog code by means of replacing 
all the existentially quantified variables by special 
expressions called Skolem functions. The purpose of 
this operation is to assign a discourse marker to 
every entity which is mentioned but not named in 
the sentence. These markers are the atomic symbols 
used by the computer to model the world being de-
scribed and referred to during the conversation, and 
keeping track of them is an essential part of the dia-
logue processing task. 
For wh-question sentences, the DCG parser cre-
ates formulas in the form of Prolog predicates. For 
instance, the sentence ?Kim zeytin yedi?? (?Who ate 
(an/some) olive(s)??) is translated to the formula 
which(X,insan(X),some(Y,zeytin(Y),ye(Event,X,Y, 
Loc, Time,Goal,Source, Instrument,      
        definite_past, none, positive)) 
whose form matches the already available logic pro-
gram which(Item,Property1Item,Property2Item). See 
the next section for a discussion of these ?question-
word? routines. 
2       Applications Based on TOY 
In this section, we will present some applications 
that were developed using the TOY infrastructure. 
Each subsection will briefly explain the application, 
the TOY components used, and the modifications 
done on the infrastructure. 
 
 
2.1    Conversational agent ? TOYagent 
Smith (1994) classifies dialogue styles that can be 
adopted by the computer during human-computer 
interaction into four modes, depending on the degree 
of control that the computer has on the dialogue: 
Directive, suggestive, declarative, and passive. 
TOYagent?s original approach mostly suits the pas-
sive mode, where the user has complete control, and 
the computer passively acknowledges user state-
ments, and provides information only as a response 
to direct user requests. 
TOYagent (Demir 2003) enables users to make 
on-line additions to the lexicon without the need to 
know Prolog. When faced with a word that it is un-
able to parse morphologically, TOYagent engages in 
a (mostly menu-driven) subdialogue with the user to 
identify the root, category, and morphophonemic 
properties of the word, and adds the appropriate en-
tries to the lexicon. The meanings of these new 
words can be incorporated to the system by the logic 
program synthesis facility, which enables the user to 
provide natural language descriptions for new predi-
cates in terms of existing predicates. These descrip-
tions are automatically converted to Prolog clauses 
and added to the knowledge base of the program for 
future use.  
The original dialogue algorithm embedded in 
TOYagent can be summarized as follows: 
1. Read a sentence (this may cause a ?word learn-
ing? subdialogue if one or more words in the sen-
tence cannot be parsed by the morphological 
analyzer) 
2. Analyze the sentence using the DCG parser, re-
solving anaphors if necessary. If the syntactic 
parse is unsuccessful, report this to the user and 
GOTO 1.  
3. If the mood is ?statement?, then the user is mak-
ing a declarative statement; use the built-in theo-
rem prover to try to prove the logical formula 
corresponding to the sentence. There are two pos-
sibilities: (In the following, all the ?canned? re-
sponses are in Turkish, of course.) 
        a. If the formula can be proven using the cur-
rent contents of the knowledge base, the informa-
tion contained in the sentence is already there; 
respond with ?Thanks, I know that? 
      b. If Prolog fails to prove the formula with its 
current knowledge, then negate the formula and 
try to prove this negation. There are two possibili-
ties: 
            i. If this new formula can be proven using the 
current contents of the knowledge base, the infor-
mation contained in the sentence is contradictory 
with what we already know; respond with ?I do 
not think so? 
            ii. If Prolog fails to prove this new formula 
with its current knowledge, create the necessary 
discourse and event markers and assert the Prolog 
clauses representing the input sentence to the 
knowledge base, responding with ?Thanks for the 
information?  
4. If the mood is ?yes_no_question?, the user has 
asked a yes-no question; use the built-in the prover 
to try to prove the sentence?s logical formula. 
There are two possibilities: 
      a. If the formula can be proven using the current 
contents of the knowledge base, respond with 
?Yes? 
    b. If Prolog fails to prove the formula with its 
current knowledge, then negate the formula and 
try to prove this negation. There are two possibili-
ties: 
            i. If this new formula can be proven using the 
current contents of the knowledge base, respond 
with ?No? 
            ii. If Prolog fails to prove this new formula 
with its current knowledge, respond with ?I do not 
know.? 
5. If the mood is ?wh_question?, the user has asked 
a wh-question; use the built-in theorem prover on 
the sentence?s logical formula. The associated 
program of each question word scans the knowl-
edge base and produces the relevant answer. The 
answer can be printed out directly, or, if required, 
in the form of a grammatical sentence generated 
by a procedure that first prepares a new logical 
formula from the produced knowledge items and 
then uses the syntax and morphology components 
to form the statement corresponding to this for-
mula. GOTO 1. 
The following conversation fragments, in which 
user entries are shown in boldface, illustrate several 
aspects of TOYagent. (The English translations are 
not part of TOYagent?s input-output, and have been 
added ?manually.?) 
As an example to ?online? learning of lexical en-
tries, we deleted the word ?ana? (?mother?) from the 
lexicon, and carried out the following dialogue with 
the program: 
 Her ana g?zeldir. (Every mother is beautiful) 
?ana? kelimesini bilmiyorum. (I do not know the 
word ?ana?) 
 Kelimenin k?k? nedir? (What is the stem of this 
word?) 
 1: a   
2: an  
3: ana  
 Hangisi: 3. 
 (Please enter: 3.) 
?ana? kelimesinin tipi nedir? (What is the type of 
the word ?ana??) 
 
 1: Cins isim (1: Common noun) 
 2: S?fat        (2: Adjective) 
 3: ?zel isim(3: Proper noun) 
 Hangisi: 3. 
(Please enter: 3) 
 S?zl?e eklendi. (It has been added to the lexicon) 
 ?ana? ne demek? Anlat?r m?s?n? (Could you ex-
plain the word ?ana??) 
 ?ocuu olan bir bayan anad?r. (A female who has a 
child is a mother) 
 Teekk?rler, ?rendim. (Thanks for the information) 
 
Since the unknown word could have appeared in 
an inflected form in the input sentence, TOYagent 
first asks about the actual stem. A Prolog rule corre-
sponding to the relevant universally quantified logic 
formula is prepared and asserted for each of the 
user?s sentences read in this dialogue. The last line is 
the program?s response to the original input sen-
tence. 
Aye bir anad?r. (Aye is a mother) 
Teekk?rler, ?rendim. (Thanks for the information) 
Aye g?zel midir? (Is Aye beautiful?) 
Evet. (Yes)  
Neden? (Why?) 
Her ana g?zeldir. (Every mother is beautiful) 
Aye anad?r. (Aye is a mother) 
 
The affirmative answer requires stepping through 
the implication translated to Prolog during the proc-
essing of the original user entry. The question 
?why?? is answered by translating the Prolog formu-
las used for the previous answer back to sentence 
form. 
Definite noun phrases are treated as anaphors: 
Canan k???k bir ?ocuk. (Canan is a small child) 
Teekk?rler, ?rendim. (Thanks for the information) 
?ocuk kahvalt?da zeytin yedi. (The child ate olives 
for breakfast) 
Teekk?rler, ?rendim. (Thanks for the information) 
Kim zeytin yedi? (Who ate olives?) 
Canan zeytin yedi. (Canan ate olives) 
Ka? kii kahvalt?da zeytin yedi? (How many people 
ate olives for breakfast?) 
Bir kii kahvalt?da zeytin yedi. (One person ate ol-
ives for breakfast) 
 
The definite noun phrase in the second user entry 
(?the child?) is matched to the most recently men-
tioned child. As mentioned earlier, question words 
have small Prolog programs corresponding to them. 
The answer extracted from the knowledge base is 
presented in the form of a grammatically correct 
sentence. (The fact that every child is also a person 
is one of the commonsense items that have been 
preencoded in the knowledge base.) 
A rudimentary capability of commonsense rea-
soning about time is implemented: The ?time? ar-
gument in verb predicates has a substructure with 
slots for the beginning and ending points of the in-
terval corresponding to the event. (In the present 
version, only a small subset of the verbal lexicon 
entries have their time subslots manually encoded 
for this purpose.) Hours are used as the unit interval. 
Kemal k???k bir ?ocuk. B?t?n k???k ?ocuklar 10 
saat uyurlar. (Kemal is a small child. All small chil-
dren sleep for 10 hours) 
Teekk?rler, ?rendim. (Thanks for the information) 
Kemal saat 23?te uyudu. (Kemal fell asleep at 23 
hours) 
Teekk?rler, ?rendim. (Thanks for the information) 
Kemal ne zaman uyudu? (When did Kemal fall 
asleep?)  
Kemal yirmi??te uyudu. (Kemal fell asleep at twenty 
three) 
Kemal ne zaman uyand?? (When did Kemal wake 
up?)  
Kemal dokuzda uyand?. (Kemal woke up at nine) 
 
Note that the program is able to do the ?modulo 
24? calculation required for producing the appropri-
ate answer. 
To find pronominal references in the absence of 
gender information, the semantic network is utilized. 
In the following excerpt, the pronoun ?o? 
(?he/she/it?) is correctly deduced to correspond to 
??ay? (?tea?), since the network does not allow 
?Kemal?, a human name, to be the agent of the word 
?bit-? (?to be consumed entirely?), which can have 
only inanimate material at that role. 
Kemal kahvalt?da ne i?ti? (What did Kemal drink for 
breakfast?) 
Bilmiyorum. (I do not know) 
Kemal ?ay i?ti ise o bitmitir. (If Kemal drank tea, 
(he/she/it) must have been consumed entirely) 
Teekk?rler, ?rendim. (Thanks for the information) 
Kemal ?ay i?ti. (Kemal drank tea) 
Teekk?rler, ?rendim.(Thanks for the information) 
?ay bitmi midir? (Has the tea been consumed en-
tirely?)  
Evet (Yes) 
 
The latest release of TOYagent (??n 2003) is 
able to manage conversations with multiple agents, 
can adapt different ?attitudes? about whether to be-
lieve what a user says depending on the user?s pro-
file, and has the capability of detecting and pointing 
out inconsistencies among the statements made by 
different users. This version also supports an op-
tional ?inquisitive? dialogue mode, where the com-
puter questions the user about the values of currently 
empty slots in the verb predicates corresponding to 
previous user statements. 
2.2     Turkish Natural Language Interface 
For SQL Queries (NALAN-TS) 
NALAN-TS (Maden, Demir and ?zcan 2003) is a 
Turkish natural language query interface for SQL 
databases, formed of a syntactic parser, semantic 
analyzer, meaning extractor, SQL constructor and 
executer. It is a dictionary based application and in-
cludes Turkish and database dictionaries. 
  
 
Figure 6. NALAN-TS Flow Diagram. 
 
The shaded modules in Figure 6 were taken com-
pletely from the TOY infrastructure, except for a 
few modifications like the addition of new Turkish 
syntax rules and a different format for the semantic 
representation of the words in the dictionary. TOY?s 
knowledge base interface is taken as the basis by 
NALAN-TS.  
2.3   Turkish Speaking Assistant -TUSA 
TUSA (eker, 2003) is a natural language interface 
for an online personal calendar. The morphological 
analyzer/generator of TOY was taken as a basis in 
this project with modifications made for utilizing.  
2.4   Generating Java Class Skeleton Using a 
Natural Language Interface- TUJA 
TUJA (?zcan, eker and Karadeniz 2004) is a natu-
ral language interface for generating Java source 
code and creating an object-oriented semantic net-
work. This program uses TOY?s morphological ana-
lyzer/generator as the starting point. 
2.5     Other Applications 
Ballhysa (2000) used TOY to produce a prototypical 
sentence-level translator between Albanian, English, 
and Turkish. (To our knowledge, this is the first 
NLP work ever done on Albanian) Dutaac? (2002) 
used the morphological component to tag a Turkish 
corpus of nearly ten million words to collect statis-
tics and compared the performance of an N-gram 
model of speech recognition based on morphemes 
with those based on words or syllables. Tekeli 
(2002) made use of the word-level components to 
build an ?ELIZA-like? (Covington 1994) dialogue 
program which caricaturizes Fatih Terim, a famous 
soccer coach and an idiosyncratic Turkish speaker. 
The program?s ?bag of tricks? includes coming up 
with rhyming responses to user sentences. Bilsel 
(2000) developed a ?poem expert? for analyzing 
Turkish folk poems for their rhyme and meter prop-
erties, a demanding task which is part of the high-
school curriculum in Turkey. 
Conclusion 
Our work on TOY is continuing on many fronts: The 
DCG component is currently being extended to 
cover both a bigger subset of Turkish syntax, and 
some types of agrammatical sentences. We hope that 
TOY will be useful in the development of many 
other applications in the near future. 
References 
Can Tekeli 2002. TERIM_SON. B.S. Thesis, Department 
of Computer Engineering, Bogazici University. 
Douglas Lenat 1995. CYC: A Large-Scale Investment in 
Knowledge Infrastructure. In ?Comm. ACM, 38/11?, 
pages 33-38. 
Eda Bilsel 2000. Poem Analyzer, B.S. Thesis, Department 
of Computer Engineering, Bogazici University. 
Elton Ballhysa 2000. Albanian-Turkish-English Transla-
tor. B.S. Thesis, Department of Computer Engineering, 
Bogazici University. 
Ender ?zcan, adi E. eker and Zeynep. I. Karadeniz 
2004. Generating Java Class Skeleton Using A Natural 
Language Interface. In ?First International Workshop 
on Natural Language Understanding and Cognitive Sci-
ence-NLUCS?. 
Fatih ??n 2003. Design and Implementation of an Im-
proved Conversational Agent Infrastructure for Turk-
ish. M.S. Thesis, Department of Computer Engineering, 
Bogazici University. 
Helin Dutaac? 2002. Statistical Language Models for 
Large Vocabulary Turkish Speech Recognition. M.S. 
Thesis, Department of Computer Engineering, Bogazici 
University.  
Ibrahim Maden, eniz Demir and Ender ?zcan 2003. 
Turkish Natural Language Interface for Generating 
SQL Queries. In ?TBD 20. Ulusal Biliim Kurultayi?. 
Kemal Oflazer 1993. Two-Level Description of Turkish 
Morphology. In ?Proc. Second Turkish Symposium on 
Artificial Intelligence and Neural Networks?, Bogazici 
University Press, pages 86-93, Istanbul.  
Michael A .Covington 1994. Natural Language Process-
ing for Prolog Programmers. Prentice Hall, Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ. 
?zlem ?etinolu 2001. A Prolog Based Natural Lan-
guage Processing Infrastructure for Turkish. M.S. The-
sis, Department of Computer Engineering, Bogazici 
University. 
Ronnie W. Smith 1994. Spoken Variable Initiative Dia-
log: An Adaptable Natural-Language Interface. In 
?IEEE Expert: Intelligent Systems and Their Applica-
tions 9/1?,pages 45-50. 
adi E. eker 2003.  Design and Implementation of a 
Personal Calendar with a Natural Language Interface 
in Turkish. M.S. Thesis, Department of Computer En-
gineering, Yeditepe University. 
eniz Demir 2003. Improved Treatment of Word Meaning  
in a Turkish Conversational Agent. M.S.     Thesis, De-
partment of Computer Engineering, Bogazici Univer-
sity. 
