Proceedings of the NAACL HLT Workshop on Semantic Evaluations: Recent Achievements and Future Directions, pages 129?137,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Relation detection between named entities: report of a shared task
Cla?udia Freitas, Diana Santos
Cristina Mota
SINTEF ICT
claudiafreitas@puc-rio.br
Diana.Santos@sintef.no
cmota@ist.utl.pt
Hugo Gonc?alo Oliveira
CISUC, DEI - FCTUC
hroliv@dei.uc.pt
Paula Carvalho
Univ. Lisbon, FCUL, XLDB
pcc@di.fc.ul.pt
Abstract
In this paper we describe the first evalu-
ation contest (track) for Portuguese whose
goal was to detect and classify relations be-
tween named entities in running text, called
ReRelEM. Given a collection annotated with
named entities belonging to ten different se-
mantic categories, we marked all relationships
between them within each document. We used
the following fourfold relationship classifi-
cation: identity, included-in, located-in, and
other (which was later on explicitly detailed
into twenty different relations). We provide a
quantitative description of this evaluation re-
source, as well as describe the evaluation ar-
chitecture and summarize the results of the
participating systems in the track.
1 Motivation
Named entity recognition can be considered the first
step towards semantic analysis of texts and a crucial
subtask of information extraction systems. Proper
names, besides their high frequency in language, do
more than just refer ? they convey additional infor-
mation as instances of general semantic categories.
But NE recognition is, as just mentioned, only the
first step for full language processing. If we want to
go beyond the detection of entities, a natural step is
establishing semantic relations between these enti-
ties, and this is what this paper is about.
There are two fairly independent communities
that focus on the task of detecting relations between
named entities: the work on anaphora resolution, il-
lustrated by (Mitkov, 2000; Collovini et al, 2007;
de Souza et al, 2008) and the work on relation de-
tection in information extraction, see e.g. (Agichtein
and Gravano, 2000; Zhao and Grishman, 2005; Cu-
lotta and Sorensen, 2004). Although both commu-
nities are doing computational semantics, the two
fields are largely non-overlapping, and one of the
merits of our work is that we tried to merge the two.
Let us briefly describe both traditions: as (Mitkov,
2000) explains, anaphora resolution is concerned
with studying the linguistic phenomenon of pointing
back to another expression in the text. The seman-
tic relations between the referents of these expres-
sions can be of different types, being co-reference a
special case when the relation is identity. The focus
of anaphora resolution is determining the antecedent
chains, although it implicitly also allows to elicit se-
mantic relations between referents. This task has a
long tradition in natural language processing (NLP)
since the early days of artificial intelligence (Web-
ber, 1978), and has from the start been considered a
key ingredient in text understanding.
A different tradition, within information extrac-
tion and ontology building, is devoted to fact ex-
traction. The detection of relations involving named
entities is seen as a step towards a more structured
model of the meaning of a text. The main concerns
here (see e.g. (Zhao and Grishman, 2005)) are the
extraction of large quantities of facts, generally cou-
pled with machine learning approaches.1
Although mentions of named entities may ex-
1Other authors use the term relation detection in still other
ways: for example, (Roth and tau Yih, 2004) use it for the trans-
lation of any natural language sentences into ?logical form?, as
in kill (x,y). This task does not concern us here.
129
Relations Works
orgBased-in, Headquarters, Org-Location, Based-in RY, AG, DI, Sn, CS, ACE07, ACE04, ZG
live-in, Citizen-or-Resident RY, ACE04, ZG, ACE07,CS
Employment, Membership, Subsidiary ZG, CS, ACE04, ACE07
located(in), residence, near ACE04, ACE07,CS, ZG
work-for, Affiliate, Founder, Management,
Client, Member, Staff CS, ACE04, ACE07, RY, ZG
Associate, Grandparent, Parent, Sibling,
Spouse, Other-professional, Other-relative, Other-personal CS, ACE04, ACE07
User, Owner,Inventor, Manufacturer ACE04,ACE07, ZG, CS
DiseaseOutbreaks AG
Metonymy ACE07
identity ARE
synonym ARE
generalisation ARE
specialisation ARE
Table 1: Relations used in other works or evaluation contests.
press semantic relations other than identity or de-
pendency, the main focus of the first school has
been limited to co-reference. Yet, relations such
as part-of have been considered under the label
of indirect anaphora, also known as associative or
bridging anaphora.
Contrarywise, the list of relations of interest for
the second school is defined simply by world knowl-
edge (not linguistic clues), and typical are the rela-
tions between an event and its location, or an orga-
nization and its headquarters. Obviously, these rela-
tions do occur between entities that do not involve
(direct or indirect) anaphora in whatever broad un-
derstanding of the term.
Also, relation detection in the second school does
not usually cover identity (cf. ACE?s seven relation
types): identity or co-reference is often considered
an intermediate step before relation extraction (Cu-
lotta and Sorensen, 2004).
Table 1 displays a non-exhaustive overview of the
different relations found in the literature.2
In devising the ReRelEM3 pilot track, our goal
was twofold: to investigate which relations could
2There is overlap between ACE 2007 and 2004 types of re-
lations. In order to ease the comparison, we used the names of
subtypes for ACE relations.
3ReRelEM stands for Reconhecimento de Relac?o?es entre
Entidades Mencionadas, Portuguese for ?recognition of rela-
tions between named entities?, see (Freitas et al, 2008).
be found between named entities in Portuguese text,
and how could a pilot task be devised that compared
the performance of different automatic systems sup-
posed to identify them. It should be emphasized that
both MUC and ACE were key inspiration sources for
ReRelEM, which stems from Linguateca?s emphasis
on evaluation.
In fact, we were conversant with MUC co-
reference track and the way it was scored, as well
as aware of two other related evaluation contests:
ACE (Doddington et al, 2004; NIST and ACE,
2007), which extended MUC by dropping the re-
quirement that entities had to be named, and ARE
(Ora?san et al, 2008), which requested the identifi-
cation of an anaphoric relation in certain types of
pre-defined relations (identity, synonymy, general-
ization and specification), but which ignored indirect
anaphora (that may convey meronymy, or inclusion,
in a broad sense).
ReRelEM, although maintaining (or adding) the
restriction to named entitites, is, from our point of
view, an advance in the field of relation detection,
since we proposed the detection (and classification)
of all (relevant) kinds of relations between NEs in a
document, providing thus both a merge and an ex-
tension of the previous evaluation campaigns.
130
Category/gloss #
PESSOA/person 196
LOCAL/place 145
ORGANIZACAO/org 102
TEMPO/time 84
OBRA/title 33
VALOR/value 33
ACONTECIMENTO/event 21
ABSTRACCAO/abstraction 17
OUTRO/other 6
COISA/thing 5
Table 2: Category distribution in the golden collection
2 Track description
The purpose of ReRelEM is to assess systems that
try to recognize the most relevant relations between
named entities, even if those relations do not involve
coreference or anaphora.
2.1 Context
In order for it to be feasible in the short time we
had, the track definition required that both referring
expression and their semantic referent were named
entities. Pronouns and definite descriptions were
hence excluded. Note also that ReRelEM was de-
fined in the context of the second edition of a larger
evaluation contest dealing with NE detection and
classification in Portuguese, HAREM (Santos et al,
2008) (for a detailed description of HAREM, in Por-
tuguese, see also (Santos and Cardoso, 2007; Mota
and Santos, 2008)). HAREM required systems to
choose among ten categories (see Table 2), 43 types
and 21 subtypes, the later concerning the categories
TEMPO (time) and LOCAL (place).
So, it should be emphasized that ReRelEM fo-
cuses only on the classification and detection of
the relations, not limiting in any way the kinds of
(named) entities that can be related (as usualy done
in other detection tasks). It only enforces the kinds
of relations that must be identified.
2.2 Relation inventory
The establishment of an inventory of the most rele-
vant relations between NEs is ultimately subjective,
depending on the kind of information that each par-
ticipant aims to extract. We have nevertheless done
an exploratory study and annotated exhaustively a
few texts to assess the most frequent and less con-
troversial (or easier to assign) relations, and came
up with just the following relation types for the task
proposal:
? identity (ident);
? inclusion (inclui (includes) or incluido
(included));
? placement (ocorre-em (occurs-in) or
sede-de (place-of));
? other (outra)
For further description and examples see section 3.
However, during the process of building
ReRelEM?s golden collection (a subset of the
HAREM collection used as gold standard), human
annotation was felt to be more reliable ? and also
more understandable ? if one specified what ?other?
actually meant, and so a further level of detail
(twenty new relations) was selected and marked,
see Table 3. (In any case, since this new refinement
did not belong to the initial task description, all
were mapped back to the coarser outra relation
for evaluation purposes.)
2.3 ReRelEM features and HAREM
requirements
The annotation process began after the annotation
of HAREM?s golden collection, that is, the relations
started to be annotated after all NE had been tagged
and totally revised. For ReRelEM, we had therefore
no say in that process ? again, ReRelEM was only
concerned with the relations between the classified
NEs. However, our detailed consideration of rela-
tions helped to uncover ? and correct some mistakes
in the original classification.
In order to explain the task(s) at hand, let us de-
scribe shortly ReRelEM?s syntax: In ReRelEM?s
golden collection, each NE has a unique ID. A re-
lation between NE is indicated by the additional at-
tributes COREL (filled with the ID of the related en-
tity) and TIPOREL (filled with the name of the re-
lation) present in the NE that corresponds to one of
the arguments of the relation. (Actually, there?s no
difference if the relation is marked in the first or in
the second argument.)
131
One referring expression can be associated with
one or more NEs through several semantic relations.
In such cases, all possible relations must be assigned
to the referring expression, in the form of a list, as
illustrated by UTAD in Figure 1.
In this example, the NE with name UTAD (and
id ex1-42) corresponds to an acronym of Univer-
sidade de Tra?s-os-Montes e Alto Douro (a univer-
sity in Portugal), maintaining with this entity an
identity relation (ident). The TIPOREL field of
ex1-42 contains another relation, inclui, which
stands for the relation of inclusion, this time with
the previously mentioned Servic?os Administrativos
(ex1-40), a specific department of the university.
In order to minimize human labour and also to
let systems mark relations the way it would better
suit them, we have postulated from the start that, for
all purposes, it would be equivalent to annotate ev-
erything or just enough relations so that all others
can be automatically computed. So, the evaluation
programs, in an obvious extension of what was pro-
posed in (Vilain et al, 1995) for identity,
1. add/expand all relations with their inverses
(e.g., ?A includes B? entails ?B is included in
A?), and
2. apply a set of expansion rules (see examples in
Table 4) to compute the closure
As a consequence, different systems may tag the
same text in different ways, but encoding the same
knowledge.
2.4 What is a relevant relation?
An important difference as to what we expect as rel-
evant relations should be pointed out: instead of re-
quiring explicit (linguistic) clues, as in traditional
research on anaphor, we look for all relations that
may make sense in the specific context of the whole
document. Let us provide two arguments supporting
this decision:
? the first one is philosophical: the borders be-
tween world knowledge and contextual infer-
ence can be unclear in many cases, so it is not
easy to distinguish them, even if we did believe
in that separation in the first place;
? the second is practical: marking all possible re-
lations is a way to also deal with unpredictable
informational needs, for example for text min-
ing applications. Take a sentence like ?When I
lived in Peru, I attended a horse show and was
able to admire breeds I had known only from
pictures before, like Falabella and Paso.?. From
this sentence, few people would infer that Paso
is a Peruvian breed, but a horse specialist might
at once see the connection. The question is:
should one identify a relation between Peru and
Paso in this document? We took the affirmative
decision, assuming the existence of users inter-
ested in the topic: ?relation of breeds to horse
shows: are local breeds predominant??.
However, and since this was the first time such eval-
uation contest was run, we took the following mea-
sure: we added the attribute INDEP to the cases
where the relation was not possible to be inferred
by the text. In this way, it is possible to assess
the frequency of these cases in the texts, and one
may even filter them out before scoring the system
runs to check their weight in the ranking of the sys-
tems. Interestingly, there were very few cases (only
6) marked INDEP in the annotated collection.
3 Qualitative relation description
Identity (or co-reference) does not need to be ex-
plained, although we should insist that this is not
identity of expression, but of meaning. So the same
string does not necessarily imply identity, cf.:
Os adeptos do Porto invadiram a cidade
do Porto em ju?bilo.4
Interestingly, even though organization is only the
third most frequent category, Figure 2 shows that we
found more co-reference among organizations than
among any other category.
As to inclusion (see Figure 3), it was defined be-
tween NEs of the same sort, as the folowing ex-
amples, respectively illustrating LOCAL, PESSOA,
OBRA and ORGANIZACAO, show:
Centenas de pessoas recepcionaram no
Aeroporto da Portela num clima de
enorme entusiasmo e euforia, a selecc?a?o
4The (FC) Porto fans invaded the (city of) Porto, very happy
132
<EM ID="ex1-39" CATEG="PESSOA" TIPO="INDIVIDUAL"> Miguel Rodrigues</EM>
, chefe dos <EM ID="ex1-40" CATEG="ORGANIZACAO" TIPO="INSTITUICAO"
COREL="ex1-39" TIPOREL="outra">Servic?os Administrativos</EM> da <EM
ID="ex1-41" CATEG="ORGANIZACAO" TIPO="INSTITUICAO" COREL="ex1-40"
TIPOREL="inclui"> Universidade de Tra?s-os-Montes e Alto Douro</EM> <EM
ID="ex1-42" CATEG="ORGANIZACAO" TIPO="INSTITUICAO" COREL="ex1-41 ex1-40"
TIPOREL="ident inclui">UTAD</EM>
Figure 1: Full example of ReRelEM syntax.
Figure 2: Distribution of NE categories for identity.
portuguesa de ra?guebi. A boa prestac?a?o
global da equipa (...) na?o passou desperce-
bida em Portugal.5
Lewis Hamilton, colega de Alonso na
McLaren6
da assinatura do Tratado de Lisboa (...)
de ver reconhecido o valor juridicamente
vinculativo da Carta um passo ?essencial
no quadro de reforma dos Tratados7
por participar na cerimo?nia de
proclamac?a?o da Carta dos Direitos
Fundamentais da UE (...) salientou
ainda o compromisso assumido pelas tre?s
instituic?o?es - PE8
5Hundreds of people waited with enthusiasm and eupho-
ria at the Portela Airport for the Portuguese national rugby
team.(...) The team?s good performance did not go unnoticed in
Portugal
6Lewis Hamilton, Alonso?s team-mate in McLaren ? Note
that, in HAREM, teams are considered groups of people, there-
fore an individual and a team have the same category PESSOA
(person), but differ in the type.
7the signing of the Lisbon Treaty (...) juridically vincula-
tive value of the Charter, a crucial step for the Treaties reform
policy
8to participate in the proclamation ceremony of the Charter
Figure 3: NE categories related by inclusion.
Placement is clearly skewed towards placement of
organizations (518 cases) as opposed to occurrence
of events (just 98 instances). However, if we con-
sider the relative distribution of organizations and
events (see Table 2), we can state that, relative to
their places, events have 4.8 relations in average and
organizations 5.0, which is a far more interesting re-
sult, not favouring any of the NE classes.
Examples of this relation are:
GP Brasil ? Na?o faltou emoc?a?o em Inter-
lagos no Circuito Jose? Carlos Pace9
As to the refinement of outra, Table 3 presents the
relations found in the material.
3.1 Vague categories
It is important to stress that the basic tenets of
HAREM had to be followed or reckoned with, not
only the classification grid (see Table 2) but par-
ticularly the fact that some named entities are con-
sidered to be vague among different categories in
of Fundamental Rights of the EU (...) stressed the commitment
assumed by the three institutions - EP
9GP Brasil ? There was no lack of excitement in Interlagos
at the Jose? Carlos Pace Circuit.
133
Relation / gloss Number
vinculo-inst / inst-commitment 936
obra-de / work-of 300
participante-em / participant-in 202
ter-participacao-de / has-participant 202
relacao-familiar / family-tie 90
residencia-de / home-of 75
natural-de / born-in 47
relacao-profissional / professional-tie 46
povo-de / people-of 30
representante-de / representative-of 19
residente-de / living-in 15
personagem-de / character-of 12
periodo-vida / life-period 11
propriedade-de / owned-by 10
proprietario-de / owner-of 10
representado-por / represented-by 7
praticado-em / practised-in 7
outra-rel/other 6
nome-de-ident / name-of 4
outra-edicao / other-edition 2
Table 3: Frequency of other relations.
HAREM.10
This last property, namely that named entities
could belong to more than one category, posed some
problems, since it was not straightforward whether
different relations would involve all or just some (or
one) category. So, in order to specify clearly the
relations between vague NEs, we decided to spec-
ify separate relations between facets of vague named
entities. Cf. the following example, in which vague-
ness is conveyed by a slash:
(...) a ideia de uma Europa (LO-
CAL/PESSOA) unida. (...) um dia feliz
para as cidada?s e os cidada?os da Unia?o
Europeia (LOCAL). (...) Somos essen-
cialmente uma comunidade de valores ?
sa?o estes valores comuns que constituem
o fundamento da Unia?o Europeia (AB-
STRACCAO/ORG/LOCAL).11
10This is different from considering metonymy classes, in
that no classifications are considered more basic than others, see
(Santos, 2006) for vagueness as an intrinsic property of natural
language.
11the idea of a united Europe (...) a happy day for the citizens
The several relations between the three bold-faced
NEs have been found to be as follows: The LO-
CAL facet of the first NE is identical with the LO-
CAL facets of the second and third NEs, while the
ORG(ANIZACAO) facet of the third NE is located
in the LOCAL facet of the second and first NEs.
(Two kinds of relations are therefore involved here:
ident and inclui.)
4 Evaluation: architecture and measures
Our first concern in this pilot track was to make a
clear separation between the evaluation of relations
and the evaluation of NE detection, which was the
goal of HAREM. So, ReRelEM ?s evaluation uses as
a starting point the set of alignments that correspond
to a mapping of the NE in the golden collection (GC)
to a (candidate) NE in the participation.
Evaluation has the following stages:
? Maximization: the sets of relations annotated in
both the GC and in the participation are maxi-
mized, applying the rules in Table 4;
? Selection: the alignments where the NE in the
GC is different from the corresponding one in
the participation are removed, and so are all re-
lations held between removed NEs;
? Normalization: The identifiers of the NE in the
participation are normalized in order to make it
possible to compare the relations in both sides,
given that each system uses its own identifiers.
? Translation: The alignments are translated to
triples: arg1 relation arg2, where the
arguments consist of the identifiers of the
NE together with the facet, for example x67
LOCAL sede-de ty45 ORGANIZACAO.
? Filtering: removing relations of types not be-
ing evaluated (because HAREM, and therefore
ReRelEM, allows for partial participation ? and
evaluation ? scenarios12).
? Individual evaluation: the triples in the GC are
compared to the triples in the participation.
of the European Union (...) We are mainly a community of
values and these common values constitute the foundation of
the European Union.
12In other words, it is possible to select a subset of the classi-
fication hierarchy.
134
A ident B ? B ident C ? A ident C
A inclui B ? B inclui C ? A inclui C
A inclui B ? B sede de C ? A sede de C
A ident B ? B any rel C ? A any rel C
Table 4: Maximization rules
System NE task Relations
Rembr. all all
SeRelEP only identification all but outra
SeiGeo only LOCAL detection inclusion
Table 5: Participant systems
? Global evaluation: measures (precision, recall
and F-measure) are calculated based on the
score of each triple.
Each triple is scored as correct, missing or incor-
rect. We only considered as correct triples (and cor-
rect relations) those which linked the correct NEs
and whose relation was well classified. So, a system
doesn?t score if it correctly matches the NEs to be re-
lated, but fails to recognize the kind of relation. We
assign one point to each correct relation and none to
incorrect or missing relations, and then we compute
precision, recall and F-measure.
ReRelEM?s golden collection includes 12 texts
with 4,417 words and 573 NEs (corresponding to
642 different facets). In all we annotated 6,790 re-
lations (1436 identity; 1612 inclusion; 1232 place-
ment; 2510 other).
5 Participation and results
For this first edition, only three systems (totalling
nine runs) participated, namely REMBRANDT
(Cardoso, 2008), SEI-Geo (Chaves, 2008), and
SeRelEP (Bruckschen et al, 2008), whose results
are found in Figure 4. However, they did not com-
pare well: they selected different NER tasks and dif-
ferent relation types, as shown in Table 5. So, given
the little and diverse participation in ReRelEM, we
cannot do a useful state of the art, but we were def-
initely able to provide an interesting and important
resource for empirical studies and for training of fu-
ture systems, as well as a set of publicly available
programs to manipulate, evaluate and display this
Figure 4: ReRelEM results: F-measure, all relations
kind of semantic data13.
6 Discussion and further work
Although this was just a pilot, a lot of knowledge
about the task and the problems to be dealt with were
gathered for the future, and important resources
were offered to the community.
We intend to annotate further sections of the
HAREM golden collection (as well as other kinds
of texts and materials) with more relations in order
to have more quantitative empirical data for studying
the semantic fabric of Portuguese.
Although from an organization point of view it
made sense to couple ReRelEM with HAREM, one
should reflect over the consequences of inheriting a
lot of decisions taken in HAREM, somehow going
counter the intuitive and easier task of just annotat-
ing relations in a first round. However, despite initial
fears to the contrary, we found out that the consid-
erably fine-grained HAREM grid was in fact benefi-
cial to the task of specifying relations: it is, after all,
much more informative to have a relation of inclu-
sion between a COISA-MEMBROCLASSE (concrete
instance of a class of objects) and a COISA-CLASSE
(a class of objects), than just a relation of inclusion
13http://www.linguateca.pt/HAREM/
135
tout court. In fact, in the next sentence, a kind of
specialization relation can be uncovered.
Astro?nomos brasileiros esperam fotogra-
far os primeiros planetas fora do Sistema
Solar com a ajuda do maior telesco?pio
do mundo, o Gemini (...) os telesco?pios
Gemini te?m capacidade cient??fica...14
Likewise, an inclusion relation held between
PESSOA-GRUPOCARGO (a group of roles performed
by people) and PESSOA-INDIVIDUAL (an individ-
ual person) , as in the following example, is more
informative than a simple relation of inclusion be-
tween NEs, or even inclusion between PESSOA enti-
ties without further discrimination.
Po?ttering, So?crates e Barroso assinam
Carta dos Direitos Fundamentais da UE.
Depois de a Carta ser assinada pelos
Presidentes das tre?s instituic?o?es, ouviu-se
o hino europeu...15
Furthermore, this relation is also different from
an inclusion relation held between PESSOA-
INDIVIDUAL (an individual) and PESSOA-
GRUPOMEMBRO (a group of people):
Lobos recebidos em apoteose. (...) o
capita?o Vasco Uva explicou por que houve
uma empatia ta?o grande entre... 16
Conversely, the specification of relations between
different NEs in a text may help in detecting and jus-
tifying different facets of a particular NE, i.e., mul-
tiple semantic categories that should be assigned to
it.
This illustrates the often observed case that it may
be easier for a human annotator to decide and choose
a specific issue than a too general one, and that there-
fore categories or choices should be more dependent
on ease of human interpretation than quantitative
factors (such as few categories or balanced ones).
14Brazilian astronomers expect to take the first pictures of
planets beyond the solar system with the help of the largest
telescope in the world, Gemini (...) Gemini telescopes have
a capacity...
15Po?ttering, So?crates e Barroso sign the declaration... After
being signed by the Presidents of the three institutions, ...
16Lobos received apoteothically. (...) Captain Vasco Uva
explained why ...
For future work, we obviously intend to increase
the size of the annotated collection (to the whole
HAREM collection and even beyond), and investi-
gate a couple of issues that interest us: which strate-
gies are used to avoid repetition of proper names
and establish textual cohesion? How do relations
between noun phrases in general compare with re-
lations between entities?
We would also like to investigate closer rela-
tionships between different relations: for exam-
ple, is it more appropriate to also develop a hi-
erarchy of relations, reconsidering, for example,
affiliation (currently one of the other) as a
kind of inclusion?
In order to understand better what this task is
about, we would also like to investigate whether
there are interesting correlations between NE cate-
gories and relations, as well as text genre and this
sort of connectivity. Even though we only studied
and annotated in depth 12 different texts, it was at
once obvious that they had quite different properties
as far as the number and kinds of relations was con-
cerned.
From an evaluation point of view, we would like
to improve our inconsistency detection programs
and be able to reason about possible contradictions
(of the annotation or of the interpretation) as well
as experiment with different weights and evaluation
measures, taking into account criteria such as pre-
dictability of relationships between NEs.
In any case, we believe this was an important first
step to understand a number of issues and to reflect
about what computational systems should be doing
to harvest semantic knowledge. We would like to
receive feedback on whether the task design seems
sound to the rest of the community, and whether sys-
tems which would perform well in such task could
be put to good use in real world applications.
Acknowledgments
This work was done in the scope of the Linguateca
project, jointly funded by the Portuguese Govern-
ment and the European Union (FEDER and FSE)
under contract ref. POSC/339/1.3/C/NAC.
136
References
Eugene Agichtein and Luis Gravano. 2000. Snowball:
Extracting Relations from Large Plain-Text Collec-
tions. In Proc. of the 5th ACM International Con-
ference on Digital Libraries (ACM DL), pages 85?94,
San Antonio, Texas, USA, June, 2-7.
M??rian Bruckschen, Jose? Guilherme Camargo de Souza,
Renata Vieira, and Sandro Rigo. 2008. Sistema
SeRELeP para o reconhecimento de relac?o?es entre en-
tidades mencionadas. In Mota and Santos (Mota and
Santos, 2008).
Nuno Cardoso. 2008. REMBRANDT - Reconhecimento
de Entidades Mencionadas Baseado em Relac?o?es e
ANa?lise Detalhada do Texto. In Mota and Santos
(Mota and Santos, 2008).
Marc??rio Chaves. 2008. Geo-ontologias e padro?es para
reconhecimento de locais e de suas relac?o?es em textos:
o SEI-Geo no Segundo HAREM. In Mota and Santos
(Mota and Santos, 2008).
Sandra Collovini, Thiago Ianez Carbonel, Ju-
liana Thiesen Fuchs, Jorge Ce?sar Coelho, Lucia
Helena Machado Rino, and Renata Vieira. 2007.
Summ-it: Um corpus anotado com informac?o?es
discursivas visando a` sumarizac?a?o automa?tica. In
Anais do XXVII Congresso da SBC: V Workshop em
Tecnologia da Informac?a?o e da Linguagem Humana
? TIL, pages 1605?1614, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil,
junho/julho.
Aron Culotta and Jeffrey Sorensen. 2004. Dependency
tree kernels for relation extraction. In Proceedings of
the 42rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (ACL?04), pages 423?429. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, July.
Jose? Guilherme Camargo de Souza, Patr??cia Nunes
Gonc?alves, and Renata Vieira. 2008. Learning coref-
erence resolution for portuguese texts. In Anto?nio
Teixeira, Vera Lu?cia Strube de Lima, Lu??s Caldas
de Oliveira, and Paulo Quaresma, editors, PROPOR,
volume 5190 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pages 153?162. Springer.
Georde Doddington, Alexis Mitchell, Mark Przybocki,
Lance Ramshaw, Stephanie Strassel, and Ralph
Weischedel. 2004. The automatic content extraction
(ace) programm. tasks, data and evaluation. In Pro-
ceedings of the Fourth International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation, pages 837?840,
Lisbon, Portugal.
Cla?udia Freitas, Diana Santos, Hugo Gonc?alo Oliveira,
Paula Carvalho, and Cristina Mota. 2008. Relac?o?es
sema?nticas do ReRelEM: ale?m das entidades no Se-
gundo HAREM. In Mota and Santos (Mota and San-
tos, 2008).
Ruslan Mitkov. 2000. Towards a more consistent and
comprehensive evaluation of anaphora resolution al-
gorithms and systems. In Proceedings of the Dis-
course Anaphora and Anaphora Resolution Collo-
quium (DAARC-2000), pages 96?107, Lancaster, UK.
Cristina Mota and Diana Santos, editors. 2008. Desafios
no reconhecimento de entidades mencionadas: O Se-
gundo HAREM. Linguateca.
NIST and ACE. 2007. Automatic Content Extrac-
tion 2008 Evaluation Plan (ACE08) ? Assessment of
Detection and Recognition of Entities and Relations
within and across Documents. Technical report, NIST.
Constantin Ora?san, Dan Cristea, Ruslan Mitkov, and An-
tonio Branco. 2008. Anaphora resolution exercise:
An overview. In Proceedings of the Sixth International
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC?08), Mar-
rakech, Morocco, May, 28 - 30.
Dan Roth and Wen tau Yih. 2004. A linear programming
formulation for global inference in natural language
tasks. In Proceedings of CoNLL-2004, pages 1?8.
Diana Santos and Nuno Cardoso, editors. 2007. Re-
conhecimento de entidades mencionadas em por-
tugue?s: Documentac?a?o e actas do HAREM, a primeira
avaliac?a?o conjunta na a?rea. Linguateca, Portugal.
Diana Santos, Cla?udia Freitas, Hugo Gonc?alo Oliveira,
and Paula Carvalho. 2008. Second HAREM: new
challenges and old wisdom. In Anto?nio Teixeira, Vera
Lu?cia Strube de Lima, Lu??s Caldas de Oliveira, and
Paulo Quaresma, editors, Computational Processing
of the Portuguese Language, 8th International Con-
ference, Proceedings (PROPOR 2008), volume LNAI
5190, pages 212?215. Springer Verlag.
Diana Santos. 2006. What is natural language? Dif-
ferences compared to artificial languages, and conse-
quences for natural language processing, 15 May. In-
vited lecture, SBLP2006 and PROPOR?2006.
Marc Vilain, John Burger, John Aberdeen, Dennis Con-
nolly, and Lynette Hirschman. 1995. A model-
theoretic coreference scoring scheme. In Proceed-
ings of the Sixth Message Understanding Conference
(MUC-6), pages 45?52. Morgan Kaufmann.
Bonnie Lynn Webber. 1978. A formal approach to dis-
course anaphora. Outstanding dissertations in linguis-
tics. Garland Publishing, New York, NY, USA.
Shubin Zhao and Ralph Grishman. 2005. Extracting re-
lations with integrated information using kernel meth-
ods. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting on As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2005),
pages 419?426, Morristown, NJ, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
137
Multiword Lexical Acquisition and Dictionary Formalization 
Cristina MOTA 
LabEL, CAUTL, IST 
Av. Rovisco Pais 
Lisboa, Portugal, 1049-001 
cristina@label.ist.utl.pt 
Paula CARVALHO 
University of Lisbon and 
LabEL, CAUTL, IST  
Av. Rovisco Pais 
Lisboa, Portugal, 1049-001 
paula@label.ist.utl.pt 
Elisabete RANCHHOD 
University of Lisbon and 
LabEL, CAUTL, IST  
Av. Rovisco Pais 
Lisboa, Portugal, 1049-001 
elisabet@label.ist.utl.pt 
 
Abstract 
In this paper, we present the current state of 
development of a large-scale lexicon built at 
LabEL1 for Portuguese. We will concentrate on 
multiword expressions (MWE), particularly on 
multiword nouns, (i) illustrating their most relevant 
morphological features, and (ii) pointing out the 
methods and techniques adopted to generate  the 
inflected forms from lemmas. Moreover, we 
describe a corpus-based aproach for the acquisition 
of new multiword nouns, which  led to a 
significant enlargement of the existing lexicon. 
Evaluation results concerning lexical coverage in 
the corpus are also discussed. 
1 Introduction 
MWEs have been viewed, for long time, as 
marginal idiosyncratic combinations of words. In 
recent years, however, there has been a growing 
awareness in the NLP community of the problems 
that MWEs pose and the need for their robust 
handling. Several major conferences and satellite 
workshops have been dedicated to the subject 
(ACL, EACL, LREC, for instance); major 
publications devote thematic issues to MWEs. 
Anticipating that growing interest, over the last 
years, a significant part of LabEL?s research has 
been devoted to the development of large-scale, 
linguistically precise language resources, namely 
to the construction of computational lexicons for 
simple  and multiword units (Eleut?rio et al, 1995; 
Ranchhod et al, 1999; Ranchhod et al, 2004). 
In fact, we have observed that MWEs are used 
frequently in both everyday language and technical 
and scientific texts to express ideas and concepts 
that in general cannot be stated by ?free? linguistic 
structures. They include a large range of different 
linguistic phenomena, such as: (i) lexical 
compounds (nouns: cellular phone, rush hour, New 
Jersey; adjectives: well-known; adverbs: for the 
time being, in short; prepositions and conjunctions: 
                                                     
1
 LabEL (Laborat?rio de Engenharia da Linguagem) 
http://label.ist.utl.pt 
in spite of, in order to) (ii) phrasal verbs (give up); 
(iii) light verbs (give a lecture); (iv) fixed 
(proverbs and maxims) and semi-fixed sentences 
(to see the light at the end of the tunnel; to take the 
Lord? name in vain). From a linguistic point of 
view, all these expressions exhibit distributional 
and selectional constraints, i.e. they lack 
compositionality, and frequently have idiomatic 
interpretations. 
In this paper, we focus on multiword nouns. 
Special attention will be given to their 
formalization and generation, using INTEX, a 
public FST (Finite-State Transducer) based NLP 
system [Silberztein, 1993]. In this context, we 
present the main characteristics of a new 
inflectional module, conceived at LabEL, fully 
compatible with this system. Next, we describe the 
acquisition methodology used to gather new 
dictionary entries in a fragment (extracts 1,520,001 
to 1,567,625) of the non-annotated version of a 
public Portuguese corpus, CETEMPublico2. 
Finally, based on this experiment, we assess, on 
the one hand, the  dictionary increase, and, on the 
other hand, the lexical coverage improvement in 
the referred corpus. 
2 Characterization of Multiword Nouns 
Multiword (or compound) nouns are composed of 
non-capitalized simple words. Superficially, they 
seem to result from general rules of word 
combinations but they present constraints 
(morphological, combinatorial, etc.) concerning 
the properties they were supposed to have. 
Regarding inflection, general rules presented by 
grammarians do apply to some cases, but most 
compounds exhibit inflectional restrictions on 
gender or number that cannot be described by the 
morphological properties of their constituents. 
Table 1 presents a few examples of the most 
representative classes of compound nouns in 
Portuguese. 
                                                     
2
 CETEMPublico is a journalistic corpus containing 
about 180 million words (see Santos and Rocha, 2001 
for techical information). 
    	 
 	         

 

 
  
 

 
 	 
  
 	 
  	 
 
  	 
 
 	 
     	 
 
 	 
       
    	 
 
 	 
  	 
 
 	 
   
  	 
 
                  
  
   Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics:shortpapers, pages 564?568,
Portland, Oregon, June 19-24, 2011. c?2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
Liars and Saviors                                                                                            
in a Sentiment Annotated Corpus of Comments to Political debates 
 
 
Paula Carvalho Lu?s Sarmento 
University of Lisbon Labs Sapo UP & University of Porto 
Faculty of Sciences, LASIGE Faculty of Engineering, LIACC 
Lisbon, Portugal Porto, Portugal 
pcc@di.fc.ul.pt las@co.sapo.pt 
 
Jorge Teixeira 
 
M?rio J. Silva 
Labs Sapo UP & University of Porto University of Lisbon 
Faculty of Engineering, LIACC Faculty of Sciences, LASIGE 
Porto, Portugal Lisbon, Portugal 
jft@fe.up.pt mjs@di.fc.ul.pt 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
We investigate the expression of opinions 
about human entities in user-generated con-
tent (UGC). A set of 2,800 online news 
comments (8,000 sentences) was manually 
annotated, following a rich annotation 
scheme designed for this purpose. We con-
clude that the challenge in performing opi-
nion mining in such type of content is 
correctly identifying the positive opinions, 
because (i) they are much less frequent 
than negative opinions and (ii) they are par-
ticularly exposed to verbal irony. We also 
show that the recognition of human targets 
poses additional challenges on mining opi-
nions from UGC, since they are frequently 
mentioned by pronouns, definite descrip-
tions and nicknames. 
1 Introduction 
Most of the existing approaches to opinion mining 
propose algorithms that are independent of the text 
genre, the topic and the target involved. However, 
practice shows that the opinion mining challenges 
are substantially different depending on these fac-
tors, whose interaction has not been exhaustively 
studied so far. 
This study focuses on identifying the most rele-
vant challenges in mining opinions targeting media 
personalities, namely politicians, in comments 
posted by users to online news articles. We are 
interested in answering open research questions 
related to the expression of opinions about human 
entities in UGC. 
It has been suggested that the target identifica-
tion is probably the easiest step in mining opinions 
on products using product reviews (Liu, 2010). 
But, is this also true for human targets namely for 
media personalities like politicians? How are these 
entities mentioned in UGC? What are the most 
productive forms of mention? Is it a standard 
name, a nickname, a pronoun, a definite descrip-
tion? Additionally, it was demonstrated that irony 
may influence the correct detection of positive 
opinions about human entities (Carvalho et al, 
2009); however, we do not know the prevalence of 
this phenomenon in UGC. Is it possible to establish 
any type of correlation between the use of irony 
and negative opinions? Finally, approaches to opi-
nion mining have implicitly assumed that the prob-
lem at stake is a balanced classification problem, 
based on the general assumption that positive and 
negative opinions are relatively well distributed in 
564
texts. But, should we expect to find a balanced 
number of negative and positive opinions in com-
ments targeting human entities, or should we be 
prepared for dealing with very unbalanced data? 
To answer these questions, we analyzed a col-
lection of comments posted by the readers of an 
online newspaper to a series of 10 news articles, 
each covering a televised face-to-face debate be-
tween the Portuguese leaders of five political par-
ties. Having in mind the previously outlined 
questions, we designed an original rich annotation 
scheme to label opinionated sentences targeting 
human entities in this corpus, named SentiCorpus-
PT. Inspection of the corpus annotations supports 
the annotation scheme proposed and helps to iden-
tify directions for future work in this research area. 
2 Related Work 
MPQA is an example of a manually annotated 
sentiment corpus (Wiebe et al, 2005; Wilson et al, 
2005). It contains about 10,000 sentences collected 
from world press articles, whose private states 
were manually annotated. The annotation was per-
formed at word and phrase level, and the sentiment 
expressions identified in the corpus were asso-
ciated to the source of the private-state, the target 
involved and other sentiment properties, like inten-
sity and type of attitude. MPQA is an important 
resource for sentiment analysis in English, but it 
does not reflect the semantics of specific text ge-
nres or domains. 
Pang et al (2002) propose a methodology for 
automatically constructing a domain-specific cor-
pus, to be used in the automatic classification of 
movie reviews. The authors selected a collection of 
movie reviews where user ratings were explicitly 
expressed (e.g. ?4 stars?), and automatically con-
verted them into positive, negative or neutral polar-
ities. This approach simplifies the creation of a 
sentiment corpus, but it requires that each opinio-
nated text is associated to a numeric rating, which 
does not exist for most of opinionated texts availa-
ble on the web. In addition, the corpus annotation 
is performed at document-level, which is inade-
quate when dealing with more complex types of 
text, such as news and comments to news, where a 
multiplicity of sentiments for a variety of topics 
and corresponding targets are potentially involved 
(Riloff and Wiebe., 2003; Sarmento et al, 2009). 
Alternative approaches to automatic and manual 
construction of sentiment corpora have been pro-
posed. For example, Kim and Hovy (2007) col-
lected web users? messages posted on an election 
prediction website (www.electionprediction.org) to 
automatically build a gold standard corpus. The 
authors focus on capturing lexical patterns that 
users frequently apply when expressing their pre-
dictive opinions about coming elections. Sarmento 
et al (2009) design a set of manually crafted rules, 
supported by a large sentiment lexicon, to speed up 
the compilation and classification of opinionated 
sentences about political entities in comments to 
news. This method achieved relatively high preci-
sion in collecting negative opinions; however, it 
was less successful in collecting positive opinions. 
3 The Corpus 
For creating SentiCorpus-PT we compiled a collec-
tion of comments posted by the readers of the Por-
tuguese newspaper P?blico to a series of 10 news 
articles covering the TV debates on the 2009 elec-
tion of the Portuguese Parliament. These took 
place between the 2nd and the 12th of September, 
2009, and involved the candidates from the largest 
Portuguese parties. The whole collection is com-
posed by 2,795 posts (approx. 8,000 sentences), 
which are linked to the respective news articles. 
This collection is interesting for several reasons. 
The opinion targets are mostly confined to a pre-
dictable set of human entities, i.e. the political 
actors involved in each debate. Additionally, the 
format adopted in the debates indirectly encour-
aged users to focus their comments on two specific 
candidates at a time, persuading them to confront 
their standings. This is particularly interesting for 
studying both direct and indirect comparisons be-
tween two or more competing human targets (Ga-
napathibhotla and Liu, 2008). 
Our annotation scheme stands on the following 
assumptions: (i) the sentence is the unit of analysis, 
whose interpretation may require the analysis of 
the entire comment; (ii) each sentence may convey 
different opinions; (iii) each opinion may have 
different targets; (iv) the targets, which can be 
omitted in text, correspond to human entities; (v) 
the entity mentions are classifiable into syntactic-
semantic categories; (vi) the opinionated sentences 
may be characterized according to their polarity 
565
and intensity; (vii) each opinionated sentence may 
have a literal or ironic interpretation. 
 
Opinion Target: An opinionated sentence may 
concern different opinion targets. Typically, targets 
correspond to the politicians participating in the 
televised debates or, alternatively, to other relevant 
media personalities that should also be identified 
(e.g. The Minister of Finance is done!). There are 
also cases wherein the opinion is targeting another 
commentator (e.g. Mr. Francisco de Amarante, did 
you watch the same debate I did?!?!?), and others 
where expressed opinions do not identify their 
target (e.g. The debate did not interest me at all!). 
All such cases are classified accordingly. 
The annotation also differentiates how human 
entities are mentioned. We consider the following 
syntactic-semantic sub-categories: (i) proper name, 
including acronyms (e.g. Jos? S?crates, MFL), 
which can be preceded by a title or position name 
(e.g. Prime-minister Jos? S?crates; Eng. S?crates); 
(ii) position name (e.g. social-democratic leader); 
(iii) organization (e.g. PS party, government); (iv) 
nickname (e.g. Pin?crates); (v) pronoun (e.g. him); 
(vi) definite description, i.e. a noun phrase that can 
be interpreted at sentence or comment level, after 
co-reference resolution (e.g. the guys at the Minis-
try of Education); (vii) omitted, when the reference 
to the entity is omitted in text, a situation that is 
frequent in null subject languages, like European 
Portuguese (e.g. [He] massacred...). 
 
Opinion Polarity and Intensity: An opinion po-
larity value, ranging from ?-2? (the strongest nega-
tive value) to ?2? (the strongest positive value), is 
assigned to each of the previously identified tar-
gets. Neutral opinions are classified with ?0?, and 
the cases that are ambiguous or difficult to interp-
ret are marked with ???.  
Because of its subjectivity, the full range of the 
intensity scale (?-2? vs. ?-1?; ?1? vs. ?2?) is re-
served for the cases where two or more targets are, 
directly or indirectly, compared at sentence or 
comment levels (e.g. Both performed badly, but 
S?crates was clearly worse). The remaining nega-
tive and positive opinions should be classified as ?-
1? and ?1?, respectively. 
Sentences not clearly conveying sentiment or 
opinion (usually sentences used for contextualizing 
or quoting something/someone) are classified as 
?non-opinionated sentences?.  
Opinion Literality: Finally, opinions are characte-
rized according to their literality. An opinion can 
be considered literal, or ironic whenever it conveys 
a meaning different from the one that derives from 
the literal interpretation of the text (e.g. This 
prime-minister is wonderful! Undoubtedly, all the 
Portuguese need is more taxes!). 
4 Corpus Analysis 
The SentiCorpus-PT was partially annotated by an 
expert, following the guidelines previously de-
scribed. Concretely, 3,537 sentences, from 736 
comments (27% of the collection), were manually 
labeled with sentiment information. Such com-
ments were randomly selected from the entire col-
lection, taking into consideration that each debate 
should be proportionally represented in the senti-
ment annotated corpus. 
To measure the reliability of the sentiment anno-
tations, we conducted an inter-annotator agreement 
trial, with two annotators. This was performed 
based on the analysis of 207 sentences, randomly 
selected from the collection. The agreement study 
was confined to the target identification, polarity 
assignment and opinion literality, using Krippen-
dorff's Alpha standard metric (Krippendorff, 
2004). The highest observed agreement concerns 
the target identification (?=0.905), followed by the 
polarity assignment (?=0.874), and finally the iro-
ny labeling (?=0.844). According to Krippen-
dorff?s interpretation, all these values (> 0.8) 
confirm the reliability of the annotations. 
The results presented in the following sections 
are based on statistics taken from the 3,537 anno-
tated sentences. 
4.1 Polarity distribution 
Negative opinions represent 60% of the analyzed 
sentences. In our collection, only 15% of the sen-
tences have a positive interpretation, and 13% a 
neutral interpretation. The remaining 12% are non-
opinionated sentences (10%) and sentences whose 
polarity is vague or ambiguous (2%). If one con-
siders only the elementary polar values, it can be 
observed that the number of negative sentences is 
about three times higher than the number of posi-
tive sentences (68% vs. 17%).  
The graphic in Fig. 1 shows the polarity distri-
bution per political debate. With the exception of 
the debate between Jer?nimo de Sousa (C5) and 
566
Paulo Portas (C3), in which the number of positive 
and negative sentences is relatively balanced, all 
the remaining debates generated comments with 
much more negative than positive sentences.
 
Fig. 1. Polarity distribution per political debate
 
When focusing on the debate participants, it can 
be observed that Jos? S?crates (C1)
censured candidate, and Jer?nimo de Sousa (
the least censured one, as shown in Fig. 
ly, the former was reelected as prime
the later achieved the lowest percentage of votes in 
the 2009 parliamentary election. 
 
Fig. 2. Polarity distribution per candidate
 
Also interesting is the information contained in 
the distributions of positive opinions. 
that there is a large correlation (The Pearson corr
lation coefficient is r = 0.917) between the 
of comments and the number of votes of each ca
didate (Table 1). 
 
 
 
 is the most 
C5) 
2. Curious-
-minister, and 
 
 
We observe 
e-
number 
n-
Candidate (C) #PosCom
Jos? S?crates (C1) 
M. Ferreira Leite (C2) 
Paulo Portas (C3) 
Francisco Lou?? (C4) 
Jer?nimo de Sousa (C5) 
 
Table 1. Number of positive comments and 
4.2 Entity mentions 
As expected, the most frequent type of mention
candidates is by name, but it only covers 36% of 
the analyzed cases. Secondly, a proper or common 
noun denoting an organization is used metonym
cally for referring its leaders or members
Pronouns and free noun-phrases, which can b
lexically reduced (or omitted) in text, represent 
together 38% of the mentions to candidates. This is 
a considerable fraction, which cannot be neglected
despite being harder to recognize
used in almost 5% of the cases. 
positions/roles of candidates are
mention category used in the corpus
4.3 Irony  
Verbal irony is present in approximately 11% of 
the annotated sentences. The data shows that irony 
and negative polarity are proportionally distributed 
regarding the targets involved (Table 2
an almost perfect correlation between them (
0.99). 
 
Candidate (C) #Neg
Jos? S?crates (C1) 
M. Ferreira Leite (C2) 
Paulo Portas (C3) 
Francisco Lou?? (C4) 
Jer?nimo de Sousa (C5) 
 
Table 2. Number of negative and iro
5 Main Findings and Future Directions
We showed that in our setting negative opinions 
tend to greatly outnumber positive opinions, lea
ing to a very unbalanced opinion 
ratio). Different reasons may explain such 
ance. For example, in UGC, readers tend to be 
more reactive in case of disagreement
express their frustrations more vehemently on ma
 #Votes 
169 2,077,238 
100 1,653,665 
69 592,778 
79 557,306 
58 446,279 
votes 
 to 
i-
 (17%). 
e 
, 
. Nicknames are 
Surprisingly, the 
 the least frequent 
 (4%). 
). There is 
r = 
Com #IronCom 
766 90 
390 57 
156 25 
171 26 
109 14 
nic comments 
 
d-
corpus (80/20 
imbal-
, and tend to 
t-
567
ters that strongly affect their lives, like politics. 
Anonymity might also be a big factor here. 
From an opinion mining point of view, we can 
conjecture that the number of positive opinions is a 
better predictor of the sentiment about a specific 
target than negative opinions. We believe that the 
validation of this hypothesis requires a thorough 
study, based on a larger amount of data spanning 
more electoral debates.  
Based on the data analyzed in this work, we es-
timate that 11% of the opinions expressed in com-
ments would be incorrectly recognized as positive 
opinions if irony was not taken into account. Irony 
seems to affect essentially sentences that would 
otherwise be considered positive. This reinforces 
the idea that the real challenge in performing opi-
nion mining in certain realistic scenarios, such as 
in user comments, is correctly identifying the least 
frequent, yet more informative, positive opinions 
that may exist. 
Also, our study provides important clues about 
the mentioning of human targets in UCG. Most of 
the work on opinion mining has been focused on 
identifying explicit mentions to targets, ignoring 
that opinion targets are often expressed by other 
means, including pronouns and definite descrip-
tions, metonymic expressions and nicknames. The 
correct identification of opinions about human 
targets is a challenging task, requiring up-to-date 
knowledge of the world and society, robustness to 
?noise? introduced by metaphorical mentions, neo-
logisms, abbreviations and nicknames, and the 
capability of performing co-reference resolution. 
SentiCorpus-PT will be made available on our 
website (http://xldb.fc.ul.pt/), and we believe that it 
will be an important resource for the community 
interested in mining opinions targeting politicians 
from user-generated content, to predict future elec-
tion outcomes. In addition, the information pro-
vided in this resource will give new insights to the 
development of opinion mining techniques sensi-
tive to the specific challenges of mining opinions 
on human entities in UGC. 
Acknowledgments 
We are grateful to Jo?o Ramalho for his assistance 
in the annotation of SentiCorpus-PT. This work 
was partially supported by FCT (Portuguese re-
search funding agency) under grant UTA 
Est/MAI/0006/2009 (REACTION project), and 
scholarship SFRH/BPD/45416/2008. We also 
thank FCT for its LASIGE multi-annual support. 
References 
Carvalho, Paula, Lu?s Sarmento, M?rio J. Silva, and 
Eug?nio Oliveira. 2009. ?Clues for Detecting Irony 
in User-Generated Contents: Oh...!! It?s ?so easy? ;-
)?. In Proc. of the 1st International CIKM Workshop 
on Topic-Sentiment Analysis for Mass Opinion Mea-
surement, Hong Kong. 
Ganapathibhotla, Murthy, and Bing Liu. 2008. ?Mining 
Opinions in Comparative Sentences?. In Proc. of the 
22nd International Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics, Manchester. 
Kim Soo-Min, and Eduard Hovy. 2007. ?Crystal: Ana-
lyzing predictive opinions on the web?. In Proc. of 
the Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing and Computational Natural 
Language Learning, Prague.  
Krippendorff, Klaus. 2004. Content Analysis: An Intro-
duction to Its Methodology, 2nd Edition. Sage Publi-
cations, Thousand Oaks, California. 
Liu, Bing. 2010. ?Sentiment Analysis: A Multifaceted 
Problem?. Invited contribution to IEEE Intelligent 
Systems. 
Pang, Bo, Lillian Lee, and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan. 
2002. ?Thumbs up? Sentiment classification using 
machine learning techniques?. In Proc. of the Confe-
rence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language 
Processing, USA. 
Riloff, Ellen, and Janice Wiebe. 2003. ?Learning extrac-
tion patterns for subjective expressions?. In Proc. of 
the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural 
Language Processing, Sapporo. 
Sarmento, Lu?s, Paula Carvalho, M?rio J. Silva, and 
Eug?nio Oliveira. 2009. ?Automatic creation of a 
reference corpus for political opinion mining in user-
generated content?. In Proc. of the 1st International 
CIKM Workshop on Topic-Sentiment Analysis for 
Mass Opinion Measurement, Hong Kong. 
Wiebe, Janice, Theresa Wilson, and Claire Cardie. 
2005. ?Annotating expressions of opinions and emo-
tions in language?. In Language Resources and Eval-
uation, volume 39, 2-3. 
Wilson, Theresa, Janice Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann. 
2005. ?Recognizing Contextual Polarity in Phrase-
Level Sentiment Analysis?. In Proc. of the Joint Hu-
man Language Technology Conference and Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, 
Canada. 
568
