Coling 2008: Companion volume ? Posters and Demonstrations, pages 173?176
Manchester, August 2008
Entailment-based Question Answering  
for Structured Data 
Bogdan Sacaleanu?, Constantin Orasan?, Christian Spurk?, Shiyan 
Ou?, Oscar Ferrandez?, Milen Kouylekov? and Matteo Negri?  
?LT-Lab, DFKI GmbH / Saarbr?cken, Germany 
?RIILP, University of Wolverhampton / Wolverhampton, UK 
?Fondazione Bruno Kessler (FBK) / Trento, Italy 
?University of Alicante / Alicante, Spain 
 
 
Abstract  
This paper describes a Question Answer-
ing system which retrieves answers from 
structured data regarding cinemas and 
movies. The system represents the first 
prototype of a multilingual and multi-
modal QA system for the domain of tour-
ism. Based on specially designed domain 
ontology and using Textual Entailment as 
a means for semantic inference, the sys-
tem can be used in both monolingual and 
cross-language settings with slight ad-
justments for new input languages. 
1 Introduction 
Question Answering over structured data has 
been traditionally addressed through a deep 
analysis of the question in order to reconstruct a 
logical form, which is then translated in the query 
language of the target data (Androutsopoulos et 
al, 1995, Popescu et al 2003). This approach im-
plies a complex mapping between linguistic ob-
jects (e.g. lexical items, syntactic structures) and 
against data objects (e.g. concepts and relations 
in a knowledge base). Unfortunately, such a 
mapping requires extensive manual work, which 
in many cases represents a bottleneck preventing 
the realization of large scale and portable natural 
language interfaces to structured data.  
This paper presents the first prototype of a 
question answering system which can answer 
questions in several languages about movies and 
cinema using a multilingual ontology and textual 
                                                 
 
? 2008. Licensed under the Creative Commons Attri-
bution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported li-
cense (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-
sa/3.0/). Some rights reserved. 
entailment. The remainder of the paper is struc-
tured as follows: Section 2 presents the concept 
of entailment-based question answering; Section 
3 describes our prototype which implements this 
concept; A brief evaluation is presented in Sec-
tion 4, followed by conclusions in Section 5. 
2 Entailment-based QA 
Recently Textual Entailment (TE) has been pro-
posed as a unifying framework for applied se-
mantics (Dagan and Glickman, 2004), where the 
need for an explicit representation of a mapping 
between linguistic objects and data objects can 
be, at least partially, bypassed through the defini-
tion of semantic inferences at a textual level. In 
this framework, a text (T) is said to entail a hy-
pothesis (H) if the meaning of H can be derived 
from the meaning of T. 
On the basis of the TE framework, the QA 
problem can be recast as an entailment problem, 
where the text (T) is the question (or its affirma-
tive version) and the hypothesis (H) is a rela-
tional answer pattern, which is associated to in-
structions for retrieving the answer to the input 
question. In this framework, given a question Q 
and a set of relational answer patterns P, a QA 
system needs to select those patterns in P that are 
entailed by Q. Instructions associated to answer 
patterns may be viewed as high precision proce-
dures for answer extraction, which are dependent 
on the specific source which is asked for. In case 
of QA over structured data, instructions could be 
queries to a database; whilst in case of QA on the 
Web, an instruction could be the URL of a Web 
page containing the answer to a question or some 
form of IR query to a search engine. 
Therefore, the underlying idea of an entail-
ment-based QA system is to match the user?s re-
quest to a set of predefined question patterns in 
order to get some kind of analysis for the request. 
173
As an example consider the question ?Where 
can I watch the movie ?Dreamgirls? next Satur-
day?? and the predefined question patterns: 
? Which movies are currently running in 
[CINEMA]?  EAT = [MOVIE] 
? Where can I watch the movie [MOVIE] 
on [WEEKDAY]?  EAT = [CINEMA] 
? Where can I see [MOVIE]? 
 EAT = [CINEMA] 
In the example, each of the patterns contains 
placeholders for relevant named entities and has 
an expected answer type (EAT) associated with 
it. The entailment-based QA system should re-
turn that pattern (2) is entailed by the question 
and as a result the retrieval instructions associ-
ated to it will be used to answer the question. 
3 Description of system 
Our question answering system implements the 
concept of entailment-based question answering 
described in the previous section. The overall 
structure of our system is presented in Figure 1.  
Given a question asked by a user of the system 
in a known location, the QA planner forwards it 
to the Instance Annotator in order to find any 
concepts that might be related to the targeted 
domain (i.e. cinema, city, movie). The result is 
then analyzed by the Relation Matcher, which on 
the basis of entailment can either select the most 
appropriate interpretation of the question and im-
plicitly its associated procedure of answering the 
question, or decide that the user request is out-of-
coverage if no such interpretation is available. 
The cross-linguality of our system and, to a 
certain extent, the interaction between its compo-
nents is ensured by a domain ontology which is 
used for all four languages involved in the pro-
ject: English, German, Italian and Spanish, and 
its modules (Ou et al, 2008). Concepts from the 
ontology are used to annotate the user questions 
as well as data from which the answer is ex-
tracted. In the current stage of the project, the 
answers are contained in databases obtained from 
content provides or built from structured web 
pages. As a result, the information in the database 
tables was annotated with concepts from the on-
tology and then converted into an RDF graph to 
Figure 1. System Architecture 
174
facilitate retrieval using SPARQL query lan-
guage (Prud'hommeaux and Seaborne, 2006). 
Question patterns corresponding to one or several 
ontological relations were produced after ques-
tions for users were collected and used in the en-
tailment module. The question patterns used by 
the system are very similar to those presented in 
the previous section and contain placeholders for 
the actual entities that are expected to appear in a 
question. 
The SPARQL query associated with a pattern 
selected for a user question is used to retrieve the 
answers from the knowledge base and prepare for 
presentation. Given that our system is not limited 
to returning only textual information, further 
processing can be applied to the retrieved data. 
For example, for proximity questions the list of 
answers consists of cinema names and their GPS-
coordinates, which are used by the Answer Sort-
ing component to reorder the list of answers on 
the basis of their distance to the user?s location. 
Besides presenting the possible answers to a 
given question, the system can offer additional 
information based on the answer?s type: 
? a map for answers that are location 
names, 
? a route description for answers that are 
cinema names, 
? a video-trailer for answers that are movie 
names and 
? an image for answers that are person 
names. 
Due to the fact that a common semantics is 
shared by all four languages by way of a domain 
ontology, the system can be used not only in a 
monolingual setting, but also in a cross-language 
setting. This corresponds to a user-scenario 
where a tourist asks for information in their own 
language in a foreign location (i.e. English 
speaker in Italy). The only difference between 
monolingual and cross-language scenarios is that 
in the cross-language setting, the QA Core sub-
system (Figure 1) selects a Find Entailed Rela-
tion component according to the user input?s lan-
guage. This is due to the entailment algorithms 
that tend to use language specific resources in 
order to attain high accuracy results of matching 
the user request with one of the lexicalized rela-
tions (patterns). It is only the entailment compo-
nent that has to be provided in order to adapt the 
system to new input languages, once the lexical-
ized relations have been translated either manual 
or automatically. 
Both the Instance Annotator and the Answer 
Retriever are language independent, but location 
dependent (Figure 2). The Answer Retriever de-
pends on the location since it is querying data 
found at that place (i.e. Italy), while the Instance 
Annotator looks up instances of the data in the 
user?s question (i.e. annotates an English ques-
tion). They are language independent since they 
are working with data abstractions like SPARQL 
queries (Answer Retriever) or work at character 
level and do not consider language specific as-
pects, like words, in their look-up process (In-
stance Annotator). 
The current version of the system1 is designed 
according to the SOA (Service Oriented Archi-
tecture) and is implemented as point-to-point in-
tegrated web services. Any of the system?s com-
ponents can be substituted by alternative imple-
mentations with no need for further changes as 
long as the functionality remains the same. 
                                                 
1
 http://attila.dfki.uni-sb.de:8282/ QallMe_Proto-
type_WEB_Update/faces/Page6.jsp 
Figure 2. Cross-language Setting 
175
4 Evaluation 
A preliminary evaluation of the first prototype 
was carried out on randomly selected questions 
from a benchmark specifically designed for the 
project. This benchmark was developed to con-
tain questions about various aspects from the 
domain of tourism and for this reason we filtered 
out questions not relevant to cinema or movies. 
The evaluation of the system did not assess 
whether it can extract the correct answer. Instead, 
it measured to what extent the system can select 
the right SPARQL pattern. The explanation for 
this can be found in the fact that once a correct 
question pattern is selected, the extraction of the 
answer requires only retrieval of the answer from 
the database. Moreover, it should be pointed out 
that the main purpose of this preliminary evalua-
tion was to test the interaction between compo-
nents and indicate potential problems, and it was 
less about their performances.  
Table 1 summarises the results of the evalua-
tion. The number of questions used in the evalua-
tion is different from one language to another. 
This can be explained by the fact that for each 
language a number of questions (in general 500) 
was randomly selected from the benchmark and 
only the ones which referred to cinema or movies 
were selected. The column Questions indicates 
the number of questions assessed. The Correct 
column indicates for how many questions a cor-
rect SPARQL was generated. The Wrong column 
corresponds to the number of questions where a 
wrong or incomplete SPARQL was generated. 
This number also includes cases where no 
SPARQL was generated due to lack of corre-
sponding answer pattern. 
 
 Questions Correct Wrong 
English 167 74 (44.31%) 93 (55.68%) 
German 214 120 (56.04%) 94 (43.92%) 
Spanish 58 50 (86.20%) 8 (13.79%) 
Italian 99 46 (46.46%) 53 (53.53%) 
Table 1: Evaluation results 
As can be seen, the results are very different 
from one language to another. This can be ex-
plained by the fact that different entailment en-
gines are used for each language. In addition, 
even though the benchmark was built using a 
common set of guidelines, the complexity of 
questions varies from one language to another. 
For this reason, for some questions it is more dif-
ficult to find the correct pattern than for others.  
Analysis of the results revealed that one of the 
easiest ways to improve the performance of the 
system is to increase the number of patterns. Cur-
rently the average number of patterns per lan-
guage is 42. Improvement of the entailment en-
gines is another direction which needs to be pur-
sued. Most of the partners involved in the project 
have more powerful entailment engines than 
those integrated in the prototype which were 
ranked highly in RTE competitions. Unfortu-
nately, many of these engines cannot be used di-
rectly in our system due to their slow speed. Our 
system is supposed to give users results in real 
time which imposes some constraints on the 
amount of processing that can be done. 
5 Conclusions 
This paper presented the first prototype of an 
entailment-based QA system, which can answer 
questions about movies and cinema. The use of a 
domain ontology ensures that the system is cross-
language and can be extended to new languages 
with slight adjustments at the entailment engine. 
The system is implemented as a set of web ser-
vices and along a Service Oriented Architecture. 
6 Acknowledgements 
This work is supported by the EU-funded pro-
ject QALL-ME (FP6 IST-033860).  
References 
Androutsopoulos, I. and G.D. Ritchie and P. Thanisch. 
1995. Natural Language Interfaces to Databases -- 
An Introduction, Journal of Natural Language En-
gineering, vol.1, no.1, Cambridge University Press. 
Popescu Ana-Marie, Oren Etzioni, and Henry Kautz. 
2003. Towards a theory of natural language inter-
faces to databases. In Proceedings of the confer-
ence on Intelligent User Interfaces. 
Dagan Ido and Oren Glickman. 2004. Probabilistic 
textual entailment: Generic applied modeling of 
language variability. In PASCAL Workshop on 
Learning Methods for Text Understanding and 
Mining, Grenoble. 
Ou Shiyan, Viktor Pekar, Constantin Orasan, Chris-
tian Spurk, Matteo Negri. 2008. Development and 
alignment of a domain-specific ontology for ques-
tion answering. In Proceedings of the 6th Edition of 
the Language Resources and Evaluation Confer-
ence (LREC-08).  
Prud'hommeaux Eric, Andy Seaborne (eds.). 2006. 
SPARQL Query Language for RDF. RDF Data Ac-
cess Working Group. 
176
