Proceedings of the IJCNLP-08 Workshop on NLP for Less Privileged Languages, pages 117?122,
Hyderabad, India, January 2008. c?2008 Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing
Part-Of-Speech Tagging for Gujarati Using Conditional Random 
Fields 
Chirag Patel and Karthik Gali 
Language Technologies Research Centre 
International Institute of Information Technology 
Hyderabad, India 
chirag_p,karthikg@students.iiit.ac.in 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper describes a machine learning 
algorithm for Gujarati Part of Speech Tag-
ging. The machine learning part is per-
formed using a CRF model. The features 
given to CRF are properly chosen keeping 
the linguistic aspect of Gujarati in mind. As 
Gujarati is currently a less privileged lan-
guage in the sense of being resource poor, 
manually tagged data is only around 600 
sentences. The tagset contains 26 different 
tags which is the standard Indian Language 
(IL) tagset. Both tagged (600 sentences) 
and untagged (5000 sentences) are used for 
learning. The algorithm has achieved an 
accuracy of 92% for Gujarati texts where 
the training corpus is of 10,000 words and 
the test corpus is of 5,000 words. 
1 Introduction 
Parts of Speech tagging is the process of tagging 
the words of a running text with their categories 
that best suits the definition of the word as well as 
the context of the sentence in which it is used. This 
process is often the first step for many NLP appli-
cations. Work in this field is usually either statisti-
cal or machine learning based, or rule based. Some 
of the models that use the first approach are Hid-
den Markov Models (HMMs), Conditional Ran-
dom Fields (CRFs), Maximum Entropy Markov 
Models (MEMMs), etc. 
The other method is the rule based approach 
where by we formulate rules based on the study of 
the linguistic aspect of the language. These rules 
are directly applied on the test corpus. The statisti-
cal learning based tools attack the problem mostly 
as a classification problem. They are not language 
specific and hence they fail when semantic knowl-
edge is needed while tagging a word with more 
than one sense. Even for unknown words, i.e., 
those words which have not appeared in the train-
ing corpus, these tools go by the probabilities but 
are not guaranteed to give the correct tag as they 
lack the semantic knowledge of the language. 
Also, they need a large annotated corpus. But the 
bright side of these tools is they can tag any word 
(known or unknown) with a high accuracy based 
on the probabilities of similar tags occurring in a 
particular context and some features provided for 
learning from the training data. 
On the other hand, purely rule based systems fail 
when the word is unknown or does not satisfy any 
of the rules. These systems just crash if the word is 
unknown. They cannot predict the plausible or 
likely tag. Hence an exhaustive set of rules are 
needed to achieve a high accuracy using this ap-
proach. 
There is another class of tools which are the hy-
brid ones. These may perform better than plain 
statistical or rule based approaches. The hybrid 
tools first use the probabilistic features of the sta-
tistical tools and then apply the language specific 
rules on the results as post processing. The best 
approach which seems intuitive is to generalize the 
language specific rules and convert them into fea-
tures. Then incorporate these features into the sta-
tistical tools. The problem here is the lack of con-
trol and flexibility on the statistical tools. So the 
perfect selection of features is what actually mat-
ters with respect to the accuracy. The more lan-
117
guage specific features that can be designed the 
higher accuracy can be achieved. 
2 Previous Work 
Different approaches have been used for part-of-
speech tagging previously. Some have focused on 
rule based linguistically motivated part-of-speech 
tagging such as by Brill (Brill, 1992 and Brill, 
1994). On the machine learning side, most of the 
previous work uses two main machine learning 
approaches for sequence labeling. The first ap-
proach relies on k-order generative probabilistic 
models of paired input sequences, for instance 
HMM (Frieda and McCallum, 2000) or multilevel 
Markov Models (Bikel et al 1999). 
CRFs bring together the best of generative and 
classification models. Like classification models, 
they can accommodate many statistically corre-
lated features of the input, and they are trained dis-
criminatively. And like generative models they can 
also tradeoff decisions at different sequence posi-
tions to obtain a globally optimal labeling. Condi-
tional Random Fields were first used for the task of 
shallow parsing by Lafferty et al (Lafferty et al, 
2000), where CRFs were applied for NP chunking 
for English on WSJ corpus and reported a per-
formance of 94.38%. For Hindi, CRFs were first 
applied to shallow parsing by Ravindran et al 
(Ravindran et. al., 2006) and Himanshu et al (Hi-
manshu et. al., 2006) for POS tagging and chunk-
ing, where they reported a performance of 89.69% 
and 90.89% respectively. Lafferty also showed that 
CRFs beat related classification models as well as 
HMMs on synthetic data and on POS-tagging task. 
Several POS taggers using supervised learning, 
both over word instances and tagging rules, report 
precision greater than 96% for English. For Hindi 
and other South Asian languages, the tagged cor-
pora is limited and together with higher morpho-
logical complexity of these languages it poses a 
difficulty in achieving results as good as those 
achieved for English in the past. 
3 Conditional Random Fields 
Charles Sutton et al (Sutton et al, 2005) formu-
lated CRFs as follows. Let G be a factor graph 
over Y. Then p(y|x) is a conditional random field if 
for any fixed x, the distribution p(y|x) factorizes 
according to G. Thus, every conditional distribu-
tion p(y|x) is a CRF for some, perhaps trivial, fac-
tor graph. If F = {A} is the set of factors in G, and 
each factor takes the exponential family form, then 
the conditional distribution can be written as 
 
X here is a random variable over data sequences 
to be labeled, and Y is a random variable over cor-
responding label sequences. All components Yi of 
Y are assumed to range over a finite label alphabet 
Y. For example, X might range over natural lan-
guage sentences and Y range over part-of-speech 
tagging of those sentences, with Y the set of possi-
ble part-of-speech tags. The random variables X 
and Y are jointly distributed, but in a discrimina-
tive framework we construct a conditional model 
p(Y|X) from paired observation and label se-
quences, and do not explicitly model the marginal 
p(X). 
CRFs define conditional probability distribu-
tions P(Y|X) of label sequences given input se-
quences. Lafferty et al defines the probability of a 
particular label sequence Y given observation se-
quence X to be a normalized product of potential 
functions each of the form: 
 
exp(??jtj(Yi-1,Yi,X,i)+??ksk (Yi,X,i)) 
 
where tj(Yi-1,Yi,X,i) is a transition feature func-
tion of the entire observation sequence and the la-
bels at positions i and i-1 in the label sequence; sk 
(Yi,X,i) is a state feature function of the label at 
position I and the observation sequence; and ?j and 
?k are parameters to be estimated from training 
data. 
 
Fj(Y,X)= ? fj (Yi-1,Yi,X,i) 
 
where each fj (Yi-1,Yi,X,i) is either a state func-
tion s(Yi-1,Yi,X,i) or a transition function t(Yi-
1,Yi,X,i). This allows the probability of a label 
sequence Y given an observation sequence X to be 
written as: 
P(Y|X, ?) = (1/Z(X)) exp(??j Fj(Y,X)) 
 
where Z(X) is a normalization factor. 
4 IL Tagset 
The currently used tagset for this project and which 
is a standard for Indian Languages is the IL (Indian 
118
Languages) tagset. The tagset consists of 26 tags. 
These have been specially designed for Indian 
Languages. The tagset contains the minimum tags 
necessary at the Parts of Speech tagging level. It 
copes with the phenomena of fineness versus 
coarseness. The tags are broadly categorized into 5 
main groups, with the nouns consisting of the gen-
eral nouns, space or time related nouns or proper 
nouns, and the verbs consisting of the main and the 
auxiliary verbs. Another category is of the noun 
and verb modifiers like adjectives, quantifiers and 
adverbs. Finally, there are numbers, cardinals etc. 
5 Approach 
Approach presented in this paper is a machine 
learning model. It uses supervised as well as unsu-
pervised techniques. It uses a CRF to statistically 
tag the test corpus. The CRF is trained using fea-
tures over a tagged and untagged data. A CRF 
when provided with good features gives accuracy 
much better than other models. The intuition here 
is that if we convert the linguistic rules specific to 
Gujarati in to features provided to CRF, then we 
make use of advantages of both statistical and rule 
based approach. But due to lack of control and 
flexibility not all features can be incorporated in 
the CRF. So after the CRF is done we do the error 
analysis. From the errors we formulate rules, 
which are general and language specific, and then 
convert them to new features and apply them back 
to CRF. This increases the accuracy. 
Gujarati when viewed linguistically is a free 
word order language. It is partially agglutinative, 
in the sense maximum 4 suffixes can attach to the 
main root. Words in Gujarati can have more than 
one sense where the tags are different in different 
senses. For e.g. ?paNa? can be a particle meaning ? 
?also?, and also can be a connective meaning ? 
?but?. ?pUrI? can be a noun meaning ? ?an eat-
able?, can be an adjective meaning ? ?finished?, 
and can also be a verb meaning ? ?to fill?. 
Also, in Gujarati, postpositions can be or can not 
be attached to the head word. For e.g. One may 
write ?rAme? or ?rAma e? literally meaning 
?rAma (ergative)?. 
Most of all, this language can drop words from 
the sentences. For example: 
 
Sent:     baXA  loko     GaramAM   gayA. 
Literal:    all    people   house + in   went. 
Tags:   QF  NN    NN          VM 
 
Here, we can drop the noun (NN) ?loko? and in 
which case the quantifier (QF) ?baXA? now be-
comes the noun (NN). 
Features used in CRF are suffixes, prefixes, 
numbers etc. For e.g. Words having suffix ?ne?, 
like ?grAhakone? are tagged as NN. CRF learns 
from the tags given to words with same suffixes in 
the training data. This suffix window is 4. This 
way the vibhakti information is explored. Similarly 
if words like ?KAine? and ?KAwo? come in the 
training corpus the CRF learns the preffix and tags 
other words with that prefix. This way the stem 
information is explored. Also if the token is a 
number then it must be QC, and if it has a number 
in it then it must be a NNP. 
6 Experiments 
Initially we just ran a rule based tagging code on 
the test data. This code used both machine learning 
and rule based features for tagging. It gave an ac-
curacy of 86.43%. The error analysis revealed that, 
as the training corpus being less, the unknown 
words are many and also well distributed over the 
tags. Hence the heuristics were not effective. 
Then we ran a CRF tool on the test data. We 
found it giving an accuracy of 89.90%. Then dur-
ing the error analysis we observed that the features 
were not up to the mark. Then we selected particu-
lar features which were generalization of rule 
based, used in the previous code, and more specific 
to Gujarati. This increased the accuracy to 91.74%. 
Then after adding more heuristics the accuracy was 
in fact reducing. Heuristics like converting all 
NNPs to NNs, removing some tags as options 
while tagging the unknown words like 
CC,QW,PRP etc. as these in a language are very 
limited and are expected that they must have came 
once in the training corpus. We also tried tagging 
the word on the basis of possible tags between the 
two surrounding words. But that too reduced the 
accuracy. Also heuristics like previous and current 
word vibhakti combination failed. 
 
Training data Test data Results (%) 
11185 5895 91.74 
Table-1. POS Tagging Results and Data Size 
 
119
7 Error Analysis 
Here the above table confirms that the errors 
have occurred across all the tags. This is mainly 
due to lack of training data. The numbers of un-
known words in the corpus were around 40%. The 
CRF while using the features and the probabilities 
to tag a particular unknown word made mistakes 
due to the flexible nature of the language. For e.g. 
the maximum errors occurred because of tagging 
an adjective by a noun. An example: 
 
motA`QFC BAganA`QF viSeRa`NN SEk-
SaNika`JJ jaruriyAwo`NN GarAvawA`VM 
bAlYako`NN sAmAnya`JJ skUlamAM`NN 
jaSe`VM .`SYM  
 
 
Actual Tag Assigned Tag Counts 
JJ NN 58 
NNP NN 35 
NN JJ 26 
NN VM 22 
NNC NN 21 
PSP NN 19 
VM VAUX 19 
NNPC NN 18 
NNC JJ 17 
NST NN 14 
VM NN 13 
Table-2. Errors Made by the Tagger. 
 
In the above example the word ?viSeRa`NN? is 
wrongly tagged. This being an adjective is tagged 
as NN, firstly because it is an unknown word. Also 
in this language adjectives may or may not occur 
before the nouns. Hence the probability of this un-
known word to be a NN or a JJ is equal or will de-
pend on the number of instances of both in the 
training corpus. Further more there is more prob-
ability of it being tagged as a noun as the next 
word is an adjective. There are very less instances 
where two adjectives come together in the training 
corpus. Again the chances of it being a noun in-
crease as the QF mostly precede nouns instead of 
adjectives. Here we also have a QF before the un-
known word. The same reason also is responsible 
for the third class of errors ? NN being wrongly 
tagged as JJ. These errors can only be corrected if 
the word is some how known. Again the next class 
of errors is the Named Entity Recognition problem 
which is an open problem in itself. 
8 Conclusion 
We have trained a CRF on Gujarati which gives an 
accuracy of around 92%. From the experiments we 
observed that if the language specific rules can be 
formulated in to features for CRF then the accu-
racy can be reached to very high extents. The CRF 
learns from both tagged that is 600 sentences and 
also untagged data, which is 5,000 sentences.  
From the errors we conclude that as the training 
data increases, the less number of unknown words 
will be encountered in the test corpus, which will 
increase the accuracy. We can also use some ma-
chine readable resources like dictionaries, morphs 
etc. when ever they are built.  
9 Intuition 
We noticed that on a less amount of training data 
also we have a good accuracy. The reason we felt 
intuitive was Gujarati uses the best part of the vib-
hakti feature linguistically. It, being more aggluti-
native than Hindi has more word forms, hence 
more word coverage, and being some less aggluti-
native than Telugu, has less ambiguity and also is 
practical to hard code the vibhaktis, uses the best 
part of advantages of the vibhakti feature in POS 
tagging. Based only on the hard coded vibhakti 
information we could tag around 1500 unknown 
words out of 5000.  
10 Future work 
We are looking forward to manually tag more 
training data in the future. We will also be trying to 
build language resources for Gujarati that will help 
in the Tagger. By increasing the amount of training 
data we expect an appreciable increase in the accu-
racy. 
References 
Himanshu Agarwal and Anirudh Mani. 2006. Part of 
Speech Tagging and Chunk-ing with Conditional 
Random Fields. In the Proceedings of NWAI work-
shop. 
Pranjal Awasthi, Delip Rao, Balaraman Ravindran. 
2006. Part Of Speech Tagging and Chunking with 
HMM and CRF. Proceedings of the NLPAI contest 
workshop during  NWAI ?06, SIGAI Mumbai. 
Karthik Kumar G, Sudheer K, Avinesh PVS. 2006. 
Comparative study of various Machine Learning 
methods For Telugu Part of Speech tagging. Pro-
120
ceedings of the NLPAI contest workshop during 
NWAI ?06, SIGAI Mumbai. 
John Lafferty, Andrew McCallum and Fernando 
Pereira. 2001. Conditional Random Fields: Probabil-
istic Models for Segment-ing and Labeling Sequence 
Data. In proceedings of ICML?01. 
Avinesh PVS and Karthik G. 2007. Part-Of-Speech 
Tagging and Chunking Using Conditional Random 
Fields and Transformation Based Learning. Proceed-
ings of the SPSAL workshop during IJCAI?07. 
Fei Sha and Fernando Pereira. 2003. Shallow Parsing 
with Conditional Random Fields. In the Proceedings 
of HLT-NAACL. 
Charles Sutton. 2007. An Introduction to Conditional 
Random Fields for Relational Learning. In proceed-
ings of ICML?07. 
CRF++: Yet Another Toolkit. 
http://chasen.org/~taku/software/CRF++ 
 
121
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
122
