Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Issues in Teaching Computational Linguistics (TeachCL-08), pages 87?96,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
The North American Computational Linguistics Olympiad (NACLO) 
 
 
Dragomir R. Radev Lori S. Levin Thomas E. Payne 
SI, EECS, and Linguistics Language Technologies Institute Department of Linguistics 
University of Michigan Carnegie-Mellon University University of Oregon 
radev@umich.edu lsl@cs.cmu.edu tpayne@uoregon.edu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
1 Introduction 
NACLO (North American Computational Linguis-
tics Olympiad) is an annual Olympiad-style contest 
for high school students, focusing on linguistics, 
computational linguistics, and language technolo-
gies. 
The goal of NACLO is to increase participation 
in these fields by introducing them before students 
reach college. Since these subjects are not nor-
mally taught in high school, we do not expect stu-
dents to have any background of these areas before 
the contest.  The contest consists of self-contained 
problems that can be solved with analytical think-
ing, but in the course of solving each problem, the 
students learn something about a language, culture, 
linguistic phenomenon, or computational tool.  
The winners of NACLO are eligible to partici-
pate in the International Linguistics Olympiad as 
part of the US team. 
1.1 History of the LO and ILO 
The International Olympiad in Linguistics is one 
of twelve international Science Olympiads (the 
others include Mathematics, Physics, Chemistry, 
Biology, Informatics, Philosophy, Astronomy, Ge-
ography, and Earth Science). It has existed since 
2003 and has, so far, been held exclusively in 
Europe (Russia, Estonia, Bulgaria, and the Nether-
lands). ILO 2007 took place in Zelenogorsk near 
St. Petersburg, Russia whereas ILO 2008 will be in 
Slantchev Bryag near Burgas, Bulgaria. ILO 2009 
will be held in Poland.  
Individual national linguistics Olympiads have 
been held in Russia since 1965 (based on an initia-
tive by Andrey Zaliznyak) and in other countries 
more recently1. Recently, a collection of problems 
from different decades appeared in Russian (Be-
likov et al, 2007). 
1.2 Linguistics Contests in the US 
Thomas Payne pioneered LO-style competitions 
in the USA by organizing three consecutive con-
tests for middle and high school students in the 
Eugene, Oregon area in 1998-2000. In the course 
of publicizing NACLO, we have discovered that 
other local linguistics contests have taken place in 
Tennessee, San Jose, and New York City. 
1.3 Origin of NACLO 
NACLO began with a planning workshop 
funded by NSF in September 2006. The attendees 
included faculty and graduate students from about 
ten universities as well as representatives from 
NSF and ACL.  Two high school teachers were 
present.  The workshop opened with presentations 
from organizers of other Olympiads and contests in 
linguistics and computer programming. In particu-
lar we received excellent advice from Ivan Derz-
hanski, representing the International Linguistics 
Olympiad, and Boris Iomdin, representing the 
Moscow Olympiad. The remainder of the work-
shop dealt with scheduling the first contest, elect-
                                                          
1
 The first author of this paper participated in the Bulgarian 
national LO in the early 1980s. 
87
ing committee chairs, and making organizational 
decisions. 
1.4 Pedagogical goals 
We have two goals in organizing NACLO.  We 
want to increase broad participation and diversity 
in all language-related careers.  We want every 
student to have a fun and educational experience 
and have a positive attitude toward taking linguis-
tics and language technologies courses in college.  
However, we also want to conduct a talent search 
for the most promising future researchers in our 
field.     NACLO uses two mechanisms to be sure 
that we reach all levels of participation.  The first 
mechanism is to separate an open round with easier 
problems from an invitation-only round with 
harder problems.  The second mechanism is related 
to grading the problems.  Forty percent of the score 
is for a correct answer and sixty percent is for ex-
plaining the answer.   The students who write the 
most insightful explanations are the focus of our 
talent search.    
 
When publicizing NACLO in high schools we 
have been focusing on certain aspects of linguistics 
and computer science.  With respect to linguistics, 
we emphasize that languages have rules and pat-
terns that native speakers are not aware of; that 
there are procedures by which these rules and pat-
terns can be discovered in your own language; and 
that the same procedures can be used to discover 
rules and patterns in languages other than your 
own.  With respect to computer science the term 
computational thinking has been coined (Wing 
2006) to refer to those parts of the field that are not 
about computers or programming:  thinking algo-
rithmically, using abstraction to model a problem, 
structuring and reducing a search space, etc.   
1.5 Organization at the national level 
NACLO has two co-chairs, currently Lori 
Levin, Carnegie Mellon University, and Thomas 
Payne, University of Oregon.  Dragomir Radev is 
the program chair and team coach.  Amy Troyani, 
a high school teacher with board certification, is 
the high school liaison and advisor on making the 
contest appropriate and beneficial to high school 
students. 
NACLO has several committees.  James Puste-
jovsky currently chairs the sponsorship committee.  
The other committees are currently unchaired, al-
though we would like to thank William Lewis (out-
reach and publicity) and Barbara Di Eugenio 
(followup) for chairing them in the first year.  
NACLO is not yet registered as a non-profit or-
ganization and does not yet have a constitution.  
We would welcome assistance in these areas. 
The national level organization provides materi-
als that are used at many local sites.  The materials 
include a comprehensive web site 
(http://www.naclo.cs.cmu.edu), practice 
problems, examples of flyers and press releases, 
PowerPoint presentations for use in high schools, 
as well as contest booklets from previous competi-
tions. 
The contest is held on the same day in all loca-
tions (universities and "online" sites as described 
below).  In 2007 there was a single round with 195 
participants.  In 2008 there was an open round with 
763 participants and an invitation-only round with 
115 participants.  Grading is done centrally.  Each 
problem is graded at one location to ensure consis-
tency. 
Three national prizes are awarded for first, sec-
ond, and third place. National prizes are also given 
for the best solution to each problem. Local hosts 
can also award prizes for first, second, and third 
place at their sites based on the national scores. 
1.6 Funding 
The main national expenses are prizes, planning 
meetings, and the trip to the International Linguis-
tics Olympiad (ILO).  The trip to the ILO is the 
largest expense, including airfare for eight team 
members (two teams of four), a coach, and two 
chaperones.  The national level sponsors are the 
National Science Foundation (2007, 2008), Google 
(2007, 2008), Cambridge University Press (2007, 
2008), and the North American Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (2007). 
The organizers constantly seek additional sponsors. 
1.7 Publicity before the contest 
At the national level, NACLO is publicized 
through its own web site as well as on LinguistList 
and Language Log.  From there, word spreads 
through personal email and news groups. No press 
releases have been picked up by national papers 
that we know of.  Local level publicity depends on 
the organization of local schools and the hosting 
88
university's high school outreach programs. In 
Pittsburgh, publicity is facilitated by a central mail-
ing list for gifted program coordinators in the city 
and county. Some of the other local organizers (in-
cluding James Pustejosvky at Brandeis, Alina 
Johnson at the University of Michigan and Barry 
Schiffman at Columbia University as well as sev-
eral others) sent mail to literally hundreds of high 
schools in their areas. Word of mouth from the 
2007 contest also helped reach out to more places.  
1.8 Registration 
NSF REU-funded Justin Brown at CMU created 
an online registration site for the 2008 contest 
which proved very helpful. Without such a site, the 
overhead of dealing with close to 1,000 students, 
teachers, and other organizers would have been 
impossible. 
1.9 Participation of graduate and under-
graduate students 
Graduate and undergraduate students participate 
in many activities including:  web site design, vis-
iting high schools, formulating problems, testing 
problems, advising on policy decisions, and facili-
tating local competitions. 
2 Problem selection  
We made a difficult decision early on not to re-
quire knowledge of linguistics, programming or 
mathematics.  Requiring these subjects would have 
reduced diversity in our pool of contestants as well 
as its overall size.   Enrollment in high school pro-
gramming classes has dropped, perhaps because of 
a perception that programming jobs are not inter-
esting.  NACLO does not require students to know 
programming, but by introducing a career option, it 
gives them a reason to take programming classes 
later. 
2.1 Problem types 
The NACLO problem sets include two main 
categories of problems: ?traditional? and ?compu-
tational/formal?. The ILO includes mostly tradi-
tional problems which include translations from 
unknown languages, glyph decoding, calendar sys-
tems, kinship systems, mathematical expressions 
and counting systems, among others. The other 
category deals with linguistic phenomena (often in 
English) as well as algorithms and formal analyses 
of text. 
2.2 Problem committee 
A problem committee was formed each year to 
work on the creation, pre-testing, and grading of 
problems. The members in 2007 included Emily 
Bender, John Blatz, Ivan Derzhanski, Jason Eisner, 
Eugene Fink, Boris Iomdin, Mahesh Joshi, Anagha 
Kulkarni, Will Lewis, Patrick Littell, Ruslan Mit-
kov, Thomas Payne, James Pustejovsky, Roy 
Tromble, and Dragomir Radev (chair). In 2008, the 
following people were members: Emily Bender, 
Eric Breck, Lauren Collister, Eugene Fink, Adam 
Hesterberg, Joshua Katz, Stacy Kurnikova, Lori 
Levin, Will Lewis, Patrick Littell, David 
Mortensen, Barbara Partee, Thomas Payne, James 
Pustejovsky, Richard Sproat, Todor Tchervenkov, 
and Dragomir Radev (chair). 
2.3 Problem pool 
At all times, the problem committee maintains a 
pool of problems which are constantly being 
evaluated and improved. Professional linguists and 
language technologists contribute problems or 
problem ideas that reflect cutting-edges issues in 
their disciplines. These are edited and tested for 
age appropriateness,  and the data are thoroughly 
checked with independent experts. 
2.4 Booklets 
The three booklets (one for 2007 and two for 
2008) were prepared using MS Publisher. Addi-
tionally, booklets with solutions were prepared in 
MS Word. All of these are available from the 
NACLO web site. 
2.5 List of problems 
This is the list of problems for NACLO 2007 (8 
problems) and 2008 (12 problems). They can be 
divided into two categories: traditional (2007: C, 
D, G and 2008: A, C, D, E, G, J, K) and for-
mal/computational (2007: A, B, E, F, H and 2008: 
B, F, H, I, L). The traditional problems addressed 
topics such as phonology, writing systems, calen-
dar systems, and cognates, among others. The 
other category included problems on stemming, 
89
finite state automata, clustering, sentence similarity 
identification, and spectrograms. 
 
 
2007 
 
A. English (Molistic) 
B. English (Encyclopedia) 
C. Ancient Greek 
D. Hmong 
E. English (Verb forms) 
F. English (Spelling correction) 
G. Huishu (Phonology) 
H. English (Sentence processing) 
 
2008 (A-E Open; F-L Invitational) 
 
A. Apinaye (Brazil) 
B. Hindi 
C. Ilocano (Philippines) 
D. Swedish and Norwegian 
E. Aymara (South America) 
F. Japanese 
G. Manam Pile (Papua New Guinea) 
H. English (Stemming) 
I. Rotokas (Automata; Bougainville Island) 
J. Irish 
K. Mayan (Calendar) 
L. English (Spectrograms) 
 
Figure 1: List of languages used in NACLO 2007 and 
2008. 
3 Contest administration  
NACLO is run in a highly distributed fashion and 
involves a large number of sites across the USA in 
Canada. 
3.1 Local administration 
NACLO is held at hosting universities and also 
"online".  The online category includes students 
who cannot get to one of the hosting universities, 
but instead are monitored by a teacher at a conven-
ient location, usually the student's high school.  
There were three hosting universities (Carnegie-
Mellon, Brandeis, and Cornell) in 2007 and thir-
teen hosting universities (the three above + U. 
Michigan, U. Illinois, U. Oregon, Columbia, Mid-
dle Tennessee State, San Jose State, U. Wisconsin, 
U. Pennsylvania, U. Ottawa, and U. Toronto) in 
2008.  Any university in the US or Canada may 
host NACLO.  Local organizers are responsible for 
providing a room for the contest, contacting high 
local high schools, and facilitating the contest on 
the specified contest date.  Local organizers may 
decide on the number of participants.  The number 
of participants at the 2008 sites ranged from a 
handful to almost 200 (CMU-Pitt). 
Local organizers may choose their level of in-
vestment of time and money.  They may spend 
only a few hours recruiting participants from one 
or two local high schools and may spend a small 
amount of money on school visits and copying.  
But they may also run large scale operations in-
cluding extensive fundraising and publicity.  The 
site with the largest local participation, Carnegie 
Mellon/University of Pittsburgh, donated adminis-
trative staff time, invested hundreds of volunteer 
hours, and raised money for snacks and souvenirs 
from local sponsors2. The CMU-Pitt site also hosts 
a problem club for faculty and students where 
problems are proposed, fleshed out, and tested.  At 
the University of Oregon, a seminar course was 
taught on Language Task Creation (formulation of 
problems) for which university students received 
academic credit.    
3.2 Remote (?online?) sites 
We had about 65 such sites in 2008. All local 
teachers and other facilitators did an amazing job 
following the instructions for administering the 
competition and for promptly returning the sub-
missions by email or regular mail. 
3.3 Clarifications 
During each of the three competitions, the jury 
was online (in some cases for 8 hours in a row) to 
provide live clarifications. Each local facilitator 
was asked to be online during the contest and relay 
to the jury any questions from the students. The 
jury then, typically within 10 minutes, either re-
plied ?no clarification needed? (the most frequent 
reply) or provided an answer which was than 
posted online for all facilitators to see. We re-
ceived dozens of clarifications requests at each of 
the rounds. 
3.4 Grading 
Grading was done by the PC with assistance 
from local colleagues. To ensure grade consis-
tency, each problem was assigned to a single 
                                                          
2
 We are grateful to the Pittsburgh sponsors: M*Modal, 
Viv?simo, JustSystems Evans Research, and Carnegie Mel-
lon's Leonard Gelfand Center for Service Learning and Out-
reach. 
90
grader or team of graders. Graders were asked to 
provide grading rubrics which assigned individual 
points for both ?practice? (that is, getting the right 
answers) and ?theory? (justifying the answers). 
3.5 Results from 2007 
195 students participated in 2007. The winners 
are shown here. One of the students was a high 
school sophomore (15 years old) while three were 
seniors at the time of the 2007 NACLO. 
 
 
1. Rachel Zax, Ithaca, NY 
2. Ryan Musa, Ithaca, NY 
3. Adam Hesterberg, Seattle, WA 
4. Jeffrey Lim, Arlington, MA 
5. (tie) Rebecca Jacobs, Encino, CA 
5. (tie) Michael Gottlieb, Tarrytown, NY 
7. (tie) Mitha Nandagopalan, San Jose, CA 
7. (tie) Josh Falk, Pittsburgh, PA 
Alternate. Anna Tchetchetkine, San Jose, CA 
 
Figure 2: List of team members from 2007. Mitha was 
unable to travel and was replaced by Anna Tchetchet-
kine. 
3.6 2008 Winners 
The 2008 contest included 763 participants in 
the Open Round and 115 participants in the Invita-
tional Round. The winners of the Invitational 
Round are listed below. These are the eight stu-
dents who are eligible to represent the USA at the 
2008 ILO. As of the writing of this paper, all eight 
were available for the trip. One of the eight is a 
high school freshman (9th grade). 
 
 
1. Guy Tabachnick, New York, NY 
2. Jeffrey Lim, Arlington, MA 
3. Josh Falk, Pittsburgh, PA 
4. Anand Natarajan, San Jose, CA 
5. Jae-Kyu Lee, Andover, MA 
6. Rebecca Jacobs, Encino, CA 
7. Hanzhi Zhu, Shrewsbury, MA 
8. Morris Alper, San Jose, CA 
 
Figure 3: List of team members from 2008. 
3.7 Canadian Participation 
Canada participated for the first time in 2008 
(about 20 students from Toronto, a handful from 
Ottawa and one from Vancouver). Two students 
did really well at the 2008 Open (one ranked sec-
ond and two tied for 13th) but were not in the top 
20 at the Invitational. 
3.8 Diversity 
About half of the participants in NACLO were 
girls in 2007 and 2008. In 2007, 25 out of the top 
50 students were female. 
The two US teams that went to the ILO in 2007 
included three girls, out of eight total team mem-
bers (two teams of four).  The 2008 teams include 
only one girl. 
3.9 Other statistics 
Some random statistics: (a) of the top 20 stu-
dents in 2008, 14 are from public schools, (b) 26 
states, 3 Canadian provinces, and the District of 
Columbia were represented in 2008. 
4 Preparation for the ILO  
Preparation for the ILO was a long and painful 
process. We had to obtain visas for Russia, fund 
and arrange for the trip, and do a lot of practices. 
4.1 Teams 
 One of the students who was eligible to be on 
the second USA team was unable to travel. We 
went down the list of alternates and picked a dif-
ferent student to replace her. 
4.2 Funding 
The ILO covered room and board for the first 
team and the team coach. The second team was 
largely self-funded (including airfare and room and 
board). Everyone else was funded as part of the 
overall NACLO budget. The University of Michi-
gan covered the coach?s airfare. 
4.3 Training 
We ran multiple training sessions. The activities 
included individual problem solving, team problem 
solving (using Skype?s chat facility), readings, as 
well as live lectures (both at the summer school in 
Estonia and on the day before the main ILO in 
Russia).  
4.4 Travel logistics 
Four students, two chaperones, and one parent 
left early to attend a summer school organized by 
the Russian team in Narva, Estonia. The third 
91
chaperone and three students traveled directly to 
the ILO. The eighth student traveled with her par-
ents and did some sightseeing in Russia prior to the 
ILO. 
5 Participation in the ILO  
The ILO was organized by a local committee from 
St. Petersburg chaired by Stanislav Gurevych. The 
organization was extraordinary. Everything (prob-
lem selection, grading, hotel, activities, food) was 
excellent. 
5.1 Organization of the ILO 
The ILO was held at a decent hotel in Ze-
lenogorsk, a suburb of St. Petersburg on the Baltic 
Sea. The first day included an orientation, the sec-
ond day was the individual contest and team build-
ing activities, the third day ? an excursion to St. 
Petersburg, the fourth day ? the team contest and 
awards ceremony. 
5.2 Problems 
The problems given at the ILO were quite di-
verse and difficult. The hardest problems were the 
one in the Ndom language which involved a non-
standard number system and the Hawaiian problem 
given at the team contests which involved a very 
sophisticated kinship system. 
 
 
Turkish/Tatar 
Braille 
Ndom (Papua New Guinea) 
Movima (Bolivia) 
Georgian (Caucasus) 
Hawaiian 
 
Figure 4: List of languages used in ILO 2007. 
5.3 Results 
Adam Hesterberg scored the highest score in the 
individual contest. One of the two US teams (Re-
becca Jacobs, Joshua Falk, Michael Gottlieb, and 
Anna Tchetchetkine) tied for first place in the team 
event. 
6 Future directions  
The unexpected interest in the NACLO poses a 
number of challenges for the organizers. Further 
challenges arise from our desire to cover more 
computational problems. 
6.1 Grading and decentralization? 
Grading close to 5,000 submissions from 763 
students in 2008 took a toll on our problem com-
mittee. The process took more than two weeks. We 
are considering different options for future years, 
e.g., reducing the number of problems in the first 
round or involving some sort of self-selection (e.g., 
asking each potential participant to do a practice 
test and obtain a minimal score on it). These op-
tions are suboptimal as they detract from some of 
the stated goals of the NACLO and we will not 
consider them seriously unless all other options 
(e.g., recruiting more graders). have been ex-
hausted.  
6.2 Problem diversity 
We would like to include more problem types, 
especially on the computational end of the contest. 
This is somewhat of a conflict with the ILO which 
includes mostly ?traditional? LO problems. One 
possibility is to have the first round be more com-
putational whereas the invitational round would be 
more aimed at picking the team members for the 
ILO by focusing more on traditional problems. 
6.3 Practice problems 
We will be looking to recruit a larger pool of 
problem writers who can contribute problems of 
various levels of difficulty (including very easy 
problems and problems based on the state of the art 
in research in NLP). We are also looking for vol-
unteers to translate problems from Russian, includ-
ing the recently published collection ?Zadachi 
Lingvisticheskyh Olimpiad?. 
6.4 Other challenges 
The biggest challenges for the NACLO in both 
years were funding and time management.  
In 2007, four of the students had to pay for their 
own airfare and room and board. At the time of 
writing, the budget for 2008 is still not fully cov-
ered. The current approach with regard to sponsor-
ship is not sustainable since NSF cannot fund 
recurring events and the companies that we ap-
proached either gave nothing or gave a relatively 
92
small amount compared to the overall annual 
budget. 
The main organizers of the NACLO each spent 
several hundred hours (one of them claims ?the 
equivalent to 20 ACL program committee chair-
manships?), mostly above and beyond their regular 
appointments. For NACLO to scale up and be suc-
cessful in the future, a much wider pool of organ-
izers will be needed. 
6.5 Other countries 
Dominique Estival told us recently that an LO 
will take place in Australia in Winter 2008 (that is, 
Summer 2008 in the Northern Hemisphere). OzLO 
(as it is called) will be collaborating with NACLO 
on problem sets. Other countries such as the 
United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland are 
considering contests as well. One advantage that 
these countries all have is that they can share (Eng-
lish-language) problem sets with NACLO. 
6.6 Participant self-selection 
Some Olympiads provide self-selection prob-
lems. Students who score poorly on these problem 
sets are effectively discouraged from participation 
in the official contest. If the number of participants 
keeps growing, we may need to consider this op-
tion for NACLO. 
6.7 More volunteers 
NACLO exerted a tremendous toll on the organ-
izers. Thousands of hours of volunteer work went 
into the event each year. NACLO desperately 
needs more volunteers to help at all levels (prob-
lem writing, local organization, web site mainte-
nance, outreach, grading, etc). 
7 Overall assessment  
While it will take a long time to properly assess the 
impact of NACLO 2007 and 2008, we have some 
preliminary observations to share. 
7.1 Openness 
We made a very clear effort to reach out to all 
high school students in the USA and Canada. 
Holding the contest online helped make it truly 
within everyone?s reach. Students and teachers 
overwhelmingly appreciated the opportunity to 
participate at no cost (other than postage to send 
the submissions back to the jury) and at their own 
schools. Students who participated at the university 
sites similarly expressed great satisfaction at the 
opportunity to meet with peers who share their in-
terests. 
7.2 Diversity and outreach 
We were pleased to see that the number of male 
and female participants was nearly equal. A num-
ber of high schools indicated that clubs in Linguis-
tics were being created or were in the works. 
7.3 Success at the ILO 
Even though the US participated for the first 
time at the ILO, the performance shown there (in-
cluding first place individually and a tie for first 
place in the team contest) was outstanding. 
Acknowledgments 
We want to thank everyone who helped turn 
NACLO into a successful event. Specifically, Amy 
Troyani from Taylor Allderdice High School in 
Pittsburgh, Mary Jo Bensasi of CMU, all problem 
writers and graders (which include the PC listed 
above as well as Rahel Ringger and Julia Work-
man) and all local contest organizers (James Puste-
jovsky, Lillian Lee, Claire Cardie, Mitch Marcus, 
Kathy McKeown, Barry Schiffman, Lori Levin, 
Catherine Arnott Smith, Richard Sproat, Roxana 
Girju, Steve Abney, Sally Thomason, Aleka 
Blackwell, Roula Svorou, Thomas Payne, Stan 
Szpakowicz, Diana Inkpen, Elaine Gold). James 
Pustejovsky was also the sponsorship chair, with 
help from Paula Chesley. Ankit Srivastava, Ronnie 
Sim and Willie Costello co-wrote some of the 
problems with members of the PC. Eugene Fink 
helped with the solutions booklets, Justin Brown 
worked on the web site, and Adam Hesterberg was 
an invaluable member of the team throughout. 
Other people who deserve our gratitude include 
Cheryl Hickey, Alina Johnson, Patti Kardia, Josh 
Cannon, Christina Hunt, Jennifer Wofford, and 
Cindy Robinson. Finally, NACLO couldn?t have 
happened without the leadership and funding pro-
vided by NSF and Tanya Korelsky in particular as 
well as the generous sponsorship from Google, 
Cambridge University Press, and the North Ameri-
can Chapter of the ACL (NAACL). 
93
The authors of this paper are also thankful to 
Martha Palmer for giving us feedback on an earlier 
draft.  
NACLO was partially funded by the National 
Science Foundation under grant IIS 0633871 Plan-
ning Workshop for a Computational Linguistics 
Olympiad. 
References  
Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou and Kathleen McKeown. 
1997. Predicting the Semantic Orientation of Adjec-
tives, ACL 1997.  
Jeannette Wing, Computational Thinking, CACM vol. 
49, no. 3, March 2006, pp. 33-35. 
V. I. Belikov, E. V. Muravenko and M. E. Alexeev, 
editors. Zadachi Lingvisticheskikh Olimpiad. 
MTsNMO. Moscow, 2007. 
Appendix A. Summary of freeform com-
ments 
?I think it's a great outreach tool to high schools.  I was es-
pecially impressed by the teachers who came and talked to 
[the linguistics professors] about starting a linguistics club? 
?The problems are great.  One of our undergraduates ex-
pressed interest in a linguistics puzzle contest (on the model of 
Google's and MS's puzzle contests) at the undergrad level.? 
?We got a small but very high-quality group of students.  
To get a larger group, we'd need to start earlier.? 
?Things could be more streamlined.  I think actually *less* 
communication, but at key points in the process, would be 
more effective.? 
?It also would have been nice if there were a camp, like 
with the other US olympiads, so that more students would get 
the chance to learn about linguistics? 
?Just get the word out to as many schools as possible. You 
could also advertise on forums like AOPS, Cogito, and even 
CollegeConfidential ? where students are looking for intel-
lectual challenges?. 
?The problems helped develop the basic code breaking.? 
?Having a camp would be a huge benefit, but otherwise I 
think the contest was done very well.  Thank you for bringing 
it to the US.? 
?Maybe send a press release to school newspapers and ask 
them to print something about it.? 
?My 9 students enjoyed participating even though none of 
them made it to the second round.  Several have indicated that 
they want to do it again next year now that they know what it 
is like.? 
?I used every opportunity to utter the phrase "computa-
tional linguistics" to other administrators, at meetings, with 
parents, students, other teachers. People inevitably want to 
know more!? 
?As I mentioned previously, we are all set to start up a new 
math/WL club next year. YAY!? 
?Advertise with world language professional organizations 
(i.e., ACTFL) and on our ListServs (i.e., FLTeach)? 
?It was wonderful. KUDOS!? 
?There were several practice sessions, about half run by a 
math teacher (who organizes many of the competitions of this 
nature) and half by the Spanish teacher. Also, several of the 
English teachers got really excited about it (especially the 
teacher who teaches AP English Language, who teaches often 
about logical reasoning) and offered extra credit to the stu-
dents who took it.? 
?The preparation for the naclo was done entirely by the 
math club.? 
?It was a very useful competition. First, it raised awareness 
about linguistics among our students. They knew nothing 
about this area before, and now they are looking for opportuni-
ties to study linguistics and some started visiting linguistic 
research seminars at the University of Washington.? 
?The Olympiad was interesting to most students because it 
was very different from all the other math Olympiads we par-
ticipate in. Students saw possibilities for other application of 
their general math skills. In addition, the students who won 
(reasonably succeeded in) this Olympiad were not the same 
students that usually win math contests at  our school. This 
was very useful for their confidence, and showed everybody 
that broadening skills is important.? 
?I was the only one to take the contest from my school, so 
it didn't really increase awareness that much. I, however, 
learned a lot about linguistics, and the people who I told about 
the contest seemed to find it interesting also.? 
?As a result of this competition, an Independent-Study 
Linguistics Course was offered this spring for a few interested 
students.? 
?Three students who participated in NACLO are now do-
ing an Independent Study course with my colleague from th 
e World Languages dept (who had a linguistics course in 
college)? 
?I'd like to see more linguistic indoctrination, so that math 
nerds are converted over to the good side.? 
?next year I will  teach a Computational Linguistics semi-
nar? 
Appendix B. Related URLs 
 
http://www.naclo.cs.cmu.edu/ 
http://www.cogito.org/ContentRedirect.aspx? 
    ContentID=16832 
http://www.cogito.org/Interviews/ 
    InterviewsDetail.aspx?ContentID=16901 
http://www.ilolympiad.spb.ru/ 
http://cty.jhu.edu/imagine/PDFs/Linguistics.pdf 
http://www.nsf.gov/news/news_summ.jsp? 
    cntn_id=109891 
http://photofile.name/users/anna_stargazer/2949079/ 
 
Figure 5: List of additional references URLs. 
Appendix C. Sample problems 
We include here some sample problems as well as 
one solution. The rest of the solutions are available 
on the NACLO Web site. 
94
C.1. Molistic 
This is a problem from 2007 written by 
Dragomir Radev and based on [Hatzivassiloglou 
and McKeown 1997]. 
 
 
Imagine that you heard these sentences: 
 
      Jane is molistic and slatty. 
      Jennifer is cluvious and brastic. 
      Molly and Kyle are slatty but danty. 
      The teacher is danty and cloovy. 
      Mary is blitty but cloovy. 
      Jeremiah is not only sloshful but also weasy. 
      Even though frumsy, Jim is sloshful. 
      Strungy and struffy, Diane was a pleasure to watch. 
      Even though weasy, John is strungy. 
      Carla is blitty but struffy. 
      The salespeople were cluvious and not slatty. 
 
1. Then which of the following would you be likely to 
hear? 
 
      a. Meredith is blitty and brastic. 
      b. The singer was not only molistic but also cluvious. 
      c. May found a dog that was danty but sloshful. 
 
2. What quality or qualities would you be looking for in a 
person? 
 
      a. blitty 
      b. weasy 
      c. sloshful 
      d. frumsy 
 
3. Explain all your answers. (Hint: The sounds of the words 
are not relevant to their meanings.) 
 
Figure 6: ?Molistic? problem from 2007. 
C.2. Garden Path 
This is another problem from 2007. 
 
 
True story: a major wireless company recently started an advertising 
campaign focusing on its claim that callers who use its phones 
experience fewer dropped calls. 
 
The billboards for this company feature sentences that are split into 
two parts. The first one is what the recipient of the call hears, and the 
second one - what the caller actually said before realizing that the call 
got dropped. The punch line is that dropped calls can lead to serious 
misunderstandings. We will use the symbol // to separate the two parts 
of such sentences. 
 
(1) Don't bother coming // early. 
(2) Take the turkey out at five // to four. 
(3) I got canned // peaches. 
 
These sentences are representative of a common phenomenon in 
language, called "garden path sentences". Psychologically, people 
interpret sentences incrementally, before waiting to hear the full text. 
When they hear the ambiguous start of a garden path sentence, they 
assume the most likely interpretation that is consistent with what they 
have heard so far. They then later backtrack in search of a new parse, 
should the first one fail. 
 
In the specific examples above, on hearing the first part, one 
incorrectly assumes that the sentence is over. However, when more 
words arrive, the original interpretation will need to be abandoned. 
 
(4) All Americans need to buy a house // is a large amount of money. 
(5) Melanie is pretty // busy. 
(6) Fat people eat // accumulates in their bodies. 
 
1. Come up with two examples of garden path sentences that are not 
just modifications of the ones above and of each other. Split each of 
these two sentences into two parts and indicate how hearing the 
second part causes the hearer to revise his or her current parse.  
 
For full credit, your sentences need to be such that the interpretation 
of the first part should change as much as possible on hearing the 
second part. For example, in sentence (6) above, the interpretation of 
the word "fat" changes from an adjective ("fat people") to a noun ("fat 
[that] people eat...").  Note: sentences like "You did a great job..., // 
NOT!" don't count.  
 
2.  Rank sentences (4), (5), (6) as well as the two sentences from your 
solution to H1 above, based on how surprised the hearer is after 
hearing the second part.  What, in your opinion, makes a garden path 
sentence harder to process by the hearer?  
 
Figure 7: ?Garden Path? problem from 2007. 
 
95
C.3. Ilocano 
This 2008 problem was written by Patrick Littell 
of the University of Pittsburgh. 
 
 
The Ilocano language is one of the major languages of the Philippines, 
spoken by more than 8 million people.  Today is it written in the 
Roman alphabet, which was introduced by the Spanish, but before that 
Ilocano was written in the Baybayin script.  Baybayin (which literally 
means ?spelling?) was used to write many Philippine languages and 
was in use from the 14th to the 19th centuries. 
 
1. Below are twelve Ilocano words written in Baybayin. Match them 
to their English translations, listed in scrambled order below.  
 
____________ 
  ____________ 
  ____________ 
   ____________ 
	 
   ____________ 
	  
 	 
   ____________ 
	 	 
 ____________ 
	 	 	 	 
 ____________ 
	  	 	 	 
 ____________ 

   ____________ 
  ____________ 
   ____________ 
 
{ to look, is skipping for joy, is becoming a skeleton, to buy, various 
skeletons, various appearances, to reach the top, is looking, 
appearance, summit, happiness, skeleton } 
 
2. Fill in the missing forms. 
 
	  	 
 ____________ 
    ____________ 
     ____________ 
____________          (the/a) purchase 
____________          is buying 
 
3. Explain your answers to 1 and 2. 
 
Figure 8: Ilocano problem from 2008. 
 
 
Practical: 11 points 
 
1. Translations (1/2 point each) 

appearance 
  various appearances 
  to look 
   is looking 
	 
   happiness 
	  
 	 
   is skipping for joy 
	 	 
 skeleton 
	 	 	 	 
 various skeletons 
	  	 	 	 
 is becoming a skeleton 

   to buy 
  summit 
   to reach the top 
 
2. Missing forms (1 point each) 
 
	  	 
 to become a skeleton 
    various summits 
     is reaching the top 

            (the/a) purchase 

  
             is buying 
 
Assign ? point each if the basic symbols (the consonants) are correct, 
and the other ? point if the diacritics (the vowels) are correct. 
 
Theoretical: 9 points 
* The first step in this problem must be to divide the English items 
into semantically similar groups (1 pt) and divide the Baybayin items 
into groups based on shared symbols (1 pt). 
* From this they can deduce that the group including  must 
correspond to the ?look/appearances? group (4 members each), that 
including 	 	 
 to the ?skeleton? group (3 members each), and 

   must be ?to buy? (1 each).  For getting this far they should 
get another 2 points. 
* Figuring out the nature of the Baybayin alternations is the tricky 
part.  A maximally good explanation will discover that there are two 
basic processes: 
? From the basic form, copy the initial two symbols and add 
them to the beginning.  The first should retain whatever 
diacritic it might have, but the second should have its dia-
critic (if any) replaced by a cross below. 
? Insert  as the second symbol, and move the initial sym-
bol?s diacritic (if any) to this one.  Add an underdot to the 
first symbol. 
* Discovering these two processes, and determining that the third 
process is the result of doing both, is worth 3 points.  Discovering 
these two processes, and describing the third as an unrelated process ? 
that is, not figuring out that it?s just a combination of the first two ? is 
worth 2 points.  Figuring out these processes without reference to the 
diacritics is worth 1 point, whether or not they correctly determine the 
nature of the third process. 
* All that remains is to match up which processes indicate which 
categories, which shouldn?t be hard if they?ve gotten this far.  Their 
description of how to determine this is worth another 1 point. 
* The remaining 1 point is reserved to distinguish particularly elegant 
solutions described with unusual clarity. 
 
 
96
