Proceedings of the EACL 2009 Workshop on Language Technologies for African Languages ? AfLaT 2009, pages 96?103,
Athens, Greece, 31 March 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Exploiting Cross-linguistic Similarities in Zulu and Xhosa            
Computational Morphology 
Laurette Pretorius 
School of Computing  
University of South Africa & 
Meraka Institute, CSIR 
Pretoria, South Africa 
pretol@unisa.ac.za 
Sonja Bosch 
Department of African Languages 
University of South Africa 
Pretoria, South Africa 
boschse@unisa.ac.za 
 
Abstract 
This paper investigates the possibilities that 
cross-linguistic similarities and dissimilarities 
between related languages offer in terms of 
bootstrapping a morphological analyser. In 
this case an existing Zulu morphological ana-
lyser prototype (ZulMorph) serves as basis 
for a Xhosa analyser. The investigation is 
structured around the morphotactics and the 
morphophonological alternations of the lan-
guages involved. Special attention is given to 
the so-called ?open? class, which represents 
the word root lexicons for specifically nouns 
and verbs. The acquisition and coverage of 
these lexicons prove to be crucial for the suc-
cess of the analysers under development.  
The bootstrapped morphological analyser is 
applied to parallel test corpora and the results 
are discussed. A variety of cross-linguistic ef-
fects is illustrated with examples from the 
corpora. It is found that bootstrapping mor-
phological analysers for languages that ex-
hibit significant structural and lexical simi-
larities may be fruitfully exploited for devel-
oping analysers for lesser-resourced lan-
guages. 
1  Introduction 
Zulu and Xhosa belong to the Nguni languages, a 
group of languages from the South-eastern Bantu 
zone and, as two of the eleven official languages 
of South Africa, are spoken by approximately 9 
and 8 million mother-tongue speakers, respec-
tively. In terms of natural language processing, 
particularly computational morphology, the 
Bantu languages including Zulu and Xhosa cer-
tainly belong to the lesser-studied languages of 
the world.  
One of the few Bantu languages for which 
computational morphological analysers have 
been fully developed so far is Swahili (Hur-
skainen, 1992; De Pauw and De Schryver, 2008). 
A computational morphological analyser proto-
type for Zulu (ZulMorph) is in an advanced 
stage of development, the results of which have 
already been used in other applications. Prelimi-
nary experiments and results towards obtaining 
morphological analysers for Xhosa, Swati and 
Ndebele by bootstrapping ZulMorph were par-
ticularly encouraging (Bosch et al, 2008). This 
bootstrapping process may be briefly summa-
rised as a sequence of steps in which the baseline 
analyser, ZulMorph, is applied to the new lan-
guage (in this case Xhosa) and then systemati-
cally extended to include the morphology of the 
other language. The extensions concern the word 
root lexicon, followed by the grammatical mor-
pheme lexicons and finally by the appropriate 
morphophonological rules. The guiding principle 
in this process is as follows: Use the Zulu mor-
phological structure wherever applicable and 
only extend the analyser to accommodate differ-
ences between the source language (Zulu) and 
the target language (in this case Xhosa). So far 
the question as to whether the bootstrapped ana-
lyser, extended to include Xhosa morphology, 
could also improve the coverage of the Zulu ana-
lyser was not specifically addressed in Bosch et 
al. (2008). 
Cross-linguistic similarity and its exploitation 
is a rather wide concept. In its broadest sense it 
aims at investigating and developing resources 
and technologies that can be compared and 
linked, used and analysed with common ap-
proaches, and that contain linguistic information 
for the same or comparable phenomena. In this 
paper the focus is on the morphological similari-
ties and dissimilarities between Zulu and Xhosa 
and how these cross-linguistic similarities and 
dissimilarities inform the bootstrapping of a 
morphological analyser for Zulu and Xhosa. In 
particular, issues such as open versus closed 
classes, and language specific morphotactics and 
alternation rules are discussed. Special attention 
96
is given to the word root lexicons. In addition, 
the procedure for bootstrapping is broadened to 
include a guesser variant of the morphological 
analyser. 
The structure of the paper is as follows: Sec-
tion 2 gives a general overview of the morpho-
logical structure of the languages concerned. The 
modelling and implementation approach is also 
discussed. This is followed in sections 3 and 4 by 
a systematic exposition of the cross-linguistic 
dissimilarities pertaining to morphotactics and 
morphophonological alternations.  Section 5 fo-
cuses on the so-called ?open? class, which repre-
sents the word root lexicons for specifically 
nouns and verbs. The acquisition and coverage of 
these lexicons prove to be crucial for the success 
of the analysers under development. Section 6 
addresses the use of the guesser variant of the 
morphological analyser as well as the application 
of the bootstrapped morphological analyser to 
parallel test corpora. A variety of cross-linguistic 
effects is illustrated with examples from the cor-
pora. This provides novel insights into the inves-
tigation and exploitation of cross-linguistic simi-
larities and their significance for bootstrapping 
purposes.  Section 7 concerns future work and a 
conclusion. 
2 General overview 
2.1 Morphological structure 
Bantu languages are characterised by a rich ag-
glutinating morphological structure, based on 
two principles, namely the nominal classification 
system, and the concordial agreement system. 
According to the nominal classification system, 
nouns are categorised by prefixal morphemes. 
These noun prefixes have, for ease of analysis, 
been assigned numbers by scholars who have 
worked within the field of Bantu linguistics, In 
Zulu a noun such as umuntu 'person' for instance, 
consists of a noun prefix umu- followed by the 
noun stem -ntu and is classified as a class 1 
noun, while the noun isitha 'rival' consists of a 
noun prefix isi- and the noun stem -tha and is 
classified as a class 7 noun. Noun prefixes gen-
erally indicate number, with the uneven class 
numbers designating singular and the corre-
sponding even class numbers designating plural. 
The plural forms of the above examples would 
therefore respectively be the class 2 noun abantu 
'persons' and the class 8 noun izitha 'rivals'. We 
follow Meinhof's (1932:48) numbering system 
which distinguishes between 23 noun prefixes 
altogether in the various Bantu languages. 
     The concordial agreement system is signifi-
cant in the Bantu languages because it forms the 
backbone of the whole sentence structure. Con-
cordial agreement is brought about by the vari-
ous noun classes in the sense that their prefixes 
link the noun to other words in the sentence. This 
linking is manifested by a concordial morpheme 
that is derived from the noun prefix, and usually 
bears a close resemblance to the noun prefix, as 
illustrated in the following example: 
Izitsha lezi ezine zephukile 
?These four plates are broken? 
This concordial agreement system governs 
grammatical correlation in verbs, adjectives, pos-
sessives, pronouns, and so forth. Bantu lan-
guages are predominantly agglutinating and po-
lymorphematic in nature, with affixes attached to 
the root or core of the word.  
The morphological make-up of the verb is 
considerably more complex than that of the 
noun. A number of slots, both preceding and fol-
lowing the verb root may contain numerous 
morphemes with functions such as derivations, 
inflection for tense-aspect and marking of nomi-
nal arguments. Examples are cross-reference of 
the subject and object by means of class- (or per-
son-/number-)specific object markers, locative 
affixes, morphemes distinguishing verb forms in 
clause-final and non-final position, negation etc. 
Despite the complexities of these domains, 
they are comparable across language boundaries, 
specifically Nguni language boundaries, with a 
degree of formal similarity that lends itself to 
exploitation for bootstrapping purposes. 
2.2 Modelling and Implementation 
In the modelling and implementation of the mor-
phological structure a finite-state approach is 
followed. The suitability of finite-state ap-
proaches to computational morphology is well 
known and has resulted in numerous software 
toolkits and development environments for this 
purpose (cf. Koskenniemi, 1997 and Karttunen, 
2001). Yli-Jyr? (2005) discusses the importance 
of a finite-state morphology toolkit for lesser-
studies languages. He maintains that ?[a]lthough 
some lexicons and morphological grammars can 
be learned automatically from texts ... fully 
automatic or unsupervised methods are not suffi-
cient. This is due to two reasons. First, the 
amount of freely available corpora is limited for 
many of the less studied languages. Second, 
many of the less studied languages have rich 
morphologies that are difficult to learn accurately 
with unsupervised methods?. 
97
The Xerox finite-state tools (Beesley and 
Karttunen, 2003) as one of the preferred toolkits 
for modelling and implementing natural lan-
guage morphology, is used in this work. 
The morphological challenges in computa-
tional morphological analysis comprise the mod-
elling of two general linguistic components, 
namely morphotactics (word formation rules) as 
well as morphophonological alternations.  
Ideally, the morphotactics component should 
include all and only word roots in the language, 
all and only the affixes for all parts-of-speech 
(word categories) as well as a complete descrip-
tion of the valid combinations and orders of these 
morphemes for forming all and only the words of 
the language concerned. Moreover, the morpho-
phonological alternations rules should constitute 
all known sound changes that occur at morpheme 
boundaries. The combination of these two com-
ponents constitutes an accurate model of the 
morphology of the language(s) under considera-
tion.  
The Xerox lexicon compiler, lexc, is well-
suited to capturing the morphotactics of Zulu. A 
lexc script, consisting of cascades of so-called 
continuation classes (of morpheme lexicons) rep-
resenting the (concatenative) morpheme se-
quencing, is compiled into a finite-state network. 
The Xerox regular expression language, xfst, 
provides an extended regular expression calculus 
with sophisticated Replace Rules for describing 
the morphophonological alternations rules of 
Zulu. The xfst script is also compiled into a fi-
nite-state network. These networks are finally 
combined by means of the operation of composi-
tion into a so-called Lexical Transducer that con-
stitutes the morphological analyser and contains 
all the morphological information of Zulu, in-
cluding derivation, inflection, alternation and 
compounding. Pretorius and Bosch (2002) ad-
dress the suitability of this approach to Zulu 
morphology and illustrate it by means of exam-
ples of lexc and xfst scripts for modelling the 
Zulu noun.  
A detailed exposition of the design and im-
plementation of ZulMorph may be found in Pre-
torius and Bosch (2003). In addition to consider-
ing both the accurate modelling of the morpho-
tactics and the morphophonological alternation 
rules, they also address implementation and other 
issues that need to be resolved in order to pro-
duce a useful software artefact for automated 
morphological analysis. Issues of implementa-
tion include a justification for the finite-state ap-
proach followed, designing for accuracy and cor-
rectness and decisions regarding the analyser's 
interface with its environment and its usage.  
Particular attention is paid to the handling of 
exceptions; the modelling of separated depend-
encies by means of so-called flag-diacritics; the 
specification of lexical forms (analyses) in terms 
of morphological granularity and feature infor-
mation; the choice of an associated and appropri-
ate morphological tag set and also the position-
ing of these tags in relation to the morphemes 
they are associated with in the morphological 
analyses (lexical forms) that are rendered. 
The components of ZulMorph, including its 
scope in terms of word categories and their mor-
phological structure, are summarised in Table 1 
while its lexical coverage as reflected by the 
number of different noun stems, verb roots etc. is 
discussed in section 5.  
The bootstrapping of ZulMorph to provide 
for Xhosa as well requires a careful investigation 
of the cross-linguistic similarities and dissimi-
larities and how they are best modelled and im-
plemented. This aspect will be discussed in more 
detail in the following section. 
 
Morphotactics 
(lexc)  
Affixes for 
all parts-of-
speech (e.g. 
subject & 
object con-
cords, noun 
class pre-
fixes, verb 
extensions 
etc.)  
Word roots 
(e.g. nouns, 
verbs, rela-
tives, ideo-
phones)  
Rules for 
legal combi-
nations and 
orders of 
morphemes 
(e.g. u-ya-
ngi-thand-a 
and not *ya-
u-a-thand-
ngi)  
Morpho-
phonological 
alternations    
(xfst)  
Rules that determine the form of each mor-
pheme  
(e.g. ku-lob-w-a > ku-lotsh-w-a, u-mu-lomo > 
u-m-lomo)  
Table 1: Zulu Morphological Analyser Compo-
nents 
3 Morphotactics 
In word formation we distinguish between so-
called closed and open classes. The open class 
accepts the addition of new items by means of 
processes such as borrowing, coining, com-
pounding and derivation. In the context of this 
paper, the open class represents word roots in-
cluding verb roots and noun stems. The closed 
class represents affixes that model the fixed 
morphological structure of words, as well as 
items such as conjunctions, pronouns etc. Typi-
cally no new items can be added to the closed 
class (Fromkin et al, 2003:74).  
Since our point of departure is ZulMorph, we 
focus on Xhosa affixes that differ from their Zulu 
98
counterparts. A few examples are given in Table 
2. 
Certain areas in the Xhosa grammar need to be 
modelled independently and then built into the
Morpheme Zulu Xhosa 
Noun Class Prefixes 
Class 1 and 3 um(u)- 
 
 
full form umu- with monosyllabic noun stems, 
shortened form with polysyllabic noun stems: 
umu-ntu, um-fana 
um- with all noun stems: um-ntu, um-fana 
Class 2a o-: o-baba oo-: oo-bawo 
Class 9 
 
in- with all noun stems: 
in-nyama  
i- with noun stems beginning with h, i, m, n, 
ny: i-hambo  
 
Class 10 izin- with monosyllabic and polysyllabic stems.  
izin-ja;  izin-dlebe 
iin- with polysyllabic stems: 
 iin-dlebe 
Contracted subject concords (future tense). Examples: 
1ps 
2ps, Class 1 & 3 
Class 4 & 9 
ngo- 
wo- 
yo- 
ndo- 
uyo- 
iyo- 
Object concords 
1ps ngi- ndi- 
 
Absolute pronouns 
1ps 
Class 15 
mina  
khona  
mna 
kona 
Demonstrative Pronouns: Three positional types of the demonstrative pronouns are listed separately for each language. Examples: 
 
Class 1 
Class 5 
Pos. 1 lo; Pos. 2 lowo; Pos. 3 lowaya 
Pos. 1 leli; Pos. 2 lelo; Pos. 3 leliya 
Pos. 1 lo; Pos. 2 lowo/loo; Pos. 3 lowa 
Pos. 1 eli; Pos. 2 elo; Pos. 3 eliya 
Adjective basic prefixes 
1ps 
2ps 
Class1& 3 
Class 8 
ngim(u-) 
umu- 
mu- 
zin- 
nim- 
um- 
m- 
zi- 
Locative demonstrative copulatives : Three positional types of the so-called locative demonstrative copulatives differ considerably for 
Zulu and Xhosa and are therefore listed separately for each language. Examples: 
Class 1 
Class 5 
 
Pos. 1 nangu; Pos. 2 nango; Pos. 3 nanguya 
Pos. 1 nanti; Pos. 2 nanto; Pos. 3 nantiya 
 
Pos. 1 nanku; Pos. 2 nanko; Pos. 3 nankuya 
Pos. 1 nali; Pos. 2 nalo; Pos. 3 naliya 
 
Copulatives : Formation of copulatives derived from Xhosa nouns differs considerably from Zulu. This construction is class dependent 
in Xhosa and is modelled differently to its Zulu counterpart. Examples: 
 yi- combines with noun prefixes i-:  
yi-indoda > yindoda 
ngu- combines with noun prefixes u-, o-, a:  
ngu-umuntu > ngumuntu 
ngu-obaba > ngobaba 
ngu-amakati > ngamakati 
wu combines with noun prefixes u-, o-:   
wu-muntu > wumuntu, 
wu-obaba > wobaba 
 
ngu- combines with classes 1, 1a, 2, 2a, 3 & 
6, e.g. ngu-umntu > ngumntu 
yi- combines with classes 4 imi- and 9 in-, 
e.g. 
yi-imithi > yimithi 
li- combines with class 5 i(li)-:  
li-ihashe > lihashe 
si- combines with class 7 isi-:  
si-isitya > sisitya 
etc. 
 
Table 2. Examples of variations in Zulu and Xhosa ?closed? morpheme information 
 
analyser, for instance the formation of the so-
called temporal form that does not occur in Zulu. 
The temporal form is an indication of when an 
action takes place or when a process is carried 
out, and has a present or past tense form (Louw, 
et al, 1984:163). The simple form consists of a 
subject concord plus -a- followed by the verb 
stem in the infinitive, the preprefix of which has 
been elided, for example si-a-uku-buya > sa-
kubuya ?when we return?. In terms of the word 
formation rules this means that an additional 
Xhosa specific morpheme lexicon (continuation 
class) needs to be included. To facilitate accurate 
modelling appropriate constraints also need to be 
formulated. 
The bootstrapping process is iterative and new 
information regarding dissimilar morphological 
constructions is incorporated systematically in 
99
the morphotactics component. Similarly, rules 
are adapted in a systematic manner. The process 
also inherently relies on similarities between the 
languages, and therefore the challenge is to 
model the dissimilarities accurately. The care-
fully conceptualised and appropriately structured 
(lexc) continuation classes embodying the Zulu 
morphotactics provide a suitable framework for 
including all the closed class dissimilarities dis-
cussed above.  
4 Morphophonological alternations 
Differences in morphophonological alternations 
between Zulu and Xhosa are exemplified in Ta-
ble 3. Some occur in noun class prefixes of class 
10 and associated constructions, such as prefix-
ing of adverbial morphemes (na-, nga-, etc.). 
Others are found in instances of palatalisation, ?a 
sound change whereby a bilabial sound in pas-
sive formation, locativisation and diminutive 
formation is replaced by a palatal sound? (Poulos 
and Msimang, 1998:531).  
 
Zulu Xhosa 
Class 10 class prefix izin- occurs before monosyllabic as well 
as polysyllabic stems, e.g. izinja, izindlebe 
Adverb prefix na + i > ne, e.g. nezindlebe (na-izin-ndlebe) 
Class 10 class prefix izin- changes to iin- before polysyllabic stems, 
e.g. izinja, iindlebe 
Adverb prefix na + ii > nee; e.g. neendlebe (na-iin-ndlebe) 
Palatalisation with passive, diminutive & locative formation: 
 b   > tsh   
-hlab-w-a > -hlatsh-w-a, intaba-ana > intatsh-ana,  
indaba > entdatsheni 
ph > sh   
-boph-w-a > -bosh-w-a, iphaphu-ana > iphash-ana 
iphaphu > ephasheni 
Palatalisation with passive, diminutive & locative formation: 
b > ty                    
-hlab-w-a > -hlaty-w-a, intaba-ana > intaty-a na 
ihlobo > ehlotyeni 
ph > tsh   
?boph-w-a  > -botsh-w-a, iphaphu-ana > iphatsh-ana, 
usapho > elusatsheni 
Table 3. Examples of variations in Zulu and Xhosa morphophonology 
As before, the Zulu alternations are assumed 
to apply to Xhosa unless otherwise modelled. 
Regarding language-specific alternations special 
care is taken to ensure that the rules fire only in 
the desired contexts and order. For example, 
Xhosa-specific sound changes should not fire 
between Zulu-specific morphemes, and vice 
versa. This applies, for instance, to the vowel 
combination ii, which does not occur in Zulu. 
While the general rule ii > i holds for Zulu, the 
vowel combination ii needs to be preserved in 
Xhosa.  
5 The word root lexicons 
Compiling sufficiently extensive and complete 
word root lexicons (i.e. populating the ?open? 
word classes) is a major challenge, particularly 
for lesser-resourced languages (Yli-Jyr?, 
2005:2). A pragmatic approach of harvesting 
roots from all readily available sources is fol-
lowed. The Zulu lexicon is based on an extensive 
word list dating back to the mid 1950s (cf. Doke 
and Vilakazi, 1964), but significant improve-
ments and additions are regularly made. At pre-
sent the Zulu word roots include noun stems with 
class information (15 759), verb roots (7 567), 
relative stems (406), adjective stems (48), ideo-
phones (1 360), conjunctions (176). Noun stems 
with class information (4 959) and verb roots (5 
984) for the Xhosa lexicon were extracted from 
various recent prototype paper dictionaries 
whereas relative stems (27), adjective stems (17), 
ideophones (30) and conjunctions (28) were only 
included as representative samples at this stage.  
The most obvious difference between the two 
word root lexicons is the sparse coverage of 
nouns for Xhosa. A typical shortcoming in the 
current Xhosa lexicon is limited class informa-
tion for noun stems.  
Observations are firstly occurrences of shared 
noun stems (mainly loan words) but different 
class information, typically class 5/6 for Zulu 
versus class 9/10 for Xhosa, for example  
?box? -bhokisi (Xhosa 9/10; Zulu 5/6) 
?duster?  -dasta (Xhosa 9/10; Zulu 5/6) 
?pinafore?  -fasikoti (Xhosa 9/10; Zulu 5/6). 
It should be noted that although a Xhosa noun 
stem may be identical to its Zulu counterpart, 
analysis is not possible if the class prefix differs 
from the specified Zulu class prefix + noun stem 
combination in the morphotactics component of 
the analyser.  
A second observation is identical noun stems 
with correct class information, valid for both 
languages, but so far only appearing in the Xhosa 
lexicon, for example 
?number? -namba (Xhosa and Zulu 9/10) 
?dice?-dayisi (Xhosa and Zulu 5/6). 
100
This phenomenon occurs mainly with bor-
rowed nouns that are more prevalent in the 
Xhosa lexicon than in the more outdated Zulu 
lexicon.  
A closer look at the contents of the lexicons 
reveals that the two languages have the following 
in common: 1027 noun stems with corresponding 
class information, 1722 verb roots, 20 relative 
stems, 11 adjective stems, 10 ideophones and 9 
conjunctions.  
6 A computational approach to cross-
linguistic similarity 
This section discusses the extension of the boot-
strapping procedure of the morphological ana-
lyser to include the use of the guesser variant of 
the morphological analyser. In addition the ap-
plication of the bootstrapped morphological ana-
lyser to parallel test corpora is addressed. A vari-
ety of cross-linguistic effects is illustrated with 
examples from the corpora.  
Even in languages where extensive word root 
lexicons are available, new word roots may occur 
from time to time. The Xerox toolkit makes pro-
vision for a guesser variant of the morphologi-
cal analyser that uses typical word root patterns 
for identifying potential new word roots (Beesley 
and Karttunen, 2003:444). By exploiting the 
morphotactics and morphophonological alterna-
tions of the analyser prototype, the guesser is 
able to analyse morphologically valid words of 
which the roots match the specified pattern.  
Therefore, in cases where both the Zulu and 
Xhosa word root lexicons do not contain a root, 
the guesser may facilitate the bootstrapping 
process.  
The extended bootstrapping procedure is 
schematically represented in Figure 1.  
Since the available Zulu word list represents a 
rather outdated vocabulary, it is to be expected 
that the coverage of word roots/stems from a re-
cent corpus of running Zulu text may be unsatis-
factory, due to the dynamic nature of language. 
For example the word list contains no entry of 
the loan word utoliki ?interpreter? since ?inter-
preter? is rendered only as i(li)humusha ?transla-
tor?, the traditional term derived from the verb 
stem ?humusha ?to translate, interpret?.    Provi-
sion therefore needs to be made for the constant 
inclusion of new roots/stems, be they newly 
coined, compounds or as yet unlisted foreign 
roots/stems.  
Updating and refining the lexicon requires the 
availability of current and contemporary  
Figure 1. Bootstrapping procedure 
 
language resources in the form of text cor-
pora as well as human intervention in the form 
of  expert lexicographers or linguists to deter-
mine the eligibility of such words. 
The language resources chosen to illustrate 
this point are parallel corpora in the form of the 
South African Constitution (The Constitution, 
(sa). The reason for the choice of these corpora is 
that they are easily accessible on-line, and it is 
assumed that the nature of the contents ensures 
accurate translations. 
The results of the application of the boot-
strapped morphological analyser to this corpus 
are as follows: 
Zulu Statistics 
Corpus size:   7057 types 
Analysed:    5748 types (81.45 %) 
Failures:  1309 types (18.55%) 
Failures analysed by guesser: 1239 types 
Failures not analysed by guesser: 70 types 
Xhosa Statistics 
Corpus size:  7423 types.  
Analysed:   5380 types (72.48 %) 
Failures:  2043 types (27.52%) 
Failures analysed by guesser: 1772 types 
Failures not analysed by guesser: 271 types 
The output of the combined morphological 
analyser enables a detailed investigation into 
cross-linguistic features pertaining to the mor-
phology of Zulu and Xhosa. The outcome of this 
investigation is illustrated by means of typical 
examples from the corpora. This provides novel 
nsights into the investigation and exploitation of 
101
cross-linguistic similarities and their significance 
for bootstrapping purposes, as shown in Figure 1. 
 Notational conventions include [Xh] for Xho-
sa specific morphemes, numbers indicate noun 
class information, e.g. [NPrePre9] tags the 
noun preprefix of a class 9 noun while [Rel-
Conc8] tags the relative concord of a class 8 
noun. 
Examples from the Zulu corpus: 
The analysis of the Zulu word ifomu ?form? uses 
the Xhosa noun stem ?fomu (9/10) in the Xhosa 
lexicon in the absence of the Zulu stem: 
ifomu i[NPrePre9]fomu[Xh][NStem] 
 
The analysis of the Zulu word ukutolikwa ?to 
interpret? uses the Xhosa verb root  
-tolik- in the Xhosa lexicon: 
ukutolikwa 
u[NPrePre15]ku[BPre15] 
tolik[Xh][VRoot]w[PassExt]a[VerbTerm] 
 
Examples from the Xhosa corpus: 
The analysis of the Xhosa words bephondo ?of 
the province? and esikhundleni ?in the office? use 
the Zulu noun stems ?phondo (5/6) and 
-khundleni (7/8) respectively in the Zulu lexicon: 
bephondo 
ba[PossConc14]i[NPrePre5]li[BPre5] 
phondo[NStem] 
 
bephondo 
ba[PossConc2]i[NPrePre5]li[BPre5] 
phondo[NStem] 
 
esikhundleni 
e[LocPre]i[NPrePre7]si[BPre7] 
khundla[NStem]ini[LocSuf] 
 
The analysis of the Xhosa words ekukhethweni 
?in the election? and esihlonyelweyo ?amended? 
use the Zulu verb roots ?kheth- and ?hlom- 
respectively in the Xhosa lexicon: 
ekukhethweni 
e[LocPre]u[NPrePre15]ku[BPre15] 
kheth[VRoot]w[PassExt]a[VerbTerm] 
ini[LocSuf] 
 
esihlonyelweyo 
esi[RelConc7]hlom[VRoot]el[ApplExt] 
w[PassExt]e[VerbTermPerf]yo[RelSuf] 
 
Ideophones used from the Zulu lexicon are: 
ga[Ideoph]  qho[Ideoph] 
sa[Ideoph]  tu[Ideoph] 
ya[Ideoph] 
 
Relative stems used from the Zulu lexicon are: 
mandla[RelStem] 
mdaka[RelStem] 
njalo[RelStem] 
mcimbi[RelStem] 
 
Conjunctions used from the Zulu lexicon are: 
futhi[Conj] 
ukuthi[Conj] 
 
Examples of the guesser output from the Zulu 
corpus: 
The compound noun -shayamthetho (7/8) ?legis-
lature? is not listed in the Zulu lexicon, but was 
guessed correctly:  
isishayamthetho 
i[NPrePre7]si[BPre7] 
shayamthetho-Guess[NStem] 
 
The following are two examples of borrowed 
nouns (amabhajethi ?budgets? and amakhemikali 
?chemicals?) not in the Zulu lexicon, but guessed 
correctly:  
amabhajethi 
a[NPrePre6]ma[BPre6] 
bhajethi-Guess[NStem] 
 
amakhemikali 
a[NPrePre6]ma[BPre6] 
khemikali-Guess[NStem] 
 
The borrowed verb root -rejest- ?register? is not 
listed in the Zulu lexicon, but was guessed cor-
rectly:  
ezirejestiwe 
ezi[RelConc8]rejest-Guess[VRoot] 
iw[PassExt]e[VerbTermPerf] 
 
ezi[RelConc10]rejest-Guess[VRoot] 
iw[PassExt]e[VerbTermPerf] 
 
The relatively small number of failures that 
are not analysed by the guesser and for which no 
guessed verb roots or noun stems are offered, 
simply do not match the word root patterns as 
specified for Zulu and Xhosa in the analyser pro-
totype, namely  
[C (C (C)) V]+ C (C (C)) 
for verb roots and 
[C (C (C)) V]+ C (C (C)) V 
for noun stems. The majority of such failures is 
caused by spelling errors and foreign words in 
the test corpus.  
7 Conclusion and Future Work 
In this paper we focused on two aspects of 
cross-linguistic similarity between Zulu and 
Xhosa, namely the morphological structure 
(morphotactics and alternation rules) and the 
word root lexicons.  
Regarding the morphological structure only 
differences between Zulu and Xhosa were added.  
102
Therefore, Zulu informed Xhosa in the sense that 
the systematically developed grammar for Zul-
Morph was directly available for the Xhosa ana-
lyser development, which significantly reduced 
the development time for the Xhosa prototype 
compared to that for ZulMorph. 
Special attention was also given to the so-
called ?open? class, which represents the word 
root lexicons for specifically nouns and verbs. 
The acquisition and coverage of these lexicons 
proved to be crucial for the success of the ana-
lysers under development. Since we were fortu-
nate in having access to word root lexicons for 
both Zulu and Xhosa we included what was 
available in such a way that word roots could be 
shared between the languages. Here, although to 
a lesser extent, Xhosa also informed Zulu by 
providing a current (more up to date) Xhosa lexi-
con. In addition, the guesser variant was em-
ployed in identifying possible new roots in the 
test corpora, both for Zulu and for Xhosa. 
In general it is concluded that bootstrapping 
morphological analysers for languages that ex-
hibit significant structural and lexical similarities 
may be fruitfully exploited for developing ana-
lysers for lesser-resourced languages.  
Future work includes the application of the 
approach followed in this work to the other 
Nguni languages, namely Swati and Ndebele 
(Southern and Zimbabwe); the application to lar-
ger corpora, and the subsequent construction of 
stand-alone versions. Finally, the combined ana-
lyser could also be used for (corpus-based) quan-
titative studies in cross-linguistic similarity.  
Acknowledgements 
This material is based upon work supported by 
the South African National Research Foundation 
under grant number 2053403. Any opinion, find-
ings and conclusions or recommendations ex-
pressed in this material are those of the authors 
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the 
National Research Foundation. 
References 
Beesley, K.R. and Karttunen, L. 2003. Finite State 
Morphology. CSLI Publications, Stanford, CA. 
Bosch, S., Pretorius, L., Podile, K. and Fleisch, A. 
2008. Experimental fast-tracking of morphological 
analysers for Nguni languages. Proceedings of the 
6th International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation, Marrakech, Morocco. 
ISBN 2-9517408-4-0. 
De Pauw, G. and de Schryver, G-M. 2008. Improving 
the computational morphological analysis of a 
Swahili corpus for lexicographic purposes. Lexikos 
18 (AFRILEX-reeks/series 18: 2008): 303?318. 
Doke, C.M. and Vilakazi, B.W. 1964. Zulu?English 
Dictionary. Witwatersrand University Press, Jo-
hannesburg. 
Fromkin, V., Rodman, R. and Hyams, N. 2007. An 
Introduction to Language. Thomson Heinle, Mas-
sachusetts, USA. 
Hurskainen, A. 1992. A two-level formalism for the 
analysis of Bantu morphology: an application to 
Swahili. Nordic Journal of African Studies, 
1(1):87-122. 
Koskenniemi, K. 1997. Representations and finite-
state components in natural language, in Finite-
State Language Processing E. Roche and Y. Scha-
bes (eds.), pp. 99?116. MIT Press, Boston. 
Karttunen, L. 2001. Applications of finite-state 
trransducers in natural language processing, in Im-
plementation and application of automata, S. Yu 
and A. Paun (eds.). Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science, 2088:34-46. Springer, Heidelberg. 
Louw, J.A., Finlayson, R. and Satyo, S.C. 1984. 
Xhosa Guide 3 for XHA100-F. University of South 
Africa, Pretoria. 
Meinhof, C. 1932. Introduction to the phonology of 
the Bantu languages. Dietrich Reimer/Ernst 
Vohsen, Berlin. 
Poulos, G. and Msimang, C.T. 1998. A linguistic 
analysis of Zulu. Via Afrika, Pretoria. 
Pretorius, L. and Bosch, S.E. 2002. Finite state com-
putational morphology: Treatment of the Zulu 
noun. South African Computer Journal, 28:30-38.  
Pretorius, L. and Bosch, S.E. 2003.  Finite state com-
putational morphology: An analyzer prototype for 
Zulu. Machine Translation ? Special issue on fi-
nite-state language resources and language proc-
essing, 18:195-216. 
The Constitution. (sa). [O]. Available: 
http://www.concourt.gov.za/site/theconstitution/the
text.htm. Accessed on 31 January 2008. 
Yli-Jyr?, A. 2005. Toward a widely usable finite-state 
morphology workbench for less studied languages 
? Part I: Desiderata. Nordic Journal of African 
Studies, 14(4): 479 ? 491.
 
103
Proceedings of the EACL 2009 Workshop on Language Technologies for African Languages ? AfLaT 2009, pages 66?73,
Athens, Greece, 31 March 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Setswana Tokenisation and Computational Verb Morphology: Facing 
the Challenge of a Disjunctive Orthography 
 
Rigardt Pretorius 
School of Languages 
North-West University 
Potchefstroom, South Africa 
Rigardt.Pretorius@nwu.ac.za 
Ansu Berg 
School of Languages 
North-West University 
Potchefstroom, South Africa 
Ansu.Berg@nwu.ac.za 
Laurette Pretorius 
School of Computing  
University of South Africa 
and 
Meraka Institute, CSIR 
Pretoria, South Africa 
pretol@unisa.ac.za 
   
  
 
Biffie Viljoen 
School of Computing 
University of South Africa 
Pretoria, South Africa 
viljoe@unisa.ac.za 
 
 
Abstract 
Setswana, a Bantu language in the Sotho 
group, is one of the eleven official languages 
of South Africa.  The language is character-
ised by a disjunctive orthography, mainly af-
fecting the important word category of verbs. 
In particular, verbal prefixal morphemes are 
usually written disjunctively, while suffixal 
morphemes follow a conjunctive writing 
style. Therefore, Setswana tokenisation can-
not be based solely on whitespace, as is the 
case in many alphabetic, segmented lan-
guages, including the conjunctively written 
Nguni group of South African Bantu lan-
guages. This paper shows how a combination 
of two tokeniser transducers and a finite-state 
(rule-based) morphological analyser may be 
combined to effectively solve the Setswana 
tokenisation problem. The approach has the 
important advantage of bringing the process-
ing of Setswana beyond the morphological 
analysis level in line with what is appropriate 
for the Nguni languages. This means that the 
challenge of the disjunctive orthography is 
met at the tokenisation/morphological analy-
sis level and does not in principle propagate 
to subsequent levels of analysis such as POS 
tagging and shallow parsing, etc. Indeed, the 
approach ensures that an aspect such as or-
thography does not obfuscate sound linguis-
tics and, ultimately, proper semantic analysis, 
which remains the ultimate aim of linguistic 
analysis and therefore also computational lin-
guistic analysis. 
1 Introduction 
Words, syntactic groups, clauses, sentences, 
paragraphs, etc. usually form the basis of the 
analysis and processing of natural language text. 
However, texts in electronic form are just se-
quences of characters, including letters of the 
alphabet, numbers, punctuation, special symbols, 
whitespace, etc. The identification of word and 
sentence boundaries is therefore essential for any 
further processing of an electronic text. Tokeni-
sation or word segmentation may be defined as 
the process of breaking up the sequence of char-
acters in a text at the word boundaries (see, for 
example, Palmer, 2000). Tokenisation may there-
fore be regarded as a core technology in natural 
language processing. 
Since disjunctive orthography is our focus, we 
distinguish between an orthographic word, that is 
a unit of text bounded by whitespace, but not 
containing whitespace, and a linguistic word, that 
is a sequence of orthographic words that together 
functions as a member of a word category such 
as, for example, nouns, pronouns, verbs and ad-
verbs (Kosch, 2006).  Therefore, tokenisation 
may also be described as the process of identify-
ing linguistic words, henceforth referred to as 
tokens. 
While the Bantu languages are all agglutina-
tive and exhibit significant inherent structural 
similarity, they differ substantially in terms of 
their orthography. The reasons for this difference 
are both historical and phonological. A detailed 
66
discussion of this aspect falls outside the scope 
of this article, but the interested reader is referred 
to Cole (1955), Van Wyk (1958 & 1967) and 
Kr?ger (2006).  
Setswana, Northern Sotho and Southern Sotho 
form the Sotho group belonging to the South-
Eastern zone of Bantu languages. These lan-
guages are characterised by a disjunctive (also 
referred to as semi-conjunctive) orthography, 
affecting mainly the word category of verbs 
(Kr?ger, 2006:12-28). In particular, verbal pre-
fixal morphemes are usually written disjunc-
tively, while suffixal morphemes follow a con-
junctive writing style. For this reason Setswana 
tokenisation cannot be based solely on 
whitespace, as is the case in many alphabetic, 
segmented languages, including the conjunc-
tively written Nguni group of South African 
Bantu languages, which includes Zulu, Xhosa, 
Swati and Ndebele.  
The following research question arises: Can 
the development and application of a precise to-
keniser and morphological analyser for Setswana 
resolve the issue of disjunctive orthography? If 
so, subsequent levels of processing could exploit 
the inherent structural similarities between the 
Bantu languages (Dixon and Aikhenvald, 
2002:8) and allow a uniform approach. 
The structure of the paper is as follows: The 
introduction states and contextualises the re-
search question. The following section discusses 
tokenisation in the context of the South African 
Bantu languages. Since the morphological struc-
ture of the Setswana verb is central to the tokeni-
sation problem, the next section comprises a 
brief exposition thereof. The paper then proceeds 
to discuss the finite-state computational approach 
that is followed. This entails the combination of 
two tokeniser transducers and a finite-state (rule-
based) morphological analyser.  The penultimate 
section concerns a discussion of the computa-
tional results and insights gained.  Possibilities 
for future work conclude the paper. 
2 Tokenisation 
Tokenisation for alphabetic, segmented lan-
guages such as English is considered a relatively 
simple process where linguistic words are usu-
ally delimited by whitespace and punctuation. 
This task is effectively handled by means of 
regular expression scripts. Mikeev (2003) how-
ever warns that ?errors made at such an early 
stage are very likely to induce more errors at 
later stages of text processing and are therefore 
very dangerous.? The importance of accurate 
tokenisation is also emphasised by Forst and 
Kaplan (2006). While Setswana is also an alpha-
betic segmented language, its disjunctive orthog-
raphy causes token internal whitespace in a 
number of constructions of which the verb is the 
most important and widely occurring. Since the 
standard tokenisation issues of languages such as 
English have been extensively discussed (Far-
ghaly, 2003; Mikeev, 2003; Palmer, 2000), our 
focus is on the challenge of Setswana verb to-
kenisation specifically. We illustrate this by 
means of two examples: 
Example 1: In the English sentence ?I shall buy 
meat? the four tokens (separated by ?/?) are I / 
shall / buy / meat.  However, in the Setswana 
sentence Ke tla reka nama (I shall buy meat) the 
two tokens are Ke tla reka / nama.   
Example 2: Improper tokenisation may distort 
corpus linguistic conclusions and statistics. In a 
study on corpus design for Setswana lexicogra-
phy Otlogetswe (2007) claims that a is the most 
frequent ?word? in his 1.3 million ?words? 
Setswana corpus (Otlogetswe, 2007:125). In re-
ality, the orthographic word a in Setswana could 
be any of several linguistic words or morphemes.  
Compare the following:  
A/ o itse/ rre/ yo/?  (Do you know this gentle-
man?)  Interrogative particle; 
Re bone/ makau/ a/ maabane/.  (We saw these 
young men yesterday.)  Demonstrative pronoun; 
Metsi/ a/ bollo/.  (The water is hot.)  Descriptive 
copulative; 
Madi/ a/ rona/ a/ mo/ bankeng/.  (Our money 
(the money of us) is in the bank.)  Possessive 
particle and descriptive copulative; 
Mosadi/ a ba bitsa/.  (The woman (then) called 
them.)  Subject agreement morpheme; 
Dintswa/ ga di a re bona/.  (The dogs did not see 
us.)  Negative morpheme, which is concomitant 
with the negative morpheme ga when the nega-
tive of the perfect is indicated, thus an example 
of a separated dependency.  
In the six occurrences of a above only four 
represent orthographic words that should form 
part of a word frequency count for a.  
The above examples emphasise the impor-
tance of correct tokenisation of corpora, particu-
larly in the light of the increased exploitation of 
electronic corpora for linguistic and lexico-
graphic research. In particular, the correct to-
kenisation of verbs in disjunctively written lan-
guages is crucial for all reliable and accurate 
corpus-based research. Hurskeinen et al 
(2005:450) confirm this by stating that ?a care-
67
fully designed tokeniser is a prerequisite for 
identifying verb structure in text?.   
3 Morphological Structure of the Verb 
in Setswana 
A complete exposition of Setswana verb mor-
phology falls outside the scope of this article (see 
Kr?ger, 2006). Main aspects of interest are 
briefly introduced and illustrated by means of 
examples.  
The most basic form of the verb in Setswana 
consists of an infinitive prefix + a root + a verb-
final suffix, for example, go bona (to see) con-
sists of the infinitive prefix go, the root bon- and 
the verb-final suffix -a.   
While verbs in Setswana may also include 
various other prefixes and suffixes, the root al-
ways forms the lexical core of a word. Kr?ger 
(2006:36) describes the root as ?a lexical mor-
pheme [that] can be defined as that part of a 
word which does not include a grammatical 
morpheme; cannot occur independently as in the 
case with words; constitutes the lexical meaning 
of a word and belongs quantitatively to an open 
class?. 
3.1 Prefixes of the Setswana verb 
The verbal root can be preceded by several pre-
fixes (cf. Kr?ger (2006:171-183): 
Subject agreement morphemes: The subject 
agreement morphemes, written disjunctively, 
include non-consecutive subject agreement mor-
phemes and consecutive subject agreement mor-
phemes.  This is the only modal distinction that 
influences the form of the subject morpheme. 
The same subject agreement morpheme therefore 
has a consecutive as well as a non-consecutive 
form. For example, the non-consecutive subject 
agreement morpheme for class 5 is le as in lekau 
le a tshega (the young man is laughing), while 
the consecutive subject agreement morpheme for 
class 5 is la as in lekau la tshega (the young man 
then laughed). 
Object agreement morphemes: The object 
agreement morpheme is written disjunctively in 
most instances, for example ba di bona (they see 
it).  
The reflexive morpheme: The reflexive mor-
pheme i- (-self) is always written conjunctively 
to the root, for example o ipona (he sees him-
self).  
The aspectual morphemes: The aspectual 
morphemes are written disjunctively and include 
the present tense morpheme a, the progressive 
morpheme sa (still) and the potential morpheme 
ka (can). Examples are o a araba (he answers), 
ba sa ithuta (they are still learning) and ba ka 
ithuta (they can learn). 
The temporal morpheme: The temporal 
morpheme tla (indicating the future tense) is 
written disjunctively, for example ba tla ithuta 
(they shall learn). 
The negative morphemes ga, sa and se: The 
negative morphemes ga, sa and se are written 
disjunctively.  Examples are ga ba ithute (they 
do not learn), re sa mo thuse (we do not help 
him), o se mo rome (do not send him). 
3.2 Suffixes of the Setswana verb 
Various morphemes may be suffixed to the 
verbal root and follow the conjunctive writing 
style: 
Verb-final morphemes: Verbal-final suffixes 
a, e, the relative -ng and the imperative ?ng, for 
example, ga ba ithute (they are not learning). 
The causative suffix -is-: Example, o rekisa 
(he sells (he causes to buy)). 
The applicative suffix -el-: Example, o balela 
(she reads for). 
The reciprocal suffix -an-: Example, re a 
thusana (we help each other). 
The perfect suffix -il-: Example, ba utlwile 
(they heard). 
The passive suffix -w-: Example, o romiwa 
(he is sent). 
3.3 Auxiliary verbs and copulatives  
Kr?ger (2006:273) states that ?Syntactically an 
auxiliary verb is a verb which must be followed 
by a complementary predicate, which can be a 
verb or verbal group or a copulative group or an 
auxiliary verbal group, because it cannot func-
tion in isolation?.  Consider the following exam-
ple of the auxiliary verb tlhola:  re tlhola/ re ba 
thusa/ (we always help them).  For a more de-
tailed discussion of auxiliary verbs in Setswana 
refer to Pretorius (1997). 
Copulatives function as introductory members 
to non-verbal complements.  The morphological 
forms of copula are determined by the copulative 
relation and the type of modal category in which 
they occur.  These factors give rise to a large va-
riety of morphological forms (Kr?ger, 2006: 
275-281). 
3.4 Formation of verbs 
The formation of Setswana verbs is governed by 
a set of linguistic rules according to which the 
various prefixes and suffixes may be sequenced 
68
to form valid verb forms (so-called morhotactics) 
and by a set of morphophonological alternation 
rules that model the sound changes that occur at 
morpheme boundaries. These formation rules 
constitute a model of Setswana morphology that 
forms the basis of the finite-state morphological 
analyser, discussed in subsequent sections.  
This model, supported by a complete set of 
known, attested Setswana roots, may be used to 
recognise valid words, including verbs. It will 
not recognise either incorrectly formed or partial 
strings as words. The significance of this for to-
kenisation specifically is that, in principle, the 
model and therefore also the morphological ana-
lyser based on it can and should recognise only 
(valid) tokens. 
Morphotactics: While verbs may be analysed 
linearly or hierarchically, our computational 
analysis follows the former approach, for exam-
ple: 
ba a kwala (they write) 
Verb(INDmode),(PREStense,Pos):AgrSubj-
Cl2+AspPre + [kwal]+Term 
o tla reka (he will buy) 
Verb(INDmode),(FUTtense,Pos):AgrSubj-
Cl1+TmpPre+[rek]+Term 
ke dirile (I have worked) 
Verb(INDmode),(PERFtense,Pos):AgrSubj-
1P-Sg+[dir]+Perf+Term 
The above analyses indicate the part-of-speech 
(verb), the mode ( indicative) and the tense (pre-
sent, future or perfect), followed by a ?:? and then 
the morphological analyses. The tags are chosen 
to be self-explanatory and the verb root appears 
in square brackets.  For example the first analysis 
is ba: subject agreement class 2; a: aspectual 
prefix; kwal: verb root; a: verb terminative (verb-
final suffix). The notation used in the presenta-
tion of the morphological analyses is user-
defined. 
In linear analyses the prefixes and suffixes 
have a specific sequencing with regard to the 
verbal root. We illustrate this by means of a 
number of examples. A detailed exposition of the 
rules governing the order and valid combinations 
of the various prefixes and suffixes may be found 
in Kr?ger (2006). 
Object agreement morphemes and the reflex-
ive morpheme always appear directly in front of 
the verbal root, for example le a di reka (he buys 
it). No other prefix can be placed between the 
object agreement morpheme and the verbal root 
or between the reflexive morpheme and the ver-
bal root. 
The position of the negative morpheme ga is 
always directly in front of the subject agreement 
morpheme, for example, ga ke di b?ne. (I do not 
see it/them). 
The negative morpheme sa follows the subject 
agreement morpheme, for example, (fa) le sa 
dire ((while) he is not working). 
The negative morpheme se also follows the 
subject agreement morpheme, for example, 
(gore) re se di je ((so that) we do not eat it).  
However, if the verb is in the imperative mood 
the negative morpheme se is used before the ver-
bal root, for example, Se kwale! (Do not write!). 
The aspectual morphemes always follow the 
subject agreement morpheme, for example, ba sa 
dira (they are still working). 
The temporal morpheme also follows the sub-
ject agreement morpheme, for example, ba tla 
dira (they shall work). 
Due to the agglutinating nature of the lan-
guage and the presence of long distance depend-
encies, the combinatorial complexity of possible 
morpheme combinations makes the identification 
of the underlying verb rather difficult. Examples 
of rules that assist in limiting possible combina-
tions are as follows: 
The object agreement morpheme is a prefix 
that can be used simultaneously with the other 
prefixes in the verb, for example, ba a di bona 
(they see it/them). 
The aspectual morphemes and the temporal 
morpheme cannot be used simultaneously, for 
example, le ka ithuta (he can learn) and le tla 
ithuta (he will learn). 
Since (combinations of) suffixes are written 
conjunctively, they do not add to the complexity 
of the disjunctive writing style prevalent in verb 
tokenisation. 
Morphophonological alternation rules: 
Sound changes can occur when morphemes are 
affixed to the verbal root. 
The prefixes: The object agreement mor-
pheme of the first person singular ni/n in combi-
nation with the root causes a sound change and 
this combination is written conjunctively, for 
example ba ni-bon-a > ba mpona (they see me).  
In some instances the object agreement mor-
pheme of the third person singular and class 1 
causes sound changes when used with verbal 
roots beginning with b-.  They are then written 
conjunctively, for example, ba mo-bon-a > ba 
mmona (they see him). 
When the subject agreement morpheme ke 
(the first person singular) and the progressive 
morpheme ka are used in the same verb, the 
sound change ke ka > nka appears, for example, 
ke ka opela > nka opela (I can sing). 
69
The suffixes: Sound changes also occur under 
certain circumstances, but do not affect the con-
junctive writing style.  
Summarising, the processing of electronic 
Setswana text requires precise tokenisation; the 
disjunctive writing style followed for verb con-
structions renders tokenisation on whitespace 
inappropriate; morphological structure is crucial 
in identifying valid verbs in text;  due to the 
regularity of word formation, linguistic rules 
(morphotactics and morphophonological alterna-
tion rules) suggest a rule-based model of 
Setswana morphology that may form the basis of 
a tokeniser transducer, and together with an ex-
tensive word root lexicon, also the basis for a 
rule-based morphological analyser. Since the 
Bantu languages exhibit similar linguistic struc-
ture, differences in orthography should be ad-
dressed at tokenisation / morphological analysis 
level so that subsequent levels of computational 
(syntactic and semantic) analysis may benefit 
optimally from prevalent structural similarities. 
4 Facing the Computational Challenge 
Apart from tokenisation, computational morpho-
logical analysis is regarded as central to the 
processing of the (agglutinating) South African 
Bantu languages (Bosch & Pretorius, 2002, Pre-
torius & Bosch, 2003). Moreover, standards and 
standardisation are pertinent to the development 
of appropriate software tools and language re-
sources (Van Rooy & Pretorius, 2003), particu-
larly for languages that are similar in structure.  
While such standardisation is an ideal worth 
striving for, it remains difficult to attain. Indeed, 
the non-standard writing styles pose a definite 
challenge.  
4.1 Other approaches to Bantu tokenisation 
Taljard and Bosch (2005) advocate an ap-
proach to word class identification that makes no 
mention of tokenisation as a central issue in the 
processing of Northern Sotho and Zulu text. For 
Northern Sotho they propose a hybrid system 
(consisting of a tagger, a morphological analyser 
and a grammar) ?containing information on both 
morphological and syntactic aspects, although 
biased towards morphology. This approach is 
dictated at least in part, by the disjunctive 
method of writing.? In contrast, Hurskainen et al 
(2005) in their work on the computational de-
scription of verbs of Kwanjama and Northern 
Sotho, concludes that ?a carefully designed to-
keniser is a prerequisite for identifying verb 
structures in text?. Anderson and Kotz? (2006) 
concur that in their development of a Northern 
Sotho morphological analyser ?it became obvi-
ous that tokenisation was a problem that needed 
to be overcome for the Northern Sotho language 
as distinct from the ongoing morphological and 
morpho-phonological analysis?.  
4.2 Our approach 
Our underlying assumption is that the Bantu lan-
guages are structurally very closely related. Our 
contention is that precise tokenisation will result 
in comparable morphological analyses, and that 
the similarities and structural agreement between 
Setswana and languages such as Zulu will pre-
vail at subsequent levels of syntactic analysis, 
which could and should then also be computa-
tionally exploited. 
 Our approach is based on the novel combina-
tion of two tokeniser transducers and a morpho-
logical analyser for Setswana. 
4.3 Morphological analyser 
The finite-state morphological analyser prototype 
for Setswana, developed with the Xerox finite 
state toolkit (Beesley and Karttunen, 2003), im-
plements Setswana morpheme sequencing (mor-
photactics) by means of a lexc script containing 
cascades of so-called lexicons, each of 
which represents a specific type of prefix, suffix 
or root. Sound changes at morpheme boundaries 
(morphophonological alternation rules) are im-
plemented by means of xfst regular expressions. 
These lexc and xfst scripts are then compiled and 
subsequently composed into a single finite state 
transducer, constituting the morphological ana-
lyser (Pretorius et al, 2005 and 2008). While the 
implementation of the morphotactics and alterna-
tion rules is, in principle, complete, the word root 
lexicons still need to be extended to include all 
known and valid Setswana roots. The verb mor-
phology is based on the assumption that valid 
verb structures are disjunctively written. For ex-
ample, the verb token re tla dula (we will 
sit/stay) is analysed as follows: 
Verb(INDmode),(FUTtense,Pos): AgrSubj-
1p-Pl+TmpPre+[dul]+Term 
or 
Verb(PARmode),(FUTtense,Pos): AgrSubj-
1p-Pl+TmpPre+[dul]+Term 
Both modes, indicative and participial, consti-
tute valid analyses. The occurrence of multiple 
valid morphological analyses is typical and 
would require (context dependent) disambigua-
tion at subsequent levels of processing.  
70
4.4 Tokeniser 
Since the focus is on verb constructions, the 
Setswana tokeniser prototype makes provision 
for punctuation and alphabetic text, but not yet 
for the usual non-alphabetic tokens such as dates, 
numbers, hyphenation, abbreviations, etc. A 
grammar for linguistically valid verb construc-
tions is implemented with xfst regular expres-
sions. By way of illustration we show a fragment 
thereof, where SP represents a single blank char-
acter, WS is general whitespace and SYMBOL is 
punctuation. In the fragment of xfst below ?...? 
indicates that other options have been removed 
for conciseness and is not strict xfst syntax : 
define WORD [Char]+[SP | SYMBOL]; 
define WORDwithVERBEnding [Char]+[a | e 
| n g] [SP | SYMBOL]; 
echo >>> define object concords 
define OBJ [g o | r e | l o | l e | m o 
| b a | o | e | a | s e | d i | b o] 
WS+; 
echo >>> define subject concords 
define SUBJ [k e | o | r e | l o | l e | 
a | b a | e | s e | d i | b o | g o] 
WS+; 
echo >>> define verb prefixes 
echo >>> define indicative mode 
define INDPREF [(g a WS+) SUBJ ([a | s a 
] WS+) ([a | k a | s a] WS+) (t l a WS+) 
(OBJ)]; 
define VPREF [...| INDPREF | ...]; 
echo >>> define verb groups 
define VGROUP [VPREF WORDwithVERBEnd-
ing]; 
echo >>> define tokens 
define Token [VGROUP | WORD | ...]; 
 
Finally, whitespace is normalised to a single 
blank character and the right-arrow, right-to-left, 
longest match rule for verb tokens is built on the 
template  
A ->@ B || L _ R; 
where A, B, L and R are regular expressions de-
noting languages, and L and R are optional 
(Beesley and Karttunen, 2003:174).  
We note that (i) it may happen that a longest 
match does not constitute a valid verb construct; 
(ii) the right-to-left strategy is appropriate since 
the verb root and suffixes are written conjunc-
tively and therefore should not be individually 
identified at the tokenisation stage while disjunc-
tively written prefixes need to be recognised. 
 The two aspects that need further clarification 
are (i) How do we determine whether a mor-
pheme sequence is valid? (ii) How do we recog-
nise disjunctively written prefixes?   Both these 
questions are discussed in the subsequent sec-
tion. 
4.5 Methodology 
Our methodology is based on a combination of 
a comprehensive and reliable morphological ana-
lyser for Setswana catering for disjunctively 
written verb constructions (see section 5.3), a 
verb tokeniser transducer (see section 5.4) and a 
tokeniser transducer that tokenises on 
whitespace. The process is illustrated in Figure 1. 
Central to our approach is the assumption that 
only analysed tokens are valid tokens and strings 
that could not be analysed are not valid linguistic 
words. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Analysed strings, typically verbs              Unanalysed strings 
 
 
 
 
   Analysed strings, typically 
       other word categories 
 
                  Unanalysed strings 
 
Figure 1: Tokenisation procedure 
 
Tokenisation procedure: 
Step 1: Normalise test data (running text) by re-
moving capitalisation and punctuation; 
Step 2: Tokenise on longest match right-to-left; 
Step 3: Perform a morphological analysis of the 
?tokens? from step 2; 
Step 4: Separate the tokens that were successfully 
analysed in step 3 from those that could not be ana-
lysed;  
Step 5: Tokenise all unanalysed ?tokens? from step 
4 on whitespace; 
[Example: unanalysed wa me becomes wa and me.] 
Step 6: Perform a morphological analysis of the 
?tokens? in step 5; 
Step 7: Again, as in step 4, separate the analysed 
and unanalysed strings resulting from step 6; 
Step 8: Combine all the valid tokens from steps 4 
and 7. 
This procedure yields the tokens obtained by 
computational means. Errors are typically strings 
that could not be analysed by the morphological 
analyser and should be rare. These strings should 
be subjected to human elicitation. Finally a com-
parison of the correspondences and differences 
Normalise running text 
Verb Tokeniser yielding 
longest matches 
Morphological Analyser 
Whitespace  Tokeniser 
yielding orthographic 
words 
Morphological Analyser 
Tokens
Errors 
71
between the hand-tokenised tokens (hand-tokens) 
and the tokens obtained by computational means 
(auto-tokens) is necessary in order to assess the 
reliability of the described tokenisation approach. 
 
The test data: Since the purpose was to estab-
lish the validity of the tokenisation approach, we 
made use of a short Setswana text of 547 ortho-
graphic words, containing a variety of verb con-
structions (see Table 1). The text was tokenised 
by hand and checked by a linguist in order to 
provide a means to measure the success of the 
tokenisation approach. Furthermore, the text was 
normalised not to contain capitalisation and 
punctuation. All word roots occurring in the text 
were added to the root lexicon of the morpho-
logical analyser to ensure that limitations in the 
analyser would not influence the tokenisation 
experiment. 
Examples of output of step 2:  
ke tla nna 
o tla go kopa 
le ditsebe 
Examples of output of step 3: 
Based on the morphological analysis, the first 
two of the above longest matches are tokens and 
the third is not. The relevant analyses are: 
ke tla nna 
Verb(INDmode), (FUTtense,Pos): AgrSubj-
1p-Sg+TmpPre+[nn]+Term 
o tla go kopa 
Verb(INDmode), (FUTtense,Pos): AgrSubj-
Cl1+TmpPre+AgrObj-2p-Sg+[kop]+Term 
Examples of output of step 5: 
le, ditsebe 
Examples of output of step 6: 
le  
CopVerb(Descr), (INDmode), (FUT-
tense,Neg): AgrSubj-Cl5 
ditsebe 
NPre10+[tsebe] 
5 Results and Discussion 
The results of the tokenisation procedure ap-
plied to the test data, is summarised in Tables 1 
and 2.  
 
Token length 
(in orthographic words) 
Test data Correctly 
 tokenised 
2 84 68 
3 25 25 
4 2 2 
Table 1. Verb constructions 
Table 1 shows that 111 of the 409 tokens in 
the test data consist of more than one ortho-
graphic word (i.e. verb constructions) of which 
95 are correctly tokenised. Moreover, it suggests 
that the tokenisation improves with the length of 
the tokens.  
 
 Tokens Types 
Hand-tokens, H  409 208 
Auto-tokens, A 412 202 
H ? A 383 (93.6%) 193 (92.8%) 
A \ H 29 9 
H \ A 26 15 
Precision, P 0.93 0.96 
Recall, R 0.94 0.93 
F-score, 2PR/(P+R) 0.93 0.94 
Table 2. Tokenisation results 
 
The F-score of 0.93 in Table 2 may be consid-
ered a promising result, given that it was ob-
tained on the most challenging aspect of 
Setswana tokenisation. The approach scales well 
and may form the basis for a full scale, broad 
coverage tokeniser for Setswana. A limiting fac-
tor is the as yet incomplete root lexicon of the 
morphological analyser. However, this may be 
addressed by making use of a guesser variant of 
the morphological analyser that contains conso-
nant/vowel patterns for phonologically possible 
roots to cater for absent roots.  
It should be noted that the procedure presented 
in this paper yields correctly tokenised and mor-
phologically analysed linguistic words, ready for 
subsequent levels of parsing. 
We identify two issues that warrant future in-
vestigation:  
? Longest matches that allow morphologi-
cal analysis, but do not constitute tokens. 
Examples are ba ba neng, e e siameng and 
o o fetileng. In these instances the tokenis-
er did not recognise the qualificative par-
ticle. The tokenisation should have been 
ba/ ba neng, e/ e siameng and o/ o fetileng.  
? Longest matches that do not allow mor-
phological analysis and are directly split 
up into single orthographic words instead 
of allowing verb constructions of interme-
diate length. An example is e le monna, 
which was finally tokenised as e/ le/ mon-
na instead of e le/ monna. 
Finally, perfect tokenisation is context sensi-
tive. The string ke tsala should have been toke-
nised as ke/ tsala (noun), and not as the verb 
construction ke tsala. In another context it can 
however be a verb with tsal- as the verb root.  
In conclusion, we have successfully demon-
strated that the novel combination of a precise 
tokeniser and morphological analyser for 
72
Setswana could indeed form the basis for resolv-
ing the issue of disjunctive orthography.  
6 Future work 
? The extension of the morphological ana-
lyser to include complete coverage of the 
so-called closed word categories, as well 
as comprehensive noun and verb root lexi-
cons; 
? The refinement of the verb tokeniser to 
cater for a more extensive grammar of 
Setswana verb constructions and more so-
phisticated ways of reducing the length of 
invalid longest right-to-left matches; 
? The application of the procedure to large 
text corpora. 
Acknowledgements 
This material is based upon work supported by 
the South African National Research Foundation 
under grant number 2053403. Any opinion, find-
ings and conclusions or recommendations ex-
pressed in this material are those of the authors 
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the 
National Research Foundation. 
References 
Anderson, W.N. and Kotz?, P.M. Finite state tokeni-
sation of an orthographical disjunctive agglutina-
tive language: The verbal segment of Northern So-
tho. In Proceedings of the 5th International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evalution, 
Genoa, Italy, May 22-28, 2006. 
Bosch, S.E. and Pretorius, L.  2002.  The significance 
of computational morphology for Zulu lexicogra-
phy.  South African Journal of African Languages, 
22(1):11-20. 
Cole, D.T.  1955.  An Introduction to Tswana Gram-
mar.  Longman, Cape Town, South Africa. 
Dixon, R.M.W. and Aikhenvald, A.Y. 2002. Word: A 
Cross-linguistic Typology. Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, UK.  
Forst, M. and Kaplan, R.M. 2006. The importance of 
precise tokenization for deep grammars. In Pro-
ceedings of the 5th International Conference on 
Language Resources and Evalution, Genoa, Italy, 
May 22-28, 2006. 
Hurskeinen, A.,  Louwrens, L. and Poulos, G.  2005  
Computational description of verbs in disjoining 
writing systems.  Nordic Journal of African Stud-
ies, 14(4): 438-451. 
Kosch, I.M. 2006. Topics in Morphology in the Afri-
can Language Context. Unisa Press, Pretoria, 
South Africa. 
Kr?ger, C.J.H.  2006.  Introduction to the Morphology 
of Setswana.  Lincom Europe, M?nchen, Germany. 
Megerdoomian, K. 2003. Text mining, corpus build-
ing and testing. In Handbook for Language Engi-
neers, Farghaly, A. (Ed.). CSLI Publications, Cali-
fornia, USA. 
Mikheev, A. 2003. Text segmentation. In The Oxford 
Handbook of Computational Linguistics, Mitkov, 
R. (Ed.) Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK. 
Otlogetswe, T.J.  2007.  Corpus Design for Setswana 
Lexicography.  PhD thesis.  University of Pretoria, 
Pretoria, South Africa. 
Palmer, D.D. 2000. Tokenisation and sentence seg-
mentation. In Handbook of natural Language 
Processing, Dale, R., Moisl, H. And Somers, H. 
(Eds.). Marcel Dekker, Inc., New York, USA. 
Pretorius, R.S.  1997.  Auxiliary Verbs as a Sub-
category of the Verb in Tswana.  PhD thesis.  PU 
for CHE, Potchefstroom, South Africa. 
Pretorius, L and Bosch, S.E.  2003.  Computational 
aids for Zulu natural language processing.  South 
African Linguistics and Applied Language Studies, 
21(4):267-281. 
Pretorius, R., Viljoen, B. and Pretorius, L. 2005. A 
finite-state morphological analysis of Setswana 
nouns. South African Journal of African Lan-
guages, 25(1):48-58. 
Pretorius, L., Viljoen, B., Pretorius, R. and Berg, A. 
2008. Towards a computational morphological 
analysis of Setswana compounds. Literator, 
29(1):1-20. 
Schiller, A. 1996. Multilingual finite-state noun-
phrase extraction. In Proceedings of the ECAI 96 
Workshop on Extended Finite State Models of 
Language, Kornai, A. (Ed.). 
Taljard, E.  2006  Corpus based linguistic investiga-
tion for the South African Bantu languages: a 
Northern Sotho case study.  South African journal 
of African languages, 26(4):165-183. 
Taljard, E. and Bosch, S.E.  2006.  A Comparison of 
Approaches towards Word Class Tagging: Disjunc-
tively versus Conjunctively Written Bantu Lan-
guages. Nordic Journal of African Studies, 15(4): 
428-442. 
Van Wyk, E.B.  1958.  Woordverdeling in Noord-
Sotho en Zoeloe.  ?n Bydrae tot die Vraagstuk van 
Woordidentifikasie in die Bantoetale.  University 
of Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa. 
Van Wyk, E.B.  1967.  The word classes of Northern 
Sotho.  Lingua, 17(2):230-261. 
73
