Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Computational Linguistics (Coling 2008), pages 729?736
Manchester, August 2008
Anomalies in the WordNet Verb Hierarchy 
Tom Richens 
Aston University 
Aston Triangle 
Birmingham B4 7ET, England 
richentm@aston.ac.uk 
 
Abstract 
The WordNet verb hierarchy is tested, 
with a view to improving the perform-
ance of its applications, revealing topo-
logical anomalies and casting doubt on 
its semantic categories. Encoded tro-
ponyms frequently misrepresent other 
kinds of entailment. Approaches are pro-
posed for correcting these anomalies in-
cluding a new top ontology. 
1 Introduction 
WordNet is a lexical database widely used for 
NLP tasks. Any application of WordNet which 
measures semantic distance employs WordNet 
relations to do so. 
As part of a wider project to build an improved 
and enriched lexical database using existing re-
sources, in the hope of improving on the per-
formance of WordNet, this study investigates the 
correctness of the hypernymy/troponymy rela-
tions between verbs.  
The broader project would ideally model these 
hierarchical relations as trees but for the phe-
nomenon of multiple inheritance, which is in-
vestigated here to see if it is semantically justi-
fied. Moreover it seems intuitively likely that 
anomalies will be concentrated where the rela-
tional structure is more complex. 
1.1 Definitions 
The only document found to specify the Word-
Net verbal relations is Fellbaum (1998), who de-
fines troponymy (the verb equivalent of hy-
ponymy) as a special case of entailment, where 
                                                 
? 2008. Licensed under the Creative Commons Attri-
bution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported 
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-
sa/3.0/). Some rights reserved. 
the entailing and entailed verb are temporally co-
extensive, distinguishing it from causation, tem-
poral inclusion, and backward presupposition, of 
which the last two are not encoded as distinct 
relations in WordNet, but are combined under 
the general heading of entailment. The expres-
sion sister terms is used to designate a pair of 
synsets which share a hypernym. 
This study distinguishes between transitive 
causation (causing another to do something) and 
reflexive causation (causing oneself to do 
something). The term quale (plural: qualia) is 
borrowed from Pustejovsky (1991). As applied to 
verbs within the context of this study, the formal 
quale means what is physically done, while the 
telic quale means the purpose or intended result 
of the action. 
1.2 Application of WordNet Relations 
Banerjee & Pedersen (2003) have employed 
WordNet relations in an extension to the Lesk 
(1986) algorithm for word sense disambiguation. 
In order to establish the relatedness of two 
words, the glosses of their WordNet relatives are 
compared. Their results are noticeably inferior 
for verbs than for nouns. Moreover, while the 
most useful relations for disambiguating nouns 
were hyponymy and meronymy, in the case of 
verbs, the example sentences proved more useful 
than any relations. Their best results were ob-
tained by using all relations between verbs indis-
criminately. This finding reflects on the distinc-
tions between kinds of verb relations and sug-
gests that at least where verbs are concerned, the 
limited success achieved by algorithms relying 
on WordNet relations arises from the probability 
that when a relation is encoded, some relation 
exists, even though the kind of relation is not 
necessarily correct. This observation suggests 
that improvements to the WordNet relations may 
well be useful for improving on the performance 
729
of WordNet as a tool for interlingual tasks and 
word sense disambiguation. 
1.3 Validation of Wordnets 
Smr? (2003) proposes a number of tests for 
validating wordnets. These involve checking for 
"cycles", "dangling uplinks" and "top-most 
synset not from the defined set" and critically 
examining "multi-parent relations". These tests 
have been applied in the development of 
BalkanNet (Various 2004). The present study 
looks for any of the listed faults or potential 
faults within WordNet 3.0. Without a defined set 
of unique beginners, it is impossible to 
distinguish a "dangling uplink" from "top-most 
synset not from the defined set". All verbs 
synsets without any hypernym will therefore be 
considered as candidate unique beginners. 
1.4 Potential Hypernymy Faults 
Liu et al (2004) have found thousands of cases 
of rings within the hierarchies, which arise when 
a synset has two hypernyms within the same se-
mantic category, which themselves have a com-
mon hypernym, along with isolators, trees iso-
lated within their own category whose only hy-
pernym lies in another category. Such deviations 
from a tree-structure, if not semantically justifi-
able, should be considered as faults. 
The occurrence of a ring implies multiple 
inheritance, which is not necessarily a fault but 
merits investigation to ensure that it is justified. 
There are two other kinds of potential fault 
which should also be considered: another kind of 
ring is a cycle, which is formed where following 
the hypernymy relation in one direction leads 
back to where one started; a special case of an 
isolator occurs where a synset has no hypernym 
at all, which makes it a candidate unique 
beginner. Liu et al (2004) dismiss this 
possibility as legitimate, without further 
consideration, on the grounds that this applies to 
the unique beginners of each semantic category. 
In fact, Fellbaum (1998) allows for more than 
one unique beginner per verb category. However 
cases where there is a large number of unique 
beginners in one category merit investigation. 
1.5 Methodology 
The present study has been conducted using a 
model of WordNet where synsets, word senses 
and relations are implemented as Java objects, 
constructed from the WordNet 3.0 Prolog files. 
Focussing mainly on verbs, three main aspects 
are investigated, topological anomalies, anoma-
lies relating to categories and the top ontology. 
An algorithm was developed to discover occur-
rences of each of the kinds of potential hy-
pernymy fault identified above. To investigate 
topological anomalies, the algorithm recursively 
constructs an upside-down tree from each synset, 
using that synset as root with its most remote 
indirect hypernyms as the leaves. Where a cycle 
occurs, a stack error will result. A ring is identi-
fied wherever a synset is found more than once 
in the same upside-down tree. This approach is 
an extension of the methodology employed by 
Liu et al (2004), in that it assumes no correlation 
between semantic categories and hypernymy so 
as to identify rings which straddle category 
boundaries. An examination of rings in the verb 
hierarchy leads onto a more general examination 
of dual inheritance among verbs (there are no 
verbs with more than 2 hypernyms). 
An isolator occurs when the only hypernym is in 
a different semantic category to the synset under 
investigation. Examination of isolators reveals 
more anomalies in the verb hierarchy but also 
raises questions about the validity of the seman-
tic categories. 
A candidate unique beginner is identified when-
ever a synset has troponyms but no hypernym. 
The proliferation of unspecified unique beginners 
among verbs prompts a full review of the top 
ontology. 
The full results which are analysed here are cur-
rently available at: 
http://www.rockhouse.me.uk/Linguistics. 
2 Topological Anomalies and Remedies 
2.1 Cycle 
The algorithm implementation generated a stack 
error when applied to a number of verbal synsets: 
in each case the same cycle was encountered, 
which is the only one in WordNet 3.0. 
 
Figure 1. Cycle topology 
 
The two synsets in fig. 1 appear to be 
synonymous. Merging them to remove the cycle 
would improve structural consistency. 
730
2.2 Rings 
Liu et al (2004) define a ring as being formed 
where a synset "has at least 2 fathers in its own 
category", which have a common ancestor also 
within that category. Our algorithm uses a 
broader definition of ring as any instance of a 
synset having two hypernyms such that these 
hypernyms themselves have a common ancestor 
or one of them is the ancestor of the other (table 
1). 
 
Case with respect to 
semantic categories 
Verbs Nouns 
Single category 5 1 
Ancestry crosses categories 
but direct relations are in 
same category as headword 
2 1984 
Ancestry crosses categories 
and direct relations cross 
categories 
1 379 
TOTAL 8 2364 
TOTAL using definition 
from Liu et al (2004) 
7 1985 
Results of Liu et al (2004) 
using WordNet 2.0 
17 1839 
Table 1. Rings in Wordnet 
 
Figure 2. Asymmetric ring topology 
 
Figure 3. Symmetric ring topology 
 
An analysis of the rings among nouns is outside 
the scope of this study. Out of the 8 rings in the 
verb hierarchies, 4 are asymmetric and 4 are 
symmetric. 
In 3 out of 4 cases of the asymmetric topology 
(fig. 2), the link between the initial synset and the 
compound hypernym is redundant and can be 
removed. In the remaining case, "eat" (transitive) 
has the simple hypernym "eat" (intransitive) 
which simply fails to specify what is eaten. This 
can be considered as synonymy and so there is a 
case for merging these synsets. The compound 
hypernym "consume, ingest" would also seem to 
be a synonym, unless one relies on the gloss: 
"serve oneself to, or consume regularly", in 
which case it as ambiguous between reflexive 
causation and iteration, neither of which fits the 
definition of hypernymy. 
The instances of symmetric topology (fig. 3) 
raise different issues. Liu et al (2004) assert that 
a ring implies a paradox because they assume 
that two hyponyms of a single hypernym must 
have opposite properties in some dimension and 
therefore cannot have a common hyponym, as a 
hyponym must inherit all the properties of its 
hypernym. In fact there need not be any paradox 
as two hyponyms can modify two different prop-
erties of their hypernym (see Amaro et al, 2006, 
for a discussion with particular reference to 
qualia properties). The symmetric ring starting 
from the word "turn" in the sense "the leaves turn 
in Autumn" involves different properties: "turn, 
grow" is distinguished from "change" by specify-
ing that the timescale is gradual, while "discol-
our" specifies which attribute is to change; "turn" 
in the above sense inherits both properties of 
gradual timescale and colour attribute. 
In the remaining three cases of symmetric rings, 
the gloss for the initial synset contains the word 
"or", conveying an ambiguity. The two hy-
pernyms in each case are in fact hypernyms or 
synonyms of the respective two meanings, and 
the grandparent is indeed a common ancestor. 
Splitting the ambiguous synsets to remove the 
ring would improve consistency.  
We conclude that in 7 out of 8 instances, rings 
among verbs can be corrected and in the 
remaining case (?turn?, above) the ring and the 
dual inheritance are justified. The question then 
arises as to why there should only be one case of 
a semantically justifiable ring. The answer to this 
question is sought through an investigation of the 
remaining 23 cases of dual inheritance among 
verbs, where there is no ring. 
731
2.3 Dual inheritance 
Table 2 shows the results of a review of the se-
mantic relations encoded as hypernymy in a dual 
inheritance context. 3 hypernyms have an am-
biguous troponym whose gloss contains the word 
"or", and 2 hypernyms are themselves ambiguous 
with glosses containing "or". 
 
Correct: Telic quale 5 
Correct: Formal quale 4 
Otherwise correct hypernym 10 
Hypernym of 1 sense of ambiguous 
troponym 
3 
No near relation 4 
Synonym of other hypernym 2 
Temporal inclusion 4 
Backward presupposition 1 
Ambiguous hypernym 2 
Reflexive cause of sister term 1 
Sister term 1 
Reverse proper inclusion of 1 sense 
of ambiguous troponym 
2 
Intransitive form of transitive tro-
ponym 
1 
Synonym 1 
Non-reflexive form of reflexive 
troponym 
1 
Transitive cause 1 
Troponym 2 
Literal sense of metaphor 1 
TOTAL 46 
% correct 34.78% 
Table 2. Verb hypernyms involved in dual inheritance 
without rings  
 
The cases of proper inclusion and backward pre-
supposition should be encoded as entailments 
according to Fellbaum's (1998) specification and 
causes also should be encoded as such. 
 
Word forms Formal quale Telic quale 
date, 
date stamp 
stamp date 
assemble, 
piece 
join, bring 
together 
make, create 
execute, put 
to death 
Kill punish, pe-
nalize 
Carve Cut shape, form 
Sing Utter interpret, 
render 
Table 3. Dual inheritance justified by qualia 
 
Table 3 shows details of those 4 cases where dual 
inheritance can be justified in terms of inheri-
tance of two different qualia (Amaro et al, 
2006). The fifth example, in italics, is not as en-
coded in WordNet: "sing" (intransitive) is given 
as a hypernym of "sing" (transitive), which is 
otherwise synonymous, consistent with the en-
coding of "eat" mentioned above. The other hy-
pernym, "interpret, render" is necessarily transi-
tive. The hypernym of "sing" (intransitive) is 
given as "talk, speak", which is really a sister 
term whose common hypernym would be "utter" 
(Miller & Johnson-Laird, 1976), which repre-
sents the formal quale, while "interpret, render" 
represents the telic quale. So there is an underly-
ing dual inheritance of different qualia proper-
ties. 
The only cases of dual inheritance which can be 
considered legitimate are those where different 
but compatible properties are inherited. While 
this handful of examples has been identified, 
there are no doubt many more which could be 
discovered (Amaro et al, 2006). The encoding of 
these might well result in further justifiable rings. 
3 Anomalies relating to Categories 
3.1 Isolators 
1593 examples were found of isolators among 
verbs and 2527 among nouns. These results ap-
proximate to those of Liu et al (2004), who 
found 1551 verb isolators and 2654 noun isola-
tors in WordNet 2.0. A review of the semantic 
relations was undertaken on a sample of 41 pairs 
of troponym and hypernym in different catego-
ries among verbs (table 4). 
 
Correct hypernymy 26 
Troponym is true troponym of one 
meaning of ambiguous hypernym 
1 
Hypernym is cause of troponym 2 
Troponym is true troponym of cause 
of hypernym 
2 
Hypernym temporally includes tro-
ponym 
1 
Hypernym is backward presupposi-
tion of troponym 
1 
Synonymous 5 
Metaphor 1 
No near relation 2 
TOTAL 41 
% correct 63% 
Table 4: Semantic relations among isolator samples 
732
Again we find cases of causation and entailment 
encoded as hypernymy. In most cases the hy-
pernymy relation is correct, while the synsets 
belong to different categories. This arises inevi-
tably because the WordNet verb categories are, 
for the most part, not mutually exclusive. In only 
one sample were the categories found to be mu-
tually exclusive (change and stative). 14 out of 
the 82 synsets were judged not to belong to the 
category to which they are assigned, while 17 
synsets do belong to the other's category.  
The majority of WordNet's verbal semantic 
categories represent overlapping semantic fields. 
It is not therefore surprising that the isolator 
phenomenon occurs and this does not necessarily 
imply an error. The only categories which could 
be considered not to overlap are stative with 
change and creation, and weather with most of 
the other semantic fields. 
A more detailed examination was made of a 
sample of 76 cases of isolator, where the hy-
pernym and troponym categories could be con-
sidered mutually exclusive. The incorrect exam-
ples in table 5 are typical of the kinds of errors 
we have already seen in the encoding of Word-
Net relations. 
 
Valid relation 55 
No near relation 5 
Hypernym is reflexive cause of 
troponym 
1 
Indeterminate (ambiguous syn-
set) 
6 
Syntactic alternation 2 
Hypernym is backward presup-
position of troponym 
2 
Hypernymy only because of mis-
leading gloss 
1 
Sister terms 1 
Hypernym is reflexive of tro-
ponym 
1 
Synonymous 1 
Troponym is transitive cause of 
true troponym 
1 
TOTAL 76 
% correct 72% 
Table 5. Semantic relations among isolator samples 
involving mutually exclusive categories 
 
Some 53 synsets (34.9%) were considered to be 
in the correct category. Change has been used 
indiscriminately to include both causative and 
inchoative alternations, while both creation and 
stative have been used for the causative alterna-
tions and stative has also been used for some of 
the inchoative alternations. By transferring all the 
inchoative alternations to change, and all the 
causative alternations to creation, some of the 
category mismatches disappear.  
Some of the verbs in this dataset have generic 
meanings like doing and happening, which do 
not fit into any of the WordNet categories. 
Creating categories for these verbs might 
eliminate more anomalies. 
3.2 Theoretical Basis of Categories 
In theory, WordNet nouns and verbs are arranged 
as a set of hierarchies (Fellbaum 1998), each 
with an unique beginner, but multiple inheritance 
is not ruled out, particularly where the second 
hypernym of a synset is in a different semantic 
category. The semantic categories in WordNet 
are based, according to Fellbaum (1998) on a 
standard work on psycholinguistics (Miller & 
Johnson-Laird, 1976). The latter discusses in 
detail verbs of motion, possession, vision 
(WordNet perception) and communication, 
which are the basis for the corresponding 
WordNet categories. Other semantic fields 
mentioned are contact, bodily activity (WN 
body), thought (WN cognition) and affect (WN 
emotion). Miller & Johnson-Laird, (1976) 
acknowledge that these categories overlap, but 
WordNet does not allow a verb to belong to more 
than one category. No theoretical basis has been 
found for the remaining categories. Competition 
is subsumed by social, and consumption is 
subsumed by body. Weather would seem self-
contained, but change, creation and stative are 
not semantic fields at all. Stative belongs to the 
Aktionsart categorisation of verbs distinguishing 
it from verbs of activity, achievement and 
accomplishment, which is orthogonal to the 
categorisation of verbs into semantic fields 
(Vendler, 1967, Moens & Steedman 1988, 
Amaro, 2006). Moreover, a verb can belong to 
more than one Aktionsart category, as these 
apply to verbs in contexts. 
3.3 Suggested Revision of Categories 
Among verbs, the level of arbitrariness and in-
correctness of the WordNet categories seems 
greater than that of the relations. Whereas the 
theoretical basis for WordNet relations is consis-
tent and the errors are failures to conform to the 
specification, in the case of categories, the theo-
retical basis is inconsistent, being, a compromise 
between more than one system of categorisation. 
733
Many anomalies arise because WordNet only 
allows a verb to belong to one category. It is im-
possible to encode semantic categories correctly 
on the basis of one category per verb. At least 
two semantic fields need to be allowed, plus at 
least one orthogonal category. Miller & Johnson-
Laird (1976) themselves point out that semantic 
components like cause and intention cross the 
boundaries between semantic fields as do opera-
tors like happen, do, act, possible and permissi-
ble. 
4 Top Ontology 
4.1 Candidate Unique Beginners 
WordNet 3.0 has 559 verbs with no hypernym, 
spread over all categories. Of these, 225 have no 
troponyms either. A further 96 have a single 
troponym of which 80 have no further 
troponyms. This leaves 254 verbs which have no 
hypernym and more than 1 direct or indirect 
troponym, in contrast with the theoretical 
position that each verb category has at most a 
handful of unique beginners (Fellbaum, 1998). 
These 254 verbs will therefore be considered as 
candidate unique beginners. 
More than one candidate was found in every 
category, the minimum being 5 for category 34 
consumption. According to Fellbaum (1998), 
category 38 motion should have two unique be-
ginners "expressing translational movement" and 
"movement without displacement" respectively. 
There are 17 other candidates in this category. 
Similarly category 40, possession should have 3 
unique beginners, representing the basic concepts 
"give", "take" and "have", whereas there are 12 
other candidates. 
Again, according to Fellbaum (1998) "Commu-
nication verbs are headed by the verb communi-
cate but immediately divide into two independ-
ent trees expressing verbal and nonverbal (ges-
tural) communication". There are 7 senses of 
"communicate" in WordNet 3.0 all of which 
have hypernyms. Fellbaum (1998) identifies a 
further subdivision between spoken and written 
language, but the only reference to "write" 
among these 254 synsets occurs in category 36: 
creation. In fact category 32 communication has 
18 candidates. There appears to be no connection 
between the theory and the practice here. 
It is always possible to define a verb in terms of 
another verb with one or more arguments. This is 
a method of identifying hypernyms, which 
appears to have been used extensively, though 
inconsistently, in the construction of WordNet, 
using the glosses for semi-automatic hypernym 
generation. Full automation of such a technique 
would lead inevitably to the cycle scenario 
defined above. There have to be unique 
beginners in order to avoid this. 
4.2 Deriving a New Top Ontology 
On a dataset of this size, it is feasible to manually 
identify hypernyms for most of the synsets, 
though there is more than one possible solution 
in many cases. In some cases it is sufficient to 
provide a more generic verb or verbal phrase as 
hypernym, which already belongs to a hierarchy. 
In other cases a combination of a verb and one or 
more arguments (mostly involving an additional 
verb) is required in order to define the verb, in 
which case the syntactic main verb in the defini-
tion can be considered as the hypernym. Auxil-
iary verbs required by the definitions include one 
modal verb ("can") not included in WordNet. 
The 254 synsets were manually annotated either 
with proposed hypernyms or with definitions in 
terms of verbs and arguments, without reference 
to semantic categories. In some cases auxiliaries 
act in conjunction with each other to form more 
complex definitions. The definitions are tenta-
tive, the objective being to demonstrate the pos-
sibility of generating a compact and consistent 
top ontology. However, there is scope for intro-
ducing more rigour by formalising the definitions 
along the lines of Jackendoff's (1983, 1990) lexi-
cal conceptual structures.  
Table 6 shows the auxiliaries used in defining the 
candidate unique beginners. The first row repre-
sents verbs which can be defined as the passive 
of another verb, namely "hang? (be supported 
from above), "depend (on)? (be caused by) and 
"belong (to)? (be had by). 
The next row but one represents transitive causa-
tion verbs e.g. "kill? (cause to die), "sensitize? 
(cause to sense), show (cause to see) etc. There 
is also negative causation, of which the most ge-
neric case is the verb "prevent". There are fewer, 
but a significant number of examples of reflexive 
causation, e.g. "look? (cause self to see) and 
more complex cases concerning possession: 
"give? (cause to have + cause self to not have), 
"take? (cause to not have + cause self to have).  
There are a number of unique beginners which 
express starting or stopping e.g. "learn? (start to 
know), "get? (start to have), "become? (start to 
be) and "lose" (stop having). 
Finally there are verbs which can be defined as 
the negation of other verbs: "displease? (not 
please), "reject? (not accept), "fail? (not suc-
734
ceed), "lack? (not have), "refrain? (not do). Al-
though "NOT" is not a verb, "doesn't/don't" is a 
verb which is generally substituted for "NOT", 
except in the infinitive. On these grounds "NOT" 
is not out of place in this list. 
Aux. Syntax n Hyp. Args. 
Be done 3 happen  
Can do 1   
Cause to do 43 make  
Cause self to do 6 make self 
Feel like doing 2   
Keep 
(repeat) 
doing 6 do again 
Start doing 11   
Stop doing 8   
Tell (1) (someone) 
to do 
1 tell (2) that you 
must 
Try to do 1 will although 
NOT 
know 
whether 
can 
NOT do 22   
Additional verbs used to define above auxilia-
ries 
Tell (2) (someone) 
that 
3 cause know 
Must do 1   
Will do 43   
Table 6. Auxiliaries needed to define candidate 
unique beginners (Aux. = auxiliary; n = number of 
candidates defined; Hyp. = proposed hypernym; Args. 
= arguments) 
 
In order to identify hypernyms from these defini-
tions consistently, we take the auxiliaries, includ-
ing "NOT", as the immediate hypernyms. 
A second meaning of "tell" has been added to 
table 6 as this has not been subsumed. The hy-
pernyms and arguments themselves introduce 
two more modal auxiliaries, "must" and "will" 
(in the Old English sense of volition).  
The implementation of this approach to identify-
ing hypernyms for candidate unique beginners, 
left 14 which could not be subsumed, (table 7). 
The two synonymous synsets in category 41 can 
be merged. Weather verbs of zero valency are 
subsumed by "happen".  
Those auxiliaries used in the definitions which 
cannot be subsumed by a hypernym must be rep-
resented in the list of outstanding unique begin-
ners. Of these, "feel", "start" and "stop" are al-
ready listed. The modals ("can", "must" and 
"will") and "NOT" need to be added to table 7 to 
complete a proposed new compact and consistent 
top ontology for verbs comprising 18 unique be-
ginners. 
There are relations between these concepts and 
the list could probably be further reduced. The 
modal verbs, together with "know" form a natu-
ral set of entailments for "do". The concept "do" 
compulsorily backwardly presupposes the com-
bination of "can" and "will" ("able and willing"). 
"Will" may be underlain or superseded by 
"must". "Can" can mean either "is physically 
equipped to" or "knows how to" or both and cor-
responds to the operator possible in the schema 
of Miller & Johnson-Laird (1976) referred to 
above, while "must" means NOT(permissi-
ble(NOT to)) using the operator permissible from 
the same schema. 
 
Synset ID Word Forms Cat. 
200109660 change 30 
200339934 happen, hap, go on 30 
200594621 know, cognize, cognise 31 
200628491 think, cogitate, cerebrate 31 
201617192 make, create 36 
201712704 perform, execute, do 36 
201771535 feel, experience 37 
201831531 move (non-translational) 38 
201835496 travel, go, move (transla-
tional) 
38 
202106506 perceive, comprehend 39 
202367363, 
202419073 
act, move 41 
202603699 exist, be 42 
202608347 begin, start 42 
202609764 end, stop, finish, terminate 42 
Addendum can n/a 
Addendum must n/a 
Addendum will n/a 
Addendum NOT n/a 
Table 7. New top ontology comprising outstanding 
unique beginners and modals 
5 Conclusion 
In the course of this study, one cycle has been 
found in WordNet and a number of "multi-parent 
relations" have been found to be unjustified. 
Over 500 instances have been found of "top-most 
synset not from the defined set" or "dangling up-
links" (Smr?, 2003). Many shortcomings have 
been found in the encoding of hypernymy be-
tween verbs, where the implementation fre-
735
quently does not conform to the theory. In their 
present state, the encoded relations can only re-
liably serve to indicate that a relation exists be-
tween two verbs and not to elucidate what that 
relation is. One is left with the impression that 
many hypernyms have been encoded arbitrarily, 
whether manually or automatically, with little 
respect for distinctions between kinds of relation. 
The hierarchy could be improved by merging 
synonymous synsets and removing redundant 
relations and by adopting a consistent approach 
to causative/inchoative alternations. The only 
valid cases of dual inheritance are where differ-
ent but compatible properties are inherited. Many 
more such relations could be encoded. The se-
mantic categories are, for the most part, not mu-
tually exclusive and lack a consistent theoretical 
basis. If semantic categories are required, then a 
verb needs to be allowed to belong to more than 
one. A new top ontology has been proposed 
which reduces the number of unique beginners 
from 254 to 18 with the aid of auxiliaries includ-
ing modal verbs. 
The issues identified can be addressed by build-
ing a new lexical database from the same 
sources, but there would be a very substantial 
overhead of applying manual corrections to the 
entire verb hierarchy or constructing an entirely 
new set of relations with a clear theoretical basis 
in a non-arbitrary manner, along the lines sug-
gested by Guarino (1998). One possible alterna-
tive is to borrow the relational structure from 
another lexical database. 
Acknowledgement 
Thanks are due to Dr. S. H. S. Wong and Dr. C. 
Buckingham of Aston University for suggestions 
regarding the presentation of these findings. 
References 
Amaro, R. 2006. WordNet as a base lexicon model for 
computation of verbal predicates. Proceedings of 
the Third Global WordNet Conference, 22-26 
January 2006, Jeju Island, Korea.  
Amaro, R., Chaves, R. P., Marrafa, P. & Mendes S. 
2006. Enriching Wordnets with new Relations and 
with Event and Argument Structures. Seventh In-
ternational Conference on Intelligent Text Process-
ing and Computational Linguistics, Mexico City, 
2006, 28 - 40. 
Banerjee, S. & Pedersen, P. 2003. Extended Gloss 
Overlaps as a Measure of Semantic Relatedness. 
Proceedings of the Eighteenth International Joint 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Acapulco, 
Mexico, August, 2003. 
Fellbaum, C. 1998. A Semantic Network of English 
Verbs, Fellbaum, C. (ed.), WordNet: An Electronic 
Lexical Database, Cambridge, Massachusetts, MIT 
Press, 69-104.  
Guarino, N., 1998. Some ontological principles for 
designing upper level lexical resources. In: Pro-
ceedings of the First International Conference on 
Language Resources and Evaluation, LREC 98. 
Jackendoff, R., 1983, Semantics & Cognition, Cam-
bridge, Massachusetts, MIT Press. 
Jackendoff, R., 1990, Semantic Structures, Current 
Studies in Linguistics Series, Cambridge, Massa-
chusetts, MIT Press. 
Lesk, M., 1986. Automatic sense disambiguation us-
ing machine readable dictionaries: How to tell a 
pine cone from a ice cream cone. In Proceedings of 
SIGDOC ?86, 
Liu, Y., Jiangsheng Y., Zhengshan W. & Shiwen Y. 
2004. Two Kinds of Hypernymy Faults in Word-
Net: the Cases of Ring and Isolator. Proceedings of 
the Second Global WordNet Conference. Brno, 
Czech Republic, 20-23 January 2004. 347-351.  
Miller & Johnson-Laird. 1976. Language & Percep-
tion, Cambridge University Press, Chapter 7, 524-
689.  
Moens, M. & Steedman, M. 1998. Temporal Ontol-
ogy and Temporal Reference, Computational Lin-
guistics, 14 (2), June 1988, 15-28. 
Pustejovsky, J., 1991. The Generative Lexicon, Com-
putational Linguistics, 17, (4), 409-441 
Smr?, P. 2004. Quality Control for Wordnet Devel-
opment. Proceedings of the Second Global Word-
Net Conference. Brno, Czech Republic, 20-23 
January 2004. 206-212. 
Various, 2004. Design and Development of a Multi-
lingual Balkan Wordnet Balkanet, IST-2000-
29388, WP8: Restructuring Improvement Word-
Nets, Deliverable D8.1: Restructuring WordNets 
for the Balkan languages, Project Report, Euro-
pean Commission 
Vendler, Z., 1967, Verbs & Times, Vendler, Z. (ed.), 
Linguistics in Philosophy, Cornell University 
Press, Ithaca & London, 97-121, 
Vossen, P. 2002. EuroWordNet General Document, 
Project Report. 
 
736
