Synset Assignment for Bi-lingual Dictionary with Limited Resource 
 
       Virach Sornlertlamvanich  
Thatsanee Charoenporn  
Chumpol Mokarat 
Thai Computational Linguistics Lab.  
NICT Asia Research Center, 
Thailand Science Park,  
Pathumthani, Thailand 
{virach,thatsanee,chumpol}@tcllab.org 
Hitoshi Isahara 
National Institute of Information 
and Communications Technology 
3-5 Hikaridai, Seika-cho, soraku-gaun, 
Kyoto, Japan 619-0289 
isahara@nict.go.jp 
 
Hammam Riza  
IPTEKNET, Agency for the Assess-
ment and Application of Technology,     
Jakarta Pusat 10340, Indonesia  
hammam@iptek.net.id 
 
Purev Jaimai  
Center for Research on Language 
Processing, National University of 
Mongolia, Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia  
purev@num.edu.mn 
 
Abstract 
This paper explores an automatic WordNet 
synset assignment to the bi-lingual diction-
aries of languages having limited lexicon 
information. Generally, a term in a bi-
lingual dictionary is provided with very 
limited information such as part-of-speech, 
a set of synonyms, and a set of English 
equivalents. This type of dictionary is 
comparatively reliable and can be found in 
an electronic form from various publishers. 
In this paper, we propose an algorithm for 
applying a set of criteria to assign a synset 
with an appropriate degree of confidence to 
the existing bi-lingual dictionary. We show 
the efficiency in nominating the synset 
candidate by using the most common lexi-
cal information. The algorithm is evaluated 
against the implementation of Thai-
English, Indonesian-English, and Mongo-
lian-English bi-lingual dictionaries. The 
experiment also shows the effectiveness of 
using the same type of dictionary from dif-
ferent sources.  
1 Introduction 
The Princeton WordNet (PWN) (Fellbaum, 1998) 
is one of the most semantically rich English lexical 
databases that are widely used as a lexical knowl-
edge resource in many research and development 
topics. The database is divided by part of speech 
into noun, verb, adjective and adverb, organized in 
sets of synonyms, called synset, each of which 
represents ?meaning? of the word entry.  
Though WordNet was already used as a starting 
resource for developing many language WordNets, 
the construction of the WordNet for any languages 
can be varied according to the availability of the 
language resources. Some were developed from 
scratch, and some were developed from the combi-
nation of various existing lexical resources. Span-
ish and Catalan WordNets, for instance, are auto-
matically constructed using hyponym relation, 
monolingual dictionary, bilingual dictionary and 
taxonomy (Atserias et al, 1997). Italian WordNet 
(Magnini et al, 1994) is semi-automatically con-
structed from definition in monolingual dictionary, 
bilingual dictionary, and WordNet glosses. Hun-
garian WordNet uses bilingual dictionary, mono-
lingual explanatory dictionary, and Hungarian the-
saurus in the construction (Proszeky et al, 2002), 
etc. 
673
This paper presents a new method particularly to 
facilitate the WordNet construction by using the 
existing resources having only English equivalents 
and the lexical synonyms. Our proposed criteria 
and algorithm for application are evaluated by im-
plementing to Asian languages which occupy quite 
different language phenomena in terms of gram-
mars and word unit. 
To evaluate our criteria and algorithm, we use 
the PWN version 2.1 containing 207,010 senses 
classified into adjective, adverb, verb, and noun. 
The basic building block is a ?synset? which is 
essentially a context-sensitive grouping of syno-
nyms which are linked by various types of relation 
such as hyponym, hypernymy, meronymy, anto-
nym, attributes, and modification. Our approach is 
conducted to assign a synset to a lexical entry by 
considering its English equivalent and lexical 
synonyms. The degree of reliability of the assign-
ment is defined in terms of confidence score (CS) 
based on our assumption of the membership of the 
English equivalent in the synset. A dictionary from 
different source is also a reliable source to increase 
the accuracy of the assignment because it can ful-
fill the thoroughness of the list of English equiva-
lent and the lexical synonyms. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: 
Section 2 describes our criteria for synset assign-
ment. Section 3 provides the results of the experi-
ments and error analysis on Thai, Indonesian, and 
Mongolian. Section 4 evaluates the accuracy of the 
assignment result, and the effectiveness of the 
complimentary use of a dictionary from different 
sources. Section 5 shows a collaborative interface 
for revising the result of synset assignment. And 
Section 6 concludes our work. 
2 Synset Assignment 
A set of synonyms determines the meaning of a 
concept. Under the situation of limited resources 
on a language, English equivalent word in a bi-
lingual dictionary is a crucial key to find an 
appropriate synset for the entry word in question. 
The synset assignment criteria described in this 
Section relies on the information of English 
equivalent and synonym of a lexical entry, which 
is most commonly encoded in a bi-lingual 
dictionary. 
Synset Assignment Criteria 
Applying the nature of WordNet which introduces 
a set of synonyms to define the concept, we set up 
four criteria for assigning a synset to a lexical entry. 
The confidence score (CS) is introduced to 
annotate the likelihood of the assignment. The 
highest score, CS=4, is assigned to the synset that 
is evident to include more than one English 
equivalent of the lexical entry in question. On the 
contrary, the lowest score, CS=1, is assigned to 
any synset that occupies only one of the English 
equivalents of the lexical entry in question when 
multiple English equivalents exist. 
The details of assignment criteria are elaborated 
as in the followings. Li denotes the lexical entry, Ej 
denotes the English equivalent, Sk denotes the syn-
set, and ? denotes the member of a set: 
Case 1: Accept the synset that includes more 
than one English equivalent with confidence score 
of 4. 
Figure 1 simulates that a lexical entry L0 has two 
English equivalents of E0 and E1. Both E0 and E1 
are included in a synset of S1. The criterion implies 
that both E0 and E1 are the synset for L0 which can 
be defined by a greater set of synonyms in S1. 
Therefore the relatively high confidence score, 
CS=4, is assigned for this synset to the lexical en-
try. 
 
Figure 1. Synset assignment with SC=4 
Example: 
L0:  
E0: aim  E1: target 
S0: purpose, intent, intention, aim, design 
S1: aim, object, objective, target 
S2: aim 
In the above example, the synset, S1, is assigned 
to the lexical entry, L0, with CS=4. 
Case 2: Accept the synset that includes more 
than one English equivalent of the synonym of the 
lexical entry in question with confidence score of 3.  
In case that Case 1 fails in finding a synset that 
includes more than one English equivalent, the 
English equivalent of a synonym of the lexical en-
try is picked up to investigate. 
L0 
E0 
S0 ?
 
S1 
?
 
E1 
?
 
S2 
?
 
674
 Figure 2. Synset assignment with SC=3 
Figure 2 simulates that an English equivalent of 
a lexical entry L0 and its synonym L1 are included 
in a synset S1. In this case the synset S1 is assigned 
to both L0 and L1 with CS=3. The score in this case 
is lower than the one assigned in Case 1 because 
the synonym of the English equivalent of the lexi-
cal entry is indirectly implied from the English 
equivalent of the synonym of the lexical entry. The 
newly retrieved English equivalent may not be dis-
torted. 
Example: 
L0: 	
  L1: 
 
E0: stare  E1: gaze 
S0: gaze, stare S1: stare 
In the above example, the synset, S0, is assigned 
to the lexical entry, L0, with CS=3. 
Case 3: Accept the only synset that includes the 
only one English equivalent with confidence score 
of 2. 
 
Figure 3. Synset assignment with SC=2 
Figure 3 simulates the assignment of CS-2 when 
there is only one English equivalent and there is no 
synonym of the lexical entry. Though there is no 
any English equivalent to increase the reliability of 
the assignment, in the same time there is no 
synonym of the lexical entry to distort the relation. 
In this case, the only one English equivalent shows 
it uniqueness in the translation that can maintain a 
degree of the confidence. 
Example: 
L0:           E0: obstetrician     
S0: obstetrician, accoucheur 
In the above example, the synset, S0, is assigned 
to the lexical entry, L0, with CS=2. 
Case 4: Accept more than one synset that in-
cludes each of the English Equivalent with confi-
dence score of 1. 
Case 4 is the most relax rule to provide some re-
lation information between the lexical entry and a 
synset. Figure 4 simulates the assignment of CS=1 
to any relations that do not meet the previous crite-
ria but the synsets that include one of the English 
equivalent of the lexical entry. 
 
Figure 4. Synset assignment with SC=1 
Example: 
L0: 
 
E0: hole  E1: canal 
S0: hole, hollow   
S1: hole, trap, cakehole, maw, yap, gop 
S2: canal, duct, epithelial duct, channel 
In the above example, each synset, S0, S1, and S2 
is assigned to lexical entry L0, with CS=1. 
3 Experiment results 
We applied the synset assignment criteria to a 
Thai-English dictionary (MMT dictionary) (CICC, 
1995) with the synset from WordNet 2.1. To com-
pare the ratio of assignment for Thai-English dic-
tionary, we also investigate the synset assignment 
of Indonesian-English and Mongolian-English dic-
tionaries. 
 WordNet (synset) T-E Dict (entry) 
 total assigned total assigned 
Noun 145,103 18,353 (13%) 43,072
11,867 
(28%)
Verb 24,884 1,333 (5%) 17,669
2,298 
(13%)
Adjective 31,302 4,034 (13%) 18,448
3,722 
(20%)
Adverb 5,721 737 (13%) 3,008
1,519 
(51%)
total 207,010 24,457 (12%) 82,197
19,406 
(24%)
Table 1. Synset assignment to T-E dictionary 
In our experiment, there are only 24,457 synsets 
from 207,010 synsets, which is 12% of the total 
number of the synset that can be assigned to Thai 
lexical entries. Table 1 shows the successful rate in 
assigning synset to Thai-English dictionary. About 
24 % of Thai lexical entries are found with the 
English equivalents that meet one of our criteria.  
Going through the list of unmapped lexical en-
try, we can classify the errors into three groups:- 
1. Compound 
The English equivalent is assigned in a com-
L0 E0 
S0 ?
 
S1 
?
 
E1 
?
 
S2 
?
 
L1 
L0 E0 S0 
?
 
L0 
E0 
S0 ?
 
S1 
?
 
E1 
S2 
?
 
675
pound, especially in case that there is no an 
appropriate translation to represent exactly 
the same sense. For example, 
L: 		Proceedings of the IJCNLP-08 Workshop on NLP for Less Privileged Languages, pages 113?116,
Hyderabad, India, January 2008. c?2008 Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing
Indigenous Languages of Indonesia: Creating Language Resources  
for Language Preservation 
Hammam Riza 
IPTEKNET 
Agency for the Assessment and 
Application of Technology (BPPT) 
Jakarta, Indonesia 
hammam@iptek.net.id 
 
 
Abstract 
In this paper, we report a survey of lan-
guage resources in Indonesia, primarily of 
indigenous languages. We look at the offi-
cial Indonesian language (Bahasa Indone-
sia) and 726 regional languages of Indone-
sia (Bahasa Nusantara) and list all the 
available lexical resources (LRs) that we 
can gathered. This paper suggests that the 
smaller regional languages may remain 
relatively unstudied, and unknown, but 
they are still worthy of our attention. Vari-
ous LRs of these endangered languages are 
being built and collected by regional lan-
guage centers for study and its preserva-
tion. We will also briefly report its pres-
ence on the Internet. 
1 Introduction 
It is not hard to get a picture of just how linguisti-
cally diverse Indonesia is. There are 726 languages 
in the country; making it the world?s second most 
diverse, after Papua New Guinea which has 823 
local languages (Mart? et al, 2005:48). Indonesia 
also has a high ratio of languages to speakers in 
each major region in Indonesia (see Figure 1). Di-
versity is the outcome of processes of language 
change (Schendl, 2001). The loss of language is 
itself a process that will logically result in mono-
lingualism.  
It is not uncommon to find the attitude among 
the general public and even among some Indone-
sian linguists that the process of language endan-
germent or language extinction is not something 
that needs worried about, that it is part of a natural 
process that should be left to take its course. This 
paper suggests otherwise. The smaller regional 
languages may remain relatively unstudied, and 
unknown, but they are still worthy of our attention 
(Lauder, 2007). This paper puts forward a number 
of claims that have been made in favour of linguis-
tic diversity and how we can preserve this diver-
sity. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Ratio of Population to Languages 
                       across Indonesia 
 
The languages of Indonesia are part of a com-
plex linguistic situation that is generally seen as 
comprised of three categories: Indonesian lan-
guage, the regional indigenous languages, and for-
eign languages (Alwi and Sugono, 2000).  Most of 
these regional languages have not received atten-
tion for computerization; they are less privilege 
languages that need to be brought into digitaliza-
tion.  
113
If we were to create NLP system for these lan-
guages, we will face one of the major obstacles, 
i.e. the amount of linguistic knowledge. Language 
analysis and generation require a complete set of 
lexical, grammatical, semantic and world knowl-
edge to carry out accurate function. On the other 
hand, these types of knowledge bases are hard to 
acquire and considerable attention has to be paid to 
the role that corpus and lexical resources can play. 
2 The Indigenous Languages and Its En-
dangerment 
The indigenous languages of Indonesia - also re-
ferred to as vernaculars or provincial languages, 
collectively called as Bahasa Nusantara - exhibits 
great variation in numbers of speakers. Thirteen of 
them have a million or more speakers, accounting 
for 69.91% of the total population. These lan-
guages are Javanese (75,200,000 speakers), Sun-
danese (27,000,000), Malay (20,000,000), 
Madurese (13,694,000), Minangkabau (6,500,000), 
Batak (5,150,000), Bugisnese (4,000,000), Bali-
nese (3,800,000), Acehnese (3,000,000), Sasak 
(2,100,000), Makasarese (1,600,000), Lampungese 
(1,500,000), and Rejang (1,000,000) (Lauder, 
2004).  
 
 
 
Figure 2. Major Indigenous Languages 
 
The remaining 713 languages have a total popu-
lation of only 41.4 million speakers, and the major-
ity of these have very small numbers of speakers. 
For example, 386 languages are spoken by 5,000 
or less; 233 have 1,000 speakers or less; 169 lan-
guages have 500 speakers or less; and 52 have 100 
or less (Gordon, 2005). These languages are facing 
various degrees of language endangerment (Crys-
tal, 2000). 
There is evidence from census data over three 
decades that the growth in the numbers of speakers 
of Indonesian is reducing the numbers of speakers 
of the indigenous languages (Lauder, 2005). Con-
cerns that this kind of growth would give Indone-
sian the potential to replace the regional languages 
were aired as early as the 1980s. (Poedjosoedarmo, 
1981; Alisjahbana, 1984).  
These languages tend to be spoken in the eastern 
or more remote parts of the country. Their small 
populations of speakers make them vulnerable to 
processes of unhealthy language change and lan-
guage endangerment. Greatest language diversity 
is found in eastern part of Indonesia (Papua) 
A language that does not have official status, but 
which has a large enough number of speakers and 
which are being safely transmitted to new genera-
tions can usually be classified as either NOT EN-
DANGERED (SAFE or VIABLE), or POTEN-
TIALLY ENDANGERED. This would include the 
13 largest local languages and perhaps a few doz-
ens of others.  
However, this does not apply to the majority of 
the remaining 700 or so languages. Among them, 
there should also be many which could be classi-
fied as VIABLE BUT SMALL or ENDANGERED 
because they have small numbers of speakers, are 
socially or economically disadvantaged and they 
are not being transmitted to younger generations of 
speakers. There will also be many of these regional 
languages which can be classified as SERIOUSLY 
ENDANGERED or MORIBUND (NEARLY EX-
TINCT) because the speaker populations are very 
small and these few remaining speakers are mostly 
old.  
When trying to estimate the degree of endan-
germent of the regional languages in Indonesia, it 
becomes apparent that there is a singular lack of 
focused and comprehensive research. However, in 
spite of this, based on a consideration of the vari-
ous possible causes, there are good reasons to sus-
pect that many of the smaller languages in Indone-
sia are indeed endangered. 
3 Preserving Endangered Languages  
Within Indonesia, and globally, we are currently 
experiencing a massive and rapid loss of language 
and culture. In particular, the languages and cul-
tures of communities with very few speakers have 
practically no chance of survival beyond the end of 
114
this century and many will disappear much sooner, 
perhaps within the next 10 to 20 years.  
The loss of these languages is largely because of 
linguistic and cultural assimilation with the major-
ity group, with migration to the cities and lack of 
support for these languages in state education be-
ing important factors.  This is particularly true in 
Indonesia, where Bahasa Indonesia is being taught 
in school and the indigenous languages are loosing 
their ground in the daily life.  
Each language is part of patterns of diversity 
that have evolved over millennia. There are a 
number of reasons why diversity is beneficial. For 
example, by learning from the original languages 
we increase our stock of human wisdom. Diversity 
breeds diversity; the seeding of insights in the 
fields of science, art and literature.  
Meanwhile, the problem is urgent. A language is 
being lost on average every two weeks worldwide. 
When an oral language is lost, it takes with it all 
the knowledge that the people possessed. When the 
last speaker dies, there is likely to be no trace at all 
of their existence. There will be no artifacts or 
physical record to reconstruct the language or the 
knowledge it encoded. As each language dies, we 
lose data for philosophers, anthropologists, folklor-
ists, historians, psychologists, linguists, and writ-
ers. The loss of one is a tragedy; what do we call 
the loss of a large proportion of the 6,000 existing 
languages? (Crystal, 2000: 53). The loss of diver-
sity is something that we need to do something 
about.  
Two kinds of action can be taken, depending on 
the status of the language. But to know what the 
status of languages is, a survey needs to be made to 
gather information for all the regional languages 
concerning the factors that are usually the causes 
of language loss or language maintenance, such as 
numbers of speakers, language attitudes, and so on. 
As a result, estimates can be made about which are 
likely to survive and which not. From this, an ac-
tion plan can be set up based on priorities.  
Of the 13 major indigenous languages, there 
only are 7 languages presence on the Internet under 
the ccTLD .id (Riza 2006). We need to explore 
furthermore to map the remaining regional lan-
guages that probably exist on the Internet. The is-
sue of ?digital language divide? has shown that 
many of the indigenous language do not have ac-
cess to Information and Communication Technol-
ogy (ICT) in general; hence they are lacking the 
process of digitalization. The relationship between 
languages on the Internet and diversity of language 
within a country indicates that even with a global-
ize network, nation states have a role to play in 
encouraging language diversity in cyberspace. 
Language diversity can be viewed as much within 
a country as within the Internet as a whole.  
For languages which are not seriously endan-
gered or moribund, language maintenance and lan-
guage revitalization programs should be put in 
place. These programs include creating LRs that 
would involve the people themselves to provide 
them with NLP toolkit and language computeriza-
tion to help keep the language alive. For seriously 
endangered languages, those that cannot possibly 
be saved, LRs creation should be set up. These 
programs would involve study, documentation and 
the assembly of a rich archive of materials that will 
help to preserve as much as possible of the lan-
guage and way of life in digital and other formats.  
We have identified three important tasks in lan-
guage preservation. The first is the exploitation of 
current techniques from computational linguistics 
to permit a multidimensional view of the LRs. The 
second is the increasing orientation of the regional 
research centers towards the creation and use of 
resources of various sorts, either to extract useful 
information or directly as components in systems. 
The third, related, trend is towards statistical or 
empirical models of language especially if the lan-
guage is near extinction and found only as spoken 
language. 
In cases where the indigenous languages exist 
only in the form of spoken language, there should 
be a collection efforts similar to the work carried 
out by ELRA on the Basic Language Resource Kit  
(ELDA, 2007) and LDC on Less Commonly 
Taught Languages (LCTL, 2007). Both initiatives 
focus on the minimal sets of LRs required develop-
ing basic research for a given language. It is crucial 
to connect the preservation work to this language 
kit in order to be shared with the language research 
community. 
In Indonesia, over the last few years, there has 
been an increasing awareness of the importance of 
corpus resources in language preservation. As re-
gional leaders begin to consider the implications of 
loosing their indigenous assets, considerable atten-
tion is being aid to the role that corpus and lexical 
resources can play.  
115
Masyarakat Linguistik Indonesia (MLI) is a 
group of institutions, organizations and corpora-
tion, working together on mutually defined goals 
and projects that seek to provide a specification of  
LRs of all languages of Indonesia. It is currently in 
the process of mapping indigenous written lan-
guages of Indonesia (540 of languages). 
MLI also help members to use the specification 
for NLP tools and applications; find the best means 
to disseminate the specifications, tools and applica-
tions and encourage an open standard-based ap-
proach to the creation and interchange of LRs. It 
also demonstrate how MLI can be applied through 
making the results of collaborative endeavors 
available to wider associations; provide training, 
awareness and educational events and share with 
each other their work on related issues.  
4 Conclusion 
A perspective on preservation of the languages of 
Indonesia is given together with a brief overview 
of some of the indigenous languages, which are 
being actively researched today by national lan-
guage centers throughout Indonesia.  
Culture and language are fundamental human 
rights; it is our right and duty to preserve and de-
velop them. This is an ethical choice, not simply a 
scientific one or one based on political or eco-
nomic expediency. Total lack of concern and inac-
tion may seem to some to be a rational choice but 
it represents an ethical failure. In addition, research 
which merely documents an endangered language 
but does nothing to help the community of the in-
formants is like the photographer who takes a pic-
ture of someone in difficulty but do nothing to help 
them. Any delay now will mean that many of the 
languages which are still around now won?t be 
there for them to do something about. Diversity 
will have been lost.  
We have identified three important tasks in lan-
guage preservation, which is the exploitation of 
computational linguistics, increasing orientation of 
the regional research centers towards the creation 
and use of resources and using towards statistical 
or empirical models of language.  
The current effort of documenting the indige-
nous languages will be shared with the rest of the 
world, to close ?digital language divide?. 
 
References 
Alisjahbana, S. T. 1984. The problem of minority lan-
fguages in the overall linguistic problems of our time. 
In Linguistic Minorities and Literacy: Language Pol-
icy Issues in Developing Countries, ed. F. Coulmas. 
Berlin: Mouton.  
Alwi, Hasan, and Sugono, Dendy. 2000. From National 
Language Politics to National Language Policy. Pro-
cedings of the Seminar on Language Politics, Jakarta 
ELDA. 2007. Basic Language Resource Kit (Blark). 
ELRA Project, http://www.elda.org/blark/index.php 
Crystal, David. 2000. Language Death. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.  
Gordon, Raymond G., Jr. ed. 2005. Ethnologue: Lan-
guages of the World, Fifteenth edition. Dallas, Tex.: 
SIL International.  
Lauder, Multamia RMT. 2005. Language Treasures in 
Indonesia. In Words and Worlds : World Languages 
Review, eds. F?lix Mart? et al, 95-97. Clevedon 
[England] ; Buffalo [N.Y.]: Multilingual Matters.  
Lauder, Allan F. 2007. Indigenous Languages in Indo-
nesia: Diversity and Endangerment. In Proceedings 
of Kongres Linguistik Nasional XII, Surakarta, 3-6 
September. 
LCTL, 2007. Less Commonly Taught Language Pro-
ject. http://projects.ldc.upenn.edu/LCTL/index.html
Mart?, F?lix, et.al. eds. 2005. Words and Worlds : World 
Languages Review. vol. 52. Bilingual Education and 
Bilingualism. Clevedon. England. 
Mikami, Y., Zavarsky, et.al. 2005. The Language Ob-
servatory Project (LOP), www2005, Proceedings, 
Chiba, Japan, 990-991. 
Poedjosoedarmo, S. 1981. Problems of Indonesian. In 
Language and Nation Building, ed. Amran Halim. 
Jakarta: Center for Language Development.  
Riza, H, et. al. 2006.  Indonesian Languages Diversity 
on the Internet, Internet Governance Forum (IGF), 
Athens. 
Schendl, Herbert. 2001. Historical linguistics. Oxford 
Introductions to Language Study. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.  
Wurm, S. A. 1998. Methods of language maintenance 
and revival, with selected cases of language endan-
germent in the world. The International Symposium 
on Endangered Languages, Tokyo, 18-20 November 
1995), ed. Kazuto Matsumura, 191-211. Tokyo: Hi-
tuzi Syobo.  
 
116
Resources Report on Languages of Indonesia 
Hammam Riza 
IPTEKNET 
Agency for the Assessment and 
Application of Technology (BPPT) 
Jakarta, Indonesia 
hammam@iptek.net.id 
 
 
Abstract 
In this paper, we report a survey of lan-
guage resources in Indonesia, primarily of 
indigenous languages. We look at the offi-
cial Indonesian language (Bahasa Indone-
sia) and 726 regional languages of Indone-
sia (Bahasa Nusantara) and list all the 
available LRs that we can gathered. This 
paper suggests that the smaller regional 
languages may remain relatively unstudied, 
and unknown, but they are still worthy of 
our attention. Various LRs of these endan-
gered languages are being built and col-
lected by regional language centers for 
study and its preservation. We will also 
briefly report its presence on the Internet. 
 
1 Introduction 
It is not hard to get a picture of just how linguisti-
cally diverse Indonesia is. There are 726 languages 
in the country; making it the world?s second most 
diverse, after Papua New Guinea which has 823 
local languages (Mart? et al, 2005:48). 
The languages of Indonesia are part of a com-
plex linguistic situation that is generally seen as 
comprised of three categories: Indonesian lan-
guage, the regional indigenous languages, and for-
eign languages. (Alwi and Sugono, 2000).   
The indigenous languages of Indonesia - also re-
ferred to as vernaculars or provincial languages, 
collectively called as Bahasa Nusantara - exhibits 
great variation in numbers of speakers. Thirteen of 
them have a million or more speakers, accounting 
for 69.91% of the total population ? Javanese 
(75,200,000 speakers), Sundanese (27,000,000), 
Malay (20,000,000), Madurese (13,694,000), Mi-
nangkabau (6,500,000), Batak (5,150,000), Bugis-
nese (4,000,000), Balinese (3,800,000), Acehnese 
(3,000,000), Sasak (2,100,000), Makasarese 
(1,600,000), Lampungese (1,500,000), and Rejang 
(1,000,000). (Lauder, 2004: 3-4). Of these 13 lan-
guages, only 7 languages have presence on the 
Internet (Riza 2006).  
The remaining 713 languages have a total popu-
lation of only 41.4 million speakers, and the major-
ity of these have very small numbers of speakers. 
For example, 386 languages are spoken by 5,000 
or less; 233 have 1,000 speakers or less; 169 lan-
guages have 500 speakers or less; and 52 have 100 
or less (Gordon, 2005). These languages are facing 
various degrees of language endangerment (Crys-
tal, 2000). 
There is evidence from census data over three 
decades that the growth in the numbers of speakers 
of Indonesian is reducing the numbers of speakers 
of the indigenous languages (Lauder, 2005). Con-
cerns that this kind of growth would give Indone-
sian the potential to replace the regional languages 
were aired as early as the 1980s. (Poedjosoedarmo, 
1981; Alisjahbana, 1984).  
 
2 Language Resources 
Many language centers in Indonesia have em-
barked in various research and development in 
creation of language resources (LRs). Unfortu-
nately, this development mainly only focused on 
creating LRs for the official language Bahasa In-
donesia. In the followings, we describe the present 
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
93
and ongoing LRs research projects with emphasis 
on the indigenous languages. 
2.1 Indonesian Electronic Dictionary System 
(KEBI) 
Our laboratory has worked to enlarge and improve 
the quality of Indonesian electronic dictionaries. 
Starting 1987, it took us at least 4 years to develop 
all necessary components for CICC-MMTS, result-
ing with many first-ever Indonesian language re-
sources, primarily electronic dictionaries and 
grammar rules for language analysis and genera-
tion. This extension have resulted in a collection of 
500,000 word entries and more than 2 million 
derivational and inflected words. As part of this 
research, we built an online access to the dictionar-
ies (http://nlp.inn.bppt.go.id/kebi) enabling users to 
add new words and definition. KBBI electronic 
dictionary is scheduled to be launched in 2008, 
during 100 years celebration of the official Bahasa 
Indonesia. 
2.2 BPPT-ANTARA Corpus 
This parallel corpus was developed as extension to 
Indonesia National Corpus Initiative (INCI) which 
was earlier created to support the development of a 
hybrid stochastic-symbolic system BIAS-II. Cur-
rently, a pure statistical MT system based on Phar-
aoh is developed by BPPT and National News 
Agency (ANTARA) using 500K sentences pair, 
expected to have better accuracy and robustness 
and could enhance the quality of translation (cur-
rent BLEU score 0.72).  
2.3 Regional Languages Mapping (National 
Language Center) 
For the past 15 years, the Indonesia National Lan-
guage Center have been collecting information re-
garding all indigenous languages. By the end of 
this year, this project will be completed and all re-
sult and findings will be open to public. 
2.4 Dictionaries of  Bahasa Nusantara, Indo-
nesian Linguistics Association (MLI)  
Masyarakat Linguistik Indonesia (MLI) is a group 
of institutions, organizations and corporation, 
working together on mutually defined goals and 
projects that seek to provide a specification of  LRs 
of all languages of Indonesia. MLI also help mem-
bers to use the specification for tools and applica-
tions; find the best means to disseminate the speci-
fications, tools and applications and  encourage an 
open standard-based approach to the creation and 
interchange of LRs. It also demonstrate how MLI 
can be applied to Asian Language Resource (ALR) 
through making the results of collaborative en-
deavors available throughout the members of  the 
group and wider associations; provide training, 
awareness and educational events and share with 
each other their work on related issues.  
2.5 Speech Corpus 
In a mission to improve the quality of automatic 
speech recognition (ASR), a collaboration of 
Telkom RDC and ATR-Japan has constructed 
speakers? corpus (40 speakers, 2000 sentences) 
which is expected to improve the accuracy of ASR 
to 90% level.  
2.6 Other Corpus 
Other monolingual corpus is found online. The 
major news articles corpora on the web is Tem-
pointerakif.com (56,471 articles). Kompas corpus 
(71,109 articles) can be found at 
http://ilps.science.uva.nl/Resources/BI. 
 
References 
Alisjahbana, S. T. 1984. The problem of minority lan-
guages in the overall linguistic problems of our time. 
In Linguistic Minorities and Literacy: Language Pol-
icy Issues in Developing Countries, ed. F. Coulmas. 
Berlin: Mouton.  
Alwi, Hasan, and Sugono, Dendy. 2000. From National 
Language Politics to National Language Policy. Pro-
cedings of the Seminar on Language Politics, Jakarta 
Crystal, David. 2000. Language Death. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.  
Lauder, Multamia RMT. 2005. Language Treasures in 
Indonesia. In Words and Worlds : World Languages 
Review, eds. F?lix Mart? et al, 95-97. Clevedon 
[England] ; Buffalo [N.Y.]: Multilingual Matters.  
Mart?, F?lix, et.al. eds. 2005. Words and Worlds : World 
Languages Review. vol. 52. Bilingual Education and 
Bilingualism. Clevedon [England] ; Buffalo [N.Y.]: 
Multilingual Matters.  
Riza, H, et. al. 2006.  Indonesian Languages Diversity 
on the Internet, Internet Governance Forum (IGF), 
Athens. 
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
94
Development of Indonesian Large Vocabulary Continuous Speech
Recognition System within A-STAR Project
Sakriani Sakti1,2, Eka Kelana3, Hammam Riza4, Shinsuke Sakai1,2
Konstantin Markov1,2, Satoshi Nakamura1,2
1National Institute of Information and Communications Technology, Japan
2ATR Spoken Language Communication Research Laboratories, Japan
3R&D Division, PT Telekomunikasi Indonesia, Indonesia
4Agency for the Assessment and Application of Technology, BPPT, Indonesia
{sakriani.sakti,shinsuke.sakai,konstantin.markov,satoshi.nakamura}@atr.jp,
eka k@telkom.co.id, hammam@iptek.net.id
Abstract
The paper outlines the development of a
large vocabulary continuous speech recog-
nition (LVCSR) system for the Indonesian
language within the Asian speech transla-
tion (A-STAR) project. An overview of the
A-STAR project and Indonesian language
characteristics will be briefly described. We
then focus on a discussion of the develop-
ment of Indonesian LVCSR, including data
resources issues, acoustic modeling, lan-
guage modeling, the lexicon, and accuracy
of recognition. There are three types of In-
donesian data resources: daily news, tele-
phone application, and BTEC tasks, which
are used in this project. They are available in
both text and speech forms. The Indonesian
speech recognition engine was trained using
the clean speech of both daily news and tele-
phone application tasks. The optimum per-
formance achieved on the BTEC task was
92.47% word accuracy.
1 A-STAR Project Overview
The A-STAR project is an Asian consortium that
is expected to advance the state-of-the-art in multi-
lingual man-machine interfaces in the Asian region.
This basic infrastructure will accelerate the devel-
opment of large-scale spoken language corpora in
Asia and also facilitate the development of related
fundamental information communication technolo-
gies (ICT), such as multi-lingual speech translation,
Figure 1: Outline of future speech-technology ser-
vices connecting each area in the Asian region
through network.
multi-lingual speech transcription, and multi-lingual
information retrieval.
These fundamental technologies can be applied to
the human-machine interfaces of various telecom-
munication devices and services connecting Asian
countries through the network using standardized
communication protocols as outlined in Fig. 1. They
are expected to create digital opportunities, improve
our digital capabilities, and eliminate the digital di-
vide resulting from the differences in ICT levels in
each area. The improvements to borderless commu-
nication in the Asian region are expected to result
in many benefits in everyday life including tourism,
business, education, and social security.
The project was coordinated together by the Ad-
vanced Telecommunication Research (ATR) and the
National Institute of Information and Communica-
tions Technology (NICT) Japan in cooperation with
several research institutes in Asia, such as the Na-
tional Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR) in
China, the Electronics and Telecommunication Re-
search Institute (ETRI) in Korea, the Agency for the
Assessment and Application Technology (BPPT)
in Indonesia, the National Electronics and Com-
puter Technology Center (NECTEC) in Thailand,
the Center for Development of Advanced Comput-
ing (CDAC) in India, the National Taiwan Univer-
sity (NTU) in Taiwan. Partners are still being sought
for other languages in Asia.
More details about the A-STAR project can be
found in (Nakamura et al, 2007).
2 Indonesian Language Characteristic
The Indonesian language, or so-called Bahasa In-
donesia, is a unified language formed from hun-
dreds of languages spoken throughout the Indone-
sian archipelago. Compared to other languages,
which have a high density of native speakers, In-
donesian is spoken as a mother tongue by only 7%
of the population, and more than 195 million people
speak it as a second language with varying degrees
of proficiency. There are approximately 300 eth-
nic groups living throughout 17,508 islands, speak-
ing 365 native languages or no less than 669 di-
alects (Tan, 2004). At home, people speak their own
language, such as Javanese, Sundanese or Balinese,
even though almost everybody has a good under-
standing of Indonesian as they learn it in school.
Although the Indonesian language is infused with
highly distinctive accents from different ethnic lan-
guages, there are many similarities in patterns across
the archipelago. Modern Indonesian is derived from
the literary of the Malay dialect. Thus, it is closely
related to the Malay spoken in Malaysia, Singapore,
Brunei, and some other areas.
Unlike the Chinese language, it is not a tonal
language. Compared with European languages, In-
donesian has a strikingly small use of gendered
words. Plurals are often expressed by means of word
repetition. It is also a member of the agglutina-
tive language family, meaning that it has a complex
range of prefixes and suffixes, which are attached to
base words. Consequently, a word can become very
long.
More details on Indonesian characteristics can be
found in (Sakti et al, 2004).
3 Indonesian Phoneme Set
The Indonesian phoneme set is defined based on In-
donesian grammar described in (Alwi et al, 2003).
A full phoneme set contains 33 phoneme symbols in
total, which consists of 10 vowels (including diph-
thongs), 22 consonants, and one silent symbol. The
vowel articulation pattern of the Indonesian lan-
guage, which indicates the first two resonances of
the vocal tract, F1 (height) and F2 (backness), is
shown in Fig. 2.
 
 
High
 
 
 
          
Mid
 
 
                     
Low
 
i
 
Front        Central      Back 
e
 
e2
 
u
 
o 
a
 
Figure 2: Articulatory pattern of Indonesian vowels.
It consists of vowels, i.e., /a/ (like ?a? in ?father?),
/i/ (like ?ee? in ?screen?), /u/ (like ?oo? in ?soon?),
/e/ (like ?e? in ?bed?), /e2/ (a schwa sound, like ?e?
in ?learn?), /o/ (like ?o? in ?boss?), and four diph-
thongs, /ay/, /aw/, /oy/ and /ey/. The articulatory pat-
tern for Indonesian consonants can be seen in Table
1.
4 Indonesian Data Resources
Three types of Indonesian data resources available
in both text and speech forms were used here. The
first two resources were developed or processed by
the R&D Division of PT Telekomunikasi Indone-
sia (R&D TELKOM) in collaboration with ATR as
continuation of the APT project (Sakti et al, 2004),
while the third one was developed by ATR under the
A-STAR project in collaboration with BPPT. They
are described in the following.
Table 1: Articulatory pattern of Indonesian consonants.
Bilabial Labiodental Dental/Alveolar Palatal Velar Glotal
Plosives p, b t, d k, g
Affricates c, j
Fricatives f s, z sy kh h
Nasal m n ny ng
Trill r
Lateral l
Semivowel w y
4.1 Text Data
The three text corpora are:
1. Daily News Task
There is already a raw source of Indonesian
text data, which has been generated by an In-
donesian student (Tala, 2003). The source is a
compilation from ?KOMPAS? and ?TEMPO?,
which are currently the largest and most widely
read Indonesian newspaper and magazine. It
consists of more than 3160 articles with about
600,000 sentences. R&D TELKOM then fur-
ther processed them to generate a clean text
corpus.
2. Telephone Application Task
About 2500 sentences from the telephone
application domain were also generated by
R&D TELKOM, and were derived from some
daily dialogs from telephone services, includ-
ing tele-home security, billing information ser-
vices, reservation services, status tracking of
e-Government services, and also hearing im-
paired telecommunication services (HITSs).
3. BTEC Task
The ATR basic travel expression corpus
(BTEC) has served as the primary source
for developing broad-coverage speech transla-
tion systems (Kikui et al, 2003). The sen-
tences were collected by bilingual travel ex-
perts from Japanese/English sentence pairs in
travel domain ?phrasebooks?. BTEC has also
been translated into several languages includ-
ing French, German, Italian, Chinese and Ko-
rean. Under the A-STAR project, there are also
plans to collect synonymous sentences from the
different languages of the Asian region. ATR
has currently successfully collected an Indone-
sian version of BTEC tasks, which consists of
160,000 sentences (with about 20,000 unique
words) of a training set and 510 sentences of a
test set with 16 references per sentence. There
are examples of BTEC English sentences and
synonymous Indonesian sentences in Table 2.
Table 2: Examples of English-Indonesian bilingual
BTEC sentences.
English Indonesian
Good Evening Selamat Malam
I like strong coffee Saya suka kopi yang kental
Where is the boarding Di manakah pintu
gate? keberangkatan berada?
How much is this? Harganya berapa?
Thank you Terima kasih
4.2 Speech Data
The three speech corpora are:
1. Daily News Task
From the text data of the news task described
above, we selected phonetically-balanced sen-
tences, then recorded the speech utterances.
Details on the phonetically-balanced sentences,
the recording set-up, speaker criteria, and
speech utterances are described in what fol-
lows:
? Phonetically-Balanced Sentences
We selected phonetically-balanced sen-
tences using the greedy search algorithm
(Zhang and S.Nakamura, 2003), resulting
in 3168 sentences in total (see Table 3).
Table 3: Number of phonetically-balanced sentences
resulting from greedy search algorithm.
Phone # Units # Sentences
Monophones 33 6
Left Biphones 809 240
Right Biphones 809 242
Triphones 9667 2978
Total 3168
? Recording Set-Up
Speech recording was done by R&D
TELKOM in Bandung, Java, Indonesia. It
was conducted in parallel for both clean
and telephone speech, recorded at respec-
tive sampling frequency of 16 kHz and 8
kHz. The system configuration is outlined
in Fig. 3.
Sennheizer
microphone
Microphone
pre-amplifier
& ADC
PC
Phone
PABX
R&D TELKOM
building
Phone USB
Microphone
pre-amplifier
& ADC
USB
Sound-proofed room
Figure 3: Recording set-up.
? Speaker Criteria
The project will require a lot of time,
money, and resources to collect all of
the possible languages and dialects of
the tribes recognized in Indonesia. In
this case, R&D TELKOM only focused
on the major ethnic accents in Bandung
area where the actual telecommunication
services will be implemented. Four
main accents were selected, including:
Batak, Javanese, Sundanese, and standard
Indonesian (no accent) with appropriate
distributions as outlined in Fig. 4. Both
genders are evenly distributed and the
speakers? ages are also distributed as out-
lined in Fig. 5. The largest percentage is
those aged 20-35 years who are expected
to use the telecommunication services
more often.
Figure 4: Accent distribution of 400 speakers in
daily news and telephone application tasks.
Figure 5: Age distribution of 400 speakers in daily
news and telephone application tasks.
? Speech Utterances
The total number of speakers was 400
(200 males and 200 females). Each
speaker uttered 110 sentences resulting
in a total of 44,000 speech utterances or
about 43.35 hours of speech.
2. Telephone Application Task
The utterances in speech of 2500 telephone
application sentences were recorded by R&D
TELKOM in Bandung, Indonesia using the
same recording set-up as that for the news task
corpus. The total number of speakers, as well
as appropriate distributions for age and accent,
were also kept the same. Each speaker uttered
100 sentences resulting in a total of 40,000 ut-
terances (36.15 hours of speech).
3. BTEC Task
From the test set of the BTEC text data pre-
viously described, 510 sentences of one refer-
ence were selected and the recordings of speech
were then done by ATR in Jakarta, Indone-
sia. BPPT helped to evaluate the preliminary
recordings. For this first version, we only se-
lected speakers who spoke standard Indonesian
(no accent). There were 42 speakers (20 males
and 22 females) and each speaker uttered the
same 510 BTEC sentences, resulting in a total
of 21,420 utterances (23.4 hours of speech).
5 Indonesian Speech Recognizer
The Indonesian LVCSR system was developed us-
ing the ATR speech recognition engine. The clean
speech of both daily news and telephone applica-
tion tasks were used as the training data, while the
BTEC task was used as an evaluation test set. More
details on the parameter set-up, acoustic modeling,
language modeling, pronunciation dictionary and
recognition accuracy will be described in the follow-
ing.
5.1 Parameter Set-up
The experiments were conducted using feature ex-
traction parameters, which were a sampling fre-
quency of 16 kHz, a frame length of a 20-ms Ham-
ming window, a frame shift of 10 ms, and 25 dimen-
sional MFCC features (12-order MFCC, ? MFCC
and ? log power).
5.2 Segmentation Utterances
Segmented utterances according to labels are usu-
ally used as a starting point in speech recognition
systems for training speech models. Automatic seg-
mentation is mostly used since it is efficient and less
time consuming. It is basically produced by forced
alignment given the transcriptions. In this case, we
used an available Indonesian phoneme-based acous-
tic model developed using the English-Indonesian
cross language approach (Sakti et al, 2005).
5.3 Acoustic Modeling
Three states were used as the initial HMM for each
phoneme. A shared state HMnet topology was then
obtained using a successive state splitting (SSS)
training algorithm based on the minimum descrip-
tion length (MDL) optimization criterion (Jitsuhiro
et al, 2004). Various MDL parameters were eval-
uated, resulting in context-dependent triphone sys-
tems having different version of total states. i.e.,
1,277 states, 1,944 states and 2,928 states. All tri-
phone HMnets were also generated with three dif-
ferent versions of Gaussian mixture components per
state, i.e., 5, 10, and 15 mixtures.
5.4 Language Modeling
Word bigram and trigram language models were
trained using the 160,000 sentences of the BTEC
training set, yielding a trigram perplexity of 67.0 and
an out-of-vocabulary (OOV) rate of 0.78% on the
510 sentences of the BTEC test set. This high per-
plexity could be due to agglutinative words in the
Indonesian language.
5.5 Pronunciation Dictionary
About 40,000 words from an Indonesian pronun-
ciation dictionary were manually developed by In-
donesian linguists and this was owned by R&D
TELKOM. This was derived from the daily news
and telephone application text corpora, which con-
sisted of 30,000 original Indonesian words plus
8,000 person and place names and also 2,000 of for-
eign words. Based on these pronunciations, we then
included additional words derived from the BTEC
sentences.
5.6 Recognition Accuracy
The performance of the Indonesian speech recog-
nizer with different versions of total states and Gaus-
sian mixture components per state is graphically
depicted in Fig. 6. On average, they achieved
92.22% word accuracy. The optimum performance
was 92.47% word accuracy at RTF=0.97 (XEON 3.2
GHz), which was obtained by the model with 1.277
total states and 15 Gaussian mixture components per
state.
Figure 6: Recognition accuracy of Indonesian
LVCSR on BTEC test set.
6 Conclusion
We have presented the results obtained from the pre-
liminary stages of an Indonesian LVCSR system.
The optimum performance achieved was 92.47%
word accuracy at RTF=0.97. A future development
will be to implement it on a real speech-to-speech
translation system using computer terminals (tablet
PCs). To further refine the system, speaker adap-
tation as well as environmental or noise adaptation
needs to be done in the near future.
References
H. Alwi, S. Dardjowidjojo, H. Lapoliwa, and A.M. Moe-
liono. 2003. Tata Bahasa Baku Bahasa Indonesia (In-
donesian Grammar). Balai Pustaka, Jakarta, Indone-
sia.
T. Jitsuhiro, T. Matsui, and S. Nakamura. 2004. Au-
tomatic generation of non-uniform HMM topologies
based on the MDL criterion. IEICE Trans. Inf. & Syst.,
E87-D(8):2121?2129.
G. Kikui, E. Sumita, T. Takezawa, and S. Yamamoto.
2003. Creating corpora for speech-to-speech trans-
lation. In Proc. EUROSPEECH, pages 381?384,
Geneva, Switzerland.
S. Nakamura, E. Sumita, T. Shimizu, S. Sakti, S. Sakai,
J. Zhang, A. Finch, N. Kimura, and Y. Ashikari. 2007.
A-star: Asia speech translation consortium. In Proc.
ASJ Autumn Meeting, page to appear, Yamanashi,
Japan.
S. Sakti, P. Hutagaol, A. Arman, and S. Nakamura. 2004.
Indonesian speech recognition for hearing and speak-
ing impaired people. In Proc. ICSLP, pages 1037?
1040, Jeju, Korea.
S. Sakti, K. Markov, and S.Nakamura. 2005. Rapid de-
velopment of initial indonesian phoneme-based speech
recognition using cross-language approach. In Proc.
Oriental COCOSDA, pages 38?43, Jakarta, Indonesia.
F. Tala. 2003. A Study of Stemming Effects on Infor-
mation Retrieval in Bahasa Indonesia. Ph.D. thesis,
The Information and Language System (ILPS) Group,
Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam, Ams-
terdam, Netherland.
J. Tan. 2004. Bahasa indonesia: Between faqs and facts.
http://www.indotransnet.com/article1.html.
J. Zhang and S.Nakamura. 2003. An efficient algorithm
to search for a minimum sentence set for collecting
speech database. In Proc. ICPhS, pages 3145?3148,
Barcelona, Spain.
Toward Asian Speech Translation System:  Developing Speech Recog-
nition and Machine Translation for Indonesian Language  
Hammam Riza 
IPTEKNET 
Agency for the Assessment and 
Application of Technology 
Jakarta, Indonesia 
hammam@iptek.net.id 
Oskar Riandi 
ICT Center 
Agency for the Assessment and 
Application of Technology 
Jakarta, Indonesia 
oskar@inn.bppt.go.id 
 
 
Abstract 
In this paper, we present a report on the re-
search and development of speech to 
speech translation system for Asian lan-
guages, primarily on the design and im-
plementation of speech recognition and 
machine translation systems for Indonesia 
language. As part of the A-STAR project, 
each participating country will need to de-
velop each component of the full system 
for the corresponding language. We will 
specifically discuss our method on building 
speech recognition and stochastic language 
model for statistically translating Indone-
sian into other Asian languages. The sys-
tem is equipped with a capability to handle 
variation of speech input, a more natural 
mode of communication between the sys-
tem and the users. 
1 Introduction 
Indonesia is one of the ten most populous nations 
in the world with the population of about 235 mil-
lion people as of 2004 and is located strategically 
within the Asia region. The exchange of people, 
goods and services as well as information increases 
and should not be hindered by language barrier. 
Even though, English language may be used as the 
main global communication language, the more 
direct and more natural way of communication is 
preferred by local and native people to ensure the 
smooth exchange of information among people of 
different languages. 
 
It would be beneficial for Indonesia people, if 
there were a system that is able, to some extent in a 
certain domain, to capture either a speech or digital 
text based on Indonesian language and process it in 
order to output into meaningful text into other lan-
guages such as English, Japanese and other world 
languages. In addition to above mentioned benefit, 
large numbers of Indonesian people, statistically, 
have problem in using and comprehending any 
information presented in English language, The 
language barrier problem is compounded by the 
problem of the explosion of digital information 
whose majority uses English language via either 
Internet or any digital / printed form which may 
overwhelms potential users and  pose a threat of 
inequality of access of information due to the lan-
guage barrier (digital divide) especially for the 
common Indonesian people. We are now part of a 
multi national project to develop speech to speech 
translation system for Asian languages facilitated 
by ATR-Japan.  
Our most recent work is focusing on developing 
Indonesian speech recognition engine and a statis-
tical language model for machine translation. Our 
approach to MT is based on the integration of sto-
chastic and symbolic approaches to be used for 
analyzing Indonesian. For creating the stochastic 
language model, it is worthwhile to utilize anno-
tated data when it is available and use supervised 
learning mechanism to estimate model?s parame-
ter. In this case, an annotated corpus is created for 
multiple genres of documents. Of course, the costs 
of annotation are prohibitively labor intensive, and 
the resulting corpora sometimes are susceptible to 
a particular genre. Due to this limitation of anno-
tated corpora, it is necessary that we use unsuper-
vised and weakly supervised learning techniques, 
which do not require large, annotated data sets. 
Unsupervised learning utilizes raw, un-
annotated corpora to discover underlying language 
structure such as lexical and contextual relation-
ships. This gives rise to emergent patterns and 
principles found in symbolic systems. In this sys-
tem, the language model is trained using weakly 
supervised learning on small annotated corpus to 
seed unsupervised learning using much larger, un-
annotated corpora. Unsupervised and weakly su-
pervised methods have been used successfully in 
several areas of NLP, including acquiring verb 
sub-categorization frames, part-of-speech tagging, 
word-sense disambiguation and prepositional 
phrase attachment. 
The significant contribution of this preliminary 
research is the development of ASR using speaker 
adaptation technique and a statistical language 
model for translating from/to Indonesian language 
as well as Indo-Malay language in some extent. 
The major language found in Indonesia, Malaysia, 
Brunei, Singapore, Southern Thailand and Philip-
pines can be categorized into a single root Indo-
Malay language spoken in different dialects. Creat-
ing an ideal language model for Indo-Malay lan-
guage is expected to be used by more than 260 mil-
lion people in the region. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Scope of Indonesian-Asian Languages 
 
2 Recognizing Indonesian Speech  
Achievement of a high performance is often the 
most dominating design criterion when implement-
ing speech recognition system. The current state of 
the art speech recognition technology is able to 
produce speaker independent recognizers which 
have extremely high recognition rates for 
small/medium vocabularies.  
Although the average recognition rates are high, 
some speakers have recognition rates considerably 
worse than others. It is generally agreed that 
speaker dependent system will give the best per-
formance in applications involving a specific 
speaker. This requires, however, that enough train-
ing data is available for training the system from 
scratch. An often used solution is to train speaker 
independent system using data from many speak-
ers. But other experiments have shown that using 
such systems, in general, involves obtaining a 
lower performance than what is achievable with a 
speaker dependent system. This problem can be 
overcome, at least partially, by using speaker adap-
tation techniques, the aim of which is to take an 
initial model system which is already trained, and 
use a sample of a new speaker data to attempt to 
improve the modeling of the speaker with the cur-
rent set of the model. 
By collecting data from a speaker and training a 
model set on this speaker's data alone, the speaker's 
characteristics can be modeled more accurately. 
Such systems are commonly known as speaker 
dependent systems, and on a typical word recogni-
tion task, may have half the errors of a speaker in-
dependent system. The drawback of speaker de-
pendent systems is that a large amount of data 
(typically hours) must be collected in order to ob-
tain sufficient model accuracy. Rather than training 
speaker dependent models, adaptation techniques 
can be applied. In this case, by using only a small 
amount of data from a new speaker, a good speaker 
independent system model set can be adapted to 
better fit the characteristics of this new speaker. 
Speaker adaptation techniques can be used in 
various different modes. If the true transcription of 
the adaptation data is known then it is termed su-
pervised adaptation, whereas if the adaptation data 
is unlabelled then it is termed unsupervised adap-
tation. In the case where all the adaptation data is 
available in one block, e.g. from a speaker enroll-
ment session, then this termed static adaptation. 
Alternatively adaptation can proceed incrementally 
as adaptation data becomes available, and this is 
termed incremental adaptation. 
One of the researches on speaker adaptation 
techniques based on HMM is Maximum Likeli-
hood Linear Regression (MLLR). This method 
transforms the mean of continuous HMM. MLLR 
 
ASR 
 
SMT 
 
SS 
Indonesia 
Language 
Asian  
Languages 
will generate a global adaptation transform when a 
small amount of data is available. While more ad-
aptation data becomes available, improved adapta-
tion is possible by increasing the number of trans-
formation using the regression class. The problem 
then occurred when the number of regression class 
increased while the adaptation data is static. The 
transformation matrices are difficult to estimate 
well enough when the amount of adaptation data is 
reduced too much due to a fine regression class 
division.  
To overcome this problem the use of Vector 
Field Smoothing (VFS) incorporated with MLLR 
is a one technique. VFS is used to deal with the 
problem of retraining with insufficient training 
data. The transformation matrices produced by 
MLLR is then be used to calculate the transform 
vector of VFS continued by smoothing process. 
 
2.1 Maximum Likelihood Linear Regression 
MLLR uses a set of regression based transform 
to tune the HMM mean parameter to new speaker. 
The aim of MLL is to estimate an appropriate 
transformation for the mean vectors of each mix-
ture component so that original system is tuned to 
the new speaker. For mixture component s with 
mean ?s, the adapted mean estimate s?) is given by 
the following equation.  
sss W ?? ?=)  
where sW is an )1( +? nn  transformation matrix 
and s?  is the extended mean vector, 
[ ]????= snss ???? ,,,  
where the value of ?  indicated whether an offset 
term is to be included: 1=?  for an offset, 0=?  
for no offset. The transformation matrix is deter-
mined with a re-estimation algorithm based upon 
the principle of maximum likelihood estimation. In 
this way, the re-estimated transformation matrix is 
the one that maximizes the probability of having 
generated the observed adaptation data using the 
model.  
 
2.2 Vector Field Smoothing 
The vector field smoothing technique assumes 
that the correspondence between feature vectors 
from different speaker is viewed as a smooth vec-
tor field. Based on this assumption, the correspon-
dence obtained from adaptation data is considered 
to be an incomplete set of observation from the 
continuous vector filed, containing observation 
errors. To achieve both better correspondence and 
reduction errors, both interpolation and smoothing 
are introduce into adaptation process. 
 
VFS has three steps, as follows: 
 
? Concatenation training: In this step, the 
mean vector of the Gaussian distribution is 
trained by concatenation training. 
? Interpolation: In this step, the untrained 
mean vector is transferred to the new 
speaker's voice space by using an interpo-
lated transfer vector. 
? Smoothing of transfer vector: In this 
step, each transfer vector is modified in ac-
cordance with the other transfer vector.  
 
2.3 MLLR-VFS 
The technique of MLLR-VFS can be separately 
performed in three steps. The first step is an exten-
sion of the MLLR to multiple regression matrixes. 
The second step is calculating the transfer vector of 
VFS using the regression matrix produced by 
MLLR. The third step is the smoothing of transfer 
vector as VFS usual manner. 
 
? Extension to multiple regression class 
If R states { }Rsss ,,, 21 ??? are shared in a given re-
gression class, then the regression matrix sW
)
 can 
be written: 
?? ? ?? ?
= =
?
= =
? ?=?
T
t
R
r s
T
t
R
r sr
srsrssrsrtsr
r r
Wtot
1 1
1
1 1
1
)()( ????? )  
 
? Calculation of transfer vector 
The transfer vector i??? is calculated from the dif-
ference between the mean vector of the initial con-
tinuous density HMM and the initial continuous 
density HMM multiplied by the regression matrix. 
isii W ??? ?)?? ?=?  
 
? Smoothing of transfer vector 
In this step, each transfer vector is modified in ac-
cordance with the other transfer vector as an usual 
VFS manner. 
We conduct these steps to develop the Indonesia 
speech recognition system with favorable result. 
Using the speech data provided by ATR-Japan, we 
obtain a promising result with accuracy rate around 
90%. The signal processing model takes 12 kHz 
sampled data and transform it into 39-dimensional 
MFCC vectors every 10 ms (see Table 1, A: 
speaker independent, B: speaker dependent, Data is 
number of words for adaptation). This experiment 
also used Left-to-Right HMM model with single 
Gaussian Mixture.  
 
 
 
Table 1. Result of  Indonesian ASR 
 
 
Based on this result, we are now in collaboration 
with Telkom RDC to develop speech data to en-
hance the accuracy. We will also improve the 
speed of the system. 
 
3 Machine Translation for Indonesian 
Language 
A large number of Indonesian people, statistically, 
have problem in using and comprehending any 
information presented in other cross-border lan-
guages. The language barrier problem is com-
pounded by the problem of the explosion of digital 
information whose majority uses English language 
via either Internet or any digital printed form 
which may overwhelms potential users and pose a 
threat of inequality of access of information due to 
the language barrier (digital divide) especially for 
the common Indonesian people. This is one of the 
motivations for us to propose a collaborative pro-
ject to develop speech to Asian speech translation 
system, between BPPT-Indonesia, ATR-Japan, 
ETRI-Korea, NECTEC-Thailand, CCNOIDA-
India, NTU-Taiwan and CAS-China. 
In line with the research objectives, our most re-
cent experiment is focusing on developing Indone-
sian statistical language model - based on the inte-
gration of stochastic and symbolic approaches - to 
be used for analysis stage in the machine transla-
tion engine. For creating the stochastic language 
model, it is worthwhile to utilize annotated data 
when it is available and use supervised learning 
mechanism to estimate model?s parameter. In this 
case, an annotated corpus is created for multiple 
genres of documents. Of course, the costs of anno-
tation are prohibitively labor intensive, and the re-
sulting corpora sometimes are susceptible to a par-
ticular genre.  
Due to this limitation of annotated corpora, it is 
necessary that we use unsupervised and weakly 
supervised learning techniques, which do not re-
quire large, annotated data sets. Unsupervised 
learning utilizes raw, un-annotated corpora to dis-
cover underlying language structure such as lexical 
and contextual relationships. This gives rise to 
emergent patterns and principles found in symbolic 
systems. In this system, the language model is 
trained using weakly supervised learning on small 
annotated corpus to seed unsupervised learning 
using much larger, un-annotated corpora. 
Unsupervised and weakly supervised methods 
have been used successfully in several areas of 
NLP, including acquiring verb sub-categorization 
frames, part-of-speech tagging, word-sense disam-
biguation and prepositional phrase attachment. 
The Internet has proven to be a huge stimulus 
for statistical MT, with hundreds of millions of 
pages of text being used as corpus resources. Over 
the last few years, there has been an increasing 
awareness of the importance of corpus resources in 
MT research. As researchers begin to consider the 
implications of developing their systems beyond 
the level of proof-of-concept research prototypes 
with very restricted coverage, considerable atten-
tion is being paid to the role that existing bilingual 
and monolingual corpus and lexical resources can 
play. Such collections are a rich repository of in-
formation about actual language usage. 
A Data  MAP VFS MLLR MLLR
-VFS 
B 
10 85.19 81.96 85.34 86.51 
20 86.50 84.28 87.91 89.22 
40 87.75 86.50 89.80 89.34 
80 90.23 90.26 90.57 91.39 
79.7 
100 90.11 90.76 90.29 91.97 
92.7
In developing monolingual corpus, we checked 
existing Indonesian news articles available on web 
(Purwarianti, 2007). We found that there are three 
candidates for the article collection. But in the arti-
cle downloading, we were only able to retrieve one 
article collection, sourced from Tempointerakif. 
We downloaded about 56,471 articles which are 
noisy with many incorrect characters and some of 
them are English. We cleaned the articles semi-
automatically by deleting articles with certain 
words as sub title. We joined our downloaded arti-
cles with the available Kompas corpus (Tala, 2003) 
at http://ilps.science.uva.nl/Resources/BI/ and re-
sulted 71,109 articles. 
In Indonesia, many research groups have been 
developing a large-scale annotated corpus to fur-
ther the NLP and Speech research in trainable sys-
tem. It should be clear that in statistical approach, 
there is no role whatsoever for the explicit encod-
ing of linguistic information, and thus the knowl-
edge acquisition problem is solved. On the other 
hand, the general applicability of the method might 
be doubted; it is heavily dependent on the avail-
ability of good quality of data in very large propor-
tions, something that is currently lacking for Indo-
nesian languages.  
In order to experiment the feasibility of statisti-
cal MT for Indonesian, we build a prototype Indo-
nesian-English MT. For that purpose, we need par-
allel corpus of Indonesian-English sentences, and 
there are none publicly available. Therefore, we 
have develop a collection of training and test sen-
tences collected from a number of information 
sources mainly from Indonesia national news 
agency ANTARA, totaling 250.000 parallel sen-
tences. We then use SRILM to build the n-gram 
language model and translation model, subse-
quently use PHARAOH (Koehn 2006) as a beam 
search decoder. 
 
4 Discussion and Future Work 
We are working forward to improve the quality of 
speech recognition and MT. Our collaboration with 
Telkom RDC and ATR-Japan will provide us with 
new speakers? data (40 speakers, 1000 words) 
which is expected to improve the accuracy of ASR 
to a better 90% level.  
In other speech processing work, University of 
Indonesia (UI) and Bandung Institute of Technol-
ogy (ITB) are also developing ASR and speech 
synthesis (SS) which will be integrated in the final 
speech translation system. 
We are also building a new corpus in broadcast-
ing news, to train the translation system, so as to 
enable automatic ?tagline? in bilingual TV pro-
gram.  The experts in translation have two differ-
ing approaches toward the translation concept: uni-
versalism and monadic. We understood there is a 
possibility of ?un-translation? which is ?translation 
fails ? or un-translability occurs when it is impos-
sible to build functionally relevant features of the 
situation into contextual meaning of target lan-
guage (TL) text. Broadly speaking, the cases where 
this happens fail into two categories. Those where 
the difficulty is linguistic, and those where it is 
cultural. 
We examine further the translability concept by 
taking into account that most Asian language share 
very similar ?culture? but different in language 
structure. We can not enforce the system and struc-
ture to target language without ?knowing? the lan-
guage itself. In this case, a rule-based system 
should be used as a preprocessing to enable the 
structure of source language to approximate the 
structure of target language. For example, in trans-
lating Indonesian-English, we need a rule-based 
system to transform the DM-MD rule. This rule 
approximates the order of noun and adjective 
phrase of Indonesian according to English noun or 
adjective phrase. For example: 
 
         MD                                     DM 
sebuah rumah besar -> a big house 
  (a)        (house)  (big)  
gunung  biru itu -> the blue mountain 
(mountain)  (blue)  (the) 
 
In our future work, by implementing several 
symbolic modules as pre-processor, it is expected 
that statistical MT will perform better in translating 
by having a ?similar? language structure. 
 
5 Conclusion 
An updated report on speech to speech translation 
system is given together with a brief overview of 
some of the issues and techniques in speech recog-
nition and statistical machine translation (SMT), 
which are being actively researched today in Indo-
nesia. 
It is particularly important for Indonesian lan-
guage to have research on speech-to-speech trans-
lation systems, which is an ideal solution to the 
field of language technology. Such work is clearly 
important but difficult because it certainly will 
bring up many interesting differences of emphasis, 
for example in speech-to-speech work, there is an 
emphasis on speed, and on dealing with sentence 
fragments, since we would like to be able to trans-
late each utterance as it is spoken, without waiting 
for the end. This gives importance to bottom up 
methods of language analysis, and severe restric-
tions on the input in terms of the type of text. 
 
References 
Ayu Purwarianti, Masatoshi Tsuchiya and Seiichi Na-
kagawa. 2007. Developing a Question Answering 
System for Limited Resource Language - Indonesian 
QA, submitted to Journal of Language Resources 
and Evaluation. 
C.H. Lee, J.L. Gauvain. 1993. ?Speaker Adaptation 
Based on MAP Estimation of HMM Parameters?, 
Proc.ICASSP, Minneapolis, USA, pp.II-558-561. 
C.J. Leggetter, P.C. Woodland. 1995. ?Maximum Like-
lihood Linear Regression for Speaker Adaptation of 
Continuous Density Hidden Markov Models?, Com-
puter Speech and Language, 9(2):171-185. 
F.Z. Tala. 2003. A Study of Stemming Effects on Infor-
mation Retrieval in Bahasa Indonesia, M.Sc. Thesis, 
University of Amsterdam. 
H. Riza. 1999. The Indonesia National Corpus and In-
formation Extraction Project (INC-IX), Technical 
Report, BPP Teknologi, Jakarta, Indonesia.  
H. Riza. 2001. BIAS-II: Bahasa Indonesia Analyser 
System Using Stochastic-Symbolic Techniques, In-
ternational Conference on Multimedia Annotation 
(MMA), Tokyo, Japan. 
Heidi Christensen. 1996. ?Speaker Adaptation of Hid-
den Markov Models using Maximum Likelihood 
Linear Regression?, Project Report, Aalborg Univer-
sity, Denmark. 
J.C. Junqua, J.P Haton. 1996. Robustness in Automatic 
Speech Recognition ? Fundamental and Application, 
Kluwer Academic Publiser, Netherland. 
Kazumi Ohkura, Masahide Sugiyama, Shigeki Sa-
gayama. 1992. ?Speaker Adaptation Based on Trans-
fer Vertor Field Smoothing with Continuous Mixture 
Density HMMS, Proc of ICSLP 92, pp. 369-372. 
M.J.F. Gales. 1997. ?Maximum Likelihood Linear 
Transformations for HMM-Based Speech 
Recognition?, TR 291, Tech. Report, Cambridge 
University Engineering Department. 
Oskar Riandi. 2001. ?A Study on the Combination of 
Maximum Likelihood Linear Regression and Vector 
Field Smoothing for Speaker adaptation?, M.Sc The-
sis, Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Tech-
nology (JAIST), Japan. 
S.Young, G. Evermann, M.J.F. Gales, T. Hain, Dan Ker-
shaw, G. Moore, J. Odell, D. Ollason, D. Povey, V. 
Valtchev, P.C. Woodland. 2005. ?The HTK Book (for 
HTK Version 3.3)?, Revised for HTK Version 3.3 
April 2005, Cambridge University Engineering De-
partment 
Philipp Koehn. 2006. Statistical Machine Translation: 
the Basic, the Novel and the Speculative, SMT Tuto-
rial, University of Edinburgh. 
Sakriani Sakti, Konstantin Markov, Satoshi Nakamura. 
2005. ?Rapid Development of initial Indonesian Pho-
neme-Based Speech Recognition Using The Cross-
Language Approach?, Proceeding of O-COCOSDA, 
Jakarta. 
 
Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, pages 9?13,
Beijing, China, 21-22 August 2010. c?2010 Asian Federation for Natural Language Processing
Collaborative Work on Indonesian Wordet through  
Asian Wordet (AW) 
Hammam Riza 
Agency for the Assessment 
and Application of 
Technology (BPPT), 
Indonesia 
hammam@iptek.net.id 
 
Budiono 
Agency for the Assessment 
and Application of 
Technology (BPPT), 
Indonesia 
budi@iptek.net.id 
Chairil Hakim 
Agency for the Assessment 
and Application of 
Technology (BPPT), 
Indonesia 
chairil@iptek.net.id 
Abstract 
 
This paper describes collaborative work 
on developing Indonesian WordNet in 
the AsianWordNet (AWN). We will de-
scribe the method to develop for colla-
borative editing to review and complete 
the translation of synset. This paper aims 
to create linkage among Asian languages 
by adopting the concept of semantic re-
lations and synset expressed in Word-
Net. 
 
1  Introduction 
 
Multilingual lexicons is of foremost importance 
for intercultural collaboration to take place, as 
multilingual lexicons are several multilingual 
application such as Machine Translation, 
terminology, multilingual computing.  
WordNet is the resource used to identify shallow 
semantic features that can be attached to lexical 
units. The original WordNet is English WordNet 
proposed and developed at Princeton University 
WordNet (PWN) by using bilingual dictionary.  
In the era of globalization, communication 
among languages becomes much more 
important. People has been hoping that natural 
language processing and speech processing. We 
can assist in smoothening the communication 
among people with different languages. 
However, especially for Indonesian language, 
there were only few researches in the past. 
The Princeton WordNet is one of the semantical-
ly English lexical banks containing semantic 
relationships between words. Concept mapping 
is a process of organizing to forming meaningful 
relationships between them. 
The goal of Indonesian AWN database man-
agement system is to share a multilingual lexical 
database of Indonesian language which are 
structured along the same lines as the AWN. 
AWN is the result of the collaborative effort in 
creating an interconnected Wordnet for Asian 
languages. AWN provides a free and public plat-
form for building and sharing among AWN. The 
distributed database system and user-friendly 
tools have been developed for user. AWN is 
easy to build and share. 
This paper describes manual interpretation me-
thod of Indonesian for AWN. Based on web ser-
vices architecture focusing on the particular 
cross-lingual distributed. We use collective in-
telligence approach to build this English equiva-
lent. In this sequel, in section 2 the collabora-
tions builders works on web interface at 
www.asianwordnet.org. In section 3, Interpretation 
of Indonesian AWN, short description of 
progress of English ? Indonesian translation and 
the obstacle of translation. 
 
2  Collaborative AW 
 
WordNet covers the vast majority of nouns, 
verbs, adjectives and adverbs from English lan-
guage. The words are organized in synonym sets 
called synset. Each synset represents a concept 
includes an impressive number of semantic rela-
tions defined across concepts. 
The information encoded in WordNet is used in 
several stages in the parsing process. For in-
stance, attribute relations, adjective/adverb clas-
sifications, and others are semantic features ex-
tracted from WordNet and stored together with  
the words, so that they can be directly used by 
the semantic parser. 
9
To build language WordNet there are two main 
of discussion; the merge approach and the ex-
pand approach. The merge approach is to build 
the taxonomies of the language (synset) using 
English equivalent words from bilingual dictio-
naries. The expand approach is to map translate 
local words the bilingual dictionaries. This ap-
proach show the relation between senses. The 
system manages the synset assignment accord-
ing to the preferred score obtained from the revi-
sion process. For the result, the community will 
be accomplish into original form of WordNet 
database. The synset can generate a cross lan-
guage result. 
AWN also introduce a web-based collaborative 
workbench, for revising the result of synset as-
signment and provide a framework to create 
AWN via linkage through PWN synset. AWN 
enables to connect and collaborate among indi-
vidual intelligence in order accomplish a text 
files.  
At present, there are ten Asian language in the 
community. The amount of the translated syn-
sets had been increased. Many language have 
collaboration in AWN. 
? Agency for the Assessment and 
Application of Technology (BPPT), 
Indonesia 
? National Institute of Information and 
Communications Technology (NICT), 
Japan 
? Thai Computational Linguistics 
Laboratory (TCL), Thailand 
? National Electronics and Computer 
Technology Center (NECTEC), 
Thailand 
? National University of Mongolia 
(NUM), Mongolia 
? Myanmar Computer Federation (MCF), 
Myanmar 
? National Authority of Science and 
Technology (NAST), Lao PDR 
? Madan Puraskar Pustakalaya (MPP), 
Nepal  
? University of Colombo School of 
Computing (UCSC), SriLanka 
? Vietnamese Academy of Science and 
Technology (VAST), Vietnam 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 1. Collaboration on Asian WordNet 
 
3  Interpretation of Indonesian AW 
 
Indonesian WordNet have been used as a gener-
al-purpose translation.   Our approach was to 
generate the query for the web services engine in 
English and then to translate every key element 
of the query (topic, focus, keywords) into Indo-
nesian without modifying the query. The dictio-
nary is distinguished by set of entry word cha-
racteristic, clear definitions, its guidance on 
usage. All dictionary information for entries is 
structured such as entry word, multiple word 
entries, notes, contemporary definitions, deriva-
tions, example sentence, idioms, etc. All dictio-
nary are implemented as text-files and as lin-
guistic databases connected to Indonesian AWN. 
The set of language tags consists of part of 
speech, case, gender, number, tense, person, 
voice, aspect, mood, form, type, reflexive, ani-
mation. 
 
3.1  Progress English ? Indonesian 
 
Indonesian WordNet is used Word Net Man-
agement System (WNMS) tools developed by 
AsianWordNet to create web services among 
Asia languages based on Princeton WordNet? 
version 3.0, Co-operation by TCL and BPPT 
establish on October 2007. 
As presented above, we follow the merge to 
create and share the Indonesian WordNet by 
translating the each synonym translation. We 
expand an appropriate synset to a lexical entry 
by considering its English equivalent. 
We plan to have reliable process to create and 
share Indonesian WordNet in AWN. We classify 
this work into four person AWN translators to 
participate in the project of Indonesian AWN. 
AsianWordNet 
Mongolia 
NUM 
Myanmar 
MCF 
Lao PDR 
NAST 
Nepal 
MPP 
Sri Langka 
UCSC 
Thailand TCL NEC-
Vietnam 
VAST 
Japan 
NICT 
Indonesia 
BPPT 
10
Each person was given a target translator in a 
month should reach at least 3000 sense so that 
the total achievement 12000 senses in a month. 
From 117.659 senses that there is expected to be 
completed within 10 months. On the process of 
mapping, a unique word will be generated for 
every lexical entry which contain. The grammat-
ical dictionaries contain normalized entry word 
with hyphenation paradigm plus grammatical 
tags. 
 
 Assignment TOTAL 
March April May sense 
Noun 10560 14199 16832 82115 
verb 6444 6444 6499 13767 
Adjective 1392 1392 1936 18156 
Adverb 481 481 488 3621 
Total 18877 22516 25755 117659 
 
Table 1. Statistic of synsets 
 
In the evaluation of our approach for synset as-
signment, we selected randomly sense from the 
the result of synset assignment to English ? In-
donesian dictionary for manually checking. The 
random set cover all types of part-of-speech. 
With the best information of English equivalents 
marked with CS=5. The word entry must be 
translated into the appropriate words by meaning 
explanation. 
Table 1. presents total assignment translated 
words into Indonesian for the second third 
month.  Following the manual to translate the 
English AWN to Indonesian, we resulted the 
progress of AWN at this time.  
We start to translate or edit from some group of 
base type in ?By Category?. These base types 
are based on categories from PWN. There is on-
ly 21.89% ( approved 25,755 of 117,659 senses ) 
of the total number of the synsets that were able 
to be assigned to lexical entry in the Indonesian 
? English Dictionary. 
 
3.2  Obstacle of Indonesian Translation 
 
Wordnet has unique meaning of word which is 
presented in synonym set. Each synset has glos-
sary which defines concept its representation. 
For examples word car, auto, automobile, and 
motorcar has one synset. 
An automatic compilation of dictionary in AWN 
have a translational issues. There are many cases 
in explanation sense. One word in English will 
be translated into a lot of Indonesian words, 
glossary can be express more than one Indone-
sian word (Ex. 1).  
One of the main obstacles in studying the ab-
sorption of English words in Indonesian words, 
is the fact that the original form of some words 
that have been removed due to Indonesian 
reform process, in which some words have been 
through an artificial process. There is no special 
character in Indonesian word, especially in tech-
nical word, so that means essentially the same as 
the English word (Ex. 2).  
  
Ex. 1. time frame  
 POS  noun time 
 synset  time_frame 
 gloss  a time period 
   during which 
   something 
   occurs or is  
   expected to occur; 
   an agreement can 
   be reached in 
   a reasonably  
   short time frame" 
 Indonesian jangka waktu, 
   selang waktu 
 
Ex. 2.  resolution 
 POS  noun phenomenon  
 synset  resolution  
 gloss  (computer science) 
    the number  
   of pixels per 
   square inch on 
   a computer   
   generated display;  
   the greater  
   the resolution, the  
   better the picture 
 Indonesian resolusi 
 
Using definitions from the WordNet electronic 
lexical database. A major problem in natural 
language processing is that of lexical ambiguity, 
be it syntactic. Each single words must be con-
tainer for some part of the linguistic knowledge 
need to ambiguous wordnet sense. Therefore, 
11
not only a single heuristic translate Indonesian 
words. The WordNet defined in some semantic 
relations, this categories using lexicographer file 
and glossary definitions relations are assigned to 
weight in the range. WordNet hierarchy for the 
first sense of the word ?empty? there are 10  
synset words (I take three of ten) that are related 
to the meaning are the following in ( Ex. 3.) 
Three concepts recur in WordNet literature that 
entail a certain amount of ambiguity : termino-
logical distance, semantic distance and concep-
tual distance. Terminological distance, by con-
trast, often appears to refer to the suitability of 
the word selected to express a given concept. 
Semantic distance is understood to mean the 
contextual factor of precision in meaning. And 
the conceptual distance between words, in which 
have relations proved. 
 
Ex. 3.  empty 
 POS  noun art  
 synset  empty  
 gloss  a container that  
   has been  
   emptied; "return  
   all empties to  
   the store" 
 Indonesian hampa 
 
 empty 
 POS  verb change  
 synset  empty, discharge 
 gloss  become empty or 
    void of its  
   content; "The  
   room emptied" 
 Indonesian mengosongkan 
 
 empty 
 POS  adjectives all 
 synset  empty 
 gloss  emptied of emotion; 
   "after  the violent 
   argument he felt  
empty" 
 Indonesian kosong, penat 
 
Disambiguation is unquestionably the most ab-
undant and varied application. It  precision and 
relevance in response to a query  inconsisten-
cies. Schematically the semantic disambiguation 
are selected in the glossaries of each noun, verb, 
and adjectives and its subordinates. 
WordNet information, whose objective is to 
build designs for the association between sen-
tences and coherence relations as well as to find 
lexical characteristics in coherence categories. 
WordNet became an ancillary tool for semantic 
ontology design geared to high quality informa-
tion extraction from the web services. 
A comparative analysis of trends in wordnet use 
: 
 
1. Support for the design of grammatical 
categories designed to classify 
information by aspects and traits, but in 
particular to design and classify 
semantic ontologies. 
2. Basis for the development of audio-
visual and multi-media information 
retrieval systems.  
 
4  Internet Viewer 
 
The pilot internet service based on Wordnet 3.0 
is published at http://id.asianwordnet.org. 
 
5  Discussion and Conclusion 
 
Any multilingual process such as cross-lingual 
information must involve resources and lan-
guage pair. Language specific can be applied in 
parallel to achieve best result.  
In this paper we describe manually sharing of 
Indonesian in the AWN by using  dictionaries. 
AWN provides a free and public platform for 
building and sharing among AWN. We want 
continue the work defined learning  the service 
matching system. Our future work on AWN will 
focuses in development platform WordNet and 
language technology web services. 
Although AWN application are going steadily, 
the limitations are: 
 
1. AWN designed for manual so 
authenticity can not be a reference. 
 
2. Classification was performed manually, 
which means that the reasons and depth 
of classification may not be consistent.  
 
 
12
References 
Valenina Balkova, Andrey Suhonogov, Sergey 
Yablonsky. 2004. Rusian WordNet: From          
UML-notation to Internet/Infranet Database  
Implementation. In Porceedings of the Second    
International WordNet Conference (GWC   
2004), 
Riza, H., Budiono,  Adiansya P., Henky M., 
(2008). I/ETS: Indonesian-English Machine 
Translation System using Collaborative P2P 
Corpus, Agency for the Assessment and 
Application of Technology (BPPT), 
Indonesia, University of North Texas. 
Shi, Lei., Rada Mehalcea, (2005), Putting Pieces 
Together : Combining FrameNet, VerbNet, 
and WordNet for Robust Semantic Parsing 
Thoongsup, S., Kergrit Robkop, Chumpol 
Mokarat, Tan Sinthurahat, (2009). Thai 
WordNet Construction.  Thai Computational 
Linguistics Lab., Thailand 
Virach Sornlertlamvanich., The 5th International 
Conference of the Global WordNet 
Association (GWC-2010), Mumbai, India , 
31st Jan. - 4th Feb., 2010. 
Fragos, Kostas, Yannis Maistros, Christos 
Skourlas, (2004). Word Sense Disambiguation 
using WORDNET relations. Dep. Of 
Computer Engineering  NTUA, Greece. 
www.asianwordnet.org 
 
13
