Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 51?58,
Honolulu, October 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Refining Generative Language Models using Discriminative Learning 
 
 
Ben Sandbank 
Blavatnik School of Computer Science 
Tel-Aviv University 
Tel-Aviv 69978, Israel 
sandban@post.tau.ac.il 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
We propose a new approach to language mod-
eling which utilizes discriminative learning 
methods. Our approach is an iterative one: 
starting with an initial language model, in 
each iteration we generate 'false' sentences 
from the current model, and then train a clas-
sifier to discriminate between them and sen-
tences from the training corpus. To the extent 
that this succeeds, the classifier is incorpo-
rated into the model by lowering the probabil-
ity of sentences classified as false, and the 
process is repeated. We demonstrate the effec-
tiveness of this approach on a natural lan-
guage corpus and show it provides an 11.4% 
improvement in perplexity over a modified 
kneser-ney smoothed trigram. 
1 Introduction 
Language modeling is a fundamental task in natu-
ral language processing and is routinely employed 
in a wide range of applications, such as speech 
recognition, machine translation, etc?. Tradition-
ally, a language model is a probabilistic model 
which assigns a probability value to a sentence or a 
sequence of words. We refer to these as generative 
language models. A very popular example of a 
generative language model is the n-gram, which 
conditions the probability of the next word on the 
previous (n-1)-words.  
Although simple and widely-applicable, it has 
proven difficult to allow n-grams, and other forms 
of generative language models as well, to take ad-
vantage of non-local and overlapping features.1 
These sorts of features, however, pose no problem 
for standard discriminative learning methods, e.g. 
large-margin classifiers. For this reason, a new 
class of language model, the discriminative lan-
guage model, has been proposed recently to aug-
ment generative language models (Gao et al, 
2005; Roark et al, 2007). Instead of providing 
probability values, discriminative language models 
directly classify sentences as either correct or in-
correct, where the definition of correctness de-
pends on the application (e.g. grammatical / 
ungrammatical, correct translation / incorrect trans-
lation, etc').  
Discriminative learning methods require 
negative samples. Given that the corpora used for 
training language models contain only real 
sentences, i.e. positive samples, obtaining these 
can be problematic. In most work on 
discriminative language modeling this was not a 
major issue as the work was concerned with 
specific applications, and these provided a natural 
definition of negative samples. For instance, 
(Roark et al, 2007) proposed a discriminative 
language model for a speech recognition task. 
Given an acoustic sequence, a baseline recognizer 
was used to generate a set of possible 
transcriptions. The correct transcription was taken 
as a positive sample, while the rest were taken as 
negative samples. More recently, however, 
Okanohara and Tsujii (2007) showed that a 
                                                           
1
 Conditional maximum entropy models (Rosenfeld, 1996) 
provide somewhat of a counter-example, but there, too, many 
kinds of global and non-local features are difficult to use 
(Rosenfeld, 1997). 
51
discriminative language model can be trained 
independently of a specific application by using a 
generative language model to obtain the negative 
samples. Using a non-linear large-margin learning 
algorithm, they successfully trained a classifier to 
discriminate real sentences from sentences 
generated by a trigram. 
In this paper we extend this line of work to 
study the extent to which discriminative learning 
methods can lead to better generative language 
models per-se. The basic intuition is the following: 
if a classifier can be used to discriminate real sen-
tences from 'false' sentences generated by a lan-
guage model, then it can also be used to improve 
that language model by taking probability mass 
away from sentences classified as false and trans-
ferring it to sentences classified as real. If the re-
sulting language model can be efficiently sampled 
from, then this process can be repeated, until gen-
erated sentences can no longer be distinguished 
from real ones. 
The remainder of the paper is structured as 
follows: In the next section we formally develop 
this intuition, providing a quick overview of the 
whole-sentence maximum-entropy model and of 
self-supervised boosting, two previous works on 
which we rely. We also present the method we use 
for sampling from the current model, which for the 
present work is far more efficient than the classical 
Gibbs sampling. Our experimental results are 
presented in section 3, and section 4 concludes 
with a discussion and a future outlook. 
 
2 Learning Framework 
2.1 Whole-sentence maximum-entropy model 
The vast majority of statistical language models 
estimate the probability of a given sentence as a 
product of conditional probabilities via the chain 
rule: 
1
1
P( ) P( ... ) P( | )
ndef def
n i i
i
s w w w h
=
= = ?   (1) 
where 1 1...
def
i ih w w ?=  is called the history of the 
word wi. Most work on language modeling 
therefore is directed at the estimation of 
( | )i iP w h . While this is theoretically correct, it 
makes it difficult to incorporate global information 
about the sentence into the model, e.g. length, 
grammaticality, etc'. For this reason, the whole-
sentence maximum-entropy model was proposed 
in (Rosenfeld, 1997). In the WSME model the 
probability of a sentence is defined directly as: 
 0
1( ) ( ) exp( ( ))i i
i
P s P s f s
Z
?= ? ?  (2) 
 
Where 0 ( )P s  is some baseline model, 
0 ( ) exp( ( ))
def
i i
s i
Z P s f s?= ?? ?  is a normalization 
constant and the {fi}'s are features encoding some 
information about the sentence. Most generally, a 
feature is a function from the set of word 
sequences to R, the set of real numbers. However, 
in most applications, as in our work, the features 
are taken to be binary. Lastly, the {?i}'s are real 
coefficients encoding the relative importance of 
their corresponding features. In the WSME 
framework the set of features {fi} is given ahead of 
training by the modeler, and learning consists of 
estimating the coefficients {?i}. This is done by 
stipulating the constraints 
  
 
1
1( ) ( ) ( )
Ndef
p i p i i j
j
E f E f f s
N =
= = ??  (3) 
 
where p?  is the empirical distribution defined by 
the training set {s1, ... sN}.2 If these constraints are 
consistent then there is a unique solution in {?i} 
that satisfies them. This solution is guaranteed to 
be the one closest to P0 in the Kullback-Leblier 
sense among all solutions satisfying (3). It is also 
guaranteed to be the maximum likelihood solution 
for the exponential family. For more details, see 
(Chen and Rosenfeld, 1999a). 
2.2 Self-supervised boosting 
 A different approach to learning the same sort 
of model as in (2) was proposed in (Welling et al, 
2003). Here, instead of having all the features pre-
given, they are learned one at a time along with 
their corresponding coefficients. Welling et al 
show that adding a new feature to (2) can be 
                                                           
2
 Sometimes a smoothed version of (3) is used instead (e.g. 
Chen and Rosenfeld, 1999b). 
52
interpreted as gradient ascent on the log-likelihood 
function, and show that the optimal feature is the 
one that best discriminates real data from data 
sampled from the current model. To see this, let 
 0( ) ln( ( )) ( )i i
i
E s P s f s?= +?  (4) 
denote the energy associated with sentence s.3 
Equation (2) can now be rewritten as - 
 
1( ) exp( ( ))P s E s
Z
=  (5) 
where Z is a normalization constant as before. The 
derivative of the log-likelihood with respect to an 
arbitrary parameter ? is then ? 
 
 
1
( )1 ( )( )
N
i
i s S
E sL E sP s
N? ? ?= ?
?? ?= ? +
? ? ?? ?  (6) 
 
where {s1, ... sN} is once again the training corpus, 
and the second sum runs over the set of all word 
sequences.  
Now, suppose we change the energy function by 
adding an infinitesimal multiple of a new feature 
f*. The log-likelihood after adding the feature can 
be approximated by ? 
 
*( ( ) ( )) ( ( )) LL E s f s L E s? ?
?
?+ ? +
?
 (7) 
where the derivative of L is taken at 0? = . 
Because the optimal feature is the one that 
maximizes the increase in log-likelihood, we are 
searching for a feature that maximizes this 
derivative. Using equation (6) and noting that 
*E f
?
? =
?
 we have ? 
 
 
* *
1
1 ( ) ( ) ( )
N
i
i s S
L f s P s f s
N? = ?
? = ? +
? ? ?  (8) 
 
This expression cannot be computed in practice, 
because the set of all word sequences S is infinite. 
The second term however can approximated using 
samples {ui} from the current model ? 
  
 
* *
1 1
1 1( ) ( )
N N
i i
i i
L f s f u
N N? = =
? ? ? +
? ? ?  (9) 
                                                           
3
 In (Welling et al, 2003) the term for P0 does not appear, 
which is equivalent to taking the uniform distribution as the 
baseline model. 
In other words, given a set of N samples {ui} 
from the model, the optimal feature to add is one 
that gives high scores to sampled sentences and 
low ones to real sentences. By labeling real 
sentences with 0 and sampled sentences with 1, the 
task of learning the feature translates into the task 
of training a classifier to discriminate between 
these two classes of sentences.  
In the remainder of the paper we will use feature 
and classifier interchangeably. 
2.3 Rejection sampling 
Self-supervised boosting was presented as a 
general method for density estimation, and was not 
tested in the context of language modeling. Rather, 
Welling at al. demonstrated its effectiveness in 
modeling hand-written digits and on synthetic data. 
?n both cases essentially linear classifiers were 
used as features. As these are computationally very 
efficient, the authors could use a variant of Gibbs 
sampling for generating negative samples.  
Unfortunately, as shown in (Okanohara and Tsujii, 
2007), with the represetation of sentences that we 
use, linear classifiers cannot discriminate real 
sentences from sentences sampled from a trigram, 
which is the model we use as a baseline, so here 
we resort to a non-linear large-margin classifier 
(see section 3 for details). While large-margin 
classifiers consistently out-perform other learning 
algorithms in many NLP tasks, their non-linear 
variations are also notoriously slow when it comes 
to computing their decision function ? taking time 
that can be linear in the size of their training data. 
This means that MCMC techniques like Gibbs 
sampling quickly become intractable, even for 
small corpora, as they require performing very 
large numbers of classifications. For this reason we 
use a different sampling scheme which we refer to 
as rejection sampling. This allows us to sample 
from the true model distribution while requiring a 
drastically smaller number of classifications, as 
long as the current model isn't too far removed 
from the baseline. 
We will start by describing the sampling 
process, and then show that the probability 
distribution it samples from has the form of  
equation (2). To sample a sentence from the cur-
rent model, we generate one from the baseline 
model, and then pass it through each of the classi-
fiers in the model. If a given classifier classifies the 
53
sentence as a model sentence, then it is rejected 
with a certain probability associated with this clas-
sifier. Only if a sentence is accepted by all classifi-
ers is it taken as a sample sentence. Otherwise, the 
sampling process is restarted. 
Let us derive an expression for the probability of 
a sentence s generated in this manner. To simplify 
notation, assume that at this point we added but a 
single feature f to the baseline model P0, and 
let
rejp  stand for the rejection probability 
associated with it. Furthermore, let p
-
 stand for the 
accuracy of f in classifying sentences sampled 
from P0 (negative samples). Formally, 
 
 
 
0
( )Pp E f? =  (10) 
First let's assume that ( ) 1f s = . The probability 
for generating s is a sum of the probabilities of two 
disjoint outcomes ? the probability of generating s 
as the first sentence and having it survive the 
rejection, plus the probability of generating in the 
first iteration some sentence s' such that ( ') 1f s = , 
rejecting that, and then generating s in one of the 
subsequent iterations. Formally, this means that ? 
 1 0 1( ) (1 ) ( ) ( )rej rejP s p P s p p P s?= ? +  (11) 
Rearranging, we have ? 
 1 0
1( ) ( )
1
rej
rej
p
P s P s
p p?
?
=
?
 (12) 
Similarly, the probability for a sentence s for 
which ( ) 0f s =  is the probability of generating s 
as the first sentence, plus the probability of 
generating some other sentence s' for which 
( ') 1f s = , rejecting it, and then generating s in a 
future iteration. Formally, 
 1 0 1( ) ( ) ( )rejP s P s p p P s?= +  (13) 
and hence ? 
 1 0
1( ) ( )
1
rej
P s P s
p p?
=
?
 (14) 
 
Letting 1
rejZ p p?= ? , and letting 
ln(1 )
rejp? = ? , we have, for all s ? 
 
 
 1 0
1( ) ( ) exp( ( ))P s P s f s
Z
?= ? ?  (15) 
This process can be trivially generalized for N 
features. Let ? 
  
 
1
( )
i
i
P ip E f?? =  (16) 
stand for fi's accuracy in classifying sentences 
generated from Pi-1, and let irejp  be the rejection 
probability associated with the i'th feature. 
Sampling from the model then proceeds by 
sampling a sentence s from P0. For each 1 i N? ? , 
in order, if ( ) 1if s = , then we attempt to reject s 
with probability i
rejp . If s survives all the rejection 
attempts, it is returned as the next sample. Using 
similar arguments as before it's possible to show 
that if we take ln(1 )ii rejp? = ?  and ?  
 
1
(1 )
N
i i
rej
i
Z p p?
=
= ??  (17) 
then the probability of a sentence s sampled by this 
process is given by equation (2). Conversely, this 
shows that rejection sampling can be used for 
obtaining negative samples from the model given 
in (2) by taking 1 exp( )i
rej ip ?= ? , as long as 
0 exp( ) 1i?< ? . In section 3 we show that in our 
experimental setup, rejection sampling brings 
about enormous savings in the number of 
classifications necessary during training, as 
compared with Gibbs sampling.  
2.4 Adding a new feature 
Given the current model Pi and a new feature 
fi+1, we wish to find the optimal ?i+1, or 
equivalently its optimal rejection probability 1i
rejp
+
. 
In the WSME framework, the weights of the 
features are set in such a way that the expected 
value of the features on sentences sampled from 
the model equals their expected value on real 
sentences. A possible way to set the weight of a 
new feature is therefore to set 1irejp
+
 such that the 
constraint:  
         
1 1 1
( ) ( )
iP i p i
E f E f
+ + += ?             (18) 
is satistfied, where p?   is once again the empirical 
distribution defined by the training set. Intuitively, 
this means that the new feature could no longer be 
used to discriminate between sentences sampled 
from Pi+1 and real sentences. However, setting 
54
1i
rejp
+ in this manner may violate the constraints (18) 
associated with the features already existing in the 
model, thus hampering the model's performance. 
Therefore, we set the new feature's rejection 
probability by directly searching for the one that 
minimizes an estimate of Pi+1's perplexity on a set 
of held out real sentences. To do this, we first 
sample a new set of sentences from Pi, 
independently of the set that was used for training 
1if + , and use it to estimate 1ip +? . For any 
arbitrarily determined 1irejp
+
, this enables us to 
calculate an estimate for the normalization constant 
Z (equation 17), and therefore an estimate for  Pi+1. 
We do this for a range of possible values for 1irejp
+
 
and pick the one that leads to the largest reduction 
in perplexity on the held out data.4  
3 Experimental work 
We tested our approach on the ATIS natural 
language corpus (Hemphill et al, 1990). We split 
the corpus into a training set of 11,000 sentences, a 
held-out set containing 1,045 sentences, and a test 
set containing 1,000 sentences which were 
reserved for measuring perplexity. The corpus was 
pre-processed so that every word appearing less 
than three times was replaced by a special UNK 
symbol. The resulting lexicon contained 603 word 
types.  
Our learning framework leaves open a number 
of design choices:  
1. Baseline language model: For P0 we used a 
trigram with modified kneser-ney smoothing 
[Chen and Goodman, 1998], which is still 
considered one of the best smoothing methods for 
n-gram language models. 
 
2. Sentence representation: Each sentence was 
represented as the collection of unigrams, bigrams 
and trigrams it contained. A coordinate was 
reserved for each such n-gram which appeared in 
the data, whether real or sampled. The value of the 
n'th coordinate in the vector representation of 
                                                           
4
 Interestingly, in practice both methods result in near identical 
rejection probabilities, within a precision of 0.0001. This 
indicates that satisfying the constraint (18) for the new feature 
is more important, in terms of perplexity, than preserving the 
constraints of the previous features, insofar as those get 
violated. 
sentence s was set to the number of times the 
corresponding n-gram appeared in s.  
 
3. Type of classifiers: For our features we used 
large-margin classifiers trained using the online 
algorithm described in (Crammer et al, 2006). The 
code for the classifier was generously provided by 
Daisuke Okanohara. This code was extensively 
optimized to take advantage of the very sparse 
sentence representation described above. As shown 
in (Okanohara and Tsujii, 2007), using this 
representation, a linear classifier cannot distinguish 
sentences sampled from a trigram and real 
sentences. Therefore, we used a 3rd order 
polynomial kernel, which was found to give good 
results. No special effort was otherwise made in 
order to optimize the parameters of the classifiers. 
 
4. Stopping criterion: The process of adding 
features to the model was continued until the 
classification performance of the next feature was 
within 2% of chance performance. 
 
We refer to the language model obtained by this 
approach as the boosted model to distinguish it 
from the baseline model. To estimate the boosted 
model's perplexity we needed to estimate the 
normalization constant Z in equation (2). Since this 
constant is equal to  
0
(exp( ))P i i
i
E f??  it can be 
estimated from a large-enough sample from P0. We 
used 10,000,000 sentences generated from the 
baseline trigram and took the upper bound of the 
95% confidence interval of the sample mean as an 
upper bound for Z. This means the perplexity 
estimates we report are upper bounds for the real 
model perplexity with 95% confidence.5  
The algorithm converged after 21 features were 
added to the model. Figure 1 presents the model's 
perplexity on the test set estimated after each 
iteration. The perplexity of the final model is 9.02. 
In comparison, the perplexity of the modified 
kneser-ney smoothed trigram on this corpus is 
10.18. This is an 11.4% improvement relative to 
the baseline model. 
                                                           
5
 Alternatively we could have used our estimate for PN(s) de-
scribed in section 2.4. A large sample of sentences would still 
be necessary though, to get a good estimate for equation (16). 
55
 Figure 1. Model perplexity during training. The x-
axis denotes the number of features added to the 
model. The final perplexity after 21 features is 9.02. 
 
 
Figure 2. Classifier accuracy during training, 
assessed on held-out data. 0.5 signifies chance 
performance. 
 
Figure 2 shows the accuracy of the trained 
features on held-out data. The held-out data was 
composed of equal parts real and model sentences, 
so 50% accuracy is chance performance. As might 
have been expected, the classifiers start out with a 
relatively high accuracy of 68%, which dwindles 
down to little over 50% as more features are added 
to the model. Not surprisingly, there is a strong 
correlation between the accuracy of a feature and 
the reduction in perplexity it engenders (spearman 
correlation coefficient r=0.89, p<10-5.)  
In tables 1 and 2 we show a representative 
sample of sentences from the baseline model and 
from the final model. As the baseline model is a 
trigram, it cannot capture dependencies that span a 
range longer than two words. Hence sentences that 
start out seemingly in one topic and then veer off 
to another are common. The global information 
available to the features used by the boosted model 
greatly reduces this phenomenon. To get a 
quantitative sense of this, we generated 200 
sentences from each model and submitted them for 
grammaticality testing by a proficient (though non-
native) English speaker. Of the trigram-generated  
please list costs in at pittsburgh 
what type of airplane is have an early morning 
what types of aircraft is that a meal 
what not nineteen forty two 
between boston and atlanta on august fifteenth 
which airlines fly american flying on 
what is the flight leaving pittsburgh after six p m 
Table 1. A sample of sentences generated by the 
baseline model, a trigram smoothed with modified 
kneser-ney smoothing. 
 
 
what is the cost of flight d l three seventeen 
sixty five 
what time does flight at eight thirty eight a m 
and six p m 
what does fare code q w mean 
what kind of aircraft will i be flying on 
flights from philadelphia on saturday 
what is the fare for flight two nine six 
what is the cost of coach transcontinental flight 
u a three oh two from denver to san francisco 
Table 2. A sample of sentences generated by the final 
model 
 
 
sentences, 86 were deemed grammatical (43%), 
while of those generated by the boosted model 132 
were grammatical (66%). This difference is 
statistically significant with p<10-5. 
Finally, let us quantify the computational 
savings obtained from using rejection sampling. 
Let |V| stand for the lexicon size (here |V|=603) 
and |L| for the average sentence length (|L|=14). In 
Gibbs sampling, a sentence is sampled by starting 
out with a random sequence of words. For each 
word position, the current word is replaced with 
each word in the lexicon, and the probability of the 
resulting sentence is calculated. Then one of the 
words is randomly selected for this position in 
proportion to the calculated probabilities. The 
sentence has to be scanned in this manner several 
times for the sample to approximate the model 
distribution. Assuming we perform only 3 scans 
for each sentence, Gibbs sampling would have thus 
required us to classify 3 | || | 25,000V L ?  
sentences per sampled sentence. Given that in each 
iteration we generate 12,045 sentences, and that in 
the n'th iteration each sentence has to be classified 
by n features, this gives a total of roughly 
56
107 10? classifications after 21 iterations. In 
contrast, using rejection sampling, we used only 
76.7 10?  classifications in total ? a difference of 
over three orders of magnitude.  
 
4 Discussion 
In this work we presented a method that enables 
using discriminative learning methods for refining  
generative language models. Utilizing large- 
margin classifiers that are trained to discriminate 
real sentences from model sentences we showed 
that sizeable improvements in perplexity over a 
state-of-the-art smoothed trigram are possible. 
Our method bears some similarity to the recently 
developed Contrastive Estimation method (Smith 
and Eisner, 2004). Contrastive estimation (CE) was 
proposed as a means for training log-linear prob-
abilistic models. As all training methods, contras-
tive estimation pushes probability mass unto 
positive samples. Unlike other methods, CE takes 
this probability mass from the 'neighborhood' of 
each positive sample. For example, given a real 
sentence s, CE might give it more probability by 
taking away probability from similar sentences 
which are likely to be ungrammatical, for instance 
sentences that are formed by taking s and switch-
ing the order of two adjacent words in it. This is 
intuitively similar to our approach ? effectively, 
our model gives probability mass to positive sam-
ples, taking it away from sentences classified as 
model sentences. A major difference between the 
two approaches, however, is that in CE the defini-
tion of the sentence's neighborhood must be speci-
fied in advance by the modeler. In our work, the 
'neighborhood' is determined automatically and 
dynamically as learning proceeds, according to the 
capabilities of the classifiers used. 
The sentence representation we chose for this 
work is rather simple, and was intended primarily 
to demonstrate the efficacy of our approach. In 
future work we plan to experiment with richer 
representations, e.g. including long-range n-grams 
(Rosenfeld, 1996), class n-grams (Brown et al, 
1992), grammatical features (Amaya and Benedy, 
2001), etc'.  
The main computational bottleneck in our 
approach is the generation of negative samples 
from the current model. Rejection sampling 
allowed us to use computationally intensive 
classifiers as our features by reducing the number 
of classifications that had to be performed during 
the sampling process. However, if the boosted 
model strays too far from the baseline P0, these 
savings will be negated by the very large sentence 
rejection probabilities that will ensue. This is likely 
to be the case when richer representations as 
suggested above are used, necessitating a return to 
Gibbs sampling. Therefore, in future work we plan 
to experiment with classifiers whose decision 
function is cheaper to compute, such as neural 
networks and decision trees. Another possible 
direction would be using the recently proposed 
Deep Belief Network formalism (Hinton et al, 
2006). DBNs utilize semi-linear features which are 
stacked recursively and thus very efficiently model 
non-linearities in their data. These have been used 
in the past for language modeling (Mnih and 
Hinton, 2007), but not within the whole-sentence 
framework. 
Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank Daisuke Okanohara for 
his generosity in providing the code for the large-
margin classifier. The author is supported by the 
Yeshaya Horowitz association through the center 
of Complexity Science. 
References  
Fredy Amaya and Jose Miguel Benedi, 2001, Improve-
ment of a whole sentence maximum entropy model us-
ing grammatical features. In Proceedings of the 39th 
Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational 
Linguistics. 
Peter. F. Brown, Vincent. J. Della Pietra, Peter. V. 
deSouza, Jenifer. C. Lai and Robert. L. Mercer. Class-
based n-gram models of natural language. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 18(4):467?479, Dec. 1992. 
Stanley F. Chen and Joshua. Goodman. 1998. An em-
pirical study of smoothing techniques for language 
modeling. Technical Report TR?10?98, Center for Re-
search in Computing Technology, Harvard University 
Stanley F. Chen and Ronald Rosenfeld. 1999a. Efficient 
sampling and feature selection in whole sentence maxi-
mum entropy language models. In Proceedings of 
ICASSP?99. IEEE. 
Stanley F. Chen and Ronald Rosenfeld. 1999b. A Gaus-
sian prior for smoothing maximum entropy models. 
Technical Report CMUCS-99-108, Carnegie Mellon 
University. 
57
Koby Crammer, Ofer Dekel, Joseph Keshet, Shai 
Shalev-Shwartz, and Yoram Singer. 2006. Online pas-
sive-aggressive algorithms. Journal of Machine Learn-
ing Research. 
Jianfeng Gao, Hao Yu, Wei Yuan, and Peng Xu. 2005. 
Minimum sample risk methods for language modeling. 
In Proc. of HLT/EMNLP. 
Charles T. Hemphill, John J. Godfrey and George R. 
Doddington. 1990. The ATIS Spoken Language Sys-
tems Pilot Corpus. The workshop on speech and natural 
language, Morgan Kaufmann. 
Geoffrey E. Hinton, Simon Osindero and Yee-Whye 
Teh, 2006. A fast learning algorithm for deep belief 
nets, Neural Computation, 18(7):1527?1554.  
Andriy Mnih and Geoffrey E. Hinton. 2007. Three new 
graphical models for statistical language modeling. In 
Proceedings of the 24th international conference on 
Machine Learning. 
Daisuke Okanohara and Jun'ichi Tsujii. 2007. A dis-
criminative language model with pseudo-negative sam-
ples. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the 
Association of Computational Linguistics. 
Brian Roark, Murat Saraclar, and Michael Collins. 
2007. Discriminative n-gram language modeling. Com-
puter Speech and Language, 21(2):373?392. 
Ronald Rosenfeld. 1996. A maximum entropy approach 
to adaptive statistical language modeling. Computer 
speech and language, 10:187?228 
Ronald Rosenfeld. 1997. A whole sentence maximum 
entropy language model. In Proc. of the IEEE Workshop 
on Automatic Speech Recognition and Understanding. 
Noah A. Smith and Jason Eisner. 2005. Contrastive es-
timation: training log-linear models on unlabeled data. 
In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation of Computational Linguistics. 
Max Welling., Richard Zemel and Geoffrey E. Hinton. 
2003. Self-Supervised Boosting. Advances in Neural 
Information Processing Systems, 15, MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, MA 
58
