A SYNCHRONIZATION STRUCTURE OF SSTC AND ITS 
APPLICATIONS IN MACHINE TRANSLATION  
 
MOSLEH  H.  AL-ADHAILEH  
Computer Aided Translation Unit 
School of Computer Sciences 
Universiti Sains Malaysia 
11800 PENANG, MALAYSIA 
mosleh@cs.usm.my,  mosleh@hotmail.com 
TANG ENYA KONG 
Computer Aided Translation Unit 
School of Computer Sciences 
Universiti Sains Malaysia 
11800 PENANG, MALAYSIA 
enyakong@cs.usm.my 
ZAHARIN YUSOFF 
Computer Aided Translation Unit 
School of Computer Sciences 
Universiti Sains Malaysia 
11800 PENANG, MALAYSIA 
zarin@cs.usm.my 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
In this paper, a flexible annotation schema called (SSTC) is introduced.  In order to describe the correspondence 
between different languages, we propose a variant of SSTC called synchronous SSTC (S-SSTC).  We will also 
describe how S-SSTC provides the flexibility to treat some of the non-standard cases, which are problematic to 
other synchronous formalisms. The proposed S-SSTC schema is well suited to describe the correspondence 
between different languages, in particular, relating a language with its translation in another language (i.e. in 
Machine Translation). Also it can be used as annotation for translation systems that automatically extract transfer 
mappings (rules or examples) from bilingual corpora. The S-SSTC is very well suited for the construction of a 
Bilingual Knowledge Bank (BKB), where the examples are kept in form of S-SSTCs. 
KEYWORDS:
 parallel text, Structured String-Tree Correspondence (SSTC), Synchronous SSTC, Bilingual 
Knowledge Bank (BKB), Tree Bank Annotation Schema. 
 
1. INTRODUCTION  
There is now a consensus about the fact that natural 
language should be described as correspondences 
between different levels of representation. Much of 
theoretical linguistics can be formulated in a very 
natural manner as stating correspondences 
(translations) between layers of representation 
structures (Rambow & Satta, 1996). 
In this paper, a flexible annotation schema called 
Structured String-Tree Correspondence (SSTC) 
(Boitet & Zaharin, 1988) will be introduced to 
capture a natural language
 text, its corresponding 
abstract linguistic representation and the mapping 
(correspondence) between these two. The 
correspondence between the string and its associated 
representation tree structure is defined in terms of the 
sub-correspondence between parts of the string 
(substrings) and parts of the tree structure (subtrees), 
which can be interpreted for both analysis and 
generation. Such correspondence is defined in a way 
that is able to handle some non-standard cases (e.g. 
non-projective correspondence). 
While synchronous systems are becoming more and 
more popular, there is therefore a great need for 
formal models of corresponding different levels of 
representation structures. Existing synchronous 
systems face a problem of handling, in a 
computationally attractive way, some non-standard 
phenomena exist between NLs. Therefore there is a 
need for a flexible annotation schema to realize 
additional power and flexibility in expressing the 
desired structural correspondences between languages 
(representation structures). 
Many problems in Machine Translation (MT), in 
particular transfer-rules extraction, EBMT, etc., can 
be expressed via correspondences. We will define a 
variant of SSTC called synchronous SSTC (S-SSTC).  
S-SSTC consists of two SSTCs that are related by a 
synchronization relation.  The use of S-SSTC is 
motivated by the desire to describe not only the 
correspondence between the text and its 
representation structure for each language (i.e. SSTC) 
but also the correspondence between two languages 
(synchronous correspondence). For instance, between 
a language and its translation in other language in the 
case of MT. The S-SSTC will be used to relate 
expression of a natural language to its associated 
translation in another language. The interface 
between the two languages is made precise via a 
synchronization relation between two SSTCs, which 
is totally non-directional.  
In this paper, we will present the proposed S-SSTC ? 
a schema well suited to describe the correspondence 
between two languages. The synchronous SSTC is 
flexible and able to handle the non-standard 
correspondence cases exist between different 
languages. It can also be used to facilitate automatic 
extraction of transfer mappings (rules or examples) 
from bilingual corpora. 
 
 
2. STRUCTURED STRING-TREE 
CORRESPONDENCE (SSTC) 
From the Meaning-Text Theory (MTT)1 point of 
view, Natural Language (NL) is considered as a 
correspondence between meanings and texts (Kahane, 
2001). The MTT point of view, even if it has been 
introduced in different formulations, is more or less 
accepted by the whole linguistic community.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In this section, we stress on the fact that in order to 
describe Natural Language (NL) in a natural manner, 
three distinct components need to be expressed by the 
linguistic formalisms; namely, the text, its 
corresponding abstract linguistic representation and 
the mapping (correspondence) between these two.   
 
Actually, NL is not only a correspondence between 
different representation levels, as stressed by MTT 
postulates, but also a sub-correspondence between 
them. For instance, between the string in a language 
and its representation tree structure, it is important to 
specify the sub-correspondences between parts of the 
string (substrings) and parts of the tree structure 
(subtrees), which can be interpreted for both analysis 
and generation in NLP. It is well known that many 
linguistic constructions are not projective (e.g. 
scrambling, cross serial dependencies, etc.). Hence, it 
is very much desired to define the correspondence in 
a way to be able to handle the non-standard cases 
(e.g. non-projective correspondence), see Figure 1. 
Towards this aim, a flexible annotation structure 
called Structured String-Tree Correspondence (SSTC) 
was introduced in Boitet & Zaharin (1988) to record 
the string of terms, its associated representation 
structure and the mapping between the two, which is 
expressed by the sub-correspondences recorded as 
part of a SSTC.  
                                                
1
 The Meaning-7H[W 7KHRU\ 077 ZDV SXW IRUZDUG LQ ?RONRYVNL 	
0HO??XN  LQ WKH IUDPHZRUk of research in Machine translation.  
0RUH SUHVHQWDWLRQV RI 077 FDQ EH IRXQG LQ 0HO??XN 