Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 947?954,
Honolulu, October 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Automatic Set Expansion for List Question Answering
Richard C. Wang, Nico Schlaefer, William W. Cohen, and Eric Nyberg
Language Technologies Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh PA 15213
{rcwang,nico,wcohen,ehn}@cs.cmu.edu
Abstract
This paper explores the use of set expan-
sion (SE) to improve question answering (QA)
when the expected answer is a list of entities
belonging to a certain class. Given a small
set of seeds, SE algorithms mine textual re-
sources to produce an extended list including
additional members of the class represented
by the seeds. We explore the hypothesis that
a noise-resistant SE algorithm can be used to
extend candidate answers produced by a QA
system and generate a new list of answers that
is better than the original list produced by the
QA system. We further introduce a hybrid ap-
proach which combines the original answers
from the QA system with the output from the
SE algorithm. Experimental results for several
state-of-the-art QA systems show that the hy-
brid system performs better than the QA sys-
tems alone when tested on list question data
from past TREC evaluations.
1 Introduction
Question answering (QA) systems are designed to
retrieve precise answers to questions posed in nat-
ural language. A list question expects a list as its
answer, e.g. Name the coffee-producing countries in
South America. The ability to answer list questions
has been tested as part of the yearly TREC QA eval-
uation (Dang et al, 2006; Dang et al, 2007). This
paper focuses on the use of set expansion to improve
list question answering. A set expansion (SE) algo-
rithm receives as input a few members of a class or
set, and mines various textual resources (e.g. web
pages) to produce an extended list including addi-
tional members of the class or set that are not in the
input. A well-known online SE system is Google
Sets1. This system is publicly accessible, but since it
is a proprietary system that might be changed at any
time, its results cannot be replicated reliably. We ex-
plore the hypothesis that a SE algorithm, when care-
fully designed to handle noisy inputs, can be applied
to the output from a QA system to produce an overall
list of answers for a given question that is better than
the answers produced by the QA system itself. We
propose to exploit large, redundant sources of struc-
tured and/or semi-structured data and use linguistic
analysis to seed a shallow analysis of these sources.
This is a hard problem since the linguistic evidence
used as seeds is noisy. More precisely, we combine
the QA system Ephyra (Schlaefer et al, 2007) with
the SE system SEAL (Wang and Cohen, 2007) to
create a hybrid approach that performs better than
either system by itself when tested on data from the
TREC 13-15 evaluations. In addition, we apply our
SE algorithm to answers generated by the five QA
systems that performed the best on the list questions
in the TREC 15 evaluation and report improvements
in F1 scores for four of these systems.
Section 2 of the paper gives an overview of the
QA and SE systems used for our experiments. Sec-
tion 3 describes how the SE system was adapted to
deal with noisy seeds produced by QA systems, and
Section 4 presents the details of the experimental de-
sign. Experimental results are discussed in Section
5, and the paper concludes in Section 6 with a dis-
cussion of planned future work.
1http://labs.google.com/sets
947
2 System Overview
2.1 Ephyra Question Answering System
Ephyra (Schlaefer et al, 2006; Schlaefer et al,
2007) is a QA system that has been evaluated in
the TREC QA track (Dang et al, 2006; Dang et al,
2007). The system combines three answer extrac-
tion techniques for factoid and list questions: (1) an
answer type classification approach; (2) a syntactic
pattern learning and matching approach; and (3) a
semantic extractor that uses a semantic role label-
ing system. The answer type based extractor clas-
sifies questions by their answer types and extracts
candidates of the expected types. The Ephyra pat-
tern matching approach learns textual patterns that
relate question key terms to possible answers and
applies these patterns to candidate sentences to ex-
tract factoid answers. The semantic approach gener-
ates a semantic representation of the question that is
based on predicate-argument structures and extracts
answer candidates from similar structures in the cor-
pus. The source code of the answer extractors is in-
cluded in OpenEphyra, an open source release of the
system.2
The answer candidates from these extractors are
combined and ranked by a statistical answer selec-
tion framework (Ko et al, 2007), which estimates
the probability of an answer based on a number of
answer validation and similarity features. Valida-
tion features use resources such as gazetteers and
Wikipedia to verify an answer, whereas similarity
features measure the syntactic and semantic simi-
larity to other candidates, e.g. using string distance
measures and WordNet relations.
2.2 Set Expander for Any Language (SEAL)
Set expansion (SE) refers to expanding a given par-
tial set of objects into a more complete set. SEAL3
(Wang and Cohen, 2007) is a SE system which ac-
cepts input elements (seeds) of some target set St
and automatically finds other probable elements of
St in semi-structured documents such as web pages.
SEAL also works on unstructured text, but its ex-
traction mechanism benefits from structuring ele-
ments such as HTML tags. The algorithm is in-
dependent of the human language from which the
2http://www.ephyra.info/
3http://rcwang.com/seal
Figure 1: Examples of SEAL?s input and output. English
entities are reality TV shows, Chinese entities are popular
Taiwanese food, and Japanese entities are famous cartoon
characters.
Figure 2: An example graph constructed by SEAL. Every
edge from node x to y actually has an inverse relation
edge from node y to x that is not shown here (e.g. m1 is
extracted by w1).
seeds are taken, and also independent of the markup
language used to annotate the documents. Examples
of SEAL?s input and output are shown in Figure 1.
In more detail, SEAL comprises three major com-
ponents: the Fetcher, the Extractor, and the Ranker.
The Fetcher focuses on retrieving web pages. The
URLs of the web pages come from top results re-
trieved from Google and Yahoo! using the concate-
nation of all seeds as the query. The Extractor au-
tomatically constructs page-specific extraction rules,
or wrappers, for each page that contains the seeds.
Every wrapper is defined by two character strings,
which specify the left-context and right-context nec-
essary for an entity to be extracted from a page.
These strings are chosen to be maximally-long con-
texts that bracket at least one occurrence of every
seed string on a page. Most of the wrappers con-
948
tain HTML tags, which illustrates the importance
of structuring information in the source documents.
All entity mentions bracketed by these contextual
strings derived from a particular page are extracted
from the same page. Finally, the Ranker builds a
graph, and then ranks the extracted mentions glob-
ally based on the weights computed by performing a
random graph walk.
An example graph is shown in Figure 2, where
each node di represents a document, wi a wrapper,
and mi an extracted entity mention. The graph mod-
els the relationship between documents, wrappers,
and mentions. In order to measure the relative im-
portance of each node within the graph, the Ranker
performs a graph walk until all node weights con-
verge. The idea is that nodes are weighted higher
if they are connected to many other highly weighted
nodes.
We apply this SE algorithm to answer candidates
for list questions generated by Ephyra and other
TREC QA systems to find additional instances of
correct answers that were not in the original candi-
date set.
3 Proposed Approach
SEAL was originally designed to handle only rele-
vant input seeds. When provided with a mixture of
relevant and irrelevant answers from a QA system,
the performance would suffer. In this section, we
propose three modifications to SEAL to improve its
ability to handle noisy input seeds.
3.1 Aggressive Fetcher
For each expansion, SEAL?s fetcher concatenates all
seeds and sends them as one query to the search
engines. However, when the seeds are noisy, the
documents fetched are constrained by the irrele-
vant seeds, which decreases the chance of finding
good documents. To overcome this problem, we
designed an aggressive fetcher (AF) that increases
the chance of composing queries containing only
relevant seeds. It sends a two-seed query for ev-
ery possible pair of seeds to the search engines. If
there are n input seeds, then the total number of
queries sent would be (n2
). For example, suppose
SEAL is given a set of noisy seeds: Boston, Seattle
and Carnegie-Mellon (assuming Carnegie-Mellon is
irrelevant), then by using AF, one query will contain
only relevant seeds (as shown in Table 1). The docu-
ments are then collected and sent to SEAL?s extrac-
tor for learning wrappers.
Queries Quality
-AF #1: Boston Seattle Carnegie-Mellon Low
+AF
#1: Boston Seattle High
#2: Boston Carnegie-Mellon Low
#3: Seattle Carnegie-Mellon Low
Table 1: Example queries and their quality given
the seeds Boston, Seattle and Carnegie-Mellon, where
Carnegie-Mellon is assumed to be irrelevant.
3.2 Lenient Extractor
SEAL?s extractor requires the longest common
contexts to bracket at least one instance of every
seed per web page. However, when seeds are noisy,
such common contexts usually do not exist or
are too short to be useful. To solve this problem,
we propose a lenient extractor (LE) which only
requires the contexts to bracket at least one in-
stance of a minimum of two seeds, instead of every
seed. This increases the chance of finding longest
common contexts that bracket only relevant seeds.
For instance, suppose SEAL is given the seeds
from the previous example (Boston, Seattle and
Carnegie-Mellon) and the passage below. Then the
extractor would learn the wrappers shown in Table 2.
?While attending a hearing in Boston City
Hall, Alan, a professor at Boston University,
met Tina, his former student at Seattle Univer-
sity, who is studying at Carnegie-Mellon University
Art School and will be working in Seattle City Hall.?
Learned Wrappers
-LE #1: at [...] University
+LE #1: at [...] University#2: in [...] City Hall
Table 2: Wrappers learned by SEAL?s extractor when
given the passage in Section 3.2 and the seeds Boston,
Seattle and Carnegie-Mellon.
949
As illustrated, with lenient extraction, SEAL is
now able to learn the second wrapper because it
brackets one instance of at least two seeds (Boston
and Seattle). This can be very helpful if the list
question is asking for city names rather than univer-
sity names. The extractor then uses these wrappers
to extract additional answer candidates, by search-
ing for other strings that fit into the placeholders of
the wrappers. Note that the example was simplified
for ease of presentation. The wrappers are actually
character-based (as opposed to word-based) and are
likely to contain HTML tags when generated from
real web pages.
3.3 Hinted Expander
Most QA systems use keywords from the question to
guide the retrieval of relevant documents and the ex-
traction of answer candidates. We believe these key-
words are also important for SEAL to identify ad-
ditional instances of correct answers. For example,
if the seeds are George Washington, John Adams,
and Thomas Jefferson, then without using any con-
text from the question, SEAL would output a mix-
ture of founding fathers and presidents of the U.S.A.
To solve this problem, we devised a hinted expan-
sion (HE) technique that utilizes the context given
in the question to constrain SEAL?s search space on
the Web. This is achieved by appending keywords
from the question to every query that is sent to the
search engines. The rationale is that the retrieved
documents will also match the keywords, which may
increase the chance of finding those documents that
contain our desired set of answers.
4 Experimental Design
We conducted experiments in two phases. In the
first phase, we evaluated the SE approach by apply-
ing SEAL to answers generated by Ephyra. In the
second phase, we evaluated the approach by apply-
ing SEAL to the output from QA systems that per-
formed the best on the list questions in the TREC 15
evaluation. In both phases, the answers found by
SEAL were retrieved from the Web instead of the
AQUAINT newswire corpus used in the TREC eval-
uations. However, we rejected answers if they could
only be found in the Web and not in the AQUAINT
corpus to avoid an unfair advantage over the QA
systems: TREC participants were allowed to extract
candidates from the Web (or any other source), but
they had to identify a supporting document in the
AQUAINT corpus for each answer and thus could
not return answers that were not covered by the cor-
pus.
Preliminary experiments showed that we can ob-
tain a good balance between the amount and quality
of the documents fetched by using only rare ques-
tion terms as hint words. In particular, we select the
three question words that occur least frequently in a
sample of the AQUAINT corpus as hints. The can-
didate answers were evaluated by using the answer
keys, composed of regular expression patterns, ob-
tained from the TREC website. We did not extend
the patterns with additional correct answers found in
our experiments. These answer keys were not offi-
cially used in the TREC evaluation; thus the baseline
scores we computed for Ephyra and other QA sys-
tems in our experiments are slightly different from
those officially reported.
4.1 Ephyra
We evaluated our SE approach on Ephyra using the
list questions from TREC 13, 14, and 15 (55, 93, and
89 questions, respectively). For each question, the
top four answer candidates from Ephyra were given
as input seeds to SEAL. Initial experiments showed
that by adding additional seeds, the effectiveness of
our approach can be improved at the expense of a
longer runtime.
We report both mean average precision (MAP)
and F1 scores. For the F1 scores, we drop answer
candidates with low confidence scores by applying
a relative cut-off threshold: an answer candidate is
dropped if the ratio of its confidence score and the
score of the top answer is below a threshold. An
optimal threshold for a question is a threshold that
maximizes the F1 score for that particular question.
For each TREC dataset, we conducted three ex-
periments: (1) evaluation of answer candidates us-
ing MAP; (2) evaluation using average F1 with an
optimal threshold for each question; and (3) eval-
uation using average F1 with thresholds trained by
5-fold cross validation. For each of those 5-fold val-
idations, only one threshold was determined for all
questions in the training folds.
950
Ephyra Ephyra?s SEAL SEAL+LE SEAL+LE SEAL+LE
Top 4 Ans. +AF +AF+HE
TREC 13 25.95% 21.39% 23.76% 31.43% 34.22% 35.26%
TREC 14 14.45% 8.71% 14.47% 17.04% 16.58% 18.82%
TREC 15 13.42% 9.02% 13.17% 16.87% 17.12% 18.95%
Table 3: Mean average precision of Ephyra, its top four answers, and various SEAL configurations, where LE is
Lenient Extractor, AF is Aggressive Fetcher, and HE is Hinted Expander.
Ephyra Ephyra?s SEAL SEAL+LE SEAL+LE SEAL+LE
Top 4 Ans. +AF +AF+HE
TREC 13 35.74% 26.29% 30.53% 36.47% 40.08% 40.80%
TREC 14 22.83% 14.05% 20.62% 22.81% 22.66% 24.88%
TREC 15 22.42% 14.57% 19.88% 23.30% 24.04% 25.65%
Table 4: Average F1 of Ephyra, its top four answers, and various SEAL configurations when using an optimal threshold
for each question.
4.2 Top QA Systems
We evaluated two SE approaches, SEAL and Google
Sets, on the five QA systems that performed the best
on the list questions in TREC 15. For each question,
the top four answer candidates4 from those systems
were given as input seeds to SEAL and Google Sets.
Unlike the candidates found by Ephyra, these can-
didates were provided without confidence scores;
hence, we assumed they all have a score of 1.0. In
our experiments with SEAL, we first determined a
single threshold that optimizes the average of the F1
scores of the top five systems in both TREC 13 and
14. We then obtained evaluation results for the top
systems in TREC 15 by using this trained threshold.
When performing hinted expansion, the keywords
(or hint words) for each question were extracted by
Ephyra?s question analysis component. In our exper-
iments with Google Sets, we requested Small Sets of
items and again measured the performance in terms
of F1 scores. We also tried requesting Large Sets but
the results were worse.
5 Results and Discussion
In Tables 3 and 4, we present evaluation results for
all answers from Ephyra, only the top four answers,
and various configurations of SEAL using the top
four answers as seeds. Table 3 shows the MAP for
4Obtained from http://trec.nist.gov/results
each dataset (TREC 13, 14, and 15), and Table 4
shows for each dataset the average F1 score when
using optimal per-question thresholds. The results
indicate that SEAL achieves the best performance
when configured with all three proposed extensions.
In terms of MAP, the best-configured SEAL im-
proves the quality of the input answers (relatively)
by 65%, 116%, 110% for each dataset respectively,
and improves Ephyra?s overall performance by 36%,
30%, 41%. In terms of optimal F1, SEAL improves
the quality of the input answers by 55%, 77%, 76%
and Ephyra?s overall performance by 14%, 9%, 14%
respectively. These results illustrate that a SE sys-
tem is capable of improving a QA system?s perfor-
mance on list questions, if we know how to select
good thresholds.
In practice, the thresholds are unknown and must
be estimated from a training set. Table 5 shows eval-
uation results using 5-fold cross validation for each
dataset (TREC 13, 14, and 15) independently, and
the combination of all three datasets (All). For each
validation, we determine the threshold that maxi-
mizes the F1 score on the training folds, and we
also determine the F1 score on the test fold by ap-
plying the trained threshold. We repeat this valida-
tion for each of the five test folds and present the av-
erage threshold and F1 score for each configuration
and dataset. The F1 scores give an estimate of the
performance on unseen data and allow a fair com-
951
Ephyra SEAL+LE+AF+HE Hybrid
Avg. F1 Avg. Threshold Avg. F1 Avg. Threshold Avg. F1 Avg. Threshold
TREC 13 25.55% 0.3808 30.71% 0.3257 29.04% 0.0796
TREC 14 15.78% 0.2636 15.60% 0.1889 17.13% 0.0108
TREC 15 15.19% 0.1192 15.64% 0.2581 16.47% 0.0123
All 18.03% 0.2883 19.15% 0.2606 19.59% 0.0164
Table 5: Average F1 of Ephyra, the best-configured SEAL, and the hybrid system, along with thresholds trained by
5-fold cross validation.
TREC 15 Baseline Top 4 Ans. Google Sets SEAL+LE+AF+HE Hybrid
QA Systems Avg. F1 Avg. F1 Avg. F1 ?F1 Avg. F1 ?F1 Avg. F1 ?F1
lccPA06 44.96% 32.67% 37.89% -15.72% 40.00% -11.04% 45.30% 0.76%
cuhkqaepisto 18.27% 17.02% 15.96% -12.68% 19.75% 8.08% 19.13% 4.70%
NUSCHUAQA1 18.40% 14.99% 16.70% -9.21% 18.74% 1.86% 18.06% -1.81%
FDUQAT15A 19.71% 14.32% 18.79% -4.63% 19.78% 0.38% 20.61% 4.57%
QACTIS06C 17.52% 15.22% 17.05% -2.72% 18.45% 5.26% 18.38% 4.85%
Average 23.77% 18.84% 21.28% -10.49% 23.34% -1.81% 24.30% 2.20%
Table 6: Average F1 of the QA systems, their top four answers, Google Sets, the best-configured SEAL, the hybrid
system, and their relative improvements over the QA systems.
parison across systems. Here, we also introduce a
hybrid system (Hybrid) that intersects the answers
found by both systems by multiplying their proba-
bilistic scores.
Tables 3, 4, and 5 show that the effectiveness of
the SE approach depends on the quality of the initial
answer candidates. The improvements are most ap-
parent for the TREC 13 dataset, where Ephyra has
a much higher performance compared to TREC 14
and 15. However, the best-configured SEAL did not
improve the F1 score on TREC 14, as reported in
Table 5. We suspect that this is due to the compar-
atively low quality of Ephyra?s top four answers for
this dataset. The experiments also illustrate that by
intersecting the answer candidates found by Ephyra
and SEAL, we can eliminate poor answer candi-
dates and partially compensate for the low preci-
sion of Ephyra on the harder TREC datasets. How-
ever, this comes at the expense of a lower recall,
which slightly hurts the performance on the compar-
atively easier TREC 13 questions. We also evaluated
Google Sets on top four answers from Ephyra for
TREC 13-15 and obtained F1 scores of 12%, 11%,
and 9% respectively (compared to 29%, 17%, and
16% for our hybrid approach with trained thresh-
olds).
Table 6 shows F1 scores for the SE approach
applied to the output from the five QA systems
with the highest performance on the list questions
in TREC 15. Again, Hybrid intersects the answers
found by the QA system and SEAL by multiplying
their confidence scores. Two thresholds were trained
separately on the top five systems in both TREC 13
and 14; one for SEAL (0.2376) and another for Hy-
brid (0.2463). As shown, the performance of Google
Sets is worse than SEAL and Hybrid, but better than
the top four answers on average. We believe our SE
system outperforms Google Sets because we have
methods to handle noisy inputs (i.e. AF, LE) and a
method for guiding the SE algorithm to search in the
right space on the Web (i.e. HE).
The results show that both SEAL and Hybrid are
capable of improving four out of the five systems.
We observed that one reason why SEAL did not im-
prove ?lccPA06? was the incompleteness of the an-
swer keys. Table 7 shows one of many examples
where SEAL was penalized for finding additional
correct answers. As illustrated, Hybrid improved
all systems except ?NUSCHUAQA1?. The reason
is that even though SEAL improved the baseline,
their overlapping answer set is too small; thus hurt-
ing the recall of Hybrid substantially. Unfortunately,
952
Question 154.6: Name titles of movies, other than ?Superman? movies, that
Christopher Reeve acted in.
lccPA06 (F1: 75%) SEAL+LE+AF+HE (F1: 40%)
+Rear Window +Rear Window
+The Remains of the Day +The Remains of the Day
+Snakes and Ladders -The Bostonians
-Superman -Somewhere in Time
-Village of the Damned
-In the Gloaming
Table 7: Example of SEAL being penalized for finding correct answers (all are correct except the last one). Answers
found in the answer keys are marked with ?+?. All four answers from ?lccPA06? were used as seeds.
Question 170.6: What are the titles of songs written by John Prine?
NUSCHUAQA1 (F1: 25%) SEAL+LE+AF+HE (F1: 44%)
+I Just Want to Dance With You +I Just Want to Dance With You
-Titled In Spite of Ourselves +Christmas in Prison
+Christmas in Prison +Sam Stone
-Grammy - Winning -Grandpa was a Carpenter
-Sabu Visits the Twin Cities Alone
+Angel from Montgomery
Table 8: Example demonstrating SEAL?s ability to handle noisy input seeds. All four answers from ?NUSCHUAQA1?
were used as seeds. Again, SEAL is penalized for finding correct answers (all answers are correct).
for the top TREC 15 systems we only had access to
the answers that were actually submitted by the par-
ticipants, whereas for Ephyra we could utilize the
entire list of generated answer candidates, includ-
ing those that fell below the cutoff threshold for list
questions. Nevertheless, the hybrid approach could
improve the baseline by more than 2% on average
in terms of F1 score. Table 8 shows that the best-
configured SEAL is capable of expanding only the
relevant seeds even when given a set of noisy seeds.
Neither Google Sets nor the original SE algorithm
without the proposed extensions could expand these
seeds with additional candidates.
On average, SEAL required about 5 seconds for
querying the search engines, 10 seconds for crawl-
ing the Web, 20 seconds for extracting answer can-
didates from the web pages, and 5 seconds for rank-
ing the candidates. Note that the SE system has not
been optimized extensively. The runtime of the web
page retrieval step and much of the search is due to
network latency and can be reduced if the search is
performed locally.
6 Conclusion and Future Work
We have shown that our SE approach is capable of
improving the performance of QA systems on list
questions by utilizing only their top four answer can-
didates as seeds. We have also illustrated a feasible
and effective method for integrating a SE approach
into any QA system. We would like to emphasize
that for each of the experiments we conducted, all
that the SE system received as input were the top
four noisy answers from a QA system and three key-
words from the TREC questions. We have shown
that higher quality candidates support more effec-
tive set expansion. In the future, we will investigate
how to utilize more answer candidates from the QA
system and determine the minimal quality of those
candidates required for SE approach to make an im-
provement.
We have also shown that, in terms of F1 scores
with trained thresholds, the hybrid method improves
the Ephyra QA system on all datasets and also im-
proves four out of the five systems that performed
953
the best on the list questions in TREC 15. How-
ever, the final list of answers only comprises candi-
dates found by both the QA system and the SE al-
gorithm. In future experiments, we will investigate
other methods of merging answer candidates, such
as taking the union of answers from both systems.
We expect further improvements from adding can-
didates that are found only by the QA system, but
it is unclear how the confidence measures from the
two systems can be combined effectively.
We would also like to emphasize that the SE ap-
proach is entirely language independent, and thus
can be readily applied to answer candidates in other
languages. In future experiments, we will investi-
gate its performance on question answering tasks in
languages such as Chinese and Japanese.
As pointed out previously, the performance of the
SE approach highly depends on the accuracy of the
seeds. However, QA systems are usually not op-
timized to provide few high-precision results, but
treat precision and recall as equally important. This
leaves room for further improvements, e.g. by ap-
plying stricter answer validation techniques to the
seeds used for SE.
We also plan to analyze the effectiveness of our
approach across different question types and evalu-
ate it on more complex questions such as the rigid
list questions in the new TAC QA evaluation, which
ask for opinion holders and subjects.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by the Google Re-
search Awards program, IBM Open Collaboration
Agreement #W0652159, and the Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency (DARPA) under Contract
No. NBCHD030010.
References
H.T. Dang, J. Lin, and D. Kelly. 2006. Overview of the
TREC 2006 question answering track. Proceedings of
the Fifteenth Text REtrieval Conference.
H.T. Dang, D. Kelly, and J. Lin. 2007. Overview of the
TREC 2007 question answering track. Proceedings of
the Sixteenth Text REtrieval Conference.
J. Ko, L. Si, and E. Nyberg. 2007. A probabilistic frame-
work for answer selection in question answering. Pro-
ceedings of NAACL-HLT.
N. Schlaefer, P. Gieselmann, and G. Sautter. 2006. The
Ephyra QA system at TREC 2006. Proceedings of the
Fifteenth Text REtrieval Conference.
N. Schlaefer, G. Sautter, J. Ko, J. Betteridge, M. Pathak,
and E. Nyberg. 2007. Semantic extensions of the
Ephyra QA system in TREC 2007. To appear in: Pro-
ceedings of the Sixteenth Text REtrieval Conference.
R.C. Wang and W.W. Cohen. 2007. Language-
independent set expansion of named entities using the
web. Proceedings of IEEE International Conference
on Data Mining.
954
