BioNLP 2008: Current Trends in Biomedical Natural Language Processing, pages 28?29,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Mining the Biomedical Literature for Genic Information
Catalina O. Tudor ? K. Vijay-Shanker ? Carl J. Schmidt ?
Department of Computer and Information Sciences ?
Department of Animal and Food Sciences ?
University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19716
{tudor,vijay}@cis.udel.edu schmidtc@udel.edu
Abstract
eGIFT (Extracting Gene Information From
Text) is an intelligent system which is in-
tended to aid scientists in surveying litera-
ture relevant to genes of interest. From a
gene specific set of abstracts retrieved from
PubMed, eGIFT determines the most impor-
tant terms associated with the given gene.
Annotators using eGIFT can quickly find ar-
ticles describing gene functions and individ-
uals scientists surveying the results of high-
throughput experiments can quickly extract
information important to their hits.
1 Introduction
Given the huge number of articles from the biomed-
ical domain, it has become very difficult for scien-
tists to quickly search and find the information they
need. Systems to facilitate literature search are being
built. E.g. GoPubMed (Doms and Schroeder, 2005)
clusters abstracts retrieved from PubMed based on
GO and MeSH terms, iHOP (Hoffman and Valen-
cia, 2005) connects biomedical literature based on
genes, EBIMed (Rebholz-Schuhmann et al, 2006)
displays sentences containing GO terms, drugs, and
species.
In contrast to these systems, eGIFT automatically
identifies the most relevant terms associated with a
given gene. We believe that such a retrieval of terms
could itself enable the scientists to form a reason-
able good idea about the gene. For example, some
of the top key phrases associated with Groucho (En-
trez Gene ID 43162) by eGIFT are: transcriptional
corepressor, segmentation, neurogenesis and wd40.
This might immediately inform a user that Grou-
cho is probably a transcriptional corepressor, that
it might be involved in the processes of segmenta-
tion and neurogenesis and that it might contain the
wd40 domain, which allows them to draw further in-
ferences about the gene. To enable the scientists to
get a deeper understanding, eGIFT further allows the
retrieval of all sentences from this gene?s literature
containing the key phrase in question. The sentences
can be displayed in isolation or in the context of the
abstract in which they appear.
2 Ranking Key Terms
(Andrade and Valencia, 1998) automatically ex-
tracted keywords from scientific text by computing
scores for each word in a given protein family, based
on the frequency of the word in the family, the aver-
age frequency of the word and the deviation of word
distribution over all families. (Liu et al, 2004) ex-
tended this method to statistically mine functional
keywords associated with genes.
Our application is somewhat similar in that we
compare the distribution of phrases in the abstracts
about the gene from some background set. We use
statistical methods to identify the situations where
the different frequencies of appearance of a term
in two sets of the literature are statistically interest-
ing. We differ from the above work by choosing a
broader range of background information. Our moti-
vation is to retrieve any type of phrases, thus not lim-
iting ourselves to only functional terms or terms that
might differentiate the selected set of protein fami-
lies. Since we no longer have several sets of litera-
28
ture, our approach differs from the above method in
that we cannot base the score on average frequencies
and term deviation in the same way.
Background Set (BSet): In order to capture a wide
range of information about genes in general, we
downloaded from PubMed all the abstracts for the
following boolean query: gene[tiab] OR genes[tiab]
OR protein[tiab] OR proteins[tiab]. Approximately
640,000 non-empty abstracts were found.
Query Set (QSet): We download from PubMed the
abstracts that mention a given gene name and its syn-
onyms. We obtained the latter from BioThesaurus
(Liu et al, 2005).
Key Term Scores: We considered many different
statistical tests to identify significant key phrases,
but eventually settled on the following score:
st = (
dctq
Nq
?
dctb
Nb
) ? ln
(
Nb
dctb
)
where dctb and dctq are the background and query
document counts of term t, and Nb and Nq are the
total number of documents from the BSet and QSet.
The difference in frequencies (dctqNq ?
dctb
Nb
) gives
preference to terms that appear more frequently in
the QSet than in the BSet. This way, we would
like to capture terms that are common to the given
gene but not to genes and proteins in general. The
difference itself is not sufficient to eliminate com-
mon words. To address this problem, similar to the
use of IDF in IR, we add a global frequency term
(ln
(
Nb
dctb
)
) to further penalize common terms, such
as protein.
To better understand how the score is computed,
consider the gene Groucho and its key term core-
pressor, which was mentioned in 66% of the QSet
and only in 0.1% of the BSet. The huge difference
in frequencies, together with the low background
frequency, helped the key term corepressor score
4.3617, while most of the terms score below 0.25.
Enhancements to Basic Method: First, we ex-
tended our method to include unigrams, bigrams,
and multi-word terms where previously identified.
We observed that some words are not meaningful
when presented alone. For instance, the words de-
velopment and embryonic taken separately are not
as informative as when put together into embryonic
development, a term which was ranked much higher
than the two words.
Next, we applied morphological grouping on
terms, based on manually developed rules, after ob-
serving variances within the same concept. In writ-
ing, we can say corepressor, co-repressor, or co-
repressors. In order to capture the concept, we com-
puted frequencies on morphological groups and not
on each individual term.
Last, we divided key terms into categories by
using morphological information to separate terms
such as descriptors, and by consulting publicly avail-
able controlled vocabularies (such as NCBI Con-
served Domains, NCBI Taxonomy, MedlinePlus,
DrugBank, and MeSH category A01).
3 Assessment
Our method has been applied on 55 different genes
selected by annotators for a public resource. The
initial feedback has been encouraging. Also pre-
liminary investigations suggest we get far more key-
words associated with some genes in resources such
as GenBank, SwissProt and Gene Ontology than the
system of (Liu et al, 2004). Our next goal is to do a
thorough evaluation of our system.
References
Miguel A Andrade and Alfonso Valencia. 1998. Auto-
matic extraction of keywords from scientific text: ap-
plication to the knowledge domain of protein families.
Bioinformatics, 14(7):600?607.
Andreas Doms and Michael Schroeder. 2005. GoP-
ubMed: exploring PubMed with the Gene Ontology.
Nucleid Acid Research, 33:w783?w786.
Robert Hoffman and Alfonso Valencia. 2005. Imple-
menting the iHOP concept for navigation of biomedi-
cal literature. Bioinformatics, 21:ii252?ii258.
Ying Liu, Martin Brandon, Shamkant Navathe, Ray Din-
gledine, and Brian J. Ciliax. 2004. Text mining
functional keywords associated with genes. MedInfo,
11:292?296.
Hongfang Liu, Zhang-Zhiu Hu, Jian Zhang, and Cathy
Wu. 2005. Biothesaurus: a web-based thesaurus of
protein and gene names. Bioinformatics, 22(1):103?
105.
Dietrich Rebholz-Schuhmann, Harald Kirsch, Miguel
Arregui, Sylvain Gaudan, Mark Riethoven, and Peter
Stoehr. 2006. EBIMed - text crunching to gather facts
for proteins from Medline. Bioinformatics, 23:e237?
e244.
29
