BioNLP 2008: Current Trends in Biomedical Natural Language Processing, pages 88?89,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Automatic inference of indexing rules for MEDLINE
Aure?lie Ne?ve?ol and Sonya E. Shooshan
National Library of Medicine
8600 Rockville Pike
Bethesda, MD 20894, USA
{neveola,sonya}@nlm.nih.gov
Vincent Claveau
IRISA - CNRS
Campus de Beaulieu
35042 Rennes, France
Vincent.Claveau@irisa.fr
Abstract
This paper describes the use and customiza-
tion of Inductive Logic Programming (ILP) to
infer indexing rules from MEDLINE citations.
Preliminary results suggest this method may
enhance the subheading attachment module of
the Medical Text Indexer, a system for assist-
ing MEDLINE indexers.
1 Introduction
Indexing is a crucial step in any information retrieval
system. In MEDLINE?, a widely used database of the
biomedical literature, the indexing process involves
the selection of Medical Subject Headings (MeSH?)
in order to describe the subject matter of articles.
The need for automatic tools to assist human in-
dexers in this task is growing with the increasing
number of publications in MEDLINE. The Medical
Text Indexer (MTI) (Aronson et al, 2004) has been
available at the U.S. National Library of Medicine
(NLM) since 2002 to provide indexers with MeSH
main heading recommendations (e.g. Aphasia, Pa-
tient Care. . . ) when they create MEDLINE citations.
This paper describes a method to enhance MTI with
the capacity to attach appropriate MeSH subhead-
ings (e.g. metabolism, pharmacology) to these main
headings in order to provide MeSH pair recommen-
dations (e.g. aphasia/metabolism), which are more
specific and therefore a significant asset to NLM in-
dexers.
Subheading attachment can be accomplished us-
ing indexing rules such as:
If a main heading from the "Anatomy"
tree and a "Carboxylic Acids" term are
recommended for indexing, then the pair
"[Carboxylic Acids]/pharmacology" should
also be recommended.
Sets of manual rules developed for a few subhead-
ings show good precision but low recall. The devel-
opment of new rules is a complex, time-consuming
task. We investigate a novel approach adapting In-
ductive Logic Programming (ILP) to the context
of MEDLINE, which requires efficient processing of
large amounts of data.
2 Use of Inductive Logic Programming
ILP is a supervised machine learning technique used
to infer rules that are expressed with logical clauses
(Prolog clauses) based on a set of examples also rep-
resented using Prolog. A comprehensive descrip-
tion of ILP can be found in (Muggleton and Raedt,
1994). We selected this method because it is able to
provide simple representations for relational prob-
lems and produces rules that can be easily inter-
preted. One caveat to the use of ILP is the complex-
ity of rule inference from large sets of positive and
negative examples. Considering each of the 24,000
MeSH main headings independently would not be
computationally feasible. For this reason, based on
work by Buntine (1988) we introduce a new defini-
tion of subsumption that allows us to go through the
set of examples efficiently by exploiting hierarchical
relationships between main headings. This type of
subsumption is in fact suitable for any rule inference
problem involving structured knowledge encoded by
ontologies.
88
Subheading Method Nb. rules Precision (%) Recall(%) F-measure(%)
Overall ILP 587 47 32 38
Manual 69 59 10 18
Baseline - 32 11 16
Table 1: Performance on the test corpus using MTI main heading recommendations
3 Experiments
ILP rules were induced using a training corpus of
100,000 citations randomly chosen from MEDLINE
2006. Another corpus of 100,000 MEDLINE 2006 ci-
tations was used for testing. ILP rules were applied
on the test corpus using main headings automatically
retrieved by MTI as triggers. The performance of
ILP was compared to manual rules and a baseline
consisting of randomly formed pairs according to
their distribution in MEDLINE prior to 2006. Overall
results obtained on 4 subheadings are presented in
Table 1.
4 Discussion
Performance. As expected, the use of MTI to pro-
duce main heading recommendations used as trig-
gers for the rules results in comparable precision
but lower recall compared to the theoretical assess-
ment. In spite of this, the performance obtained by
ILP rules is superior to the baseline and shows the
best F-measure. The precision obtained by the man-
ual rules, when they exist, is higher, but they pro-
duce a recall inferior to ILP and even to the baseline
method.
ILP vs. manual rules. A detailed analysis of the
rules obtained shows that not all ILP rules are easily
understood by indexers. This is due to some unex-
pected regularities which do not seem to be relevant
but nonetheless achieved good results on the training
data used to infer rules.
Furthermore, we noticed that while most rules
typically contain a ?trigger term? (e.g. Anatomy
in our previous example) and a ?target term? (e.g.
Carboxylic Acids above), in some ILP rules the tar-
get term can also serve as the trigger term. Some
changes in the ILP inferring process are foreseen in
order to prevent the production of such rules.
Rule filtering vs. manual review. Preliminary ex-
periments with producing ILP rules suggested that
improvement could be achieved by 1/ filtering out
rules that showed a comparatively low precision on
the training corpus when applied to main headings
retrieved by MTI; and 2/ by having an indexing ex-
pert review the rules to improve their readability. On
most subheadings, filtering had little impact but gen-
erally tended to improve precision while F-measure
stayed the same, which was our goal. The manual
review of the rules seemed to degrade the perfor-
mance obtained with the original ILP.
5 Conclusion and perspectives
We have shown that ILP is an adequate method for
automatically inferring indexing rules for MEDLINE.
Further work will be necessary in order to obtain
rules for all 83 MeSH subheadings. Subsequently,
the combination of ILP rules with other subheading
attachment methods will be assessed. We anticipate
that the rule sets we have obtained will be integrated
into MTI?s subheading attachment module.
Acknowledgments
This study was supported in part by the Intramural Re-
search Programs of NIH, NLM. A. Ne?ve?ol was supported
by an appointment to the NLM Research Participation
Program administered by ORISE through an inter-agency
agreement between the U.S. Department of Energy and
NLM.
References
Alan R. Aronson, James G. Mork, Clifford W. Gay, Su-
sanne M. Humphrey, and Willie J. Rogers. 2004. The
NLM Indexing Initiative?s Medical Text Indexer. In
Proceedings of Medinfo 2004, San Francisco, Califor-
nia, USA.
Wray L. Buntine. 1988. Generalized Subsumption and
its Application to Induction and Redundancy. Artifi-
cial Intelligence, 36:375?399.
Stephen Muggleton and Luc De Raedt. 1994. Inductive
logic programming: Theory and methods. Journal of
Logic Programming, 19/20:629?679.
89
