Proceedings of the IJCNLP-08 Workshop on NLP for Less Privileged Languages, pages 91?98,
Hyderabad, India, January 2008. c?2008 Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing
Morphology Driven Manipuri POS Tagger 
 
 
Thoudam Doren Singh             Sivaji Bandyopadhyay 
      Computer Science Department       Computer Science & Engineering Department 
  St. Anthony?s College                 Jadavpur University 
              Shillong-793001, Meghalaya, India                     Kolkata ? 700 032, India 
        thoudam_doren@rediffmail.com                     sivaji_cse_ju@yahoo.com
 
 
Abstract 
 
A good POS tagger is a critical component 
of a machine translation system and other 
related NLP applications where an 
appropriate POS tag will be assigned to 
individual words in a collection of texts. 
There is not enough POS tagged corpus 
available in Manipuri language ruling out 
machine learning approaches for a POS 
tagger in the language. A morphology 
driven Manipuri POS tagger that uses three 
dictionaries containing root words, prefixes 
and suffixes has been designed and 
implemented using the affix information 
irrespective of the context of the words. We 
have tested the current POS tagger on 3784 
sentences containing 10917 unique words. 
The POS tagger demonstrated an accuracy 
of 69%. Among the incorrectly tagged 31% 
words, 23% were unknown words (includes 
9% named entities) and 8% known words 
were wrongly tagged.  
 
1 Introduction 
 
Manipuri (Meiteilon or Meiteiron) belongs to the 
Tibeto-Burman language family and is highly 
agglutinative in behavior, monosyllabic, influenced 
and enriched by the Indo-Aryan languages of 
Sanskrit origin and English. The affixes play the 
most important role in the structure of the language. 
A clear -cut demarcation between morphology and 
syntax is not possible. In Manipuri, words are formed 
in three processes called affixation, derivation and 
compounding (Thoudam, 2006). The majority of the 
roots found in the language are bound and the affixes 
are the determining factor of the class of the words in 
the language. Classification of words using the role 
of affix helps to implement the tagger for a resource 
poor language like Manipuri with high performance.  
There are many POS taggers developed using 
different techniques for many major languages such 
as transformation-based error-driven learning (Brill, 
1995), decision trees (Black et al, 1992), Markov 
model (Cutting et al, 1992), maximum entropy 
methods (Ratnaparkhi, 1996) etc for English. 
Decision trees are used to estimate marginal 
probabilities in a maximum entropy model for 
predicting the parts-of-speech of a word given the 
context in which it appears (Black et al, 1992). The 
rules in a rule-based system are usually difficult to 
construct and typically are not very robust (Brill, 
1992). Large tables of statistics are not needed for the 
rule-based tagger. In a stochastic tagger, tens of 
thousands of lines of statistical information are 
needed to capture the contextual information (Brill, 
1992). For a tagger to function as a practical 
component in a language processing system, a tagger 
must be robust, efficient, accurate, tunable and 
reusable (Cutting, 1992).  
 
2 Previous work on Manipuri POS tagger 
 
Morphology based POS tagging of some languages 
like Turkish (Oflazer and Kuruoz, 1994), Czech 
(Hajic, et al, 2001) has been tried out using a 
combination of hand-crafted rules and statistical 
learning. A Marathi rule based POS tagger used a 
technique called SRR (suffix replacement rule) 
(Burange et al, 2006) with considerable accuracy. A 
POS tagger for Hindi overcomes the handicap of 
annotated corpora scarcity by exploiting the rich 
morphology of the language (Singh et al, 2006). To 
the best of our knowledge, there is no record 
available of work done on a Manipuri POS tagger. A 
related work of word class and sentence type 
identification in a Manipuri Morphological Analyzer 
91
is found in (Thoudam and Bandyopadhyay, 2006) 
where the classification of few word categories and 
sentence type identification are discussed based on 
affix rules.  
 
3 Manipuri Morphemes 
 
There are free and bound roots in Manipuri. All the 
verb roots are bound roots. There are also a few 
bound noun roots, the interrogative and 
demonstrative pronoun roots. They cannot occur 
without some particle prefixed or suffixed to it. The 
bound root may form a compound by the addition of 
another root. The free roots are pure nouns, 
pronouns, time adverbials and some numerals. The 
bound roots are mostly verb roots although there are 
a few noun and other roots. The suffixes, which are 
attached to the nouns, derived nouns, to the 
adjectives in noun phrases including numerals, the 
case markers and the bound coordinators are the 
nominal suffixes. In Manipuri, the nominal suffixes 
are always attached to the numeral in a noun phrase 
and the noun cannot take the suffixes. Since 
numerals are considered as adjectives, the position 
occupied by the numerals in Manipuri may be 
regarded adjective position (Thoudam, 2006). There 
are a few prefixes in Manipuri. These prefixes are 
mostly attached to the verb roots. They can also be 
attached to the derived nouns and bound noun roots. 
There are also a few prefixes derived from the 
personal pronouns.  
In this agglutinative language the numbers of 
verbal suffixes are more than that of the nominal 
suffixes (Singh, 2000). New words are easily formed 
in Manipuri using morphological rules. Inflectional 
morphology is more productive than derivative 
morphology (Chelliah, 1997). There are 8 
inflectional (INFL) suffixes and 23 enclitics (ENC). 
There are 5 derivational prefixes out of which 2 are 
category changing and 3 are non-category changing. 
There are 31 non-category changing derivational 
suffixes and 2 category changing suffixes. The non-
category changing derivational suffixes may be 
divided into first level derivatives (1st LD) of 8 
suffixes, second level derivatives (2nd LD) of 16 
suffixes and third level derivatives (3rd LD) of 7 
suffixes.  Enclitics in Manipuri fall in six categories: 
determiners, case markers, the copula, mood 
markers, inclusive/exclusive and pragmatic peak 
markers and attitude markers. The categories are 
determined on the basis of position in the word 
(category 1 occurs before category 2, category 2 
occurs before category 3 and so on). 
 
4 Dictionaries  
 
Three different dictionaries namely prefix which 
contains prefix information, suffix which contains 
suffix information and root containing 2051 entries 
are used for the system. The format of root is 
<root><category>. 
A bilingual dictionary consisting of Manipuri 
word and its corresponding pronunciation, POS, 1st 
English (Eng1) word meaning, 2nd English (Eng2) 
word meaning (if any), 3rd English (Eng3) word 
meaning (if any), a Manipuri sentence or phrase 
using the word and corresponding English meaning 
has been developed based on the work of Manipuri to 
English Dictionary (Imoba, 2004). The bilingual 
parallel dictionary is used for testing POS tagger and 
later on will be used for EBMT system. The 
Manipuri sentences/phrases using a particular word 
are used as the input to the POS tagger thus enabling 
to sort out words with multiple meaning.   
 
5 Morphological analysis of Major Lexical 
categories  
 
The lexical categories in Manipuri can be of two 
types ? major and minor (Chelliah, 1997). Major 
lexical categories can be of two types, namely 
?actual? and ?potential?. The lexicon of actual lexical 
categories i.e., actual lexicon consists of an 
unordered list of roots and affixes and lexicalized 
forms. Each lexical entry in the actual lexicon 
consists of what lexical category it belongs to and 
what its meaning is. On the other hand, the output of 
the potential lexicon consists of words created 
through productive morphological processes. In the 
actual lexicon, roots may be bound or free. Nouns 
and verbs from the actual lexicon can be 
distinguished on formal grounds in that bound roots 
are verbs and free roots are nouns. In the potential 
lexicon, adjectives, adverbs and nominal forms can 
be derived from verb roots and stative verbs can be 
derived from noun roots. There are several instances 
where the words belonging to some class or category 
plays the role of some other category sometimes 
based on its position in the sentences (P.C. Thoudam, 
92
2006) Some of the generalized handcrafted rules to 
identify the lexical are given as below.  
 
5.1 Nouns 
 
Nouns can be distinguished from other lexical 
categories on morphological grounds. Unlike verbs, 
nouns can be suffixed by gender, number or case 
markers. Proper nouns and common nouns are free 
standing forms.  
The following is the list of word structure rules 
for nouns (Chelliah, 1997) 
N ? Root INFL (ENC) 
Root ? Root (2nd LD) 
Root ? Root (1st LD) 
Root ? (prefix) root (root) 
Figure 1 shows the general form of noun 
morphology in Manipuri. Examples of some 
singular/plural noun forms are listed in Table 1. 
 
Prono
minal 
prefix 
Root gende
r 
number Quant
ifier 
Cas
e 
Figure 1. General form of Noun Morphology 
 
Singular Form Plural Form 
=??J?E?  -Uchek (bird) =??J?E??`e -Ucheksing(birds) 
]   -Ma (He/She) ]?F??^  -Makhoy (they) 
]?  -Mi (man) ]??^?] -Mi-yaam (men) 
Table 1: Singular/Plural forms 
 
Although case markers are functionally 
inflectional, they exhibit the clitic like characteristic 
of docking at the edge of a phrase. The word 
structure of rules of verbs and nouns are identical 
except for the category of the word level node, the 
possible terminal elements of the derivational and 
inflectional categories and the lack of the third level 
nominal derivation. Two examples to demonstrate 
the noun morphology are given below:- 
]J??X?Y??`eX? (m?-ca-nu-pi-si?-n?) ?by his/her 
daughters? 
]J??X?Y??`eX? (m?-ca-nu-pa-si?- n?) ?by his/her sons? 
 
The ] -m? ?his/her? is the pronominal suffix and J?? -ca 
?child? is the noun root. The X? -nu ?human? is suffixed 
by Y? -pi to indicate a female human and Y??pa to 
indicate a male human. ?`e ?si? or ?F?+ -khoy or ?^?]?
yaam can be used to indicate plurality. -si? cannot be 
used with pronouns or proper nouns and -khoy 
cannot be used with nonhuman nouns. X? -n? meaning 
?by the? is the instrumental case marker.  
 
5.2 Pronouns 
 
The singular personal pronouns are B -?y ?I?, Xe -n?? 
?you? and ]? -ma ?he/she?. Possessive pronouns are 
formed through the suffixation of ?E? -ki ?genitive? on 
these personal pronouns.  Indefinite pronouns are 
also lexicalized forms that consists of a question 
word which may be followed by a? -su ?also? or the 
sequence E????? -kumb? composed of E??] ?kum, ?like?, 
?kind of? and [? ?b? ?nominalizer?. The strategy for 
creating relative clause in Manipuri is to place the 
relativized noun directly after a normalized clause; 
there is no relative pronoun to mark the relative 
clause. The determiner may occur either as an 
independent pronoun or encliticized on the noun 
phrase with no difference in meaning. The 
determiners ?a ?si ?proximate? and T?  ?tu ?distal? are 
stems that function as enclitics. ?a ?si indicated that 
the object or person being spoken of is near or 
currently seen or known to be near., even if not 
viewable by the speaker, or is currently the topic of 
conversation; T? ?-tu signifies something or someone 
not present at the time of speech or newly introduced 
in the conversation. Possessive pronominal prefix 
may be affixed to the root `? sa ?body? to form 
pronouns emphasizing that the subject of the verb is 
a particular person or thing and no one or nothing 
else: +`?X? isan? ?by myself? X`?X? n?san? ?by 
yourself? and ]`?X? m?san? ?by him/her/itself/.  The 
set of Manipuri Pronominal prefixes differ for 
different persons (+  {I} for 1st person, X {Na} for 2nd 
person and ]  {Ma} for 3rd person) while the set of 
pronominal suffixes differ only on gender (Y? ?pa for 
masculine gender,  Y? -Pi for feminine gender). 
 
5.3 Verbs 
 
Verbs roots are in the actual lexicon and are bound 
forms. A verb may be free standing word if it is 
minimally suffixed by an inflectional marker. The 
verb root may also be followed by one of the 
enclitics. Three derivational categories may 
optionally precede the final inflectional suffix. The 
1st LD suffixes signal adverbial meanings, the 2nd LD 
suffixes indicate evidentiality, the deitic reference of 
93
a verb, or the number of persons performing the 
action and the 3rd LD suffixes signal aspect and 
mood. Verb roots may also be used to form verbal 
nouns, adjectives and adverbs. Verbal nouns are 
formed through the suffixation of the nominalizer Y? 
?p? to the verb root. 
The following is the list of word structure rules 
for verbs (Chelliah, 1997) 
 
a. Verb ? Root INFL 
b. Root ? Root (3rd LD) 
c. Root ? Root (2nd LD) 
d. Root ? Root (1st LD) 
e. Root ? root (root) 
f. 3rd LD ? (mood1)(mood2)(aspect) 
g. 2nd LD ? (2nd LD1),(2nd LD2),(2nd LD3).. 
h. 1st LD ? 1st LD 
 
Derivat
ional 
Prefixa
tion 
Ro
ot 
1st 
Level 
derivati
on 
2nd 
level 
derivati
on 
3rd 
level 
deriv
ation 
Infle
ction 
Figure 2. General form of Verb Morphology 
 
There are 3 categories (mood1, mood2, and 
aspect) belonging to the third level derivational (3rd 
LD) markers. The general form of verb morphology 
is shown in figure 2. 
The sub-categorization frames of affixes will 
restrict that only nominal affixes occur with a noun 
and verbal affixes occur with a verb root. The 
derivational suffix order of the word ??J?E?F?+?[?h??X is 
given below:- 
 
??J?E?         F?+?            ?[?E?        E            ?X 
cek        ?khay                -r?k          -k?              -ni 
crack   -totally affect    -distal      -potential   ?copula 
 (1st LD)          (2nd LD)     (3rd LD)  
The ?[?E? -r?k  has allomorph _E?-l?k.  ?[?E? -r?k occurs 
after vowels while _E?-l?k occurs after consonants. 
Such allomorph is an example of orthographic 
change and it is taken care by the system by making 
individual entries into the dictionary.  
 
?J???[?E?A ?ca-r?k-y (ate there and came here)  
?J?????E?A ? cam-l?k-y (washed there and came here) 
 
The formation of verb can be of the form 
 
Verb stem + aspect/mood ? verb 
UE? -th?k (drink)  + ?_ -le- ? UE??_ th?kle (has drunk) 
 
The verbal noun is formed with the rule as given as 
 
Verb Stem + Nominalizer ? Verbal noun 
?U?e -thong (cook)+ [?? -ba  ? ?U?e[??? thongba  (to cook) 
  
5.4 Adjectives 
 
An adjective is derived through the affixation of the 
attributive, derivational prefix % ?- to a verbal noun.  
e.g. 
% -? + Verbal noun ? Adjective 
% -? + ?a -si (die) + [?? -ba?>%?a[?? ?siba (something 
dead) 
Adjectives may appear before or after the nouns 
they modify.  Possessive adjectives are formed 
through the suffixation of the genitive marker ?E? ?ki 
to the possessor of a noun.  
 
5.5 Adverbs 
 
Manner adverbs are formed through suffixation of X? 
?n? ?adverbial? to a verb root. e.g. ?_??^X?  loyn? 
?completely, all? from loy ?complete,finish?. e.g.,  
 
Stem  +   X? - na   ? Adverb 
E?Y -K?p (cry)+ X? - na  ?> E?YX? -k?p-na (cryingly) 
 
Locative adverbs are derived through the 
prefixation of ] m? ?noun marker? to a noun or verb 
roots. e.g. ]F? m?kha ?below, underneath? from  F?  
kha ?south? 
 
 
6 Morphological analyses of some minor 
lexical categories 
 
The three minor lexical categories of Manipuri are 
quantifiers, numerals and interjections. These are 
considered minor categories because these lexical 
items are closed sets which express meanings most 
often encoded by affixal morphology. The lexical 
items in interjection is defined on the semantic 
similarity of its members, all express strong emotion.  
 
 
 
 
94
6.1 Quantifiers 
 
Most quantifiers in Manipuri are lexicalized forms 
consisting of the unproductive prefix khV- (where the 
vowel can be a, i, u). These are F?[?? -kh?ra ?some? 
which indicates an indeterminate amount; ?FTe -
khit?? ?ever so little, a particle? of some tangible 
material. These quantifiers can be combined as in  
 
<?`e   F?[??     ?FT?e     Y??[?E?=. 
Ishi?   kh?ra    khit?? pur?k-u 
 ?Bring me just a little bit of water?. 
 
6.2 Numerals 
 
The numerals are nouns. Ordinal numerals are 
adjectives, derived through the affixation of the 
attributive prefix % ?? and the nominalizer [?? ?b? to 
any numeral with ? ?su ?also?: thus %?X?[?? ?nisub? 
?second one?. 
 
6.3 Interjections 
 
The lexical items of this category which is defined on 
the semantic similarity of its members, all express 
strong emotion. Some of these are composite forms 
where one syllable is identifiable as the exasperative 
enclitic ?c? ?he and the second syllable is not 
identifiable as a productive affix or stem. 
 
7 Manipuri Tagset  
 
The basic Manipuri POS tag set used in the POS 
tagger is listed below. E??y?? E??y?? kukru kukru (a 
pigeon?s cry) is ideophone. T?? tu ?that? is a 
determiner. c???^[??` haybasi is a determiner 
complementizer.  
 
Sl. No. Category 
name 
Tag 
1 adjective ADJ 
2 adverb ADV 
3 conjunction CONJ 
4 complementizer CMP 
5 determiner DET 
6 ideophone IDEO 
7 interjection INTJ 
8 noun N 
9 pronoun PN 
10 quantifier QU 
11 verb VB 
12 Verbal noun VN 
13 Unknown  UNK 
Table 2. Manipuri POS tagset 
 
8 Design of Manipuri POS tagger 
 
In Manipuri, the basic POS tags are assigned to the 
words on the basis of morphological rules. Figure 3 
shows the system diagram of Manipuri POS tagger.  
 
         Input sentence 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lexical  
Rules 
 
              Tagged Output Sentence 
 
Figure 3. System Diagram 
 
The different parts involved in the system are:- 
a. Tokenizer: Words are separated based on 
the space given between consecutive words. 
b. Stemmer: It separates the prefixes and 
suffixes from the words. 
c. Engine: Different analysis and treatment of 
different words are performed based on the 
category. 
d. Tag Generator: Tags are assigned to the 
words in the sentence input based on the 
tagset and morphology rules. 
e. Dictionaries:  Prefix, suffix and word 
dictionary along with sentences using the 
words are maintained.  
 
 
Tokenizer Stemmer 
                      
 
Engine 
Major 
Lexical 
Category 
Module 
Minor 
Lexical 
Category 
module 
Dictionaries
   Tag Generator 
95
8.1 Algorithm of POS tagging 
 
Algorithm used for tagging is as follows:- 
 
1. Input the Manipuri input texts to the 
Tokenizer. 
2. Repeat steps 3 to 6 until the end of the texts 
for each token. 
3. Feed the tokens to the stemmer. 
4. Check the patterns and order of the different 
morphemes by looking at the stem category. 
5. Apply the handcrafted morphological rules 
for identifying the category using the engine. 
6. Generate the POS tags using Tag generator. 
7. End. 
The Visual C++, MsAccess and GIST SDK are 
used to develop the system. The Manipuri words are 
entered into the dictionary using Bengali script (BN1 
TTBidisha font).  
 
9 Evaluation 
 
In Manipuri, word category is not so distinct except 
Noun. The verbs are also under bound category. 
Another problem is to classify basic root forms 
according to word class although the distinction 
between the noun class and verb classes is relatively 
clear, the distinction between nouns and adjectives is 
often vague. Distinction between a noun and an 
adverb becomes unclear because structurally a word 
may be a noun but contextually it is adverb. Thus, 
the assumption made for word categories are 
depending upon the root category and affix 
information available from the dictionaries. At the 
moment, we use a sequential search of a stem from 
the root dictionary in alphabetical order. It is found 
to be suitable for small size dictionary. Further a part 
of root may also be a prefix which leads to wrong 
tagging. The verb morphology is more complex than 
that of noun. A comparative study on the number of 
words tagged by the system and manually tagged had 
been carried out. The inputs of 3784 Manipuri 
sentences of 10917 unique words as input to the 
tagger engine. Sometimes two words get fused to 
form a complete word. Handling such collocations is 
difficult. Conjuncts require a separate dealing using a 
table. Verbs, nouns and noun phrases, subordinate 
sentences, and root sentences can be affixed by 
enclitics. Table 4 shows the percentage statistics of 
tagging output based on the actual and correctly 
tagged words. The accuracy of tagging can be further 
improved by populating more root morphemes to the 
root dictionary.  
             No. of single correct tags 
Accuracy percentage=            X 100 
    Total no. of tokens 
 
Group Types Percentage 
Single tagged correct words 65% 
Multiple tagged correct words  4% 
Unknown words 23% ( 9% 
Named Entities) 
Wrong tagged words 8% 
Table 4. Tagger output statistics 
 
The unknown words are the words which could not 
be tagged based on the linguistic rules and 
unavailability of entries mainly in root dictionary. In 
the process of word formation, only affixation: 
prefixing, suffixing or compounding takes the role of 
formation of new words in this language. Due to the 
fact that new words are easily formed in Manipuri, 
thus the number of unknown words (out of 
vocabulary) is relatively large (Sirajul et al, 2004). 
  
10 Challenges for future work 
 
The noun group words handling are not incorporated. 
For example %F?E? %?[??C (pronounced as ?khak ?raw) 
meaning thunderbolt, %I?] %?[??+ FI?V[?? (pronounced as 
??am ?ray kh??d?ba) meaning wanton are noun 
group words and are not tagged by the POS tagger 
correctly. The Noun-Adjective ambiguity 
disambiguation scheme is required as a separate 
module and implementations are to be included in the 
future work. The Manipuri tagging is very much 
dependent on the morphological analysis and lexical 
rules of each category. There is a cleaning process of 
all word and morphemes specially the spelling to 
ensure that the lexical rules are implemented. This 
has not yet been implemented. Collocations handling 
and more disambiguation rules will be developed in 
further phases of the work. The output of the POS 
tagger will be used in a Manipuri-English machine 
translation system.  
  
References 
 
E. Black, F. Jelinek, J. Lafferty, R. Mercer and S. Roukos. 
1992. Decision tree models applied to labeling of texts 
96
with parts of speech. In DARPA Workshop on Speech 
and Natural Language. San Mateo, CA, 1992, Morgan 
Kaufman. 
 
Eric Brill. 1992. A simple rule-based part of speech 
tagger. In Proceedings Third Conference on Applied 
Natural Language Processing, ACL, Trento, Italy. 
 
Eric Brill. 1995. Transformation-Based Error Driven 
Learning and Natural Language Processing: A case 
study in Parts-Of-Speech tagging. Computational 
Linguistics 21(94): pp 543-566. 
 
Sachin Burange, Sushant Devlakar, Pushpak 
Bhattacharyya. 2006. Rule Governed Marathi POS 
Tagging. In Proceeding of  MSPIL, IIT Bombay, pp 69-
78. 
 
Shobhana L. Chelliah. 1997. A Grammar of Meithei. 
Mouton de  Gruyter, Berlin, pp 77-92. 
 
Sirajul Islam Choudhury, Leihaorambam Sarbajit Singh, 
Samir Borgohain, P.K. Das. 2004. Morphological 
Analyzer for Manipuri: Design and Implementation. In 
Proceedings of AACC, Kathmandu, Nepal, pp 123-129. 
 
D. Cutting. 1992. A practical part-of-speech tagger. In 
Proceeding of third conference on Applied Natural 
Language Processing. ACL, 1992. pp 133-140. 
 
J. Hajic, P. Krbec, P. Kveton, K. Oliva, V.Petkevic, 2001. 
A Case Study in Czech Tagging. In proceedings of the 
39th Annual Meeting of the ACL. 
 
S. Imoba. 2004. Manipuri to English Dictionary.  S. 
Ibetombi Devi, Imphal. 
 
K. Oflazer, I Kuruoz. 1994. Tagging and morphological 
disambiguation of Turkish text. In Proceedings of 4th 
ACL conference on Applied Natural Language 
Processing Conference. 
 
A. Ratnaparakhi. 1996. A maximum entropy Parts-Of-
Speech Tagger. In Proceedings EMNLP-ACL. pp 133-
142. 
 
Smriti Singh, Kuhoo Gupta, Manish Shrivastava, Pushpak 
Bhattacharya. 2006. Morphological Richness offsets 
Resource Demand ? Experiences in constructing a POS 
tagger for Hindi. In Proceedings of COLING-ACL, 
Sydney, Australia. 
 
Ch. Yashawanta Singh. 2000. Manipuri Grammar. Rajesh 
Publications, New Delhi. 
 
P.C. Thoudam. 2006. Problems in the Analysis of 
Manipuri Language. www.ciil-ebooks.net, CIIL, 
Mysore. 
 
D. S. Thoudam and S. Bandyopadhyay. 2006. Word Class 
and Sentence Type Identification in Manipuri 
Morphological Analyzer.  In Proceedings of MSPIL, 
IIT Bombay, pp 11-17. 
97
 98
Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on South and Southeast Asian Natural Language Processing (WSSANLP), pages 35?42,
the 23rd International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING), Beijing, August 2010
Web Based Manipuri Corpus for Multiword NER and        
Reduplicated MWEs Identification using SVM 
Thoudam Doren Singh 
Department of Computer Science and 
Engineering 
Jadavpur University  
thoudam.doren@gmail.com 
Sivaji Bandyopadhyay 
Department of Computer Science and 
Engineering 
Jadavpur University 
sivaji_cse_ju@yahoo.com 
 
  
 
Abstract 
A web based Manipuri corpus is devel-
oped for identification of reduplicated 
multiword expression (MWE) and mul-
tiword named entity recognition (NER). 
Manipuri is one of the rarely investi-
gated language and its resources for 
natural language processing are not 
available in the required measure. The 
web content of Manipuri is also very 
poor. News corpus from a popular Ma-
nipuri news website is collected. Ap-
proximately four and a half million Ma-
nipuri wordforms have been collected 
from the web. The mode of corpus col-
lection and the identification of redupli-
cated MWEs and multiword NE based 
on support vector machine (SVM) 
learning technique are reported. The 
SVM based reduplicated MWE system 
is evaluated with recall, precision and F-
Score values of 94.62%, 93.53% and 
94.07% respectively outperforming the 
rule based approach. The recall, preci-
sion and F-Score for multiword NE are 
evaluated as 94.82%, 93.12% and 
93.96% respectively. 
1 Introduction  
The NER and MWE identification are important 
tasks for natural language applications that in-
clude machine translation and information re-
trieval. The present work reports the NER and 
reduplicated MWE identification of Manipuri 
on web based news corpus. The use of web as a 
corpus for teaching and research on languages 
has been proposed several times (Rundell, 2000; 
Fletcher, 2001; Robb, 2003; Fletcher 2004). A 
special issue of the Computational Linguistics 
journal on web as corpus (Kilgarriff and Gre-
fenstette, 2003) was published. Several studies 
have used different methods to mine web data. 
The web walked into the ACL meetings starting 
in 1999. The special interest group of ACL on 
web as corpus is promoting interest in the use of 
the web as a source of linguistic data, and as an 
object of study in its own right. India is a multi-
lingual country with a lot of cultural diversity. 
Bharati et al (2001) reports an effort to create 
lexical resources such as transfer lexicon and 
grammar from English to several Indian lan-
guages and dependency Treebank of annotated 
corpora for several Indian languages. In Indian 
context, a web based Bengali corpus develop-
ment work from web is reported in Ekbal and 
Bandyopadhyay (2008) and Manipuri-English 
semi automatic parallel corpora extraction by 
Singh et. al., (2010). Newspaper is a huge 
source of readily available documents. In the 
present work, the Manipuri monolingual corpus 
has been developed from web for NLP and re-
lated tasks. 
Manipuri is a scheduled Indian language 
spoken approximately by three million people 
mainly in the state of Manipur in India and in 
the neighboring countries namely Bangladesh 
and Myanmar. It is a Tibeto-Burman language 
and highly agglutinative in nature, influenced 
and enriched by the Indo-Aryan languages of 
Sanskrit origin and English. The affixes play the 
most important role in the structure of the lan-
guage. In Manipuri, words are formed in three 
processes called affixation, derivation and com-
pounding. The majority of the roots found in the 
35
language are bound and the affixes are the de-
termining factor of the class of the words in the 
language. Annotated corpus, bilingual dictiona-
ries, name dictionaries, WordNet, morphologi-
cal analyzers etc. are not yet available in Mani-
puri in the required measure. 
In the present work, the tasks of identifica-
tion of Manipuri multiword named entity (MNE) 
and reduplicated multiword expression (RMWE) 
identification using support vector machine 
(SVM) learning technique on the corpus col-
lected from web is reported. 
Works on multiword expressions (MWEs) 
have started with a momentum in different lan-
guages. In the Indian context, some of the 
works can be seen in (Dandapat et. al., 2006; 
Kunchukuttan and Damani, 2008; Kishorjit et. 
al., 2010). The identification of MWEs in sev-
eral languages concentrate on compound nouns, 
noun-verb combination, some on idioms and 
phrases and so on but not much on RMWEs. 
The reason may be that the reduplicated words 
are either rare or easy to identify for these lan-
guages since only complete duplication and 
some amount of partial reduplication may be 
present in these languages. On the other hand, 
reduplicated MWEs are quite large in number in 
Manipuri and there are wide varieties of redup-
licated MWEs in Manipuri. 
2 Manipuri News Corpus and Statis-
tics 
The content of Manipuri language on the web is 
very poor. One of the sources is the daily news 
publications. Again, there is no repository. Thus, 
the possibility of deploying web crawler and 
mining the web corpus is not possible. The Ma-
nipuri news corpus is collected from 
http://www.thesangaiexpress.com/ covering the 
period from May 2008 to May 2010 on daily 
basis. The Manipuri news is available in PDF 
format. A tool has been developed to convert 
contents from PDF documents to Unicode for-
mat. There are 15-20 articles in each day. Con-
sidering the Manipuri corpus covering the pe-
riod from May 2008 to May 2010, there are 
4649016 wordforms collected1. 
                                                 
1
There are no publications on some occasions. 
2.1 Conversion from PDF to UTF-8  
The general Manipuri news collected is in PDF 
format. A tool has been developed to convert 
Manipuri news PDF articles to Bengali Unicode. 
The Bengali Unicode characters are used to 
represent Manipuri as well. The conversion of 
PDF format into Unicode involves the conver-
sion to ASCII and then into Unicode using 
mapping tables between the ASCII characters 
and corresponding Bengali Unicode. The map-
ping tables have been prepared at different le-
vels with separate tables for single characters 
and conjuncts with two or more than two cha-
racters. The single character mapping table con-
tains 72 entries and the conjunct characters 
mapping table consists of 738 entries. There are 
conjuncts of 2, 3 and 4 characters. Sub-tables 
for each of the conjuncts are prepared. English 
words are present on the Manipuri side of the 
news and they are filtered to avoid unknown 
character features. 
2.2 Use of language resources 
The Manipuri web corpus collected from the 
web is cleaned by removing the unknown cha-
racters. After the cleaning process, the running 
texts are picked up followed by spelling correc-
tion. The web based news corpus is POS tagged 
using the 26 tagset2 defined for the Indian lan-
guages based on the work of (Singh et. al. , 
2008). The Manipuri news corpus developed in 
this work has been used to identify MNE and 
RMWEs identification. 
3 Support Vector Machine 
The SVM (Vapnik, 1995) is based on discr i-
minative approach and makes use of both pos i-
tive and negative examples to learn the distinc-
tion between the two classes. The SVMs are 
known to robustly handle large feature sets and 
to develop models that maximize their generali-
zability.   Suppose we have a set of training data 
for a two-class problem: 1 1{( , ),.....( , )}N Nx y x y, 
where xi ? RD is a feature vector of the i
th sam-
ple in the training data and yi ? {+1, -1} is the 
class to which xi belongs. The goal is to find a 
decision function that accurately predicts class y 
                                                 
2http://shiva.iiit.ac.in/SPSAL2007/iiit_tagset_guidelines.p
df 
36
for an input vector x. A non-linear SVM clas-
sifier gives a decision function f (x)= sign (g (x)) 
for an input vector where,  
1
( ) ( , )im i
i
g x wK x z b
?
? ??  Here, f(x)=+1 means 
x is a member of a certain class and f(x)=-1 
means x is not a member. The support vector is 
represented by zi and stands for the training ex-
amples; m is the number of support vectors 
Therefore, the computational complexity of g(x) 
is proportional to m. Support vectors and other 
constants are determined by solving a certain 
quadratic programming problem. ( , )iK x z is a 
kernel that implicitly maps vectors into a higher 
dimensional space. Typical kernels use dot 
products: ( , ) ( . )iK x z k x z? .A polynomial ker-
nel of degree d is given by ( , )iK x z = (1+x)d. 
We can use various kernels, and the design of 
an appropriate kernel for a particular application 
is an important research issue. 
The MNE/RMWE tagging system includes 
two main phases: training and classification. 
The training process has been carried out by 
YamCha3 toolkit, an SVM based tool for detect-
ing classes in documents and formulating the 
MNE/RMWE tagging task as a sequence labe-
ling problem. Here, both one vs rest and pair-
wise multi-class decision methods have been 
used. Different experiments with the various 
degrees of the polynomial kernel function have 
been carried out. In one vs rest strategy, K bi-
nary SVM classifiers may be created where 
each classifier is trained to distinguish one class 
from the remaining K-1 classes. In pairwise 
classification, we constructed K (K-1)/2 clas-
sifiers considering all pairs of classes, and the 
final decision is given by their weighted voting. 
For classification, the TinySVM-0.074 classifier 
has been used that seems to be the best opti-
mized among publicly available SVM toolkits.  
4 Multiword Named Entity Recogni-
tion  
Named Entity Recognition for Manipuri is re-
ported in (Singh et. al., 2009). The present work 
focuses and reports on the recognition of mul-
tiword NEs. In order to identify the MNEs,  
                                                 
3http://chasen-org/~taku/software/yamcha/  
4http://cl.aist-nara.ac.jp/~taku-ku/software/TinySVM  
28,629 wordforms from Manipuri news corpus 
has been manually annotated and used as train-
ing data with the major named entity (NE) tags, 
namely person name, location name, organiza-
tion name and miscellaneous name to apply 
Support Vector Machine (SVM) based machine 
learning technique. Miscellaneous name in-
cludes the festival name, name of objects, name 
of building, date, time, measurement expression 
and percentage expression etc. The SVM based 
system makes use of the different contextual 
information of the words along with the variety 
of word-level orthographic features that are 
helpful in predicting the MNE classes. 
MNE identification in Indian languages as 
well as in Manipuri is difficult and challenging 
as: 
? Unlike English and most of the European lan-
guages, Manipuri lacks capitalization infor-
mation, which plays a very important role in 
identifying MNEs. 
? A lot of MNEs in Manipuri can appear in the 
dictionary with some other specific meanings. 
? Manipuri is a highly inflectional language 
providing one of the richest and most chal-
lenging sets of linguistic and statistical fea-
tures resulting in long and complex word-
forms. 
? Manipuri is a relatively free word order lan-
guage. Thus MNEs can appear in subject and 
object positions making the NER task more 
difficult compared to others. 
? Manipuri is a resource-constrained language. 
Annotated corpus, name dictionaries, sophis-
ticated morphological analyzers, POS taggers 
etc. are not yet available.  
 
MNE 
Tag 
Meaning MNE Exam-
ples 
B-LOC 
 
 
 
Beginning, 
Internal or the 
End of 
a multiword 
location name 
?????? (Thanga) 
I-LOC ? ???????? (Moi-
rangthem) 
E-LOC ????? (Leikai) 
B-PER 
 
Beginning, 
Internal or the 
End of a mul-
tiword person 
name 
????? (Oinam) 
I-PER 
 
?????? (Ibobi) 
E-PER ???? (Meetei) 
 Table 1. Named entity examples 
37
In the present work, the NE tagset used 
have been further subdivided into the detailed 
categories in order to denote the boundaries of 
MNEs properly.  Table 1 shows examples. 
5 Reduplicated MWEs Identification 
Manipuri is very rich in RMWEs like other Ti-
beto-Burman languages. The work of (Singh, 
2000) describes the linguistic rules for identify-
ing reduplicated words. A rule based Manipuri 
RMWE identification is reported in (Kishorjit 
and Bandyopadhyay, 2010). The process of re-
duplication (Singh, 2000) is defined as: ?redup-
lication is that repetition, the result of which 
constitutes a unit word?.  These single unit 
words are the MWEs. The RMWEs in Manipuri 
are classified as: 1) Complete RMWEs, 2) Par-
tial RMWEs, 3) Echo RMWEs and 4) Mimic 
RMWEs. Apart from these four types of 
RMWEs, there are also cases of a) Double 
RMWEs and b) Semantic RMWEs. 
Complete RMWEs: In the complete 
RMWEs the single word or clause is repeated 
once forming a single unit regardless of phono-
logical or morphological variations. 
???? ???? (?marik marik?) which means 
?drop by drop?. 
 ???? ?????? (?atek atek-pa? ) which 
means ?fresh? 
??? ??? (?kari kari?) means ?what/which?.  
Partial RMWEs: In case of partial 
reduplication the second word carries some part 
of the first word as an affix to the second word, 
either as a suffix or a prefix. 
For example, ????? ????? (?chat-thok chat-
sin?) means ?to go to and fro?; ???? ????? (?saa-mi 
laan-mi?) means ?army?. 
Mimic RMWEs: In the mimic  
reduplication the words are complete 
reduplication but the morphemes are 
onomatopoetic, usually emotional or natural 
sounds. For example, ??? ???  (?krak krak? ) 
means ?cracking sound of earth in drought?. 
Echo RMWEs: The second word does not 
have a dictionary meaning and is basically an 
echo word of the first word. For example, ???? 
???? (?thak-si kha-si?) means ?good manner?. 
Double RMWEs: Such type of reduplica-
tion generally consists of three words where the 
prefix or suffix of the first two words is redupli-
cated but in the third word the prefix or suffix is 
absent. An example of double prefix reduplica-
tion is ???? ???? ????? (?i-mun i-mun mun-ba?) 
which means, ?completely ripe?. 
Semantic RMWEs: Both the reduplication 
words have the same meaning and so also is the 
MWE. Such types of MWEs are very special to 
the Manipuri language. For example,  ????? ?? 
(?paamba kei?) means ?tiger? and each of the 
component words means ?tiger?. 
5.1 Role of suffix and prefix 
Apart from the above cases meaningful prefixes 
or suffixes are used with RMWEs otherwise 
they are ungrammatical. 
Suffixes/ wh- duplicating 
words 
Part of 
Speech 
?? (?da),  ?? (?gi) and  ?? (?ki) 
 
Beginning, Internal or the End 
of 
a multiword location name 
Noun 
?? (?ba) and?? (?pa) Adjective 
?? (?na) Adverb 
??? ??? (?kari kari?), ??? ??? 
(?kanaa kanaa?), ???? ???? 
(?kadaay kadaay?) and ??? 
??? (?karam karam?) 
Wh- ques-
tion type 
Table 2. Suffixes/wh- duplicating words list 
used in Complete Reduplication and  POS 
tagging 
 
Prefix: With such prefixes the semantic 
shapes are different and sometimes even the 
same prefix carries a different meaning. By 
these prefixation, the root is reduplicated as 
given below: 
 
{[?(i)-/??(pang)-/??(khang)-/?(ta)-/???(pum)-/ 
???(suk)] + Root }  
?  
{[?(i)-/??(pang)-/??(khang)-/?(ta)-/???(pum)-/ 
???(suk)] + Root  + Root} 
 
?????   ????  ???? 
 mahaak-na       i-waang    waang-ngi 
 he/she-nom    ?tall          tall-asp 
 He/She is the tallest 
 
Suffix: There are some suffixes that carry 
certain meaning when used with RMWEs. 
Commonly used suffixes are, ??? (-trik) / ??? (-
drik), ???? (-throk), ???? (-drong), ??? (-suk), ?? (-
sang), ??? (-dring), ??? (-sit), ??? (-sin), ??? (-
38
dreng), ???? (-sroke) etc. Generally these suffix-
es indicate a superlative degree or emphatic 
meaning. 
Some examples are as follows, 
??????       ????? 
mun-trik   mun-ba 
ripe         ripe 
?very ripe? 
 
Role of affix in Partial Reduplication: 
Character-wise comparisons are done with not 
less than two characters either from front or rear 
for both the words since the second word is not 
a complete repetition.  
Also the last few characters of the first 
word and the same number of first characters of 
the second word are compared to check the par-
tial reduplication. The prefixes or suffixes are 
verified with a list of accepted suffixes and pre-
fixes (see table 2) to validated the reduplication.  
Role of affix in Echo Reduplication: 
Identification of echo reduplication is done by 
comparing the equality of suffixes of   consecu-
tive two words w1 and w2. 
6 Best Feature Selection for SVM 
The use of prefix/suffix information works well 
for the highly inflected languages like the In-
dian languages. Different combinations from 
the following set for identifying  the best feature 
set for MNE/RMWE are experimented: 
F={ , .., 1, , 1, ....,i m i i i i nw w w w w? ? ? ?, |prefix|<=n, 
|suffix|<=n, MNE/RMWE tag(s) of previous 
word(s), POS tag(s) of the current and/or the 
surrounding word(s), First word, Length of the 
word, Digit information, Infrequent word}, 
where iw  is the current word; i mw ?  is the 
previous mth word and i nw ?  is the next n
th 
word. Following are the details of the features: 
1 Context word feature: Preceding and fol-
lowing words of a particular word since 
the surrounding words carry effective in-
formation for the identification of 
MNE/RMWEs. 
2 Word suffix: Word suffix information is 
helpful to identify MNE/RMWEs. This is 
based on the observation that the 
MNE/RMWEs share some common suf-
fixes. The fixed length (say, n) word suf-
fix of the current and/or the surrounding 
word(s) can be treated as the feature. If 
the length of the corresponding word is 
less than or equal to n ? 1 then the feature 
values are not defined and are denoted by 
?ND?. The feature value is also not de-
fined (ND) if the token itself is a punctua-
tion symbol or contains any special sym-
bol or digit. Word suffixes are the effec-
tive features and work well for the highly 
inflective Indian languages like Manipuri.  
3 Word prefix: Word prefixes are also help-
ful to identify MNE/RMWEs. It is based 
on the observation that MNE/RMWEs 
share some common prefix strings. This 
feature has been defined in a similar way 
as that of the fixed length suffixes.  
4 MNE and RMWE Information: The 
MNE/RMWE tag(s) of the previous 
word(s) have been used as the only dy-
namic feature in the experiment. The out-
put tag of the previous word is very in-
formative in deciding the MNE/RMWE 
tag of the current word. 
5 Digit features: Several binary valued digit 
features have been defined depending 
upon the  
(i). Presence and/or the exact number 
of digits in a token. 
(a). CntDgtCma: Token consists of 
digits and comma 
 (b). CntDgtPrd: Token consists of 
digits and periods 
(ii). Combination of digits and sym-
bols. For example, 
(a). CntDgtSlsh: Token consists of 
digit and slash 
(b). CntDgtHph: Token consists of 
digits and hyphen 
(c). CntDgtPrctg: Token consists of 
digits and percentages 
(iii). Combination of digit and special 
symbols. For example, 
(a). CntDgtSpl: Token consists of 
digit and special symbol such as $, 
# etc. 
39
These binary valued digit features are 
helpful in recognizing miscellaneous 
NEs such as measurement expression 
and percentage expression. 
6 Infrequent word: The frequencies of the 
words in the training corpus have been 
calculated. A cut off frequency has been 
chosen in order to consider the words that 
occur with less than the cut off frequency 
in the training corpus. A binary valued 
feature ?Infrequent? is defined to check 
whether the current word appears in this 
infrequent word list or not. This is based 
on the observation that the infrequent 
words are most probably MNE/RMWEs. 
7 Length of a word: This binary valued fea-
ture is used to check whether the length 
of the current word is less than three or 
not. We have observed that very short 
words are most probably not the 
MNE/RMWEs. 
8 Part of Speech (POS) information: 
We have used an SVM-based POS 
tagger (Singh et. al., 2008) that was 
originally developed with 26 POS 
tags, defined for the Indian languages. 
The POS information of the current 
and/or the surrounding words can be 
effective for MNE/RMWE identifica-
tion. 
 
The Table 3 gives the statistics of training, 
development and test sets. The various nota-
tions used in the experiments are presented in 
Table 4. The Table 5 shows the recall (R), pre-
cision (P) and F-Score (FS) in percentage in the 
development set.  
 
Table 3. Statistics of the training, development 
and test sets 
 
Notation Meaning 
W[-i,+j]  Words spanning from the ith left 
position to the jth right position  
POS[-i, +j] POS tags of the words spanning 
from the ith left to the jth right 
positions 
Pre Prefix of the word 
Suf Suffix of the word 
NE [-i, -j] NE tags of the words spanning 
from the ith left to the jth left 
positions 
Table 4. Meaning of the notations 
 
Feature  R 
% 
P 
% 
FS 
% 
Static: W[-2,+2], POS[-
2,+2], |Pre|<=3, |Suf|<=3, 
Length, Infrequent, 
FirstWord, Digit  
Dynamic: 
MNE/RMWE[-2,-1]  
94.
26 
96.
72 
95.
47 
Static: W[-3,+3], POS[-
3,+3], |Pre|<=3, |Suf|<=3, 
Length, Infrequent, 
FirstWord, Digit 
Dynamic: 
MNE/RMWE[-3,-1] 
88.
23 
94.
82 
91.
40 
Static: W[-3,+2], POS[-
3,+2], |Pre|<=3, |Suf|<=3, 
Length, Infrequent, 
FirstWord, Digit 
Dynamic: 
MNE/RMWE[-3,-1] 
90.
32 
93.
18 
91.
72 
Static: W[-4,+3], POS[-
4,+3], |Pre|<=3, |Suf|<=3, 
Length, Infrequent, 
FirstWord, Digit 
Dynamic: 
MNE/RMWE[-2,-1] 
88.
15 
92.
62 
90.
32 
Static: W[-4,+3], POS[-
4,+3], |Pre|<=3, |Suf|<=3, 
Length, Infrequent, 
FirstWord, Digit 
Dynamic: 
MNE/RMWE[-3,-1] 
86.
24 
92.
31 
89.
17 
Static: W[-2,+2], POS[- 88. 91. 90.
 Training Devel-
opment 
Test 
# of sentences 1235 732 189 
#of wordforms 28,629 15,000 4,763 
# of distinct 
wordforms 
8671 4,212 2,207 
40
2,+2], |Pre|<=4, |Suf|<=4, 
Length, Infrequent, 
FirstWord, Digit 
Dynamic: 
MNE/RMWE[-2,-1] 
70 49 07 
Static: W[-3,+3], POS[-
3,+3], |Pre|<=4, |Suf|<=4, 
Length, Infrequent, 
FirstWord, Digit 
Dynamic: 
MNE/RMWE[-3,-1] 
85.
05 
90.
09 
87.
49 
Static: W[-4,+3], POS[-
4,+2], |Pre|<=4, |Suf|<=4, 
Length, Infrequent, 
FirstWord, Digit 
Dynamic: 
MNE/RMWE[-2,-1] 
78.
55 
89.
54 
83.
68 
Static: W[-4,+4], POS[-
4,+4], |Pre|<=4, |Suf|<=4, 
Length, Infrequent, 
FirstWord, Digit 
Dynamic: 
MNE/RMWE[-3,-1] 
73.
71 
89.
44 
80.
81 
Table 5. Results on the development set 
7 Results on the Test Set 
The best feature set (F) of Manipuri MNER and 
RMWE is identified as F=[prefixes and suffixes 
of length upto three characters of the current 
word, dynamic NE tags of the previous two 
words, POS tags of the previous two and next 
two words, digit information, length of the 
word]. After the selection of the best feature set, 
the SVM based system for MNE and RMWEs 
is tested on the test set of 4,763 wordforms. 
 
Reduplicated 
MWE type  
Recall 
% 
Precision 
% 
F-
Score 
% 
Complete and 
mimic 
96.21 95.12 95.66 
Partial 88.32 85.03 86.64 
Echo 97.76 96.45 97.10 
Double 93.23 94.23 93.72 
Semantic 74.45 81.56 77.84 
Table 6. Result on RMWE test set 
 
In this work, SVM that parses from left to 
right is considered. The break-up of the 
RMWEs and the scores are given in Table 6. 
The handling of semantic RMWEs requires fur-
ther investigation to improve the performance. 
The rule based RMWE identification (Kishorjit 
and Bandyopadhyay, 2010) shows a recall, pre-
cision and F-Score of 94.24%, 82.27% and 
87.68% respectively. 
 
Multiword 
NE  
Recall 
% 
Precision 
% 
F-
Score% 
Person 94.21 95.12 94.66 
Location 94.32 95.03 94.67 
Organization 95.76 93.45 94.59 
Miscellaneous 92.23 91.23 91.72 
Table 7. Result on MNE test set 
 
It is observed that the SVM based system 
outperforms the rule based system. Table 7 
shows the break-up scores of different types of 
MNEs and Table 8 shows the overall scores of 
MNE and RMWE. 
 
 Recall 
% 
Precision 
% 
F-Score 
% 
MNE 94.82 93.12 93.96 
RMWE 94.62 93.53 94.07 
Table 8. Overall recall, precision and F-Scores 
on test set 
8 Conclusion 
In this paper, the development of RMWEs iden-
tification and recognition of MNE for a re-
source-constrained language using web based 
corpus of Manipuri is reported. This training 
data of 28,629 is then manually annotated with 
a coarse-grained tagset of four NE tags and six 
RMWEs in order to apply SVM and tested with 
4,763 wordforms. The SVM classifier makes 
use of the different contextual information of 
the words along with the various orthographic 
word-level features. A number of experiments 
have been carried out to find out the best set of 
features for MWE in Manipuri. The SVM based 
RMWE system outperforms the rule based ap-
proach. The SVM based RMWE shows recall, 
precision and F-Score of 94.62%, 93.53% and 
94.07% respectively. The rule based RMWE 
41
identification shows a recall, precision and F-
Score of 94.24%, 82.27% and 87.68% respec-
tively. The overall performance of the system 
shows reasonable output for both MNE and 
RMWE. 
References 
Bharati, A., Sharma, D. M., Chaitanya, V., Kulkarni, 
A. P., & Sangal, R., 2001. LERIL: Collaborative 
effort fo r creating lexical resources. In Proceed-
ings of the 6th NLP Pacific Rim Symposium Post-
Conference Workshop, Japan. 
Dandapat, S., Mitra, P., and Sarkar, S., 
2006. Statistical investigation of Bengali noun-
verb (N-V) collocations as multi-word-
expressions, In Proceedings of Modeling and 
Shallow Parsing of Indian Languages (MSPIL), 
Mumbai, pp 230-233 
Ekbal, A., and Bandyopadhyay, S., 2008. A web 
based Bengali news corpus for Named Entity 
Recognition, Lang Resources & Evaluation 
(2008) 42:173?182, Springer 
Fletcher, W. H., 2001. Concordancing the web with 
KWiCFinder. In Proceedings of the Third North 
American Symposium on Corpus Linguistics and 
Language Teaching, Boston, MA, 23?25 March 
2001. 
Fletcher, W. H., 2004. Making the web more use-ful 
as source for linguists corpora. In U. Conor & T. 
A. Upton (Eds.), Applied corpus linguists: A mul-
tidimensional perspective (pp. 191?205). Amster-
dam: Rodopi. 
Kilgarriff, A., and Grefenstette, G., 2003. Introduc-
tion to the special issue on the web as corpus. 
Computational Linguistics, 29(3), 333?347. 
Kishorjit, N., and Bandyopadhyay, S., 2010. Identi-
fication of Reduplicated MWEs in Manipuri: A 
Rule Based Approch, In proceedings of 23rd 
International Conference on the Computer 
Processing of Oriental Languages (ICCPOL 
2010) - New Generation in Asian Information 
Processing , Redmond City, CA  
Kunchukuttan, A., and Damani, O. P., 2008. A Sys-
tem for Compound Nouns Multiword Expression 
Extraction for Hindi, In  Proceedings of 6th Inter-
national conference on Natural Language 
Processing (ICON 2008), Pune, India  
Robb, T., 2003. Google as a corpus tool? ETJ 
Journal, 4(1), Spring. 
Rundell, M., 2000. The biggest corpus of all. Huma-
nising Language Teaching, 2(3) 
Singh. Chungkham Y., 2000. Manipuri Grammar, 
Rajesh Publications, Delhi, pp 190-204 
Singh, Thoudam D., Ekbal, A., Bandyopadhyay, S. 
2008. Manipuri POS tagging using CRF and 
SVM: A language independent approach, In pro-
ceeding of 6th International conference on Natural 
Language Processing (ICON -2008), Pune, India, 
pp 240-245 
Singh, Thoudam D., Kishorjit, N., Ekbal, A., Ban-
dyopadhyay, S., 2009. Named Entity Recognition 
for Manipuri using Support Vector Machine, In 
proceedings of 23rd Pacific Asia Conference on 
Language, Information and Computation (PAC-
LIC 23), Hong Kong, pp 811-818 
Singh, Thoudam D., Singh, Yengkhom R. and Ban-
dyopadhyay, S., 2010. Manipuri-English Semi 
Automatic Parallel Corpora Extraction from Web, 
In proceedings of 23rd International Conference 
on the Computer Processing of Oriental Lan-
guages (ICCPOL 2010) - New Generation in 
Asian Information Processing , Redmond City, 
CA 
Vapnik, Vladimir N. 1995: The nature of Statistical 
learning theory. Springer 
42
Proceedings of SSST-4, Fourth Workshop on Syntax and Structure in Statistical Translation, pages 83?91,
COLING 2010, Beijing, August 2010.
Manipuri-English Bidirectional Statistical Machine  
Translation Systems using Morphology and Dependency Relations 
Thoudam Doren Singh 
Department of Computer Science and  
Engineering 
Jadavpur University  
thoudam.doren@gmail.com 
Sivaji Bandyopadhyay 
Department of Computer Science and  
Engineering 
Jadavpur University 
sivaji_cse_ju@yahoo.com 
 
 
 
Abstract 
The present work reports the develop-
ment of Manipuri-English bidirectional 
statistical machine translation systems. In 
the English-Manipuri statistical machine 
translation system, the role of the suffixes 
and dependency relations on the source 
side and case markers on the target side 
are identified as important translation 
factors. A parallel corpus of 10350 sen-
tences from news domain is used for 
training and the system is tested with 500 
sentences. Using the proposed translation 
factors, the output of the translation qual-
ity is improved as indicated by baseline 
BLEU score of 13.045 and factored 
BLEU score of 16.873 respectively. Si-
milarly, for the Manipuri English system, 
the role of case markers and POS tags in-
formation at the source side and suffixes 
and dependency relations at the target 
side are identified as useful translation 
factors. The case markers and suffixes 
are not only responsible to determine the 
word classes but also to determine the 
dependency relations. Using these trans-
lation factors, the output of the transla-
tion quality is improved as indicated by 
baseline BLEU score of 13.452 and fac-
tored BLEU score of 17.573 respectively. 
Further, the subjective evaluation indi-
cates the improvement in the fluency and 
adequacy of both the factored SMT out-
puts over the respective baseline systems. 
 
1 Introduction 
Manipuri has little resource for NLP related re-
search and development activities. Manipuri is a 
less privileged Tibeto-Burman language spoken 
by approximately three million people mainly in 
the state of Manipur in India as well as its neigh-
boring states and in the countries of Myanmar 
and Bangladesh. Some of the unique features of 
this language are tone, the agglutinative verb 
morphology and predominance of aspect than 
tense, lack of grammatical gender, number and 
person. Other features are verb final word order 
in a sentence i.e., Subject Object Verb (SOV) 
order, extensive suffix with more limited prefixa-
tion. In Manipuri, identification of most of the 
word classes and sentence types are based on the 
markers. All sentences, except interrogatives end 
with one of these mood markers, which may or 
may not be followed by an enclitic. Basic sen-
tence types in Manipuri are determined through 
illocutionary mood markers, all of which are 
verbal inflectional suffixes, with the exception of 
the interrogatives that end with an enclitic. Two 
important problems in applying statistical ma-
chine translation (SMT) techniques to English-
Manipuri bidirectional MT systems are: (a) the 
wide syntactic divergence between the language 
pairs, and (b) the richer morphology and case 
marking of Manipuri compared to English. The 
first problem manifests itself in poor word-order 
in the output translations, while the second one 
leads to incorrect inflections and case marking. 
The output Manipuri sentences in case of Eng-
lish-Manipuri system suffer badly when mor-
phology and case markers are incorrect in this 
free word order and morphologically rich lan-
guage. 
83
The parallel corpora used is in news domain 
which have been collected, cleaned and aligned 
(Singh et al , 2010b) from the Sangai Express 
newspaper website www.thesangaiexpress.com 
available in both Manipuri and English. A daily 
basis collection was done covering the period 
from May 2008 to November 2008 since there is 
no repository. 
2 Related Works  
Koehn and Hoang (2007) developed a frame-
work for statistical translation models that tightly 
integrates additional morphological, syntactic, or 
semantic information. Statistical Machine Trans-
lation with scarce resources using morpho-
syntactic information is discussed in (Nie?en and 
Ney, 2004). It introduces sentence level restruc-
turing transformations that aim at the assimila-
tion of word order in related sentences and 
exploitation of the bilingual training data by ex-
plicitly taking into account the interdependencies 
of related inflected forms thereby improving the 
translation quality. Popovic and Ney (2006) dis-
cussed SMT with a small amount of bilingual 
training data. Case markers and morphology are 
used to address the crux of fluency in the Eng-
lish-Hindi SMT system (Ramanathan et al, 
2009). Work on translating from rich to poor 
morphology using factored model is reported in 
(Avramidis and Koehn, 2008). In this method of 
enriching input, the case agreement for nouns, 
adjectives and articles are mainly defined by the 
syntactic role of each phrase. Resolution of verb 
conjugation is done by identifying the person of 
a verb and using the linguistic information tag. 
Manipuri to English Example Based Machine 
Translation system is reported in (Singh and 
Bandyopadhyay, 2010a) on news domain. For 
this, POS tagging, morphological analysis, NER 
and chunking are applied on the parallel corpus 
for phrase level alignment. Chunks are aligned 
using a dynamic programming ?edit-distance 
style? alignment algorithm. The translation 
process initially looks for an exact match in the 
parallel example base and returns the retrieved 
target output. Otherwise, the maximal match 
source sentence is identified. For word level 
mismatch, the unmatched words in the input are 
either translated from the lexicon or translite-
rated. Unmatched phrases are looked into the 
phrase level parallel example base; the target 
phrase translations are identified and then re-
combined with the retrieved output. English-
Manipuri SMT system using morpho-syntactic 
and semantic information is reported in (Singh 
and Bandyopadhyay, 2010c). In this system, the 
role of the suffixes and dependency relations on 
the source side and case markers on the target 
side are identified as important translation fac-
tors. 
3 Syntactic Reordering 
This is a preprocessing step applied to the in-
put English sentences for English-Manipuri SMT 
system. The program for syntactic reordering 
uses the parse trees generated by Stanford parser1 
and applies a handful of reordering rules written 
using perl module Parse::RecDescent. By doing 
this, the SVO order of English is changed to 
SOV order for Manipuri, and post modifiers are 
converted to pre-modifiers. The basic difference 
of Manipuri phrase order compared to English is 
handled by reordering the input sentence follow-
ing the rule (Rao et al, 2000): 
 
SSmV VmOOmCm  ??C'mS'mS'O'mO'V'mV'  
where,    S: Subject 
O: Object 
V : Verb 
Cm: Clause modifier 
X': Corresponding constituent in Manipuri, 
where X is S, O, or V 
Xm: modifier of X 
 
There are two reasons why the syntactic reor-
dering approach improves over the baseline 
phrase-based SMT system (Wang et al, 2007). 
One obvious benefit is that the word order of the 
transformed source sentence is much closer to 
the target sentence, which reduces the reliance on 
the distortion model to perform reordering during 
decoding. Another potential benefit is that the 
alignment between the two sides will be of high-
er quality because of fewer ?distortions? between 
the source and the target, so that the resulting 
phrase table of the reordered system would be 
better. However, a counter argument is that the 
reordering is very error prone, so that the added 
noise in the reordered data actually hurts the 
alignments and hence the phrase tables. 
                                                                 
1 http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/lex-parser.shtml 
84
4 Morphology 
The affixes are the determining factor of the 
word class in Manipuri. In this agglutinative lan-
guage the number of verbal suffixes is more than 
that of nominal suffixes. Works on Manipuri 
morphology are found in (Singh and Bandyo-
padhyay, 2006) and (Singh and Bandyopadhyay, 
2008). In this language, a verb must minimally 
consist of a verb root and an inflectional suffix. 
A noun may be optionally affixed by derivational 
morphemes indicating gender, number and quan-
tity. Further, a noun may be prefixed by a pro-
nominal prefix which indicates its possessor. 
Words in Manipuri consist of stems or bound 
roots with suffixes (from one to ten suffixes), 
prefixes (only one per word) and/or enclitics.  
(a) ?? ????-??  ? ??-? ?      ???? 
Ibomcha-na  Ball-du  kao-i 
Ibomcha-nom Ball-distal kick 
Ibomcha kicks the ball.   
(b) ? ??-? ?  ?? ????-??  ???? 
Ball-du  Ibomcha-na kao-i 
Ball-distal Ibomcha-nom kick 
Ibomcha kicks the ball.   
The identification of subject and object in both 
the sentences are done by the suffixes ?? (na) and 
? ?(du) as given by the examples (a) and (b). The 
case markers convey the right meaning during 
translation though the most acceptable order of 
Manipuri sentence is SOV. In order to produce a 
good translation output all the morphological 
forms of a word and its translations should be 
available in the training data and every word has 
to appear with every possible suffixes. This will 
require a large training data. By learning the gen-
eral rules of morphology, the amount of training 
data could be reduced. Separating lemma and 
suffix allows the system to learn more about the 
different possible word formations.  
 
Manipuri  Gloss English Meaning 
? ????? Tom-na by Tom 
? ????? Tom-dagi from Tom 
? ??? ? Tom-su Tom also 
? ???? Tom-gi of Tom 
? ???? Tom-ga with Tom 
Table 1: Some of the inflected forms of names in 
Manipuri and its corresponding English meaning 
 
Table 1 gives some examples of the inflected 
forms of a person name and its corresponding 
English meaning. The Manipuri stemmer sepa-
rates the case markers such as ??? (-na), -??? (-
dagi), -? ? (-su), -?? (-gi), -?? (-ga) etc. from 
surface forms so that ?? ??? (Tom) from Manipu-
ri side matches with ?Tom? at English side help-
ing to overcome the data sparseness. Enclitics in 
Manipuri fall into six categories: determiners, 
case markers, the copula, mood markers, inclu-
sive / exclusive and pragmatic peak markers and 
attitude markers. The role of the enclitics used 
and its meaning differs based on the context. 
5  Factored Model of Translation 
Using factored approach, a tighter integration of 
linguistic information into the translation model 
is done for two reasons2: 
? Translation models that operate on more 
general representations, such as lemma in-
stead of surface forms of words, can draw on 
richer statistics and overcome the data 
sparseness problem caused by limited train-
ing data. 
? Many aspects of translation can be best ex-
plained at a morphological, syntactic or se-
mantic level. Having such information 
available to the translation model allows the 
direct modeling of these aspects. For in-
stance, reordering at the sentence level is 
mostly driven by general syntactic principles, 
local agreement constraints that show up in 
morphology, etc.  
5.1 Combination of Components in Fac-
tored Model 
Factored translation model is the combination of 
several components including language model, 
reordering model, translation steps and genera-
tion steps in a log-linear model3: 
Z is a normalization constant that is ignored in 
practice. To compute the probability of a transla-
tion e given an input sentence f, we have to eva-
luate each feature function hi. The feature weight 
                                                                 
2http://www.statmt.org/moses/?n=Moses.FactoredModels 
3http://www.statmt.org/moses/?n=Moses.FactoredModels 
 
    
      (1 ) 
85
?i in the log linear model is determined by using 
minimum error rate training method (Och, 2003). 
For a translation step component, each feature 
function ht is defined over the phrase pairs (f j,ej) 
given a scoring function ?:  
 
   
  (2) 
For the generation step component, each fea-
ture function hg given a scoring function ? is de-
fined over the output words ek only: 
 
 
 (3) 
  
5.2 Stanford Dependency Parser  
The dependency relations used in the experiment 
are generated by the Stanford dependency parser 
(Marie-Catherine de Marneffe and Manning, 
2008). This parser uses 55 relations to express 
the dependencies among the various words in a 
sentence. The dependencies are all binary rela-
tions: a grammatical relation holds between a 
governor and a dependent. These relations form a 
hierarchical structure with the most general rela-
tion at the root.  
 
Figure 1. Dependency relation graph of the sen-
tence ?Sources said that Tom was shot by police? 
generated by Stanford Parser 
There are various argument relations like sub-
ject, object, objects of prepositions and clausal 
complements, modifier relations like adjectival, 
adverbial, participial, infinitival modifiers and 
other relations like coordination, conjunct, exple-
tive and punctuation. Let us consider an example 
?Sources said that Tom was shot by police?. 
Stanford parser produces the dependency rela-
tions, nsubj(said, sources) and agent (shot, po-
lice) . Thus, sources|nsubj and police|agent are 
the factors used. ?Tom was shot by police? forms 
the object of the verb ?said?. The Stanford parser 
represents these dependencies with the help of a 
clausal complement relation which links ?said? 
with ?shot? and uses the complementizer relation 
to introduce the subordination conjunction. Fig-
ure 1 shows the dependency relation graph of the 
sentence ?Sources said that Tom was shot by po-
lice?. 
5.3 Factorization approach of English-
Manipuri SMT system 
Manipuri case markers are decided by dependen-
cy relation and aspect information of English. 
Figure 2 shows the translation factors used in the 
translation between English and Manipuri.  
 
(i) Tomba drives the car. 
   ? ?????? ????? ???? 
     Tomba-na car-du thou-i 
    (Tomba)  (the car)  (drives) 
Tomba|empty|nsubj drive|s|empty the|empty|det 
car|empty|dobj 
A subject requires a case marker in a clause 
with a perfective form such as ??? (na). It can be 
represented as, 
suffix+ dependency relation ? case marker  
    s|empty  + empty|dobj ? ?? (na) 
 
(ii) Birds are flying. 
   ????????? ???????  
      ucheksing payri 
     (birds are)  (flying) 
      Bird|s|nsubj are|empty|aux fly|ing|empty 
 
Thus, English-Manipuri factorization consists of  
 
? a lemma to lemma translation factor [i.e., 
Bird ? ???? (uchek) ] 
? a suffix + dependency relation ? suffix [i.e.,  
s + nsubj ? ????? (sing)] 
? a lemma + suffix ? surface form generation 
factor  
[i.e., ???? (uchek) + ????? (sing) ? ????????? 
(ucheksing)] 
said 
source
s 
shot 
that 
Tom was 
Police 
nsubj 
ccomp  
complm 
nsubjpass auxpass 
agent 
86
 
Figure 2. English to Manipuri translation factors 
5.4 Factorization approach of Manipuri-
English SMT system 
Manipuri case markers are responsible to identify 
dependency relation and aspect information of 
English. Figure 3 shows the translation factors 
used in the translation between Manipuri and 
English. The Manipuri- English factorization 
consists of: 
 
? Translation factor: lemma to lemma  
[e.g., ???? (uchek) ? Bird] 
? Translation factor: suffix + POS ? depen-
dency relation + POS + suffix  
[e.g., ????? (sing) + NN ? nsubj + NN + s] 
? Generation factor: lemma + POS + depen-
dency Relation +suffix ? surface form gen-
eration factor  
[e.g., ???? (uchek) + NN  + nsubj + ????? (sing) 
?  ????????? (ucheksing ] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. The Manipuri-English translation factors 
5.5 Syntactically enriched output 
High-order sequence models (just like n-gram 
language models over words) are used in order to 
support syntactic coherence of the output (Koehn 
and Hoang, 2007).  
                 Input             Output 
 
          word                                word 
 
 
                3-gram                       Parts-of-speech 
                
                7-gram 
Figure 4. By generating additional linguistic factors 
on the output side, high-order sequence models over 
these factors support syntactical coherence of the out-
put. 
Adding part-of-speech factor on the output 
side and exploiting them with 7-gram sequence 
models (as shown in Figure 4) results in minor 
improvements in BLEU score. 
6 Experimental Setup 
A number of experiments have been carried out 
using factored translation framework and incor-
porating linguistic information. The toolkits used 
in the experiment are: 
? Stanford Dependency Parser4 was used to (i) 
generate the dependency relations and (ii) 
syntactic reordering of the input English sen-
tences using Parse::RecDescent module. 
? Moses5  toolkit (Koehn, 2007) was used for 
training with GIZA++6, decoding and mini-
mum error rate training (Och, 2003) for tun-
ing. 
? SRILM7 toolkit (Stolcke, 2002) was used to 
build language models with 10350 Manipuri 
sentences for English-Manipuri system and 
four and a half million English wordforms 
collected from the news domain for Manipu-
ri-English system. 
? English morphological analyzer morpha 8 
(Minnen et al, 2001) was used and the 
                                                                 
4 http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/lex-parser.shtml 
5 http://www.statmt.org/moses/ 
6 http://www.fjoch.com/GIZA++.html 
7 http://www.speech.sri.com/projects/srilm 
8  
ftp://ftp.informatics.susx.ac.uk/pub/users/johnca/morph.tar.
gz 
Word 
 
 
Lemma 
 
 
 
Suffix  
 
 
Dependency 
Relation 
Word 
 
 
 
Lemma 
 
 
 
 
Case 
Marker 
 
  Input              Output 
Word 
 
 
Lemma 
 
 
 
POS 
 
 
Suffix/ 
Case 
Marker 
Word 
 
 
Lemma 
 
 
 
POS 
 
 
Dependen-
cy Relation  
 
Suffix 
 
87
stemmer from Manipuri Morphological ana-
lyzer (Singh and Bandyopadhyay, 2006) was 
used for the Manipuri side.  
? Manipuri POS tagger (Singh et. al., 2008) is 
used to tag the POS (Parts of speech) factors 
of the input Manipuri sentences. 
7 Evaluation 
7.1 English-Manipuri SMT System 
The evaluation of the machine translation sys-
tems developed in the present work is done in 
two approaches using automatic scoring with 
reference translation and subjective evaluation as 
discussed in (Ramanathan et al, 2009). 
Evaluation Metrics: 
? NIST (Doddington, 2002): A high score 
means a better translation by measuring the 
precision of n-gram. 
? BLEU (Papineni et al 2002): This metric 
gives the precision of n-gram with respect to 
the reference translation but with a brevity 
penalty.  
 
 No of sentences No of words 
Training 10350 296728 
Development 600 16520 
Test 500 15204 
Table 2. Train ing, development and testing corpus 
statistics 
 
Table 2 shows the corpus statistics used in the 
experiment. The corpus is annotated with the 
proposed factors. The following models are de-
veloped for the experiment. 
Baseline: 
The model is developed using the default setting 
values in MOSES.  
Lemma +Suffix: 
It uses lemma and suffix factors on the source 
side, lemma and suffix on the target side for 
lemma to lemma and suffix to suffix translations 
with generation step of lemma plus suffix to sur-
face form. 
Lemma + Suffix + Dependency Relation: 
Lemma, suffix and dependency relations are used 
on the source side.  The translation steps are (a) 
lemma to lemma (b) suffix + dependency rela-
tion to suffix and generation step is lemma + suf-
fix to surface form. Table 3 shows the BLEU and 
NIST scores of the system using these factors. 
Table 4 shows the BLEU and NIST scores of 
the English-Manipuri SMT systems using lexica-
lized and syntactic reordering.  
 
Model BLEU NIST 
Baseline (surface) 13.045 4.25 
Lemma + Suffix 15.237 4.79 
Lemma + Suffix + De-
pendency Relation 
16.873 5.10 
Table 3. Evaluation Scores of English - Manipuri 
SMT System using various translation factors 
 
Model Reordering BLEU NIST 
Baseline 
(surface) 
 13.045 4.25 
Surface Lexicalized 13.501 4.32 
Surface Syntactic 14.142 4.47 
Table 4. Evaluation Scores of English-Manipuri SMT 
system using Lexicalized and Syntactic Reordering  
 
Input/Output of English-Manipuri SMT: 
 
(1a) Input: Going to school is obligatory for stu-
dents. 
   ???  ????  ?????????? ? ?? ??? ? ???????? | 
    School chatpa shatra-sing-gi touda ya     
    draba mathouni. 
 Baseline output:  ??? ???? ???? ?? ??? 
              school mathou chatpa oy shatra 
     gloss : school duty going is student. 
 Syntactic Reorder output: ??? ??? ???? ? ?? ??? ? 
                 shatra school chatpa touda yadraba 
     gloss: Student school going compulsory.  
 Dependency output: ???????? ??? ???? ???????? 
     shatrasing schoolda chatpa mathouni 
     gloss: Students going to the school is duty. 
 
(1b) Input: Krishna has a flute in his hand.  
           ?????     ????    ? ?????   ??? ?? | 
                 Krishna-gi khut-ta toudri ama lei. 
 Syntactic Reorder output:  ??? ?? ???? ??? ? ?????  
                           Krishna lei khut ama toudri 
      gloss : Krishna has a hand flute 
 Dependency output: ????? ?? ? ????? ??? ????  
                           krishnagi lei toudri ama  khutta   
      gloss : Krishna has a flute in his hand 
88
One of the main aspects required for the fluen-
cy of a sentence is agreement. Certain words 
have to match in gender, case, number, person 
etc. within a sentence. The rules of agreement are 
language dependent and are closely linked to the 
morphological structure of language. Subjective 
evaluations on 100 sentences have been per-
formed for fluency and adequacy by two judges. 
The fluency measures how well formed the sen-
tences are at the output and adequacy measures 
the closeness of the output sentence with the ref-
erence translation. The Table 5 and Table 6 show 
the adequacy and fluency scales used for evalua-
tion and Table 7 shows the scores of the evalua-
tion. 
 
Level Interpretation 
4 Full meaning is conveyed 
3 Most of the meaning is conveyed 
2 Poor meaning is conveyed 
1 No meaning is conveyed 
Table 5. Adequacy scale 
 
Level Interpretation 
4 Flawless with no grammatical error  
3 Good output with minor errors 
2 Disfluent ungrammatical with correct 
phrase 
1 Incomprehensible 
Table 6. Fluency scale 
 
 Sentence 
length 
Fluency Adequacy 
Baseline <=15 
words 
1.95 2.24 
>15 words 1.49 1.75 
Reordered <=15 
words 
2.58 2.75 
>15 words 1.82 1.96 
Dependency 
Relation 
<=15 
words 
2.83 2.91 
>15 words 1.94 2.10 
Table 7. Scale o f Fluency and Adequacy on sentence 
length basis of English-Manipuri SMT system 
7.2 Manipuri-English SMT System 
The system uses the corpus statistics shown in 
Table 2. The corpus is annotated with the pro-
posed factors. The following models are devel-
oped for the experiment. The baseline and 
lemma+suffix systems follow same factors as 
English-Manipuri.  
Lemma + Suffix + POS: 
Lemma, suffix and POS are used on the source 
side.  The translation steps are (a) lemma to 
lemma (b) suffix + POS to POS + suffix + de-
pendency relation and generation step is lemma 
+ suffix + POS + dependency relation to surface 
form. 
 
Model BLUE NIST 
Baseline (surface) 13.452 4.31 
Lemma + Suffix 16.137 4.89 
Lemma + Suffix + POS 17.573 5.15 
Table 8. Evaluation Scores of Manipuri-English SMT 
system using various translation factors 
 
Table 8 shows the BLEU and NIST scores of 
the Manipuri-English systems using the different 
factors. Table 9 shows the scores of using lexica-
lized reordering and POS language model. 
 
Model BLUE NIST 
Baseline + POS LM 14.341 4.52 
Baseline + Lexicalized 13.743 4.46 
Baseline + Lexicalized 
+POS LM 
14.843 4.71 
Table 9. Evaluation Scores of Manipuri-English SMT 
system using Lexicalized reordering and POS Lan-
guage Model 
 
Input/Output of Manipuri-English SMT: 
 
 (2a) Input: ??? ???? ?????????? ? ?? ??? ? ???????? | 
     gloss: School chatpa shatra-sing-gi touda 
yadraba mathouni. 
     Going to school is obligatory for students. 
Baseline output: school going to the students 
important 
Lexicalized Reordered output: school going 
important to the students 
Lemma+Suffix+POS+lexicalized reordered 
output: School going important to the students 
 
(2b) Input: ????? ???? ? ????? ??? ?? | 
     gloss: Krishna-gi khut-ta toudri ama lei. 
     Krishna has a flute in his hand.  
 Baseline output: Krishna is flute and hand  
Lexicalized Reordered output: Krishna flute 
has his hand  
89
Lemma+Suffix+POS+lexicalized reordered 
output: Krishna has flute his hand 
By considering the lemma along with suffix 
and POS factors, the fluency and adequacy of the 
output is better addressed as given by the sample 
input and output (2a) and (2b) over the baseline 
system. Using the Manipuri stemmer, the case 
markers and suffixes are taken into account for 
different possible word forms thereby helping to 
overcome the data sparseness problem. Table 10 
shows the scores of adequacy and fluency of the 
evaluation. 
 
 Sentence 
length 
Fluency Adequacy 
Baseline <=15 
words 
1.93 2.31 
>15 words 1.51 1.76 
Reordered <=15 
words 
2.48 2.85 
>15 words 1.83 1.97 
Lemma + 
Suffix  
+ POS 
<=15 
words 
2.86 2.92 
>15 words 2.01 2.11 
Table 10. Scale of Fluency and Adequacy on sen-
tence length basis of Manipuri-English SMT system 
Subjective evaluations on 100 sentences have 
been performed for fluency and adequacy. In the 
process of subjective evaluation, sentences were 
judged on fluency, adequacy and the number of 
errors in case marking/morphology. It is ob-
served that poor word-order makes the baseline 
output almost incomprehensible, while lexica-
lized reordering solves the problem correctly 
along with parts-of-speech language model (POS 
LM). Statistical significant test is performed to 
judge if a change in score that comes from a 
change in the system reflects a change in overall 
translation quality. It is found that all the differ-
ences are significant at the 99% level. 
8 Discussion 
The factored approach using the proposed factors 
show improved fluency and adequacy at the Ma-
nipuri output for English-Manipuri system as 
shown in the Table 6. Using the Stanford gener-
ated relations shows an improvement in terms of 
fluency and adequacy for shorter sentences than 
the longer ones.  
Input : Khamba pushed the stone with a lever. 
       ?????? ???????? ??? ?? ????????? | 
Outputs: 
Syntactic Reordered: ???? ??? ??????  ?? ???????? | 
 Khamba nung jamfat adu illi 
gloss:  Khamba stone the lever push 
Dependency: ?????? ??? ?? ????????? ??????? | 
 Khambana nung adu jamfatna illi 
gloss: Khamba the stone pushed with lever 
 
By the use of semantic relation, ?? (na) is at-
tached to ???? (Khamba), which makes the mean-
ing ??????  ?by Khamba?  instead of  just ???? 
?Khamba?. 
Input : Suddenly the woman burst into tears. 
       ??? ???? ??? ????? ????? ?????????? | 
Outputs: 
Syntactic Reordered: ???? ???? ????????? ????? | 
 Nupi thuna pirang-ga kappi 
gloss: woman soon tears cry 
Dependency:  ?? ??? ????? ????????? | 
 Athubada nupidu kaplammi 
gloss: suddenly the woman cried 
 
Here, in this example, the ???? (nupi) is suf-
fixed by the ?? (du), to produce ????? ??the wom-
an? instead of just ???? ?woman?. 
The factored approach of Manipuri-English 
SMT system also shows improved BLEU and 
NIST scores using the proposed factors as shown 
in Table 8 not only gain in fluency and adequacy 
scores as shown in Table 10.  
9 Conclusion 
A framework for Manipuri and English bidirec-
tional SMT system using factored model is expe-
rimented with a goal to improve the translation 
output and reduce the amount of training data. 
The output of the translation is improved by in-
corporating morphological information and se-
mantic relations by tighter integration. The 
systems are evaluated using automatic scoring 
techniques BLEU and NIST. The subjective 
evaluation of the systems is done to find out the 
fluency and adequacy. The fluency and adequacy 
are also addressed better for the shorter sentences 
than the longer ones using semantic relations. 
The improvement is statistically significant. 
 
90
References  
Avramidis, E. and Koehn, P. 2008. Enriching mor-
phologically poor languages for Statistical Machine 
Translation, Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT 
 
Callison-Burch, Chris., Osborne, M. and Koehn, P. 
2006. Re-evaluating the Role of Bleu in Machine 
Translation Research" In Proceedings of EACL-
2006 
 
Doddington, G. 2002. Automat ic evaluation of Ma-
chine Translation quality using n-gram co-
occurrence statistics. In Proceedings of HLT 2002, 
San Diego, CA. 
 
Koehn. P., and Hoang, H. 2007.  Factored Translation 
Models, In Proceedings of EMNLP-2007 
 
Koehn, P., Hieu, H., Alexandra, B., Chris, C., Marcel-
lo, F., Nicola, B., Brooke, C., Wade, S., Christine, 
M., Richard, Z., Chris, D., Ondrej, B., A lexandra, 
C., Evan, H. 2007. Moses: Open Source Toolkit  for 
Statistical Machine Translation, Proceedings of the 
ACL 2007 Demo and Poster Sessions, pages 177?
180, Prague. 
 
Marie-Catherine de Marneffe and Manning, C. 2008.  
Stanford Typed Dependency Manual 
 
Minnen, G., Carro ll, J., and Pearce, D. 2001. Applied 
Morphological Processing of English, Natural 
Language Engineering, 7(3), pages 207-223 
 
Nie?en, S., and Ney, H. 2004. Statistical Machine 
Translation with Scarce Resources Using Morpho-
syntactic Information, Computational Linguistics, 
30(2), pages 181-204 
 
Och, F. 2003. Minimum error rate train ing in Statis-
tical Machine Translation , Proceedings of ACL 
 
Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Ward, T., and Zhu, W. 
2002. BLEU: a method for automat ic evaluation of 
machine translation. In Proceedings of 40th  ACL, 
Philadelphia, PA 
 
Popovic, M., and Ney, H. 2006.  Statistical Machine 
Translation with a s mall amount of bilingual train-
ing data, 5th LREC SALTMIL Workshop on Minor-
ity Languages 
Ramanathan, A., Choudhury, H., Ghosh, A., and 
Bhattacharyya, P. 2009. Case markers and Mor-
phology: Addressing the crux of the fluency prob-
lem in  English-Hindi SMT, Proceedings of the 
Joint Conference of the 47th Annual Meeting of the 
ACL and the 4th International Joint Conference on 
Natural Language Processing of the AFNLP: Vo-
lume 2, pages: 800-808  
 
Rao, D., Mohanraj, K., Hegde, J., Mehta, V. and Ma-
hadane, P. 2000. A practical framework for syntac-
tic transfer of compound-complex sentences for 
English-Hindi Machine Translation, Proceedings 
of KBCS 2000, pages 343-354 
 
Singh, Thoudam D., and Bandyopadhyay, S. 2006. 
Word Class and Sentence Type Identification in  
Manipuri Morphological Analyzer, Proceeding of 
Modeling and Shallow Parsing of Indian Languag-
es(MSPIL) 2006, IIT Bombay, pages 11-17, Mum-
bai, India  
 
Singh, Thoudam D., and Bandyopadhyay, S. 2008. 
Morphology Driven Manipuri POS Tagger,  In pro-
ceedings International Joint Conference on Natu-
ral Language Processing (IJCNLP-08) Workshop 
on Natural Language Processing of Less Privi-
leged Languages (NLPLPL) 2008, pages 91-98, 
Hyderabad, India  
 
Singh, Thoudam D., and Bandyopadhyay, S. 2010a. 
Manipuri-English Example Based Machine Trans-
lation System, International Journal of Computa-
tional Linguistics and Applications (IJCLA), ISSN 
0976-0962, pages 147-158 
 
Singh, Thoudam D., Singh, Yengkhom R. and Ban-
dyopadhyay, S., 2010b. Manipuri-English Semi 
Automatic Parallel Corpora Extraction from Web, 
In proceedings of 23rd International Conference 
on the Computer Processing of Oriental Languag-
es (ICCPOL 2010) - New Generation in Asian In-
formation Processing , San Francisco Bay, CA, 
USA, Pages 45-48 
Singh, Thoudam D. and Bandyopadhyay, S., 2010c. 
Statistical Machine Translation of English-
Manipuri using Morpho-Syntactic and Semantic 
Information, In  the proceedings of Ninth Confe-
rence  of the Association for Machine Translation 
in Americas (AMTA 2010), Denver, Colorado, 
USA. (To appear) 
Stolcke. A. 2002. SRILM - An Extensible Language 
Modeling Toolkit. In  Proc. Intl. Conf. Spoken Lan-
guage Processing, Denver, Colorado, September.  
 
Wang, C., Collin,  M., and Koehn, P. 2007. Ch inese 
syntactic reordering for statistical machine transla-
tion, Proceedings of EMNLP-CoNLL 
91
Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Syntax, Semantics and Structure in Statistical Translation, pages 11?18,
Atlanta, Georgia, 13 June 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Taste of Two Different Flavours: Which Manipuri Script Works Better 
for English-Manipuri Language Pair SMT Systems? 
 
 
Thoudam Doren Singh 
Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (CDAC), Mumbai 
Gulmohor Cross Road No 9, Juhu 
Mumbai-400049, INDIA 
thoudam.doren@gmail.com 
 
 
 
Abstract 
The statistical machine translation (SMT) sys-
tem heavily depends on the sentence aligned 
parallel corpus and the target language model. 
This paper points out some of the core issues 
on switching a language script and its reper-
cussion in the phrase based statistical machine 
translation system development. The present 
task reports on the outcome of English-
Manipuri language pair phrase based SMT 
task on two aspects ? a) Manipuri using Ben-
gali script, b) Manipuri using transliterated 
Meetei Mayek script. Two independent views 
on Bengali script based SMT and transliter-
ated Meitei Mayek based SMT systems of the 
training data and language models are pre-
sented and compared. The impact of various 
language models is commendable in such sce-
nario. The BLEU and NIST score shows that 
Bengali script based phrase based SMT 
(PBSMT) outperforms over the Meetei Mayek 
based English to Manipuri SMT system. 
However, subjective evaluation shows slight 
variation against the automatic scores. 
 
1 Introduction 
The present finding is due to some issue of socio-
linguistics phenomenon called digraphia - a case of 
Manipuri language (a resource constrained Indian 
languages spoken mainly in the state of Manipur) 
using two different scripts namely Bengali script1 
                                                          
1
 http://unicode.org/charts/PDF/U0980.pdf 
and Meetei Mayek2. Meetei Mayek (MM) is the 
original script which was used until the 18th cen-
tury to represent Manipuri text. Its earliest use is 
dated between the 11th and 12th centuries CE3. 
Manipuri language is recognized by the Indian Un-
ion and has been included in the list of 8th sched-
uled languages by the 71st amendment of the 
constitution in 1992. In the recent times, the Ben-
gali script is getting replaced by Meetei Mayek at 
schools, government departments and other admin-
istrative activities. It may be noted that Manipuri is 
the only Tibeto-Burman language which has its 
own script. Digraphia has implications in language 
technology as well despite the issues of language 
planning, language policy and language ideology. 
There are several examples of languages written in 
one script that was replaced later by another script. 
Some of the examples are Romanian which origi-
nally used Cyrillic then changed to Latin; Turkish 
and Swahili began with the Arabic then Latin, and 
many languages of former Soviet Central Asia, 
which abandoned the Cyrillic script after the disso-
lution of the USSR. The present study is a typical 
case where the natural language processing of an 
Indian language is affected in case of switching 
script. 
Manipuri is a monosyllabic, morphologically 
rich and highly agglutinative in nature. Tone is 
very prominent. So, a special treatment of these 
tonal words is absolutely necessary. Manipuri lan-
guage has 6 vowels and their tone counterparts and 
6 diphthongs and their tone counterparts. Thus, a 
                                                          
2
 http://unicode.org/charts/PDF/UABC0.pdf 
3
 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Meitei_language 
11
Manipuri learner should know its tone system and 
the corresponding word meaning.  
Natural language processing tasks for Manipuri 
language is at the initial phase. We use a small par-
allel corpus and a sizable monolingual corpus col-
lected from Manipuri news to develop English-
Manipuri statistical machine translation system. 
The Manipuri news texts are in Bengali script. So, 
we carry out transliteration from Bengali script to 
Meetei Mayek as discussed in section 3. Typically, 
transliteration is carried out between two different 
languages ?one as a source and the other as a tar-
get. But, in our case, in order to kick start the MT 
system development, Bengali script (in which most 
of the digital Manipuri text are available) to Meetei 
Mayek transliteration is carried out using different 
models. The performance of the rule based translit-
eration is improved by integrating the conjunct and 
syllable handling module in the present rule based 
task along with transliteration unit (TU). However, 
due to the tonal characteristic of this language, 
there is loss of accents for the tonal words when 
getting translated from Bengali script. In other 
words, there is essence of intonation in Manipuri 
text; the differentiation between Bengali characters 
such as ? (i) and ? (ee) or ?  (u) and ?  (oo) cannot 
be made using Meetei Mayek. This increases the 
lexical ambiguity on the transliterated Manipuri 
words in Meetei Mayek script. 
 
2 Related Work  
Several SMT systems between English and mor-
phologically rich languages are reported. (Tou-
tonova et al, 2007) reported the improvement of 
an SMT by applying word form prediction models 
from a stem using extensive morphological and 
syntactic information from source and target lan-
guages. Contributions using factored phrase based 
model and a probabilistic tree transfer model at 
deep syntactic layer are made by (Bojar and Haji?, 
2008) of English-to-Czech SMT system. (Yeniterzi 
and Oflazer, 2010) reported syntax-to-morphology 
mapping in factored phrase-based Statistical Ma-
chine Translation (Koehn and Hoang, 2007) from 
English to Turkish relying on syntactic analysis on 
the source side (English) and then encodes a wide 
variety of local and non-local syntactic structures 
as complex structural tags which appear as addi-
tional factors in the training data. On the target side 
(Turkish), they only perform morphological analy-
sis and disambiguation but treat the complete com-
plex morphological tag as a factor, instead of 
separating morphemes. (Bojar et al, 2012) pointed 
out several pitfalls when designing factored model 
translation setup. All the above systems have been 
developed using one script for each language at the 
source as well as target. 
Manipuri is a relatively free word order where 
the grammatical role of content words is largely 
determined by their case markers and not just by 
their positions in the sentence. Machine Transla-
tion systems of Manipuri and English is reported 
by (Singh and Bandyopadhyay, 2010b) on devel-
opment of English-Manipuri SMT system using 
morpho-syntactic and semantic information where 
the target case markers are generated based on the 
suffixes and semantic relations of the source sen-
tence. The above mentioned system is developed 
using Bengali script based Manipuri text. SMT 
systems between English and morphologically rich 
highly agglutinative language suffer badly if the 
adequate training and language resource is not 
available. Not only this, it is important to note that 
the linguistic representation of the text has implica-
tions on several NLP aspects not only in machine 
translations systems. This is our first attempt to 
build and compare English-Manipuri language pair 
SMT systems using two different scripts of Ma-
nipuri. 
3 Transliterated Parallel Corpora 
The English-Manipuri parallel corpora and Ma-
nipuri monolingual corpus collected from the news 
website www.thesangaiexpress.com are based on 
Bengali script. The Bengali script has 52 conso-
nants and 12 vowels. The modern-day Meetei 
Mayek script is made up of a core repertoire of 27 
letters, alongside letters and symbols for final con-
sonants, dependent vowel signs, punctuation, and 
digits. Meetei Mayek is a Brahmic script with con-
sonants bearing the inherent vowel and vowel ma-
tras modifying it. However, unlike most other 
Brahmi-derived scripts, Meetei Mayek employs 
explicit final consonants which contain no final 
vowels. The use of the killer (which refers to its 
function of killing the inherent vowel of a conso-
nant letter) is optional in spelling; for example, 
while ?? may be read dara or dra, ??? must be read 
dra. Syllable initial combinations for vowels can 
12
occur in modern usage to represent diphthongs.  
The Meetei Mayek has 27 letters (Iyek Ipee), 8 
dependent vowel signs (Cheitap Iyek), 8 final con-
sonants (Lonsum Iyek), 10 digits (Cheising Iyek) 
and 3 punctuation (Cheikhei, Lum Iyek and Apun 
Iyek).  
 
Bengali 
Script 
Meetei Mayek 
, , 	,  
 K (Sam) 
,  e (Na) 
,  f (Til) 
,  F (Thou) 
,  \ (Yang) 
,  r (Dil) 
,  R (Dhou) 
,  B (Un) 
, 