Developing a Typology of Dialogue Acts: Some Boundary Problems 
Tiit Hennoste 
Department of Estonian and 
Finno-Ugric Linguistics 
University of Tartu 
50409 Tartu, Estonia 
hennoste@ut.ee 
Krista Strandson 
Department of Estonian and 
Finno-Ugric Linguistics 
University of Tartu 
50409 Tartu, Estonia 
ks@ut.ee 
Mare Koit 
Institute of Computer Science 
University of Tartu 
50409 Tartu, Estonia 
koit@ut.ee 
 
Maret Valdisoo 
Institute of Computer Science 
University of Tartu 
50409 Tartu, Estonia 
maret@ut.ee 
Andriela R??bis 
Department of Estonian and 
Finno-Ugric Linguistics 
University of Tartu 
50409 Tartu, Estonia 
andriela@ut.ee  
Evely Vutt 
Institute of Computer Science 
University of Tartu 
50409 Tartu, Estonia 
nurm@ut.ee 
 
 
Keywords: spoken dialogue, typology of dialogue 
acts, annotation 
Abstract 
The paper gives an overview of a typo-
logy of dialogue acts used for annotating 
Estonian spoken dialogues. Several prob-
lems of the classification and determining 
of dialogue acts are considered. Our fur-
ther aim is to develop a dialogue system 
which can interact with the user in natural 
language following the norms and rules of 
human-human communication. 
1 Introduction 
The paper describes a typology of dialogue acts we 
use for annotating of Estonian dialogues. The prob-
lems of classifying and determining dialogue acts 
are considered. Our aim is to develop a typology of 
dialogue acts which is general, not domain- or 
problem-oriented and can be used for annotating 
both spoken human-human and human-machine 
dialogues. Our main goal is to model natural dia-
logue on the computer. Underlying our solutions is 
the presupposition that the computer is one of the 
dialogue participants. Still, the computer has some 
restrictions in its work, and human-computer dia-
logues are simpler than human-human ones. Nev-
ertheless, natural dialogue corpora can be used for 
dialogue systems development, a distilling method 
can be implemented to simplify the real dialogues 
(J?nsson, Dahlb?ck 2000). 
2 Principles of Classification 
There are several requirements for developing a 
dialogue act system for dialogue analysis. First, the 
acts that people use in actual conversations must be 
found. Secondly, the act system must make it pos-
sible to differentiate functions. Thirdly, the typol-
ogy must make it possible to differentiate 
utterances with the same linguistic realisation but 
with different functions. 
There are several well-known typologies of dia-
logue acts (Sinclair, Coulthard 1975, Francis, Hun-
ston 1992, Stenstr?m 1994, Bunt 1999, Stolcke et 
al 2000, Dybkj?r 2000, Allwood et al2001, 
Mengel et al2001). We have decided to develop 
our own dialogue act system because no typology 
seemed to fully correspond to our needs.  
The principles underlying our typology are the 
same as for other coding schemes (Edwards 1995). 
Three types of principles are used: 1) category de-
sign, 2) readability, 3) computer manipulation. 
The first type is important for our current study. 
There are three features in designing this group: 
categories must be systematically discriminable, 
exhaustive, and systematically contrastive.  
The first means that for each event in the data 
and each category it must be clear whether or not 
the category applies.  
Exhaustibility means that for each particular 
case in the data there must be a fitting category 
(even if only ?miscellaneous?). For that reason, 
every type in our typology contains a subtype 
?other? which is used for annotating the things we 
are not interested in at the moment, or are not able 
to determine exactly.  
Contrastivity needs some more discussion. 
When categories are treated as exclusive alterna-
tives, the categories partially determine each 
other?s boundaries. When categories are not mutu-
ally exclusive, as with speech act (or dialogue act) 
categories, there is an implicit contrast between the 
presence and the absence of each individual con-
ceptual property. The researcher?s task in choosing 
a set of descriptive categories for coding is to ex-
ploit the contrastiveness of categories, that is, to 
choose categories which contrast in ways which 
are most likely to reveal the properties of interest 
in the research (Edwards 1995: 21-22). 
Why are we developing a new typology? In our 
opinion, the categories used by most of the typolo-
gies are too general. For example, the communica-
tion management or acknowledgement can not 
form only one category, i.e. a unit with one func-
tion. Conversation studies have found out a more 
detailed classification of utterance functions. A 
typology must to take in account such classifica-
tion. 
Our typology departs from the point of view of 
conversation analysis (CA) that focuses on the 
techniques used by people themselves when they 
are actually engaged in social interaction. This it is 
an empirical, inductive analysis of conversation 
data (see e.g. Hutchby, Fooffitt 1998).  
An advantage of this approach is the fact that 
CA departs from empirical data, i.e. it tries to find 
out markers in the text that allow the determination 
of utterance functions. In our opinion, it is 
especially important for human-computer 
interaction. On the other side, CA implements only 
microanalysis, it does not use a previously ready-
made typology of dialogue acts but tries to analyse 
every dialogue act as it would be unique. 
Still, the most part of our typology coincidences 
with the existing typologies. Interpretation of 
communication management and of relations be-
tween turns is different, and these differences form 
a methodological basis for the new taxonomy. 
The departing point of the CA is that a partner 
always must react to previous turn regardless of 
his/her own plans and strategies. Therefore the 
analysis of relations between two turns is central. 
This is the reason why we do not start our typology 
with determination of forward-looking and back-
ward-looking acts but differentiate adjacency pair 
relations from non-adjacency pair relations. 
Some classes of dialogue acts conventionally 
form adjacency pairs (AP) where producing the 
first act makes the second act relevant. There are 
differences between the first and second part. A 
conceded first part requires certain second part 
(e.g. a question requires an answer). The second 
part of an AP has certain relevant position in dia-
logue (e.g. the answer to a question must come 
after the end of the question, not earlier, not later). 
In real conversations there are a lot of violations of 
this norm. For example, one can answer a question 
immediately after a questioning word of the part-
ner or there may be insertion sequences between 
the parts. In some cases, the second part remains 
missing. Still, the second part remains relevant 
even if it is not produced in the next turn.  
It means that norms followed by participants 
form the basis of conversation. Still, participants 
may violate norms. In this case they give a signal 
to the partner. We suppose that the computer as a 
dialogue participant must follow the norms and 
recognise signals of violations of the norms by the 
partner. The computer must be able to differentiate 
the first part of an AP (which is expecting a reac-
tion) from acts that do not need a reaction, e.g. 
questions from narrative or real questions from 
rhetorical questions that do not expect any reac-
tion. Thus, the first basis of the act typology is: the 
acts forming APs must be differentiated from the 
acts that do not form APs. 
Such a system allows to relate antecedents and 
responses and analyse such types of turns 
/utterances that are located between a question and 
an answer (insertions sequences). 
Secondly, acts used in dialogue are typically 
divided into two groups: information acts and dia-
logue managing acts. In our opinion, communica-
tion management is not one function but there are 
different functions. The most important is repair 
that means solving all the communication or lin-
guistic problems (cf. Schegloff, Jefferson, Sacks 
1977, for Estonian Hennoste 2000-2001:2689-
2710, 179-183, Strandson 2001). Human-human 
communication can not be fluent in principle. In 
human-computer interaction, the computer must be 
able to differentiate a problem solving act from an 
information act or fluent interaction. It is essential 
because some information acts and repair acts have 
similar form (e.g. almost all initiations of repairs 
are questions). This gives us the following differ-
ence from the existing typologies: the dialogue 
managing acts must be divided into 1) fluent con-
versation managing acts and 2) acts for solving 
communication problems or repair acts. 
Based on the category design principles and the 
two principles of dialogical communication, we 
differentiate 8 groups of dialogue acts in our typol-
ogy: 1) Rituals (greeting, thanking etc), 2) Restruc-
turing acts (used to change a topic or a type of 
activity, e.g. from small talk to meeting), 3) Con-
tact control, 4) Repair, 5) Questions and answers, 
6) Directives (request, etc), 7) Opinions (assertion, 
argument etc), 8) Other acts (that do not form 
APs). The overall number of dialogue acts is 137. 
An overview of the typology is given in appendix 
1. 
Let us concentrate now on acts of groups 5 and 
6, i.e. question and directive APs.  
3 Corpus 
The corpus of spoken Estonian forms the basis of 
our study. It consists of various types of oral 
speech, usage of both everyday and institutional 
conversation, spontaneous and planned speech, 
monologues and dialogues, face-to-face interaction 
and media texts (Hennoste et al2001). The corpus 
is transcribed by the transcription of CA.  
For this paper we have analysed calls to 
information (asking phone numbers, addresses 
etc), and calls and face-to-face conversations in 
travel bureaus.1 Those two activity types are quite 
similar. Both are institutional dialogues where the 
caller/customer asks for information and the con-
sultant tries to provide the wanted information. 
Participants are strangers. Face-to-face interaction 
                                                           
1
 The activity type typology in our corpus is characterised by 
the following general parameters (see Hennoste et al2001): 1. 
Face-to-face, telephone, media. 2. Primary goal: involved/task 
oriented-information. 3. Everyday/ institutional communica-
tion. 4. Monologue/dialogue 5. Spontaneous/pre-planned text. 
6. Participants are familiars/strangers. 
takes place in the institutional territory (travel bu-
reau). The text of the participants is partly pre-
planned (the client has thought beforehand what to 
ask and the consultant has given the same informa-
tion several times). At the same time there are 
some differences, too. The travel bureau dialogues 
are consultations where a lot of questions are 
asked. The calls to information typically contain 
only one fixed question.  
The sub-corpus we have used for the analysis 
consists of 114 texts, each of which is annotated by 
two different annotators and then unified. Our sub-
corpus has 5815 dialogue act tags, among them 
308 first parts and 258 second parts of directives, 
633 questions and 1081 answers.  
4 Questions and Directives 
Some typologies we have studied make a differ-
ence between questions and directives, some do 
not (e.g. Bunt 1999). Sometimes questions and 
directives are differentiated on the basis whether 
the user needs some information (then it is ques-
tion) or he/she wants to influence the hearer?s fu-
ture non-communicative actions (then it is 
directive). Our departing point is that it is not im-
portant for dialogue continuation whether the 
hearer must to do something outside of current dia-
logue or not. He/she must react to both a question 
and a directive because both are the first parts of 
APs. The second part of AP can be verbal (as in 
our dialogues) or non-verbal (some action). It can 
come immediately after the first part of AP or later. 
Additionally, the response can influence the course 
of dialogue (e.g. determine the structure of the 
partner?s next turn). The main difference between 
directives and questions is formal ? questions have 
special explicit form in Estonian (interrogatives, 
intonation, specific word order) but directives do 
not have it. Imperative directive expressions occur 
seldom in our dialogues. 
On the other hand, there are interrogative utter-
ances that are used not to ask an information ques-
tion but to initiate repair, to form a rhetoric 
question, contact control, conventional questions 
(how are you?). Those utterances are excluded 
from question-answer APs in our typology. 
4.1 Types of Questions and Answers 
There are three types of questions depending on 
the expected reaction: 
- questions expecting giving information: 
open (wh-)question, open (declarative) 
yes/no question 
- questions expecting agreement/refusal: 
closed yes/no question, question that offers 
answer 
- questions expecting the choice of an alter-
native: alternative question. 
Additionally, we have the question type Other. 
We differentiate two sub-groups in the first and 
third group because from one side they have for-
mal specific features and from the other side there 
are particular problems with boundary determina-
tion (see also Hennoste 2003). Open yes/no ques-
tion and closed yes/no question have similar form 
but they expect different reactions from the an-
swerer (e.g. Are you open in winter? expects the 
answer yes or no, but by asking Is there a bus that 
arrives in Tallinn after 8? the questioner wants to 
know the departure times of buses). 
The computer must be able to differentiate the 
two types of questions. There are no formal differ-
ences thus other criteria must be found. 
The first observation is that these questions oc-
cur in different parts of a dialogue. Most of open 
yes/no questions are the second parts of series of 
questions that express the main line, the same 
topic.  
Most of the closed yes/no questions have the 
function of specifying questions in our dialogues, 
and there are some that initiate repair (Hennoste 
2003). 
Secondly, how does the computer understand 
that something is wrong? For this purpose text 
characteristics can be found in human-human dia-
logues where the interpretations of participants are 
different. There are no examples in our corpus 
where the answerer interprets a closed question as 
an open one. Still, there are some examples where 
an open question is interpreted as a closed one and 
only yes or no answer is used instead of giving 
more information. There are two possibilities to 
solve the problem in the dialogues of our corpus.  
The first possibility is that the client asks a 
specifying question immediately (example 1, the 
participants are: H ? client, V ? consultant). 2 
                                                           
2
 To simplify the picture, only those acts are marked in exam-
ples, which are connected with question-answer pairs and are 
relevant for the analysis of the example. Dialogue act names 
are written in capitals. Transcription marks cf. appendix 2. 
(1) H: ahah .hh kas teil on ming-
isugune (.) ?veebiaadress  ka ole-
mas kus saab (.) [infot.]  
OPEN YES/NO QUESTION  
do you have any www-address too where to get 
information 
V: [jaa?] AGREEING YES  (.) {-} 
 yes 
H: ?mis see ?oleks.  SPECIFYING 
QUESTION  
 what is it 
V: ?tlen kohe?(0.5) ?kolm 
dabl?juud,  OPEN ANSWER: GIVING 
INFORMATION  
 I will say at once three dabljuus /.../ 
 
The second possibility is that the yes/no answer 
is followed by a long pause, and only then the in-
formation is given by the answerer (example 2). 
The necessary length of pause needs additional 
study. On the other side, these types of questions 
are used in different positions in Estonian dia-
logues.  
 
(2) H: {ahah} (0.5) ja on seal ka 
mingisuguseid ?sporditegemise v?i-
malusi.  OPEN YES/NO QUESTION 
 and are there any possibilities to do sport 
V: ikka on.  AGREEING YES   
 yes there are 
 (1.0)  
 ?palli {m?ngida saab ja 
?piljardit siis=ja ?keeglit=ja} 
v?i vabandust=e (.) ee seda 
?sulgpalli=ja  OPEN ANSWER: GIVING 
INFORMATION 
 one could play ball and billiards and bowl-
ing and or sorry that badminton=and 
 
The second type of questions (expecting agree-
ment/refusal) can be divided into two sub-types: 
closed yes-no question, and question that offers 
answer (e.g. see ?seitseteist kolmk?mend on k?ige 
?ilisem v?i /is the seventeen thirty the latest/). The 
questioner has some opinion, hypothesis and 
he/she is expecting confirmation by the partner. 
These sub-types can be differentiated on basis of 
different linguistic realisations in Estonian. 
There are 237 wh-questions, 123 closed yes-no 
questions, 73 open yes-no questions, 153 questions 
that offer answer, 45 alternative questions in our 
analysed corpus. 
Certain questions are closely connected with 
certain answers:  
- wh-questions and open yes/no-questions 
 
 open answers: giving information / 
missing information; 
- closed yes/no-questions and questions that 
offer answer 
 
 closed answers: yes / no / 
agreeing no / other yes/no-answer; 
- alternative questions 
 
 alternative an-
swers: one / both / third choice / negative / 
other alternative answer.  
In addition, there are some answers that could be 
used with different questions: postponing the an-
swer (one minute please, I will look at once), an-
swering with the question (Q: what do you think? 
A: and what do you think?), refusing to answer (Q: 
do you have some tours to South-Estonia? A: we 
don?t organise the tours at all), the answer that 
gives alternatives (the answer to the wh-question 
or yes/no question where more than one alternative 
is given that makes the customer decide himself or 
to ask specifying questions), the unsure answer (I 
am not sure, ...I think so, but...). 
4.2 Types of Directives and Reactions to them 
The first parts of directive APs are request, pro-
posal and offer. A request expresses the author?s 
need or intent to get something (information or an 
action by partner). The utterances that have the 
form of requests can sometimes manage conversa-
tion. Such acts belong to the corresponding groups 
in our typology and are not considered here.  
In example 3 H informs V that he wishes to 
speak with a certain person. In example 4 H ex-
press a wish to finish the partner?s (V) action. 
 
(3) V: tere paluksin ?Merlet. 
REQUEST 
good morning may I speak to  Merle 
H: jaa ma=kuulen.  
FULFILLING DIRECTIVE: OTHER 
yes I?m speaking 
 
(4) V: ? Raadi kauplus, (1.5) neli-
sada, kolm kolm kolm. (...) 
?Ristiku kauplus, (1.0) neli 
seitse ?ks, (.) kolm viis kolm. 
(1.0) 
Raadi shop four hundred three three three Ristiku 
shop four seven one three five three 
H: no aitab.   REQUEST (.) 
it?s enough 
V: jaa=palun?  
FULFILLING DIRECTIVE: OTHER 
yes you?re welcome 
H: ait?h.  
thank you 
 
Proposals and offers differ from requests be-
cause they expect a different second part. Requests 
are similar to open questions in the sense that they 
expect giving information and not a yes/no answer 
or the choice of an alternative. The suitable reac-
tions to requests are fulfilling directive: giving in-
formation or fulfilling directive: missing 
information. Proposals and offers are similar to 
closed yes/no questions. In this case the suitable 
reactions are agreement or refusal (agreement with 
directive and refusal of directive in our typology). 
Offers must be differentiated from proposals. In 
the first case, the  action will originate from the 
author (offer: I?ll send you the programme), in the 
second case from the partner (proposal: please 
come tomorrow, call me later), cf. example 5.  
 
(5) H: ?? kas te oskate ?elda kui 
palju se ?pilet maksab.  
could you tell me how much the ticket will cost  
V: kahjuks ?piletite=inda meil 
ei=ole. te peate sealt k?sima= 
PROPOSAL 
unfortunately we do not have ticket prices you 
must ask there 
ma=v?in ?numbri anda kui ?soovite.    
OFFER  
I can give you the number if you want 
H: mt ee v?ite anda ?k?ll jah? 
AGREEMENT WITH DIRECTIVE 
mm you can give yes 
V: see on kaks ?kolm, (0.5)    
it is two three 
 
The first parts of directives have analogues in 
the group of questions: 
request ?  open yes-no question / wh-question 
proposal / offer ? closed yes-no question. 
There are 142 requests, 62 offers and 38 pro-
posals in our analysed corpus. 
Offer must be differentiated from promise. In 
the last case, the author commits to do an action as 
in the case of offer, but promise does not presup-
pose the agreement of the partner and therefore it 
is non-AP act. 
Different acts behave differently in information 
dialogues. 
First, some of directives need immediate fulfill-
ing (e.g. in the next turn) and some of them need it 
in future. In our dialogues, proposals expect typi-
cally a future action (outside of current conversa-
tion). Offers typically need immediate fulfilling. 
Requests always need immediate fulfilling and 
they are connected with the current dialogue. 
Secondly, the analysis of directives shows that 
the authors of different types of acts are different. 
Typically, request is used by the client. The con-
sultant uses questions in similar situations.  
Proposals and offers are used mainly by con-
sultant, client has used them only in two cases in 
our data. 
Reactions to directives are similar to answers to 
questions. Still, we annotate them differently as 
they belong to different APs. There are certain 
pairs of the first and second parts of directive APs: 
- request 
 
 fulfilling directive: giving in-
formation / missing information 
- proposal / offer 
 
 agreement with direc-
tive / refusal of directive. 
In addition to that, there are some reactions that 
could be used with different directives and are 
similar to answers to questions: postponing the 
reaction (one minute please, I will look at once), 
refusing to answer (we have no such information), 
unsure reaction (I am not sure, ...I think so, but...). 
5 Communication Problems 
If a questioner asks such questions and/or ex-
presses such requests that the answerer is able to 
react adequately and give the answer immediately, 
then the conversation is fluent. In fact, such con-
versations occur seldom. Typically, there are prob-
lems in a conversation which need to be solved. 
5.1 Repair and Adjusting 
In some situations one of partners finds some 
communication problem. He/she signals it and 
both partners agree that the problem must be 
solved. Repair is used for solving such problems.  
The computer must understand the repair initia-
tion by the partner and be capable of performing 
the repair. On the other side, the computer must be 
able to initiate repairs itself if there are problems in 
the preceding text.  
It is important to bring out repair because most 
of repairs are formally question-answer APs. (We 
do not consider the boundaries of information re-
quest and repair here.) 
There are several types of repairs. We are not 
interested in self-repairs but in the hearer-initiated 
and speaker-performed repairs. Such repairs can be 
classified in different ways (see Hennoste 2000-
2001, Strandson 2001). 
Our typology of repairs is similar to question-
answer APs because most of the initiations of re-
pairs are questions in Estonian. We differentiate 
three types of repair initiations. The first type is the 
clarification where the hearer repeats the previous 
information to check whether he/she understood it 
right or not. Formally, there are questions that offer 
answer. 
The second type is the re-formulation where the 
hearer offers his/her interpretation of previous 
information. It may have several forms. 
Questions that are used for repair initiation dif-
fer from information questions by their content and 
linguistic form. Certain linguistic means are used 
in repair questions (cf. Strandson 2001 for Esto-
nian). 
Both of the repair initiations need either con-
firmation or rejection by the partner who has 
caused the problem. Thus the pairs of acts are simi-
lar to the question-answer pairs. 
The third type is non-understanding. It can be 
divided into several sub-types. The partner could 
not hear the previous turn, he/she finds the infor-
mation surprising and decides to check it, or he/she 
did not understand the utterance. There are two 
linguistic subtypes of this act. The first is open ini-
tiation (formed by some very general words: ah, 
what) that do not determine the location of the 
problem. The typical response is repeating of in-
formation. The second subtype is specifying initia-
tion, formed by a wh-question. The typical 
response is adjusting, extending or clarification. 
We are currently interested in the last sub-group 
that differs from information questions by content 
and not by linguistic form. It appears very fre-
quently in information dialogues. 
     Clients often ask too general questions and the 
consultant is not able to answer without adjusting 
the questions. Traditionally, such situations were 
not considered as repairs. The reason may be that 
such repair is very seldom in everyday dialogues 
that usually form the basis of the typology of re-
pairs. To the contrary, repairs of this type are fre-
quent in information dialogues. Thus we 
introduced a special act for such repair which we 
call adjusting the conditions of answer (example 
6).  
 
(6) H: tahaks odavalt ?Inglismaale 
s?ita.  (0.5)  REQUEST 
I want to travel to England cheaply 
V: jaa?   (0.5) CONTINUER 
yes 
H: j?rgmisel n?dalal. 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION: ADJUSTING 
the next week 
V: reisite ?ksi v?i ?kahekesi. 
ADJUSTING THE CONDITIONS OF ANSWER 
do you travel alone or two together 
H: kahe?kesi.   (0.5) ANSWER AS 
ALTERNATIVE: ONE 
two together 
V: sis saab seda Es?tonian Airi 
?kaks ?he hinnaga ?pakkumist kasu-
tada.    FULFILLING DIRECTIVE: 
GIVING INFORMATION 
then you can use the Estonian Air offer: two 
with one price 
 
It is defined as follows: this act must react to a 
request or a question. The purpose of the act is to 
get additional information in order to provide the 
answer. Consultants typically use this act. 
5.2 Refusal and Missing Information 
The second problem group are situations where the 
answerer is not able to give information. Three 
cases can be differentiated depending on continua-
tion of dialogue: the answerer does not have the 
needed information, he/she refuses to give it, or 
he/she cannot give it immediately. 
If the answerer does not have the information 
then the questioner must abandon the following 
attempts. 
In the case of having information we have two 
possibilities depending on whether the answerer is 
the consultant or client. The first possibility can be 
excluded because the consultant (computer) as an 
institutional provider of information may not re-
fuse to give information. The second case is possi-
ble, the client may refuse and moreover, he is not 
obliged to explain such behaviour. From the point 
of view of continuation of conversation we have 
similar solution here as in the case of missing in-
formation. Therefore we annotate both acts as re-
fusing to answer. 
If the answerer cannot give information imme-
diately then the conversation can continue in two 
different ways. First, the question or request was 
too general, and after the questioner has adjusted it 
the answerer will be able to give the needed infor-
mation or point to its absence. There are four ad-
justing possibilities in Estonian dialogues. 
The most frequently used possibility is that the 
answerer asks the questioner to adjust the previous 
question. In this case he/she reacts to a general re-
quest by using particles (jaa, jah /yes/ etc.). Such 
reaction is marked as a continuer (example 6). 
The second possibility is that the answerer asks 
adjustable questions himself/herself. Such act is 
called adjusting the conditions of the answer (ex-
ample 6).  
The third possibility is to avoid the reaction. A 
too general request or question is followed by a 
pause.  
The fourth possibility is that the answerer re-
fuses to answer but he/she proposes another way to 
the partner to get the needed information (per e-
mail, fax, to go to the office, etc.). 
In human-computer interaction it can be sup-
posed that the computer tries to answer all the gen-
eral questions and uses adjusting acts for this 
purpose. 
Another case is if the answerer does not have 
conditions to give information. In example 7, the  
client wants to know the price of the car repair. 
Obviously, the consultant has a previous under-
standing of the price, therefore we cannot annotate 
his turn as missing information. But he is not able 
to say the exact price without seeing the car and 
therefore he cannot give the answer during the cur-
rent conversation. 
 
(7) H: ? mis see umbes ?maksma v?iks 
minna. (0.8) ja kui ?kiiresti. 
(0.5) OPEN QUESTION 
how much does it cost approximately 
V: no ?t?hendab=?, (.) 
k?igepealt ?mina vaatan ?autot, 
[vaatan] ?asju, mis ma pean ?alla 
panema, 
    it means I shall see the car see the things that I 
must use 
H:      
  [jah]   CONTINUER 
    yes 
V: sis ma ?tlen ?hinna.    
REFUSING TO ANSWER 
then I?ll tell the price 
sellep?arst=et=et=et kui=ma kui=ma 
panen ?alla need ?asjad, mis ?teie 
mulle ?pakute: see asi p?rast ei 
?t??ta, ADDITIONAL INFORMATION: 
ARGUMENTATION 
    because if if I?ll use the things you are offering 
this thing will not work later 
H: a:hah     (3.2) CONTINUER 
V: ma ei ?saa ee ?v?lja pakkuda 
?hinda ?selle p?hjal, mida ma ei 
?n?e. ADDITIONAL INFORMATION: 
ARGUMENTATION 
I can not offer the price if I do not see 
 
Similarly to the first parts, (most of) the second 
parts of directives have analogues in the group of 
answers to questions, cf. table 1. 
 
Table 1. Correspondence between some second 
parts of APs. 
Alternative answer: one 
Alternative answer: 
both  
Alternative answer: 
third 
Alternative answer: 
other  
Alternative answer: 
negative 
Open answer:  
giving information 
 
 
 
 
 
Fulfilling directive: giv-
ing information 
Open answer:  
missing information 
Fulfilling directive: 
missing information 
Refusing of answer Refusing of directive 
Postponing the answer Postponing the answer 
of directive 
Unsure answer 
Answer as an alternative 
Restricted fulfilling of 
directive 
Agreeing yes 
Agreeing no 
Agreement with direc-
tive 
Non-agreeing no Non-agreement with 
directive 
 
6 Conclusion 
Our further work will concentrate on the defini-
tions of dialogue acts. The frame formalism can be 
used. Some examples of the definitions can be 
found in (Koit, Oim 2000). In this process we will 
make additions to our annotation guide. The kappa 
value of the annotation must be increased, cur-
rently it is between 0.59 (for face-to-face dialogues 
in travel bureau) and 0.79 (for calls to informa-
tion). Our further aim is to develop a programme 
which will implement statistical learning methods 
for recognising dialogue acts. 
7 Acknowledgement 
This work was supported in part by Estonian Sci-
ence Foundation under Grant No. 4555. 
References 
Allwood, Jens; Ahlsen, Elisabeth; Bj?rnberg, Maria; 
Nivre, Joakim. 2001. Social activity and communica-
tion act-related coding. In Cothenburg Papers in 
Theoretical Linguistics 85. Dialog Coding ? Function 
and Grammar. G?teborg Coding Schemas. Ed by 
Jens Allwood. Goteburg. 1? 28. 
Bunt, Harry. 1999. Dynamic Interpretation and Dia-
logue Theory. // The Structure of Multimodal Dia-
logue II. Ed. By M.M. Taylor, F. Neel, and D.G. 
Bouwhuis. John Benjamins Publishing Company, 
Phiadelphia/Amsterdam, 1999, pp. 139-166. 
Dybkj?r, Laila. 2000. MATE Deliverable D6.2. Final 
Report http://mate.nis.sdu.dk/about/deliverables.html 
(variant 27.08.2002). 
Edwards, Jane. 1995. Principles and alternative systems 
in the transcription, coding and mark-up of spoken 
discourse. In Geoffrey Leech, Greg Myers, Jenny 
Thomas (eds.), Spoken English on Computer. Tran-
scription, Mark-up and Application. London: Long-
man, 19-34. 
Francis, Gill and Susan Hunston. 1992. Analysing eve-
ryday conversation. //Advances in Spoken Discourse 
Analysis. Ed. By Malcolm Coulthard. Routledge, 
London&New York, 123-161. 
Hennoste, Tiit. 2003. Question-answer adjacency pairs 
relations in information dialogues: Estonian case. 
//Norfa network Nordtalk. Corpus-based research on 
Spoken Language (in press). 
Hennoste, Tiit. 2000-2001. Sissejuhatus suulisesse eesti 
keelde I-IX. In Akadeemia 5, 1117-1150; 6, 1343-
1374; 7, 1553-1582; 8, 1773-1806; 9, 2011-2038; 10, 
2223-2254; 11, 2465-2486; 12, 2689-2710; 1,179-
206. 
Hennoste, Tiit; Liina Lindstr?m, Andriela R??bis, Piret 
Toomet, Riina Vellerind. 2001. Tartu University 
Corpus of Spoken Estonian. In Congressus Nonus 
Internationalis Fenno-Ugristarum 7.-13.8.2000 Tartu. 
Pars IV. Dissertationes sectionum: Linguistica I. Re-
degit: T?nu Seilenthal. Curaverunt: Anu Nurk, Triinu 
Palo. Tartu, 345-351. 
Hutchby, Ian; Wooffitt, Robin. 1998. Conversation 
Analysis. Principles, Practices and Applications. Pol-
ity Press. 
J?nsson, Arne and Nils Dahlb?ck. 2000. Distilling dia-
logues - A method using natural dialogue corpora for 
dialogue systems development Proceedings of 6th 
Applied Natural Language Processing Conference, 
Seattle, 44-51.  
Koit, Mare and Haldur Oim. 2000. Dialogue manage-
ment in the agreement negotiation process: a model 
that involves natural reasoning // The 1st SIGdial 
Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue. Ed. L. 
Dybkjaer, K. Hasida, D. Traum. HongKong, Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2000, 
102-111. 
Mengel, A.; Dybkj?r, L.; Garrido, J. M.; Heid, U.; 
Klein, M.; Pirrelli, V.; Poesio, M.; Quazza, S.; Schif-
frin, A.; Soria, C. 2000. MATE Dialogue Annotation 
Guidelines. Dialogue acts. In http://www.ims.uni-
stuttgart.de/projekte/mate/mdag/da/da_1.html (vari-
ant 9. 02. 2001). 
Schegloff, E.; G. Jefferson; H. Sacks 1977. The prefer-
ence for self-correction in the organization of repair 
in conversation. In Language 52:2, 361-382. 
Sinclair, J.M.; Coulthard, R.M. 1975. Towards of 
Analysis of Discourse: The English used by Teachers 
and Pupils. London: Oxford UP. 
Stenstr?m, Anna-Brita 1994. An Introduction to Spoken 
Interaction. London and New York: Longman. 
Stolcke, Andreas; Coccaro, Noah; Bates, Rebecca; Tay-
lor, Paul; Van Ess-Dykema, Carol; Ries, Klaus; 
Shriberg, Elizabeth; Jurafsky, Daniel; Martin, Ra-
chel; Meteer, Marie. 2000. Dialogue act modeling for 
automatic tagging and recognition of conversational 
speech. In Computaional Linguistics 26:3, 339?373. 
Strandson, Krista. 2001. Kuidas vestluskaaslane paran-
dusprotsessi algatab. In Keel ja Kirjandus 6, 394-409. 
Appendix 1. Dialogue Acts 
Only the acts are listed that are essential for the current paper. 
 
 
I. Adjacency pair acts 
1. Rituals  
/--/ 
2. Restructuring acts  
/--/ 
3. Contact control  
     CONTINUER 
/--/ 
4. Repair 
4.1. Initiating repair 
     RE-FORMULATION 
     RE-QUESTION 
     NON-UNDERSTANDING 
     OTHER 
4.2. PERFORMING REPAIR 
4.3. EVALUATING REPAIR 
4.4. OTHER 
5. Questions 
5.1. First parts 
By form 
     CLOSED YES-NO QUESTION 
     OPEN YES-NO QUESTION 
ALTERNATIVE QUESTION 
OPEN QUESTION 
QUESTION THAT OFFERS ANSWER 
By content 
     ADJUSTING QUESTION 
     ADJUSTING THE CONDITIONS OF 
ANSWER 
     OTHER 
5.2. Second parts 
     AGREEING YES 
     NON-AGREEING NO 
     AGREEING NO 
     OTHER ANSWER TO YES-NO QUESTION 
     ANSWER AS ALTERNATIVE: ONE 
     ANSWER AS ALTERNATIVE: BOTH 
      ANSWER AS ALTERNATIVE: THIRD 
     ANSWER AS ALTERNATIVE: NEGATIVE 
     ANSWER AS ALTERNATIVE: OTHER 
     OPEN ANSWER: GIVING INFORMATION 
     OPEN ANSWER: MISSING INFORMATION 
POSTPOSING THE ANSWER 
REFUSING OF ANSWER 
     ANSWER AS AN ALTERNATIVE 
     UNSURE ANSWER 
     OTHER 
6. Directives 
6.1. First parts 
REQUEST 
PROPOSAL 
OFFER 
OTHER 
6.2. Second parts 
  FULFILLING DIRECTIVE: GIVING 
INFORMATION 
  FULFILLING DIRECTIVE: MISSING 
INFORMATION 
  FULFILLING DIRECTIVE: ACTION 
  AGREEMENT WITH DIRECTIVE 
  REFUSAL OF DIRECTIVE 
  POSTPONING THE ANSWER OF DIRECTIVE 
  RESTRICTED FULFILLING OF DIRECTIVE 
     RESTRICTED AGREEMENT WITH 
DIRECTIVE 
     OTHER 
7. Opinions  
/--/ 
II. Non-AP acts  
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION: ARGUMEN-
TATION 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION: SPECIFYING 
PROMISE 
/--/ 
Appendix 2. Transcription marks 
falling intonation  point 
fall not to low   comma 
raising intonation  ? 
short interval (max 0.2 sec) (.) 
timed interval   (2.0) 
begin of overlap  [ 
end of overlap   ] 
latching at end of utterance word= 
latching at beginning  =word 
drawling   :: 
stress  ` at the beginning of the stressed syllable 
glottal cut off   do- 
in-breath   .hhh  
item in doubt   {text} 
unreachable text  {---} 
