Errgrams ? A Way to Improving ASR
for Highly Inflected Dravidian Languages
Kamadev Bhanuprasad
Andhra University, Visakhapatnam
Andhra Pradesh 530 003
India
save.climate@gmail.com
Mats Svenson
University of Macau
Av. Padre Toms Pereira, Taipa
Macau, China
svmats@yahoo.com
Abstract
In this paper, we present results of our ex-
periments with ASR for a highly inflected
Dravidian language, Telugu. First, we pro-
pose a new metric for evaluating ASR per-
formance for inflectional languages (Inflec-
tional Word Error Rate IWER) which takes
into account whether the incorrectly recog-
nized word corresponds to the same lexi-
con lemma or not. We also present results
achieved by applying a novel method ? er-
rgrams ? to ASR lattice. With respect to
confidence scores, the method tries to learn
typical error patterns, which are then used
for lattice correction, and applied just be-
fore standard lattice rescoring. Our confi-
dence measures are based on word posteri-
ors and were improved by applying antimod-
els trained on anti-examples generated by
the standard N-gram language model. For
Telugu language, we decreased the WER
from 45.2% to 40.4% (by 4.8% absolute),
and the IWER from 41.6% to 39.5% (2.1 %
absolute), with respect to the baseline per-
formance. All improvements are statistically
significant using all three standard NIST sig-
nificance tests for ASR.
1 Introduction
Speech recognition technologies allow computers
equipped with a source of sound input, such as a
microphone, to interpret human speech, for exam-
ple, for transcription or as an alternative method
of interacting with a machine. Using constrained
grammar recognition (described below), such appli-
cations can achieve remarkably high accuracy. Re-
search and development in speech recognition tech-
nology has continued to grow as the cost for imple-
menting such voice-activated systems has dropped
and the usefulness and efficiency of these systems
has improved. Furthermore, speech recognition has
enabled the automation of certain applications that
are not automatable using push-button interactive
voice response (IVR) systems. Speech recognition
system are based on simplified stochastic models,
so any aspects of the speech that may be important
to recognition but are not represented in the mod-
els cannot be used to aid in recognition. An es-
sential part of each Automatic Speech Recognition
(ASR) system is Language Model (LM) (Rabiner L.
and Juang BH., 1993; Huang X., 2001; Jelinek F.,
1998). For languages with rich inflection, language
modeling is difficult (Ircing P. et al, 2001; Rotovnik
T. et al, 2007). To be able to perform Very (300K+)
Large Vocabulary Continuous Speech Recognition
in real (or at least acceptable) time, nowadays, it is
often only possible to use 2-gram LM for the first
recognition pass. Using only one word context is
usually insufficient in order to achieve good results.
To improve performance for off-line ASR, it is pos-
sible to rescore output lattice afterward (Chelba and
Jelinek, 1999; Richardson F. et al, 1995; Finke et
805
al., 1999; Ircing P. and Psutka J., 2002). In this
paper, we describe our method for reducing error
rates, that was applied to improve ASR results for
LVCSR of Dravidian languages namely the Telugu
language.
2 Telugu and Dravidian languages in
general
Since there have not yet been many publications on
ASR for the Dravidian languages, we give here some
basic information on them. Dravidian languages are
spoken by more than 200 million people (Wikipedia,
2007). In phonology, Dravidian languages suffer
from the lack of distinction between aspirated and
unaspirated stops. While some Dravidian languages
have large numbers of loan words from Sanskrit and
other Indo-European languages, the words are often
mispronounced by monolingual Dravidian speak-
ers. Dravidian languages are also characterized by
a three-way distinction between dental, alveoar and
retroflex places of articulation as well as large num-
bers of liquids.
In this work, we show evidence from one partic-
ular Dravidian language Telugu. Telugu belongs to
the family but with ample influences by the Indo-
Arian family and is the official language of the state
of Andhra Pradesh, India. It is the Dravidian lan-
guage with the greatest number of speakers, the sec-
ond largest spoken language in India after Hindi and
one of the 22 official national languages of India.
The Telugu script is believed to descend from
the Brahmi script of the Ashokan era. Merchants
took the Eastern Chalukyan Script to Southeast Asia
where it parented the scripts of Mon, Burmese, Thai,
Khmer, C?am, Javanese and Balinese languages.
Their similarities to Telugu script can be discerned
even today. Its appearance is quite similar to the
Kannada script, its closest cousin. Telugu script is
written from left to right and consists of sequences
of simple and/or complex characters. The script is
largely syllabic in nature - the basic units of writing
are syllables. Since the number of possible syllables
is very large, syllables are composed of more basic
units such as vowels (achchu or swar) and conso-
nants (hallu or vyanjan). Consonants in consonant
clusters take shapes which are very different from
the shapes they take elsewhere. Consonants are pre-
sumed to be pure consonants, that is, without any
vowel sound in them. However, it is traditional to
write and read consonants with an implied ?a? vowel
sound. When consonants combine with other vowel
signs, the vowel part is indicated orthographically
using signs known as vowel maatras. The shapes
of vowel maatras are also very different from the
shapes of the corresponding vowels. The overall pat-
tern consists of 60 symbols, of which 16 are vowels,
3 vowel modifiers, and 41 consonants. Spaces are
used between words as word separators. The sen-
tence ends with either a single (purna virama) or a
double bar (deergha virama). They also have a set of
symbols for numerals, though Arabic numbers are
typically used.
In Telugu, Karta (nominative case or the doer),
Karma (object of the verb), and Kriya (action or the
verb) follow a sequence. This is one of the several
reasons why linguists classify Telugu as a Dravid-
ian Language ? this pattern is found in other Dravid-
ian languages but not in Sanskrit. Telugu allows for
polyagglutination, the unique feature of being able
to add multiple suffixes to words to denote more
complex features. Telugu also exhibits one of the
rare features that Dravidian languages share with
few others: the inclusive and exclusive we. The
bifurcation of the First Person Plural pronoun (we
in English) into inclusive (manamu) and exclusive
(memu) versions can also be found in Tamil and
Malayalam. Like all Dravidian languages, Telugu
has a base (or of words which are essentially Dra-
vidian in origin.
Telugu pronouns follow the systems for gender
and respect also found in other Indian languages.
The second person plural ?miru? is used in address-
ing someone with respect, and there are also respect-
ful third personal pronouns pertaining to both gen-
ders. A specialty of the Telugu language, however, is
that the third person non-respectful feminine is used
to refer to objects, and there is no special ?neuter?
gender that is used.
806
3 Method
3.1 Data
We have recorded a large broadcast news corpus for
Telugu. All commercials and stretches of sponta-
neous speech were removed from the data, since
we focus here on ASR for an unexplored language
rather than on dealing with automatic audio segmen-
tation and spontaneous speech recognition. Overall,
we had at disposal 61.2 hours of pure transcribed
speech. It yields 635k word tokens, contained in
manual human transcriptions. Due to rich morphol-
ogy of Dravidian languages, it represents 78k differ-
ent word forms, with plenty of words appearing just
once. We used ?70% of data for training, ?15% for
development, and the remainding ?15% for testing.
For language modeling, we used a newspaper cor-
pus containing data from three major Telugu news-
papers - Andhra Prabha, Eenadu, and Vaartha. This
corpus contains 20M tokens, which corresponds to
615k different word forms.
3.2 Evaluation method
The usual metric to evaluate ASR system perfor-
mance is Word Error Rate (WER). Unfortunately,
as we described in Section 2, Telugu is a highly in-
flectional language having a really high number of
different word forms. Using WER, this cause to un-
derestimate the real system performance, since this
metric does not distinguish between confusing word
identities and confusing just forms of the same word
(lemma). However, it is obvious that these errors do
not have the same influence on the usability of auto-
matic transcripts. Taking an example from English,
recognizing who instead of whom is not that bad as
confusing boom (especially when most Americans
or not able to distinguish who and whom anyway).
Thus, we propose to use Inflectional Word Error
Rate (IWER), which gives weight 1 to errors con-
fusing lemmas, while only a weight 0.5 when the
lemma of the incorrectly recognized word is correct,
but the whole word form is not correct. Lemmas
corresponding to particular word forms may be ob-
tained using an automatic lemmatization technique.
3.3 Confidence measuring
The key problem for our method (as described be-
low) is to perform appropriate ASR confidence mea-
suring. Confidence measures (CMs) need to be in-
terpreted in order to decide whether a word is prob-
ably recognized correct or incorrect. In this pa-
per, we use a confidence measure based on posterior
probability formulation. It is well known that the
conventional ASR algorithm is usually formulated
as a pattern classification problem using the max-
imum a posterior (MAP) decision rule to find the
most likely sequence of words W which achieves
the maximum posterior probability p(W |X) given
any acoustic observation X .
Obviously, the posterior probability p(W |X) is a
good confidence measure for the recognition deci-
sion that X is recognized as W . However, most real-
world ASR systems simply ignore the term p(X)
during the search, since it is constant across differ-
ent words W . This explains why the raw scores are
not usable as confidence scores to reflect recogni-
tion reliability. Anyway, after the normalization by
p(X), the posterior probability p(W |X) can be em-
ployed as a good confidence measure; it represents
the absolute quantitative measure of the correspon-
dence between X and W .
In real-world tasks, we have to either employ
certain simplifying assumptions or adopt some ap-
proximate methods when estimating p(X) in order
to obtain the desired posteriors. In the first cat-
egory, it includes the so-called filler-based meth-
ods which try to calculate p(X) from a set of gen-
eral filler or background models. These approaches
are very straightforward and usually can achieve an
reasonable performance in many cases. However,
we rather used the so-called lattice-based methods
which attempt to calculate p(X), then the poste-
rior probability p(W |X) in turn, from a word lattice
or graph based on the forwardbackward algorithm,
such as Schaaf (Schaaf T. and Kemp T., 1997) and
Wessel (Wessel F. et al, 1999) and their colleagues,
among others.
Usually, a single word lattice or graph is gen-
erated by the ASR decoder for every ?utterance?.
807
Then, the posterior probability of each recognized
word or the whole hypothesized stream of words can
be calculated based on the word-graph from an ad-
ditional post-processing stage. Since word graph is
a compact and fairly accurate representation of all
alternative competing hypotheses of the recognition
result which usually dominate the summation when
computing p(X) over a variety of hypotheses, the
posterior probability calculated from a word graph
can approximate the true p(W |X) very well.
In our approach, we extended the lattice based
CM by using an antimodel. The idea of antimod-
els has already been proposed for CMs (Rahim M.
et al, 1997), however, it has remained unclear
what data should be used to estimate these anti-
models. In our work, we simply generated anti-
examples from our N-gram model. The rationale be-
hind this is very straightforward. LM constraints are
very strong in determining the final ASR hypothe-
ses, and may sometimes undesirably wash out cor-
rect acoustic posteriors. Also, when you let your
LM generate sentences, these sentences correspond
well to N-gram probabilities but are definitely nei-
ther grammatically nor semantically correct. Thus,
these generated sentences can be very well used
as anti-examples to train the antimodel. Then, we
performed forced-alignment against a random tran-
script to generate training data for each anti-model.
3.4 Errgrams
The main problem when applying ASR to extremely
inflected languages such as Telugu, is the need to use
a very large vocabulary, in order to reduce the OOV
rate to an acceptable level. However, this causes
problems for making the automatic transcription in
a time close to the real-time. Since we cannot use
such a big dictionary in these task, our first results
had quite high WERs and IWERs. However, we an-
alyzed the errors and found that some typical error
patterns occur repeatedly. This fact inspired us to
design and employ the following method.
First, using HTK large vocabulary speech recog-
nizer (HTK, 2007) and a bigram LM, we generated
an N-best ASR output and a scored bigram lattice.
Then we statistically analyzed the errors and cre-
ated so-called errgrams. Errgrams are pairs of bi-
grams, the first member of the pair is the correct
bigram and the second member is the recognized
bigram. For infrequent bigrams, the method is al-
lowed to back-off to unigrams, using discounting
based on common smoothing strategies (such Katz
backoff), but the backoff is more penalized since un-
igram errgrams are much less reliable compared to
common language modeling backoffs (such as back-
off for training LMs for ASR). Errgrams were not
only trained using 1-best ASR output, but to gain
more real ASR data, we used 5-best hypothesis for
training. For estimating errgram pairs, we also take
into account confidence scores - the lower CM, the
higher weight is given to a particular errgram exam-
ple. By this approach, we may achieve better results
with using vocabulary of standard size (< 100k),
since words in ?correct? parts of errgrams may in-
clude words that are not in the limited size vocab-
ulary used for the first recognition pass. In other
words, we can partially reduce the OOV problem by
this approach. Note that LMs used for lattice rescor-
ing include all such words originally missing in the
baseline LM but appearing in errgrams.
The errgrams trained in the above described way,
are then applied in the following way during the de-
coding phase:
1. Using a bigram model, generate an ASR lattice
2. Walk through the lattice and look for bigrams
(or unigrams) having a low CM
3. If for such a low CM n-gram we have a cor-
responding errgram with p > Threshold, sub-
tract majority (particular percent is optimized
on held-out data) of the probability mass and
add it to the ?correct? part of the errgram
4. Perform standard lattice rescoring using four-
gram LMs
4 Results
Table 1 shows the comparison of WERs and IW-
ERs for Telugu LVCSR achieved by various post-
808
processing methods. The baseline was achieved us-
ing just the first bigram pass. Then, we report re-
sults obtained by standard lattice rescoring method,
using a fourgram LM, as well as results which were
achieved by applying errgram method prior to lattice
rescoring. The improvement was achieved by apply-
ing the errgram correction method. We decreased
the WER from 45.2% to 40.4% (by 4.8% absolute),
and the IWER from 41.6% to 39.5% (2.1%absolute),
with respect to the baseline performance. As you
can see, WER dropped more than the IWER did.
This may be understood as that the errgrams help
more in correcting errors in grammatical agreement,
i.e. when the word forms differs but the lemmas are
recognized correctly. The improvement from base-
line to the best system is significant at p < 0.01
using all three NIST significance tests, while the im-
provement from standard lattice rescoring system is
significant at p < 0.05, using the same statistical
tests.
5 Summary, conlusions, and future work
In this paper, we have presented a very LVCSR
for the highly inflected Dravidian language, namely
Telugu. A new metric for evaluating ASR perfor-
mance for inflectional languages, Inflectional Word
Error Rate ? IWER, taking into account whether in-
correctly recognized words correspond to the same
lemma or not, was proposed to be used together with
the standard WER. We also present results achieved
by applying a novel method errgrams to ASR lat-
tice. With respect to confidence scores, the method
tries to learn typical error patterns, which are then
used for lattice correction, and applied just before
standard lattice rescoring. By this approach, we may
achieve better results with using vocabulary of stan-
dard size (< 100k).
The improvement was achieved by applying the
errgram correction method. We decreased the WER
from 45.2% to 40.4% (by 4.8% absolute), and the
IWER from 41.6% to 39.5% (2.1% absolute), with
respect to the baseline performance. All improve-
ments are statistically significant using all three stan-
dard NIST significance tests for ASR.
Since this method is completely new, there is a
lot of space for potential improvements. In our fu-
ture work, we would definitely like to focus on im-
proving the errgram estimation and smoothing tech-
niques, as well as to finding the best approach for
lattice rescoring. Moreover, we would like to apply
our idea to other inflected languages, such as Ara-
bic, Slovenian, Estonian or Russian. We also hope
that our Telugu language will draw more attention
of ASR engineers.
In the near future, we plan to largely extend
our research on automic processing of spoken Tel-
ugu, especially move toward processing of sponta-
neous speech. Currently, we are preparing new large
database of conversational speech which will be an-
notated with MDE-style structural metadata sym-
bols (Strassel et al, 2005), reflecting spontaneous
speech events such as fillers and edit dysfluencies.
We are looking forward to test our methods on this
challenging data, and compare the results with the
broadcast news data used in this work.
6 Aknowledgements
The authors thank the linguists from the Macau Uni-
versity for kindly discussing the inflected language
ASR issues. The scientific work was kindly co-
funded by Anand Foundation, Raandhanpuur Foun-
dation and Scientific Agency of Macau. All views
presented in this paper are only the views of authors,
and do not necessarily reflect the view by funding
agencies.
References
Rabiner L., Juang BH 1993. Fundamentals of
Speech Recognition, Prentice Hall PTR; 1. edition,
0130151572
Huang, X. 2001. Spoken Language Processing: A Guide
to Theory, Algorithm and System Development, Pren-
tice Hall PTR; 1st edition, 0130226165
Jelinek, F. 1998. Statistical Methods for Speech Recog-
nition (Language, Speech, and Communication), The
MIT Press , 0262100665
Ircing, P., Psutka, J.,Krbec P., Hajic J., Khudanpur S.,
Jelinek F., Byrne W: 2001. On Large Vocabulary
809
Table 1: WER[%] and Inflectional WER(IWER)[%] for LVCSR Telugu ASR using various methods
WER [%] IWER [%]
1st bigram pass 45.2 41.6
fourgram lattice rescoring 42.3 40.2
errgrams+lattice rescoring 40.4 39.5
Continuous Speech Recognition of Highly Inflectional
Language, Eurospeech Aalborg
T. Rotovnik, M.S. Maucec, Z. Kacix. 2007. Large vo-
cabulary continuous speech recognition of an inflected
language using stems and endings. Speech Communi-
cation, Vol.49, No.6, pp.437-452
C. Chelba and F. Jelinek 1999. Structured language
modeling for speech recognition In Proceedings of
NLDB99, Klagenfurt, Austria
F. Richardson, M. Ostendorf, and J.R. Rohlicek. 1995.
Lattice-based search strategies for large vocabulary
speech recognition. Proc. ICASSP
M. Finke, J. Fritsch, D. Koll, A. Waibel. 1999. Mod-
eling And Efficient Decoding Of Large Vocabulary
Conversational Speech. In Proceedings of the EU-
ROSPEECH99, Vol. 1, pp. 467?470, Budapest, Hun-
gary, September 1999
Ircing P, Psutka J. 2002. Lattice Rescoring in
Czech LVCSR System Using Linguistic Knowl-
edge. International Workshop Speech and Computer
SPECOM2002, St. Petersburgh, Russia. pp. 23-26.
Wikipedia 2007.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dravidian languages
H. Jiang. 2005. Confidence measures for speech recog-
nition: A survey, Speech Communication 45 (2005),
pp. 455-470
Schaaf, T., Kemp, T. 1997. Confidence measures for
spontaneous speech recognition. Proc. of International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Process-
ing, pp. 875-878.
Wessel, F., Macherey, K., Ney., H. 1999. A compar-
ison of word graph and N-best list based confidence
measures. Proc. of European Conference on Speech
Communication Technology, pp. 315-318
Rahim, M.G., Lee, C.-H. 1997. String-based minimum
verification error (SB-MVE) training for speech recog-
nition. Computer Speech Language 11, 147-160.
HTK website. 2007. http://htk.eng.cam.ac.uk/
Strassel, S., Kolar, J., Song Z., Barclay L., Glenn M.
2005. Structural Structural Metadata Annotation:
Moving Beyond English. Proc. of European Confer-
ence on Speech Communication Technology, Lisbon.
810
