A Semantic Study on Yami Ontology in Traditional Songs
    Yin-Sheng Tai                D. Victoria Rau               Meng-Chien Yang
     Providence University,          Providence University,        Providence University,  
                     Taiwan                                  Taiwan                                Taiwan 
             wratp2@msn.com                dhrau@pu.edu.tw            mcyang2@pu.edu.tw
Abstract
The  purpose  of  this  study  was  to  provide  an 
example of how to build a Yami ontology from 
traditional  songs  by  employing  Prot?g?,  an 
open-source  tool for  editing  and  managing 
ontologies developed  by  Stanford  University. 
Following  Conceptual  Blending  Theory 
(Fauconnier  and Turner, 1998),  we found that 
Yami  people use the  conceptual  metaphor  of 
?fishing? in traditional songs when praising the 
host?s diligence  in  a ceremony  celebrating the 
completion  of  a  workhouse.  The  process  of 
building ontologies  is explored and illustrated. 
The  proposed construction of  an ontology for 
Yami  traditional  songs  can  serve  as  a 
fundamental  template,  using  the corpus 
available online from the Yami documentation 
website  (http://yamiproject.cs.pu.edu.tw/yami) 
to build ontologies for other domains.  
1 Introduction
Yami is an endangered Austronesian language, 
spoken on  Orchid  Island (Lanyu),  46  kilometers 
southeast  of  the  main  island  of  Taiwan. For  the 
purposes of  language  documentation and 
preservation, an on-line Yami dictionary1 has been 
developed to facilitate language learning. Although 
each  lexical  entry contains  basic  meanings  of 
words  (in  both  English  and  Chinese), 
pronunciations,  and  roots  and  affixes, no 
information  on  lexical  semantics,  such  as 
synonyms, hyponyms, or metaphors is available. If 
information  on  lexical  relationships could  be 
incorporated into  the Yami dictionary,  this online 
tool would be even more useful for Yami language 
learners.
In  the  present  study,  we  focused  on  the 
metaphors in Yami lyrics. Knight (2005) considers 
that,  from a Yami native speaker?s point of  view, 
1  Available from the following IP address:
http://yamiproject.cs.pu.edu.tw/elearn/search.php
?Raods? (traditional songs) play an important role 
in culture because they subsume features such as 
archaism, metaphors, puns and polite contradiction. 
In  addition,  Yami  traditonal  songs  reflect  Yami 
values, such as love and honoring hard work (e.g. 
fishing or farm work), and cultural events, such as 
completion  of  hard  work  and  special  festivals. 
Thus,  we  would  like  to  build  an  ontology  using 
Yami traditional songs, adapting the taxonomies in 
WordNet and SUMO, which can serve as a point of 
departure  for  further  mapping  of other  Yami 
ontologies. In  this  paper,  we  will  report  our 
preliminary  results,  giving  one  example  at  this 
early stage of the research project on constructing 
Yami  ontology,  led  by  the  second  and  third 
authors. 
2  Literature Review
2.1 Conceptual Metaphor Theory
The original Conceptual Metaphor Theory was 
proposed  by  Lakoff  and  Johnson (1980).  They 
identify metaphor as a transfer between the source 
domain and  the  target domain.  This  has  become 
known as the ?two-domain theory? of metaphor. 
2.2 Conceptual Blending Theory
Conceptual  Blending Theory (Fauconnier  and 
Turner, 1998; 2002) is a framework for interpreting 
cognitive  linguistic  phenomena  such  as  analogy, 
metaphor, etc. According to Conceptual  Blending 
Theory, the input structures, generic structures, and 
blend structures in the network are mental spaces. 
In  Figure  1,  the  frame  structure  recruited  to  the 
mental  space  is  represented  as  a  rectangle  either 
outside or iconically inside the circle.
Figure 1. Conceptual Blending Theory
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
81
2.3  Prot?g?
In this study, we are building a Yami ontology 
based  on  traditional  songs  using  Prot?g?2,  which 
not  only provides a rich set  of basic knowledge-
modeling structures and a way to enter  data,  but 
can also  be customized to create new domains in 
knowledge models. 
As  demonstrated  in  previous  studies  (e.g., 
Dodds,  2005;  Lin  2006),  Prot?g? has  been 
successfully applied to construction of ontology in 
specific domains. Therefore, the present study used 
Prot?g? to  construct  an  ontology  of Yami 
traditional songs. 
3. Methodology
3.1 Data Collection
The  main  data  resource  came  from  Dong?s 
monograph (1994)  ?In  Praise of Taro,? which 
contains a total of 250 songs. This study is based 
on  one  song  which  contains  many  fishing 
metaphors.  Seven metaphorical  tokens  were 
extracted from this song. 
3.2 Data Analysis
First of all, the question of the use of metaphor 
in  Yami  was  analyzed  by  Lakoff  &  Johnson?s 
Conceptual  Metaphor  Theory  (1980)  and 
Fauconnier and  Turner?s  Conceptual  Blending 
Theory  (1998).  Secondly,  two taxonomic tenors 
were  identified  using WordNet (Fellbaum,  1999) 
and Yami  Texts  with  Reference  Grammar  and  
Dictionary (Rau & Dong,  2006).  Based on these 
taxonomic tenors, Yami words were classified into 
?Verbs? and ?Nouns?.
4.  Results and Discussion
4.1 Conceptual Blending
In the following discussion, we begin with an 
analysis of a traditional Yami song celebrating the 
completion of a workhouse with a harvest of taro. 
It  mostly  praises  the  host?s  achivement and hard 
work.  After  praising  the  host?s  achivement,  the 
guests take all the host?s taros and cover the roof of 
the workhouse with them. Finally, the guests sing 
songs with the host in turn. 
The lyric is illustrated as follows: 
1 oya   rana    minangyid  siapen      rarakeh
this already  reached_the_harbor grandfather old 
2  Prot?g? is a free, open source ontology editor and 
knowledge-base framework. The IP address of 
Prot?g? is: http://protege.stanford.edu/.
?Now, the old man reached the harbor.?
2 ji    na       minatokod Jicamongan  ta
NEG already  reached     PLN       because
?He didn?t paddle to Jicamongan.?
3 kalagarawan     am   paneneneban  o     ...
 fingerling_place  TOP  shallow_sea   NOM  ...
?He moved in the shallow sea where only fingerling 
fish live.? 
4 to    na      rana  avavangi   sia  ta
AUX 3.S.GEN already row a boat there because
?He could only row his boat there?
5 ji   na      rana    voaz  o    kakaod
 NEG 3.S.GEN already  row  NOM  paddle 
?Because he had already lost strength to row.?     
Seven metaphorical tokens  related to ?fishing? 
were detected from the lyric. They are marked in 
bold  case.  In  Line  1, minangyid ?reached  the 
harbor?  was  identified  as  metaphorical  because 
although  it  literally  describes  going  back  home 
after finishing one?s fishing, its intended meaning 
is  ?to  rest  and  hold  a  ceremony  celebrating the 
completion of a workhouse.? Using the Conceptual 
Metaphor  Theory (1980),  we  compared  the 
cognitive  activities  in  the  lyrics  and  the  mental 
space (Table 1). The entities, quality, and functions 
in the domain of fishing were analyzed.
Table 1. Reached the harbor vs. Holding a 
ceremony celebrating the completion of a 
workhouse
Table 1 shows that Yami people prefer to use 
?fishing? as a metaphor for the intended meanings 
of  building  a  house  or  farming.  We  further 
employed the Conceptual  Blending  Theory (1998) 
to interpret the ?harbor? example (see Figure 2).
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
82
Figure 2. ?Reached the harbor? vs. ?Holding a 
ceremony celebrating the completion of a 
workhouse?
The  concept  of ?reached  the  harbor?  is 
categorized  into  Input  space  I,  and  ?holding a 
ceremony  celebrating the  completion  of  a 
workhouse? is categorized into Input space II. Both 
Inputs  have certain similarities as well as distinct 
features. From Input Space I, ?fisherman,? ?boat,? 
?fish,? ?harbor,?  and ?to  share  his  achievements 
and  honor  with  his  friends  and  relatives?  are 
respectively  mapped  into  ?host/builder,? ?new 
workhouse,? ?taro,? ?yard,?  and  ?to  share  his 
achievements  and  honor  with  his  friends  and 
relatives,?  in  Input  Space  II.  The  Inputs  might 
share some cross-mapping properties, which can be 
listed in the Generic space. The structure from the 
two input mental spaces is projected into the Blend 
space.  Essentially,  which elements  from  Input 
space II should be selected and projected onto the 
blend space  are determined by the contents of  the 
lyric. Thus, in the blend space, all elements remain 
separate from their corresponding counterparts, but 
the relations among  the features in Input  space I 
determines the relations  between corresponding 
counterparts. That is to say, the running structure in 
the  blend  space  partially  projected  from  Input 
space I determines the existing relations among the 
elements  in  the  blend.  In  Input space I, a 
?fisherman? needs a ?boat? to fish in the ocean, so 
the relation between ?fisherman? and ?boat? is  a 
kind  of  ?earning a  living.?  In  addition,  what  a 
?fisherman?  works for  is  ?fish.?  After  the 
fisherman finishes his work,  he has to  go back to 
the harbor. Such relations also operate among those 
elements projected from Input space II. As a result, 
?the  host  of  the  completion  ceremony  of  a 
workhouse? is  the  ?fisherman? of  the  ?workhouse 
ceremony;? the relation between ?the host? and the 
?workhouse ceremony? is that of ?finishing a time-
consuming job.?  Additionally,  ?taros? in the yard 
are  compared  with ?fish? at  the harbor,  which 
await to be ?shared with friends and relatives.?
4.2  Taxonomy 
Yami verbs subsume dynamic verbs and stative 
verbs (Rau and Dong, 2006). Based on the notions 
from  WordNet, we  further  divided  verbs  into 
Bodily  Function  and Care  Verbs, Change Verbs, 
Communication Verbs, Competition Verbs, 
Consumption  Verbs,  Contact  Verbs,  Cognition 
Verbs,  Creation Verbs,  Motion Verbs,  Emotion or 
Psych  Verbs,  Stative  Verbs,  Perception  Verbs, 
Possession  Verbs, Social  Interaction  Verbs,  and 
Weather  Verbs.  Since  Yami  does  not  possess  a 
distinctive  adjective word  class,  both  descriptive 
and relational adjectives are in this study classified 
under  stative  verbs  in  WordNet.  Descriptive 
adjectives subsume  antonymy,  gradation, 
markedness, polysemy and selectional preferences, 
reference-modifying  adjectives,  color  adjectives, 
quantifiers,  and  participial  adjectives.  Relational 
adjectives include  two  domains,  ?pertaining? or 
?relating to? (Fellbaum 1999: 63).  The coding of 
adjectives  in  this  file  is  different  from  that  of 
descriptive adjectives. Rather than being part of a 
cluster, each synset is entered individually, so that 
the  interface  will  present  the  adjective  with  its 
related noun and information about the sense of the 
noun. 
For the aspect of Yami Nouns, we categorized 
the nouns into 10 basic noun  categories following 
WordNet (Fellbaum,  1999:  30),  including  entity, 
abstraction,  psycho-feature,  natural  phenomena, 
activity,  event,  group,  location,  possession, and 
state.
4.3  Example from the Yami Lyric
The  following  example  illustrates  how  we 
extracted the metaphorical words of ?fishing? from 
the lyric and classfied them into their domains. 
Firstly, minangyid ?reached the harbor,?  avavangi 
?row, sail something? and  voaz ?row something,? 
were  classified  as Motion  Verbs.  Secondly, 
Jicamongan ?a  place  name  of  deep water,? 
kalagarawan ?a place where fingerling fish swim? 
and  paneneneban ?shallow place,? were 
categorized under  the  main  section  Location  and 
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
83
the sub-section Sea. Finally, kakaod ? paddle? was 
classified in the main section Entity and the sub-
section Artifact, as shown in Figure 3 and Figure 4.
Figure 3. An example of four Yami nouns in the 
ontology of Yami lyrics 
Figure 4. An example of three Yami verbs in the 
ontology of Yami lyrics
4.4  Mapping metaphorical words
   To  classify  Yami  metaphor,  we  made  links 
(equivalent  classes)  between  the  literal  meaning 
and the metaphorical meaning using Prot?g?. Since 
Input space I usually works as the source domain 
and Input space II as  the  target domain, we found 
that, at least in this case, this is a one-sided network 
of  metaphor mapping. We  thus  employed  the 
property  ?mappings?  to  define  the  relationship 
between ?reached the harbor? and ?to hold a new 
workhouse celebration.? Moreover, in order to set 
up the restrictions for searching words, we added 
the property ?hasConceptOf?. We then named the 
class expression of ?reached the harbor? with the 
following restriction: 
has_concept_of some3 (harbor and4 fish and 
fisherman and boat and share)   
Similarly, we also provided the phrase ?to hold 
a new workhouse celebration? with the following 
restriction: 
has_concept_of some (host and builder and
workhouse and share and taro and yard)
Finally, for  the  sake  of  correctly  linking 
3  This refers to the existential quantifier ( ) in OWL 
syntax, which can be read as at least one, or some. 
4 An intersection class is described by combining two or
more classes using the AND operator ( ).
meanings of each word, the ontology builder can 
check  the  ontology  with  the  DL  Query  Tab  in 
Prot?g?.
In summary,  the  connection between the  two 
items minangyid, ?reached the harbor? and ?to hold 
a new workhouse celebration,? shown in shadow in 
Figure  4,  is  solely  based  on  the  structure  of  the 
inputs,  since  each  of  them  are  from  a  different 
domain of verbs. This structure is in harmony with 
Yami custom and contextual structure.
5  Conclusion
This paper has provided an example of how to 
construct  an  ontology  of Yami  using  traditional 
songs.  We  hope  this  approach  will  serve  as  a 
fundamental  template for further  mappings  with 
more texts to produce other Yami ontologies.
 
References
Dodds, D. 2005. Qualitative geospatial
processing, ontology and spatial metaphor.
presented at the GML and Geo-Spatial Web
Services. 
Dong, M. N. 1995. In Praise of Taro. Dao-Xiang
Publisher.
Fauconnier, G. & Turner,M. 1998. Conceptual
Integration Networks. Cognitive Science, 22
(2), 133-187.
Fellbaum,C. 1999. WordNet:an Electronic
Lexical Database. Cambridge,Mass.: MIT
Press.
Knight, P., & Lu Y. H.. 2005. Music heritage of
the oral traditions by meykaryag of the Tao 
tribe. Paper presented at the 2005
International Forum of Ethnomusicology in
Taiwan: Interpretation and Evolutionof
Musical Sound. Taipei: Soochow University.
Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. 1980. Metaphors We
Live By. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Lin, J.H. 2006. Using formal concept analysis
to construct the computer virus
characteristics domain ontology. MA thesis,
National Yunlin University of Science &
Technology, Taiwan.
Rau, D.Victoria & Dong, M. N. 2006 Yami Texts
with Reference Grammar and Vocabulary.
Language and Linguistics, Academia Sinica, 
Taipei, Monograph A-10.
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
84
