Enhanced Tools for Online Collaborative Language Resource  
Development 
Virach Sornlertlamvanich  
Thatsanee Charoenporn  
Suphanut Thayaboon 
Chumpol Mokarat 
Thai Computational Linguistics Lab.  
NICT Asia Research Center, 
Pathumthani, Thailand 
{virach, thatsanee, suphanut,  
chumpol}@tcllab.org 
Hitoshi Isahara 
National Institute of Information 
and Communications Technology 
3-5 Hikaridai, Seika-cho, soraku-gaun, 
Kyoto, Japan 619-0289 
isahara@nict.go.jp 
 
Abstract 
This paper reports our recent work of tool 
development for language resource con-
struction. To make a revision of Asian 
WordNet which is automatically generated 
by using the existing English translation 
dictionary, we propose an online collabora-
tive tool which can organize multiple trans-
lations. To support the work of syntactic 
dependency tree annotation, we develop an 
editing suite which integrates the utilities 
for word segmentation, POS tagging and 
dependency tree into a sequence of editing. 
1 Introduction 
Though WordNet was already used as a starting 
resource for developing many language WordNets, 
the constructions of the WordNet for languages 
can be varied according to the availability of the 
language resources. Some were developed from 
scratch, and some were developed from the combi-
nation of various existing lexical resources. 
This paper presents an online collaborative tool 
particularly to facilitate the construction of the 
Asian WordNet which is automatically generated 
by using the existing resources having only Eng-
lish equivalents and the lexical synonyms. 
In addition, to support the work of syntactic de-
pendency tree annotation, we develop an editing 
suite which integrates the utilities for word seg-
mentation, POS tagging and dependency tree. The 
tool is organized in 4 steps, namely, sentence se-
lection, word segmentation, POS tagging, and syn-
tactic dependency tree annotation. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: 
Section 2 describes the collaborative interface for 
revising the result of synset translation. Section 3 
describes the tool for annotating Thai syntactic 
dependency tree corpus. And, Section 4 concludes 
our work. 
2 Collaborative Tools for Asian WordNet 
Construction 
There are some efforts in developing Wordnets for 
some of Asian languages, e.g. Chinese, Japanese, 
Korean, and Hindi. The number of languages that 
have been successfully developed their Wordnets 
is still limited to some active research in the area. 
However, the extensive development of Wordnet 
in other languages is of the efforts to support the 
NLP research and implementation. It is not only to 
facilitate the implementation of NLP applications 
for the language, but also provide an inter-linkage 
among the Wordnets for different languages to de-
velop multi-lingual applications. 
We adopt the proposed criteria for automatic 
synset assignment for Asian languages which has 
limited language resources. Based on the result 
from the above synset assignment algorithm, we 
introduce KUI (Knowledge Unifying Initiator), 
(Sornlertlamvanich et al, 2007) to establish an 
online collaborative work in refining the WorNets. 
KUI is a community software tool which allows 
registered members including language experts to 
revise and vote for the synset assignment. The sys-
tem manages the synset assignment according to 
the preferred score obtained from the revision 
process. As a result, the community-based Word-
Nets will be accomplished and exported into the 
original form of WordNet database. Via the synset 
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
105
ID assigned in the WordNet, the system can gener-
ate a cross language WordNet. Through this effort, 
a translated version of Asian WordNet can be es-
tablished. 
Table 1 shows a record of WordNet displayed 
for translation in KUI interface. English entry to-
gether with its part-of-speech, synset, and gloss are 
provided if exists. The members will examine the 
assigned lexical entry and decide whether to vote 
for it or propose a new translation. 
Car 
[Options] 
POS : NOUN 
Synset : auto, automobile, machine, motorcar 
Gloss : a motor vehicle with four wheels; usually propelled 
by an internal combustion engine; 
Table 1. A record for a synset 
 
Figure 1. KUI interface (www.tcllab.org/kui) 
Figure 1 illustrates the translation page of KUI 
In the working area, the login member can partici-
pate in proposing a new translation or voting for 
the preferred translation to revise the synset as-
signment. Statistics of the progress as well as many 
useful functions such as item search, chat, and list 
of online participants are also provided to under-
stand the progress of work and to work online with 
other members. 
3 Tool for Constructing a Syntactic De-
pendency Tree Annotated Corpus 
The tool is organized in 4 steps, namely, sentence 
selection, word segmentation, POS tagging, and 
syntactic dependency tree annotation, shown in 
Figure 2. Sentence segmentation is yet another 
crucial issue for the Thai language. We, however, 
will not discuss about the issue in this work. The 
input is already a list of sentences provided for an-
notator to select. 
 
Figure 2. Syntactic Dependency Tree Annotation 
3.1 POS Annotation 
The result from the automatic word segmentation 
and POS tagging program is generated with alter-
native POSs for revision. A dropdown list of POSs 
is provided for annotator to correct the POS. Since 
word segmentation is processed together with POS 
tagging, the annotator is also provided a GUI to 
merge or to divide the proposed word unit. 
 
3.2 Syntactic Dependency Tree Annotation 
The result from POS annotation in Section 3.1 is 
passed to define the syntactic dependency between 
words. The dependency is assigned to form a 
phrase and a sentence respectively. The final out-
put will be marked in the XML manner and shown 
as a tree for confirmation. 
 
4 Conclusion 
Our current work on the web-based collaborative 
tool for Asian WordNet construction and tool for 
Syntactic Dependency Tree Annotation are devel-
oped as an open platform for online contribution. 
A user-friendly interface and self-organizing utili-
ties are intentionally prepared to support the online 
collaborative work. 
References 
Virach Sornlertlamvanich, Thatsanee Charoenporn, 
Kergit Robkop, and Hitoshi Isahara. 2007. Collabo-
rative Platform for Multilingual Resource Develop-
ment and Intercultural Communication, IWIC2007, 
Springer, LNCS4568:91-102.
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
106
