Coling 2008: Companion volume ? Posters and Demonstrations, pages 119?122
Manchester, August 2008
Construction of an Infrastructure for Providing Users
with Suitable Language Resources
Hitomi Tohyama? Shunsuke Kozawa? Kiyotaka Uchimoto?
Shigeki Matsubara? and Hitoshi Isahara?
?Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, 464-8601, Japan
{hitomi,kozawa,matubara}@el.itc.nagoya-u.ac.jp
?National Institute of Information and Communications Technology
3-5 Hikari-dai, Seika-cho, Soraku-gun, Kyoto, 619-0289, Japan
{uchimioto,isahara}@nict.go.jp
Abstract
Our research organization has been con-
structing a large scale database named
SHACHI by collecting detailed meta in-
formation on language resources (LRs) in
Asia and Western countries. The metadata
database contains more than 2,000 com-
piled LRs such as corpora, dictionaries,
thesauruses and lexicons, forming a large
scale metadata of LRs archive. Its meta-
data, an extended version of OLAC meta-
data set conforming to Dublin Core, have
been collected semi-automatically. This
paper explains the design and the structure
of the metadata database, as well as the re-
alization of the catalogue search tool.
1 Introduction
The construction of LRs such as corpora, dictio-
naries, thesauruses, etc., has boomed for years
throughout the world in its aim of encouraging
research and development in the main media of
spoken and written languages, and its importance
has also been widely recognized. Of the organiza-
tions willing to store and distribute LRs, there ex-
ist some consortia fulfilling their function such as
LDC1, ELRA2, CLARIN3, and OLAC4, in West-
c
? 2008. Licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported li-
cense (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/).
Some rights reserved.
1LDC:Linguistic Data Consortium,
http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/
2ELRA: European LRs Association
3CLARIN: Common Language Resources and Technolo-
gies Infrastructure, http://www.ilsp.gr/clarin eng.html
4OLAC: Open Language Archives Community,
http://www.language-archives.org/
ern countries, and GSK5 which does so mainly in
Japan. However, those released LRs are scarcely
connected with each other because of the dif-
ference between written and spoken language as
well as the difference between languages such
as Japanese, English, and Chinese (OLAC User
Guide, 2008).
This situation makes it difficult for researchers
and users to find LRs which are useful for their re-
searches. In the meantime, by connecting system-
atically existing various LRs with Wrapper Pro-
gram, the attempt to realize multilingual transla-
tion services has already begun (Ishida et al 2008,
Hayashi et al 2008). Moreover, since language in-
formation tags given to those LRs and their data
formats are multifarious, each LR is operated in-
dividually. As LR development generally entails
enormous cost, it is highly desirable that the re-
search efficiency be enhanced by systematically
combining those existing LRs altogether and ex-
tending them, which will encourage an efficient
development of unprecedented LRs.
Our research organization has been constructing
a large scale metadata database named SHACHI6
by collecting detailed meta information on LRs
in Western and Asian countries. This research
project aims to extensively collect metadata such
as tag sets, formats, and usage information about
researches on those LRs. and recorded contents of
LRs existing at home and abroad and store them
systematically. Meanwhile, we have already de-
veloped a search system of LRs by the use of meta
information and are attempting the experiment of
widely providing meta information on our stored
5GSK: Gengo Shigen Kyokai; Language Resource Asso-
ciation, http://www.gsk.or.jp/
6SHACHI: Metadata Database of Language Resources-
SHACHI, Shachi means ?orca? in English.
119
Figure 1: A sample page of SHACHI catalogue (ex. Euro WordNet)
LRs to those from researchers to common users.
This metadata database has been now open to the
public in the Web and allows every Internet user
to access it for the search and read information of
LRs at will.
2 Purpose of Metadata Database
Construction
The purpose of the construction of the database is
the following fivefold.
1. To store language resource metadata:
SHACHI semi-manually collects detailed
metadata of language resources and con-
structs their detailed catalogues. Figure 1
shows a sample page of a LR catalogue stored
in SHACHI (ex. Euro WordNet). The cata-
logue provides more detailed meta informa-
tion than other LR consortia do.
2. To systematize language resource meta-
data: Language resource ontology is tenta-
tively constructed by classifying types of lan-
guage resources (in this paper, it is called ?on-
tology?). Figure 2 shows an example of its
ontology. At the moment, it is under investi-
gation what is the most useful and functional
ontology for users by developing some on-
tologies such as human-made ontology, semi-
automatically produced ontology, and auto-
matically produced ontology.
3. To make each language resource related
to each other: The detailed metadata en-
abled us to describe characteristics of each
language resource and to expectably specify
relationships among language resources. Fig-
ure 3 shows a part of the SHACHI search
screen. It shows language resources found as
a search result, the references to which these
language resources conform as well as other
language resources whose formats are com-
mon to theirs.
4. To statistically investigate language re-
sources: By statistically analyzing the meta-
data, users are able to grasp what kinds of lan-
guage resources exist in different part of the
world and to understand current tendencies of
language resources which have been available
to the public.
5. To promote the distribution of language re-
sources: Since this metadata database en-
ables users to easily gain access to language
resources in accordance with their needs,
owing to fully equipped search functions,
SHACHI will be able to support an effective
use and an efficient development of language
resources.
Some 2,000 resources of metadata have already
been collected in the database so far and they will
be enlarged by a further 3,000. To that end, it is
120
Figure 2: Automatically produced ontology
indispensable for us to work in cooperation with
language resource consortia at home and abroad
and to take the initiative in contributing to Asian
language resources.
3 SHACHI Metadata Set
3.1 Policy for Collecting Metadata
The LRs which our metadata database stores
should satisfy the following conditions:
? Those resources should be stored in a digital
format.
? Those resources should be one of the follow-
ing: corpus, dictionary, thesaurus, or lexicon.
(Numeric data are not considered to be the
subject of collection for SHACHI.)
? Those resources should be collected from En-
glish websites and its data must be open to the
public.
? Those resources should be created by re-
search institutions, researchers, or business
organizations. (Developed tools such as facet
search.)
LRs metadata database SHACHI covers meta
information provided by LR consortia such as
ELRA, LDC, and OLAC whose more detailed
metadata are fed into the database by semi-
automatic means of importing.
3.2 Extensions of Metadata Element
Since users sometimes search for LRs without a
clear objective, it is necessary for language re-
source providers to construct language resource
ontology. This database conforms to the OLAC
metadata set which is based on 15 kinds of fun-
damental elements of Dublin Core7 and consti-
tutes an extended vision of OLAC with 19 newly
added metadata elements which were judged to
be indispensable for describing characteristics of
LRs. SHACHI provides usage information about
how and in which situation language resource re-
searchers utilized each language resource, which
is also important for users. The usage informa-
tion about LRs is automatically retrieved from aca-
demic article databases (Kozawa et al 2008). (See
?Utilization? in Figure1).
3.3 Systematic Storage of LRs
Clear description of the relations among LRs can
be applied to the efficient development of LRs
and search tools for common users of database.
Figure 2 shows ontology generated through auto-
matic means, based on language resource metadata
stored in SHACHI. We first surveyed the frequency
of possible values of metadata element choicesand
generated the ontology by hierarchicalizing meta
elements of our meta categories. While ontology
can be constructed in various ways from different
standpoints, our ontology is particularly designed
for users to enable to find them efficiently by fol-
lowing the hierarchical classes of our ontology.
4 Search Tools for Providing
Users-Oriented Information
Figure 3 shows a screen image of a search re-
sult through SHACHI. This section discusses three
search functions provided in SHACHI.
4.1 Three Types of Search Functions
For the purpose of facilitating users of this meta-
data database to find their intended language re-
source catalogues, SHACHI provides three search
functions:
1. Keyword search function: This tool is suit-
able for users who have clear images to search
7Dublin Core Metadata Initiative, http://dublincore.org/
121
Figure 3: Catalogue search tool
for specified LRs and a technical knowledge
of language processing. It allows them to in-
put keywords as they want and to search all
words stored in SHACHI metadata archive.
2. Facet search function: This tool is suitable
for users who have a vague idea of what kind
of LR they want. It is equipped with a choice
of 15 kinds of metadata elements selected
from the SHACHI metadata set. The users
narrow down the target LRs one by one in
order to find the intended one. For example,
with one click on ?age?, three choices such as
?Childrenfs utterance??, ?Adultsf utterance??
and ?Both are OK?? will be shown.
3. Ontology search function: This tool was de-
veloped by adopting the idea acquired by sys-
tematizing LRs registered in SHACHI. When
using the ontology search function, users find
the intended LRs by following the vertical re-
lationship of the ontology. It was ascertained
that ontology search function tool had the
merit of enabling users to discover LRs that
have not been ever found by keyword search
and facet search functions.
5 Conclusion
In this paper, we reported on the design of
SHACHI, a metadata database of LRs now be-
ing developed, the expansion and construction of
metadata for it, and an actualization of a search
function. At present, it contains approximately
2,000 pieces of meta information on LRs such
as corpora, dictionaries and thesauruses. One of
SHACHIfs characteristic features is that with a
collection of tag sets, format samples, and us-
age information on LRs which is automatically re-
trieved from scholarly papers given to LRs. From
now on the SHACHI project is intended to promote
cooperation among other LRs consortia abroad as
well as in Japan and to take the initiative in con-
tributing to the development of LRs in Asia.
References
Ishida,T., Nadamoto, A., Murakami,Y., Inaba, R. et al
2008. A Non-Profit Operation Model for the Lan-
guage Grid, In proceedings of the 1st International
Conference on Global Interoperability for language
Resources, pp.114-121.
Kozawa, S., Tohyama, H., Uchimoto, K., Matsubara,
S., and Isahara. H. 2008. Automatic Acquisition of
Usage Infor-mation for Language Resources, In pro-
ceedings of the 6th edition of the Language Re-
sources and Evaluation Conference.
OLAC (Open Language Archives Communi-ty), 2008.
Searching of OLAC Metadata: User Guide, http://
www.language-archives.org/tools/search/searchDoc.html
Yoshihito Hayashi, Thierry Declerck, Paul Buitelaar,
Monica Monachini. 2008. Ontologies for a Global
Language Infrastructure, In proceedings of the 1st
International Conference on Global Interoperability
for language Resources, pp.105-112.
122
