Coling 2008: Companion volume ? Posters and Demonstrations, pages 185?188
Manchester, August 2008
Semantic visualization and meaning computation
Fabienne Venant
Loria
Campus Scientifique
BP 239
54506 Vandoeuvre-les-Nancy
fabienne.venant@loria.fr
Abstract
We present here VISUSYN, a prototype we
developed in order to study meaning con-
struction. This software implements the
model of dynamic construction of meaning
proposed by Victorri and Fuchs (1996). It
allows a semantic visualization that can be
used to compute the meaning of a lexical
unit in a given context
1 Introduction
Meaning construction ? how words take meaning
in a sentence or in a text ?i s an important issue for
computational linguistics. The major problem we
have to deal with is that each word can have a lot
of different meanings, depending on context. This
phenomenon ? called polysemy ? is constitutive of
language, and is the basis of its richness. However
it is quite difficult to formalize. In most models of
language, polysemy is considered as a kind of arte-
fact. In these models, polysemy amounts to very
little: a choice in a list of pre-existing meanings.
However the omnipresence of polysemy always
leads this kind of computation to combinatorial ex-
plosions. To avoid this problem, we want to give a
central place in meaning construction to polysemy:
that is why we define our model within the frame-
work of continuous mathematics. This model was
first proposed by Victorri and Fuchs (1996). It is
deeply rooted in Gestalttheorie (Guillaume, 1979).
Each linguistic unit is associated with a semantic
space, where its different meanings are organized
according to semantic proximity. The other units
of the utterance define a potential function, which
c
? 2008. Licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported li-
cense (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/).
Some rights reserved.
allows us to determinate the region of the seman-
tic space corresponding to the meaning of the unit
studied within the utterance.
Figure 1: Model
We present here VISUSYN, the software we de-
veloped in order to implement this model. VIS-
USYN is still a work in progress. The working ver-
sion was developed in Matlab. A Java version will
be developed as soon as possible.
2 Presentation of VISUSYN
VISUSYN makes two kinds of operations, corre-
sponding to the two componants of the model:
it constructs semantics spaces and then com-
putes meaning functions defined on these semantic
spaces.
The algorithm for building semantic spaces re-
lies on the analysis of a graph of synonyms. The
aim of the exploration is to reveal the structure of
the lexicon modelled by the graph so an automatic
system can reach the information it contains. VIS-
USYN can construct local spaces, representing the
semantic of a given unit, as well as global spaces,
representing a lexical paradigm in its whole (for
French adjectives, or adverbs for instance). Local
185
spaces are used to compute meaning of the unit
under study when accompanied by a given word
in a sentence. To compute the corresponding po-
tential function, VISUSYN uses cooccurence data
from large scale corpora.
3 Small-world graphs
It has been discovered recently that most lexical
graphs belong to the class of small-world graphs.
This term denotes graphs where most nodes are
neighbors of one another, but every node can be
reached from other by a small number of hops
or steps. Small-world networks were defined by
Watts and Strogatz (1998). They noted that graphs
could be classified according to their clustering co-
efficient (C) and their characteristic path length
(L). Additionally, a third property can be associ-
ated with small-world networks even though it is
not required for that classification. Specifically,
if a small-world network has a degree-distribution
which can be fitted with a power law distribution,
it is taken as a sign that the network is small-
world. These networks are known as scale-free
networks. Ravasz and Barab?asi (2003) showed that
a high clustering coefficient with scale free topol-
ogy determines an original combination of modu-
larity and hierarchical organization. It is not a sim-
ply pyramidal organization. The structure is made
of groups of nodes, with small clusters at the bot-
tom and very large groups at the top. Moreover,
groups of nodes may overlap at any level. This
self-similar nesting of different groups or module
into each other forces a strict fine structure on real
networks (Ravasz and Barab?asi, 2003).
4 Building semantic spaces
The algorithm will be here illustraded on the
French adjective lexicon. The graph under study,
called Synadj, is a graph of synonymy with 3,699
vertices and 22,568 links. We verified the small-
word structure of this graph (C, L and degree dis-
tribution). This small-world structure led us to
use the cliques
1
of the graph as a tool for build-
ing the semantic space. A clique in a graph is a
maximal set of pairwise adjacent vertices, or ? in
other words ? an induced subgraph which is a max-
imal complete graph. In the present case, a clique
is made of adjectives which are all synonyms in
1
Following the idea first proposed by Ploux and Vic-
torri (1998)
a one to one relationship. By virtue of the defi-
nition, small-world networks will inevitably have
high representation of cliques, and subgraphs that
are a few edges shy of being cliques, i.e. small-
world networks will have sub-networks that are
characterized by the presence of connections be-
tween almost any two nodes within them. This
follows from the requirement of a high cluster co-
efficient. We can consider as a first approxima-
tion that the cliques define very precise meanings
that can be considered as the intersection of the
meanings of all the units belonging to the clique.
We thus define the semantic space as the euclidian
space generated by the vertices of the graph (the
adjectives, here). Each clique of the graph is as-
sociated with a point of this space, which coordi-
nates depend on wich vertices belong to the clique.
VISUSYN uses the chi-square distance to compute
the distances between the cliques. Then a princi-
pal component analysis is applied to reduce the di-
mensionality of the space. In order to build a lo-
cal semantic space (for example associated with a
given word), we select a sub-graph, made only by
the word under study and all its synonyms. The
local space only contains the cliques of this sub-
graph
2
. Figure 2 shows a visualization of the se-
mantic space associated with the French adjective
sec (dry, severe, brusque...). It accounts for the six
main meanings we can find in a dictionary.
Figure 2: Local space associated with the French
adjectives sec
The global semantic space is generated by
all the vertices of Synadj. It contains all the
11,900 cliques of Synadj. Figure 3 shows a part
of the global space of French adjectives. The
2
Ploux and Victorri (1998) first proposed the algo-
rithm and built the lexical data. Local semantic spaces
can be consulted at http://elsap1.unicaen.fr/dicosyn.html or
http://dico.isc.cnrs.fr/fr/index.html.
186
Figure 3: Global semantic space: French adjectives (2D)
very centre of the space only contains intensive
meanings like authentique; certain; evident; in-
contestable (authentic; certain; evident; incon-
testable) or agr?eable; charmant; enivrant; ravis-
sant; s?eduisant (agreeable; delightful; exciting;
attractive). These meanings are very general
meanings and can apply to any nouns.
There are now many semantic branches more
or less long growing out from the central core.
These branches are very dense near the centre and
then go in all the directions becoming sparser and
sparser. They are homogenous from a semantic
viewpoint. Each branch only contains one sort of
adjectival meaning: relational, qualificative, or in-
tensive. VISUSYN had also been used to explore
other global lexicons, like French verbs (Figure 4
? (Gaume et al, 2006)) or French adverbs ending
in -ment (more or less corresponding to english ad-
verbs ending in -ly).
5 Meaning Computation
Let?s go on with French adjectives. An attributive
adjective is always linked to a noun. It is this noun
which mostly constrains the meaning of this adjec-
tive, even if other units like the article can play a
role.
We show here how Visynsyn can be used to au-
tomatically find which synonyms match better the
meaning of an adjective (here the French adjec-
tive sec) when used with a given noun. In order to
do this, VISUSYN associates a characteristic func-
Figure 4: Global semantic space: French verbs
(3D)
tion with each synonym. To compute the value of
the function in a given point, it evaluates wether
the synonym belongs to the corresponding clique
or not. The basins of this function represent the
meaning zones of the semantic space in which the
synonymy between the word and the given syn-
onym is relevant.
To compute the meaning of sec when used with
a given noun, VISUSYN associates a potential
function with the noun. The value of this func-
tion in each point depends on the frequencies of
cooccurrence of the noun with the adjectives of the
corresponding clique. The basins of the function
determine the zone of the semantic space corre-
sponding to the meaning of sec when used with
the associated noun. Figure 6 shows the potential
187
function associated with fleur (flower). In this case
the noun fleur forces sec to take a precise meaning
in the zone ?lack of water?.
Figure 5: Characteristic function associated with
the adjective brusque
Figure 6: Potential function associated with fleur
(flower)
The method of disambiguation consists in com-
paring the function of a synonym to the function
of the noun under focus. The more the functions
overlap, the more you can replace sec with its syn-
onym without changing the meaning of the syn-
tagm. This method has been used to compute
the overlap rate for 20 nouns among the most fre-
quently used with sec in a large corpus (Frantext,
http://atilf.atilf.fr/frantext.htm). The results auto-
matically processed were compared with the hu-
man answers on the same task. The rate of success
is 79% (Venant, 2006).
This works for a fined grained disambiguation.
VISUSYN can also deal with a more macrocopic
partition of the semanctic space. Figure 2 shows
a division of the semantic space of sec in 6 zones.
VISUSYN can decide automatically which of these
six zones correspond to the meaning of sec , when
used with a given noun. The method is similar to
the previous: It now associates each zone (and not
only each synonym) with a characteristic function.
This function is computed according to the cliques
belonging to the zone. For each noun, VISUSYN
compares its potential function with that of each
zone. It thus computes an affinity rate between
each noun and each zone. This method gives better
results than the previous
6 Conclusion
Although VISUSYN is still a prototype, it seems
very promising. Our basic result is that the kind
of visualization presented here displays the struc-
ture of lexical graphs. It also constitutes an ori-
ginal tools to explore the structure of small-world
graphs. As the algorithm is independent of the na-
ture of the relation modelized by the graph, it could
be used to explore other small-world graphs
It offers interesting possibilities of using seman-
tic informations in computational linguistics, espe-
cially in the domain of automatic disambiguation.
(We also evaluated its results on verbs and noun).
From a more theoretical point of view, it accounts
for the validity of the underlying model. Of course
this model has some limits and the work is still in
progress. We have to develop the system. How-
ever, this work shows how continuous mathema-
tics can be relevant for semantic modelization and
encourages us in the challenge of using continuity
for corpus linguistics.
References
Gaume, Bruno, Fabienne Venant, and Bernard Victorri.
2006. Hierarchy in lexical organisation of natural
languages. Hierarchy in Natural and social Sciences
Denise Pumain (ed), pages 121?142.
Guillaume, Gustave. 1979. La psychologie de la forme.
Flammarion.
Ploux, Sabine and Victorri Bernard. 1998. Construc-
tion d?espaces s?emantiques ?a l?aide de dictionnaires
de synonymes. Traitement automatique des langues,
39:161?182.
Ravasz, Erzs?ebet and Albert L?aszl?o Barab?asi. 2003.
Hierarchical organization in complex networks.
Physical Review, E 67:026112.
Venant, Fabienne. 2006. A geometric approach to
graph exploration. In Fourth Workshop in Informa-
tion and Human Language Technology (TIL?2006).
Victorri, Bernard and Catherine Fuchs. 1996.
La polys?emie, construction dynamique du sens.
Herm`es.
Watts, Duncan .J. and Steven H. Strogatz. 1998. Col-
lective dynamics of small-world networks. Nature,
393:440?442.
188
