Deletions and their reconstruction in tectogrammatical syntactic 
tagging of very large corpora 
Eva ItAJICOVA 
UFAL 
Charles University 
Malostransk6 nfim. 25 
118 00 Prague, Czech Republic 
hajicova @ufal.mff.cuni.cz 
MarkEta CEPLOVA 
0FAL 
Charles University 
Malostransk6 n&n. 25 
118 00 Prague, Czech Republic 
ceplovam@yahoo.com 
Abstract 
The procedure of reconstruction of the 
underlying structure of sentences (in the 
process of tagging a very large corpus of 
Czech) is described, with a special attention 
paid to the conditions under which the 
reconstruction of ellipted nodes is carried 
out. 
1. The tagging scenarios with different 
(degrees and types of) theoretical 
backgrounds have undergone a rather rapid 
development flom morphologically based 
part-of-speech (POS) tagging through 
treebanks capturing the surface syntactic 
structures of sentences to semantically 
oriented tagging models, taking into account 
the underlying structure of sentences and/or 
certain issues of the 'inner' semantics of 
lexical units and their collocations. 
One of the critical aspects of the tagging 
scenario capturing the underlying structure 
of the sentences i  the 'depth' of the resulting 
tree structures; in other words, how far these 
structures differ from the surface structures. 
If we take for granted (as is the case in most 
of the syntactic treebanks) that every word 
of the (surface) sentence should have a node 
of its own in the surface tree structure, then 
this issue can in part be reformulated in 
terms of two subquestions: 
(i) which surface nodes are superfluous and 
should be 'pruned away', 
(ii) which nodes should be assumed to be 
deleted in the surface and should be 
'restored' in the underlying structure (e.g. in 
forms of different kinds of dummy symbols, 
see Fillmore 1999). 
In our paper, we are concerned with the 
point (ii). 
2. In the TG and post-TG writings, it is 
common to distinguish between two types of 
deletions: (a) ellipsis proper and (b) 
gapping. For both of them, it is crucial that 
the elliptical construction and its antecedent 
should be parallel and 'identical' at least in 
some features. The two types of ellipsis can 
be illustrated by examples (1) and (2), 
respectively. 
(1) Psal jenom flkoly, kterd chtal. 
lit. 'He-wrote only homework's which he- 
wanted' 
(2) Honza dal Marii rfiki a Petr Ida tulipfin. 
lit. 'John gave Mary rose and Peter Ida tulip' 
For both types, a reconstruction i  some 
way or another is necessary, if the tree 
structure is to capture the underlying 
structure of the sentences. 
3. The examples quoted in the previous 
section cover what Quirk et al (1973, pp. 
536-620) call 'ellipsis in the strict sense'; 
they view ellipsis as a purely surface 
278 
phenomenon: the recoverability of the 
ellipted words is always unique and 'fits' 
into the surface structure. They difl'erentiate 
ellipsis fiom 'semantic implication' which 
would cover e.g. such cases as (3) and (4): 
(3) John wants to read. 
(4) Thanks. 
If (3) is 'reconstructed' as 'John wants John 
to read', then the two occurrences of 'John' 
are referentially different, which is not true 
about the interpretation of (3). With (4), it 
cannot be uniquely determined whether the 
full corresponding structure should be '1 owe 
you thanks' or 'I give you thanks' etc. 
4. For tagging a corpus on the underlying 
level, it is clear that we cannot limit 
ourselves to the cases of ellipsis in tile strict 
sense but we have to broaden lhe notion of 
'reconstruction' to cover both 
(i) deletions licensed by the grammatical 
i)roperties of sentence lements or sentence 
structure, and 
(it) deletions licensed only by the preceding 
context (be it co-text or context of situation). 
4.1. In our analysis of a sample of Czech 
National Corpus, two situations may occur 
within the group (i): 
(a) Only the position itself that should be 
"filled" in the sentence structure is 
predetemfined (i.e. a sentence element is 
subcategorized for this position), but its 
lexical setting is Tree'. 
This is e.g. the case of the so-called pro- 
drop character of Czech, where the position 
of the subject of a verb is 'given', but it may 
be filled in dependence on the context. 
(5) Pi:edseda vlfidy i:ekl, ~e pf'edlo~i nfivrh na 
zmenu volebniho systdmu. 
'The Prime-minister said that (0) will submit 
a proposal on tile change of the electoral 
system.' 
The 'dropped' subject of the verb pi:edlo2i 
'will submit' may refer to the Prime- 
minister, to the Govermnent, or to 
somebody else identifiable on the basis of 
the context. 
Here also belong cases of the semantically 
obligatory but deletable complementations 
of verbs: the Czech verb l)i:(/et 'to arrive' has 
as its obligatory complementation a Actor 
and a Directional "where-to" (the 
obligatoriness of the Directional 
complementation can be tested by a question 
test, see Panevovfi 1974; Sgall et al 1986), 
which can be deleted on the surface; its 
reference is determined by the context. 
(6) Vlak pi~ijede v poledne. 
'Tile train will arrive at noon.' 
The utterer of (6) deletes the Direction 
'where-to' because s/he assumes that the 
hearer knows the referent. 
(b) Both the position and its 'filler' are 
predetermined. 
This is the case of e.g. the subject of the 
infinitival complement of the so-called verbs 
of control as in (7). 
(7) Pi"edseda vVldy slibil pi~edlo~it nfivrh na 
zm6nu volebniho systdmu. 
'The Prime-minister promised to submit a 
proposal on the change of the electoral 
system.' 
The identification of the underlying subject 
of the infinitive is 'controlled' by the Actor 
of the main verb, in our example it is 'the 
Prime-minister'. 
Another example of this class of deletions 
are the so-called General Participants (close 
to the English one or German man): General 
Actor in (8), General Patient in (9), or 
General Addressee in (10). 
(8) Ta kniha byla u~ vydfina dvakrfit. 
'The book has already been published twice.' 
(9) V nedeli obvykle pe~,u. 
'On Sundays (I) usually bake.' 
(10) D6dei?ek 6asto vypravuie pohfidky. 
'Grandfather often tells fairy-tales.' 
279 
4.2 Within the group (ii), there belong cases 
of the so-called 'occasional ellipsis' 
conditioned by the context alone. 
We are aware that not everything in any 
position that is identifiable on the basis of 
the context can be deleted in Czech (as 
might be in an extreme way concluded from 
examples (11) through (14)). However, the 
conditions restricting the possibility of 
ellipsis in Czech seem to be less strict than 
e.g. in English, as illustrated by (15): 
(11) Milujeme a ctime svdho u~itele. 
'We love and honour our teacher.' 
(12) Marii j sem vid~l a slygel zpivat. 
lit. 'Mary-Acc. Aux-be saw and heard to- 
sing' 
'! saw and heard Mary singing.' 
(13) Jirka se v~era v hospod6 opil do 
n6moty a Honza dneska. 
lit. 'Jirka himself yesterday in pub drunk to 
death and Honza today.' 
'In the pub, Jirka drunk himself to death 
yesterday and Honza today.' 
(14) Petr f-ikal Pavlovi, aby ~el ven, a 
Martin, aby zflstal doma. 
'Peter told Pavel to go outside and Martin 
(told Pavel) to stay at home.' 
(15) (Potkaljsi veera Toma?) Potkal. 
'(Did you meet Tom yesterday?) Met'. 
4.3 in addition to setting principles of which 
nodes need to be restored it is also important 
to say in which cases no restoration is 
desirable. Nodes are not restored in cases of: 
(a) accidental omission (due to emotion, 
excitement or insufficient command of 
language, see e.g. Hlavsa 1990); 
(b) unfinished sentences, which usually lack 
focus (unlike ellipsis where the 'missing' 
elements belong to topic); 
(c) sentences without a finite verb that can 
be captured by a structure with a noun in its 
root (in these cases there are no empty 
positions, nothing can be really added). 
All these cases have no clear-cut boundaries, 
rather it is more appropriate to expect 
continual transitions. 
5.1 The Prague Dependency Tree Bank 
(PDT in the sequel), which has been 
inspired by the build-up of the Penn 
Treebank (Marcus, Santorini & 
Marcinkiewicz 1993; Marcus, Kim, 
Marcinkiewicz et al 1994), is aimed at a 
complex annotation of (a part of) the Czech 
National Corpus (CNC in the sequel), the 
creation of which is under progress at the 
Department of Czech National Corpus at the 
Faculty of Philosophy, Charles University 
(the corpus currently comprises about 100 
million tokens of word forms). PDT 
comprises three layers of annotations: (i) the 
morphemic layer with about 3000 
morphemic tag values; a tag is assigned to 
each word form of a sentence in the corpus 
and the process of tagging is based on 
stochastic procedures described by Haii6 
and Hladkfi (1997); (ii) analytic tree 
structures (ATSs) with every word form and 
punctuation mark explicitly represented asa 
node of a rooted tree, with no additional 
nodes added (except for the root of the tree 
of every sentence) and with the edges of the 
tree corresponding to (surface) dependency 
relations; (iii) tectogrammatical tree 
structures (TGTSs) corresponding to the 
underlying sentence representations, again 
dependency-based. 
At present the PDT contains 100000 
sentences (i.e. ATSs) tagged on the first two 
layers. As for the third layer, the input for 
the tagging procedure are the ATSs; this 
procedure is in its starting phase and is 
divided into (i) automatic preprocessing (see 
BOhmov~ and Sgall 2000) and (ii) the 
manual phase. The restoration of the 
syntactic information absent in the surface 
(morphemic) shape of the sentence (i.e. for 
which there are no nodes on the analytic 
level) is mostly (but not exclusively) done - 
280 
at least for the time being - in the manual 
phase of the transduction procedure. In this 
phase, the tagging of the topic-focus 
articulation is also performed (see 
Burfifiovfi, Hajieovfi and Sgall 2000). 
5.2 The reconstruction of deletions in 
TGTSs is guided by the following general 
principles: 
(i) All 'restored' nodes standing for elements 
deleted in the surface structure of the 
sentence but present in its underlying 
structure get marked by one of the following 
values in the attribute DEL: 
ELID: the 'restored' element stauds alone; 
e.g. the linearized TGTS (disregarding other 
than structural relations) for (16) is (16'). 
(Note: Every dependent item is enclosed in a 
pair of parenthesis. The capitalized 
abbreviations stand for dependency relations 
and are self-explaining; in our examples we 
use English lexical units to make the 
representations more transparent.) 
(16) Sbfral houby. 
'Collected-he mushrooms.' 
(16') (he.ACT.ELID) collected 
(mushrooms.PAT) 
ELEX: if the antecedent is an expanded 
head node and not all the deleted nodes 
belong to the obligatory colnplementations 
of the given node and as such not all are 
reconstructed, cf. e.g. the simplified TGTS 
for (13) in (13'). 
(13') ((Jirka.ACT) (yesterday.TWHEN) 
(pub.LOC) drunk-himself (to- 
death.MANN)) and (drunk-himself.ELEX 
(Honza.ACT) (today.TWHEN)) 
EXPN: if the given node itself was not 
ellipted but some of its complementations 
were and are not restored (see the principle 
(iii)(b) below), cf. e.g. the simplified TGTS 
in (15') for (15) above, with non- 
reconstructed telnporal modification: 
(15') (I.ACT.ELID) met.EXPN 
(Tom.PAT.ELID) 
(ii) The restored nodes are added 
immediately to the left of their governor. 
(iii) The following cases are prototypical 
examples of restorations (for an easier 
reference to the above discussion of the 
types of deletions, the primed numbers of 
tile TGTSs refer to the example sentences in
Section 4): 
(a) Restoration of nodes for 
complementations for which the head nodes 
(governors) are subcategorized. The 
assignment of the lexical labels is governed 
by the following principles: in pro-drop 
cases (5') (comparable to Fillmore's 1999 
CNI - constructionally-licensed null 
instantiation) and with an obligatory but 
deletable complementation (6') (cf. 
Filhnore's definite null instantiation, DNI) 
the lexieal value corresponds to the 
respective pronoun; with grammatical 
coreference (control), the lexical value is 
Cor (7'); in both these cases, the lexical 
wdue of the antecedent is put into a special 
attribute of Coreference; in cases of general 
participants (cf. Filllnore's indefinite null 
instantiation - INI) the lexical value is Gen 
(10'): 
(5') (prime-minister.ACT) said 
((he.ACT.ELID; COREF: prime-minister) 
will-submit.PAT (proposal.PAT 
(change.PAT (system.PAT 
(electoral.RSTR))))) 
(6') (train.ACT) will-arrive (noon.TWHEN) 
(here/there.ELID.DIR3) 
(7') (prime-lninister.ACT) promised 
((Cor.ACT.ELID; COREF: prilne-nainister) 
submit.PAT (proposal.PAT (change.PAT 
(system.PAT (electoral.RSTR))))) 
(10') (grandfather.ACT) (often.TWHEN) 
(Gen.ADDR.ELID) tells (fairy-tales.PAT) 
(b) Elipted optional complelnentations are 
not restored (see (13') above) unless they are 
governors of adjuncts. 
(c) For coordinated structures, the guiding 
principle says: whenever possible, give 
281 
precedence to a "constituent" coordination 
before a "sentential" one (more generally: 
"be as economical as possible"), thus 
examples like (t7) are not treated as 
sentential coordination (i.e. they are not 
transformed into structures corresponding to
(17')). 
(17) Karel pfinesl Jan6 kv6tiny a knihu. 
'Katel brought Jane flowers and a book.' 
(17') Karel pfinesl Jan6 kv6tiny a Katel 
pfinesl Jan6 knihu. 
'Karel brought Jane flowers and Karel 
brought Jane a book.' 
A special symbol CO is introduced in the 
complex labels for the coordinated nodes to 
mark which nodes stand in the coordination 
relation and which modify the coordination 
as a whole (see (11')); the lexical value of 
the restored elements is copied from the 
antecedents (see (13') above): 
(11') ((we.ACT) (love.CO) and (honour.CO) 
(our teacher.PAT)) 
The analysis of (11') is to be preferred to 
sentential coordination with deletion also for 
its correspondence with the fact, that in 
Czech object can stand after coordinated 
verbs only if the semantic relation between 
the verbs allows for a unifying 
interpretation, as shown by cases, where the 
object must be repeated with each verb 
(compare the contrast between (18) and 
(19)). 
(I 8) Potkal jsem Petra, ale nepoznal jsem 
ho. 
'I met Peter, but I didn't recognize him.' 
(19) ??Potkal, ale nepoznal jsem Petra. 
'I met but didn't recognize Peter.' 
However, there are cases where the 
coordination has to be taken as sentential or 
at least at a higher level. As modal verbs are 
represented asgramatemes of the main verb, 
sentences as (20) have to be analysed as in 
(20'): 
(20) Petr musel i cht61 pfijit. 
'Peter had to and wanted to come.' 
(20') (Peter.ACT) (had-to-come.CO) and 
(wanted-to-come.ELID. CO) 
Another case of a less strict adherence to the 
economy principle are sentences with 
double reading. Such a treatnaent hen 
allows for a distinction to be made between 
the two readings, e.g. in (21), namely 
between (a) 'villagers who are (both) old and 
sick' and (b) 'villagers who are sick (but not 
necessarily old) and villagers who ate old 
(but not necessarily sick)': 
(21) Jim zachrfinil star6 a nemocnd 
vesnieany. 
'Jim saved old and sick villagers.' 
(2 l'a) (Jim.ACT) saved (villagers.PAT 
((old.CO.RSTR) and (sick.CO.RSTR))) 
(2 l'b) (Jim.ACT) saved 
((villagers.CO.PAT.ELID (old.RSTR)) and 
(villagers.CO.PAT (sick.RSTR))) 
5.3 The research reported oll in this 
contribution is work in progress: the 
principles are set, but precisions are 
achieved as the annotators progress. There 
are many issues left for further 
investigation; let us mention just one of 
them, as an illustration. Both in (22) and in 
(23), the scope of 'mfilokdo' (few) is (at least 
on the preferential readings) wide ('there are 
few people such that...'); however, (24) is 
ambiguous: (i) there were few people such 
that gave P. a book and M. flowers, (ii) few 
people gave P. a book and few people gave 
M. flowers (not necessarily the same 
people). A similar ambiguity is exhibited by 
(25): (i) there was no such (single) person 
that would give P. a book and M. flowers, 
(ii) P. did not get a book and M. did not get 
flowers. However, there is no such 
ambiguity in (26). 
(22) Mfilokdo jf jablka a nejf ban,~ny. 
lit. 'Few eat apples and do-not-eat bananas' 
'Few people eat apples and do not eat 
bananas.' 
282 
(23) Mfilokdo dal Petrovi knihu a Marii 
kvetiny ne. 
lil. 'Few gave Peter book and Mary flowers 
not' 
'l~ew people gave Peter a book and did not 
give Mary flowcrs.' 
(24) Mfilokdo dal Petrovi knihu a Marii 
kv6tiny. 
lit. 'Few gave Peter book and Mary flowers' 
'Few people gave Peter a book and Mary 
flowers.' 
(25) Nikdo nedal Petrovi knihu a Marii 
kv6tiny. 
lit. 'Nobody did-not-give Peter book and 
Mary flowers' 
'Nobody gave Peter a book and Mary 
flowers.' 
(26) Petrovi nikdo nodal knihu a Marii 
kv6tiny. 
lit. 'Peter nobody did-not-give book and 
Mary flowers' 
'To Peter, nobody gave a book and to Mary, 
flowers.' 
An explanation of this behaviour offers 
itself in terms of the interplay el! contrast in 
polarity and of topic-focus articulation: an 
element standing at Ille beginning of the 
sentence with a contras\[ in polarity carries a 
wide scopc ('few' in (22) and (23)); with 
sentences without such a contrast both wide 
scope and narrow scope interpretations are 
possible ('few' and 'nobody' in (24) and (25), 
respectively); (25) differs from (26) in that 
in the latter sentence, the element in 
contrastive topic is 'Peter' in the first 
conjunct and 'Mary' in the second, rather 
than 'nobody', and there is no contrast in 
polarity involved. 
The tagging scheme sketched in the 
previous ections offers only a single TGTS 
for the ambiguous structures instead of two, 
which is an undesirable result. However, if 
lhe explanation offered above is confl'onted 
with a larger amount of data and confirmed, 
lhe difference between the two 
interpretations could be captured either by 
means of a combination of tags for the 
restored nodes and for the topic-focus 
articulation or by diflerent structures for 
coordination: while example (22) supports 
the economical treatment of coordinate 
structures (the ACT modifying the 
coordination as whole), examples (24) 
through (26) seem to suggest hat there may 
be cases where the other approach 
(sentential coordination with ellipsis) is 
more appropriate to capture the differences 
in meaning. 
Acknowledgement. The research reported 
on in this paper has bccn predominantly 
carried out within a project suplgorted by the 
Czech Grant Agency 405-96-K214 and in 
part by the Czech Ministry o17 Education VS 
96-151. 
References 
l~;6hmc, v{l A. and Sgall F'. (2000) Automat ic  
procedures in tectogrammatical t gging. In these 
lhocecdings. 
Burfifiovfi E., ltaji~ovfi E. and Sgall P. (2000) 
Tagging oJ' ve O' large coq~ora: T<)pic-Foctts 
Articuhltion. In this volume. 
Fillmore C. J. (1999) Silem amtFhora." Corlms, 
FrallleNel, all(\[ missin,~ colslplelllellts. Paper 
presented atthe TELI~.I workshop: P, ratislava. 
llaji,2 J. and ltladkfi 13. (1997) Probabilistic crag 
rule-based tagger of an iqflective hmguage - a 
eomparisols. In "Proceedings of the Fifth 
Conference on Applied Natural Language 
Processing", Washington, D.C., pp. 111 -118. 
llaii6ovfi E., Panevovfi J. and Sgall P. (1998) 
Language Resources Need Amtotatimls 7b Make 
Them Really Reusable: The Prague Dependency 
7)'eebank. in "Proceedings ofthe First International 
Conference on Language Resources & 
Evaluation", Granada, Spain, pp. 713-718. 
llaji~ovfi E., Partee B. and Sgall P. (1998) 7bpic- 
focus articulation, trOmrtite structures, and 
semantic ontent. Kluwcr, l)ordrccht. 
Hlavsa Z. (1990) Some Notes on Ellipsis in Czech 
Language cmd Linguistics. Studi italiani di 
linguistica leorica cd applicata 19, pp. 377-387. 
Marcus M. P., Kim G., Marcinkicwicz M. A. et al 
(1994) 7'he Penn Treebank: Amzotating l'redicate 
283 
Argunwnt Structure. Proceedings of tile ARPA 
Human Language Technology Workshop. Morgan 
Kaufmann, San Francisco. 
Marcus M. P., Santorini B. and Marcinkiewicz M. A. 
(1993) Building a Large Annotated Ccnpus of 
English: the Penn Treebank. Computational 
Linguislics, 19(2), pp. 313-330. 
Panevovfi J. (1974) On verbal frames in Functional 
Generative Description. Prague Bulletin of 
Mathematical Linguistics 22, pp. 3-40; 23(1975), 
pp. 17-52. 
Quirk R., Greenbaum S., Leech G. and Svartvik J. 
(1973) A glztmmar of contemporao, English. 2nd 
Ed. Longman, London. 
Sgall P., Haji~ovfi E. and Panevovfi J. (1986) The 
Meaning of the Sentence in lts Semalttic and 
Pragmatic Aspects, ed. by J. L. Mey, Dordrecht, 
Reidel - Prague, Academia. 
284 
