Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT, Short Papers (Companion Volume), pages 33?36,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Icelandic Data Driven Part of Speech Tagging
Mark Dredze
Department of Computer and Information Science
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
mdredze@cis.upenn.edu
Joel Wallenberg
Department of Linguistics
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
joelcw@babel.ling.upenn.edu
Abstract
Data driven POS tagging has achieved good
performance for English, but can still lag be-
hind linguistic rule based taggers for mor-
phologically complex languages, such as Ice-
landic. We extend a statistical tagger to han-
dle fine grained tagsets and improve over the
best Icelandic POS tagger. Additionally, we
develop a case tagger for non-local case and
gender decisions. An error analysis of our sys-
tem suggests future directions.
1 Introduction
While part of speech (POS) tagging for English is
very accurate, languages with richer morphology de-
mand complex tagsets that pose problems for data
driven taggers. In this work we consider Icelandic,
a language for which a linguistic rule-based method
is the current state of the art, indicating the difficulty
this language poses to learning systems. Like Ara-
bic and Czech, other morphologically complex lan-
guages with large tagsets, Icelandic can overwhelm
a statistical tagger with ambiguity and data sparsity.
Shen et al (2007) presented a new framework for
bidirectional sequence classification that achieved
the best POS score for English. In this work, we
evaluate their tagger on Icelandic and improve re-
sults with extensions for fine grained annotations.
Additionally, we show that good performance can
be achieved using a strictly data-driven learning ap-
proach without external linguistic resources (mor-
phological analyzer, lexicons, etc.). Our system
achieves the best performance to date on Icelandic,
with insights that may help improve other morpho-
logically rich languages.
After some related work, we describe Icelandic
morphology followed by a review of previous ap-
proaches. We then apply a bidirectional tagger and
extend it for fine grained languages. A tagger for
case further improves results. We conclude with an
analysis of remaining errors and challenges.
2 Related Work
Previous approaches to tagging morphologically
complex languages with fine grained tagsets have
considered Czech and Arabic. Khoja (2001) first in-
troduced a tagger for Arabic, which has 131 tags,
but subsequent work has collapsed the tagset to sim-
plify tagging (Diab et al, 2004). Like previous Ice-
landic work (Loftsson, 2007), morphological ana-
lyzers disambiguate words before statistical tagging
in Arabic (Habash and Rambow, 2005) and Czech
(Hajic? and Hladk?, 1998). This general approach
has led to the serial combination of rule based and
statistical taggers for efficiency and accuracy (Hajic?
et al, 2001). While our tagger could be combined
with these linguistic resources as well, as in Loftsson
(2007), we show state of the art performance without
these resources. Another approach to fine-grained
tagging captures grammatical structures with tree-
based tags, such as ?supertags? in the tree-adjoining
grammar of Bangalore and Joshi (1999).
3 Icelandic Morphology
Icelandic is notable for its morphological richness.
Verbs potentially show as many as 54 different
forms depending on tense, mood, voice, person and
33
number. A highly productive class of verbs also
show stem vowel alternations reminiscent of Semitic
verb morphology (Arabic). Noun morphology ex-
hibits a robust case system; nouns may appear in
as many as 16 different forms. The four-case sys-
tem of Icelandic is similar to that of the Slavic lan-
guages (Czech), with case morphology also appear-
ing on elements which agree in case with nouns.
However, unlike Czech, case frequently does not
convey distinct meaning in Icelandic as it is of-
ten determined by elements such as the governing
verb in a clause (non-local information). There-
fore, while Icelandic case looks formally like Slavic
and presents similar challenges for POS tagging, it
also may be syntactically-determined, as in Standard
Arabic. Icelandic word-order allows a very limited
form of scrambling, but does not produce the variety
of permutations allowed in Slavic languages. This
combination of morphological complexity and syn-
tactic constraint makes Icelandic a good case study
for statistical POS tagging techniques.
The morphology necessitates the large extended
tagset developed for the Icelandic Frequency Dictio-
nary (?slensk or?t??nib?k/IFD), a corpus of roughly
590,000 tokens (Pind et al, 1991). We use the
10 IFD data splits produced by Helgad?ttir (2004),
where the first nine splits are used for evaluation
and the tenth for model development. Tags are com-
prised of up to six elements, such as word class, gen-
der, number, and case, yielding a total of 639 tags,
not all of which occur in the training data.
4 Previous Approaches
Helgad?ttir (2004) evaluated several data-driven
models for Icelandic, including MXPost, a maxi-
mum entropy tagger, and TnT, a trigram HMM; both
did considerably worse than on English. Icelandic
poses significant challenges: data sparseness, non-
local tag dependencies, and 136,264 observed tri-
gram sequences make discriminative sequence mod-
els, such as CRFs, prohibitively expensive. Given
these challenges, the most successful tagger is Ic-
eTagger (Loftsson, 2007), a linguistic rule based
system with several linguistic resources: a morpho-
logical analyzer, a series of local rules and heuris-
tics for handling PPs, verbs, and forcing agreement.
Loftsson also improves TnT by integrating a mor-
phological analyzer (TnT*).
Despite these challenges, data driven taggers have
several advantages. Learning systems can be eas-
ily applied to new corpora, tagsets, or languages and
can accommodate integration of other systems (in-
cluding rule based) or new linguistic resources, such
as those used by Loftsson. Therefore, we seek a
learning system that can handle these challenges.
5 Bidirectional Sequence Classification
Bidirectional POS tagging (Shen et al, 2007), the
current state of the art for English, has some prop-
erties that make it appropriate for Icelandic. For ex-
ample, it can be trained quickly with online learning
and does not use tag trigrams, which reduces data
sparsity and the cost of learning. It can also allow
long range dependencies, which we consider below.
Bidirectional classification uses a perceptron style
classifier to assign potential POS tags (hypotheses)
to each word using standard POS features and some
additional local context features. On each round, the
algorithm selects the highest scoring hypothesis and
assigns the guessed tag. Unassigned words in the
context are reevaluated with this new information.
If an incorrect hypothesis is selected during train-
ing, the algorithm promotes the score of the correct
hypothesis and demotes the selected one. See Shen
et al for a detailed explanation.
We begin with a direct application of the bidirec-
tional tagger to Icelandic using a beam of one and
the same parameters and features as Shen et al On
the development split the tagger achieved an accu-
racy of 91.61%, which is competitive with the best
Icelandic systems. However, test evaluation is not
possible due to the prohibitive cost of training the
tagger on nine splits; training took almost 4 days on
an AMD Opteron 2.8 GHz machine.
Tagset size poses a problem since the tagger must
evaluate over 600 options to select the top tag for
a word. The tagger rescores the local context af-
ter a tag is committed or all untagged words if the
classifier is updated. This also highlights a problem
with the learning model itself. The tagger uses a one
vs. all multi-class strategy, requiring a correct tag to
have higher score than every other tag to be selected.
While this is plausible for a small number of labels,
it overly constrains an Icelandic tagger.
34
Accuracy Train
Tagger All Known Unkn. Time
Bidir 91.61 93.21 69.76 90:27
Bidir+WC 91.98 93.58 70.10 12:20
Bidir+WC+CT 92.36 93.93 70.95 14:02
Table 1: Results on development data. Accuracy is mea-
sured by exact match with the gold tag. About 7% of
tokens are unknown at test time.
As with most languages, it is relatively simple to
assign word class (noun, verb, etc.) and we use this
property to divide the tagset into separate learning
problems. First, the tagger classifies a word accord-
ing to one of the eleven word classes. Next, it se-
lects and evaluates all tags consistent with that class.
When an incorrect selection is updated, the word
class classifier is updated only if it was mistaken
as well. The result is a dramatic reduction in the
number of tags considered at each step. For some
languages, it may make sense to consider further re-
ductions, but not for Icelandic since case, gender,
and number decisions are interdependent. Addition-
ally, by learning word class and tag separately, a cor-
rect tag need only score higher than other tags of
the same word class, not all 639. Furthermore, col-
lapsing tags into word class groups increases train-
ing data, allowing the model to generalize features
over all tags in a class instead of learning each tag
separately (a form of parameter tying).
Training time dropped to 12 hours with the bidi-
rectional word class (WC) tagger and learning per-
formance increased to 91.98% (table 1). Word class
accuracy, already quite high at 97.98%, increased to
98.34%, indicating that the tagger can quickly fil-
ter out most inappropriate tags. The reduced train-
ing cost allowed for test data evaluation, yielding
91.68%, which is a 12.97% relative reduction in er-
ror over the best pure data driven model (TnT) and a
1.65% reduction over the best model (IceTagger).
6 Case Tagger
Examining tagger error reveals that most mis-
takes are caused by case confusion on nouns
(84.61% accuracy), adjectives (76.03%), and pro-
nouns (90.67%); these account for 40% of the cor-
pus. While there are 16 case-number-definiteness
combinations in the noun morphology, a noun might
realize several combinations with a single phonolog-
ical/orthographic form (case-syncretism). Mistakes
in noun case lead to further mistakes for categories
which agree with nouns, e.g. adjectives. Assigning
appropriate case for nouns is important for a num-
ber of other tagging decisions, but often the noun?s
case provides little or no information about the iden-
tity of other tags. It is in this situation that the tag-
ger makes most case-assignment errors. Therefore,
while accuracy depends on correct case assignment
for these nouns, other tags are mostly unaffected.
One approach to correcting these errors is to intro-
duce long range dependencies, such as those used by
IceTagger. While normally hard to add to a learn-
ing system, bidirectional learning provides a natu-
ral framework since non-local features can be added
once a tag has been committed. To allow dependen-
cies on all other tag assignments, and because cor-
recting the remaining case assignments is unlikely to
improve other tags, we constructed a separate bidi-
rectional case tagger (CT) that retags case on nouns,
adjectives and pronouns. 1 Since gender is important
as it relates to case, it is retagged as well. The CT
takes a fully tagged sentence from the POS tagger
and retags case and gender to nouns, adjectives and
pronouns. The CT uses the same features as the POS
tagger, but it now has access to all predicted tags.
Additionally, we develop several non-local features.
Many case decisions are entirely idiosyncratic,
even from the point of view of human language-
learners. Some simple transitive verbs in Icelandic
arbitrarily require their objects to appear in dative
or genitive case, rather than the usual accusative.
This arbitrary case-assignment adds no additional
meaning, and this set of idiosyncratic verbs is mem-
orized by speakers. A statistical tagger likewise
must memorize these verbs based on examples in
the training data. To aid generalization, verb-forms
were augmented by verb-stems features as described
in Dredze and Wallenberg (2008): e.g., the verb
forms dveldi, dvaldi, dvelst, dvelur
all mapped to the stem dv*l (dvelja ?dwell?). The
tagger used non-local features, such as the preced-
ing verb?s (predicted) tag, gender, case, stem, and
nouns within the clause boundary as indicated by
1We considered adding case tagging features to and remov-
ing case decisions from the tagger; both hurt performance.
35
Tagger All Known Unknown
MXPost 89.08 91.04 62.50
TnT 90.44 91.82 71.68
TnT* 91.18 92.53 72.75
IceTagger 91.54 92.74 75.09
Bidir+WC 91.68 93.32 69.25
Bidir+WC+CT 92.06 93.70 69.74
Table 2: Results on test data.
the tags cn (complementizer) or ct (relativizer)
(Dredze and Wallenberg, 2008).
The CT was used to correct the output of the tag-
ger after training on the corresponding train split.
The CT improved results yielding a new best ac-
curacy of 92.06%, a 16.95% and 12.53% reduction
over the best data driven and rule systems.
7 Remaining Challenges
We have shown that a data driven approach can
achieve state of the art performance on highly in-
flected languages by extending bidirectional learn-
ing to fine grained tagsets and designing a bidirec-
tional non-local case tagger. We conclude with an
error analysis to provide future direction.
The tagger is particularly weak on unknown
words, a problem caused by case-syncretism and
idiosyncratic case-assignment. Data driven taggers
can only learn which verbs assign special object
cases by observation in the training data. Some
verbs and prepositions also assign case based on the
meaning of the whole phrase. These are both serious
challenges for data-driven methods and could be ad-
dressed with the integration of linguistic resources.
However, there is more work to be done on data
driven methods. Mistakes in case-assignment due
to case syncretism, especially in conjunction with
idiosyncratic-case-assigning verbs, account for a
large proportion of remaining errors. Verbs that take
dative rather than accusative objects are a particu-
lar problem, such as mistaking accusative for dative
feminine objects (10.6% of occurrences) or dative
for accusative feminine objects (11.9%). A possi-
ble learning solution lies in combining POS tagging
with syntactic parsing, allowing for the identifica-
tion of clause boundaries, which may help disam-
biguate noun cases by deducing their grammatical
function from that of other clausal constituents.
Additionally, idiosyncratic case-assignment could
be learned from unlabeled data by finding un-
ambiguous dative objects to identify idiosyncratic
verbs. Furthermore, our tagger learns which prepo-
sitions idiosyncratically assign a single odd case
(e.g. genitive) since prepositions are a smaller class
and appear frequently in the corpus. This indicates
that further work on data driven methods may still
improve the state of the art.
8 Acknowledgments
We thank Hrafn Loftsson for sharing IceTagger and
the datasplits, Libin Shen for his tagger, and the ?rni
Magn?sson Institute for Icelandic Studies for access
to the corpus.
References
Srinivas Bangalore and Arivand K. Joshi. 1999. Su-
pertagging: An approach to almost parsing. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 25(2).
Mona Diab, Kadri Hacioglu, and Daniel Jurafsky. 2004.
Automatic tagging of arabic text: From raw text to
base phrase chunks. In NAACL/HLT.
Mark Dredze and Joel Wallenberg. 2008. Further results
and analysis of icelandic part of speech tagging. Tech-
nical Report MS-CIS-08-13, CIS Dept, University of
Pennsylvania.
Nizar Habash and Owen Rambow. 2005. Arabic tok-
enization, part-of-speech tagging and morphological
disambiguation in one fell swoop. In ACL.
Jan Hajic? and Barbora Hladk?. 1998. Tagging inflective
languages: prediction of morphological categories for
a rich, structured tagset. In COLING.
Jan Hajic?, Pavel Krbec, Pavel Kve?ton?, Karel Oliva, and
Vladim?r Petkevic?. 2001. Serial combination of rules
and statistics: a case study in czech tagging. In ACL.
Sigrun Helgad?ttir. 2004. Testing data-driven learning
algorithms for pos tagging of icelandic.
Shereen Khoja. 2001. Apt: Arabic part-of-speech tagger.
In NAACL Student Workshop.
Hrafn Loftsson. 2007. Tagging icelandic text using a
linguistic and a statistical tagger. In NAACL/HLT.
J Pind, F Magn?sson, and S Briem. 1991. The icelandic
frequency dictionary. Technical report, The Institute
of Lexicography, University of Iceland.
Libin Shen, Giorgio Satta, and Aravind K. Joshi. 2007.
Guided learning for bidirectional sequence classifica-
tion. In ACL.
36
