NLP Applications of Sinhala: TTS & OCR 
Ruvan Weerasinghe, Asanka Wasala, Dulip Herath and Viraj Welgama 
Language Technology Research Laboratory,  
University of Colombo School of Computing, 
35, Reid Avenue, Colombo 00700, Sri Lanka 
 {arw,raw,dlh,wvw}@ucsc.cmb.ac.lk 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper brings together the practical ap-
plications and the evaluation of the first 
Text-to-Speech (TTS) system for Sinhala 
using the Festival framework and an Opti-
cal Character Recognition system for Sin-
hala. 
1 Introduction 
Language Technology Research Laboratory ? 
(LTRL) of the University of Colombo School of 
Computing (UCSC), was established in 2004 
evolving from work engaged in by academics of 
the university since the early 1990?s in local lan-
guage computing in Sri Lanka. 
Under the scope of the laboratory, numerous 
Natural Language Processing projects are being 
carried out with the relevant national bodies, inter-
national technology partners, local industry and the 
wider regional collaboration particularly within the  
PAN Localization Initiative*. The Sri Lankan com-
ponent of the PAN Localization Project concen-
trated on developing some of the fundamental re-
sources needed for language processing and some 
software tools for immediate deployment at the 
end of the project. Among the resources produced 
is a Sinhala Language Corpus of 10m words, and a 
tri-lingual Sinhala-English-Tamil lexicon. The two 
main software tools developed include a Sinhala 
Text-to-Speech (TTS) system and an Optical Char-
acter Recognition (OCR) system for recognizing 
commonly used Sinhala publications.  
                                                 
? See website: http://www.ucsc.cmb.ac.lk/ltrl 
* See project website: http://www.panl10n.net 
This paper focuses primarily on the end-user ap-
plications developed under the above project; Sin-
hala TTS system and OCR system. The paper de-
scribes the practical applications of these tools and 
evaluates it in the light of experience gained so far. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: 
Section 2 gives an overview of the Sinhala TTS 
system; Section 3 describes the Sinhala OCR sys-
tem. A summary along with future research direc-
tions and improvements are discussed in the last 
section. 
2 Sinhala Text-to-Speech System 
Sighted computer users spend a lot of time reading 
items on-screen to do their regular tasks such as 
checking email, fill out spreadsheets, gather infor-
mation from internet, prepare and edit documents, 
and much more. However visually impaired people 
cannot perform these tasks without an assistance 
from other, or without using assistive technologies. 
A TTS (text-to-speech) system takes computer 
text and converts the words into audible speech 
(Dutoit, 1997). With a TTS engine, application, 
and basic computer hardware, one can listen to 
computer text instead of reading it. A Screen 
Reader (2007) is a piece of software that attempts 
to identify and read-aloud what is being displayed 
on the screen. The screen reader reads aloud text 
within a document, and it also reads aloud infor-
mation within dialog boxes and error messages. In 
other words, the primary function of any-screen 
reading system is to become the ?eye? of the visu-
ally impaired computer user. These technologies 
enable blind or visually impaired people to do 
things that they could not perform before by them-
963
selves. As such, text-to-speech synthesizers make 
information accessible to the print disabled. 
Within Sri Lanka, there is a great demand for a 
TTS system in local languages, particularly a 
screen reader or web browser for visually impaired 
people. In the case of the Tamil language, work 
done in India could be used directly. Until the 
LTRL of UCSC initiatives were launched in 2004, 
there was no viable TTS system found developed 
for Sinhala, the mother tongue of 74 % Sri 
Lankans (Karunatillake, 2004). 
A project was launched to develop a ?commer-
cial grade? Sinhala text-to-speech system in UCSC 
in year 2004. Later, it was extended to develop a 
Screen Reader which can be used by visually im-
paired persons for reading Sinhala texts. 
The Sinhala TTS system was implemented 
based on the Festival speech synthesizer (Taylor et 
al., 1998). The Festival speech synthesis system is 
an open-source, stable and portable multilingual 
speech synthesis system developed at Center for 
Speech Technology Research (CSTR), University 
of Edinburgh (Taylor et al, 1998, Black and 
Lenzo, 2003). TTS systems have been developed 
using the Festival framework for different lan-
guages, including English, Japanese, Welsh, Turk-
ish, Hindi, and Telugu (Black and Lenzo, 2003). 
However, efforts are still continuing to develop a 
standard Sinhala speech synthesizer in Sri Lanka.  
The Sinhala text-to-speech system is developed 
based on the diphone concatenation approach. 
Construction of a diphone database and implemen-
tation of the natural language processing modules 
were key research areas explored in this project. In 
this exercise, 1413 diphones were determined. The 
diphones were extracted from nonsensical words, 
and recordings were carried out in a professional 
studio. Moreover, language specific scripts (phone, 
lexicon, tokenization) and speaker specific scripts 
(duration and intonation) were defined for Sinhala. 
It is worthy to mention the development of con-
text-sensitive letter-to-sound conversion rule set 
for Sinhala. Incorporation of a high accuracy na-
tive syllabification routine (Weerasinghe et al, 
2005) and implementation of comprehensive text 
analysis facilities (capable of producing the accu-
rate pronunciation of the elements such as num-
bers, currency symbols, ratios, percentages, abbre-
viations, Roman numerals, time expressions, num-
ber ranges, telephone numbers, email addresses, 
English letters and various other symbols) have 
been found unique for the language (Weerasinghe 
et al, 2007). Despite the Festival's incomplete 
support for UTF-8, the above rules were re-
writtenin UTF-8 multi-byte format following the 
work done for Telugu language (Kamisetty, 2006). 
The current Sinhala TTS engine accepts Sinhala 
Unicode text and converts it into Speech. A male 
voice has been incorporated. Moreover, the system 
has been engineered to be used in deferent plat-
forms, operating systems (i.e. Linux and Windows) 
and by different software applications (Weeras-
inghe et al, 2007).  
2.1 Applications of TTS Synthesis Engine 
Sinhala text is made accessible via two interfaces, 
by the TTS engine. A standalone software named 
?Katha Baha? primarily reads documents in Sin-
hala Unicode text format aloud. The same applica-
tion can also be used to record the synthesized 
speech.  
In this way, local language news papers and text 
books can be easily transformed into audio materi-
als such as CDs. This software provides a conven-
ient way to disseminate up-to-date news and in-
formation for the print disabled. e.g. Newspaper 
company may podcast their news paper, enabling 
access for print disabled and everyone else. Fur-
thermore, the same application can be utilized to 
produce Sinhala digital talking books. To ensure 
the easy access by print disabled, keyboard short 
cuts are provided.  
Owing to the prevalent use of Windows among 
the visually impaired community in Sri Lanka, it 
becomes essential that a system is developed 
within the Windows environment which offers 
Sinhala speech synthesis to existing applications. 
The standard speech synthesis and recognition in-
terface in Microsoft Windows is the Microsoft 
Speech Application Programming Interface (MS-
SAPI) (Microsoft Corporation, n.d.). MS-SAPI 
enabled applications can make use of any MS-
SAPI enabled voice that has been installed in Win-
dows. Therefore, steps were taken to integrate Sin-
hala voice into MS-SAPI. As a result, the MS-
SAPI compliant Sinhala voice is accessible via any 
speech enabled Windows application. The Sinhala 
voice is proved to work well with ?Thunder?? a 
freely available screen reader for Windows. Addi-
tionally, steps were taken to translate and integrate 
                                                 
? Available from: http://www.screenreader.net/ 
964
common words found related to Thunder screen 
reader (e.g. link=????????, list item= ????????? 
??????) (Weerasinghe et al, 2007).  
Since most Linux distributions now come with 
Festival pre-installed, the integration of Sinhala 
voice in such platforms is very convenient. Fur-
thermore, the Sinhala voice developed here was 
made accessible to GNOME-Orca and Gnoperni-
cus - powerful assistive screen reader software for 
people with visual impairments. 
It is noteworthy to mention that for the first time 
in Sri Lankan history, the print disabled commu-
nity will be able to use computers in their local 
languages by using the current Sinhala text-to-
speech system. 
2.2 Evaluation of the Text-to-Speech  Synthe-
sis Engine 
Text-to-speech systems have been compared and 
evaluated with respect to intelligibility (under-
standability of speech), naturalness, and suitability 
for used application (Lemmetty, 1999). As the 
Sinhala TTS system is a general-purpose synthe-
sizer, a decision was made to evaluate it under the 
intelligibility criterion. Specially, the TTS system 
is intended to be used with screen reader software 
by visually impaired people. Therefore, intelligibil-
ity is a more important feature than the naturalness. 
A Modified Rhyme Test (MRT) (Lemmetty, 
1999), was designed to test the Sinhala TTS sys-
tem. The test consists of 50 sets of 6 one or two 
syllable words which makes a total set of 300 
words. The words are chosen to evaluate phonetic 
characteristics such as voicing, nasality, sibilation, 
and consonant germination. Out of 50 sets, 20 sets 
were selected for each listener.  The set of 6 words 
is played one at the time and the listener marks the 
synthesized word. The overall intelligibility of the 
system measured from 20 listeners was found to be 
71.5% (Weerasinghe et al, 2007). 
3 Optical Character Recognition System 
Optical Character Recognition (OCR) technology 
is used to convert information available in the 
printed form into machine editable electronic text 
form through a process of image capture, process-
ing and recognition (Optical Character Recogni-
tion, 2007).  
There are three essential elements to OCR tech-
nology. Scanning ? acquisition of printed docu-
ments as optical images using a device such as 
flatbed scanner. Recognition- involves converting 
these images to character streams representing let-
ters of recognized words and the final element in-
volves accessing or storing the converted text. 
Many OCR systems have been developed for 
recognizing Latin characters (Weerasinghe et al, 
2006). Some OCR systems have been reported to 
have a very high accuracy and most of such sys-
tems are commercial products. Leaving a land 
mark, a Sinhala OCR system has been developed 
at UCSC (Weerasinghe et al, 2006).  
Artificial Neural Network (ANN) and Template 
Matching are two popular and widely used algo-
rithms for optical character recognition. However, 
the  application of above algorithms to a highly 
inflected languages such as Sinhala is arduous due 
to the high number of input classes. Empirical es-
timation of least number of input classes needed 
for  training a neural net for Sinhala character rec-
ognition suggested about  400 classes (Weeras-
inghe et al, 2006). Therefore, less-complicated K-
nearest neighbor algorithm (KNN) was employed 
for the purpose of Sinhala character recognition.  
The current OCR system is the first ever re-
ported OCR system for Sinhala and is capable of 
recognizing printed Sinhala letters typed using 
widely used fonts in the publishing industry. The 
recognized content is presented as editable Sinhala 
Unicode text file (Weerasinghe et al, 2006). 
A large volume of information is available in the 
printed form. The current OCR system will expe-
dite the process of digitizing this information. 
Moreover, the information available via printed 
medium is inaccessible to the print disabled, and 
the OCR system, especially when coupled with 
Sinhala TTS, will provide access to these informa-
tion for the print disabled.  
3.1 Evaluation of the Optical Character Rec-
ognition System 
The performance of the Sinhala OCR system has 
been evaluated using 18000 sample characters for 
Sinhala. These characters have been extracted from 
various books and newspapers (Weerasinghe et al, 
2006). Performance of the system has been evalu-
ated with respect to different best supportive fonts. 
The results have been summarized in the Table 1 
(Weerasinghe et al, 2006). 
 
 
965
Font FM DL Lakbima Letter 
% Recog. 97.17 96.26 89.89 95.81
Table 1. Experimental Results of Classification* 
 
From this evaluation it can be concluded that the 
current Sinhala OCR has average accuracy of 95% 
(Weerasinghe et al, 2006). 
4 Conclusion and Future Work 
This paper brings together the development of a 
diphone voice for Sinhala based on the Festival 
speech synthesis system and an Optical Character 
Recognizer for Sinhala. 
Future work on the Sinhala TTS engine will 
mainly focus on improving the prosody modules. 
A speech corpus containing 2 hours of speech has 
been already recorded. The material is currently 
being segmented, and labeled. We are also 
planning to improve the duration model using the 
data obtained from the annotated speech corpus. It 
is also expected to develop a female voice in near 
future. The current Sinhala OCR system is font 
dependent. Work is in progress to make the OCR 
system font independent and to improve the accu-
racy. Sinhala OCR and the TTS systems, which are 
currently two separate applications, will be inte-
grated enabling the user friendliness to the print 
disabled. 
A number of other ongoing projects are aimed at 
developing resources and tools such as a POS tag 
set, a POS tagger and a tagged corpus for Sinhala, 
an on-the-fly web page translator, a translation 
memory application and several language teaching 
-learning resources for Sinhala, Tamil and English. 
All resources developed under this project are 
made available (under GNU General Public Li-
cense) through the LTRL website.  
Acknowledgement 
This work was made possible through the PAN 
Localization Project, (http://www.PANL10n.net) a 
grant from the International Development Re-
search Center (IDRC), Ottawa, Canada, adminis-
tered through the Center for Research in Urdu 
Language Processing, National University of 
Computer and Emerging Sciences, Pakistan.  
                                                 
*  FM ? ?FM Abhaya?, DL ? ?DL Manel Bold?, Letter ? 
?Letter Press? 
References 
Alan W. Black and Kevin A. Lenzo. 2003. Building 
Synthetic Voices, Language Technologies Institute, 
Carnegie Mellon University and Cepstral LLC. Re-
trieved from http://festvox.org/bsv/. 
Microsoft Corporation. (n.d.). Microsoft Speech SDK 
Version 5.1. Retrieved from:  
http://msdn2.microsoft.com/en-/library/ms990097.aspx 
T. Dutoit. 1997.  An Introduction to Text-to-Speech Syn-
thesis, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 
Netherlands. 
C. Kamisetty, S.M. Adapa. 2006. Telugu Festival Text-
to-Speech System. Retrieved from:  
http://festival-te.sourceforge.net/wiki/Main_Page 
W.S. Karunatillake. 2004. An Introduction to Spoken 
Sinhala, 3rd edn., M.D. Gunasena & Co. ltd., 217, 
Olcott Mawatha, Colombo 11. 
Sami Lemmetty. 1999. Review of Speech Synthesis 
Technology, MSc. thesis, Helsinki University of 
Technology. 
Screen Reader. 2007. Screen Reader. Retrieved from: 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Screen_reader. 
Optical Character Recognition. 2007. Optical Character 
Recognition. Retrieved from: 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Optical_character_recog
nition 
P.A Taylor, A.W. Black, R.J. Caley. 1998. The Archi-
tecture of the Festival Speech Synthesis System, 
Third ESCA Workshop in Speech Synthesis, Jenolan 
Caves, Australia. 147-151. 
Ruvan Weerasinghe, Asanka Wasala, Kumudu Gamage. 
2005. A Rule Based Syllabification Algorithm for 
Sinhala, Proceedings of 2nd International Joint Con-
ference on Natural Language Processing (IJCNLP-
05). Jeju Island, Korea.  438-449. 
Ruvan Weerasinghe, Dulip Lakmal Herath, N.P.K. 
Medagoda. 2006. A KNN based Algorithm for 
Printed Sinhala Character Recognition, Proceedings 
of 8th International Information Technology Confer-
ence, Colombo, Sri Lanka 
Ruvan Weerasinghe, Asanka Wasala, Viraj Welgama 
and Kumudu Gamage. 2007.  Festival-si: A Sinhala 
Text-to-Speech System, Proceedings of 10th Interna-
tional Conference on Text, Speech and Dialogue 
(TSD 2007), Pilse?, Czech Republic, September 3-7, 
2007. 472-479  
966
Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 17?23,
Suntec, Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
 Corpus-based Sinhala Lexicon  
 
Ruvan Weerasinghe1, Dulip Herath2, Viraj Welgama3 
Language Technology Research Laboratory, 
University of Colombo School of Computing 
35, Reid Avenue, Colombo 07, 
Sri Lanka 
{arw1, dlh2, wvw3}@ucsc.cmb.ac.lk 
  
  
 
Abstract 
Lexicon is in important resource in any kind of 
language processing application. Corpus-based 
lexica have several advantages over other tra-
ditional approaches. The lexicon developed for 
Sinhala was based on the text obtained from a 
corpus of 10 million words drawn from di-
verse genres. The words extracted from the 
corpus have been labeled with parts of speech 
categories defined according to a novel classi-
fication proposed for Sinhala. The lexicon re-
ports 80% coverage over unrestricted text ob-
tained from online sources. The lexicon has 
been implemented in Lexical Mark up Frame-
work. 
1 Introduction 
The availability of lexical resources is central to 
many natural language processing tasks as words 
play a crucial role in defining higher level con-
structions such as phrases, clauses and sentences 
of any language. The most generic and basic 
lexical resource for such work is a lexicon, pref-
erably with part of speech annotation and infor-
mation about possible word forms. The latter is 
important especially for morphologically rich 
languages such as Sinhala. This kind of resource 
is extremely useful for part of speech tagging, 
grammar development and parsing, machine 
translations, speech processing applications, 
among others. As new knowledge is created, new 
concepts are introduced to the language in terms 
of words. Non-corpus-based lexicon develop-
ment approaches are not capable of acquiring 
these new words into lexica due to their inherent 
limitations such as reliance on introspection and 
linguistic exposure of the human compiler(s). 
Therefore it is essential to adopt less expensive 
(less time consuming, labor intensive and robust) 
alternative strategies to develop wide-coverage 
lexica for less studied languages. 
This paper presents a lexicon for Sinhala which 
has nearly 35,000 entries based on the text drawn 
from the UCSC Text Corpus of Contemporary 
Sinhala consisting of 10 million words from di-
verse genres. The corpus-based approach taken 
in this work can overcome the limitations that 
traditional approaches suffering from such as less 
reliance on less expert knowledge, the ability to 
capture modern usage based on recently intro-
duced words and wide coverage.  
The lexical entries defined in this approach are 
classified according to a novel classification in 
order to fulfill the requirements of language 
processing tasks. The broad classes defined are 
significantly different from those described in 
traditional Sinhala grammar. For declensional 
classes such as Nouns and Verbs, further subdi-
visions have been proposed based on their mor-
pho-phonemic features. Each of the subdivision 
classes is associated with a set of rules that can 
be used to generate all possible morphological 
forms of that group. This has made a significant 
contribution to improve the coverage of the lexi-
con as for a given lexical entry it is hard to guar-
antee that all possible forms exist in the original 
corpus. However, the rules defined in each class 
guarantee recognize such unseen forms in the test 
data set.   
In addition, a comprehensive set of function 
words has been defined based on some of the 
indeclinable classes such as Post-positions, Parti-
cles, Determiners, Conjunctions and Interjec-
tions. The lexicon also consists of the most 
commonly used named entities such as person 
and city names. Syllabified phonetic transcrip-
tions of the lexical entries are also incorporated 
in order to make this resource useful in speech 
processing applications. 
17
These characteristics are essential in building 
effective practical natural language processing 
applications.  To the best of our knowledge, this 
is the first attempt to build a wide coverage lexi-
con for Sinhala from a computational linguistic 
perspective reported in the literature. 
The rest of the paper describes the work carried 
out in detail. Section 2 gives a detailed descrip-
tion of the data acquisition stage, the part of 
speech categories and the subdivisions based on 
morphology and the phonetic transcription with 
syllabification. The implementation details of the 
lexicon and schemas defined for lexical entries 
using Lexical Mark up Framework (LMF) is 
given in Section 3. Section 4 comments on the 
results of the experiments conducted to measure 
the coverage of the lexicon. Finally, Section 5 
discusses the issues and limitations of the current 
work with insights for future work. 
2 Sinhala Lexicon 
2.1 Data Acquisition 
The data for the lexicon was obtained from the 
UCSC Sinhala Corpus which has text drawn 
from diverse genres namely, Creative Writing, 
Technical Writing and News Reportage. The 
corpus represents the modern usage of Sinhala in 
the above mentioned genres. This guarantees the 
robustness of the lexicon in practical language 
processing applications. The text distribution 
across genres in the corpus is given in Table 1. 
 
Genre Number  of Words 
% Number 
of Words 
Creative 
Writing 
2,340,999 
 
23% 
 
Technical 
Writing 
4,357,680 
 
43% 
 
News 
Reportage 3,433,772 
34% 
 
 
Table 1. Distribution of Corpus Text 
across Genres 
 
It is clear from the Table 1 that the corpus is 
fairly balanced across genres while Creative 
Writing and Technical Writing genres respec-
tively make the lowest and the highest contribu-
tions to the total word count of the corpus. 
In order to extract the candidate words for the 
lexicon, a distinct word list with frequencies was 
obtained by running a simple tokenizer on the 
corpus text. Misspelt and irrelevant tokens (num-
bers, foreign words, etc) were removed from the 
list after manual inspection. Further, the resultant 
words were manually classified into their respec-
tive parts of speech for subsequent processing 
based on a predefined classification. This was 
carried out by a team of five members including 
one senior linguist. At the initial stage of this 
phase, a substantial effort was made to train the 
manual classifiers to classify words according to 
the predefined set of classification criteria. In 
order to automate this process, the high fre-
quency words were first classified into their re-
spective parts of speech and then certain word 
ending patterns peculiar to each class were iden-
tified. These patterns were used to classify the 
rest of the list automatically by running regular 
expression matching followed by manual clean-
ing. This strategy significantly accelerated the 
data acquisition process. 
In addition to the words taken from the corpus, a 
comprehensive list of named entities such as per-
son, village/city, country, capital, product names 
was added to the lexicon after processing data 
sources obtained from the Departments of Cen-
sus & Statistics and Inland Revenue. These en-
tries were absorbed into the lexicon on the basis 
of complete enumeration.  
2.2 Parts of Speech and Morphology 
In traditional Sinhala grammar, several classifi-
cations have been proposed for parts of speech. 
This is mainly due to the existence of different 
grammatical schools in Sinhala language studies. 
They can be broadly classified into three main 
categories namely, notions based on Sanskrit 
grammar (Dharmarama, 1913), ideas inspired by 
language purism significantly different from 
those based on Sanskrit grammar (Kumaratu-
naga, 1963), and classifications proposed in the 
light of modern linguistics (Karunatilake, 2004). 
From a computational linguistic point of view, 
each of these classifications while having their 
own strengths is unable to capture phenomena 
which are useful for computational linguistics. 
They are mainly descriptive treatments of lan-
guage which are used for pedagogical purposes 
whereas a computational model requires a formal 
analytical treatment in order to be of any use. 
Due to the limitations of the existing classifica-
tions of Sinhala words, a novel classification of 
part-of-speech categories was developed after 
studying the existing classifications closely; con-
sulting linguists and reviewing part of speech tag 
set design initiatives for other Indic languages. 
Widely accepted and used tag sets for English 
were also taken into account when proposed 
18
classification was developed. As described in 
section 1, the current classification has improved 
the predictive power of each class and this has in 
turn improved the coverage that is essential for 
robustness of the lexicon in computational lin-
guistic and natural language processing tasks. 
 
 
Part of 
Speech 
Frequency 
Noun 12264 35.89% 
Verb 1018 3.00% 
Adjective 2869 8.40% 
Adverb 315 0.92% 
Postposition 146 0.43% 
Particle 145 0.42% 
Conjunction 29 0.08% 
Numeral 382 1.12% 
Determiner 76 0.22% 
Pronoun 150 0.44% 
Proper Noun 16585 48.52% 
Verb Particle 158 0.46% 
Interjection 44 0.13% 
 
Table 2. Part of Speech Categories 
and their Frequencies 
Table 2 shows the thirteen broad classes of parts 
of speech used in the proposed lexicon. Names of 
these categories are self-explanatory except for 
Verb Particle which stands for a category of 
words that are used in Sinhala compound verbs, 
exemplified best by the terms ????? (Sinhala: 
ikuth, Sanskrit: athikr?nth?), ??? (Sinhala: path, 
Sanskrit: pr?pth?), and ?? (Sinhala: pal?, San-
skrit: pr?k?t?). Most of these Verb Particles are 
localized forms of past participle forms of some 
Sanskrit verbs. For some historical reason, only 
past participle forms of these verbs are present in 
modern usage of Sinhala but not the other forms.  
According to the frequency distribution of parts 
of speech categories given in Table 2, it is clear 
that nearly 50% of the lexical entries are Proper 
Nouns. Overall 85% of the total number of en-
tries is nouns with only 3% being Verbs. This is 
mainly due to the fact that Sinhala has many 
compound verbs. Compound verbs are usually 
formed by using Nouns, Adjectives, Verb Parti-
cles and Participles of some verbs together with 
the helper verbs such as ????? (English: do), 
????? (English: be), ????? (English: give),  
?????? (English: take), and ????? (English: put). 
As this contextual information is absent it is hard 
to determine whether a particular noun or adjec-
tive or any other word has occurred as a constitu-
ent of a compound verb or not. Therefore they 
were classified as if they occurred in their pri-
mary category. 
Even though the number of entries under Verb 
category is relatively small i.e. nearly 3%, it was 
found that the number of instances of those verbs 
is significantly high. In the distinct word list ob-
tained from the original corpus, 4.64% of the 
entries were verbs (including inflected forms). 
The total number of instances of verbs (including 
inflected forms) in the corpus is 19.4% of the 
total number of words in the corpus. This implies 
that 3% of the lexicon has coverage of nearly 
20% of the corpus. In addition, it was found that 
27.7% of the verbs in the corpus are compound 
verbs since verbs that are essentially part of 
compound verbs (?????, ?????, ?????, ??????, 
?????) have occurred 27.7% of the corpus. 
It was also possible to identify a set of words 
which plays only functional roles in Sinhala sen-
tences and have no lexical meaning. In the tradi-
tional treatments of grammar they are classified 
as nipa:th? which literally means ?things that fall 
in either initial or medial or final position of a 
sentence to express the relationships among ele-
ments of the sentence?. This definition does not 
take into account the different functional roles 
played by those words and therefore classifies 
them into one single class called nipa:th?. In the 
work described here, these words were classified 
into five classes namely, Postpositions, Particles, 
Conjunctions, Determiners and Interjections. A 
list of 440 words that belong to these five classes 
form the first function (stop) word list reported 
for Sinhala. Identifying the function words is 
important for applications such as information 
retrieval, prosody modeling in speech synthesis, 
semantic role labeling, and dependency parsing. 
Nouns and Verbs are further classified into sub-
classes according to their inflectional/declension 
paradigms given in Table 3 and 4. These sub-
classes are mainly specified by the morpho-
phonemic characteristics of stems/roots. 
 
Gender Subclass Frequency
Consonant-1 63 
Consonant-2 13 
Consonant 
Reduplication 973 
Front-Mid 
Vowel 1231 
Back Vowel 191 
Retroflex-1 81 
Retroflex-2 61 
Kinship 180 
Masculine 
Irregular 41 
Feminine Consonant 12 
19
Front-Mid 
Vowel 168 
Back Vowel 78 
Irregular 17 
Consonant 2303 
Consonant 
Reduplication 206 
Front-Mid 
Vowel 4379 
Mid Vowel 115 
Back Vowel 1097 
Retroflex-1 127 
Retroflex-2 523 
Uncountable 404 
Neuter 
Irregular 12 
 
Table 3. Noun Subclasses 
 
Nouns are primarily classified with respect to the 
phone type of the final position of the stem: Con-
sonant-1 and Consonant-2 classes have stems 
that have a consonant ending. The difference be-
tween these two classes is defined by the phono-
logical changes that take place when nominal and 
accusative suffixes are added to the stem. The 
noun stems belong Consonant-1 has the plural 
suffix (-u) and their final position consonant is 
reduplicated when the suffix is appended 
whereas noun stems belong to Consonant-2 has 
null suffix to mark plurality. 
The noun stems that belong to Consonant Redu-
plication have either vowel /i/ or /u/ at the final 
position. When a nominative or accusative suffix 
(-a: / -O: / -an) is appended to the noun stem the 
final position vowel is deleted and the penulti-
mate non-retroflex consonant is reduplicated. If 
the consonant is retroflex they are classified un-
der Retroflex-1. If the noun stems that have 
vowel /?/ at the final position and the penultimate 
consonant is retroflex then the vowel is deleted 
and the nominative or accusative suffix is ap-
pended to the remaining part of the stem. This 
class is named as Retroflex-2. 
When a nominative or accusative suffix is ap-
pended to a noun stem that belongs to Front-Mid 
Vowel subclass, the semi-consonant /y/ is in-
serted between the noun stem and the suffix. 
Similarly, /w/ is inserted if the noun stem belongs 
to Back Vowel category.Kinship and Uncount-
able nouns1 are inflected in a unique manner irre-
spective of the phonetic characteristics of stem 
endings. Each subcategory (Masculine, Femi-
                                                 
1 These two classes have been defined on a semantic 
basis whereas the other classes are based on phonetic 
and morphological characteristics of stems. 
nine, and Neuter) has a set of stems that behaves 
irregularly. 
Each category has a unique set of phonological 
rules and inflectional suffixes to generate 130 
possible word forms. 
Verbs have been classified into four main sub-
classes according to the phonetic characteristics 
of their roots. 
 
Subclass Frequency 
?-ending 488 
e-ending 325 
i-ending 90 
irregular 115 
 
Table 4. Verb Subclasses 
 
As shown in Table 4 the most frequently occur-
ring verbs belong to the ?-ending category. Each 
of these verb categories except for the irregular 
category has a unique set of phonological rules 
and suffixes to generate 240 possible word 
forms. 
2.3 Phonetic Transcriptions 
Sinhala orthography is relatively unambiguous as 
each character corresponds to a unique speech 
sound. However there are a few ambiguous cases 
that have to be resolved by taking the context 
into account. Though Sinhala orthography has 
different symbols to denote aspirated and un-
aspirated consonants, in present usage aspiration 
is not present. Similarly, the alveolar consonants 
such as ? (/l/) and ? (/n/) are now pronounced as 
their dental counterparts ? and ?. Schwa epen-
thesis also plays a crucial role in Sinhala pronun-
ciation as it leads to significant meaning changes 
of Sinhala words. 
Having considered all these issues, it was de-
cided to incorporate phonetic transcriptions of 
lexical entries in order to make the current lexi-
con general purpose. This piece of information is 
very useful for speech synthesis and recognition 
application development. Syllabified phonetic 
transcriptions were automatically derived by ap-
plying the grapheme to phoneme (G2P) rules and 
the syllabification algorithm described in (Wa-
sala et al 2006) and (Weerasinghe et al 2005) 
respectively that report 98% on G2P and 99% 
accuracy on syllabification. All phonetic tran-
scriptions are given in International Phonetic Al-
phabet (IPA) symbols. 
20
3 Implementation 
The lexicon has been implemented in XML ac-
cording to the specification given in Lexical 
Mark-up Framework (Francopoulo et al 2006) 
which is now the ISO standard for lexicon devel-
opment. The XML schema defined for Nouns 
and Verbs with some examples are shown in 
Figure 1 and 2 respectively. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Lexical Entries for 
Nouns ????? and ?????. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Lexical Entries for 
Verbs ????? (see) and ????????? (smile) 
 
As shown in Figure 1, a typical noun entry has 
main part of speech category (partOfSpeech), 
sub category (subClass). Each Lemma has two 
feature attributes namely citation form and pro-
nunciation. WordForm has several feature at-
tributes called writtenForm which is the ortho-
graphic representation, pronunciation, number, 
gender, person, definiteness and case of the par-
ticular word form. 
In addition to the attributes available in Nouns, 
schema defined for Verbs have some attributes 
peculiar to verbs such as tense, aspect and mo-
dality. For Verb, only the present tense. 
4 Evaluation 
4.1 Test Data Sets 
The coverage of the current lexicon was meas-
ured by conducting a set of experiments on test 
data prepared for each of the three genres: News 
Reportage, Technical Writing, and Creative 
Writing. This data was obtained from text avail-
able online: online newspapers, Sinhala Wikipe-
dia, blogs and other websites. From this data two 
types of test data sets were prepared namely un-
cleaned and cleaned test data sets. The un-
cleaned test data contains all the text as they 
were whereas the cleaned test data contains 
words that have occurred more than once. Tables 
5 and 6 respectively give the details of un-
cleaned and cleaned data sets. 
 
Genre Type Size 
Full Text 108,018 Creative 
Writing Distinct List 22,663 
Full Text 107,004 Technical 
Writing Distinct List 25,786 
Full Text 103,194 News 
Reportage Distinct List 20,225 
 
Table 5. Un-Cleaned Test Data for 
Three Main Genres 
 
Genre Type Size 
Full Text 94,971 Creative 
Writing Distinct List 9,616 
Full Text 91,323 Technical 
Writing Distinct List 10,105 
Full Text 91,838 News 
Reportage Distinct List 8,869 
 
Table 6. Cleaned Test Data for 
Three Main Genres 
4.2 Lexicon Coverage 
Initially, coverage of the lexicon was measured 
for each genre for both Full Text (FT) and Dis-
tinct Wordlist (DW) obtained from full text on 
21
each data sets: un-cleaned and cleaned. Accord-
ing to the results of this experiment shown in 
Table 7, the lexicon reports its highest coverage 
in Creative Writing genre and the lowest is re-
ported in News Reportage. 
 
Data Set 
Genre 
Un-cleaned Cleaned 
 DW FT DW FT 
Creative 
Writing 60.11% 
 
82.42% 
 
 
72.21% 
 
86.71% 
Technical 
Writing 
 
58.74% 
 
 
80.32% 
 
 
70.73% 
 
84.15% 
News 
Reportage 55.20% 79.82% 71.1% 85.81% 
 
Table 7. Coverage Reported for each 
Genre on Un-cleaned and Cleaned Data Sets 
 
There is a significant difference between the 
coverage reported on the Distinct Wordlists ob-
tained from Un-cleaned and Cleaned datasets 
that is 60% to 72% in Creative Writing, 58% to 
70% in Technical Writing and 55% to 71% in 
News Reportage. This consistent difference 
proves that a significant number of the words 
that could not be found in the lexicon were oc-
curred only once in the test data set. 
Relatively higher coverage can be achieved when 
the full text is used rather than a distinct list of 
words. As high frequency words occur in text 
more than once in practical situations the lexicon 
covers a large area of the text though it cannot 
recognize some low frequency words in the text. 
This is evident from the differences of coverage 
reported on Distinct Wordlists and Full Text for 
both un-cleaned and cleaned data sets (see Table 
7). Around 20% coverage difference between 
Distinct Wordlist and Full Text was reported for 
each genre. 
The average coverage of the lexicon was com-
puted by averaging the coverage reported for 
three different genres on un-cleaned full-text 
(FT) data set, which is 80.9%. 
In addition, a similar experiment was conducted 
to measure the significance of the classification 
proposed in the current work. In that experiment, 
the coverage of the lexicon was measured by tak-
ing only the word forms occurred in the original 
corpus but not all the forms of the words oc-
curred in the original corpus. Then the rules de-
fined in each subdivision of nouns and verbs 
were used to generate all possible forms of the 
words occurred in the original corpus. This ex-
periment was carried out on the distinct word list 
obtained from the un-cleaned data set. The re-
sults show that there were 3.8%, 3.4% and 3.2% 
improvements in the coverage of creative writ-
ing, technical writing and news reportage genres 
respectively after introducing the generation 
rules for each subdivision of nouns and verbs.  
4.3 Error Analysis 
A comprehensive error analysis was done on the 
words that could not be found in the lexicon to 
identify the issues behind the errors reported. It 
was found that there were several types of errors 
that have contributed to the overall error. The 
identified error types are given in Table 8. 
 
Error Type Description 
Word Division Errors (D) 
Word does not follow 
standard word division 
policy  
Spelling Error (E) Word is incorrectly spelt 
Foreign Word (F) Foreign word written in Sinhala script 
Non Standard Spelling (N) Word does not follow standard spelling 
Proper Nouns (P) Word is a Proper Noun  
Spoken Forms (S) Word is a spoken form 
Typographic Errors (T) Word had typographic errors 
Wrong Word Forms (W) Word is an incorrect morphological form 
Correct Forms (C) Correct word not found in the lexicon 
 
Table 8. Typical Errors Found in the 
Error Analysis 
 
The distribution of these errors across three dif-
ferent genres is given in Table 9. These results 
were taken only for the cleaned data set. Accord-
ing to the reported results, it is clear that some 
errors are prominent in some genres are some are 
consistently present in all the genres. For exam-
ple, word division errors (D), correct form errors 
(C), wrong word form errors (W), and non stan-
dard spelling errors (N) are consistently occur-
ring in all three genres whereas spoken form er-
rors (S) are prominent in Creative Writing genre 
(8.52%), Spelling Errors (E) are more prominent 
in Technical Writing genre, more foreign word 
errors (F) are found in Technical Writing genre, 
typographic errors (T) are prominent in found in 
News Reportage. 
 
Error 
Type 
Creative 
Writing 
Technical 
Writing 
News 
Reportage 
 DW FT DW FT DW FT 
22
C 38.88 39.59 25.81 25.20 17.16 10.57 
D 31.84 32.28 23.16 25.36 33.82 33.15 
E 5.01 4.49 6.31 5.72 2.31 2.60 
F 3.01 2.27 5.27 3.37 2.12 2.19 
N 2.30 2.77 6.34 5.94 5.40 6.44 
P 2.86 1.89 11.37 11.59 11.03 7.88 
S 8.52 8.64 3.20 2.14 5.40 4.34 
T 6.22 6.84 14.96 17.88 18.97 29.10 
W 1.36 1.22 3.58 2.79 3.78 3.73 
 
Table 9. Different Error Types Distributed 
across Three Genres Reported on 
Distinct Wordlist (DW) and Full Text (FT) 
 
It can be concluded from these observations that 
the errors that are genre independent occur more 
frequently than genre dependent error and they 
are the most general mistakes that writers make 
in their writings. The typographic errors that 
more frequent in Technical Writing and News 
Reportage genres are mainly due to the compli-
cations in Sinhala typing and Unicode represen-
tation. As Sinhala Unicode uses Zero Width 
Joiner character very often to represent combined 
characters typists make errors when typing by 
inserting this character incorrectly. It is hard for 
them to correct it by deleting that character as it 
is invisible to the typist on the computer screen. 
It is clear that from the results shown in Table 9 
that there is no significant difference between the 
error distributions in distinct wordlist and full 
text test data. 
5 Issues and Future Work 
The current lexicon has 80% coverage over unre-
stricted text selected from online sources. In or-
der to make this lexicon robust in practical lan-
guage processing applications it is important to 
further improve its coverage in different do-
mains.  
It was observed that the number of verbs in the 
lexicon is relatively small due to the fact that 
fairly large numbers of Sinhala verbs are com-
pound verbs. In the future it is expected to incor-
porate those compound verbs so that the cover-
age of verbs of the lexicon is relatively higher. 
In the current implementation the word forms of 
nouns and verbs are generated by using third 
party commercial software. It is expected to in-
corporate a morphological analyzer and genera-
tor so that all the possible word forms can be 
generated by the lexicon itself. 
6 Acknowledgements 
Authors are very grateful to Prof Tissa Jayawar-
dana at the University of Colombo for his gener-
ous support extended to linguistic aspect of this 
project. The contribution made by the members 
of the Development Team at the Language Tech-
nology Research Laboratory of the University of 
Colombo of School of Computing-Sri Lanka for 
manual data classification process is highly ap-
preciated. Authors would also like to acknowl-
edge the feedback given by three unknown re-
viewers as they have been extremely useful in 
improving the quality of the work reported. 
 
References  
Asanka Wasala, Ruvan Weerasinghe, Kumudu 
Gamage. 2006. Sinhala Grapheme-toPhoneme 
Conversion and Rules for Schwa Epenthesis. Pro-
ceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 Main Confer-
ence Poster Sessions, Sydney, Australia. pp. 890?
897 
Gil Francopoulo, Monte George, Nicoletta Calzolari, 
Monica Monachini, Nuria Bel, Mandy Pet, Claudia 
Soria. 2006. Lexical Ma rkup Framework. LREC 
2006 
Kumaratunga Munidasa. 1963. Vyakarana Viva-
ranaya. M. D. Gunasena Publishers, Colombo 
Rathmalane Dharmarama. 1913. Sidath Sangarawa. 
Author Publication.  
Ruvan Weerasinghe Asanka Wasala, and Kumudu 
Gamage. 2005 A Rule Based Syllabification 
Algtoithm for Sinhala. Proceedings of the 2nd In-
ternational Joint Conference on Natural Language 
Processing (IJCNLP-05), Jeju Island, Korea. pp. 
438-449 
W S Karunatilaka. 2004. Sinhala Bhasa Vyakaranaya. 
5th Edition, M. D Gunasena Publishers, Colombo 
23
