Proceedings of the 12th Conference of the European Chapter of the ACL, pages 336?344,
Athens, Greece, 30 March ? 3 April 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Person Identification from Text and Speech Genre Samples 
Jade Goldstein-Stewart 
U.S. Department of Defense 
 
jadeg@acm.org 
Ransom Winder 
The MITRE Corporation 
Hanover, MD, USA 
rwinder@mitre.org 
Roberta Evans Sabin 
Loyola University 
Baltimore, MD, USA 
res@loyola.edu 
 
Abstract 
 
In this paper, we describe experiments con-
ducted on identifying a person using a novel 
unique correlated corpus of text and audio 
samples of the person?s communication in six 
genres.  The text samples include essays, 
emails, blogs, and chat.  Audio samples were 
collected from individual interviews and group 
discussions and then transcribed to text.  For 
each genre, samples were collected for six top-
ics.  We show that we can identify the com-
municant with an accuracy of 71% for six fold 
cross validation using an average of 22,000 
words per individual across the six genres.  
For person identification in a particular genre 
(train on five genres, test on one), an average 
accuracy of 82% is achieved.  For identifica-
tion from topics (train on five topics, test on 
one), an average accuracy of 94% is achieved.  
We also report results on identifying a per-
son?s communication in a genre using text ge-
nres only as well as audio genres only.  
1 Introduction 
Can one identify a person from samples of 
his/her communication?  What common patterns 
of communication can be used to identify 
people?  Are such patterns consistent across va-
rying genres? 
People tend to be interested in subjects and 
topics that they discuss with friends, family, col-
leagues and acquaintances.  They can communi-
cate with these people textually via email, text 
messages and chat rooms.  They can also com-
municate via verbal conversations.  Other forms 
of communication could include blogs or even 
formal writings such as essays or scientific ar-
ticles.  People communicating in these different 
?genres? may have different stylistic patterns and 
we are interested in whether or not we could 
identify people from their communications in 
different genres. 
The attempt to identify authorship of written 
text has a long history that predates electronic 
computing.  The idea that features such as aver-
age word length and average sentence length 
could allow an author to be identified dates to 
Mendenhall (1887).  Mosteller and Wallace 
(1964) used function words in a groundbreaking 
study that identified authors of The Federalist 
Papers.  Since then many attempts at authorship 
attribution have used function words and other 
features, such as word class frequencies and 
measures derived from syntactic analysis, often 
combined using multivariable statistical tech-
niques.  
Recently, McCarthy (2006) was able to diffe-
rentiate three authors? works, and Hill and Prov-
ost (2003), using a feature of co-citations, 
showed that they could successfully identify 
scientific articles by the same person, achieving 
85% accuracy when the person has authored over 
100 papers.  Levitan and Argamon (2006) and 
McCombe (2002) further investigated authorship 
identification of The Federalist Papers (three 
authors).   
The genre of the text may affect the authorship 
identification task.  The attempt to characterize 
genres dates to Biber (1988) who selected 67 
linguistic features and analyzed samples of 23 
spoken and written genres.  He determined six 
factors that could be used to identify written text.  
Since his study, new ?cybergenres? have 
evolved, including email, blogs, chat, and text 
messaging.  Efforts have been made to character-
ize the linguistic features of these genres (Baron, 
2003; Crystal, 2001; Herring, 2001; Shepherd 
and Watters, 1999; Yates, 1996).  The task is 
complicated by the great diversity that can be 
exhibited within even a single genre.  Email can 
be business-related, personal, or spam; the style 
336
can be tremendously affected by demographic 
factors, including gender and age of the sender.  
The context of communication influences lan-
guage style (Thomson and Murachver, 2001; 
Coupland, et al, 1988).  Some people use ab-
breviations to ease the efficiency of communica-
tion in informal genres ? items that one would 
not find in a formal essay.  Informal writing may 
also contain emoticons (e.g., ?:-)? or ???) to 
convey mood. 
Successes have been achieved in categorizing 
web page decriptions (Calvo, et al, 2004) and 
genre determination (Goldstein-Stewart, et al, 
2007; Santini 2007).  Genders of authors have 
been successfully identified within the British 
National Corpus (Koppel, et al, 2002). In 
authorship identification, recent research has fo-
cused on identifying authors within a particular 
genre: email collections, news stories, scientific 
papers, listserv forums, and computer programs 
(de Vel, et al, 2001; Krsul and Spafford, 1997; 
Madigan, et al, 2005; McCombe, 2002).  In the 
KDD Cup 2003 Competitive Task, systems at-
tempted to identify successfully scientific articles 
authored by the same person.  The best system 
(Hill and Provost, 2003) was able to identify 
successfully scientific articles by the same per-
son 45% of the time; for authors with over 100 
papers, 85% accuracy was achieved. 
Are there common features of communication 
of an individual across and within genres?  Un-
doubtedly, the lack of corpora has been an impe-
diment to answering this question, as gathering 
personal communication samples faces consider-
able privacy and accessibility hurdles.  To our 
knowledge, all previous studies have focused on 
individual communications in one or possibly 
two genres.  
To analyze, compare, and contrast the com-
munication of individuals across and within dif-
ferent modalities, we collected a corpus consist-
ing of communication samples of 21 people in 
six genres on six topics.  We believe this corpus 
is the first attempt to create such a correlated 
corpus.   
From this corpus, we are able to perform expe-
riments on person identification.  Specifically, 
this means recognizing which individual of a set 
of people composed a document or spoke an ut-
terance which was transcribed.  We believe using 
text and transcribed speech in this manner is a 
novel research area.  In particular, the following 
types of experiments can be performed: 
- Identification of person in a novel genre 
(using five genres as training) 
- Identification of person in a novel topic 
(using five topics as training) 
- Identification of person in written genres, 
after training on the two spoken genres 
- Identification of person in spoken genres, 
after training on the written genres 
- Identification of person in written genres, 
after training on the other written genres 
In this paper, we discuss the formation and 
statistics of this corpus and report results for 
identifying individual people using techniques 
that utilize several different feature sets.  
2 Corpus Collection 
Our interest was in the research question: can a 
person be identified from their writing and audio 
samples?  Since we hypothesize that people 
communicate about items of interest to them 
across various genres, we decided to test this 
theory.  Email and chat were chosen as textual 
genres (Table 1), since text messages, although 
very common, were not easy to collect.  We also 
collected blogs and essays as samples of textual 
genres.  For audio genres, to simulate 
conversational speech as much as possible, we 
collected data from interviews and discussion 
groups that consisted of sets of subjects 
participating in the study.  Genres labeled ?peer 
give and take? allowed subjects to interact. 
Such a collection of genres allows us to 
examine both conversational and non-
conversational genres, both written and spoken 
modalities, and both formal and informal writing 
with the aim of contrasting and comparing 
computer-mediated and non-computer-mediated 
genres as well as informal and formal genres. 
 
Genre 
Com-
puter-
me-
diated 
Peer 
Give 
and 
Take 
Mode 
Con 
versa-
tional 
Au-
dience 
Email yes no text yes ad-
dressee 
Essay No no text no unspec 
Inter-
view 
No no speech yes inter-
viewer 
Blog yes yes text no world 
Chat yes yes text yes group 
Dis-
cussion 
No yes speech yes group 
Table 1.  Genres 
 
In order to ensure that the students could pro-
duce enough data, we chose six topics that were 
controversial and politically and/or socially rele-
337
vant for college students from among whom the 
subjects would be drawn.  These six topics were 
chosen from a pilot study consisting of twelve 
topics, in which we analyzed the amount of in-
formation that people tended to ?volunteer? on 
the topics as well as their thoughts about being 
able to write/speak on such a topic.  The six top-
ics are listed in Table 2.  
 
Topic Question 
Church Do you feel the Catholic Church 
needs to change its ways to adapt to 
life in the 21st Century? 
Gay Marriage While some states have legalized gay 
marriage, others are still opposed to 
it.  Do you think either side is right or 
wrong? 
Privacy Rights Recently, school officials prevented a 
school shooting because one of the 
shooters posted a myspace bulletin.  
Do you think this was an invasion of 
privacy? 
Legalization of 
Marijuana 
The city of Denver has decided to 
legalize small amounts of marijuana 
for persons over 21.  How do you feel 
about this? 
War in Iraq The controversial war in Iraq has 
made news headlines almost every 
day since it began.  How do you feel 
about the war? 
Gender  
Discrimination 
Do you feel that gender discrimina-
tion is still an issue in the present-day 
United States? 
Table 2. Topics 
 
The corpus was created in three phases 
(Goldstein-Stewart, 2008).  In Phase I, emails, 
essays and interviews were collected.  In Phase 
II, blogs and chat and discussion groups were 
created and samples collected.  For blogs, sub-
jects blogged over a period of time and could 
read and/or comment on other subjects? blogs in 
their own blog.  A graduate research assistant 
acted as interviewer and discussion and chat 
group moderator. 
Of the 24 subjects who completed Phase I, 7 
decided not to continue into Phase II.  Seven 
additional students were recruited for Phase II.  
In Phase III, these replacement students were 
then asked to provide samples for the Phase I 
genres.  Four students fully complied, resulting 
in a corpus with a full set of samples for 21 
subjects, 11 women and 10 men. 
All audio recordings, interviews and discus-
sions, were transcribed.  Interviewer/moderator 
comments were removed and, for each discus-
sion, four individual files, one for each partici-
pant?s contribution, were produced. 
Our data is somewhat homogeneous: it sam-
ples only undergraduate university students and 
was collected in controlled settings.  But we be-
lieve that controlling the topics, genres, and de-
mographics of subjects allows the elimination of 
many variables that effect communicative style 
and aids the identification of common features. 
3 Corpus Statistics 
3.1 Word Count 
The mean word counts for the 21 students per 
genre and per topic are shown in Figures 1 and 2, 
respectively.  Figure 1 shows that the students 
produced more content in the directly interactive 
genres ? interview and discussion (the spoken 
genres) as well as chat (a written genre). 
 
 
Figure 1.  Mean word counts for gender and genre 
 
 
Figure 2.  Mean word counts for gender and topic 
338
 
The email genre had the lowest mean word 
count, perhaps indicating that it is a genre in-
tended for succinct messaging. 
3.2 Word Usage By Individuals 
We performed an analysis of the word usage of 
individuals.  Among the top 20 most frequently 
occurring words, the most frequent word used by 
all males was ?the?.  For the 11 females, six most 
frequently used ?the?, four used ?I?, and one 
used ?like?.  Among abbreviations, 13 individu-
als used ?lol?.  Abbreviations were mainly used 
in chat.  Other abbreviations were used to vary-
ing degrees such as the abbreviation ?u?.  Emoti-
cons were used by five participants.   
4 Classification 
4.1 Features 
Frequencies of words in word categories were 
determined using Linguistic Inquiry and Word 
Count (LIWC).  LIWC2001 analyzes text and 
produces 88 output variables, among them word 
count and average words per sentence.  All oth-
ers are percentages, including percentage of 
words that are parts of speech or belong to given 
dictionaries (Pennebaker, et al, 2001).  Default 
dictionaries contain categories of words that in-
dicate basic emotional and cognitive dimensions 
and were used here.  LIWC was designed for 
both text and speech and has categories, such 
negations, numbers, social words, and emotion.  
Refer to LIWC (www.liwc.net) for a full descrip-
tion of categories.  Here the 88 LIWC features 
are denoted feature set L. 
From the original 24 participants? documents 
and the new 7 participants? documents from 
Phase II, we aggregated all samples from all ge-
nres and computed the top 100 words for males 
and for females, including stop words.  Six 
words differed between males and females.  Of 
these top words, the 64 words with counts that 
varied by 10% or more between male and female 
usage were selected.  Excluded from this list 
were 5 words that appeared frequently but were 
highly topic-specific: ?catholic?, ?church?, ?ma-
rijuana?, ?marriage?, and ?school.? 
Most of these words appeared on a large stop 
word list (www.webconfs.com/stop-words.php).  
Non-stop word terms included the word ?feel?, 
which was used more frequently by females than 
males, as well as the terms ?yea? and ?lot? (used 
more commonly by women) and ?uh? (used 
more commonly by men).  Some stop words 
were used more by males (?some?, ?any?), oth-
ers by females (?I?, ?and?).  Since this set mainly 
consists of stop words, we refer to it as the func-
tional word features or set F. 
The third feature set (T) consisted of the five 
topic specific words excluded from F. 
The fourth feature set (S) consisted of the stop 
word list of 659 words mentioned above. 
The fifth feature set (I) we consider informal 
features.  It contains nine common words not in 
set S: ?feel?, ?lot?, ?uh?, ?women?, ?people?, 
?men?, ?gonna?, ?yea? and ?yeah?.  This set alo 
contains the abbreviations and emotional expres-
sions ?lol?, ?ur?, ?tru?, ?wat?, and ?haha?. Some 
of the expressions could be characteristic of par-
ticular individuals. For example the term ?wat? 
was consistently used by one individual in the 
informal chat genre. 
Another feature set (E) was built around the 
emoticons that appeared in the corpus.  These 
included ?:)?, ?:(?, ?:-(?, ?;)?, ?:-/?, and ?>:o)?. 
For our results, we use eight feature set com-
binations: 1. All 88 LIWC features (denoted L); 
2. LIWC and functional word features, (L+F); 3. 
LIWC plus all functional word features and the 
topic words (L+F+T); 4. LIWC plus all function-
al word features and emoticons (L+F+E); 5. 
LIWC plus all stop word features (L+S); 6. 
LIWC plus all stop word and informal features 
(L+S+I); 7. LIWC supplemented by informal, 
topic, and stop word features, (L+S+I+T).  Note 
that, when combined, sets S and I cover set F. 
4.2 Classifiers 
Classification of all samples was performed us-
ing four classifiers of the Weka workbench, ver-
sion 3.5 (Witten and Frank, 2005).  All were 
used with default settings except the Random 
Forest classifier (Breiman, 2001), which used 
100 trees.  We collected classification results for 
Na?ve-Bayes, J48 (decision tree), SMO (support 
vector machine) (Cortes and Vapnik, 1995; Platt, 
1998) and RF (Random Forests) methods. 
5 Person Identification Results 
5.1 Cross Validation Across Genres 
To identify a person as the author of a text, six 
fold cross validation was used.  All 756 samples 
were divided into 126 ?documents,? each con-
sisting of all six samples of a person?s expression 
in a single genre, regardless of topic.  There is a 
baseline of approximately 5% accuracy if ran-
domly guessing the person.  Table 3 shows the 
339
accuracy results of classification using combina-
tions of the feature sets and classifiers. 
The results show that SMO is by far the best 
classifier of the four and, thus, we used only this 
classifier on subsequent experiments.  L+S per-
formed better alone than when adding the infor-
mal features ? a surprising result. 
Table 4 shows a comparison of results using 
feature sets L+F and L+F+T.  The five topic 
words appear to grant a benefit in the best trained 
case (SMO). 
Table 5 shows a comparison of results using 
feature sets L+F and L+F+E, and this shows that 
the inclusion of the individual emoticon features 
does provide a benefit, which is interesting con-
sidering that these are relatively few and are typ-
ically concentrated in the chat documents. 
 
Feature SMO RF100 J48 NB 
L 52 30 15 17 
L+F 60 44 21 25 
L+S 71 42 19 33 
L+S+I 71 39 17 33 
L+S+I+T 71 40 17 33 
Table 3. Person identification accuracy (%) using six 
fold cross validation 
 
Feature SMO RF100 J48 NB 
L+F 60 44 21 25 
L+F+T 67 40 21 25 
Table 4. Accuracy (%) using six fold cross validation 
with and without topic word features (T) 
 
Feature SMO RF100 J48 NB 
L+F 60 44 21 25 
L+F+E 65 41 21 25 
Table 5. Accuracy (%) using six fold cross validation 
with and without emoticon features (E) 
5.2 Predict Communicant in One Genre 
Given Information on Other Genres 
The next set of experiments we performed was to 
identify a person based on knowledge of the per-
son?s communication in other genres.  We first 
train on five genres, and we then test on one ? a 
?hold out? or test genre.   
Again, as in six fold cross validation, a total of 
126 ?documents? were used: for each genre, 21 
samples were constructed, each the concatena-
tion of all text produced by an individual in that 
genre, across all topics.  Table 6 shows the re-
sults of this experiment.  The result of 100% for 
L+F, L+F+T, and L+F+E in email was surpris-
ing, especially since the word counts for email 
were the lowest.  The lack of difference in L+F 
and L+F+E results is not surprising since the 
emoticon features appear only in chat docu-
ments, with one exception of a single emoticon 
in a blog document (?:-/?), which did not appear 
in any chat documents.  So there was no emoti-
con feature that appeared across different genres. 
 
SMO HOLD OUT (TEST GENRE) 
Features A B C D E S I 
L 60 76 52 43 76 81 29 
L+F 75 81 57 48 100 90 71 
L+F+T 76 86 62 52 100 86 71 
L+F+E 75 81 57 48 100 90 71 
L+S 82 81 67 67 86 90 100 
L+S+I 79 86 52 57 86 90 100 
L+S+I+T 81 86 52 67 90 90 100 
Table 6.  Person identification accuracy (%) training 
with SMO on 5 genres and testing on 1. A=Average 
over all genres, B=Blog, C=Chat, D=Discussion, 
E=Email, S=Essay, I=Interview 
 
Train Test L+F L+F+T 
CDSI Email 67 95 
BDSI Email 71 52 
BCSI Email 76 100 
BCDI Email 57 90 
BCDS Email 57 81 
Table 7. Accuracy (%) using SMO for predicting 
email author after training on 4 other genres. B=Blog, 
C=Chat, D=Discussion, S=Essay, I=Interview 
 
We attempted to determine which genres were 
most influential in identifying email authorship, 
by reducing the number of genres in its training 
set.  Results are reported in Table 7.  The differ-
ence between the two sets, which differ only in 
five topic specific word features, is more marked 
here.  The lack of these features causes accuracy 
to drop far more rapidly as the training set is re-
duced.  It also appears that the chat genre is im-
portant when identifying the email genre when 
topical features are included.  This is probably 
not just due to the volume of data since discus-
sion groups also have a great deal of data.  We 
need to investigate further the reason for such a 
high performance on the email genre. 
The results in Table 6 are also interesting for 
the case of L+S (which has more stop words than 
L+F).  With this feature set, classification for the 
interview genre improved significantly, while 
that of email decreased.  This may indicate that 
the set of stop words may be very genre specific 
? a hypothesis we will test in future work.  If this 
in indeed the case, perhaps certain different sets 
340
of stop words may be important for identifying 
certain genres, genders and individual author-
ship.  Previous results indicate that the usage of 
certain stop words as features assists with identi-
fying gender (Sabin, et al, 2008). 
Table 6 also shows that, using the informal 
words (feature set I) decreased performance in 
two genres: chat (the genre in which the abbrevi-
ations are mostly used) and discussion.  We plan 
to run further experiments to investigate this.  
The sections that follow will typically show the 
results achieved with L+F and L+S features.  
 
Train\Test B C D E S I 
Blog 100 14 14 76 57 5 
Chat 24 100 29 38 19 10 
Discussion 10 5 100 5 10 29 
Email 43 10 5 100 48 0 
Essay 67 5 5 33 100 5 
Interview 5 5 5 5 5 100 
Table 8. Accuracy (%) using SMO for predicting per-
son between genres after training on one genre using 
L+F features 
 
Table 8 displays the accuracies when the L+F 
feature set of single genre is used for training a 
model tested on one genre.  This generally sug-
gests the contribution of each genre when all are 
used in training.  When the training and testing 
sets are the same, 100% accuracy is achieved.  
Examining this chart, the highest accuracies are 
achieved when training and test sets are textual.  
Excluding models trained and tested on the same 
genre, the average accuracy for training and test-
ing within written genres is 36% while the aver-
age accuracy for training and testing within spo-
ken genres is 17%.  Even lower are average ac-
curacies of the models trained on spoken and 
tested on textual genres (9%) and the models 
trained on textual and tested on spoken genres 
(6%). This indicates that the accuracies that fea-
ture the same mode (textual or spoken) in train-
ing and testing tend to be higher. 
Of particular interest here is further examina-
tion of the surprising results of testing on email 
with the L+F feature set. Of these tests, a model 
trained on blogs achieved the highest score, per-
haps due to a greater stylistic similarity to email 
than the other genres.  This is also the highest 
score in the chart apart from cases where train 
and test genres were the same.  Training on chat 
and essay genres shows some improvement over 
the baseline, but models trained with the two 
spoken genres do not rise above baseline accura-
cy when tested on the textual email genre. 
5.3 Predict Communicant in One Topic 
Given Information on Five Topics 
This set of experiments was designed to deter-
mine if there was no training data provided for a 
certain topic, yet there were samples of commu-
nication for an individual across genres for other 
topics, could an author be determined? 
 
SMO HOLD OUT (TEST TOPIC) 
Features Avg Ch Gay Iraq Mar Pri Sex 
L+F 87 81 95 86 95 100 67 
L+F+T 65 76 71 86 29 62 67 
L+F+E 87 81 95 86 95 95 67 
L+S 94 95 95 81 100 100 95 
Table 9.  Person identification accuracy (%) training 
with SMO on 5 topics and testing on 1. Avg = Aver-
age over all topics: Ch=Catholic Church, Gay=Gay 
Marriage, Iraq=Iraq War, Mar=Marijuana Legaliza-
tion, Pri=Privacy Rights, Sex=Sex Discrimination 
 
Again a total of 126 ?documents? were used: 
for each topic, 21 samples were constructed, 
each the concatenation of all text produced by an 
individual on that topic, across all genres.  One 
topic was withheld and 105 documents (on the 
other 5 topics) were used for training.  Table 9 
shows that overall the L+S feature set performed 
better than either the L+F or L+F+T sets.  The 
most noticeable differences are the drops in the 
accuracy when the five topic words are added, 
particularly on the topics of marijuana and priva-
cy rights.  For L+F+T, if ?marijuana? is withheld 
from the topic word features when the marijuana 
topic is the test set, the accuracy rises to 90%.  
Similarly, if ?school? is withheld from the topic 
word features when the privacy rights topic is the 
test set, the accuracy rises to 100%.  This indi-
cates the topic words are detrimental to deter-
mining the communicant, and this appears to be 
supported by the lack of an accuracy drop in the 
testing on the Iraq and sexual discrimination top-
ics, both of which featured the fewest uses of the 
five topic words.  That the results rise when us-
ing the L+S features shows that more features 
that are independent of the topic tend to help dis-
tinguish the person (as only the Iraq set expe-
rienced a small drop using these features in train-
ing and testing, while the others either increased 
or remained the same).  The similarity here of the 
results using L+F features when compared to 
L+F+E is likely due to the small number of emo-
ticons observed in the corpus (16 total exam-
ples).  
341
5.4 Predict Communicant in a Speech Ge-
nre Given Information on the Other  
One interesting experiment used one speech ge-
nre for training, and the other speech genre for 
testing.  The results (Table 10) show that the ad-
ditional stop words (S compared to F) make a 
positive difference in both sets.  We hypothesize 
that the increased performance of training with 
discussion data and testing on interview data is 
due to the larger amount of training data availa-
ble in discussions.  We will test this in future 
work. 
 
Train Test L+F L+S 
Inter Disc 5 19 
Disc Inter 29 48 
Table 10.  Person identification accuracy (%) training 
and testing SMO on spoken genres 
5.5 Predict Authorship in a Textual Genre 
Given Information on Speech Genres  
Train Test L+F L+S 
Disc+Inter Blog 19 24 
Disc+Inter Chat 5 14 
Disc+Inter Email 5 10 
Disc+Inter Essay 10 29 
Table 11.  Person identification accuracy (%) training 
SMO on spoken genres and testing on textual genres 
 
Table 11 shows the results of training on speech 
data only and predicting the author of the text 
genre.  Again, the speech genres alone do not do 
well at determining the individual author of the 
text genre.  The best score was 29% for essays. 
5.6 Predict Authorship in a Textual Genre 
Given Information on Other Textual 
Genres  
Table 12 shows the results of training on text 
data only and predicting authorship for one of the 
four text genres.  Recognizing the authors in chat 
is the most difficult, which is not surprising since 
the blogs, essays and emails are more similar to 
each other than the chat genre, which uses ab-
breviations and more informal language as well 
as being immediately interactive. 
 
Train Test L+F L+S 
C+E+S Blog 76 86 
B+E+S Chat 10 19 
B+C+S Email 90 81 
B+C+E Essay 90 86 
Table 12.  Person identification accuracy (%) train-
ing and testing SMO on textual genres 
5.7 Predict Communicant in a Speech Ge-
nre Given Information on Textual Ge-
nres 
Training on text and classifying speech-based 
samples by author showed poor results.  Similar 
to the results for speech genres, using the text 
genres alone to determine the individual in the 
speech genre results in a maximum score of 29% 
for the interview genre (Table 13). 
 
Train Test L+F L+S 
B+C+E+S Discussion 14 23 
B+C+E+S Interview 14 29 
Table 13. Person identification accuracy (%) training 
SMO on textual genres and testing on speech genres 
5.8 Error Analysis 
Results for different training and test sets vary 
considerably.  A key factor in determining which 
sets can successfully be used to train other sets 
seems to be the mode, that is, whether or not a 
set is textual or spoken, as the lowest accuracies 
tend to be found between genres of different 
modes.  This suggests that how people write and 
how they speak may be somewhat distinct. 
Typically, more data samples in the training 
tends to increase the accuracy of the tests, but 
more features does not guarantee the same result.  
An examination of the feature sets revealed fur-
ther explanations for this apart from any inherent 
difficulties in recognizing authors between sets.  
For many tests, there is a tendency for the same 
person to be chosen for classification, indicating 
a bias to that person in the training data.  This is 
typically caused by features that have mostly, but 
not all, zero values in training samples, but have 
many non-zero values in testing.  The most 
striking examples of this are described in 5.3, 
where the removal of certain topic-related 
features was found to dramatically increase the 
accruacy.  Targetted removal of other features 
that have the same biasing effect could increase 
accuracy. 
While Weka normalizes the incoming features 
for SMO, it was also discovered that a simple 
initial normalization of the feature sets by 
dividing by the maximum or standardization by 
subtracting the mean and dividing by the 
standard deviation of the feature sets could 
increase the accuracy across the different tests.  
6 Conclusion 
In this paper, we have described a novel unique 
corpus consisting of samples of communication 
342
of 21 individuals in six genres across six topics 
as well as experiments conducted to identify a 
person?s samples within the corpus.  We have 
shown that we can identify individuals with rea-
sonably high accuracy for several cases: (1) 
when we have samples of their communication 
across genres (71%), (2) when we have samples 
of their communication in specific genres other 
than the one being tested (81%), and (3) when 
they are communicating on a new topic (94%). 
For predicting a person?s communication in 
one text genre using other text genres only, we 
were able to achieve a good accuracy for all 
genres (above 76%) except chat.  We believe this 
is because chat, due to its ?real-time 
communication? nature is quite different from 
the other text genres of emails, essays and blogs. 
Identifying a person in one speech genre after 
training with the other speech genre had lower 
accuracies (less than 48%).  Since these results 
differed significantly, we hypothesize this is due 
to the amount of data available for training ? a 
hypothesis we plan to test in the future.  
Future plans also include further investigation 
of some of the suprising results mentioned in this 
paper as well investigation of stop word lists 
particular to communicative genres.  We also 
plan to investigate if it is easier to identify those 
participants who have produced more data 
(higher total word count) as well as perform a 
systematic study the effects of the number of 
words gathered on person identificaton. 
?n addition, we plan to investigate the efficacy 
of using other features besides those available in 
LIWC, stopwords and emoticons in person 
identification.  These include spelling errors, 
readability measures, complexity measures, 
suffixes, and content analysis measures. 
References 
Naomi S. Baron. 2003. Why email looks like speech. 
In J. Aitchison and D. M. Lewis, editors, New Me-
dia Language. Routledge, London, UK. 
Douglas Biber. 1988. Variation across speech and 
writing. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
UK. 
Leo Breiman. 2001. Random forests. Technical Re-
port for Version 3, University of California, Berke-
ley, CA. 
Rafael A. Calvo, Jae-Moon Lee, and Xiaobo Li. 2004. 
Managing content with automatic document classi-
fication. Journal of Digital Information,  5(2). 
Corinna Cortes and Vladimir Vapnik. 1995. Support 
vector networks. Machine Learning, 20(3):273-
297. 
Nikolas Coupland, Justine Coupland, Howard Giles, 
and Karen L. Henwood. 1988. Accommodating the 
elderly: Invoking and extending a theory, Lan-
guage in Society, 17(1):1-41. 
David Crystal. 2001. Language and the Internet. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
Olivier de Vel, Alison Anderson, Malcolm Corney, 
George Mohay. 2001. Mining e-mail content for 
author identification forensics, In SIGMOD: Spe-
cial Section on Data Mining for Intrusion Detec-
tion and Threat Analysis. 
Jade Goldstein-Stewart, Gary Ciany, and Jaime Car-
bonell. 2007. Genre identification and goal-focused 
summarization, In Proceedings of the ACM 16th 
Conference on Information and Knowledge Man-
agement (CIKM) 2007, pages 889-892. 
Jade Goldstein-Stewart, Kerri A. Goodwin, Roberta 
E. Sabin, and Ransom K. Winder. 2008. Creating 
and using a correlated corpora to glean communic-
ative commonalities. In LREC2008 Proceedings, 
Marrakech, Morocco. 
Susan Herring. 2001. Gender and power in online 
communication. Center for Social Informatics, 
Working Paper, WP-01-05.  
Susan Herring. 1996. Two variants of an electronic 
message schema. In Susan Herring, editor, Com-
puter-Mediated Communication: Linguistic, Social 
and Cross-Cultural Perspectives. John Benjamins, 
Amsterdam, pages 81-106. 
Shawndra Hill and Foster Provost. 2003. The myth of 
the double-blind review? Author identification us-
ing only citations. SIGKDD Explorations. 
5(2):179-184. 
Moshe Koppel, Shlomo Argamon, and Anat Rachel 
Shimoni. 2002. Automatically categorizing written 
texts by author gender. Literary and Linguistic 
Computation. 17(4):401-412. 
Ivan Krsul and Eugene H. Spafford. 1997.  Author-
ship analysis: Identifying the author of a program. 
Computers and Security 16(3):233-257. 
Shlomo Levitan and Shlomo Argamon. 2006.  Fixing 
the federalist: correcting results and evaluating edi-
tions for automated attribution. In Digital Humani-
ties, pages 323-328, Paris. 
LIWC, Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count. 
http://www.liwc.net/ 
David Madigan, Alexander Genkin, David Lewis, 
Shlomo Argamon, Dmitriy Fradkin, and Li Ye. 
2005. Author identification on the large scale. 
Proc. of the Meeting of the Classification Society 
of North America.  
343
Philip M. McCarthy, Gwyneth A. Lewis, David F. 
Dufty, and Danielle S. McNamara. 2006. Analyz-
ing writing styles with Coh-Metrix, In Proceedings 
of AI Research Society International Conference 
(FLAIRS), pages 764-769. 
Niamh McCombe. 2002. Methods of author identifi-
cation, Final Year Project, Trinity College, Ireland. 
Thomas C. Mendenhall. 1887. The characteristic 
curves of composition. Science, 9(214):237-249. 
Frederick Mosteller and David L. Wallace. 1964.  
Inference and Disputed Authorship: The Federal-
ist. Addison-Wesley, Boston. 
James W. Pennebaker, Martha E. Francis, and Roger 
J. Booth. 2001. Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count 
(LIWC): LIWC2001. Lawrence Erlbaum Asso-
ciates, Mahwah, NJ. 
John C. Platt. 1998. Using sparseness and analytic QP 
to speed training of support vector machines. In M. 
S. Kearns, S. A. Solla, and D. A. Cohn, editors, 
Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems 11. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass. 
Roberta E. Sabin, Kerri A. Goodwin, Jade Goldstein-
Stewart, and Joseph A. Pereira. 2008. Gender dif-
ferences across correlated corpora: preliminary re-
sults. FLAIRS Conference 2008, Florida, pages 
207-212. 
Marina Santini.  2007.  Automatic Identification of 
Genre in Web Pages. Ph.D., thesis,  University of 
Brighton, Brighton, UK.  
Michael Shepherd and Carolyn Watters. 1999. The 
functionality attribute of cybergenres. In Proceed-
ings of the 32nd Hawaii International Conf. on 
System Sciences (HICSS1999), Maui, HI. 
Rob Thomson and Tamar Murachver. 2001. Predict-
ing gender from electronic discourse. British Jour-
nal of Social Psychology. 40(2):193-208. 
Ian Witten and Eibe Frank. 2005. Data Mining: Prac-
tical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques 
(Second Edition). Morgan Kaufmann, San Francis-
co, CA. 
Simeon J. Yates. 1996. Oral and written linguistic 
aspects of computer conferencing: a corpus based 
study. In Susan Herring, editor, Computer-
mediated Communication: Linguistic, Social, and 
Cross-Cultural Perspectives. John Benjamins, 
Amsterdam, pages 29-46. 
344
