An archive for all of Europe: the TRACTOR initiative 
Martin Wynne 
Centre for Corpus Linguistics, 
Department of English, 
University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham 
UK ? B15 2TT 
martin@clg.bham.ac.uk 
 
Abstract  
TRACTOR is the TELRI Research 
Archive of Computational Tools and 
Resources. It features monolingual, 
bilingual, and multilingual corpora 
and lexicons in a wide variety of 
languages, as well as tools for 
language processing. TRACTOR is a 
key element of TELRI II, a pan-
European alliance of focal national 
language technology institutions with 
the emphasis on Central and Eastern 
European and NIS countries. 
TRACTOR hopes to complement 
other archives by providing a service 
for languages and users who are 
currently under-represented in 
existing archives. TRACTOR's unique 
strength lies in the amount of 
resources provided by centres in 
Central and Eastern Europe, and its 
role at the hub of a network of 
resource creation, standardisation and 
distribution which links the EU and 
non-EU European research 
communities. The TRACTOR User 
Community brings together resource 
providers, academic users and 
industrial users in an ongoing 
relationship, which is designed to 
foster the emergence of joint research 
projects in language engineering. 
The TRACTOR philosophy is to 
accept deposits of resources in any 
format, and to distribute them in the 
form in which they are received (with 
small changes if possible such as 
additional documentation, and putting 
a browsable version or sample online.) 
In addition, certain standards are 
recommended and help is offered to 
providers who wish to make their 
resources conformant with the 
standards. This lack of standardisation 
is not simply a pragmatic measure in 
the face of problems of heterogeneity, 
but is based on a profound scepticism 
towards current resource 
standardisation practice. 
In the future, TRACTOR aims to 
build up particularly parallel corpora 
and tools for processing and 
extracting meaning from such 
resources. 
1 What is TRACTOR? 
TRACTOR (www.tractor.de) is the TELRI 
Research Archive of Computational Tools and 
Resources. It features monolingual, bilingual, 
and multilingual corpora and lexicons in a wide 
variety of languages, currently including 
Belarus, Bulgarian, Cornish, Croatian, Czech, 
Dutch, English, Estonian, French, German, 
Hungarian, Italian, Latvian, Lithuanian, 
Romanian, Russian, Serbian, Slovenian, 
Swedish, Turkish, Ukrainian and Uzbek. 
TRACTOR is also building up a portfolio of 
tools for language processing. While the original 
aim was to pool the resources of TELRI 
partners, TRACTOR also serves other 
institutions by making their resources and tools 
available for the wider community. The borders 
of the TRACTOR User Community now stretch 
beyond Europe, with members in Africa, Asia, 
and America. 
1.1 What is TELRI? 
TRACTOR is a key element of TELRI II. The 
EC Concerted Action TELRI II is a pan-
European alliance of currently 28 focal national 
language technology institutions with the 
emphasis on Central and Eastern European and 
NIS countries. 
TELRI II?s primary objectives are:  
? To strengthen the pan-European 
infrastructure for the multilingual 
language research and development 
community;  
? To collect, promote, and make available 
monolingual and multilingual language 
resources and tools for the extraction of 
language data and linguistic knowledge;  
? To offer a customized comprehensive 
service to academic and industrial users;  
? To prepare and organize research and 
development projects focusing on 
translation aids, multilingual authoring 
systems, and information retrieval;  
? To provide a forum where experts from 
academia and industry share and assess 
tools and resources, assess software, 
evaluate new trends, investigate 
alternative approaches, and engage in 
joint activities;  
? To make available the expertise of its 
partner institutions to the research 
community, to the public, and to 
language industry.  
TELRI II implements these objectives in the 
following activities:  
? Networking: This work package 
includes liaising with related 
infrastructure activities, centres, and 
institutions, promoting TELRI activities 
(newsletter, webpage, TELRI list), and 
strengthening the permanent 
infrastructure of the TELRI Association.  
? TELRI Seminars: The series of 
successful TELRI seminars continues 
with annual seminars in CEE/NIS 
countries, this year to be held in 
Bulgaria. 
? TRACTOR Service: This work package 
comprises promotion, support, and 
availability of customized service to the 
TRACTOR User Community.  
? TRACTOR Tools and Resources: This 
work package focuses on the acquisition 
of attractive tools and resources for 
TRACTOR, the TELRI Research 
Archive of Computational Tools and 
Resources.  
? Organizing Joint Research: TELRI 
partners will prepare European R&D 
projects with strong industrial 
involvement focusing on multilingual 
language and terminology issues.  
2 TRACTOR?s Role 
TRACTOR is not the only language resource 
archive, as participants in this workshop are well 
aware. It does not aim to become the only focal 
point for language resource distribution on the 
web. Rather it hopes to complement other 
archives by providing a service for languages 
and users who are currently under-represented in 
existing archives. TRACTOR's unique strength 
lies in the amount of resources provided by 
centres in Central and Eastern Europe, and its 
role at the hub of a network of resource creation, 
standardisation and distribution which links the 
EU and non-EU European research 
communities. The TRACTOR User Community 
brings together resource providers, academic 
users and industrial users in an ongoing 
relationship, which is designed to foster the 
emergence of joint research projects in language 
engineering.  
The resources are in many languages, with 
several different character sets and widely 
differing storage and markup conventions, and 
variable degrees of documentation, which is also 
in various formats. This raises particular 
challenges in terms of standardisation and 
evaluation of the resources. Since most of the 
resources have been collected over a period of 
several years, and from countries with varying 
degrees of familiarity with the standards of the 
western European human language technology 
community standards, they do not in general 
conform to one, or in some cases to any, 
commonly accepted standards of digital storage, 
character encoding, textual or linguistic 
annotation. There are exceptions to this, such as 
the highly standardised corpus resources 
collected within the ELAN framework, now 
made available through the TRACTOR archive.  
The TRACTOR philosophy is to accept deposits 
of resources in any format, and to distribute 
them in the form in which they are received 
(with small changes if possible such as 
additional documentation, and putting a 
browsable version or sample online.) In 
addition, certain standards are recommended and 
help is offered to providers who wish to make 
their resources conformant with the standards.  
This lack of standardisation is not simply a 
pragmatic measure in the face of problems of 
heterogeneity. It is also based on the idea that 
standardisation should not be a barrier to 
language resource distribution. Sometimes 
providers of resources do not have the resources 
or expertise to adapt them to strict standards. We 
also recognise that the resource providers and 
users do not have requirements in common 
which can easily be translated into standards. 
Highly standardised resources built according to 
carefully crafted and strict criteria, and intended 
to be of commercial value such as EuroWordnet, 
the SIMPLE ontology, the ELAN network have 
more resources and attention paid to the design 
than the quality or usefulness of the knowledge 
which they contain. Furthermore, they are often 
too narrow in their applicability and in many 
cases they are simply not being used. 
TRACTOR aims to produce a synergy between 
academic and industrial researchers whereby the 
knowledge and resources can be shared and 
developed at a pre-competitive stage. Such 
collaborations can then develop on a commercial 
basis when on terms suitable for all parties. This 
is thought to be a more productive approach than 
the attempting to identify global, common needs 
and then to deliver large, valuable resources of 
general applicability. 
As far as documentation of the resources is 
concerned, we believe that standardisation is 
probably a good idea, and we are looking into 
participating in the OLAC initiative.  
3 Practicalities 
3.1 How does it work? 
TRACTOR provides ongoing help and support 
for the User Community, a task which chiefly 
involves solving simple queries regarding the 
nature of the resources on offer, and how to 
download them, and referring more complex 
queries to experts in the User Community, or in 
the wider TELRI network. Comments and 
feedback from users on the service and the 
resources are encouraged. The helpdesk tries to 
put users with research interests in common in 
touch with each other. 
Visits to the website and downloads from it are 
logged exhaustively, and feedback is given to 
the resource providers.  
3.2 How do you join? 
Fill in the form at 
http://www.tractor.de/docs/user.html and 
arrange for the Euro 50 annual fee to be paid 
(details on the form). There is a special reduced 
rate of Euro 20 for Central and East European 
countries outside of the EU, and for NIS 
countries.  
If researchers also want to deposit some of your 
resources with TRACTOR for distribution, we 
will be very pleased to receive them. In this case 
the fee is waived. Once these formalities are 
completed, we send a user ID and password by 
email so that you can access the resources.  
3.3 What is the TUC? 
The TUC is the TRACTOR User Community. 
This is the name given to everyone involved in 
depositing and accessing resources in the 
archive.  
3.4 Why do we charge a fee? 
There is a small annual administrative fee 
charged for joining the TRACTOR User 
Community. This is waived in the case of 
members of the TELRI Association and users 
who also deposit resources.  
The principal reason for doing this is in order to 
put membership on a formal basis. To put it 
bluntly, if researchers have to pay for access, 
then they usually have to alert their colleagues 
and masters to it and persuade them to authorise 
the payment. Also, having paid for something, 
they are more likely to use it. The fee is 
considerably less than what users have to pay for 
more commercially oriented archives such as 
ELRA.  
TRACTOR needs an active User Community, 
and we would prefer to have a compact group of 
committed and active users, to a large number of 
people who register because it is free, and then 
take no active part in the activities. Having said 
that, we do hope a large number of people and 
institutions join, and membership is not 
conditional on taking part in any activities!  
3.5 What sort of resources can I 
deposit? 
Resources are gratefully received for the 
TRACTOR archive. We currently aim to build 
up the archive with language corpora, lexicons 
and software tools for processing language. If 
you have something different which would be of 
use to the human language technology 
community, then we would also be very pleased 
to hear from you!  
3.6 What sorts of resources are there? 
There are currently corpora, tools, and lexicons. 
Corpora can be subdivided as general 
monolingual (e.g. German Parole, Uzbek, 
Ukrainian, Slovenian), specialist monolingual 
(the CFRL collection of Russian literature); 
parallel corpora (the Plato and 1984 corpora). 
An important recent acquisition for the archive 
is the special TRACTOR version of the Qwick 
corpus analysis program, which is available to 
the TUC with indexed monolingual corpora in 
many languages. This is considered an important 
development as it means that corpora can now 
be delivered ready to analyse and use without 
any further demands on the expertise or software 
which the user may or may not have. 
It is intended to greatly increase the range and 
depth of holdings in the TRACTOR archive 
throughout 2001, as a key part of the work of the 
Centre for Corpus Linguistics in the English 
Department at the University of Birmingham. 
Particular efforts are being made to create and 
acquire parallel translation corpora, which are of 
particular interest for research purposes for 
many academic and industrial users of 
TRACTOR. 
TRACTOR is not in competition with other 
archives such as the Oxford Text Archive, 
ELDA and the Linguistic Data Consortium. 
TRACTOR is unique in it?s combination of the 
following features: 
? TRACTOR is not just an archive; it is a 
network of researchers with interests in 
linguistic resources; 
? all resources are available for research 
purposes only and not for commercial 
exploitation; 
? the primary interest of the TRACTOR 
community is working with multilingual 
resources; 
? the strength and focus of TRACTOR is on 
Central and Eastern Europe; 
? the acquisition philosophy is not to seek to 
impose standards of textual markup or 
linguistic annotation on resource providers. 
4 The future 
TRACTOR aims to build up particularly parallel 
corpora and tools for processing and extracting 
meaning from such resources. Given the 
continuing failure of attempts to build useful 
multilingual software on the basis of conceptual 
ontologies and other artificial intelligence 
approaches, and the failure of translation 
approaches on the basis of translation 
equivalence at the word level, it is the belief of 
Wolfgang Teubert and other researchers in 
Birmingham and in the TRACTOR network that 
the most productive way forward now is to 
extract knowledge about equivalence from 
parallel corpora and apply it to automatic 
multilingual text processing tasks. 
This is just one area of interest, and members are 
free to develop ideas and resources in a 
multitude of directions.  
It is also intended that the User Community 
continues to grow and become more active, not 
only as a group of researchers accessing the 
archive, but also as a research network. 
