Coling 2008: Companion volume ? Posters and Demonstrations, pages 139?142
Manchester, August 2008
Sentence Compression as a Step in Summarization or an Alternative Path
in Text Shortening
Mehdi Yousfi-Monod
University of Montpellier 2, CNRS
LIRMM, 161 rue Ada
34392 Montpellier Cedex 5
yousfi@lirmm.fr
Violaine Prince
University of Montpellier 2, CNRS
LIRMM, 161 rue Ada
34392 Montpellier Cedex 5
prince@lirmm.fr
Abstract
The originality of this work leads in tack-
ling text compression using an unsuper-
vised method, based on a deep linguistic
analysis, and without resorting on a learn-
ing corpus. This work presents a system
for dependent tree pruning, while preserv-
ing the syntactic coherence and the main
informational contents, and led to an op-
erational software, named COLIN. Exper-
iment results show that our compressions
get honorable satisfaction levels, with a
mean compression ratio of 38 %.
1 Introduction
Automatic summarization has become a crucial
task for natural language processing (NLP) since
information retrieval has been addressing it as one
of the most usual user requirements in its panel
of products. Most traditional approaches are con-
sidering the sentence as a minimal unit in the
summarization process. Some more recent works
get into the sentence in order to reduce the num-
ber of words by discarding incidental informa-
tion. Some of these approaches rely on statistical
models (Knight and Marcu, 2002; Lin and Hovy,
2002; Hovy et al, 2005), while some other works
use rule-based linguistically-motivated heuristics
(McKeown et al, 2002; Dorr et al, 2003; Gagnon
and Sylva, 2005) to improve the determination of
the importance of textual segments. Considering
a deeper linguistic analysis could considerably im-
prove the quality of reduced sentences, we decided
c
? 2008. Licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported li-
cense (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/).
Some rights reserved.
to develop a sentence compression approach ex-
clusively focused on linguistic heuristics. Our first
work (Yousfi-Monod and Prince, 2005), slightly
anterior to (Gagnon and Sylva, 2005), showed in-
teresting results, and led to a deeper and more com-
plete work fully detailed in (Yousfi-Monod, 2007).
This paper sums up our approach.
2 Theoretical framework
The main hypothesis of this work leans on the ob-
servation that incident sentence constituents are
often not as important as principal constituents.
For instance, let us consider the temporal adver-
bial in the following sentence: ?Taiwan elected
on Saturday its first president?. While the subject
?Taiwan? and the verb ?elected? are principal con-
stituents of the sentence, ?on Saturday? is incident
and can be removed without causing neither an
agrammaticality nor a weighty content lost. Two
aspects of the constituent significance: Grammati-
cality and content, are dealt with in this section.
2.1 Grammaticality preservation thanks to
the syntactic function
The principal/incident constituent principle can be
found in constituent or dependency grammar rep-
resentations. The approach embedded in COLIN
is based on such grammars, while adapting them
to the relevant proprieties for sentence compres-
sion. As we aim at preserving sentences gram-
maticality, our first goal is to get a syntactic tree
based on the grammatical importance, where for
each node, a daughter node is an incident con-
stituent which may be removed under certain con-
ditions. We opted for the X-bar theory (Chomsky,
1970), which represents a sentence through a tree
of constituents, composed by heads and governed
constituents (also dependents). While a head is
139
grammatically mandatory, its dependents can often
be removed, depending on some of their linguistic
properties and/or those of their heads. Our goal is
first to have a syntactic structure modeling based
on constituents grammatical importance. Syntactic
writing rules of the X-bar theory are focusing on
sentence construction by placing specifiers, com-
plements and adjuncts in the subtree of their con-
stituent. While adjuncts are systematically remov-
able, we have had to adopt a case-by-case study
for specifiers and complements. For instance, in a
noun phrase (NP), the article, if present, is a speci-
fier, and it cannot be removed, while in an adjective
phrase, the specifier is typically an adverb, which
is removable. The removability of a complement
depends on the subcategorisation properties of its
head. On a clause scale, the dependents are not
well defined in the X-bar theory and may include
the subject and verbal groups, as, respectively, the
specifier and the complement of the clause. Thus,
the specifier (subject) cannot be removed. Our
study has then consisted in a categorization of the
X-bar?s functional entities according to their re-
moval property. We have decided (i) to consider
mandatory specifiers as complements required by
their head and (ii) to bring together optional spec-
ifiers and adjuncts in a different category: Modi-
fiers
1
.
We have defined two classes of functions: Comple-
ments (X-bar complements and mandatory speci-
fiers) and Modifiers (X-bar adjuncts and optional
specifiers). This syntactic function classification
allows us to clearly define which sentence objects
can be candidates for removal.
Nevertheless, the syntactic function information,
although crucial, is not sufficient. One has to use
other linguistic properties in order to refine the as-
sessment of the constituent importance.
2.2 Important content preservation thanks to
linguistic proprieties
Subcategorisation. For noun and clause heads,
some of our complements have been identified
as systematically mandatory in order to preserve
the sentence coherence (subject, verbal group, ar-
ticles. . . ). Other heads (verb, adjective, adverb,
preposition and pronoun) may admit optional or
mandatory complements, depending on either the
lexical head category or a particular head instance
1
We have chosen the term ?modifier? as its definitions in
the literature fit quite well our needs.
(a lexical entry). Indeed, prepositions are sys-
tematically requiring a complement
2
, while other
heads must be considered on a case-by-case basis.
Once we get the subcategorisation information for
a head, we are able to determine whether its com-
plement(s) can be removed without causing an in-
coherence.
Other linguistic proprieties. We identified sev-
eral other linguistic clues that may help assessing
the importance of dependents. We do not detail our
analysis here for space reasons, refer to (Yousfi-
Monod, 2007) for the full description. These clues
include lexical functions, fixed expressions, type
of the article (definite or indefinite), parenthetical
phrases, detached noun modifiers, the dependent
constituent position in the sentence, negation and
interrogation.
3 COLIN?s compressor: System
architecture and implementation
3.1 Architecture
We assume we have a raw text as an input, which
may be the output of an extract summarizer, and
we have to produce a compressed version of it,
by reducing as many sentences as we can, without
deleting a single one.
Syntactic analysis. This step consists in using
a syntactic analyzer to produce, from the source
text, dependent trees according to our syntactic
model (heads, complements, modifiers). In order
to handle the important content assessment, the
parser uses linguistic resources including subcat-
egorisation information, lexical functions, and the
other linguistic properties (section 2.2), and then
enriches the trees with this information.
Pruning and linearization. The trees will be
then pruned according to a set of compression rules
defined from our theoretical analysis. Several set
of rules can be defined according to (i) the desired
importance conservation, (ii) the desired compres-
sion rate, (iii) the confidence in syntactic analy-
sis results, (iv) the trust in the identified linguistic
clues, (v) the textual genre of the source text. In
order to get effective rules, we have first defined
a relatively reliable kernel of rules. Then we have
decided to define and test, during our evaluation
2
Accordingly to the X-bar structure as well as ours: The
preposition is the head of the prepositional syntagm.
140
described in the next section, several rules configu-
rations, taking into account each of the five points,
in order to find the most effective ones. Rules tag
each tree node (complements and modifiers) which
will be removed, then trees are pruned and lin-
earized to get back new sentences, compressed.
3.2 Implementation
The first step in our implementation was to se-
lect a parser satisfying our syntactic requirements
as much as possible. SYGFRAN (described in
(Yousfi-Monod, 2007)), is the one that has been
chosen as: (i) It produces constituent trees very
close to our model, (ii) it has a good syntactic cov-
erage, (iii) it has a very good parsing complexity
(O(n.log(n)), with n the size of the data in words),
and (iv) its author and developer, Jacques Chauch?e,
works in our research team at LIRMM
3
, which
considerably eases the adaptation of the syntac-
tic model to ours. SYGFRAN consists in a set
of grammar networks, each of them containing
several set of transformational rules. COLIN and
SYGFRAN?s rules are implemented with the parser
SYGMART, a tree transducers system (Chauch?e,
1984). COLIN?s rules are split into several gram-
mars including (i) a basic anaphora resolution, (ii)
a tagging of candidate nodes
4
, (iii) a pruning of
tagged constituents and a linearization of leaves.
4 Evaluation, experimentation and
results
This section sums up the validation process used
for our approach. Our evaluation protocol is man-
ual intrinsic, focuses on facilitating the evalua-
tor? task and is inspired from (Knight and Marcu,
2002)?s one. For space reasons, we do not detail
the protocol here, a full description of the proto-
col as well as the experimentation is available in
(Yousfi-Monod, 2007).
Setting up. As our approach deeply relies on
syntactic properties, which are not always properly
detected by current parsers, we decided to manu-
ally improve the syntactic analysis of our evalua-
tion corpus. Otherwise, the evaluation would have
more reflected the users? satisfaction about parsing
than their opinion about the quality of our impor-
tance criteria. In order to assess the genre influ-
3
http://www.lirmm.fr
4
We tag trees before pruning them as COLIN can work in
a semi-automatic mode (not presented here) where a user can
modify the tagging.
ence, we selected three genres: Journalistic, narra-
tive and scientific. We composed 5 texts per gen-
res, each of them contained about 5 paragraphs,
16 sentences and 380 words, thus a total of 240
sentences. We decided to test the importance of
different clause modifiers, i.e. adverbial phrases,
according to their type. We considered the follow-
ing types: Temporal, locative and other ones. So,
while keeping the core rules for each rules config-
uration, we tested the removal of (i) all adverbials,
(ii) temporal adverbials, (iii) locative adverbials,
(iv) only other adverbials (keeping temporal and
place ones).
We got 25 active users participating to the evalua-
tion, who were mainly composed of PhD students
and PhDs, working in NLP or computational lin-
guistic domains, and being fluent in French. Some
of them did a set of manual compressions, used to
compare the quality with COLIN compressions in
the scoring stage of the evaluation. 59 text com-
pressions were done, corresponding to about 3,9
compressions per text. In the scoring stage, judges
gave about 5,2 notations per compressed paragraph
for manual and automatic compressions.
Results. Tables 1 and 2 present the results of
respectively obtained average compression rates
5
and paragraph scorings
6
, per genre. For COLIN?s
evaluation, we only display the rules configuration
which has obtained the best results for the com-
pression rate relatively to the paragraph scoring,
i.e. the rules configuration (iv).
Jour. Narr. Scien. Mean
Manual 36 % 17 % 23 % 25 %
COLIN 38 % 35 % 41 % 38 %
Table 1: Average compression rates.
Jour. Jour. Scien. Mean
Manual 4,03 3,67 3,41 3,7
COLIN 3,7 3 3 3,23
Table 2: Average paragraph scorings.
The compression rate proposed by COLIN is
quite better than the manual one for a quality scor-
ing just below the latter. COLIN is obviously
5
A higher percentage means a shorter compressed text.
6
Scores are between 1 and 5, a value of 1 means a com-
pletely unsatisfying compression, while a value of 5 means a
very good compression for the judge.
141
far better in compression time, with about 5 sec-
onds per document versus between 200 and 300
seconds for the manual compressions. COLIN?s
compression?quality?time ratio is therefore really
better than the manual compressions. Each genre
obtained a good compression rate as well as a cor-
rect quality scoring, particularly for the journalis-
tic one. Note that our results could have been im-
proved if they weren?t sensibly degraded because
of an imperfect parsing, despite some focused im-
provements we did on it.
A performance comparison with similar ap-
proaches was an issue for our approach for at least
two reasons: (i) As our parser is exclusively for
French, we had to do comparisons with French
tongue systems only. The system presented in
(Gagnon and Sylva, 2005) is the only that matches
this constraint. (ii) Our evaluation protocol drasti-
cally differs from traditional ones in several points:
1. Having a single human judge who compresses
sentences produces compressions which are too
much subjective to the latter, that?s why each of
our texts were compressed about 4 times by dif-
ferent humans. Evaluating compressions rise the
same issue of subjectivity, so each of our compres-
sions were evaluated about 5 times. 2. We con-
sider assessing the quality of separated compressed
sentences is harder and less relevant for evaluators
than assessing full paragraphs as we did. 3. Text
genre has an actual influence on NLP approaches,
thus we took into account this factor in our eval-
uation, as described above, while the above cited
system extracted random sentences in a single cor-
pus. For all these reasons, we haven?t been able to
perform a comparison with the above cited system
yet.
5 Conclusion
In this paper we have addressed the task of sen-
tence compression based on a deep linguistic anal-
ysis. The system we developed, called COLIN,
theoretically relies on a constituents and depen-
dencies sentence tree pruning, removing those
branches which could be cut without jeopardiz-
ing the sentence construction, or tempering too
strongly with the sentence meaning. A careful
study of syntactic properties, lexical functions,
verbs arguments has led us to design several differ-
ent configurations in which the sentence compres-
sion quality could degrade if compression goes too
far. The appreciation of a compression quality has
been here demonstrated as a user satisfaction pro-
tocol. If COLIN has been able to shorten texts by
an average 38%, humans were not able to remove
more than 25%. At the same time, the satisfaction
mean score is 3.23 over 5, whereas the same users
attribute to human compressors a satisfaction mean
score of 3.7, really not so much more.
References
Chauch?e, Jacques. 1984. Un outil multidimensionnel
de l?analyse du discours. In Coling?84, pages 11?15.
Chomsky, Noam. 1970. Remarks on nominalization.
In R. Jacobs and P. Rosenbaum (eds.) Reading in En-
glish Transformational Grammar, pages 184?221,
Waltham: Ginn.
Dorr, Bonnie, David Zajic, and Richard Schwartz.
2003. Hedge trimmer: A parse-and-trim approach
to headline generation. In In R. Radev & S. Teufel
(Eds.), Proceedings of the HLT-NAACL 2003 Work-
shop on Text Summarization. Omnipress, pages 1?8.
Gagnon, Michel and Lyne Da Sylva. 2005. Text
summarization by sentence extraction and syntac-
tic pruning. In Computational Linguistics in the
North East (CliNE?05), Universit?e du Qu?ebec en
Outaouais, Gatineau, 26 August.
Hovy, Eduard H., Chin-Yew Lin, and Liang Zhou.
2005. A be-based multi-document summarizer with
sentence compression. In the Multilingual Summa-
rization Evaluation Workshop at the ACL 2005 con-
ference.
Knight, Kevin and Daniel Marcu. 2002. Summariza-
tion beyond sentence extraction: a probabilistic ap-
proach to sentence compression. Artificial Intelli-
gence archive, 139(1):91?107, July.
Lin, Chin-Yew and Eduard H. Hovy. 2002. Auto-
mated multi-document summarization in neats. In
the DARPA Human Language Technology Confer-
ence, pages 50?53.
McKeown, K., D. Evans, A. Nenkova, R. Barzi-
lay, V. Hatzivassiloglou, B. Schiffman, S. Blair-
Goldensohn, J. Klavans, and S. Sigelman. 2002.
The columbia multi-document summarizer for duc
2002.
Yousfi-Monod, Mehdi and Violaine Prince. 2005. Au-
tomatic summarization based on sentence morpho-
syntactic structure: narrative sentences compres-
sion. In the 2nd International Workshop on Natu-
ral Language Understanding and Cognitive Science
(NLUCS 2005), pages 161?167, Miami/USA, May.
Yousfi-Monod, Mehdi. 2007. Compression automa-
tique ou semi-automatique de textes par ?elagage des
constituants effac?ables : une approche interactive et
ind?ependante des corpus. Ph.D. thesis, University of
Montpellier II, Montpellier, November.
142
