Large Scale Diagnostic Code Classification for Medical Patient Records
Lucian Vlad Lita and Shipeng Yu and Stefan Niculescu and Jinbo Bi
Siemens Medical Solutions
firstname.lastname@siemens.com
Abstract
A critical, yet not very well studied problem
in medical applications is the issue of accu-
rately labeling patient records according to
diagnoses and procedures that patients have
undergone. This labeling problem, known as
coding, consists of assigning standard medi-
cal codes (ICD9 and CPT) to patient records.
Each patient record can have several corre-
sponding labels/codes, many of which are
correlated to specific diseases. The cur-
rent, most frequent coding approach involves
manual labeling, which requires considerable
human effort and is cumbersome for large
patient databases. In this paper we view
medical coding as a multi-label classification
problem, where we treat each code as a label
for patient records. Due to government regu-
lations concerning patient medical data, pre-
vious studies in automatic coding have been
quite limited. In this paper, we compare two
efficient algorithms for diagnosis coding on a
large patient dataset.
1 Introduction
In order to be reimbursed for services provided to pa-
tients, hospitals need to provide proof of the proce-
dures that they performed. Currently, this is achieved
by assigning a set of CPT (Current Procedural Ter-
minology) codes to each patient visit to the hospi-
tal. Providing these codes is not enough for receiv-
ing reimbursement: in addition, hospitals need to jus-
tify why the corresponding procedures have been per-
formed. In order to do that, each patient visit needs to
be coded with the appropriate diagnosis that require
the above procedures. There are several standardized
systems for patient diagnosis coding, with ICD9 (In-
ternational Classification of Diseases, (Organization,
1997)) being the official version. Usually a CPT code
is represented by a five digit integer whereas an ICD9
code is a real number consisting of a 2-3 digit dis-
ease category followed by 1-2 decimal subcategory.
For example, a CPT code of 93307 is used for an
Echo Exam. An ICD9 code of 428 represents Heart
Failure (HF) with subcategories 428.0 (Congestive
HF, Unspecified), 428.1 (Left HF), 428.2 (Systolic
HF), 428.3 (Diastolic HF), 428.4(Combined HF) and
428.9 (HF, Unspecified).
The coding approach currently used in hospi-
tals relies heavily on manual labeling performed by
skilled and/or not so skilled personnel. This is a
very time consuming process, where the person in-
volved reads the patient chart and assigns the appro-
priate codes. Moreover, this approach is very er-
ror prone given the huge number of CPT and ICD9
codes. A recent study (Benesch et al, 1997) suggests
that only 60%-80% of the assigned ICD9 codes re-
flect the exact patient medical diagnosis. This can
be partly explained by the fact that coding is done
by medical abstractors who often lack the medical
expertise to properly reach a diagnosis. Two situa-
tions are prevalent: ?over-coding? (assigning a code
for a more serious condition than it is justified) and
?under-coding? (missing codes for existing proce-
dures/diagnoses). Both situations translate into sig-
nificant financial loses: for insurance companies in
the first case and for hospitals in the second case.
Additionally, accurate coding is extremely important
because ICD9 codes are widely used in determining
patient eligibility for clinical trials as well as in quan-
tifying hospital compliance with quality initiatives.
Another recent study (Sonel et al, 2006) stresses
the importance of developing automated methods for
patient record information extraction by demonstrat-
ing how an automated system performed with 8%
better accuracy than a human abstractor on a task of
identifying guideline compliance for unstable angina
patients. In the study, differences between the auto-
mated system and the human abstractor were adjudi-
877
cated by an expert based on the evidence provided.
In this paper we compare several data mining tech-
niques for automated ICD9 diagnosis coding. Our
methods are able to predict ICD9 codes by model-
ing this task as a classification problem in the natural
language processing framework. We demonstrate our
algorithms in section 4 on a task of ICD9 coding of a
large population of patients seen at a cardiac hospital.
2 Related Work
Classification under supervised learning setting has
been a standard problem in machine learning or
data mining area, which learns to construct inference
models from data with known assignments, and then
the models can be generalized to unseen data for code
prediction. However, it has been rarely employed
in the domain for automatic assignment of medi-
cal codes such as ICD9 codes to medical records.
Part of the reason is that the data and labels are dif-
ficult to obtain. Hospitals are usually reluctant to
share their patient data with research communities,
and sensitive information (e.g. patient name, date of
birth, home address, social security number) has to
by anonymized to meet HIPAA (Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act) (hip, ) standards.
Another reason is that the code classification task is
itself very challenging. The patient records contain
a lot of noise (misspellings, abbreviations, etc), and
understanding the records correctly is very important
to make correct code predictions.
Most of the ICD9 code assignment systems
work with a rule-based engine as, for in-
stance, the one available online from the site
http://www.icd9coding.com/, or the one described in
(reb, ), which displays different ICD9 codes for a
trained medical abstractor to look at and manually
assign proper codes to patient records.
A health care organization can significantly im-
prove its performance by implementing an automated
system that integrates patients documents, tests with
standard medical coding system and billing systems.
Such a system offers large health care organizations
a means to eliminate costly and inefficient man-
ual processing of code assignments, thereby improv-
ing productivity and accuracy. Early efforts dedi-
cated to automatic or semi-automatic assignments of
ICD9 codes (Larkey and Croft, 1995; Lovis et al,
1995) demonstrate that simple machine learning ap-
proaches such as k-nearest neighbor, relevance feed-
back, or Bayesian independence classifiers can be
used to acquire knowledge from already-coded train-
ing documents. The identified knowledge is then em-
ployed to optimize the means of selecting and rank-
ing candidate codes for the test document. Often a
combination of different classifiers produce better re-
sults than any single type of classifier. Occasionally,
human interaction is still needed to enhance the code
assignment accuracy (Lovis et al, 1995).
Similar work was performed to automatically cat-
egorize patients documents according to meaningful
groups and not necessarily in terms of medical codes
(de Lima et al, 1998; Ruch, 2003; Freitas-Junior et
al., 2006; Ribeiro-Neto et al, 2001). For instance, in
(de Lima et al, 1998), classifiers were designed and
evaluated using a hierarchical learning approach. Re-
cent works (Halasz et al, 2006) also utilize NGram
techniques to automatically create Chief Complaints
classifiers based on ICD9 groupings.
In (Rao et al, ), the authors present a small scale
approach to assigning ICD9 codes of Diabetes and
Acute Myocardial Infarction (AMI) on a small popu-
lation of patients. Their approach is semi-automatic,
consisting of association rules implemented by an ex-
pert, which are further combined in a probabilistic
fashion. However, given the high degree of human
interaction involved, their method will not be scal-
able to a large number of medical conditions. More-
over, the authors do not further classify the subtypes
within Diabetes or AMI.
Very recently, the Computation Medicine Center
was sponsoring an international challenge task on
this type of text classification problem.1 About 2, 216
documents are carefully extracted (including training
and testing), and 45 ICD9 labels (with 94 distinct
combinations) are used for these documents. More
than 40 groups submitted their results, and the best
macro and micro F1 measures are 0.89 and 0.77, re-
spectively. The competition is a worthy effort in the
sense that it provides a test bed to compare different
algorithms. Unfortunately, public datasets are to date
much smaller than the patient records in even a small
hospital. Moreover, many of the documents are very
simple (one or two sentences). It is difficult to train
1http://www.computationalmedicine.org/challenge/index.php
878
good classifiers based on such a small data set (even
the most common label 786.2 (for ?Cough?) has only
155 reports to train on), and the generalizability of
the obtained classifiers is also problematic.
3 Approach
This section describes the two data mining algo-
rithms used in section 4 for assigning ICD9 codes to
patient visits as well as the real world dataset used in
our experiments.
3.1 Data: ICD-9 Codes & Patient Records
We built a 1.3GB corpus using medical patient
records extracted from a real single-institution pa-
tient database. This is important since most pub-
lished previous work was performed on very small
datasets. Due to privacy concerns, since the database
contains identified patient information, it cannot be
made publicly available. Each document consists of
a full hospital visit record for a particular patient.
Each patient may have several hospital visits, some of
which may not be documented if they choose to visit
multiple hospitals2 . Our dataset consists of 96557
patient visits, each of them being labeled with a one
or more ICD9 codes. We have encountered 2618 dis-
tinct ICD9 codes associated with these visits, with the
top five most frequent summarized in table 1. Given
sufficient patient records supporting a code, this pa-
per investigates the performance of statistical classifi-
cation techniques. This paper focuses on correct clas-
sification of high-frequency diagnosis codes.
Automatic prediction of the ICD9 codes is a chal-
lenging problem. During each hospital visit, a patient
might be subjected to several tests, have different lab
results and undergo various treatments. For the ma-
jority of these events, physicians and nurses generate
free text data either by typing the information them-
selves or by using a local or remote speech-to-text
engine. The input method also affects text quality
and therefore could impact the performance of clas-
sifiers based on this data. In addition to these obsta-
cles for the ICD9 classification task, patient records
often include medical history (i.e. past medical con-
ditions, medications etc) and family history (i.e. par-
ents? chronic diseases). By embedding unstructured
2Currently, there is a movement to more portable electronic
health records
medical information that does not directly describe a
patient?s state, the data becomes noisier.
A significant difference between medical patient
record classification and general text classification
(e.g. news domain) is word distribution. Depend-
ing on the type of institution, department profile, and
patient cohort, phrases such as ?discharge summary?,
?chest pain?, and ?ECG? may be ubiquitous in cor-
pus and thus not carry a great deal of information
for a classification task. Consider the phrase ?chest
pain?: intuitively, it should correlate well with the
ICD-9 code 786.50, which corresponds to the con-
dition chest pain. However, through the nature of
the corpus, this phrase appears in well over half of
the documents, many of which do not belong to the
786.50 category.
3.2 Support Vector Machines
The first classification method consists of support
vector machines (SVM), proven to perform well
on textual data (Rogati and Yang, 2002). The
experiments presented use the SVM Light toolkit
(Joachims, 2002) with a linear kernel and a tar-
get positive-to-negative example ratio defined by the
training data. We experiment with a cost function
that assigns equal value to all classes, as well as with
a target class cost equal to the ratio of negative to pos-
itive examples. The results shown in this paper corre-
spond to SVM classifiers trained using the latter cost
function. Note that better results may be obtained by
tuning such parameters on a validation set.
3.3 Bayesian Ridge Regression
The second method we have tried on this problem is a
probabilistic approach based on Gaussian processes.
A Gaussian process (GP) is a stochastic process
that defines a nonparametric prior over functions in
Bayesian statistics (Rasmussen and Williams, 2006).
In the linear case, i.e. the function has linear form
f(x) = w>x, the GP prior on f is equivalent to
a Gaussian prior on w, which takes the form w ?
N (?w,?w), with mean ?w and covariance ?w.
Then the likelihood of labels y = [y1, . . . , yn]> is
P (y) =
? n
?
i=1
P (yi|w>xi)P (w|?w,?w) dw (1)
with P (yi|w>xi) the probability that document xi
takes label yi.
879
ICD9 Freq Coverage Description
786.50 59957 0.621 Chest pain, unspecified
401.9 28232 0.292 Essential hypertension, unspecified
414.00 27872 0.289 Unspecified type of vessel, native or graft
427.31 15269 0.158 Atrial fibrillation
414.01 13107 0.136 Coronary atherosclerosis of native coronary artery
Table 1: Statistics of the top five ICD-9 codes most frequent in the patient record database. Frequency of ICD-9 code in corpus and
the corresponding coverage (i.e. fraction of documents in the corpus that were coded with the particular ICD-9 code).
In general we fix ?w = 0, and ?w = I with
I the identity matrix. Based on past experience we
simply choose P (yi|w>xi) to be a Gaussian, yi ?
N (w>xi, ?2), with ?2 a model parameter. Since
everything is Gaussian here, the a posteriori dis-
tribution of w conditioned on the observed labels,
P (w|y, ?2), is also a Gaussian, with mean
??w =
(
X>X + ?2I
)?1
X>y, (2)
where X = [x1, . . . ,xn]> is a n?d matrix. The only
model parameter ?2 can also be optimized by maxi-
mizing the likelihood (1) with respect to ?2. Finally
for a test document x?, we predict its label as ??>wx?
with the optimal ?2. We can also estimate the vari-
ance of this prediction, but describing this is beyond
the scope of this paper.
This model is sometimes called the Bayesian ridge
regression, since the log-likelihood (i.e., the loga-
rithm of (1)) is the negation of the ridge regression
cost up to a constant factor (see, e.g., (Tikhonov and
Arsenin, 1977; Bishop, 1995)):
`(y,w,X) = ?y ?Xw?2 + ??w?2,
with ? = ?2. One advantage of Bayesian ridge re-
gression is that there is a systematic way of optimiz-
ing ? from the data. Feature selection is done prior to
calculation (2) to ensure the matrix inverse is feasi-
ble. Cholesky factorization is used to speed up calcu-
lation. Though the task here is classification, we treat
the classification labels as regression labels and nor-
malize them before learning (i.e., subtract the mean
such that
?
i yi = 0).
4 Experiments
In this section we describe our experimental setup
and results using the previously mentioned dataset
and approaches. Each document in the patient
database represents an event in the patient?s hospi-
tal stay: e.g. radiology note, personal physician note,
lab tests etc. These documents are combined to cre-
ate a hospital visit profile and are subsequently pre-
processed for the classification task. No stemming is
performed for the experiments in this paper.
We limit our experiments on hospital visits with
less than 200 doctor?s notes. As a first pre-processing
step, we eliminate redundancy at a paragraph level
and we perform tokenization and sentence splitting.
In addition, tokens go through a number and pro-
noun classing smoothing process, in which all num-
bers are replaced with the same token, and all person
pronouns are replaced with a similar token. Further
classing could be performed: e.g. dates, entity class-
ing etc, but were not considered in these experiments.
As a shared pre-processing for all classifiers, viable
features are considered all unigrams with a frequency
of occurrence greater or equal to 10 that do not appear
in a standard lists of function words.
After removing consolidating patient visits from
multiple documents, our corpus consists of near
100, 000 data points. We then randomly split the
visits into training, validation, and test sets which
contain 70%, 15%, and 15% of the corpus respec-
tively. The classifiers were tested on an 15% unseen
test set. Thus, the training set consists of approxi-
mately 57, 000 data points (patient visits), which is
a more realistic dataset compared to the previously
used datasets ? e.g. the medical text dataset used in
the Computation Medicine Center competition.
This paper presents experiments with the five most
frequent ICD9 codes. This allows for more in-depth
experiments with only a few labels and also ensures
sufficient training and testing data for our experi-
ments. From a machine learning perspective, most of
the ICD9 codes are unbalanced: i.e. much less than
half of the documents in the corpus actually have a
given label. From a text processing perspective, this
880
Average F1 Measure
Micro Macro
SVM 0.683 0.652
BRR 0.688 0.667
Table 3: F1 measure for the ICD-9 classification experiments
is a normal multi-class classification setting.
Prior to training the classifiers on our dataset, we
performed feature selection using ?2. The top 1, 500
features with the highest ?2 values were selected to
make up the feature vector. The previous step in
which the vocabulary was drastically reduced was
necessary, since the ?2 measure is unstable (Yang and
Pedersen, 1997) when infrequent features are used.
To generate the feature vectors, the ?2 values were
normalized into the ? coefficient and then each vec-
tor was normalized to an Euclidean norm of 1.
In these experiments, we have employed two
classification approaches: support vector machine
(SVM) and Bayesian ridge regression (BRR), for
each of the ICD9 codes. We used the validation set to
tune the specific parameters parameters for these ap-
proaches ? all the final results are reported using the
unseen test set. For the Bayesian ridge regression, the
validation set is used to determine the ? parameter as
well as the best cutting point for positive versus nega-
tive predictions in order to optimize the F1 measure.
Training is very fast for both methods when 1, 500
features are selected using ?2.
We evaluate our models using Precision, Recall,
AUC (Area under the Curve) and F1 measure. The
results on the top five codes for both classification ap-
proaches are shown in Table 2. For the same exper-
iments, the receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
curves of prediction are shown in Figure 1 and in
Figure 2. The support vector machine and Bayesian
ridge regression methods obtain comparable results
on these independent ICD9 classification problems.
The Bayesian ridge regression method obtains a
slightly better performance.
It is important to note that the results presented in
this section may considerably underestimate the true
performance of our classifiers. Our classifiers are
tested on ICD9 codes labeled by the medical abstrac-
tors, who, according to (Benesch et al, 1997), only
have a 60%-80% accuracy. A better performance es-
timation can be obtained by adjudicating the differ-
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
 
 
414.00
786.50
414.01
427.31
401.9
Figure 1: ROC curve for the SVM ICD9 classification
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
 
 
414.00
786.50
414.01
427.31
401.9
Figure 2: ROC curve for the BRR ICD9 classification
ences using a medical expert (as the small scale ap-
proach presented in (Sonel et al, 2006)), but we did
not have access to such a resource.
5 Conclusions & Future Work
Code classification for medical patient records is be-
coming a critical task in the healthcare industry. This
paper presents two automatic code classification ap-
proaches and applies them on a real, large hospi-
tal dataset. We view this problem as a multi-label
classification problem and seek automatic solutions,
specifically targeting ICD9 code classification. We
have tested two state-of-the-art classification algo-
rithms: support vector machines and Bayesian ridge
regression) with promising performance.
The data set in our study contains more than
90,000 patient visits, and is by far the largest corpus
for research purpose to the best of our knowledge.
The features extracted from patient visits were se-
lected for individual ICD9 codes based on ?2 score.
Low and high-frequency features were filtered out.
Several other feature selection methods were consid-
ered (including information gain), yielding compara-
tively moderate performance levels.
881
ICD9 Support Vector Machine Bayesian Ridge Regression
Prec Rec F1 AUC Prec Rec F1 AUC
786.50 0.620 0.885 0.729 0.925 0.657 0.832 0.734 0.921
401.9 0.447 0.885 0.594 0.910 0.512 0.752 0.609 0.908
414.00 0.749 0.814 0.784 0.826 0.784 0.763 0.772 0.827
427.31 0.444 0.852 0.584 0.936 0.620 0.625 0.623 0.931
414.01 0.414 0.906 0.568 0.829 0.575 0.742 0.648 0.836
Table 2: Top five ICD-9 codes most frequent in the patient record database showing the performance of support vector machine-
based method (SVM) and of bayesian ridge regression-based method (BRR).
Both Support Vector Machines and Bayesian ridge
regression methods are fast to train and achieve com-
parable results. The F1 measure performance on the
unseen test data is between 0.6 to 0.75 for the tested
ICD9 codes, and the AUC scores are between 0.8 to
0.95. These results support the conclusion that au-
tomatic code classification is a promising research
direction and offers the potential to change clinical
coding dramatically.
Current approaches are still an incipient step to-
wards more complex, flexible and robust coding
models for classifying medical patient records. In
current and future work we plan to employ more
powerful models, extract more complex features, and
explore inter-code correlations.
Patient record data exhibits strong correlations
among certain ICD9 codes. For instance the code for
fever 780.6 is very likely to co-occur with the code
for cough 786.2. Currently we do not consider inter-
code correlations and train separate classifier for in-
dividual codes. We are currently exploring methods
that can take advantage of inter-code correlations and
obtain a better, joint model for all ICD9 codes.
References
C. Benesch, D.M. Witter Jr, A.L. Wilder, P.W. Duncan, G.P.
Samsa, and D.B. Matchar. 1997. Inaccuracy of the interna-
tional classification of diseases (icd-9-cm) in identifying the
diagnosis of ischemic cerebrovascular disease. Neurology.
C. M. Bishop. 1995. Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition.
Oxford University Press.
Luciano R. S. de Lima, Alberto H. F. Laender, and Berthier A.
Ribeiro-Neto. 1998. A hierarchical approach to the auto-
matic categorization of medical documents. In CIKM.
H. R. Freitas-Junior, B. A. Ribeiro-Neto, R. De Freitas-
Vale, A. H. F. Laender, and L. R. S. De Lima. 2006.
Categorization-driven cross-language retrieval of medical in-
formation. JASIST.
S. Halasz, P. Brown, C. Goodall, D. G. Cochrane, and J. R. Al-
legra. 2006. The NGram cc classifier: A novel method of au-
tomatically creating cc classifiers based on ICD9 groupings.
Advances in Disease Surveillance, 1(30).
Health insurance portability and accountability act. 2003.
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/hipaa.
T. Joachims. 2002. Learning to Classify Text Using Support
Vector Machines. Dissertation. Kluwer.
L. Larkey and W. Croft. 1995. Automatic assignment of icd9
codes to discharge summaries.
Christian Lovis, P. A. Michel, Robert H. Baud, and Jean-Raoul
Scherrer. 1995. Use of a conceptual semi-automatic icd-9
encoding system in a hospital environment. In AIME, pages
331?339.
World Health Organization. 1997. Manual of the international
statistical classification or diseases, injuries, and causes of
death. World Health Organization, Geneva.
R.B. Rao, S. Sandilya, R.S. Niculescu, C. Germond, and H. Rao.
Clinical and financial outcomes analysis with existing hospi-
tal patient records. SIGKDD.
C. E. Rasmussen and C. K. I. Williams. 2006. Gaussian Pro-
cesses for Machine Learning. MIT Press.
PhyCor of Corsicana. In Book Chapter of Information Technol-
ogy for the Practicing Physician. Springer London.
B. A. Ribeiro-Neto, A. H. F. Laender, and L. R. S. De-Lima.
2001. An experimental study in automatically categorizing
medical documents. JASIST.
Monica Rogati and Yiming Yang. 2002. High-performing fea-
ture selection for text classification. CIKM.
P. Ruch. 2003. Applying natural language processing to
information retrieval in clinical records and biomedical
texts. Ph.D. thesis, Department of Informatics, Universite De
Gene?ve.
A.F. Sonel, C.B. Good, H. Rao, A. Macioce, L.J. Wall, R.S.
Niculescu, S. Sandilya, P. Giang, S. Krishnan, P. Aloni, and
R.B. Rao. 2006. Use of remind artificial intelligence software
for rapid assessment of adherence to disease specific manage-
ment guidelines in acute coronary syndromes. AHRQ.
A. N. Tikhonov and V. Y. Arsenin. 1977. Solutions of Ill-Posed
Problems. Wiley, New York.
Yiming Yang and Jan O. Pedersen. 1997. A comparative study
on feature selection in text categorization. ICML.
882
