Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Constraints and Language Processing (CSLP-06), pages 25?32,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Pragmatic Constraints on Semantic Presupposition
Yafa Al-Raheb
National Centre for Language Technology
School of Computing
Dublin City University, Ireland
yafa.alraheb@gmail.com
Abstract
The literature investigating the notion
of presupposition in Discourse Represen-
tation Theory (DRT) has mainly been
dubbed as being semantic (Simons 2003).
This paper investigates the linguistic ap-
plication of pragmatic-based constraints to
the ?semantic? notion of presupposition in
DRT. By applying pragmatic-based con-
straints to presuppositional phenomenon,
we aim to defend DRT against the accu-
sation that DRT?s interpretation of presup-
positional phenomenon is essentially ?se-
mantic? and push this interpretation fur-
ther towards the pragmatic side of the se-
mantic/pragmatic interface.1
1 Introduction
Devising an appropriate theory of presupposition
has been one of the main issues in semantics, prag-
matics and most recently computational linguis-
tics. Indeed, many theorists have argued exten-
sively about the definition that captures the mean-
ing of presupposition and whether presuppositions
are a property of the utterance or of the speaker.
Developments in dynamic semantics, as opposed
to static semantics, resulting in DRT, have led
to a framework suitable for the representation of
linguistic phenomenon. Some of DRT?s princi-
pal concerns are with finding the right truth con-
ditions and interpretation for referential expres-
sions, specifically anaphora. This is relevant for
further investigation of ?pragmatic? presupposition
because it has in fact been proposed by van der
1I gratefully acknowledge support from Science Founda-
tion Ireland grant 04/IN/I527.
Sandt and Geurts (1991) that it is anaphora that
lies at the basis of presupposition.
However, Simons (2003) has recently noted
some pragmatic limitations in the present state of
DRT. She refers in the following quotation to ?dy-
namic semantics?, the field taken to include DRT.
Dynamic semantics does not attempt
to understand presupposition and pre-
suppositional constraints in terms of
the speaker?s beliefs and intentions, or
to root presuppositional constraints in
terms of the broad goals of communica-
tors (Simons 2003: 27).
Indeed, Simons concludes that DRT is a the-
ory of semantic and not pragmatic presupposition
(2003). The criticism that DRT is only semantic
is not wholly justified. While DRT stems from
the need for appropriate semantic representation
of discourse, DRT does recognize the importance
of context in representing referents in discourse,
which is generally taken to mark a pragmatic per-
spective on presupposition. Additionally, theories
within DRT, such as the Binding Theory (Geurts
1999), have attempted to make DRT more prag-
matic; in particular, Presupposition as Anaphora
Theory?s construction process of presupposition
(van der Sandt and Geurts 1991). However, while
this paper aims to show that DRT is not entirely
devoid of pragmatics, it argues that DRT is in need
of a more pragmatic treatment of presupposition,
which (a) pays more attention to the beliefs and
intentions of the speaker and the hearer and their
relation to presupposition and (b) makes presup-
positional constraints more precise. Further, other
scholars have criticized DRT for being essentially
truthconditional. Werth, for example, claims that
DRT is essentially only about truthconditionality:
25
[DRT?s] goal is truth-conditionality and
its models are minimal worlds inhabited
by predicates and variables... it does not
model human understanding: there is no
place in it for participant roles, setting,
background knowledge, purposes, even
inferences (Werth 1999: 65).
Again, this criticism is not entirely just. To address
the aforementioned pragmatic limitations of DRT,
the aim of this paper is to address the problem
of insightfully capturing pragmatic constraints on
presuppositional phenomenon within the frame-
work of DRT. To achieve this, a pragmatically-
constrained definition of presupposition is at-
tempted. This is followed by setting some prag-
matic constraints on agents? conception of presup-
positional phrases based on the agents? roles in
conversation. An example of how these pragmatic
constraints operate in DRT is then examined. Fur-
thermore, an overall structure computationally en-
compassing these pragmatic constraints in DRT is
described.
2 Pragmatic-based Presupposition
In linguistics the treatment of presupposition has
generally been split between two camps, seman-
tics and pragmatics. Karttunen (1973) maintains
that the semantic perspective on presupposition
sees presupposition as emanating from the sen-
tence, and the pragmatic perspective as emanat-
ing from the speaker. Levinson argues that pre-
supposition cannot be viewed as semantic in the
narrow sense (based on formal logic and truth con-
ditionality), but rather as dependent on context
and ?the actual linguistic structure of sentences?
(Levinson 1983: 167). Theories defining presup-
position within pragmatics depend mainly on mu-
tual knowledge (or common ground).
Within computational linguistics the treatment
of presupposition falls mainly within dynamic se-
mantics, within which DRT has developed. In the
broadest terms presupposition, whether in linguis-
tics or philosophy, has been viewed as a relation
between sentences or propositions, where the pre-
supposed proposition is not in focus in the presup-
position sentence. DRT, and dynamic semantics in
general, is precisely concerned with such relations
? i.e. with the relations between an utterance and
previous utterances in the discourse.
Given these varying definitions as to what con-
stitutes presupposition, before attempting to in-
troduce pragmatic constraints to presupposition in
DRT, we must first explain what pragmatic presup-
position, as used in this paper, constitutes. Two
important notions come into question when as-
sessing what constitutes presupposition, namely,
the notion of givenness and the relationship be-
tween the beliefs (or the cognitive states) of the
agents involved in a conversation.
2.1 Presupposition and Givenness
While presuppositions can be defined as that part
of the utterance that is taken to be ?given? (Lam-
brecht 1994), the notion of ?given? needs clari-
fying. ?Given? means known information, infor-
mation that the speaker regards as known to both
speaker and hearer - information directly relating
to the topic of the dialogue or as part of gen-
eral background knowledge assumptions about the
world. The presupposition in this sense is a re-
flection of the speaker?s assumptions about the
hearer?s state of mind, i.e. the speaker assumes the
hearer already knows this information (Lambrecht
1994). An alternate meaning of ?given? is when
the speaker knows that the information the presup-
position provides is, in fact, new to the hearer. In
this case, the speaker introduces the new informa-
tion ?as if? it were given, in order to indicate that
the presupposed information is not the focus of
the speaker?s attention. Unlike Stalnaker?s under-
standing of presupposition (Stalnaker 2002), this
understanding of ?given? to include information
new to the hearer means that the presupposition
introduced is not necessarily part of what is often
termed the ?common ground?.
Thus, we might think in terms of a speaker
?packaging? information as a presupposition
(speaker presupposition). In this approach, the
speaker has the choice of picking information she
deems to be known to the hearer or information
that she deems to be new to the hearer, knowing
that to do so, she (the speaker) is communicating
that the presupposition is not the focus of her ut-
terance, but rather she would like the hearer to di-
rect his attention to the new information provided
by the rest of the utterance. For new, presupposed
information to pass as given, the speaker must be
aware that introducing an ?out of the ordinary? or
?remarkable? presupposition will cause problems.
For instance, example (1) is less likely to cause
problems than example (2) when the hearer knows
that the speaker lives in the city centre.
26
(1) The car across the street from my house
belongs to my neighbour.
(2) The small jet across the street from my
house belongs to my neighbour,
2.2 Presupposition and Agents? Cognitive
States
To define pragmatic presupposition within DRT,
presupposition should be understood to be a prop-
erty of the agent. Lambrecht (1994) understands
pragmatic presupposition as an interest in the as-
sumptions speakers make about hearers. There are
two types of agent presupposition, speaker pre-
supposition and hearer presupposition. This is
different from semantic presupposition, i.e. sen-
tence presupposition. Agent presupposition dif-
fers from sentence presupposition in that the latter
stems from sentence meaning, whereas the former
attaches itself to the beliefs of the speaker and her
intentions.
In essence, the effect of presupposition is to give
insights about the speaker?s beliefs as well as the
speaker?s beliefs about the hearer?s beliefs. In this
sense, the dynamic semantic notion of ?taken for
granted? means that the speaker believes the pre-
supposition to be either known information or in-
formation that is not the desired focus of atten-
tion. When a speaker introduces a presupposition
in her utterance, she is not primarily concerned
with the information the presupposition provides,
but rather in the new information, the ?assertion?
part, the utterance communicates.
Presupposition is related to the beliefs of the
speaker. Speaker belief leads to presupposi-
tion, which indicates the beliefs of the speaker to
the hearer. Presupposition is a reflection of the
speaker?s state of mind. What speakers presup-
pose gives an indication as to what speakers be-
lieve or accept (weakly believe) and what they be-
lieve hearers believe or accept within the context
of a dialogue (cf. Al-Raheb 2005). This is stronger
than what is generally conceded in the relevant lit-
erature (Geurts 1999).
While this view of pragmatic presupposition
shares Stalnaker?s (2002) view concerning the im-
portance of beliefs and context to understanding
linguistic phenomena, the present view of presup-
position has a different understanding of the rela-
tionship between belief and presupposition. Stal-
naker sees beliefs, not in terms of the speaker, but
rather in terms of the vague term the ?common
ground? (cf. Al-Raheb 2005). ?[T]o believe p to
be common ground is to presuppose in Stalnaker?s
sense? as Simons (2003: 19) puts it. The view pre-
sented here takes the position that presuppositions
reflect the speaker?s beliefs, regardless of whether
the beliefs are part of common ground or not.
3 Pragmatic Constraints
Having defined what is meant by pragmatic pre-
supposition, we now move to discuss introducing
pragmatic constraints on the phenomenon of pre-
supposition in DRT. In order to enhance the prag-
matic representation of presuppositional phenom-
enon in DRT, Gricean maxims need to be formu-
lated in terms of pragmatic constraints on gener-
ating presuppositional utterances (speaker?s per-
spective) and interpreting them (hearer?s perspec-
tive). The maxims are reformulated in terms of
the cognitive relationship between the speaker and
the hearer, producing constraints on presupposi-
tion which are necessary for successful communi-
cation.
Following Grice?s Cooperative Principle (Grice
1989), by adhering to the maxims, dialogue agents
are being cooperative and not attempting to de-
ceive or lie to one another (Grice 1989). The inten-
tion to communicate requires the speaker to assess
her beliefs concerning the hearer?s beliefs. This
way of thinking about dialogue communication
leads to the formulation of pragmatic constraints.
It is proposed that these constraints broadly cor-
respond to Grice?s quantity and quality maxims.
Section 4 describes an implementation of the prag-
matic constraints introduced in this section.
To make her contribution informative (maxim
of quantity), the speaker needs to follow the first
pragmatic constraint placed on making an asser-
tion (BCA1): to express an assertion the speaker
needs to believe that the hearer does not hold the
assertion, A, as a belief. In other words, the
speaker believes the hearer does not hold the belief
that A. This is similar to van der Sandt?s (1992)
informativity constraint, although his informativ-
ity constraint is not directly linked to beliefs. This
pragmatic constraint is illustrated in the following
example:
(3) Speaker: Mia likes dancing.
Hearer: Yeah I know.
In example (3) the hearer indicates previous
knowledge of A, which means that either the
27
speaker is not following BCA1, or that the speaker
was not aware that the hearer believes A. With
each new utterance, the speaker must be aware of
the BCA1.
The second pragmatic constraint placed on as-
sertion is BCA2. Following from our assumptions
concerning Grice?s quality maxim, for a speaker
to express an assertion, the speaker must herself
believe or accept that assertion. That is to say, be-
ing cooperative, to express A, the speaker must be-
lieve or accept that A.
Similarly, to introduce a presupposition, the
speaker must include the presupposition in her
beliefs or acceptance space (quality maxim),
(BCP1). If the speaker is initiating a topic, the
hearer has more grounds to conclude the speaker
believes P (BCP1a). At the same time, the speaker
must also be aware that when introducing P, the
speaker is communicating that the speaker be-
lieves P. That is to say, if the speaker initiates the
topic of P, the hearer may assume that the speaker
believes P. However, when it is the hearer?s turn to
become the speaker, and he refers to the presup-
position, P, introduced by the speaker, the speaker,
who introduced P, may assume a weaker belief on
the part of the hearer, namely that the hearer ac-
cepts P. Thus, presuppositions are built on the cur-
rent context, which is built upon the union of be-
liefs and acceptance spaces of an agent. In other
words, if the hearer refers to a presupposition em-
ployed previously by the speaker, the hearer (who
now becomes the speaker) at least accepts P (i.e.
holds P in his acceptance space) (BCP2).
For example,
(4) S1: I must buy Vincent?s wife a birthday
present.
H1: I didn?t know Vincent was married.
S2: Yes, he is. His wife likes chocolate.
H2: She may also like flowers.
S3: I?ll buy her chocolates.
The speaker initiates the presupposition (in exam-
ple (4) it is new information to the hearer) that Vin-
cent has a wife. According to BCP1, the hearer
may safely assume and indeed add to his beliefs
about the speaker?s beliefs that the speaker be-
lieves P (Vincent has a wife). However, when the
hearer comes to refer to P (Vincent?s wife), the
speaker does not necessarily infer that the hearer
believes Vincent is married, but rather that the
hearer accepts P. Introducing a topic for the pre-
supposition allows the hearer to add more strength
to her representation of the speaker?s beliefs, i.e.
to establish belief rather than acceptance. This
would be more evident in a context where the
speaker is attempting to persuade the hearer to do
something. For information dialogues, where the
information provider has the authority of possess-
ing the answers to the information seeker?s ques-
tions, the beliefs of the information provider may
attain a stronger position than they would in other
types of social contexts (cf. Al-Raheb 2005). The
information seeker is less likely to challenge or
evaluate the strength of belief of the information
provider. If we contrast example (4) with example
(5), the strength of beliefs are much higher, we can
assume, than for when the hearer is not required to
perform any action.
(5) S1: You should buy Vincent?s wife a
birthday present.
H1: I didn?t know Vincent was married.
S2: Yes he is. His wife likes chocolate.
H2: She may also like flowers.
S3: But she prefers chocolate.
H3: I?ll get her some chocolate.
In example (4), where the hearer was not re-
quired to perform any action, it is safer for the
speaker to assume that the hearer accepts P as the
hearer is not committing himself to doing any task,
than to assume the stronger case, i.e. the hearer
believes P. However, in example (5) where the
hearer agrees to buying Vincent?s wife a present in
H3 (that is the hearer commits to perform an ac-
tion for Vincent?s wife), the speaker will conclude
that the hearer believes the presupposed proposi-
tion and adds this to the speaker?s representation
of the hearer?s beliefs. In other words, when the
hearer makes P, in H3, the speaker concludes that
the hearer believes P and adds this to the speaker?s
representation, or beliefs set, of the hearer?s be-
liefs. Thus, someone getting someone else?s com-
mitment to do something implies greater strength
of belief about a presupposition which affects that
commitment.
Allowing the hearer to assume weaker belief
brings us back to Simons? (2003) suggestion of
modifying Stalnaker?s understanding of presuppo-
sition to become what she terms the ?disposition
of presupposition?: speakers ?act as if? they take
the presupposition for granted. Simons (2003) ar-
gues that speakers do not need to believe the pre-
suppositions they use. With acceptance, as un-
derstood by the view of pragmatic presupposition
28
presented in this paper, speakers do not have to
hold the strong belief P. But, at the same time,
to express P, speakers should not hold the belief
that P is false. That is, being cooperative neces-
sitates that when the speaker utters P, the speaker
does not hold the belief that ? P. Speakers may
indicate stronger belief. However, if there is no
such indication (e.g. ?Definitely?, or ?I couldn?t
agree more?), hearers may conclude that speakers
at least hold the presupposition in their acceptance
space. Speakers may later allow the hearer to con-
clude that they hold greater strength of belief than
at first assumed.
4 Implementing Pragmatic Constraints
The following set of operations implement the
pragmatic constraints on presupposition and asser-
tion set out in section 3, namely BCA1, BCA2,
BCP1, and BCP2.2 We begin, firstly, by show-
ing how the pragmatic constraint operations are
implemented and by demonstrating how the code
works on linear DRSs (cf. Al-Raheb 2005). Sec-
ondly, we demonstrate how the constraints work
on a real example by passing an example dialogue
through the implemented pragmatic constraints for
both the speaker and the hearer.
4.1 Implementation
The first pragmatic constraint on assertion (BCA1)
is represented by beliefConstraintA1. It checks
that a condition is not in the hearer?s Belief DRS
nor inside the hearer?s Acceptance DRS in a
Speaker?s Belief or Acceptance DRS. Agent?s Be-
lief DRSs represent stronger beliefs they hold and
stronger beliefs they have about other agents in di-
alogue, whereas Acceptance DRSs represent their
weaker beliefs about the dialogue and about the
weaker beliefs held by other agents in dialogue (cf.
Al-Raheb 2005). When a condition is not found in
either embedded DRS, it succeeds.
The second pragmatic constraint on assertion
(BCA2) is represented by beliefConstraintA2,
which checks if a condition is either in the
speaker?s Belief or Acceptance DRS. The oper-
ation succeeds once a match is found.3 BCP1
2The implementation outlined in this section demon-
strates how pragmatic constraints on presupposition can be
implemented, but does not describe the entire architecture of
checking that these constraints are adhered to in processing
an entire dialogue.
3These pragmatic constraints on assertion are not demon-
strated as the focus of this paper is presupposition.
drs1:drs([x, z],
[walter(x),
vincent(z),
attitude(i, ?BEL?, drs2),
drs2:drs([ ],
[attitude(you, ?BEL?, drs3),
drs3:drs([ ],
[ ]) ]),
attitude(i, ?ACCEPT?, drs4),
drs4:drs([ ],
[c1: dancer(z),
attitude(you, ?ACCEPT?, drs5),
drs5:drs([ ],
[ ]) ]) ]).
becomes:
drs1:drs([x, z],
[walter(x),
vincent(z),
attitude(i, ?BEL?, drs2),
drs2:drs([ ],
[attitude(you, ?BEL?, drs3),
drs3:drs([ ],
[b1: singer(x) ]) ]),
attitude(i, ?ACCEPT?, drs4),
drs4:drs([ ],
[c1: dancer(z),
attitude(you, ?ACCEPT?, drs5),
drs5:drs([ ],
[ ]) ]) ]).
Figure 1: Hearer BCP1
has been subdivided into speaker and hearer.
The speaker side, beliefConstraintSpeakerP1
checks if a condition is a member of the speaker?s
belief or acceptance DRS.
For the hearer, beliefConstraintHearerP1
checks if a condition is not a member of the
speaker?s acceptance or belief DRS, then checks
if the condition is not a member of the hearer?s
belief or acceptance DRS. If this check passes,
the condition is added to the hearer?s belief about
the speaker?s belief, i.e. speaker?s belief DRS
embedded inside the hearer?s DRS. When us-
ing ?beliefConstraintHearerP1? to check for the
condition ?singer(X)?, we get the second DRS as a
result in Figure 1.
The second version of the hearer?s BCP1, be-
liefConstraintHearerP1a, checks if a condition
is not a member of the speaker?s belief or accep-
tance DRS, and is a member of the hearer?s be-
lief or acceptance DRS. Then, it adds the condi-
tion to the speaker?s acceptance DRS, embedded
inside the hearer?s acceptance DRS. This is shown
in Figure 2.
The second pragmatic constraint on Presuppo-
29
drs1:drs([x, z],
[walter(x),
vincent(z),
attitude(i, ?BEL?, drs2),
drs2:drs([ ],
[b1: singer(x),
attitude(you, ?BEL?, drs3),
drs3:drs([ ],
[ ]) ]),
attitude(i, ?ACCEPT?, drs4),
drs4:drs([ ],
[c1: dancer(z),
attitude(you, ?ACCEPT?, drs5),
drs5:drs([ ],
[ ]) ]) ]).
becomes:
drs1:drs([x, z],
[walter(x),
vincent(z),
attitude(i, ?BEL?, drs2),
drs2:drs([ ],
[b1: singer(x),
attitude(you, ?BEL?, drs3),
drs3:drs([ ],
[ ]) ]),
attitude(i, ?ACCEPT?, drs4),
drs4:drs([ ],
[c1: dancer(z),
attitude(you, ?ACCEPT?, drs5),
drs5:drs([ ],
[c2: singer(x) ]) ]) ]).
Figure 2: Hearer BCP1a
sition (BCP2) is also divided into speaker side
and hearer side. The speaker?s side, belief-
ConstraintSpeakerP2, checks a condition, e.g.
?singer(X)?, is a member of the speaker?s belief or
acceptance DRS, but not a member of the hearer?s
acceptance or belief DRS, embedded inside the
speaker?s DRSs (Figure 3). Once this is fulfilled,
the condition is added to the hearer?s acceptance
DRS, embedded inside the speaker?s acceptance
DRS.
BCP2, from the hearer?s perspective, uses be-
liefConstraintHearerP2, which checks whether
a condition, e.g. ?singer(X)?, is a member of the
speaker?s belief or acceptance DRS (embedded in-
side the hearer?s DRSs), and then checks if the
condition is not a member of the hearer?s accep-
tance or belief DRSs. It then adds the condition to
the hearer?s acceptance DRS, as in Figure 4.
4.2 Application
The following example
drs1:drs([x, z],
[walter(x),
vincent(z),
attitude(i, ?BEL?, drs2),
drs2:drs([ ],
[b1: singer(x),
attitude(you, ?BEL?, drs3),
drs3:drs([ ],
[ ]) ]),
attitude(i, ?ACCEPT?, drs4),
drs4:drs([ ],
[c1: dancer(z),
attitude(you, ?ACCEPT?, drs5),
drs5:drs([ ],
[ ]) ]) ]).
becomes:
drs1:drs([x, z],
[walter(x),
vincent(z),
attitude(i, ?BEL?, drs2),
drs2:drs([ ],
[b1: singer(x),
attitude(you, ?BEL?, drs3),
drs3:drs([ ],
[ ]) ]),
attitude(i, ?ACCEPT?, drs4),
drs4:drs([ ],
[c1: dancer(z),
attitude(you, ?ACCEPT?, drs5),
drs5:drs([ ],
[c2: singer(x) ]) ]) ]).
Figure 3: Speaker BCP2
(6) S1: You have to buy Vincent?s wife a
present.
H1: Should I send Mia flowers?
S1: Mia likes chocolate. Buy her some.
H2: I?ll buy her chocolate.
is passed through the implemented pragmatic con-
straints to briefly demonstrate how the pragmatic
constraints can be employed in dialogue. Figures 5
and 6 show the initial beliefs of both agents before
the dialogue is initiated. To proceed, the pragmatic
constraints for the speaker are applied. If the prag-
matic constraints do not apply, the dialogue cannot
go forward. This starts a recognition process on
the part of the hearer.
To utter S1, the speaker is constrained by BCP1
for the speaker, which dictates that the presupposi-
tion to be uttered needs to be part of the speaker?s
beliefs or acceptance DRSs (cf. section 3). When
this is verified, the speaker is able to make an
utterance containing the presupposition resulting
30
drs1:drs([x, z],
[walter(x),
vincent(z),
attitude(i, ?BEL?, drs2),
drs2:drs([ ],
[attitude(you, ?BEL?, drs3),
drs3:drs([ ],
[b1: singer(x) ]) ]),
attitude(i, ?ACCEPT?, drs4),
drs4:drs([ ],
[c1: dancer(z),
attitude(you, ?ACCEPT?, drs5),
drs5:drs([ ],
[ ]) ]) ]).
becomes:
drs1:drs([x, z],
[walter(x),
vincent(z),
attitude(i, ?BEL?, drs2),
drs2:drs([ ],
[attitude(you, ?BEL?, drs3),
drs3:drs([ ],
[b1: singer(x) ]) ]),
attitude(i, ?ACCEPT?, drs4),
drs4:drs([ ],
[c1: dancer(z),
c2: singer(x),
attitude(you, ?ACCEPT?, drs5),
drs5:drs([ ],
[ ]) ]) ]).
Figure 4: Hearer BCP2
in Figure 7.4 Here, the speaker already believes
the hearer believes the contents of the presuppo-
sition, ?Vincent has a wife?, and as such nothing
needs to be changed in the speaker?s beliefs about
the hearer?s beliefs, BCP2 for the speaker. If,
however, the speaker did not already believe the
hearer believes the presupposition, the contents of
the presupposition would be added to the hearer?s
acceptance DRS inside the speaker?s acceptance
DRS according to BCP2 for the speaker.
In the process of recognizing the speaker?s ut-
terance, the hearer?s pragmatic constraints are em-
ployed and if they are violated, again the dialogue
cannot proceed. The first pragmatic constraint for
the hearer to apply is BCP1, which checks whether
both the speaker and the hearer do not believe
or accept the presupposition. Upon finding that
both the speaker and the hearer believe the pre-
supposition, there is no need to add anything to ei-
ther the hearer?s or the speaker?s belief and accep-
tance spaces. If, however, that was not the case,
BCP1 and BCP1a alter the hearer?s and speaker?s
4Figures 7 and 8 show both agents? beliefs after S1 is ut-
tered.
belief states accordingly by adding the contents
of the presupposition as indicated in section 4.1.
The same reasoning applies to checking whether
BCP2 applies, for if the hearer did not already be-
lieve or accept the presupposition, BCP2 adds the
contents of the presupposition to the hearer?s ac-
ceptance DRS. After this, the speaker?s pragmatic
constraints are checked against the hearer?s, who
is now the speaker, utterance and so on.
drs1:
i you v m
drs2:
attitude(you, ?ACCEPT?, drs3)
drs3:
attitude(i, ?ACCEPT?, drs2)
attitude(i, ?BEL?, drs4)
drs4:
x y
b1:vincent(v)
b2:male(v)
b3:married(v, m)
b4:has(v,m)
b5:mia(m)
b6:wife(m)
b7:female(m)
b8:buy(you, m, x)
b9:present(x)
b10:chocolate(y)
b11:like(m, y)
b12:buy(you, m, y)
attitude(you, ?BEL?, drs5)
drs5:
b13:vincent(v)
b14:male(v)
b15:married(v, m)
b16:has(v,m)
b17:mia(m)
b18:wife(m)
b19:female(m)
attitude(i, ?INT?, drs6)
drs6:
Figure 5: Speaker Initial State
5 Conclusion
This paper has introduced a pragmatic view of pre-
supposition both in terms of givenness and the ef-
fects agents? cognitive states have on formulating
presupposition. To introduce this pragmatic view
of presupposition into DRT, some pragmatic con-
straints have been formulated and demonstrated by
way of example. In addition, an implementation of
these pragmatic constraints on presupposition has
been introduced into the extended DRT represen-
tation formulated by Al-Raheb (2005).
References
Al-Raheb, Y. 2005. Speaker/Hearer Representation in
a Discourse Representation Theory Model of Pre-
supposition: A Computational-Linguistic Approach.
Phd. University of East Anglia.
31
drs1:
i you v m
drs2:
attitude(you, ?ACCEPT?, drs3)
drs3:
attitude(i, ?ACCEPT?, drs2)
attitude(i, ?BEL?, drs4)
drs4:
x z
b18:vincent(v)
b19:male(v)
b20:married(v, m)
b21:has(v,m)
b22:mia(m)
b23:wife(m)
b24:female(m)
b25:flowers(z)
attitude(you, ?BEL?, drs5)
drs5:
b26:vincent(v)
b27:male(v)
b28:married(v, m)
b29:has(v,m)
b30:mia(m)
b31:wife(m)
b32:female(m)
attitude(i, ?INT?, drs6)
drs6:
Figure 6: Hearer Initial State
drs1:
i you v
drs2:
attitude(you, ?ACCEPT?, drs3)
drs3:
attitude(i, ?ACCEPT?, drs2)
attitude(i, ?BEL?, drs4)
drs4:
y
b1:vincent(v)
b2:male(v)
b3:married(v, m)
b4:has(v,m)
b5:mia(m)
b6:wife(m)
b7:female(m)
b8:buy(you, m, x)
b9:present(x)
b10:chocolate(y)
b11:like(m, y)
b12:buy(you, m, y)
attitude(you, ?BEL?, drs5)
drs5:
b13:vincent(v)
b14:male(v)
b15:married(v, m)
b16:has(v,m)
b17:mia(m)
b18:wife(m)
b19:female(m)
attitude(i, ?INT?, drs6)
drs6:
m x v
a1:buy(you, m, x)
a2:present(x)
p1:female(m)
p2:wife(m)
p3:male(v)
p4:vincent(v)
inform(i, you, a1)
inform(i, you, a2)
Figure 7: Speaker Generation: After S1
Geurts, B. 1999. Presuppositions and Pronouns: Cur-
rent Research in the Semantics/ Pragmatics Inter-
face. Oxford: Elsevier.
drs1:
i you v
drs2:
attitude(you, ?ACCEPT?, drs3)
drs3:
attitude(i, ?ACCEPT?, drs2)
attitude(i, ?BEL?, drs4)
drs4:
x, z
b18:vincent(v)
b19:male(v)
b20:married(v, m)
b21:has(v,m)
b22:mia(m)
b23:wife(m)
b24:female(m)
b25:flowers(z)
attitude(you, ?BEL?, drs5)
drs5:
b26:vincent(v)
b27:male(v)
b28:married(v, m)
b29:has(v,m)
b30:mia(m)
b31:wife(m)
b32:female(m)
attitude(i, ?INT?, drs6)
drs6:
a1:buy(i, m, x)
a2:present(x)
p1:female(m)
p2:has(v, m)
p3:married(v, m)
p4:wife(m)
p5:male(v)
p6:vincent(v)
inform(you, i, a1)
inform(you, i, a2)
Figure 8: Hearer Recognition: After S1
Grice, P. 1989. Studies in the Way of Words. Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Lambrecht, K. 1994. Information Structure and Sen-
tence Form: Topic, Focus and the Mental Represen-
tations of Discourse Referents. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Levinson, S. 1983. Pragmatics. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Simons, M. 2003. ?Presupposition and Accommo-
dation: Understanding the Stalnakerian Picture?.
Philosophical Studies 112, pp. 251?278.
Stalnaker, R. 2002. ?Common ground?. Linguistics
and Philosophy 25(5-6), pp. 701?721.
van der Sandt, R. and Geurts, B. 1991. ?Presupposi-
tion, Anaphora, and Lexical Content?. In: O. Her-
zog and C.-R. Rollinger (Eds.). Text Understand-
ing in LILOG. pp. 259?296. Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Verlag.
van der Sandt, R. 1992. ?Presupposition Projection as
Anaphora Resolution?. Journal of Semantics 9, pp.
333?377.
Werth, P. 1999. Text Worlds: Representing Conceptual
Space in Discourse. New York: Longman.
32
Proceedings of the 7th SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 46?53,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
DRT Representation of Degrees of Belief
Yafa Al-Raheb
National Centre for Language Technology
Dublin City University
Ireland
yafa.alraheb@gmail.com
Abstract
This paper investigates the problems facing mod-
elling agents? beliefs in Discourse Representation
Theory (DRT) and presents a viable solution in the
form of a dialogue-based DRT representation of
beliefs. Integrating modelling dialogue interaction
into DRT allows modelling agents? beliefs, inten-
tions and mutual beliefs. Furthermore, it is one of
the aims of the paper to account for the important
notion of agents? varying degrees of belief in differ-
ent contexts.1
1 Introduction
Heydrich et al remark that ?serious description of
natural dialogue seems to necessitate that we con-
sider the mental states of the speakers involved?
(1998).2 This is a step that is by no means easy. It
is the aim of this paper to integrate previous work
on beliefs in DRT and dialogue theory in order to
model the mental states of agents in dialogue.
The connection between beliefs, intentions and
speech or dialogue acts has been noted in the liter-
ature. Stalnaker notes, for instance, that
[i]f we understand contexts, and the
speech acts made in contexts, in terms
of the speaker?s beliefs and intentions,
we have a better chance of giving sim-
pler and more transparent explanations
of linguistic behaviour (Stalnaker 2002:
720).
The kind of agent beliefs we are concerned with
here arises in dialogue interaction. The nature of
1I gratefully acknowledge support from Science Founda-
tion Ireland grant 04/IN/I527.
2Other names for mental state used in the literature in-
clude ?information state?, ?conversational score?, and ?dis-
course context? (Larsson and Traum 2000).
interaction dictates that the strength or degree of
belief varies depending on contextual factors. This
can be seen from the following example:
(1) A: I want to make a booking for my
wife.
B: Yeah.
A: What time is the Thailand flight on
Monday?
B: It?s at 2 pm.
In example (1) B does not necessarily need to be-
lieve the presupposition (given information) that
A has a wife. For the purposes of the conversa-
tion, which is providing A with information, B can
simply ?go along with? the presupposition and not
have it as a member of his beliefs (i.e. his belief
set) (Stalnaker 2002). Similarly, let us consider the
following example, (2). The speaker is a customer
in a clothing shop.
(2) S1: I want to buy a dress for my wife.
H1: Is it for a formal occasion?
S2: Yes.
H2: What is her favourite colour?
S3: She doesn?t like red anymore.
H3: Does your wife like black?
S4: Yes
As the speaker, S, introduces the presupposition
that he has a wife, the hearer, H, can come to the
conclusion that S believes S has a wife. However,
when the hearer comes to refer to S?s wife, H does
not necessarily have to believe S has a wife. H
can simply go along with the information that the
speaker has a wife and use this form of acceptance
in H2 without committing to ?strongly believing?
it. Indeed, the speaker may be buying a dress for
his mistress rather than his wife. By going along
46
with it, the hearer does not have to commit him-
self to believing that the speaker has a wife. What
is more at stake than believing that the speaker in-
deed has a wife and not a mistress is closing the
sale. Contrast examples (1) and (2) with example
(3):
(3) S1: You have to get Peter?s son a Chris-
tening present.
H1: Peter has a son?
S2: Sorry I forgot to mention that be-
fore.
H2: Ok, what sort of present should I
get him?
S3: A toy would be nice.
In this context, the hearer, H, is required to commit
more strongly to the presupposition of Peter hav-
ing a son than simply going along with it, since H
is being asked to buy a Christening present. The
fact that H2 agrees to buying a present for Peter?s
son reflects more commitment to the presuppo-
sition than B shows in example (1). Considera-
tions of this kind lead to the conclusion that dif-
ferent contexts call for varying strengths of beliefs
and belief representation. We shall not attempt to
describe all the contextual factors that can cause
strength of belief to vary. The point is, rather, that
we clearly need to model strength of belief and
no current model of DRT incorporates such a pro-
posal. This paper, thus, makes an original proposal
for including a system for graded beliefs in the be-
lief spaces (or sets) of both the speaker and the
hearer.
Bearing this in mind, there is a need in DRT for
representing the differing beliefs of agents in dia-
logue and their beliefs (meta-beliefs) about other
agents? beliefs or mental state. By focussing on
the intentions of speakers and hearers and infer-
ring agents? intentions in making an utterance, the
approach presented in this paper aims at fulfilling
this need. It follows that, to have a ?full? theory of
beliefs and to have an insight into the mental states
of agents in dialogue (the speaker and the hearer),
it is necessary to have a representation of agents?
beliefs, degrees of beliefs, and the dialogue acts
expressed by their utterances (Asher 1986). This is
also in order to strengthen the link between utter-
ances and agents? intentions in dialogue. The di-
alogue act or function performed by the utterance
tells us something about the speaker?s beliefs. Fur-
thermore, what is also needed is a representation
of beliefs that are shared between, or are common
to, the two agents.
The question is: how can DRT best model be-
liefs? The following section, 2, outlines the prob-
lems facing modelling beliefs in DRT. Section 3
presents a graded view of agents? beliefs in dia-
logue as a solution to these problems. This is fol-
lowed by a description of the relationship between
belief and mutual belief, section 4, and then of the
relationship between belief and dialogue acts, sec-
tion 5.
2 Problems Facing Modelling Beliefs in
DRT
According to Heydrich et al (1998), paradigms of
dynamic semantics (DRT, Situation Semantics and
Dynamic Predicate Logic) face three obstacles in
modelling dialogue. First, there is the problem of
adapting the paradigm, originally made to model
monological discourse, to the description of dia-
logue with different agents. The second problem
is the description of mental states and the beliefs
of the agents. The third problem is in explaining
how the mental states are related to overt linguistic
behaviour.
With respect to the first problem, DRT has grad-
ually attempted to address problems of belief rep-
resentation in dialogue. For example, in Prole-
gomena, Kamp introduces a simple model of ver-
bal communication (Kamp 1990: 71), which con-
sists of two agents, A and B, and their mental
states K(A) and K(B). Later work by Kamp et
al. (2005) introduces agent modelling for single-
sentence discourse, namely the hearer. The treat-
ment presented in this paper allows the represen-
tation of dialogue with different agents, thus, ad-
dressing the first problem identified by Heydrich
et al (1998).
With regard to the second problem, however,
DRT has been primarily concerned with repre-
senting utterances containing propositional atti-
tudes such as ?believe?, rather than the beliefs and
meta-beliefs of agents. Segmented-DRT (SDRT)
has mainly focused on belief update and revision
(Asher and Lascarides 2003). The treatment in
this paper takes previous work on beliefs in dy-
namic semantics as a starting point and extends it
to reach a richer representation of the interaction
between mental states and the linguistic content of
utterances. For example, both speaker and hearer
mental states are represented and the beliefs and
47
meta-beliefs of agents are reviewed after each ut-
terance.
As a semantic theory, DRT tells us which dis-
course referents are needed in context. However,
DRT does not deal with planning, nor with prag-
matic aspects of contexts rendered through re-
lating the current utterance to agents? intentions.
Kamp et al?s (2005) expansion of the original,
also known as ?vanilla?, DRT (Poesio and Traum
1997a), deal minimally with intentions. To deal
with the third problem mentioned by Heydrich et
al., Al-Raheb (2005) has already outlined a prag-
matic extension to DRT that makes it appropriate
for linking the current utterance and agents? inten-
tions.
The present paper aims to show how that link
can be strengthened through modelling agents? in-
tentions and relating them to the dialogue acts
communicated via utterances. In relation to this
link, the significance of degrees of belief is ex-
plained in the following section.
drs1:
i you m
drs2:
s
c1: buy(you,c2)
c2: newShoes(s)
attitude(you, ?ACCEPT?, drs3)
drs3:
attitude(i, ?ACCEPT?, drs2)
attitude(i, ?BEL?, drs4)
drs4:
y
b1: mary(m)
b2: party(y)
b3: has(m,y)
attitude(you, ?BEL?, drs5)
drs5:
s
b4: mary(m)
b5: party(y)
b6: has(m,y)
b7: buy(you,b8)
b8: newShoes(s)
attitude(you, ?INT?, drs6)
drs6:
y s
p1: mary(m)
p2:party(y)
p3: has(m,y)
a1: buy(you,a2)
a2: newShoes(s)
inform(you, i, a1)
Figure 1: Hearer Recognition of S1
3 Degrees of Belief
To our knowledge, there is no account in DRT
that accommodates strengths or degrees of belief
of agents in dialogue. This section addresses this
gap and proposes initially two strengths of belief
involved in dialogue to be expanded in future re-
search to include further degrees of belief. Modal
expressions, including words such as ?possibly?
and ?might?, are evidence that there exist more de-
grees of belief than the ones discussed in this pa-
per.
The beliefs of an agent are ?her model of how
things are? (Traum 1994: 15). The notion of belief
(or strong belief) is to be understood in relation
to the agent: it is what the agent takes to be true.
There is an important philosophical background to
the discussion of ?belief? and ?knowledge?. It is
outside the scope of this paper to review all the
literature here. Quine (1960), Hintikka (1962),
Lewis (1969, 1979), and Davidson (1983) are rep-
resentative. The term ?belief? is understood in this
paper to refer to propositions strongly held by the
agent to be true and when making utterances relat-
ing to them, the speaker not only commits herself
to their truth but also communicates to the hearer
that she, the speaker, believes those proposition to
be true.
Another degree of belief called acceptance is
accounted for in this model. Acceptance consists
of the agent?s weakly believed propositions. The
agent may be going along with what the speaker
is saying or has acquired a new proposition based
on the speaker?s utterance which has not yet been
confirmed into a stronger belief.
To illustrate what is meant by the distinction be-
tween belief and acceptance, let us look at:
(4) S1: I need to buy new shoes for Mary?s
party.
H1: Try Next on Henry Street.
The speaker tells the hearer that she has to buy
new shoes for Mary?s party. In this example, the
hearer already (strongly) believes there is a party
and he suggests a place where the speaker can buy
them. Figure 1 demonstrates the hearer?s mental
state after hearing the speaker?s utterance, S1. The
hearer?s mental state is represented by a Discourse
Representation Structure (DRS), which contains
three sub-DRSs, one for intention (referred to by
?attitude(you, ?INT?, drs6)? and the label for the
intention DRS, drs6), another for the belief DRS
containing strong beliefs (referred to by ?attitude(i,
?BEL?, drs4)? and the the label for the belief DRS,
drs4), and finally the acceptance DRS contain-
ing weak beliefs (referred to by ?attitude(i, ?AC-
CEPT?, drs2)? and the the label for the acceptance
48
DRS, drs2).3
If we change example (4) so that the hearer does
not actually hold the belief that there is a party, as
in:
(5) S1: I need to buy new shoes for Mary?s
party.
H1: I didn?t realize Mary is throwing a
party.
S2: Yeah she is. It?s next Tuesday.
H2: You can probably buy them at Next.
The hearer does not necessarily need to strongly
believe that Mary is throwing a party. He can ?go
along with? or accept it and even suggest a place
where the speaker can buy the shoes. The exis-
tence of a party does not affect the hearer person-
ally or directly, i.e. he does not need to act on
it. However, let us now consider the effect if we
change the example again so that the hearer does
not know about Mary?s party, nor that he is re-
quired to buy new shoes, as in:
(6) S1: You need to buy new shoes for
Mary?s party.
H1: I didn?t realize Mary is throwing a
party.
S2: Yeah she is. You should try Next on
Henry Street.
H2: I will.
This time, for the hearer to commit to buying
something for a party (in H2) that he did not even
know existed suggests a stronger degree of belief
than that of ?going along with? the speaker having
to buy it. The existence of the party affects the
hearer personally and directly. Therefore, agree-
ing to buy new shoes justifies the inference that he
believes rather than just accepts there is a party.
This is what the paper describes as belief, or a
strong degree of belief. Contrast Figure 1 with the
figure representing the speaker?s mental state after
hearing H2 in example 6, Figure 2.
4 Beliefs and Mutual Beliefs
The treatment of beliefs that we are developing
here requires an explicit account of how the be-
lief spaces or DRSs of two agents can interact.
3Inside the agent?s DRS, ?i? is used to refer to the agent
and ?you? is used to refer to the other agent. Assertions are
marked by ?an?, presuppositions by ?pn?, believed informa-
tion by ?bn? and accepted information by ?cn?.
drs1:
i you m
drs2: attitude(you, ?ACCEPT?, drs3)
drs4:
attitude(i, ?ACCEPT?, drs2)
attitude(i, ?BEL?, drs4)
drs4:
s n
b1: mary(m)
b2:party(y)
b3: has(m,y)
b4: buy(you,b5)
b5: newShoes(s)
b6: try(you,b7)
b7: next(n)
attitude(you, ?BEL?, drs5)
drs5:
b8: mary(m)
b9:party(y)
b10: has(m,y)
b11: buy(you,b12)
b12: newShoes(s)
b13: try(you,b13)
b14: next(n)
attitude(you, ?INT?, drs7)
drs7:
s n
p1: newShoes(s)
p2: next(n)
a1: buy(you,p1)
a2: try(you,p2)
inform(you,i,a1)
inform(you,i,a2)
Figure 2: Speaker Recognition of H2
?Mutual belief?, also referred to as ?mutual knowl-
edge?, is the term used by Traum (1994) among
others, where a group of individuals may believe
X, where X may or may not be true. Stalnaker?s
(2002) ?common belief? is comparable to what
others call mutual belief. For X to be a mutual
belief, it has to be accessible to a group; all be-
lieve X and all believe that all believe X, and all
believe that all believe that all believe X.
In face-to-face communication, the hearer be-
lieves that the speaker believes what she, the
speaker, is communicating. On the other hand, un-
less the hearer indicates doubt or objects to what
the speaker is saying, the speaker assumes that the
hearer believes what the speaker has said ? which
is consistent with expectations under Gricean co-
operativeness assumptions (1989). The speaker
also assumes that the hearer now has the belief that
the speaker believes what she just said. This as-
sumption is what leads to ?mutual? beliefs (Kamp
1990: 79).
However, mutual belief can be viewed as the
process of establishing that the speaker and the
hearer hold the same belief. One way in which
this process may occur is when the speaker holds
a belief and communicates that belief to the hearer.
49
This belief may then be adopted by the hearer who
can provide feedback to the speaker that the infor-
mation communicated has now acquired the status
of belief in an ideal situation with a cooperative
hearer. When both participants reach the conclu-
sion that S bel(ieves) X, H bel X, H bel S bel X,
and S bel H bel X, then mutual belief is estab-
lished. The speaker in example (7) believes her
neighbour is a weirdo. Whether the utterance is
informative (new) or not depends on the context.
In this example, (7), the speaker may not already
have the belief that the hearer believes her neigh-
bour is a weirdo.
(7) Speaker: My neighbour is such a
weirdo.
Hearer: Yeah, he is. I saw him peeping
through your window the other day.
However, after the hearer makes his utterance, the
speaker can now strongly believe that the hearer
believes her neighbour is a weirdo, that he believes
she believes her neighbour is a weirdo, and now
she believes he believes her neighbour is a weirdo.
Figure 3 shows the level of nesting to accommo-
date the mutual belief that the speaker?s neighbour
is a weirdo. It is possible when this level of nesting
is reached to have a separate DRS or space for mu-
tual beliefs, called ?mutual belief DRS?. In which
case, the propositions held in drs6, can now be
removed from drs6 and added to the ?mutual be-
lief DRS?. Figure 3 represents the speaker?s men-
tal state after the hearer makes his utterance. For
the purposes of this example, the DRT represented
in Figure 3 will mainly focus on the speaker?s be-
lief DRT.
Achieving mutual belief is immensely helped
by dialogue acts. For example, when a hearer
provides strong feedback about a new proposition
(cf. drs7 in Figure 3), the speaker can come to
believe the hearer believes that proposition. Sec-
tion 5 shows the importance of considering the di-
alogue acts expressed by an assertion (new infor-
mation) and their relationship to degrees of belief
and strengthening of beliefs.
5 Beliefs and Dialogue Acts
When someone makes an assertion, they commu-
nicate not only information they assume to be new
to the hearer, but also communicate to the hearer
information about their own beliefs. In order to
drs1:
i you
drs2:
attitude(you, ?ACCEPT?, drs3)
drs3:
attitude(i, ?ACCEPT?, drs2)
attitude(i, ?BEL?, drs4)
drs4:
x y
b1: neighbour(x)
b2: have(i,x)
b3: weirdo(x)
b4: window(y)
b5: have(i,y)
b6: peeping-through(x,y)
b7: saw(you,b6)
attitude(you, ?BEL?, drs5)
drs5:
b8: neighbour(x)
b9: have(i,x)
b10: weirdo(x)
b11: window(y)
b12: have(i,y)
b13: peeping-through(x,y)
b14: saw(you,b13)
attitude(i, ?BEL?, drs6)
drs6:
b15: neighbour(x)
b16: have(i,x)
b17: weirdo(x)
b18: window(y)
b19: have(i,y)
b20: peeping-through(x,y)
b21: saw(you,b20)
attitude(you, ?INT?, drs7)
drs7:
x y
p1: neighbour(x)
p2: weirdo(x)
p3: window(y)
p4: have(i,y)
a1: peeping-through(x,y)
a2: saw(you,a1)
strongPosFeedback(you,i,p2)
inform(you,i,a2)
Figure 3: Speaker Recognition
model beliefs in dialogue, it is necessary to un-
derstand what the representation of dialogue in-
volves. A dialogue is ?a cooperative undertaking
of agents engaged in developing and transform-
ing their common situation?, involving verbal and
non-verbal action (Heydrich et al 1998: 21). In
a dialogue, utterances give rise to dialogue acts
(cf. agents? intention DRSs in Figures 1, 2 and
3), named speech acts by some, and conversation
acts by others (Traum 1994).
One of the features of dialogue acts is how they
affect the agents? mental states. As Traum points
out, ?... speech acts are a good link between the
mental states of agents and purposeful communi-
cation? (Traum 1999: 30). Each agent in dialogue
needs to have a representation of their beliefs and
the other agent?s beliefs or cognitive state in or-
der for a dialogue act to be felicitous in Austin?s
and Searle?s sense (Asher 1986). That is to say,
dialogue acts depend on agents? beliefs for inter-
pretation.
50
Each assertion made has one ?function? or more.
For example, the function of a statement could be
to make a claim about the world. Traum (1997) di-
vides statements into ?assert?, ?re-assert?, and ?in-
form?. ?Assert? is trying to ?change? the belief of
the addressee. The result of assert is that the hearer
now assumes that the speaker is trying to get the
hearer to believe the assertion. ?Re-assert? can be
used when participants try to verify old informa-
tion, and not necessarily inform of something new.
?Inform? means that the speaker is trying to pro-
vide the hearer with information that the hearer
did not have before. However, Traum does not
go further to discuss cases where agents believe
their utterances (Traum 1994: 14). It is one of the
claims of this paper that agents in dialogue either
strongly or weakly believe their utterances in order
to be cooperative. It is possible to extend this ap-
proach in order to include cases where agents are
purposefully deceitful. However, this is left for fu-
ture research.
The adapted dialogue acts, or functions, in thiss
paper?s treatment of beliefs in DRT are mainly
?inform?, ?change belief? and ?other?. ?Inform?
is used to communicate new information to the
hearer, whereas ?change belief? (or to use Poesio
and Traum?s (1997b) dialogue act term ?assert?)
is used to change the hearer?s beliefs about some
proposition. The importance of the representation
introduced in section 3 in relation to dialogue acts
transpires in allowing us to make the distinction
between the dialogue acts ?inform? and ?change
belief? (?assert?). To ?inform? the hearer of X, the
speaker needs to have the belief in her beliefs that
the hearer does not believe X, i.e. bel(S,? bel(H,
X)). This is a constraint to making an informative
utterance. Figure 4 shows the speaker?s beliefs be-
fore making the utterance in example (8).
(8) The X-Files DVD is on sale on Amazon.
The speaker believes the hearer does not al-
ready believe that the X-Files DVD is on sale on
Amazon, drs3. This is demonstrated by the miss-
ing propositions representing ?on sale on Amazon?
?onSale(x, b4)? and ?at(a)? from drs3 in Figure 4.
On the other hand, to make a ?change belief? or
an ?assert?, the speaker would have reason to be-
lieve that the hearer believes something different
or the opposite of what the speaker believes, bel(S,
bel(H, ? X)). The DRT treatment of beliefs pro-
posed in this paper allows us to reflect this in
drs1:
i you x a
attitude(i, ?BEL?, drs2)
drs2:
b1: xFilesDVD(x)
b2: amazon(a)
b3: onSale(x, b4)
b4: at(a)
attitude(you, ?BEL?, drs3)
drs3:
b5: xFilesDVD(x)
Figure 4: Inform: Speaker?s utterance
drs1:
i you x a
attitude(i, ?BEL?, drs2)
drs2:
b1: xFilesDVD(x)
b2: amazon(a)
b3: onSale(x, b4)
b4: at(a)
attitude(you, ?BEL?, drs3)
drs3: b5: xFilesDVD(x)
b6: not(onSale(x))
Figure 5: Change belief
Figure 5, drs3, in which the speaker believes the
hearer believes the X-Files DVD is not on sale,
?not(onSale(x))?.
The category ?Other? embraces any dialogue act
other than ?inform? and ?change belief?, whose
recognition involves the same process explained
for others, e.g. ?suggest?, ?clarify?, and ?explain?.4
The dialogue acts ?accept? and ?reject? come un-
der the umbrella of feedback as they can be in re-
sponse to, for instance, a ?suggest? dialogue act.
The dialogue act ?clarify? is used when a hearer
is having difficulty recognizing the speaker?s ut-
terance.5 On the other hand, ?explain? is when
the speaker responds to the hearer?s clarification
request and provides a clarifying utterance. The
hearer can accept, believe, or reject that explana-
tion. The dialogue act ?suggest? also instigates one
of three reactions: the hearer can accept, believe or
reject that suggestion and may provide feedback to
indicate which is his reaction. It is of more inter-
est to this paper to examine the effects of dialogue
acts on the hearer?s beliefs, and what dialogue acts
suggest about the speaker?s beliefs.
4It is possible for this category to be expanded to in-
clude more dialogue acts such as ?question?, ?answer?, ?self-
correct? and ?offer?.
5Clarification is a form of feedback. ?I didn?t hear what
you said? is both ?feedback? act and an ?inform? (Schegloff et
al. 1977).
51

	



	








  Proceedings of the 7th SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 68?75,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Semantic and Pragmatic Presupposition in Discourse Representation
Theory
Yafa Al-Raheb
National Centre for Language Technology
School of Computing
Dublin City University, Ireland
yafa.alraheb@gmail.com
Abstract
This paper investigates semantic and prag-
matic presupposition in Discourse Repre-
sentation Theory (DRT) and enhances the
pragmatic perspective of presupposition in
DRT. In doing so, it draws attention to the
need to account for agent presupposition
(i.e. both speaker and hearer presuppo-
sition) when dealing with pragmatic pre-
supposition. Furthermore, this paper links
this pragmatic conception of presupposi-
tion with the semantic one (sentence pre-
supposition) through using ?information
checks? which agents are hypothesized to
employ when making and receiving utter-
ances.1
1 Introduction
DRT, with its detailed apparatus for the representa-
tion of context, offers the most obvious framework
for investigating presupposition in depth (Kamp
1984, 1988, 1990, 1995, 2001a, 2001b; Kamp and
Reyle 1993; Kamp et al 2005). However, de-
spite the suitability of DRT for pursuing a detailed
account of presupposition, it is argued that in or-
der to enrich our understanding of presupposition
within the DRT framework, this framework itself
needs to be modified (cf. Al-Raheb 2005). The ap-
proach presented in this paper understands presup-
position within the parameters of dynamic seman-
tics (van der Sandt 1992), part of which is DRT,
but attempts to go beyond that in order to make the
understanding of presupposition within DRT more
pragmatic. The dynamic semantics view of pre-
supposition is incomplete from a pragmatic stand-
point because it neglects the connection between
1I gratefully acknowledge support from Science Founda-
tion Ireland grant 04/IN/I527.
beliefs and presupposition, hence neglecting the
connection between pragmatic presupposition and
semantic presupposition in DRT.
To account for pragmatic presupposition as well
as making presupposition within DRT more prag-
matic, presupposition is understood to be a prop-
erty of the agent. In essence, the effect of pre-
supposition is to give insights about the speaker?s
beliefs as well as the speaker?s beliefs about the
hearer?s beliefs. Speaker belief leads to presuppo-
sition, which indicates the beliefs of the speaker
to the hearer. Presupposition is a reflection of the
speaker?s state of mind. This is stronger than what
is generally conceded in the literature. Geurts
(1996, 1998, 1999) maintains that a presupposi-
tion should not necessarily reflect the beliefs of
the speaker, but rather the speaker?s commitment
to the truth of the presupposition. If, for example,
we were to use Stalnaker?s (2002) example,
(1) I have to pick my sister up from the air-
port.
Geurts argues that the speaker does not have to be-
lieve she has a sister, but just needs to be ?commit-
ted to? the truth of the presupposition that she has a
sister. In other words, the speaker need only com-
mit to the presupposition (P) being true. The ap-
proach presented here takes a somewhat stronger
position than Geurts? position (Geurts 1999) be-
cause it assumes that Grice?s Cooperative Princi-
ple is in place (Grice 1975, 1989). If we make the
simplifying assumption that the agents in the dia-
logue are being cooperative, are not lying, are be-
ing relevant, etc., we can take the stronger position
that the information introduced by the presupposi-
tion, here ?having a sister?, is indeed a belief held
by the speaker.
68
	





	












Figure 1: Speaker, Sentence and Hearer Presupposition
Viewing presupposition from the more prag-
matic perspective of the agents? point of view
in dialogue leads us to viewing presupposition
from both the speaker?s and the hearer?s points
of view. Distinguishing speaker presupposition
from hearer presupposition helps make the ap-
proach to presupposition within DRT more prag-
matic, since we are speaking not of truth condi-
tions but of states of mind in communicative in-
teraction. Therefore, this paper deals with two
types of agent presupposition, speaker presuppo-
sition and hearer presupposition (cf. section 3).
This is different from semantic presupposition, i.e.
sentence presupposition (cf. section 2). Agent
presupposition differs from sentence presupposi-
tion in that the latter stems from sentence mean-
ing, whereas the former attaches itself to the be-
liefs of the speaker and her intentions. It is argued
here that the semantic and pragmatic notions of
presupposition in DRT can be linked through link-
ing agents? beliefs to the utterance being commu-
nicated.
2 Semantic and Pragmatic
Presupposition
The literature has mostly considered the hearer?s
side of receiving the presupposition when deal-
ing with agent presupposition (pragmatics) as op-
posed to sentence presupposition (semantics). For
instance, van der Sandt (1992) deals with accom-
modation from the hearer?s perspective, not dis-
tinguishing between speaker and hearer presup-
position. However, the relationship between sen-
tence presupposition and agent presupposition can
be explained by dividing agent presupposition into
speaker presupposition and hearer presupposition.
From the speaker?s point of view, speakers
make utterances to communicate new informa-
tion. Generally speaking, to generate a commu-
nicatively meaningful utterance, there would be
some discrepancy between the speaker?s beliefs
and the speaker?s beliefs about the hearer?s be-
liefs. The discrepancy leads to an assertion, A,
which may need presupposed arguments to be un-
derstood. First, the speaker decides on the asser-
tion after checking belief discrepancies. Then, the
speaker finds the right presuppositions to be able
to communicate the assertion.
Hearer presupposition differs in that utterances
are split into presupposition and assertion, where
possible, and presuppositions are first needed to
establish links to objects in order for the new in-
formation to be understood by the hearer. For a
hearer, assertions build on presupposition and the
procedure is bottom-up (assertion is supported by
presupposition).2
Therefore, in line with linking the speaker?s
beliefs with the linguistic utterance and the lin-
guistic utterance with the hearer?s beliefs, the
speaker?s presupposition is conveyed through the
speaker?s utterance (sentence presupposition), and
the speaker?s utterance leads to the hearer?s pre-
supposition. This interaction between the seman-
tic and pragmatic notions of presupposition is a
more balanced conception of presupposition (cf.
Figure 1).
With regard to the A part of an utterance re-
ceived by the hearer, the hearer can first ?accept?,
or ?weakly believe?, the new information and later
on turn that weak belief into a belief, by adding it
to her belief set (Al-Raheb 2005). However, it is
worth mentioning that when making an utterance,
both the speaker and the hearer focus their atten-
tion on A, which can get accepted by the hearer.
In such a case, the hearer may later adopt A as
a belief and indicate so to the speaker, making A
a mutual belief, which may or may not serve as
a presupposition afterwards in the dialogue. It is
possible for P to be a mutual belief that both agents
in the conversation mutually know they hold, or a
2It remains for future work to test the psychological real-
ity of these hypotheses.
69
new piece of information packaged as P. From this
discussion, it can be seen that beliefs impose some
constraints on making an utterance. The follow-
ing section distinguishes between agent presuppo-
sition (speaker presupposition and hearer presup-
position) and links agents presupposition to sen-
tence presupposition.
3 Agent Presupposition
Speaker presupposition differs from hearer pre-
supposition in terms of three ?information checks?
agents are hypothesized to perform when intro-
ducing or dealing with presupposition. The checks
are (1) clarification check, (2) informativity check,
and (3) consistency check. The checks are sim-
ilar in principle to Purver (2004) and van der
Sandt (1992). However, they are developed here
as a process which distinguishes speaker genera-
tion from hearer recognition, allowing us to dif-
ferentiate speaker presupposition from hearer pre-
supposition, hence establishing the link between
speaker presupposition and sentence presupposi-
tion, and between sentence presupposition and
hearer presupposition. The three checks apply to
both speaker and hearer.
The clarification check may be used at the be-
ginning of the process of checking. It corresponds
to Grice?s maxim of manner on the part of the
speaker (1989). Nonetheless, as there are different
kinds of clarification requests (Purver et al 2003),
clarification can also be initiated at various stages
of the check process, indicating a different kind of
clarification.
The purpose of the informativity check is to
check whether the presupposition is new or old
information to the speaker and the hearer. This
check is a modification of Grice?s (1989) qual-
ity maxim, which has been reworked to include
two degrees of beliefs, acceptance and belief (Al-
Raheb 2005). In addition, it checks whether the
information is new or old to the other agent, based
on the beliefs of one agent about the other. The
process of checks for the speaker mirrors that of
the hearer. However, as the process of recogni-
tion is different from the process of generation, the
?information checks? are described for the speaker
and hearer individually.
Similarly, the consistency check determines
whether the presupposition is consistent with
the agents? beliefs ? in accordance with Grice?s
maxim of relevance (1989). For presupposition,
as part of the consistency check, another check is
performed, more specifically for the hearer?s ben-
efit, which checks whether the presupposition is
remarkable or unremarkable. Generally, informa-
tion can be accommodated, so long as it is ?unre-
markable? (Geurts 1999: 36). For example,
(2) The car across the street from my house
belongs to my neighbour.
is less likely to cause problems than
(3) The small jet across the street from my
house belongs to my neighbour,
when the hearer knows that the speaker lives in the
city centre.3
The process of ?information checks? influences
how speakers make their utterances and how hear-
ers recognize those utterances. Section 3.1 follows
the information check process for presuppositions
for the speaker, whereas section 3.2 demonstrates
that process for the hearer.
3.1 Speaker Presupposition
Speaker presupposition differs from hearer pre-
supposition in terms of checks. When a speaker
generates a sentence presupposition (via the com-
municated utterance), we are assuming that the
speaker is bound by Grice?s Cooperative Princi-
ple (1975, 1989). To utter a sentence trigger-
ing a presupposition, the speaker needs to have
reason to believe that her presupposition is go-
ing to be ?clear? and ?consistent?. The speaker
may have previous context in memory that shows
her presupposition to be consistent with her be-
liefs about the hearer?s beliefs. However, when
such evidence is lacking, the speaker may still
make presupposition?triggering utterances (sen-
tence presupposition) and then make the judge-
ment that the presupposition is consistent if there
is no negative feedback; alternatively, the speaker
might receive evidence that shows the presupposi-
tion to be contradictory with her beliefs about the
hearer?s beliefs.
The informativity check comes into play when
the speaker elaborates on given or known infor-
mation by packaging it as a presupposition and fo-
cusing attention on the assertion part of her utter-
ance, i.e. on the new information. In this case, the
3Of course, anything can be ?out of the ordinary? or its
reverse for a specific set of circumstances. The speaker is
making assumptions about shared conceptions of the ?ordi-
nary?.
70

	
	


	


	
		

	
 	
 


Figure 2: Speaker Presupposition
speaker needs to have reason to believe that the
hearer is already aware of this presupposed infor-
mation, therefore, that it is known. For example,
(4) My grandchild loves horses.
To be consistent, the speaker checks her mem-
ory to see if the speaker has record that she, the
speaker, has reason to believe that the hearer be-
lieves that the speaker has a grandchild. The
speaker, being in a retirement home, discussing
her grandchildren with the carer, and having had
previous conversations with the same carer about
her family, has reason to believe that the hearer al-
ready knows she has a grandchild. She, therefore,
presupposes ?I have a grandchild?.
Another example of elaborating on given in-
formation is when the speaker believes the given
information has been established, i.e. both the
speaker and the hearer believe that the information
is part of their mutual or common beliefs. This
constitutes a case of strong speaker belief. Con-
sider example (5):
(5) Sylvia?s will means we have to move
out.
In this case, the speaker and the hearer have been
talking about Sylvia?s will in their dialogue and
both have reason to believe that Sylvia has a will
and that they both know the other person has rea-
son to believe Sylvia has a will.
Generally, if the speaker assumes the informa-
tion presented in the presupposition to be known
to the hearer, the speaker would expect the hearer
to accept the information provided by the sentence
presupposition by default, or even believe it. This
process is generally referred to as binding in dy-
namic semantics.4 Of course, the hearer may ex-
perience some difficulty in understanding and ask
for a ?clarification?, check 1.
However, the information presented as a sen-
tence presupposition may be new. The speaker
may wish to introduce a topic into the dialogue,
knowing that the hearer has no previous knowl-
edge of the topic. The new information (speaker
presupposition) is then checked by the speaker for
consistency, where it may be remarkable or unre-
markable. Here, we follow Geurts?s (1999) classi-
fication of remarkable and unremarkable presup-
position.5 Thus, examples (6) and (7), given a cer-
tain situation and agents, are more unusual to ac-
commodate without questioning than example (1),
where many people may have sisters.
(6) I have to pick my personal trainer up
from the airport.
(7) I have to get the keys for my private jet.
Unremarkable information is information that
people may accept without too much questioning,
4The lack of feedback about this information is consid-
ered ?weak positive feedback? that the hearer has accepted
the information (Al-Raheb 2005).
5This further subclassification of presupposition is not in-
dicated in the classification of checks for reasons of clarity,
but it is incorporated in the DRT model presented in this pa-
per.
71
Figure 3: Hearer Presupposition: Check 1 (Clarification Check)
such as having a brother or a sister. An example of
remarkable information might be:
(8) My private jet arrives this afternoon.
In social contexts in which it is not expected that
everyone owns a private jet, such information will
at least raise an eyebrow. Being cooperative, the
speaker will assume, unless the hearer indicates
otherwise, that the information she provides in
the presupposition is unremarkable for the partic-
ular hearer in the particular context, and that the
hearer will accommodate the information by either
accepting it or believing it. Whether something
is remarkable depends on the specific participant
and type of communicative situation. For exam-
ple, two film stars talking together would presum-
ably not find example (8) ?remarkable?, nor might
a journalist interviewing a celebrity.
The speaker has to be prepared for cases when,
despite being cooperative, the hearer might per-
ceive sentence presupposition as unclear and/or
contradictory. What this means for the present
treatment of presupposition is that generally the
speaker believes that the new information pre-
sented in the presupposition is unremarkable;
therefore, the speaker will expect the hearer to
accommodate the new information. However, in
case the hearer should find the new information
unusual or remarkable, the speaker will, we as-
sume, expect the hearer to check whether the pre-
supposition is consistent with her beliefs or not.
The speaker may also expect the hearer to ask for
clarification if the sentence presupposition is not
clear.
If clear, the speaker may expect the hearer to ac-
commodate the sentence presupposition and may
safely assume that the information has been ac-
cepted, unless it is indicated through ?strong pos-
itive feedback? that the information is actually
strongly believed (Al-Raheb 2005). However, if
the presupposition is not clear, the speaker may
expect the hearer to ask for clarification and a clar-
ification process takes place, in which the hearer
might ask for more clarification if the information
is still not clear. When the information is finally
clear, the hearer may provide feedback.
Despite the speaker?s best efforts to be coop-
erative, there are cases where the presupposition
contradicts the hearer?s previous beliefs. Speakers
usually do not expect this to happen, but are gener-
ally prepared to produce a clarification or attempt
to fix the dialogue when such a problem occurs.
Figure 2 is a flowchart displaying the speaker?s
expectations in terms of presupposition according
to her beliefs and on the assumption that she is
being cooperative. According to this treatment of
presupposition, whether the speaker believes the
information in a presupposition is new or old, the
result is the same in terms of how the speaker ex-
pects the hearer to act. The only difference is
that new information gets accommodated by the
hearer, while known information is ?bound? and
either already accepted or believed (Asher and
Lascarides 1998; van der Sandt and Geurts 1991).6
It has to be said that this is of course an ideal sit-
uation. The speaker does not always have beliefs
concerning whether the hearer already believes the
presupposed information or not.
To sum up, when initiating the topic of a
presupposition, we can conclude the following:
bel(S, P), bel(S, clear(P)), bel(S, consistent(P)),
and bel(S, accept(H,P)).7 The speaker may have
either the belief bel(S,? bel(H,P)) or the belief
bel(S,bel(H,P)). However, in our implementation
of the pragmatic and semantic notions of presup-
position in DRT, the only beliefs represented after
S?s utterance are: bel(S, P), or accept(S,P) and if
6Discourse referents of known presuppositions attach
themselves to previous discourse markers referring to the
same object or person.
7S stands for the speaker, H stands for the hearer and bel
stands for believes.
72

		

 




 

 	 

		



Figure 4: Hearer Presupposition: Check 2 (Informativity Check: Old)
sufficient previous information is available, either
bel(S,? bel(H,P)) or bel(S,bel(H,P)).
3.2 Hearer Presupposition
As a result of the speaker?s initiating the topic of
P indicated through sentence presupposition, the
hearer acquires the belief that the speaker believes
the presupposition. The first information check
to apply to hearer presupposition is the clear/
not clear check. That is to say, upon hearing
P, the hearer first checks whether the presuppo-
sition is clear (e.g. hearer has no problems with
perception). As mentioned previously, there are
other types of clarification requested when incon-
sistency arises. However, what we are concerned
with here is whether the hearer has been able to
receive the message or not. Other clarification
checks may take place after the hearer performs
the new/old (informativity) check and the consis-
tency check.
If the presupposition is not clear in the above
sense, the hearer may ask the speaker to clarify
her statement. As a simple example, consider an
imaginary dialogue between a customer and cus-
tomer service assistant about a gas heater:
(9) Customer: How long does it take to fix
my gas heater?
Customer Service Assistant: Your
what?
Customer: My gas heater needs fixing.
After checking whether the information, sentence
presupposition, is clear, the customer service as-
sistant asks the customer to clarify. In this partic-
ular case, the lack of clarity may be attributed to,
e.g. not hearing very well. The hearer expects the
speaker to provide an explanation or clarification.
The speaker is then obliged to provide a further
explanation. If the information is still not clear,
the hearer may ask for more clarification and the
hearer needs to provide an explanation. Figure 3
incorporates this potentially iterative loop. This
is consistent with conversation analysis research,
which assumes that information may be cleared up
after an explanation is provided, but also allows
for further clarification if needed (Schegloff et al
1977). If the sentence presupposition is cleared
up, then the hearer may provide feedback that the
information is clear. However, lack of feedback
is also considered a case of ?weak positive feed-
back? (Al-Raheb 2005). Generally, after provid-
ing an explanation, the speaker?s assumptions are
likely to be that the hearer now has no problems
with the sentence presupposition.
Having made sure that the sentence presupposi-
tion is clear, the hearer may now move on to per-
form the informativity check, check 2. If the in-
formation the speaker presents as a sentence pre-
supposition is known to the hearer, in the sense of
being in his acceptance space, i.e. already a hearer
presupposition, the hearer may strengthen that ac-
ceptance by now believing the presupposition (cf.
Al-Raheb 2005). The hearer may previously hold
a strong belief about the presupposition, i.e. the
hearer may already believe P. In this case, it is
not necessary to add a new belief that P to hearer
presupposition. We are assuming here that the
hearer?s knowledge of a sentence presupposition
means that this presupposition does not contradict
previous beliefs held by the hearer. Figure 4 shows
the hearer?s options if the sentence presupposition
is already a hearer presupposition, or known to
him. The speaker ideally expects the hearer will
accept P (i.e. P will have become hearer presup-
position), unless negative feedback is provided by
the hearer. If strong positive feedback is provided
by the hearer, the speaker may thereby form the
meta-belief that bel(H,bel(S,bel(H,P))).
If the sentence presupposition provides new in-
formation, the hearer then performs the consis-
73

		

 


 












Proceedings of the Analyzing Conversations in Text and Speech (ACTS) Workshop at HLT-NAACL 2006, pages 58?61,
New York City, New York, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Pragmatic Discourse Representation Theory
Yafa Al-Raheb
National Centre for Language Technology
Dublin City University
Ireland
yafa.alraheb@gmail.com
Abstract
This paper presents a pragmatic approach to Dis-
course Representation Theory (DRT) in an attempt
to address the pragmatic limitations of DRT (Werth
1999; Simons 2003). To achieve a more prag-
matic DRT model, this paper extends standard DRT
framework to incorporate more pragmatic elements
such as representing agents? cognitive states and the
complex process through which agents recognize
utterances employing the linguistic content in form-
ing mental representations of other agent?s cogni-
tive states. The paper gives focus to the usually
ignored link in DRT literature between speaker be-
liefs and the linguistic content, and between the lin-
guistic content and hearer?s beliefs.
1 Introduction
Developments in dynamic semantics, resulting in
DRT, have led to a framework suitable for the rep-
resentation of linguistic phenomena (van Eijck and
Kamp 1997). This is specifically due to the fact that,
recognizing the importance of context, DRT concen-
trates on updating the context with the processing of
each utterance. In addition, DRT can also be viewed
as an agent?s mental model of the world and not just
a representation of the discourse. It is for these rea-
sons that DRT holds great potential for incorporating
more pragmatic phenomena.
However, despite the suitability of DRT for repre-
senting linguistic phenomena, some pragmatic lim-
itations have been noted in the literature. Simons
(2003) remarks that DRT is a theory of seman-
tics and not pragmatics. Werth remarks that ?there
is no place in [DRT] for participant roles, setting,
background knowledge, purposes, even inferences?
(Werth 1999: 65). In general terms, we can say that
the pragmatic dimension supplements semantic con-
tent by using context and cognitive states of agents
in dialogue. The discipline of pragmatics is, there-
fore, concerned with the process by which agents
infer information about elements of another agents?
cognitive state such as their beliefs and intentions.
Thus, this paper focuses on extending standard DRT
pragmatically to model agents? cognitive states in
the pragmatic context of dialogue.
2 A More Pragmatic DRT
This section presents a more pragmatic DRT focus-
ing on the relationship between speaker generation
and the linguistic content, and between the linguistic
content and hearer recognition. Figure 1 represents
the link between our representation of the speaker?s
cognitive state, the speaker?s linguistic content and
the hearer?s cognitive state or DRS (Discourse Rep-
resentation Structure). This relationship has not to
our knowledge been explored in the literature and
deserves investigation.
Generally speaking, to generate an utterance,
there would be some discrepancy between the
speaker?s beliefs and the speaker?s beliefs about the
hearer?s beliefs. The discrepancy leads to an utter-
ance, i.e. linguistic content. The linguistic content
is the window the hearer has onto the speaker?s state
of mind. It is what influences hearer recognition.
By analysis of the linguistic content provided by the
speaker, the hearer can propose a hypothesis regard-
ing the speaker?s state of mind.
58
Speaker Generation:
i you
attitude(i, ?BEL?, drs1)
drs1:
attitude(i, ?INT?, drs2)
drs2:
? Linguistic contentSpeaker?s utterance ? Hearer Recognition:
i you
attitude(i, ?BEL?, drs3)
drs3:
attitude(you, ?INT?, drs4)
drs4:
Figure 1: Speaker DRS, Linguistic Content and Hearer DRS
2.1 New DR-Structures
The DRT representation introduced here extends
standard DRT language and structure resulting in a
suitable pragmatic-based framework for represent-
ing this pragmatic link. Separate DRSs are created
to represent each agent. DRSs get updated with each
new utterance. Each DRS representing an agent?s
cognitive state includes the two personal reference
markers ?i? and ?you?. When ?i? is used in a DRS, it
refers to the agent?s self within that DRS; i.e. if the
agent is the speaker, then ?i? refers to the speaker in
the entire DRS. To refer to the other agent, ?you? is
used. To follow from the speaker?s example, ?you? in
this case refers to the hearer. To account for agents?
cognitive states and their meta-beliefs, a sub-DRS
representing the agent?s cognitive state called the be-
lief DRS is created to include the speaker?s beliefs
about the hearer?s beliefs. Additionally, a new DRS
for representing weaker beliefs called acceptance is
introduced. The same level of embedding offered
to belief DRSs is introduced in acceptance DRSs.
Acceptance DRS includes the speaker?s acceptance
DRS as well as what the speaker takes the hearer to
accept. Provided the speaker has sufficient informa-
tion, the speaker can also have the embedded DRS
within the acceptance DRS that represents what the
hearer takes the speaker to accept.
In addition to expanding the belief DRS, each
agent?s cognitive state contains an intention DRS. In-
tention in the sense used here refers to the agent?s
goals in making an utterance, which are represented
by the corresponding dialogue act marked in the
intention DRS. The hearer?s intention DRS repre-
sents the recognized utterance and contains elements
of utterance-making generally associated with prag-
matics such as the function of an utterance, its dia-
logue act. This pragmatic enriching strengthens the
link between an agent?s intentions and the linguistic
form uttered. What is proposed is that the intention
DRS be designed to include the linguistic content
provided within utterances.
To further enhance the link between agents? cog-
nitive states and the linguistic content of their ut-
terances, the intention DRS contains the rich prag-
matic information offered by explicitly marking the
presupposition (given information) and the assertion
(new information) of the current utterance. The in-
tention DRS is a separate DRS from the belief DRS.
The beliefs of an agent give the motivation for mak-
ing an utterance, and the intention DRS represents
the speaker?s intended message. The recognition
of an utterance gives the hearer an insight into the
agent?s beliefs. Depending upon the particular dia-
logue represented, the intention DRS could have the
speaker?s intention, the hearer?s intentions or both.
The intention DRS functions as the immediate con-
text, the one containing the utterance being gener-
ated or recognized. The belief and acceptance DRSs
function as background context containing informa-
tion pertaining to the dialogue and not just the cur-
rent utterance. This division of labour context-wise
is useful in that the information represented in the
intention DRS directly feeds into the speaker?s ut-
terance, and is then inferred by the hearer through
the linguistic content. The hearer?s intention DRS
includes the inferred speaker intentions in uttering
the current utterance. This gives the flexibility of
being able to model information that the hearer has
inferred but has not yet decided to accept or believe
and is, therefore, not yet included in either the belief
or acceptance DRS. For instance, while the hearer
in example (1) has recognized S1?s utterance, he has
not yet accepted S1?s utterance. This motivates sep-
arating the representation of beliefs from intentions.
59
(1) S1: Bob?s trophy wife is cheating on him.
H1: When did Bob get married?
2.2 Extending DRT Language
In addition to the three DRSs introduced above, in
order to make the link between speaker generation,
linguistic content, and hearer recognition more ex-
plicit, labels, ?labeln?, n an integer, are introduced.
The labels mark the distinction between presupposi-
tion and assertion, and the distinction between weak
and strong beliefs. Furthermore, the labels can be
used to refer to a particular predicate by another
complex predicate. The labels increase the expres-
sive power from an essentially first-order formal-
ism to a higher-order formalism. Presuppositions
are marked by a presupposition label ?pn?. Simi-
larly, DRSs inside the main speaker or hearer DRS
are labeled ?drsn?. Assertions are marked by ?an?
to strengthen the connections between the linguistic
form (in the separation between presupposition and
assertion) and the representation of beliefs. Believed
information labeled ?bn? inside a belief DRS or ac-
cepted information labeled ?cn? inside an acceptance
DRS can be either presupposed or asserted inside the
intention DRS. Thus, the labels in the intention DRS
can only be ?p? or ?a?.
Conditions referring to attitudes (acceptance, be-
liefs, and intentions) have been added to the ex-
tended semantics of DRT. Figure 2 shows three em-
bedded DRSs, acceptance DRS, drs2, belief DRS,
drs4, and intention DRS, drs6 representing:
(2) A: Tom is buying Mary a puppy.
B: That?s sweet.
DRSs are referred to by the attitude describing them.
For example, attitude(i,?BEL?, drs4) refers to the
DRS containing the speaker?s beliefs, using the la-
bel for the belief DRS, drs4. Other conditions
are allowed to employ ?i? as an argument. Atti-
tude(i,?accept?, drs2) refers to the DRS containing
the speaker?s acceptance DRS, using the label for
the acceptance DRS, drs2. Attitude(i,?INT?, drs6)
refers to the DRS containing the speaker?s intention
in uttering example (2), using the label for the inten-
tion DRS, drs6. The speaker?s acceptance DRS con-
tains an embedded DRS for the hearer?s acceptance
DRS, drs2. In this case, it is empty, as no weakly be-
lieved propositions have been introduced yet. Simi-
larly, the belief DRS contains space for the speaker?s
beliefs about the hearer?s beliefs, drs5. The intention
DRS contains the linguistic content of the utterance
that the speaker is about to make, drs6, as well as the
relevant dialogue acts.
drs1:
i you t m
drs2:
attitude(you, ?ACCEPT?, drs3)
drs3:
attitude(i, ?ACCEPT?, drs2)
attitude(i, ?BEL?, drs4)
drs4:
p
b1: tom(t)
b2: mary(m)
b3: puppy(p)
b4: buy(t,m,p)
attitude(you, ?BEL?, drs5)
drs5: b5: tom(t)b6: mary(m)
attitude(i, ?INT?, drs6)
drs6:
p
p1: tom(t)
p2: mary(m)
a1: puppy(p)
a2: buy(t,m,a1) inform(i,you,a2)
Figure 2: A?s initial Cognitive State
In Figure 2, there are essentially three levels of
embedding in a main DRS. If we look at the belief
DRS, the first embedded DRS is the agent?s own be-
lief DRS. Level two is the agent?s beliefs about the
other agent?s beliefs DRS. Level three is inserted
when necessary and represents the agent?s beliefs
about the other agent?s beliefs about the agent?s be-
liefs DRS. DRSs of the same level of embedding
have similar status. For example, the agent?s accep-
tance and belief DRSs have equal status. However,
the only discourse referents in common are the ones
in the main DRS?s universe. Each equal-level em-
bedding has its own set of discourse referents, as
well as its own conditions.
Discourse referents of same and higher levels of
embedding are accessible to lower levels of embed-
ding and are therefore not represented in the lower
level embedding universe. This does not entail that
when a lower level embedding makes use of a dis-
course referent introduced in a higher level embed-
ding the agent and other agent share the same inter-
nal or external anchors. For example, when talking
about a rabbit, the speaker?s representation of rabbit
60
will be: b1:rabbit(x), whereas the speaker?s repre-
sentation of the hearer?s beliefs will be b2:rabbit(x).
This is to replace Kamp and Reyle?s (1993) use of
different discourse referents, where a new discourse
referent is used every time the same object or in-
dividual is referred to in a new sentence (e.g. rab-
bit(x), then rabbit(y)). The aim is to avoid having
to overtly use the x=y rule every time the same rab-
bit is referred to. The principles behind the equation
predicate are still in place; i.e. every time rabbit is
referred to, it is bound to the rabbit already in the
context. However, we bind it to the previous proper-
ties of rabbit already in context through attaching it
to the same discourse referent, rabbit(x).
Both Kamp and Reyle?s and our representation
face revision when it transpires that the agents in
dialogue have different referents in mind. For ex-
ample, both the speaker and hearer might be talking
about ?rabbit?. However, they might have a differ-
ent ?rabbit? in mind, and assume the other partici-
pant is thinking of the rabbit they have in mind. The
speaker might have a grey rabbit in mind, whereas
the hearer has a white rabbit in mind. In this case,
Kamp and Reyle?s revision would consist of deleting
x=y predicate, and any previous equation predicate
that may have been introduced each time rabbit was
referred to. In our representation, the revision takes
place by changing the other agent?s discourse refer-
ent, b2:rabbit(x) becomes label2:rabbit(y).
Furthermore, the previous pragmatic extensions
to standard DRT have been implemented computa-
tionally to approximate a computational model of
communication and to enable us to see whether the
extended DRT works logically. The implementation
relates the linguistic content of utterances to the be-
liefs and intentions of the agents. The implementa-
tion operates with a specific dialogue, which can be
modified, within a restricted domain. It seems rea-
sonable to conclude on the basis of the implementa-
tion that the conceptual and formal proposals made
provide a basis for further development.
3 Conclusion and Further Extensions
This paper pushes the treatment of linguistic
phenomena in DRT more towards pragmatics,
by bringing more pragmatic elements to the
semantic/pragmatic interface which is DRT. It has
been the aim of this paper to achieve this by (a) ex-
panding DRT structure to incorporate the pragmatic
extensions introduced in this paper, (b) representing
the complex process of speakers recognizing utter-
ances and using the linguistic information in form-
ing mental representations of hearers? mental repre-
sentations, (c) enhancing the link between speaker
beliefs, and between the linguistic content and the
linguistic content and hearer?s beliefs and (d) putting
all these extensions and enhancements to the prag-
matic side of DRT in a computational model.
While the work presented in this paper offers a
more pragmatic approach to DRT, there is still more
work to be done on making DRT more pragmatic.
The possibility of extending the present treatment
to include more agents remains for future work.
In addition, future work can employ the intention
DRS introduced in this paper, in order to enhance
the complexity of the pragmatic representation of
speaker/hearer intentions. For instance, embedding
turn-taking acts within the intention DRS and relat-
ing them to agents? beliefs and intentions should be
straightforward. It is also hoped that future work
will address more aspects of context than the two
detailed and implemented in this paper, namely, the
immediate and background context. Furthermore,
the sample implementation of the extensions sug-
gested in this paper serves as an example of how the
extensions to DRT can be implemented. One way
of developing this implementation is to incorporate
it into a dialogue system which aims to achieve a
more balanced approach to the semantic/pragmatic
interface in representing linguistic phenomena.
References
Kamp, H. and Reyle, U. 1993. From Discourse to Logic: In-
troduction to Model Theoretic Semantics of Natural Lan-
guage, Formal Logic and Discourse Representation Theory.
Boston, Dordrecht: Kluwer.
van Eijck, J. and Kamp, H. 1997. ?Representing Discourse in
Context?. In: J. van Benthem and A. Ter Meulen (Eds.).
Handbook of Logic and Language. pp. 179?237. Amster-
dam: Elsevier.
Simons, M. 2003. ?Presupposition and Accommodation: Un-
derstanding the Stalnakerian Picture?. Philosophical Studies
112, pp. 251?278.
Werth, P. 1999. Text Worlds: Representing Conceptual Space
in Discourse. New York: Longman.
61
