Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 1?8,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
An Empirical Study in Source Word Deletion
for Phrase-based Statistical Machine Translation
Chi-Ho Li, Dongdong Zhang, Mu Li, Ming Zhou
Microsoft Research Asia
Beijing, China
chl, dozhang@microsoft.com
muli, mingzhou@microsoft.com
Hailei Zhang
Northeastern University of China
Shenyang, China
hailei.zh@gmail.com
Abstract
The treatment of ?spurious? words of source
language is an important problem but often
ignored in the discussion on phrase-based
SMT. This paper explains why it is impor-
tant and why it is not a trivial problem, and
proposes three models to handle spurious
source words. Experiments show that any
source word deletion model can improve a
phrase-based system by at least 1.6 BLEU
points and the most sophisticated model
improves by nearly 2 BLEU points. This
paper also explores the impact of training
data size and training data domain/genre on
source word deletion.
1 Introduction
It is widely known that translation is by no
means word-to-word conversion. Not only be-
cause sometimes a word in some language trans-
lates as more than one word in another language,
also every language has some ?spurious? words
which do not have any counterpart in other lan-
guages. Consequently, an MT system should be
able to identify the spurious words of the source
language and not translate them, as well as to gen-
erate the spurious words of the target language.
This paper focuses on the first task and studies
how it can be handled in phrase-based SMT.
An immediate reaction to the proposal of inves-
tigating source word deletion (henceforth SWD)
is: Is SWD itself worth our attention? Isn?t it a
trivial task that can be handled easily by existing
techniques? One of the reasons why we need to
pay attention to SWD is its significant improve-
ment to translation performance, which will be
shown by the experiments results in section 4.2.
Another reason is that SWD is not a trivial task.
While some researchers think that the spurious
words of a language are merely function words
or grammatical particles, which can be handled
by some simple heuristics or statistical means,
there are in fact some tricky cases of SWD which
need sophisticated solution. Consider the follow-
ing example in Chinese-to-English translation: in
English we have the subordinate clause ?accord-
ing to NP?, where NP refers to some source of
information. The Chinese equivalent of this
clause can sometimes be ?ACCORDING-TO/??
NP EXPRESS/,+?; that is, in Chinese we could
have a clause rather than a noun phrase following
the preposition ACCORDING-TO/??. There-
fore, when translating Chinese into English, the
content word EXPRESS/,+ should be consid-
ered spurious and not to be translated. Of course,
the verb EXPRESS/,+ is not spurious in other
contexts. It is an example that SWD is not only
about a few function words, and that the solu-
tion to SWD has to take context-sensitive factors
into account. Moreover, the solution needed for
such tricky cases seems to be beyond the scope
of current phrase-based SMT, unless we have a
very large amount of training data which cov-
ers all possible variations of the Chinese pattern
?ACCORDING-TO/?? NP EXPRESS/,+?.
Despite the obvious need for handling spuri-
ous source words, it is surprising that phrase-
based SMT, which is a major approach to SMT,
does not well address the problem. There are
two possible ways for a phrase-based system to
deal with SWD. The first one is to allow a source
1
language phrase to translate to nothing. How-
ever, no existing literature has mentioned such
a possibility and discussed the modifications re-
quired by such an extension. The second way is
to capture SWD within the phrase pairs in trans-
lation table. That is, suppose there is a foreign
phrase F? = (fAfBfC) and an English phrase
E? = (eAeC), where fA is aligned to eA and fC
to eC , then the phrase pair (F? , E?) tacitly deletes
the spurious word fB . Such a SWD mechanism
fails when data sparseness becomes a problem. If
the training data does not have any word sequence
containing fB , then the spurious fB cannot asso-
ciate with other words to form a phrase pair, and
therefore cannot be deleted tacitly in some phrase
pair. Rather, the decoder can only give a phrase
segmentation that treats fB itself as a phrase, and
this phrase cannot translate into nothing, as far
as the SMT training and decoding procedure re-
ported by existing literature are used. In sum, the
current mechanism of phrase-based SMT is not
capable of handling all cases of SWD.
In this paper, we will present, in section 3, three
SWD models and elaborate how to apply each
of them to phrase-based SMT. Experiment set-
tings are described in section 4.1, followed by the
report and analysis of experiment results, using
BLEU as evaluation metric, in section 4.2, which
also discusses the impact of training data size and
training data domain on SWD models. Before
making our conclusions, the effect of SWD on an-
other evaluation metric, viz. METEOR, is exam-
ined in section 5.
2 Literature Review
Research work in SMT seldom treats SWD as
a problem separated from other factors in trans-
lation. However, it can be found in differ-
ent SMT paradigms the mechanism of handling
SWD. As to the pioneering IBM word-based
SMT models (Brown et al, 1990), IBM mod-
els 3, 4 and 5 handle spurious source words by
considering them as corresponding to a particular
EMPTY word token on the English side, and by the
fertility model which allows the English EMPTY
to generate a certain number of foreign words.
As to the hierarchical phrase-based ap-
proach (Chiang, 2007), its hierarchical rules are
more powerful in SWD than the phrase pairs
in conventional phrase-based approach. For
instance, the ?ACCORDING-TO/?? NP EX-
PRESS/,+? example in the last section can be
handled easily by the hierarchical rule
X ?<?? X,+, according to X > .
In general, if the deletion of a source word
depends on some context cues, then the hier-
archical approach is, at least in principle, ca-
pable of handling it correctly. However, it is
still confronted by the same problem as the con-
ventional phrase-based approach regarding those
words whose ?spuriousness? does not depend on
any context.
3 Source Word Deletion Models
This section presents a number of solutions to the
problem of SWD. These solutions share the same
property that a specific empty symbol ? on the tar-
get language side is posited and any source word
is allowed to translate into ?. This symbol is in-
visible in every module of the decoder except the
translation model. That is, ? is not counted when
calculating language model score, word penalty
and any other feature values, and it is omitted in
the final output of the decoder. It is only used to
delete spurious source words and refine transla-
tion model scores accordingly.
It must be noted that in our approach phrases
comprising more than one source word are not al-
lowed to translate into ?. This constraint is based
on our subjective evaluation of alignment matrix,
which indicates that the un-alignment of a con-
tinuous sequence of two or more source words is
far less accurate than the un-alignment of a sin-
gle source word lying within aligned neighbors.
Consequently, in order to treat a source word as
spurious, the decoder must give a phrase segmen-
tation that treats the word itself as a phrase.
Another important modification to the phrase-
based architecture is a new feature added to the
log-linear model. The new feature, ?-penalty, rep-
resents how many source words translate into ?.
The purpose of this feature is the same as that
of the feature of word penalty. As many features
used in the log-linear model have values of log-
arithm of probability, candidate translations with
more words have, in general, lower scores, and
2
Model 1 P (?)
Model 2 P (?|f)
Model 3 PCRF (?|~F (f)
Table 1: Summary of the Three SWD Models
therefore the decoder has a bias towards shorter
translations. Word penalty (in fact, it should be
renamed as word reward) is used to neutralize
this bias. Similarly, the more source words trans-
late into ?, the shorter the translation will be,
and therefore the higher score the translation will
have. The ?-penalty is proposed to neutralize the
bias towards shorter translations.
The core of the solutions is the SWD model,
which calculates P (?|f), the probability distribu-
tion of translating some source word f to ?. Three
SWD models will be elaborated in the following
subsections. They differ from each other by the
conditions of the probability distribution, as sum-
marized in Table 1. Model 1 is a uniform prob-
ability distribution that does not take the source
word f into account. Model 2 is a simple proba-
bility distribution conditioned on the lexical form
of f only. Model 3 is a more complicated distribu-
tion conditioned on a feature vector of f , and the
distribution is estimated by the method of Condi-
tional Random Field.
3.1 Model 1: Uniform Probability
The first model assumes a uniform probability
of translation to ?. This model is inspired by
the HMM-based alignment model (Och and Ney,
2000a), which posits a probability P0 for align-
ment of some source word to the empty word
on the target language side, and weighs all other
alignment probabilities by the factor 1 ? P0. In
the same style, SWD model 1 posits a probability
P (?) for the translation of any source word to ?.
The probabilities of normal phrase pairs should
be weighed accordingly. For a source phrase
containing only one word, its weight is simply
P (??) = 1 ? P (?). As to a source phrase con-
taining more than one word, it implies that every
word in the phrase does not translate into ?, and
therefore the weighing factor P (??) should be mul-
tiplied as many times as the number of words in
the source phrase. In sum, for any phrase pair
< F? , E? >, its probability is
P (E?|F? ) =
{
P (?) ifE? = (?)
P (??)|F? |PT (E?|F? ) otherwise
where PT (E?|F? ) is the probability of the phrase
pair as registered in the translation table, and |F? |
is the length of the phrase F? . The estimation of
P (?) is done by MLE:
P (?) = number of unaligned source word tokensnumber of source word tokens .
3.2 Model 2: EMPTY as Normal Word
Model 1 assumes that every word is as likely to be
spurious as any other word. Definitely this is not
a reasonable assumption, since certain function
words and grammatical particles are more likely
to be spurious than other words. Therefore, in our
second SWD model the probability of translating
a source word f to ? is conditioned on f itself.
This probability, P (?|f), is in the same form as
the probability of a normal phrase pair, P (E?|F? ),
if we consider ? as some special phrase of the tar-
get language and f as a source language phrase
on its own. Thus P (?|f) can be estimated and
recorded in the same way as the probability of
normal phrase pairs. During the phase of phrase
enumeration, in addition to enumerating all nor-
mal phrase pairs, we also enumerate all unaligned
source words f and add phrase pairs of the form
< (f), (?) >. These special phrase pairs, TO-
EMPTY phrase pairs, are fed to the module of
phrase scoring along with the normal phrase pairs.
Both types of phrase pairs are then stored in the
translation table with corresponding phrase trans-
lation probabilities. It can be seen that, since the
probabilities of normal phrase pairs are estimated
in the same procedure as those of TO-EMPTY
phrase pairs, they do not need re-weighing as in
the case of SWD model 1.
3.3 Model 3: Context-sensitive Model
Although model 2 is much more informative than
model 1, it is still unsatisfactory if we consider
the problem of SWD as a problem of tagging.
The decoder can be conceived as if it carries out
a tagging task over the source language sentence:
each source word is tagged either as ?spurious? or
?non-spurious?. Under such a perspective, SWD
3
model 2 is merely a unigram tagging model, and
it uses only one feature template, viz. the lex-
ical form of the source word in hand. Such a
model can by no means encode any contextual
information, and therefore it cannot handle the
?ACCORDING-TO/?? NP EXPRESS/,+? ex-
ample in section 1.
An obvious solution to this limitation is a more
powerful tagging model augmented with context-
sensitive feature templates. Inspired by research
work like (Lafferty et al, 2001) and (Sha and
Pereira, 2003), our SWD model 3 uses first-order
Conditional Random Field (CRF) to tackle the
tagging task.1 The CRF model uses the follow-
ing feature templates:
1. the lexical form and the POS of the foreign
word f itself;
2. the lexical forms and the POSs of f?2, f?1,
f+1, and f+2, where f?2 and f?1 are the two
words to the left of f , and f+1 and f+2 are
the two words to the right of f ;
3. the lexical form and the POS of the head
word of f ;
4. the lexical forms and the POSs of the depen-
dent words of f .
The lexical forms are the major source of infor-
mation whereas the POSs are employed to allevi-
ate data sparseness. The neighboring words are
used to capture local context information. For ex-
ample, in Chinese there is often a comma after
verbs like ?said? or ?stated?, and such a comma
is not translated to any word or punctuation in
English. These spurious commas are therefore
identified by their immediate left neighbors. The
head and dependent words are employed to cap-
ture non-local context information found by some
dependency parser. For the ?ACCORDING-TO/?
? NP EXPRESS/,+? example in section 1,
the Chinese word ACCORDING-TO/?? is the
head word of EXPRESS/,+. The spurious to-
ken of EXPRESS/,+ in this pattern can be dis-
tinguished from the non-spurious tokens through
the feature template of head word.
1Maximum Entropy was also tried in our experiments but
its performance is not as good as CRF.
The training data for the CRF model comprises
the alignment matrices of the bilingual training
data for the MT system. A source word (token)
in the training data is tagged as ?non-spurious? if
it is aligned to some target word(s), otherwise it is
tagged as ?spurious?. The sentences in the train-
ing data are also POS-tagged and parsed by some
dependency parser, so that each word can be as-
signed values for the POS-based feature templates
as well as the feature templates of head word and
dependency words.
The trained CRF model can then be used to
augment the decoder to tackle the SWD problem.
An input source sentence should first be POS-
tagged and parsed for assigning feature values.
The probability for f being spurious, P (?|f), is
then calculated by the trained CRF model as
PCRF (spurious|~F (f)).
The probability for f being non-spurious is sim-
ply 1 ? P (?|f). For a normal phrase pair
< F? , E? > recorded in the translation table,
its phrase translation probability and the lexical
weight should be re-weighed by the probabilities
of non-spuriousness. The weighing factor is
?
fi?F?
(1? P (?|fi)),
since the translation of F? into E? means the de-
coder considers every word in F? as non-spurious.
4 Experiments
4.1 Experiment Settings
A series of experiments were run to compare the
performance of the three SWD models against the
baseline, which is the standard phrase-based ap-
proach to SMT as elaborated in (Koehn et al,
2003). The experiments are about Chinese-to-
English translation. The bilingual training data
is the one for NIST MT-2006. The GIGAWORD
corpus is used for training language model. The
development/test corpora are based on the test
sets for NIST MT-2005/6.
The alignment matrices of the training data are
produced by the GIZA++ (Och and Ney, 2000b)
word alignment package with its default settings.
The subsequent construction of translation table
was done in exactly the same way as explained
4
in (Koehn et al, 2003). For SWD model 2,
the phrase enumeration step is modified as de-
scribed in section 3.2. We used the Stanford
parser (Klein and Manning, 2003) with its default
Chinese grammar for its POS-tagging as well as
finding the head/dependent words of all source
words. The CRF toolkit used for model 3 is
CRF++2. The training data for the CRF model
should be the same as that for translation table
construction. However, since there are too many
instances (every single word in the training data
is an instance) with a huge feature space, no pub-
licly available CRF toolkit can handle the entire
training set of NIST MT-2006.3 Therefore, we
can use at most only about one-third of the NIST
training set (comprising the FBIS, B1, and T10
sections) for CRF training.
The decoder in the experiments is our re-
implementation of HIERO (Chiang, 2007), aug-
mented with a 5-gram language model and a re-
ordering model based on (Zhang et al, 2007).
Note that no hierarchical rule is used with the de-
coder; the phrase pairs used are still those used
in conventional phrase-based SMT. Note also that
the decoder does not translate OOV at all even
in the baseline case, and thus the SWD models
do not improve performance simply by removing
OOVs.
In order to test the effect of training data size on
the performance of the SWD models, three varia-
tions of training data were used:
FBIS Only the FBIS section of the NIST training
set is used as training data (for both transla-
tion table and the CRF model in model 3).
This section constitutes about 10% of the en-
tire NIST training set. The purpose of this
variation is to test the performance of each
model when very small amount of data are
available.
BFT Only the B1, FBIS, and T10 sections of the
NIST training set are used as training data.
These sections are about one-third of the en-
tire NIST training set. The purpose of this
2http://crfpp.sourceforge.net/
3Apart from CRF++, we also tried FLEX-
CRF (http://flexcrfs.sourceforge.net) and MALLET
(http://mallet.cs.umass.edu).
Data baseline model 1 model 2 model 3
FBIS 28.01 29.71 29.48 29.64
BFT 29.82 31.55 31.61 31.75
NIST 29.77 31.39 31.33 31.71
Table 2: BLEU scores in Experiment 1: NIST?05 as
dev and NIST?06 as test
variation is to test each model when medium
size of data are available.4
NIST All the sections of the NIST training set
are used. The purpose of this variation is to
test each model when a large amount of data
are available.
(Case-insensitive) BLEU-4 (Papineni et al,
2002) is used as the evaluation metric. In each
test in our experiments, maximum BLEU training
were run 10 times, and thus there are 10 BLEU
scores for the test set. In the following we will
report the mean scores only.
4.2 Experiment Results and Analysis
Table 2 shows the results of the first experiment,
which uses the NIST MT-2005 test set as develop-
ment data and the NIST MT-2006 test set as test
data. The most obvious observation is that any
SWD model achieves much higher BLEU score
than the baseline, as there is at least 1.6 BLEU
point improvement in each case, and in some case
the improvement of using SWD is nearly 2 BLEU
points. This clearly proves the importance of
SWD in phrase-based SMT.
The difference between the performance of the
various SWD models is much smaller. Yet there
are still some noticeable facts. The first one is
that model 1 gives the best result in the case of
using only FBIS as training data but it fails to
do so when more training data is available. This
phenomenon is not strange since model 2 and
model 3 are conditioned on more information and
therefore they need more training data.
The second observation is about the strength of
SWD model 3, which achieves the best BLEU
score in both the BFT and NIST cases. While
its improvement over models 1 and 2 is marginal
in the case of BFT, its performance in the NIST
4Note also that the BFT data set is the largest training
data that the CRF model in model 3 can handle.
5
case is remarkable. A suspicion to the strength of
model 3 is that in the NIST case both models 1
and 2 use the entire NIST training set for esti-
mating P (?), while model 3 uses only the BFT
sections to train its CRF model. It may be that
the BFT sections are more consistent with the test
data set than the other NIST sections, and there-
fore a SWD model trained on BFT sections only
is better than that trained on the entire NIST. This
conjecture is supported by the fact that in all four
settings the BLEU scores in the NIST case are
lower than those in the BFT case, which suggests
that other NIST sections are noisy. While it is im-
possible to test model 3 with the entire NIST, it is
possible to restrict the data for the estimation of
P (?|f) in model 1 to the BFT sections only and
check if such a restriction helps.5 We estimated
the uniform probability P (?) from only the BFT
sections and used it with the translation table con-
structed from the complete NIST training set. The
BLEU score thus obtained is 31.24, which is even
lower than the score (31.39) of the original case
of using the entire NIST for both translation table
and P (?|f) estimation. In sum, the strength of
model 3 is not simply due to the choice of train-
ing data.
The test set used in Experiment 1 distinguishes
itself from the development data and the training
data by its characteristics of combining text from
different genres. There are three sources of the
NIST MT-2006 test set, viz. ?newswire?, ?news-
group?, and ?broadcast news?, while our devel-
opment data and the NIST training set comprises
only newswire text and text of similar style. It is
an interesting question whether SWD only works
for some genres (say, newswire) but not for other
genres. In fact, it is dubious whether SWD fits the
test set to the same extent as it fits the develop-
ment set. That is, perhaps SWD contributes to the
improvement in Experiment 1 simply by improv-
ing the translation of the development set which is
composed of newswire text only, and SWD may
not benefit the translation of the test data at all.
In order to test this conjecture, we ran Experi-
ment 2, in which the SWD models were still ap-
plied to the development data during training, but
5Unfortunately this way does not work for model 2 as
the estimation of P (?|f) and the construction of translation
table are tied together.
Data model 1 model 2 model 3
FBIS 29.85 29.91 29.95
BFT 31.73 31.84 32.08
NIST 31.70 31.82 32.05
Table 3: BLEU scores in Experiment 2, which is the
same as Experiment 1 but no word is deleted for test
corpus. Note: the baseline scores are the same as the
baselines in Experiment 1 (Table 2).
all SWD models stopped working when translat-
ing the test data with the trained parameters. The
results are shown in Table 3. These results are
very discouraging if we compare each cell in Ta-
ble 3 against the corresponding cell in Table 2: in
all cases SWD seems harmful to the translation of
the test data. It is tempting to accept the conclu-
sion that SWD works for newswire text only.
To scrutinize the problem, we split up the test
data set into two parts, viz. the newswire sec-
tion and the non-newswire section, and ran ex-
periments separately. Table 4 shows the results
of Experiment 3, in which the development data
is still the NIST MT-2005 test set and the test
data is the newswire section of NIST MT-2006
test set. It is confirmed that if test data shares
the same genre as the training/development data,
then SWD does improve translation performance
a lot. It is also observed that more sophisticated
SWD models perform better when provided with
sufficient training data, and that model 3 exhibits
remarkable improvement when it comes to the
NIST case.
Of course, the figures in Table 5, which shows
the results of Experiment 4 where the non-
newswire section of NIST MT-2006 test set is
used as test data, still leave us the doubt that SWD
is useful for a particular genre only. After all, it
is reasonable to assume that a model trained from
data of a particular domain can give good perfor-
mance only to data of the same domain. On the
other hand, the language model is another cause
of the poor performance, as the GIGAWORD cor-
pus is also of the newswire style.
While we cannot prove the value of SWD with
respect to training data of other genres in the
mean time, we could test the effect of using de-
velopment data of other genres. In our last ex-
periment, the first halves of both the newswire
6
apply SWD for test set no SWD for test set
Data model 1 model 2 model 3 model 1 model 2 model 3
FBIS 30.81 30.81 30.68 29.23 29.61 29.46
BFT 33.57 33.74 33.71 31.88 31.87 32.25
NIST 33.65 34.01 34.42 32.14 32.59 32.87
Table 4: BLEU scores in Experiment 3, which is the same as Experiments 1 and 2 but only the newswire section
of NIST?06 test set is used. Note: the baseline scores are the same as the baselines in Experiment 1 (Table 2).
apply SWD for test set no SWD for test set
Data model 1 model 2 model 3 model 1 model 2 model 3
FBIS 29.19 28.86 29.16 30.07 29.67 30.08
BFT 30.62 30.64 30.86 31.66 31.83 32.00
NIST 30.34 30.10 30.46 31.50 31.45 31.66
Table 5: BLEU scores in Experiment 4, which is the same as Experiments 1 and 2 but only the non-newswire
section of NIST?06 test set is used. Note: the baseline scores are the same as the baselines in Experiment 1
(Table 2).
Data baseline model 1 model 2 model 3
FBIS 26.87 27.79 27.51 27.61
BFT 29.11 30.38 30.49 30.41
NIST 29.34 30.63 30.95 31.00
Table 6: BLEU scores in Experiment 5: which is the
same as Experiment 1 but uses half of NIST?06 as de-
velopment set and another half of NIST?06 as test set.
and non-newswire sections of NIST MT-2006 test
set are combined to form the new development
data, and the second halves of the two sections
are combined to form the new test data. The new
development data is therefore consistent with the
new test data. If SWD, or at least a SWD model
from newswire, is harmful to the non-newswire
section, which constitutes about 60% of the de-
velopment/test data, then it will be either that the
parameter training process minimizes the impact
of SWD, or that the SWD model will make the
parameter training process fail to search for good
parameter values. The consequence of either case
is that the baseline setting should produce similar
or even higher BLEU score than the settings that
employ some SWD model. Experiment results, as
shown in Table 6, illustrate that SWD is still very
useful even when both development and test sets
contain texts of different genres from the training
text. It is also observed, however, that the three
SWD models give rise to roughly the same BLEU
scores, indicating that the SWD training data do
not fit the test/development data very well as even
the more sophisticated models are not benefited
from more data.
5 Experiments using METEOR
The results in the last section are all evaluated us-
ing the BLEU metric only. It is dubious whether
SWD is useful regarding recall-oriented metrics
like METEOR (Banerjee and Lavie, 2005), since
SWD removes information in source sentences.
This suspicion is to certain extent confirmed by
our application of METEOR to the translation
outputs of Experiment 1 (c.f. Table 7), which
shows that all SWD models achieve lower ME-
TEOR scores than the baseline. However, SWD is
not entirely harmful to METEOR: if SWD is ap-
plied to parameter tuning only but not for the test
set, (i.e. Experiment 2), even higher METEOR
scores can be obtained. This puzzling observa-
tion may be because the parameters of the de-
coder are optimized with respect to BLEU score,
and SWD benefits parameter tuning by improv-
ing BLEU score. In future experiments, maxi-
mum METEOR training should be used instead
of maximum BLEU training so as to examine if
SWD is really useful for parameter tuning.
7
Experiment 1 Experiment 2
SWD for both dev/test SWD for dev only
Data baseline model 1 model 2 model 3 model 1 model 2 model 3
FBIS 50.07 47.90 49.83 49.34 51.58 51.08 51.17
BFT 52.47 50.55 51.89 52.10 54.72 54.43 54.30
NIST 52.12 49.86 50.97 51.59 54.14 53.82 54.01
Table 7: METEOR scores in Experiments 1 and 2
6 Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we have explained why the han-
dling of spurious source words is not a trivial
problem and how important it is. Three solu-
tions, with increasing sophistication, to the prob-
lem of SWD are presented. Experiment results
show that, in our setting of using NIST MT-2006
test set, any SWD model leads to an improvement
of at least 1.6 BLEU points, and SWD model 3,
which makes use of contextual information, can
improve up to nearly 2 BLEU points. If only
the newswire section of the test set is considered,
SWD model 3 is even more superior to the other
two SWD models.
The effect of training data size on SWD has
also been examined, and it is found that more
sophisticated SWD models do not outperform
unless they are provided with sufficient amount
of data. As to the effect of training data do-
main/genre on SWD, it is clear that SWD models
trained on text of certain genre perform the best
when applied to text of the same genre. While
it is infeasible for the time being to test if SWD
works well for non-newswire style of training
data, we managed to illustrate that SWD based on
newswire text still to certain extent benefits the
training and translation of non-newswire text.
In future, two extensions of our system are
needed for further examination of SWD. The first
one is already mentioned in the last section: max-
imum METEOR training should be implemented
in order to fully test the effect of SWD regard-
ing METEOR. The second extension is about the
weighing factor in models 1 and 3. The current
implementation assumes that all source words
in a normal phrase pair need to be weighed by
1? P (?). However, in fact some source words in
a source phrase are tacitly deleted (as explained
in the Introduction). Thus the word alignment in-
formation within phrase pairs need to be recorded
and the weighing of a normal phrase pair should
be done in accordance with such alignment infor-
mation.
References
Brown, P., J. Cocke, S. Della Pietra, V. Della Pietra,
F. Jelinek, J. Lafferty, R. Mercer, and P. Roossin.
1990. A Statistical Approach to Machine Transla-
tion Computational Linguistics, 16(2).
Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. 2005. METEOR:
An Automatic Metric for MT Evaluation with Im-
proved Correlation with Human Judgments. Pro-
ceedings of Workshop on Evaluation Measures for
MT and/or Summarization at ACL 2005.
David Chiang. 2007. Hierarchical Phrase-based
Translation. Computational Linguistics, 33(2).
Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning. 2003. Ac-
curate Unlexicalized Parsing. Proceedings for ACL
2003.
Philipp Koehn, Franz J. Och, and Daniel Marcu. 2003.
Statistical Phrase-based Translation. Proceedings
for HLT-NAACL 2003.
John Lafferty, Andrew McCallum, and Fernando
Pereira 2001. Conditional Random Fields: Prob-
abilistic Models for Segmenting and Labeling Se-
quence Data. Proceedings for 18th International
Conf. on Machine Learning.
Franz J. Och, and Hermann Ney. 2000. A comparison
of alignment models for statistical machine transla-
tion. Proceedings of COLING 2000.
Franz J. Och, and Hermann Ney. 2000. Improved
Statistical Alignment Models. Proceedings for ACL
2000.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and
Wei-Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a Method for Auto-
matic Evaluation of Machine Translation. Proceed-
ings for ACL 2002.
Fei Sha, Fernando Pereira. 2003. Shallow parsing
with conditional random fields. Proceedings of
NAACL 2003.
Dongdong Zhang, Mu Li, Chi-Ho Li and Ming
Zhou. 2007. Phrase Reordering Model Integrat-
ing Syntactic Knowledge for SMT. Proceedings for
EMNLP 2007.
8
