A Discourse Resource for Turkish: 
Annotating Discourse Connectives in the METU Corpus 
 
Deniz Zeyrek 
Department of Foreign Language  
Education 
Middle East Technical University 
Ankara, Turkey  
dezeyrek@metu.edu.tr 
Bonnie Webber 
School of Informatics 
University of Edinburgh 
Edinburgh, Scotland 
 
bonnie@inf.ed.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper describes first steps towards 
extending the METU Turkish Corpus 
from a sentence-level language resource to 
a discourse-level resource by annotating 
its discourse connectives and their 
arguments. The project is based on the 
same principles as the Penn Discourse 
TreeBank (http://www.seas.upenn.edu/~pdtb) 
and is supported by TUBITAK, The 
Scientific and Technological Research 
Council of Turkey. We first present the 
goals of the project and the METU 
Turkish corpus. We then describe how we 
decided what to take as explicit discourse 
connectives and the range of syntactic 
classes they come from. With 
representative examples of each class, we 
examine explicit connectives, their linear 
ordering, and types of syntactic units that 
can serve as their arguments. We then 
touch upon connectives with respect to 
free word order in Turkish and 
punctuation, as well as the important issue 
of how much material is needed to specify 
an argument. We close with a brief 
discussion of current plans. 
1 Introduction 
The goal of the project is to extend the METU 
Turkish Corpus (Say et al 2002) from a sentence-
level language resource to a discourse-level 
resource by annotating its discourse connectives, 
and their arguments. The 2-million word METU 
Turkish Corpus (MTC) is an electronic resource of 
520 samples of continuous text from 291 different 
sources written between 1990-2000. It includes 
multiple genres, such as novels, short stories, 
newspaper columns, biographies, memoirs, etc. 
annotated topographically, i.e., for paragraph 
boundaries, author, publication date, and the 
source of the text. A small part of the MTC, called 
the METU-Sabanc? TreeBank (5600 sentences) has 
been annotated with morphological features and 
dependency relationships (e.g., modifier-of, 
subject-of, object-of, etc.). The result is a set of 
dependency trees. The MTC as a whole provides a 
large-scale resource on Turkish discourse and is 
being used in research on Turkish. To date, there 
have been 81 requests for permission to use the 
MTC and 31 requests to use the TreeBank sub-
corpus. Most of the users are linguists, computer or 
cognitive scientists working on Turkish, or 
graduate students of similar disciplines. Some 
users have expressed a desire for the MTC to be 
extended by annotations at the discourse level, 
which provides further impetus for the present 
project.  
 The result of annotating discourse connectives 
will be a clearly defined level of discourse 
structure on the MTC. Annotation of text from the 
multiple genres present in the MTC will allow us 
to compare the distribution of connectives and 
their arguments across genres. The annotation will 
help researchers understand Turkish discourse by 
enabling them to give concise, clear descriptions of 
the issues concerning discourse structure and 
semantics, and support a rigorous empirical 
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
65
characterization of where and how the free word-
order in a language like Turkish is sensitive to 
features of the surrounding discourse. It can thus 
serve as a major resource for natural language 
processing, language technology and pedagogy. 
2 Overview of Turkish Discourse 
Connectives 
From a semantic perspective, a discourse 
connective is a predicate that takes as its 
arguments, abstract objects (propositions, facts, 
events, descriptions, situations, and eventualities). 
The primary linguistic unit in which abstract 
objects (AOs) are realized in Turkish is the clause, 
either tensed or untensed. Discourse connectives 
themselves may be realized explicitly or implicitly. 
An explicit connective is realized in the form of a 
lexical item or a group of lexical items, while an 
implicit connective can be inferred from adjacent 
text spans that realise AOs and whose AOs are 
taken to be related. To constrain the amount of text 
selected for arguments, a minimality principle can 
be imposed, limiting arguments to the minimum 
amount of information needed to complete the 
interpretation of the discourse relation. The project 
will initially focus on annotating explicit 
connectives, integrating implicit ones at a later 
stage.  
One of the most challenging issues so far has 
been determining the set of explicit discourse 
connectives in Turkish (i.e., the various linguistic 
elements that can be interpreted as predicates on 
AO arguments) and the syntactic classes they are 
identified with. In the Penn Discourse TreeBank 
(PDTB), the explicit discourse connectives were 
taken to comprise (1) coordinating conjunctions, 
(2) subordinating conjunctions, and (3) discourse 
adverbials (Forbes-Riley et al 2006). But 
coordinating and subordinating conjunctions are 
not classes in Turkish per se. Moreover, most of 
the existing grammars of Turkish describe clausal 
adjuncts and adverbs in semantic (e.g., temporal, 
additive, resultative, etc.) rather than syntactic 
terms. We therefore made a rough classification 
first and determined the broad syntactic classes by 
considering the morpho-syntactic properties shared 
by elements of the initial classification.  
As a result of this process, we have come to 
identify explicit discourse connectives in Turkish 
with three grammatical types, forming five classes: 
(a) Coordinating conjunctions such as single 
lexical items ??nk? ?because?, ama ?but,? 
ve ?and?, and the particle dA.  (N.B., dA 
can also function as a subordinator.) 
(b) Paired coordinating conjunctions such as 
hem .. hem ?both and,? ne .. ne ?neither 
nor? which link two clauses, with one 
element of the pair associated with each 
clause in the discourse relation. 
(c) Simplex subordinators (also termed as 
converbs), i.e., suffixes forming non-finite 
adverbial clauses, e.g. ?(y)kAn, ?while?, -
(y)ArAk ?by means of?. 
(d) Complex subordinators, i.e., connectives 
which have two parts, usually a 
postposition (ra?men ?despite?, i?in ?for?, 
gibi ?as well as?) and an accompanying 
suffix on the (non-finite) verb of the 
subordinate clause.1  
(e)  Anaphoric connectives such as ne var ki 
?however?, ?stelik ?what is more?, ayr?ca 
?apart from this?, ilk olarak ?firstly?, etc. 
In the PDTB, non-finite clauses have not been 
annotated as arguments. However, since all non-
finite clauses are marked with a suffix in Turkish 
(see sections 4.1 and 4.2 below) and encode a 
relation between AOs, we would have missed an 
important property of the language if we had not 
identified them as discourse connectives (cf. 
Prasad et al, 2008).  
All the discourse connectives above have 
exactly two arguments. So as in English, while 
verbs in Turkish can vary in the number of 
arguments they take, Turkish discourse 
connectives take two and only two arguments. 
These can conveniently be called ARG1 and 
ARG2. It remains an open question whether there 
is any language in which discourse connectives 
take more than two arguments. 
In the following, we give representative 
examples of each of the above five classes of 
discourse connectives and discuss the assignment 
of the argument labels, linear order of arguments 
and types of arguments. By convention, we label 
                                                 
1
 Postpositions correspond to prepositions in English, though 
there are many fewer of them. They form a subordinate clause 
by nominalizing their complements and marking them with 
the dative, ablative, or the possessive case. In the examples 
given in this paper, suffixes are shown in upper-case letters. 
Case suffixes are underlined in addition to being presented in 
upper-case letters.   
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
66
the argument containing (or with an affinity for) 
the connective as ARG2 (presented in boldface) 
and the other argument as ARG1 (presented in 
italics). Discourse connectives are underlined. This 
annotation convention is used in the English 
translations as well. Except for examples (12), 
(13), (19), (20), all examples have been taken from 
the MTC.  
3 Coordinating conjunctions 
3.1 Simple coordinating conjunctions 
Coordinating conjunctions are like English and 
combine two clauses of the same syntactic type, 
e.g., two main clauses. They are typically 
sentence-medial and show an affinity with the 
second clause (evidenced in part through 
punctuation and their ability to move to the end of 
the second clause). Whether a coordinating 
conjunction links clauses within a single sentence 
or clauses across adjacent sentences (cf. Section 6), 
it shows an affinity with the second clause. Thus 
ARG2 of these conjunctions is the second clause 
and ARG1 is the first clause.  
 
(1) Yap?lar?n? kerpi?ten yap?yorlar, ama sonra ta?? 
kullanmay? ??reniyorlar. Mimarl?k a??s?ndan ?ok 
?nemli, ??nk? bu yap? malzemesini ba?ka bir 
malzemeyle beraber kullanmay?, ilk defa 
burada g?r?yoruz. 
 
?They constructed their buildings first from mud-
bricks but then they learnt to use the stone. 
Architecturally, this is very important because we 
see the use of this construction material with 
another one at this site for the first time.?  
 
    The particle dA can serve a discourse 
connective function with an additive (Example 2) 
or adversative sense (Example 3). In contrast with 
coordinating conjunctions, the order of arguments 
to dA is normally ARG2-ARG1, thus exhibiting a 
similarity with subordinators (see below). 
However, since dA combines two clauses of the 
same syntactic type, we take it to be a simple 
coordinating conjunction.  
 
(2) Konu?may? unuttum diyorum da g?l?yorlar 
bana.   
 ?I said I?ve forgotton to talk and they laughed at 
me.? 
(3) Belki bir ?ocu?umuz olsa onunla oyalan?rd?m 
da  Allah k?smet etmedi. 
 ?If we had a child I would keep myself busy 
with her/him but God did not predestine it.?  
3.2 Paired coordinating conjunctions 
Paired coordinating conjunctions are composed of 
two lexical items, with the second often a duplicate 
of the first element. These lexical items express a 
single discourse relation, such as disjunction as in 
example (4). The order of arguments is ARG1-
ARG2 and the position of the conjunctions is 
clause-initial. 
    
(4) Birilerinin ya i?i vard?r, aceleyle y?r?rler, ya 
ko?arlar. 
 ?Some people are either busy and walk hurriedly, 
or they run.?  
4 Subordinators 
4.1 Simplex subordinators 
When a subordinate clause is reduced in Turkish, it 
loses its tense, aspect and mood properties. In this 
way, it becomes a nominal or adverbial clause 
associated with the matrix verb. The relationship of 
an adverbial clause with the AO expressed by the 
matrix verb and its arguments is conveyed by a 
small set of suffixes corresponding to English 
?while?, ?when?, ?by means of?, ?as if?, or  temporal 
?since?, added to the non-finite verb of the reduced 
clause. This pair of non-finite verb and suffix, we 
call a ?converb?. The normal order of the 
arguments of a converb is ARG2-ARG1, where the 
converb appears as the last element of ARG2. The 
following example illustrates ?(y)ArAk ?by means 
of? and its arguments: 
 
(5) Kafiye Han?m beni kucaklad?, yana??n? yana??ma 
s?rterek iyi yolculuklar diledi. 
 ?Kafiye hugged me and by rubbing her cheek 
against mine, she wished me a good trip.?  
4.2 Complex subordinators 
Complex subordinators constitute a larger set than 
the set of simplex subordinators. Here, a lexical 
item, usually a postposition, must appear with a 
nominalizing suffix and, if required, a case suffix 
as well. If the verb of the clause does not have a 
subject, it is nominalized with ?mAk (the infinitive 
suffix). If  it has a subject, it is nominalized with -
DIK (past) or ?mA (non-past) and carries the 
possessive marker agreeing with the subject of the 
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
67
verb. The normal order of the arguments of a 
complex subordinator is the same as with 
converbs, i.e., ARG2-ARG1. The nominalizer, the 
possessive and the case suffix (if any) appear 
attached to the non-finite verb of ARG2 in that 
order. The connective appears as the last element 
of ARG2.  
Some postpositions have multiple senses, 
depending on the type of nominalizer attached to 
the non-finite verb. For example, the postposition 
i?in means causal ?since? with ?DIK (Example 6), 
and ?so as to? with ?mA or ?mAk (Example 7). In 
these examples, the lexical part of the complex 
subordinator is underlined, and the suffixes on the 
non-finite verb of ARG2 rendered in small caps.  
 
(6) Herkes ?oktan pazara ??kTI?I i?in kentin o dar,       
e?ri b??r? arka sokaklar?n? bo?alm?? ve sessiz 
bulurduk. 
 ?Since everyone has gone to the bazaar long 
time ago, we would find the narrow and curved 
back streets of the town empty and quiet.?  
(7) [Turhan Baytop] Paris Eczac?l?k Fak?ltesi 
Farmakognozi k?rs?s?nde g?rg? ve bilgisini 
artt?rMAK i?in ?al??m??t?r. 
 ?Turhan Baytop worked at Paris Pharmacology 
Faculty so as to increase his experience and 
knowledge,?  
 
Since postpositions also have a non-discourse 
role in which they signal a verb?s arguments and/or 
adjuncts, we will only annotate postpositions as 
discourse connectives when they have clausal 
elements as arguments. Given that a clausal 
element always has a nominalizing suffix, the 
distinction will be straightforward. For example, in 
(8) i?in takes an NP complement (marked with the 
possessive case) and will not be annotated, while 
in (9) ra?men  ?despite? comes with a nominalizer 
and the dative suffix, and it will be annotated: 
 
(8) Bunun i?in paraya ihtiyac?m?z var. 
 ?We need money for this.? 
(9) ?ok iyi bir bi?imde yay?lm?? olMASINA                 
ra?men Celtis (?itlenbik) poleninin yoklu?u 
dikkate de?erdir. 
 ?Despite not dispersing well, the absence of the 
Celtis [tree] polen is worthy of attention.? 
 
In general, both parts of a complex subordinator 
must be realized in the discourse. An exception is 
?if? e?er and its accompanying suffix ?sE (and the 
marker agreeing with the subject of the subordinate 
clause where necessary). The suffix suffices to 
introduce a discourse relation on its own, even 
without the postposition e?er:  
 
(10) Salman Rushdi ?ld?r?l?rSE ?slam dini bundan 
bir onur mu kazanacak? 
 ?If Salman Rushdi was to be killed, would the 
Islam religion be honoured??  
(11) E?er sigaray? b?rakmak i?in m?kemmel 
zaman? bekliyorSAn?z asla sigaray? 
b?rakamazs?n?z. 
 ?If you are waiting for the best time to stop 
smoking, you can never stop smoking?  
5 Anaphoric connectives 
The fifth type of explicit discourse connectives are 
anaphoric connectives. Anaphoric connectives are 
distinguished from clausal adverbs like ?o?unlukla 
?usually?, mutlaka ?definitely, maalesef 
?regrettably?, which are interpreted only with 
respect to their matrix sentence. In contrast, 
anaphoric connectives also require an AO from a 
sentence or group of sentences adjacent (Example 
12) or non-adjacent (Example 13) to the sentence 
containing the connective. Another important 
property of anaphoric connectives is that they can 
access the inferences in the prior discourse 
(Webber et al2003). This material is neither 
accessible by other types of discourse connectives 
nor clausal connectives.  For example, in example 
(14), the anaphoric connective yoksa ?or else, 
otherwise? accesses the inference that the 
organizations have not united and hence did not 
introduce political strategies unique to Turkey.  
 
(12) Ali hi? spor yapmaz. Sonu? olarak ?ok istedi?i   
halde kilo veremiyor. 
 ?Ali never exercises. Consequently, he can?t lose 
weight although he wants to very much.? 
(13) Zeynep ?nceleri Bodrum?da oturdu. Krediyle 
deniz kenar?nda bir ev ald?. Evi dayad?, d??edi, 
bah?eye yasemin ekti. Ne var ki banka kredisini 
?deyemedi?inden evi satmak zorunda kald?.  
 ?Zeynep first lived in Mersin. She bought a house 
by the sea on credit. She furnished it fully and 
planted jasmine in the garden. However, she had 
to sell the house because she couldn?t pay back 
the credit.? 
  
 
 
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
68
(14) Bu ?rg?tlerin birle?erek T?rkiye?yi etkilemesi ve 
T?rkiye?ye ?zg? politikalar? g?ndeme getirmesi 
laz?m.  Yoksa Tony Blair ??yle yapt? ?imdi biz 
de ?imdi b?yle yapaca??zla olmaz. 
 ?These organizations must unite, have an impact 
on Turkey and introduce political strategies 
unique to Turkey. Or else talking about what 
Tony Blair did and hoping to do what he did is 
outright wrong.? 
6 Ordering flexibility of explicit discourse 
connectives and their arguments 
In Turkish, the linear ordering of coordinating 
conjunctions and subordinators and the clauses in 
which they occur shows some flexibility as to 
where in the clause they appear or as to the 
ordering of the clauses. For example, coordinating 
conjunctions may appear at the beginning of their 
ARG2, i.e. S-initially. This was shown earlier in 
Example (1). The sentences below illustrate ama 
?but? and ??nk? ?because? used at this position.  
 
(15) Hatem A?a?n?n mal?na kimse yana?amaz, 
dokunamazd?. Ama Osman gitmi?, Hatem 
A?a?n?n ?iftli?ini yakm??t?. 
 ?No one could approach and touch Agha 
Hatem?s property. But Osman had burnt Agha 
Hatem?s ranch.? 
(16) S?z ?zg?rl???n?n belli yasalar, belli ilkeler 
?er?evesinde kalmak zorunda oldu?unu 
biliyoruz. ??nk?, b?t?n ?zg?rl?kler gibi, belli 
s?n?rlar a??l?nca, ba?kalar?na zarar vermek, 
ba?kalar?n?n ?zg?rl?klerini zedelemek s?z 
konusu oluyor.  
 ?We know that freedom of speech should remain 
within the limits of certain laws and principles. 
Because, like all the other freedoms, when 
certain constraints are violated, one may 
harm others? freedom.? 
  
But coordinating conjunctions may also appear at 
the end of their ARG2 and so will appear S-finally 
in sentences with ARG1-ARG2 order. Below, we 
illustrate two cases of ama ?but? and ??nk? 
?because?.    
 
(17) Kaz?yabildi?ini sildi, biriktirdi mendilinin i?ine. 
?aba isteyen zor bir i?ti bu yapt??? ama. 
 ?He wiped the area he had scraped and saved all 
he could scrape in his rag. But what he was 
doing was a difficult job, requiring effort.? 
(18) Kimi m??teriler dore rengi kuma?larla, sar? 
taftalarla gelirdi de, elim dolu yapamam, diye 
geri ?evirirdi, pek anlam veremezdim. Paray? 
severdi ??nk?. 
 ?Some customers would come with gold coloured 
fabrics and yellow taffeta weaves but he would 
reject them saying his hands were full, which I 
could not give any meaning to. Because he loved 
money.?  
 
In contrast, the position of a subordinator (both 
simplex and complex) in its ARG2 clause is fixed: 
it must appear at the end of the clause, as shown in 
example (19). However, the clause is free in the 
sentence and may be moved to the right of the 
sentence, as in example (20). It is a matter of 
empirical research to find out whether different 
genres vary more in how clauses are ordered and 
what motivates preposing of ARG1. 
 
(19) Ay?e konu?urken ben dinlemiyordum. 
 ?I was not listening while Ay?e was talking.? 
(20) Ben dinlemiyordum Ay?e konu?urken. 
 ?I was not listening while Ay?e was talking.? 
7 Issues and plans 
As mentioned above, we also plan to annotate 
implicit connectives between adjacent sentences or 
clauses whose relation is not explicitly marked 
with a discourse connective. This we will do at a 
later stage, after explicit connectives have been 
annotated, following the procedure used in 
annotating implicit connectives in the PDTB 
(PDTB-Group, 2006). Preliminary analysis has 
shown that punctuation serves as a useful hint in 
inserting a coordinating conjunctions such as ?and? 
or an anaphoric connective such as ?then? or 
?consequently? between the multiple adjacent main 
clauses that can occur in a Turkish sentence 
separated by a comma. Example (21) illustrates 
these cases. 
 
(21) Y?r?yor, Imp = THEN oturuyor, resim yapmaya 
?al???yor ama yapam?yor, tabela yazmaya 
?al???yor ama yazam?yor, Imp= CONSEQUENTLY 
s?k?l?p soka?a ??k?yor, Imp=AND bisikletine 
atlad??? gibi pedallara bas?yor. 
 ?He walks around, then sits down and tries to 
draw, but he can?t. He tries to inscribe words on 
the wooden plaque, but again he can?t. 
Consequently he gets bored, goes out, and hops 
on his bike and pedals.? 
 
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
69
A second important issue that will have to be 
tackled in the project is determining how much 
material is needed to specify the argument of a 
discourse connective. Annotation will be on text 
spans, rather than on syntactic structure. This 
reflects two facts: First, there is only a small 
amount of syntactically treebanked data in the 
MTC, and secondly, as has been discovered for 
English, one can not assume that discourse units 
map directly to syntactic units (Dinesh et al 2005). 
Preliminary analysis also shows that discourse 
units may not coincide with a clause in its entirety. 
For example, in examples (9) and (16), one can 
take ARG1 to cover only the nominal complement 
of the matrix verb: The rest of the clause is not 
necessary to the discourse relation. The ways in 
which the arguments of a discourse connective 
may diverge from syntactic units must be 
characterized for Turkish as is being done for 
English (Dinesh et al 2005). 
A third issue we will investigate is whether 
different senses of a subordinator may be identified 
simply from the type of nominalizing suffix 
required on the subordinate verb. For example, we 
have noted in examples (6) and (7) that the two 
senses of the postposition i?in (namely, ?since 
(causal)? and ?in order to?) are disambiguated by 
the nominalizing suffixes. The extent to which 
morphology aids sense disambiguation is an 
empirical issue that will be further addressed in the 
project. 
Acknowledgement 
We would like to thank Sumru ?zsoy, Asl? G?ksel 
and Cem Boz?ahin for their comments on an 
earlier version of this paper. The first author also 
thanks the Caledonian Research Foundation and 
the Royal Society of Edinburgh for awarding her 
with the European Visiting Research Fellowship, 
which made this research possible. All remaining 
errors are ours. 
References 
Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, Eleni Miltsakaki, Rashmi 
Prasad, Aravind Joshi and Bonnie Webber (2005). 
Attribution and the (Non-)Alignment of Syntactic 
and Discourse  Arguments of Connectives. 
Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Frontiers in 
Corpus Annotation II: Pie in the Sky. Ann Arbor, 
Michigan. June 2005. 
Katherine Forbes-Riley, Bonnie Webber and Aravind 
Joshi (2006). Computing Discourse Semantics: The 
Predicate-Argument  Semantics of Discourse 
Connectives in D-LTAG. Journal of Semantics 23, 
pp. 55?106.  
Asl? G?ksel and Celia Kerslake (2005). Turkish: A 
Comprehensive Grammar.  London and New York: 
Routledge. 
Kornfilt, Jacklin (1997). Turkish. London and New 
York: Routledge. 
 PDTB-Group (2006). The Penn Discourse TreeBank 
1.0 Annotation Manual. Technical Report IRCS 06-
01, University of Pennsylvania. 
Rashmi Prasad, Samar Husain, Dipti Sharma and 
Aravind Joshi (2008). Towards an Annotated Corpus 
of Discourse Relations in Hindi. The Third 
International Joint Conference on Natural Language 
Processing, January 7-12, 2008.  
Bilge Say, Deniz Zeyrek, Kemal Oflazer and Umut 
?zge (2002). Development of a Corpus and a 
TreeBank for Present-day Written Turkish. 
Proceedings of the Eleventh International 
Conference of Turkish Linguistics, Eastern 
Mediterranean University, Cyprus, August 2002.  
Bonnie Webber, Aravind Joshi, Matthew Stone and 
Alistair Knott (2003). Anaphora and Discourse 
Structure. Computational Linguistics 29 (4) 547-588.  
Appendix: A preliminary list of explicit 
discourse connectives found in the MTC belonging 
to five syntactic classes and their English 
equivalents 
 
Simple coordinating  
conjunctions 
English equivalent 
ama but 
fakat but 
??nk? because 
dA and, but 
halbuki despite  
oysa despite 
?nce before 
sonra after 
ve and 
veya or 
ya da or 
veyahut or  
 
 
 
 
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
70
Paired coordinating 
conjunctions 
English equivalent 
hem .. hem both and 
ya .. ya either or 
gerek .. gerek(se) either or 
 
Simplex subordinators 
(Converbs)  
English equivalent 
-ArAk by means of 
-Ip and 
-(y)kEn while, whereas 
-(y)AlI since 
-(I)ncA when 
 
Complex subordinators English equivalent 
-Ir gibi as if, as though  
-e?er (y)sE if 
-dI?I zaman when 
-dI?I kadar as much as 
-dI?I gibi as well as 
-dAn sonra after 
-dAn ?nce before 
-dAn dolay? due to 
-(y)sE dA even though 
-(y)Incaya kadar/dek  until 
-(y)AlI beri since (temporal) 
-(n)A ra?men/kar??l?k despite, although 
-(n)A g?re since (causal) 
  
Anaphoric connectives English equivalent 
aksi halde if not, otherwise 
aksine on the contrary 
bu nedenle for this reason 
buna ra?men/kar??l?k despite this 
bundan ba?ka besides this 
bunun yerine instead of this 
dahas? moreover, in addition 
ilk olarak firstly, first of all 
?rne?in for example 
mesela for example 
sonu? olarak consequently 
?stelik what is more 
yoksa otherwise 
ard?ndan afterwards 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
71
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
72
Proceedings of the Third Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 44?47,
Suntec, Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Annotating Subordinators in the Turkish Discourse Bank
Deniz Zeyreka,0, U?mit Turanb, Cem Bozsahina, Ruket C?ak?c?a,
Ay?s??g?? Sevdik-C?all?a, Is??n Demirs?ahina, Berfin Aktas?a, I?hsan Yalc??nkayaa, Hale O?gela
a Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey
b Anadolu University, Eskis?ehir, Turkey
Abstract
In this paper we explain how we anno-
tated subordinators in the Turkish Dis-
course Bank (TDB), an effort that started
in 2007 and is still continuing. We in-
troduce the project and describe some of
the issues that were important in anno-
tating three subordinators, namely kars??n,
rag?men and halde, all of which encode the
coherence relation Contrast-Concession.
We also describe the annotation tool.
1 Introduction
The Turkish Discourse Bank (TDB) is a project
initiated by the joint effort of a group of re-
searchers in Turkey. The project builds on an ex-
isting corpus, namely the METU Turkish Corpus
(MTC) (Say et al, 2002), and extends it to a dis-
course level resource by following the principles
of the PDTB (Prasad et al, 2007) in annotating
discourse connectives and their arguments. The 2-
million-word MTC contains 520 continuous texts
from various genres written between 1991-2000.
From a semantic perspective, we take discourse
connectives as predicates that take as their argu-
ments tensed or untensed clauses with abstract ob-
ject interpretations. Abstract objects are proposi-
tions, facts, events, situations, etc. (Asher, 1993).
Connectives themselves may be realized explicitly
or implicitly (Halliday, 1985; Prasad et al, 2007).
Explicit connectives are simple or complex lexi-
cal items that encode a discourse relation, while
implicit connectives can be inferred from related
text spans that have coherence relations. The TDB
project aims to annotate explicit connectives only.
In Turkish, discourse connectives are identified
with three syntactic categories (Zeyrek and Web-
ber, 2008): (a) Coordinating conjunctions (b) Sub-
ordinators (c) Discourse adverbials (or anaphoric
0Corresponding author: dezeyrek@metu.edu.tr
connectives). All these discourse connectives have
two and only two arguments, which are conve-
niently labeled as ARG1 and ARG2.1 ARG2 is
always the argument that syntactically hosts the
connective.
The ARG1/ARG2 organization of discourse
connectives is consistent with the following ob-
servations in discourse: Sentences in discourse
are coherently related, and therefore when ex-
plicit discourse connectives are used, if they are
really discourse connectives, they are bound to
set up a relation between a consequent clause and
its antecedent. (Note that the ARG2 designation
does not imply that ARG2 is consequent or an-
tecedent.) In certain cases presupposition needs a
mediator, viz. the discourse connective. Noncon-
nectival discourse relations are certainly possible,
but connective-engendered discourse relations are
claimed to be more specific about their semantics,
e.g. they bring about presuppositional meaning
(van der Sandt, 1992; Webber et al, 1999).
In this regard, the ARG1/ARG2 classification is
unlike syntactic subcategorization, which is a lex-
ical property of functors (e.g. verbs) which are
not necessarily presuppositional and hence they
can differ in arbitrary ways (ditransitive, transitive,
unergative, unaccusative etc.).
2 The Data
The MTC is preprocessed to obtain the raw texts
keeping the title, author, publishing date and the
text type information at the beginning of each file.
Stand-off annotation is done on the textual render-
ing of the MTC.
To enable the data to be viewable universally
without losing any character information, the file
format (originally xcs) was converted to text, and
the character encoding (originally Turkish-ISO-
1Whether or not discourse connectives in any language
take more than two arguments is an open question that needs
to be established in further research.
44
Text type File Count % S1 % S2 % S3 % S4 %
Novel 123 15.63% 31 15.74% 30 15.23% 31 15.82% 31 15.74%
Short story 114 14.49% 28 14.21% 29 14.72% 28 14.29% 29 14.72%
Research
/Monograph 49 6.23% 13 6.60% 12 6.09% 12 6.12% 12 6.09%
Article 38 4.83% 9 4.57% 10 5.08% 9 4.59% 10 5.08%
Travel 19 2.41% 5 2.54% 5 2.54% 4 2.04% 5 2.54%
Interview 7 0.89% 2 1.02% 2 1.02% 2 1.02% 1 0.51%
Memoir 18 2.29% 4 2.03% 5 2.54% 5 2.55% 4 2.03%
News 419 53.24% 105 53.30% 104 52.79% 105 53.57% 105 53.30%
TOTAL 787 197 197 196 197
Table 1: File count and percentage information according to text type for the preprocessed MTC and its
subcorpora. (S:Subcorpus)
8859-9) was converted to the UTF-8. Finally, the
processed MTC data were divided into four sub-
corpora by keeping the text type distribution, file
count and word count as equal as possible in each
subcorpus. The text type distribution, file count
and word percentage information in each subcor-
pus are given in Table 1. In the project, we plan to
annotate subcorpus 1.
3 Subordinating Conjunctions in
Turkish: A Brief Overview
Subordinators have two subtypes. Converbs are
suffixes attached directly to verb roots. For exam-
ple, the suffix -(y)ArAk ?by (means of)? requires
as its ARG2 a nominalized adverbial clause as in
(1). Complex subordinators, e.g. rag?men ?despite,
although?, kars??n ?although?, halde ?despite, along
with?, ic?in causal ?since?, purposive ?so as to?, etc.
mostly take case-marked nominalized clauses as
their ARG2.
(1) Hu?ku?met ... uyum paketini onaylayarak ...
Erdog?an?n o?nu?ndeki engellerden birini kald?rd?.
By approving the adaptation package ..., the
government alleviated one of the obstacles for
Erdog?an ...
In this paper, we will not deal with converbs.
We will also not deal with connectives taking as
their ARG2 a finite clause because none of these
subtypes have been annotated yet. We will focus
on three postpositions taking a nominalized clause
as ARG2, namely rag?men, kars??n and halde, all of
which encode the Contrast-Concession relation.
In the PDTB, such clauses were not annotated as
arguments. However, in Turkish, they are so com-
mon as arguments of subordinators that we would
have missed an important property of Turkish dis-
course if we did not annotate them. In the rest
of the paper, we provide examples taken from the
MTC. We underline the connective, show ARG2
in bold letters and render ARG1 in italics.
3.1 The minimality principle
As in the PDTB, the minimality principle is in-
voked, according to which clauses, parts of clauses
or sentences that are minimally necessary and suf-
ficient for the discourse relation engendered by
the connective are annotated as ARG1 or ARG2
(Prasad et al, 2007). Any other text span that
is perceived to be important for the interpretation
of the discourse relation can be selected as sup-
plementary information in addition to ARG1 or
ARG2.
3.2 Morphological properties of the
arguments and their relative ordering
In Turkish, subordinate clauses are essentially
nominalizations, which may be formed by -DIK
or -mA suffixes (the factive nominal and the action
nominal, respectively (Kornfilt, 1997)).
Two of the connectives, i.e. rag?men and kars??n
expect action nominals, the person agreement suf-
fix, and the dative suffix -(y)A on their ARG2. On
the other hand, the connective halde expects a fac-
tive nominal and the person agreement suffix. In
the examples below, we show these suffixes with
glosses on the English translations.
The arguments of subordinators are necessarily
adjacent and mostly exhibit the ARG2-ARG1 or-
der because Turkish is a left-branching language
and subordinate clauses are on the left in canonical
order. ARG2 can be postposed for backgrounding
purposes or to express new and unexpected infor-
mation, as in (2).
(2) ... ayn? annesine oldu]ugu gibi ona da, kimseye
ba/uglanmayanlar kolayca bag?lan?yordu; u?stelik o
o?yle bir bag??ml?l?k talep etmedig?i halde.
... just as it happened to her mother, people who
can?t easily commit themselves to anyone would
45
easily commit themselves to her, although she
would not ask-FACTN-AGR for such a commit-
ment.
3.3 Issues in annotating the arguments
One of the challenges we have faced so far is the
question of how to annotate connectives which are
themselves a converb suffix (e.g. -(y)ArAk, as in
(1)) or postpositions that choose a case-marked
ARG2 as in (2). In both cases, we decided to an-
notate ARG2 by selecting the clause without sepa-
rating the suffixes. In this way, we would not inter-
fere with the annotators? intuitions since we would
not be demanding them to have conscious knowl-
edge of the morphological constraints on the ar-
guments. This style of annotation was welcomed
by the annotators. When all the annotations are
completed, we plan to separate the suffixes with a
morphological parser to provide a full view of the
morphology of the arguments.
Another issue was how to annotate shared sub-
jects in subordinate clauses. Turkish allows sub-
ject pro-drop and in complex sentences, the shared
subject is shown by the person agreement suffix
on the verb of the consequent clause. To capture
this fact, we chose to exclude shared subjects from
the annotation of the arguments. This style of
annotation conforms to the minimality principle.
As illustrated in (3), the subject, Neriman, which
appears in its canonical clause-initial position in
ARG2 is not selected because the verb of the sub-
sequent clause carries the person agreement suffix.
(3) Neriman yatak odas?nda sigara ic?ilmesini is-
temedig?i halde s?imdilik sigaraya ses c??karm?yor.
Although Neriman does not want-FACTN-AGR
people to smoke in her bedroom, (she) doesn?t
say-AGR anything for the moment.2
If the subject is not shared, it is included in the
annotation, even if it causes discontinuity. As it
is illustrated in (4), ARG2 intervenes in ARG1 by
separating it from its subject.
(4) Rukiye, kendisinden u?c? yas? ufak olmas?na
rag?men, erkek kardes?ini kendi og?lu san?yordu, ...
Rukiye, although (he) is-ACTN-AGR-DAT three
years younger than herself, thought-AGR that her
brother was her son...
2The pronoun is in parentheses to reflect pro-drop. The
following abbreviations are used on the translations to show
the morphological characteristics of the clauses: ACTN: Ac-
tion nominal, FACTN: Factive nominal, AGR: Person agree-
ment suffix, DAT: Dative case, ABL: Ablative case. NOM:
Nominative case.
Example (5) shows that two nominalized
clauses can be selected as the arguments of the
subordinator kars??n leaving out the shared sub-
ject. In this example, the subject is shown between
square brackets for clarity. Note that, ARG1 is
also a nominalized clause since it is embedded un-
der the attribution verb so?yle - ?say?.3
(5) ... [herkes yarat?lan toplumsal deg?erden verdig?i
emek oran?nda pay alacak bic?imindeki sosyalist
iktisat ilkesinin] asl?nda c?ok es?itlikc?i gibi
go?zu?kmesine kars??n es?itsizlig?i engelleye-
meyeceg?ini, ... so?yler
... says that ... despite (it) looks-ACTN-AGR-
DAT quite egalitarian, [the socialist principle,
stating that everyone gets a share proportional to
his labor] will not prevent-ACTN-AGR inequality
...
Finally, in annotating adjuncts, we follow the
same principle we followed in annotating shared
subjects. For instance in (6), the adjunct yemekte
?at dinner? is not annotated since it is shared by the
arguments of the connective rag?men.
(6) Gu?l de yemekte kilo ald?rmas?na rag?men S?am
tatl?lar?ndan c?ok hos?land?g??n? ifade etti.
At dinner, Gu?l-NOM, also said that although
(theyi) are-ACTN-AGR-DAT fattening, (he)
likes Damascus deserts-ABLi very much.
4 The Annotation Process
Before the annotation procedure started, a set of
annotation guidelines were prepared. The guide-
lines include the basic principles, such as what
discourse connectives are, where in the discourse
one can find ARG1 and ARG2, how to annotate
shared subjects, adjuncts, etc. Rather than being
strict rules, the guidelines are aimed at being gen-
eral principles guiding the annotators in their de-
cision of selecting the text span that is minimally
sufficient for interpreting the discourse relation en-
coded by the connective.
The annotation cycle consisted of 1) annotat-
ing a connective by at least three different people
2) measuring the agreement among them with the
inter-anotator agreement tool 3) resolving the dis-
agreements with an anonymous decision.
4.1 The annotation tool
We have an XML-based infrastructure for annota-
tion. It aims to produce searchable and trackable
data. Stand-off annotation has well-known advan-
tages such as the ability to see layers separately, or
3In the PDTB, attribution is not taken as a discourse re-
lation but it is annotated. Attribution is not annotated in the
TDB.
46
Overall Annotator1 Annotator2 Annotator3
Conn. ARG1 ARG2 Overall ARG1 ARG2 Overall ARG1 ARG2 Overall ARG1 ARG2 Overall
rag?men 0.37 0.343 0.444 0.476 0.493 0.538 0.810 0.889 0.83 0.591 0.550 0.660
kars??n 0.394 0.546 0.364 0.771 0.781 0.724 0.677 0.833 0.71 0.677 0.62 0.676
halde 0.749 0.826 0.758 0.957 1 0.978 0.772 0.826 0.758 - - -
Table 2: Textspan inclusion agreement among three annotators for three subordinators with minimum success prob. >0.05.
The first column shows the overall agreement among the three annotators. Other columns show the agreement of one annotator
with the agreed/gold standard annotations. For halde, 2 annotators performed a common annotation (given as Annotator1) and
a third annotator annotated it separately (given as Annotator2).
to distribute annotation without data due to licens-
ing constraints. To this list we can add the em-
pirical necessity that, the crossing links in a single
layer of same kind of annotation might not be easy
to do inline. They can be done inline using SGML
OCCURS checks, but they are easier to annotate
in stand-off mode.
The tool has a regular expression mode in which
the annotator can use his/her knowledge of Turk-
ish word structure to collect similarly inflected
words without morphological analysis. For exam-
ple, -ArAk$, in which the uppercase forms repre-
sent metaphonemes, will bring words ending with
the allomorphs of the converb suffix due to vowel
harmony: erek, arak etc.
5 Conclusion
The TDB project is a first attempt in creating an
annotated resource for written Turkish discourse.
The annotation process is still continuing. In this
paper, the emphasis was on a small number of con-
nectives, namely three postpositions, which form a
subclass of subordinators. The paper described the
role of certain morpho-syntactic facts in interpret-
ing the coherence relation between two clauses,
and how these facts were reflected in the annota-
tions.
Three subjects separately annotated each of the
subordinators on the annotation tool, and inter-
rater reliability was calculated. The statistics were
obtained from Cochran?s Q test to the ARG1 and
ARG2 spans. The annotation data were encoded
with 1 if the character is in the span and 0 if it
is not. The encoded data were put to the Q test.
All the results were above the minimum success
probability (>0.05), showing that the annotations
were consistent (see Table 2). We will run another
Cochran experiment in which we will test whether
the annotators agree on ARG1/ARG2 boundaries,
rather than just word inclusion in the text spans as
above.
Given the distribution of agreements, Cochran
provides the number of subjects who must agree
so that a text span can be reliably considered an
ARG1 or ARG2. This we believe is important to
report with the final product (to be made public
soon), so that its gold standard can be assessed by
the community.
Acknowledgments
We thank TUBITAK for financial support. We
also thank our two anonymous reviewers for their
insightful comments.
References
Nicholas Asher. 1993. Reference to Abstract objects
in Discourse. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Michael A. K. Halliday. 1985. An Introduction to
Functional Linguistics. Edward Arnold Publishers
Ltd.
Jaklin Kornfilt. 1997. Turkish. Routledge, London.
Rashmi Prasad, Eleni Miltsakaki, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan
Lee, Aravind Joshi, Livio Robaldo, and Bonnie
Webber. 2007. The penn discourse treebank 2.0.
annotation manual. Technical report, Institute for
Research in Cognitive Science, University of Penn-
sylvania, March.
Bilge Say, Deniz Zeyrek, Kemal Oflazer, and Umut
O?zge. 2002. Development of a corpus and a tree-
bank for present-day written turkish. In Proceedings
of the Eleventh International Conference of Turkish
Linguistics.
Rob van der Sandt. 1992. Presuppositon projection as
anaphora resolution. Journal of Semantics, 9:333?
377.
Bonnie Webber, Alistair Knott, Matthew Stone, and
Aravind Joshi. 1999. Discourse relations: A struc-
tural and presuppositional account using lexicalised
tag. In Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 41?48, College Park, Maryland, USA.
Deniz Zeyrek and Bonnie Webber. 2008. A discourse
resource for turkish: Annotating discourse connec-
tives in the metu turkish corpus. In The 6th Work-
shop on Asian Language Resources, The Third In-
ternational Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (IJNLP), Hyderabad,India, January.
47
Proceedings of the Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL 2010, pages 202?206,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Discourse Relation Configurations in Turkish
and an Annotation Environment
Berfin Aktas?? and Cem Bozsahin? ? and Deniz Zeyrek? ?
? Informatics Institute, ? Computer Eng. and ? Foreign Language Education Dept.
Middle East Technical University, Ankara Turkey 06531
berfinaktas@gmail.com {bozsahin,dezeyrek}@metu.edu.tr
Abstract
In this paper, we describe an annotation
environment developed for the marking of
discourse structures in Turkish, and the
kinds of discourse relation configurations
that led to its design.
1 Introduction
The property that distinguishes a discourse from a
set of arbitrary sentences is defined as coherence
(Halliday and Hasan, 1976). Coherence is estab-
lished by the relations between the units of dis-
course.
Systematic analysis of coherence requires an
annotated corpus in which coherence relations are
encoded. Turkish Discourse Bank Project (TDB)
aims to produce a large-scale discourse level an-
notation resource for Turkish (Zeyrek and Weber,
2008). The TDB follows the annotation scheme of
the PDTB (Miltsakaki et al 2004). The lexicalized
approach adopted in the TDB assumes that dis-
course relations are set up by lexical items called
discourse connectives. Connectives are consid-
ered as discourse level predicates which take ex-
actly two arguments. The arguments are ab-
stract objects like propositions, facts, events, etc.
(Asher, 1993). They can be linked either by ex-
plicitly realized connectives or by implicit ones
recognized by an inferential process. We anno-
tate explicit connectives; implicit connectives are
future work. We use the naming convention of the
PDTB. Conn stands for the connective, Arg1 and
Arg2 for the first and the second argument, respec-
tively. Conn, Arg1 and Arg2 are assumed to be
required components of discourse relations. Sup-
plementary materials which are relevant to but not
necessary for the interpretation are also annotated.
Our main data is METU Turkish Corpus(MTC)
(Say et al 2002). MTC is a written source of Turk-
ish with approximately 2 million words. The orig-
inal MTC files include informative tags, such as
the author of the text, the paragraph boundaries in
the text, etc. We removed these tags to obtain raw
text files and set the character encoding of the files
to ?UTF-8?. These conversions are useful for pro-
gramming purposes such as visualizing the data in
different platforms and the use of third-party li-
braries.
We developed an annotation environment to
mark up the discourse relations, which we call
DATT (Discourse Annotation Tool for Turkish).
DATT produces XML files as annotation data
which are generated by the implementation of a
stand-off annotation methodology. We present in
?2 the data from Turkish discourse, which forced
us to use stand-off annotation instead of in-line
markup. The key aspect is potential crossing of
the markup links. However, stand-off annotation
is also advantageous for separate licensing. We
present the design of data structure and the func-
tionality of the tool in ?3. We report some prelim-
inary results in the conclusion.
2 Dependency analysis of discourse
relations
The TDB has no a priori assumption on how the
predicates and arguments are placed. We need to
take into account potential cases to be able to han-
dle overlappings and crossings among relations.
We use the terminology proposed by Lee et al
(2006), and follow their convention for naming the
variations of structures we came across.
We looked at the connective tokens placed close
to each other, and made an initial investigation to
reveal how these predicates and their arguments
are located in the text. Preliminary analysis of the
data indicates that the components of two relations
are placed in 7 different ways, two of which are
special to Turkish (?2.5; ?2.6). This section is de-
voted to the descriptions of observed patterns with
202
representative examples.1
In the examples the connective (Conn) is
underlined, Arg1 is in italics and Arg2 is in bold-
face. A connective?s relative order with respect
to its own arguments is not shown in the graphi-
cal templates. It is made explicit in the subsequent
examples.
2.1 Independent relations
The predicate-argument structure of the connec-
tives are independent from each other (i.e., there
is no overlap between the arguments of different
connectives.) The template is (1). An example is
provided in (2).
(1)
(2) Ak?nt?ya kap?l?p umulmad?k bir geceyi
b?l?s?t? benimle ve bu kadarla kals?n
istedi belki. Eda a??s?ndan olay?n yorumu
bu kadar yal?n olmal?. Ama eg?er b?yleyse
benim i?in yorumlanmas? olanaks?z bir
d?s?ten bas?ka kalan yok geriye s?imdi.
She was drifted with a current and shared an
unexpected night with me and perhaps she
wanted to keep it this much only. From
the perspective of Eda, the interpretation of
the incident should be that simple. But, if this
is the case, now there is nothing left be-
hind for me but a dream impossible to in-
terpret.
In (2), the relation set up by Ama is fully preceded
by the relation set up by ve. There is no overlap
between the argument spans of the connectives ve
and Ama.
2.2 Full embedding
The text span of a relation constitutes an argument
of another connective (3). An example is provided
in (4).
(3)
(4)a. [..] madem yanl?s? bir yerde oldug?umuzu
d?s??n?yoruz da dog?ru denen yere asla
varamayacag??m?z? biliyoruz , senin gibi
biri nas?l b?yle bir soru sorar ,[..]
1All data in this paper are taken from MTC, unless stated
otherwise. More examples can be found in Aktas? (2008).
b. [..] madem yanl?s? bir yerde oldug?umuzu
d?s??n?yoruz da dog?ru denen yere asla
varamayacag??m?z? biliyoruz , senin gibi biri
nas?l b?yle bir soru sorar,[..]
[..] if we think that we are in a wrong place,
and we know that we will never never reach
the right place; how come a person like you
ask such a question? [..]
In (4), the span of the relation headed by da con-
stitutes the Arg2 of the connective madem.
2.3 Shared argument
Two different connectives can share the same ar-
gument (5).
(5)
In some situations, different connectives can share
both of their arguments as in the case of (6):
(6) Dedektif roman? i?inden ??k?lmaz gibi g?r?-
nen esrarl? bir cinayetin ??z?m?n? sundug?u
i?in, her s?eyden ?nce mant?g?a g?veni ve
inanc? dile getiren bir anlat? t?r?d?r ve
bundan ?t?r? de burjuva rasyonellig?inin
edebiyattaki ?z? haline gelmis?tir.
Unraveling the solution to a seemingly intri-
cate murder mystery, the detective novel is a
narrative genre which primarily gives voice
to the faith and trust in reason and being so,
it has become the epitome of bourgeois ra-
tionality in the literature.
2.4 Properly contained argument
The argument span of one connective encapsu-
lates the argument of another connective plus more
text (7).
(7)
An example is provided in (8), where Arg2 of ve
properly contains Arg1 of Tersine.
(8)a. Kap?dan girdi ve s?yler misin, hi? etkilen-
medin mi yazd?klar?ndan?, dedi. Tersine,
?ok etkilendim.
b. Kap?dan girdi ve s?yler misin, hi? etkilen-
medin mi yazd?klar?ndan?, dedi. Tersine,
?ok etkilendim.
203
S/he entered through the door and said ?Tell
me, are you not touched at all by what s/he
wrote??. On the contrary, I am very much
affected.
2.5 Properly contained relation
The argument span of one connective covers the
predicate-argument structure of another connec-
tive and more text (9), as exemplified in (10).
(9)
(10)a. Burada bizce bir ifade bozuklug?u veya ?e-
viri yanl?s?? bahis konusu olabilir, ??nk? el-
biseler sanki giyildig?i s?rece ve y?pran-
mam?s?ken y?kanamaz, fakat daha sonra
y?kanabilirmis? gibi bir anlam tas??mak-
tad?r.
b. Burada bizce bir ifade bozuklug?u veya ?e-
viri yanl?s?? bahis konusu olabilir, ??nk?
elbiseler sanki giyildig?i s?rece ve y?pran-
mam?s?ken y?kanamaz, fakat daha sonra
y?kanabilirmis? gibi bir anlam tas??maktad?r.
Here a mistake of expression or mistransla-
tion might be the case, because the meaning
is as if the clothes cannot be washed as long
as they are used and not worn out, but can
be washed later.
In (10), the second argument of ??nk? covers the
whole relation headed by fakat and the text ?gibi
bir anlam tas??maktad?r?, which is not part of it.
2.6 Nested relations
A relation is nested inside the span of another re-
lation (11).
(11)
In (12), the relation headed by da is properly
nested between the connective ve and its first ar-
gument.
(12) B?y?k bir masada g?nlerce, gecelerce otu-
rup konus?acag??z - konus?may? unuttum diy-
orum da g?l?yorlar bana - ve biriniz
kalk?p s?iir okuyacak.
We will sit and talk around a big table for
days and nights - I say I have forgotten how
to speak and they laugh at me - and one of
you will stand up and recite poetry.
2.7 Pure crossing
The dependency structure of a relation interleaves
with the arguments, or the connective of another
relation (13), as exemplified in (14).
(13)
(14)a. (Constructed) Kitab? okumaya bas?lad?m :
Okullar ?oktan a??lm?s?t?. Ard?ndan kap?n?n
?ald?g??n? duydum ama yerimden kalk-
madan okumaya devam ettim: Ama bu
okula hen?z ?g?retmen atanmam?s?t?.
b. Kitab? okumaya bas?lad?m Okullar ?oktan
a??lm?s?t?. Ard?ndan kap?n?n ?ald?g??n? duy-
dum ama yerimden kalkmadan okumaya de-
vam ettim: Ama bu okula hen?z ?g?retmen
atanmam?s?t?.
I started to read the book. The schools had
long been opened. Then, I heard the door
bell ring but I continued reading without
getting up: But a teacher had not been ap-
pointed to this school yet.
3 The tool
DATT is an XML-based infrastructure for text an-
notation. It aims to produce searchable and track-
able data. An initial investigation of connective
and argument locations revealed that there is ar-
gument sharing of various sorts, and nested and
crossing relations in Turkish discourse. The ex-
istence of such constructions lead us to use a
stand-off annotation rather than an in-line method.
These dependencies are violations of tree struc-
ture required by XML. Using the OCCURS fea-
ture of SGML for this purpose would lead to a less
portable markup tool.
3.1 Data representation
In stand-off markup, annotations are stored sepa-
rate from data. Since the base file is not modified
during annotation, it is guaranteed that all the an-
notators are dealing with the same version of the
data. The text spans of dependency constructions
are represented in terms of character offsets from
204
the beginning of the text file. This is a highly error-
prone way of storing annotation data. If there is a
shift in the character indexes in the original text
file, previously annotated data will be meaning-
less. To compensate for this, we keep the text
spans of annotations for recovery purposes.
Annotation files are well-formed XML files.
One can easily add new features to the annota-
tions. XML facilities available as online sources
such as the libraries for search and post-processing
reduce the implementation effort of adding new
features.
3.2 Search functionality
In the TDB, the annotation process is organized
according to connective types and their tokens.
The connective to be annotated is identified, and
all the relations which are set up by the instances
of that connective are marked. Therefore it is im-
portant to be able to find all the instances of a spe-
cific connective in the entire data source. DATT
has a search functionality which walks through all
resource files and shows the annotator which files
have the token. We used ?Apache Lucene Search
Library? for this functionality.
Two distinguishing characteristics of Turkish,
the vowel harmony and voicing, motivated us to
enhance the search facilities by adding support for
allomorphy. In Turkish, suffixes may have many
different forms. The ability to search on these
forms is crucial if connectives are attached to the
inflected forms of words, which is very frequently
the case. For instance, the ?-d?k?(the factive nom-
inal) suffix has eight allomorphs (i.e. -d?k, -dik,
-duk, -d?k, -t?k, -tik, -tuk, -t?k) depending on the
phonological environment.
In Turkish discourse, the meaning of a connec-
tive may change according to the inflectional cate-
gory of the word that precedes it. For example, the
word just before the connective?i?in? can be in-
flected with ?-d?k? and ?-mak?(the infinitive) suf-
fixes. With ?-d?k? the connective bears the mean-
ing of causal ?since?, while in the other case, the
connective has the meaning of ?so as to?(Zeyrek,
Webber, 2008). Because of this semantic differ-
ence, it will be important for the annotator to clus-
ter the instances of a connective token preceded by
all the forms of a certain inflectional suffix in one
search. DATT provides this opportunity with the
allomorph search support.
In Turkish, connectives can be inflected. For ex-
ample, the connective ?dolay?s?yla? (due to that)
is the inflected form of ?dolay??(due to). The sup-
port for regular expression search is also added to
DATT to retrieve the inflected forms of the same
connective.
3.3 The user interface
The user interface of DATT is expected to allow
the marking of dependency hierarchies mentioned
in Section 2 in a user-friendly way. the TDB an-
notation requires at least three components, which
are Arg1, Conn and Arg2. In DATT, in order to
guide the annotator, we enforce the labeling of
these mandatory components, while marking of
the supplementary material is optional.
Another feature of DATT is the ability to mark
discontiguous text spans as a unique relation,
which is attested in Turkish discourse (15). Its
connective-argument structure is shown below.
The Arg1 of the connective -erek is interleaved
with the second argument Arg2.
(15) Y?r? lan, dedi Katana, Ramiz?i kolundan
?ekerek, Miskoye korkuyo!
?Hey you, move? said Katana, while drag-
ging Ramiz by the arm, ?Miskoye is freaked
out.?
Conn Arg1 Arg2
-erek Y?r? ... Kat$ 5, Mis$ korkuyo Ram$ ... ?ekerek
4 Conclusion
We adopt a lexical approach to discourse annota-
tion. Connectives are words, and they take two
text spans as arguments. An exploration of these
structures shows that there is argument-sharing
and overlap among relations. We are considering
automatic detection of relation types for an ap-
praisal of discourse relation distribution. For the
time being, DATT has search support for allomor-
phy and regular expressions as an aid to finding
the connectives.
Approximately 60 connective types and 100 to-
kens have been determined so far in the annotation
process, using 3 annotators. 7,000 relation tokens
headed by the connectives have been annotated us-
ing DATT, spanning approximately 300,000-word
text. Work for agreement statistics is under way.
We hope that machine learning techniques can dis-
cover more structure in the data once we have rea-
sonable confidence with annotation.
5We use the notation ?abc$? to refer to the word that be-
gins with the string ?abc?.
205
References
Berfin Aktas?. 2008. Computational Aspects of Dis-
course Annotation. Informatics Institute, METU.
Unpublished master thesis.
Nicholas Asher. 1993. Reference to Abstract Objects
in Discourse. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
M. A. K. Halliday and Ruqaiya Hasan. 1976. Cohe-
sion in English. London: Longman.
Alan Lee and Rashmi Prasad and Aravind Joshi and
Nikhil Dinesh and Bonnie Webber. 2006. Com-
plexity of dependencies in discourse. In Proceed-
ings of the 5th International Workshop on Treebanks
and Linguistic Theories.
Eleni Miltsakaki and Rashmi Prasad and Aravind Joshi
and Bonnie Webber. 2004. The Penn Discourse
TreeBank. LREC, Lisbon, Portugal.
Bilge Say and Deniz Zeyrek and Kemal Oflazer and
Umut Ozge. 2002. Development of a Corpus and
a Treebank for Present-day Written Turkish. 11th
International Conference on Turkish Linguistics.
Deniz Zeyrek and Bonnie Webber. 2008. A Discourse
Resource for Turkish: Annotating Discourse Con-
nectives in the METU Corpus. In Proceedings of
IJCNLP.
206
Proceedings of the Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL 2010, pages 282?289,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
The Annotation Scheme of the Turkish Discourse Bank and An  Evaluation of Inconsistent Annotations  Deniz Zeyrek, I??n Demir?ahin, Ay????? Sevdik-?all?, Hale ?gel Balaban,  ?hsan Yal??nkaya Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey and   ?mit Deniz Turan Anadolu University, Eski?ehir, Turkey  Corresponding author: dezeyrek@metu.edu.tr  Abstract  In this paper, we report on the annotation procedures we developed for annotating the Turkish Discourse Bank (TDB), an effort that extends the Penn Discourse Tree Bank (PDTB) annotation style by using it for annotating Turkish discourse. After a brief introduction to the TDB, we describe the annotation cycle and the annotation scheme we developed, defining which parts of the scheme are an extension of the PDTB and which parts are different. We provide inter-coder reliability calculations on the first and second arguments of some connectives and discuss the most important sources of disagreement among annotators.   1 A brief introduction to the Turkish Discourse Bank 1.1 The Data The Turkish Discourse Bank (TDB) project aims to annotate the 500,000-word-subcorpus of the two-million-word METU Turkish Corpus (MTC) (Say et al 2002). The subcorpus includes a wide range of texts, e.g. fiction, interviews, memoirs, news articles, etc. reflecting the distribution of the genres in the MTC (Zeyrek et al 2009). The main objective of the project is to annotate discourse connectives with their two arguments, modifiers and supplementary text spans. Following the Penn Discourse Tree Bank (PDTB), we take discourse connectives as discourse-level predicates taking two (and only 
two) arguments, called Arg1 and Arg2, which may span one or more clauses and sentences that are adjacent or nonadjacent to the connective (Prasad et al 2007, Webber, 2004). Discourse relations can certainly be expressed without connectives but we have chosen to annotate discourse relations encoded by connectives since they are more specific about their semantics.  Discourse connectives are identifiable from three syntactic classes, namely, coordinating conjunctions, subordinating conjunctions, and discourse adverbials. As in the PDTB, we take elements belonging to these syntactic classes as discourse connectives when they semantically relate syntactic entitities such as clauses, sentences, sequences of sentences, and nominalizations having an abstract object interpretation i.e., eventualities, possibilities, situations, facts, and propositions (as in Asher, 1993, cf. Webber, et al 2005). Major departures from the PDTB are, attribution is not annotated, only overt connectives are being annotated, and the nominal arguments of connectives are being annotated where they denote an abstract object. Annotation of implicit connectives is further work.  1.2 The annotation cycle Before the annotation process started, the annotators studied the guidelines, which defined some general principles and illustrated difficult cases. The guidelines were written in a way to allow the annotators enough freedom to reflect their intuitions on the annotations. The annotators were also told to observe the minimality principle (MP) of the PDTB guidelines, which expects them to mark as argument parts of a clause or sentence that are 
282
minimally sufficient and necessary for the discourse relation encoded by the connective. The annotation cycle includes three steps. First, the annotators go through the whole subcorpus to annotate a given connective at a time. Any disagreements are discussed and resolved by the project team. In the second step, the definitions in the annotation guidelines are revised with the new issues that emerged in annotating the connective. Finally, the agreed annotations are checked to ensure they obeyed the annotation guidelines fully. The annotations were created by a tool designed by Akta? (2008).  The connectives are being annotated for the categories given in the next section by three annotators, who have been in the project since the annotation effort started. The three-step annotation process and the number of annotators we use slow down the task considerably but given the complexity of discourse annotation and the need for annotation efforts in Turkish, we were compelled to target maximum reliability achieved by three annotators.  The inter-coder reliability has recently stabilized and to speed the annotation effort, two annotators have started to carry out their task as a pair, while the other annotator works independently. This annotation style involves two annotators working side-by-side at one computer, continuously collaborating on one connective type at a time to code all its tokens in the subcorpus. One of the annotators carries out the task on the annotation tool, while the other observes her continuously for any defects and problems and suggests alternative solutions. This style of annotation, created by our group independently of pair programming, corresponds to the practice explained in Williams, et al(2000) and Williams and Kessler (2000). It is quite a beneficial and reliable method that also speeds up the process (Demir?ahin, et alms). 1 We give the preliminary results of this procedure in section 2.1.4.  1.3 An outline of Turkish connectives and the annotation scheme We annotate discourse connectives belonging to the syntactic classes listed below, leaving out converbs that may function as discourse connectives.                                                    1 Except for ve ?and?, the statistics reported in this paper reflect the agreement among 3 independent annotators. 
? Coordinating conjunctions (ve ?and?, ya da ?or?, ama ?but?) ? Complex subordinators (i?in ?for?, ra?men ?although, despite?), converbs/simplex subordinators (-Ince ?when,? ?ken ?while, now that?)2 ? Anophoric connectives (bundan ba?ka ?in addition to/separate from these?, bunun sonucunda ?as a result of this,? bunun i?in ?due to/for this reason?, buna ra?men ?despite this?) and discourse adverbials (oysa ?however?, ?te yandan ?on the other hand?, then ?sonradan?) In Turkish, coordinators are typically s(entence)-medial, they may also be found s-initially, or s-finally. Coordinators show an affinity with the second clause, as evidenced by punctuation and their ability to move to the end of the second clause. Subordinators take as their second argument a nonfinite clause that contains a genitive marked subject that agrees with the subordinate verb in terms of person and number.  The subordinate clause may also be assigned case by the postposition that functions as the connective. The subordinator and its host clause are always adjacent and the subordinate clause may appear s-initially or s-finally. Anaphoric connectives are characterized by an anaphoric element in the phrase and hence they have the ability to access the inference in the prior discourse (Webber, et al2003). Furthermore, they may take as their first argument text spans that are nonadjacent to the sentence containing the connective (Zeyrek and Webber, 2008).3  As example (1) illustrates, discourse adverbials can be used with connectives from other syntactic classes, e.g. a coordinating conjunction, fakat ?but? may be used with sonradan ?then?, and in accessing its first argument, the discourse adverbial may cross one or more clauses. In the examples, Arg1 is italicized, Arg2 set in bold, and the connective head is underlined.                                                   2 The capital letters are used to capture the cases where a vowel agrees with the vowel harmony rules of the language. The vowel rendered by the capital letter I may be resolved as any of the high vowels in the language, i.e., i, ?, ?, u.  3In the PDTB, expressions like after that are coded as ?alternative lexicalization? while coding implicit connectives, i.e., as a ?nonconnective expression? (Prasad et al 2007:22).  In Turkish, such phrasal expressions are abundant. They are two-part expressions with one part referring to the relation, the other anaphorically to Arg1 as in English. We decided to take these expressions as connectives because otherwise, we would be missing an important fact about Turkish. Therefore they are being annotated as connectives in the TDB project.  
283
(1) a. Bunlar? a??klad???m?z vakit y?neticiler evvela ?a??rd?lar  When (we) explained these, the administrators were first surprised. b. B?yle bir ?eyi asla beklemiyorlard?.     (They) were never expecting such a thing. c. Fakat sonradan kendilerini toparlad?lar.  But then they gained their composure.  Largely following the annotation style of the PDTB, we determined the categories that form the annotation of a relation as follows:  Conn: This is the connective head of an explicit connective. Arg2: This tag refers to the argument that forms a syntactic unit with the connective.  Arg1: This tag is for the other argument that the connective relates semantically to Arg2. Sup1/Sup2: This attribute specifies either the material that makes the semantic contribution of the argument more specific (as in the PDTB), or the clause/sentence where an anaphoric element expressed in the argument is resolved. The Sup tag is not specifically used for anaphor resolution in the PDTB.  Mod: This tag specifies the following features: (a) the adverbs that are used along with connective heads, e.g. tam aksine ?just to the contrary?, (b) the focus particle dE used together with the connective head (e.g., ve de ?and-focus particle ?and?), (c) adverbs showing the determinacy of the relation, e.g. belki  ?perhaps?, sadece ?only? etc., (d) polarity of postpositional phrases (e.g. i?in de?il ?not for?). In the PDTB, the Mod category is utilized only for adverbs used together with connective heads. The other categories are used to capture aspects of attribution and verbs of attribution.   Shared: This attribute identifies the subjects, objects, or any temporal adverbs shared by the arguments of the discourse relation. This category was required for Turkish, which is a pro-drop and free word-order language. In Turkish, subjects, objects or adverbs can appear s-initially, s-medially or s-finally. Subjects and objects are dropped if they are salient in the discourse. This category allows us to capture the variable position of subjects, objects and adverbs shared by the arguments of a discourse relation.  The PDTB does not have this feature.    In what follows, we will report on the inter-coder reliability statistics on Arg1 and Arg2 of a set of connectives for which we obtained low inter-coder reliability results and discuss the most common inconsistencies. The remaining 
categories mentioned above are under use but inter-coder reliability statistics have not been calculated for them.  2 A quantitative and qualitative evaluation of the inconsistent annotations in the TDB  So far, 60 types of discourse connectives amounting to 6873 relations have been annotated in the TDB project.  We computed the reliability of the coders? agreement for Arg1 and Arg2 of these connectives by means of the Kappa statistic (Carletta, 1996). A value of K agreement coefficient (henceforth K values) between 0.80 and 1.00 shows a good agreement, and a value between 0.60 and 0.80 indicates some agreement (Poesio, 2000). The K values we obtained for Arg1 and Arg2 of most connectives annotated so far range between 0.80 and 1.00 but for the connectives that are in focus in this paper, the K values for Arg1 are less than 0.80 (see Appendix B). It is these connectives that we now turn to.  These connectives are listed below again, along with the K values obtained for their Arg1 and Arg2. Before calculating the K values, all annotated text spans were re-processed in order to express the annotations in (pseudo) categories. During re-processing, for each annotator the annotated text span boundary characters (i.e., the beginning and end characters) were coded as 1 and the remaining text was coded as 0, so that an agreement table could be constructed (Artstein, and Poesio, 2008; Di Eugenio and Glass, 2004).  It is on the basis of this table which we measured inter-coder reliability.    Connective K value  Arg1 Arg2 yandan ?on the other hand? 0.523 0.645 ayr?ca ?in addition, separately? 0.545 0.760 ra?men ?despite, despite this? 0.688 0.742 fakat ?but? 0.719 0.855 tersine ?on the contrary? 0.741 1.000 dolay?s?yla ?as a result? 0.759 0.930 oysa ?however? 0.767 0.913 ama?la ?for this purpose? 0.785 0.876 Table 1. Eight connectives with K values less than 0.80 (total number of annotations: 554)  
284
For comparison, we provide the K values for two discontinuous connectives in Table 2:  Connective K value  Arg1 Arg2 ne .. ne ?neither nor? 0.820 0.930 hem .. hem ?both .. and? 1.000 0.982 Table 2. Two discontinous connectives with K values higher than 0.80 (total number of annotations: 126)  As seen in Table 2, inter-coder agreement in discontinuous connectives is high. We argue that discontinuous connectives are maximally different from anaphoric connectives (and discourse adverbials) since they unambiguously draw the boundaries of their arguments.  As a result, the inter-coder reliability tests yield good agreements, with K values > 0.80. Anaphoric connectives relate their second argument with another argument adjacent or nonadjacent to the connective, in a way much similar to how definite NPs find their antecedents in the previous discourse. Depending on the relation encoded by the connective, the previous discourse is likely to contain clauses that elaborate and expand a generalization, refute an assertion, list the components of a statement, explain the cause of an eventuality, etc. It may not be an easy task to decide whether one should take all or part of these clauses as Arg1; therefore inconsistencies are expected in drawing the Arg1?s boundaries. Arg2, on the other hand, is relatively easier to determine since it is syntactically related to the connective and hence its domain is determined. Example (2), which shows a relation encoded by the connective tersine ?on the contrary?, presents one of the most common cases of inconsistency in determining the Arg1 span.  (2) a. Eyleme de?il, karaktere a??rl?k veren modern romanda biliyoruz ki roman ki?ilerinin psikolojisi, i? d?nyas?, bilinci ve bilin?alt? yazar?n dikkatle ??zmeye ?al??t??? ilgin? sorunlar? i?erir.  (We) know that in the modern novel, which emphasizes character rather than action, the novel contains the interesting problems that the writer wants to solve and the characters? psychology, their inner world, consciousness, and the subconscious.   
b. Bundan ?t?r? ?nemli bir y?n?n? olu?turur roman?n.  For this reason, (it) constitutes an  important aspect of the novel. c. Ama gene biliyoruz ki halk edebiyat? ?r?nlerinde ?nemli olan ki?inin i? d?nyas? de?il,  But we also know that in folk literature what is important is not the person?s inner world, d. tersine, eylemidir.  on the contrary, (it) is his action.   Two annotators selected as Arg1 the italicized part in (2c) while the third one selected as Arg1 the clauses in (2a), and (2c). In fact, a careful analysis of the discourse connective tersine ?on the contrary? reveals that in all tokens in the corpus, the speaker introduces an assertion, then refutes some aspect of it with an overt negation and then rectifies it in Arg2.  (Turan and Zeyrek, 2010). The third annotator?s selection of Arg1 is compatible with this observation, while the other annotators? selection of Arg1 appears to be guided by the MP.   2.1 Common Sources of Disagreement An examination of the 8 connectives for which K values were below 0.80 for Arg1 or Arg2 showed that there were 6 main sources for the inconsistencies. These were (a) no overlapping annotations for Arg1, (b) partially overlapping annotations for Arg1 or (c) Arg2, (d) lack of adequate definitions in the guidelines, (e) annotators? errors in following the linguistic definitions in the guidelines, (f) other inconsistencies, e.g., errors in selecting spaces, leaving characters out, etc. (Appendix A). 4 Among these, partially overlapping Arg1 annotations is the major source of discrepancy observed in 63.98% of the inconsistent cases, followed by partially overlapping Arg2 annotations observed in 10.17% of the cases, and no overlapping annotations in 9.74% of the cases. While errors grouped under the ?other? category is 9.74%, annotators? errors in following the linguistic definitions in the guidelines is negligible (2.97%). The percentage of lacking definitions in the guidelines is also low (3.39%), showing that the coverage is good in the updated guidelines. Let us now turn to the                                                  4 There were also missing annotations but since we did not calculate inter-coder statistics for them, they are not mentioned in this work.  
285
common sources of disagreement among annotators.  2.1.1 Interpretations of the minimality principle  A frequent reason for inconsistent annotations was lack of agreement in determining the exact boundaries of argument spans, which is ultimately related to how the MP is interpreted. For example, in (3), the connective fakat ?but? may be taken as linking clauses (3a) and (3b).  Yet, the scope of the predicative morpheme (i.e. ?t?r in (3c)) that determines finiteness is shared by the verbs of (3b) and (3c), i.e. this morpheme takes into its scope two consecutive clauses. While two annotators coded only clause (3b) as Arg2, the third annotator tended to interpret Arg2 as the clauses within the scope of the shared predicative morpheme (-t?r), coding (3b) and (3c) as Arg2. It appears that the disagreement in example (3) stems from different interpretations of the MP coupled with a structural property of Turkish.   (3) a. Onlara sunulan kurbanlar, ba?lang??ta insanlard?  At the beginning, it was humans that were sacrified for them.  b. Fakat bu ?det sonralar? hafifletilerek, insan yerine hayvanlar kurban edilme?e ba?lanm??,  But later on, loosening this tradition, (they) started to sacrifice animals instead of humans,  c. sonunda da bu hayvanlar? temsil eden baz? ?eylerin (?) k???t hayvan fig?rlerinin  (?) yahut da bir ta??n suya at?lmas?n?n yeterli olaca??na inan?lm??t?r.  finally, it was believed that it would be sufficient to throw a stone or paper animal figures to the water, as well as other objects that represent these animals.  The text given in (4) further illustrates a case where the annotators disagreed on the final boundary of Arg2. One annotator selected as Arg2 the span ?this is .. noted? (4b), while the other annotators selected the span ?this is?. a lost place? ((4b)-(4c)); i.e., they included as Arg2 not only the clause adjacent to the connective, but they also selected the clause that followed where the cataphor is resolved. Faced with such inconsistencies, we decided to annotate the material that is needed for pronoun resolution as supplementary text. In this case, the clause in (4c) is marked as Sup2.   
(4) a. ? ikincisindeki ayr?nt? bollu?u Recaizade Ekrem?in ger?ek?ili?ine atfedilmi?tir.   .. the richness of details in the second (novel) was attributed to Recaizade Ekrem?s realism. b. Oysa as?l dikkat ?ekmesi gereken ?udur:  However, this is what should be noted: c. Araba Sevdas?n?n ?aml?ca?s? yitik bir ?aml?ca?d?r.  The ?aml?ca described in Araba Sevdas? is a lost place.  The inconsistencies that derive from different interpretations of the minimality requirement is particularly interesting from a theoretical perspective. It appears that this principle may be interpreted as syntactic minimality as illustrated in example (3), and as a factor that goes against basic insights of discourse interpretation such as anaphor/cataphor resolution as in example (4). In the former case, the MP pulls the annotators in one direction, and the need to reflect their understanding of the discourse in the annotations pulls them in the opposite direction, especially when there is morphological/syntactic evidence for them to choose more than one clause. In the latter case, the annotators seem to feel they would lose the anaphoric/coreference chains in the discourse if they left out the text span where the anaphor was resolved.  After using the Sup label for anaphor resolution/coreference chains, disagreements of the latter sort diminished considerably but this was a methodological approach with a bias towards the MP rather than the desired solution of the role of anaphoric/coreference chains in argument spans. We aim to tackle this issue in further research.   A parenthetical or evaluative clause in the argument span also led to inconsistencies in determining argument boundaries. For example, the annotators gave conflicting decisions as to whether or not they should select parenthetical clauses, especially when they are s-medial, as in (5): (5)  Kemal, bir yandan askeri bir sava? verirken ?te yandan yerli i?birlik?ilerle ?ki bunlar?n ba??nda da bas?n- sava?mak zorunda kalm??t?r.  Kemal, while on the one hand fighting a military war, on the other hand (he) had to fight with local accomplices ?which mainly included the media.  
286
Disagreements that arise from parenthetical clauses have diminished after we added a new principle to the guidelines, asking annotators to select the parenthetical together with the argument if it contributed to the meaning of the argument.    2.1.2 Ambiguity  Another reason for inconsistent annotations was ambiguity in meaning. Consider example (1) once again, where the contrast relation can be interpreted in three ways: it is not clear whether the contrast is between to be surprised in (1a) and to regain composure in (1c) or whether it is between not expecting such a thing in (1b) and to regain composure in (1c). Alternatively, the contrast can be interpreted between (1a) and (1b) on the one hand, and between (1a) and (1c) on the other. We observed that some of the disagreements concerning the span of Arg 1 stemmed from such cases.   2.1.3 Type of discourse relation  Yet another type of inconsistency appears to be associated with the type of discourse relation. Sanders and Noordman (2000) and Pitler, et. al. (2008) state that causal (contingency) relations are among the most salient coherence relations. They suggest that the connectives that signal comparison and contingency are mostly unambiguous. Being cognitively salient, causal and contingency relations are more tightly organized than the additive list relation. This is because in causal relations, one target sentence is more important than the other; while in a list relation there is more than one sentence contributing to the discourse. Sanders and Noordman (2000:53) argue that causal relations are more strongly connecting than additive relations. This salience in discourse relations can be universal.  In fact, we found that the inter-coder agreement of the causal connective ??nk? ?because? was high (0.888 for Arg1 and 0.941 for Arg2). However, for the connective ayr?ca ?in addition to?, which encodes the list relation, the inter-coder K value was 0.545 for Arg1, 0.765 for Arg 2. An example of the list reading interpretation of this connective is illustrated in (6) below.  (6) a. Baban?n ya?am? art?k derli toplu olmu?tu.   The father?s life now became orderly.   b. Evde kavgalar da azalm??t?.  The fights at home have diminished 
c. Ayr?ca yeni bir ?evrede de bulunuyorlard?.  Besides, (they) are now in a new neighborhood.   In the extract given in (6), the topic under discussion seems to be the list of the family?s diminishing problems: Father?s having an orderly life, reduced fights at home, etc.  While two annotators preferred to select (6b) as Arg 1, the third one preferred to select (6a) and (6b) together.  The connective ayr?ca, marking a weaker relation between its two arguments, is among the connectives that yielded such instances of disagreement.   2.1.4 Nominalized arguments  In this section, we will report on some preliminary results about a common inconsistency that occurred while annotating the connective ve ?and,? namely the problem of teasing apart nominalized arguments that have an abstract object interpretation and those that do not. We also explain the pair annotation process. In Turkish, a nominalizing process realized by various inflectional suffixes forms nonfinite clauses. The clauses formed by some of these suffixes are abstract enough to be easily specified as an argument of a discourse relation, e.g. ?mAk. On the other hand, some of the suffixes (e.g. ?mA, -I?) are very productive in deriving ordinary nouns referring to actual instances or things. It is these cases where disagreement among the annotators increases. Example (7) illustrates the use of ?mAk, where the clauses it forms were easily determined as arguments with abstract object interpretations.   (7)  18. y?zy?l?n yapt???,  17. Y?zy?l?n yaratt?klar?n? ?o?altmak ve yaymakt?r.  What the 18th century did was to increase and to extend what the 17th century created.  Example (8) shows a difficult case where the annotators were inconsistent in deciding whether the connective?s arguments have abstract object interpretations or not. This is because the morphological form of the words geli?me (improve-mA) ?improvement? and yap?la?ma (construct-mA) ?(re)construction? are very much the same as the words bekleme (wait-mA) ?waiting? and arama (search-mA) ?search, searching? shown in (9). The final decision was to annotate (9) only.  
287
(8)  Deprem b?lgesinde yeniden [geli?me] ve [yap?la?man?n] planlanmas? gibi ciddi bir sorun bulunmaktad?r.  There is the important issue of planning the [improvement] and [re-construction] of the areas affected by the earthquake.   (9)  Art?k onu beklemenin ve araman?n bo?una oldu?unu anlam??t?r.  He has already figured out that it was futile to wait for her and to search her.   We noticed such inconsistencies in annotating 1/3 of the files for and. When we shifted to the pair annotation procedure, we obtained high agreement on Arg1 and Arg2 annotations of and because we observed that when done in pairs, resolving any disagreements between the annotations was faster since the members of the pair discussed difficult cases between them and sometimes determined a preferred annotation before presenting the results to the group. Table 3 shows the results for and annotations. A repeated measures test shows that the increase in K values is significant (p< 0.01).  Annotators K value  Arg1 Arg2 3 annotators 0.692 0.791 A pair of annotators and an independent annotator 0.945 0.964 Table 3 K values for ve ?and? of 3 independent annotators, and a pair and an independent annotator 3 Summary  In this paper we presented common sources of disagreement we observed in annotating the arguments of discourse connectives in the TDB, a project of discourse-level annotation on written Turkish. We defined our annotation scheme and annotation cycle. We achieved high agreement on argument annotations of discontinuous connectives but agreement on some other connectives was low, particularly for Arg1. Since these connectives belong to different syntactic classes, the inconsistencies cannot be easily explained by the properties of the syntactic class of connectives. We discussed various potential factors affecting inter-coder agreement, including the minimality principle coupled with language specific properties, the structure of discourse (as in the case of our example in tersine), cognitive salience of discourse relations, 
and ambiguity.? We discussed inconsistencies resulting form the difficulty of distinguishing the non-abstract object interpretation of a nominalized clause from its abstract object interpretation. We argued that once inter-coder reliability stabilizes, it is beneficial to shift to the procedure where a pair of annotators works together to annotate a specific connective while the third works independently.     Acknowledgments We acknowledge the grant form The Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey and thank our anonymous referees for comments.  References Berfin Akta?. 2008. Computational Aspects of Discourse Annotation. Unpublished MS Thesis, Cognitive Science Program, Middle East Technical University  Ron, Artstein and Massimo Poesio (2008). Inter-coder agreement for computational linguistics. Computational Linguistics, 34(4). pp. 555-596. Nicholas Asher. 1993. Reference to Abstract Objects in Discourse. Kluwer Academic Publishers. I??n Demir?ahin, ?hsan Yal??nkaya, Deniz Zeyrek (ms). Pair Annotation: Adaption of Pair Programming to Corpus Annotation.  Barbara Di Eugenio, & Michael Glass (2004). The Kappa statistic: a second look. Computational Linguistics, 30(1). pp. 95-101. Eleni Miltsakaki, Rashmi Prasad, Aravind Joshi, Bonnie Webber. 2004. Annotating Discourse Connectives and Their Arguments. In Proceedings of the HLT/NAACL Workshop on Frontiers in Corpus Annotation. Boston, MA. 2004. Emily Pitler, Mridhula Raghupathy, Hena Mehta, Ani Nenkova, Alan Lee, and Aravind Joshi. 2008. Easily Identifiable Discourse Relations Proceedings of COLING, 2008. Poster paper.  Massimo Poesio. 2000. Annotating a Corpus to Develop and Evaluate Discourse Entity Realization Algorithms: Issues and Preliminary Results. Proceedings of LREC-2000. Athens, May 2000. Rashmi Prasad, Eleni Miltsakaki, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, Aravind Joshi, Livio Robaldo and Bonnie Webber. 2007. The Penn Discourse Tree Bank 2.0 Annotation Manual. December 17, 2007.  Ted J. M. Sanders and Leo G. M. Noordman.  2000. The Role of Coherence Relations and Their Linguistic Markers in Text Processing. Discourse Processes 29(1):  37?60. 
288
Bilge Say, Deniz Zeyrek, Kemal Oflazer, and Umut ?zge. 2002. Development of a Corpus and a Treebank for Present-day Written Turkish. In Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference of Turkish Linguistics.  ?mit Deniz Turan and Deniz Zeyrek. 2010. Context, Contrast, and the Structure of Discourse in Turkish. ms. Bonnie Webber, Aravind Joshi, Eleni Miltsakaki, Rashmi Prasad, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, and Kate Forbes. 2005. A Short Introduction to the Penn Discourse Treebank. Copenhagen Working Papers in Language and Speech Processing. Bonnie Webber. D-LTAG: Extending Lexicalized TAG to Discourse. Cognitive Science, 28(5). September 2004. Bonnie Webber, Aravind Joshi, Matthew Stone, and Alistair Knott. 2003. Anaphora and Discourse Structure. Computational Linguistics 29(4). pp. 545-587. 2003 Laurie Williams, Robert R. Kessler, Ward Cunningham, Ron Jeffries. 2000. Strengthening the Case for Pair Programming. IEEE Software, July/August 2000, pp. 19-25. Laurie Williams and Kessler, Robert R. 2000. All I Really Need to Know about Pair Programming I Learned In Kindergarten, Communications of the ACM, Vol. 43, No., 5, pp. 108-114, May 2000. Deniz Zeyrek and Bonnie Webber. 2008. A Discourse Resource for Turkish: Annotating Discourse Connectives in the METU Turkish Corpus. The 6th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, The Third International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (IJNLP), Hyderabad, India, January 2008. Deniz Zeyrek, ?mit Turan, Cem Boz?ahin, Ruket ?ak?c?, Ay????? Sevdik-?all?, I??n Demir?ahin, Berfin Akta?, ?hsan Yal??nkaya, Hale ?gel. 2009. Annotating Subordinators in the Turkish Discourse Bank.ACL-IJCNLP, In Proceedings of LAW III Annotation Workshop III. Singapore, August 6-7, 2009, pp. 44-48. Appendix A. Sources of disagreement in 8 connectives (Turkish equivalents of ?but?, ?however?, ?for this reason?, ?despite?, ?on the other hand?, ?for this reason?, ?on the contrary?, ?in addition?)  Source of disagreement No. % Partial Arg1 overlap 151 63.98 Partial Arg2 overlap 24 10.17 No overlap of Arg1 23 9.74 Other 23 9.75 Lack of guidelines 8 3.39 Guidelines not followed 7 2.97 Total 236 100 
Appendix B. K values of connective types annotated in the TDB project5     K Value Connective (type) English equivalent  Arg1 Arg2 ne ..ne neither .. nor 1.000 0.982 veya or 0.942 0.980 dolay? since 0.892 0.957 ??nk? because 0.888 0.941 ?rne?in for  example 0.870 0.898 ya da or 0.843 0.974 yoksa otherwise 0.837 0.938 ama but 0.832 0.901 kar??n despite, despite this 0.824 0.893 hem .. hem both .. and 0.820 0.930 dahas? moreover 0.785 0.908 ama?la for the purpose of 0.785 0.876 i?in for, for this reason 0.776 0.915 oysa however 0.767 0.913 dolay?-s?yla for this reason 0.759 0.930 tersine on the contrary 0.741 1.000 fakat but 0.719 0.855 amac?yla for the purpose of 0.700 0.912 ve and 0.692 0.791 ra?men despite, despite this 0.688 0.742 ayr?ca in addition; separately 0.545 0.760 yandan on the one hand 0.523 0.645                                                        5 The results about the connective types for which 10 or more relations have been annotated by three annotators are included in the appendices. 
289
Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, pages 111?119,
Beijing, China, 21-22 August 2010. c?2010 Asian Federation for Natural Language Processing
 
Unaccusative/Unergative Distinction in Turkish:  
A Connectionist Approach 
Cengiz Acart?rk 
Middle East Technical University 
Ankara, Turkey 
acarturk@acm.org 
Deniz Zeyrek 
Middle East Technical University 
Ankara, Turkey 
dezeyrek@metu.edu.tr 
 
Abstract 
This study presents a novel computational 
approach to the analysis of unaccusa-
tive/unergative distinction in Turkish by 
employing feed-forward artificial neural 
networks with a backpropagation algo-
rithm. The findings of the study reveal cor-
respondences between semantic notions 
and syntactic manifestations of unaccusa-
tive/unergative distinction in this language, 
thus presenting a computational analysis of 
the distinction at the syntax/semantics in-
terface. The approach is applicable to other 
languages, particularly the ones which lack 
an explicit diagnostic such as auxiliary se-
lection but has a number of diagnostics in-
stead. 
1 Introduction 
Ever since Unaccusativity Hypothesis (UH, 
Perlmutter, 1978), it is widely recognized that 
there are two heterogeneous subclasses of in-
transitive verbs, namely unaccusatives and un-
ergatives. The phenomenon of unaccusa-
tive/unergative distinction is wide-ranging and 
labeled in a variety of ways, including active, 
split S, and split intransitivity (SI). (cf. Mithun, 
1991).1 
  Studies dealing with SI are numerous and re-
cently, works taking auxiliary selection as the 
basis of this syntactic phenomenon have in-
creased (cf. McFadden, 2007 and the references 
therein). However, SI in languages that lack 
                                                 
1  In this paper, the terms unaccusative/unergative 
distinction and split intransitivity (SI) are used 
interchangeably. 
explicit syntactic manifestations such as auxil-
iary selection has been less studied.2 Computa-
tional approaches are even scarcer. The major 
goal of this study is to discuss the linguistic is-
sues surrounding SI in Turkish and present a 
novel computational approach that decides 
which verbs are unaccusative and which verbs 
are unergative in this language. The computa-
tional approach may in turn be used to study the 
split in lesser-known languages, especially the 
ones lacking a clear diagnostic. It may also be 
used with well-known languages where the split 
is observed as a means to confirm earlier predic-
tions made about SI.  
2 Approaches to Split Intransitivity (SI) 
Broadly speaking, approaches to the SI may be 
syntactic or semantic. Syntactic approaches di-
vide intransitive verbs into two syntactically 
distinct classes. According to the seminal work 
of Perlmutter (1978), unaccusative and unerga-
tive verbs form two syntactically distinct classes 
of intransitive verbs. Within the context of Rela-
tional Grammar, Perlmutter (1978) proposed 
that unaccusative verbs have an underlying ob-
ject promoted to the subject position, while un-
ergative verbs have a base-generated subject. 
This hypothesis, known as the Unaccusativity 
Hypothesis (UH) maintains that the mapping of 
the sole argument of an intransitive verb onto 
syntax as subject or direct object is semantically 
predictable. The UH distinguishes active or ac-
tivity clauses (i.e., unergative clauses) from un-
accusative ones. Unergative clauses include 
                                                 
2 An exception is Japanese. For example see Kishimoto 
(1996), Hirakawa (1999), Oshita (1997), Sorace and Sho-
mura (2001), and the references therein. Also see Richa 
(2008) for Hindi. 
111
willed or volitional acts (work, speak) and cer-
tain involuntary bodily process predicates 
(cough, sleep); unaccusative clauses include 
predicates whose initial term is semantically 
patient (fall, die), predicates of existing and 
happening (happen, vanish), nonvoluntary 
emission predicates (smell, shine), aspectual 
predicates (begin, cease), and duratives (remain, 
survive). 
   From a Government and Binding perspective, 
Burzio (1986) differentiates between two in-
transitive classes by the verbs? theta-marking 
properties. In unaccusative verbs (labeled ?erga-
tives?), the sole argument is the same as the 
deep structure object; in unergative verbs, the 
sole argument is the same as the agent at the 
surface. The configuration of the two intransi-
tive verb types may be represented simply as 
follows: 
 
 Unergatives: NP [VP  V]  John ran. 
 Unaccusatives: [VP  V NP]   John fell. 
 
In its original formulation, the UH claimed that 
the determination of verbs as unaccusative or 
unergative somehow correlated with their se-
mantics and since then, there has been so much 
theoretical discussion about how strong this 
connection is. It has also been noted that a strict 
binary division is actually not tenable because 
across languages, some verbs fail to behave 
consistently with respect to certain diagnostics. 
For example, it has been shown that, with stan-
dard diagnostics, certain verbs such as last, stink, 
bleed, die, etc can be classified as unaccusative 
in one language, unergative in a different lan-
guage (Rosen, 1984; Zaenen, 1988, among 
many others). This situation is referred to as 
unaccusativity mismatches. New proposals that 
specifically focus on these problems have also 
been made (e.g., Sorace, 2000, below).  
2.1 The Connection of Syntax and Seman-
tics in SI  
Following the initial theoretical discussions 
about the connection between syntactic diagnos-
tics and their semantic underpinnings, various 
semantic factors were suggested. These involve 
directed change and internal/external causation 
(Levin & Rappaport-Hovav, 1995), inferable 
eventual position or state (Lieber & Baayen, 
1997), telicity and controllability (Zaenen, 
1993), and locomotion (see Randall, 2007; 
Alexiadou et al, 2004, and, Aranovich, 2007, 
and McFadden, 2007 for reviews). Some re-
searchers have suggested that syntax has no role 
in SI. For example, van Valin (1990), focusing 
on Italian, Georgian, and Achenese, proposed 
that SI is best characterized in terms of Aksion-
sart and volitionality. Kishimoto (1996) sug-
gested that volitionality is the semantic parame-
ter that largely determines unaccusa-
tive/unergative distinction in Japanese.  
   Auxiliary selection is among the most reliable 
syntactic diagnostics proposed for SI. This re-
fers to the auxiliary selection properties of lan-
guages that have two perfect auxiliaries corre-
sponding to be and have in English. In Romance 
and Germanic languages such as Italian, Dutch, 
German, and to a lesser extent French, the equi-
valents of be (essere, zijn, sein, etre) tend to be 
selected by unaccusative predicates while the 
equivalents of have (avere, haben, hebben, 
avoir) tend to be selected by unergative predi-
cates (Burzio, 1986; Zaenen, 1993; Keller, 
2000; Legendre, 2007, among others). In (1a?b) 
the situation is illustrated in French (F), German 
(G) and Italian (I). (Examples are from Legen-
dre, 2007). 
 
(1) a. Maria a travaill? (F)/hat gearbeitet 
(G)/ha lavorato (I).  
  ?Maria worked.? 
 b. Maria est venue (F)/ist gekommen 
(G)/? venuta (I).  
  ?Maria came.? 
 
Van Valin (1990) and Zaenen (1993) discuss 
auxiliary selection as a manifestation of the se-
mantic property of telicity. Hence in Dutch, 
zijn-taking verbs are by and large telic, hebben-
taking verbs are atelic.  
   Impersonal passivization is another diagnostic 
that seems applicable to a wide range of lan-
guages and used by a number of authors, e.g. 
Perlmutter (1978), Hoekstra and Mulder (1990), 
Keller (2000). This construction is predicted to 
be grammatical with unergative clauses but not 
with unaccusative clauses. Zaenen (1993) notes 
that impersonal passivization is controlled by 
the semantic notion of protagonist control in 
Dutch; therefore incompatibility of examples 
such as bleed with impersonal passivization is 
112
attributed to the fact that bleed is not a protago-nist control verb. Levin and Rappaport-Hovav (1995:141) take impersonal passivization as an unaccusativity diagnostic but take its sensitivity to protagonist control as a necessary but an in-sufficient condition for unergative verbs to al-low it. In other words, only unergative verbs will be found in this construction, though not all of them.    Refinements of the UH have also been pro-posed. Most notably, Sorace (2000) argued that the variation attested across languages (as well as within the dialects of a single language) is orderly, and that there are a number of cut-off points to which verb classes can be sensitive.     Sorace?s work on (monadic) intransitive verbs is built on variation in the perfective auxiliary selection of verbs in Romance and Germanic languages and called Auxiliary Selection Hier-archy (ASH). She demonstrates that the varia-tion is based on a hierarchy of thematic and as-pectual specification of the verbs (viz., telicity and agentivity) and that it is a function of the position of a verb on the hierarchy. Verbs with a high degree of aspectual and thematic specifica-tion occupy the extreme ends; variable verbs occupy the middle position, reflecting the de-creasing degree of aspectual specification. Both cross-dialectally and across languages, these verbs may be used either with unaccusative or unergative syntax.3 The ASH therefore is a de-scriptive statement considering auxiliary selec-tion as a property characterized by both syntax and semantics, as originally viewed by the UH.     We now turn to Turkish, which lacks perfec-tive auxiliaries. A number of other syntactic diagnostics, reviewed below, have been pro-posed but unlike auxiliaries in other languages, these are not obligatory constructions in Turk-ish. In addition, the semantic properties underly-ing the proposed diagnostics have not been studied extensively. Therefore, Turkish presents a particular challenge for any study about SI.                                                    3 The claim that the two notions of ASH lie within a single dimensional hierarchy has been questioned by Randall (2007). The ASH has also been criticized since it does not explain the reason why a certain language shows the pattern it does (McFadden, 2007).  
3 Diagnostics for SI in Turkish Just as other languages, intransitive verbs in Turkish are sensitive to a set of syntactic envi-ronments, summarized below. 3.1   The ?ArAk Construction One of the diagnostics is the ?ArAk construc-tion, which is an adverbial clause formed with the root verb plus the morpheme ?ArAk (?zkarag?z, 1986). In a Turkish clause which involves the verbal suffix ?ArAk, both the con-troller (the complement verb) and the target (the matrix verb) have to be either unaccusative or unergative. In addition, both the controlled and the target have to be the final (surface) subjects of the clause. The examples below contain sen-tences where both the controller and the target verbs are unaccusative (2) or both are unerga-tive (3). The examples also contain ungram-matical sentences where the controller verb is unergative whereas the target verb is unaccusa-tive (4), and those in which the controller verb is unaccusative whereas the target verb is unergative (5). (Examples are from ?zkarag?z, 1986). (2) Hasan [kol-u  kana -y -arak] ac? ?ek  -ti.             arm-POSS bleed-GL-ArAk suffer -PST  ?Hasan, while his arm bled, suffered.?  (3) K?z [ (top) oyna-y -arak]    ?ark? s?yle-di.  girl    ball  play-GL-ArAk   sing -PST  ?The girl, while playing (ball), sang.?  (4) * K?z [ (top) oyna-y -arak]    kay-d?.     girl    ball  play-GL-ArAk   slip -PST  ?The girl, while playing (ball), slipped.?  (5) * K?z [kayak kay-arak]   d??-t?.     girl    ski-ArAk              fall-PST  ?The girl, while skiing, fell.? 3.2   Double Causatives  Double construction is allowed with unaccusa-tive verbs but not with unergatives, as shown in (6) and (7) below (?zkarag?z, 1986). (6) Sema Turhan-a                ?i?e?-i         sol- dur     -t      -tu.                       -DAT flower-ACC fade-CAUS-CAUS-PST 
113
 ?Sema made Turhan cause the flower to fade.? (7) * Ben Turhan-a Sema-y? ko?-tur       -t       -t   -um  I                 -DAT   -ACC run-CAUS-CAUS-PST-1sg  ?I made Turhan make Sema run.? 3.3   Gerund Constructions The gerund constructions ?Irken ?while? and  ?IncE ?when? are further diagnostics. The for-mer denotes simultaneous action and the latter denotes consecutive action. Unergative verbs are predicted to be compatible with the ?Irken construction, whereas unaccusatives are pre-dicted to be compatible with the ?IncE con-struction, as shown in (8) and (9).4   (8) Adam ?al??-?rken esne-di.  man work-Irken yawn-PAST.3per.sg  ?The man yawned while working.? (9) Atlet tak?l-?nca    d??-t?.  athlete trip-IncE fall-PAST.3per.sg  ?The athlete when tripped fell.? 3.4   The Suffix ?Ik It has also been suggested that the derivational suffix ?Ik, used for deriving adjectives from verbs, is compatible with unaccusatives but not with unergatives, as shown in (10) and (11).   (10) bat-?k    gemi  sink-Ik  ship  the sunk ship (11) *?al??-?k adam   work-Ik man  the worked man  3.5   The ?mI? Participle The past participle marker ?mI?, which is used for deriving adjectives from verbs has been pro-posed as yet another diagnostic. The suffix ?mI? forms participles with transitive and intransitive verbs, as well as passivized verbs. The basic requirement for the acceptability of the ?mI? participle is the existence of an internal argu-ment in the clause. In well-formed ?mI? partici-ples, the modified noun must be the external                                                  4 Examples in sections 3.3 and 3.4 are from Nakipo?lu (1998). 
argument of a transitive verb (e.g., anne ?mother? in [12]), or the internal argument of a passivized verb (e.g., bor? ?debt? in [13]). The internal argument of a transitive verb is not al-lowed as the modified noun as illustrated in (14).   (12) ?ocu?u-n-u      b?rak-m?? anne  Child-POSS-ACC  leave-mI?  mother  ?a/the mother who left her children? (13) ?de-n-mi? bor?  pay-PASS-mI?  debt  ?the paid debt? (14) *?de-mi?  bor?  pay-mI?    debt  *?the pay debt?  As expected, the adjectives formed by intransi-tive verbs and the ?mI? participle is more ac-ceptable with unaccusatives compared to uner-gatives, as shown in (15) and (16).  (15) sol-mu?/ karar-m?? ?i?ek  wilt/ blacken -mI? flower  ?The wilted/blackened flower? (16) *s??ra-m??/ y?z-m??/ ba??r-m?? ?ocuk  jump/ swim/ shout -mI? child  ?The jumped/ swum/ shouted child? 3.6   Impersonal Passivization Impersonal passivization, used as a diagnostic to single out unergatives by some researchers, appears usable for Turkish as well. In Turkish, impersonal passives carry the phonologically conditioned passive suffix marker, -Il, accom-panied by an indefinite human interpretation and a resistance to agentive by-phrases. It has been suggested that the tense in which the verb appears affects the acceptability of impersonal passives: when the verb is in the aorist, the im-plicit subject has an arbitrary interpretation, i.e. either a generic or existential interpretation. On the other hand, in those cases when the verb is in past tense, the implicit subject has a referen-tial meaning, namely a first person plural read-ing. It was therefore suggested that impersonal passivization is a proper diagnostic environment only in the past tense, which was also adopted in the present study (Nakipo?lu-Demiralp, 2001, cf. Sezer, 1991). (17) and (18) exemplify 
114
impersonal passivization with the verb in the past tense.  (17) Burada ko?uldu.  Here     run-PASS-PST  ?There was running here.? (existential interpretation)  (18) ??Bu yetimhanede     b?y?nd?.  This orphanage-LOC grow-PASS-PST  ?It was grown in this orphanage.?  The diagnostics summarized above do not al-ways pick out the same verbs in Turkish. For example, most diagnostics will fare well with the verbs d??- ?fall?, gel- ?come?, gir- ?enter? (with a human subject) just as well as imper-sonal passivization. In other words, these verbs are unaccusative according to most diagnostics and unergative according to impersonal passivization. The opposite of this situation also holds. The stative verb devam et- ?continue? is bad or marginally acceptable with most diagnostics as well as impersonal passivization.    The conclusion is that in Turkish, acceptabil-ity judgments with the proposed diagnostic en-vironments do not yield a clear distinction be-tween unaccusative and unergative verbs. In addition, it is not clear which semantic proper-ties these diagnostics are correlated with. The model described below is expected to provide some answers to these issues. It is based on na-tive speaker judgments but it goes beyond them by computationally showing that there are cor-respondences between semantic notions and syntactic manifestations of SI in Turkish. The model is presented below. 4 The Model This study employs feed-forward artificial neu-ral networks with a backpropagation algorithm as computational models for the analysis of un-accusative/unergative distinction in Turkish. 4.1 Artificial Neural Networks and Learn-ing Paradigms  An artificial neural network (ANN) is a compu-tational model that can be used as a non-linear statistical data modeling tool. ANNs are gener-ally used for deriving a function from observa-tions, in applications where the data are com-plex and it is difficult to devise a relationship 
between observations and outputs by hand. ANNs are characterized by interconnected group of artificial neurons, namely nodes. An ANN generally has three major layers of nodes: a single input layer, a single or multiple hidden layers, and a single output layer. In a feedfor-ward ANN, the outputs from all the nodes go to succeeding but not preceding layers.    There are three major learning paradigms that are used for training ANNs: supervised learning, unsupervised learning, and reinforcement learn-ing. A backpropagation algorithm is a super-vised learning method which is used for teach-ing a neural network how to perform a specific task. Accordingly, a feed-forward ANN with a backpropagation algorithm is a computational tool that models the relationship between obser-vations and output by employing supervised learning method (see Hertz et al, 1991; Ander-son & Rosenfeld, 1988, among many others for ANNs). The following section presents how such an ANN is used for analyzing unaccusa-tive/unergative distinction in Turkish.  4.2 The Analysis  Two feed-forward ANNs with a backpropaga-tion algorithm were developed for the analysis. Both models had a single input layer, a single hidden layer, and a single output layer of nodes. Both models had a single output node, which represents the binary status of a given verb as unaccusative (0) or unergative (1). The number of nodes in the hidden layer was variable (see below for a discussion of network parameters).     The difference between the two models was the design of the input layer. The first model (henceforth, the diagnostics model DIAG) took diagnostics as input nodes, whereas the second model (henceforth, the semantic parameters model SEMANP) took semantic parameters as input nodes, as presented in detail below.    The Diagnostics Model (DIAG): Binary ac-ceptability values of the phrases or sentences formed by the syntactic diagnostics constituted the input nodes for the network (see above for the SI diagnostics). Each syntactic diagnostic provided a binary value (either 0 or 1) to one of the input nodes. For example, consider the ?mI? participle as one of the syntactic diagnostics for SI in Turkish. As discussed above, the ?mI? par-ticiple forms acceptable adjectival phrases with 
115
unaccusative verbs (e.g., sol- ?wilt?) but not with the unergative verbs (e.g., s??ra- ?jump, leap?), as shown in (19) and (20) below.     (19) sol-mu? ?i?ek-ler             wilt-mI? flower-PLU            ?wilted flowers?    (20) *s??ra-m?? sporcu-lar              jump-mI?   sportsman-PLU             ?jumped sportsmen?  Accordingly, for the verb sol- ?wilt?, the ?mI? participle diagnostic provides the value 1 with one of the input nodes, whereas for the verb s??ra- ?jump, leap? it provides the value 0 with the corresponding input node. In this way, the syntactic diagnostics constituted an input pat-tern with eight members for each verb.5 The construction of an input pattern is exemplified in (21) for the unergative verb konu?- ?talk?.  (21) A sample input pattern for DIAG. a. *Adam konu?arak k?zard?. :0  The man talk-ArAk blush-PST   ?The man blushed by talking.?  b. Adam konu?arak y?r?d?. :1  The man talk-Arak walk-PST   ?The man walked by talking.?  c. *Adam kad?na ?ocu?u konu?turttu. :0  ?The man made the woman have the boy talked.?  d. Adam konu?urken y?r?d?. :1  The man talk-Irken walk-PST     ?The man walked while talking.?  e. Adam konu?unca y?r?d?. :1  The man speak-IncE walk-PST   ?The man walked when he talked.?  f. *Konu?-uk adam :0  Talk-Ik man   ?The talked man?  g. *Konu?-mu? adam :0  Talk-mI? man   ?The talked man?  h. T?rende konu?uldu. :1  Ceremony-LOC talk-PASS   ?It was spoken in the ceremony.?                                                   5  One of the syntactic diagnostics (the gerund suffix   ?ArAk ) involves two verbs (i.e., the target and the matrix verb). Therefore, two sentences/phrases were formed?one with unaccusatives and the other with unergatives?which provided two binary values with the input pattern. 
Accordingly, the input pattern for the verb konu?- ?talk? is schematically shown below. 0 1 0 1 1 0 0 1    The Semantic Parameters Model (SE-MANP): The input nodes for the SEMANP network were constituted by four binary values that represented the status of four semantic pa-rameters (telicity, volitionality, dynamicity, and directed motion) for each verb. Each semantic parameter provided a binary value (either 0 or 1) to one of the input nodes. The value of the input nodes were determined by applying the follow-ing tests for the relevant semantic aspects: (1) in/for an hour test for telicity (e.g. the phrase to talk *in/for an hour shows that the verb talk is atelic whereas the phrase to wilt in/*for an hour shows that the verb wilt is telic), (2) on purpose test for volitionality, (3) hala- ?still? test for dy-namicity, (4) and the dative test (i.e., acceptabil-ity of adding a dative term to the verb) for di-rected motion.    The construction of an input pattern for SE-MANP is exemplified in (22) for the unaccusa-tive verb sol- ?wilt?.  (22) A sample input pattern for DIAG. a. Telic :1 b. Non-volitional :0 c. Non-dynamic :0 d. No directed motion :0  Accordingly, the input pattern for the verb sol- ?wilt? is schematically shown below. 1 0 0 0 4.3 The Training Phase The network was trained by providing patterns for 52 verbs that are recognized as unaccusa-tives in the SI literature or placed closer to the unaccusative end rather than the unergative end of the Auxiliary Selection Hierarchy (ASH, So-race, 2000); and 52 verbs that are recognized to be unaccusative in the SI literature or placed closer to the unergative end rather than the un-accusative end of the ASH. As a result, a total of 104 input patterns, each composed of eight nodes, were used to train the DIAG model and 104 input patterns, each composed of four nodes, were used to train the SEMANP model. The 
116
single output node was set to 0 if the verb with the given input pattern was unaccusative and it was set to 1 if the verb was unergative. Super-vised learning method was used, as employed by the backpropagation algorithm.    One hidden layer with a variable number of hidden units was used (see below for the analy-sis of model parameters). Sigmoid activation function, shown in (23), was used for modeling the activation function.  (23)   
x
e
xf
?
+
=
1
1
)(
  The number of maximum iterations per epoch was set to 20. The system sensitivity was de-fined by a global variable (?=0.01) which de-cided whether the loops in the code converge or not. 4.4 The Test Phase The DIAG and SEMANP models were tested by providing the following input patterns:    Group A: five verbs that are either recog-nized as unaccusatives in the SI literature or placed closer to the unaccusative end rather than the unergative end of the ASH.    Group B: Five verbs that are either recog-nized as unergatives in the SI literature or placed closer to the unergative end rather than the unaccusative end of the ASH.    Group C: Three verbs that are reported to exhibit variable behavior within the ASH.    After the training, the networks provided the binary outputs for the test verbs, which showed whether a test verb was unaccusative or unerga-tive according to the models. 5 Results The results are presented in the two sections below, separately for the DIAG model and for the SEMANP model. 5.1 The DIAG Model After the training of the network and the opti-mization of the number of hidden units and the learning rate, the DIAG model classified all verbs in Group A as unaccusatives. The model 
also classified all Group-B verbs as unergatives. Finally, the model categorized three Group-C verbs that were reported to show variable be-havior (kana- ?bleed?, parla- ?shine? and ???- ?be, feel cold?) as unaccusative verbs in Turkish.    The distribution of weights after the training showed that the ?mI? participle received the highest weight, which indicates that the ?mI? participle is the most reliable diagnostics for analyzing unaccusative/unergative distinction in Turkish. 5.2  The SEMANP Model The SEMANP model classified two of the Group-A verbs (namely, gir- ?enter? and yeti?- ?grow?) as unaccusatives and the three remain-ing verbs (dur- ?remain, stay?, kal- ?stall, stay, and varol- ?exist?) as unergatives. The model also classified four of five Group-B verbs (g?l- ?laugh?, s?r?t- ?grin?, s?ylen- ?mutter?, yak?n- ?complain?) as unergatives and the remaining verb (y?z- ?swim?) as unaccusative. Finally, the model categorized three Group-C verbs (kana- ?bleed?, parla- ?shine? and ???- ?be, feel cold?) as unaccusative verbs in Turkish. The distribution of weights after the training showed that among the four semantic parame-ters that were selected in this study, telicity re-ceived the highest weight, which indicates that unaccusative and unergative verbs are most sen-sitive to the telicity aspect of the verb in Turkish. 5.3 Evaluation of Model Parameters Four model design parameters, their initial val-ues and acceptable ranges after optimization are discussed below.    The number of hidden units: The number of hidden layers was set to 1 as a non-variable de-sign parameter of the network. The initial num-ber of hidden units was set to 3. Keeping the learning rate (?=-0.25) and the momentum term (?=0.25) constant, the number of hidden units was adjusted and the behavior of the network was observed. The analyses showed that the optimum range for the number of hidden units was between 2 and 6.    The learning rate: The learning rate was ini-tially set to ?=-0.25. Keeping the number of hidden units (hidden_size=3) and the momen-tum term (?=0.25) constant, adjusting the learn-
117
ing rate between ?=-0.005 and ?=-0.9 did not have an effect on the results.    The momentum term: The momentum term was set to ?=0.25 initially. Keeping the number of hidden units (hidden_size=3) and the learn-ing rate (?=-0.25) constant, adjusting the mo-mentum term between ?=0.01 and ?=1.0 did not have an effect on the results. However, the sys-tem did not converge to a solution for the mo-mentum term equal to and greater than ?=1.0. 6 Discussion A major finding of the suggested model is that the predictions of the two models are compati-ble with the UH (Perlmutter, 1978) in that they divide most intransitive verbs into two, as ex-pected. Furthermore, the differences between the decisions of the diagnostics-based DIAG model and the semantic-parameters-based  SEMANP model reflect a reported finding in the unaccusativity literature, i.e., the tests used to differentiate between unaccusatives and unergatives do not uniformly delegate all verbs to the same classes (the solution of why such mismatches occur in Turkish is beyond the scope of this study, see Sorace, 2000; Randall, 2007, for some suggestions). More specifically, the three Group-A verbs that were predicted as unaccusative by the DIAG model and unerga-tive by the SEMANP model (dur- ?remain, stay?, kal- ?stall, stay, and varol- ?exist?) are stative verbs, which are known to show inconsistent behavior in the literature and classified as vari-able-behavior verbs by Sorace (2000). An un-expected finding is the Group-B verb (y?z- ?swim?), which is predicted as unergative by the DIAG model and unaccusative by the SEMANP model. This seems to reflect the role of seman-tic parameters other than telicity (namely, dy-namicity and directed motion) in Turkish. The remaining nine verbs of thirteen tested verbs were predicted to be of the same type (either unaccusative or unergative) by both models.    Another finding of the model is the alignment between the most weighted syntactic diagnos-tics for unaccusative/unergative distinction in Turkish, namely the ?mI? participle which re-ceived the highest weight after the training, and the most weighted semantic parameter, namely telicity.  
7 Conclusion and Future Research This study contributes to our understanding of the distinction in several respects.    Firstly, it proposes a novel computational ap-proach that tackles the unaccusative/unergative distinction in Turkish. The model confirms that a split between unaccusative and unergative verbs indeed exists in Turkish but that the divi-sion is not clear-cut. The model suggests that certain verbs (e.g., stative verbs) behave incon-sistently, as mentioned in most accounts in the literature. Moreover, the model reflects a corre-spondence between syntactic diagnostics and semantics, which supports the view that unaccu-sativity is semantically determined and syntacti-cally manifested (Permutter, 1978, Levin & Rappaport-Hovav, 1995). Since this approach uses relevant language-dependent features, it is particularly applicable to languages that lack explicit syntactic diagnostics of SI.    The computational approach is based on the connectionist paradigm which employs feed-forward artificial neural networks with a back-propagation algorithm. There are several dimen-sions in which the model will further be devel-oped. First, the reliability of input node values will be strengthened by conducting acceptability judgment experiments with native speakers, and the training of the model will be improved by increasing the number of verbs used for training. Acceptability judgments are influenced not only by verbs but also by other constituents in clauses or sentences; therefore the input data will be improved to involve different senses of verbs under various sentential constructions. Second, alternative classifiers, such as decision trees and na?ve Bayes, as well as the classifiers that use discretized weights may provide more informative accounts of the findings of SI in Turkish. These alternatives will be investigated in further studies.     Acknowledgements We thank Cem Boz?ahin and three anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments and suggestions. All remaining errors are ours.     
118
References Alexiadou, Artemis, Anagnostopoulou, Elena, and Everaert, Martin (eds.). 2004. The unaccusativity puzzle: Explorations of the syntax-lexicon inter-face. Oxford University Press. Anderson, James, and Rosenfeld, Edward. 1988. Neurocomputing: Foundations of research. MIT Press. Aranovich, Ra?l (ed.). 2007. Split auxiliary systems. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins. Burzio, Luigi. 1986. Italian syntax: A Government-Binding approach. Dordrecht: Reidel. Hertz, John, Krogh, Anders, and Palmer, Richard G. 1991. Introduction to the theory of neural compu-tation. Addison-Wesley, Massachusetts. Hirakawa, Makiko. 1999. L2 acquisition of Japanese unaccusative verbs by speakers of English and Chinese. In The acquisition of japanese as a se-cond language, ed. Kazue Kanno, 89-113. Am-sterdam: John Benjamins. Hoekstra, Teun, and Mulder, Ren?. 1990. Unergati-ves as copular verbs: Locational and existential predication. The Linguistic Review 7: 1-79. Keller, Frank. 2000. Gradience in grammar: Expe-rimental and computational aspects of degrees of grammaticality. University of Edinburgh disserta-tion. Kishimoto, Hideki. 1996. Split intransitivity in Japa-nese and the Unaccusative Hypothesis. Language 72: 248-286. Legendre, G?raldine. 2007. On the typology of auxi-liary selection. Lingua 117: 1522-1540. Levin, Beth, and Rappaport-Hovav, Malka. 1995. Unaccusativity at the syntax-lexical semantics in-terface. MIT Press. Lieber, R., and Baayen, H. 1997. A semantic princi-ple of auxiliary selection in Dutch. Natural Lan-guage and Linguistic Theory 15: 789-845. McFadden, Thomas. 2007. Auxiliary selection. Lan-guage and Linguistics Compass 1/6: 674-708. Mithun, Marianne. 1991. Active/agentive case mar-king and its motivations. Language 67: 510-546. Nakipo?lu, Mine. 1998. Split intransitivity and the syntax-semantics interface in Turkish, Minneapo-lis: University of Minnesota dissertation. Nakipo?lu-Demiralp, Mine. 2001. The referential properties of the implicit arguments of impersonal passive constructions. In The verb in Turkish, ed. 
E. Eser Taylan, 129-150, John Benjamins. Oshita, Hiroyuki. 1997. The unaccusative trap: L2 acquisition of English intransitive verbs. Universi-ty of Southern California dissertation. ?zkarag?z, ?nci Z. 1986. The relational structure of Turkish syntax, San Diego: University of Califor-nia dissertation. Perlmutter, David M. 1978. Impersonal passives and the Unaccusative Hypothesis. In Proceedings of the Fourth Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Lingui-stics Society, ed. Farrell Ackerman et al, 157-189. Randall, J. 2007. Parameterized auxiliary selection: A fine-grained interaction of features and linking rules. In Split auxiliary systems, ed. Ra?l Arano-vich, 207-236. John Benjamins. Richa, Srishti. 2008. Unaccusativity, unergativity and the causative alternation in Hindi: A minima-list analysis. New Delhi: Jawaharlal Nehru Uni-versity dissertation. Rosen, Carol G. 1984. The interface between seman-tic roles and initial grammatical relations. In Stu-dies in relational grammar, eds. Carol G. Rosen and David M. Perlmutter. University of Chicago Press. Sezer, Engin. 1991. Issues in Turkish syntax. Cam-bridge: Harvard University dissertation. Sorace, Antonella. 2000. Gradients in auxiliary se-lection with intransitive verbs. Language 76: 859-890. Sorace, Antonella, and Shomura, Yoko. 2001. Lexi-cal constraints on the acquisition of split intransiti-vity. Evidence from L2 Japanese. Studies in Se-cond Language Acquisition 23: 247-278. van Valin, Robert D., Jr. 1990. Semantic parameters of split transitivity. Language 66: 221-260. Zaenen, Annie. 1988. Unaccusative verbs in Dutch and the syntax-semantics interface. CSLI Reports 88-123, CSLI, Stanford University. Zaenen, Annie. 1993. Unaccusativity in Dutch: Inte-grating syntax and lexical semantics. In Semantics and the lexicon, ed. James Pustejovsky. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
119
Proceedings of the 7th Linguistic Annotation Workshop & Interoperability with Discourse, pages 122?130,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9, 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
 
 
Applicative Structures and Immediate Discourse in the Turkish 
Discourse Bank 
 
 
I??n Demir?ahin, Adnan ?zt?rel, Cem Boz?ahin, and Deniz Zeyrek 
Department of Cognitive Science, Informatics Institute 
Middle East Technical University 
{disin,ozturel,bozsahin,zeyrek}@metu.edu.tr 
 
  
 
Abstract 
Various discourse theories have argued for da-
ta structures ranging from the simplest trees to 
the most complex chain graphs. This paper in-
vestigates the structure represented by the ex-
plicit connectives annotated in the multiple-
genre Turkish Discourse Bank (TDB). The de-
pendencies that violate tree-constraints are an-
alyzed. The effects of information structure in 
the surface form, which result in seemingly 
complex configurations with underlying sim-
ple dependencies, are introduced; and the 
structural implications are discussed. The re-
sults indicate that our current approach to local 
discourse structure needs to accommodate 
properly contained arguments and relations, 
and partially overlapping as well as shared ar-
guments; deviating further from simple trees, 
but not as drastically as a chain graph structure 
would imply, since no genuine cases of struc-
tural crossing dependencies are attested in 
TDB. 
1 Introduction 
A variety of structures for discourse representa-
tion has been proposed, including successive 
trees of varying sizes connected and occasionally 
intertwined at the peripheries (Hobbs, 1985), a 
single tree structure (Rhetorical Structure Theo-
ry, RST, Mann & Thompson, 1988), entity 
chains (Knott et al 2001), tree-adjoining gram-
mars (Discourse-Lexicalized Tree Adjoining 
Grammar, D-LTAG, Webber, 2004), directed 
acyclic graphs (Lee et al, 2006, 2008) and chain 
graphs (Wolf & Gibson, 2005).  
The simplest of these structures is a tree, 
which treats discourse structure simpler than 
sentence-level syntax. The most complex repre-
sentation, chain graphs that allow for crossing 
dependencies and other tree-violations, treats 
discourse as more complex than sentence level. 
We know since the work of Shieber (1985) and 
Joshi (1985) that sentence-level structures re-
quire more than context-free power, but not to 
the extent of dealing with general graphs, or with 
strings that grow out of constant control.  It is of 
general interest to discover whether such com-
plexity occurs in natural discourses, because we 
would like to know how far discourse structures 
deviate from applicative semantics. (Applicative 
structures are binary operations on data; for ex-
ample a connective?s meaning depending only on 
two arguments. A system is applicative if it only 
makes use of function application, but not e.g. 
graph reduction or general function composition. 
The concepts are distinct but related: function 
application can be linked to applicative structures 
by currying.) If more complex structures are 
found, we must go above applicative semantics, 
and we must worry about function compositions 
and graph reductions, which are known to re-
quire more computational power.  
2 Turkish Discourse Bank 
Turkish Discourse Bank (TDB) is the first large-
scale publicly available language resource with 
discourse level annotations for Turkish built on a 
~ 400,000-word sub-corpus of METU Turkish 
Corpus (MTC) (Say et al, 2002), annotated in 
the style of Penn Discourse Tree Bank (PDTB) 
(Prasad et al, 2008). The TDB Relations are 
annotated for explicit discourse connectives, 
which link two spans of text that can be inter-
preted as Abstract Objects (Asher, 1993). Con-
nectives are annotated together with their modi-
fiers and arguments,and with supplementary 
materials for the arguments (Zeyrek & Webber, 
2008; Zeyrek et al, 2010). The first release of 
TDB is available at http://medid.ii.metu.edu.tr/.  
122
  
As in PDTB, the connectives in TDB come 
from a variety of syntactic classes (Zeyrek & 
Webber, ibid). The coordinating and subordinat-
ing conjunctions such as ve ?and? and i?in ?for? 
and ?in order to?, respectively, are considered 
structural connectives, meaning that they take 
both arguments structurally. Discourse adverbials 
and phrasal expressions that are built by combin-
ing a discourse-anaphoric element with a subor-
dinating conjunction are considered to be ana-
phoric connectives, meaning that they only take 
the argument that is syntactically related, and the 
other argument is interpreted anaphorically. In 
PDTB and TDB style, the syntactically related 
argument is called the second argument (Arg2), 
and the other argument is called the first argu-
ment (Arg1), for both structural and anaphoric 
connectives. The syntactic class of the discourse 
connective will be included in the further releas-
es of TDB along with the sense of the discourse 
relations, and some morphological features for 
the arguments of subordinating conjunctions 
(Demir?ahin et al, 2012). 
3 Discourse Relation Configurations in 
Turkish 
Lee et al (2006) identified independent relations 
and fully embedded relations as conforming to 
the tree structure, and shared arguments, proper-
ly contained arguments, pure crossing, and par-
tially overlapping arguments as departures from 
the tree structure in PDTB. Although most depar-
tures from the tree structure can be accounted for 
by non-structural explanations, such as anaphora 
and attribution, Lee et al (2006, 2008) state that 
shared arguments may have to be accepted in 
discourse structure. 
Akta? et al (2010) identified similar structures 
in TDB, adding nested relations that do not vio-
late tree structure constraints, as well as properly 
contained relations that introduce further devia-
tions from trees. Following their terminology, we 
will reserve the word relation to discourse rela-
tions (or coherence relations), and use the term 
configuration to refer to relations between dis-
course relations.  
1.1 Independent, Fully Embedded and 
Nested Relations 
The first release of TDB consists of 8,484 explic-
it relations. The argument spans of some dis-
course connectives do not overlap with those of 
any other connectives in the corpus. We call 
them independent relations. All others are called 
non-independent relations. We have identified 
2,548 non-independent configurations consisting 
of 3,474 unique relations, meaning that 5,010 
relations (59.05%) are independent. Table 1 
shows the distribution of 2,548 non-independent 
configurations.  
 
Configuration # %
Full Embedding 695 27.28
Nested Relations 138 5.42
Total Non-violating  
Configurations 833 32.69
Shared Argument 489 19.19
Prop. Cont. Argument 194 7.61
Prop. Cont. Relation 1018 39.95
Pure Crossing 2 0.08
Partial Overlap 12 0.47
Total Violating  
Configurations 1715 67.31
Total 2548 100.00
 
Table 1: Distribution of non-independent config-
urations 
 
Since full embedding and nested relations con-
form to tree structure, these configurations will 
not be discussed further. The following subsec-
tions discuss the suitability of explanations in-
volving anaphora and attribution to tree-violating 
configurations. Those that cannot be completely 
explained away must be accommodated by the 
discourse structure. 
1.2 Shared Arguments 
Lee et al (2006, 2008) state that shared argu-
ment is one of the configurations that cannot be 
explained away, and should be accommodated by 
discourse structure. Similarly, Egg & Redeker 
(2008) admit that even in a corpus annotated 
within RST Framework, which enforces tree 
structure by annotation guidelines, there is a 
genre-specific structure that is similar to the 
shared arguments in Lee et al (2006). 
 
  
Figure 1 - Shared Argument  
 
123
  
Of the 489 shared arguments in TDB, 331 be-
long to anaphoric discourse relations (i.e. rela-
tions in which at least one of the connectives 
involved is either a discourse adverbial or a 
phrasal expression) (67.69%). In the remaining 
158 relations (32.31%), arguments are shared by 
structural connectives. (1) is an example of a 
shared argument.  
 
(1) 00001131-2&3  
(a) Vazge?mek kolayd?, ertelemek de. Ama 
t?rmanmaya ba?land? m? bitirilmeli! ??nk? her 
seferinde ac?mas?z bir geriye d?n?? vard?. 
?It was easy to give up, so was to postpone. But 
once you start climbing you have to go all the 
way! Because there was a cruel comeback 
everytime.?  
(b) Vazge?mek kolayd?, ertelemek de. Ama 
t?rmanmaya ba?land? m? bitirilmeli! ??nk? her 
seferinde ac?mas?z bir geriye d?n?? vard?. 
?It was easy to give up, so was to postpone. But 
once you start climbing you have to go all the 
way! Because there was a cruel comeback 
everytime.? 
 
All examples are from TDB; the first line indi-
cates the file name (00077211 in (1)), and the 
browser index of the connectives involved in the 
configuration (2 & 3 in (1)). The first arguments 
(Arg1) of the connectives are in italic, the second 
arguments (Arg2) are in bold. The connectives 
themselves are underlined. For the sake of sim-
plicity, the modifiers of the connectives are dis-
played as part of the connective, and the shared 
tags are omitted when they are immaterial to the 
configuration being discussed. 
In (1), the first argument of but (relation 2) 
annotated in (a) completely overlaps with the 
first argument of because (relation 3), annotated 
in (b) on the same text for comparison. The result 
is a shared argument configuration. 
1.3 Properly Contained Relations and Ar-
guments 
In TDB there are 1,018 properly contained rela-
tions, almost half of which (471 relations; 
46.27%) are caused by anaphoric relations. 
Properly contained relations where anaphoric 
connectives are not involved can be caused by 
attribution, complement clauses, and relative 
clauses. (2) is a relation within a relative clause 
(a), which is part of another relation in the matrix 
clause (b). The result is a properly contained 
relation. 
  
(2) 00001131-27&28 
(a) Sabah ?ok erken saatte bir ?nceki ak?am 
g?n batmadan hemen ?nce ast??? ?ama??rlar? 
toplamaya ??k?yordu ve do?al olarak da g?n 
batmadan o g?nk? ?ama??rlar? asmak i?in 
geliyordu. 
?She used to go out to gather the clean laundry 
she had hung to dry right before the sun went 
down the previous evening, and naturally she 
came before sunset to hang the laundry of the 
day.? 
(b) Sabah ?ok erken saatte bir ?nceki ak?am g?n 
batmadan hemen ?nce ast??? ?ama??rlar? 
toplamaya ??k?yordu ve do?al olarak da g?n 
batmadan o g?nk? ?ama??rlar? asmak i?in 
geliyordu. 
?She used to go out to gather the clean laundry 
she had hung to dry the previous evening right 
before the sun went down, and naturally she 
came before sunset to hang the laundry of the 
day.? 
 
 a. Full Embedding 
 
 b. Properly Contained Relation 
 
Figure 2 - Properly Contained Relation vs. Full 
Embedding 
 
Sometimes a verb of attribution is the only el-
ement that causes proper containment. Lee et al 
(2006) argue that since the relation between the 
verb of attribution and the owner of the attribu-
tion is between an abstract object and an entity, 
and not between two abstract objects, it is not a 
124
  
relation on the discourse level. Therefore, those 
stranded verbs of attribution should not be re-
garded as tree-structure violations. In (3) the 
properly contained relations occur in a quote, but 
the intervening materials are more than just verbs 
of attribution. Because the intervening materials 
in (3) are whole sentences that participate in 
complex discourse structures, we believe that (3) 
is different than the case proposed by Lee et al 
(2006) and should be considered a genuine case 
of properly contained relation. 
 
(3) 00003121-10, 11&13  
(a) "Evet, k???k amcamd? o, nur i?inde yats?n, 
yetmi?lik bir rak?y? devirip ipi sek sek ge?meye 
kalkm??; kaptan olan amcam ise kocaman bir 
gemiyi sulara g?md?. Aylardan kas?md?, ben 
?ocuktum, ?ok iyi an?ms?yorum, f?rt?nal? bir 
gecede, Karadeniz?in bat?s?nda batm??lard?. 
Kaptand?, ama y?zme bilmezdi amcam. Bir 
namaz tahtas?na sar?lm?? olarak k?y?ya 
vurdu?unda kollar?n? zor a?m??lar, yar? yar?ya 
donmu?. Belki de o anda Tanr??ya yakar?p 
yard?m istiyordu, ??nk? ?ok dindar bir adamd?. 
Ama art?k de?il; k?p gibi i?ip meyhanelerde 
keman ?al?yor." Sonra da Nesli?nin ilgiyle 
?at?lm?? aln?na bak?p g?l?yor: "?ok istavritsin!" 
?Yes, he was my younger uncle, may he rest in 
peace, he tried to hop on the tightrope after 
quaffing down a bottle of raki; my other uncle 
who was a captain, on the other hand, sank a 
whole ship. It was October, I was a child, I re-
member it vividly, in a stormy night, they sank 
by the west of the Black Sea. He was a captain, 
but he couldn?t swim, my uncle. When he 
washed ashore holding onto a piece of driftwood, 
they pried open his arms with great difficulty, he 
was half frozen. Maybe at that moment he was 
begging God for help, because he was a very 
religious man. But not anymore, now he hits the 
bottle and plays the violin in taverns.? Then he 
sees Nesli?s interested frown and laughs: 
?You?re so gullible!?   
(b) "Evet, [...] Ama art?k de?il; k?p gibi i?ip 
meyhanelerde keman ?al?yor." Sonra da 
Nesli?nin ilgiyle ?at?lm?? aln?na bak?p g?l?yor: 
"?ok istavritsin!" 
?Yes, [...]But not anymore, now he hits the bottle 
and plays the violin in taverns.? Then he sees 
Nesli?s interested frown and laughs: ?You?re 
so gullible!? 
 
Whereas attribution can be discarded as a non-
discourse relation, a discourse model based on 
discourse connectives should be able to accom-
modate partially contained relations resulting 
from relations within complements of verbs and 
relative clauses. 
 
  
Figure 3 - Properly Contained Argument 
As in properly contained relations, properly 
contained arguments may arise when an abstract 
object that is external to a quote is in a relation 
with an abstract object in a quote. Likewise, a 
discourse relation within the complement of a 
verb or a relative clause can cause properly con-
tained arguments. Anaphoric connectives ac-
count for the 129 (66.49%) of the 194 properly 
contained arguments in TDB.  
1.4 Partial Overlap 
There are only 12 partial overlaps in TDB, and 
3 of them involve anaphoric relations. 
 
  
Figure 4 - Partial Overlap 
 
In (4), the argument span of in order to par-
tially overlaps with the argument span of to. This 
is a partial overlap of the arguments of two struc-
tural connectives. 
  
(4) 20630000-44&45 
(a) H?k?metin, 1998?de kapat?lan 
kumarhaneleri, kaynak sorununa ??z?m 
bulmak amac?yla yeniden a?mak i?in harekete 
ge?mesi, tart??ma yaratt?. 
?The fact that the governtment took action in 
order to reopen the casinos that were closed 
down in 1998 in order to come up with a solu-
tion to the resource problem caused argu-
ments.? 
(b) H?k?metin, 1998?de kapat?lan 
kumarhaneleri, kaynak sorununa ??z?m 
bulmak amac?yla yeniden a?mak i?in harekete 
ge?mesi, tart??ma yaratt?. 
125
  
?The fact that the governtment took action in 
order to reopen the casinos that were closed 
down in 1998 in order to come up with a solu-
tion to the resource problem caused argu-
ments.? 
 
The first argument of relation 44 (a) properly 
contains the first argument of 45 (b), whereas the 
second argument of (b) properly contains the 
second argument of (a). This double containment 
results in a complicated structure that will be 
analyzed in detail in ?3.5. 
In (5) the second argument of but (relation 42 
(a)) contains only one of the two conjoined 
clauses, whereas the first argument of after (rela-
tion 43 (b)) contains both of them. The most 
probable cause for this difference in annotations 
is the combination of ?blind annotation? with the 
?minimality principle.? This principle guides the 
participants to annotate the minimum text span 
required to interpret the relation. Since the anno-
tators cannot see previous annotations, they have 
to assess the minimum span of an argument 
again when they annotate the second relation. 
Sometimes the minimal span for one relation is 
annotated differently than the minimal span re-
quired for the other, resulting in partial overlaps.  
 
(5) 00001131-42&43 
(a) Yine istedi?i ki?iyi bir t?rl? g?rememi?ti, ama 
aylarca sabrettikten sonra g?zetledi?i bir 
kad?n solu?unu daraltt?, t?yleri diken diken 
oldu. 
?Once again he couldn?t see the person he want-
ed to see, but after waiting patiently for 
months, a woman he peeped at took his breath 
away, gave him goose bumps?.  
(b) Yine istedi?i ki?iyi bir t?rl? g?rememi?ti, 
ama aylarca sabrettikten sonra g?zetledi?i bir 
kad?n solu?unu daraltt?, t?yleri diken diken oldu.
?Once again he couldn?t see the person he want-
ed to see, but after waiting patiently for 
months, a woman he peeped at took his breath 
away, gave him goose bumps.? 
1.5 Pure Crossing 
There are only 2 pure crossing examples in the 
current release of TDB, a number so small that it 
is tempting to treat them as negligible. However, 
the inclusion of pure crossing would result in the 
most dramatic change in discourse structure, 
raising the complexity level to chain graph and 
making discourse structure markedly more com-
plex than sentence level grammar. Therefore, we 
would like to discuss both examples in detail. 
(6) 00010111-54&55 
(a) Sonra ans?z?n sesler gelir. Ayak sesleri. Biri-
lerinin ya i?i vard?r, aceleyle y?r?rler, ya 
ko?arlar. O zaman k?z kat?la??r ans?z?n. O?lan 
da kat?la??r ve her ko?unun gizli bir iste?i var. 
?And then suddenly there is a sound. Footsteps. 
Someone has an errand to run, they walk hurried-
ly or run. Then the girl stiffens suddenly. The 
boy stiffens, too; and every run has a hidden 
wish.?  
(b) Sonra ans?z?n sesler gelir. Ayak sesleri. Biri-
lerinin ya i?i vard?r, aceleyle y?r?rler, ya 
ko?arlar. O zaman k?z kat?la??r ans?z?n. O?lan da 
kat?la??r ve her ko?unun gizli bir iste?i var. 
?And then suddenly there is a sound. Footsteps. 
Someone has an errand to run, they walk hur-
riedly or run. Then the girl stiffens suddenly. 
The boy stiffens, too; and every run has a hid-
den wish.?
 
In (6), the discourse relation encoded by then 
is not only anaphoric -and therefore not determi-
nant in terms of discourse structure- but also the 
crossing annotation does not necessarily arise 
from the coherence relation of the connective?s 
arguments. It is more likely imposed by lexical 
cohesive elements (Halliday & Hasan, 1976), as 
the annotators apparently made use of the repeti-
tions of ans?z?n ?suddenly? and ko? ?run? in the 
text when they could not interpret the intended 
meaning. 
 
  
Figure 5 - Pure Crossing 
 
The other example, given in (7), is not ana-
phoric. It is more interesting as it points to a pe-
culiar structure similar to (4) in ?3.4, a surface 
crossing which is frequent in the subordinating 
conjunctions of Turkish.  
 
(7) 20510000-31,32&34 
(a) Ceza, Telekom?un iki farkl? internet al 
yap?s? pazar?nda tekel konumunu k?t?ye 
kulland??? i?in ve uydu istasyonu i?letmecili?i 
pazar?nda art?k tekel hakk? kalmad??? halde 
rakiplerinin faaliyetlerini zorla?t?rd??? i?in 
verildi. 
126
  
?The penalty was given because Telekom 
abused its monopoly status in the two differ-
ent internet infrastructure markets and be-
cause it caused difficulties with its rivals? activi-
ties although it did not have a monopoly status in 
the satellite management market anymore.? 
(b) Ceza, Telekom?un iki farkl? internet al yap?s? 
pazar?nda tekel konumunu k?t?ye kulland??? i?in 
ve uydu istasyonu i?letmecili?i pazar?nda 
art?k tekel hakk? kalmad??? halde rakiplerinin 
faaliyetlerini zorla?t?rd??? i?in verildi. 
?The penalty was given because Telekom abused 
its monopoly status in the two different internet 
infrastructure markets and because it caused 
difficulties with its rivals? activities although it 
did not have a monopoly status in the satellite 
management market anymore.? 
(c) Ceza, Telekom?un iki farkl? internet al yap?s? 
pazar?nda tekel konumunu k?t?ye kulland??? i?in 
ve uydu istasyonu i?letmecili?i pazar?nda 
art?k tekel hakk? kalmad??? halde rakiplerinin 
faaliyetlerini zorla?t?rd??? i?in verildi. 
?The penalty was given because Telekom abused 
its monopoly status in the two different internet 
infrastructure markets and because it caused 
difficulties with its rivals? activities although it 
did not have a monopoly status in the satellite 
management market anymore.? 
 
A closer inspection reveals that the pure cross-
ings in (7) are caused by two distinct reasons.  
The first reason is the repetition of the subor-
dinator i?in ?because?. Had there been only the 
rightmost subordinator, the relation would be a 
simple case of Full Embedding, where ve ?and? 
in (b) connects the two reasons for the penalty, 
while the rightmost subordinator connects the 
combined reasons to the matrix clause (see Fig-
ure 6). However, since both subordinators were 
present, they were annotated separately. They 
share their first arguments, and take different 
spans as their second arguments, which are also 
connected by ve ?and?, resulting in an apparent 
pure crossing.  
Our alternative analysis is that ve ?and? actual-
ly takes the subordinators i?in ?because? in its 
scope, and it should be analyzed similar to an 
assumed single-subordinator case. This kind of 
annotation was not available in TDB because the 
annotation guidelines state that the discourse 
connectives at the peripheries of the arguments 
should be left out. Machine Learning can help us 
spot these instances. 
The second reason for crossing is the wrap-
ping of the first arguments of (a) and (c) around 
the subordinate clause. This crossing is in fact 
not a configuration-level dependency, but a rela-
tion-level surface phenomenon confined within 
the relation anchored by i?in ?because?, without 
underlying complex discourse semantics. Exam-
ple (8) is a simpler case where the surface cross-
ing within the relation can be observed.  
 
 a. Double-subordinator (as-is) 
  
b. Single-subordinator (hypothetical) 
 
Figure 6 - Configuration for (7) as is, and the hypothetical single-subordinator version
127
  
 (8) 10380000-3 
1882?de ?stanbul Ticaret Odas?, bir zahire ve 
ticaret borsas? kurulmas? i?in giri?imde 
bulunuyor ama sonu? alam?yor. 
?In 1882, ?stanbul Chamber of Commerce makes 
an attempt for founding a Provisions and 
Commodity Exchange Market but cannot ob-
tain a result.? 
 
Subordinators in Turkish form adverbial 
clauses (Kornfilt, 1997), so they can occupy any 
position that is legitimate for a sentential adverb. 
Wrapping in discourse seems to be motivated 
information-structurally. In the unmarked posi-
tion, the subordinate clause comes before the 
matrix clause and introduces a theme. However, 
the discourse constituents can occupy different 
positions or carry non-neutral prosodic features 
to express different information structures 
(Demir?ahin, 2008). In (7), wrapping takes ceza 
?penalty? away from the rheme and makes it part 
of the theme, at the same time bringing the caus-
al discourse relation into the rheme. 
As is clear from the gloss in (7) and its 
stringset, this is function application, where ceza 
verildi ?penalty was given? wraps in the first 
argument as a whole. Double occurrence of the 
?connective? within the wrapped-in argument is 
causing the apparent crossing, but there is in fact 
one discourse relation. 
  
Figure 7 - Wrapping 
 
Wrapping in discourse is almost exclusive to 
subordinating conjunctions, possibly due to their 
adverbial freedom in sentence-level syntax. The 
subordinators make up 468 of the total of 479 
wrapping cases identified in TDB. However, 
there are also four cases of coordinating conjunc-
tions with wrapping. Two of them result in sur-
face crossing as in (9), and the other two build a 
nested-like structure, as in (10) and (11). The 
latter two are both parentheticals. 
 
(9) 10690000-32 
Bezirci?nin sonradan elimize ge?en ve 
1985?lerde yapt??? antoloji haz?rl???nda, [?] 
?In the preparation for an anthology which 
Bezirci made during 1985?s and which came 
into our possession later[?]? 
In (9) ve ?and? links two relative clauses, one 
of which seems to be embedded in the other. It 
should be noted that the first part of Arg1 
(Bezirci-nin) has an ambiguous suffix. The suffix 
could be the agreement marker of the relative 
clause, as reflected in the annotation, or it could 
be the genitive marked complement of the geni-
tive-possessive construction Bezirci?nin antoloji 
haz?rl??? ?Bezirci?s anthology preparation?. The 
latter analysis does not cause wrapping. 
 
(10) 00003121-26 
Biz yasalar kar??s?nda evli say?lacak, ama 
ger?ekte evli iki insan gibi de?il de (evlilikler 
s?radanla??yordu ??nk?, tekd?ze ve s?k?c?yd?; 
biz farkl? olacakt?k), ayn? evi payla?an iki 
??renci gibi ya?ayacakt?k. 
?We would be married under the law, but in real-
ity we would live like two students sharing the 
same house rather than two married people (be-
cause marriages were getting ordinary, (they 
were) monotonous and boring; we would be 
different).? 
 
(11) 00008113-10 
Masa ya da duvar saatleri bulunmayan, ezan 
seslerini her zaman duyamay?p zaman? ??renmek 
i?in erkeklerin (evde olduklar? zaman, tabii) cep 
saatiyle do?an?n ???k saatine ve kendi 
i?g?d?leriyle tahminlerine bel ba?layan bir?ok 
aile, ya?amlar?n? bu top sesine g?re ayarlarlard?. 
?Lots of families who didn?t have a table clock 
or a wall clock and couldn?t always hear the 
prayer calls, who relied upon the men?s pocket 
watch (when they were home, of course) and 
their instincts and guesses to learn the time ad-
justed their lives according to this cannon shot.? 
 
Both (10) and (11) are parentheticals, resulting 
in a double-wrapping-like construction (Figure 
8). However, parentheticals move freely in the 
clause and occupy various positions, so we be-
lieve that this construction should be taken as a 
peculiarity of the parenthetical, rather than the 
structural connectives involved in the relation.  
 
  
Figure 8 - Double-wrap-like Parenthetical Con-
struction for (10) 
 
128
  
4 Conclusion 
In this paper we presented possible deviations 
from the tree structure in the first release of 
TDB. Following Lee et al (2006, 2008) and 
Akta? et al (2010). We have scanned the corpus 
for shared arguments, properly contained rela-
tions and arguments, partial overlaps, and pure 
crossings. Overall, about half of these configura-
tions can be accounted for by anaphoric rela-
tions, i.e. they are not applicative structures (see 
Table 2). Note that if one of the relations in a 
configuration is anaphoric, we treat the configu-
ration as anaphoric.  
 
Configuration Struc-tural 
Ana-
phoric Total 
Shared Argument 158 331 489
 32.31% 67.69% 100.00%
Prop. Cont. Arg. 65 129 194
 33.51% 66.49% 100.00%
Prop. Cont. Rel. 547 471 1018
 53.73% 46.27% 100.00%
Pure Crossing 1 1 2
 50.00% 50.00% 100.00%
Partial Overlap 9 3 12
 75.00% 25.00% 100.00%
Total 780 935 1715
 45.48% 54.52% 100.00%
 
Table 2: Distribution of anaphoric relations 
among tree-violating configurations 
 
In addition to the shared arguments that were 
accepted in discourse structure by Lee et al, we 
have also come up with partially contained rela-
tions arising from verbal complements and rela-
tive clauses. These structures can be treated dif-
ferently in other frameworks; for instance in 
RST, they are treated as discourse constituents 
taking part in coherence relations. However, for 
the connective-based approach adopted in this 
study, they need to be accommodated as devia-
tions from tree structure.  
The few partial overlaps we have encountered 
could mostly be explained away by wrapping and 
by different interpretations of annotation guide-
lines by the annotators, especially the minimality 
principle. Recall that wrap has applicative se-
mantics. Of the two pure crossing examples we 
have found, one was also anaphoric, whereas the 
other could be explained in terms of information-
structurally motivated relation-level surface 
crossing, rather than configuration-level crossing 
dependency. In other words, if we leave the pro-
cessing of information structure to other process-
es, the need for more elaborate annotation disap-
pears. In Joshi?s (2011) terminology, immediate 
discourse in the TDB appears to be an applica-
tive structure, which, unlike syntax, seems to be 
in no need of currying.  
As a result, we can state that pure crossing (i.e. 
crossing of the arguments of structural connec-
tives) is not genuinely attested in the current 
release of TDB. The annotation scheme need not 
be enriched to allow more complex algorithms to 
deal with unlimited use of crossing. There seems 
to be a reason in every contested case to go back 
to the annotation, and revise it in ways to keep 
the applicative semantics, without losing much of 
the connective?s meaning.  
  In summary, our preliminary analysis shows 
that discourse structure may have to accommo-
date partial containment and wrap in addition to 
shared arguments. TDB has an applicative struc-
ture.   
  Taking into account that independent relations, 
fully embedded relations and nested relations are 
frequent in discourse structure, and that the dis-
course structure should accommodate shared 
arguments and partial containments; we are cur-
rently inclined to think of discourse structure as 
Hobbs (1985) does: local trees of various sizes 
connected and occasionally intertwined at the 
edges. Further complications within trees are an 
open field for further studies. 
References  
Berfin Akta?, Cem Boz?ahin, Deniz Zeyrek. 2010. 
Discourse  Relation  Configurations  in  Turkish  
and  an Annotation  Environment.  Proc.  LAW  IV  
-  The Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop. 
Nicholas Asher. 1993. Reference to Abstract Objects 
in Discourse. Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
I??n Demir?ahin. 2008. Connective Position, Argu-
ment Order and Information Structure of Discourse 
Connectives in Written Turkish Texts. Un-
published MS Thesis, Cognitive Science Program, 
Middle East Technical University. 
I??n Demir?ahin, Ay????? Sevdik-?all?, Hale ?gel 
Balaban, Ruket ?ak?c? and Deniz Zeyrek. 2012. 
Turkish Discourse Bank: Ongoing Developments. 
Proc. LREC 2012. The First Turkic Languages 
Workshop. 
Markus Egg, Gisela Redeker. 2010. How Complex is 
Discourse Structure? Proc. 7th International Con-
ference on Language Resources and Evaluation 
(LREC 2010) pp. 1619?23. 
129
  
Michael A. K. Halliday, Ruqaiya Hasan. 1976.  Cohe-
sion in English. London: Longman 
Jerry R. Hobbs. 1985. On the Coherence and Struc-
ture of Discourse. Report CSLI-85-37, Center for 
Study of Language and Information.  
Aravind K. Joshi. 1985. How Much Context-
sensitivity is Necessary for Characterizing Struc-
tural Descriptions: Tree Adjoining Grammars. In 
David Dowty, Lauri Karttunen and Arnold Zwicky 
(eds.) Natural Language Parsing . Cambridge Uni-
versity Press. 
Aravind K. Joshi. 2011. Some Aspects of Transition 
from Sentence to Discourse. Keynote address, In-
formatics Science Festival, Middle East Technical 
University, Ankara, June 9.  
Alistair  Knott,  Jon  Oberlander,  Michael  O?Donnel, 
Chris Mellish. 2001. Beyond elaboration: The in-
teraction of relations and focus in coherent text. In 
Ted Sanders, Joost Schilperoord and Wilbert 
Spooren (Eds.), Text Representation: Linguistic  
and  psycholinguistic  aspects (181-196): John 
Benjamins Publishing. 
Jacqueline Kornfilt. 1997. Turkish. New York: 
Routledge. 
Alan Lee, Rashmi Prasad, Aravind K. Joshi, Nikhil 
Dinesh, Bonnie Webber. 2006. Complexity of de-
pendencies in discourse: are dependencies in dis-
course more complex than in syntax?  Proc. 5th 
Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theory 
(TLT?06 ).  
Alan  Lee,  Rashmi  Prasad,  Aravind  K.  Joshi,  
Bonnie Webber. 2008. Departures from tree struc-
tures in discourse. Proc. Workshop on Constraints 
in Discourse III. 
William C. Mann, Sandra A. Thompson. 1988. Rhe-
torical structure theory: Toward a functional theory 
of text organization. Text, 8(3),  243-281. 
Rashmi Prasad, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, Eleni 
Miltsakaki,  Livio  Robaldo,  Aravind  K.  Joshi,  
Bonnie Webber.  2008.  The  Penn Discourse  
Treebank  2.0. Proc. LREC?08 - The sixth interna-
tional conference on Language Resources and 
Evaluation. 
Bilge Say, Deniz Zeyrek, Kemal O fl azer, and Umut 
?zge.  2002. Development of a Corpus and a Tree-
bank for Present-day Written Turkish. Proc. Elev-
enth International Conference on Turkish Linguis-
tics (ICTL 2002). 
Stuart Shieber. 1985. Evidence against the Context-
Freeness of Natural Language.  Linguistics and 
Philosophy: 8:333-343. 
Bonnie Webber. 2004. D-LTAG: Extending Lexical-
ized TAG to Discourse. Cognitive Science,  28(5), 
751-779. 
Florian Wolf, Edward Gibson. 2005. Representing 
discourse  coherence:  a corpus-based  study.  
Computational Linguistics 31: 249?87. 
Deniz Zeyrek, Bonnie Webber. 2008. A Discourse 
Resource for Turkish: Annotating Discourse Con-
nectives in the METU Turkish Corpus. Proc. 6 th 
Workshop on Asian Language Resources, The 
Third International Joint Conference on Natural 
Language Processing (IJNLP).  
Deniz  Zeyrek,  I??n  Demir?ahin,  Ay?????  Sevdik-
?all?, Hale ?gel Balaban, ?hsan Yal??nkaya, ?mit 
Deniz Turan. 2010. The annotation scheme of 
Turkish discourse bank and an evaluation of incon-
sistent annotations.  Proc. 4th  Linguistic  Annota-
tion  Workshop (LAW IV). 
 
130
LAW VIII - The 8th Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 105?109,
Dublin, Ireland, August 23-24 2014.
Annotating Discourse Connectives in Spoken Turkish 
 
 
I??n Demir?ahin 
Middle East Technical University 
Informatics Institute 
Department of Cognitive Science 
e128500@metu.edu.tr 
Deniz Zeyrek 
Middle East Technical University 
Informatics Institute 
Department of Cognitive Science 
 dezeyrek@metu.edu.tr 
 
  
 
Abstract 
In an attempt to extend Penn Discourse Tree Bank (PDTB) / Turkish Discourse Bank (TDB) 
style annotations to spoken Turkish, this paper presents the first attempt at annotating the explicit 
discourse connectives in the Spoken Turkish Corpus (STC) demo version. We present the data 
and the method for the annotation. Then we reflect on the issues and challenges of transitioning 
from written to spoken language. We present the preliminary findings suggesting that the distri-
bution of the search tokens and their use as discourse connectives are similar in the TDB and the 
STC demo. 
1 Introduction 
Turkish Discourse Bank (TDB) is the first discourse-annotated corpus of Turkish, which follows the 
principles of Penn Discourse Tree Bank (PDTB) (Prasad et al., 2008) and includes annotations for dis-
course connectives, their arguments, modifiers and supplements of the arguments. The TDB is built on 
a ~ 400,000-word sub-corpus of METU Turkish Corpus (MTC) (Say et al., 2002), a 2 million-word 
multi-genre corpus of post-1990 written Turkish1. 
In both PDTB and TDB, the discourse connectives link two text spans that can be interpreted as, or 
can be anaphorically resolved to abstract objects (Asher, 2003). The PDTB includes annotations for both 
explicit and implicit connectives, whereas TDB has covered only explicit connectives so far.  
The explicit discourse connectives annotated in TDB come from a variety of syntactic classes, namely 
coordinating conjunctions (ve ?and?), subordinating conjunctions (i?in ?for/since?) and discourse adver-
bials (ancak ?however?). It also annotates phrasal expressions (Zeyrek et al, 2013).  
The coordinating and subordinating conjunctions are ?structural? discourse connectives that take their 
arguments syntactically, whereas discourse adverbials only take one argument syntactically, and the 
other one anaphorically (Forbes-Riley et al. 2006). For all syntactic types, the argument that syntacti-
cally accommodates the discourse connective is called the second argument (Arg2). The other argument 
is called the first argument (Arg1). In TDB, phrasal expressions consist of an anaphoric element and a 
subordinating conjunction. In PTDB, similar expressions are annotated as AltLex, a subtype of implicit 
connectives (Prasad et al. 2008). For example, onun i?in ?because of that? in (1) is annotated as a dis-
course connective with its two argument spans. In the rest of the paper, the connective is underlined, the 
Arg2 is in bold face, and Arg1 is shown in italics. Supplementary materials and modifiers are shown in 
square brackets labelled with subscripts when necessary.  
 
 
 
1 The MTC and the TDB are freely available to researches at http://ii.metu.edu.tr/corpus and http://medid.ii.metu.edu.tr, re-
spectively. 
 
This work is licenced under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. Page numbers and proceedings footer 
are added by the organizers. License details:http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ 
 
 
 
105
(1) O ses dinleme cihaz?. ?dev var da. Onun i?in sizi dinliyorum ?u anda. 
     ?That is a recording device. I have homework. Because of that I?m recording you right 
now.? 
 
The TDB has chosen to annotate these expressions as discourse connectives because they are highly 
frequent and have limited compositional productivity. Furthermore, some phrasal expressions such as 
bunun aksine ?contrary to this?, aksi takdirde ?however? are so frequent that the native speakers perceive 
them as single lexical entries.  
In an attempt to extend the PDTB/TDB style discourse annotation to spoken Turkish, we have anno-
tated the search tokens in TDB on the Spoken Turkish Corpus (STC) (Ruhi et al.2009; 2010) demo 
version2. Following the TDB conventions, we annotated the phrasal expressions such as onun i?in ?be-
cause of that? and ondan sonra ?after that?. The annotation of 77 search tokens identified in TDB yielded 
a total of 416 relations in the STC demo. 
In this paper we first present the data from the STC demo release, the method we used for annotations, 
and issues and challenges we have met. Then we present our preliminary findings. Finally, we discuss 
the methods and the findings of the study and draw a road map for future work. 
2 Annotating Spoken Turkish 
2.1 The Data 
The Spoken Turkish Corpus demo version is a ~20,000-word resource of spoken Turkish. The demo 
version contains 23 recordings amounting to 2 hours 27 minutes. Twenty of the recordings include cas-
ual conversations and encounters, comprising 2 hours 1 minutes of the total, the 3 remaining recordings 
are broadcasts lasting a total of 26 minutes. The casual conversations include a variety of situations such 
as conversations among families, relatives and friends, and service encounters. The broadcasts are news 
commentaries. The topics of conversation range from daily activities such as infant care and naming 
babies to biology e.g. the endocrine system, to politics such as European Union membership process or 
the clearing of the mine fields on Syrian border. Such wide range of topics provide for a wide coverage 
of possible uses of discourse connectives even in such a relatively small corpus.  
2.2 Annotation Method 
Since our main aim was to follow the PDTB/TDB style, we chose to use the Discourse Annotation Tool 
for Turkish (DATT) (Akta? et al., 2010). We used the transcription texts included in the STC demo 
version as the DATT input and provided the annotators with separate audio files. 
This approach was a trade-off: the annotators could not make use of the rich features of the time-
aligned annotation of the STC; but by importing text transcripts directly into an existing specialized 
annotation tool we did not have to go through any software development and/or integration stage. The 
annotators reported only slight discomfort in matching the text and the audio file during annotation, but 
stated that it was manageable as none of the files are long enough to get lost between the two environ-
ments.  
2.3 Issues and Challenges 
Some of the challenges of annotating discourse connectives we have already observed in written lan-
guage transfer to the spoken modality. For example, in written discourse it is possible for an expression 
to be ambiguous between a discourse and non-discourse use, as the anaphoric elements can refer to both 
abstract objects and non-abstract entities. This applies to spoken language as well.  
 
(2) SER000062: ?ey Glomerulus o yuvarlak topun ad? m?yd? (bu)? Ordan ?ey oluyor?  
AFI000061: h?-h? h?-h?  
AFI000061: S?z?lme ondan sonra oluyor ama. ?u Henle kulpu falan var ya. ??yle geri. 
 
2 The STC demo version is freely available to researches at http://std.metu.edu.tr  
106
     ?SER000062: Um Glomerulus was (this) the name of that round ball? Stuff happens there ?  
AFI000061: Yes, yes. 
AFI000061: Filtration occurs after that, though. That Loop of Henle and such. Reverse like 
this.? 
 
In (2) ondan sonra ?after that? could be interpreted as resolving to the clause ?Stuff happens there?, 
which is an abstract object although a vague one. The pronoun can also refer to the glomerulus, which 
is an NP. This was exactly the case during the annotation of this specific example: one annotator inter-
preted it as a temporal discourse connective that indicates the order of two sub-processes of kidney 
function, whereas the other annotator interpreted that o ?that? refers to the NP and did not annotate this 
instance of ondan sonra. As a TDB principle, if an expression has at least one discourse connective 
meaning, it is annotated. As a result, this example was annotated as per the first annotator?s annotation. 
In spoken language, particularly spontaneous casual dialogues, phrasal expressions can take their first 
arguments from anywhere in the previous discourse. This is very much like discourse adverbials. For 
example, i?in in (3) displays an unattested use in TDB, as it appears distant from both its arguments, 
allowing the participant to question the discourse relation between two previous text spans. Given the 
supplemental material ?thyroxin increases the metabolism? in line (a) by speaker AFI, speaker SER 
provides two propositions, ?thyroxin is secreted by the thyroid gland? in line (b) and ?people with over-
active thyroids tend to be hyperactive? in line (e). In line (h), AFI offers a discourse connective ?be-
cause? in order to show her understanding of the preceding discourse, i.e., something like ?(so they tend 
to be very active) because of that??, where the material in parentheses are elided. One can argue that this 
connective builds a new discourse relation with one anaphoric and one elliptic argument. Nevertheless, 
we kept the annotations as shown in the example, because (a) it was the most intuitive annotation ac-
cording to the annotators and (b) the DATT does not allow annotation of ellipsis as arguments for now.  
 
(3) (a) AFI000061: [SUPP1Tiroksin. Ha bak. Metabolizma h?z?n? artt?r?yor.] 
[?] 
(b) SER000062: Tiroit bezinden tiroksin salg?lan?yor. 
(c) AFI000061: Hmm salg?lan?yor dedin sen. Tamam. Do?ru.  
(d) SER000062: Tamam.  
(e) SER000062: Hatta tiroit ?ey olan? Emm tiroidinde sorun olanlar ?ok ee ?ey olur ya 
aktif olur ya.  
(f) AFI000061: Hmm?  
(g) SER000062: ?ok hareketli olurlar. Evet.  
(h) AFI000061: Onun i?in [MODmi]? 
 
     ?(a) AFI000061: [SUPP1Thyroxin. Oh look. It speeds up the metabolism.] 
[?] 
(b) SER000062: Thyroxin is secreted by the thyroid gland.  
(c) AFI000061: Hmm you said secreted. Ok. Right. 
(d) SER000062: Ok.  
(e) SER000062: Actually thyroid is the one that? Emm you know, those who have prob-
lems with thyroid are ee they tend to be very active.  
(f) AFI000061: Hmm?  
(g) SER000062: They tend to be very energetic. Yes.  
(h) AFI000061: [MOD Is (it)] because of that?? 
 
Another problem with spoken corpus is that some elements may be missing. There are many examples 
that could not be annotated as discourse connectives, because the speakers were interrupted before they 
could complete, or at times even start, the latter argument of a possible discourse relation. In other 
examples, the argument may be there but not recorded clearly, or may be completely inaudible even 
though they were uttered because of background noise or overlapping arguments.  
107
3 Preliminary Findings 
In this section we present some of our preliminary findings and compare them to the TDB to the extent 
possible. Because of the large difference in size between the two corpora, we converted the raw numbers 
to frequencies. We used number/1000 words as the frequency unit in Table 1.  
The top five most frequent connectives in the TDB in descending order are ve ?and?, i?in ?for?, ama 
?but?, sonra ?later? and ancak ?however? and  the top five most frequent connectives in the STC are ama 
?but?, ve  ?and?, mesela ?for example?,  sonra ?later? and i?in ?for?.  Here we compare the four most 
frequent connectives, namely, ve, i?in, ama and sonra, which make up 4951 (58.3%) of the total 8484 
annotations in TDB and 217 (52.2%) of the total 416 relations annotated in the STC.  
 
 TDB STC demo 
 
Discourse 
connectives 
Total 
instances 
Discourse 
connectives 
Total 
instances 
Conn # f % # f % # f % # f % 
ve ?and? 2112 5.31 28.2 7501 18.86 100 50 2.40 48.1 104 5.00 100 
i?in ?because? 1102 2.77 50.9 2165 5.44 100 32 1.54 61.5 52 2.50 100 
ama ?but? 1024 2.57 90.6 1130 2.84 100 96 4.61 80.7 119 5.72 100 
sonra ?later? 713 1.79 56.7 1257 3.16 100 39 1.87 72.2 54 2.60 100 
 
Table 1 - Written and spoken uses of ve, i?in, ama, and sonra. 
 
Although both the frequency of the total occurrences of the connectives and their discourse uses seem 
to be lower in the spoken corpus, chi square tests show that the differences are not statically significant 
(p>0.5). The percentage of the use of tokens as discourse connectives across modalities is not significant 
either (p>0.5). The preliminary results indicate that the distribution of these five connectives and their 
uses as discourse connective are similar in written and spoken language.   
The similarity is expected, as the MTC and the subcorpus that the TDB is built on are multi-genre 
corpora. Specifically, the TDB includes novels and stories, which in turn include dialogues. Also, there 
are interviews in news excerpts, which are basically transcriptions of spoken language. As a result, the 
TDB texts reflect some aspects of spoken language. In addition, 3 of the 23 files of the STC demo are 
news broadcasts and interviews, which are probably scripted and/or prepared. Thus they may not nec-
essarily reflect all aspects of spontaneous spoken language.   
4 Discussion and Conclusion 
In this paper we presented a preliminary attempt at annotating Turkish Spoken Language in PDTB/TDB 
style. We used the transcripts and audio files of STC demo as our source, and used DATT of TDB to 
annotate the discourse relations. As future work, we intend to integrate the discourse annotation to the 
time-aligned annotation of the STC, thus allowing the users to benefit from the features of both annota-
tion schemes. 
During the annotation process, we encountered the use of discourse connectives unattested in TDB, 
specifically i?in ?since/for? in a predicative/interrogative position, where the connective occurs with its 
deictic Arg1. We assume that the question in which this connective is used has a rhetorical role, possibly 
expressing the speaker?s understanding of the discourse relation in the previous discourse. Apart from 
this newly attested use, the distribution of the search tokens and their use as discourse connectives re-
main largely similar to that of the TDB. We conclude that this similarity results from the fact that the 
TDB includes some features of the spoken language just as the STC demo may include scripted record-
ing. Yet, we suspect that the occurrence of discourse connectives with a deictic Arg1 is quite frequent 
in spoken language. We leave the investigation of such occurrences, and other issues such as the genre 
breakdown of the frequency of discourse connectives in STC for further study.  
Our goal for the near future is to complete at least a second set of double-blind annotations and the 
agreement statics on the STC, so that the discourse-level annotation of spoken Turkish can be compared 
to those of the TDB. 
  
108
Reference 
Akta?, B., Bozsahin, C., & Zeyrek, D. 2010. Discourse relation configurations in Turkish and an annotation envi-
ronment. Proceedings of the Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pp. 202-206. 
Asher, N. 1993. Reference to Abstract Objects in Discourse. Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
Demir?ahin, I., Sevdik-?all?, A., ?gel Balaban, H., ?ak?c?, R. & Zeyrek, D. 2012. Turkish Discourse Bank: On-
going Developments. Proceedings of LREC 2012 The First Turkic Languages Workshop. 
Forbes-Riley, K., Webber, B., & Joshi, A. 2006. Computing discourse semantics: The predicate-argument seman-
tics of discourse connectives in D-LTAG. Journal of Semantics, 23(1), 55?106. 
Prasad, R., Dinesh, N., Lee, A., Miltsakaki, E., Robaldo, L., Joshi, A., and Webber, B. 2008. The Penn Discourse 
Treebank 2.0. In Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation. 
(LREC?08).  
Ruhi, ??kriye, ?okal Karada?, Derya. 2009. Features for an internet accessible corpus of spoken Turkish discourse. 
Working Papers in Corpus-based Linguistics and Language Education 3, 311-320. 
Ruhi, ??kriye, Er?z Tu?a, Betil, Hatipo?lu, ?iler, I??k-G?ler, Hale, Can, H?meyra, Karaka?, ?zlem, Acar, G?ne?, 
Ery?lmaz, Kerem (2010). T?rk?e i?in genel ama?l? s?zl? derlem olu?turmada veribilgisi, ?eviriyaz? 
?l??nle?tirmesi ve derlem y?netimi. XXIV. Dilbilim Kurultay?, 17-18 May?s, 2010, Yuvarlak Masa Toplant?s?. 
Say, B., Zeyrek, D., Oflazer, K., and ?zge, U. 2002. Development of a Corpus and a Treebank for Present-day 
Written Turkish. In Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Turkish Linguistics (ICTL 2002). 
Zeyrek, D., and Webber, B. (2008). A Discourse Resource for Turkish: Annotating Discourse Connectives in the 
METU Turkish Corpus. In Proceedings of the 6thWorkshop on Asian Language Resources, The Third Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (IJNLP). 
Zeyrek, D., Demir?ahin, I., Sevdik-?all?, A. B., ?ak?c?, Ruket. 2013. Turkish Discourse Bank: Porting a discourse 
annotation style to a morphologically rich language. Discourse and Dialogue 4 (3), 174-184. 
109
