Proceedings of the EACL 2009 Workshop on Language Technologies for African Languages ? AfLaT 2009, pages 53?58,
Athens, Greece, 31 March 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Building Capacities in Human Language Technology  
for African Languages 
 
 
Tunde Adegbola 
African Languages Technlogy Initiative (Alt-i), Ibadan, Nigeria 
taintransit@hotmail.com 
 
  
Abstract 
The development of Human Language Technology 
(HLT) is one of the important by-products of the in-
formation revolution.  However, the level of knowl-
edge and skills in HLT for African languages remain 
unfortunately low as most scholars continue to work 
within the frameworks of knowledge production for 
an industrial society while the information age dawns. 
This paper reports the work of African Languages 
Technology Initiative (Alt-i) over a five-year period, 
and thereby presents a proposal for the acceleration of 
the development of knowledge and skills in HLT for 
African languages. 
1 Introduction 
The world is undergoing a transformation from 
industrial economies to an information economy, 
in which the indices of value are shifting from 
material to non-material resources. This trans-
formation has been rightly described as a revolu-
tion because of the height of its pace and inten-
sity.  Of necessity therefore, the response to the 
changes brought about by the information revo-
lution has to be commensurate, both in pace and 
intensity. 
At the root of the information revolution is 
the development of digital technology which has 
brought about a major shift in the way we con-
ceptualize, describe and anticipate our world. 
One of the salient social imperatives of the in-
formation revolution is the need for humans to 
communicate through and with machines.  This 
has brought about the need to make machines 
capable of handling natural language used by 
humans as against formal language used by ma-
chines.  The field of Human Language Technol-
ogy (HLT) was developed to provide the neces-
sary knowledge and skills that will enhance the 
effectiveness and efficiency with which ma-
chines mediate communication between humans 
as well as facilitate communication between hu-
mans and machines. 
So far, developments in HLT have not suffi-
ciently addressed African languages.  This is at-
tributable to a low level of awareness of the im-
portance of and lack of interest in HLT and 
among scholars of African languages and schol-
ars of technology on the African continent.  Fur-
thermore, there is little or no immediate eco-
nomic incentive in working in HLT.  Conse-
quently, there is a dearth of scholars with the 
requisite impetus, knowledge and skills to sup-
port the development of HLT for African lan-
guages.  Hence, even though there are pockets of 
activities in Africa, the level of development of 
HLT for African languages remains low. 
The circumstances that necessitated the de-
velopment of HLT have been described, and 
rightly so as a revolution.  The response therefore 
has to be commensurate both in pace and inten-
sity.  Hence, the need for accelerated develop-
ment of HLT for African languages is urgent. 
This paper presents a proposal aimed at accel-
erating the development of HLT for African lan-
guages based on the experiences gathered at Af-
rican Languages Technology Initiative (Alt-i) 
over a five-year period of activities mainly in 
Nigeria. 
2 The State of Language technology in 
Africa  
The application of Language technology to Afri-
can languages is relatively new and most efforts 
seem to be incidental.  The most consistent ef-
forts motivated and guided by national policy 
come from South Africa while projects in other 
countries are based primarily on private initia-
tives.  In a report on HLT development in Sub-
Saharan Africa, Justus Roux (2008) reported nine 
organizations involved in HLT activities in South 
Africa, one organization in West Africa and two 
in East Africa.  Seven out of the nine organiza-
tions in South Africa are based in universities, 
one is a Semi-Government institution and one is 
an agency of the Government. 
The seven universities with HLT projects are: 
53
z University of Cape Town 
z University of Limpopo 
z University of the North West (Potchef-
stroom) 
z University of Pretoria 
z University of South Africa 
z University of Stellenbosch 
z University of the Witwatersrand (Johan-
nesburg) 
The Meraka institute is semi-governmental 
while there is a Human Language Technology 
Unit under the Department of Arts and Culture of 
the Government of South Africa. 
In West Africa the only organization reported 
is Africa Languages Technology Initiative (Alt-
i), while the two reported in East Africa are The 
Djibouti Center for Speech Research and Tech-
nobyte Speech Technologies in Kenya. 
Apart from the organisations reported above, 
there are individual efforts in some universities. 
These include Dr. Odetunji Odejobi working on 
Text to Speech Synthesis at Obafemi Awolowo 
University, Ile Ife, Nigeria, Dr. Wanjiku 
Ng'ang'a working on Machine Translation and 
Dr. Peter Wagacha working on Machine Learn-
ing, both at the at the University of Nairobi, 
Kenya. 
Apart from these organizations and individu-
als that are strictly located in Africa, there are a 
number  other efforts in various parts of the 
world that address HLT for Africa languages, 
usually in cooperation with some organizations 
in Africa.  Examples include: 
z Local Language Speech Technology Ini-
tiative (LLSTI), a project of Outside 
Echo in the UK 
z West African Language Documentation, 
a project of the University of Bielefeld, 
Germany in collaboration with the Uni-
versity of Uyo, Nigeria and the Univer-
sity of Cocody, Cote D'Ivoire. 
Also, there are significant short-term activi-
ties on language technology for African lan-
guages both within and outside Africa which 
have not been sufficiently publicized.  For exam-
ple, in 2002, there was an undergraduate project 
in Yoruba-English machine translation at the St 
Mary's College of Maryland, USA.1 
                                                          
1 It is also necessary to mention the efforts of 
Bisharat and SIL.  Even though both organizations are 
not strictly founded for developing language technol-
ogy for African languages, they have both done im-
portant work in making various resources and tools 
3 On-going Alt-i Activities  
Since its inception, Alt-i has done more work in 
Yoruba than in other African languages.  This is 
due primarily to the ready availability of intellec-
tual and other resources for Yoruba at Alt-i's base 
in Ibadan.  However, work in a few other lan-
guages with available local resources have also 
been undertaken.  The main projects undertaken 
so far are: 
3.1 Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) of 
Yoruba 
The ASR project started in 2001, and is still on-
going.  A PhD thesis with the title of Application 
of Tonemic Information for Search-Space Reduc-
tion in the Automatic Speech Recognition of Yo-
ruba is one of the results of the ASR project.  The 
project approaches ASR of Yoruba from the 
point of view that Yoruba tones carry so much 
information that ?talking drums? can ?speak? the 
Yoruba language, hence, ASR of Yoruba (and 
probably other African tone languages) should be 
based primarily on tones or at least should ad-
dress considerable computational resources to-
wards correct identification of  tones.  Experi-
ments have shown that a  tone-guided search  of 
the recognition space as proposed in the above 
PhD thesis leads to improvement in recognition 
speed and accuracy.  ASR efforts are continuing 
within the project ?Redefining Literacy?; Alt-i's 
main on-going project funded by the Open Soci-
ety Initiative for West Africa (OSIWA). 
3.2 Text to Speech (TTS) synthesis of Yoru-
ba 
This project was conceived and initiated in 2002.  
TTS is a major component of the ?Redefining 
Literacy? project but we have not yet succeeded 
in attracting funding for this component of the 
project.  Hence, it is in abeyance.  However, one 
of our Associates, Dr. Odetunji Odejobi of the 
Department of Computer Science and Engineer-
ing of the Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile Ife 
is actively working on TTS and we are collabora-
tion with him on this project.  Dr. Odejobi ap-
plies fuzzy logic to formalise Yoruba prosody. 
3.3 Machine Translation 
Work is on-going on Igbo-English and Yoruba-
English Machine Translation.  The machine 
translation projects are not funded at present, but 
                                                                                        
for developing language technology for African lan-
guages available. 
54
they are taking advantage of the efforts of stu-
dent volunteers from the Department of Linguis-
tics and African Languages as well as the Africa 
Regional Center for information Science, both at 
the University of Ibadan.  The main thrust of the 
present stage of the project is identifying and 
developing formal specifications for various 
challenges of a rule-based machine translation as 
it relates to translation between Igbo/Yoruba and 
English. 
3.4 Yoruba Spelling checker 
As a member of the African Network of Localiz-
ers (AnLoc), Alt-i is developing a spelling 
checker for Yoruba in Open Office.  This has 
provided the opportunity to undertake a compu-
tational study of Yoruba morphology.  Staff and 
students of the Department of Linguistics and 
African Languages at the University of Ibadan 
are playing an active role in this project.  The 
work is producing new insights for interpreting 
the existing literature of Yoruba morphology and 
is already leading to interests in similar projects 
for other languages.  As at the time of writing, a 
dictionary file of about 5000 Yoruba root words 
and over 100 highly productive affix rules have 
been developed.   Even though some important 
Yoruba morphological rules cannot be efficiently 
coded in Hunspell (the software on which the 
spelling checker is based) the modest dictionary 
and affix files have produced a useful spelling 
checker. The project is funded by the Interna-
tional Development Research Center (IDRC) of 
Canada. 
3.5 Automatic diacritic application for Yo-
ruba 
As a by-product of the Yoruba spelling checker 
project, Alt-i is developing an automatic diacritic 
application program, using the Bayesian learning 
approach.  This project is not funded, but it is 
taking due advantage of some of the resources, 
particularly the corpus produced in the IDRC 
funded spelling checker project.  Work is on-
going to expand the corpus used for the auto-
matic diacritic application program. 
3.6 Localization of Microsoft Vista and Of-
fice Suite 
Alt-i was appointed by Microsoft as moderators 
for the localization of Microsoft Vista and Office 
Suite into Hausa, Igbo and Yoruba.  This project 
is making steady progress. 
3.7 Academic assistance to the University of 
Ibadan 
Apart from the above projects, Alt-i offers aca-
demic support to the University of Ibadan.  The 
Executive Director of Alt-i teaches post-graduate 
courses in Artificial Intelligence and Information 
Networking as well as supervises post-graduate 
projects at the Africa Regional Center for Infor-
mation Science (ARCIS) in the University of 
Ibadan.  He also gives various levels of support 
in the supervision of post-graduate projects, par-
ticularly in the area of acoustic analysis of speech 
at the Department of Linguistics and African 
Languages. 
Some of the HLT issues addressed in the 
Master in Information Science projects between 
2002 and the present include: 
Statistical Language Model (SLM) of Yoruba,  
Man-Machine Communication in Yoruba,  Ma-
chine Translation between spoken and signed 
Yoruba for the deaf and impaired in hearing, Yo-
ruba phonology multimodal learning courseware 
and phonetically motivated automatic language 
identification. 
Many PhD students of the Department of Lin-
guistics and African Languages have also en-
joyed intellectual support and use of Alt-i's 
speech laboratory in their studies 
3.8 Support to other universities and schol-
arly associations 
Many staff members and students from far and 
wide travel to Ibadan to use Alt-i's speech labora-
tory.  PhD students as well as faculty members 
from the University of Lagos, University of Ilo-
rin, University of Benin and University of Abuja 
come regularly to use the facilities.  At present a 
teaching staff of the Department of Systems En-
gineering of the University of Lagos is undertak-
ing a PhD programme on ASR of Yoruba.  This 
PhD candidate visits Ibadan frequently and regu-
larly to use Alt-i's library and speech laboratory, 
as well as consult Alt-i staff. 
Alt-i is involved in the activities of various 
scholarly associations such as the West African 
Linguistic Society (WALS),  Linguistics Asso-
ciation of Nigeria (LAN) and the Yoruba Studies 
Association of Nigeria (YSAN).  In 2004, Alt-i 
collaborated with the West African Linguistics 
Society to organize the West African Languages 
Congress with the theme: Globalisation and the 
Future of African Languages.  Alt-i's collabora-
tion in the organization of this congress influ-
enced the proceedings towards language technol-
55
ogy which brought about great awareness of lan-
guage technology issues among West African 
linguists. 
3.9 Bridge building seminar series 
Alt-i runs a Bridge Building Seminar series as a 
way of encouraging cross-disciplinary studies in 
universities and research centers.  These semi-
nars have so far been run in eight Nigerian uni-
versities and the National Institute for Nigerian 
Languages (NINLAN).  The one-day seminars 
bring together scholars from Linguistics, Litera-
ture, Psychology, Mathematics, Physics, Com-
puter Science and other relevant departments to 
build awareness of language technology prob-
lems and the need for knowledge and skills from 
a wide range of departments for their solutions 
4 Observations 
While undertaking the above activities in the last 
five years between 2003 and 2008, the following 
observation were made: 
z The intellectual resources needed for de-
veloping knowledge, skills and academic 
programmes in Language Technology 
are largely available in Nigerian univer-
sities.   
z The lack of awareness of the need to ad-
dress language technology problems has 
made it difficult to harness and direct 
these resources towards the development 
of language technology for African lan-
guages. 
z Strong sentimental attachments to de-
partmental traditions makes it extremely 
difficult for scholars to venture far out-
side their departmental cocoons. 
z The importance of linguistics as a field 
of study and the role of linguists in soci-
ety are not properly understood.  Hence 
students of linguistic may not be suffi-
ciently motivated to aspire to their im-
portant roles in society.  
z Inappropriate admission criteria,  limited 
curricular, and low level of formal inter-
action between different faculties in the 
universities make it extremely difficult 
for students of the pure sciences, tech-
nology and linguistics to share courses 
and thereby have opportunities for aca-
demic interaction beneficial to the de-
velopment of HLT. 
5 Recommendations 
z Intensive and sustained awareness build-
ing programmes on the importance of 
linguistics and language technology 
should be undertaken in institutions of 
higher learning.  This will make it possi-
ble to harness some of the available intel-
lectual resources that remain yet un-
tapped for the development of language 
technology for African languages in 
these institutions. 
z Admission criteria and curricular should 
be reviewed in order to encourage and 
capacitate students to widen their intel-
lectual horizon beyond the artificial tra-
ditional departmental boundaries. 
z Modern techniques for the management 
of learning resources should be em-
ployed in order to address the logistic 
challenges that discourage students from 
taking courses across the faculties of sci-
ence, technology and arts. 
6 Alt-i: a historical perspective 
Initial interests in language technology that ulti-
mately led to the founding of Alt-i date back to 
1978, but it was in 1985 that a small group of one 
Electrical Engineer and two Physicist started to 
investigate Text to Speech synthesis of Yoruba in 
Ibadan, Nigeria.  All they were armed with was a 
book (Electronic Speech Synthesis by Geof Bris-
tow), a microphone and storage oscilloscope.  It 
was extremely difficult to get the required mate-
rials in the Nigeria of those days. 
Unfortunately, neither the Physicists nor the 
Engineer realized the relevance of linguistics in 
their work because the academic environment 
within which they grew did not provide the nec-
essary impetus for interdisciplinary or multidis-
ciplinary studies between certain fields of study, 
certainly not between linguistics, physics and 
engineering.  This brought about a lot of misdi-
rected efforts and frustration.  By 2001 however, 
with better access to the scientific literature of 
computational linguistics and HLT, it had be-
come clear to what was left of the group that 
HLT is as much an issue in language as it is an 
issue in technology. 
A careful review of the relevant aspects of the 
scientific literature of linguistics was then under-
taken.  Contacts were made with some of the 
known scholars of Yoruba phonology and their 
insights brought new impetus to the work, lead-
ing to the founding of Alt-i in 2001. 
56
The salient point in this historical perspective 
is that the academic environment that produced 
the members of the original group did not pro-
vide the necessary impetus for the level of cross-
disciplinary cooperation demanded by the solu-
tions to the problems the group was  addressing.  
Even though there were many papers that illus-
trated fruitful connections between linguistics 
and computer science in the mid 1980's, the Ni-
gerian economy was in such a bad state that the 
universities could not afford to keep their librar-
ies updated with current publications in any field.  
Nigerian universities now have noticeably better 
access to the global academic literature but a sys-
temic weaknesses that does not encourage inter-
disciplinary scholarship still subsists and needs 
to be addressed. 
7 Proposal 
A project with advocacy and service components 
aimed at accelerating the development of lan-
guage technology for African languages is here-
by proposed.  The aim of the proposed project is 
to produce lecturers, researchers and other ex-
perts in language technology for African lan-
guages. 
The advocacy component will identify and 
develop policy thrusts that will encourage the 
development of language technology and raise 
awareness at various levels of the importance of 
linguistics and language technology.  These in-
clude raising awareness among secondary school 
students, university undergraduates, cultural ac-
tivists and relevant policy makers. 
Within the service component, in affiliation 
with a university, a post-graduate course of study 
aimed at producing a number of PhDs in lan-
guage technology/computational linguistics with-
in the space of about five to six years is to be 
developed.  The candidates for this post-graduate 
course shall be university graduates of various 
relevant fields.  The programme shall start with a 
one year diploma programme of intensive course 
work in linguistics, computational and cognitive 
sciences.  These will serve to widen the knowl-
edge-base of the participants thereby creating the 
necessary connections between their back-
grounds and various aspects of language tech-
nology.  Those that attain a high level of 
achievement in the diploma course may stay on 
for another six-months to undertake a practical 
project in language technology.  Success in this 
project will earn such candidates a master degree 
in language technology or computational linguis-
tics.  Graduates of the master programme that 
attain a high level of performance in the project 
will be encouraged to stay on for the PhD pro-
gramme. 
The main faculty for the programme shall be 
drawn from relevant departments in the univer-
sity.  They shall undergo induction courses (lo-
cally and overseas) to re-orientate their knowl-
edge towards applications in language technol-
ogy. 
To kick-start the programme, the support of 
scholars in the international language technology 
community shall be sought for curricular devel-
opment as well as teaching.  Occasional or short-
term visiting lectureships will be accommodated 
within sabbatical, fellowship and exchange pro-
grammes. 
As an on-going experiment in this regard, two 
students of the university of Ibadan are at present 
working together on Yoruba-English machine 
translation.  One student is a graduate of Com-
puter Science, working towards a master degree 
in Information Science, while the other is a grad-
uate of Linguistics working towards a master de-
gree in Linguistics.  The two students are jointly 
supervised by a lecturer in Information Science 
and a lecturer in Linguistics.  Even though the 
computer science graduate has never had any 
formal training in Linguistics and the Linguistics 
graduate has never had any formal training in 
computing, their collaboration has served to wi-
den their knowledge-bases.  The student of lin-
guistics is approaching the project from the point 
of view of comparative syntax and is now able to 
express syntax rules in the form of context-free-
grammar in Prolog, while the Information Sci-
ence student is approaching the project from the 
point of view of predicate logic as a knowledge 
representation formalism and now has a fair un-
derstanding of the principles of Yoruba and Eng-
lish grammars. 
Even though the experiment is still on-going, 
the emerging results suggest that the one year of 
formal study in the proposed diploma programme 
will provide adequate knowledge and skills for 
graduates of the physical sciences, computer sci-
ence, technology, linguistics and psychology to 
undertake productive research in language tech-
nology. 
8 Conclusion 
The development of language technology for Af-
rican languages is at a rather embryonic stage.  
Apart from the efforts in South Africa, there are 
57
little or no coherent programmes on language 
technology in African universities.  National lan-
guage policies where they exist do not accom-
modate language technology issues and  there is 
a generally low level of awareness of the benefits 
derivable from language technology. 
With one-third of the world's languages spo-
ken in Africa, there is an urgent need for the de-
velopment of new techniques that address the 
peculiar features of these languages and thereby 
make it possible for the cultures that use them to 
benefit from the information revolution without 
having to adopt foreign languages  
The implementation of the proposed aca-
demic programme in HLT would require active 
support of the Nigerian government in coopera-
tion and collaboration with other friendly gov-
ernments as well as various multilateral agencies 
for funding and other resources.  However, in the 
absence of a language policy and a coherent lan-
guage technology programme, the advocacy 
component becomes be the necessary starting 
point.   
Developments in HLT and computational lin-
guistics present avenues for Nigerian universities 
to re-invigorate the study of linguistics, provide 
new impetus for students of linguistics and pre-
pare graduates of linguistics for more roles in 
society than the traditional teaching of local lan-
guages at secondary level.   Nigerian universities 
must therefore play an important role in the nec-
essary advocacy. 
As the world moves further into the informa-
tion age, concerted efforts are need to ensure that 
developments in HLT takes due account of Afri-
can languages so that African languages and cul-
tures can benefit from the information revolu-
tion. 
 
Acknowledgments 
Alt-i acknowledges with thanks the funding sup-
port of Tiwa Systems Ltd., Bait-al-Hikma, Open 
Society Initiative for West Africa (OSWIA) and 
International Development Research Center 
(IDRC) in its activities. 
References  
Tunde Adegbola.  2005. Application of tonemic in-
formation for search-space reduction in the auto-
matic speech recognition of Yoruba.  Unpublished 
PhD. Thesis, December, 2005, University of Iba-
dan, Nigeria. 
 Tunde Adegbola. 2007. Hitting the right tone. ICT 
Update http://ictupdate.cta.int/en/Feature-
Articles/Hitting-the-right-tone 
Tunde Adegbola. 2009. The Future of African Lan-
guages in a Globalising World.  Presented at the 
Bamako Summit on Multilingualism, 19 - 21 Janu-
ary 2009.  Bamako, Mali. 
Tunde Adegbola. 2009 Indigenising Human Language 
Technology for National Development.  To be pre-
sented at the Africa Regional Center for Informa-
tion Science (ARCIS), University of Ibadan, Guest 
Lecture, March 18, 2009. 
eLearning Africa. 2007. Interview with Dr. Tunde 
Adegbola. http://www.elearning-
africa.com/newsportal/english/news56_print.php, 
International Conference on ICT for Development 
Education 
Justus Roux. 2008. HLT Development in Sub-Saharna 
Africa.  Report to COCOSDA/WRITE Workshop, 
LREC2008, Marrakesh. 
http://www.ilc.cnr.it/flarenet/documents/lrec2008_
cocosda-write_workshop_roux.pdf 
Adam Samassekou. 2007. Linguistic Diversity.  ICT 
Update. http://ictupdate.cta.int/en/Regulars/Carte-
blanche/Linguistic-diversity 
Roger Tucker. 2003. Local language speech technol-
ogy initiative. http:/www.llsti.org 
58
