Proceedings of the NAACL HLT Student Research Workshop and Doctoral Consortium, pages 49?54,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Using emotion to gain rapport in a spoken dialog system
Jaime C. Acosta
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at El Paso
El Paso, TX 79968, USA
jcacosta@miners.utep.edu
Abstract
This paper describes research on automati-
cally building rapport. This is done by adapt-
ing responses in a spoken dialog system to
users? emotions as inferred from nonverbal
voice properties. Emotions and their acous-
tic correlates will be extracted from a persua-
sive dialog corpus and will be used to imple-
ment an emotionally intelligent dialog system;
one that can recognize emotion, choose an op-
timal strategy for gaining rapport, and render
a response that contains appropriate emotion,
both lexically and auditory. In order to deter-
mine the value of emotion modeling for gain-
ing rapport in a spoken dialog system, the final
implementation will be evaluated using differ-
ent configurations through a user study.
1 Introduction
As information sources become richer and technol-
ogy advances, the use of computers to deliver in-
formation is increasing. In particular, interactive
voice technology for information delivery is becom-
ing more common due to improvements in tech-
nologies such as automatic speech recognition, and
speech synthesis.
Several problems exist in these voice technologies
including speech recognition accuracy and lack of
common sense and basic knowledge. Among these
problems is the inability to achieve rapport.
Gratch et al (2007) defines rapport as a feel-
ing of connectedness that seems to arise from rapid
and contingent positive feedback between partners
and is often associated with socio-emotional pro-
cesses. In the field of neuro-linguistics, O?Connel
and Seymour (1990) stated that matching or com-
plimenting voice features such as volume, speed,
and intonation, is important to gain rapport. Shep-
ard et al?s Communication Accommodation The-
ory (2001) states that humans use prosody and
backchannels in order to adjust social distance with
an interlocutor. These features of voice can also be
associated with emotions.
Previous work has shown that automated systems
can gain rapport by reacting to user gestural nonver-
bal behavior (Chartrand and Bargh, 1999; Gratch et
al., 2007; Cassell and Bickmore, 2003). In contrast,
this research looks at how rapport can be gained
through voice-only interaction.
Preliminary analysis of human-human dialog pro-
vides evidence that shifts in pitch, associated with
emotion by two judges, are used by an interlocu-
tor for persuasion. Figure 1 shows the pitch of a
sound snippet from the corpus and how it differs
from neutral, computer synthesized voice (produced
using MaryTTS). This illustrates the more general
fact that when humans speak to each other, we dis-
play a variety of nonverbal behaviors in voice, es-
pecially when trying to build rapport. The main hy-
pothesis of this research is that a spoken dialog sys-
tem with emotional intelligence will be effective for
gaining rapport with human users.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows:
first, related work is reviewed and current limitations
for building automated rapport are described. After-
wards, the hypotheses and expected contributions of
this work are described along with the research ap-
proach. Lastly, broader significance of this work is
discussed.
49
Figure 1: Pitch levels of a conversation taken from the persuasive dialog corpus includes a student (Std) and a graduate
coordinator (Grad.Coord). Pitch was analyzed using the Praat software. It can be seen that the student displays rich
prosody in voice (tree parents) and that the human response (left branch) contains more varied prosody than the
computer synthesized voice (right branch).
2 Related Work
Communication Accommodation Theory states that
people use nonverbal feedback to establish social
distance during conversation. In order to gain rap-
port, people would most likely want to decrease
social distance in order to achieve the connected-
ness and smoothness in conversation that is seen
in human social interaction. Research in human-
computer interaction has pursued these nonverbal
behaviors through appropriate backchanneling, head
nods, and gaze techniques, but still missing is atten-
tion to user emotional state, which can be detected
through some of these nonverbal behaviors in voice.
Two methods for describing emotions are discrete
and dimensional. Discrete emotions include anger,
disgust, fear, joy, sadness, and surprise. Dimen-
sional emotions use two or more components to de-
scribe affective state. More commonly used dimen-
sions are Osgood et al?s (1957) evaluation (a.k.a.
valence), activity, and potency (a.k.a. power). Emo-
tion research has had limited success at detecting
discrete emotions, e.g. (D?Mello et al, 2008). In
the tutoring domain, some have looked at appropri-
ately responding to students based on their prosody
in voice (Hollingsed and Ward, 2007). The dif-
ficulty of recognizing discrete emotions exists be-
cause humans typically show more subtle emotions
in most real human-human interactions (Batliner et
al., 2000). Forbes et al (2004) had promising results
by looking at a three-class set of emotions (positive,
negative, neutral).
The intent of this research is to develop a method
for detecting three dimensions of emotion from
voice in order to build rapport. There is a possibility
that using a dimensional approach will enable more
accurate modeling of subtle emotions that exist in
spontaneous human-human dialogs.
3 Hypotheses and Expected Contributions
The main hypothesis of this work is that a spoken
dialog system with emotional intelligence will be
more effective for gaining rapport than a spoken di-
alog system without emotional intelligence. In or-
der to test this hypothesis, I will implement and
evaluate a spoken dialog system. This system will
50
choose topics and content depending on user emo-
tional state. The resulting system will advance the
state of the art in three technologies: recognizing
appropriate emotion, planning accordingly, and syn-
thesizing appropriate emotion. The system will also
demonstrate how to integrate these components.
In addition to choosing the correct content based
on user emotional state, this research will investi-
gate the effect of adding emotion to voice for rap-
port. The second hypothesis of the research is that
expressing emotion in voice and choosing words,
compared to expressing emotion only by choosing
words, will be more effective for building rapport
with users.
4 Approach
This section outlines the steps that have been com-
pleted and those that are still pending to accomplish
the goals of the research.
4.1 Corpus Analysis and Baseline System
This work is based on a persuasive dialog corpus
consisting of audio recordings of 10 interactions av-
eraging 16 minutes in length. The corpus consists
of rougly 1000 turns between a graduate coordina-
tor and individual students. The graduate coordina-
tor was a personable female staff member who was
hired by the University to raise the graduate student
count. The students were enrolled in an introduc-
tory Computer Science course and participated in
the study as part of a research credit required for
course completion. The students had little knowl-
edge of the nature or value of graduate school and of
the application process. Preliminary analysis of the
corpus showed evidence of a graduate coordinator
building rapport with students by using emotion.
A baseline system built using commercial state-
of-the-art software was implemented based on the
corpus (mainly the topics covered). Informal user
comments about the baseline system helped deter-
mine missing features for automated rapport build-
ing technology. One salient feature that is missing
is attention to emotion in voice. This confirmed the
direction of this research.
This corpus was transcribed and annotated with
dimensional emotions (activation, valence, and
power) by two judges. Activation is defined as
sounding ready to take action, valence is the amount
of positive or negative sound in voice, and power
is measured by the amount of dominance in voice.
The dimensions are annotated numerically on scales
from -100 to +100.
The following are examples taken from the corpus
with annotated acoustic features.
? Example 1
Grad.Coord(GC1): So you?re in the 1401
class? [rising pitch]
Subject(S1): Yeah. [higher pitch]
GC2: Yeah? How are you liking it so
far? [falling pitch]
S2: Um, it?s alright, it?s just the labs are
kind of difficult sometimes, they can, they give
like long stuff. [slower speed]
GC3: Mm. Are the TAs helping you?
[lower pitch and slower speed]
S3: Yeah. [rising pitch]
GC4: Yeah. [rising pitch]
S4: They?re doing a good job.
[normal pitch and normal speed]
GC5: Good, that?s good, that?s good.
[normal pitch and normal speed]
? Example 2
GC6: You?re taking your first CS class huh.
[slightly faster voice]
S5: Yeah, I barely started. [faster voice]
GC7: How are you liking it?
[faster voice, higher pitch]
S6: Uh, I like it a lot, actually, it?s prob-
ably my favorite class. [faster, louder]
GC8: Oh good. [slower, softer]
51
S7: That I?m taking right now yeah.
[slightly faster, softer]
GC9: Oh that?s good. That?s exciting.
[slow and soft then fast and loud]
GC10: Then you picked the right major
you?re not gonna change it three times like I
did. [faster, louder]
In the first example, the coordinator noticably
raises her pitch at the end of her utterance. This
is probably so that she can sound polite or inter-
ested. On line S2, the subject displays a falling
pitch (which sounds negative) and the coordinator
responds with a lower fundamental frequency and a
slower speed. The subject sounds unsure by display-
ing a rising pitch in his answer (S3). The coordinator
mirrors his response (GC4) and finally both inter-
locutors end with normal pitch and normal speed.
In the second example, the subject speaks faster
than usual (S5). The coordinator compensates by
adjusting her speed as well. From S6 through GC8,
when the subject?s voice gets louder, the coordina-
tor?s voice gets softer, almost as though she is back-
ing off and letting the subject have some space. In
GC9 the coordinator responds to the student?s posi-
tive response (liking the class) and becomes imme-
diately faster and louder.
A next step for the analysis is to determine the
most expressive acoustic correlates for emotions. In-
formal auditory comparisons show some possible
correlations (see Table 1). These correlations seem
promising because many correspond with previous
work (Schroder, 2004).
The emotion annotations of the two judges show
that strategies for adaptive emotion responses can
be extracted from the corpus. Communication Ac-
comodation Theory states that interlocutors mir-
ror nonverbal behaviors during interaction when at-
tempting to decrease social distance. The coordina-
tor?s emotional responses were correlated with the
student?s emotional utterances to determine if emo-
tional mirroring (matching student emotion and co-
ordinator response) was present in the persuasive di-
alog corpus. This was the case in the valence dimen-
sion, which showed a correlation coefficient of 0.34.
Table 1: Informal analysis reveals acoustic correlates
possibly associated with the dimensions of emotion
Dimension High Low
Activeness Faster, more
varied pitch,
louder
Slower, less
varied pitch,
softer
Valence Higher pitch
throughout,
laughter, speed
up
Falling ending
pitch, articula-
tion of words,
increasing
loudness
Power Faster, louder,
falling ending
pitch, articu-
lation of word
beginnings,
longer vowels
Softer, higher
pitch through-
out, quick
rise in pitch,
smoother word
connection
However, regarding power, there was an inverse re-
lationship; if the student showed more power, the
coordinator showed less (?0.30 correlation coeffi-
cient). Activation showed a small correlation coeffi-
cient (?0.14).
To realize a spoken dialog system that could
model this responsive behavior, machine learning
was used. The students? three emotion dimensions
were taken as attributes and were used to predict
the coordinators emotional responses using Bagging
with REPTrees. Measuring the correlations between
the predictions of the model and the actual values in
the corpus revealed correlation coefficients of 0.347,
0.344, and 0.187 when predicting the coordinator?s
valence, power, and activation levels, respectively.
4.2 Full System
The full system will provide a means to evaluate
whether emotion contributes to automated rapport
building. This system will be based on several avail-
able technologies and previous research in spoken
dialog systems.
Figure 2 shows the different components antici-
pated for the full system. The components that will
be implemented for this research include emotion
recognition, user modeling components, and text
and emotion strategy databases. The other compo-
nents will be based on available open source soft-
ware packages. The implementation effort also in-
52
Figure 2: Full System Dataflow Diagram
cludes the integration of all components.
The following is a scenario that depicts how the
full system will operate.
1. The system begins by saying ?How are you do-
ing today??
2. The user says ?I?m doing good? with a negative
sounding voice.
3. The voice signal is then processed through the
speech recognizer and emotion recognizer in
parallel. The speech recognizer extracts words
from the voice signal while the emotion recog-
nizer extracts emotion.
4. This data is sent to the user modeling com-
ponent which determines the immediate user
state based only on the current emotion and the
words spoken. In this scenario, the user?s state
will be negative even though the user stated
otherwise.
5. This user state update information is then
passed to the user model which updates the
current user state. This component contains
knowledge, beliefs and feelings of the user.
Since there was no previous user state, the cur-
rent emotion is set to negative. Stored in user
knowledge will be the fact that the user was
asked ?How are you doing today??. Some in-
formation about the user?s contradictory state is
stored as user beliefs: stated good, but sounds
negative.
6. Next, this information is used to select some
predefined text from the lexical generation
along with an associated emotion from the
emotion strategy database (these two are done
in parallel). Since the user?s state is negative,
the system may choose to ask another question
such as ?ok, do you have any concerns?? with a
negative sounding voice (to mirror the valence
dimension). In contrast, if the user was pos-
itive, the system may have chosen something
similar to ?great, let?s get going then? with a
highly positive voice.
7. Lastly, the text with corresponding emotion
coloring is rendered to speech and played to the
user by the speech synthesis component.
4.3 Evaluation
To achieve the final goal of determining whether
emotion helps gain rapport, the final system de-
scribed herein will be evaluated.
The final system will be configurable; it will allow
for enabling emotion in voice (voiced) or disabling
the emotions in voice (not voiced). In addition, there
53
will be a control configuration, perhaps one that will
display a random emotion (random). A user study
(hopefully within subjects) will be conducted that
will ask users to interact with four versions of the
system (baseline, voiced, not voiced, and random).
A post-test questionnaire consisting of Likert scales
will ask users how much rapport they felt with each
version of the system. In addition, some objective
metrics such as disfluency count and interaction time
will be collected. This will help test the two hy-
potheses of this research. First, it is expected that
subjects will have more rapport with the not voiced
configuration than with the baseline system. The
second hypothesis will be verified by determining
if subjects have more rapport with the voiced than
with the not voiced system. The random configura-
tion will be used to determine whether the system?s
adaptive responses are better than random responses.
5 Broader Significance
This research addresses methods for gaining rap-
port as an important dimension of successful human-
computer interaction, and one likely to be useful
even for business-like dialogs. For example, build-
ing rapport with customers can decrease the number
of disfluencies, which are currently a problem for
speech recognizers. In addition, customer support
systems will have the ability to tailor responses to
decrease negative emotion.
Similarly, the learned rules for detecting emotion
and responding appropriately could be used to train
people how to more effectively gain rapport. Lastly,
this work can supplement other rapport research that
uses other forms of nonverbal behavior such as gaze
and gestures seen especially in embodied conversa-
tional agents.
6 Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my advisor, Nigel Ward for his
help. Also, I would like to thank Anais Rivera and
Sue Walker for the collection of the persuasive dia-
log corpus and Jun Zheng for his help in fine tuning
the baseline system. This work is supported in part
by NSF grant IIS-0415150.
References
A. Batliner, K. Fischer, R. Huber, J. Spilker, and E. No?th.
2000. Desperately Seeking Emotions or: Actors,
Wizards, and Human Beings. In ISCA Tutorial and
Research Workshop (ITRW) on Speech and Emotion.
ISCA.
J. Cassell and T. Bickmore. 2003. Negotiated Collusion:
Modeling Social Language and its Relationship Ef-
fects in Intelligent Agents. User Modeling and User-
Adapted Interaction, 13(1):89?132.
T.L. Chartrand and J.A. Bargh. 1999. The chameleon
effect: The perception-behavior link and social inter-
action. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
76(6):893?910.
S.K. D?Mello, S.D. Craig, A. Witherspoon, B. McDaniel,
and A. Graesser. 2008. Automatic detection of learn-
ers affect from conversational cues. User Modeling
and User-Adapted Interaction, 18(1):45?80.
K. Forbes-Riley and D. Litman. 2004. Predicting
emotion in spoken dialogue from multiple knowledge
sources. Proc. Human Language Technology Conf. of
the North American Chap. of the Assoc. for Computa-
tional Linguistics (HLT/NAACL).
J. Gratch, N. Wang, A. Okhmatovskaia, F. Lamothe,
M. Morales, R.J. van der Werf, and L. Morency. 2007.
Can Virtual Humans Be More Engaging Than Real
Ones? 12th International Conference on Human-
Computer Interaction.
Tasha K. Hollingsed and Nigel G. Ward. 2007. A com-
bined method for discovering short-term affect-based
response rules for spoken tutorial dialog. Workshop
on Speech and Language Technology in Education
(SLaTE).
J. O?Connor and J. Seymour. 1990. Introducing neuro-
linguistic programming. Mandala.
C.E. Osgood. 1957. The Measurement of Meaning. Uni-
versity of Illinois Press.
M. Schroder. 2004. Dimensional Emotion Representa-
tion as a Basis for Speech Synthesis with Non-extreme
Emotions. In Proceedings Workshop Affective Dia-
logue Systems, 3068:209?220.
C.A. Shepard, H. Giles, and B.A. Le Poire. 2001. Com-
munication accommodation theory. The new hand-
book of language and social psychology, pages 33?56.
54
