Proceedings of SIGDIAL 2009: the 10th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group in Discourse and Dialogue, pages 21?28,
Queen Mary University of London, September 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Are You Being Addressed? - real-time addressee detection to support
remote participants in hybrid meetings
Harm op den Akker
Roessingh Research and Development
Enschede
the Netherlands
h.opdenakker@rrd.nl
Rieks op den Akker
Human Media Interaction Twente
Enschede
the Netherlands
infrieks@cs.utwente.nl
Abstract
In this paper, we describe the development
of a meeting assistant agent that helps
remote meeting participants by notifying
them when they are being addressed. We
present experiments that have been con-
ducted to develop machine classifiers to
decide whether ?you are being addressed?
where ?you? refers to a fixed (remote) par-
ticipant in a meeting. The experimental re-
sults back up the choices made regarding
the selection of data, features, and classifi-
cation methods. We discuss variations of
the addressee classification problem that
have been considered in the literature and
how suitable they are for addressee detec-
tion in a system that plays a role in a live
meeting.
1 Introduction
In order to understand what is going on in a meet-
ing, it is important to know who is talking, what
is being said, and who is being addressed (talked
to). Here, we focus on the question of whom the
speech is addressed to. We present results ob-
tained in developing a classifier for real-time ad-
dressee prediction to be used in an assistant for a
remote participant in a hybrid meeting, a meeting
where a number of participants share a common
meeting room and one or more others take part via
teleconferencing software.
It is obvious that in order to effectively par-
ticipate in a meeting, participants need to know
who is being addressed at all times. For remote
participants in hybrid meetings, understanding the
course of the conversation can be difficult due to
the fact that it is hard to figure out who is being
addressed. But it is not only meeting participants
who are interested in addressees. The question
who is being addressed has long been of interest
for science: group therapists (Bales, 1950), small
group research, or outside observers who analyse
recorded meetings.
How speakers address listeners, what kind of
procedures speakers use to designate their audi-
ence and to make clear whom they address has
been the focus of conversational analysis, socio-
linguistics and ethnomethodology for quite some
time. An analysis of addressee selection is pre-
sented in (Lerner, 1996). Addressing as a special
type of multi-modal interactional referring expres-
sion generation behavior is considered in (op den
Akker and Theune, 2008).
The problem of automatic addressee detection
is one of the problems that come up when technol-
ogy makes the move from two-party man-machine
natural dialogue systems to systems for multi-
party conversations. In this context the addressing
problem was raised by Traum (2004).
Since Jovanovic? (2004), presented her research
on addressee prediction in meetings at SigDial,
quite a few publications on the topic appeared. Jo-
vanovic? used a number of multi-modal meeting
corpora developed in the European projects M4
and AMI. In (Jovanovic? et al, 2006b) the first
multi-modal multi-party corpus containing hand
labeled addressee annotations was presented. The
public release of the multi-modal AMI meeting
corpus (Carletta, 2007; McCowan et al, 2005), a
100 hour annotated corpus of small group meet-
ings has already shown to be an important achieve-
ment for research; not only for conversational
speech recognition and tracking of visual elements
21
but also for automatic multi-modal conversational
scene analysis. The M4 and AMI corpora are the
only multi-modal meeting corpora (partly) anno-
tated with addressee labels. Addressee detection
in robot-human interaction is studied in (Katzen-
maier et al, 2004) and in multi-party dialogue
systems in (Knott and Vlugter, 2008; van Turn-
hout et al, 2005; Bakx et al, 2003; Rickel et al,
2002). Addressing in face-to-face conversations is
achieved by multi-modal behavior and addressee
detection is thus a multi-modal recognition task.
This task requires not only speech recognition but
also gaze and gesture recognition, the recognition
of deictic references, and, ideally, the understand-
ing of the ?what?s going on? in the meeting. It
requires the detection of who is involved in cur-
rent (parallel) activities. Speakers show explicit
addressing behavior when they are not confident
that the participants they want to address are pay-
ing attention to their words. Analysis of the re-
mote meetings recorded in the EC project AMIDA
reinforces our experiences that this happens more
in remote meetings than in small group face-to-
face meetings.
In AMIDA, the European follow-up project of
AMI, the two new research goals are: (1) real-time
processing (real-time speech recognition (Hain
et al, 2008), focus of attention recognition (Ba
and Odobez, 2009), real-time dialogue act label-
ing (Germesin et al, 2008) and addressee detec-
tion); and (2) technology for (remote) meeting
support. Technology based on the analysis of
how people behave and converse in meetings is
now going to re-shape the meetings, and hopefully
make them more effective and more engaging. So-
cial interaction graphs that show who is talking to
whom and how frequently in a meeting may help
the group by mirroring its interpersonal relations,
dominance, and group dynamics, and understand
social mechanisms as possible causes of ineffec-
tiveness. Although, feedback about the social in-
teractions may also be useful during meetings, it
doesn?t require the prediction of the speaker?s ad-
dressees in real-time. A participant in a meeting,
however, needs to know who is being addressed by
the speaker at ?the time of speaking?. This holds
for humans as well as for an artificial partner, a
robot or a virtual Embodied Conversational Agent
in a multi-party conversation.
The problem of addressee prediction comes in
different flavors, depending on the relations that
the subject who is in need of an answer, has with
the event itself. Time is one of the aspects that play
a role here: whether the subject needs to know
the addressee of an utterance in real-time or off-
line. But it is not only time that plays a role. The
addressing problem is an interactional problem,
meaning that it is determined by the role that the
subject has in the interaction itself; if and how the
speaker and others communicate with each other
and with the subject. Is he himself a possible
addressee of the speaker or is he an outside ob-
server? What type of communication channels
are available to the subject and which channels of
communication are available to the conversational
partners in the meeting? It is often harder to fol-
low a face-to-face discussion on the radio than to
follow a radio broadcasted multi-party discussion
that was held via a point-to-point telephone con-
nection.
What speakers do to make clear whom they are
addressing depends on the status and capacities of
the communication lines with their interlocutors.
Discussion leaders in TV shows are aware of their
TV audience. Every now and then, they explicitly
address their virtual audience at home. They also
design their questions so as to make clear to the
TV viewer whom their questions are addressed to.
Outside observers in the form of a video camera
will, however, not affect the way speakers make
clear whom they address as long as the camera
is not considered as a participant interested in the
speaker?s intention. Because remote participants
are often out of sight, speakers in the meeting
room do not take them into account when they
converse to others in the meeting room. Remote
participants become a kind of outside observers
and share the same problems that annotators have
when they watch video recordings of meetings to
see what is happening in the meeting and who is
being addressed by the speaker.
In section 2 we will specify the particular type
of addressing problem that we are trying to tackle
here. We make clear how our problem and ap-
proach differ from those of other researchers and
what this means for the applicability of previous
results and available data. In section 3 we present
the data we used for testing and training. We set
a baseline for the performance of our classifiers as
22
well as a hypothesized maximum value, or ceiling,
based on the complexity of the task at hand. In
section 4 we discuss the experiments, for selecting
the optimal features, classifiers, and parameters.
In section 5 we present the experimental results.
In section 6 we discuss how the currently imple-
mented addressing module works in the meeting
assistant and what is required to use all the features
of the addressee predictor in a hybrid meeting.
2 The Addressing Problem Considered
Here
Jovanovic? et al (2004) and Jovanovic? et al
(2006a) describe the classifiers that have been
trained and tested on the M4 and AMI corpora.
The classification problem is to assign an ad-
dressee label to a dialogue act, a hand-labeled and
hand-segmented sequence of words, which is ob-
tained by manual transcription of a speaker?s utter-
ance. The output of the classifier is one of a set of
possible addressee labels: Group, or P0,P1,P2,P3,
which are the four fixed positions around the ta-
ble of the four participants in the meeting. Since
the AMI data contains several meetings of differ-
ent groups of four people, the class value cannot be
the name of a participant, as that is not an invari-
ant of the meeting setting. Positions at the rect-
angular table are invariant. This implies that the
classifiers can only be used for meetings with this
setting and four participants. A comparison of the
statistical classifier of Jovanovic? with a rule-based
method using the same part of the AMI corpus is
presented in (op den Akker and Traum, 2009). The
same data is also used by Gupta et al (2007) in
their study of a related problem: finding the person
the speaker refers to when he uses a second person
pronoun (e.g. ?you? or ?your?) as a deictic referring
expression. Their class values are not positions at
the table but ?virtual positions? in the speaking or-
der (e.g. next speaker, previous speaker), a solu-
tion that generalises to a broader class of conversa-
tions than four participants in a face-to-face meet-
ing. In a more recent study, Frampton et al (2009)
use positions at the table relative to the position
of the speaker as class values: L1, L2, L3. The
reason for this is to alleviate the problem of class
imbalance in the corpus.
We will also use the AMI corpus but we will
look at a different variant of the addressing prob-
lem. This is motivated by our application: to sup-
port a remote participant in a hybrid meeting. The
question that we will try to answer is ?are you
being addressed??, where ?you? refers to an in-
dividual participant in a conversation. The possi-
ble answers we consider are ?yes? or ?no?1. The
addressing classifier that solves this problem is
thus dedicated to a personal buddy. Note that this
makes the method useable for any type of conver-
sational setting. Note also that the addressing pre-
diction problem ?are you being addressed?? for
a meeting assistant who is not himself participat-
ing in the meeting is different from the problem
?am I being addressed?? that a participant himself
may have to solve. The meeting assistant does not
have direct ?internal? knowledge about the pro-
cesses or attentiveness of his buddy participant; he
has to rely on outside observations. Our view on
the problem implies that we have to take another
look at the AMI data and that we will analyse and
use it in a different way for training, testing and
performance measuring. It also implies that we
cannot rely for our binary classification problem
on the results of Jovanovic? (2007) with (dynamic)
Bayesian networks.
3 The Data and How Complex Our Task
Is
We use a subset of the AMI corpus, containing
those fourteen meetings that have not only been
annotated with dialogue acts, but where dialogue
acts are also attributed an addressee label, telling
if the speaker addresses the Group, or the person
sitting at position P0,P1,P2 or P32. They have also
been annotated with visual focus of attention: at
any time it is known for each partner where he is
looking and during what time frame. Annotated
gaze targets are persons in the meeting, white-
board, laptop, table or some other object.
Another level of annotations that we use con-
cerns the topic being discussed during a topic seg-
ment of the meeting. Participants in the AMI cor-
pus play a role following a scenario, the group has
to design a remote TV control and team members
each have one of four roles in the design project:
PM - project manager; UI - user interface de-
signer; ID - industrial designer; or ME - market-
ing expert. For details on the meeting scenario see
1A ?yes? means that the dialogue act is addressed to ?you?
only. Group-addressed dialogue acts are considered to be
?no? (not addressed to you only).
2Annotators could also use label Unknown in case they
could not decide the addressee of the speaker, this is treated
as Group-addressed or ?no?.
23
(Post et al, 2004). In training and testing the clas-
sifiers we alternately take up the position in the
meeting of one of the participants, who is treated
as the target for addressee prediction.
3.1 Base-line and Ceiling-value
Because most of the dialogue acts are not specif-
ically addressed to one and the same meeting
participant, the baseline for the binary classifica-
tion task is already quite high: 89.20%, being
the percentage of all dialogue acts annotated with
addressing information ?not addressed to You?,
which is 5962 out of a total of 6648 dialogue acts.
The performance of a supervised machine
learning method depends on (1) the selection of
features (2) the type of classifier including the
settings of the hyper-parameters of the classi-
fiers (Daelemans et al, 2003), and (3) the quality
and the amount of training data (Reidsma, 2008;
Reidsma and Carletta, 2008). Since we measure
the classifier?s performance with a part of the an-
notated data it is interesting to see how human an-
notators (or, ?human classifiers?) perform on this
task.
One of the AMI meetings3 has been annotated
with addressing information by four different an-
notators. We will use this to measure how am-
biguous the task of addressee labeling is. Table
1 shows the confusion matrix for two annotators:
s95 and vka. This shows the (dis-)agreements for
labelling the 412 dialogue acts as addressed to A,
B, C, D or to the Group. 4 However, because we
use our data differently, we will look at the con-
fusion matrices in a different way. We split it up
into 4 matrices, each from the view of one of the
four meeting participants. Table 2 is an example of
this, taking the view of participant A (i.e. for the
binary decision task ?is Participant A being ad-
dressed??, and having annotator s95 as gold stan-
dard.
Table 2 shows that when taking annotator s95
as gold standard, and considering annotator vka
as the classifier, he achieves an accuracy of 92.23
(380 out of 412 instances classified correctly).
3IS1003d
4Note that the annotators first independently segmented
the speaker?s turns into dialogue act segments; then labeled
them with a dialogue act type label and then labeled the dia-
logue acts with an addressee label. The 412 dialogues acts are
those segments that both annotators identified as a dialogue
act segment.
A B C D Group Total
A 29 10 39
B 14 8 22
C 32 7 39
D 1 1 49 18 69
Group 21 10 19 22 171 243
Total 51 24 52 71 214 412
Table 1: Confusion matrix for one pair of annota-
tors ( = 0.55).
A ?A Total
A 29 10 39
?A 22 351 373
Total 51 361 412
Table 2: Confusion matrix for one pair of anno-
tators, considering addressed to A or not (derived
from the matrix in Table 1).
We can argue that we can use these human an-
notators/classifiers scores as a measure of ?max-
imum performance?, because it indicates a level
of task ambiguity. Classifiers can achieve higher
scores, because they can learn through noise in the
data. Thus, the inter-annotator confusion value is
not an absolute limit of actual performance, but
cases in which the classifier is ?right? and the test-
set ?wrong? would not be reflected in the results.
Since the inter-annotator confusion does also say
something about the inherent task ambiguity, it
can be used as a measure to compare a classifier
score with. Table 3 contains the overall scores
(taken over all 4 individual participants) for the
6 annotator pairs. The average values for Recall,
Precision, F-Measure and Accuracy in Table 3 are
considered as ceiling values for the performance
measures for this binary classification task5. The
Hypothesized Maximum Score (HMS) is the aver-
age accuracy value: 92.47.
Pair Rec Prec F Acc
s-v 73.37 62.63 67.58 92.78
m-s 59.75 70.59 64.72 91.87
m-v 69.92 74.78 72.27 93.11
m-d 37.77 81.61 51.64 91.79
v-d 42.04 80.49 55.23 92.22
s-d 43.68 77.55 55.88 93.02
Average: 54.42 74.61 61.22 92.47
Table 3: Recall, Precision, F-measure and Accu-
racy values for the 6 pairs of annotators.
5Inter-changing the roles of the two annotators, i.e. con-
sider vka as ?gold standard? in Table 2, means inter-changing
the Recall and Precision values. The F-value remains the
same, though.
24
The baseline (89.20 for all dialogue acts anno-
tated with addressing) and the HMS (92.47) accu-
racy values will be used for comparison with the
performance of our classifiers.
4 The Methods and Their Features
In the experiments, four different classifiers were
created:
1. Lexical and Context Classifier
2. Visual Focus of Attention Classifier
3. Combined Classifier
4. Topic and Role Extended Classifier
For each of these classifiers a large number of
experiments were performed with a varying num-
ber of 15 to 30 different machine learning meth-
ods -using Weka (Witten and Frank, 1999)- to se-
lect optimal feature sets. In this section we sum-
marize the most important findings. For a more
detailed analysis refer to (op den Akker, 2009).
Because of the large number of features and clas-
sifiers used, the various classifier hyper parame-
ters have largely been kept to their default val-
ues. Where it was deemed critical (Neural Net-
work training epochs and number of trees in Ran-
domForest classifier) these parameters were varied
afterwards to make sure that the performance did
not deviate too much from using the default val-
ues. It didn?t.
4.1 Lexical and Context Classifier
The lexical and context based classifier uses fea-
tures that can be derived from words and dialogue
acts only. A total of 14 features were defined,
7 of which say something about the dialogue act
(type, number of words, contains 1st person sin-
gular personal pronoun, and so on) and 7 of which
say something about the context of the dialogue
act (how often was I addressed in the previous 6 di-
alogue acts, how often did I speak in the previous
5 dialogue acts, and so on). Of these 14 features,
the optimal feature subset was selected by trying
out all the subsets. This was repeated using 15
different classifiers from the WEKA toolkit. The
best result was achieved with a subset of 10 fea-
tures, by the MultiLayerPerceptron classifier. In
this way an accuracy of 90.93 was reached. Given
the baseline of the used train and test set of 89.20
and the HMS of 92.47, this can be seen as 53% of
what ?can? be achieved.
4.2 Visual Focus of Attention Classifier
The VFOA classifier uses features derived from a
meeting participant?s visual focus of attention. A
total of 8 features were defined, such as: the total
time that the speaker looks at me, the total time
everyone is looking at me, and so on. The optimal
time interval in which to measure who is looking
at you was extensively researched by trying out
different intervals around the start of a dialogue
act, and training and testing a classifier on the fea-
ture. These optimal interval values differ for every
feature, but is usually somewhere between a few
seconds before the start of the dialogue act, to 1
second into the dialogue act. The difference in per-
formance for using the optimal interval compared
to using the start- and end times of the dialogue
act is sometimes as much as 0.93 accuracy (which
is a lot given a base score of 89.20 and HMS of
92.47). This shows, that when looking at VFOA
information, one should take into account the par-
ticipant?s gaze before the dialogue act, instead of
looking at the utterance duration as in (Jovanovic?,
2007; Frampton et al, 2009)6. The representation
of feature values was also varied by either nor-
malizing to the duration of the window or using
the raw values. Again the optimal feature subset
was calculated using brute-force. Because of the
reduced time complexity for 28 possible feature
subsets, 30 different classifiers from the WEKA
toolkit were trained and tested. One of the best re-
sults was achieved with a feature set of 4 features
again with the MultiLayerPerceptron: 90.80 accu-
racy. The train and test sets used for this classifier
are slightly smaller than those used for the Lex-
Cont classifier because not all dialogue acts are
annotated with VFOA. The base score for the data
here is 89.24, and given the HMS of 92.47, this re-
sult can be seen as 48% of what can be achieved.
4.3 Combined Classifier
The third classifier is a combination of the first
two. We tried three different methods of combin-
ing the results of the LexCont and VFOA classi-
fiers. First we tried to train a classifier using all
the features (14 lexical, 8 vfoa) which exploded
the feature subset search space to over 4 million
possibilities. A second approach was to combine
the output of the LexCont and VFOA classifiers
using a simple rule-based approach. The OR-rule
6Note that a dialogue act segment can be preceded by an
other utterance unit of the same speaker.
25
(if either of the two classifiers thinks the DA is ad-
dressed to you, the outcome is ?yes?) performed
the best (91.19% accuracy). But the best results
were achieved by training a rule based (Ridor)
classifier on the output of the first two. For these
experiments the test-set of the previous two clas-
sifiers was split again into a new train (3080 in-
stances) and test set (1540 instances). The features
are the outputs of the VFOA and LexCont classi-
fiers (both class and class-probabilities). For this
task, 35 classifiers have been trained with the best
results coming from the Ridor classifier: 92.53 ac-
curacy. The results of all the different techniques
for combining the classifiers can be seen in Table
4. The baseline score for this smaller test set is
89.87, so given the HMS of 92.47, this result can
be seen as 102% of what can be achieved. Note
that this is not ?impossible?, because the Hypoth-
esized Maximum Score is merely an indication of
how humans perform on the task, not an absolute
ceiling.
4.4 Topic and Role Extended Classifier
As a final attempt to improve the results we used
topic and role information as features to our com-
bined classifier. In the AMI corpus, every meet-
ing participant has a certain role (project manager,
interface designer, etc. . . ) and the meetings were
segmented into broad topic (opening, discussion,
industrial designer presentation). Now the idea is
that participants with certain roles are more likely
to be addressed during certain topics. As an illus-
tration of how much these a-priori chances of be-
ing addressed can change, take the example of an
industrial designer during an ?industrial designer
presentation?. The a-priori probability of you be-
ing addressed as industrial designer in the entire
corpus is 13%. This probability, given also the
fact that the current topic is ?industrial designer
presentation? becomes 46%. This is a huge differ-
ence, and this information can be exploited. For all
combinations of topic and role, the a-priori prob-
ability of you being addressed as having that role
and during that topic, have been calculated. These
values have been added as features to the features
used in the Combined Classifier, and the experi-
ments have been repeated. This time, the best per-
forming classifier is Logistic Model Trees with an
accuracy of 92.99%. Given the baseline of 89.87
and HMS of 92.47, this can be seen as 120% of
what ?can? be achieved, which is better by a fairly
large margin than the results of the inter-annotator
agreement values.
5 Summary of Results
Table 4 summarizes the results for the various
classifiers. The LexCont and VFOA classifiers in-
dividually achieve only about 50% of what can
be achieved, but if combined in a clever way,
their performance seems to reach the limit of what
is possible based on the comparison with inter-
annotator agreement. The fact that the topic-role
extended classifier achieves so much more than
100% can be ascribed to the fact that it is cheating.
It uses pre-calculated a-priori chances of ?you?
being addressed given the circumstances. This
knowledge could be calculated by the machine
learner by feeding it the topic and role features,
and letting it learn these a-priori probabilities for
itself. But the classifier that uses these types of
features can not easily be deployed in any differ-
ent setting, where participants have different roles
and where different topics are being discussed.
Method Acc Rec Prec F PoM
HMS 92.47 54.42 74.61 61.22 -
LexCont 90.93 33.10 66.02 44.09 53
VFoA 90.80 27.77 67.65 39.38 48
CombinedFeat 91.56 36.62 70.82 48.28 72
ClassOfResults 43.68 77.55 55.88 93.02 102
LogComb(AND) 90.24 9.86 94.23 17.85 31
LogComb(OR) 91.19 47.08 61.90 53.48 60
TopicRoleExt 92.99 41.03 80.00 54.24 120
Table 4: Performance values of the Methods dis-
cussed in this paper: Accuracy, Recall, Precision,
F-measure and Percentage of Hypothezised Maxi-
mum Score (PoM).
6 How Does The Assistant Work?
At the time of writing, the assistant that has been
implemented is based on the simple visual focus
of attention classifier. The focus of attention is
inferred from the head pose and head movements
of a participant in the meeting room who is being
observed by a close-up camera. The real-time fo-
cus of attention module sends the coordinates of
the head pose to a central database 15 times per
second (Ba and Odobez, 2009). The coordinates
are translated into targets: objects and persons
in the meeting room. For the addressing module
most important are the persons and in particular
the screen in the meeting room where the remote
26
participant is visible. The addressing module is
notified of updates of who is speaking and decides
whether the remote participant is being looked at
by the speaker.
If the remote participant (RP) is not attentive
(which can be detected automatically based on his
recent activity) he is called when he is addressed
or when the real-time keyword spotter has de-
tected a word or phrase that occurs on the list of
topics of interest to the RP. For a detailed descrip-
tion of the remote meeting assistant demonstrator
developed in the AMIDA project refer to (op den
Akker et al, 2009).
The meeting assistant allows the RP to dis-
tribute his attention over various tasks. The system
can give a transcript of the fragment of the meet-
ing that is of interest to the RP, so he can catch
up with the meeting if he was not following. The
simple focus of attention based addressing module
works fine. The question is now if an addressing
module that uses the output of the real-time dia-
logue act recognizer, which in turn uses the out-
put of the real-time speech recognizer will outper-
form the visual focus of attention based addressee
detector. Experiments make us rather pessimistic
about this: the performance drop of state of the art
real-time dialogue segmentation and labeling tech-
nology based on real-time ASR output is too large
in comparison with those based on hand-annotated
transcripts (Jovanovic?, 2007). For real-time au-
tomatic addressee detection more superficial fea-
tures need to be used, such as: speech/non-speech,
who is speaking, some prosodic information and
visual focus of attention, by means of head orien-
tation.
The most explicit way of addressing is by using
a vocative, the proper name of the addressed per-
son. In small group face-to-face meetings, where
people constantly pay attention and keep track of
others? attentiveness to what is being said and
done, this method of addressing hardly ever oc-
curs. In remote meetings where it is often not clear
to the speaker if others are paying attention, people
call other?s names when they are addressing them.
Other properties of the participant relevant for ad-
dressee detection include his role and his topics
of interest. These can either be obtained directly
from the participant when he subscribes for the
meeting, or they can be recognized during an in-
troduction round that most business meetings start
with. For automatic topic detection further anal-
ysis of the meeting will be needed (Purver et al,
2007). Probability tables for the conditional prob-
abilities of the chance that someone with a given
role is being addressed when the talk is about a
given topic, can be obtained from previous data,
and could be updated on the fly during the meet-
ing. Only when that has been achieved will it
be possible for our extended topic/role addressee
classifier to be fully exploited by a live meeting
assistant.
Acknowledgements
The research of the first author was performed
when he was a Master?s student at the Human Me-
dia Interaction group of the University of Twente.
This work is supported by the European IST Pro-
gramme Project FP6-0033812 (AMIDA). We are
gratefull to the reviewers of SigDial 2009 for their
encouraging comments, and to Lynn Packwood
for correcting our English.
References
Sileye Ba and Jean-Marc Odobez. 2009. Recognizing
human visual focus of attention from head pose in
meetings. In IEEE Transaction on Systems, Man,
and Cybernetics, Part B (Trans. SMC-B), volume 39,
pages 16?33.
I. Bakx, K. van Turnhout, and J. Terken. 2003. Facial
orientation during multi-party interaction with infor-
mation kiosks. In Proceedings of 9th IFIP TC13 In-
ternational Conference on Human-Computer Inter-
action (INTERACT), Zurich, Switzerland.
Robert Freed Bales. 1950. Interaction Process Analy-
sis; A Method for the Study of Small Groups. Addi-
son Wesley, Reading, Mass.
Jean C. Carletta. 2007. Unleashing the killer corpus:
experiences in creating the multi-everything AMI
meeting corpus. Language Resources and Evalua-
tion, 41(2):181?190, May.
Walter Daelemans, Ve?ronique Hoste, Fien De Meul-
der, and Bart Naudts. 2003. Combined opti-
mization of feature selection and algorithm param-
eter interaction in machine learning of language.
In Proceedings of the 14th European Conference
on Machine Learning (ECML-2003), Lecture Notes
in Computer Science 2837, pages 84?95, Cavtat-
Dubrovnik, Croatia. Springer-Verlag.
Matthew Frampton, Raquel Fernndez, Patrick Ehlen,
Mario Christoudias, Trevor Darrell, and Stanley Pe-
ters. 2009. Who is you? combining linguistic and
gaze features to resolve second-person references in
27
dialogue. In Proceedings of the 12th Conference of
the EACL.
Sebastian Germesin, Tilman Becker, and Peter Poller.
2008. Determining latency for on-line dialog act
classification. In Poster Session for the 5th Inter-
national Workshop on Machine Learning for Multi-
modal Interaction, volume 5237.
Surabhi Gupta, John Niekrasz, Matthew Purver, and
Daniel Jurafsky. 2007. Resolving ?you? in multi-
party dialog. In Proceedings of the 8th SIGdial
Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue, Antwerp,
Belgium, September.
Thomas Hain, Asmaa El Hannani, Stuart N. Wrigley,
and Vincent Wan. 2008. Automatic speech recogni-
tion for scientific purposes - webasr. In Proceedings
of the international conference on spoken language
processing (Interspeech 2008).
Natasa Jovanovic? and Rieks op den Akker. 2004. To-
wards automatic addressee identification in multi-
party dialogues. In Proceedings of the 5th SIGdial
Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 89?
92, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Natasa Jovanovic?, Rieks op den Akker, and Anton Ni-
jholt. 2006a. Addressee identification in face-to-
face meetings. In Proceedings of 11th Conference
of the European Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (EACL), Trento, Italy.
Natasa Jovanovic?, Rieks op den Akker, and Anton Ni-
jholt. 2006b. A corpus for studying addressing
behaviour in multi-party dialogues. Language Re-
sources and Evaluation Journal, 40(1):5?23.
Natasa Jovanovic?. 2007. To whom it may con-
cern: adressee identification in face-to-face meet-
ings. Ph.D. thesis, University of Twente.
M. Katzenmaier, R. Stiefelhagen, and T. Schultz. 2004.
Identifying the addressee in human-human-robot in-
teractions based on head pose and speech. In Pro-
ceedings of International Conference on Multimodal
Interfaces (ICMI), pages 144?151, State College,
PA.
A. Knott and P. Vlugter. 2008. Multi-agent human-
machine dialogue: issues in dialogue management
and referring expression semantics. Artificial Intel-
ligence, 172:69?102.
Gene H. Lerner. 1996. On the place of linguistic
resources in the organization of talk-in interaction:
?Second person? reference in multi-party conversa-
tion. Pragmatics, 6(3):281?294.
I. McCowan, J. Carletta, W. Kraaij, S. Ashby, S. Bour-
ban, M. Flynn, M. Guillemot, T. Hain, J. Kadlec,
V. Karaiskos, M. Kronenthal, G. Lathoud, M. Lin-
coln, A. Lisowska, W. Post, D. Reidsma, and
P. Wellner. 2005. The AMI meeting corpus. In
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on
Methods and Techniques in Behavioral Research.
Rieks op den Akker and Mariet Theune. 2008. How
do I address you? - modelling addressing behavior
based on an analysis of a multi-modal corpus of con-
versational discourse. In Proceedings of the AISB
2008 Symposium on Multimodal Output Generation
(MOG 2008), Aberdeen, UK, pages 10?17.
Rieks op den Akker and David Traum. 2009. A com-
parison of addressee detection methods for multi-
party conversations. In Proceedings of DiaHolmia,
13th Workshop on the Semantics and Pragmatics of
Dialogue.
Rieks op den Akker, Dennis Hofs, Hendri Hondorp,
Harm op den Akker, Job Zwiers, and Anton Nijholt.
2009. Engagement and floor control in hybrid meet-
ings. In Proceedings COST Action Prague 2008 (to
appear), LNCS. Springer Verlag.
Harm op den Akker. 2009. On addressee detection
for remote hybrid meeting settings. Master?s thesis,
University of Twente.
W.M. Post, A.H. Cremers, and O.B. Henkemans. 2004.
A research environment for meeting behavior. In
A. Nijholt, T. Nishida, R. Fruchter, and D. Rosen-
berg, editors, Social Intelligence Design, Enschede,
The Netherlands.
Matthew Purver, John Dowding, John Niekrasz,
Patrick Ehlen, Sharareh Noorbaloochi, and Stanley
Peters. 2007. Detecting and summarizing action
items in multi-party dialogue. In Proceedings of the
8th SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue,
Antwerp, Belgium, September.
Dennis Reidsma and Jean C. Carletta. 2008. Relia-
bility measurement without limits. Computational
Linguistics, 34(3):319?326, September.
Dennis Reidsma. 2008. Annotations and Subjective
Machines. Ph.D. thesis, University of Twente.
J. Rickel, S. Marsella, J. Gratch, R. Hill, D. Traum, and
W. Swartout. 2002. Towards a new generation of
virtual humans for interactive experiences. Intelli-
gent Systems, 17:32?36.
David Traum. 2004. Issues in multiparty dialogues. In
Advances in Agent Communication, pages 201?211.
K. van Turnhout, J. Terken, I. Bakx, and B. Eggen.
2005. Identifying the intended addressee in
mixed human-human and human-computer interac-
tion from non-verbal features. In Proceedings of 7th
International Conference on Multimodal Interfaces
(ICMI?05), Trento, Italy.
Ian H. Witten and Eibe Frank. 1999. Data Mining:
Practical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques
with Java Implementations. Morgan Kaufmann, 1st
edition, October.
28
