Proceedings of EACL 2009 Workshop on Semantic Representation of Spoken Language - SRSL 2009, pages 10?18,
Athens, Greece, 30 March 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
On the segmentation of requests in spoken language
Michael Alvarez-Pereyre
Universite? Paris-Sorbonne ? CELTA
Maison de la recherche (D.310)
28 rue Serpente, 75006 Paris, France
maponline@gmail.com
Abstract
This paper presents a theoretical approach
to the characterization of requests bound-
aries and structure in general spoken di-
alogue. Emphasis is laid on the fracture
between the illocutionary act of requesting
(for which the term ?request? is kept) and
the locutionary elements that carry it out
(its ?instantiation?). This approach leads to
a representation of requests based on the
inclusion of a semantic level under a prag-
matic level via a structural level. These
distinctions are meant to benefit to the
semantic-pragmatic segmentation of dia-
logue and the study of request strategies.
1 Introduction
This paper focuses on the segmentation of requests
in spoken language from a semantic-pragmatic
perspective. Taxonomies exist for specific types of
requests,1 and general dialogue-acts taxonomies
like DAMSL cover various types of utterances ?in-
fluencing the addressee?s future action? (Core and
Allen, 1997; Stolcke et al, 2000). The aim is
not to replace them?the former are finer-grained
than what is proposed here, and the latter have
the advantage of treating requests in a framework
which includes other types of dialogue acts. The
purpose of this paper is rather to contribute to a
middle-ground, with distinctions general enough
to encompass all types of action requests (assum-
ing that a common process of ?requesting? under-
lies them), yet detailed and structured enough to
account for the construction of their meaning. The
goal is therefore not to provide a taxonomy iden-
tifying speech or dialogue acts in ?shallow? dis-
1For instance clarification requests or ?CRs? (Corsaro,
1977; Purver, Ginzburg and Healey, 2003; Purver, 2004;
Rodr??guez and Schlangen, 2004, among others), check-
questions (Jurafsky and Martin, 2000, ?19.3), etc.
course structure (Jurafsky et al, 1997), but a struc-
tured explanatory taxonomy of requesting means.
The scope is ?requests for action? taken in a
broad sense, as exemplified by (1-3).2
(1) Err / hmm / you know / it would probably be easiest if
I just squeezed back there and poked around myself /
would that be alright with you? // (BRO 0h32m56s)
(2) Mister Masry? // [?Yeah //] I was wondering can you
tell me who I talk to / about maybe getting an advance
on my paycheck // Just / for the week-end //
(BRO 0h14m33s)
(3) Now you listen // I don?t give a damn / which way you
go / just don?t follow me / you got that? //
(FUG 0h18m59s)
?Request? is understood broadly to include the
whole spectrum of invitations, entreaties, com-
mands, etc. ?Action? is understood broadly in the
sense that the scope includes requests for clarifi-
cation (e.g. ?Who said it??); for attention, as ?Now
you listen? in (3) or ?Mr Masry?? in (2); for con-
firmation, as ?You got that?? in (3); and of course
what corresponds to a narrow understanding of the
expression ?action requests?, namely requests for
actions not concerned with dialogue management,
as the request to allow the speaker of (1) into the
file room of the county water board, the request to
direct the speaker of (2) to the right person, or the
request not to follow the speaker of (3). The scope
excludes ?true? questions (unmarked information
2The sequences quoted in this paper are extracted from a
corpus of contemporary North-American films. Though film
dialogues can by no means be called ?spontaneous? speech,
they share enough features with naturally occurring interac-
tions as to help us define the tools to study requests in spoken
language. The advantage of working with commercial films
is that such material covers the whole gamut of pragmatic in-
teractions and situations?though, admittedly, as represented
not ?intercepted? scenes. Sequences are indexed with three
block capitals to identify the film quoted (e.g. Erin Brock-
ovich, found at [BRO] in the References) and three numbers
specifying the hour, minute and second when the sequence
begins. The sound track is transcribed as the succession of
speech ?increments? separated by pauses, with simple slashes
[/] and double slashes [//] to distinguish between ?tentative?
and ?final? pauses, following Pike (1945).
10
requests in which no significant attempt to further
influence the addressee is traced).
The main question of this paper is: What def-
inition of a ?request? should we work with, if we
are to describe the outer boundaries and the inner
complexity of requests in a way that enables mod-
elization and quantification of request strategies?3
Section 2 starts from the difficulty of assign-
ing boundaries to spoken language ?requests? in
the framework of traditional speech act theory,
and stresses key principles for pragmatic research
based on spoken corpora. Section 3 proposes a
minimal set of distinctions necessary to account
for the inner organization of request instantiations.
Section 4 assesses the approach.
2 Towards a definition of ?requests?
One aspect of language interactions which tends to
be oversimplified is the relationship between a ?re-
quest? and its instantiation.4 True, with ?indirect
requests?, traditional pragmatics cast light on the
gap between the ?illocutionary act? of requesting
and the ?locutionary act? (or the ?literal? elements)
used to express it. To bridge this gap, it focused
on the contextual felicity-conditions of utterances,
or on the conversational implicatures, the maxims,
the inference rules or the cognitive faculties that
enable us to construe their meaning (Austin, 1962;
Searle, 1969; Searle, 1979; Grice, 1975; Perrault
and Allen, 1980; Lenci, 1994, etc.); but all too of-
ten, the very examples given as a starting point to
such analyses are far too simple, as the signifier of
the request is almost invariably composed of one
isolated, syntactically pure segment.5 Pragmatic
analyses of this kind encourage an idealized vi-
sion of language interactions, in which a request
(and more generally a speech act) coincides per-
fectly with one stand-alone, clear-cut and atempo-
ral piece of language.
More recent ?cue-based? (Jurafsky and Martin,
3This paper deals primarily with the theoretical founda-
tions of methodology and does not tackle the technical im-
plementation of the results.
4?Instantiation? might be preferred to ?formulation?, as the
former term makes it clearer that the speech elements uttered
participate not so much in the communication as in the per-
forming of the request (along with other elements not dis-
cussed here such as intonation, gesture, social context, etc.).
5Stubbs (1983, p. 148) noted that ?it is something of a
paradox that speech act theory emphasizes the uses of lan-
guage, and in fact applies to utterances not sentences, but has
depended largely on introspective judgments of isolated sen-
tences?. Geis (1995) pointed out that acts such as requesting
or inviting often develop over several interaction turns.
2000) probabilistic approaches, on the other hand,
give an increasingly accurate surface description
of empirical dialogues as successions of normal-
ized ?moves? or ?dialogue acts? (Carletta et al,
1997; Stolcke et al, 2000); but the normalization
of sequences as distinct ?utterances? also encour-
ages an atomistic, ?one segment, one act? vision.6
Yet, as far as semantic-pragmatic representa-
tion is concerned, it is artificial and problematic to
imagine that a request corresponds to a ?block? of
signifier (?2.1) and to a ?block? of meaning (?2.2).
2.1 ?Requests??from signs to meaning
Spoken corpora show that requests are rarely com-
posed of one clause or one simple clause-complex
(though dialogue management requests might tend
to correspond to monosegmental clauses or frag-
ments). The majority of requests take the form
of several increments of various syntactic, seman-
tic and pragmatic types, often with repetitions of
increments, interruptions from the co-interactants
(and from the speakers themselves), embedded
phases of negotiation, etc. The safest way to ap-
proach the problem is therefore to consider that a
priori every request instantiation is likely to have a
discontinuous signifier and extensible boundaries.
Requesting: a real-time process
Even assigning the beginning and the end of a ?re-
quest? in a linear transcription can prove difficult,
as shown by some seemingly simple, supposedly
straightforward ?imperative? requests:
(4) Put a light in there // Put a light in there //
(FUG 0h32m59s)
(5) Put that gun down // Put that gun down // Now //
(FUG 0h36m40s)
The police officer who utters (4) points succes-
sively at two different locations in a tunnel in
which he is walking with his staff. It is there-
fore not a problem to say that the two clauses in
this sequence correspond to two different requests.
When some time later the police officer corners
a fugitive and shouts (5), this ?bijective? analysis
does not hold anymore: the officer does not want
two separate actions of ?putting the gun down?.
To consider the segment ?Put that gun down? as
?a request? would force us to consider the second
6That these ?utterances? may contribute to conversational
or dialogue ?games? (Carletta et al, 1997; Levin et al, 1998,
for instance) tends, in practice, to reinforce their atomistic
character, despite the fundamental remark by Traum and
Hinkelman (1992) on the divisibility of ?utterances?.
11
segment, as well as ?now?, as so many ?requests?,
since each of the three segments, in the situation,
is pronounced in order to trigger an action. It
is preferable to say that the three increments in-
stantiate one same request. The reason is, that all
throughout the speech sequence, the police officer
has one result in mind only, and the fulfillment of
his request at any moment of the sequence would
in fact render the subsequent increments useless
and even incoherent (which is not the case in (4)).7
The situation of a ?surjective? relationship be-
tween the speech increments and the acts they per-
form occurs in cases like (5) because the instan-
tiation of action-requests rarely fits the ideal sce-
nario according to which one ?block? stimulus trig-
gers one clear reaction (or not), as summarized in
the left part of Figure 1. Spoken language being a
real-time process, interactants habitually take into
consideration the current state of the world, check-
ing whether their expectations have been met (and
probably in a scalar not a polar way), and decid-
ing whether more stimulation (seen as process) is
necessary. In other words, the perlocutionary (the
set of effects of the utterance) may influence the
locutionary in return, as long as the world differs
from what the speakers would like it to be; and as
long as the speakers do not recognize the prod-
uct of their intention in the world, they have to
choose between several options: repeat, rephrase,
modify the extent of, or abandon their requests.
To account for this, one must consider request-
instantiation not as an end-product but as a pro-
cess, not as ?act? but as action in progress. This is
summarized in the right part of Figure 1.
"time"
"request""reaction"
"time ofspeech"
"time ofreference"
locutionary event(s)
perlocutionary(and other) event(s)
Both ways: Interpretations, decisions, adjustments
Figure 1: Requesting, a real-time process
7Still, it is common for a speaker to add request-related
increments of specific types (e.g. stating motives) even af-
ter the addressee has started complying. This is because the
speaker?s goal is usually not just to have the addressee ful-
fill the request: preserving or attaining a specific kind of re-
lationship with one?s interactants (e.g. by sharing one?s rea-
sons with them) is an objective in itself, which partly explains
the ?variability? in request strategies (Bloomfield, 1933, ?2.6)
and sometimes even justifies the withdrawal of a request.
The speech/act fracture
The problem of the instantiation of requests
reaches in fact deeper than the ?mere? real-time
calculation of an intention/effects (and /cost) ra-
tio on the part of the speaker. Speech being linear,
any request that uses spoken language for its in-
stantiation will extend over a certain span. Often,
the length of that span is primarily accounted for
by the internal complexity of the request instan-
tiation, even before it becomes relevant to assess
the perlocutionary. That a radical fracture must be
acknowledged between the speech elements used
and the act performed is exemplified by (6), ut-
tered in an emergency ward by a chief-doctor who
is examining a patient, to a fellow doctor who is
taking care of another patient a few meters away.
(6) Al / get over here / I need you // (FUG 1h06m42s)
It is tempting to analyze (6) as a request pre-
ceded by a specification of its target and followed
by an explanation of its motive. The problem with
this ?narrow? analysis is that it forces major de-
scriptive changes when possible variants are taken
into consideration, such as (6?) and (6??) (assum-
ing that, in the situation, they could have produced
the same effect). It seems indeed difficult to de-
scribe the increment ?I need you? as a ?request? in
(6?) but as a mere explanation, ?banalized? by the
presence of the imperative increment, in (6); and
it seems equally difficult to hold that the vocative
increment ?Al? falls within the scope of the request
in (6??) but outside of it in (6).
(6?) Al / I need you //
(6??) Al //
The ?narrow? analysis presented above results
from a vision of request instantiations in EI-
THER/OR terms within a limited range of clear-cut
strategies (sometimes reduced to clause-types).
However, the comparison of common requests
such as (6) with their possible variants shows that
the very idea of pinpointing one increment (usu-
ally a sentence) as the support of the request is
taken at fault?so much so that the distinction be-
tween ?direct? and ?indirect? speech acts falls. Im-
perative clauses may retain a specificity compared
with other segments (see further on), but the facts
remain that (a) countless requests are instantiated
by several increments, (b) a great number of these
increments might suffice to instantiate the corre-
sponding request alone, (c) none of these incre-
ments can claim to be ?the segment of speech that
12
performs the act?, and therefore (d) all of the in-
crements, far from excluding one another from the
request instantiation, contribute to it.
From this perspective, the semantic-pragmatic
segmentation of requests in spoken language con-
sists in, first, identifying the increments involved
in ?carrying out? the request and, second, deter-
mining the contribution of each increment to the
whole. It seems doubtful, however, that the mean-
ing of a request should be the simple, composi-
tional addition of the meanings of its increments.
One reason is that the increments of a request
are often semantically and pragmatically hetero-
geneous (the three increments in (6) are by no
means equatable), and their modes of contribu-
tion are therefore several. If heterogeneity is not a
problem for the interactants, it is probably because
they rely on a broader and more flexible vision of
a request?s meaning than is often acknowledged.
2.2 Requesting?from intention to signs
Why do speakers formulate requests? In most
cases, the goal is not to actually witness an action.
The speaker of (4) is not interested in ?seeing? his
staff set up spotlights because he said so, nor is
the speaker of (6) interested in ?seeing? ?Al? come
over to her (if it were the case, motive increments
such as ?I need you? would be incoherent, except
maybe as ploys). The officer wants the tunnel to
be lit, and the doctor wants immediate help from a
colleague nearby. Each of these requests is there-
fore meant to bring about a specific situation. To
be sure, the ultimate object of most requests is a
desired state of the world?not an action; and the
possible actions of the co-interactant(s) often have
value not of themselves but primarily as a step to-
wards the advent of that state.8 A useful way to
represent the speaker?s mental context preceding
a request instantiation is therefore to distinguish
several ?worlds? roughly seen as static?the cur-
rent world and the possible worlds (including the
target world but also undesired worlds, maybe oth-
ers still)?separated by a dynamic ?transition situ-
ation? which includes the possible actions of the
co-interactants and the possibility for the speaker
to stimulate them into enacting them.
Stating the reason that makes the target-world
desirable (?I need you?) or naming, with an imper-
ative, the action that can bring about this world
8The idea of ?plan? below is close to that found in Perrault
and Allen (1980, ?3.3), but its treatment, from the perspective
of a linguistic ?geo-strategy?, will be different.
(?Come here?), are two ways, not mutually ex-
clusive, to reach the desired situation. Other in-
crements could be added without ?exhausting? the
meaning of the request, i.e. without instantiating
a new or different one. Thus, the meaning of a
request is often alluded to jointly by several ele-
ments which emphasize various parameters of the
worlds or of the transition situation considered,
along with elements referring to the process of re-
questing itself. Even when a speaker resorts to the
imperative in order to call for an action, it is habit-
ually clear to all that this action is to be enacted in
the name of something else. The functioning of a
request is therefore always metonymic (i.e. based
on a radical speech/act fracture) in the sense that
increments focus on one element or another and
yet instantiate the whole request.
Requests might therefore be best described not
as ?attempts. . . by the speaker to get the hearer to
do something? (Searle, 1979, p. 13) but rather as
attempts to involve the addressee into a plan de-
vised to reach a target world?a plan defined es-
pecially (but never exclusively) by the projected
action(s) of the addressee. In this perspective, the
increments not naming the projected action are not
seen as the conditions meant to help the addressee
decode that action (in traditional pragmatic ex-
amples, these elements strangely disappear in the
presence of the imperative); they are understood
here as part of the general strategy of sharing of a
plan that takes place when a request is instantiated
(a ?sharing? which can, of course, be minimal).
3 Towards a ?constituency? of request
instantiations
This section details how the reflections developed
in ?2 can be rendered operational in order to
segment request instantiations. The aim here is
to sort out the semantic-pragmatic ?constituency?
of request instantiations, i.e. the system whereby
higher (and often larger) units include lower (of-
ten smaller) ones. The task is therefore to find out
which ranks are relevant for the study of requests
and what primary distinctions should be acknowl-
edged between the units of these ranks.9
9The reflection below is presented in a progressive way
rather than as a complete nomenclature, both to show the em-
pirical necessity of the distinctions acknowledged, and as a
reminder that this model has not reached a definitive phase.
Parallels may be found between the Universe, Manners and
Phases described below and (respectively) the attentional, lin-
guistic and intentional structures of Grosz and Sidner (1986),
though with differences not discussed here.
13
3.1 Semantic distinctions
Part of what defines a request instantiation is,
purely and simply, its ?Universe?, understood as
what entities, concepts, qualities and relations are
verbalized (and regardless of the way they are).
One level of description (at least) should there-
fore be dedicated to distinctions between the types
of elements that appear in speech. Since the
?Universe? of speakers is not objective but rather
peopled and structured by what makes sense in
their world-views, some elements are given more
prominence than others among the ?worlds? and
the ?transition situation? assumed above.
In many request instantiations, the speaker
refers to what could be called the ?head-action?
of the request, i.e. the action that should lead most
directly to the ?target world?: ?(Can you) tell me
who. . . ? (2), ?Put that gun down? (5), etc. Reg-
ularly, however, actions are named which are not
the head-action of the request. What is verbalized
often corresponds either to a ?sub-action? of the
head-action hoped for, or to a ?germane action?
which is not a necessary subpart of the head-action
but is, in the context, related to it and meant to trig-
ger it. ?Call? names a sub-action in (7), as it is a
necessary step within the head-action ?tell?. ?Look
at it? names a germane action in (8): with this ut-
terance a fisherman asks a shark specialist to re-
consider his judgment that the shark under exam-
ination (caught by the fisherman) is too small to
qualify as the man-eater everyone is hunting for.
Though ?Looking? is not properly a sub-action of
?changing one?s judgment? (or of ?reconsidering?
it), it is supposed, in this context, to lead to that.
(7) . . . You call Judge Rubin / you tell him I want a whole
bunch of phone-taps. . . // (FUG 0h29m37s)
(8) What / this is a big mouth / look at it // (JAW 0h33m09s)
Many other verb-referents can be found which
are not to be enacted by the addressee, such as
?I was wondering? in (2) or ?You know? in (1).
The former is a (mental) process attributed to the
first person (P1), the latter is a (mental) state at-
tributed to the second person (P2). An additional
difference is that ?I was wondering? is an assertion
(of the occurrence of a reflection process) whereas
?You know?, in this utterance, hesitates between
the question and the assertion (as it often does).
This difference relates to a second level of descrip-
tion: actions (and other elements) can be verbal-
ized in different ?manners?, for instance a direc-
tive or a descriptive manner. Following a tradi-
tional distinction, the former tells the addressee to
do the action (through imperatives, performatives
and maybe nominals, as in the army?s ?Ateeen-
tion!?) whereas the latter talks of or about the
action (through various types of questions, asser-
tions, exclamations, hypotheses, etc.). In (1), ?It
would probably be easiest. . . ? is the (descriptive)
assertion of a judgment on ?. . . if I just squeezed
back there and poked around myself?, in which
a sub-action and a higher-action (attributed to the
first person, and to be allowed, not enacted by the
second person) are verbalized as the (descriptive)
evocation of a possibility (see Tables 2 and 3).
Other elements than actions are found in the
verbalized ?Universe? of a request instantiation.
People and objects are often named, some more
than others. Addressees are crucial interactants as
they are often hoped to become the agents of the
projected head-actions, and they are therefore of-
ten named in separate increments (especially to at-
tract their attention, as in (2), or to modalize the re-
quest). In a similar way, the notion of head-object
can be useful to refer to those objects that occupy a
central position in the representation of the head-
action. Indeed, head-objects are so important on
the ?mind map? of the speaker that they are com-
monly named without the action itself (?Scalpel?
in an operating room, ?The door!?, etc.). Some-
times, these objects are accompanied by other el-
ements which help specify what is to be done, es-
pecially the location where the action is to take
place or end. When people, objects, locations or
other elements are verbalized outside the net of re-
lationships found in clauses, they are often pointed
at through speech, and the manner can be said to
be ?indexical?. Table 1 illustrates the concepts of
?head? action, object and location (FUG 0h36m49s).
(9) Hands up Over your head Turn around
Univ. h-obj.R1 head-location(s)R1 h-actionR2
Manner idx. idx. indexical directive
REQUEST 1 REQUEST 2
Table 1: ?Head? actions, objects and locations
If the target-situation is desired (and if other sit-
uations, including the current one, are unwanted),
it is usually because a change would be benefi-
cial to someone or something (the speaker, the ad-
dressee, other people, institutions, moral princi-
ples, etc.). This explains why, quite often, values
concerning the request plan are asserted (e.g. ?It
14
would probably be easiest. . . ?) or discussed (e.g.
?Would that be alright with you??). Elements of
other types might be acknowledged in the Uni-
verse of the speaker, referring not to actions, par-
ticipants, circumstances or values but to specific
meaning-contents that can be given prominence
when isolated as an increment. Thus, ?Just?, in (2),
does not refer to an entity but brings in the mean-
ing of ?restriction??here a restriction bearing on
the scope of the ultimate goal, in such a way that
the request itself is attenuated. Often, the restric-
tion bears directly on the head-action, as in (3).
3.2 Structural distinctions
One issue raised by the last remark is that of deal-
ing with units of different ranks, as boundaries do
not always coincide. ?Just / for the week-end //? is
related to a verb in a preceding increment (?getting
an advance on my paycheck?) yet it appears after
a final pause, as an afterthought. An approach fa-
voring syntax might try to emphasize the relation-
ship with the verb or the clause. A pragmatic al-
ternative (or addition) can be proposed, underlin-
ing the fact that speakers (consciously or not) iso-
late some increments and join others. ?Just? carries
the meaning of ?restriction?; giving it prominence
through prosody (by separating it both from what
precedes and follows it) might therefore be an ef-
fective way of increasing the chances of a request
to be fulfilled. Indeed, ?Just / for the week-end
//? is not verbalized so much for the informational,
referential specification it provides concerning the
preceding verb, as for the way it restricts the ?cost?
of fulfilling the future request (of asking for an ad-
vance on the salary) and therefore the present one
(?. . . tell me who I speak to. . . ?).10 The prosodic
boundaries both signal and enact a reorganization
of the roles and importance of verbalized elements
under pragmatic considerations?a reorganization
for which syntactic distinctions fail to account,
and which might be erased or downplayed when
increments are normalized into ?utterances?.11
Still, ?Just? does not function alone. An accurate
semantic-pragmatic description should be able to
render the facts (a) that signs have meaning in iso-
lation, (b) that they enter in meaningful larger syn-
10As ?Mr Masry? is the director of the firm, he can be ex-
pected to have a say in salary matters, which might influence
his reaction to a request to name the office manager.
11In other words, this paper believes that functions are ful-
filled a bit below (with ?phases?, see ?3.3) and a bit above
(with ?speech acts?, roughly Discourse Units as in Traum and
Hinkelman (1992), and see ?2) the level of ?utterances?.
tactic structures (on which traditional corpus seg-
mentation has focused) and (c) that prosodic cues
often cut through these structures or fuse several
of them,12 an operation of (re)organization which
is of semantic-pragmatic relevance.
Several types of meaningful units are therefore
available.13 They are treated here on three sep-
arate ranks (some of which might require sub-
division to cover the whole structural complex-
ity). The semantic ranks describing the verbalized
Universe and the verbalizing Manner will com-
monly deal with whole increments as well as ?sub-
increments? (e.g. ?It would probably be easiest? in
(1)). The pragmatic ranks (see ?3.3), on the other
hand, will typically deal with whole increments, as
what the speaker does through speech seems to be
carried out by ?phases? which often fit into incre-
ment boundaries (or run over several increments).
The general correspondence of phase boundaries
with those of increments is strengthened by the ob-
servation that when several functions are fulfilled
within the limits of one increment, they are usu-
ally fulfilled in a syncretic, not a successive fash-
ion (though ?phases? may sometimes run on parts
of increments only). Focusing on ?functions? of
increments leads us to pragmatic distinctions.
3.3 Pragmatic distinctions
The increments uttered when instantiating a re-
quest are not just semantically and structurally het-
erogeneous (some assert judgments, others pin-
point objects or circumstances, etc.), they are also
pragmatically heterogeneous: different types of
?phases? fulfilling different functions can usually
be distinguished within a request instantiation.14
Taking each increment one after the other, we can
ask: what is the speaker trying to achieve with
this increment with regard to the general request
under way? do neighboring increments fulfill the
same function? are several functions fulfilled by
the same increment? if so, can the increment be
divided into sub-increments corresponding to dif-
ferent phases, or are all the functions fulfilled syn-
12In ?Do not smoke in here thank you very much //?
(JAW 0h30m49s), fusion of an action-specifying phase with
a ?second answer? (which normally follows a positive ?first?
answer such a ?Ok?) expresses the refusal of an alternative.
13None of these units need be ?grammatical? in the tradi-
tional, syntactic sense, as many types of fragments are in fact
accepted in spoken language (Goldman-Eisler, 1968).
14The labels (e.g. angling<calling<urging) are meant to
be ?intuitive?. Their pragmatic relevance vis-a`-vis the formal
cues (word order, intonation, etc.) retained to describe speech
elements with them is, of course, only assumed for English.
15
UNIVERSE (major/head/high/sub/germane/next/ultimate) (mental/physical)
ACTION/PROCESS/STATE (P{1-6}); TIME; PLACE; VALUE; ?RESTRICTION?;...
Notes: Modifiers before action, process or state specify their place on the mental world-map and their
type. Modifiers afterwards attribute them to person. At this stage, values are not attributed to person.
MANNER EGOPHORIC (sends back to speaker); INDEXICAL [INTERPELLATION/POINTING];
DESCRIPTIVE [ASSERTION/QUESTION/EVOCATION/RANGE/(...?) (of/on) ACT-
ION/STATE/POSSIBILITY/CIRCUMSTANCE/JUDGMENT/REFLECTION/FEELING/...];
DIRECTIVE[IMPERATIVE/PERFORMATIVE/NOMINAL];
OPERATIVE (performs an action by itself, e.g. ?just?, ?please?, etc.);(...?)
Notes: This level assesses the semantico-structural contribution; labels can be modified by ?Ambiguity?,
which is sometimes part of the speaker?s strategy (see Table 3, (1)), and by ?Negative? (ibid., (3)).
PHASES SPECIFYING/RESTRICTING/QUESTIONING (of) MOTIVE/ACTION/GOAL/SCOPE;
ANGLING/CALLING/URGING (for) ATTENTION/FOCUS/EMPATHY/ACTION;
(soft) PHATIC/FOCALIZING/ATTENUATING/MODALIZING/INTENSIFYING/...
Notes: This level assesses the pragmatic contribution of increments. Label changes are to be expected.
DEPEN-
DENCY
ATTENTION REQUEST; CONFIRMATION REQUEST; METAPRAGMATIC REQUEST;(...?)
Notes: Request dependencies are described in Table 3 only when relevant.
Table 2: Preliminary ontology of levels of analysis and their labels (see Table 3 for application)
thetically by the whole increment? if the latter,
are the functions distinct (a case represented by
sign ?&? in Table 3) or is one derived from another
(in which case the position on a lower line with-
out ?&? represents derivation from functions on a
higher line)?
Phases, through their ?vertical? relations with
formal manners and their ?horizontal? inter-
relations, are useful to evaluate request strategies.
One important difference between the directive
and descriptive manners, for instance, is that in
addition to specifying an action, directive manners
conventionally convey an urge to enact it. Descrip-
tive manners, as for them, are regularly accompa-
nied by elements fulfilling other functions such as
stating the value of the action (1) or questioning its
possibility (2). Fine distinctions should also allow
to compare, for instance, increments subtly ?an-
gling? for attention (such as the throat clearing in
(1)) and others more clearly ?calling? for it (the
vocative in (2)), not to forget the cases where ob-
taining the addressee?s attention is presented as a
request in itself (?Now you listen? in (3)).
With this last remark, we are hitting upon an im-
portant pragmatic distinction: not all increments
in a request participate in its instantiation equally.
This is not just because different types of ?phases?
must be acknowledged but also because, in some
cases, these phases actually contribute to the re-
quest via their participation to the instantiation
of a ?satellite?, or ?dependent? request. True, re-
quests for attention and confirmation are com-
monly found as ?independent? requests (for in-
stance in a classroom), but they often serve the
purpose of ensuring the felicity of a ?main? re-
quest, as in (3). ?Now you listen? and ?You got
that?? are requests in their own right;15 neverthe-
less, these requests would have no raison d?e?tre
without the main request not to follow the speaker.
A layer can therefore be added in the tables to
account for request ?Dependency?; and the head-
action of the main request gains a new status, as
?major? action in the request plan.16
4 Limitations and prospects
The model presented here has not yet reached a
state of maturity where its reliability as an annota-
tion scheme can be tested. Fine-tuning of the dis-
tinctions, and clear decision-trees for each rank,
are among the next necessary steps. One theoret-
ical limitation is that this approach, in its current
form, does not cover the use of metaphoric lan-
guage and more generally the lexical contribution
of a number of elements (for instance, the non-
professional and vague verb ?to poke around? in
(1) is not chosen by chance instead of, say, ?to
search for the legal records my firm needs?). As
important is the need to take prosody into fuller
15The co-speaker?s ?Yeah? following the latter is not only
an ANSWER but also an AGREEMENT/ACCEPT (or COMMIT),
in terms of the SWBD-DAMSL taxonomy (Jurafsky et al,
1997; Stolcke et al, 2000). The general duality affecting
?check questions? was noted in Core and Allen (1997).
16Clarification is needed of the Phase/Dependency bound-
ary, i.e. of the criteria used to decide when ?phases? of a
request acquire the status of ?dependent request? (of which
some uses of ?Come on? and ?Do it? illustrate another type,
that of a ?metapragmatic? request to fulfill the main request).
16
(1) Err hmm You know It would probably if I just squeezed back there Would that be
be easiest and poked around myself alright with you?
Universe - state (P2) value sub-act? + high-act? (P1) value
Manner egophoric descriptive descriptive descriptive descriptive
Ambig. Ass?/Q? Assert? Judgment Evocat? Possibility Quest? Judgment
Phases att? angling empathy angling specifying motive & specifying goal assent angling
REQUEST (to let speaker go look for files herself)
(2) Mr Masry? I was wondering can you tell me who I talk to about maybe get- Just for the
(-Yeah) ting an advance week-end
on my paycheck
U addressee mental proc. (P1) state (P2) head-a? next a? (P1) ultimate a? (P1) ?restr?? moment
M indexical descriptive descr. descr. descr. descriptive operative descr.
Interpellat? Assert? Reflect? Q? Poss. Evoc? P. Evoc? P. Evocat? Possib. Restrict? Evoc? Circ.
specifying goal=motive restricting scope
Ph soft focalizing & & head-act? specifying attenuating
att? calling soft modalizing & Calling modalizing
D ATTENT? R.
?
REQUEST
(to tell speaker how (and if) possible to get advance on her paycheck)
(3) Now you listen I don?t give a damn which way you go Just don?t follow me You got that?
Univ. time head-act?R? value (feeling) act? (P2) ?restr?? major action sub-actionR??
Man. idx. directive descriptive descriptive operative directive descriptive
Imp. Assertion Feeling Range Act?s Restrict? Imp. (neg.) Quest? Act?
Ph. & spec. act? Expressing concession : specifying act? spec. s-act?
focus angl. & urging modalizing phase : & urging & questioning
Dep. ATTENTION R. REQUEST FOR ACTION CONFIRM? R.
(not to follow speaker)
Table 3: Description of examples (1), (2) and (3)
account and to include nonverbal cues. Another
issue is the fact that repair, backchannel and over-
lapping tend to be more common in spontaneous
speech than in films (work in preparation); these
phenomena (all of which can be of pragmatic sig-
nificance in the context of request-formulation), as
well as turn-taking, must be better integrated.
On the plus side, this approach has the advan-
tage of trying to bridge the gap, with strong empir-
ical emphasis, between ?emic? parameters such as
the speakers? beliefs, desires and intentions, and
?etic? cues from the signifier (Pike, 1954; Blum-
Kulka, 1981; Reiss, 1985; Jurafsky, 2004). By
focusing on the contribution of increments to the
construction of meaning, and by running statis-
tics to reveal which types of increments are used
by speakers in which context and according to
which concatenation patterns, we should eventu-
ally be able to draw a picture of the ?strategies??
conscious or routinized?used when requesting.
5 Conclusion
Traditional speech act theory rests primarily on the
structure of isolated sentences. However, at least
as far as requests are concerned, speakers tend to
express themselves with several increments, het-
erogeneous both in nature and function. ?Cue-
based? approaches designed to recognize atomic
acts can give accurate descriptions of the speech
surface; but the treatment of each unit as ?act?
tends to blur the deeper interrelations. The ap-
proach presented here, based on the loose inclu-
sion of a lower semantic level under a higher prag-
matic level via a structural level, suggests that, as
far as the representation of spontaneous spoken
language is concerned, gains might be made by
broadening the scope of dialogue acts and ?lower-
ing? the aim from the identification of distinct acts
to that of the means of their instantiation.
Acknowledgments
I wish to thank Pierre Cotte, Frank Alvarez-
Pereyre, Ruth Shalev and an anonymous reviewer
for useful comments and discussions.
17
References
John L. Austin. 1962. How to do things with words
[edited by J. O. Urmson]. Clarendon Press.
Leonard Bloomfield. 1933. Language. Holt & Co.
Shoshana Blum-Kulka. 1981. The study of translation
in view of new developments in discourse analysis:
The problem of indirect speech acts. Poetics Today,
2(4):89?95.
[BRO] Erin Brockovich. 2000. Directed by Steven
Soderbergh. Written by Susannah Grant. Jersey
Films.
Jean Carletta, Amy Isard, Stephen Isard, Jacqueline C.
Kowtko, Gwyneth Doherty-Sneddon, Anne H. An-
derson. 1997. The Reliability of A Dialogue Struc-
ture Coding Scheme. Computational Linguistics,
23(1):13?31.
Mark Core and James Allen. 1997. Coding dialogs
with the DAMSL annotation scheme. In Working
Notes of the AAAI Fall Symposium on Communica-
tive Action in Humans and Machines, pages 28?35.
William A. Corsaro. 1977. The clarification request
as a feature of adult interactive styles with young
children. Language in Society, 6:183?207.
[FUG] The Fugitive. 1993. Directed by Andrew
Davis. Written by Roy Huggins, David Twohy and
Jeb Stuart. Warner Bros. Pictures.
Michael L. Geis. 1995. Speech acts and conversa-
tional interaction. Cambridge University Press.
Frieda Goldman-Eisler. 1968. Psycholinguistics: Ex-
periments in spontaneous speech. Academic Press.
H. Paul Grice. 1975. Logic and conversation. In P.
Cole and J. Morgan, editors, Syntax and semantics
3: Speech acts. Academic Press.
Barbara J. Grosz and Candace L. Sidner. 1986. Atten-
tion, intentions, and the structure of discourse. Com-
putational Linguistics, 12(3):175?204.
[JAW] Jaws. 1975. Directed by Steven Spielberg.
Written by Peter Benchley (based on his novel) and
Carl Gottlieb. Zanuck/Brown Productions ? Univer-
sal Pictures.
Daniel Jurafsky, Elizabeth Shriberg and Debra Biasca.
1997. Switchboard SWBD-DAMSL labeling project
coder?s manual, Draft 13. TR 97-02, University of
Colorado Institute of Cognitive Science.
Daniel Jurafsky and James H. Martin. 2000. Speech
and language processing: An introduction to natural
language processing, computational linguistics, and
speech recognition. Prentice Hall.
Daniel Jurafsky. 2004. Pragmatics and computational
linguistics. In L. R. Horn and G. L. Ward, editors,
The handbook of pragmatics, chapter 26. Blackwell.
Alessandro Lenci. 1994. A relevance-based approach
to speech acts. In E. Fava, editor, Speech acts and
linguistic research. Proceedings of the workshop,
July 15?17, 1994, Center of Cognitive Science of
New York at Buffalo. Nemo, 1995.
Lori Levin, Ann Thyme?-Gobbel, Alon Lavie, Klaus
Ries and Klaus Zechner. 1998. A discourse coding
scheme for conversational Spanish. In Proceedings
of ICSLP 98, 6:2335?2338.
C. Raymond Perrault and James F. Allen. 1980. A
plan-based analysis of indirect speech acts. Amer-
ican Journal of Computational Linguistics, 6:167?
182.
Kenneth L. Pike. 1945. The intonation of Ameri-
can English. University of Michigan Publications.
Reprinted in part as Chapter 3 in D. Bolinger, editor,
Intonation, Penguin Books, 1972.
Kenneth L. Pike. 1954. Language in relation to a uni-
fied theory of the structure of human behavior. Sum-
mer institute of linguistics.
Matthew Purver, Jonathan Ginzburg and Patrick
Healey. 2003. On the means for clarification in di-
alogue. In J. C. J. Van Kuppevelt and R. W. Smith,
editors, Current and New Directions in Discourse &
Dialogue. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Matthew Purver. 2004. The theory and use of clari-
fication requests in dialogue. Ph.D. thesis. King?s
College, University of London.
Nira Reiss. 2004. Speech act taxonomy as a tool for
ethnographic description (Pragmatics and Beyond
VI:7). John Benjamins.
Kepa J. Rodr??guez and David Schlangen. 2004. Form,
intonation and function of clarification requests in
German task-oriented spoken dialogues. In Pro-
ceedings of Catalog ?04 (The 8th Workshop on the
Semantics and Pragmatics of Dialogue, SemDial04),
pages 101?108.
John R. Searle. 1969. Speech acts: An essay in the phi-
losophy of language. Cambridge University Press.
John R. Searle. 1979. Expression and meaning: Stud-
ies in the theory of speech acts. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Andreas Stolcke, Klaus Ries, Noah Coccaro, Elizabeth
Shriberg, Rebecca Bates, Daniel Jurafsky, Paul Tay-
lor, Rachel Martin, Marie Meteer and Carol Van Ess-
Dykema. 2000. Dialog act modeling for automatic
tagging and recognition of conversational speech.
Computational linguistics, 26:98?105.
Michael Stubbs. 1983. Discourse analysis: The soci-
olinguistic analysis of natural language (Language
in Society 4). Basil Blackwell Ltd.
David R. Traum and Elizabeth A. Hinkelman. 1992.
Conversation acts in task-oriented spoken dialogue.
Computational Intelligence, 8(3):575?599.
18
