Proceedings of the EACL 2009 Workshop on Language Technologies for African Languages ? AfLaT 2009, pages 46?52,
Athens, Greece, 31 March 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Development of an Amharic Text-to-Speech System  
Using Cepstral Method  
Tadesse Anberbir 
ICT Development Office, Addis 
Ababa University, Ethiopia 
tadanberbir@gmail.com 
Tomio Takara 
Faculty of Engineering, University of 
the Ryukyus, Okinawa, Japan 
takara@ie.u-ryukyu.ac.jp 
 
  
 
Abstract 
This paper presents a speech synthesis system 
for Amharic language and describes and how 
the important prosodic features of the lan-
guage were modeled in the system. The devel-
oped Amharic Text-to-Speech system 
(AmhTTS) is parametric and rule-based that 
employs a cepstral method. The system uses a 
source filter model for speech production and 
a Log Magnitude Approximation (LMA) filter 
as the vocal tract filter. The intelligibility and 
naturalness of the system was evaluated by 
word and sentence listening tests respectively 
and we achieved 98% correct-rates for words 
and an average Mean Opinion Score (MOS) of 
3.2 (which is categorized as good) for sen-
tences listening tests. The synthesized speech 
has high intelligibility and moderate natural-
ness. Comparing with previous similar study, 
our system produced considerably similar 
quality speech with a fairly good prosody. In 
particular our system is mainly suitable for 
building new languages with little modifica-
tion. 
1 Introduction 
Text-to-Speech (TTS) synthesis is a process 
which artificially produces synthetic speech for 
various applications such as services over tele-
phone, e-document reading, and speaking system 
for handicapped people etc.  
    The two primary technologies for generating 
synthetic speech are concatenative synthesis and 
formant (Rule-based) synthesis methods. Con-
catenative synthesis produces the most natural-
sounding synthesized speech. However, it re-
quires a large amount of linguistic resources and 
generating a various speaking style is a challeng-
ing task. In general the amount of work required 
to build a concatenative system is enormous. Par-
ticularly, for languages with limited linguistic 
resources, it is more difficult. On the other hand,  
 
formant synthesis method requires small linguis-
tic resources and able to generate various speak-
ing styles. It is also suitable for mobile applica-
tions and easier for customization. However, this 
method produced less natural-sounding synthe-
sized speech and the complex rules required to 
model the prosody is a big problem.  
      In general, each method has its own strengths 
and weaknesses and there is always a tradeoff. 
Therefore, which approach to use will be deter-
mined by the intended applications, the availabil-
ity of linguistic resources of a given language 
etc. In our research we used formant (rule-based) 
synthesis method because we are intending to 
prepare a general framework for Ethiopian Se-
mitic languages and apply it for mobile devices 
and web embedded applications. 
      Currently, many speech synthesis systems are 
available mainly for ?major? languages such as 
English, Japanese etc. and successful results are 
obtained in various application areas. However, 
thousands of the world?s ?minor? languages lack 
such technologies, and researches in the area are 
quite very few. Although recently many localiza-
tion projects (like the customization of Festvox1) 
are being undergoing for many languages, it is 
quite inadequate and the localization process is 
not an easy task mainly because of the lack of 
linguistic resources and absence of similar works 
in the area. Therefore, there is a strong demand 
for the development of a speech synthesizer for 
many of the African minor languages such as 
Amharic.  
     Amharic, the official language of Ethiopia, is 
a Semitic language that has the greatest number 
of speakers after Arabic. According to the 1998 
census, Amharic has 17.4 million speaker as a 
mother thong language and 5.1 million speakers 
as a second language. However, it is one of the 
                                                
1 Festvox is a voice building framework which offers gen-
eral tools for building unit selection voices for new lan-
guages. 
46
least supported and least researched languages in 
the world. Although, recently, the development 
of different natural language processing (NLP) 
tools for analyzing Amharic text has begun, it is 
often very far comparing with other languages 
(Alemu et al, 2003). Particularly, researches 
conducted on language technologies like speech 
synthesis and the application of such technolo-
gies are very limited or unavailable. To the 
knowledge of the authors, so far there is only one 
published work (Sebsibe, 2004) in the area of 
speech synthesis for Amharic. In this study they 
tried to describe the issues to be considered in 
developing a concatenative speech synthesizer 
using Festvox and recommended using syllables 
as a basic unit for high quality speech synthesis. 
    In our research we developed a syllabic based 
TTS system with prosodic control method which 
is the first rule-based system published for Am-
haric. The designed Amharic TTS (AmhTTS) is 
parametric and rule-based system that employs a 
Cepstral method and uses a Log Magnitude Ap-
proximation (LMA) filter. Unlike the previous 
study, Sebsibe (2004), our study provides a total 
solution on prosodic information generation 
mainly by modeling the durations.  The system is 
expected to have a wide range of applications, 
for example, in software aids to visually im-
paired people, in mobile phones and can also be 
easily customized for other Ethiopian languages.  
2 Amharic Language?s Overview 
Amharic (????) is a Semitic language and it is 
one of the most widely spoken languages in 
Ethiopia. It has its own non Latin based syllabic 
script called ?Fidel? or ?Abugida?. The ortho-
graphic representation of the language is organ-
ized into orders (derivatives) as shown in Fig.1. 
Six of them are CV (C is a consonant, V is a 
vowel) combinations while the sixth order is the 
consonant itself. In total there are 32 consonants 
and 7 vowels with 7x32= 224 Syllables. But 
since there are redundant sounds that represent 
the same sounds, the phonemes are only 28 (see 
the Appendix).  
 
1st  2nd  3rd  4th  5th  6th  7th  
C/e/   
? 
C/u/  
? 
C/i/
? 
C/a/  
? 
C/ie/ 
?   
C 
? 
C/o/
? 
Figure 1:  Amharic Syllables structure  
  
    Like other languages, Amharic also has its 
own typical phonological and morphological fea-
tures that characterize it. The following are some 
of the striking features of Amharic phonology 
that gives the language its characteristic sound 
when one hears it spoken: the weak, indetermi-
nate stress; the presence of glottalic, palatal, and 
labialized consonants; the frequent gemination of 
consonants and central vowels; and the use of an 
automatic helping vowel (Bender et al, 1976).  
     Gemination in Amharic is one of the most 
distinctive characteristics of the cadence of the 
speech, and also caries a very heavy semantic 
and syntactic functional weight (Bender and Fu-
lass, 1978). Amharic gemination is either lexical 
or morphological. Gemination as a lexical fea-
ture cannot be predicted. For instance, ?? may 
be read as al? meaning 'he said', or all? meaning 
'there is'. Although this is not a problem for Am-
haric speakers, it is a challenging problem in 
speech synthesis. As a morphological feature 
gemination is more predictable in the verb than 
in the noun, Bender and Fulass (1978). However, 
this is also a challenging problem in speech syn-
thesis because to automatically identify the loca-
tion of geminated syllables, it requires analysis 
and modeling of the complex morphology of the 
language. The lack of the orthography of Am-
haric to show geminates is the main problem. In 
this study, we used our own manual gemination 
mark (?) insertion techniques (see Section 3.3.1).  
    The sixth order syllables are the other impor-
tant features of the language. Like geminates, the 
sixth order syllables are also very frequent and 
play a key role for proper pronunciation of 
speech. In our previous study, (Tadesse and Ta-
kara, 2006) we found that geminates and sixth 
order syllables are the two most important fea-
tures that play a key role for proper pronuncia-
tion of words. Therefore, in our study we mainly 
consider these language specific features to de-
velop a high quality speech synthesizer for Am-
haric language. 
3 AmhTTS System 
Amharic TTS synthesis system is a parametric 
and rule based system designed based on the 
general speech synthesis system. Fig.2. shows 
the scheme of Amharic speech synthesis system. 
The design is based on the general speech syn-
thesis system (Takara and Kochi, 2000). The sys-
tem has three main components, a text analysis 
subsystem, prosodic generation module and a 
speech synthesis subsystem. The following three 
sub-sections discuss the details of each compo-
nent.  
 
47
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
Figure 2: Amharic Speech Synthesis System 
3.1 Text Analysis 
The text analysis subsystem extracts the linguis-
tic and prosodic information from the input text. 
The program iterates through the input text and 
extracts the gemination and other marks, and the 
sequences of syllables using the syllabification 
rule. The letter-to-sound conversion has simple 
one-to-one mapping between orthography and 
phonetic transcription (see Apendix). As defined 
by (Baye, 2008; Dawkins, 1969) and others, 
Amharic can be considered as a phonetic lan-
guage with relatively simple relationship be-
tween orthography and phonology. 
3.2 Speech Analysis and Synthesis systems 
First, as a speech database, all Amharic syllables 
(196) were collected and their sounds were pre-
pared by recording on digital audio tape (DAT) 
at a 48 kHz sampling rate and 16-bit value. After 
that, they were down-sampled to 10 kHz for ana-
lyzing. All speech units were recorded with nor-
mal speaking rate. 
      Then, the speech sounds were analyzed by 
the analysis system. The analysis system adopts 
short-time cepstral analysis with frame length 
25.6 ms and frame shifting time of 10 ms. A 
time-domain Hamming window with a length of 
25.6 ms is used in analysis. The cepstrum is de-
fined as the inverse Fourier transform of the 
short-time logarithm amplitude spectrum (Furui, 
2001). Cepstral analysis has the advantage that it 
could separate the spectral envelope part and the 
excitation part. The resulting parameters of 
speech unit include the number of frames and, 
for each frame, voiced/unvoiced (V/UV) deci-
sion, pitch period and cepstral coefficients c[m], 
0 ? m ? 29. The speech database contains these 
parameters as shown in fig.2. 
     Finally, the speech synthesis subsystem gen-
erates speech from pre-stored parameters under 
the control of the prosodic rules. For speech syn-
thesis, the general source-filter model is used as 
a speech production model as shown in fig.3. 
The synthetic sound is produced using Log Mag-
nitude Approximation (LMA) filter (Imai, 1980) 
as the system filter, for which cepstral coeffi-
cients are used to characterize the speech sound.  
 
 
Figure 3: Diagram of Speech Synthesis Model 
 
    The LMA filter presents the vocal tract charac-
teristics that are estimated in 30 lower-order que-
frency elements. The LMA filter is a pole-zero 
filter that is able to efficiently represent the vocal 
tract features for all speech sounds. The LMA 
filter is controlled by cepstrum parameters as 
vocal tract parameters, and it is driven by fun-
damental period impulse series for voiced sounds 
and by white noise for unvoiced sounds. The 
fundamental frequency (F0) of the speech is con-
trolled by the impulse series of the fundamental 
period. The gain of the filter or the power of syn-
thesized speech is set by the 0th order cepstral 
coefficient, c [0].  
3.3 Prosody Modeling  
For any language, appropriate modeling of pros-
ody is the most important issue for developing a 
high quality speech synthesizer.  
   In Amharic language segments duration is the 
most important and useful component in prosody 
control. It is shown that, unlike English language 
in which the rhythm of the speech is mainly 
characterized by stress (loudness), rhythm in 
Amharic is mainly marked by longer and shorter 
syllables depending on gemination of conso-
nants, and by certain features of phrasing 
(Bender et al, 1976). Therefore it is very impor-
tant to model the syllables duration in AmhTTS 
system. In this paper we propose a new segmen-
tal duration control methods for synthesizing a 
high quality speech. Our rule-based TTS system 
uses a compact rule-based prosodic generation 
method in three phases: 
 
? modeling geminated consonants duration 
 
 
 
Speech database  
 
Fundamental 
frequency (F0) 
 
Voiced/ 
Unvoiced 
 
Cepstral 
Coefficient 
 
 
Text 
Input 
 
 
Voice 
Output 
 
Prosodic 
Generation 
 
 
Speech 
Synthesis 
Subsys-
tem 
 
Text  
Analysis 
Subsystem 
 
48
? controlling of sixth order syllables dura-
tion 
? assignment of a global intonation contour 
Prosody is modeled by variations of pitch and 
relative duration of speech elements. Our study 
deals only with the basic aspects of prosody such 
as syllables duration and phrase intonation. 
Gemination is modeled as lengthened duration in 
such a way geminated syllables are modeled on 
word level. Phrase level duration is modeled as 
well to improve prosodic quality. Prosodic 
phrases are determined in simplified way by us-
ing text punctuation. To synthesize F0 contour 
Fujisaki pitch model that superimpose both word 
level and phrase level prosody modulations is 
used (Takara and Jun, 1988). 
   The following sub-sections discuss the pro-
sodic control methods employed in our system. 
3.3.1 Gemination rule 
Accurate estimation of segmental duration for 
different groups of geminate consonants (stops, 
nasals, liquids, glides, fricatives) will be crucial 
for natural sounding of AmhTTS system. In our 
previous study, Tadesse and Takara (2006), we 
studied the durational difference between single-
tons vs. geminates of contrastive words and de-
termined the threshold duration for different 
groups of consonants. Accordingly the following 
rule was implemented based on the threshold 
durations we obtained in our previous study.  
    The gemination rule is programmed in the sys-
tem and generates geminates from singletons by 
using a simple durational control method. It gen-
erates geminates by lengthening the duration of 
the consonant part of the syllables following the 
gemination mark. Two types of rules were pre-
pared for two groups of consonants, continuant 
(voiced and unvoiced) and non-continuant (stops 
and glottalized) consonants. If a gemination 
mark (?) is followed by syllable with voiced or 
unvoiced consonant  then, the last three frames 
of the cepstral parameters (c[0]) of vowel is ad-
justed linearly and then 120 ms of frame 1, 2 and 
3 of second syllable is added. Then the second 
syllable is connected after frame 4. Totally 90 ms 
of cepstral parameters is added. Otherwise, if, a 
gemination mark (?) is followed by syllable with 
glottal or non-glottal consonant then, the last 
three frames of the cepstral parameters (c[0]) of 
vowel is adjusted linearly and then 100 ms of 
silence is added. Finally the second syllable is 
directly connected.  
  Since Amharic orthography does not use gemi-
nation mark,  in our study we used our own 
gemination mark and a manual gemination inser-
tion mechanism for input texts. Although some 
scholars make use of two dots (  ? which is pro-
posed in UNICODE 5.1 version as 135F) over a 
consonant to show gemination, so far there is no 
software which supports this mark.  
3.3.2 Sixth order syllables rule 
As mentioned earlier the sixth order syllables are 
very frequent and play a major role for proper 
pronunciation of words. The sixth order ortho-
graphic syllables, which do not have any vowel 
unit associated to it in the written form, may as-
sociate the helping vowel (epenthetic vowel /ix/, 
see the Apendix) in its spoken form (Dawkins, 
1969). The sixth order syllables are ambiguous; 
they can stand for either a consonant in isolation 
or a consonant with the short vowel.  In our 
study we prepared a simple algorithm to control 
the sixth order syllables duration. The algorithm 
to model the sixth order syllables duration uses 
the following rules:  
 
1. The sixth order syllables at the beginning of 
word are always voweled (see /sxix/ in fig 5). 
2. The sixth order syllables at the end of a 
word are unvoweled (without vowel) but, if 
it is geminated, it becomes voweled.  
3. The sixth order syllables in the middle of 
words are always unvoweled (see /f/ in 
fig.5). But, if there is a cluster of three or 
more consonants, it is broken up by inserting 
helping vowel /ix/.  
 
The following figures shows sample words syn-
thesized by our system by applying the prosodic 
rules. Fig.5 and fig.7 shows the waveform and 
duration of words synthesized by applying both 
the gemination and sixth order syllables rules. 
Fig.4 and fig.6 shows the waveform of original 
words just for comparison purpose only. The two 
synthesized words are comparative words which 
differ only by presence or absence of gemination. 
In the first word /sxixfta/ ??? meaning ?bandit?, 
the sixth order syllable /f/ is unvoweled (see 
fig.5). However, in the second word /sxixffixta/ 
??? meaning ?rash?, the sixth order syllable /f/ 
is voweled and longer /ffix/ (see fig.7) because it 
is geminated.  In our previous study, Tadesse and 
Takara (2006), we observed that vowels are 
needed for singletons to be pronounced as gemi-
nates.   
49
 
Figure 4: Waveform & duration of original word 
???/sxixfta/, meaning ?bandit? 
 
 
Figure 5: Waveform & duration of synthesized        
            word ???/sxixfta/, meaning ?bandit? 
 
 
Figure 6: Waveform & duration of original word 
???/sxixffixta/, meaning ?rash? 
 
 
Figure 7: Waveform & duration of synthesized  
            word ???/sxixffixta/, meaning ?rash? 
3.3.3 Syllables connection rules 
For syllables connections, we prepared four 
types of syllables connection-rules based on the 
type of consonants. The syllable units which are 
represented by cepstrum parameters and stored in 
the database are connected based on the types of 
consonants joining with vowels. The connections 
are implemented either by smoothing or interpo-
lating the cepstral coefficients, F0 and amplitude 
at the boundary. Generally, we drive two types of 
syllabic joining patterns. The first pattern is 
smoothly continuous linkage where the pitch, 
amplitude and spectral assimilation occur at the 
boundary. This pattern occurs when the bound-
ary phonemes of joining syllables are unvoiced. 
Another joining pattern is interpolation, this pat-
tern occurs when one or both of the boundary 
phonemes of joining syllables is voiced. If the 
boundary phonemes are plosive or glottal stop 
then the pre-plosive or glottal stop closure pauses 
with 40ms in length is inserted between them.  
3.3.4 Intonation 
The intonation for a sentence is implemented by 
applying a simple declination line in the log fre-
quency domain adopted from similar study for 
Japanese TTS system by Takara and Jun (1988). 
Fig.8 shows the intonation rule. The time ti is the 
initial point of syllable, and the initial value of 
F0 (circle mark) is calculated from this value. 
This is a simple linear line, which intends to ex-
periment the very first step rule of intonation of 
Amharic. In this study, we simply analyzed some 
sample sentences and take the average slope = -
0.0011. But as a future work, the sentence pros-
ody should be studied more. 
0 t1 t2 t3 Time [frame]
Lo
g 
fre
qu
en
cy
 [H
z]
f0
f1
f2
f3
fn = f0 * 2
-0.0011tn
 
Figure 8: Intonation rule 
 
4 Evaluation and Discussion 
In order to evaluate the intelligibility and natu-
ralness of our system, we performed two types of 
listening tests. The first listening test was per-
formed to evaluate the intelligibility of words 
synthesized by the system and the second listen-
ing test was to evaluate the naturalness of syn-
thesized sentences. The listening tests were used 
to evaluate the effectiveness of the prosodic rule 
employed in our system. 
4.1 Recordings 
For both listening tests the recording was done in 
a soundproof room, with a digital audio tape re-
corder (SONY DAT) and SONY ECM-44S Elec-
trets Condenser Microphone. Sampling rate of 
DAT was set at 48kHz then from DAT the re-
corded data were transferred to a PC via a digital 
audio interface (A/D, D/A) converter. Finally, 
the data was converted from stereo to mono; 
down sampled to 10 kHz and the amplitude was 
normalized using Cool Edit program. All re-
cording was done by male native speaker of the 
language who is not included in the listening 
tests. 
/f/ 
/ff         ix/ 
/sx        ix/ /t    a/ 
/sx     ix/ /t    a/ 
/sx        ix/ 
/f/ 
/t    a/ 
/sx        ix/ /ff       ix/ /t    a/ 
50
4.2 Speech Materials 
The stimuli for the first listening test were con-
sisted of 200 words which were selected from 
Amharic-English dictionary. The selected words 
are commonly and frequently used words in the 
day-to-day activities adopted from (Yasumoto 
and Honda, 1978). Among the 200 words we 
selected, 80 words (40% of words) contain one 
or more geminated syllables and 75% of the 
words contain sixth order syllables. This shows 
that how geminates and sixth order syllables are 
very frequent.  
       Then, using these words, two types of syn-
thesized speech data were prepared: Analy-
sis/synthesis sounds and rule-based synthesized 
sounds using AmhTTS system. The original 
speech sounds were also added in the test for 
comparison purpose.  
      For the second listening test we used five 
sentences which contains words with either 
geminated syllables or sixth order syllables or 
both. The sentences were selected from Amharic 
grammar book, Baye (2008) which are used as 
an example. We prepared three kinds of speech 
data: original sentences, analysis/synthesis sen-
tences, and synthesized sentences by our system 
by applying prosodic rules. In total we prepared 
15 speech sounds. 
4.3 Methods 
Both listening tests were conducted by four 
Ethiopian adults who are native speakers of the 
language (2 female and 2 male). All listeners are 
20-35 years old in age, born and raised in the 
capital city of Ethiopia. For both listening tests 
we prepared listening test programs and a brief 
introduction was given before the listening test.  
     In the first listening test, each sound was 
played once in 4 second interval and the listeners 
write the corresponding Amharic scripts to the 
word they heard on the given answer sheet.  
    In the second listening test, for each listener, 
we played all 15 sentences together and ran-
domly. And each subject listens to 15 sentences 
and gives their judgment score using the listen-
ing test program by giving a measure of quality 
as follows: (5 ? Excellent, 4 - Good, 3 - Fair, 2 - 
Poor, 1 ? Bad). They evaluated the system by 
considering the naturalness aspect. Each listener 
did the listening test fifteen times and we took 
the last ten results considering the first five tests 
as training. 
4.4 Results and discussion 
After collecting all listeners? response, we calcu-
lated the average values and we found the fol-
lowing results.  
      In the first listening test, the average correct-
rate for original and analysis-synthesis sounds 
were 100% and that of rule-based synthesized 
sounds was 98%. We found the synthesized 
words to be very intelligible. 
       In the second listening test the average Mean 
opinion score (MOS) for synthesized sentences 
were 3.2 and that of original and analy-
sis/synthesis sentences were 5.0 and 4.7 respec-
tively. The result showed that the prosodic con-
trol method employed in our system is effective 
and produced fairly good prosody. However, the 
durational modeling only may not be enough to 
properly generate natural sound. Appropriate 
syllable connections rules and proper intonation 
modeling are also important. Therefore studying 
typical intonation contour by modeling word 
level prosody and improving syllables connec-
tion rules by using quality speech units is neces-
sary for synthesizing high quality speech. 
5 Conclusions and future works 
We have presented the development of a syllabic 
based AmhTTS system capable of synthesizing 
intelligible speech with fairly good prosody.  We 
have shown that syllables produce reasonably 
natural quality speech and durational modeling is 
very crucial for naturalness. However the system 
still lacks naturalness and needs automatic gemi-
nation assignment mechanisms for better dur-
ational modeling. 
    Therefore, as a future work, we will mainly 
focus on improving the naturalness of the syn-
thesizer. We are planning to improve the dura-
tion model using the data obtained from the an-
notated speech corpus, properly model the co-
articulation effect of geminates and to study the 
typical intonation contour. We are also planning 
to integrate a morphological analyzer for auto-
matic gemination assignment and sophisticated 
generation of prosodic parameters. 
References  
Atelach Alemu, Lars Asker and Mesfin Getachew. 
2003. Natural Language Processing For Am-
haric: Overview And Suggestions for a Way 
Forward, Proc. 10th Conference ?Traitement 
Automatique Des Languages Naturalles?, pp. 173-
182, Vol.2, Batz-Sur-Mer, France. 
51
Sebsibe H/Mariam, S P Kishore, Alan W Black, Rohit 
Kumar, and Rajeev Sangal. 2004. Unit Selection 
Voice for Amharic Using Festvox, 5th ISCA 
Speech Synthesis Workshop, Pittsburgh. 
M.L Bender, J.D.Bowen, R.L. Cooper and C.A. Fer-
guson. 1976. Language in Ethiopia, London, Ox-
ford University Press. 
M. Lionel Bender, Hailu Fulass. 1978. Amharic 
Verb Morphology: A Generative Approach, 
Carbondale.  
Tadesse Anberbir and Tomio Takara. 2006. Amharic 
Speech Synthesis Using Cepstral Method with 
Stress Generation Rule, INTERSPEECH 2006 
ICSLP, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, pp. 1340-1343. 
T. Takara and T. Kochi. 2000. General speech syn-
thesis system for Japanese Ryukyu dialect, 
Proc. of the 7th WestPRAC, pp. 173-176. 
Baye Yimam. 2008. ????? ???? (?Amharic 
Grammer?), Addis Ababa. (in Amaharic). 
C.H DAWKINS. 1969. The Fundamentals of Am-
haric, Bible Based Books, SIM Publishing, Addis 
Ababa, Ethiopia, pp.5-7. 
S. Furui, Digital Speech Processing, Synthesis, 
and Recognition, Second Edition, Marcel Dekker, 
Inc., 2001, pp. 266-270. 
S. Imai. 1980. Log Magnitude Approximation 
(LMA) filter, Trans. of IECE Japan, J63-A, 12, 
PP. 886-893. (in Japanese).  
Takara, Tomio and Oshiro, Jun. 1988. Continuous 
Speech Synthesis by Rule of Ryukyu Dialect, 
Trans. IEEE of Japan, Vol. 108-C, No. 10, pp. 773-
780. (in Japanese) 
B. Yasumoto and M. Honda. 1978. Birth Of Ja-
panses, pp.352-358, Taishukun-Shoten. (in Japa-
nese). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 
Amharic Phonetic List, IPA Equivalence and its 
ASCII Transliteration Table. (Mainly adopted 
from (Sebsibe, 2004; Baye, 2008) 
 
 
 
52
