Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 76?83,
Suntec, Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Bengali Verb Subcategorization Frame Acquisition - A Baseline Model 
 
Somnath Banerjee                      Dipankar Das                      Sivaji Bandyopadhyay 
Department of Computer Science & Engineering 
Jadavpur University, Kolkata-700032, India 
s.banerjee1980@gmail.com, dipankar.dipnil2005@gmail.com, 
sivaji_cse_ju@yahoo.com 
 
 
 
Abstract 
 
Acquisition of verb subcategorization frames 
is important as verbs generally take different 
types of relevant arguments associated with 
each phrase in a sentence in comparison to 
other parts of speech categories. This paper 
presents the acquisition of different subcate-
gorization frames for a Bengali verb Kara 
(do). It generates compound verbs in Bengali 
when combined with various noun phrases. 
The main hypothesis here is that the subcate-
gorization frames for a Bengali verb are same 
with the subcategorization frames for its 
equivalent English verb with an identical 
sense tag.  Syntax plays the main role in the 
acquisition of Bengali verb subcategorization 
frames. The output frames of the Bengali 
verbs have been compared with the frames of 
the equivalent English verbs identified using 
a Bengali-English bilingual lexicon. The 
flexible ordering of different phrases, addi-
tional attachment of optional phrases in Ben-
gali sentences make this frames acquisition 
task challenging. This system has demon-
strated precision and recall values of 77.11% 
and 88.23% respectively on a test set of 100 
sentences. 
1 Introduction  
A subcategorization frame is a statement of what 
types of syntactic arguments a verb (or an adjec-
tive) takes, such as objects, infinitives, that-
clauses, participial clauses, and subcategorized 
prepositional phrases (Manning,1993). The verb 
phrase in a sentence usually takes various types 
of subcategorization frames compared to phrases 
of other types and hence the acquisition of such 
frames for verbs are really challenging. 
A subcategorization dictionary obtained auto-
matically from corpora can be updated quickly 
and easily as different usages develop. Several 
large, manually developed subcategorization 
lexicons are available for English, e.g. the 
COMLEX Syntax (Macleod et al, 1994), AC-
QUILEX (Copestake, 1992) and the ANLT 
(Briscoe et al, 1987) dictionaries. VerbNet (VN) 
(Kipper-Schuler, 2005) is the largest online verb 
lexicon with explicitly stated syntactic and se-
mantic information based on Levin?s verb classi-
fication (Levin, 1993). It is a hierarchical do-
main-independent, broad-coverage verb lexicon 
with mappings to other lexical resources such as 
WordNet (Miller, 1990), XTAG (XTAG Re-
search Group, 2001) and FrameNet (Baker et al, 
1998). But, there is no existing subcategorization 
lexicon available for Bengali language. The sub-
categorization of verbs is an essential issue in 
parsing for the free phrase order languages such 
as Bengali. As there is no such existing parser 
available in Bengali, the acquisition as well as 
evaluation of the acquired subcategorization 
frames are difficult but crucial tasks. The main 
difference between English and Bengali sentence 
is the variation in the ordering of various 
phrases. The pivotal hypothesis here is that the 
subcategorization frames obtained for a Bengali 
verb are same with the subcategorization frames 
that may be acquired for its equivalent verb with 
an identical sense tag in English. 
The present work deals with the acquisition of 
verb subcategorization frames of a verb kara 
(do) from a Bengali newspaper corpus. This verb 
generates various types of compound verbs in 
combination with other preceding noun phrases 
in Bengali. The sentences containing these types 
of compound verb entries have been retrieved 
from the Bengali corpus. The Bengali verb sub-
categorization frame acquisition task has been 
carried out for the ten most frequent compound 
verbs that contain kara (do) as a component. The 
number of occurrences of other compound verbs 
76
is negligible in the corpus. So, for evaluation 
purpose, we have not considered those verbs. 
Each of the ten Bengali compound verbs has 
been searched in the Bengali-English bilingual 
lexicon1 and the equivalent English verb mean-
ings with its synonyms have been identified and 
retrieved. All possible subcategorization frames 
for each of the English synonyms of the Bengali 
verb have been acquired from the English 
VerbNet2. These frames have been mapped to the 
Bengali sentences that contain the compound 
verb. Evaluation results with a test set of 100 
sentences show the effectiveness of the model 
with precision, recall and F-Measure values of 
77.11%, 88.23% and 79.24% respectively. There 
are some frames that have not been identified 
due to their absence in the corpus. Linguists have 
suggested that these frames do appear in Bengali 
and hence can be acquired.   
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 gives the description of the related 
works carried out in this area.  Section 3 de-
scribes the framework for the acquisition of sub-
categorization frames for ten compound Bengali 
verbs. Evaluation results of the system are dis-
cussed in section 4. Finally section 5 concludes 
the paper. 
2 Related Work 
One of the early works for identifying verbs that 
resulted in extremely low yields for subcategori-
zation frame acquisition is described in (Brent, 
1991). A rule based system for automatically 
acquiring six verb subcategorization frames and 
their frequencies from a large corpus is men-
tioned in (Ushioda et al, 1993). An open class 
vocabulary of 35,000 words was analyzed manu-
ally in (Briscoe and Carroll, 1997) for subcatego-
rization frames and predicate associations. The 
result was compared against associations in 
ANLT and COMLEX. Variations of subcatego-
rization frequencies across corpus type (written 
vs. spoken) have been studied in (Carroll and 
Rooth, 1998). A mechanism for resolving verb 
class ambiguities using subcategorization frames 
is reported in (Lapata and Brew, 1999). All these 
works deal with English. Several works on the 
term classification of verb diathesis roles or the 
lexical semantics of predicates in natural lan-
guage have been reported in ((McCarthy, 2001), 
                                                                                                 
1 http://home.uchicago.edu/~cbs2/banglainstruction.html 
2 http://verbs.colorado.edu/~mpalmer/projects/verbnet.html 
(Korhonen, 2002), (Stevenson and Merlo, 1999) 
and (Walde, 1998)).  
A cross lingual work on learning verb-
argument structure for Czech language is de-
scribed in (Sarkar and Zeman, 2000).  (Samanta-
ray, 2007) gives a method of acquiring different 
subcategorization frames for the purpose of ma-
chine aided translation system for Indian lan-
guages. The work on subcategorization frame 
acquisition of Japanese verbs using breadth-first 
algorithm is described in (Muraki et al, 1997). 
3     System Outline 
We have developed several modules for the ac-
quisition of verb subcategorization frames from 
the Bengali newspaper corpus. The modules con-
sist of POS tagging and chunking, Identification 
and Selection of Verbs, English Verb Determina-
tion, Frames Acquisition from VerbNet and 
Bengali Verb Subcategorization Frame Acquisi-
tion. 
3.1 POS Tagging and Chunking 
We have used a Bengali news corpus (Ekbal and 
Bandyopadhyay, 2008) developed from the web-
archives of a widely read Bengali newspaper.  A 
portion of the Bengali news corpus containing 
1500 sentences have been POS tagged using a 
Maximum Entropy based POS tagger (Ekbal et 
al., 2008). The POS tagger was developed with a 
tagset of 26 POS tags3, defined for the Indian 
languages. The POS tagger demonstrated an ac-
curacy of 88.2%. We have also developed a rule-
based chunker to chunk the POS tagged data 
with an overall accuracy of 89.4%. 
3.2 Identification and Selection of Verbs 
Our previous work (Das et.al., 2009) on the ac-
quisition of Bengali subcategorization frames 
from the same Bengali news corpus was carried 
out for the most frequent verb ?????? (dekha) 
(see) in that corpus. The next highest frequent 
verb in this corpus is ????? (kara) (do) which is 
a special verb in Bengali. However to the best of 
our knowledge, no frame acquisition task has 
been carried out yet for this Bengali verb. The 
single occurrence of ????? (kara) as a main verb 
in a sentence takes completely different subcate-
gorization frames in comparison with the ac-
quired frames for the compound verbs consisting 
of ????? (kara) as a component. Hence, we have 
 
3http://shiva.iiit.ac.in/SPSAL2007/iiit_tagset_guidelines.pdf  
 
77
concentrated our focus to acquire subcategoriza-
tion frames for the Bengali verb ????? (kara).   
For this purpose, we have manually analyzed 
the tagged and chunked data to identify the word 
????? (kara) that are tagged as main verb (VM) 
and belong to the verb group chunk (VG) in the 
corpus. The preceding noun phrase of ????? 
(kara) generally produces completely different 
verbs in Bengali (e.g. [???? ??? (tairi(NN) 
kara(VM))(make)], [?????? ??? (byabahar (NN) 
kara(VM))(use)] etc.).  
Bengali, like any other Indian languages, is 
morphologically very rich. Different suffixes 
may be attached to a verb depending on the vari-
ous features such as Tense, Aspect, and Person. 
The Bengali stemmer uses a suffix list to identify 
the stem form of the verb ????? (kara). Another 
table stores the stem form and the corresponding 
root form. Stemming process has correctly iden-
tified 234 occurrences of the verb ????? (kara) 
from its 241 occurrences in the corpus with an 
accuracy of 97.09%. The sentences where the 
verb ????? (kara) appears in any inflected form 
but has been tagged as main verb (VM) have 
been retrieved. These sentences have been con-
sidered for fine-grained analysis of verb subcate-
gorization frames. It is expected that the corpus 
will have adequate number of occurrences for 
each subcategorization frame of the verb. The 
passive occurrences of ????? (kara) such as 
???????? (karano), ????? (kariye) have been fil-
tered out and the sentences containing the pas-
sive entries of ????? have not been considered in 
the present work. 
The compound verb phrases with pattern such 
as {[XXX] (NN) [kara] (VM)} have been identi-
fied and retrieved from the Bengali POS tagged 
and chunked corpus. It has been observed that 
most of these compound verb phrases are indi-
vidually different verbs in Bengali. Around 182 
various kinds of verbs have been identified. Cer-
tain typical and distinct occurrences of ????? 
(kara) have also been identified. But, linguistic 
verification shows that these typical verbs are 
formed by attaching the verb ????? (kara) to an 
adjective or an adverb word, like ???? ??? 
(jhakjhak kara) , ???? ??? (taktak kara), ??? 
??? (sheet kara) etc. Such types of around 48 
verb entries have been identified and filtered out 
from the corpus. The rest 134 distinct types of 
Bengali compound verbs (CV) with ????? (kara) 
as a component have been considered as target 
verbs for analysis. 
We have identified the frequencies of these 
verbs in the corpus. It has to be mentioned that 
only a few verbs have an adequate number of 
sentences in the corpus. For this reason, only the 
top ten compound verbs that have the largest 
number of occurrences in the corpus have been 
selected. Table 1 represents the top 10 different 
Bengali compound verbs and their frequencies 
obtained from the corpus.  
 
  Table 1. Top 10 Bengali Compound Verbs and 
their frequencies obtained from the corpus 
Bengali Verbs Freq. 
???? ??? (tairi kara) (make) 23 
?????? ??? (byabahar kara) (use) 18 
??? ??? (bas kara) (live) 17 
??? ??? (kaj kara) (work) 15 
??g? ??? (sangraha kara) (collect) 13 
?n ??? (bandha kara) (shut) 13 
???????   ??? (chitkar kara) (shout) 3 
??? ??? (bhul kara) (mistake) 3 
??j??? ??? (jigyasa kara) (ask) 3 
?????k? ??? (parjabekkhan kara) 
(observe) 
3 
3.3 English Verb Determination  
The verb subcategorization frames for the 
equivalent English verbs (in the same sense) of a 
Bengali verb are the initial set of verb subcatego-
rization frames that have been considered as 
valid for that Bengali verb. The root forms of the 
target verbs appearing in different inflected 
forms in the Bengali corpus have been identified 
by the process described in section 3.2. The de-
termination of equivalent English verbs has been 
carried out using a Bengali-English bilingual 
lexicon. We have used the available Bengali-
English bilingual dictionary that has been for-
matted for the text processing tasks. Various syn-
tactical representations of a word entry in the 
lexicon have been analyzed to identify its syno-
nyms and meanings. The example of an entry in 
the bilingual lexicon for our target verb ????? 
(kara) is given as follows. 
<??? [kar?] v to do, to per-
form, to accomplish, to exe-
cute (??? ???); to build, to 
make (???? ???) ;.....> 
 
But, the various distinct verbs, with ????? 
(kara) as a component have individual separate 
78
entries in the bilingual dictionary. We have iden-
tified the equivalent English verbs from those 
Bengali verb entries in the dictionary. For exam-
ple,  
<???? ??? v. to build, to 
make; ?> 
<?????? ??? v. to apply, to 
use; to behave; to treat (a 
person), to behave towards; 
?> 
<??? ??? v. to work; to 
serve; to be effective ;?> 
 
Different synonyms for a verb having the 
same sense are separated using ?,? and different 
senses are separated using ?;? in the lexicon. The 
synonyms including different senses of the target 
verb have been extracted from the lexicon. This 
yields a resulting set called Synonymous Verb 
Set (SVS). For example, the English synonyms 
(apply, use) and synonym with another sense 
(behave) have been selected for Bengali verb 
??????? ???? (byabahar kara) and have been 
categorized as two different SVS for the Bengali 
verb ??????? ????. Two synonyms (make, build) 
for the Bengali verb ????? ???? (tairi kara) are 
thus present in the same SVS. Now, the task is to 
acquire all the possible existing frames for each 
member of the SVS from the VerbNet. The 
????? (kara) verb may also appear in passive 
form in Bengali sentences. For example,  
 ?????          ???        
(Ramke)NNP  (kaj)NN   
 ??????        ?????? 
(karano)VM  (hayechilo)VAUX 
 
The corresponding dictionary entry for the 
passive form of ????? (kara) is as follows. But in 
this work, we have concentrated only on those 
sentences where ????? (kara) appears in active 
form.  
<?????? [kar?n?] v to cause to 
do or perform or accomplish 
or execute or build or 
make?> 
3.4 Frames Acquisition from VerbNet  
VerbNet associates the semantics of a verb with 
its syntactic frames and combines traditional 
lexical semantic information such as thematic 
roles and semantic predicates, with syntactic 
frames and selectional restrictions. Verb entries 
in the same VerbNet class share common syntac-
tic frames, and thus they are believed to have the 
same syntactic behavior. The VerbNet files con-
taining the verbs with their possible subcategori-
zation frames and membership information is 
stored in XML file format. The Bengali verb ???? 
??? (tairi kora) (make) has no direct class in 
VerbNet. The verb ?make? and its synonymous 
verb ?build? are members of one of the sub-
classes of the build-26.1 class and ?make? is also 
a member of the dub-29.3 class. A snapshot of 
XML file for the build-26.1 class is given below.
..... 
<VNCLASS ID="build-26.1"  
.....<SUBCLASSES> 
   <VNSUBCLASS ID="build-26.1-1"> 
<MEMBERS> 
    <MEMBER name="build" 
wn="build%2:36:00"/> 
    <MEMBER name="make" 
wn="make%2:36:01 make%2:36:05 
..... 
make%2:42:13 make%2:36:10"/> 
.....  
</MEMBERS> 
..... 
<FRAME> 
    <DESCRIPTION descriptionNum-
ber="3.9" primary="NP-PP" secon-
dary="Asset-PP" xtag=""/>            
<EXAMPLES> 
    <EXAMPLE> The contractor 
builds houses for $100,000.     
    </EXAMPLE> 
    .....  
</EXAMPLES> 
.....</FRAME> 
..... 
The verbs in VerbNet that take same type of sub-
categorization frames are stored in the  <MEM-
BER> tag and the possible primary and secon-
dary subcategorization frames are kept in <DE-
SCRIPTION> tag with proper English examples 
for each frame. The example for each of the sub-
categorization frames for the English verb 
"make" has been given in the "build-26.1-1" sub-
class of the ?build-26.1? class in the VerbNet. 
The sentence tagged within <EXAMPLE>.. 
</EXAMPLE> shows that after the occurrence 
of the verb "build/make", one noun phrase (NP) 
and one prepositional phrase (PP) have occurred 
as the arguments of the verb. The frame cor-
responding to this sentence has been described as 
the primary frame "NP-PP" in the frame descrip-
tion <DESCRIPTION> tag. 
79
Sense wise separated SVS members occupy 
the membership of same class or subclass in 
VerbNet. It has been observed that the verbs 
?build? and ?make? are members of the same 
SVS (extracted from the Bengali-English bilin-
gual dictionary) and they are also members of the 
same subclass build-26.1-1. Therefore, both of 
the verbs take same subcategorization frames. 
 
SVS (VerbNet 
classes) 
Primary and Secondary 
Frames for a SVS 
Make (build-
26.1-1) 
Build (build-
26.1-1) 
NP-PP, NP, NP-NP, NP-
NP-PP, Asset-PP 
Asset-Subject 
Use (use-105, 
consume-66, fit-
54.3) 
Apply (use-105) 
NP-ADVP, NP-PP, NP-
TO-INF-VC, Basic 
Transitive, NP-ING-SC, 
Location Subject 
Alternation, NP-PP 
for-PP, Location-PP 
Behave (mas-
querade-29.6, 
29.6-1) 
PP, Basic Transitive 
as-PP, like-PP, in-PP 
Table 2. The SVS members and their subcatego-
rization frames for the corresponding Bengali 
verbs ???? ??? (tairi kara) and  
?????? ??? (byabahar kara) 
 
The xml files of VerbNet have been preproc-
essed to build up a general list that contains all 
members (verbs) and their possible subcategori-
zation frames (primary as well as secondary) in-
formation. This preprocessed list is searched to 
acquire the subcategorization frames for each 
member of the SVS of the ten Bengali verbs 
(identified in section 3.3).  As the verbs are clas-
sified according to their semantics in the 
VerbNet, the frames for the particular Bengali 
verb are assumed to be similar to the frames ob-
tained for the members of its SVS.  It has also 
been observed that the same verb with a different 
sense can belong to a separate class in the 
VerbNet. For example, the acquired frames (pri-
mary and secondary) for each member of the 
SVS of the target verbs (??????? ???? and ????? 
????) have been shown in Table 2. In this way, 
all possible subcategorization frames for each 
member of a SVS have been extracted from the 
generalized search list for our ten target verbs. 
3.5 Bengali Verb Subcategorization Frames 
Acquisition  
The acquired VerbNet frames have been mapped 
to the Bengali verb subcategorization frames by 
considering the position of the verb as well as its 
general co-existing nature with other phrases in 
Bengali sentences. 
    The syntax of ?NP-PP? frame for a Bengali 
sentence has been acquired by identifying the 
target verb followed by a NP chunk and a PREP 
chunk. The sentences containing prepositional 
frame ?PP? do not appear in the Bengali corpus, 
as there is no concept of preposition in Bengali. 
But, when we compare the sentences containing 
postpositional markers, i.e. PREP (postpositions) 
as a probable argument of the verb, the system 
gives the desired output.  
???       ????         ??????? 
(jar)PRP (theke)PREP (hat-
pakha)NN                      
 ??      ?c???        ???? 
(ar)CC   (achhadon)QF 
(toiri)NN                                
????????         ???k 
(korechilen)VM (Max)NN 
 
All the frames of a SVS corresponding to a 
Bengali verb have been considered. The Bengali 
verb ??????? ???? (byabahar kara) in the fol-
lowing sentence has taken the frame ?ADVP-
PRED? (the word with RB tag) from a different 
SVS.  
 ?????????            
(karmachari ra)NN 
 ?nh??? ??          
(bondhuttwapurno)RB                      
??????          ???? 
(byabahar)NN  (karen)VM 
   
Another form of ?ADVP-PRED? frame has 
been obtained by considering the Bengali mean-
ing of the corresponding English adverbial 
phrase. ?There? is an adverbial phrase taken by 
the ?live? verb in English. The corresponding 
representation in the equivalent Bengali verb is 
o????i (okhanei) as shown in the following sen-
tence. Hence, the frame has been identified. 
o????i        ???  
(okhanei)RB (bas)NN         
????        ??? 
(karte)VM  (habe)VAUX  
 
80
The NNPC (Compound proper noun), NNP 
(Proper noun), NNC (Compound common noun) 
and NN (Common noun) POS tags help to de-
termine the subjects, objects as well as the loca-
tive information related to the verb. In simple 
sentences the occurrence of these POS tags pre-
ceded by the PRP (Pronoun) or NNPC tags and 
followed by the verb gives similar frame syntax 
for ?Basic Transitive? frame of the VerbNet. 
Only the components like subject, object and a 
single verb in Bengali as well as in English sen-
tence can be signified as simple ?Basic Transi-
tive? frame. 
 ??            ???         
(se)PRP   NP((rakam)NN   
 ????i???       ???      ???       
(designer)NN) (kaj)NN (kare)VM 
 
The following example shows that the frame 
identified from the sentence is also a ?transitive 
frame? and the secondary frame component is a 
?material object? for that sentence. 
   e??       ??????                                 
The set of acquired subcategorization frames or 
the frame lexicon can be evaluated against a gold 
standard corpus obtained either through manual 
analysis of corpus data or from subcategorization 
frame entries in a large dictionary or from the 
output of the parser made for that language. As 
there is no parser available for the Bengali and 
also no existing dictionary for Bengali that con-
tains subcategorization frames, manual analysis 
from corpus data is the only method for evalua-
tion. The chunked sentences that contain the ten 
most frequent verbs have been evaluated manu-
ally to prepare the gold standard data.  
(ekti)QC (bagaze)NNP 
     ??g?          ????? 
 VGNF((sangroho)NN (korlam)VM) 
 
The PREP (postposition) followed by a NP 
phrase and the target verb gives similar syntax 
for a NP-PP frame but it has been noticed that 
the secondary frame here can be a component of 
?Location-PP?. 
????        ????                                          
We have identified 45 different kinds of verbs 
in the corpus. A detailed statistics of the verb 
????? (kara) is presented in Table 3. During the 
Bengali verb subcategorization frame acquisition 
process, it has been observed that the simple sen-
tences contain most of the frames that the Eng-
lish verb form usually takes in VerbNet. Analysis 
of a simple Bengali sentence to identify the verb 
subcategorization frames is easier in the absence 
of a parser than analyzing complex and com-
pound sentences. There are only three occur-
rences of ????? (kara) as auxiliary in the corpus. 
These are chunking errors as the verb ????? 
(kara) does not occur as auxiliary verb.  
(setu)NNP (theke)PREP 
    ????      u?d? 
NP((nana)JJ (udvid)NN)) 
  p????         ?????k?            
  (projati)JJ (porjobekkhon)NN 
????? 
(korlam)VM  
 
The sentences where the determiner (DEM) 
and a NP chunk follow the target verb the se-
quence (Target verb DEM NP) is considered as 
the frame of sentential complement "S" for that 
target verb. 
 ???        ?????? 
(Ram)NNP (chitkar)(NN)           
???           ??    ?? 
(korlo)VM(je)(DEM) (se)(PRP) 
 ??         ???o 
(ar)CC      (kokhono)NN 
????      ?? 
(asbe)VM (na)NEG  
 
The presence of JJ (Adjective) generally does 
not play any role in the acquisition process of 
verb subcategorization frames. There are some 
frames that did not have any instance in our cor-
pus. Such frames are ?Asset-PP?, ?After-PP?, 
?Location Subject Alternation? and ?NP-TO-
INF-VC? etc. A close linguistic analysis shows 
that these frames can also be acquired from the 
Bengali sentences. They have not occurred in the 
corpus that has been considered for the analysis 
in the present work. 
4 Evaluation 
The verb subcategorization frames acquisition 
process is evaluated using type precision (the 
percentage of subcategorization frame types that 
the system proposes are correct according to the 
gold standard), type recall (the percentage of 
subcategorization frame types in the gold stan-
dard that the system proposes) and F-measure:   
          
 
 
81
The system has been evaluated with 100 gold 
standard test sentences containing ten most fre-
quent verbs and the evaluation results are shown 
in Table 4. The recall of the system shows a sat-
isfactory performance in producing Bengali verb 
subcategorization frames but the precision value 
requires more improvement.   
 
  Information Freq. 
Number of sentences in the corpus      1500 
Number of different verbs in the 
corpus 
45 
Number of inflected forms of the 
verb ????? in the corpus 
49 
Total number of occurrences of the 
verb ????? (before stemming ) in the 
corpus  
241  
Total number of occurrences of the 
verb ????? (after stemming) in the 
corpus  
234 
Number of sentences where ????? 
occurs as a  Main Verb (VM) 
206 
Number of sentences where ????? 
occurs as a Simple Main Verb 
(SVM) 
2 
Number of sentences where ????? 
occurs as a Compound Main Verb 
(CVM) 
204 
Number of sentences where ????? 
occurs as a Passive Verb 
(??????)(done) 
25 
Number of sentences where ????? 
occurs as a  Auxiliary Verb (VAUX) 
3 
Number of simple sentences where 
????? occurs as a Simple Main Verb 
(SVM) 
0 
Number of simple sentences where 
?????  occurs as a Compound Main 
Verb (CVM) 
127 
Table 3. The frequency information of the verb 
????? (kara) acquired from the corpus 
 
Measures Results 
Recall 88.23% 
Precision 71.11% 
F-Measure 79.24 
Table 4. The Precision, Recall and F-Measure 
values of the system 
 
It has been noticed that the absence of other 
frames in the Bengali corpus is due to the free 
phrase ordering characteristics of Bengali Lan-
guage. The proper alignment of the phrases is 
needed to cope up with this language specific 
problem. The number of different frames ac-
quired for these ten verbs is shown in Table 5.  
 
Bengali Verbs Subcategory 
Frames 
No. of 
Frames  
???? ??? 
(toiri kora)  
NP-PP 
NP-NP 
15 
3 
?????? ??? 
(babohar kora) 
NP-ADVP 
NP-PP 
NP-ING-SC 
NP-PP 
Location-PP 
1 
2 
1 
1 
1 
??? ??? (bas 
kora) 
Basic  
Transitive 
PP 
ADVP-
PRED 
 
12 
1 
1 
??? ??? (kaj 
kora) 
PP 
NP-PP 
1 
11 
??g? ??? 
(sangroho 
kora) 
Transitive  
(Material 
obj) 
PP 
1 
 
 
2 
?n ??? 
(bondho kora) 
Basic 
Transitive 
NP-PP 
 
1 
1 
???????   ??? 
(chitkar kora) 
S 
PP 
1 
1 
??? ??? (bhul 
kora) 
Nil 0 
??j??? ??? 
(jigyasa kora) 
BT 1 
?????k? ??? 
(porjobekkhon 
kora) 
Transitive 
(Location-
PP) 
NP-PP 
1 
 
 
1 
Table 5. The frequencies of different frames ac-
quired from corpus 
5 Conclusion 
The acquisition of subcategorization frames for 
more number of verbs and clustering them will 
help us to build a verb lexicon for Bengali lan-
guage. We need to find out Bengali verb sub-
categorization frames that may not be supported 
for the corresponding English verb with identical 
sense. 
82
There is no restriction for domain dependency 
in this system. For the free-phrase-order lan-
guages like Bengali, the overall performance can 
be increased by proper assumptions, rules and 
implementation procedures. Verb morphological 
information, synonymous sets and their possible 
subcategorization frames are all important in-
formation to develop a full-fledged parser for 
Bengali. This system can be used for solving 
alignment problems in Machine Translation for 
Bengali as well as to identify possible argument 
selection for Question and Answering systems.  
References  
Anna Korhonen. 2002. Semantically motivated sub-
categorization acquisition. ACL Workshop on 
Unsupervised Lexical Acquisition. Philadelphia. 
Anoop Sarkar and Daniel Zeman. 2000. Automatic 
extraction of subcategorization frames for czech. 
COLING-2000.
A. Ekbal and S. Bandyopadhyay. 2008. A Web-based 
Bengali News Corpus for Named Entity Recogni-
tion. LRE Journal. Springer. 
A.Ekbal, R. Haque and S. Bandyopadhyay. 2008. 
Maximum Entropy Based Bengali Part of Speech 
Tagging. RCS Journal, (33): 67-78.  
Akira Ushioda, David A. Evans, Ted Gibson, Alex 
Waibel. 1993. The Automatic Acquisition of Fre-
quencies of Verb Subcategorization Frames from 
Tagged Corpora. Workshop on Acquisition of 
Lexical Knowledge from Text, 95-106. Colum-
bus, Ohio.  
B. K. Boguraev and E. J. Briscoe.1987. Large lexi-
cons for natural language processing utilising the 
grammar coding system of the Longman Diction-
ary of Contemporary English. Computational 
Linguistics, 13(4): 219-240.  
Christopher D. Manning. 1993. Automatic Acquisi-
tion of a Large Subcategorization Dictionary from 
Corpora. 31st Meeting of the ACL, 235-242. Co-
lumbus, Ohio. 
Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B. 
Lowe.1998. The Berkeley FrameNet project. 
COLING/ACL-98, 86-90. Montreal. 
Copestake A.1992. The ACQUILEX LKB: Represen-
tation Issues in the Semi-automatic Acquisition of 
Large Lexicons. ANLP. Trento, Italy. 
D.Das, A.Ekbal, and S.Bandyopadhyay. 2009. Ac-
quiring Verb Subcategorization Frames in Bengali 
from Corpora. ICCPOL-09, LNAI-5459, 386-
393.Hong Kong.  
 Dan Gusfield. 1997. Algorithms on Strings, Trees 
and Sequences. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK. 
Diana McCarthy. 2001. Lexical Acquisition at the 
Syntax-Semantics Interface: Diathesis Alter-
nations, Subcategorization Frames and Selec-
tional Preferences. University of Sussex.  
Grishman, R., Macleod, C., and Meyers, A. 1994. 
Comlex syntax : building a computational lexicon. 
COLING-94, 268-272. Kyoto, Japan.   
George A. Miller. 1990. WordNet: An on-line lexical 
database. International Journal of Lexicogra-
phy, 3(4):235-312.  
Glenn Carroll, Mats Rooth. 1998. Valence induction 
with a head-lexicalized PCFG. EMNLP. Granada.  
Karin Kipper-Schuler.2005. VerbNet: A broad-
coverage, comprehensive verb lexicon. Ph.D. 
thesis, Computer and Information Science Dept., 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. 
Kazunori Muraki, Shin'ichiro Kamei, Shinichi 
Doi.1997. A Left-to-right Breadth-first Algo-
rithm for. Subcategorization Frame Selection 
of Japanese Verbs. TMI.  
Levin, B. 1993. English Verb Classes and Alterna-
tion: A Preliminary Investigation. The Univer-
sity of  Chicago Press. 
Michael Brent.1991. Automatic acquisition of sub-
categorization frames from untagged text.   29th 
Meeting of the ACL, 209-214. California.  
Maria Lapata, Chris Brew.1999. Using subcategoriza-
tion to resolve verb class ambiguity. 
WVLC/EMNLP, 266-274.  
Suzanne Stevenson, Paola Merlo. 1999. Automatic 
Verb Classification using Distributions of Gram-
matical Features. EACL-99, 45-52. Norge.  
Sabine Schulte im Walde. 1998. Automatic Seman-
tic Classification of Verbs According to Their 
Alternation Behavior. Master's thesis,  Stuttgart. 
S.D. Samantaray.2007. A Data mining approach for 
resolving cases of Multiple Parsing in Machine 
Aided Translation of Indian Languages. ITNG'07 
? IEEE. 
Ted Briscoe, John Carroll.1997. Automatic Extraction 
of Subcategorization from Corpora. ANLP-ACL, 
356-363.  Washington, D.C. 
XTAG Research Group. 2001. A lexicalized tree ad-
joining grammar for English. IRCS. University of 
Pennsylvania. 
83
