Proceedings of the Workshop on BioNLP, pages 125?132,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
________________________________ 
*  formerly with the Medical Imaging Informatics Group, Dept. of 
Radiological Sciences, University of California - Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, CA 90024 
Incorporating syntactic dependency information towards improved   
coding of lengthy medical concepts in clinical reports 
 
Vijayaraghavan Bashyam, PhD* 
Monster Worldwide Inc. 
Mountain View, CA 94043 
vbashyam@ucla.edu 
Ricky K Taira, PhD 
Medical Imaging Informatics Group 
University of California, Los Angeles 
Los Angeles, CA 90024 
rtaira@mii.ucla.edu 
Abstract 
Medical concepts in clinical reports can be 
found with a high degree of variability of ex-
pression. Normalizing medical concepts to 
standardized vocabularies is a common way 
of accounting for this variability. One of the 
challenges in medical concept normalization 
is the difficulty in comparing two concepts 
which are orthographically different in repre-
sentation but are identical in meaning. In this 
work we describe a method to compare medi-
cal phrases by utilizing the information found 
in syntactic dependencies. We collected a 
large corpus of radiology reports from our 
university medical center. A shallow semantic 
parser was used to identify anatomical phras-
es. We performed a series of transformations 
to convert the anatomical phrase into a norma-
lized syntactic dependency representation. 
The new representation provides an easy in-
tuitive way of comparing the phrases for the 
purpose of concept normalization. 
1 Introduction 
A vast amount of electronic information is 
generated in hospitals as a part of routine clinical 
care due to the adoption of the electronic medical 
record by health care centers in the United States 
(Berner et al, 2005; Jha et al, 2006). A significant 
portion of this information is in the form of un-
structured free-text (Hall, 2000; Tange et al, 
1998). A free text representation makes it difficult 
for applications to accurately extract medical in-
formation for generic purposes (Ananiadou et al, 
2004). The problem of variability of expression in 
natural language expression has been well studied 
(Bates, 1986, 1989, 1998; Blair and Maron, 1985; 
Funk and Reid, 1983; Furnas et al, 1984; Gomez 
et al, 1990). In the medical domain in particular, 
users frequently express the same concept in dif-
ferent ways and different concepts in similar ways 
(Ananiadou and Nenadic, 2006). To illustrate, the 
terms heart attack and cardiac attack both refer to 
the same concept ? myocardial infarction. Con-
versely the term left lobe could refer to the left lobe 
of lung or the left lobe of liver depending on the 
context (occurrence in a chest radiology report ver-
sus a gastro-intestinal radiology report). Such va-
riability suggests a need to normalize concepts 
encountered in medical reports to a standard voca-
bulary in order to ensure interoperability.  
 
Several standardized vocabularies exist in the 
medical domain such as the Unified Medical Lan-
guage System (Humphreys and Lindberg, 1993), 
Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine - Clinical 
Terms (College of American Pathologists, July 
2003), Medical Subject Headings (National Li-
brary of Medicine), and the International Classifi-
cation of Diseases (World Health Organization). 
There have been several attempts in the past 
(Aronson, 2001; Bashyam and Taira, 2005; Ba-
shyam et al, 2007; Cooper and Miller, 1998; 
Friedman et al, 2004; Nadkarni et al, 2001; Oliv-
er and Altman, 1994; Ruch et al, 2003; Zou et al, 
2003) to map medical concepts to their standar-
dized concept found in these terminologies. These 
approaches are based on mostly on lexical match-
ing (Bashyam et al, 2007), string matching (Nad-
karni et al, 2001), statistical indexing (Cooper and 
125
Miller, 1998), natural language processing (Aron-
son, 2001; Friedman et al, 2004) information re-
trieval techniques (Bashyam and Taira, 2005; 
Oliver and Altman, 1994; Ruch et al, 2003; Zou et 
al., 2003) or a combination of these approaches 
(Cooper and Miller, 1998). These systems have 
managed to map a large percentage of medical 
terms to their respective standard terminologies in 
their reported experiments. While these systems 
have managed to perform satisfactorily for the task 
of normalizing simple expressions, they all ac-
knowledge the larger problem of normalizing leng-
thy expressions. To illustrate, Nadkarni et al 
(2001) mention the mapping of the phrase spleen 
rupture and normal stomach to the concept sto-
mach rupture as a possible spurious mapping.  
 
We hypothesize that using deep syntactic in-
formation can help in avoiding such spurious map-
ping. We describe a system which uses information 
found in syntactic dependencies to help in the cod-
ing of lengthy phrases. Preliminary results using 
this approach are reported as a proof-of-concept. 
2 Background 
Syntactic dependency parsing has received 
much focus from the natural language processing 
community (Eisner, 1996; Kudo and Matsumoto, 
2000; Nivre and Scholz, 2004; Yamada and Mat-
sumoto, 2003). A syntactic dependency relation is 
an asymmetric relation between two words. One 
word is called the head, and the other word is 
called the modifier or dependent. A word in the 
sentence can play the role of the head in several 
dependency relations (i.e., it can have several mod-
ifiers) but each word can play the role of the mod-
ifier only once. A special word, named the root, 
does not play the role of the modifier in any rela-
tion. The set of dependency relations that can be 
defined on a sentence form a tree, called the de-
pendency tree. An example of dependencies in a 
typical sentence found in a radiology report is 
shown in Figure 1. 
  
Systems based on syntactic dependencies have 
been used successfully in several information re-
trieval experiments with results outperforming tra-
ditional retrieval systems (Croft et al, 1991; Gao 
et al, 2004; Gonzalez et al, 2005; Smeaton, 
1986). In particular, this method has been used for 
word sense disambiguation (Lin, 1997) and thesau-
rus construction (Lin, 1998). Dependency trees 
have also been used for medical concept represen-
tation in the domains of radiology (Steimann, 
1998) and pathology (Romacker et al, 1999). 
3 Methods 
3.1 Anatomy Phrase Extraction 
For identifying anatomy phrases, we use a spe-
cialized phrase parser trained to identify anatomy 
phrases within clinical reports. The input to the 
parser is a sentence tagged with a part-of-speech 
tag and a semantic tag. The lexical analyzer mod-
ule of our NLP system takes a single sentence as 
the input and produces an output of word tokens 
tagged with their syntactic and semantic classes. 
The semantic tag is obtained by mapping tokens in 
a sentence to a taxonomy handcrafted for the do-
main of radiology reports custom built from radi-
ology textbooks, radiology review manuals, 
radiology word compilations and published radiol-
ogy glossaries apart from actual radiology reports 
(Taira et al, 2001). Features of our implementation 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Example of a syntactic dependency parse tree with emphasis towards semantics. Each arc  
   shows a dependency relation between a head and a modifier. 
 
 
126
include: 1) a large number (>450)  of semantic 
classes as compared to lexical sources currently 
available allowing improved discrimination for 
tasks such as syntactic parsing, semantic interpre-
tation and frame building; 2) the system recognizes 
special symbols including dates, medical abbrevia-
tions, medical coding symbols, numeric measure-
ments, image slice references, and proper names; 
and 3) the system performs some word sense dis-
ambiguation using surrounding syntactic and se-
mantic word features. 
 
Our phrase parsing module currently targets 
anatomy phrases (e.g., right upper lobe of lung), 
existential relationships (e.g., there is no evidence 
of), and spatial relationships (e.g., is located 1cm 
above). We utilize a supervised learning approach 
to estimate the feature weights to a maximum en-
tropy model which classifies words as the start, 
inside, end, single, or outside of a phrase boundary. 
A Viterbi dynamic programming algorithm  is used 
to maximize the tag sequence probability. The 
anatomy phrase chunker has been tested on 4,500 
sentences with recall and precision scores of 97.1% 
and 97.4% respectively. 
3.2 Normalized Dependency Representation 
We perform a series of transformations to con-
vert an anatomical phrase from a free-text repre-
sentation to a normalized dependency vector space 
representation. The following steps are taken in the 
representation conversion: 
 
Syntactic Parsing  
 
The anatomy phrase identified by the phrase 
parser preserves lexical information which is used 
to obtain a dependency parse tree using a full syn-
tactic parser. This parser is based on a novel field 
theory approach to dependency parsing. The parser 
is strongly modeled for the radiology domain with 
performance accuracies of 84.9% and 89.9% for 
link precision and recall respectively for parsing 
whole sentences (Taira et al, 2007). In compari-
son, the state-of-the-art parsers have performance 
accuracies in the low nineties for link precision and 
recall in the domain of newspaper text, with per-
formance unknown in the domain of clinical text.  
 
Link Reduction 
 
 Our system classifies dependency links into 
two types ? bilexical links and trilexical links. A 
bilexical link is a strong dependency relation be-
tween two words (e.g. determiner?noun) whereas 
a trilexical link usually has a mediator word in be-
tween the two words (e.g. finding?in?location). 
When possible, a trilexical link is converted to a 
bilexical link by the elimination of the mediator 
word and the link type is tagged by the mediator 
word. The link type can play important roles in 
certain cases. In cases where the mediator word is 
also important, the trilexical link is considered as a 
pair of bilexical links. 
 
Token Level Normalization 
 
Once the parse tree is obtained, the tokens are 
normalized to their base form. The normalization is 
an approximate kind of lemmatization. However 
we also perform word level synonym normaliza-
tion. For lemmatization, we use the Lexical Va-
riant Generator tools developed by the National 
Library of Medicine for biomedical text (McCray 
et al, 1994). For synonyms, we use a handcrafted 
lexicon built for the domain of radiology. This step 
helps in avoiding missing a mapping due to lexical 
differences due to pluralization, abbreviations and 
acronyms, case differences etc. This representation 
is referred to as the normalized dependency vector 
space representation 
3.3 Mapping to a Terminology 
The normalized dependency parse tree is 
represented as in a vector space as a bag-of-links as 
analogous to the so-called bag-of-words represen-
tation in conventional information retrieval. Two 
phrases can now be compared by using similarity 
measures such as cosine, dice, jaccard etc. within 
the dimension-space of dependency-links. One 
phrase can be the anatomy phrase in a clinical re-
port and the other phrase can be an entry in a stan-
dardized terminology. 
 
127
 
 
Figure 2. Example illustrating the transformation of a medical phrase from a free-text representation to a 
normalized syntactic dependency  vector space representation. 
 
An exercise in normalization is described in 
Figure 2 to illustrate how this method works. Con-
sider the following phrase in a neuro-radiology 
report: ventral postero-medial thalamic nucleus. 
The corresponding concept in the target terminolo-
gy is the phrase postero-medial ventral nucleus of 
thalamus. These phrases if compared by string 
matching will not result in direct matches. Permut-
ing words and trying to compare rearrangements is 
complicated. In our approach, we first preprocess 
our terminology list and store it in a database. The 
preprocessing step is described in the right column 
(Phrase 2) of Figure 2. Starting with the phrase 
postero-medial ventral nucleus of thalamus, we 
first tokenize the individual words (lexical analy-
sis) in the first step. In the second step, we parse 
the phrase to arrive at the dependency tree. In the 
third step, the trilexical link nuc-
leus?of?thalamus is converted to a bilexical link 
by eliminating the word of and tagging it as the 
link type. In the following step, each word is nor-
malized to its base form. In the fifth step, the 
phrase is represented as a bag-of-links and stored 
in a database. Similarly all the other phrases in our 
terminology are stored. 
 
When the query phrase ventral postero-medial 
thalamic nucleus is compared against the terminol-
ogy it undergoes the same processes previously 
described (Figure 2, Phrase 1). The importance of 
word-normalization can be seen here. In step 4, the 
word thalamic is normalized to thalamus. The final 
output is the bag-of-links representation. For con-
128
venience of comparison Figure 2 shows together, 
the query phrase and target phrase undergoing the 
various steps starting from a bag-of-words repre-
sentation to a bag-of-links representation. It is clear 
that both phrases look identical in the final repre-
sentation. While a string comparison would have 
missed equating the two in their original word-
level representation, a comparison in the depen-
dency vector space is likely to score them as a per-
fect match. 
4 Experiment and Results 
We obtained a set of 2500 neuro-radiology re-
ports from our university medical center. Using the 
shallow semantic parser, we extracted a set of 2551 
unique anatomical phrases. Of the 2551 phrases, 
819 phrases were single worded terms. We dis-
carded the single word terms. Single worded 
phrases do not fall into the difficult-to-map catego-
ry which this method is specifically aiming to ad-
dress. Moreover, a minimum of two words are 
required to define a syntactic dependency and thus 
the method is irrelevant for single worded terms. 
Thus we used only the 1732 multi-worded terms in 
our experiment. The average length of the multi-
worded terms was 2.48 words. 
 
We chose the UMLS, a coordinated repository 
of vocabularies as a target for concept coding. To 
reduce complexity, we removed non-English con-
cepts and concepts outside the domain of     neuro-
radiology by filtering out unrelated concepts. Our 
final terminology had a size of about 100,000 en-
tries. We preprocessed the entire terminology us-
ing the above mentioned steps and stored the 
dependency representation in a database. Every 
anatomy phrase was queried against this database 
and cosine similarity was used to measure relev-
ance. No weighting system was employed although 
it is possible to weight links by their types. A phy-
sician domain expert manually evaluated the re-
sults of the 1732 queries for performance. Of the 
1732 phrases, 1091  phrases (62.9% accuracy, 95% 
CI ?0.946%) were successfully matched. Since the 
target set is extremely large in size (as in any IR 
system), a recall analysis was not performed.  A 
baseline comparison with MMTx (in phrase mode) 
resulted in 1051 phrases (60.68% accuracy, 95% 
CI ?0.49%) being mapped by MMTx. Table 1 
summarizes the results. 
 
5 Discussion 
Analysis of the errors showed that the follow-
ing error types resulted in the inability to match 
phrases perfectly: 
 
Parsing without context: 
 
A syntactic parser can parse a sentence and 
identify dependency relations in a sentence. How-
ever, when a phrase is given as an input, it is not 
always easy to parse a phrase and generate a de-
pendency representation. There is context (remain-
ing portions of the sentence) missing which is 
needed to unambiguously parse the phrase. In the 
case of anatomical phrases, our system was able to 
parse it because the source sentences from which 
they were extracted were available. However, in 
the case of the UMLS phrases, there is no such 
available information. Therefore manual parsing of 
several UMLS phrases had to be performed. One 
potential solution to this problem could be to iden-
tify MEDLINE sentences that contain these UMLS 
concepts and obtain a dependency parse tree using 
the context of the sentence. 
 
Modular system architecture:  
 
Since the system is modular, any errors in one 
of the modules (tokenization, word level normali-
zation etc.) would result in the final dependency 
representation being imperfect. The specific errors 
we noticed were: 
 
Parsing Errors:  
 
Our parser has a higher accuracy for parsing 
phrases than whole sentences. However in this ex-
periment, there were 37 instances where it failed in 
MMTx 
Matched Phrases 
Syn. Dependency 
Matched Phrases  
1051 1091 n=1732 
60.68% 62.99%  
(?0.49%) (?0.49%)  
 
Table 1. Overview of Results 
129
assigning the correct links. This resulted in partial 
matches. 
 
Word Normalization Errors: 
 
 There is a natural ambiguity introduced when 
words are normalized to their base forms. Words 
with completely different senses can have the same 
root form (e.g. left?leaves and left?left (spatial 
direction)). Similarly, a word can have different 
normalized forms depending on the sense (e.g. 
leaf?leaves and left?leaves). A robust method 
for word-level normalization is desired that can 
also perform word-sense disambiguation. Current-
ly the NLM?s word level normalization tool is be-
ing used which is not perfect and therefore errors 
introduced due to this module result in the entire 
phrase being transformed incorrectly or ambi-
guously. The ideal word level normalization will 
result in the words cancer, cancerous, carcinoma 
all conflating to the same word which is beyond 
purely morphological analysis. 
 
Link Reduction Errors:  
 
Not all relations manifest as simple bilexical 
and trilexical links. Some relations are tetralexical 
and although they can be reduced effectively to 
bilexical links, the methodology needs to be inves-
tigated. To illustrate, consider the phrases ?mass 
consistent with cancer? and ?cancerous mass? 
parsed as 
 
 mass?consistent?with?cancer 
 cancerous?mass.  
 
The former is parsed as four words with three 
links. To convert it into a bilexical link, the words 
?consistent? and ?with? need to be: (1) clustered as 
a single token and (2) eliminated by transferring it 
to the link as a label. This is a more complicated 
process and we still haven?t explored such abstrac-
tions. A robust rule based link reduction system is 
desired to handle such cases. 
 
Another limitation of this method is that the 
heuristic rules for link reduction may not be appli-
cable outside the radiology domain. Finally, syn-
tactic dependency parsers are built using 
computationally complex algorithms. Thus while 
using them can result in advanced language under-
standing, they may not be suitable for real-time 
applications. There is always a tradeoff between 
accuracy and speed and it remains to be seen if 
robust low complexity parsers can be developed. 
 
The inability to perform a recall analysis also 
make is difficult to judge the theoretical best per-
formance. That is, it is quite likely that there are 
many phrases in our dataset that do not have a cor-
responding UMLS concept. Performing a recall 
analysis would help in determining this. 
 
While we noticed several areas of improvement 
in our system, we were encouraged by the compar-
ison of the overall results of our system to that of 
MMTx. We did not do an error analysis of MMTx 
since several previous publications have docu-
mented the various kinds of errors in MMTx (Ba-
shyam et al, 2007; Divita et al, 2004; Meng et al, 
2005). Our idea is to provide a baseline compari-
son showing that our approach performs compara-
bly if not better than MMTx which is the most 
commonly used1 tool for concept coding. To our 
knowledge this the first time syntactic dependen-
cies have been used for this task, Previous attempts 
have relied purely on shallow parsers. 
 
6 Future Work 
Increasing the robustness of the individual 
modules is a primary requirement for further expe-
riments to prevent the weakest link effect cascading 
to the final output. Specifically we plan to work 
towards a robust word level normalization system. 
Additionally, robust evaluation methods including 
comparisons with other techniques will be investi-
gated. 
7 Conclusion 
Syntactic dependency based methods for med-
ical concept coding show promise. While some of 
the described implementations are specific to do-
main (radiology) and phrase type (anatomy), it is 
expected that the principle is general enough to be 
applied in other domains as well. 
                                                           
1 For an overview of recent applications of MMTx, see (Ba-
shyam et al, 2007) 
130
Acknowledgements 
The authors would like to thank Lew Andrada, 
Gregory Leazer, Jonathan Furner and Christine 
Borgman for several useful suggestions. 
 
This work was supported in part by the follow-
ing grants: 
1. National Institute of Biomedical Imaging 
and Bioengineering P01-EB00216 
2. National Institute of Health R01-
EB002247 
References 
 
Ananiadou, S., Friedman, C., and Tsujii, J. (2004). In-
troduction: named entity recognition in biomedicine. 
Journal of  Biomedical Informatics, 37(6), 393-395. 
Ananiadou, Sophia, and Nenadic, Goran. (2006). Auto-
matic Terminology Management in Biomedicine. In 
Sophia Ananiadou and John McNaught (Eds.), Text 
Mining for Biology And Biomedicine. Norwood 
MA: Artech House. 
Aronson, A. R. (2001). Effective mapping of biomedi-
cal text to the UMLS Metathesaurus: the MetaMap 
program, AMIA Annu Symp Proc (pp. 17-21). Port-
land, OR. 
Bashyam, V., and Taira, R. K. (2005). Indexing Ana-
tomical Phrases in Neuro-Radiology Reports to the 
UMLS 2005AA, American Medical Informatics As-
sociation Annual Symposium (pp. 26-30). Washing-
ton DC. 
Bashyam, Vijayaraghavan, Divita, Guy, Bennett, David 
B, Browne, Allen C, and Taira, Ricky K. (2007, Au-
gust 2007). A Normalized Lexical Lookup Approach 
to identifying UMLS concepts in free text. Paper pre-
sented at the 12th World Congress on Health (Medi-
cal) Informatics (MEDINFO). Brisbane, Australia. 
Bates, M. J. (1986). Subject access in online catalogs: A 
design model. Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science, 37(6), 357-376. 
Bates, M. J. (1989). Rethinking Subject Cataloging in 
the Online Environment. Library Resources and 
Technical Services, 33(4), p400-412. 
Bates, M. J. (1998). Indexing and access for digital li-
braries and the internet: Human, database, and do-
main factors. Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science, 49(13), 1185-1205. 
Berner, E. S., Detmer, D. E., and Simborg, D. (2005). 
Will the Wave Finally Break? A Brief View of the 
Adoption of Electronic Medical Records in the Unit-
ed States. J Am Med Inform Assoc, 12(1). 
Blair, David C., and Maron, M. E. (1985). An Evalua-
tion of retrieval effectiveness for a full-text document 
retrieval system. Communications of the ACM, 
28(3), 289-299. 
College of American Pathologists. (July 2003). 
SNOMED Clinical Terms ? Technical Reference 
Guide. 
Cooper, G. F., and Miller, R. A. (1998). An Experiment 
Comparing Lexical and Statistical Methods for Ex-
tracting MeSH Terms from Clinical Free Text, Pro-
ceedings of the American Medical Informatics 
Association Annual Symposium. 
Croft, W. B., Turtle, H. R., and Lewis, D. D. (1991). 
The use of phrases and structured queries in informa-
tion retrieval. Paper presented at the Proc of the 14th 
Annu Intnl ACM SIGIR Conf on R&D in Informa-
tion Retrieval. 
Divita, Guy, Tse, Tony, and Roth, Laura. (2004). Fail-
ure analysis of MetaMap transfer (MMTx). In M Fie-
schi et. al. (Ed.), Proceedings of the 11 World 
Congress on Health Informatics (MEDINFO 2004). 
Eisner, J. (1996). Three new probabilistic models for 
dependency parsing: An exploration. Paper presented 
at the Proc COLING. 
Friedman, C., Shagina, L., Lussier, Y., and Hripcsak, G. 
(2004). Automated Encoding of Clinical Documents 
Based on Natural Language Processing. Journal of 
the American Medical Informatics Association, 
11(5), 392. 
Funk, M. E., and Reid, C. A. (1983). Indexing consis-
tency in MEDLINE. Bulletin of the Medical Library 
Association, 71(2), 176-183. 
Furnas, G. W., Landauer, T. K., Gomez, L. M., and 
Dumais, S. T. (1984). Statistical semantics: analysis 
of the potential performance of keyword information 
systems. In Human factors in computer systems (pp. 
187-242): Ablex Publishing Corp. Norwood, NJ, 
USA. 
Gao, J., Nie, J. Y., Wu, G., and Cao, G. (2004). Depen-
dence language model for information retrieval. Pa-
per presented at the Proc ACM SIGIR. 
Gomez, L. M., Lochbaum, C. C., and Landauer, T. K. 
(1990). All the right words: Finding what you want 
as a function of richness of indexing vocabulary. 
Journal of the American Society for Information 
Science, 41(8), 547-559. 
131
Gonzalez, M., Strube De Lima, V. L., and Valdeni De 
Lima, J. (2005). Binary Lexical Relations for Text 
Representation in Information Retrieval. In Natural 
Language Processing and Information Systems (Vol. 
3513, pp. 21-31). Berlin / Heidelberg: Springer  
Hall, F. (2000). Language of the radiology report. 
American Journal of Roentology, 175, 1239-1241. 
Humphreys, B. L., and Lindberg, D. A. B. (1993). The 
UMLS project: making the conceptual connection 
between users and the information they need. Bulle-
tin of the Medical Library Association, 81(2), 170. 
Jha, Ashish K., Ferris, Timothy G., Donelan, Karen, 
DesRoches, Catherine, Shields, Alexandra, Rosen-
baum, Sara, and Blumenthal, David. (2006). How 
Common Are Electronic Health Records In The 
United States? A Summary Of The Evidence. Health 
Affairs, doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.25.w496. 
Kudo, T., and Matsumoto, Y. (2000). Japanese depen-
dency structure analysis based on support vector ma-
chines. Paper presented at the Proc  International 
Conference On Computational Linguistics. 
Lin, D. (1997). Using syntactic dependency as local 
context to resolve word sense ambiguity, Proceedings 
of the 35th Annual Meeting of the Association for 
ComputationalLinguistics and 8th Conference of the 
European Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics. Madrid, Spain. 
Lin, D. (1998). Automatic retrieval and clustering of 
similar words. Paper presented at the Proc 36th Annu 
Meeting of the ACL and 17th Intnl Conf on Comp 
Ling. 
McCray, AT, Srinivasan, S, and Browne, AC. (1994). 
Lexical methods for managing variation in biomedi-
cal terminologies. Paper presented at the Proceedings 
of the Annual Symposium on Computer Applications 
in Medical Care. 
Meng, F., D'Avolio, L. W., Chen, A. A., Taira, R. K., 
and Kangarloo, H. (2005). Generating Models of 
Surgical Procedures using UMLS Concepts and Mul-
tiple Sequence Alignment, AMIA Annu Symp Proc 
(Vol. 520, pp. 4). Washington, DC. 
Nadkarni, P., Chen, R., and Brandt, C. (2001). UMLS 
Concept Indexing for Production Databases: A Fea-
sibility Study. Journal of the American Medical In-
formatics Association, 8(1), 80. 
National Library of Medicine. MEdical Subject Head-
ings. www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/ meshhome.html Last 
Accessed 09 March  2007 Bethesda, MD. 
Nivre, J., and Scholz, M. (2004). Deterministic depen-
dency parsing of English text. Paper presented at the 
Proc COLING. 
Oliver, D. E., and Altman, R. B. (1994). Extraction of 
SNOMED concepts from medical record texts, Proc 
of the 18th Annual SCAMC (Vol. 17983). Washing-
ton: McGraw Hill. 
Romacker, M., Schulz, S., and Hahn, U. (1999). 
Streamlining semantic interpretation for medical 
narratives. Paper presented at the AMIA Annu Symp 
Proc. 
Ruch, P., Baud, R., and Geissb?hler, A. (2003). Learn-
ing-free Text Categorization, Proc of 9th Conf on Ar-
tificial Intelligence in Medicine (pp. 199?204). 
Smeaton, A. F. (1986). Incorporating syntactic informa-
tion into a document retrieval strategy: an investiga-
tion. Paper presented at the Proc of the 1986 ACM 
Conf on R&D in Information Retrieval, Pisa, Italy. 
Steimann, F. (1998). Dependency parsing for medical 
language and concept representation. Artificial Intel-
ligence in Medicine, 12(1), 77-86. 
Taira, R. K., Soderland, S. G., and Jakobovits, R. M. 
(2001). Automatic Structuring of Radiology Free-
Text Reports. Radiology, 21, 237-245. 
Taira, Ricky K, Bashyam, Vijayaraghavan, and Kangar-
loo, Hooshang. (2007). A Field Theoretical Approach 
for Medical Natural Language Processing. IEEE 
Transactions on IT in Biomedicine, 11(4), 364-375. 
Tange, H.J., Schouten, H.C., Kester, A.D.M., and Has-
man, A. (1998). The Granularity of Medical Narra-
tives and Its Effect on the Speed and Completeness 
of Information Retrieval. J Am Med Inform Assoc, 
5(6), 571-582. 
World Health Organization. 
http://www.who.int/classifications/icd/en/ Last Ac-
cessed 09 March  2007. 
Yamada, H., and Matsumoto, Y. (2003). Statistical de-
pendency analysis with support vector machines. Pa-
per presented at the Proceedings of the 8th 
International Workshop on Parsing Technologies 
(IWPT). 
Zou, Q., Chu, W. W., Morioka, C., Leazer, G. H., and 
Kangarloo, H. (2003). IndexFinder: A Method of Ex-
tracting Key Concepts from Clinical Texts for Index-
ing, AMIA Annu Symp Proc (Vol. 2003, pp. 763-
767). 
 
 
132
