Human Language Technologies: The 2009 Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 46?55,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Corpus-Based Approach for the Prediction of Language Impairment in
Monolingual English and Spanish-English Bilingual Children
Keyur Gabani and Melissa Sherman and Thamar Solorio and Yang Liu
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Dallas
keyur,mesh,tsolorio,yangl@hlt.utdallas.edu
Lisa M. Bedore and Elizabeth D. Pen?a
Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders
The University of Texas at Austin
lbedore,lizp@mail.utexas.edu
Abstract
In this paper we explore a learning-based ap-
proach to the problem of predicting language
impairment in children. We analyzed sponta-
neous narratives of children and extracted fea-
tures measuring different aspects of language
including morphology, speech fluency, lan-
guage productivity and vocabulary. Then, we
evaluated a learning-based approach and com-
pared its predictive accuracy against a method
based on language models. Empirical re-
sults on monolingual English-speaking chil-
dren and bilingual Spanish-English speaking
children show the learning-based approach is
a promising direction for automatic language
assessment.
1 Introduction
The question of how best to identify children with
language disorders is a topic of ongoing debate.
One common assessment approach is based on cut-
off scores from standardized, norm-referenced lan-
guage assessment tasks. Children scoring at the
lower end of the distribution, typically more than
1.25 or 1.5 Standard Deviations (SD) below the
mean, are identified as having language impair-
ment (Tomblin et al, 1997). This cutoff-based
approach has several well-documented weaknesses
that may result in both over- and under-identification
of children as language impaired (Plante and Vance,
1994). Recent studies have suggested considerable
overlap between children with language impairment
and their typically developing cohorts on many of
these tasks (e.g., (Pen?a et al, 2006b; Spaulding et
al., 2006)). In addition, scores and cutoffs on stan-
dardized tests depend on the distribution of scores
from the particular samples used in normalizing the
measure. Thus, the validity of the measure for chil-
dren whose demographic and other socioeconomic
characteristics are not well represented in the test?s
normative sample is a serious concern. Finally, most
norm-referenced tests of language ability rely heav-
ily on exposure to mainstream language and expe-
riences, and have been found to be biased against
children from families with low parental education
and socioeconomic status, as well as children from
different ethnic backgrounds (Campbell et al, 1997;
Dollaghan and Campbell, 1998).
This paper aims to develop a reliable and auto-
matic method for identifying the language status of
children. We propose the use of different lexico-
syntactic features, typically used in computational
linguistics, in combination with features inspired
by current assessment practices in the field of lan-
guage disorders to train Machine Learning (ML) al-
gorithms. The two main contributions of this pa-
per are: 1) It is one step towards developing a re-
liable and automatic approach for language status
prediction in English-speaking children; 2) It pro-
vides evidence showing that the same approach can
be adapted to predict language status in Spanish-
English bilingual children.
2 Related Work
2.1 Monolingual English-Speaking Children
Several hypotheses exist that try to explain the gram-
matical deficits of children with Language Impair-
46
ment (LI). Young children normally go through a
stage where they use non-finite forms of verbs in
grammatical contexts where finite forms are re-
quired (Wexler, 1994). This is referred as the op-
tional infinitive stage. The Extended Optional Infini-
tive (EOI) theory (Rice and Wexler, 1996) suggests
that children with LI exhibit the use of a ?young?
grammar for an extended period of time, where
tense, person, and number agreement markers are
omitted.
In contrast to the EOI theory, the surface account
theory (Leonard et al, 1997) assumes that chil-
dren with LI have reduced processing capabilities.
This deficit affects the perception of low stress mor-
phemes, such as -ed, -s, be and do, resulting in an
inconsistent use of these verb morphemes.
Spontaneous narratives are considered as one of
the most ecologically valid ways to measure com-
municative competence (Botting, 2002). They rep-
resent various aspects involved in children?s every-
day communication. Typical measures for sponta-
neous language samples include Mean Length of
Utterance (MLU) in words, Number of Different
Words (NDW), and errors in grammatical morphol-
ogy. Assessment approaches compare children?s
performance on these measures against expected
performance. As mentioned in Section 1, these cut-
off based methods raise questions concerning accu-
racy and bias. Manually analyzing the narratives is
also a very time consuming task. After transcribing
the sample, clinicians need to code for the differ-
ent clinical markers and other morphosyntactic in-
formation. This can take up to several hours for each
child making it infeasible to analyze a large number
of samples.
2.2 Bilingual Spanish-English Speaking
Children
Bilingual children face even more identification
challenges due to their dual language acquisition.
They can be mistakenly labeled as LI due to: 1) the
inadequate use of translations of assessment tools;
2) an over reliance on features specific to English; 3)
a lack of appropriate expectations about how the lan-
guages of a bilingual child should develop (Bedore
and Pen?a, 2008); 4) or the use of standardized
tests where the normal distribution used to compare
language performance is composed of monolingual
children (Restrepo and Gutie?rrez-Clellen, 2001).
Spanish speaking children with LI show differ-
ent clinical markers than English speaking children
with LI. As mentioned above, English speakers have
problems with verb morphology. In contrast, Span-
ish speakers have been found to have problems with
noun morphology, in particular in the use of articles
and clitics (Restrepo and Gutie?rrez-Clellen, 2001;
Jacobson and Schwartz, 2002; Bedore and Leonard,
2005). Bedore and Leonard (2005) also found dif-
ferences in the error patterns of Spanish and related
languages such as Italian. Spanish-speakers tend to
both omit and substitute articles and clitics, while
the dominant errors for Italian-speakers are omis-
sions.
3 Our Approach
We use language models (LMs) in our initial inves-
tigation, and later explore more complex ML algo-
rithms to improve the results. Our ultimate goal is
to discover a highly accurate ML method that can be
used to assist clinicians in the task of LI identifica-
tion in children.
3.1 Language Models for Predicting Language
Impairment
LMs are statistical models used to estimate the prob-
ability of a given sequence of words. They have been
explored previously for clinical purposes. Roark et
al. (2007) proposed cross entropy of LMs trained
on Part-of-Speech (POS) sequences as a measure of
syntactic complexity with the aim of determining
mild cognitive impairment in adults. Solorio and
Liu (2008) evaluated LMs on a small data set in a
preliminary trial on LI prediction.
The intuition behind using LMs is that they can
identify atypical grammatical patterns and help dis-
criminate the population with potential LI from
the Typically Developing (TD) one. We use LMs
trained on POS tags rather than on words. Using
POS tags can address the data sparsity issue in LMs,
and place less emphasis on the vocabulary and more
emphasis on the syntactic patterns.
We trained two separate LMs using POS tags
from the transcripts of TD and LI children, respec-
tively. The language status of a child is predicted
using the following criterion:
47
d(s) =
{ LI if (PPTD(s) > PPLI(s))
TD otherwise
where s represents a transcript from a child, and
PPTD(s) and PPLI(s) are the perplexity values
from the TD and LI LMs, respectively. We used the
SRI Language Modeling Toolkit (Stolcke, 2002) for
training the LMs and calculating perplexities.
3.2 Machine Learning for Predicting Language
Impairment
Although LMs have been used successfully on dif-
ferent human language processing tasks, they are
typically trained and tested on language samples
larger than what is usually collected by clinicians for
the purpose of diagnosing a child with potential LI.
Clinicians make use of additional information be-
yond children?s speech, such as parent and teacher
questionnaires and test scores on different language
assessment tasks. Therefore in addition to using
LMs for children language status prediction, we ex-
plore a machine learning classification approach that
can incorporate more information for better predic-
tion. We aim to identify effective features for this
task and expect this information will help clinicians
in their assessment.
We consider various ML algorithms for the clas-
sification task, including Naive Bayes, Artificial
Neural Networks (ANNs), Support Vector Ma-
chines (SVM), and Boosting with Decision Stumps.
Weka (Witten and Frank, 1999) was used in our ex-
periments due to its known reliability and the avail-
ability of a large number of algorithms. Below we
provide a comprehensive list of features that we ex-
plored for both English and Spanish-English tran-
scripts. We group these features according to the
aspect of language they focus on. Features specific
to Spanish are discussed in Section 5.2.
1. Language productivity
(a) Mean Length of Utterance (MLU) in
words
Due to a general deficit of language abil-
ity, children with LI have been found to
produce language samples with a shorter
MLU in words because they produce
grammatically simpler sentences when
compared to their TD peers.
(b) Total number of words
This measure is widely used when build-
ing language profiles of children for diag-
nostic and treatment purposes.
(c) Degree of support
In spontaneous samples of children?s
speech, it has been pointed out that chil-
dren with potential LI need more encour-
agement from the investigator (Wetherell
et al, 2007) than their TD peers. A sup-
port prompt can be a question like ?What
happened next?? We count the number of
utterances, or turns, of the investigator in-
terviewing the child for this feature.
2. Morphosyntactic skills
(a) Ratio of number of raw verbs to the total
number of verbs
As mentioned previously, children with LI
omit tense markers in verbs more often
than their TD cohorts. For example:
...the boy look into the hole but didn?t
find...
Hence, we include the ratio of the number
of raw verbs to the total number of verbs
as a feature.
(b) Subject-verb agreement
Research has shown that English-speaking
children with LI have difficulties mark-
ing subject-verb agreement (Clahsen and
Hansen, 1997; Schu?tze and Wexler, 1996).
An illustration of subject-verb disagree-
ment is the following:
...and he were looking behind the rocks
As a way of capturing this information
in the machine learning setting, we con-
sider various bigrams of POS tags: noun
and verb, noun and auxiliary verb, pro-
noun and verb, and pronoun and auxiliary
verb. These features are included in a bag-
of-words fashion using individual counts.
Also, we allow a window between these
pairs to capture agreement between sub-
48
ject and verb that may have modifiers in
between.
(c) Number of different POS tags
This feature is the total number of differ-
ent POS tags in each transcript.
3. Vocabulary knowledge
We use the Number of Different Words (NDW)
to represent vocabulary knowledge of a child.
Although such measures can be biased against
children from different backgrounds, we expect
this possible negative effect to decrease as a re-
sult of having a richer pool of features.
4. Speech fluency
Repetitions, revisions, and filled pauses have
been considered indicators of language learn-
ing difficulties (Thordardottir and Weismer,
2002; Wetherell et al, 2007). In this work
we include as features (a) the number of fillers,
such as uh, um, er; and (b) the number of disflu-
encies (abandoned words) found in each tran-
script.
5. Perplexities from LMs
As mentioned in Section 3.1 we trained LMs of
order 1, 2, and 3 on POS tags extracted from
TD and LI children. We use the perplexity val-
ues from these models as features. Addition-
ally, differences in perplexity values from LI
and TD LMs for different orders are used as
features.
6. Standard scores
A standard score, known as a z-score, is the dif-
ference between an observation and the mean
relative to the standard deviation. For this fea-
ture group, we first find separate distributions
for the MLU in words, NDW and total num-
ber of utterances for the TD and LI populations.
Then, for each transcript, we compute the stan-
dard scores based on each of these six distribu-
tions. This represents how well the child is per-
forming relative to the TD and LI populations.
Note that a cross validation setup was used to
obtain the distribution for the TD and LI chil-
dren for training. This is also required for the
LM features above.
4 Experiments with Monolingual Children
4.1 The Monolingual English Data Set
Our target population for this work is children with
an age range of 3 to 6 years old. However, currently
we do not have any monolingual data sets readily
available to test our approach in this age range. In
the field of communication disorders data sharing
is not a common practice due to the sensitive con-
tent of the material in the language samples of chil-
dren, and also due to the large amount of effort and
time it takes researchers to collect, transcribe, and
code the data before they can begin their analysis.
To evaluate our approach we used a dataset from
CHILDES (MacWhinney, 2000) that includes nar-
ratives from English-speaking adolescents with and
without LI with ages ranging between 13 and 16
years old. Even though the age range is outside the
range we are interested in, we believe that this data
set can still be helpful in exploring the feasibility of
our approach as a first step.
This data set contains 99 TD adolescents and 19
adolescents who met the LI profile at one point in
the duration of the study. There are transcripts from
each child for two tasks: a story telling and a spon-
taneous personal narrative. The first task is a picture
prompted story telling task using the wordless pic-
ture book, ?Frog, Where Are You?? (Mayer, 1969).
In this story telling task children first look at the
story book ?to develop a story in memory? and then
are asked to narrate the story. This type of elicitation
task encourages the use of past tense constructions,
providing plenty of opportunities for extracting clin-
ical markers. In the spontaneous personal narrative
task, the child is asked to talk about a person who an-
noys him/her the most and describe the most annoy-
ing features of that person. This kind of spontaneous
personal narrative encourages the participant for the
use of third person singular forms (-s). Detailed in-
formation of this data set can be found in (Wetherell
et al, 2007).
We processed the transcripts using the CLAN
toolkit (MacWhinney, 2000). MOR and POST from
CLAN are used for morphological analysis and POS
tagging of the children?s speech. We decided to use
these analyzers since they are customized for chil-
dren?s speech.
49
Story telling Personal narrative
Method P (%) R (%) F1 (%) P (%) R (%) F1 (%)
Baseline 28.57 10.53 15.38 33.33 15.79 21.43
1-gram LMs 41.03 84.21 55.17 34.21 68.42 45.61
2-gram LMs 75.00 47.37 58.06 55.56 26.32 35.71
3-gram LMs 80.00 21.05 33.33 87.50 36.84 51.85
Table 1: Evaluation of language models on the monolingual English data set.
Story telling Personal narrative
Algorithm P (%) R (%) F1 (%) P (%) R (%) F1 (%)
Naive Bayes 38.71 63.16 48.00 34.78 42.11 38.10
Bayesian Network 58.33 73.68 65.12 28.57 42.11 34.04
SVM 76.47 68.42 72.22 47.06 42.11 44.44
ANNs 62.50 52.63 57.14 50.00 47.37 48.65
Boosting 70.59 63.16 66.67 69.23 47.37 56.25
Table 2: Evaluation of machine learning algorithms on the monolingual English data set.
4.2 Results with Monolingual
English-Speaking Children
The performance measures we use are: precision
(P), recall (R), and F-measure (F1). Here the LI cat-
egory is the positive class and the TD category is the
negative class.
Table 1 shows the results of leave-one-out-cross-
validation (LOOCV) obtained from the LM ap-
proach for the story telling and spontaneous personal
narrative tasks. It also shows results from a base-
line method that predicts language status by using
standard scores on measures that have been asso-
ciated with LI in children (Dollaghan, 2004). The
three measures we used for the baseline are: MLU
in words, NDW, and total number of utterances pro-
duced. To compute this baseline we estimate the
mean and standard deviation of these measures us-
ing LOOCV with the TD population as our norma-
tive sample. The baseline predicts that a child has
LI if the child scores more than 1.25 SD below the
mean on at least two out of the three measures.
Although LMs yield different results for the story
telling and personal narrative tasks, they both pro-
vide consistently better results than the baseline. For
the story telling task the best results, in terms of the
F1 measure, are achieved by a bigram LM (F1 =
58.06%) while for the personal narrative the highest
F1 measure (51.85%) is from the trigram LM. If we
consider precision, both tasks have the same increas-
ing pattern when increasing LM orders. However for
recall that is not the case. In the story telling task,
recall decreases at the expense of higher precision,
but for the personal narrative task, the trigram LM
reaches a better trade-off between precision and re-
call, which yields a high F1 measure. We also evalu-
ated 4-gram LMs, but results did not improve, most
likely because we do not have enough data to train
higher order LMs.
The results for different ML algorithms are shown
in Table 2, obtained by using all features described
in Section 3.2. The feature based approach us-
ing ML algorithms outperformed using only LMs
on both tasks. For the story telling task, SVM
with a linear kernel achieves the best results (F1 =
72.22%), while Boosting with Decision Stumps pro-
vides the best performance (F1 = 56.25%) for the
personal narrative task.
4.3 Feature and Error Analysis
The ML results shown above use the entire feature
set described in Subsection 3.2. The next question
we ask is the effectiveness of different features for
this task. The datasets we are using in our evalua-
tion are very small, especially considering the num-
ber of positive instances. This prevents us from hav-
ing a separate subset of the data for parameter tun-
ing or feature selection. Therefore, we performed
additional experiments to evaluate the usefulness of
individual features. Figure 1 shows the F1 measures
50
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
1 2 3 4 5 6
F-m
eas
ure
 (%
)
Features
Story TellingPersonal Narrative
Figure 1: Discriminating power of different groups of
features. The numbers on the x-axis correspond to the
feature groups in Section 3.2.
when using different feature groups. The numbers
on the x-axis correspond to the feature groups de-
scribed in Section 3.2. The F1 measure value for
each of the features is the highest value obtained by
running different ML algorithms for classification.
We noticed that for the story telling task, using
perplexity values from LMs (group 5) as a feature
in the ML setting outperforms the LM threshold ap-
proach by a large margin. It seems that having the
perplexity values as well as the perplexity differ-
ences from all the LMs of different orders in the ML
algorithm provides a better estimation of the target
concept.
Only the standard scores (group 6) yield a higher
F1 measure for the personal narrative task than the
story telling one. The majority of the features (5
out of 6 groups) provide higher F1 measures for the
story telling task, which explains the significantly
better results on this task over the personal narrative
in our learning approach. This is consistent with pre-
vious work contrasting narrative genre stating that
the restrictive setting of a story retell is more reveal-
ing of language difficulties than spontaneous narra-
tives, where the subjects have more control on the
content and style (Wetherell et al, 2007).
We also performed some error analysis for some
of the transcripts that were consistently misidenti-
fied by different ML algorithms. In the story telling
task, we find that some LI transcripts are misclassi-
fied as TD because they (1) have fewer fillers, dis-
fluencies, and degree of support; (2) are similar to
the TD transcripts, which is depicted by the perplex-
ity values for these transcripts; or (3) contain higher
MLU in words as compared to their LI peers. Some
of the reasons for classifying transcripts in the TD
category as LI are shorter MLU in words as com-
pared to other TD peers, large number of fillers, and
excessive repetitions of words and phrases unlike the
other TD children. These factors are consistent with
the effective features that we found from Figure 1.
For the personal narrative task, standard scores
(group 6) and language productivity (group 1) have
an important role in classification, as shown in Fig-
ure 1. The TD transcripts that are misidentified have
lower standard scores and MLU in words than those
of their TD peers.
We believe that another source of noise in the
transcripts comes from the POS tags themselves.
For instance, we found that many verbs in present
tense for third person singular are tagged as plural
nouns, which results in a failure to capture subject-
verb agreement.
Lastly, according to the dataset description, chil-
dren in the LI category met the LI criteria at one
stage in their lifetime and some of these children
also had, or were receiving, some educational sup-
port in the school environment at the time of data
collection. This support for children with LI is
meant to improve their performance on language
related tasks, making the automatic classification
problem more complicated. This also raises the
question about the reference label (TD or LI) for
each child in the data set we used. The details about
which children received interventions are not speci-
fied in the dataset description.
5 Experiments with Bilingual Children
In this section we generalize the approach to a
Spanish-English bilingual population. In adapting
the approach to our bilingual population we face two
challenges: first, what shows to be promising for
a monolingual and highly heterogeneous population
may not be as successful in a bilingual setting where
we expect to have a large variability of exposure to
each language; second, there is a large difference
in the mean age of the monolingual setting and that
of our bilingual one. This age difference will result
in different speech patterns. Younger children pro-
51
duce more ill-formed sentences since they are still
in a language acquisition phase. Lastly, the clini-
cal markers in adolescents are geared towards prob-
lems at the pragmatic and discourse levels, while at
younger ages they focus more on syntax and mor-
phology.
For dealing with the first challenge we are extract-
ing language-specific features and hope that by look-
ing at both languages we can reach a good discrim-
ination performance. For the second challenge, our
feature engineering approach has been focused on
younger children from the beginning. We are aiming
to capture the type of morphosyntactic patterns that
can identify LI in young children. In addition, the
samples in the bilingual population are story retells,
and our feature setting showed to be a good match
for this task. Therefore, we expect our approach to
capture relevant classification patterns, even in the
presence of noisy utterances.
5.1 The Bilingual Data Set
The transcripts for the bilingual LI task come from
an on-going longitudinal study of language impair-
ment in Spanish-English speaking children (Pen?a et
al., 2006a). The children in this study were enrolled
in kindergarten with a mean age of about 70 months.
Of the 59 children, 6 were identified as having a
possible LI by an expert in communication disor-
ders, while 53 were identified as TD. Six of the TD
children were excluded due to missing information,
yielding a total of 47 TD children.
Each child told a series of stories based on Mercer
Mayer?s wordless picture books (Mayer, 1969). Two
stories were told in English and two were told in
Spanish, for a total of four transcripts per child. The
books used for English were ?A Boy, A Dog, and
A Frog? and ?Frog, Where Are You?? The books
used for Spanish retelling were ?Frog on His Own?
and ?Frog Goes to Dinner.? The transcripts for each
separate language were combined, yielding one in-
stance per language for each child.
An interesting aspect of the bilingual data is that
the children mix languages in their narratives. This
phenomenon is called code-switching. At the begin-
ning of a retelling session, the interviewer encour-
ages the child to speak the target language if he/she
is not doing so. Once the child begins speaking the
correct language, any code-switching thereafter is
not corrected by the interviewer. Due to this, the En-
glish transcripts contain Spanish utterances and vice
versa. We believe that words in the non-target lan-
guage help contribute to a more accurate language
development profile. Therefore, in our work we de-
cided to keep these code-switched elements. A com-
bined lexicon approach was used to tag the mixed-
language fragments. If a word does not appear in the
target language lexicon, we apply the POS tag from
the non-target language.
5.2 Spanish-Specific Features
Many structural differences exist between Spanish,
a Romance language, and English, a Germanic lan-
guage. Spanish is morphologically richer than En-
glish. It contains a larger number of different verb
conjugations and it uses a two gender system for
nouns, adjectives, determiners, and participles. A
Spanish-speaking child with LI will have difficulties
with different grammatical elements, such as articles
and clitics, than an English-speaking child (Bedore
and Pen?a, 2008). These differences indicate that the
Spanish feature set will need to be tailored towards
the Spanish language.
To account for Spanish-specific patterns we in-
cluded new POS bigrams as features. To capture
the use of correct and incorrect gender and num-
ber marking morphology, we added noun-adjective,
determiner-noun, and number-noun bigrams to the
list of morphosyntactic features.
5.3 Results on Bilingual Children
Results are shown for the baseline and LM threshold
approach for the bilingual data set in Table 3. The
baseline is computed from the same measures as the
monolingual dataset (MLU in words, NDW, and to-
tal utterances).
Compared to Table 1, the values in Table 3
are generally lower than on the monolingual story
telling task. In this inherently difficult task, the bilin-
gual transcripts are more disfluent than the monolin-
gual ones. This could be due to the age of the chil-
dren or their bilingual status. Recent studies on psy-
cholinguistics and language production have shown
that bilingual speakers have both languages active
at speech production time (Kroll et al, 2008) and
it is possible that this may cause interference, espe-
cially in children still in the phase of language acqui-
52
English Spanish
Method P (%) R (%) F1 (%) P (%) R (%) F1 (%)
Baseline 20.00 16.66 18.18 16.66 16.66 16.66
1-gram LMs 40.00 33.33 36.36 17.64 50.00 26.08
2-gram LMs 50.00 33.33 40.00 33.33 16.66 22.22
3-gram LMs 100.00 33.33 50.00 0.00 0.00 -
Table 3: Evaluation of language models on Bilingual Spanish-English data set.
sition. In addition, the LMs in the monolingual task
were trained using more instances per class, possibly
yielding better results.
There are some different patterns between using
the English and Spanish transcripts. In English,
the unigram models provide the least discriminative
value, and the bigram and trigram models improve
discrimination. We also evaluated higher order n-
grams, but did not obtain any further improvement.
We found that the classification accuracy of the LM
approach was influenced by two children with LI
who were consistently marked as LI due to a greater
perplexity value from the TD LM. A further analysis
shows that these children spoke mostly Spanish on
the ?English? tasks yielding larger perplexities from
the TD LM, which was trained from mostly English.
In contrast, the LI LM was created with transcripts
containing more Spanish than the TD one, and thus
test transcripts with a lot of Spanish do not inflate
perplexity values that much.
For Spanish, unigram LMs provide some discrim-
inative usefulness, and then the bigram performance
decreases while the trigram model provides no dis-
criminative value. One reason for this may be that
the Spanish LMs have a larger vocabulary. In the
Spanish LMs, there are 2/3 more POS tags than in
the English LM. This size difference dramatically
increases the possible bigrams and trigrams, there-
fore increasing the number of parameters to esti-
mate. In addition, we are using an ?off the shelf?
POS tagger (provided by CLAN) and this may add
noise in the feature extraction process. Since we do
not have gold standard annotations for these tran-
scripts, we cannot measure the POS tagging accu-
racy. A rough estimate based on manually revis-
ing one transcript in each language showed a POS
tagging accuracy of 90% for English and 84% for
Spanish. Most of the POS tagger errors involve
verbs, nouns and pronouns. Thus while the accu-
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
1 2 3 4 5 6
F-m
eas
ure
 (%
)
Features
EnglishSpanish
Combined
Figure 2: Discriminating power of different groups of
features for the bilingual population. The numbers on the
x-axis correspond to the feature groups in Section 3.2.
racy might not seem that low, it can still have a ma-
jor impact on our approach since it involves the POS
categories that are more relevant for this task.
Table 4 shows the results from various ML algo-
rithms. In addition to predicting the language status
with the English and Spanish samples separately, we
also combined the English and Spanish transcripts
together for each child, and used all the features
from both languages in order to allow a prediction
based on both samples. The best F1 measure for this
task (60%) is achieved by using the Naive Bayes al-
gorithm with the combined Spanish-English feature
set. This is an improvement over both the separate
English and Spanish trials. The Naive Bayes algo-
rithm provided the best discrimination for the En-
glish (54%) and Combined data sets and Boosting
and SVM provided the best discrimination for the
Spanish set (18%).
5.4 Feature Analysis
Similar to the monolingual dataset, we performed
additional experiments exploring the contribution
of different groups of features. We tested the six
53
English Spanish Combined
Algorithm P (%) R (%) F1 (%) P (%) R (%) F1 (%) P (%) R (%) F1 (%)
ANNs 66.66 33.33 44.44 0.00 0.00 - 100.00 16.66 28.57
SVM 14.28 16.66 15.38 20.00 16.66 18.18 66.66 33.33 44.44
Naive Bayes 60.00 50.00 54.54 0.00 0.00 - 75.00 50.00 60.00
Logistic Regression 25.00 16.66 20.00 - 0.00 - 50.00 33.33 40.00
Boosting 50.00 33.33 40.00 20.00 16.66 18.18 66.66 33.33 44.44
Table 4: Evaluation of machine learning algorithms on the Bilingual Spanish-English data set.
groups of features described in Section 3.2 sepa-
rately. Overall, the combined LM perplexity val-
ues (group 5) provided the best discriminative value
(F1 = 66%). The LM perplexity values performed
the best for English. It even outperformed using all
the features in the ML algorithm, suggesting some
feature selection is needed for this task.
The morpohsyntactic skills (group 2) provided the
best discriminative value for the Spanish language
features, and performed better than the complete
feature set for Spanish. Within group 2, we evalu-
ated different POS bigrams for the Spanish and En-
glish sets and observed that most of the bigram com-
binations by themselves are usually weak predictors
of language status. In the Spanish set, out of all of
the lexical combinations, only the determiner-noun,
noun-verb, and pronoun-verb categories provided
some discriminative value. The determiner-noun
category captured the correct and incorrect gender
marking between the two POS tags. The noun-verb
and pronoun-verb categories covered the correct and
incorrect usage of subject-verb combinations. In-
terestingly enough, the pronoun-verb category per-
formed well by itself, yielding an F1 measure of
54%. There are also some differences in the frequen-
cies of bigram features in the English and Spanish
data sets. For example, there is no noun-auxiliary
POS pattern in Spanish, and the pronoun-auxiliary
bigram appears less frequently in Spanish than in
English because in Spanish the use of personal pro-
nouns is not mandatory since the verb inflection will
disambiguate the subject of the sentence.
The vocabulary knowledge feature (group 3) did
not provide any discriminative value for any of the
language tasks. This may be because bilingual chil-
dren receive less input for each language than a
monolingual child learning one language, or due to
the varied vocabulary acquisition rate in our bilin-
gual population.
6 Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper we present results on the use of LMs
and ML techniques trained on features representing
different aspects of language gathered from spon-
taneous speech samples for the task of assisting
clinicians in determining language status in chil-
dren. First, we evaluate our approach on a monolin-
gual English-speaking population. Next, we show
that this ML approach can be successfully adapted
to a bilingual Spanish-English population. ML al-
gorithms provide greater discriminative power than
only using a threshold approach with LMs.
Our current efforts are devoted to improving pre-
diction accuracy by refining our feature set. We are
working on creating a gold standard corpus of chil-
dren?s transcripts annotated with POS tags. This
data set will help us improve accuracy on our POS-
based features. We are also exploring the use of
socio-demographic features such as the educational
level of parents, the gender of children, and enroll-
ment status on free lunch programs.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NSF grant 0812134,
and by grant 5 UL1 RR024982 from NCRR, a com-
ponent of NIH. We also thank the three NAACL re-
viewers for insightful comments on the submitted
version of this paper.
References
Lisa M. Bedore and Laurence B. Leonard. 2005. Verb
inflections and noun phrase morphology in the sponta-
neous speech of Spanish-speaking children with spe-
cific language impairment. Applied Psycholinguistics,
26(2):195?225.
54
Lisa M. Bedore and Elizabeth D. Pen?a. 2008. Assess-
ment of bilingual children for identification of lan-
guage impairment: Current findings and implications
for practice. International Journal of Bilingual Edu-
cation and Bilingualism, 11(1):1?29.
Nicola Botting. 2002. Narrative as a tool for the assess-
ment of linguistic and pragmatic impairments. Child
Language Teaching and Therapy, 18(1):1?21.
Thomas Campbell, Chris Dollaghan, Herbert Needle-
man, and Janine Janosky. 1997. Reducing bias in lan-
guage assessment: Processing-dependent measures.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research,
40(3):519?525.
Harald Clahsen and Detlef Hansen. 1997. The grammat-
ical agreement deficit in specific language impairment:
Evidence from therapy experiments. In Myrna Gop-
nik, editor, The Inheritance and Innateness of Gram-
mar, chapter 7. Oxford University Press, New York.
Christine A. Dollaghan and Thomas F. Campbell. 1998.
Nonword repetition and child language impairment.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research,
41(5):1136?1146.
Christine A. Dollaghan. 2004. Taxometric analyses of
specific language impairment in 3- and 4-year-old chil-
dren. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Re-
search, 47(2):464?475.
Peggy F. Jacobson and Richard G. Schwartz. 2002.
Morphology in incipient bilingual Spanish-speaking
preschool children with specific language impairment.
Applied Psycholinguistics, 23(1):23?41.
Judith F. Kroll, Chip Gerfen, and Paola E. Dussias. 2008.
Laboratory designs and paradigms: Words, sounds,
sentences. In L. Wei and M. G. Moyer, editors, The
Blackwell Guide to Research Methods in Bilingualism
and Multilingualism, chapter 7. Blackwell Pub.
Laurence B. Leonard, Julia A. Eyer, Lisa M. Bedore,
and Bernard G. Grela. 1997. Three accounts of
the grammatical morpheme difficulties of English-
speaking children with specific language impairment.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research,
40(4):741?753.
Brian MacWhinney. 2000. The CHILDES project: Tools
for analyzing talk. Lawrence Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ.
Mercer Mayer. 1969. Frog, where are you? Dial Press.
Elizabeth D. Pen?a, Lisa M. Bedore, Ronald B. Gillam,
and Thomas Bohman. 2006a. Diagnostic markers
of language impairment in bilingual children. Grant
awarded by the NIDCD, NIH.
Elizabeth D. Pen?a, Tammie J. Spaulding, and Elena
Plante. 2006b. The composition of normative groups
and diagnostic decision making: Shooting ourselves
in the foot. American Journal of Speech-Language
Pathology, 15(3):247?254.
Elena Plante and Rebecca Vance. 1994. Selection
of preschool language tests: A data-based approach.
Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools,
25(1):15?24.
Mar??a Adelaida Restrepo and Vera F. Gutie?rrez-Clellen.
2001. Article use in Spanish-speaking children with
specific language impairment. Journal of Child Lan-
guage, 28(2):433?452.
Mabel L. Rice and Kenneth Wexler. 1996. Toward tense
as a clinical marker of specific language impairment
in English-speaking children. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Research, 39(6):1239?1257.
Brian Roark, Margaret Mitchell, and Kristy Holling-
shead. 2007. Syntactic complexity measures for de-
tecting mild cognitive impairment. In Proceedings of
the Workshop on BioNLP 2007, pages 1?8. ACL.
Carson T. Schu?tze and Kenneth Wexler. 1996. Subject
case licensing and English root infinitives. In Proceed-
ings of the 20th Annual Boston University Conference
on Language Development. Cascadilla Press.
Thamar Solorio and Yang Liu. 2008. Using language
models to identify language impairment in Spanish-
English bilingual children. In Proceedings of the
Workshop on BioNLP 2008, pages 116?117. ACL.
Tammie J. Spaulding, Elena Plante, and Kimberly A.
Farinella. 2006. Eligibility criteria for language im-
pairment: Is the low end of normal always appropri-
ate? Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in
Schools, 37(1):61?72.
Andreas Stolcke. 2002. SRILM ? an extensible lan-
guage modeling toolkit. In Proceedings of the Inter-
national Conference on Spoken Language Processing,
volume 2, pages 901?904.
Elin T. Thordardottir and Susan Ellis Weismer. 2002.
Content mazes and filled pauses on narrative language
samples of children with specific language impair-
ment. Brain and Cognition, 48(2-3):587?592.
J. Bruce Tomblin, Nancy L. Records, Paula Buckwal-
ter, Xuyang Zhang, Elaine Smith, and Marlea O?Brien.
1997. Prevalence of specific language impairment in
kindergarten children. Journal of Speech, Language,
and Hearing Research, 40(6):1245?1260.
Danielle Wetherell, Nicola Botting, and Gina Conti-
Ramsden. 2007. Narrative in adolescent specific
language impairment (SLI): a comparison with peers
across two different narrative genres. International
Journal of Language and Communication Disorders,
42:583?605(23).
Kenneth Wexler. 1994. Optional infinitives. In David
Lightfoot and Norbert Hornstein, editors, Verb Move-
ment. Cambridge University Press.
Ian H. Witten and Eibe Frank. 1999. Data Mining: Prac-
tical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques with
Java Implementations. Morgan Kaufmann.
55
Proceedings of the 2013 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing (BioNLP 2013), pages 89?97,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Exploring word class n-grams to measure
language development in children
Gabriela Ram??rez de la Rosa and Thamar Solorio
University of Alabama at Birmingham
Birmingham, AL 35294, USA
gabyrr,solorio@cis.uab.edu
Manuel Montes-y-Go?mez
INAOE
Sta. Maria Tonantzintla, Puebla, Mexico
mmontesg@ccc.inaoep.mx
Yang Liu
The University of Texas at Dallas
Richardson, TX 75080, USA
yangl@hlt.utdallas.edu
Aquiles Iglesias
Temple University
Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA
iglesias@temple.edu
Lisa Bedore and Elizabeth Pen?a
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712, USA
lbedore,lizp@mail.utexas.edu
Abstract
We present a set of new measures designed
to reveal latent information of language
use in children at the lexico-syntactic
level. We used these metrics to analyze
linguistic patterns in spontaneous narra-
tives from children developing typically
and children identified as having a lan-
guage impairment. We observed signif-
icant differences in the z-scores of both
populations for most of the metrics. These
findings suggest we can use these metrics
to aid in the task of language assessment
in children.
1 Introduction
The analysis of spontaneous language samples is
an important task across a variety of fields. For in-
stance, in language assessment this task can help
to extract information regarding language profi-
ciency (e.g. is the child typically developing or
language impaired). In second language acqui-
sition, language samples can help determine if
a child?s proficiency is similar to that of native
speakers.
In recent years, we have started seeing a grow-
ing interest in the exploration of NLP techniques
for the analysis of language samples in the clinical
setting. For example, Sahakian and Snyder (2012)
propose a set of linguistic measures for age pre-
diction in children that combines three traditional
measures from language assessment with a set of
five data-driven measures from language samples
of 7 children. A common theme in this emerg-
ing line of research is the study of the syntax in
those language samples. For instance, to annotate
data to be used in the study of language develop-
ment (Sagae et al, 2005), or to build models to
map utterances to their meaning, similar to what
children do during the language acquisition stage
(Kwiatkowski et al, 2012). In addition, language
samples are also used for neurological assessment,
as for example in (Roark et al, 2007; Roark et
al., 2011) where they explored features such as
Yngve and Frazier scores, together with features
derived from automated parse trees to model syn-
tactic complexity and surprisal. Similar features
are used in the classification of language samples
to discriminate between children developing typ-
ically and children suffering from autism or lan-
guage impairment (Prud?hommeaux et al, 2011).
In a similar line of research, machine learning and
features inspired by NLP have been explored for
the prediction of language status in bilingual chil-
dren (Gabani et al, 2009; Solorio et al, 2011).
More recent work has looked at the feasibility of
scoring coherence in story narratives (Hassanali et
al., 2012a) and also on the inclusion of coherence
89
as an additional feature to boost prediction accu-
racy of language status (Hassanali et al, 2012b).
The contribution of our work consists on new
metrics based on n-grams of Part of Speech (POS)
tags for assessing language development in chil-
dren that combine information at the lexical and
syntactic levels. These metrics are designed to
capture the lexical variability of specific syntac-
tic constructions and thus could help to describe
the level of language maturity in children. For in-
stance, given two lists of examples of the use of
determiner + noun: ?the dog, the frog, the tree?
and ?this dog, a frog, these trees? we want to be
able to say that the second one has more lexical
variability than the first one for that grammatical
pattern.
Our approach to compute these new metrics
does not require any special treatment on the tran-
scripts or special purpose parsers beyond a POS
tagger. On the contrary, we provide a set of mea-
sures that in addition to being easy to interpret by
practitioners, are also easy to compute.
2 Background and Motivation
To establish language proficiency, clinical re-
searchers and practitioners rely on a variety of
measures, such as number of different words,
type-token ratio, distribution of part-of-speech
tags, and mean length of sentences and words per
minute (Lu, 2012; Yoon and Bhat, 2012; Chen and
Zechner, 2011; Yang, 2011; Miller et al, 2006), to
name a few. Most of these metrics can be cate-
gorized as low-level metrics since they only con-
sider rates of different characteristics at the lexi-
cal level. These measures are helpful in the so-
lution of several problems, for example, building
automatic scoring models to evaluate non-native
speech (Chen and Zechner, 2011). They can also
be used as predictors of the rate of growth of En-
glish acquisition in specific populations, for in-
stance, in typically developing (TD) and language
impaired (LI) bilingual children (Rojas and Igle-
sias, 2012; Gutie?rrez-Clellen et al, 2012). Among
the most widely used metrics are mean length of
utterance (MLU), a measure of syntactic complex-
ity (Bedore et al, 2010), and measures of lexi-
cal productivity, such as the number of different
words (NDW) and the child?s ratio of functional
words to content words (F/C) (Sahakian and Sny-
der, 2012).
MLU, NDW, F/C and some other low-level
measures have demonstrated to be valuable in the
assessment of language ability considering that
practitioners often only need to focus on produc-
tivity, diversity of vocabulary, and sentence or-
ganization. Although useful, these metrics only
provide superficial measures of the children?s lan-
guage skills that fail to capture detailed lexico-
syntactic information. For example, in addition to
knowing that a child is able to use specific verb
forms in the right context, such as, third person
singular present tense or regular past tense, knowl-
edge about what are the most common patterns
used by a child, or how many different lexical
forms for noun + verb are present in the child?s
speech is needed because answering these ques-
tions provides more detailed information about the
status of grammatical development. To fill in this
need, we propose a set of measures that aim to cap-
ture language proficiency as a function of lexical
variability in syntactic patterns. We analyze the
information provided by our proposed metrics on
a set of spontaneous story retells and evaluate em-
pirically their potential use in language status pre-
diction.
3 Proposed measures
To present the different metrics we propose in this
study we begin with the definition of the following
concepts:
A syntactic pattern p is an n-gram of part-of-
speech tags denoted as p = ?t1 t2 ... tn?, where
ti indicates the part-of-speech tag corresponding
to the word at position i. For simplicity we use
tpi to indicate the tag at position i from pattern p.
Two examples of syntactic patterns of length two
are ?DT NN? and ?DT JJ? 1.
A lexical form f is an n-gram of words. It is de-
fined as f = ?w1 w2 ... wn?, where wi is the word
at position i. Similarly to the previous definition,
we use wfi to indicate the word at position i in a
lexical form f .
A lexical form f corresponds to a syntactic
pattern p if and only if |f | is equal to |p| and
?ktag(w
f
k ) = t
p
k, where tag() is a function that re-
turns the part-of-speech of its argument. The set of
lexical forms in a given transcript corresponding to
a syntactic pattern p is denoted by LF p. Two ex-
amples of lexical forms from the syntactic pattern
?DT NN? are ?the cat? and ?the frog?.
1We use the Penn Treebank POS tagset
90
DT the (62), a (17), all (8), no(2), that (1)
NN frog (16), boy(7), dog (6), boat (4), name (3), place (2), house (2), water (2), rabbit (2), noise (2), stick (1), tree
(1), bye(1), floor (1), um (1), baby (1), forest (1), room (1), foot (1), rock (1), squirrel (1), back (1), rabb (1),
card (1), one (1), present (1), dress (1), box (1), family (1)
VBD saw (7), dropped (4), said (4), started (4), looked (3), kicked (3), called (3), found (2), took (2), got (2), jumped
(2), heard (2), thought (1), turned (1), fell (1), waked (1), stood (1), wa (1), touched (1), told (1), scared (1), tur
(1), haded (1), opened (1), shh (1)
DT NN the frog (3), the dog (2), the place (2), the water (2), the boat (2), a noise (2), the forest (1), the rock (1), a tree
(1), a present (1), a um (1), the card (1), the box (1), the rabb (1), the floor (1), the back (1), no one (1)
DT VBD all started (2), all heard (1)
Table 1: Example of 5 syntactic patterns with their lists of lexical forms and the number of repetitions
of each of them. This information corresponds to an excerpt of an example transcript. DT is the part-of-
speech tag for determiner, NN for noun, and VBD for verb in past tense.
The bag-of-words associated to a syntactic pat-
tern p is denoted as W p. This set is composed
of all the words from the lexical forms that corre-
spond to the syntactic pattern p. It is formally de-
fined as follows: W p = {w|w ? f, f ? LF p}.
For example, the bag-of-words of the syntactic
pattern ?DT NN? with lexical forms ?the cat? and
?the frog? is {the, cat, frog}.
Table 1 shows five syntactic patterns of a tran-
script?s fragment. For each syntactic pattern in the
transcript we show the list of its lexical forms and
their frequency. We will use this example in the
description of the measures in the following sub-
sections.
3.1 Number of different lexical forms
(NDLF)
Analogous to the number of different words
(NDW), where words in the transcript are consid-
ered atomic units, we propose a metric where the
atomic units are lexical forms. Then, we measure
the number of different lexical forms used for each
syntactic pattern in the transcript. Formally, given
a syntactic pattern p and its set of lexical forms
LF p, the number of different lexical forms is com-
puted as follows:
NDLF(p) = |LF p| (1)
This measure gives information about the num-
ber of different ways the child can combine words
in order to construct a fragment of a speech that
corresponds to a specific grammatical pattern. Re-
search in language assessment has shown that
when children are in the early acquisition stages
of certain grammatical constructions they will use
the patterns as ?fixed expressions?. As children
master these constructions they are able to use
these grammatical devices in different contexts,
but also with different surface forms. Thereby, we
could use this measure to discriminate the syntac-
tic patterns the child has better command of from
those that might still be problematic and used in-
frequently or with a limited combination of sur-
face forms. For example, from the information
on Table 1 we see that NDLF(DT NN) = 17, and
NDLF(DT VBD) = 2. This seems to indicate that
the child has a better command of the grammatical
construction determiner + noun (DT NN) and can
thus produce more different lexical forms of this
pattern than determiner + verb (DT + VBD). But
also, we may use this measure to identify rare pat-
terns, that are unlikely to be found in a typically
developing population.
3.2 Lexical forms distribution (LFdist)
Following the idea of lexical forms as atomic
units, NDLF allows to know the different lexical
forms present in the transcripts. But we do not
know the distribution of use of each lexical form
for a specific syntactic pattern. In other words,
NDLF tells us the different surface forms observed
for each syntactic pattern, but it does not measure
the frequency of use of each of these lexical forms,
nor whether each of these forms are used at similar
rates. We propose to use LFdist to provide infor-
mation about the distribution of use for LF p, the
set of lexical forms observed for the syntactic pat-
tern p. We believe that uniform distributions can
be indicative of syntactic structures that the child
has mastered, while uneven distributions can re-
veal structures that the child has only memorized
(i.e. the child uses a fixed and small set of lex-
ical forms). To measure this distribution we use
the entropy of each syntactic pattern. In particu-
lar, given a syntactic pattern p and its set of lexical
forms LF p, the lexical form distribution is com-
puted as follows:
91
LFdist(p) = ?
?
fi?LF p
prob(fi) log prob(fi)
(2)
where
prob(fi) =
count(fi)
?
fk?LF p count(fk)
(3)
and count() is a function that returns the fre-
quency of its argument. Larger values of LFdist
indicate a greater difficulty in the prediction of
the lexical form that is being used under a spe-
cific grammatical pattern. For instance, in the ex-
ample of Table 1, LFdist(DT VBD) = 0.91 and
LFdist(DT NN) = 3.97. This indicates that the
distribution in the use of lexical forms for deter-
miner + noun is more uniform than the use of
lexical forms for determiner + verb, which im-
plies that for determiner + verb there are some
lexical forms that are more frequently used than
others2. Syntactic patterns with small values of
LFdist could flag grammatical constructions the
child does not feel comfortable manipulating and
thus might still be in the acquisition stage of lan-
guage learning.
3.3 Lexical variation (LEX)
Until now we are considering lexical forms as
atomic units. This could lead to overestimating
the real lexical richness in the sample, in particu-
lar for syntactic patterns of length greater than 1.
To illustrate this consider the syntactic pattern p =
?DT NN? and suppose we have the following set
of lexical forms for p = {?the frog?, ?a frog?, ?a
dog?, ?the dog?}. The value for NDLF (p) = 4.
But how many of these eight words are in fact dif-
ferent? That is the type of distinction we want to
make with the next proposed measure: LEX, that
is also an adaptation of type-token ratio (Lu, 2012)
used in the area of communication disorders but
computed over each grammatical pattern. For this
example, we want to be able to find that the lex-
ical variation of ?DT NN? is 0.5 (because there
are only four different words out of eight). For-
mally, given a syntactic pattern p, its set of lexical
forms LF p, and the bag-of-words W p, the lexical
variation is defined as shown in Equation 4.
2We recognize that this is an oversimplification of the en-
tropy measure since the number of outcomes will most likely
be different for each syntactic pattern.
LEX(p) =
|W p|
|LF p| ? n
(4)
Note that |LF p| = NDLF(p), and n is the
length of the syntactic pattern p. In Table 1 the lex-
ical variation of the pattern ?determiner + noun?
(DT+NN) is equal to 0.58 ( 2017?2 ), and for deter-
miner + verb (DT+VBD) is equal to 0.75 ( 32?2 ).
That means 58% of total words used under the pat-
tern ?DT+NN? are different, in comparison with
the 75% for ?DT+VBD?. In general, the closer the
value of LEX is to 1, there is less overlap between
the words in the lexical forms for that pattern.
Our hypothesis behind this measure is that for the
same syntactic pattern TD children may have less
overlap of words than children with LI, e.g. less
overlap indicates the use of a more diverse set of
words.
3.4 Lexical use of syntactic knowledge
(LexSyn)
With LEX we hope to accomplish the character-
ization of lexical richness of syntactic patterns
assuming that each part-of-speech has a similar
number of possible lexical forms. We assume as
well that less overlap in the words used for the
same grammatical pattern represents a more devel-
oped language than that with more overlap. How-
ever the definition of LEX overlooks a well known
fact about language: different word classes have
a different range of possibilities as their lexical
forms. Consider open class items, such as nouns
and verbs, where the lexicon is large and keeps
growing. In contrast, closed class items, such as
prepositions and determiners are fixed and have a
very small number of lexical forms. Therefore it
seems unfair to assign equal weight to the overlap
of words for these different classes. To account
for this phenomenon, we propose a new measure
that includes the information about the syntactic
knowledge that the child shows for each part of
speech. That is, we weigh the level of overlap
for specific grammatical constructions according
to the lexicon for the specific word classes in-
volved. Since we limit our analysis to the language
sample at hand, we define the ceiling of the lexi-
cal richness of a specific word class to be the to-
tal number of different surface forms found in the
transcript. In particular, given a syntactic pattern
p = ?t1 t2 ... tn?, with its set of lexical forms
LF p, the lexical use of syntactic knowledge is de-
fined as:
92
LexSyn(p) =
1
n
n?
i=1
|wfi |f ? LF
p|
NDLF(tpi )
(5)
where the numerator is the size of the set of
words in the i-th position in all the lexical forms.
Note that this measure does not make sense for
syntactic patterns of length < 2. Instead, syn-
tactic patterns of length 1 were used to identify
the syntactic knowledge of the child by using the
NDLF of each POS in p. In the example of Ta-
ble 1, LexSyn(DT NN) = 0.59. This value corre-
sponds to the sum of the number of different de-
terminers used in position 1 for LF p divided by
the total number of different determiners that this
child produced in the sample (for this case, the
number of determiners that this child produced is
given by NDLF(DT), that is 5), plus the number
of different nouns used under this syntactic pat-
tern over the total number of nouns produced by
the child (NDLF(NN)=29). The complete calcula-
tion of LexSyn(DT NN) = 12 ?(
3
5+
17
29) = 0.59.
This contrasts with the value of LexSyn for the pat-
tern ?determiner + verb?, LexSyn(DT VBD) =
1
2 ? (
1
5 +
2
25) = 0.14 that seems to indicate that the
child has more experience combining determiners
and nouns than determiners and verbs. Perhaps
this child has had limited exposure to other pat-
terns combining determiner and verb, or this pat-
tern is at a less mature stage in the linguistic reper-
toire of the child.
Children with LI tend to exhibit a less devel-
oped command of syntax than their TD cohorts.
Syntactic patterns with large values of LexSyn
show a high versatility in the use of those syntactic
patterns. However, since the syntactic reference is
taken from the same child, this versatility is rela-
tive only to what is observed in that single tran-
script. For instance, suppose that the total num-
ber of different determiners observed in the child?s
transcript is 1. Then any time the child uses that
determiner in a syntactic pattern, the knowledge of
this class, according to our metric, will be 100%,
which is correct, but this might not be enough to
determine if the syntactic knowledge of the child
for this grammatical class corresponds to age ex-
pectations for a typically developing child. In or-
der to improve the measurement of the lexical use
of syntactic knowledge we propose the measure
LexSynEx, that instead of using the information
of the same child to define the coverage of use for
a specific word class, it uses the information ob-
served for a held out set of transcripts from TD
children. This variation allows the option of mov-
ing the point of reference to a specific cohort, ac-
cording to what is needed.
4 Data set
The data used in this research is part of an ongoing
study of language impairment in Spanish-English
speaking children (Pen?a et al, 2003). From this
study we used a set of 175 children with a mean
age of about 70 months. Language status of these
children was determined via expert judgment by
three bilingual certified speech-language pathol-
ogists. At the end of the data collection period,
the experts reviewed child records in both lan-
guages including language samples, tests proto-
cols, and parent and teacher questionnaire data.
They made independent judgments about chil-
dren?s lexical, morphosyntactic, and narrative per-
formance in each language. Finally, they made an
overall judgment about children?s language abil-
ity using a 6 point scale (severely language im-
paired to above normal impairment). If at least two
examiners rated children?s language ability with
mild, moderate or severe impairment they were as-
signed to the LI group. Percent agreement among
the three examiners was 90%. As a result of this
process, 20 children were identified by the clinical
researchers as having LI, while the remaining 155
were identified as typically developing (TD).
The transcripts were gathered following stan-
dard procedures for collection of spontaneous lan-
guage samples in the field of communication dis-
orders. Using a wordless picture book, the chil-
dren were asked to narrate the story. The two
books used were ?A boy, a dog, and a frog? (Mayer,
1967) and ?Frog, where are you?? (Mayer, 1969).
For each child in the sample, 4 transcripts of story
narratives were collected, 2 in each language. In
this study we use only the transcripts where En-
glish was the target language.
5 Procedure
The purpose of the following analysis is to inves-
tigate the different aspects in the child?s language
that can be revealed by the proposed metrics. All
our measures are based on POS tags. We used the
Charniak parser (Charniak, 2000) to generate the
POS tags of the transcripts. For all the results re-
ported here we removed the utterances from the
interrogators and use all utterances by the chil-
93
dren. From the 155 TD instances, we randomly se-
lected 20, that together with the 20 instances with
LI form the test set. The remaining 135 TD in-
stances were used as the normative population, our
training set.
After the POS tagging process, we extracted the
set of syntactic patterns with length equal to 1, 2, 3
and 4 that appear in at least 80% of the transcripts
in the training set. The 80% threshold was chosen
with the goal of preserving the content that is most
likely to represent the TD population.
6 Analysis of the proposed measures and
implications
Figure 1 shows 5 plots corresponding to each of
our proposed measures. Each graph shows a com-
parison between the average values of the TD and
the LI populations. The x-axis in the graphs rep-
resents all the syntactic patterns gathered from the
training set that appeared on the test data, and the
y-axis represents the difference in the z-score val-
ues of each measure from the test set. The x-axis
is sorted in descending order according to the z-
score differences between values of TD and LI.
The most relevant discovery is that NDFL,
LFdist, LexSyn and LexSynEx show a wider gap
in the z-scores between the TD and LI popula-
tions for most of the syntactic patterns analyzed.
This difference is easy to note visually as most of
the TD patterns tend to have larger values, while
the ones for children with LI have lower scores.
Therefore, it seems our measures are indeed cap-
turing relevant information that characterizes the
language of the TD population.
Analyzing LEX from Figure 1, we see that most
of the LEX values are positive, for both TD and
LI instances, and we cannot observe marked dif-
ferences between them. That might be a con-
sequence of assuming all word classes can have
an equivalent number of different lexical forms.
Once we weigh each POS tag in the pattern by the
word forms the child has used (as in LexSyn and
LexSynEx), noticeable differences across the two
groups emerge. When we include syntactic knowl-
edge of a group of children (as in LexSynEx), those
similarities disappear. This behavior highlights the
need for a combined lexico-syntactic measure that
can describe latent information about language us-
age in children.
For building an intervention plan that helps to
improve child language skills, practitioners could
LFdist
verb (3rd person singular present)
verb (past tense) + personal pronoun
personal pronoun + auxiliary verb + adverb
verb (gerund)
NDLF
there + auxiliary verb
personal pronoun + auxiliary verb + adverb
adjective + noun
verb (3rd person singular present)
LexSyn
verb (past tense) + personal pronoun
personal pronoun + verb (past tense) + personal pronoun
personal pronoun + auxiliary verb + adverb
there + auxiliary verb
LexSynEx
personal pronoun + auxiliary verb + adverb
personal pronoun + verb (past tense) + personal pronoun
verb (past tense) + personal pronoun
there + auxiliary verb
Table 2: List of syntactic patterns with the biggest
difference between LI and TD in 4 measures:
LFdist, NDLF, and LexSyn and LexSynEx.
use the knowledge of specific grammatical con-
structions that need to be emphasized ?those that
seem to be problematic for the LI group. These
structures can be identified by pulling the syntac-
tic patterns with the largest difference in z-scores
from the TD population. Table 2 shows a list of
syntactic patterns with small values for LI and the
largest differences between LI and TD instances
in the test set. As the table indicates, most of the
syntactic patterns have length greater than 1. This
is not surprising since we aimed for developing
measures of higher-order analysis that can com-
plement the level of information provided by com-
monly used metrics in language assessment (as in
the case of MLU, NDW or F/C). The table also
shows that while each measure identifies a differ-
ent subset of syntactic patterns as relevant, some
syntactic patterns emerge in all the metrics. For
instance, personal pronoun + auxiliary verb + ad-
verb and there + auxiliary verb. This repetition
highlights the importance of those grammatical
constructions. But the differences also show that
the metrics complement each other. In general,
the syntactic patterns in the list represent complex
grammatical constructions where children with LI
are showing a less advanced command of language
use.
Table 3 shows some statistics about the lexical
forms present under pronoun + verb (3rd person
singular present) + verb (gerund or present par-
ticiple) (PP VBZ VBG) in all our data set. The last
94
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 1.2
z-s
cor
e
Syntactic patterns
Difference (TD-LI)
(a) NDLF
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 1.2
z-s
cor
e
Syntactic patterns
Difference (TD-LI)
(b) LFdist
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 1.2
z-s
cor
e
Syntactic patterns
Difference (TD-LI)
(c) LEX
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 1.2
z-s
cor
e
Syntactic patterns
Difference (TD-LI)
(d) LexSyn
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 1.2
z-s
cor
e
Syntactic patterns
Difference (TD-LI)
(e) LexSynEx
Figure 1: Performance comparison of the proposed measures for the TD and LI groups. Each data point
represents the difference in z-scores between the average values of the TD and LI instances in the test
set.
row in that table presents an example of the lexi-
cal forms used by two children. Note that for the
child with LI, there is only one lexical form: he is
touching. On the other hand, the TD child is using
the grammatical pattern with six different surface
forms. Clinical practitioners can take this infor-
mation and design language tasks that emphasize
the use of ?PP VBZ VBG? constructions.
6.1 Analysis of correlations among measures
To analyze the level of overlap between our mea-
sures we computed correlation coefficients among
them. The results are shown in Table 4.
The results from the correlation analysis are not
that surprising. They show that closely related
measures are highly to moderately correlated. For
instance, LEX and eLEX have a correlation of
TD LI
number of PP 6 5
number of VBZ 3 2
number of VBG 7 4
Example (instances: she is putting he is touching
td-0156 and li-3022) she is going
he is pushing
she is looking
she is carrying
she is playing
Table 3: Statistics of the surface forms for the
grammatical pattern PP VBZ VBG.
0.69, and LexSynEx and LexSyn have a correla-
tion of 0.61. NDLF and LFdist showed a posi-
tive correlation score of 0.81. This high correla-
tion hints to the fact that as the number of lexical
forms increases, so does the gap between their fre-
95
LFdist NDLF LEX eLEX LexSyn LexSynEx
LFdist 1.00
NDLF 0.81 1.00
LEX -0.53 -0.31 1.00
eLEX -0.54 -0.43 0.69 1.00
LexSyn 0.07 0.02 -0.23 -0.10 1.00
LexSynEx -0.02 -0.03 -0.08 -0.03 0.61 1.00
Table 4: Correlation matrix for the proposed metrics.
quency of use. While this may be a common phe-
nomenon of language use, it does not have a neg-
ative effect since the same effect will be observed
in both groups of children and we care to see the
differences in performance between a TD and an
LI population.
For all other pairs of measures, the correlation
scores were in the range of [?0.5, 0.1]. It was in-
teresting to note that LexSyn showed the lowest
correlation with the rest of the measures (between
[?0.11, 0.01]).
Correlation coefficients between our metrics
and MLU, NDW, and F/C were computed sepa-
rately for syntactic patterns of different lengths.
However all the different matrices showed the
same correlation patterns. We found a high cor-
relation between MLU and NDW, but low cor-
relation with all our proposed measures, except
for one case: NDW and LexSyn seemed to be
highly correlated (?-0.7). Interestingly, we noted
that despite the high correlation between MLU and
NDW, MLU and LexSyn showed weak correlation
(?-0.4). Overall, the findings from this analysis
support the use of our metrics as complimentary
measures for child language assessment.
7 Conclusions and future work
We proposed a set of new measures that were de-
veloped to characterize the lexico-syntactic vari-
ability of child language. Each measure aims to
find information that is not captured by traditional
measures used in communication disorders.
Our study is still preliminary in nature and re-
quires an in depth evaluation and analysis with a
larger pool of subjects. However the results pre-
sented are encouraging. The set of experiments
we discussed showed that TD and LI children have
significant differences in performance according
to our metrics and thus these metrics can be used to
enrich models of language trajectories in child lan-
guage acquisition. Another potential use of met-
rics similar to those proposed here is the design of
targeted intervention practices.
The scripts to compute the metrics as described
in this paper are available to the research commu-
nity by contacting the authors. However, the sim-
plicity of the metrics makes it easy for anyone to
implement, and it certainly makes it easy for clin-
ical researchers to interpret.
Our proposed metrics are a contribution to the
set of already known metrics for language assess-
ment. The goal of these new metrics is not to
replace existing ones, but to complement what is
already available with concise information about
higher-order syntactic constructions in the reper-
toire of TD children.
We are interested in evaluating the use of our
metrics in a longitudinal study. We believe they
are a promising framework to represent language
acquisition trajectories.
Acknowledgments
This research was partially funded by NSF under
awards 1018124 and 1017190. The first author
also received partial funding from CONACyT.
References
Lisa M. Bedore, Elizabeth D. Pen?a, Ronald B. Gillam,
and Tsung-Han Ho. 2010. Language sample mea-
sures and language ability in Spanish-English bilin-
gual kindergarteners. Journal of Communication
Disorders, 43:498?510.
Eugene Charniak. 2000. A maximum-entropy-
inspired parser. In Proceedings of the 1st North
American chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics conference, NAACL 2000, pages
132?139, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Miao Chen and Klaus Zechner. 2011. Computing
and evaluating syntactic complexity features for au-
tomated scoring of spontaneous non-native speech.
In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies - Volume 1, HLT ?11, pages
722?731, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
96
Keyur Gabani, Melissa Sherman, Thamar Solorio,
Yang Liu, Lisa M. Bedore, and Elizabeth D. Pen?a.
2009. A corpus-based approach for the prediction
of language impairment in monolingual English and
Spanish-English bilingual children. In Proceedings
of Human Language Technologies: The 2009 An-
nual Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
NAACL ?09, pages 46?55, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
V. Gutie?rrez-Clellen, G. Simon-Cereijido, and
M. Sweet. 2012. Predictors of second language
acquisition in Latino children with specific language
impairment. American Journal of Speech Language
Pathology, 21(1):64?77.
Khairun-nisa Hassanali, Yang Liu, and Thamar
Solorio. 2012a. Coherence in child language narra-
tives: A case study of annotation and automatic pre-
diction of coherence. In Proceedings of 3rd Work-
shop on Child, Computer and Interaction (WOCCI
2012).
Khairun-nisa Hassanali, Yang Liu, and Thamar
Solorio. 2012b. Evaluating NLP features for auto-
matic prediction of language impairment using child
speech transcripts. In Interspeech.
Tom Kwiatkowski, Sharon Goldwater, Luke Zettel-
moyer, and Mark Steedman. 2012. A probabilis-
tic model of syntactic and semantic acquisition from
child-directed utterances and their meanings. In
Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 234?244, Avignon, France. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Xiaofei Lu. 2012. The relationship of lexical richness
to the quality of ESL learners? oral narratives. The
Modern Language Journal, 96(2):190?208.
Mercer Mayer. 1967. A boy, a dog, and a frog. Dial
Press.
Mercer Mayer. 1969. Frog, where are you? Dial
Press.
Jon F. Miller, John Heilmann, Ann Nockerts, Aquiles
Iglesias, Leah Fabiano, and David J. Francis. 2006.
Oral language and reading in bilingual children.
Learning Disabilities Research and Practice, 21:30?
43.
Elizabeth D. Pen?a, Lisa M. Bedore, Ronald B. Gillam,
and Thomas Bohman. 2003. Diagnostic markers
of language impairment in bilingual children. Grant
awarded by the NIDCH, NIH.
Emily T. Prud?hommeaux, Brian Roark, Lois M.
Black, and Jan van Santen. 2011. Classification of
atypical language in autism. In Proceedings of the
2nd Workshop on Cognitive Modeling and Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 88?96, Portland, Oregon,
USA, June. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Brian Roark, Margaret Mitchell, and Kristy Holling-
shead. 2007. Syntactic complexity measures for
detecting mild cognitive impairment. In Biologi-
cal, translational, and clinical language processing,
pages 1?8, Prague, Czech Republic, June. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Brian Roark, Margaret Mitchell, John-Paul Hosom,
Kristy Hollingshead, and Jeffrey Kaye. 2011. Spo-
ken language derived measures for detecting mild
cognitive impairment. IEEE Transcations on Au-
dio, Speech, and Language Processing, 19(7):2081?
2090, September.
Rau?l Rojas and Aquiles Iglesias. 2012. The language
growth of Spanish-speaking English language learn-
ers. Child Development.
Kenji Sagae, Alon Lavie, and Brian MacWhinney.
2005. Automatic measurement of syntactic devel-
opment in child language. In Proceedings of the
43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, ACL ?05, pages 197?204,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Sam Sahakian and Benjamin Snyder. 2012. Automat-
ically learning measures of child language develop-
ment. In ACL, pages 95?99. The Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Thamar Solorio, Melissa Sherman, Y. Liu, Lisa
Bedore, Elizabeth Pen?a, and A. Iglesias. 2011. An-
alyzing language samples of Spanish-English bilin-
gual children for the automated prediction of lan-
guage dominance. Natural Language Engineering,
pages 367?395.
Charles Yang. 2011. A statistical test for grammar.
In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Cognitive
Modeling and Computational Linguistics, pages 30?
38, Portland, Oregon, USA, June. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Su-Youn Yoon and Suma Bhat. 2012. Assessment of
ESL learners? syntactic competence based on sim-
ilarity measures. In EMNLP-CoNLL, pages 600?
608. Association for Computational Linguistics.
97
