Proceedings of SIGDIAL 2009: the 10th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group in Discourse and Dialogue, page 29,
Queen Mary University of London, September 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Invited Talk
What?s Unique About Dialogue?
Hand gestures, figurative language, facial displays,
and direct quotation
Janet Beavin Bavelas
Department of Psychology, University of Victoria, Victoria, B.C., Canada
web.uvic.ca/psyc/bavelas
bavelas@uvic.ca
Face-to-face dialogue is the basic site of language use. Our group?s program of research
focuses on unique features of face-to-face dialogue, especially the ways in which participants
collaborate moment-by-moment (e.g. Bavelas et al, 1995; Bavelas and Chovil, 1997; Bavelas
et al, 2000, 2002). Current experiments are showing that the availability of collaborative processes
in dialogue significantly affects whether speakers use the modality that Peirce called iconic and
Clark and Gerrig (1990) called demonstration. Demonstrations resemble their referents, creating
an image for the addressee; for example, hand gestures, facial displays, direct quotation, and
figurative language are all demonstrations. We have shown the effect of dialogue on these four
kinds of demonstration by using an experimental design with three conditions: a face-to-face
dialogue; a dialogue on the telephone; and a monologue to a tape recorder. The first experiment on
gesture (Bavelas et al, 2008) showed an independent effect of dialogue, over and above the effect
of visibility. The rate of hand gestures was higher in dialogue than in monologue, that is, both the
face-to-face and the telephone dialogues had significantly higher rates of gesturing than for the
same task in a monologue. Figurative language also showed a dialogue effect; for example, the
rate of figurative language was significantly higher in a telephone dialogue than a monologue to a
tape recorder. We have subsequently replicated these two effects in a different data set. The second
experiment with the same design examined the effects of dialogue on conversational facial displays
and direct quotations. Again, the dialogues produced significantly higher rates of these forms of
demonstration, while the monologues consisted almost entirely of conventional verbal description.
We propose that monologue suppresses both verbal and nonverbal forms of demonstration because
demonstrations require an addressee. Current research is investigating which particular feature of
speaker-addressee interaction is essential to the use of demonstrations.
References
J. B. Bavelas and N. Chovil. 1997. Faces in dialogue. In J. A. Russell and J. M. Fernandez-Dols, editors,
The psychology of facial expression, pages 334?346. Cambridge University Press.
J. B. Bavelas, N. Chovil, L. Coates, and L. Roe. 1995. Gestures specialized for dialogue. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 21:394?405.
J. B. Bavelas, L. Coates, and T. Johnson. 2000. Listeners as co-narrators. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 79:941?952.
J. B. Bavelas, L. Coates, and T. Johnson. 2002. Listener responses as a collaborative process: The role of
gaze. Journal of Communication, 52:566?580.
J. B. Bavelas, J. Gerwing, C. Sutton, and D. Prevost. 2008. Gesturing on the telephone: Independent effects
of dialogue and visibility. Journal of Memory and Language, 58:495?520.
H. H. Clark and R. J. Gerrig. 1990. Quotations as demonstrations. Language, 66:764?805.
29
