Proceedings of the Third Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 10?18,
Suntec, Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Complex Linguistic Annotation ? No Easy Way Out!  A Case from Bangla and Hindi POS Labeling Tasks  Sandipan Dandapat1         Priyanka Biswas1       Monojit Choudhury  Kalika Bali Dublin City University       LDCIL         Microsoft Research Labs India Ireland                   CIIL-Mysore, India               Bangalore, India E-mail:  sdandapat@computing.dcu.ie, biswas.priyanka@gmail.com, monojitc@microsoft.com, kalikab@microsoft.com   Abstract 
Alternative paths to linguistic annotation, such as those utilizing games or exploiting the web users, are becoming popular in recent times owing to their very high benefit-to-cost ratios. In this paper, however, we report a case study on POS annotation for Bangla and Hindi, where we observe that reliable linguis-tic annotation requires not only expert anno-tators, but also a great deal of supervision. For our hierarchical POS annotation scheme, we find that close supervision and training is necessary at every level of the hierarchy, or equivalently, complexity of the tagset. Never-theless, an intelligent annotation tool can sig-nificantly accelerate the annotation process and increase the inter-annotator agreement for both expert and non-expert annotators. These findings lead us to believe that reliable annotation requiring deep linguistic knowl-edge (e.g., POS, chunking, Treebank, seman-tic role labeling) requires expertise and su-pervision. The focus, therefore, should be on design and development of appropriate anno-tation tools equipped with machine learning based predictive modules that can signifi-cantly boost the productivity of the annota-tors.1  1 Introduction Access to reliable annotated data is the first hur-dle encountered in most NLP tasks be it at the level of Parts-of-Speech (POS) tagging or a more complex discourse level annotation. The per-formance of the machine learning approaches which have become de rigueur for most NLP tasks are dependent on accurately annotated large datasets. Creation of such databases is, hence, a highly resource intensive task both in terms of time and expertise.                                                  1 This work has been done during the authors? internship at Microsoft Research Lab India. 
While the cost of an annotation task can be characterized by the number of man-hours and the level of expertise required, the productivity or the benefit can be measured in terms of the reliability and usability of the end-product, i.e., the annotated dataset. It is thus no surprise that considerable effort has gone into developing techniques and tools that can effectively boost the benefit-to-cost ratio of the annotation proc-ess. These include, but are not limited to: (a) exploiting the reach of the web to reduce the effort required for annotation (see, e.g., Snow et al (2008) and references therein) (b) smartly designed User Interfaces for aiding the annotators (see, e.g., Eryigit (2007); Koutsis et al (2007); Reidsma et al (2004)) (c) using supervised learning to bootstrap a small annotated dataset to automatically la-bel a larger corpus and getting it corrected by human annotators (see, e.g., Tomanek et al (2007); Wu et al (2007)) (d) Active Learning (Ringger et al 2007) where only those data-points which are directly re-levant for training are presented for manual annotation. Methods exploiting the web-users for linguis-tic annotation are particularly popular these days, presumably because of the success of the ESP-Game (von Ahn and Dabbish, 2004) and its suc-cessors in image annotation. A more recent study by (Snow et al, 2008) shows that annotated data obtained from non-expert anonymous web-users is as good as those obtained from experts. How-ever, unlike the game model, here the task is dis-tributed among non-experts through an Internet portal such as Amazon Mechanical Turk, and the users are paid for their annotations.  This might lead to an impression that the ex-pert knowledge is dispensable for NLP annota-tion tasks. However, while these approaches may work for more simple tasks like those described in (Snow et al, 2008), most NLP related annota-tion tasks such as POS tagging, chunking, se-mantic role labeling, Treebank annotation and 
10
discourse level tagging, require expertise in the relevant linguistic area. In this work, we present a case study of POS annotation in Bangla and Hindi using a hierarchical tagset, where we ob-serve that reliable linguistic annotation requires not only expert annotators, but also a great deal of supervision. A generic user interface for facili-tating the task of hierarchical word level linguis-tic annotation was designed and experiments conducted to measure the inter-annotator agreement (IA) and annotation time. It is ob-served that the tool can significantly accelerate the annotation process and increase the IA. The productivity of the annotation process is further enhanced through bootstrapping, whereby a little amount of manually annotated data is used to train an automatic POS tagger. The annotators are then asked to edit the data already tagged by the automatic tagger using an appropriate user interface.      However, the most significant observation to emerge from these experiments is that irrespec-tive of the complexity of the annotation task (see Sec. 2 for definition), language, design of the user interface and the accuracy of the automatic POS tagger used during bootstrapping, the pro-ductivity and reliability of the expert annotators working under close supervision of the dataset designer is higher than that of non-experts or those working without expert-supervision. This leads us to believe that among the four aforemen-tioned approaches for improving the benefit-to-cost ratio of the annotation tasks, solution (a) does not seem to be the right choice for involved linguistic annotations; rather, approaches (b), (c) and (d) show more promise. The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides a brief introduction to IL-POST ? a hi-erarchical POS Tag framework for Indian Lan-guages which is used for defining the specific annotation tasks used for the experiments. The design and features of the data annotation tool are described in Section 3. Section 4 presents the experiments conducted for POS labeling task of Bangla and Hindi while the results of these ex-periments are discussed in Section 5. The con-clusions are presented in Section 6. 2 IL-POST IL-POST is a POS-tagset framework for Indian Languages, which has been designed to cover the morphosyntactic details of Indian Languages (Baskaran et al 2008).  It  supports  a  three-level 
 Figure 1: A schematic of IL-POST framework  hierarchy of Categories, Types  and  Attributes that provides a systematic method to annotate language specific categories without disregarding the shared traits of the Indian languages. This allows the framework to offer flexibility, cross-linguistic compatibility and reusability across several languages and applications. An important consequence of its hierarchical structure and decomposable tags is that it allows users to spec-ify the morpho-syntactic information applicable at the desired granularity according to the spe-cific language and task. The complete framework supports 11 categories at the top level with 32 types at the second level to represent the main POS categories and their sub-types. Further, 18 morphological attributes or features are associ-ated with the types. The framework can thus, be used to derive a flat tagset of only 11 categories or a complex three level tagset of several thou-sand tags depending on the language and/or ap-plication. Figure 1 shows a schematic of the IL-POST framework. The current framework has been used to derive maximally specified tagsets for Bangla and Hindi (see Baskaran et al (2008) for the descriptions of the tagsets), which have been used to design the experiments presented in this paper. 3 Annotation Tool  Though a number of POS annotation tools are available none are readily suitable for hierarchi-cal tagging. The tools from other domains (like discourse annotation, for example) that use hier-archical tagsets require considerable customiza-tion for the task described here. Thus, in order to facilitate the task of word-level linguistic annota-tion for complex tagsets we developed a generic annotation tool. The annotation tool can be cus-tomized to work for any tagset that has up to 
11
 Figure 2: The basic Interface Window and Controls. See the text for details.  three levels of hierarchy and for any word level linguistic annotation task, such as Named Entity annotation and Chunk boundary labeling. In this section we describe the design of the user inter-face and other features of the annotation tool. 3.1 Interface Design Principles The annotation scheme followed for linguistic data creation is heavily dependent on the end-application the data will cater to. Moreover, an-notations are often performed by trained linguists who, in the Indian context, are either novice or intermittent users of computer. These observa-tions led us to adopt the following principles: (1) customizability of the interface to any word level annotation task; (2) mouse driven selection of tags for faster and less erroneous annotation; and (3) display of all possible choices at every stage of the task to reduce memorization overload.   3.2 Basic Interface Figure 2 depicts the basic interface of the annota-tion tool 3.2.1 Automatic Handling Apart from the surface controls, the interface also supports automatic selection facility that highlights the next unlabeled word that needs to be annotated. After loading the task (i.e., a sen-tence) it automatically highlights the first unla-beled word. Once a tag is assigned to the high-lighted word, the next unlabeled word is auto-matically selected. However, the automatic se-lection module can be stopped by selecting a par-ticular word through a mouse click. 3.2.2 Handling Hierarchical Annotation The first two levels of the IL-POST hierarchy are displayed (on a right mouse click) as a two level 
context menu. This is illustrated in Fig. 3(a). On selection of the category and type by left clicks, a window is dynamically generated for the as-signment of the attribute values, i.e., the third level of the hierarchy. A drop down box is asso-ciated with each attribute for selecting the appro-priate values. This is shown in Fig. 3(b). The default values for each of the attributes are set based on the frequency of occurrence of the val-ues in a general corpus. This further reduces the time of tag assignment. When the user clicks ?OK? on the attribute assignment window, the system automatically generates the tag as per the user?s selection and displays it in the Text-box just after the selected word.  3.3 Edit Mode Annotation While performing the annotation task, human annotators need to label every word of a sen-tence. Instead of annotating every word from scratch, we incorporate machine intelligence to automatically label every word in a sentence. Suppose that we have an automatic POS tag pre-diction module that does a fairly accurate job. In that case, the task of annotation would mean ed-iting the pre-assigned tags to the words. We hy-pothesize that such an editing based annotation task that incorporates some intelligence in the form of a tagger will be much faster than purely manual annotation, provided that the pre-assigned tags are ?sufficiently accurate?. Thus, human annotators only need to edit a particular word whenever machine assigns an incorrect tag making the process faster. We also make certain changes to the basic interface for facilitating easy editing.  In particular, when the corpus is loaded using the interface, the predicted tags are shown for each word and the first category-type is high-lighted automatically. The user can navigate 
12
                                                       (a)                                 (b)  Figure 3: Annotation at a) Category-Type level, b) Attribute level  to the next or pervious editable positions (Cate-gory-Type or Attributes) by using the Shift and the Ctrl keys respectively. The user may edit a particular pre-assigned tag by making a right mouse click and choosing from the usual context menus or attribute editing window.  The user also has the provision to choose an editable loca-tion by left mouse-click. 3.3.1 Automatic POS Tagger We developed a statistical POS tagger based on Cyclic Dependency Network (Toutanova et al, 2003) as an initial annotator for the Edit mode annotation. The tagger was trained for Bangla and Hindi on the data that was created during the first phase of annotation (i.e. annotation from scratch). We developed taggers for both Cate-gory+Type level (CT) and Category+Type+ At-tribute level (CTA). We also developed two ver-sions of the same tagger with high and low accu-racies for each level of the annotation by control-ling the amount of training data.  As we shall see in Sec. 4 and 5, the different versions of the tag-ger at various levels of the hierarchy and accu-racy will help us to understand the relation be-tween the Edit mode annotation, and the com-plexity of the tagset and the accuracy of the tag-ger used for initial annotation. The taggers were trained on 1457 sentences (approximately 20,000 words) for Bangla and 2366 sentences (approxi-mately 45,000 words) for Hindi. The taggers were tested on 256 sentences (~ 3,500 words) for Bangla and 591 sentences for Hindi, which are disjoint from the training corpus. The evaluation of a hierarchical tagset is non-trivial because the error in the machine tagged data with respect to the gold standard should take into account the level of the hierarchy where the mismatch be-tween the two takes place. Clearly, mismatch at the category or type level should incur a higher 
penalty than one at the level of the attributes. If for a word, there is a mismatch between the type assigned by the machine and that present in the gold standard, then it is assumed to be a full error (equivalent to 1 unit). On the other hand, if the type assigned is correct, then the error is 0.5 times the fraction of attributes that do not agree with the gold standard.  Table 1 reports the accuracies of the various taggers. Note that the attributes in IL-POST cor-respond to morphological features. Unlike Bangla, we do not have access to a morphologi-cal analyzer for Hindi to predict the attributes during the POS tagging at the CTA level. There-fore, the tagging accuracy in the CTA level for Hindi is lower than that of Bangla even though the amount of training data used in Hindi is much higher than that in Bangla.  4 Experiments The objective of the current work is to study the cognitive load associated with the task of linguis-tic annotation, more specifically, POS annota-tion. Cognitive load relates to the higher level of processing required by the working memory of an annotator when more learning is to be done in a shorter time. Hence, a higher cognitive load implies more time required for annotation and higher error rates. The time required for annota-tion can be readily measured by keeping track of the time taken by the annotators while tagging a sentence. The timer facility provided with the annotation tool helps us keep track of the annota-tion time. Measuring the error rate is slightly trickier as we do not have any ground truth (gold standard) against which we can measure the ac-curacy of the manual annotators. Therefore, we measure the IA, which should be high if the error rate is low. Details of the evaluation metrics are discussed in the next section. 
13
 Table 1: Tagging accuracy in % for Bangla and Hindi  The cognitive load of the annotation task is de-pendent on the complexity of the tagset, (un)availability of an appropriate annotation tool and bootstrapping facility. Therefore, in order to quantify the effect of these factors on the annota-tion task, annotation experiments are conducted under eight different settings. Four experiments are done for annotation at the Category+Type (CT) level. These are: ? CT-AT: without using annotation tool, i.e., using any standard text editor2. ? CT+AT: with the help of the basic anno-tation tool.  ? CT+ATL: with the help of the annota-tion tool in the edit mode, where the POS tagger used has low accuracy. ? CT+ATH: in the edit mode where the POS tagger used has a high accuracy. Similarly, four experiments are conducted at the Category+Type+Attribute (CTA) level, which are named following the same convention: CTA-AT, CTA+AT, CTA+ATL, CTA+ATH.  4.1 Subjects The reliability of annotation is dependent on the expertise of the annotators. In order to analyze the effect of annotator expertise, we chose sub-jects with various levels of expertise and pro-vided them different amount of training and su-pervision during the annotation experiments.  The experiments for Bangla have been con-ducted with 4 users (henceforth referred to as B1, B2, B3 and B4), all of whom are trained linguists having at least a post-graduate degree in linguis-tics. Two of them, namely B1 and B2, were pro-vided rigorous training in-house before the anno-tation task. During the training phase the tagset and the annotation guidelines were explained to them in detail. This was followed by 3-4 rounds of trial annotation tasks, during which the anno-                                                2 The experiments without the tool were also conducted using the basic interface, where the annotator has to type in the tag strings; the function of the tool here is limited to loading the corpus and the timer.  
tators were asked to annotate a set of 10-15 sen-tences and they were given feedback regarding the correctness of their annotations as judged by other human experts. For B1 and B2, the experi-ments were conducted in-house and under close supervision of the designers of the tagset and the tool, as well as a senior research linguist.   The other two annotators, B3 and B4, were provided with the data, the required annotation tools and the experimental setup, annotation guidelines and the tool usage guidelines, and the task were described in another document. Thus, the annotators were self-trained as far as the tool usage and the annotation scheme were con-cerned. They were asked to return the annotated data (and the time logs that are automatically generated during the annotation) at the end of all the experiments. This situation is similar to that of linguistic annotation using the Internet users, where the annotators are self-trained and work under no supervision. However, unlike ordinary Internet users, our subjects are trained linguists.    Experiments in Hindi were conducted with two users (henceforth referred to as H1 and H2), both of whom are trained linguists. As in the case of B1 and B2, the experiments were conducted under close supervision of a senior linguist, but H1 and H2 were self-trained in the use of the tool.   The tasks were randomized to minimize the effect of familiarity with the task as well as the tool. 4.2 Data The annotators were asked to annotate approxi-mately 2000 words for CT+AT and CTA+AT experiments and around 1000 words for CT-AT and CTA-AT experiments. The edit mode ex-periments (CT+ATL, CT+ATH, CTA+ATL and CTA+ATH) have been conducted on approxi-mately 1000 words. The amount of data was de-cided based primarily on the time constraints for the experiments. For all the experiments in a par-ticular language, 25-35% of the data was com-mon between every pair of annotators. These common sets have been used to measure the IA. However, there was no single complete set common to all the annotators. In order to meas-ure the influence of the pre-assigned labels on the judgment of the annotators, some amount of data was kept common between CTA+AT and CTA+ATL/H experiments for every annotator. 
CT CTA Language High Low High Low Bangla 81.43 66.73 76.98 64.52 Hindi 87.66 67.85 69.53 57.90 
14
  
 (a)        (b) Figure 4: Mean annotation time (in sec per word) for different users at (a) CT and (b) CTA levels  Mean Time (in Sec) Level -AT +AT +ATL +ATH CT 6.3 5.0 (20.7) 2.6 (59.4) 2.5 (59.8) CTA 15.2 10.9 (28.1) 5.2 (66.0) 4.8 (68.3) Table 2: Mean annotation time for Bangla ex-periments (%reduction in time with respect to ?AT is given within parentheses). 5 Analysis of Results In this section we report the observations from our annotation experiments and analyze those to identify trends and their underlying reasons.  5.1 Mean Annotation Time We measure the mean annotation time by com-puting the average time required to annotate a word for a sentence and then average it over all sentences for a given experiment by a specific annotator. Fig. 4 shows the mean annotation time (in seconds per word) for the different experi-ments by the different annotators. It is evident that complex annotation task (i.e., CTA level) takes much more time compared to a simple one (i.e., CT level). We also note that the tool effec-tively reduces the annotation time for most of the subjects. There is some variation in time (for ex-ample, B3) where the subject took longer to get accustomed to the annotation tool. As expected, the annotation process is accelerated by boot-strapping. In fact, the higher the accuracy of the automatic tagger, the faster is the annotation. Table 2 presents the mean time averaged over the six subjects for the 8 experiments in Bangla along with the %reduction in the time with re-spect to the case when no tool is present (i.e., ?-AT?). We observe that (a) the tool is more effec-tive for complex annotation, (b) on average, an-notation at the CTA level take twice the time of their CT level counterparts, and (c) bootstrapping   
IA (in %) Level -AT +AT +ATL +ATH CT 68.9 79.2 (15.0) 77.2 (12.2) 89.9 (30.6) CTA 51.4 72.5 (41.0) 79.3 (54.2) 83.4 (62.1) Table 3: Average IA for Bangla experiments (%increase in IA with respect to ?AT is given within parentheses).  can significantly accelerate the annotation proc-ess.  We also note that experts working under close supervision (B1 and B2) are in general faster than self-trained annotators (B3 and B4). 5.2 Inter-annotator Agreement Inter-annotator agreement (IA) is a very good indicator of the reliability of an annotated data. A high IA denotes that at least two annotators agree on the annotation and therefore, the probability that the annotation is erroneous is very small. There are various ways to quantify the IA rang-ing from a very simple percentage agreement to more complex measures such as the kappa statis-tics (Cohen, 1960; Geertzen and Bunt, 2006). For a hierarchical tagset the measurement of IA is non-trivial because the extent of disagreement should take into account the level of the hierar-chy where the mismatch between two annotators takes place. Here we use percentage agreement which takes into consideration the level of hier-archy where the disagreement between the two annotators takes place. For example, the differ-ence in IA at the category level between say, a Noun and a Nominal Modifier, versus the differ-ence at the number attribute level between singu-lar and plural. The extent of agreement for each of the tags is computed in the same way as we have evaluated our POS tagger (Sec.3.2.1). We have also measured the Cohen?s Kappa (Cohen, 1960) for the CT level experiments. Its behavior is similar to that of percentage agreement. 
15
 (a)      (b) Figure 5: Pair-wise IA (in %) at (a) CT and (b) CTA levels  Fig. 5 shows the pair-wise percentage IA for the eight experiments and Table 3 summarizes the %increase in IA due to the use of tool/bootstrapping with respect to the ?-AT? ex-periments at CT and CTA levels. We observe the following basic trends: (a) IA is consistently lower for a complex annotation (CTA) task than a simpler one (CT),  (b)  use  of  annotation  tool  helps in improvement of the IA, more so for the CTA level experiments, (c) bootstrapping helps in further improvement in IA, especially when the POS tagger used has high accuracy, and (d) IA between the trained subjects (B1 and B2) is always higher than the other pairs. IA is dependent on several factors such as the ambiguity in the tagset, inherently ambiguous cases, underspecified or ambiguously specified annotation guidelines, and errors due to careless-ness of the annotator. However, manual inspec-tion reveals that the factor which results in very low IA in ?-AT? case that the tool helps improve significantly is the typographical errors made by the annotators while using a standard text editor for annotation (e.g., NC mistyped as MC). This is more prominent in the CTA level experiments, where typing the string of attributes in the wrong order or missing out on some attributes, which are very common when annotation tool is not used, lead to a very low IA. Thus, memorization has a huge overload during the annotation proc-ess, especially for complex annotation schemes, which the annotation tool can effectively handle. In fact, more than 50% errors in CTA level are due to the above phenomenon. The analysis of other factors that lower the IA is discussed in Sec. 5.4. We would like to emphasize the fact that al-though the absolute time difference between the trained and un-trained users reduces when the  tool and/or bootstrapping is used, the IA does not decrease significantly in case of the untrained users for the complex annotation task.   
 Subjects Level Tagger B1 B2 B3 B4 Low 89.6 89.8 74.2 81.8 CT High 90.8 90.1 64.8 77.8 Low 85.4 85.1 68.2 76.1 CTA High 86.4 85.4 59.1 73.4 Table 4: Percentage agreement between the edit and the normal mode annotations (for Bangla).   5.3 Machine Influence We have seen that the IA increases in the edit mode experiments. This apparent positive result might be an unacceptable artifact of machine influence, which is to say that the annotators, whenever in confusion, might blindly agree with the pre-assigned labels.  In order to understand the influence of the pre-assigned labels on the annotators, we calculate the percentage agree-ment for a subject between the data annotated from scratch using the tool (+AT) and that in the edit mode (+ATL and +ATH). The results are summarized in Table 4.  The low agreement between the data anno-tated under the two modes for the untrained an-notators (B3 and B4) shows that there is a strong influence of pre-assigned labels for these users. Untrained annotators have lower agreement while using a high accuracy initial POS tagger compared to the case when a low accuracy POS tagger is used. This is because the high accuracy tagger assigns an erroneous label mainly for the highly ambiguous cases where a larger context is required to disambiguate. These cases are also difficult for human annotators to verify and un-trained annotators tend to miss these cases during edit mode experiments. The trained annotators show a consistent performance. Nevertheless, there is still some influence of the pre-assigned labels. 
16
5.4 Error Patterns In order to understand the reasons of disagree-ment between the annotators, we analyze the confusion matrix for different pairs of users for the various experimental scenarios. We observe that the causes of disagreement are primarily of three kinds: (1) unspecified and/or ambiguous guidelines, (2) ignorance about the guidelines, and (3) inherent ambiguities present in the sen-tences. We have found that a large number of the errors are due to type (1). For example, in attrib-ute level annotation, for every attribute two spe-cial values are ?0? (denotes ?not applicable for the particular lexical item?) and ?x? (denotes ?undecided or doubtful to the annotator?). How-ever, we find that both trained and untrained an-notators have their own distinct patterns of as-signing ?0? or ?x?. Later we made this point clearer with examples and enumerated possible cases of ?0? and ?x? tags. This was very helpful in improving the IA.   A major portion of the errors made by the un-trained users are due to type (2).  For example, it was clearly mentioned in the annotation guide-lines that if a borrowed/foreign word is written in the native script, then it has to be tagged accord-ing to its normal morpho-syntactic function in the sentence. However, if a word is typed in for-eign script, then it has to be tagged as a foreign word.  However, none of the untrained annota-tors adhered to these rules strictly.  Finally, there are instances which are inher-ently ambiguous. For example, in noun-noun compounds, a common confusion is whether the first noun is to be tagged as a nouns or an adjec-tive. These kinds of confusions are evenly dis-tributed over all the users and at every level of annotation. One important fact that we arrive at through the analysis of the confusion matrices is that the trained annotators working under close supervi-sion have few and consistent error patterns over all the experiments, whereas the untrained anno-tators exhibit no consistent and clearly definable error patterns. This is not surprising because the training helps the annotators to understand the task and the annotation scheme clearly; on the other hand, constant supervision helps clarifying doubts arising during annotation.  6 Conclusion In this paper we reported our observations for POS annotation experiments for Bangla and Hindi using the IL-POST annotation scheme un-
der various scenarios. Experiments in Tamil and Sanskrit are planned in the future. We argue that the observations from the various experiments make a case for the need of training and supervision for the annotators as well as the use of appropriate annotation interfaces and techniques such as bootstrapping. The results are indicative in nature and need to be validated with larger number of annotators. We summarize our salient contributions/conclusions: ? The generic tool described here for complex and hierarchical word level annotation is ef-fective in accelerating the annotation task as well as improving the IA. Thus, the tool helps reducing the cognitive load associated with annotation. ? Bootstrapping, whereby POS tags are pre-assigned by an automatic tagger and human annotators are required to edit the incorrect labels, further accelerates the task, at the risk of slight influence of the pre-assigned labels. ? Although with the help of the tool and tech-niques such as bootstrapping we are able to bring down the time required by untrained annotators to the level of their trained coun-terparts, the IA, and hence the reliability of the annotated data for the former is always poorer. Hence, training and supervision is very important for reliable linguistic annota-tion. We would like to emphasize the last point be-cause recently it is being argued that Internet and other game based techniques can be effectively used for gathering annotated data for NLP. While this may be suitable for certain types of annota-tions, such as word sense, lexical similarity or affect (see Snow et al (2008) for details), we argue that many mainstream linguistic annotation tasks such as POS, chunk, semantic roles and Treebank annotations call for expertise, training and close supervision. We believe that there is no easy way out to this kind of complex linguistic annotations, though smartly designed annotation interfaces and methods such as bootstrapping and active learning can significantly improve the productivity and reliability, and therefore, should be explored and exploited in future. Acknowledgements We would like to thank the annotators Dripta Piplai, Anumitra Ghosh Dastidar, Narayan Choudhary and Maansi Sharma. We would also like to thank Prof. Girish Nath Jha for his help in conducting the experiments. 
17
References  S. Baskaran, K. Bali, M. Choudhury, T. Bhattacharya, P. Bhattacharyya, G. N. Jha, S. Rajendran, K. Sa-ravanan, L. Sobha and K.V. Subbarao. 2008. A Common Parts-of-Speech Tagset Framework for Indian Languages. In Proc. of LREC 2008. J.  Cohen. 1960. A coefficient of agreement for nomi-nal scales. Educational and Psychological Meas-urement, 20 (1):37-46 J. Geertzen, and H. Bunt. 2006.  Measuring annotator agreement in a complex hierarchical dialogue act annotation scheme. In Proc. of the Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue, ACL 2006, pp. 126-133. G. Eryigit. 2007. ITU Treebank annotation tool. In Proc. of Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL 2007, pp. 117-120. I. Koutsis, G. Markopoulos, and G. Mikros. 2007. Episimiotis: A Multilingual Tool for Hierarchical Annotation of Texts. In Corpus Linguistics, 2007. D. Reidsma, N. Jovanovi, and D. Hofs. 2004. Design-ing annotation tools based on the properties of an-notation problems. Report, Centre for Telematics and Information Technology, 2004. E. Ringger, P. McClanahan, R. Haertel, G. Busby, M. Carmen, J. Carroll, K. Seppi, and D. Lonsdale. 2007. Active Learning for Part-of-Speech Tagging: Accelerating Corpus Annotation. In Proc. of Lin-guistic Annotation Workshop, ACL 2007, pp.  101-108. R. Snow, B. O?Connor, D. Jurafsky and A. Y. Ng. 2008. Cheap and Fast ? But is it Good? Evaluat-ing Non-Expert Annotations for Natural Language Tasks. In Proc of EMNLP-08 K. Tomanek, J. Wermter, and U. Hahn. 2007. Effi-cient annotation with the Jena ANotation Environ-ment (JANE). In Proc. of Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL 2007, pp.  9-16. L. von Ahn and L. Dabbish. 2004. Labeling Images with a Computer Game. In ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI 2004. Y. Wu, P. Jin, T. Guo and S. Yu. 2007. Building Chi-nese sense annotated corpus with the help of soft-ware tools. In Proc. of Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL 2007, pp. 125-131.  
18
