Proceedings of the EACL 2009 Workshop on Language Technology and Resources for Cultural Heritage,
Social Sciences, Humanities, and Education ?LaTeCH ? SHELT&R 2009, pages 10?17,
Athens, Greece, 30 March 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
An intelligent authoring environment for abstract semantic
representations of cultural object descriptions
Stasinos Konstantopoulos and Vangelis Karkaletsis and Dimitris Bilidas
Institute of Informatics & Telecommunications
NCSR ?Demokritos?, Greece
{konstant,vangelis,dbilid}@iit.demokritos.gr
Abstract
In this paper we describe an authoring
environment for the creation of cultural-
domain ontologies and the associated lin-
guistic and profile annotations, for dy-
namically generating adaptable natural-
language descriptions of the cultural ob-
jects in the ontology. Adaptation is
achieved at the expense of considerable
authoring effort, since it relies on pro-
viding numerical parameters for each on-
tological entity. To assist the authoring
process, we provide an intelligent author-
ing back-end that completes manually au-
thored models by inferring missing values.
This intelligent authoring support facility,
combined with immediate previews, can
considerably reduce the effort required to
create a fully functional model as the au-
thor can iterate through cycles of provid-
ing information, previewing the generated
text, and only elaborating the model where
the text is unsatisfactory.
1 Introduction
Cultural heritage organizations create and main-
tain repositories of (digital representations of) arti-
facts, including extensive semantic knowledge and
meta-data about the cultural objects in the collec-
tion. Such semantic repositories are typically seen
as an opportunity to catalogue, index, and classify
the cultural content, for the purpose of providing
semantic searching and browsing facilities to pro-
fessional users as well as to the general public.
In this article we discuss another unique op-
portunity that cultural heritage repositories offer:
the opportunity to automatically generate adapt-
able and customizable textual descriptions of the
cultural objects for a variety of audiences and pur-
poses.
More specifically, we present ELEON, an au-
thoring environment for creating abstract concep-
tual representations of cultural heritage object de-
scriptions, as well as the linguistic and profil-
ing models necessary to realize those into con-
crete natural-language descriptions exploiting nat-
ural language generation technology. The advan-
tages of this approach, as opposed to directly au-
thoring natural language descriptions, are mani-
fold:
? Abstract descriptions constitute machine-
readable and reusable models of the cultural
heritage collection. Besides deriving natural
language descriptions, such models can be
used for the semantic indexing and search-
ing of the collection. This can also be seen
from the reverse perspective: the natural lan-
guage descriptions can be derived from ex-
isting conceptual models created for the pur-
pose of semantic indexing and searching.
? The conceptual descriptions are realized us-
ing domain-independent, reusable linguistic
models. By clearly separating the conceptual
and linguistic models, the same conceptual
descriptions can be realized in different lan-
guages and the same linguistic models can be
used to realize descriptions of different col-
lections.
? The dynamic generation of the description
is driven by profiles that personalize the de-
scriptions for different audiences, but also
adapt them to different contexts and situa-
tions.
ELEON provides great flexibility in finely
parametrizing how the generated descriptions are
adapted to different audiences and situations. Fur-
thermore, the authoring environment is backed by
Artificial Intelligence tools that assist the author
10
by automatically inferring missing profile param-
eters, alleviating the burden of explicitly providing
all necessary details for large numbers of objects.
Although the system can be used in a variety of
domains and Human-Computer interaction appli-
cations, it is particularly pertinent to cultural her-
itage content, which is interesting for wide ranges
of age groups, levels of expertise, cultural and edu-
cational backgrounds, situations and contexts, em-
phasising the need for personalized and custom-
tailored text.
In the rest of this article we first set the back-
ground by describing the authoring environment
and particularly the way in which it can be used to
create the conceptual model of the collection and
populate it with data (Section 2) and then proceed
to to describe how adaptation parameters are rep-
resented and used by human-computer interaction
systems (Section 3). We then focus on the main
contribution of this paper by describing the intel-
ligence mechanism behind the environment (Sec-
tion 4), discuss related work (Section 5), and con-
clude (Section 6).
2 Authoring Domain Ontologies
ELEON enables its authors?i.e., persons that have
domain expertise but no technological expertise?
to create a new application domain, defining the
ontology of the new domain, as well as the cor-
responding language resources and the profiling
models. All these elements are used by a natu-
ral language generation (NLG) engine in order to
derive natural language descriptions from the con-
ceptual representations in the ontology. The envi-
ronment also enables authors to generate text pre-
views using the NLG engine in order to examine
the effect of their updates to the domain ontology,
the language resources and the profiling parame-
ters.
Concerning the language resources, these affect
the content and the surface form of the derived
texts, leading to more varied texts and contain en-
tries for nouns and verbs for each supported lan-
guage. With regard to the profiling parameters,
these are used by ELEON to adapt the generated
descriptions to the users? preferences and knowl-
edge.
ELEON ontologies encode domain knowledge in
the form of concepts, instances of concepts, (en-
tity types and entities respectively in ELEON ter-
minology), and relations between concepts and in-
stances.
Figure 1 illustrates part of such an ontology
that encodes knowledge about the ancient Agora
of Athens. This ontology is used in the INDIGO
project,1 implementing a use case where the sys-
tem guides visitors through an exhibition on the
ancient Agora of Athens, introducing the build-
ings to them before they attend a virtual 3D tour
of the Agora hosted at the Foundation of the Hel-
lenic World. The examples used in this paper are
drawn from this domain.
In the example of Figure 1, ?stoa-of-attalus?,
is an instance of the entity type Stoa, a sub-
type of Building which is a sub-type of Archi-
tecturalConstruction, a sub-type of PhysicalOb-
ject. Properties and relationships are expressed
using fields. For any entity type, it is possible
to introduce new fields which then become avail-
able to all the entities that belong to that type and
its subtypes. In Figure 1, the field locatedIn is
introduced at the ArchitecturalConstruction en-
tity type and is defined as a relationship between
ArchitecturalConstruction and Place, while the
using-period field defines a property of the Phys-
icalObject entity type. Consequently, all enti-
ties of type PhysicalObject and its subtypes, i.e.
ArchitecturalConstruction and ArtObject inherit
these fields. Furthermore, all the instances of these
entity types and their subtypes also inherit these
fields.
The proposed system expresses such ontologi-
cal conceptual models in OWL [11], an ontology
representation language that is one of the core se-
mantic web technologies. OWL models can be
created from scratch in the authoring tool or im-
ported, facilitating the use of well-established con-
ceptual models in the cultural heritage domain, as
almost all can be (or already are) expressed as on-
tologies. The CIDOC conceptual reference model,
for example, also provides an official OWL ver-
sion.2 Most other cultural heritage vocabularies,
thesauri, and classification schemes using XML
or relational database data models are consistent
with the Simple Knowledge Organization System
(SKOS) and can be automatically converted to on-
tologies.3
1See http://www.ics.forth.gr/indigo/ and
Acknowledgements section.
2http://cidoc.ics.forth.gr/official_
release_cidoc.html
3See http://www.w3.org/2004/02/skos/
about SKOS. A variety of tools exist for con-
verting SKOS data models to, or aligning with,
11
Figure 1: ELEON screen, showing the class hi-
erarchy and the individuals of each class (left),
the properties of the currently selected individual
(right top), and a preview of the description of the
individual (right bottom). The preview language
and profile can be seen on (and selected from) the
bar at the bottom of the screen.
3 Description Adaptation
Besides modelling the cultural heritage domain
itself, ELEON supports annotating the objects,
classes, and properties of the domain with adapta-
tion and linguistic information. Such information
is used by NLG engines to (a) plan the descrip-
tion that will be generated, adapting it to the cur-
rent audience and circumstance, and (b) realize the
planned description in a particular language.
Realization is based on clause plans (micro-
plans) that specify how an ontological property
can be expressed in each supported natural lan-
guage. The author specifies the clause to be gen-
erated in abstract terms, by specifying, for ex-
ample, the verb to be used, the voice and tense
of the resulting clause, etc. Similar annota-
tions for instances and classes specify how they
should be realized as noun phrases that fill slots
in the property-generated clauses. Micro-plan an-
notations also comprise several other language-
specific parameters, such as whether the resulting
clause can be aggregated into a longer sentence or
not, its voice and tense, and so on, as described in
more detail by Androutsopoulos et al [1], Sect. 3.
Adaptive planning, on the other hand, operates
at the abstract level and does not involve specifics
of the target language. It is rather aimed at re-
ontological models. See, for example, http:
//www.heppnetz.de/projects/skos2gentax/
and http://annocultor.sourceforge.net/
flecting a synthetic personality in the description,
as well as personalizing it for a particular audi-
ence. Adaptation parameters are provided in the
form of profile attributes that control aspects of the
text plan such as how many and which of the facts
known about an object should be used to describe
it, as discussed in more detail below.
3.1 Personalization and personality
The system supports authoring the adaptation pro-
files that control the dynamic adaptation of the
generated descriptions. Profiles permit the au-
thor to specify, for example, that technical vocab-
ulary be used when generating for experts, or that
shorter and simpler sentences are generated for
children. This is achieved by providing a variety
of generation parameters though user profiles, in-
cluding a numerical interest attribute of the prop-
erties of the ontology.
Isard et al [7] describe how interest is used to
impose a preference ordering of the properties of
ontological entities, controlling which facts will be
used when describing each entity. In the work de-
scribed here, we have extended profiles in two re-
spects:
? by generalizing interest into arbitrary, author-
defined profile attributes; and
? by permitting profile attributes to apply not
only to ontological properties, but also to in-
dividuals and classes.
Using these extensions, authors can define person-
ality profiles for generating text, managing dia-
logue, and simulating emotional variation in a way
that reflects a certain personality on behalf of the
system.
In the INDIGO project we use these profiles
in a human-robot interaction application, where
a robotic tour guide that gives the impression of
empathizing with the visitor is perceived as more
natural and user-friendly. But the methodology
is generally interesting in any context of generat-
ing descriptions of cultural heritage content, es-
pecially if the individual descriptions are aggre-
gated in a tour of the collection. In such contexts,
dialogue-management adaptivity can vary the ex-
hibits included in personalized tours and emo-
tional state variation can match the described con-
tent and make the tour more engaging and lively.
The way in which personality profiles are used
to parametrize dialogue management and simu-
12
lated emotions are discussed in more detail else-
where [9], so we shall only briefly outline it
here. Emotional variation is achieved by using the
personality profile to estimate the emotional ap-
praisal of dialogue acts and update the mood and
emotional state of artificial agents. Dialogue man-
agement is affected both directly, by taking exhibit
preference into account when deliberating over di-
alogue acts, and indirectly, by being influenced by
the artificial agent?s current mood; and, as already
mentioned above, NLG is adapted by using prop-
erty preference to plan a description
In the Konstantopoulos et al [9] model, prefer-
ence is calculated based on a logic model of the
robot?s personality traits and also on ground facts
regarding objective attributes of the content?such
as the importance of an exhibit?but also subjec-
tive attributes that reflect the robot?s perception of
the content?such as how interesting an exhibit is.
With the work described here, we alleviate the bur-
den of manually providing all the ground param-
eters, exploiting the fact that these parameters are
strongly inter-related and can, to a large extend, be
automatically inferred. More specifically, ELEON
backs the profile authoring process by reasoning
over manually provided exhibit attributes in order
to infer what the values of the missing attributes
should be. The author can inspect the explicitly
provided as well as the automatically inferred val-
ues and make corrections where necessary (Fig-
ure 2). Manual corrections trigger a re-estimation
of the missing values, so that after each round of
corrections the overall model is a closer approxi-
mation of the author?s intention.
3.2 Representation and interoperability
Linguistic and profile annotations are represented
in RDF, the Resource Description Framework
(RDF) [5]. RDF is a knowledge representa-
tion technology built around the concept of us-
ing subject-predicate-object triples to describe ab-
stract entities, resources. RDF triples assign to
their subject resource the property of being related
to the object through the predicate resource. Pred-
icates can be data properties, in which case their
objects are concrete values (numbers, strings, time
periods, and so on), or object properties, in which
case their objects are abstract resources.
Although OWL is not formally defined in RDF,
it is defined in such a way that it can be repre-
sented within RDF. In fact, the OWL specification
Figure 2: Screen fragment, showing the pop-up
window for providing profile attribute values for
an exhibit. Automatically inferred attribute values
are displayed in red, to stand out from explicitly
provided ones which are displayed in black.
itself provides a serialization of OWL ontologies
as RDF for transport and data interchange pur-
poses. Since ELEON uses this OWL/RDF repre-
sentation for the domain ontology, linguistic and
profile annotations can be directly represented as
RDF triples of extra-ontological properties of the
ontological instances.
The RDF vocabulary used defines a prop-
erty that relates ontological entities (individuals,
classes, and properties) with profile attribute nodes
that involve:
? the profile to which they are pertinent, e.g.,
?expert?;
? the attribute, e.g., ?interest? or ?importance?;
and
? the numerical value of the attribute for this
entity in this profile.
When applied to ontology properties, profile at-
tribute nodes can be further elaborated to apply
only to properties of instances of a particular class.
For example, one can express that users find it
more interesting to know the architectural style
when discussing temples than when discussing
stoas.
Using RDF is motivated by the usage of OWL
to represent the domain ontology as well as the
availability of natural language generation (NLG)
engines that support it. More specifically, as al-
ready discussed, OWL ontologies and RDF anno-
13
tations can be easily merged in a combined model
since OWL ontologies can be expressed in RDF.
An alternative approach would have been to in-
corporate profile attributes in the OWL ontology.
Since profile attributes refer to classes and proper-
ties as well as individuals, profile attributes would,
then, have to be interpreted as second-order on-
tological properties. Although second-order con-
structs can be represented in OWL-Full (the most
expressive ?dialect? of OWL), logical inference
over OWL-Full ontologies is a challenging and
computationally inefficient task. In fact, second-
order inference is only supported by research pro-
totypes and only for restricted fragments, often
excluding binary second-order predicates (second-
order properties).
By contrast, the chosen approach restricts
the ontology within the computationally efficient
OWL-DL dialect, for which multiple stable and
highly optimized inference engines have been de-
veloped. Profile attributes are provided as extra-
ontological properties, without tying them to a
particular logical interpretation. We shall revisit
this point in the following section.
The second motivating factor behind RDF pro-
file attributes is interoperability with NLG en-
gines. The RDF vocabulary used to assign linguis-
tic and profile attributes is understood by the NAT-
URALOWL [6] and METHODIUS [10] generation
engines (Figure 3).
4 Intelligent Authoring Support
We have previously discussed how profile at-
tributes were not directly incorporated in the do-
main ontology as second-order statements, but are
rather represented as extra-logical RDF annota-
tions. While avoiding forcing a second-order in-
terpretation of profile attributes is a definite ad-
vantage from a computational-complexity point of
view, this choice leaves profile attributes outside
the scope of OWL reasoning tools.
In order to be able to efficiently reason over and
draw inferences about profile attributes, we have
chosen to interpret profile attributes within many-
valued description logics. Using description log-
ics has the advantage of direct access to the do-
main ontology; using many-valued valuations has
the advantage of providing a means to represent
and reason over numerical values.
This section describes this interpretation and
how it is used, after first introducing description
Figure 3: System architecture showing the inter-
facing with NLG and Inference engines
logics and many-valued valuations.
4.1 Integrating reasoning in ELEON
ELEON specifies a Java interface through which
inference results can be requested and retrieved:
OWL domain models and RDF profile annotations
are passed to an inference engine, which responds
with the numerical values of profile attributes for
all ontological entities in the domain (individuals,
classes, and properties).
ELEON also extends and uses the TransOnto se-
mantic knowledge migration system4 to perform
all the necessary transformations for using many-
valued DL reasoners, i.e., transforming the OWL
and RDF models into many-valued DL assertions,
as well as transforming logical query answers into
the numerical profile-attribute values.
Furthermore, as depicted in Figure 3, the im-
plementation includes the necessary API calls for
using either of two many-valued DL reasoners,
YADLR [8] or FUZZYDL [4]. Support for alter-
native many-valued DL reasoners can be easily
added, by using such reasoners to implement the
reasoning API expected by the authoring system.
4.2 Many-valued DL Reasoning
Description Logics (DL) [2] are a family of first-
order logics; their main characteristic is decidabil-
ity, attained by being restricted to concepts (unary
predicates, sets of individuals) and relations (bi-
nary predicates, sets of pairs of individuals). Of
particular importance is the DL called SHOIN ,
which covers OWL-DL.
4See http://transonto.sourceforge.net/
14
DL statements, concept descriptions, use logi-
cal connectives to define concepts by combining
(a) other concepts, and (b) relation constructs that
describe the set of individuals that have a certain
relation with a certain set of fillers (relation ob-
jects). Relation descriptions are not supported,
and membership in a relation can only be ex-
plicitly asserted, except for a limited set of rela-
tion axioms such as inversion, subordination, and
transitivity. Most DL reasoners also provide lim-
ited support for reasoning over concrete domains
(numbers, strings, etc.) through data properties
that relate abstract individual subjects with con-
crete value objects.
Many-valued logics in general, and conse-
quently many-valued DLs, extend the binary true-
false valuations of logical formulae into many-
valued numerical valuations, denoting the degree
to which formulae hold. Such many-valued mod-
els receive their semantics not from set theory, as
is the case with binary valuations, but from al-
gebraic norms that assign semantics to the logi-
cal connectives. These norms are used to calcu-
late the degree at which complex logical proposi-
tions hold, given the degrees of their constituent
elementary propositions.
In the work described here we use
?ukasziewicz-Tarski algebra to provide many-
valued semantics [9, Sect. 3]. Although there is
nothing in ELEON itself that forces this choice,
?ukasiewicz-Tarski algebra is well-suited to
inferring profile attribute values, as it is founded
on neither probability nor uncertainty, which
would be inappropriate in our case, but on the
notion of relevance.
4.3 Inferring missing attribute values
Profile attributes of individuals are captured by
normalizing in the [0, 1] range and then using the
normalized value as a class membership degree.
So, for example, if interesting is such an at-
tribute of individual exhibits, then an exhibit with
a (normalized) interest level of 0.7 is an instance
of the Interesting class at a degree of 0.7.
Attributes of classes are reduced to attributes of
the members of the class, expressed by a class sub-
sumption assertion at the degree of the attribute.
So, if the class of stoas is interesting at a degree
of 0.6, this is expressed by asserting that being a
member of Stoa implies being a member of Inter-
esting. The implication is asserted at a degree of
Ontology Interesting
Instance membership
Doric style 0.8
Ionic style 0.7
Pergamene style 0.3
Attalus 0.9
Table 1: Profile fragment.
Resource Property Value
Stoa of Attalus style Doric
Stoa of Attalus style Ionic
Stoa of Attalus style Pergamene
Stoa of Attalus orderedBy Attalus
Table 2: Ontology fragment, showing the proper-
ties of the ?Stoa of Attalus? instance.
0.6, which, under ?ukasiewicz-Tarski semantics,
means that being a stoa implies being interesting
at a loss of 0.4 of a degree. Thus individuals that
are members of the Stoa class at a degree of 1.0,
are implicitly interesting at a degree of 0.6. Al-
though this is not identical to saying that the class
itself is interesting, it clearly captures the intention
behind the original RDF annotation.
Profile attributes can also characterize proper-
ties, like orderedBy, creationEra or style, en-
coding the information that it might, for example,
be more interesting to describe the artistic style of
an exhibit rather than provide historical data about
it. This is interpreted as the strength of the con-
nection between how interesting an exhibit is, and
how interesting its properties are. In other words,
if having an interesting filler for style also makes
the exhibit interesting, this is taken as an indica-
tion that the style relation itself is an interesting
one. Formulated in logical terms, having interest-
ing relation fillers implies being interesting, and
the implication holds at a degree provided by the
interest level of the relation itself.
For example, consider the assertion at 0.8 that
the class of things that are related to at least
one Interesting instance with the style property,
are themselves Interesting and the assertion at
0.4 that the class of things that are related to at
least one Interesting instance with the orderedBy
property, are themselves Interesting.
Given a profile fragment like the one in Table 1
and a domain ontology including the factual infor-
mation in Table 2, ?Stoa of Attalus? has an interest-
15
ing style at a degree of 0.8, which is the maximum
among the three architectural styles found in the
stoa (Doric, Ionic, and Pergamene). Since style
fillers transfer interest at a loss of 0.2, style con-
tributes 0.6 to the stoa?s Interesting-ness. By con-
trast, the filler of orderedBy (which is more inter-
esting in this profile than any of the architectural
styles) only contributes 0.3 of a degree, because
orderedBy is annotated as uninteresting and in-
terest transfers across it at a heavy loss.
We have so far discussed how to infer profile
attribute values for the individuals of the domain.
Classes and relations receive the value of the min-
imal instance of the class (relation). That is to say,
the individual (pair of individuals) for which noth-
ing else is known, except that it is a member of the
class (relation).
As an example, consider a DoricBuilding class
which is a subclass of Building that only admits
instances that have a style relation with ?Doric?.
The minimal instance of this class is a member of
Interesting through having an interesting property
as discussed above, even though nothing else is
known about it. This membership degree in Inter-
esting is taken to be an attribute of the class itself
rather than any one of its members, and is used as
the attribute value for the class itself.
For relations, two minimal instances of the rela-
tion?s domain and range are created. The attribute
value for the property is the degree of the impli-
cation that having this property makes the domain
individual have the attribute. For example, in order
to infer how interesting the property devotedTo is,
we first observe that it relates Temple instances
with MythicalPerson instances, and create bare
instances of these two classes. The implication
that having a devotedTo relation to an Interest-
ing individual leads to being member of Interest-
ing holds to a degree that can be calculated, given
the Interesting degrees of the Temple and Mythi-
calPerson instances involved in the relation. The
degree of the implication is then used as the value
of the interesting attribute.
5 Related Work
ELEON is based on the authoring tool described
by Androutsopoulos et al [1], which was also tar-
geted at creating ontologies for generating person-
alized descriptions of the individuals in the ontol-
ogy. ELEON inherits from that tool the idea of
separating the abstract ontological relations from
the concrete linguistic information, facilitating the
easy reuse of the ontological information to gener-
ate descriptions in multiple languages, as well as
using an external NLG engine to provide previews
of the descriptions from within the authoring envi-
ronment.
The system presented here extends a previous
version of ELEON [3], which supports using an
external DL reasoner to catch logical errors by
checking the consistency of the authored ontology.
In the work described here, the intelligence behind
the tool is substantially extended by using logical
inference to predict values that have not been ex-
plicitly entered by the user, alleviating the need to
manually provide large volumes of numerical data.
A parallel line of development of the origi-
nal Androutsopoulos et al tool is based on the
Prote?ge? ontology authoring and management en-
vironment.5 Galanis and Androutsopoulos [6] de-
veloped a Prote?ge? plug-in that builds upon the ex-
tensive ontology authoring features of Prote?ge? to
provide an environment for creating cultural her-
itage ontologies and the associated linguistic and
profiling annotations. It does not, however, of-
fer the flexibility to define new profile attributes
as ELEON does, and is restricted to specifying the
level of interest of the various ontological entities.
Furthermore, it only uses logic inference to catch
ontological inconsistencies in a manner similar to
that described by Bilidas et al [3] without any pre-
diction facilities.
6 Conclusion
In this article we have presented an authoring envi-
ronment for the creation of domain ontologies and
the associated linguistic and profile annotations.
Annotated ontologies can be used to automatically
generate natural-language descriptions of the enti-
ties of the ontology, dynamically adapting the gen-
eration engine to the audience and context of the
description.
The advantages of using ELEON instead of
generic knowledge tools, such as Prote?ge?, stem
from the ability to couple ELEON with external en-
gines that provide important conveniences to the
author. More specifically, ELEON can invoke a nat-
ural language generation engine in order to display
previews of the description based on the informa-
tion currently provided about an object. Further-
more, logical inference is used to provide an intel-
5See http://protege.stanford.edu/
16
ligent authoring back-end that completes the cur-
rent model by inferring missing values based on
what has already been provided.
This intelligent authoring support facility, com-
bined with the immediate previews, can consid-
erably reduce the effort required to create a fully
functional model as the author can iterate through
cycles of providing information, previewing the
generated text, and only elaborating the model
where the text is unsatisfactory. This iterative pro-
cess converges to satisfactory descriptions much
faster than having to manually enter all adaptation
parameters, especially for large and complex do-
mains.
In the context of the XENIOS project,6 the pre-
vious version of ELEON has been evaluated by cu-
rators of the Foundation of the Hellenic World,
who used it to create an ontology of the buildings,
rooms, and exhibitions of the Foundation. In the
context of creating the Agora of Athens ontology
and annotations for INDIGO, we are planning to
extend this evaluation to include the new intelli-
gent authoring features.
Acknowledgements
The work described here is supported by the FP6-
IST project INDIGO7 which aims to advance
human-robot interaction methodology and tech-
nology, enabling robots to perceive natural human
behaviour, as well as making them act in ways that
are more familiar to humans. The authors also
wish to acknowledge the help of the colleagues
from the Foundation of the Hellenic World who
used ELEON to create the initial version of the on-
tology for the ancient Agora of Athens.
References
[1] Ion Androutsopoulos, Jon Oberlander, and
Vangelis Karkaletsis. 2007. Source authoring
for multilingual generation of personalised
object descriptions. Journal of Natural Lan-
guage Engineering, 13(3):191?233.
[2] Franz Baader, Ian Horrocks, and Ulrike Sat-
tler. 2003. Description logics as ontology
languages for the semantic web. In Steffen
Staab and Rudi Studer, editors, Lecture Notes
in Artificial Intelligence. Springer Verlag.
6See http://www.ics.forth.gr/xenios/ (in
Greek)
7See http://www.ics.forth.gr/indigo/
[3] Dimitris Bilidas, Maria Theologou, and Van-
gelis Karkaletsis. 2007. Enriching OWL on-
tologies with linguistic and user-related an-
notations: the ELEON system. In Proc.
19th IEEE Intl. Conf. on Tools with Artificial
Intelligence (ICTAI-2007), Patras, Greece,
Oct. 2007. IEEE Computer Society.
[4] Fernando Bobillo and Umberto Straccia.
2008. fuzzyDL: an expressive fuzzy Descrip-
tion Logic reasoner. In Proceedings of the
2008 International Conference on Fuzzy Sys-
tems (FUZZ-08).
[5] Dan Brickley and R. V. Guha. 2004. RDF
Primer. W3C Recommendation.
[6] Dimitris Galanis and Ion Androutsopoulos.
2007. Generating multilingual descriptions
from linguistically annotated OWL ontolo-
gies: the NaturalOWL system. In Pro-
ceedings of the 11th European Workshop on
Natural Language Generation (ENLG 2007),
Schloss Dagstuhl, Germany, pages 143?146.
[7] Amy Isard, Jon Oberlander, Ion Androut-
sopoulos, and Colin Matheson. 2003. Speak-
ing the users? languages. IEEE Intelligent
Systems, 18(1):40?45.
[8] Stasinos Konstantopoulos and Georgios
Apostolikas. 2007. Fuzzy-DL reasoning
over unknown fuzzy degrees. In Proc. Intl.
IFIP Workshop of Semantic Web and Web
Semantics (IFIP-SWWS 07), Nov. 2007,
Vilamoura, Portugal. LNCS 4806, Springer,
Berlin/Heidelberg.
[9] Stasinos Konstantopoulos, Vangelis
Karkaletsis, and Colin Matheson. 2008.
Robot personality: Representation and exter-
nalization. In Proceedings of Intl. Workshop
on Computational Aspects of Affective and
Emotional Interaction (CAFFEi 08), Patras,
Greece, July 2008.
[10] Matthew Marge, Amy Isard, and Johanna
Moore. 2008. Creation of a new do-
main and evaluation of comparison gener-
ation in a natural language generation sys-
tem. In Proceedings of the Fifth Inter-
national Language Generation Conference
(INLG08), June 2008, Salt Fork, Ohio, USA.
[11] Michael K. Smith, Chris Welty, and Debo-
rah L. McGuinness. 2004. OWL web ontol-
ogy language. W3C Recommendation.
17
Proceedings of the EACL 2009 Demonstrations Session, pages 37?40,
Athens, Greece, 3 April 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Adaptive Natural Language Interaction
Stasinos Konstantopoulos
Athanasios Tegos
Dimitris Bilidas
NCSR ?Demokritos?, Athens, Greece
Colin Matheson
Human Communication Research Centre
Edinburgh University, U.K.
Ion Androutsopoulos
Gerasimos Lampouras
Prodromos Malakasiotis
Athens Univ. of Economics and Business
Greece
Olivier Deroo
Acapela Group, Belgium
Abstract
The subject of this demonstration is natu-
ral language interaction, focusing on adap-
tivity and profiling of the dialogue man-
agement and the generated output (text
and speech). These are demonstrated in
a museum guide use-case, operating in a
simulated environment. The main techni-
cal innovations presented are the profiling
model, the dialogue and action manage-
ment system, and the text generation and
speech synthesis systems.
1 Introduction
In this demonstration we present a number of
state-of-the art language technology tools, imple-
menting and integrating the latest discourse and
knowledge representation theories into a complete
application suite, including:
? dialogue management, natural language gen-
eration, and speech synthesis, all modulated
by a flexible and highly adaptable profiling
mechanism;
? robust speech recognition and language inter-
pretation; and,
? an authoring environment for developing the
representation of the domain of discourse as
well as the associated linguistic and adaptiv-
ity resources.
The system demonstration is based on a use
case of a virtual-tour guide in a museum domain.
Demonstration visitors interact with the guide us-
ing headsets and are able to experiment with load-
ing different interaction profiles and observing the
differences in the guide?s behaviour. The demon-
stration also includes the screening of videos from
an embodied instantiation of the system as a robot
guiding visitors in a museum.
2 Technical Content
The demonstration integrates a number of state-of-
the-art language components into a highly adap-
tive natural language interaction system. Adap-
tivity here refers to using interaction profiles that
modulate dialogue management as well as text
generation and speech synthesis. Interaction pro-
files are semantic models that extend the objective
ontological model of the domain of discourse with
subjective information, such as how ?interesting?
or ?important? an entity or statement of the objec-
tive domain model is.
Advanced multimodal dialogue management
capabilities involving and combining input and
output from various interaction modalities and
technologies, such as speech recognition and syn-
thesis, natural language interpretation and gener-
ation, and recognition of/response to user actions,
gestures, and facial expressions.
State-of-the art natural language generation
technology, capable of producing multi-sentence,
coherent natural language descriptions of objects
based on their abstract semantic representation.
The resulting descriptions vary dynamically in
terms of content as well as surface language ex-
pressions used to realize each description, depend-
ing on the interaction history (e.g., comparing
to previously given information) and the adaptiv-
ity parameters (exhibiting system personality and
adapting to user background and interests).
3 System Description
The system is capable of interacting in a vari-
ety of modalities, including non-verbal ones such
as gesture and face-expression recognition, but in
this demonstration we focus on the system?s lan-
guage interaction components. In this modality,
abstract, language-independent system actions are
first planned by the dialogue and action manager
(DAM), then realized into language-specific text
37
by the natural language generation engine, and fi-
nally synthesized into speech. All three layers are
parametrized by a profiling and adaptivity module.
3.1 Profiling and Adaptation
Profiling and adaptation modulates the output of
dialogue management, generation, and speech
synthesis so that the system exhibits a synthetic
personality, while at the same time adapting to
user background and interests.
User stereotypes (e.g., ?expert? or ?child?) pro-
vide generation parameters (such as maximum de-
scription length) and also initialize the dynamic
user model with interest rates for all the ontologi-
cal entities (individuals and properties) of the do-
main of discourse. This same information is also
provided in system profiles reflecting the system?s
(as opposed to the users?) preferences; one can,
for example, define a profile that favours using
the architectural attributes to describe a building
where another profile would choose to concentrate
on historical facts regarding the same building.
Stereotypes and profiles are combined into a
single set of parameters by means of personal-
ity models. Personality models are many-valued
Description Logic definitions of the overall pref-
erence, grounded in stereotype and profile data.
These definitions model recognizable personality
traits so that, for example, an open personality will
attend more to the user?s requests than its own
interests in deriving overall preference (Konstan-
topoulos et al, 2008).
Furthermore, the system dynamically adapts
overall preference according to both interaction
history and the current dialogue state. So, for one,
the initial (static model) interest factor of an ontol-
ogy entity is reduced each time this entity is used
in a description in order to avoid repetitions. On
the other hand, preference will increase if, for ex-
ample, in the current state the user has explicitly
asked about an entity.
3.2 Dialogue and Action Management
The DAM is built around the information-state
update dialogue paradigm of the TRINDIKIT
dialogue-engine toolkit (Cooper and Larsson,
1998) and takes into account the combined user-
robot interest factor when determining informa-
tion state updates.
The DAM combines various interaction modal-
ities and technologies in both interpretation/fusion
and generation/fission. In interpreting user ac-
tions the system recognizes spoken utterances,
simple gestures, and touch-screen input, all of
which may be combined into a representation of
a multi-modal user action. Similarly, when plan-
ning robotic actions the DAM coordinates a num-
ber of available output modalities, including spo-
ken language, text (on the touchscreen), the move-
ment and configuration of the robotic platform, fa-
cial expressions, and simple head gestures.1
To handle multimodal input, the DAM uses a fu-
sion module which combines messages from the
language interpretation, gesture, and touchscreen
modules into a single XML structure. Schemati-
cally, this can be represented as:
<userAction>
<userUtterance>hello</userUtterance>
<userButton content="13"/>
</userAction>
This structure represents a user pressing some-
thing on the touchscreen and saying hello at the
same time.2
The representation is passed essentially un-
changed to the DAM, to be processed by its up-
date rules, where the ID of button press is inter-
preted in context and matched with the speech.
In most circumstances, the natural language pro-
cessing component (see 3.3) produces a seman-
tic representation of the input which appears in
the userUtterance element; the use of ?hello?
above is for illustration. An example update rule
which will fire in the context of a greeting from
the user is (in schematic form):
if
in(/latest_utterance/moves, hello)
then
output(start)
Update rules contain a list of conditions and a
list of effects. Here there is one condition (that the
latest moves from the user includes ?hello?), and
one effect (the ?start? procedure). The latter initi-
ates the dialogue by, among other things, having
the system utter a standardised greeting.
As noted above, the DAM is also multimodal
on the output side. An XML representation is
created which can contain robot utterances and
robot movements (both head movements and mo-
bile platform moves). Information can also be pre-
sented on the touchscreen.
1Expressions and gestures will not be demonstrated, as
they can not be materialized in the simulated robot.
2The precise meaning of ?at the same time? is determined
by the fusion module.
38
3.3 Natural Language Processing
The NATURALOWL natural language generation
(NLG) engine (Galanis et al 2009) produces
multi-sentence, coherent natural language descrip-
tions of objects in multiple languages from a sin-
gle semantic representation; the resulting descrip-
tions are annotated with prosodic markup for driv-
ing the speech synthesisers.
The generated descriptions vary dynamically, in
both content and language expressions, depending
on the interaction profile as well as the dynamic
interaction history. The dynamic preference factor
of the item itself is used to decide the level of de-
tail of the description being generated. The prefer-
ence factors of the properties are used to order the
contents of the descriptions to ensure that, in cases
where not all possible facts are to be presented in
a single turn, the most relevant ones are chosen.
The interaction history is used to check previously
given information to avoid repeating the same in-
formation in different contexts and to create com-
parisons with earlier objects.
NaturalOWL demonstrates the benefits of
adopting NLG on the Semantic Web. Organiza-
tions that need to publish information about ob-
jects, such as exhibits or products, can publish
OWL ontologies instead of texts. NLG engines,
embedded in browsers or Web servers, can then
render the ontologies in natural language, whereas
computer programs may access the ontologies, in
effect logical statements, directly. The descrip-
tions can be very simple and brief, relying on
question answering to provide more information
if such is requested. This way, machine-readable
information can be more naturally inspected and
consulted by users.
In order to generate a list of possible follow
up questions that the system can handle, we ini-
tially construct a list of the particular individuals
or classes that are mentioned in the generated de-
scription; the follow up questions will most likely
refer to them. Only individuals and classes for
which there is further information in the ontology
are extracted.
After identifying the referred individuals and
classes, we proceed to predict definition (e.g.,
?Who was Ares??) and property questions (e.g.,
?Where is Mount Penteli??) about them that
could be answered by the information in the on-
tology. We avoid generating questions that cannot
be answered. The expected definition questions
are constructed by inserting the names of the re-
ferred individuals and classes into templates such
as ?who is/was person X?? or ?what do you know
about class or entity Y??.
In the case of referred individuals, we also gen-
erate expected property questions using the pat-
terns NaturalOWL generates the descriptions with.
These patterns, called microplans, show how to
express the properties of the ontology as sentences
of the target languages. For example, if the indi-
vidual templeOfAres has the property excavate-
dIn, and that property has a microplan of the form
?resource was excavated in period?, we anticipate
questions such as ?when was the Temple of Ares
excavated?? and ?which period was the Temple of
Ares excavated in??.
Whenever a description (e.g., of a monument)
is generated, the expected follow up questions for
that description (e.g., about the monument?s ar-
chitect) are dynamically included in the rules of
the speech recognizer?s grammar, to increase word
recognition accuracy. The rules include compo-
nents that extract entities, classes, and properties
from the recognized questions, thus allowing the
dialogue and action manager to figure out what the
user wishes to know.
3.4 Speech Synthesis and Recognition
The natural language interface demonstrates ro-
bust speech recognition technology, capable of
recognizing spoken phrases in noisy environ-
ments, and advanced speech synthesis, capable of
producing spoken output of very high quality. The
main challenge that the automatic speech recogni-
tion (ASR) module needs to address is background
noise, especially in the robot-embodied use case.
A common technique used in order to handle this
is training acoustic models with the anticipated
background noise, but that is not always possi-
ble. The demonstrated ASR module can be trained
on noise-contaminated data where available, but
also incorporates multi-band acoustic modelling
(Dupont, 2003) for robust recognition under noisy
conditions. Speech recognition rates are also sub-
stantially improved by using the predictions made
by NATURALOWL and the DAM to dynamically
restrict the lexical and phrasal expectations at each
dialogue turn.
The speech synthesis module of the demon-
strated system is based on unit selection technol-
ogy, generally recognized as producing more nat-
39
ural output that previous technologies such as di-
phone concatenation or formant synthesis. The
main innovation that is demonstrated is support for
emotion, a key aspect of increasing the naturalness
of synthetic speech. This is achieved by combin-
ing emotional unit recordings with run-time trans-
formations. With respect to the former, a complete
?voice? now comprises three sub-voices (neutral,
happy, and sad), based on recordings of the same
speaker. The recording time needed is substan-
tially decreased by prior linguistic analysis that se-
lects appropriate text covering all phonetic units
needed by the unit selection system. In addition to
the statically defined sub-voices, the speech syn-
thesis module implements dynamic transforma-
tions (e.g., emphasis), pauses, and variable speech
speed. The system combines all these capabilities
in order to dynamically modulate the synthesised
speech to convey the impression of emotionally
modulated speech.
3.5 Authoring
The interaction system is complemented by
ELEON (Bilidas et al, 2007), an authoring tool for
annotating domain ontologies with the generation
and adaptivity resources described above. The do-
main ontology can be authored in ELEON, but any
existing OWL ontology can also annotated.
More specifically, ELEON supports author-
ing linguistic resources, including a domain-
dependent lexicon, which associates classes and
individuals of the ontology with nouns and proper
names of the target natural languages; microplans,
which provide the NLG with patterns for realizing
property instances as sentences; and a partial or-
dering of properties, which allows the system to
order the resulting sentences as a coherent text.
The adaptivity and profiling resources include
interest rates, indicating how interesting the enti-
ties of the ontology are in any given profile; and
stereotype parameters that control generation as-
pects such as the number of facts to include in a
description or the maximum sentence length.
Furthermore, ELEON supports the author with
immediate previews, so that the effect of any
change in either the ontology or the associated re-
sources can be directly reviewed. The actual gen-
eration of the preview is relegated to external gen-
eration engines.
4 Conclusions
The demonstrated system combines semantic rep-
resentation and reasoning technologies with lan-
guage technology into a human-computer interac-
tion system that exhibits a large degree of adapt-
ability to audiences and circumstances and is able
to take advantage of existing domain model cre-
ated independently of the need to build a natural
language interface. Furthermore by clearly sepa-
rating the abstract, semantic layer from that of the
linguistic realization, it allows the re-use of lin-
guistic resources across domains and the domain
model and adaptivity resources across languages.
Acknowledgements
The demonstrated system is being developed by
the European (FP6-IST) project INDIGO.3 IN-
DIGO develops and advances human-robot inter-
action technology, enabling robots to perceive nat-
ural human behaviour, as well as making them
act in ways that are more familiar to humans. To
achieve its goals, INDIGO advances various tech-
nologies, which it integrates in a robotic platform.
References
Dimitris Bilidas, Maria Theologou, and Vangelis
Karkaletsis. 2007. Enriching OWL ontologies
with linguistic and user-related annotations: the
ELEON system. In Proc. 19th Intl. Conf. on
Tools with Artificial Intelligence (ICTAI-2007).
Robin Cooper and Staffan Larsson. 1998. Dia-
logue Moves and Information States. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 3rd Intl. Workshop on Computa-
tional Semantics (IWCS-3).
Ste?phane Dupont. 2003. Robust parameters
for noisy speech recognition. U.S. Patent
2003182114.
Dimitrios Galanis, George Karakatsiotis, Gerasi-
mos Lampouras and Ion Androutsopoulos.
2009. An open-source natural language gener-
ator for OWL ontologies and its use in Prote?ge?
and Second Life. In this volume.
Stasinos Konstantopoulos, Vangelis Karkaletsis,
and Colin Matheson. 2008. Robot personality:
Representation and externalization. In Proc.
Computational Aspects of Affective and Emo-
tional Interaction (CAFFEi 08), Patras, Greece.
3http://www.ics.forth.gr/indigo/
40
