Proceedings of the 2009 Workshop on Multiword Expressions, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 47?54,
Suntec, Singapore, 6 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Improving Statistical Machine Translation Using
Domain Bilingual Multiword Expressions
Zhixiang Ren1 Yajuan Lu?1 Jie Cao1 Qun Liu1 Yun Huang2
1Key Lab. of Intelligent Info. Processing 2Department of Computer Science
Institute of Computing Technology School of Computing
Chinese Academy of Sciences National University of Singapore
P.O. Box 2704, Beijing 100190, China Computing 1, Law Link, Singapore 117590
{renzhixiang,lvyajuan huangyun@comp.nus.edu.sg
caojie,liuqun}@ict.ac.cn
Abstract
Multiword expressions (MWEs) have
been proved useful for many natural lan-
guage processing tasks. However, how to
use them to improve performance of statis-
tical machine translation (SMT) is not well
studied. This paper presents a simple yet
effective strategy to extract domain bilin-
gual multiword expressions. In addition,
we implement three methods to integrate
bilingual MWEs to Moses, the state-of-
the-art phrase-based machine translation
system. Experiments show that bilingual
MWEs could improve translation perfor-
mance significantly.
1 Introduction
Phrase-based machine translation model has been
proved a great improvement over the initial word-
based approaches (Brown et al, 1993). Recent
syntax-based models perform even better than
phrase-based models. However, when syntax-
based models are applied to new domain with few
syntax-annotated corpus, the translation perfor-
mance would decrease. To utilize the robustness
of phrases and make up the lack of syntax or se-
mantic information in phrase-based model for do-
main translation, we study domain bilingual mul-
tiword expressions and integrate them to the exist-
ing phrase-based model.
A multiword expression (MWE) can be consid-
ered as word sequence with relatively fixed struc-
ture representing special meanings. There is no
uniform definition of MWE, and many researchers
give different properties of MWE. Sag et al (2002)
roughly defined MWE as ?idiosyncratic interpre-
tations that cross word boundaries (or spaces)?.
Cruys and Moiro?n (2007) focused on the non-
compositional property of MWE, i.e. the property
that whole expression cannot be derived from their
component words. Stanford university launched
a MWE project1, in which different qualities of
MWE were presented. For bilingual multiword
expression (BiMWE), we define a bilingual phrase
as a bilingual MWE if (1) the source phrase is a
MWE in source language; (2) the source phrase
and the target phrase must be translated to each
other exactly, i.e. there is no additional (boundary)
word in target phrase which cannot find the corre-
sponding word in source phrase, and vice versa.
In recent years, many useful methods have been
proposed to extract MWEs or BiMWEs automati-
cally (Piao et al, 2005; Bannard, 2007; Fazly and
Stevenson, 2006). Since MWE usually constrains
possible senses of a polysemous word in context,
they can be used in many NLP applications such
as information retrieval, question answering, word
sense disambiguation and so on.
For machine translation, Piao et al (2005) have
noted that the issue of MWE identification and
accurate interpretation from source to target lan-
guage remained an unsolved problem for existing
MT systems. This problem is more severe when
MT systems are used to translate domain-specific
texts, since they may include technical terminol-
ogy as well as more general fixed expressions and
idioms. Although some MT systems may employ
a machine-readable bilingual dictionary of MWE,
it is time-consuming and inefficient to obtain this
resource manually. Therefore, some researchers
have tried to use automatically extracted bilingual
MWEs in SMT. Tanaka and Baldwin (2003) de-
scribed an approach of noun-noun compound ma-
chine translation, but no significant comparison
was presented. Lambert and Banchs (2005) pre-
sented a method in which bilingual MWEs were
used to modify the word alignment so as to im-
prove the SMT quality. In their work, a bilin-
gual MWE in training corpus was grouped as
1http://mwe.stanford.edu/
47
one unique token before training alignment mod-
els. They reported that both alignment quality
and translation accuracy were improved on a small
corpus. However, in their further study, they re-
ported even lower BLEU scores after grouping
MWEs according to part-of-speech on a large cor-
pus (Lambert and Banchs, 2006). Nonetheless,
since MWE represents liguistic knowledge, the
role and usefulness of MWE in full-scale SMT
is intuitively positive. The difficulty lies in how
to integrate bilingual MWEs into existing SMT
system to improve SMT performance, especially
when translating domain texts.
In this paper, we implement three methods that
integrate domain bilingual MWEs into a phrase-
based SMT system, and show that these ap-
proaches improve translation quality significantly.
The main difference between our methods and
Lambert and Banchs? work is that we directly aim
at improving the SMT performance rather than im-
proving the word alignment quality. In detail, dif-
ferences are listed as follows:
? Instead of using the bilingual n-gram trans-
lation model, we choose the phrase-based
SMT system, Moses2, which achieves sig-
nificantly better translation performance than
many other SMT systems and is a state-of-
the-art SMT system.
? Instead of improving translation indirectly
by improving the word alignment quality,
we directly target at the quality of transla-
tion. Some researchers have argued that large
gains of alignment performance under many
metrics only led to small gains in translation
performance (Ayan and Dorr, 2006; Fraser
and Marcu, 2007).
Besides the above differences, there are some
advantages of our approaches:
? In our method, automatically extracted
MWEs are used as additional resources rather
than as phrase-table filter. Since bilingual
MWEs are extracted according to noisy au-
tomatic word alignment, errors in word align-
ment would further propagate to the SMT and
hurt SMT performance.
? We conduct experiments on domain-specific
corpus. For one thing, domain-specific
2http://www.statmt.org/moses/
corpus potentially includes a large number
of technical terminologies as well as more
general fixed expressions and idioms, i.e.
domain-specific corpus has high MWE cov-
erage. For another, after the investigation,
current SMT system could not effectively
deal with these domain-specific MWEs es-
pecially for Chinese, since these MWEs are
more flexible and concise. Take the Chi-
nese term ?^ j ? (? for example. The
meaning of this term is ?soften hard mass
and dispel pathogenic accumulation?. Ev-
ery word of this term represents a special
meaning and cannot be understood literally
or without this context. These terms are dif-
ficult to be translated even for humans, let
alone machine translation. So, treating these
terms as MWEs and applying them in SMT
system have practical significance.
? In our approach, no additional corpus is intro-
duced. We attempt to extract useful MWEs
from the training corpus and adopt suitable
methods to apply them. Thus, it benefits
for the full exploitation of available resources
without increasing great time and space com-
plexities of SMT system.
The remainder of the paper is organized as fol-
lows. Section 2 describes the bilingual MWE ex-
traction technique. Section 3 proposes three meth-
ods to apply bilingual MWEs in SMT system.
Section 4 presents the experimental results. Sec-
tion 5 draws conclusions and describes the future
work. Since this paper mainly focuses on the ap-
plication of BiMWE in SMT, we only give a brief
introduction on monolingual and bilingual MWE
extraction.
2 Bilingual Multiword Expression
Extraction
In this section we describe our approach of bilin-
gual MWE extraction. In the first step, we obtain
monolingual MWEs from the Chinese part of par-
allel corpus. After that, we look for the translation
of the extracted MWEs from parallel corpus.
2.1 Automatic Extraction of MWEs
In the past two decades, many different ap-
proaches on automatic MWE identification were
reported. In general, those approaches can be
classified into three main trends: (1) statisti-
cal approaches (Pantel and Lin, 2001; Piao et
48
al., 2005), (2) syntactic approaches (Fazly and
Stevenson, 2006; Bannard, 2007), and (3) seman-
tic approaches (Baldwin et al, 2003; Cruys and
Moiro?n, 2007). Syntax-based and semantic-based
methods achieve high precision, but syntax or se-
mantic analysis has to be introduced as preparing
step, so it is difficult to apply them to domains with
few syntactical or semantic annotation. Statistical
approaches only consider frequency information,
so they can be used to obtain MWEs from bilin-
gual corpora without deeper syntactic or semantic
analysis. Most statistical measures only take two
words into account, so it not easy to extract MWEs
containing three or more than three words.
Log Likelihood Ratio (LLR) has been proved a
good statistical measurement of the association of
two random variables (Chang et al, 2002). We
adopt the idea of statistical approaches, and pro-
pose a new algorithm named LLR-based Hierar-
chical Reducing Algorithm (HRA for short) to ex-
tract MWEs with arbitrary lengths. To illustrate
our algorithm, firstly we define some useful items.
In the following definitions, we assume the given
sentence is ?A B C D E?.
Definition 1 Unit: A unit is any sub-string of the
given sentence. For example, ?A B?, ?C?, ?C D E?
are all units, but ?A B D? is not a unit.
Definition 2 List: A list is an ordered sequence of
units which exactly cover the given sentence. For
example, {?A?,?B C D?,?E?} forms a list.
Definition 3 Score: The score function only de-
fines on two adjacent units and return the LLR
between the last word of first unit and the first
word of the second unit3. For example, the score
of adjacent unit ?B C? and ?D E? is defined as
LLR(?C?,?D?).
Definition 4 Select: The selecting operator is to
find the two adjacent units with maximum score
in a list.
Definition 5 Reduce: The reducing operator is to
remove two specific adjacent units, concatenate
them, and put back the result unit to the removed
position. For example, if we want to reduce unit
?B C? and unit ?D? in list {?A?,?B C?,?D?,?E?},
we will get the list {?A?,?B C D?,?E?}.
Initially, every word in the sentence is consid-
ered as one unit and all these units form a initial
list L. If the sentence is of length N , then the
3we use a stoplist to eliminate the units containing func-
tion words by setting their score to 0
list contains N units, of course. The final set of
MWEs, S, is initialized to empty set. After initial-
ization, the algorithm will enter an iterating loop
with two steps: (1) select the two adjacent units
with maximum score in L, naming U1 and U2; and
(2) reduce U1 and U2 in L, and insert the reducing
result into the final set S. Our algorithm termi-
nates on two conditions: (1) if the maximum score
after selection is less than a given threshold; or (2)
if L contains only one unit.
c1(?? p ?? w  ? )
c1(?? p ?? w )
c1(?? p ?? w)
c1(??)
c2(p ?? w)
c2(p ??)
c2(p) c3(??) c4(w) c5()
c6(? )
c6(?) c7()
?? p ?? w  ? 147.1 6755.2 1059.6 0 0 809.6
Figure 1: Example of Hierarchical Reducing Al-
gorithm
Let us make the algorithm clearer with an ex-
ample. Assume the threshold of score is 20, the
given sentence is ??? p ?? w  ? ?4.
Figure 1 shows the hierarchical structure of given
sentence (based on LLR of adjacent words). In
this example, four MWEs (?p ???, ?p ??
w?, ?? ?, ??? p ?? w?) are extracted
in the order, and sub-strings over dotted line in fig-
ure 1 are not extracted.
From the above example, we can see that the
extracted MWEs correspond to human intuition.
In general, the basic idea of HRA is to reflect
the hierarchical structure pattern of natural lan-
guage. Furthermore, in the HRA, MWEs are mea-
sured with the minimum LLR of adjacent words
in them, which gives lexical confidence of ex-
tracted MWEs. Finally, suppose given sentence
has length N , HRA would definitely terminate
within N ? 1 iterations, which is very efficient.
However, HRA has a problem that it would ex-
tract substrings before extracting the whole string,
even if the substrings only appear in the particu-
lar whole string, which we consider useless. To
solve this problem, we use contextual features,
4The whole sentence means ?healthy tea for preventing
hyperlipidemia?, and we give the meaning for each Chi-
nese word: ??(preventing), p(hyper-), ??(-lipid-), w(-
emia), (for),?(healthy),(tea).
49
contextual entropy (Luo and Sun, 2003) and C-
value (Frantzi and Ananiadou, 1996), to filter out
those substrings which exist only in few MWEs.
2.2 Automatic Extraction of MWE?s
Translation
In subsection 2.1, we described the algorithm to
obtain MWEs, and we would like to introduce the
procedure to find their translations from parallel
corpus in this subsection.
For mining the English translations of Chinese
MWEs, we first obtain the candidate translations
of a given MWE from the parallel corpus. Steps
are listed as follows:
1. Run GIZA++5 to align words in the training
parallel corpus.
2. For a given MWE, find the bilingual sentence
pairs where the source language sentences in-
clude the MWE.
3. Extract the candidate translations of the
MWE from the above sentence pairs accord-
ing to the algorithm described by Och (2002).
After the above procedure, we have already
extracted all possible candidate translations of a
given MWE. The next step is to distinguish right
candidates from wrong candidates. We construct
perceptron-based classification model (Collins,
2002) to solve the problem. We design two
groups of features: translation features, which
describe the mutual translating chance between
source phrase and target phrase, and the language
features, which refer to how well a candidate
is a reasonable translation. The translation fea-
tures include: (1) the logarithm of source-target
translation probability; (2) the logarithm of target-
source translation probability; (3) the logarithm
of source-target lexical weighting; (4) the loga-
rithm of target-source lexical weighting; and (5)
the logarithm of the phrase pair?s LLR (Dunning,
1993). The first four features are exactly the same
as the four translation probabilities used in tradi-
tional phrase-based system (Koehn et al, 2003).
The language features include: (1) the left entropy
of the target phrase (Luo and Sun, 2003); (2) the
right entropy of the target phrase; (3) the first word
of the target phrase; (4) the last word of the target
phrase; and (5) all words in the target phrase.
5http://www.fjoch.com/GIZA++.html
We select and annotate 33000 phrase pairs ran-
domly, of which 30000 pairs are used as training
set and 3000 pairs are used as test set. We use the
perceptron training algorithm to train the model.
As the experiments reveal, the classification preci-
sion of this model is 91.67%.
3 Application of Bilingual MWEs
Intuitively, bilingual MWE is useful to improve
the performance of SMT. However, as we de-
scribed in section 1, it still needs further research
on how to integrate bilingual MWEs into SMT
system. In this section, we propose three methods
to utilize bilingual MWEs, and we will compare
their performance in section 4.
3.1 Model Retraining with Bilingual MWEs
Bilingual phrase table is very important for
phrase-based MT system. However, due to the er-
rors in automatic word alignment and unaligned
word extension in phrase extraction (Och, 2002),
many meaningless phrases would be extracted,
which results in inaccuracy of phrase probability
estimation. To alleviate this problem, we take the
automatically extracted bilingual MWEs as paral-
lel sentence pairs, add them into the training cor-
pus, and retrain the model using GIZA++. By
increasing the occurrences of bilingual MWEs,
which are good phrases, we expect that the align-
ment would be modified and the probability es-
timation would be more reasonable. Wu et al
(2008) also used this method to perform domain
adaption for SMT. Different from their approach,
in which bilingual MWEs are extracted from ad-
ditional corpus, we extract bilingual MWEs from
the original training set. The fact that additional
resources can improve the domain-specific SMT
performance was proved by many researchers
(Wu et al, 2008; Eck et al, 2004). However,
our method shows that making better use of the
resources in hand could also enhance the quality
of SMT system. We use ?Baseline+BiMWE? to
represent this method.
3.2 New Feature for Bilingual MWEs
Lopez and Resnik (2006) once pointed out that
better feature mining can lead to substantial gain
in translation quality. Inspired by this idea, we
append one feature into bilingual phrase table to
indicate that whether a bilingual phrase contains
bilingual MWEs. In other words, if the source lan-
guage phrase contains a MWE (as substring) and
50
the target language phrase contains the translation
of the MWE (as substring), the feature value is 1,
otherwise the feature value is set to 0. Due to the
high reliability of bilingual MWEs, we expect that
this feature could help SMT system to select bet-
ter and reasonable phrase pairs during translation.
We use ?Baseline+Feat? to represent this method.
3.3 Additional Phrase Table of bilingual
MWEs
Wu et al (2008) proposed a method to construct a
phrase table by a manually-made translation dic-
tionary. Instead of manually constructing transla-
tion dictionary, we construct an additional phrase
table containing automatically extracted bilingual
MWEs. As to probability assignment, we just as-
sign 1 to the four translation probabilities for sim-
plicity. Since Moses supports multiple bilingual
phrase tables, we combine the original phrase ta-
ble and new constructed bilingual MWE table. For
each phrase in input sentence during translation,
the decoder would search all candidate transla-
tion phrases in both phrase tables. We use ?Base-
line+NewBP? to represent this method.
4 Experiments
4.1 Data
We run experiments on two domain-specific patent
corpora: one is for traditional medicine domain,
and the other is for chemical industry domain. Our
translation tasks are Chinese-to-English.
In the traditional medicine domain, table 1
shows the data statistics. For language model, we
use SRI Language Modeling Toolkit6 to train a tri-
gram model with modified Kneser-Ney smoothing
(Chen and Goodman, 1998) on the target side of
training corpus. Using our bilingual MWE ex-
tracting algorithm, 80287 bilingual MWEs are ex-
tracted from the training set.
Chinese English
Training Sentences 120,355
Words 4,688,873 4,737,843
Dev Sentences 1,000
Words 31,722 32,390
Test Sentences 1,000
Words 41,643 40,551
Table 1: Traditional medicine corpus
6http://www.speech.sri.com/projects/srilm/
In the chemical industry domain, table 2 gives
the detail information of the data. In this experi-
ment, 59466 bilingual MWEs are extracted.
Chinese English
Training Sentences 120,856
Words 4,532,503 4,311,682
Dev Sentences 1,099
Words 42,122 40,521
Test Sentences 1,099
Words 41,069 39,210
Table 2: Chemical industry corpus
We test translation quality on test set and use the
open source tool mteval-vllb.pl7 to calculate case-
sensitive BLEU 4 score (Papineni et al, 2002) as
our evaluation criteria. For this evaluation, there is
only one reference per test sentence. We also per-
form statistical significant test between two trans-
lation results (Collins et al, 2005). The mean of
all scores and relative standard deviation are calcu-
lated with a 99% confidence interval of the mean.
4.2 MT Systems
We use the state-of-the-art phrase-based SMT sys-
tem, Moses, as our baseline system. The features
used in baseline system include: (1) four transla-
tion probability features; (2) one language model
feature; (3) distance-based and lexicalized distor-
tion model feature; (4) word penalty; (5) phrase
penalty. For ?Baseline+BiMWE? method, bilin-
gual MWEs are added into training corpus, as a
result, new alignment and new phrase table are
obtained. For ?Baseline+Feat? method, one ad-
ditional 0/1 feature are introduced to each entry in
phrase table. For ?Baseline+NewBP?, additional
phrase table constructed by bilingual MWEs is
used.
Features are combined in the log-linear model.
To obtain the best translation e? of the source sen-
tence f , log-linear model uses following equation:
e? = arg max
e
p(e|f)
= arg max
e
M
?
m=1
?mhm(e, f) (1)
in which hm and ?m denote the mth feature and
weight. The weights are automatically turned by
minimum error rate training (Och, 2002) on devel-
opment set.
7http://www.nist.gov/speech/tests/mt/resources/scoring.htm
51
4.3 Results
Methods BLEU
Baseline 0.2658
Baseline+BiMWE 0.2661
Baseline+Feat 0.2675
Baseline+NewBP 0.2719
Table 3: Translation results of using bilingual
MWEs in traditional medicine domain
Table 3 gives our experiment results. From
this table, we can see that, bilingual MWEs
improve translation quality in all cases. The
Baseline+NewBP method achieves the most im-
provement of 0.61% BLEU score compared
with the baseline system. The Baseline+Feat
method comes next with 0.17% BLEU score im-
provement. And the Baseline+BiMWE achieves
slightly higher translation quality than the baseline
system.
To our disappointment, however, none of these
improvements are statistical significant. We
manually examine the extracted bilingual MWEs
which are labeled positive by perceptron algorithm
and find that although the classification precision
is high (91.67%), the proportion of positive exam-
ple is relatively lower (76.69%). The low positive
proportion means that many negative instances
have been wrongly classified to positive, which in-
troduce noises. To remove noisy bilingual MWEs,
we use the length ratio x of the source phrase over
the target phrase to rank the bilingual MWEs la-
beled positive. Assume x follows Gaussian distri-
butions, then the ranking score of phrase pair (s, t)
is defined as the following formula:
Score(s, t) = log(LLR(s, t))? 1?
2pi?
?e?
(x??)2
2?2
(2)
Here the mean ? and variance ?2 are estimated
from the training set. After ranking by score, we
select the top 50000, 60000 and 70000 bilingual
MWEs to perform the three methods mentioned in
section 3. The results are showed in table 4.
From this table, we can conclude that: (1) All
the three methods on all settings improve BLEU
score; (2) Except the Baseline+BiMWE method,
the other two methods obtain significant improve-
ment of BLEU score (0.2728, 0.2734, 0.2724)
over baseline system (0.2658); (3) When the scale
of bilingual MWEs is relatively small (50000,
60000), the Baseline+Feat method performs better
Methods 50000 60000 70000
Baseline 0.2658
Baseline+BiMWE 0.2671 0.2686 0.2715
Baseline+Feat 0.2728 0.2734 0.2712
Baseline+NewBP 0.2662 0.2706 0.2724
Table 4: Translation results of using bilingual
MWEs in traditional medicine domain
than others; (4) As the number of bilingual MWEs
increasing, the Baseline+NewBP method outper-
forms the Baseline+Feat method; (5) Comparing
table 4 and 3, we can see it is not true that the
more bilingual MWEs, the better performance of
phrase-based SMT. This conclusion is the same as
(Lambert and Banchs, 2005).
To verify the assumption that bilingual MWEs
do indeed improve the SMT performance not only
on particular domain, we also perform some ex-
periments on chemical industry domain. Table 5
shows the results. From this table, we can see that
these three methods can improve the translation
performance on chemical industry domain as well
as on the traditional medicine domain.
Methods BLEU
Baseline 0.1882
Baseline+BiMWE 0.1928
Baseline+Feat 0.1917
Baseline+Newbp 0.1914
Table 5: Translation results of using bilingual
MWEs in chemical industry domain
4.4 Discussion
In order to know in what respects our methods im-
prove performance of translation, we manually an-
alyze some test sentences and gives some exam-
ples in this subsection.
(1) For the first example in table 6, ?? ??
is aligned to other words and not correctly trans-
lated in baseline system, while it is aligned to cor-
rect target phrase ?dredging meridians? in Base-
line+BiMWE, since the bilingual MWE (?? ??,
?dredging meridians?) has been added into train-
ing corpus and then aligned by GIZA++.
(2) For the second example in table 6, ??
? has two candidate translation in phrase table:
?tea? and ?medicated tea?. The baseline system
chooses the ?tea? as the translation of ?? ?,
while the Baseline+Feat system chooses the ?med-
52
Src T ?? ? k ?? ! ? ? ! ? ? ! ) 9 ! | Y ! S  _? ?
 , ? ?  ?E 8 "
Ref the obtained product is effective in tonifying blood , expelling cold , dredging meridians
, promoting production of body fluid , promoting urination , and tranquilizing mind ;
and can be used for supplementing nutrition and protecting health .
Baseline the food has effects in tonifying blood , dispelling cold , promoting salivation and water
, and tranquilizing , and tonic effects , and making nutritious health .
+Bimwe the food has effects in tonifying blood , dispelling cold , dredging meridians , promoting
salivation , promoting urination , and tranquilizing tonic , nutritious pulverizing .
Src ? ? ???J ! J ! ?J !?! 5J "
Ref the product can also be made into tablet , pill , powder , medicated tea , or injection .
Baseline may also be made into tablet , pill , powder , tea , or injection .
+Feat may also be made into tablet , pill , powder , medicated tea , or injection .
Table 6: Translation example
icated tea? because the additional feature gives
high probability of the correct translation ?medi-
cated tea?.
5 Conclusion and Future Works
This paper presents the LLR-based hierarchical
reducing algorithm to automatically extract bilin-
gual MWEs and investigates the performance of
three different application strategies in applying
bilingual MWEs for SMT system. The translation
results show that using an additional feature to rep-
resent whether a bilingual phrase contains bilin-
gual MWEs performs the best in most cases. The
other two strategies can also improve the quality
of SMT system, although not as much as the first
one. These results are encouraging and motivated
to do further research in this area.
The strategies of bilingual MWE application is
roughly simply and coarse in this paper. Com-
plicated approaches should be taken into account
during applying bilingual MWEs. For example,
we may consider other features of the bilingual
MWEs and examine their effect on the SMT per-
formance. Besides application in phrase-based
SMT system, bilingual MWEs may also be inte-
grated into other MT models such as hierarchical
phrase-based models or syntax-based translation
models. We will do further studies on improving
statistical machine translation using domain bilin-
gual MWEs.
Acknowledgments
This work is supported by National Natural Sci-
ence Foundation of China, Contracts 60603095
and 60873167. We would like to thank the anony-
mous reviewers for their insightful comments on
an earlier draft of this paper.
References
Necip Fazil Ayan and Bonnie J. Dorr. 2006. Going
beyond aer: an extensive analysis of word align-
ments and their impact on mt. In Proceedings of the
44th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 9?16.
Timothy Baldwin, Colin Bannard, Takaaki Tanaka, and
Dominic Widdows. 2003. An empirical model
of multiword expression decomposability. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACL-2003 Workshop on Multiword
Expressions: Analysis, Acquisiton and Treatment,
pages 89?96.
Colin Bannard. 2007. A measure of syntactic flex-
ibility for automatically identifying multiword ex-
pressions in corpora. In Proceedings of the ACL
Workshop on A Broader Perspective on Multiword
Expressions, pages 1?8.
Peter F. Brown, Stephen Della Pietra, Vincent J. Della
Pietra, and Robert L. Mercer. 1993. The mathe-
matics of statistical machine translation: Parameter
estimation. Computational Linguistics, 19(2):263?
311.
Baobao Chang, Pernilla Danielsson, and Wolfgang
Teubert. 2002. Extraction of translation unit from
chinese-english parallel corpora. In Proceedings of
the first SIGHAN workshop on Chinese language
processing, pages 1?5.
Stanley F. Chen and Joshua Goodman. 1998. Am em-
pirical study of smoothing techniques for language
modeling. Technical report.
Michael Collins, Philipp Koehn, and Ivona Kuc?erova?.
2005. Clause restructuring for statistical machine
translation. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual
53
Meeting on Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 531?540.
Michael Collins. 2002. Discriminative training meth-
ods for hidden markov models: Theory and exper-
iments with perceptron algorithms. In Proceedings
of the Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing Conference, pages 1?8.
Tim Van de Cruys and Begon?a Villada Moiro?n. 2007.
Semantics-based multiword expression extraction.
In Proceedings of the Workshop on A Broader Per-
spective on Multiword Expressions, pages 25?32.
Ted Dunning. 1993. Accurate methods for the statis-
tics of surprise and coincidence. Computational
Linguistics, 19(1):61?74.
Matthias Eck, Stephan Vogel, and Alex Waibel. 2004.
Improving statistical machine translation in the med-
ical domain using the unified medical language sys-
tem. In Proceedings of the 20th international con-
ference on Computational Linguistics table of con-
tents, pages 792?798.
Afsaneh Fazly and Suzanne Stevenson. 2006. Auto-
matically constructing a lexicon of verb phrase id-
iomatic combinations. In Proceedings of the EACL,
pages 337?344.
Katerina T. Frantzi and Sophia Ananiadou. 1996. Ex-
tracting nested collocations. In Proceedings of the
16th conference on Computational linguistics, pages
41?46.
Alexander Fraser and Daniel Marcu. 2007. Measuring
word alignment quality for statistical machine trans-
lation. Computational Linguistics, 33(3):293?303.
Philipp Koehn, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu.
2003. Statistical phrase-based translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2003 Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics on Human Language Technology, pages
48?54.
Patrik Lambert and Rafael Banchs. 2005. Data in-
ferred multi-word expressions for statistical machine
translation. In Proceedings of Machine Translation
Summit X, pages 396?403.
Patrik Lambert and Rafael Banchs. 2006. Grouping
multi-word expressions according to part-of-speech
in statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
the Workshop on Multi-word-expressions in a multi-
lingual context, pages 9?16.
Adam Lopez and Philip Resnik. 2006. Word-based
alignment, phrase-based translation: What?s the
link? In proceedings of the 7th conference of the as-
sociation for machine translation in the Americas:
visions for the future of machine translation, pages
90?99.
Shengfen Luo and Maosong Sun. 2003. Two-character
chinese word extraction based on hybrid of internal
and contextual measures. In Proceedings of the sec-
ond SIGHAN workshop on Chinese language pro-
cessing, pages 24?30.
Franz Josef Och. 2002. Statistical Machine Transla-
tion: From Single-Word Models to Alignment Tem-
plates. Ph.d. thesis, Computer Science Department,
RWTH Aachen, Germany.
Patrick Pantel and Dekang Lin. 2001. A statistical cor-
pus based term extractor. In AI ?01: Proceedings of
the 14th Biennial Conference of the Canadian Soci-
ety on Computational Studies of Intelligence, pages
36?46.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the
40th Annual Conference of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 311?318.
Scott Songlin Piao, Paul Rayson, Dawn Archer, and
Tony McEnery. 2005. Comparing and combining a
semantic tagger and a statistical tool for mwe extrac-
tion. Computer Speech and Language, 19(4):378?
397.
Ivan A. Sag, Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann
Copestake, and Dan Flickinger. 2002. Multi-
word expressions: A pain in the neck for nlp. In
Proceedings of the 3th International Conference
on Intelligent Text Processing and Computational
Linguistics(CICLing-2002), pages 1?15.
Takaaki Tanaka and Timothy Baldwin. 2003. Noun-
noun compound machine translation: A feasibility
study on shallow processing. In Proceedings of
the ACL-2003 Workshop on Multiword Expressions:
Analysis, Acquisition and Treatment, pages 17?24.
Hua Wu, Haifeng Wang, and Chengqing Zong. 2008.
Domain adaptation for statistical machine transla-
tion with domain dictionary and monolingual cor-
pora. In Proceedings of Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics (COLING), pages 993?1000.
54
