Proceedings of the Workshop on BioNLP, pages 171?178,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Evaluation of the Clinical Question Answering Presentation 
 
Yong-Gang Cao John Ely Lamont Antieau Hong Yu 
College of Health Sci-
ences 
Carver College of 
Medicine 
College of Health Sci-
ences 
College of Health Sci-
ences 
University of Wisconsin 
Milwaukee 
University of Iowa University of Wisconsin  
Milwaukee 
University of Wisconsin 
Milwaukee 
Milwaukee, WI 
53211,USA 
Iowa, IA 52242,USA Milwaukee, WI 
53211,USA 
Milwaukee, WI 
53211,USA 
yonggang@uwm.edu john-
ely@uiowa.edu 
antieau@uwm.edu hongyu@uwm.edu 
 
 
 
Abstract 
Question answering is different from infor-
mation retrieval in that it attempts to an-
swer questions by providing summaries 
from numerous retrieved documents rather 
than by simply providing a list of docu-
ments that requires users to do additional 
work.  However, the quality of answers that 
question answering provides has not been 
investigated extensively, and the practical 
approach to presenting question answers 
still needs more study. In addition to fac-
toid answering using phrases or entities, 
most question answering systems use a sen-
tence-based approach for generating an-
swers. However, many sentences are often 
only meaningful or understandable in their 
context, and a passage-based presentation 
can often provide richer, more coherent 
context. However, passage-based presenta-
tions may introduce additional noise that 
places greater burden on users. In this 
study, we performed a quantitative evalua-
tion on the two kinds of presentation pro-
duced by our online clinical question 
answering system, AskHERMES 
(http://www.AskHERMES.org). The over-
all finding is that, although irrelevant con-
text can hurt the quality of an answer, the 
passage-based approach is generally more 
effective in that it provides richer context 
and matching across sentences. 
1 Introduction 
Question answering is different from informa-
tion retrieval in that it attempts to answer ques-
tions by providing summaries from numerous 
retrieved documents rather than by simply pro-
viding a list of documents for preparing the user 
to do even more exploration. The presentation of 
answers to questions is a key factor in its effi-
ciently meeting the information needs of infor-
mation users. 
 
While different systems have adopted a variety 
of approaches for presenting the results of ques-
tion answering, the efficacy of the use of these 
different approaches in extracting, summarizing, 
and presenting results from the biomedical lit-
erature has not been adequately investigated.  In 
this paper, we compare the sentence-based ap-
proach and the passage-based approach by using 
our own system, AskHERMES, which is de-
signed to retrieve passages of text from the bio-
medical literature in response to ad hoc clinical 
questions.   
2 Background 
2.1 Clinical Question Collection 
The National Library of Medicine (NLM) has 
published a collection of 4,653 questions that 
can be freely downloaded from the Clinical 
Questions Collection website1 and includes the 
questions below: 
 
                                                           
1
 http://clinques.nlm.nih.gov/JitSearch.html 
171
Question 1: ?The maximum dose of estradiol 
valerate is 20 milligrams every 2 weeks. We 
use 25 milligrams every month which seems to 
control her hot flashes. But is that ade-
quate for osteoporosis and cardiovascular 
disease prevention?? 
 
Question 2: ?Child has pectus carinatum. Ra-
diologist told Dr. X sometimes there are as-
sociated congenital heart problems. Dr. X 
wants to study up on this. Does the patient 
have these associated problems?? 
 
Such examples show that clinicians pose com-
plex questions of a far greater sophistication 
than the simple term searches that typical infor-
mation retrieval systems require as input. Ask-
HERMES, however, has been designed to 
handle such complexity as it encounters it. 
2.2 Result Presentation 
In recent years, there has been an emergence of 
numerous search engines ? both open domain 
and domain-specific ? as well as question an-
swering systems, and these systems have em-
ployed a variety of methods for presenting their 
results, including the use of metadata, sentences, 
snippets, and passages. PubMed (Anon 2009a) 
and EAGLi (Anon 2009b), for example, use ar-
ticle metadata to present their results, and the 
combination of title, author name and publica-
tion name that they use works like the citation at 
the end of a paper to provide users with a gen-
eral idea of what the listed article is about. On 
the other hand, AnswerBus (Anon 2009c) and 
AnswerEngine (Anon 2009d) extract sentences 
from relevant articles, then rank and list them 
one by one to answer the questions that users 
have.  In response to a query, Google and other 
general search engines provide the title of a 
work plus a snippet of text to provide metadata 
as well as multiple matching hints from articles. 
In response to user questions, Start (Anon 
2009e), Powerset(Anon 2009f) and Ask (Anon 
2009g) provide a single passage as output, mak-
ing them ideal for answering simple questions 
because they do not require users to access and 
read extra articles in order to answer the ques-
tions they have.  
 
Each of these methods of presentation has 
strengths and weaknesses.  First, a strength of 
using metadata is that it provides a way for dis-
covering the general idea of an article, but it 
does not explain to a user why the article is rele-
vant to the query or question, making it difficult 
to decide whether it is worth the time and effort 
to access the listed article to read more. An ap-
proach presenting a single sentence in response 
to a query can result in a good answer if the user 
is lucky but typically provides a limited idea of 
what the target article contains and demands that 
users access the source of the item to learn more. 
A snippet-based approach can provide a hint as 
to why the target article is relevant, but snippets 
are limited in that they are composed of seg-
ments and usually cannot be read at all; even 
presenting a snippet with metadata as Google 
does is not suitable for adequately answering 
many questions.  
 
We propose a passage-based approach in which 
each passage is constructed by coherent sen-
tences.  The approach we propose is similar to 
that used by Start and Ask, but these systems 
have limited knowledge bases and require que-
ries to be written using very specific question 
types. On the other hand, our system will be able 
to answer ad hoc questions (that is, questions not 
limited to specific types).  Furthermore, the sys-
tem we propose will be oriented toward answer-
ing questions in the biomedical community, a 
field in which automated question answering 
and information retrieval and extraction are in 
strong demand.    
3 Passage-Based Approach versus Sen-
tence-Based Approach  
We define as sentence-based approaches those 
approaches that return a list of independently 
retrieved and ranked sentences. Although all the 
sentences are assumed to be relevant to the ques-
tion, there are no assumptions of their relation-
ship with each other. On the other hand, a 
passage-based approach is defined as one that 
returns a list of independently retrieved and 
ranked passages, each of which can comprise 
multiple tightly coupled sentences. 
 
The passage-based approach has two benefits: 
 
1. It provides richer context for reading 
and understanding. 
2. It provides greater evidence for relevant 
ranking of the passage by matching 
across sentences. 
 
For example, in Figure 1, the passage-based out-
put of the top results of AskHERMES pertains 
to the question ?What is the difference between 
the Denver ii and the regular Denver develop-
mental screening test?? The first answer is a 
passage with two sentences; the first sentence in 
the passage informs users that there have been 
172
criticisms of the ?Denver Developmental 
Screening Test,? and the second sentence shows 
that ?Denver II? addressed several concerns of 
the ?Denver Developmental Screening Test.? 
The two sentences indicate that the article will 
mention several issues that answer the question. 
And the second passage directly shows the an-
swer to the question: The criteria to select Den-
ver II and the difference between the two tests.  
 
If we use the sentence-based approach (see Fig-
ure 2), the sentences in the first passage will be 
ranked very low and might not appear in the re-
sults because both of them contain only one of 
the screening tests mentioned in the question. 
The second passage will be reduced to only the 
second sentence, which is an incomplete answer 
to the question; consequently, the user may re-
main uninformed of the selection criteria be-
tween the two screening tests without further 
examination of the article. Figure 2 shows the 
sentence-based output of the same question. A 
comparison of the examples in the figure clearly 
shows how the results of the query are affected 
by the two approaches. The first result is incom-
plete, and the second and third results are irrele-
vant to the question although they have many 
matched terms. 
 
 
Figure 1. AskHERMES? passage-based output for the question ?What is the difference between the Den-
ver ii and the regular Denver developmental screening test?? 
 
 
Figure 2. AskHERMES? sentence-based output for the question ?What is the difference between 
the Denver ii and the regular Denver developmental screening test?? 
173
 While the results shown in Figures 1 and 2 suggest 
that a passage-based approach might be better than 
a sentence-based approach for question answering, 
this is not to say that passage-based approaches are 
infallible. Most importantly, a passage-based ap-
proach can introduce noisy sentences that place an 
additional burden on users as they search for the 
most informative answers to their questions. In 
Figure 3, the first sentence in the output of sen-
tence-based approach answers the question. How-
ever, the passage-based approach does not answer 
the question until the fourth passage, and when it 
does, it outputs the same core answer sentence that 
was provided in the sentence-based approach. Ad-
ditionally, the core sentence is nested within a 
group of sentences that on their own are only mar-
ginally relevant to the query and in effect bury the 
answer. 
 
 
Figure 3. An example comparing the sentence-based approach and passage-based approach 
 
4 Evaluation Design 
To evaluate whether the passage-based presenta-
tion improves question answering, we plugged two 
different approaches into our real system by mak-
ing use of either the passage-based or the sentence-
based ranking and presentation unit constructor. 
Both of them share the same document retrieval 
component, and they share the same ranking and 
clustering strategies. In our system, we used a den-
sity-based passage retrieval strategy (Tellex et al 
2003) and a sequence sensitive ranking strategy 
similar to ROUGE (F. Liu and Y. Liu 2008). An 
in-house query-oriented clustering algorithm was 
used to construct the order and structure of the fi-
nal hierarchical presentation. The difference be-
tween the two approaches is the unit for ranking 
and presentation. A passage-based approach takes 
the passage as its primary unit, with each passage 
consisting of one or more sentences. Those sen-
tences in the passage are extracted from the adja-
cent matching sentences in the original article.  
174
To evaluate the difference between the passage-
based presentation and sentence-based presenta-
tion, we randomly selected 20 questions from 
4,653 clinical questions. A physician (Dr. John 
Ely) was shown the corresponding passage-based 
and sentence-based outputs of every question and 
was then asked to judge the relevance of the output 
and which output had the higher quality answer. 
Because physicians have little time in clinical set-
tings to be sifting through data, we presented only 
the top five units (sentences or passages) of output 
for every question. 
 
 
Figure 4. A partial screenshot of AskHERMES 
illustrating hierarchical clustering based on the 
question ?What is the dose of sporanox?? 
 
For answer extraction, we built a hierarchical 
weighted-keyword grouping model (Yu and Cao 
2008;Yu and Cao 2009). More specifically, in us-
ing this model we group units based on the pres-
ence of expanded query-term categories: 
keywords, keyword synonyms, UMLS concepts, 
UMLS synonyms, and original words, and we then 
prioritize the groups based on their ranking. For 
example, units that incorporate keywords are 
grouped into the first cluster, followed by the clus-
ter of units that incorporate keyword synonyms, 
UMLS concepts, etc. The units that appear syn-
onymous are in the clusters with the same parent 
cluster. Figure 4 shows an example of the top 
branch of the clusters for the question ?What is the 
dose of sporanox?? in which the answers are or-
ganized by sporanox and dose as well as their 
synonyms. 
 
5 Evaluation Result and Discussion 
We classify physician evaluations as being of the 
following four types and plot their distribution in 
Figure 5: 
? Hard Question: The question is considered 
difficult because it is patient-specific or 
unclear (that is, it is a poorly formed ques-
tion), e.g., ?Multiple small ulcers on ankles 
and buttocks. No history of bites. I sent 
him for a complete blood count (cbc) and 
blood sugar but I don't know what these 
are.? 
? Failed Question: Neither approach can find 
any relevant information for the question. 
? Passage Better: Passage-based approach 
presents more useful information for an-
swering the question. 
? Sentence Better: Sentence-based approach 
provides the same amount of useful infor-
mation while reducing the effort required 
by the passage-based approach. 
 
Failed 
Question
25%
Passage 
Better
40%
Sentence 
Better
15%
Hard 
Question
20%
 
Figure 5. Distribution of the defined Evaluation 
categories 
 
 
175
The evaluation data is shown in Table 1.  In our 
study, the score range is set from 0 to 5 with the 
value 0 referring to answers that are totally irrele-
vant to the question and the value 5 meaning there 
is enough information to fully answer the question. 
Our results show that the passage-based approach 
is better than the sentence-based approach (p-value 
< 0.05).  
 
Table 1. Quantitative measurement of the answers 
generated by both approaches to the 20 questions 
No. Passage-based 
approach score 
Sentence-based 
approach score 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
mean 
s.deviation 
3 
2 
2 
0 
0 
1 
3 
3 
0 
0 
1 
1 
3 
0 
1 
2 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1.15 
1.18 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
2 
2 
4 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.55 
1.05 
p-value 0.01 
 
Through further analysis of the results, we found 
that 70% of the sentences yielded by the sentence-
based approach did not answer the question at all 
(the score is zero), while this was true for only 
40% of the output of the passage-based approach. 
This indicates that the passage-based approach pro-
vides more evidence for answering questions by 
providing richer context and matching across sen-
tences.  
 
On the other hand, if the question was too general 
and included a plethora of detail and little focus, 
both approaches failed.  For example, in the ques-
tion ?One year and 10-month-old boy removed 
from his home because of parental neglect. Care-
taker says he often cries like he's in pain, possibly 
abdominal pain. Not eating, just drinking liquids, 
not sleeping. The big question with him: "is it 
something physical or all adjustment disorder?"? 
there is a great deal of description of the boy, and a 
variety of common symptoms are also provided. 
AskHERMES found a passage containing all of the 
following extracted words: ?availability, because, 
before, between, changes, children, decrease, dis-
order/disorders, drug, eating, going, increase, indi-
cations/reasons, intake, laboratory, level, may, 
often, one, patient/patients, physical, recom-
mended, routinely, specific, still, symp-
tom/symptoms, two, urine, used, women, 
treat/treated/treating/therapy/treatment/treatments, 
and work.? But since these words are so commonly 
used in a variety of scenarios, the output passage is 
off-topic. 
 
For very simple questions, the sentence-based ap-
proach works well for providing answers in a very 
concise form. For example, the question ?what is 
the dose of zyrtec for a 3-year-old?? can be an-
swered by the dosage amount for the target age 
group, and the query resulted in this answer: 
??children of both sexes aged between 2 to 6 
years with allergy rhinitis (AR) were included in 
this study, who were randomly selected to be 
treated with Zyrtec (Cetirizine 2 HCL) drops 5 mg 
daily for 3 weeks.? From a literal view, this looks 
like an answer to the question because it discusses 
the dosage of Zyrtec for the specific age group; 
however, it actually describes an experiment and 
does not necessarily provide the suggested dosage 
that the user is seeking. This leads to an interesting 
problem for clinical question answering: how 
should experimental data be distinguished from 
suggestion data for recommended daily usage? 
People tend to ask for the best answer instead of 
the possible answers. This is one of the main rea-
sons why in Table 1, there is no perfect score (5). 
 
Our result looks similar to the conclusion of Lin et 
al (Jimmy Lin et al 2003), whose study on open-
domain factoid question answering indicates a 
preference among users for the answer-in-
paragraph approach rather than  the three other 
types of presentation: exact-answer (that is, answer 
entity), answer-in-sentence, and answer-in-
176
document. The results of both Lin?s research and 
our own indicate the usefulness of context, but 
Lin?s work focuses on how surrounding context 
helps users to understand and become confident in 
answers retrieved by simple open-domain queries, 
while our research reveals that adjacent sentences 
can improve the quality of answers retrieved using 
complex clinical questions. Our results also indi-
cate that context is important for relevance rank-
ing, which has not been thoroughly investigated in 
previous research. Furthermore, our work places 
emphasis on proper passage extraction from the 
document or paragraph because irrelevant context 
can also be a burden to users, especially for physi-
cians who have limited time for reading through 
irrelevant text. Our continuous sentence-based pas-
sage extraction method works well for our study, 
but other approaches should be investigated to im-
prove the passage-based approach.  
 
With respect to the quality of the answer, the con-
tent of the output is not the only important issue. 
Rather, the question itself and the organization of 
content are also important issues to consider. Luo 
and Tang (Luo and Tang 2008) proposed an itera-
tive user interface to capture the information needs 
of users to form structured queries with the assis-
tance of a knowledge base, and this kind of ap-
proach guides users toward a clearer and more 
formal representation of their questions. DynaCat 
(Pratt and Fagan 2000) also uses a knowledge-
based approach to organize search results. Thus, 
applying domain-specific knowledge is promising 
for improving the quality of an answer, but the dif-
ficulty of the knowledge-based approach is that 
building and updating such knowledge bases is 
human labor intensive, and furthermore, a knowl-
edge-based approach restricts the usage of the sys-
tem.  
 
6 Conclusion and Future Work 
In this study, we performed a quantitative evalua-
tion on the two kinds of presentation produced by 
our online clinical question answering system, 
AskHERMES. Although there is some indication 
that sentence-based passages are more effective for 
some question types, the overall finding is that by 
providing richer context and matching across sen-
tences, the passage-based approach is generally a 
more effective approach for answering questions. 
Compared to Lin?s study on open-domain factoid 
questions (Jimmy Lin et al 2003), our study ad-
dresses the usefulness of context for answering 
complex clinical questions and its ability to im-
prove answer quality instead of just adding sur-
rounding context to the specific answer. 
While conducting this investigation, we noticed 
that simple continuous sentence-based passage 
constructions have limitations in that they have no 
semantic boundary and will form too long a pas-
sage if the question contains many common words. 
Therefore, we will take advantage of recent ad-
vances we have made in HTML page analysis 
components to split documents into paragraphs and 
use the paragraph as the maximum passage, that is, 
a passage will only group sentences that appear in 
the same paragraph. Furthermore, by setting the 
boundary at a single paragraph, we can loosen the 
adjacency criterion of our current approach, which 
requires that the sentences in a passage be next to 
each other in the original source, and instead adopt 
a requirement that they only be in the same para-
graph. This will enable us to build a model consist-
ing of one or more core sentences as well as 
several satellite sentences that could be used to 
make the answer more complete or understandable. 
Acknowledgments 
The authors acknowledge support from the Na-
tional Library of Medicine to Hong Yu, grant 
number 1R01LM009836-01A1. Any opinions, 
findings, or recommendations are those of the au-
thors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the 
NIH. 
References  
Anon. 2009a. PubMed Home. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/ (Ac-
cessed: 10. March 2009). 
Anon. 2009b. EAGLi: the EAGL project's biomedical 
question answering and information retrieval 
interface. http://eagl.unige.ch/EAGLi/ (Ac-
cessed: 6. March 2009). 
Anon. 2009c. AnswerBus Question Answering System. 
http://www.answerbus.com/index.shtml (Ac-
cessed: 6. March 2009). 
Anon. 2009d. Question Answering Engine. 
http://www.answers.com/bb/ (Accessed: 6. 
March 2009). 
177
Anon. 2009e. The START Natural Language Question 
Answering System. http://start.csail.mit.edu/ 
(Accessed: 6. March 2009). 
Anon. 2009f. Powerset. http://www.powerset.com/ (Ac-
cessed: 19. April 2009). 
Anon. 2009g. Ask.com Search Engine - Better Web 
Search. http://www.ask.com/ (Accessed: 6. 
March 2009). 
Lin, Jimmy, Dennis Quan, Vineet Sinha, Karun Bakshi, 
David Huynh Boris, Boris Katz and David R 
Karger. 2003. What Makes a Good Answer? 
The Role of Context in Question Answering 
Jimmy Lin, Dennis Quan, Vineet Sinha, Karun 
Bakshi, PROCEEDINGS OF INTERACT 2003: 
25--32. doi:10.1.1.4.7644, . 
Liu, F. and Y. Liu. 2008. Correlation between rouge and 
human evaluation of extractive meeting sum-
maries. In: The 46th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics: 
Human Language Technologies (ACL-HLT 
2008). 
Luo, Gang and Chunqiang Tang. 2008. On iterative 
intelligent medical search. In: Proceedings of 
the 31st annual international ACM SIGIR con-
ference on Research and development in in-
formation retrieval, 3-10. Singapore, 
Singapore: ACM. 
doi:10.1145/1390334.1390338, 
http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1390338 
(Accessed: 13. March 2009). 
Pratt, Wanda and Lawrence Fagan. 2000. The Useful-
ness of Dynamically Categorizing Search Re-
sults. Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association 7, Nr. 6 (December): 
605?617. 
Tellex, S., B. Katz, J. Lin, A. Fernandes and G. Marton. 
2003. Quantitative evaluation of passage re-
trieval algorithms for question answering. In: 
Proceedings of the 26th annual international 
ACM SIGIR conference on Research and de-
velopment in informaion retrieval, 41-47. 
ACM New York, NY, USA. 
Yu, Hong and Yong-Gang Cao. 2008. Automatically 
extracting information needs from ad hoc clini-
cal questions. AMIA ... Annual Symposium 
Proceedings / AMIA Symposium. AMIA Sym-
posium: 96-100. 
Yu, Hong and Yong-Gang Cao. 2009. Using the 
weighted keyword models to improve informa-
tion retrieval for answering biomedical ques-
tions. In: To appear in AMIA Summit on 
Translational Bioinformatics. 
178
