Proceedings of the ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Conference Short Papers, pages 201?204,
Suntec, Singapore, 4 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Mining Association Language Patterns for  
Negative Life Event Classification 
 
 
Liang-Chih Yu1, Chien-Lung Chan1, Chung-Hsien Wu2 and Chao-Cheng Lin3 
1Department of Information Management, Yuan Ze University, Taiwan, R.O.C. 
2Department of CSIE, National Cheng Kung University, Taiwan, R.O.C. 
3Department of Psychiatry, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taiwan, R.O.C. 
{lcyu, clchan}@saturn.yzu.edu.tw, chwu@csie.ncku.edu.tw, linchri@gmail.com 
 
  
 
Abstract 
 
Negative life events, such as death of a family 
member, argument with a spouse and loss of a 
job, play an important role in triggering de-
pressive episodes. Therefore, it is worth to de-
velop psychiatric services that can automati-
cally identify such events. In this paper, we 
propose the use of association language pat-
terns, i.e., meaningful combinations of words 
(e.g., <loss, job>), as features to classify sen-
tences with negative life events into prede-
fined categories (e.g., Family, Love, Work). 
The language patterns are discovered using a 
data mining algorithm, called association pat-
tern mining, by incrementally associating fre-
quently co-occurred words in the sentences 
annotated with negative life events. The dis-
covered patterns are then combined with sin-
gle words to train classifiers. Experimental re-
sults show that association language patterns 
are significant features, thus yielding better 
performance than the baseline system using 
single words alone. 
1 Introduction 
With the increased incidence of depressive dis-
orders, many psychiatric websites have devel-
oped community-based services such as message 
boards, web forums and blogs for public access. 
Through these services, individuals can describe 
their stressful or negative life events such as 
death of a family member, argument with a 
spouse and loss of a job, along with depressive 
symptoms, such as depressive mood, suicidal 
tendencies and anxiety. Such psychiatric texts 
(e.g., forum posts) contain large amounts of natu-
ral language expressions related to negative life 
events, making them useful resources for build-
ing more effective psychiatric services. For in-
stance, a psychiatric retrieval service can retrieve 
relevant forum or blog posts according to the 
negative life events experienced by users so that 
they can be aware that they are not alone because 
many people have suffered from the same or 
similar problems. The users can then create a 
community discussion to share their experiences 
with each other. Additionally, a dialog system 
can generate supportive responses like ?Don?t 
worry?, ?That?s really sad? and ?Cheer up? if it 
can understand the negative life events embed-
ded in the example sentences shown in Table 1. 
Therefore, this study proposes a framework for 
negative life event classification. We formulate 
this problem as a sentence classification task; 
that is, classify sentences according to the type of 
negative life events within them. The class labels 
used herein are presented in Table 1, which are 
derived from Brostedt and Pedersen (2003). 
Traditional approaches to sentence classifica-
tion (Khoo et al, 2006; Naughton et al, 2008) or 
text categorization (Sebastiani 2002) usually 
adopt bag-of-words as baseline features to train 
classifiers. Since the bag-of-words approach 
treats each word independently without consider-
ing the relationships of words in sentences, some 
researchers have investigated the use of n-grams 
to capture sequential relations between words to 
boost classification performance (Chitturi and 
Hansen, 2008; Li and Zong, 2008). The use of n-
grams is effective in capturing local dependen-
cies of words, but tends to suffer from data 
sparseness problem in capturing long-distance 
dependencies since higher-order n-grams require 
large training data to obtain reliable estimation. 
For our task, the expressions of negative life 
events can be characterized by association lan-
guage patterns, i.e., meaningful combinations of 
words, such as <worry, children, health>, <break 
up, boyfriend>, <argue, friend>, <loss, job>, and 
201
<school, teacher, blame> in the example sen-
tences in Table 1. Such language patterns are not 
necessarily composed of continuous words. In-
stead, they are usually composed of the words 
with long-distance dependencies, which cannot 
be easily captured by n-grams. 
Therefore, the aim of this study is two-fold: (1) 
to automatically discover association language 
patterns from the sentences annotated with nega-
tive life events; and (2) to classify sentences with 
negative life events using the discovered patterns. 
To discover association language patterns, we 
incorporate the measure mutual information (MI) 
into a data mining algorithm, called association 
pattern mining, to incrementally derive fre-
quently co-occurred words in sentences (Section 
2). The discovered patterns are then combined 
with single words as features to train classifiers 
for negative life event classification (Section 3). 
Experimental results are presented in Section 4. 
Conclusions are finally drawn in Section 5. 
2 Association Language Pattern Mining 
The problem of language pattern acquisition can 
be converted into the problem of association pat-
tern mining, where each sales transaction in a 
database can be considered as a sentence in the 
corpora, and each item in a transaction denotes a 
word in a sentence. An association language pat-
tern is defined herein as a combination of multi-
ple associated words, denoted by 1,..., kw w< > . 
Thus, the task of association pattern mining is to 
mine the language patterns of frequently associ-
ated words from the training sentences. For this 
purpose, we adopt the Apriori algorithm 
(Agrawal and Srikant, 1994) and modified it 
slightly to fit our application. Its basic concept is 
to identify frequent word sets recursively, and 
then generate association language patterns from 
the frequent word sets. For simplicity, only the 
combinations of nouns and verbs are considered, 
and the length is restricted to at most 4 words, 
i.e., 2-word, 3-word and 4-word combinations. 
The detailed procedure is described as follows. 
2.1 Find frequent word sets 
A word set is frequent if it possesses a minimum 
support. The support of a word set is defined as 
the number of training sentences containing the 
word set. For instance, the support of a two-word 
set { iw , jw } denotes the number of training sen-
tences containing the word pair ( iw , jw ). The 
frequent k-word sets are discovered from (k-1)-
word sets. First, the support of each word, i.e., 
word frequency, in the training corpus is counted. 
The set of frequent one-word sets, denoted as 1L , 
is then generated by choosing the words with a 
minimum support level. To calculate kL , the fol-
lowing two-step process is performed iteratively 
until no more frequent k-word sets are found. 
z Join step: A set of candidate k-word sets, 
denoted as kC , is first generated by merg-
ing frequent word sets of 1kL ? , in which 
only the word sets whose first (k-2) words 
are identical can be merged. 
z Prune step: The support of each candidate 
word set in kC  is then counted to determine 
which candidate word sets are frequent. Fi-
nally, the candidate word sets with a sup-
port count greater than or equal to the 
minimum support are considered to form 
kL . The candidate word sets with a subset 
that is not frequent are eliminated. Figure 1 
shows an example of generating kL . 
Label Description Example Sentence 
Family  Serious illness of a family member; 
Son or daughter leaving home 
I am very worried about my children?s health. 
Love Spouse/mate engaged in infidelity; 
Broke up with a boyfriend or girlfriend 
I broke up with my dear but cruel boyfriend 
recently. 
School Examination failed or grade dropped; 
Unable to enter/stay in school 
I hate to go to school because my teacher al-
ways blames me. 
Work Laid off or fired from a job; 
Demotion and salary reduction 
I lost my job in this economic recession a few 
months ago. 
Social Substantial conflicts with a friend; 
Difficulties in social activities 
I argued with my best friend and was upset. 
Table 1.  Classification of negative life events.  
202
2.2 Generate association patterns from fre-
quent word sets 
Association language patterns can be generated 
via a confidence measure once the frequent word 
sets have been identified. The confidence of an 
association language pattern of k words is de-
fined as the mutual information of the k words, 
as shown below. 
1 1
1
1
1
( ,... ) ( ,... )
( ,... )
                              ( ,... ) log
( )
k k
k
k k
i
i
Conf w w MI w w
P w w
P w w
P w
=
< > =
=
?
      (1) 
where 1( ,... )kP w w  denotes the probability of the 
k words co-occurring in a sentence in the training 
set, and ( )iP w  denotes the probability of a sin-
gle word occurring in the training set. Accord-
ingly, each frequent word set in kL  is assigned a 
mutual information score. In order to generate a 
set of association language patterns, all frequent 
word sets are sorted in the descending order of 
the mutual information scores. The minimum 
confidence (a threshold at percentage) is then 
applied to select top N percent frequent word sets 
as the resulting language patterns. This threshold 
is determined empirically by maximizing classi-
fication performance (Section 4). Figure 1 (right-
hand side) shows an example of generating the 
association language patterns from kL . 
3 Sentence Classification  
The classifiers used in this study include Support 
Vector Machine (SVM), C4.5, and Na?ve Bayes 
(NB) classifier, which is provided by Weka 
Package (Witten and Frank, 2005). The feature 
set includes: 
Bag-of-Words (BOW): Each single word in 
sentences. 
Association language patterns (ALP): The top 
N percent association language patterns acquired 
in the previous section. 
Ontology expansion (Onto): The top N percent 
association language patterns are expanded by 
mapping the constituent words into their syno-
nyms. For example, the pattern <boss, conflict> 
can be expanded as <chief, conflict> since the 
words boss and chief are synonyms. Here we use 
the HowNet (http://www.keenage.com), a Chi-
nese lexical ontology, for pattern expansion. 
4 Experimental Results 
Data set: A total of 2,856 sentences were col-
lected from the Internet-based Self-assessment 
Program for Depression (ISP-D) database of the 
PsychPark (http://www.psychpark.org), a virtual 
psychiatric clinic, maintained by a group of vol-
unteer professionals of Taiwan Association of 
Mental Health Informatics (Bai et al, 2001). 
Each sentence was then annotated by trained an-
notators with one of the five types of negative 
life events. Table 2 shows the break-down of the 
distribution of sentence types.  
The data set was randomly split into a training 
set, a development set, and a test set with an 
8:1:1 ratio. The training set was used for lan-
guage pattern generation. The development set 
was used to optimize the threshold (Section 2.2) 
for the classifiers (SVM, C4.5 and NB). Each 
classifier was implemented using three different 
levels of features, namely BOW, BOW+ALP, 
Prune Step
(min. support)
Sorting
and
Thresholding
<Boyfriend, Conflict>
<Boyfriend, Break up>
<Boss, Conflict>
<Conflict, Break up>
Find Frequent Word Sets Generate Association Language Patterns
Join
Step
Prune Step
(min. support)
Prune Step
(min. support)
<Boyfriend, Conflict, Break up>Join Step
Figure 1.  Example of generating association language patterns. 
Sentence Type % in Corpus 
Family 28.8 
Love 22.8 
School 13.3 
Work 14.3 
Social 20.8 
Table 2. Distribution of sentence types. 
203
and BOW+ALP+Onto, to examine the effective-
ness of association language patterns. The classi-
fication performance is measured by accuracy, 
i.e., the number of correctly classified sentences 
divided by the total number of test sentences. 
4.1 Evaluation on threshold selection 
Since not all discovered association language 
patterns contribute to the classification task, the 
threshold described in Section 2.2 is used to se-
lect top N percent patterns for classification. This 
experiment is to determine an optimal threshold 
for each involved classifier by maximizing its 
classification accuracy on the development set. 
Figure 2 shows the classification accuracy of NB 
against different threshold values.  
When using association language patterns as 
features (BOW+ALP), the accuracy increased 
with increasing the threshold value up to 0.6, 
indicating that the top 60% discovered patterns 
contained more useful patterns for classification. 
By contrast, the accuracy decreased when the 
threshold value was above 0.6, indicating that the 
remaining 40% contained more noisy patterns 
that may increase the ambiguity in classification. 
When using the ontology expansion approach 
(BOW+ALP+Onto), both the number and diver-
sity of discovered patterns are increased. There-
fore, the accuracy was improved and the optimal 
accuracy was achieved at 0.5. However, the ac-
curacy dropped significantly when the threshold 
value was above 0.5. This finding indicates that 
expansion on noisy patterns may produce more 
noisy patterns and thus decrease performance. 
4.2 Results of classification performance 
The results of each classifier were obtained from 
the test set using its own threshold optimized in 
the previous section. Table 3 shows the compara-
tive results of different classifiers with different 
levels of features. The incorporation of associa-
tion language patterns improved the accuracy of 
NB, C4.5, and SVM by 3.9%, 1.9%, and 2.2%, 
respectively, and achieved an average improve-
ment of 2.7%. Additionally, the use of ontology 
expansion can further improve the performance 
by 1.6% in average. This finding indicates that 
association language patterns are significant fea-
tures for negative life event classification. 
5 Conclusion  
This work has presented a framework that uses a 
data mining algorithm and ontology expansion 
method to acquire association language patterns 
for negative life event classification. The asso-
ciation language patterns can capture word rela-
tionships in sentences, thus yielding higher per-
formance than the baseline system using single 
words alone. Future work will focus on devising 
a semi-supervised or unsupervised method for 
language pattern acquisition from web resources 
so as to reduce reliance on annotated corpora. 
References  
R. Agrawal and R. Srikant. 1994. Fast Algorithms for Min-
ing Association Rules. In Proc. Int?l Conf. Very Large 
Data Bases (VLDB), pages 487-499. 
Y. M. Bai, C. C. Lin, J. Y. Chen, and W. C. Liu. 2001. Vir-
tual Psychiatric Clinics. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
vol. 158, no. 7, pp. 1160-1161. 
E. M. Brostedt and N. L. Pedersen. 2003. Stressful Life 
Events and Affective Illness. Acta Psychiatrica Scandi-
navica, vol. 107, pp. 208-215. 
R. Chitturi and J. H.L. Hansen. 2008. Dialect Classification 
for online podcasts fusing Acoustic and Language based 
Structural and Semantic Information. In Proc. of ACL-08, 
pages 21-24. 
A. Khoo, Y. Marom and D. Albrecht. 2006. Experiments 
with Sentence Classification. In Proc. of Australasian 
Language Technology Workshop, pages 18-25. 
S. Li and C. Zong. 2008. Multi-domain Sentiment Classifi-
cation. In Proc. of ACL-08, pages 257-260. 
M. Naughton, N. Stokes, and J. Carthy. 2008. Investigating 
Statistical Techniques for Sentence-Level Event Classi-
fication. In Proc. of COLING-08, pages 617-624. 
F. Sebastiani. 2002. Machine Learning in Automated Text 
Categorization. ACM Computing Surveys, vol. 34, no. 1, 
pp. 1-47. 
I. H. Witten and E. Frank. 2005. Data Mining: Practical 
Machine Learning Tools and Techniques, 2nd Edition, 
Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco. 
 NB C4.5 SVM
BOW 0.717 0.741 0.787
BOW+ALP 0.745 0.755 0.804
BOW+ALP+Onto 0.759 0.766 0.815
Table 3. Accuracy of classifiers on testing data. 
0.62
0.64
0.66
0.68
0.70
0.72
0.74
0.76
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
Threshold
Ac
cu
rac
y
BOW+ALP
BOW+ALP+Onto
 
Figure 2. Threshold selection. 
204
