Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 131?138,
Suntec, Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Philippine Language Resources: Trends and Directions 
 
Rachel Edita Roxas Charibeth Cheng Nathalie Rose Lim 
Center for Language Technologies 
College of Computer Studies 
De La Salle University 
2401 Taft Ave, Manila, Philippines 
rachel.roxas, chari.cheng, nats.lim@delasalle.ph 
 
Abstract 
We present the diverse research activities on 
Philippine languages from all over the country, 
with focus on the Center for Language Tech-
nologies of the College of Computer Studies, 
De La Salle University, Manila, where major-
ity of the work are conducted.  These projects 
include the formal representation of Philippine 
languages and the processes involving these 
languages.  Language representation entails 
the manual and automatic development of lan-
guage resources such as lexicons and corpora 
for various human languages including Philip-
pine languages, across various forms such as 
text, speech and video files.  Tools and appli-
cations on languages that we have worked on 
include morphological processes, part of 
speech tagging, language grammars, machine 
translation, sign language processing and 
speech systems.  Future directions are also 
presented. 
1 Introduction 
The Philippines is an archipelagic nation in 
Southeast Asia with more than 7,100 islands with 
168 natively spoken languages (Gordon, 2005).  
These islands are grouped into three main island 
groups: Luzon (northern Philippines), Visayas 
(central) and Mindanao (southern), and various 
Philippine languages distributed among its is-
lands. 
Little is known historically about these lan-
guages.  The most concrete evidence that we 
have is the Doctrina Christiana, the first ever 
published work in the country in 1593 which 
contains the translation of religious material in 
the local Philippine script (the Alibata), Spanish 
and old Tagalog (a sample page is shown in Fig-
ure 1, courtesy of the University of Sto. Tomas 
Library, 2007).  Alibata is an ancient Philippine 
script that is no longer widely used except for a 
few locations in the country.  The old Tagalog 
has evolved to the new Filipino alphabet which 
now consists of 26 letters of the Latin script and 
?ng? and ???.  
The development of the national language can 
be traced back to the 1935 Constitution Article 
XIV, Section 3 which states that "...Congress 
shall make necessary steps towards the develop-
ment of a national language which will be based 
on one of the existing native languages..." due to 
the advocacy of then Philippine President 
Manuel L. Quezon for the development of a na-
tional language that will unite the whole country. 
Two years later, Tagalog was recommended as 
the basis of the national language, which was 
later officially called Pilipino. In the 1987 Con-
stitution, Article XIV, Section 6, states that ?the 
National language of the Philippines is Filipino. 
As it evolves, it shall be further developed and 
enriched on the basis of existing Philippine and 
other languages.?  To date, Filipino that is being 
taught in our schools is basically Tagalog, which 
is the predominant language being used in the 
archipelago.1   
 
 
Figure 1: Alibata, Spanish and Old Tagalog sam-
ple page: Doctrina Christiana (courtesy of the 
University of Sto. Tomas Library, 2007) 
 
Table 1 presents data gathered through the 
2000 Census conducted by the National Statistics 
                                                 
1
 Thus, when we say Filipino, we generally refer to 
Tagalog. 
131
Office, Philippine government, on the Philippine 
languages that are spoken by at least one percent 
of the population.  
 
Languages Number of native 
speakers 
Tagalog 22,000,000 
Cebuano 20,000,000 
Ilokano 7,700,000 
Hiligaynon 7,000,000 
Waray-Waray 3,100,000 
Capampangan 2,900,000 
"Northern Bicol" 2,500,000 
Chavacano 2,500,000 
Pangasinan 1,540,000 
"Southern Bicol" 1,200,000 
Maranao 1,150,000 
Maguindanao 1,100,000 
Kinaray-a 1,051,000 
Tausug 1,022,000 
Surigaonon 600,000 
Masbate?o 530,000 
Aklanon 520,000 
Ibanag 320,000 
Table 1. Philippine languages spoken by least 
1% of the population. 
 
Linguistics information on Philippine lan-
guages are available, but as of yet, the focus has 
been on theoretical linguistics and little is done 
about the computational aspects of these lan-
guages.  To add, much of the work in Philippine 
linguistics focused on the Tagalog language (Li-
ao, 2006, De Guzman, 1978). In the same token, 
NLP researches have been focused on Tagalog, 
although pioneering work on other languages 
such as Cebuano, Hiligaynon, Ilocano, and 
Tausug have been made.  As can be noticed from 
this information alone, NLP research on Philip-
pine languages is still at its infancy stage.  
One of the first published works on NLP re-
search on Filipino was done by Roxas (1997) on 
IsaWika!, a machine translation system involving 
the Filipino language.  From then on most of the 
NLP researches have been conducted at the   
Center for Language Technologies of the College 
of Computer Studies, De La Salle University, 
Manila, Philippines, in collaboration with our 
partners in academe from all over the country.  
The scope of experiments have expanded from 
north of the country to south, from text to speech 
to video forms, and from present to past data. 
NLP researches address the manual construc-
tion of language resources literally built from 
almost non-existent digital forms, such as the 
grammar, lexicon, and corpora, augmented by 
some automatic extraction algorithms. Various 
language tools and applications such as machine 
translation, information extraction, information 
retrieval, and natural language database interface, 
were also pursued.  We will discuss these here, 
the corresponding problems associated with the 
development of these projects, and the solutions 
provided.  Future research plans will also be pre-
sented.  
2 Language Resources 
We report here our attempts in the manual con-
struction of Philippine language resources such 
as the lexicon, morphological information, gram-
mar, and the corpora which were literally built 
from almost non-existent digital forms.  Due to 
the inherent difficulties of manual construction, 
we also discuss our experiments on various tech-
nologies for automatic extraction of these re-
sources to handle the intricacies of the Filipino 
language, designed with the intention of using 
them for various language technology applica-
tions. 
We are currently using the English-Filipino 
lexicon that contains 23,520 English and 20,540 
Filipino word senses with information on the part 
of speech and co-occurring words through sam-
ple sentences.  This lexicon is based on the dic-
tionary of the Commission on the Filipino Lan-
guage (Komisyon sa Wikang Filipino), and digi-
tized by the IsaWika project (Roxas, 1997). Ad-
ditional information such as synsetID from 
Princeton WordNet were integrated into the lexi-
con through the AeFLEX project (Lim, et al, 
2007b). As manually populating the database 
with the synsetIDs from WordNet is tedious, 
automating the process through the SUMO (Sug-
gested Upper Merged Ontology) as an InterLin-
gua is being explored to come up with the Fili-
pino WordNet (Tan and Lim, 2007).  
Initial work on the manual collection of docu-
ments on Philippine languages has been done 
through the funding from the National Commis-
sion for Culture and the Arts considering four 
major Philippine Languages namely, Tagalog, 
Cebuano, Ilocano and Hiligaynon with 250,000 
words each and the Filipino sign language with 
7,000 signs (Roxas, et al, 2009).  Computational 
features include word frequency counts and a 
concordancer that allows viewing co-occurring 
words in the corpus.  Mark-up conventions fol-
lowed some of those used for the ICE project. 
Aside from possibilities of connecting the 
Philippine islands and regions through language, 
132
crossing the boundaries of time are one of the 
goals (Roxas, 2007a; Roxas, 2007b).  An unex-
plored but equally challenging area is the collec-
tion of historical documents that will allow re-
search on the development of the Philippine lan-
guages through the centuries, one of which is the 
already mentioned Doctrina Christiana which 
was published in 1593.   
Attempts are being made to expand on these 
language resources and to complement manual 
efforts to build these resources. Automatic meth-
ods and social networking are the two main op-
tions currently being considered.  
2.1 Language Resource Builder 
Automatic methods for bilingual lexicon ex-
traction, named-entity extraction, and language 
corpora are also being explored to exploit on the 
resources available on the internet.  These auto-
matic methods are discussed in detail in this sec-
tion. 
An automated approach of extracting bilingual 
lexicon from comparable, non-parallel corpora 
was developed for English as the source lan-
guage and Tagalog as the target language (Tiu 
and Roxas, 2008). The study combined ap-
proaches from previous researches which only 
concentrated on context extraction, clustering 
techniques, or usage of part of speech tags for 
defining the different senses of a word, and rank-
ing has shown improvement to overall F-measure 
from 7.32% to 10.65% within the range of values 
from previous studies. This is despite the use of 
limited amount of corpora of 400k and seed lexi-
con of 9,026 entries in contrast to previous stud-
ies of 39M and 16,380, respectively. 
The NER-Fil is a Named Entity Recognizer 
for Filipino Text (Lim, et al, 2007a).  This sys-
tem automatically identifies and stores named-
entities from documents, which can also be used 
to annotate corpora with named-entity informa-
tion.  Using machine learning techniques, named 
entities are also automatically classified into ap-
propriate categories such as person, place, and 
organization.   
AutoCor is an automatic retrieval system for 
documents written in closely-related languages 
(Dimalen and Roxas, 2007). Experiments have 
been conducted on four closely-related Philip-
pine languages, namely: Tagalog, Cebuano and 
Bicolano.  Input documents are matched against 
the n-gram language models of relevant and ir-
relevant documents.  Using common word prun-
ing to differentiate between the closely-related 
Philippine languages, and the odds ratio query 
generation methods, results show improvements 
in the precision of the system.  
Although automatic methods can facilitate the 
building of the language resources needed for 
processing natural languages, these automatic 
methods usually employ learning approaches that 
would require existing language resources as 
seed or learning data sets.  
2.2 Online Community for Corpora Build-
ing  
PALITO is an online repository of the Philippine 
corpus (Roxas, et al, 2009).  It is intended to 
allow linguists or language researchers to upload 
text documents written in any Philippine lan-
guage, and would eventually function as corpora 
for Philippine language documentation and re-
search.  Automatic tools for data categorization 
and corpus annotation are provided by the sys-
tem.  The LASCOPHIL (La Salle Corpus of Phil-
ippine Languages) Working Group is assisting 
the project developers of PALITO in refining the 
mechanics for the levels of users and their corre-
sponding privileges for a manageable monitoring 
of the corpora.  Videos on the Filipino sign lan-
guage can also be uploaded into the system.  Up-
loading of speech recordings will be considered 
in the near future, to address the need to employ 
the best technology to document and systemati-
cally collect speech recordings especially of 
nearly extinct languages in the country. This 
online system capitalizes on the opportunity for 
the corpora to expand faster and wider with the 
involvement of more people from various parts 
of the world.  This is also to exploit on the reality 
that many of the Filipinos here and abroad are 
native speakers of their own local languages or 
dialects and can largely contribute to the growth 
of the corpora on Philippine languages.   
3 Language Tools  
Language tools are applications that support lin-
guistic research and processing of various lan-
guage computational layers.  These include lexi-
cal units, to syntax and semantics.   Specifically, 
we have worked on the morphological processes, 
part of speech tagging and parsing.  These proc-
esses usually employ either the rule-based ap-
proach or the example-based approach.  In gen-
eral, rule-based approaches capture language 
processes by formally capturing these processes 
which would require consultations and inputs 
from linguists.  On the other hand, example-
based approaches employ machine learning 
133
methodologies where automatic learning of rules 
is performed based on manually annotated data 
that are done also by linguists.  
3.1 Morphological Processes 
We have tested both rule-based and example-
based approaches in developing our morphologi-
cal analyzers and generators. Rule-based mor-
phological analysis in the current methods, such 
as finite-state and unification-based, are pre-
dominantly effective for handling concatenative 
morphology (e.g. prefixation and suffixation), 
although some of these techniques can also han-
dle limited non-concatenative phenomena (e.g. 
infixation and partial and full-stem reduplication) 
which are largely used in Philippine languages. 
TagMA (Fortes-Galvan and Roxas, 2007) uses a 
constraint-based method to perform morphologi-
cal analysis that handles both concatenative and 
non-concatenative morphological phenomena, 
based on the optimality theory framework and 
the two-level morphology rule representation.  
Test results showed 96% accuracy. The 4% error 
is attributed to d-r alteration, an example of 
which is in the word lakaran, which is from the 
root word lakad and suffix -an, but d is changed 
to r.  Unfortunately, since all candidates are gen-
erated, and erroneous ones are later eliminated 
through constraints and rules, time efficiency is 
affected by the exhaustive search performed. 
To augment the rule-based approach, an ex-
ample-based approach was explored by extend-
ing Wicentowski?s Word Frame model through 
learning of morphology rules from examples 
(Cheng and See, 2006).  In the WordFrame 
model, the seven-way split re-write rules com-
posed of the canonical prefix/beginning, point-
of-prefixation, common prefix substrings, inter-
nal vowel change, common suffix substring, 
point-of-suffixation, and canonical suffix/ending.  
Infixation, partial and full reduplication as in 
Tagalog and other Philippine languages are im-
properly modeled in the WordFrame model as 
point-of-prefixation as in the word (hin)-intay 
which should have been modeled as the word 
hintay with infix ?in-. Words with an infix within 
a prefix are also modeled as point-of-prefixation 
as in the word (hini-)hintay which should be rep-
resented as infix ?in in partial reduplicated sylla-
ble hi-.   In the revised WordFrame model 
(Cheng and See, 2006), the non-concatenative 
Tagalog morphological behaviors such as infixa-
tion and reduplication are modeled separately 
and correctly.  Unfortunately, it is still not capa-
ble of fully modeling Filipino morphology since 
some occurrences of reduplication are still repre-
sented as point-of-suffixation for various loca-
tions of the longest common substring.  There are 
also some problems in handling the occurrence 
of several partial or whole-word reduplications 
within a word. Despite these problems, the train-
ing of the algorithm that learns these re-write 
rules from 40,276 Filipino word pairs derived 
90% accuracy when applied to an MA.  The 
complexity of creating a better model would be 
computationally costly but it would ensure an 
increase in performance and reduced number of 
rules.     
Work is still to be done on exploring tech-
niques and methodologies for morphological 
generation (MG).  Although it could be inferred 
that the approaches for MA can be extended to 
handle MG, an additional disambiguation proc-
ess is necessary to choose the appropriate output 
from the many various surface form of words 
that can be generated from one underlying form.  
3.2 Part of Speech Tagging 
One of the most useful information in the lan-
guage corpora are the part of speech tags that are 
associated with each word in the corpora.  These 
tags allow applications to perform other syntactic 
and semantic processes.  Firstly, with the aid of 
linguists, a revised tagset for Tagalog has been 
formulated (Miguel and Roxas, 2007), since a 
close examination of the existing tagset for lan-
guages such as English showed the insufficiency 
of this tagset to handle certain phenomena in 
Philippine languages such as the lexical markers, 
ligatures and enclitics.  The lexical marker ay is 
used in inverted sentences such as She is good 
(Siya ay mabuti).  Ligatures can take the form of 
the word na or suffixes ?ng (-g), the former is 
used if the previous noun, pronoun or adjective 
ends with a consonant (except for n), and the lat-
ter if the previous word ends with a vowel (or n).  
Manual tagging of corpora has allowed the 
performance of automatic experiments on some 
approaches for tagging for Philippine languages 
namely MBPOST, PTPOST4.1, TPOST and 
TagAlog, each one exploring on a particular ap-
proach in tagging such as memory-based POS, 
template-based and rule-based approaches. A 
study on the performance of these taggers 
showed accuracies of 85, 73, 65 and 61%, re-
spectively (Miguel and Roxas, 2007).   
3.3 Language Grammars 
Grammar checkers are some of the applications 
where syntactic specification of languages is 
134
necessary.  SpellCheF is a spell checker for Fili-
pino that uses a hybrid approach in detecting and 
correcting misspelled words in a document 
(Cheng, et al, 2007).  Its approach is composed 
of dictionary-lookup, n-gram analysis, Soundex 
and character distance measurements.  It is im-
plemented as a plug-in to OpenOffice Writer. 
Two spelling rules and guidelines, namely, the 
Komisyon sa Wikang Filipino 2001 Revision of 
the Alphabet and Guidelines in Spelling the Fili-
pino Language, and the Gabay sa Editing sa Wi-
kang Filipino rulebooks, were incorporated into 
the system. SpellCheF consists of the lexicon 
builder, the detector, and the corrector; all of 
which utilized both manually formulated and 
automatically learned rules to carry out their re-
spective tasks.   
FiSSAn, on the other hand, is a semantics-
based grammar checker.  Lastly, PanPam (Jasa, 
et al, 2007) is an extension of FiSSAn that also 
incorporates a dictionary-based spell checker 
(Borra, et al, 2007).  
These systems make use of the rule-based ap-
proach. To complement these systems, an exam-
ple-based approach is considered through a 
grammar rule induction method (Alcantara and 
Borra, 2008).  Constituent structures are auto-
matically induced using unsupervised probabilis-
tic approaches.  Two models are presented and 
results on the Filipino language show an F1 
measure of greater than 69%.  Experiments re-
vealed that the Filipino language does not follow 
a strict binary structure as English, but is more 
right-biased. 
A similar experiment has been conducted on 
grammar rule induction for the automatic parsing 
of the Philippine component of the International 
Corpus of English (ICE-PHI) (Flores and Roxas, 
2008).  The ICE-PHI corpora consist of English 
texts with indigenous words and phrases during 
speaker context switching. The markup language 
followed the standards specified by the ICE 
group, which is headed by ICE-GB. Constituent 
rule induction is performed from manually en-
coded syntactically bracketed files from the ICE-
PHI, and will be used to parse the rest of the cor-
pus.   Manual post editing of the parse will be 
performed.  The development of such tools will 
directly benefit the descriptive and applied lin-
guistics of Philippine English, as well as other 
Englishes, in particular, those language compo-
nents in the ICE.  
Various applications on Philippine languages 
have been created at the Center for Language 
Technologies, College of Computer Studies, De 
La Salle University to cater to different needs. 
4 Language Applications  
4.1 Machine Translation 
The Hybrid English-Filipino Machine Transla-
tion (MT) System is a three-year project (with 
funding from the PCASTRD, DOST), which in-
volves a multi-engine approach for automatic 
language translation of English and Filipino 
Roxas, et al, 2008).  The MT engines explore on 
approaches in translation using a rule-based 
method and two example-based methods.  The 
rule-based approach requires the formal specifi-
cation of the human languages covered in the 
study and utilizes these rules to translate the in-
put. The two other MT engines make use of ex-
amples to determine the translation.  The exam-
ple-based MT engines have different approaches 
in their use of the examples (which are existing 
English and Filipino documents), as well as the 
data that they are learning.   
The system accepts as input a sentence or a 
document in the source language and translates 
this into the target language.  If source language 
is English, the target language is Filipino, and 
vise versa.  The input text will undergo preproc-
essing that will include POS tagging and mor-
phological analysis.  After translation, the output 
translation will undergo natural language genera-
tion including morphological generation. Since 
each of the MT engines would not necessarily 
have the same output translation, an additional 
component called the Output Modeler was cre-
ated to determine the most appropriate among the 
translation outputs (Go and See, 2008).  There 
are ongoing experiments on the hybridization of 
the rule-based and the template-based approaches 
where transfer rules and unification constraints 
are derived (Fontanilla and Roxas, 2008). 
The rule-based MT builds a database of rules 
for language representation and translation rules 
from linguists and other experts on translation 
from English to Filipino and from Filipino to 
English.  We have considered lexical functional 
grammar (LFG) as the formalism to capture these 
rules.  Given a sentence in the source language, 
the sentence is processed and a computerized 
representation in LFG of this sentence is con-
structed.  An evaluation of how comprehensive 
and exhaustive the identified grammar is will be 
considered.  Is the system able to capture all pos-
sible Filipino sentences? How are all possible 
sentences to be represented since Filipino exhib-
135
its some form of free word order in sentences?  
The next step is the translation step, that is, the 
conversion of the computerized representation of 
the input sentence into the intended target lan-
guage.  After the translation process, the comput-
erized representation of the sentence in the target 
language will now be outputted into a sentence 
form, or called the generation process.  Although 
it has been shown in various studies elsewhere 
and on various languages that LFG can be used 
for analysis of sentences, there is still a question 
of whether it can be used for the generation proc-
ess.  The generation involves the outputting of a 
sentence from a computer-based representation 
of the sentence.  This is part of the work that the 
group intends to address. 
The major advantage of the rule-based MT 
over other approaches is that it can produce high 
quality translation for sentence patterns that were 
accurately captured by the rules of the MT en-
gine; but unfortunately, it cannot provide good 
translations to any sentence that go beyond what 
the rules have considered. 
In contrast to the rule-based MT which re-
quires building the rules by hand, the corpus-
based MT system automatically learns how 
translation is done through examples found in a 
corpus of translated documents.  The system can 
incrementally learn when new translated docu-
ments are added into the knowledge-base, thus, 
any changes to the language can also be accom-
modated through the updates on the example 
translations.  This means it can handle translation 
of documents from various domains (Alcantara, 
et al, 2006). 
The principle of garbage-in-garbage-out ap-
plies here; if the example translations are faulty, 
the learned rules will also be faulty. That is why, 
although human linguists do not have to specify 
and come up with the translation rules, the lin-
guist will have to first verify the translated 
documents and consequently, the learned rules, 
for accuracy. 
It is not only the quality of the collection of 
translations that affects the overall performance 
of the system, but also the quantity.  The collec-
tion of translations has to be comprehensive so 
that the translation system produced will be able 
to translate as much types of sentences as possi-
ble.  The challenge here is coming up with a 
quantity of examples that is sufficient for accu-
rate translation of documents. 
With more data, a new problem arises when 
the knowledge-base grows so large that access to 
it and search for applicable rules during transla-
tion requires tremendous amount of access time 
and to an extreme, becomes difficult.  Exponen-
tial growth of the knowledge-base may also hap-
pen due to the free word order nature of Filipino 
sentence construction, such that one English sen-
tence can be translated to several Filipino sen-
tences.  When all these combinations are part of 
the translation examples, a translation rule will 
be learned and extracted by the system for each 
combination, thus, causing growth of the knowl-
edge-base.  Thus, algorithms that perform gener-
alization of rules are considered to remove speci-
ficity of translation rules extracted and thus, re-
duce the size of the rule knowledge-base.  
One of the main problems in language proc-
essing most especially compounded in machine 
translation is finding the most appropriate trans-
lation of a word when there are several meanings 
of source words, and various target word equiva-
lents depending on the context of the source 
word.  One particular study that focuses on the 
use of syntactic relationships to perform word 
sense disambiguation has been explored (Do-
mingo and Roxas, 2006).  It uses an automated 
approach for resolving target-word selection, 
based on ?word-to-sense? and ?sense-to-word? 
relationship between source words and their 
translations, using syntactic relationships (sub-
ject-verb, verb-object, adjective-noun). Using 
information from a bilingual dictionary and word 
similarity measures from WordNet, a target word 
is selected using statistics from a target language 
corpus. Test results using English to Tagalog 
translations showed an overall 64% accuracy for 
selecting word translation.  
Other attempts on MT are on Tagalog to Ce-
buano (Yara, 2007), and Ilocano to English (Mi-
guel and Dy, 2008).  Both researches focus on 
building the language resources for the languages 
Cebuano and Ilocano, respectively, since focus 
on the Philippine languages have so far been on 
Tagalog. It is also important to note that these 
contributions are local researches being done 
where the languages are actually spoken and ac-
tively in usage. 
4.2 Sign Language Processing 
Most of the work that we have done focused on 
textual information. Recently, we have explored 
on video and speech forms. 
With the inclusion of the Filipino sign lan-
guage in a corpora building project (Roxas, et al, 
2009), video formats are used to record, edit, 
gloss and transcribe signs and discourse. Video 
editing merely cuts the video for final rendering, 
136
glossing allows association of sign to particular 
words, and transcription allows viewing of tex-
tual equivalents of the signed videos.   
Work on the automatic recognition of Filipino 
sign language involves digital signal processing 
concepts.  Initial work has been done on sign 
language number recognition (Sandjaja, 2008) 
using color-coded gloves for feature extraction.  
The feature vectors were calculated based on the 
position of the dominant-hand?s thumb.  The sys-
tem learned through a database of numbers from 
1 to 1000, and tested by the automatic recogni-
tion of Filipino sign language numbers and con-
version into text.  Over-all accuracy of number 
recognition is 85%. 
Another proposed work is the recognition of 
non-manual signals focusing on the various parts 
of the face; in particular, initially, the mouth is to 
be considered.  The automatic interpretation of 
the signs can be disambiguated using the inter-
pretation of the non-manual signals.  
4.3 Speech Systems 
PinoyTalk is an initial study on a Filipino-
based text to speech system that automatically 
generates the speech from input text (Casas, et 
al., 2004).  The input text is processed and 
parsed from words to syllables, from syllables to 
letters, and assigned prosodic properties for each 
one.  Six rules for Filipino syllabication were 
identified and used in the system.  A rule-based 
model for Filipino was developed and used as 
basis for the implementation of the system. The 
following were determined in the study consider-
ing the Filipino speaker: duration of each pho-
neme and silences, intonation, pitches of conso-
nants and vowel, and pitches of words with the 
corresponding stress. The system generates an 
audio output and able to save the generated file 
using the mp3 or wav file format. 
A system has been developed at the Digital 
Signal Processing Laboratory at the University of 
the Philippines at Diliman to automatically rec-
ognize emotions such as anger, boredom, happi-
ness and satisfaction (Ebarvia, et al, 2008).   
5 Future Directions 
Through the Center for Language Technologies 
of the College of Computer Studies, De la Salle 
University, and our partners, varied NLP re-
sources have been built, and applications and 
researches explored.  Our faculty members and 
our students have provided the expertise in these 
challenging endeavors, with multi-disciplinary 
efforts and collaborations. Through our graduate 
programs, we have trained many of the faculty 
members of universities from various parts of the 
country; thus, providing a network of NLP re-
searchers throughout the archipelago.  We have 
organized the National NLP Research Sympo-
sium for the past five years, through the efforts 
of the CeLT of CCS-DLSU, and through the 
support of government agencies such as 
PCASTRD, DOST and CHED, and our industry 
partners. Last year, we hosted an international 
conference (the 22nd Pacific Asia Conference on 
Language, Information and Computation) which 
was held in Cebu City in partnership with 
UPVCC and Cebu Institute of Technology.  We 
have made a commitment to nurture and 
strengthen NLP researches and collaboration in 
the country, and expand on our international 
linkages with key movers in both the Asian re-
gion and elsewhere.  For the past five years, we 
have brought in and invited internationally-
acclaimed NLP researchers into the country to 
support these endeavors.  Recently, we have also 
received invitations as visiting scholars, and par-
ticipants to events and meetings within the Asean 
region which provided scholarships, which in 
turn, we also share with our colleagues and re-
searchers in other Philippine universities. 
It is an understatement to say that much has to 
be explored in this area of research that inter-
leaves diverse disciplines among technology-
based areas (such as NLP, digital signal process-
ing, multi-media applications, and machine 
learning) and other fields of study (such as lan-
guage, history, psychology, and education), and 
cuts across different regions and countries, and 
even time frames (Cheng, et al, 2008).  It is 
multi-modal and considers various forms of data 
from textual, audio, video and other forms of 
information.  Thus, much is yet to be accom-
plished, and experts with diverse backgrounds in 
these various related fields will bring this area of 
research to a new and better dimension. 
References  
D. Alcantara and A. Borra. 2008. Constituent Struc-
ture for Filipino: Induction through Probabilistic 
Approaches.  Proceedings of the 22nd Pacific Asia 
Conference on Language, Information and Compu-
tation (PACLIC). 113-122. 
D. Alcantara, B. Hong, A. Perez and L. Tan. 2006. 
Rule Extraction Applied in Language Translation ? 
R.E.A.L. Translation. Undergraduate Thesis, De la 
Salle University, Manila. 
137
A. Borra, M. Ang, P. J. Chan, S. Cagalingan and R. 
Tan.  2007. FiSSan: Filipino Sentence Syntax and 
Semantic Analyzer.  Proceedings of the 7th Philip-
pine Computing Science Congress. 74-78. 
D. Casas, S. Rivera, G. Tan, and G. Villamil. 2004. 
PinoyTalk: A Filipino Based Text-to-Speech Syn-
thesizer.  Undergraduate Thesis.  De La Salle Uni-
versity. 
C. Cheng, R. Roxas, A. B. Borra, N. R. L. Lim, E. C. 
Ong and S. L. See. 2008. e-Wika: Digitalization of 
Philippine Language. DLSU-Osaka Workshop. 
C. Cheng, C. P. Alberto, I. A. Chan and V. J. Querol. 
2007. SpellChef: Spelling Checker and Corrector 
for Filipino.  Journal of Research in Science, Com-
puting and Engineering.  4(3), 75-82. 
C. Cheng, and S. See. 2006. The Revised Wordframe 
Model for Filipino Language. Journal of Research 
in Science, Computing and Engineering.  3(2), 17-
23. 
D. Dimalen and R. Roxas.  2007. AutoCor: A Query-
Based Automatic Acquisition of Corpora of Closely-
Related Languages. Proceedings of the 21st PA-
CLIC. 146-154.  
E. Domingo and R. Roxas. 2006. Utilizing Clues in 
Syntactic Relationships for Automatic Target Word 
Sense Disambiguation. Journal of Research for 
Science, Computing and Engineering. 3(3), 18-24.  
E. Ebarvia, M. Bayona, F. de Leon, M. Lopez, R. 
Guevara, B. Calingacion, and P. Naval, Jr. 2008. 
Determination of Prosodic Feature Set for Emo-
tion Recognition in Call Center Speech. Proceed-
ings of the 5th National Natural Language Proc-
essing Research Symposium (NNLPRS). 65-71. 
D. Flores and R. Roxas. 2008. Automatic Tools for 
the Analysis of the Philippine component of the In-
ternational Corpus of English. Linguistic Society of 
the Philippines Annual Meeting and Convention. 
G. Fontanilla and R. Roxas. 2008. A Hybrid Filipino-
English Machine Translation System. DLSU Sci-
ence and Technology Congress.   
F. Fortes-Galvan and R. Roxas. 2007. Morphological 
Analysis for Concatenative and Non-concatenative 
Phenomena.  Proceedings of the Asian Applied 
NLP Conference. 
K. Go and S. See. 2008. Incorporation of WordNet 
Features to N-Gram Features in a Language Mod-
eller. Proceedings of the 22nd PACLIC, 179-188.  
Gordon, R. G., Jr. (Ed.). 2005. Ethnologue: Lan-
guages of the World, 5th Ed. Dallas,Texas: SIL In-
ternational. Online version: www.ethnologue.com. 
M. Jasa, M. J. Palisoc and J. M. Villa. 2007. Panuring 
Panitikan (PanPam): A Sentence Syntax and Se-
mantics-based Grammar Checker for Filipino.  
Undergraduate Thesis.  De La Salle University, 
Manila. 
H. Liao. 2006. Philippine linguistics: The state of the 
art (1981-2005). De La Salle University, Manila.  
N. R. Lim, J. C. New, M. A. Ngo, M. Sy, and N. R. 
Lim. 2007a. A Named-Entity Recognizer for Fili-
pino Texts. Proceedings of the 4th NNLPRS. 
N. R. Lim, J. O. Lat, S. T. Ng, K. Sze, and G. D. Yu. 
2007b. Lexicon for an English-Filipino Machine 
Translation System. Proceedings of the 4th Na-
tional Natural Language Processing Research 
Symposium. 
D. Miguel and M. Dy. 2008. Anglo-Cano: an Ilocano 
to English Machine Translation. Proceedings of 
the 5th National Natural Language Processing Re-
search Symposium. 85-88. 
D. Miguel and R. Roxas. 2007. Comparative Evalua-
tion of Tagalog Part of Speech Taggers. Proceed-
ings of the 4th NNLPRS.  
R. Roxas, P. Inventado, G. Asenjo, M. Corpus, S. 
Dita, R. Sison-Buban and D. Taylan.  2009. Online 
Corpora of Philippine Languages.  2nd DLSU Arts 
Congress: Arts and Environment. 
R. Roxas, A. Borra, C. Ko, N. R. Lim, E. Ong, and M. 
W. Tan. 2008. Building Language Resources for a 
Multi-Engine Machine Translation System.  Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation.  Springer, Neth-
erlands. 42:183-195. 
R. Roxas. 2007a. e-Wika: Philippine Connectivity 
through Languages. Proceedings of the 4th 
NNLPRS. 
R. Roxas. 2007b. Towards Building the Philippine 
Corpus. Consultative Workshop on Building the 
Philippine Corpus. 
R. Roxas. 1997. Machine Translation from English to 
Filipino: A Prototype. International Symposium of 
Multi-lingual Information Technology (MLIT ?97), 
Singapore. 
I. Sandjaja. 2008. Sign Language Number Recogni-
tion. Graduate Thesis.  De La Salle University, 
Manila.   
P. Tan and N. R. Lim. 2007. FILWORDNET: To-
wards a Filipino WordNet. Proceedings of the 4th 
NNLPRS. 
E. P. Tiu and R. Roxas. 2008. Automatic Bilingual 
Lexicon Extraction for a Minority Target Lan-
guage, Proceedings of the 22nd PACLIC. 368-376. 
J. Yara. 2007. A Tagalog-to-Cebuano Affix-Transfer-
Based Machine Translator. Proceedings of the 4th 
NNLPRS. 
 
 
138
