Population Testing: Extracting Semantic Information 
 On Near-Synonymy From Native Speakers 
Ulla Vanhatalo 
Department of Finno-Ugrian Studies, 
University of Helsinki 
Department of Scandinavian Studies, 
University of Washington 
ulla.vanhatalo@helsinki.fi 
Hilary Chan 
Department of Near Eastern 
           Languages & Civilizations, 
University of Washington 
hilaryc@u.washington.edu 
someguy@hilarychan.com 
 
Abstract 
Measuring differences between near-
synonyms constitutes a major challenge in the 
development of electronic dictionaries and 
natural language processing systems. This pa-
per presents a pilot study on how Population 
Test Method (PTM) may be used as an effec-
tive, empirical tool to define near-synonyms 
in a quantifiable manner. Use of PTM pre-
sumes that all knowledge about lexical mean-
ing in a language resides collectively in the 
mind(s) of its native speakers, and that this in-
tersubjective understanding may be extracted 
via targeted surveys that encourage creative, 
thinking responses. In this paper we show (1) 
examples of such tests performed on a group 
of high school students in Finland, (2) result-
ing data from the tests that is surprisingly 
quantifiable, and (3) a web-based visualiza-
tion program we are developing to analyze 
and present the collected data. 
1 Introduction 
The problem of near-synonym discrimination presents a 
formidable challenge to computer-based natural lan-
guage processing systems (Edmonds 1999; Edmonds 
and Hirst, 2002), as well as to humans who are attempt-
ing to acquire near-native competency in a foreign lan-
guage. In both cases, a comprehensive lexical database 
specifically designed for near-synonymy in the target 
language is a pre-requisite for the further development 
of practical applications in their respective domains. 
Some promising approaches have appeared in recent 
literature. These include corpus based procedures (Ink-
pen and Hirst 2001, 2002),  and applied componential 
analysis, in particular continuing work on cross-lingual 
semantic primitives by Wierzbicka and her colleagues 
(Wierzbicka 1996, 1999). 
Corpus-based approaches are, however, constrained 
by the kind and scope of pre-existing corpora and tools 
that are currently available; while componential analysis 
necessarily depends heavily on the subjective judgment 
of its investigators. Under such conditions, it may prove 
difficult to achieve complete and evenly distributed 
lexical coverage that truly reflects the diversity of the 
language community. 
In this paper we propose another approach that we 
hope would complement these existing methods. In this 
approach, we go directly and repeatedly, in an iterative 
process, to the native speakers of the speech community 
to acquire and to verify the semantic information thus 
collected. 
We also briefly describe a visualization tool (a Java 
applet) that we are currently developing to aid us in 
analyzing the collected data, and in further refining the 
semantic model. 
2  Extracting Lexical Semantic Data with 
the Population Test Method (PTM) 
2.1 General Background 
Population Test Method (PTM) is based on the assump-
tion that the semantics of human language is intersub-
jective in nature. The term intersubjectivity has long 
been associated with theories and practice in philoso-
phy, cognitive science, and experimental and develop-
mental psychology derived from, or influenced by 
phenomenology, a branch of philosophical thinking pio-
neered by the German philosopher Edmund Husserl in 
early 20th Century. It is also known, in the field of 
semiotics, as a central concern in the works of Walker 
Percy (Percy 1976). In this paper, however, we gener-
ally use this term in a more restricted sense, namely, to 
refer to the guiding principles for a specific empirical 
method, due to Raukko, for acquiring semantic informa-
tion from non-expert informants in a speech community 
(Raukko 1999). 
Another background framework of PTM is inspired 
by an idea from Wierzbicka?s Natural Semantic Meta-
language (NSM) ? that all complex meanings are de-
composable into constituent parts that can be readily 
expressed in natural language. 
 Unlike NSM, however, PTM has a more practical 
goal and a more narrow scope, namely, that of extract-
ing information to help differentiate a relatively small 
group of closely related words. Thus, instead of search-
ing for and verifying whether a semantic feature is a 
proper universal primitive, we take a more ad-hoc ap-
proach, i.e. if it is evident from empirical data that a 
new feature would help distinguish one group of words 
from another, then we will adopt it at the next iteration 
of our investigation as one of the dimensions to test the 
population with, and deal with the theoretical issues 
later. 
2.2 Practical Considerations 
Since the very nature of PTM is to examine the produc-
tive use of actual everyday words in their natural set-
tings, the tests need to be specifically tailored both for 
the words of interest, and for the study population. Also, 
it should be noted that PTM is by design intended as a 
re-iterative process, where each test round generates 
hypothesis to be tested in the following round. 
2.2.1 Tailoring the Tests for Features Specific 
to the Words under Investigation 
While some semantic dimensions are common to all 
vocabulary, many words or word groups also have their 
own unique semantic characteristics that are not appar-
ent at first, even to a trained semanticist. These subtle 
nuances often do not come out automatically in con-
scious explanations, but can nevertheless be drawn out 
very prominently with the right kind of testing (see 
Vanhatalo 2002a, 2002b). 
For instance, while most native English speakers 
would instinctively choose either shout or yell in his or 
her speech, such speakers are often at a loss at first 
when asked to explain why one choice is made over the 
other. 
To draw out such hidden linguistic intuition, we 
need to think of some non-rigid way of testing that en-
courages creative brainstorming. In PTM this often 
comes in the form of a natural-sounding, open-ended 
task given in a non-pressured setting, such as a free-
form question framed in a plausible context, e.g. 
?You?ve just met an exchange student from Japan. She 
would like to know what the difference is between shout 
and yell. How would you explain the difference to her?? 
Finally, a practical concern is that the number of 
semantic features for words in any given word group 
can be quite large. However, since we are only inter-
ested in differentiation among these closely related 
words, we can choose only features that contribute to 
such differentiation. Furthermore, because of the re-
iterative nature of PTM, the feature set for each group 
of words can grow or shrink as we go. 
2.2.2 Testing in Settings that are Realistic for 
the Informants 
In order to generate data that are as authentic as possi-
ble, our test settings are tailored so that they are natural 
for each informant group. For instance, since it would 
appear more natural for high school students to explain 
the difference between words to their friends, or to place 
themselves in situations that are plausible for an average 
teenager, our tests for them are designed accordingly. 
Below in Fig. 1 is an example of a multiple choice 
task where the various near-synonyms for the Finnish 
version of the verb ?to nag? is used in a realistically 
plausible setting (for the Finnish high school students 
who were our informants): 
 
HOW ANGRY WAS YOUR MOTHER? 
1 -- a little angry;  5 -- very angry. 
 1 2 3 4 5 
Yesterday I came home late and 
Mom j?k?tti. __ __ __ __ __ 
Yesterday I came home late and 
Mom valitti. 
__ __ __ __ __ 
Yesterday I came home late and 
Mom marisi. 
__ __ __ __ __ 
.... ... ... ... ... ... 
Fig. 1 A Multiple Choice Question 
2.3 Details of one Pilot Study: Procedures 
and Results 
We have conducted several pilot studies with over 450 
subjects in Finland and Estonia to date. One such study 
was carried out with 154 high school students in 
Finland. The tests were delivered on paper. The tested 
vocabulary comprised of 18 speech act verbs that de-
scribe complaining (e.g. English ?to nag? or ?to carp?) 
in Finnish (see Appendix A for the list with English 
glosses.) According to existing dictionaries, these words 
are considered near-synonyms. The tasks constituting 
the testing were either production tasks or multiple 
choice tasks. 
In most production tasks (i.e. open-ended tests), the 
informants were asked to compare two or more near-
synonyms, often by explaining them to their non-native 
peers. In the analysis phase, features in their descrip-
tions were extracted and collected into matrices, which 
were then used to generate frequency charts for compi-
lation of further test series. Semi-quantitative compari-
sons were also performed with the results from multiple 
choice tasks. The most surprising observations were the 
abundance of discriminating features between words, 
and the high frequency of some answers (e.g. reasons 
for a certain speech act). 
In multiple choice tasks (i.e. difference evaluation 
tests), the informants were requested (1) to choose the 
best word for the given context, (2) to choose the best 
context for the given word, or (3) to rate/rank the word 
in a given semantic dimension. All these results were 
analyzed statistically. Tasks requiring word ranking or 
rating yielded direct numerical values with measures of 
variance. 
An example of numerical rating of a semantic di-
mension is given in Figure 2, where the informants were 
asked to rate volume of the speech act on a scale of 1 to 
5. It appears that the assumed near-synonyms are clearly 
distinguishable in this semantic dimension, and the cal-
culated confidence intervals (short vertical bars) demon-
strate the high consensus among the informants.  
 
Fig. 2 Volume of the Speech Act 
 
An example of ranking between near-synonyms is 
given in Figure 3, which shows the result of a task to 
select the gender (of the agent) in the speech act. The 
result reveals that some verbs are clearly associated with 
female or male gender, while others are not as clearly 
gender-associated. 
 
 
Fig. 3 Gender (of Agent) in the Speech Act 
 
3 Visualizing Near-Synonymy in a Quasi 
3-D Space 
3.1 The Need for an Intuitive Way to View 
and Review Semantic Information 
While we are in general satisfied with the results from 
the first round of our pilot study, we have come to real-
ize that, in order to pass the results back to the infor-
mants for the next iteration of our test process, we need 
to present our findings in a more intuitive format. 
Furthermore, as researchers engaging in the design 
of modern electronic dictionaries and thesauri for hu-
man users, we are interested in creating a user friendly 
interface for a thesaurus like application. Indeed, we 
have in mind that our informants would also be the us-
ers of such a thesaurus/dictionary, and thus have an in-
centive to make contribution to its continuing update 
and improvement. The general configuration of such a 
setup is illustrated in Fig. 4 below and described in 
more detail in a forthcoming paper (Vanhatalo 2003). 
 
 
Fig. 4 A New Kind of Dictionary/Thesaurus 
 
The convergence of these interests and requirements 
resulted in the prototype visualization tool, currently 
implemented as a Java applet, described in the follow-
ing sections. 
 
 
Fig. 5 Single-Axis Layout Based on gender 
 
 
Population 
Tests Analysis 
Dictionary  
/Thesaurus 
The screen-shot of  the visualization tool in Fig. 5 
above contains essentially the same information as in 
the bar chart of Fig. 3, except here the words themselves 
are the main objects being displayed. The words are 
distributed along a diagonal axis based on gender (of the 
agent), with lower left being more ?male?-like, and up-
per right being more ?female?-like. 
The view shown in Fig. 6 is similar, but in this case 
we use x-axis for gender and the y-axis for volume. In 
other words, Fig. 6 contains the same information as 
those in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 combined. 
Actually, there is more. In both Fig. 5 and Fig 6 
there is a third (z-) dimension shown via type size and 
color. This dimension is currently used to represent the 
semantic distance of each word from the focus, i.e. the 
currently selected word of interest highlighted in a box. 
The basic idea is that the word of interest would be 
closest to the viewer, and thus largest in type and dark-
est in color; while the other words (its near-synonyms) 
will be nearer or further from the viewer depending on 
how close they are semantically to this focus word. In 
other words, we hypothesize that the viewer would have 
an intuitive feel for this notion of ?semantic distance?, 
and that he or she would instinctively translate this men-
tal distance into a perceived visual distance, and vice 
versa. 
 
 
Fig. 6 Dual-Axis Layout (gender x volume) 
 
For example, in both Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 above, where 
the semantic distance is calculated as a weighted aver-
age of six semantic dimensions, one could see at a 
glance which word(s) are the closest near-synonyms to 
the selected focus word. Thus, in Fig. 5 for vaikeroida it 
is voivotella; while in Fig. 6 for nurista, they are pur-
nata and mukista.  
 
3.2 Towards a Web-Based, Visually Enriched 
Extension to PTM 
We envision this Web-based, visual extension to PTM 
to work mostly the same as the paper-and-pencil ver-
sion, except that (1) it would be conducted over the 
Internet; and (2) some, though not all, of the tests would 
be more visually oriented. 
More specifically, the visual tests would still consist 
of both multiple-choice tasks and open-ended tasks as 
before. 
For an open-ended task, one option is to present one 
of these displays, say Fig. 5 or Fig. 6 above, and ask the 
informants if the picture makes sense, and if not, to ex-
plain in their own words what in the picture appears odd 
to them, and why. 
As to multiple-choice tasks, consider the four views 
in Fig. 7a - 7d below: 
  
   
 Fig. 7a   Fig. 7b 
 
   
 Fig. 7c   Fig. 7d 
 
These four views are essentially variations on the 
same theme, i.e. they have the same x- and y-axis layout 
and the same focus word. The only difference among 
them is in the weight assignment for calculating seman-
tic distance from the focus word j?k?tt??. The viewer 
will be asked to rank the four displays in terms of their 
?naturalness?. 
Another way to do this will allow the weights to be 
assigned by the viewer directly, e.g. via a set of sliders 
similar to those for photo manipulation programs. While 
this would require more work for the informant, it could 
actually be more fun and thus perhaps would have a 
greater potential as a successful method for an Internet 
based approach. 
4 Discussion 
We are primarily researcher and practitioners in the 
field of foreign language studies, and our interests are 
focused on the design and implementation of electronic 
dictionaries and thesauri for human users who are study-
ing a second language. Nevertheless, we have benefited 
greatly from exposure to research done in computational 
linguistics, and look forward to the exchange of ideas 
that we hope would benefit both of our fields. 
In this paper we presented an approach towards 
solving the problem of building a large scale lexical 
database with specific emphasis on near-synonymy. As 
we are still at a very early stage of our investigation, 
many unanswered questions remain.  
First of all, while we have confidence that our ?in-
formant-friendly? intersubjective approach can extract 
good semantic information, we are less sure that all the 
information thus collected can always be easily con-
verted into some numeric format, or be intuitively rep-
resentable in some visualized form. 
Another concern has to do with the assumption that 
the informant would intuitively perceive visual similar-
ity as semantic similarity. As this has not yet been 
tested, we simply do not know if it will work as hoped. 
We also wonder if purely visual design factor (e.g. color 
clashes, compositional imbalance) could inadvertently 
skew an informant?s judgment on a particular display?s 
semantic ?naturalness?. 
Lastly, doing survey of any sort on the Internet in-
volves a whole set of issues that we are aware of, but 
have not yet seriously investigated. 
Despite these uncertainties, we are in general very 
optimistic about the direction we are heading. We envi-
sion the next phase of our research to involve scaling up 
the testing, to include both more word groups and many 
more (in the thousands, ideally) informants, possibly via 
the Internet but more probably a large  university?s in-
ternal network, in our first venture into the Web-based 
survey world. 
We would also like to do some more experiments 
with the visualization tool, e.g. to try out different 
schemes for calculating semantic distances, to use data 
from other databases (and in other languages, e.g. Eng-
lish), or  to create a more appealing, 3-D game like user 
interface. Perhaps even a ?space war? type game for 
near-synonymy.  Maybe. 
Appendix A. ?Nag? Verbs in Finnish 
 
jupista mutter, mumble; grumble 
jurnutta (colloq.) annoy, vex 
j?k?tt?? (colloq.) [yakety-] yak; nag 
marista whine, whimper, fret, grumble 
marmattaa grumble 
motkottaa carp, nag 
mukista grumble, grouse 
nalkuttaa nag, carp 
napista grumble, gripe, murmur 
nurista grumble 
purnatta grouse, grumble 
ruikuttaa whine, whimper, complain, 
(colloq.) moan, wail, (colloq.) 
pester 
urputtaa -- N/A --* 
vaikeroida moan, groan, wail, lament, be-
moan 
valittaa groan, moan, wail, lament, com-
plain 
voihkia groan, moan 
voivotella moan, whine, bewail 
 
(edited from Finnish-English General Dictionary 1984) 
 
* The word urputtaa is not yet found in current Fin-
nish-English dictionaries, though it has been col-
lected into the more recent monolingual Finnish 
dictionaries. 
References 
Edmonds, Philip: Semantic Representation of Near-
Synonyms for Automatic Lexical Choice. PhD Thesis, 
University of Toronto (1999) 
Edmonds, Philip and Hirst, Graeme. ?Near-synonymy 
and lexical choice.? Computational Linguistics, 
28(2), June 2002, 105--144. 
Finnish-English General Dictionary. Uusi suomi-
englanti suursanakirja (1984). Raija Hurme, Riitta-
Leena Malin, Olli Syv?oja. WSOY. Helsinki. 
Inkpen, Diana Zaiu and Hirst, Graeme. ?Acquiring col-
locations for lexical choice between near-synonyms.? 
In SIGLEX Workshop on Unsupervised Lexical Ac-
quisition, 40th meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics, Philadelphia, June 2002. 
Inkpen, Diana Zaiu and Hirst, Graeme. ?Building a 
lexical knowledge-base of near-synonym differ-
ences.? In Proceedings of the Workshop on WordNet 
and Other Lexical Resources, Second meeting of the 
North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, Pittsburgh, June 2001. 
Percy, Walker: The Message in the Bottle, Farrar, 
Strauss and Giroux, New York, 1976 
Raukko, Jarno 1999: ?An ?intersubjective? Method for 
cognitive-semantic Research on Polysemy: The case 
of GET?. ? In Masako K. Hiraga, Chris Sinha, and 
Sherman Wilcox (ed.), Cultural, Psychological and 
Typological Issues in Cognitive Linguistics. Selected 
papers of the bi-annual ICLA meeting in Albuquer-
que, July 1995 pp. 87?105. John Benjamins. Amster-
dam/Philadelphia. [Current Issues in Linguistic 
Theory, 152.] 
Vanhatalo, Ulla 2002a: ?Population Tests in Lexicogra-
phy?. In Geoffrey Stewart Morrison & Les Zsoldos 
(ed.), Proceedings of the Northwest Linguistics Con-
ference 2002. pp. 83-94. Available online at 
http://edocs.lib.sfu.ca/projects/NWLC2002/ 
NWLC2002_Proceedings_Vanhatalo.pdf 
Vanhatalo, Ulla 2002b: ?Naiset motkottaa aiheesta ja 
nalkuttaa syytt??: Kyselytestit verbien semanttisten 
sis?lt?jen arvioinnissa. [Using Questionnaires to As-
sess Semantic Content of Verbs]. In Viritt?j? 106: 3. 
pp. 330-353. 
Vanhatalo, Ulla 2003: ?Finnish Electronic Dictionaries: 
Present and Future Challenges in Incorporating Se-
mantic and Pragmatic Information?. In Journal of 
Finnish Studies. Forthcoming.  
Wierzbicka, Anna 1996: Semantics: Primes and Uni-
versals. Oxford University Press. 
Wierzbicka, Anna 1999: Emotions Across Languages 
and Cultures: Diversity and Universals. Cambridge 
University Press. 
 
