Proceedings of SIGDIAL 2009: the 10th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group in Discourse and Dialogue, pages 341?348,
Queen Mary University of London, September 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Unsupervised Classification of Dialogue Acts using a Dirichlet Process
Mixture Model
Nigel Crook, Ramon Granell, and Stephen Pulman
Oxford University Computing Laboratory
Wolfson Building
Parks Road, OXFORD, UK
nigc@comlab.ox.ac.uk
ramg@comlab.ox.ac.uk
sgp@clg.ox.ac.uk
Abstract
In recent years Dialogue Acts have be-
come a popular means of modelling the
communicative intentions of human and
machine utterances in many modern di-
alogue systems. Many of these systems
rely heavily on the availability of dialogue
corpora that have been annotated with Di-
alogue Act labels. The manual annota-
tion of dialogue corpora is both tedious
and expensive. Consequently, there is a
growing interest in unsupervised systems
that are capable of automating the annota-
tion process. This paper investigates the
use of a Dirichlet Process Mixture Model
as a means of clustering dialogue utter-
ances in an unsupervised manner. These
clusters can then be analysed in terms of
the possible Dialogue Acts that they might
represent. The results presented here are
from the application of the Dirichlet Pro-
cess Mixture Model to the Dihana corpus.
1 Introduction
Dialogue Acts (DAs) are an important contribu-
tion from discourse theory to the design of di-
alogue systems. These linguistics abstractions
are based on the illocutionary force of speech
acts (Austin, 1962) and try to capture and model
the communicative intention of human or ma-
chine utterances. In recent years, several dia-
logue systems have made use of DAs for mod-
elling discourse phenomena in either the Dialogue
Manager (Keizer et al, 2008), Automatic Speech
Recogniser (Stolcke et al, 2000) or the Auto-
matic Speech Synthesiser (Zovato and Romportl,
2008). Additionally, they have been used also in
other tasks such as summarisation, (Murray et al,
2006). Therefore, a correct DA classification of di-
alogue turns can bring benefits to the performance
of these modules and tasks.
Many machine learning approaches have been
used to automatically label DAs. They are usu-
ally based on Supervised Learning techniques
involving combinations of Ngrams and Hidden
Markov Models (Stolcke et al, 2000; Mart??nez-
Hinarejos et al, 2008), Neural Networks (Garfield
and Wermter, 2006) or Graphical Models (Ji and
Bilmes, 2005). Relatively few approaches to DA
classification have been based on unsupervised
learning methods. Some promising results were
reported by Anderach et al(Andernach et al,
1997; Andernach, 1996) who applied Kohonen
Self Organising Maps (SOMs) to the problem of
DA classification. Although the SOM is nonpara-
metric in the sense that it doesn?t require that the
number of clusters to be found in the data be a pa-
rameter of the SOM that is specified before clus-
tering begins, it?s capacity to detect clusters is lim-
ited to the size of the two-dimensional lattice onto
which the clusters are projected, and the size of
this lattice is determined prior to clustering. This
paper investigates the use of an unsupervised, non-
parametric Bayesian approach to automatic DA
labelling: namely the Dirichlet Process Mixture
Model (DPMM). Specifically, the paper reports re-
sults from applying the Chinese Restaurant Pro-
cess (CRP), a popular approach to DPMMs, to
the automatic labelling of DAs in the Dihana cor-
pus. The Dihana corpus (J.M.Bened?? et al, 2006)
has previously been used for the same task but
with a supervised learning approach (Mart??nez-
Hinarejos et al, 2008). The results reported here
indicate that, treating each utterance as a bag of
words, the CRP is capable of automatically clus-
341
tering most utterances according to speaker, level
1 and in some cases level 2 DA annotations (see
below).
2 The Dihana corpus
The Dihana corpus consists of human-computer
spoken dialogues in Spanish about queuing infor-
mation of train fares and timetables. The acquisi-
tion was performed using the Wizard of Oz (WoZ)
technique, where a human simulates the system
following a prefixed strategy. User and system
utterances are different in nature, user utterances
are completely spontaneous speech whereas sys-
tem utterances are based on pre-written patterns
that the WoZ selected according to what the user
said in the previous turn, the current dialogue state
and the WoZ strategy. There is a total of 900 dia-
logues with a vocabulary of 823 words. However,
after applying a process of name entity recognition
(cities, times, number, ...) and making the distinc-
tion between system and user words there are 964
different words. The same process of name en-
tity recognition was also used by Martinez Hinare-
jos (Mart??nez-Hinarejos et al, 2008)
2.1 Annotation scheme
Dialogues were manually annotated using a dia-
logue act annotation scheme based on three lev-
els (see Table 1). The first level corresponds to
the general intention of the speaker (speech act),
the second level represents the implicit informa-
tion that is referred to in the first level and the third
level is the specific data provided in the utterance.
Using these three levels and making the distinc-
tion between user and system labels, there are 248
different labels (153 for the user and 95 for the sys-
tem). Combining only first and second level there
are 72 labels (45 for user and 27 for system), and
with only first level there are 16 labels (7 for user
and 9 for system).
Annotation was done at utterance level. That
is, each dialogue turn was divided (segmented)
into utterances such that each one corresponds to a
unique DA label. An example of the segmentation
and annotation of two turns of a dialogue can be
seen in Figure 1
3 Dirichlet Process Mixture Models
This paper present a Dirichlet Process Mixture
Model (DPMM) (Maceachern and Mu?ller, 1998;
Escobar and West, 1995; Antoniak, 1974) for the
Level Labels
First Opening, Closing, Confirmation,
Undefined, Not-understood, Waiting,
Consult, Acceptance, Rejection
Second Departure-hour, Arrival-hour,
Fare, Origin, Destination, Day,
Train-Type, Service, Class, Trip-time
Third Departure-hour, Arrival-hour,
Fare, Origin, Destination, Day,
Train-Type, Service, Class,
Trip-time, Order-number,
Number-trains, Trip-type
Table 1: Set of dialogue act labels used in the Di-
hana corpus
automatic, unsupervised clustering of the utter-
ances in the Dihana corpus. This approach treats
each utterance as a bag of words (i.e. an unordered
collection of words) (Sebastiani, 2002). Utter-
ances are clustered according to the relative counts
of word occurrences that they contain so that utter-
ances with similar histograms of word counts will,
in general, appear in the same cluster.
Bayesian methods for unsupervised data clus-
tering divide into parametric and nonparametric
approaches. Parametric approaches to clustering
such as Finite Bayesian Mixture Models (Mclach-
lan and Peel, 2000) require prior estimation of the
number of clusters that are expected to be found
in the data. However, it is not always possible to
know this in advance and often it is necessary to
repeat a modelling experiment many times over a
range of choices of cluster numbers to find an op-
timal number of clusters. Sub-optimal choices for
the number of clusters can lead to a degradation
in the generalisation performance of the model.
Nonparametric approaches to mixture modelling,
on the other hand, do not require prior estimates
of the number of clusters in the data; this is dis-
covered automatically as the model clusters the
data. Dirichlet Processes offer one approach to de-
veloping Bayesian nonparametric mixture models.
The remainder of this section briefly introduces
DPMMs, beginning with a brief look at finite
Bayesian mixture models which will serve as use-
ful background for presenting the Chinese Restau-
rant Process, the Dirichlet Process paradigm used
in this paper.
342
Speaker Utterance Transcription
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
S S1 Welcome to the railway information system. How may I help you?
Opening Nil Nil
U U1 Could you tell me the departure times from Valencia
Question Departure-hour Origin
U2 to Madrid .
Question Departure-hour Destination
Figure 1: An example of some turns from an annotated dialogue of DIHANA corpus.
Figure 2: A 3-simplex with two examples points
and the corresponding distributions
3.1 Finite Bayesian Mixture Models
A Dirichlet distribution is defined as a measure
on measures. Specifically, a Dirichlet distribution
defines a probability measure over the k-simplex.
The k-simplex is a convex hull constructed so that
each point on the surface of the simplex describes
a probability distribution over k outcomes:
Qk = {(x1, . . . , xk) : xi ? 0
?i ? {1 . . . k},
k
?
i=1
xi = 1}
Figure 2 shows a 3-simplex with two example
points and the corresponding distributions. The
Dirichlet distribution places a probability measure
over the k-simplex so that certain subsets of points
on the simplex (i.e. certain distributions) have
higher probabilities than others (Figure 3). The
probability measure in the Dirichlet is parame-
terised by a set of positive, non-zero concentra-
tion constants ? = {?1, . . . ?k : ?i > 0}, written
Dirichletk(?1, . . . ?k). The effects of different
values of ? for the 3-simplex are shown in Figure
3.
The probability density function of the Dirichlet
Figure 3: Three example Dirichlet Distributions
over the 3-simplex with darker regions showing
areas of high probability: (a) Dirichlet(5,5,5), (b)
Dirichlet(0.2, 5, 0.2), (c) Dirichlet(0.5,0.5,0.5).
343
distribution is given by:
Dirichletk(?1, . . . , ?k) = f(x1, . . . , xk;?1, . . . , ?k)
= ?(
?k
i=1 ?i)
?k
i=1 ?(?i)
k
?
i=1
xai?1i
where ?(x) (=
? ?
0 t(x?1)e?tdt) extends the fac-
torial function to the real numbers. Since a
draw from a Dirichlet distribution (written ? ?
Dirichletk(?)) gives a distribution, a Dirichlet
can be used as the prior for a Bayesian finite mix-
ture model:
? ? Dirichletk(?1, . . . , ?k)
? is a distribution over the k components ? of
the finite mixture model. Each component ?zi is
drawn from a base measure G0 (?zi ? G0). The
choice of distribution G0 depends on the nature
of the data to be clustered; with data that is rep-
resented using the bag of words model, G0 must
generate distributions over the word vocabulary.
Hence the Dirichlet distribution is an appropriate
choice in this case:
?zi ? Dirichletv(?1, . . . , ?v)
where v is the size of the vocabulary.
For each data point (utterance) xi a component
?zi is selected by a draw zi from the multinomial
distribution ?:
zi ? Multinomialk(?)
A suitable distribution F (?zi) is then used to draw
the data point (utterance). In the bag of words
model, the multinomial distribution is used to
draw the words for each data point xi:
xi ? Multinomialv(?zi)
A small example will illustrate this generative
process. Imagine that there are just two types
of utterances with a vocabulary consisting sim-
ply of the words A, B and C. A finite Bayesian
mixture model in this case would first draw ?
from a suitable Dirichlet distribution (e.g. ? ?
Dirichlet2(0.5, 1)) as, for example, is shown in
Figure 4(a). Next the two components ?z1 and
?z2 would be drawn from a suitable base distribu-
tion G0 (e.g. ?z1 ? Dirichlet3(1, 0.5, 0.5) and
?z2 ? Dirichlet3(0.5, 0.5, 1), see Figure 4(b)
and 4(c)). In this case, ?z1 will tend to generate
Figure 4: An example finite Bayesian mixture
model. (a) The prior distribution over components
?z1 (b) and ?z2 (c)
utterances containing more occurrences of word
A than B or C, whilst ?z2 will tend to gener-
ate utterances with more C?s than A?s or B?s. A
component zi is then selected for each utterance
(zi ? Multinomialk(?)). Note that in this ex-
ample, the distribution ? would lead to more utter-
ances generated by ?z2 than by ?z1 . Suppose that
five utterances are to be generated by this model
and that the components for each utterance are
z1 = 1, z2 = 2, z3 = 2, z4 = 1 and z5 = 2.
The words in each utterance are then generated
by repeated draws from the corresponding com-
ponent (e.g. x1 = ACAAB, x2 = ACCBCC,
x3 = CCC, x4 = CABAAC and x5 = ACC).
3.2 Dirichlet Processes
A Dirichlet Process can be thought of as an exten-
sion of a Dirichlet distribution where the dimen-
sions of the distribution are infinite. The prob-
lem with the infinite dimension Dirichlet distri-
bution, though, is that its probability mass would
be distributed across the whole of the distribution.
However, in most practical applications of mixture
modelling there will be a finite number of clusters.
The solution is to have a process which will tend
to place most of the probability mass at the be-
ginning of the infinite distribution, thereby mak-
ing it possible to assign probabilities to clusters
without restricting the number of clusters avail-
able. The GEM stick breaking construction (the
name comes from the first letters of Griffiths, En-
gen and McCloskey (Pitman, 2002)) achieves pre-
cisely this (Pitman and Yor, 1997). Starting with
344
a stick of unit length, random portions ??k are re-
peatedly broken off the stick, with each part that
is broken off representing the proportion of prob-
ability assigned to a component:
??k ? Beta(1, ?) ?k =
?k?1
i+1 (1? ??i) ? ??k
The Dirichlet Process mixture model can now
be specified as:
? ?GEM(?) ?zi ?G0 zi ? (1 . . .?)
zi ?Multinomial(?) xi ? F (?zi)
3.3 Chinese Restaurant Process
The Chinese Restaurant Process (CRP) is a popu-
lar Dirichlet Process paradigm that has been suc-
cessfully applied to many clustering problems. In
the CRP, one is asked to imagine a Chinese restau-
rant with an infinite number of tables. The cus-
tomers enter the restaurant and select, according to
a given distribution, a table at which to sit. All the
customers on the same table share the same dish.
In this paradigm, the tables represent data clusters,
the customers represent data points (xi) and the
dishes represent components (?z). As each cus-
tomer (data point) enters the restaurant the choice
of which table (cluster) and therefore which dish
(component) is determined by a draw from the fol-
lowing distribution:
?i|?1, . . . , ?i?1 ?
1
(? + i? 1)
?
?
i?1
?
j=1
??j + ?G0
?
?
where ? is the concentration parameter for the
CRP. The summation over the ??j ?s counts the
number of customers sat at each of the occupied
tables. The probability of sitting at an already oc-
cupied table, therefore, is proportional to the num-
ber of customers already sat at the table, whilst the
probability of starting a new table is proportional
to ?G0. Figure 5 illustrates four iterations of this
initial clustering process.
Once all the customers (data points) have been
placed at tables (clusters), the inference process
begins. The posterior p(?,?, z|x) cannot be cal-
culated exactly, but Gibbs sampling can be used.
Gibbs sampling for the CRP involves iteratively
removing a randomly selected customer from their
table, calculating the posterior probability distri-
bution across all the occupied tables together with
a potential new table (with a randomly drawn dish,
Figure 5: The first four steps of the initial cluster-
ing process of the CRP. The probability distribu-
tion over the tables is also shown in each case.
i.e. component), and making a draw from that dis-
tribution to determine the new table for that cus-
tomer. The posterior distribution across the tables
is calculated as follows:
?i|?1, . . . ,?i?1,x
? 1B
?
?
i?1
?
j=1
??jp(xi|?j) + ?G0p(xi|?i)
?
?
where B = ?p(xk) +
?i?1
j=1 p(xi|?i) is the nor-
malising constant. After a predetermined number
of samples, the dish (component) of each occupied
table is updated to further resemble the customers
(data points) sitting around it. In the bag of words
approach used here, this involves converting the
histogram of word counts in each customer (utter-
ance) sitting at the table into an empirical distribu-
tion H(xi), taking the average of these empirical
distributions and modifying the dish (component)
to further resemble this distribution:
?i = ?i +
?
mi
mi
?
j=1
H(xj)
where ? (0 ? ? < 1) is the learning con-
stant and mi is the number of customers around
345
table i. The inference process continues to it-
erate between Gibbs sampling and updating the
table dishes (components) until the process con-
verges. Convergence can be estimated by observ-
ing n consecutive samples in which the customer
was returned to the same table they were taken
from.
4 Results
The CRP with Gibbs sampling was used to clus-
ter both user and system utterances from the 900
dialogues in the Dihana corpus. Each utterance is
treated as an independent bag of words where all
information about the dialogue that it came from
and the context in which it was uttered is ignored
during training. Intra-cluster and inter-cluster sim-
ilarity measures were used to evaluate the resulting
clusters. Intra-cluster similarity S?i is calculated
by averaging the Euclidean distance between ev-
ery pair of data points in the cluster i:
S?i =
1
2mi
mi
?
i=1;j=1
|xi ? xj |
Inter-cluster similarity S?? is calculated by sum-
ming the Euclidean distance between the centroids
of all pairs of clusters:
S?? =
n
?
i=1;j=1
|Ci ? Cj |
where Ci is the centroid of cluster i and n is the
number of clusters.
Two classification error measures were also
used, one from the cluster (table) perspective E?,
and the other from the perspective of the Dialogue
Act (DA) annotations (first level) of the Dihana
corpus E??. The cluster classification error of ta-
ble i is calculated by summing up the occurrences
of each DA on the table, finding the DA with the
largest total and allocating that DA as the correct
classification for that table Di. The number of
false positives fpi for that table is the count of all
customers (utterances) with DA annotations not in
Di. The number of false negatives fni is the count
of utterances with label Di that occur on other ta-
bles. The cluster classification error for table i is
therefore:
E?i =
1
n(f
p
i + fni )
The DA classification error E??i measures how
well DA i has been clustered, using the size of the
Cluster
No. Ans Ask Clo Not Rej Und
1 1 5
4 2 91 2
9 2 1 9
12 7 161 1 1
13 273 26 8
14 382 12 1 5
15 6 1 909 1 327 22
17 47 39 1 1
18 73 1 3
19 1 4
20 131 115 1 3 1
22 270 29 3 3
23 135 8 2 2
25 83 31 1 4
28 247 16 1 4
29 349 6 1 12
33 13 3 5 1 4 25
41 202 45 1 2 3
46 4 1
49 6 251 1 2 4
51 124 896 1 12
53 45 477 10
Table 2: Clusters of user utterances, with the
counts for each level 1 speech act. The largest
cluster for each speech act is in bold. The abbrevi-
ations are: Und = Undefined, Ans = Answering,
Ask = Asking, Clo = Closing, Rej = Rejection,
Not = Not-understood.
DA classN ci , the size of the largest cluster of utter-
ances from that DA classM ci , and the total number
of utterances n in the corpus:
E??i =
1
n(N
c
i ?M ci )
Table 6 summarises the results from three sep-
arate runs of the CRP, each increasing in number
of epochs. It should be noted here that the Dihana
corpus has 72 DA categories, so the ideal number
of clusters discovered by the CRP would be 72. It
should also be noted that given an initial random
clustering, a good clustering algorithm will reduce
intra-cluster similarity (S??), increase inter-cluster
similarity (S??) and reduce the classification errors
(E?? and E???).
346
Epochs (K) No. Clusters S?? S?? E?? E???
0 70 99703.6 243.74 0.05303 0.00979
1000 44 14975.4 217.56 0.01711 0.00385
1500 54 10093.7 336.15 0.01751 0.00435
Figure 6: The results from three separate runs of the CRP on utterances from the Dihana corpus. Cluster
similarity measures and classification error values are shown after 0 (i.e. random clustering), 1000K, and
1500K epochs. S??, E?? and E??? are averaged values.
Level 1 Level 2 Cluster
No.
Answering Day 14
Destination 22
Fare 29
Departure-hour 28, 41
Asking Departure-hour,Fare 4
Train-type 12
Fare 49
Departure-hour 51, 53
Table 3: Clusters that have specialised on level 1
and level 2 annotations.
5 Discussion
The first row of the table in Figure 6 shows the
cluster similarity measures and classification er-
rors after 0 epochs of the inference procedure (i.e.
for a random clustering of utterances). This gives a
baseline for the measures and error values used in
subsequent runs. The second row of values shows
the results after a run of 1000K epochs of the in-
ference procedure. This run finds only 44 clusters
but has a much lower value for S?? than was found
in the random clustering, showing a significant in-
crease in the similarity between utterances within
each cluster. Surprisingly, the value for S?? is also
reduced, showing that the differentiation between
the clusters formed at this stage is even lower than
there was with the random clustering. E?? and E???
show suitable reductions indicating that the classi-
fication errors are being reduced by the inference
process. The third row of values show that after
1500K epochs 54 clusters have been found, intra-
cluster similarity is increased beyond that for the
random clustering, but the classification errors re-
main essentially the same as for the 1500K run.
Although the 1500K epoch run found only 54
clusters, it was able to clearly distinguish between
system and user utterances: with 30 clusters con-
taining system utterances only, 22 clusters con-
taining user utterances only and 2 clusters contain-
ing instances of both. Given that the system utter-
ances in the Dihana corpus are generated from a
restricted set of sentences, it is not surprising that
these were easy to cluster and differentiate from
user utterances. However, the CRP was also able
to cluster user utterances well, which is more of
a challenge. Table 2 shows the clusters that have
specialised on user utterances, with the counts of
the level 1 annotations in each case. The largest
cluster for each level 1 annotation is shown in bold
typeface. From here it can be seen that cluster 15
has specialised on bothClosing and Rejection. It is
not surprising that these fall within the same clus-
ter since the words used in each are often the same
(e.g. ?No thank you? can act as either a closing
statement or a rejection statement). Clusters 14,
22, 29, 28 and 41 have specialised to the Answer-
ing annotation, whilst clusters 4, 12 49, 51 and 53
have specialised to Asking. Table 3 shows how
each of these clusters have specialised to level 2
annotations. Cluster 14, for example, specialises
on the Answering:Day pair, whilst 22 specialises
on Answering:Destination pair.
These initial results show that, at least for the
Dihana corpus, the DPMM can successfully clus-
ter utterances into Speaker, Level 1, and Level2
classes. Whilst this looks promising, it must be
acknowledged that the Dihana corpus is restricted
to train service inquiries and it remains unclear
whether this approach will generalise to other di-
alogue corpora with a broader range of topics and
wider vocabularies. Future work will include in-
vestigating the use of ngrams of words, syntactic
features, the DAs of previous utterances and ex-
perimentation with other corpora such as Switch-
board (Godfrey et al, 1992).
Acknowledgments
This work was funded by the Companions project
(www.companions-project.org) sponsored by the
347
European Commission as part of the Information
Society Technologies (IST) programme under EC
grant number IST-FP6-034434. We thank Jeff
Bilmes (University of Washington) for many very
helpful discussions about Dirichlet processes and
their application.
References
Toine Andernach, Mannes Poel, and Etto Salomons.
1997. Finding classes of dialogue utterances with
kohonen networks. In In Daelemans, pages 85?94.
J.A. Andernach. 1996. A machine learning approach
to the classification and prediction of dialogue utter-
ances. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Con-
ference on New Methods in Language Processing,
pages 98?109.
Charles E. Antoniak. 1974. Mixtures of dirichlet pro-
cesses with applications to bayesian nonparametric
problems. The Annals of Statistics, 2(6):1152?1174.
J.L. Austin. 1962. How to do things with words. Ox-
ford: Clarendon Press.
Michael D. Escobar and Mike West. 1995. Bayesian
density estimation and inference using mixtures.
Journal of the American Statistical Association,
90(430):577?588.
Sheila Garfield and Stefan Wermter. 2006. Call clas-
sification using recurrent neural networks, support
vector machines and finite state automata. Knowl.
Inf. Syst., 9(2):131?156.
J. J. Godfrey, E. C. Holliman, and J. Mcdaniel. 1992.
SWITCHBOARD: telephone speech corpus for re-
search and development. In Proc. ICASSP, vol-
ume 1, pages 517?520 vol.1.
Gang Ji and J. Bilmes. 2005. Dialog act tagging using
graphical models. In Acoustics, Speech, and Signal
Processing, 2005. Proceedings. (ICASSP ?05). IEEE
International Conference on, volume 1, pages 33?
36.
J.M.Bened??, E.Lleida, A. Varona, M.J.Castro,
I.Galiano, R.Justo, I. Lo?pez, and A. Miguel. 2006.
Design and acquisition of a telephone spontaneous
speech dialogue corpus in spanish: Dihana. In Fifth
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC), pages 1636?1639, Genova,
Italy, May.
S. Keizer, M. Gasic, F. Mairesse, B. Thomson, K. Yu,
and S. Young. 2008. Modelling user behaviour
in the his-pomdp dialogue manager. In IEEE SLT,
pages 121?124, Dec.
Steven N. Maceachern and Peter Mu?ller. 1998. Esti-
mating mixture of dirichlet process models. Jour-
nal of Computational and Graphical Statistics,
7(2):223?238.
C. D. Mart??nez-Hinarejos, J. M. Bened??, and
R. Granell. 2008. Statistical framework for a span-
ish spoken dialogue corpus. Speech Communica-
tion, 50:992?1008.
Geoffrey Mclachlan and David Peel. 2000. Finite Mix-
ture Models. Wiley Series in Probability and Statis-
tics. Wiley-Interscience, October.
Gabriel Murray, Steve Renals, Jean Carletta, and Jo-
hanna Moore. 2006. Incorporating speaker and
discourse features into speech summarization. In
Proceedings of the main conference on Human Lan-
guage Technology Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association of Computational
Linguistics, pages 367?374, Morristown, NJ, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
J. Pitman and M. Yor. 1997. The two-parameter
Poisson-Dirichlet distribution derived from a stable
subordinator. Annals of Probability, 25(2):855?900.
J. Pitman. 2002. Combinatorial stochastic processes.
Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2002. Machine learning in au-
tomated text categorization. ACM Comput. Surv.,
34(1):1?47, March.
Andreas Stolcke, Noah Coccaro, Rebecca Bates, Paul
Taylor, Carol Van Ess-Dykema, Klaus Ries, Eliza-
beth Shriberg, Daniel Jurafsky, Rachel Martin, and
Marie Meteer. 2000. Dialogue act modeling for
automatic tagging and recognition of conversational
speech. Comput. Linguist., 26(3):339?373.
E. Zovato and J. Romportl. 2008. Speech synthesis
and emotions: a compromise between flexibility and
believability. In Proceedings of Fourth International
Workshop on Human-Computer Conversation, Bel-
lagio, Italy.
348
Proceedings of SIGDIAL 2010: the 11th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 277?280,
The University of Tokyo, September 24-25, 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
?How was your day?? An affective companion ECA prototype 
 
Marc Cavazza 
School of Computing 
Teesside University 
Middlesbrough TS1 3BA 
m.o.cavazza@tees.ac.uk 
Ra?l Santos de la C?mara 
Telef?nica I+D 
C/ Emilio Vargas 6 
28043 Madrid 
e.rsai@tid.es 
Markku Turunen 
University of Tampere 
Kanslerinrinne 1 
FI-33014 
mturunen@cs.uta.fi 
 
 
Jos? Rela?o Gil 
Telef?nica I+D 
C/ Emilio Vargas 6 
28043 Madrid 
joserg@tid.es 
Jaakko Hakulinen 
University of Tampere 
Kanslerinrinne 1 
FI-33014 
jh@cs.uta.fi 
Nigel Crook 
Oxford University 
Computing Laboratory 
Oxford OX1 3QD 
nigc@comlab.ox.
ac.uk 
Debora Field 
Computer Science 
Sheffield University 
Sheffield S1 4DP 
d.field@shef. 
ac.uk 
 
Abstract 
This paper presents a dialogue system in 
the form of an ECA that acts as a socia-
ble and emotionally intelligent compan-
ion for the user. The system dialogue is 
not task-driven but is social conversation 
in which the user talks about his/her day 
at the office. During conversations the 
system monitors the emotional state of 
the user and uses that information to in-
form its dialogue turns. The system is 
able to respond to spoken interruptions 
by the user, for example, the user can in-
terrupt to correct the system. The system 
is already fully implemented and aspects 
of actual output will be used to illustrate. 
1 Introduction 
Historically, Embodied Conversational Agents 
(ECAs) have been used in research and industry 
make information and complex tasks more ac-
cessible to customers and users. With the rise of 
new technologies in affective dialogue systems, 
we are beginning to see a future in which ECA 
dialogues are not all task-driven, but some will 
be focused on the social aspects of conversation. 
We envisage the development of ECAs that en-
hance the social quality of life of the user, and 
that build deep relationships with their users over 
years of use. Our affective companion ECA is 
our first contribution to this emerging technol-
ogy.  
Our emotionally intelligent dialogue system 
requires a high level of understanding of the 
meaning of the user turns, and so is quite unlike 
a ?chatbot?. Affective aspects of the situation are 
also key in influencing the course of the conver-
sation. The system attempts to balance both se-
mantic and affective understanding in order to 
create an engaging and enjoyable companion for 
social conversation. 
2 Scenario description 
The system conversation is free-ranging and fol-
lows the user?s initiative, rather than being task-
driven. We have for the time being restricted the 
range of conversation topics to things that hap-
pen in the life of someone who works in an of-
fice (the ?How was your day?? (HWYD) sce-
nario). The user ?offloads? about his/her day at 
work by chatting to the ECA, and the ECA tries 
to empathise with and advise the user. The ECA 
asks questions to elicit information from the user, 
makes empathetic and sympathetic comments, 
and offers advice.  
The system is able to process long user turns, 
as well as to generate long system turns (around 
50 words). If the user perhaps dislikes what 
he/she hears, he/she can interrupt the system by 
barging in, and the ECA will respond in a hu-
man-like way. The conversation style is therefore 
considerably different from traditional task-based 
dialogues that consist of short dialogue turns and 
in which the system takes all the initiative.  
The dialogue in Table 1 (actual output from a 
user session) illustrates some of the significant 
features of the system, including long system 
277
turns, user interruptions and emotional analysis 
of user input.  
 
User1 Worst day ever. I arrived late be-
cause of the traffic. 
System1 You have my sympathy. What 
happened next? 
User2 I missed the meeting on project 
responsibilities; got more work 
dumped on me. Just what I don?t 
need. I?m already likely to miss 
the deadline. [ECA looks worried 
when user?s negative tone is de-
tected] 
System2 Sorry to hear that. Who was at the 
meeting? 
User3 Only my team. They gave me a 
set of PowerPoint slides from the 
meeting. I spent the rest of the day 
reading them but my computer 
kept crashing because of  updates. 
System3 Oh dear! It is understandable how 
you must be feeling. It?s right to 
be unhappy about such a bad situ-
ation. Try not to worry about 
missing the deadline because of 
the technical problems. [At this 
point user interrupts ECA by 
beginning turn User4] It?s sad that 
your motivation could be affected 
by them. [System stops speaking] 
User4 No, I?m not worried about the 
technical problems, I?m worried 
about the amount of extra work on 
this project and the deadline. 
System4 What is the project about? 
 
Table 1: Dialogue example 
 
A video demonstration of the system in action 
is available at: 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
BmDMNguQUmM 
3 Architecture 
Figure 1 shows a screen shot taken at run-time of 
actual system output. The ECA is represented on 
a screen as a woman (waist up) who displays 
natural, human-like movements and performs a 
wide range of complex facial expressions, bodily 
movements, and hand and arm gestures. 
The screen also displays a transcript of the 
user and system turns. The user turns shown con-
stitute the output of the Automatic Speech Rec-
ogniser (ASR). The system?s analysis of the 
user?s emotional state is also shown. 
The right-most panel of the screen shows 
graphics which convey real-time information 
about how the dialogue is being processed. It 
presents a streamlined view of the software 
modules that comprise the system. Module activ-
ity is visually represented at run-time by flashing 
colours. This ?glass-box? approach enables de-
tailed observation and analysis of system 
procedure at run-time. 
The system comprises a number of distinct 
modules that are connected using Inamode, a 
hub-based message-passing framework using 
XML formatted messages over plain text sock-
ets. 
The system?s ASR is the NuanceTM dictation 
engine. This is run in parallel with our own a-
coustic analysis pipeline which extracts low level 
(pitch, tone) speech features and also high-level 
features such as emotional characteristics. 
Analysis of the emotions is currently carried out 
 
Figure 1: Screenshot of the prototype interface 
 
278
by EmoVoice (Vogt et al (2008)). The ASR 
output strings are analysed for sentiment by the 
AFFECTiS system (Moilanen and Pulman (2007, 
2009)) and classed as positive, neutral, or nega-
tive. This output is fused with the output from 
EmoVoice to generate a value that represents the 
user?s current emotional state, which is ex-
pressed as a valence+arousal pairing (with five 
possible values). 
The ASR output goes to our own Natural Lan-
guage Understanding (NLU) module which per-
forms syntactic and semantic analysis of user 
utterances and derives noun phrases and verb 
groups and associated arguments. Events rele-
vant to the scenario (e.g., promotions, redundan-
cies, meetings, arguments, etc.) are recognised 
by the NLU and are used to populate an ontology 
(a model of the conversation content).  The sys-
tem is currently able to recognize and respond to 
more than 30 event types.  
The events recognised in a user turn are 
labelled with the output of the Emotion Module 
for that turn; the result is a representation of both 
the semantic and affective information that the 
user might be trying to convey. 
Our own rule-based Dialogue Manager (DM) 
takes the affect-annotated semantic output of the 
NLU, and from that and its model of the conver-
sation content determines the next system turn. It 
will either ask a question about the events that 
occurred in the user?s day, express an opinion on 
the events already described, or make empathetic 
comments. Whenever the system has gained suf-
ficient understanding of a key event in the user?s 
day, it generates a complex long turn that encap-
sulates comfort, opinion, warnings and advice to 
the user. 
These long system turns are generated by our 
own plan-based Affective Strategy Module that 
makes an appraisal of the user?s situation and  
generates an appropriate emotional strategy 
(Cavazza et al (2010)). This strategy?expressed 
as an abstract, conceptual representation?is han-
ded to our own Natural Language Generator 
(NLG) that maps it into a series of linguistic sur-
face forms (usually 4 or 5 sentences). We use a 
style-controllable system using Tree-Furcating 
Grammars (an extension of the Tree-Adjoining 
Grammars formalism (Joshi et al (1997)). This 
ensures the generation of a large set of different 
surface forms from the same semantic input. 
The output of the NLG is passed to a module 
that adds this information to its system turn 
instructions for the ECA. The ECA has been de-
veloped around the HaptekTM toolkit and is con-
trolled using an FML-like language (after 
Hern?ndez et al (2008)). This 2-D embodiment 
produces gestures, facial expressions, and body 
movements that convey the emotional state of 
the ECA. Its movements and expressions enable 
it to visually display interest and enjoyment in 
talking to the user, and to display empathy with 
the user. The speech synthesis module is our own 
emotion-focused extension of the LoquendoTM 
TTS system. It includes paralinguistic elements 
such as exclamations and laughter, and emo-
tional prosody generation for negative and posi-
tive utterances. 
4 Special procedural features 
A significant processing design feature of the 
system is that there are two main processing 
loops from user input to system output; a ?long 
loop? which passes through all the components 
of the system; and a ?short loop? or ?feedback 
loop? which will now be discussed (the proce-
dure already described in Section 3 is the long 
loop procedure). 
4.1 Feedback loop 
The feedback loop (?short loop?) bypasses many 
linguistic components and generates immediate 
reactions to user activity. The main function of 
the short loop is maintain user engagement by 
preventing unnaturally long gaps of ECA inactiv-
ity. The feedback loop engages the acoustic 
analysis components, the TTS, and the ECA. It is 
responsible for the generation of real-time (< 500 
ms) reactions in the ECA in response to the emo-
tional state of the user. It attempts to align  both 
verbal behaviour (backchannelling) and non-
verbal behaviour (facial expressions, gestures, 
and general body language) to the emotions de-
tected during most recent user turn. In order to 
achieve a reasonable level of realism, these sys-
tem reactions to the perceived emotional state of 
the user need to be perceptibly instantaneous. 
Using this short feedback loop that bypasses 
many of the linguistic components ensures this. 
The feedback loop is also occasionally used to 
make sympathetic comments immediately after 
the user stops speaking. These act as acknowl-
edgements of the emotion expressed by the user. 
An example can be seen in the System2 turn of 
the example dialogue in Table 1: 
1.?Sorry to hear that. Who was at the meeting?? 
Here, the first utterance was spoken by the sys-
tem within a few tenths of a second after the end 
279
of the previous user turn (User2). The system 
tried to identify the user?s emotion in the previ-
ous turn and then to behave linguistically and 
visually in an empathetic way. The actual sympa-
thetic utterance was randomly chosen from a set 
of ?negative emotion utterances? (there are also 
?positive? and ?neutral? sets).  
The second half of the system turn in (1) was 
derived by the system?s ?long loop?. It is a ques-
tion which refers to a meeting that the user men-
tioned in the previous turn. This ?meeting? event 
has been heard by the ASR, understood by the 
NLU system, remembered by the DM, and is 
now referred to by an appropriate definite noun 
phrase in the output of the NLG.   
The feedback and main loops run in parallel. 
However, the feedback loop generates its speech 
output almost immediately, giving time for the 
main dialogue loop to complete its more detailed 
analysis of the user?s utterance.  
4.2 Handling user interruptions 
This system has a complex strategy for handling 
situations in which the user interrupts long 
system turns.  The system?s response to ?barge-
in? user interruptions is overseen by the Interrup-
tion Manager (IM), which is alerted by the 
acoustic input modules whenever a genuine user 
interruption (as opposed to, say, a backchannel) 
is detected during a long system utterance. When 
alerted, the IM instructs the ECA to stop speak-
ing when it reaches a natural stopping point in its 
current turn (usually the end of the current 
phrase). The user?s interruption utterance is 
processed by the long loop. Its progress is 
tracked and controlled by the IM, for example, it 
makes sure that the linguistic modules know that 
the current utterance is an interruption, whic 
means it requires special treatment. The DM has 
a range of strategies for system recoveries from 
user interruptions, including different ways of 
continuing, replanning, and aborting. An exam-
ple of a user interruption is shown in Table 1. 
The user interrupts the long system utterance in 
the System3 turn. The system?s response to the 
interruption is to stop the speech output from the 
ECA, abort the long system turn altogether, and 
instead to ask for more details about the project 
that the user has just mentioned during the inter-
ruption. (See (Crook et al (2010))  for a more 
detailed description of the IM.) 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
This work was funded by Companions, a Eu-
ropean Commission Sixth Framework Pro-
gramme Information Society Technologies Inte-
grated Project (IST-34434).  
We would also like to thank the following 
people for their valuable contributions to the 
work presented here: Stephen Pulman, Ramon 
Granell, and Simon Dobnick (Oxford Univer-
sity), Johan Boye (KTH Stockholm), Cameron 
Smith and Daniel Charlton (Teesside Univer-
sity), Roger Moore, WeiWei Cheng and Lei Ye 
(University of Sheffield), Morena Danieli and 
Enrico Zovato (Loquendo). 
References 
Cavazza, M., Smith, C., Charlton, D., Crook, N., 
Boye, J., Pulman, S., Moilanen, K., Pizzi, D., San-
tos de la Camara, R., Turunen, M. 2010 Persuasive 
Dialogue based on a Narrative Theory: an ECA 
Implementation, Proc. of the 5th Int. Conf. on Per-
suasive Technology (Persuasive 2010), to appear 
2010. 
Crook, N., Smith, C., Cavazza, M., Pulman, S., 
Moore, R., and Boye, J. 2010 Handling User Inter-
ruptions in an Embodied Conversational Agent In 
proc. of AAMAS 2010. 
Hern?ndez, A., L?pez, B., Pardo, D., Santos, R., 
Hern?ndez, L., Rela?o Gil, J. and Rodr?guez, M.C. 
(2008) Modular definition of multimodal ECA 
communication acts to improve dialogue robust-
ness and depth of intention. In: Heylen, D., Kopp, 
S., Marsella, S., Pelachaud, C., and Vilhj?lmsson, 
H. (Eds.), AAMAS 2008 Workshop on Functional 
Markup Language.  
Joshi, A.K. & Schabes, Y. (1997) Tree-adjoining 
Grammars. Handbook of formal languages, vol. 3: 
Beyond Words, Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., 
New York, NY, 1997. 
Moilanen, K. and Pulman. S. (2009). Multi-entity 
Sentiment Scoring. Proc. Recent Advances in 
Natural Language Processing (RANLP 2009). 
September 14-16, Borovets, Bulgaria. pp. 258--
263.  
Moilanen, K. and Pulman. S. (2007). Sentiment Com-
position. Proc. Recent Advances in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (RANLP 2007). September 27-
29, Borovets, Bulgaria. pp. 378--382. 
Vogt, T., Andr?, E. and Bee, N. 2008. EmoVoice ? A 
framework for online recognition of emotions 
from voice. Proc. Workshop on Perception and 
Interactive Technologies for Speech-Based Sys-
tems, Springer, Kloster Irsee, Germany, (June 
2008). 
280
