Using the Segmentation Corpus to define an inventory of 
concatenative units for Cantonese speech synthesis 
 
Wai Yi Peggy WONG 
Chris BREW 
Mary E. BECKMAN 
Linguistics Dept., Ohio State University 
222 Oxley Hall, 1712 Neil Ave. 
Columbus, OH, 43210-1298  USA 
{pwong, cbrew, mbeckman}@ling.osu.edu 
Shui-duen CHAN 
Chinese Language Centre, 
Hong Kong Polytechnic University 
Yuk Choi Road, Hung Hom, Kowloon, 
HONG KONG 
chsdchan@polyu.edu.hk 
 
Abstract  
The problem of word segmentation affects 
all aspects of Chinese language processing, 
including the development of text-to-speech 
synthesis systems. In synthesizing a Hong 
Kong Cantonese text, for example, words 
must be identified in order to model fusion 
of coda [p] with initial [h], and other similar 
effects that differentiate word-internal 
syllable boundaries from syllable edges that 
begin or end words. Accurate segmentation 
is necessary also for developing any list of 
words large enough to identify the word-
internal cross-syllable sequences that must 
be recorded to model such effects using 
concatenated synthesis units. This paper 
describes our use of the Segmentation 
Corpus to constrain such units. 
Introduction 
What are the best units to use in building a fixed 
inventory of concatenative units for an unlimited 
vocabulary text-to-speech (TTS) synthesis 
system for a language? Given a particular choice 
of unit type, how large is the inventory of such 
units for the language, and what is the best way 
to design materials to cover all or most of these 
units in one recording session? Are there effects 
such as prosodically conditioned allophony that 
cannot be modeled well by the basic unit type? 
These are questions that can only be answered 
language by language, and answering them for 
Cantonese1 poses several interesting challenges.   
                                                     
                                                                               
1We use ?Cantonese? to mean the newer Hong Kong 
One major challenge involves the definition 
of the ?word? in Cantonese. As in other varieties 
of Chinese, morphemes in Cantonese are 
typically monosyllabic and syllable structure is 
extremely simple, which might suggest the 
demi-syllable or even the syllable (Chu & 
Ching, 1997) as an obvious basic unit. At the 
same time, however, there are segmental 
?sandhi? effects that conjoin syllables within a 
word. For example, when the morpheme ? 
zaap6 2  stands as a word alone (meaning ?to 
collect?), the [p] is a glottalized and unreleased 
coda stop, but when the morpheme occurs in the 
longer word ?? zaap6hap6 (?to assemble?), 
the coda [p] often resyllabifies and fuses with 
the following [h] to make an initial aspirated 
stop. Accurate word segmentation at the text 
analysis level is essential for identifying the 
domain of such sandhi effects in any full-fledged 
TTS system, whatever method is used for 
generating the waveform from the specified 
pronunciation of the word. A further challenge is 
to find a way to capture such sandhi effects in 
systems that use concatenative methods for 
waveform generation.  
This paper reports on research aimed at 
defining an inventory of concatenative units for 
Cantonese using the Segmentation Corpus, a 
lexicon of 33k words extracted from a large 
corpus of Cantonese newspaper texts. The 
corpus is described further in Section 2 after an 
excursus (in Section 1) on the problems posed 
standard, and not the older Canton City one. 
2 We use the Jyutping romanization developed by the 
Linguistics Society of Hong Kong in 1993. See 
http://www.cpct92.cityu.edu.hk/lshk.  
by the Cantonese writing system. Section 3 
outlines facts about Cantonese phonology 
relevant to choosing the concatenative unit, and 
Section 4 calculates the number of units that 
would be necessary to cover all theoretically 
possible syllables and sequences of syllables. 
The calculation is done for three models: (1) 
syllables, as in Chu & Ching (1997), (2) Law & 
Lee?s (2000) mixed model of onsets, rhymes, 
and cross-syllabic rhyme-onset units, and (3) a 
positionally sensitive diphone model. This 
section closes by reporting how the number of 
units in the last model is reduced by exploiting 
the sporadic and systematic phonotactic gaps 
discovered by looking for words exemplifying 
each possible unit in the Segmentation Corpus.  
1 The Cantonese writing system 
The Cantonese writing system poses unique 
challenges for developing online lexicons, not 
all of which are related to the ?foremost 
problem? of word segmentation. These problems 
stem from the long and rich socio-political 
history of the dialect, which makes the writing 
system even less regular than the Mandarin one, 
even though Cantonese is written primarily with 
the same logographs (?Chinese characters?).  
The main problem is that each character has 
several readings, and the reading cannot always 
be determined based on the immediate context 
of the other characters in a multisyllabic word. 
For some orthographic forms, the variation is 
stylistic. For example, the word?? ?support? 
can be pronounced zi1jyun4 or zi1wun4. But 
for other orthographic forms, the variation in 
pronunciation corresponds to different words, 
with different meanings.  For example, the 
character sequence?? writes both the function 
word zing3dong1 ?while? and the content word 
zing3dong3 ?proper?. Moreover, some words, 
such as ko1 ?to page, telephone?, ge3 (genitive 
particle), and laa3 (aspect marker), have no 
standard written form. In colloquial styles of 
writing, these forms may be rendered in non-
standard ways, such as using the English source 
word call to write ko1, or writing the particles 
with special characters unique to Cantonese. In 
more formal writing, however, such forms must 
be left to the reader to interpolate from a 
character ?borrowed? from some other 
morpheme. For example, ge3 (genitive particle) 
might be written ? , a character which more 
typically writes the morpheme dik1 in 
muk6dik1?? ?aim?, but which suggests ge3 
because it also writes a genitive particle in 
Mandarin (de in the Pinyin romanization). Thus, 
?  has a reading dik1 that is etymologically 
related to the Mandarin morpheme, but it also 
has the etymologically independent reading ge3 
because Cantonese readers can read texts written 
in Mandarin as if they were Cantonese. Such 
ambiguities of reading make the task of 
developing online wordlists from text corpora 
doubly difficult, since word segmentation is 
only half the task.  
2 The Segmentation Corpus 
The Segmentation Corpus is an electronic 
database of around 33,000 Cantonese word types 
extracted from a 1.7 million character corpus of 
Hong Kong newspapers, along with a tokenized 
record of the text. It is described in more detail 
in Chan & Tang (1999). The Cantonese corpus 
is part of a larger database of segmented Chinese 
texts, including Mandarin newspapers from both 
the PRC and Taiwan.  The three databases were 
created using word-segmentation criteria 
developed by researchers at the Chinese 
Language Centre and Department of Chinese 
and Bilingual Studies, Hong Kong Polytechnic 
University. Since these criteria were intended to 
be applicable to texts in all three varieties, they 
do not refer to the phonology.  
For our current purpose, the most useful part 
of the Segmentation Corpus is the wordlist 
proper, a file containing a separate entry for each 
word type identified by the segmentation criteria. 
Each entry has three fields: the orthographic 
form(s), the pronunciation(s) in Jyutping, and 
the token frequency in the segmented newspaper 
corpus. In the original corpus, the first field 
could have multiple entries. For example, there 
are two character strings, ?? and??, in the 
entry for the word faan6laam6 ?to flood?. 
However, the two readings of ?? were not 
listed separately in the pronunciation field for 
that orthographic form (and there was only one 
entry for the two words written with ??).  
Before we could use the wordlist, therefore, 
we had to check the pronunciation field for each 
entry. The first author, a native speaker of Hong 
Kong Cantonese, examined each entry in order 
to add variant readings not originally listed (as 
in the entry for ?? ?support?) and to correct 
readings that did not correspond to the modern 
Hong Kong pronunciation (as in the entry for? 
?box?). In addition, when the added variant 
pronunciation corresponded to an identifiably 
different word (as in zing3dong3 ?proper? 
versus zing3dong1 ?while? for ?? ), the 
entry was split in two, and all tokens of that 
character string in the larger corpus were 
examined, in order to allocate the total token 
count for the orthographic form to the two 
separate frequencies for the two different words. 
Approximately 90 original entries were split into 
separate entries by this processing. In this way, 
the 32,840 entries in the original word list 
became 33,037 entries. Once this task was 
completed, we could use the wordlist to count 
all of the distinct units that would be needed to 
synthesize all of the words in the Segmentation 
Corpus. To explain what these units are, we 
need to describe the phonology of Cantonese 
words and longer utterances. 
3 Cantonese phonology 
The smallest possible word is a nasal ([m] or 
[]) or vowel as a bare tone-bearing syllable 
nucleus, as in ? ng5 ?five? and? aa2 ?dumb?. 
A syllable with a vowel as nucleus can also have 
an onset consonant, and it can have a more 
complex rhyme which combines the vowel with 
any of the three coda nasals [m], [n], and [], the 
two glides [j] and [w], or the three coda stops 
[p], [t], and [k], as in ? zoeng1 ?will?, ? wai6 
?stomach?, and ? leot2 ?rate?. Tables 1 and 2 
show the 11 vowels and 19 consonants of 
Cantonese, and Figure 1 plots representative F0 
contours for each of the tones that contrast on a 
syllable with an all-sonorant rhyme.  
If there were no phonotactic restrictions on 
combinations of vowels and consonants, there 
would be 101 distinct rhymes in each of the six 
tones. However, not all combinations are 
possible. For example, tone 5 does not occur on 
syllables with coda stops (and tone 4 on such 
checked syllables is limited to onomatopoeia). 
Also, the mid short vowel [e] does not occur in 
open syllables, and in closed syllables it occurs 
only before [k], [], and [j], whereas [i:] occurs 
in closed syllables only before [p], [t], [m], [n], 
and [w]. The Jyutping transliteration system 
takes advantage of this kind of complementary 
distribution to limit the number of vowel 
symbols. Thus ?i? is used to transcribe both the 
short mid vowel [e] in the rhymes [ek] and [e], 
and the high vowel [i:] in the rhymes [i:], [i:t], 
[i:p], [i:m], [i:n], and [i:w]. Ignoring tone, there 
are 54 rhyme types in standard usage of 
Jyutping. Canonical forms of longer words can 
be described to a very rough first approximation 
as strings of syllables. However, fluent synthesis 
cannot be achieved simply by stringing syllables 
together without taking into account the effects 
of position in the word or phrase.  
 
front central back  
 round  round  
 i: y:  u: high 
e  

o mid (short) 
: :  : mid (long) 
  
 a: low vowels
Table 1. Vowels of Cantonese. 
 
labial dental palatal velar labio
velar 
 
ph th, tsh  kh khw  
p t, ts  k kw  
f s    h 
m n, l 
  w  
Table 2. Consonants of Cantonese. 
Time (s)
0 0.7
100
300
 
tone 1
tone 3
tone 6
tone 4
tone 2 
tone 5 
Figure 1. F0 contours for six words [wj] with 
different tones. Numbers to the right identify the 
endpoints of the two rising tones (in grey) and 
numbers to the left identify starting points of the 
other four tones (in black). The discontinuities in 
wai4 are where the speaker breaks into creak. 
o5 jyun4 loi4 hai6 wai3
223 221 221 22 333 HL%
laa221+22
Time (s)
0 1.56807
100
250
 
F
re
qu
en
cy
 (
H
z)
 
Figure 2. Spectrogram with F0 track superimposed for an utterance of the sentence o5 jyun4loi4 hai6 
wai3 ?Oh, I get it.  It was the character?!? (The context is a dictation task.) The labelling window above the 
signal view shows a partial transcription in the annotation conventions proposed by Wong, Chan & Beckman 
(in press), with a syllable-by-syllable Jyutping transliteration (top tier), a transcription of the (canonical) 
lexical tones and boundary tone, and a phonetic transcription of fused forms (lowest tier). The HL% 
boundary tone is a pragmatic morpheme, which we have translated with the ?Oh, I get it.? phrase.   
 
 ? ? ? ? basic units 
Jyutping ging1 zai3 hok6 gaa1 (added units) 
Chu & Ching 	
   :	 	:# 1042 (1042) 
Law & Lee #	 
$ $ :	$	 :# 1801 
diphones #	
 
 $  j $: :	 	: :# 1097 
Table 3. The string of basic units and exceptional units (underlined) that would be needed to synthesize an 
utterance of the word ?economist? in each of the three models.   
 
One of these effects is the fusion of coda [p] 
with initial [h] in words such as ?? zaap6 
hap6. In fluent connected speech, such effects 
can be extreme. Consonants can be reduced or 
deleted, with the abutting vowels fused together, 
as in the pronunciation [jy:n21la:212] for the 
phrase ??? jyun4loi4 hai6 ?was? (with 
the verb cliticized onto the preceding tense 
adverb) as in Figure 2. Eventually, we plan to 
use the larger Segmentation Corpus to look for 
likely targets of fusion. For now, however, we 
focus on positional effects that can be modeled 
just by recording word lists. Figure 2 illustrates 
one such effect. The final syllable in this 
utterance is sustained, to be longer than the other 
four syllables combined. It also bears two extra 
tone targets for the HL% boundary tone. (See 
Wong, Chan & Beckman, in press, for a 
discussion of these utterance-level effects.) 
Phrase-final lengthening is not usually so 
extreme in read speech, and the inventory of 
boundary tones is more limited. However, there 
will be sufficient final lengthening to warrant the 
recording of separate units for (the rhymes of) 
final syllables. These two positional effects 
increase the inventory of units, albeit in different 
ways depending on the choice of ?basic? unit.  
4 Counting different unit types 
Table 3 illustrates three synthesis models using 
the word ????  ging1zai3hok6gaa1 
?economist?. The last column in Table 3 lists the 
theoretically possible number of basic units. The 
first model concatenates syllables. If each onset 
could be combined with each rhyme, there 
would be 1042 syllable types. A second set of 
syllables can be recorded to capture final 
lengthening. However, there is no comparably 
obvious way to capture the cross-syllabic effects 
with this concatenative unit. The second model 
uses cross-syllabic units which combine the 
rhyme of one syllable with the following initial. 
This automatically captures the sandhi effects. 
The model also captures final lengthening, 
because separate units are recorded for onsets 
with no preceding rhyme and rhymes with no 
following onset. With 54 final rhymes, 1728 
combinations of rhyme followed by medial 
onset, and 19 initial onsets, there are 1801 
theoretically possible units. The last model is 
our diphone model, which differentiates codas 
from onset consonants. That is, the rhyme aak$ 
is distinct from the cross-syllabic diphone aa$k. 
This model has the advantage over Law & Lee?s 
cross-syllable final-initial combination model in 
that spectral continuity between the initial and 
rhyme is captured in the CV diphones (such as 
#gi and zai). Similarly, the diphones capture 
the dependency between the quality of the [h] 
and that of the following vowel (i.e., one records 
separate cross-syllable diphones for i$ho, i$hi, 
i$haa, and so on). However, the number of 
theoretically possible units is smaller, because 
we do not record consonant sequences that abut 
silence with silence ? e.g., aak$ can be 
combined directly with $ka or $ta, so no cross-
syllabic units need be recorded for k$k and k$t. 
Note that none of these counts takes tone 
into consideration. However, since every 
syllable bears a (full) tone, and since tones are 
rarely deleted in running speech, recording 
different units for rhymes with different tones 
should improve naturalness, particularly for 
cases where voice quality is part of the tonal 
specification (as suggested by the contour for 
tone 4 in Figure 1). Naturalness may also require 
different cross-syllabic units for different tone 
sequences when sonorant segments abut at 
syllable edges (so as to insure tonal continuity).  
Of course, when tone specification is taken 
into account, the number of necessary units 
grows substantially. For example, there are 
12,120 distinct syllables, and even more units in 
the other two models. However, when we count 
only those types that are attested in the words of 
the Segmentation Corpus, there are many fewer 
units. For example, the total number of attested 
units taking tone into account in the diphone 
model is 2292. If each diphone were recorded in 
a disyllabic carrier word, a Cantonese speaker 
could speak all of the words to make a new 
voice in a single recording session. (For 
comparison, the number of attested diphones 
ignoring tone is 634.) 
Conclusion 
We have shown one way of using a segmented 
database to inform the design of a unit inventory 
for TTS. We augmented the Segmentation 
Corpus with transliterations that would let us 
predict more accurately the pronunciation that a 
Cantonese speaker adopting a careful speaking 
style would be likely to produce for a character 
sequence. Judgements about the phonology of 
Cantonese, in combination with the augmented 
wordlist, and the associated word frequency 
data, can be used to assess the costs and likely 
benefits of different strategies for unit selection 
in Cantonese TTS. In particular, we present data 
indicating the feasibility of a new diphone 
selection strategy that finesses some of the 
problems in modelling the interactions between 
tone and segmental identity. It remains to be 
demonstrated that this strategy can actually 
deliver the results which it appears to promise. 
This is our future work. 
Acknowledgements 
This work was supported by a grant from the 
University Grants Committee of Hong Kong to 
Y. S. Cheung and an SBC/Ameritech Faculty 
Research Award to C. Brew and M. Beckman.  
References  
Chan S. D. and Tang Z. X. (1999) Quantitative 
Analysis of Lexical Distribution in Different 
Chinese Communities in the 1990?s. Yuyan Wenzi 
Yingyong [Applied Linguistics], No.3, 10-18. 
Chu M. and Ching P. C. (1997) A Cantonese 
synthesizer based on TD-PSOLA method. 
Proceedings of the 1997 International Symposium 
on Multimedia Information Processing. Academia 
Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, Dec. 1997.  
Law K. M. and Lee Tan (2000) Using cross-syllable 
units for Cantonese speech synthesis. Proceedings 
of the 2000 International Conference on Spoken 
Language Processing, Beijing, China, Oct. 2000.  
Wong W. Y. P., Chan M. K-M., and Beckman M. E. 
(in press)  An Autosegmental-Metrical analysis and 
prosodic conventions for Cantonese. To appear in 
S-A. Jun, ed. Prosodic Models and Transcription: 
Towards Prosodic Typology. Oxford University 
Press.  
