Extracting Causal Knowledge from a Medical Database
Using Graphical Patterns
Christopher S.G. Khoo, Syin Chan and Yun Niu
Centre for Advanced Information Systems, School of Computer Engineering
Blk N4, Rm2A-32, Nanyang Avenue
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore 639798
assgkhoo@ntu.edu.sg; asschan@ntu.edu.sg; niuy n@hotmail.com
Abstract
This paper reports the first part of a project
that aims to develop a knowledge extrac-
tion and knowledge discovery system that
extracts causal knowledge from textual da-
tabases. In this initial study, we develop a
method to identify and extract cause-effect
information that is explicitly expressed in
medical abstracts in the Medline database.
A set of graphical patterns were constructed
that indicate the presence of a causal rela-
tion in sentences, and which part of the
sentence represents the cause and which
part represents the effect. The patterns are
matched with the syntactic parse trees of
sentences, and the parts of the parse tree
that match with the slots in the patterns are
extracted as the cause or the effect.
1 Introduction
Vast amounts of textual documents and data-
bases are now accessible on the Internet and the
World Wide Web. However, it is very difficult
to retrieve useful information from this huge
disorganized storehouse. Programs that can
identify and extract useful information, and re-
late and integrate information from multiple
sources are increasingly needed. The World
Wide Web presents tremendous opportunities
for developing knowledge extraction and knowl-
edge discovery programs that automatically ex-
tract and acquire knowledge about a domain by
integrating information from multiple sources.
New knowledge can be discovered by relating
disparate pieces of information and by infer-
encing from the extracted knowledge.
This paper reports the first phase of a project
to develop a knowledge extraction and knowl-
edge discovery system that focuses on causal
knowledge. A system is being developed to
identify and extract cause-effect information
from the Medline database ? a database of ab-
stracts of medical journal articles and conference
papers. In this initial study, we focus on cause-
effect information that is explicitly expressed
(i.e. indicated using some linguistic marker) in
sentences. We have selected four medical areas
for this study ? heart disease, AIDS, depression
an  schizophrenia.
The medical domain was selected for two
reasons:
1. The causal relation is particular important in
medicine, which is concerned with devel-
oping treatments and drugs that can effect a
cure for some disease
2. Because of the importance of the causal re-
lation in medicine, the relation is more likely
to be explicitly indicated using linguistic
means (i.e. using words such as result, ef-
fect, cause, etc.).
2 Previous Studies
The goal of information extraction research is to
develop systems that can identify the passage(s)
in a document that contains information that is
relevant to a prescribed task, extract the infor-
mation and relate the pieces of information by
filling a structured template or a database record
(Cardie, 1997; Cowie & Lehnert, 1996; Gai-
zauskas & Wilks, 1998).
Information extraction research has been
influenced tremendously by the series of Mes-
sage Understanding Conferences (MUC-5,
MUC-6, MUC-7), organized by the U.S. Ad-
vanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA)
(http://www.muc.saic.com/proceedings/proceedi
ngs_index.html). Participants of the conferences
develop systems to perform common informa-
tion extraction tasks, defined by the conference
organizers.
For each task, a template is specified that
indicates the slots to be filled in and the type of
information to be extracted to fill each slot. The
set of slots defines the various entities, aspects
and roles relevant to a prescribed task or topic of
interest. Information that has been extracted can
be used for populating a database of facts about
entities or events, for automatic summarization,
for information mining, and for acquiring
knowledge to use in a knowledge-based system.
Information extraction systems have been devel-
oped for a wide range of tasks. However, few of
them have focused on extracting cause-effect
information from texts.
Previous studies that have attempted to ex-
tract cause-effect information from text have
mostly used knowledge-based inferences to infer
the causal relations. Selfridge, Daniell & Sim-
mons (1985) and Joskowsicz, Ksiezyk &
Grishman (1989) developed prototype computer
programs that extracted causal knowledge from
short explanatory messages entered into the
knowledge acquisition component of an expert
system. When there was an ambiguity whether a
causal relation was expressed in the text, the
systems used a domain model to check whether
such a causal relation between the events was
possible.
Kontos & Sidiropoulou (1991) and Kaplan
& Berry-Rogghe (1991) used linguistic patterns
to identify causal relations in scientific texts, but
the grammar, lexicon, and patterns for identify-
ing causal relations were hand-coded and devel-
oped just to handle the sample texts used in the
studies. Knowledge-based inferences were also
used. The authors pointed out that substantial
domain knowledge was needed for the system to
identify causal relations in the sample texts ac-
curately.
More recently, Garcia (1997) developed a
computer program to extract cause-effect infor-
mation from French technical texts without us-
ing domain knowledge. He focused on causative
verbs and reported a precision rate of 85%.
Khoo, Kornfilt, Oddy & Myaeng (1998) devel-
oped an automatic method for extracting cause-
effect information from Wall Street Journal texts
using linguistic clues and pattern matching.
Their system was able to extract about 68% of
the causal relations with an error rate of about
36%.
The emphasis of the current study is on ex-
tracting cause-effect information that is explic-
itly expressed in the text without knowledge-
based inferencing. It is hoped that this will result
in a method that is more easily portable to other
subject areas and document collections. We also
make use of a parser (Conexor?s FDG parser) to
construct syntactic parse trees for the sentences.
Graphical extraction patterns are constructed to
extract information from the parse trees. As a
result, a much smaller number of patterns need
be constructed. Khoo et al (1998) who used
only part-of-speech tagging and phrase bracket-
ing, but not full parsing, had to construct a large
number of extraction patterns.
3 Initial Analysis of the Medical Texts
200 abstracts were downloaded from the Med-
line database for use as our training sample of
texts. They are from four medical areas: depres-
sion, schizophrenia, heart disease and AIDs
(fifty abstracts from each area). The texts were
analysed to identify:
1. the different roles and attributes that are in-
volved in a causal situation. Causeand effect
are, of course, the main roles, but other roles
also exist including enabling conditions, size
of the effect, and size of the cause (e.g. dos-
age).
2. the various linguistic markers used by the
writers to explicitly signal the presence of a
causal relation, e.g. as a result, affect, re-
duce, etc.
3.1 Cause-effect template
The various roles and attributes of causal situ-
tions identified in the medical abstracts are
s ructured in the form of a template. There are
three levels in our cause-effect template, Level 1
giving the high-level roles and Level 3 giving
the most specific sub-roles. The first two levels
are given in Table 1. A more detailed description
i  provided in Khoo, Chan & Niu (1999).
The information extraction system devel-
oped in this initial study attempts to fill only the
m in slots of cause, effect and modality, without
attempting to divide the main slots into subslots.
Table 1. The cause-effect template
Level 1 Level 2
Object
State/EventCause
Size
Object
State/EventEffect
Size
Polarity (e.g. ?Increase?, ?Decrease?,
etc.)
Object
State/Event
Size
Duration
Condition
Degree of necessity
Modality (e.g. ?True?, ?False?,
?Probable?, ?Possible?, etc.)
Research method
Sample size
Significance level
Information source
Evidence
Location
Type of causal relation
Table 2. Common causal expressions for
depression & schizophrenia
Expression No. of
Occurrences
 causative verb  69
 effect (of) ?(on)  51
 associate with  35
 treatment of  31
 have effect on  28
 treat with  26
 treatment with  22
 effective (for)  14
 related to  10
Table 3. Common causal expressions for
AIDs & heart disease
 Expression  No. of
Occurrences
 causative verb  119
 have effect on  30
 effect (of)?(on)  25
 due to  20
 associate with  19
 treat with  15
 causative noun (including
nominalized verbs)
 12
 effective for  10
3.2 Causal expressions in medical texts
Causal relations are expressed in text in various
ways. Two common ways are by using causal
links and causative verbs. Causal links are words
used to link clauses or phrases, indicating a
causal relation between them. Altenburg (1984)
provided a comprehensive typology of causal
links. He classified them into four main types:
the adverbial link (e.g. hence, therefore), the
prepositional link (e.g. because of, on account
of), subordination (e.g. because, as, since, for,
so) and the clause-integrated line (e.g. that?s
why, the result was). Causative verbs are transi-
tive action verbs that express a causal relation
between the subject and object or prepositional
phrase of the verb. For example, the transitive
verb break can be paraphrased as to cause to
break, and the transitive verb kill can be para-
phrased as to cause to die.
We analyzed the 200 training abstracts to
identify the linguistic markers (such as causal
links and causative verbs) used to indicate causal
relations explicitly. The most common linguistic
expressions of cause-effect found in the Depres-
sion and Schizophrenia bstracts (occurring at
least 10 times in 100 abstracts) are listed in Ta-
ble 2. The common expressions found in the
AIDs and Heart Disease abstracts (with at least
10 occurrences) are listed in Table 3. The ex-
pressions listed in the two tables cover about
70% of the explicit causal expressions found in
the sample abstracts. Six expressions appear in
both tables, indicating a substantial overlap in
the two groups of medical areas. The most fr-
quent way of expressing cause and effect is by
using causative verbs.
4 Automatic Extraction of Cause-
Effect Information
The information extraction process used in this
study makes use of pattern matching. This is
similar to methods employed by other research-
ers for information extraction. Whereas most
studies focus on particular types of events or
topics, we are focusing on a particular type of
relation. Furthermore, the patterns used in this
study are graphical patterns that are matched
with syntactic parse trees of sentences. The pat-
terns represent different words and sentence
structures that indicate the presence of a causal
relation and which parts of the sentence repr-
sent which roles in the causal situation. Any part
of the sentence that matches a particular pattern
is considered to describe a causal situation, and
the words in the sentence that match slots in the
pattern are extracted and used to fill the appro-
priate slots in the cause-effect template.
4.1 Parser
The sentences are parsed using Conexor?s Func-
tional Dependency Grammar of English (FDG)
parser (http://www.conexor.fi), which generates
a representation of the syntactic structure of the
sentence (i.e. the parse tree). For the example
sentence
Paclitaxel was well tolerated and resulted in a
significant clinical response in this patient.
a graphical representation of the parser output is
given in Fig. 1. For easier processing, the syn-
tactic structure is converted to the linear con-
ceptual graph formalism (Sowa, 1984) given in
Fig. 2.
A conceptual graph is a graph with the
nodes representing concepts and the directed
arcs representing relations between concepts.
Although the conceptual graph formalism was
developed primarily for semantic representation,
we use it to represent the syntactic structure of
sentences. In the linear conceptual graph nota-
tion, concept labels are given within square
brackets and relations between concepts are
Fig. 1. Syntactic structure of a sentence
given within parentheses. Arrows indicate the
direction of the relations.
4.2 Construction of causality patterns
We developed a set of graphical patterns that
specifies the various ways a causal relation can
be explicitly expressed in a sentence. We call
them causality patterns. The initial set of pat-
terns was constructed based on the training set
of 200 abstracts mentioned earlier. Each abstract
was analysed by two of the authors to identify
the sentences containing causal relations, and the
p rts of the sentences representing the cause and
the effect. For each sentence containing a causal
relation, the words (causality identifiers) that
were used to signal the causal relation were also
iden ified. These are mostly causal links and
causative verbs described earlier.
Example sentence
Paclitaxel was well tolerated and resulted in a
significant clinical response in this patient.
Syntactic structure in linear conceptual
gr ph format
[tolerate]-
   (vch)->[be]->(subj)->[paclitaxel]
   (man)->[well]
   (cc)->[and]
   (cc)->[result]-
(loc)->[in]->(pcomp)->[response]-
(det)->[a]
(attr)->[clinical]->(attr)
->[significant],
(phr)->[in]->(pcomp)->[patient]
->(det)->[this],,.
Example causality pattern
[*]-
&(v-ch)->(subj)->[T:cause.object]
(cc|cnd)->[result]+-
(loc)+->[in]+->(pcomp)
->[T:effect.event]
(phr)->[in]->(pcomp)
->[T:effect.object],,.
Cause-effect template
Cause: paclitaxel
Effect: a significant clinical response in this
patient
Fig. 2. Sentence structure and causality
pattern in conceptual graph format
main
root
tolerate
be
v-ch
well and
man cc result
cc
in in
loc phr
response
pcomp
patient
pcomp
clinical
attr
a
det
this
det
significant
attr
We constructed the causality patterns for
each causality identifier, to express the different
sentence constructions that the causality identi-
fier can be involved in, and to indicate which
parts of the sentence represent the cause and the
effect. For each causality identifier, at least 20
sentences containing the identifier were ana-
lysed. If the training sample abstracts did not
have 20 sentences containing the identifier, ad-
ditional sentences were downloaded from the
Medline database. After the patterns were con-
structed, they were applied to a new set of 20
sentences from Medline containing the identi-
fier. Measures of precision and recall were cal-
culated. Each set of patterns are thus associated
with a precision and a recall figure as a rough
indication of how good the set of patterns is.
The causality patterns are represented in lin-
ear conceptual graph format with some exten-
sions. The symbols used in the patterns are as
follows:
1. Concept nodes take the following form:
[concept_label] or [concept_label:
role_indicator]. Concept_label can be:
? a character string in lower case, represent-
ing a stemmed word
? a character string in uppercase, refering to a
class of synonymous words that can occupy
that place in a sentence
? ?*?, a wildcard character that can match
any word
? ?T?, a wildcard character that can match
with any sub-tree.
Role_indicator refers to a slot in the cause-
effect template, and can take the form:
? role_label which is the name of a slot in the
cause-effect template
? role_label = ?value?, where value is a
character string that should be entered in
the slot in the cause-effect template (if
?value? is not specified, the part of the
sentence that matches the conc pt_label is
entered in the slot).
2. Relation nodes take the following form:
(set_of_relations). Set_of_relations can be:
? a relation_label, which is a character string
representing a syntactic relation (these are
the relation tags used by Conexor?s FDG
parser)
? relation_label | set of relations (?|? indi-
cates a logical ?or?)
3. &subpattern_label refers to a set of sub-
graphs.
Each node can also be followed by a ?+?
indicating that the node is mandatory. If the
mandatory nodes are not found in the sentence,
then the pattern is rejected and no information is
extracted from the sentence. All other nodes are
optional. An example of a causality pattern is
given in Fig. 2.
4.3 Pattern matching
The information extraction process involves
matching the causality patterns with the parse
trees of the sentences. The parse trees and the
ca sality patterns are both represented in the
linear conceptual graph notation. The pattern
matching for each sentence follows the follow-
ing procedure:
1. the causality identifiers that match with
keywords in the sentence are identified,
2. the causality patterns associated with each
matching causality identifier are shortlisted,
3. for each shortlisted pattern, a matching pro-
cess is carried out on the sentence.
The matching process involves a kind of
spreading activation in both the causality pattern
graph and the sentence graph, starting from the
node representing the causality identifier. If a
pattern node matches a sentence node, the
matching node in the pattern and the sentence
are activated. This activation spreads outwards,
with the causality identifier node as the center.
When a pattern node does not match a sentence
node, then the spreading activation stops for that
branch of the pattern graph. Procedures are at-
tached to the nodes to check whether there is a
match and to extract words to fill in the slots in
the cause-effect template. The pattern matching
program has been implemented in Java (JDK
1.2.1). An example of a sentence, matching pat-
tern and filled template is given in Fig. 2.
5 Evaluation
A total of 68 patterns were constructed for the
35 causality identifiers that occurred at least
twice in the training abstracts. The patterns were
appli d to two sets of new abstracts downloaded
from Medline: 100 new abstracts from the origi-
nal four medical areas (25 abstracts from each
area), and 30 abstracts from two new domains
(15 each) ? digestive system diseases and respi-
ratory tract diseases. Each test abstract was
analyzed by at least 2 of the authors to identify
?medically relevant? cause and effect. A fair
number of causal relations in the abstracts are
trivial and not medically relevant, and it was felt
that it would not be useful for the information
extraction system to extract these trivial causal
relations.
Of the causal relations manually identified
in the abstracts, about 7% are implicit (i.e. have
to be inferred using knowledge-based inferenc-
ing) or occur across sentences. Since the focus
of the study is on explicitly expressed cause and
effect within a sentence, only these are included
in the evaluation. The evaluation results are pre-
sented in Table 4. Recall is the percentage of the
slots filled by the human analysts that are cor-
rectly filled by the computer program. Precision
is the percentage of slots filled by the computer
program that are correct (i.e. the text entered in
the slot is the same as that entered by the human
analysts). If the text entered by the computer
program is partially correct, it is scored as 0.5
(i.e. half correct). The F-measure given in Table
4 is a combination of recall and precision
equally weighted, and is calculated using the
formula (MUC-7):
2*precision*recall / (precision + recall)
Table 4. Extraction results
Slot Recall
Preci-
sion
F-
Measure
Results for 100 abstracts from the
original 4 medical areas
Causality
Identifier
.759 .768 .763
Cause .462 .565 .508
Effect .549 .611 .578
Modality .410 .811 .545
Results for 30 abstracts from 2 new
medical areas
Causality
Identifier
.618 .759 .681
Cause .415 .619 .497
Effect .441 .610 .512
Modality .542 .765 .634
For the 4 medical areas used for building the
extraction patterns, the F-measure for the cause
and effect slots are 0.508 and 0.578 respectively.
If implicit causal relations are included in the
evaluation, the recall measures for cause and
effect are 0.405 and 0.481 respectively, yielding
an F-measure of 0.47 for cause and 0.54 for ef-
fect. The results are not very good, but not very
bad either for an information extraction task.
For the 2 new medical areas, we can see in
Table 4 that the precision is about the same as
for the original 4 medical areas, indicating that
the current extraction patterns work equally well
in th  new areas. The lower recall indicates that
n w causality identifiers and extraction patterns
need to be constructed.
The sources of errors were analyzed for the
set of 100 test abstracts and are summarized in
Table 5. Most of the spurious extractions (in-
formation extracted by the program as cause or
effect but not identified by human analysts) were
actually causal relations that were not medically
relevant. As mentioned earlier, the manual iden-
tification of causal relations focused on medi-
cally relevant causal relations. In the cases
wher  the program did not correctly extract
cause and effect information identified by the
analysts, half were due to incorrect parser out-
put, and in 20% of the cases, causality patterns
have not been constructed for the causality iden-
tifier found in the sentence.
We also analyzed the instances of implicit
causal relations in sentences, and found that
many of them can be identified using some
amount of semantic analysis. Some of them in-
volve words like when, after and with that indi-
cate a time sequence, for example:
? The results indicate that changes to 8-OH-
DPAT and clonidine-induced responses oc-
cur quicker with the combination treatment
than with either reboxetine or sertraline
treatments alone.
? There are also no reports of serious adverse
events when lithium is added to a monoam-
ine oxidase inhibitor.
? Four days after flupenthixol administration,
the patient developed orolingual dyskinetic
movements involving mainly tongue biting
and protrusion.
Table 5. Sources of Extraction Errors
A. Spurious errors (the program identified
cause or effect not identified by the hu-
man judges)
A1.The relations extraced are not relevant to medi-
cine or disease. (84.1%)
A2.Nominalized or adjectivized verbs are identified
as causative verbs by the program because of
parser error. (2.9%)
A3.Some words and sentence constructions that are
used to indicate cause-effect can be used to indi-
cate other kinds of relations as well. (13.0%)
B. Missing slots (cause or effect not ex-
tracted by program), incorrect text ex-
tracted, and partially correct extraction
B1.Complex sentence structures that are not in-
cluded in the pattern. (18.8%)
B2.The parser gave the wrong syntactic structure of
a sentence. (49.2%)
B3.Unexpected sentence structure resulting in the
program extracting information that is actually
not a cause or effect. (1.5%)
B4.Patterns for the causality identifier have not been
constructed. (19.6%)
B5.Sub-tree error. The program extracts the relevant
sub-tree (of the parse tree) to fill in the cause or
effect slot. However, because of the sentence
construction, the sub-tree includes both the cause
and effect resulting in too much text being ex-
tracted. (9.5%)
B6.Errors caused by pronouns that refer to a phrase
or clause within the same sentence. (1.3%)
In these cases, a treatment or drug is associated
with a treatment response or physiological event.
If noun phrases and clauses in sentences can be
classified accurately into treatments and treat-
ment responses (perhaps by using Medline?s
Medical Subject Headings), then such implicit
causal relations can be identified automatically.
Another group of words involved in implicit
causal relations are words like receive, get and
take, that indicate that the patient received a
drug or treatment, for example:
? The nine subjects who received p24-VLP
and zidovudine had an augmentation and/or
broadening of their CTL response compared
with baseline (p = 0.004).
Such causal relations can also be identified by
semantic analysis and classifying noun phrases
and clauses into treatments and treatment r-
sponses.
6. Conclusion
We have described a method for performing
automatic extraction of cause-effect information
from textual documents. We use Conexor?s FDG
parser to construct a syntactic parse tree for each
target sentence. The parse tree is matched with a
set of graphical causality patterns that indicate
the presence of a causal relation. When a match
is found, various attributes of the causal relation
(e.g. the cause, the effect, and the modality) can
then be extracted and entered in a cause-effect
template.
The accuracy of our extraction system is not
yet satisfactory, with an accuracy of about 0.51
(F-measure) for extracting the cause and 0.58
for extracting the effect that are explicitly ex-
pressed. If both implicit and explicit causal rela-
tions are included, the accuracy is 0.41 for cause
and 0.48 for effect. We were heartened to find
that when the extraction patterns were applied to
2 new medical areas, the extraction precision
was the same as for the original 4 medical areas.
Future work includes:
1. Constructing patterns to identify causal re-
lations across sentences
2. Expanding the study to more medical areas
3. Incorporating semantic analysis to extract
implicit cause-effect information
4. Incorporating discourse processing, includ-
ing anaphor and co-reference resolution
5. Developing a method for constructing ex-
traction patterns automatically
6. Investigating whether the cause-effect in-
formation extracted can be chained together
to synthesize new knowledge.
Two aspects of discourse processing is being
studied: co-reference resolution and hypothesis
confirmation. Co-reference resolution is impor-
t nt for two reasons. The first is the obvious rea-
son that to extract complete cause-effect infor-
mation, pronouns and references have to be
r solved and replaced with the information that
they refer to. The second reason is that quite of-
ten a causal relation between two events is ex-
pressed more than once in a medical abstract,
each time providing new information about the
causal situation. The extraction system thus
needs to be able to recognize that the different
causal expressions refer to the same causal
situation, and merge the information extracted
from the different sentences.
The second aspect of discourse processing
being investigated is what we refer to as hy-
pothesis confirmation. Sometimes, a causal rela-
tion is hypothesized by the author at the begin-
ning of the abstract. This hypothesis may be
confirmed or disconfirmed by another sentence
later in the abstract. The information extraction
system thus has to be able to link the initial hy-
pothetical cause-effect expression with the con-
firmation or disconfirmation expression later in
the abstract.
Finally, we hope eventually to develop a
system that not only extracts cause-effect infor-
mation from medical abstracts accurately, but
also synthesizes new knowledge by chaining the
extracted causal relations. In a series of studies,
Swanson (1986) has demonstrated that logical
connections between the published literature of
two medical research areas can provide new and
useful hypotheses. Suppose an article reports
that A causes B, and another article reports that
B causes C, then there is an implicit logical link
between A and C (i.e. A causes C). This relation
would not become explicit unless work is done
to extract it. Thus, new discoveries can be made
by analysing published literature automatically
(Finn, 1998; Swanson & Smalheiser, 1997).
References
Altenberg, B. (1984). Causal linking in spoken and
written English. Studia Linguistica, 38(1), 20-69.
Cardie, C. (1997). Empirical methods in information
extraction. AI Magazine, 18(4), 65-79.
Cowie, J., & Lehnert, W. (1996). Information extrac-
tion. Communications of the ACM, 39(1), 80-91.
Finn, R. (1998). Program Uncovers Hidden Connec-
tions in the Literature. Th  Scientist, 12( 0), 12-13.
Gaizauskas, R., & Wilks, Y. (1998). Information
extraction beyond document retrieval. Journ l of
Documentation, 54(1), 70-105.
Garcia, D. (1997). COATIS, an NLP system to locate
expressions of actions connected by causality links.
In Knowledge Acquisition, Modeling and Ma-
agement, 10th European Workshop, EKAW ?97
Proceedings (pp. 347-352). Berlin: Springer-
Verlag.
Joskowsicz, L., Ksiezyk, T., & Grishman, R. (1989).
Deep domain models for discourse analysis. In The
Annual AI Systems in Government Conference (pp.
195-200). Silver Spring, MD: IEEE Computer So-
ciety.
Kaplan, R. M., & Berry-Rogghe, G. (1991). Knowl-
edge-based acquisition of causal relationships in
text. Knowledge Acquisition, 3(3), 317-337.
Khoo, C., Chan, S., Niu, Y., & Ang, A. (1999). A
method for extracting causal knowledge from tex-
tual databases. Singapore Journal of Library &
Information Management, 28, 48-63.
Khoo, C.S.G., Kornfilt, J., Oddy, R.N., & Myaeng,
S.H. (1998). Automatic extraction of cause-effect
information from newspaper text without knowl-
edge-based inferencing. Literary and Linguistic
Computing, 13(4), 177-186.
Kontos, J., & Sidiropoulou, M. (1991). On the acqui-
sition of causal knowledge from scientific texts
with attribute grammars. Expert Systems for Infor-
mation Management, 4(1), 31-48.
MUC-5. (1993). Fifth Message Understanding Co-
fer nce (MUC-5). San Francisco: Morgan Kauf-
mann.
MUC-6. (1995). Sixth Message Understanding Con-
ference (MUC-6). San Francisco: Morgan Kauf-
mann.
MUC-7. (2000).  Message Understanding Confer-
e ce proceedings (MUC-7) [Online]. Available:
http://www.muc.saic.com/proceedings/muc_7_toc.
html.
Selfri ge, M., Daniell, J., & Simmons, D. (1985).
Learning causal models by understanding real-
world natural language explanations. In The Sec-
ond Conference on Artificial Intelligence Applica-
tions: The Engineering of Knowledge-Based Sys-
tems (pp. 378-383). Silver Spring, MD: IEEE
Computer Society.
Sowa, J.F. (1984). Conceptual structures: Informa-
 processing in man and machine. Reading,
MA: Addison-Wesley,.
Swanson, D.R. (1986). Fish oil, Raynaud?s Syn-
drome, and undiscovered public knowledge. Per-
spectives in Biology and Medicine, 30(1), 7-18.
Swanson, D.R., & Smalheiser, N.R. (1997). An inter-
active system for finding complementary litera-
tures: A stimulus to scientific discovery. Artificial
Intelligence, 91, 183-203.
