Proceedings of SIGDIAL 2009: the 10th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group in Discourse and Dialogue, pages 107?110,
Queen Mary University of London, September 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Prosodic turn-yielding Cues with and without optical Feedback 
 
 
Caroline Clemens 
Technische Universit?t Berlin 
Deutsche Telekom Laboratories 
Ernst-Reuter-Platz 7 
10587 Berlin 
Caroline.Clemens@telekom.de 
Christoph Diekhaus 
Technische Universit?t Berlin 
Department f. Language and Communication 
Stra?e des 17. Juni 135 
10623 Berlin 
c.diekhaus@alice-dsl.net 
 
Abstract 
The authors present a study of prosodic 
turn-taking indicators. The aim was to 
investigate whether some of the prosodic 
cues increase in quality or quantity if the 
optical feedback channel in the verbal 
conversation is missing. For the study we 
built up an experimental setup in which 
conversational partners held a conversa-
tion once with and once without an opti-
cal feedback channel. A detailed tran-
scription of the recorded speech material 
was segmented into turns. In each turn 
the topic units were identified and the 
syllables were labelled. We measured 
and compared prosodic feature character-
istics between turn-final and turn-medial 
topic units. 
1 Introduction 
In a verbal conversation the roles of speaker and 
listener have to be defined. Sacks et al (1974) 
stated ?minimize gap and overlap? as the first 
rule for a working turn-taking-mechanism. 
According to them, the end of turn has to be 
marked in some way. Since linguistic cues are 
rarely found, it is obvious that this marking has 
to be realized by prosodic features. This 
supposition was corroborated by the findings of 
Lehiste (1975), that listeners got the ability to 
identify the position of clauses within a turn, 
even if the clauses were represented in isolation. 
In the speaker?s turn several prosodic cues are 
presumed to indicate to the listener whether the 
speaker wants to keep or end the turn. At points 
with high speaker switch potential noticeable 
gestural and mimic cues can be found. It is 
unknown how important those non-verbal 
aspects are for the turn-taking indication. The 
main research question of the presented study is: 
Do prosodic cues compensate if the optical 
feedback channel is missing in the verbal 
conversation?  
2 Prosodic and non-verbal turn-taking 
indicators 
Duncan (1972) sorted turn-taking signals by their 
function. He classified the signals as turn-
yielding, turn-demanding (listener), attempt-
suppressing, and back-channel-communication 
(listener response). 
We focused on turn-yielding as those signals 
are easy to locate, and because most found pro-
sodic and non-verbal cues belong to this class. 
Beattie (1981) and Orestr?m (1983) showed that 
a noticeable rising or falling movement of fun-
damental frequency acts as a prosodic turn-
yielding cue. According to Orestr?m (1983), the 
final syllable of the turn is lengthened and some-
times the syllable frequency is increased. Duncan 
(1972) and Orestr?m (1983) documented a de-
crease of intensity at the end of a turn. 
In addition, non-verbal cues for turn-yielding 
have been suggested. Kendon (1967) noticed that 
a speaker often doesn?t look at the listener during 
an utterance but does so at the end of the turn. 
An explanation is that at those points of the con-
versation visual contact is required. Exline 
(1965) discovered that participants in a conversa-
tion look at their dialogue partner more often 
while they are listening. Duncan (1972) found 
several non-verbal cues in the behaviour of a 
speaker as turn-yielding signals: Relaxation of a 
tensed hand-position, completion of a gesture, 
regression of the torso, and relaxation of the fa-
cial expression.  
3 Data Retrieval 
3.1 Experimental setup 
In our experiment speakers held two conversa-
tions, both in two conditions: first with eye-
107
contact and then without. Speakers didn?t know 
each other. The given task was to plan a party by 
seating guests on a map of the party location. For 
solving the task it was necessary that the conver-
sational partners share their information. 
3.2 Preparation of recorded speech mate-
rial 
There were four speakers in two bilateral conver-
sations. During the first half of a conversation 
the speakers could see each other. After they had 
accomplished half of the task a screen foreclosed 
eye-contact. The recordings were transliterated 
into orthographic text by a phonetic expert. This 
detailed transliteration contains information like 
word fragments, hesitations, pauses, and vocal 
events like laughter. The transcribed text was 
then segmented into turns. In each turn the topic 
units were identified according to our definition:  
? A topic unit can be considered as seman-
tically and grammatically complete and 
? there is no further division possible in 
grammatically and semantically complete 
units. 
Table 1 shows the number of topic units we 
found in our material. The syllables were la-
belled and the F0-contours were determined by 
manual judgment. 
 
Table 1: Numbers of topic units for each speaker. 
 
3.3 Acoustic Measurements 
In the analysis of the acoustic speech signal we 
focused on features that have been suspected as 
turn-yielding signals in former studies. Each end 
of a topic unit has the potential to be the end of 
the turn and to initiate a turn taking. We assumed 
that a speaker marks topic units in turn-final po-
sition compared to turn-medial topic units by 
prosodic differences and that those differences 
change if the optical feedback channel is miss-
ing. 
We observed the following prosodic features: 
? Speech rate (syllables per second) 
? Average intensity across topic units  
? Difference of intensity of final last three 
syllables and non-final last three syllable 
of topic units (in Hertz) 
? Mean F0 in topic units (in Hertz) 
? Mean range of F0 in topic units (in 
Hertz) 
? Difference in duration between final and 
non-final syllables of topic units (in ms) 
? Relative distribution of five different 
closing F0-contours in the topic units 
? Characteristic F0-values of five different 
closing F0-contours (manual judgment) 
4 Findings 
We intended to examine whether the differences 
between turn-final and turn-medial topic units 
differ in the feature characteristics between the 
two conditions. Feature characteristics could dif-
fer in quality or quantity. For a variation in quan-
tity the number of potential signals would in-
crease or decrease between the two conditions. A 
variation in quality could only be analyzed if the 
potential signal appears in both conditions and 
occurs as an increase or decrease of the strength 
of the feature. 
4.1 Duration 
The mean syllable rate of final topic unit and 
non-final topic unit was compared. Our results 
indicate an increased syllable frequency at the 
end of the turn in condition 2. But there is no 
significant difference between the two condi-
tions. One speaker even decreased syllable fre-
quency in turn-final positions compared to non-
turn-final positions. 
4.2 Intensity 
For the intensity we analyzed differences be-
tween 
? the overall intensity of the topic units in 
final and in non-final position, and 
? the internal reduction of intensity at the 
end of the topic units in final and non-final 
position (by comparing the last three syl-
lables to the others). 
The overall intensity of topic units in turn-
final position is significantly decreased for two 
(of four) speakers in the condition with sight and 
for three speakers in the condition without sight. 
That is, there seems to be a signal function which 
108
is used by one more speaker in condition 2. 
However, this is just a quantitative difference 
between the two conditions. For the speakers, 
using this potential signal in both conditions, 
there?s no detectable qualitative variation in con-
dition 2 (no enhanced difference between the 
intensity of topic units in final and non-final po-
sition). 
For all topic units a decrease of intensity at the 
end has been found. Due to the decrease of air 
pressure during an utterance this was expected. 
This reduction of intensity is for all four speakers 
only significant for topic units in final position. 
That is, that in topic units at the end of a turn the 
final reduction of intensity is much greater than 
in the other topic units. One could assume a sig-
nal function. Further analyses showed that this 
distinction is intensified by two of the speakers 
in condition 2, while it is weaker for the other 
two speakers. The modifications in condition 2 
don?t have a mutual direction. 
4.3 Fundamental frequency 
Concerning the fundamental frequency, we ex-
amined the following issues by comparing the 
two conditions: 
? The over-all F0-mean and F0-range of 
the topic units in final and non-final posi-
tion 
? The percentage distribution of final F0-
contours at the end of the topic units in fi-
nal and non-final position 
? The representative last F0-values of 
these contours in final and non-final posi-
tion (last level tone for movements and 
F0-mean for sustained F0). 
The speakers (exception is one speaker in condi-
tion 2) realized the turn-final topic units with 
lower fundamental frequency; which is signifi-
cant only for two speakers in both conditions. 
These two speakers made a stronger distinction 
between final and non-final topic units in condi-
tion 2 by increasing the difference of mean F0. 
The other two speakers diminish this distinction 
in condition 2. 
Equivalent is the finding for the F0-range. The 
same two speakers who decreased the mean fre-
quency decreased also the F0-range in final topic 
units. For these speakers there?s also a noticeable 
intensification of the distinction in condition 2, 
while the other speakers behave contrarily. 
Analyzing the percentage distribution of F0-
movements, we distinguished five F0-contours at 
the end of the topic units: Sustain, Fall, Rise, 
Rise/fall, and Fall/rise. 
None of these contours seemed to appear more 
often in turn-final position. This includes the fal-
ling and rising F0-movements, which were as-
sumed to be turn-yielding signals. In contrast 
most of the topic units where realized with a fi-
nal sustain and there was no higher occurrence of 
rise or fall in turn-final position detectable.  
For the final level tone (F0-mean for sustain) 
we found only for sustain, fall and rise/fall dif-
ferences between final and non-final topic units. 
These contours had lower final level tones (lower 
F0-mean for sustain) in turn-final position for at 
least one speaker in condition 1 and 2 speakers in 
condition 2. These findings accounted for the 
general lowering of F0 in final topic units. Al-
though this distinction between final and non-
final position doesn?t change qualitatively be-
tween conditions, there?s some evidence for a 
quantitative change, because more speakers seem 
to use these signals in condition 2. 
5 Discussion and Conclusion 
To examine whether turn-yielding signals are 
intensified in the condition without sight, we 
constituted the criterion that a cue has to appear 
in one of the conditions for at least three of the 
speakers to be considered. For those cues we de-
veloped a comparison chart in which qualitative 
and quantitative changes between condition 1 
and 2 (with and without sight) were inscribed 
(Table 2). 
Qualitative differences could only occur if a 
speaker shows the signal in both conditions. 
They are treated dichotomous (as increased and 
decreased). Quantitative differences are marked 
as added or omitted signals for each speaker. 
Table 2 shows that none of the signals under-
goes changes of the same direction for more than 
two speakers. For syllable frequency there?s no 
change between the conditions at all. For inten-
sity of topic units, F0-mean of sustain, and last 
level-tone of fall there?s only a quantitative 
change for one speaker. That is, one more 
speaker added this signal in condition 2, while 
one or more speaker use it in both conditions, 
without qualitative shades.  
Only the last level-tone of rise/fall and the dif-
ference of intensity between final and non-final 
syllable groups show changes for more than one 
speaker. But while the difference of intensity 
between final and non-final syllable groups is 
increased in condition 2 for the conversation 
109
partners in group 1, it is decreased for group 2. 
The results cancel each other.  
Only the last level-tone of rise/fall was modi-
fied in condition 2 by more than one speaker 
without being modified by other speakers in the 
contrary way. That is, it was added. For the mean 
F0 and the F0-range one speaker omitted the sig-
nals in condition 2 and one speaker increased 
their distinctive function.  
Taking a look at the sum of shown signals, we 
recognize that for none of the speakers there?s a 
remarkable raise in the total number of shown 
signals in condition 2. Finally, every increased 
distinctive function of a signal, which could be 
judged as compensation, has a negative counter-
part like decrease or omission. Based on the re-
sults of this study one can?t assume, that the ana-
lyzed prosodic cues compensate if the optical 
feedback channel is missing. This leaves the 
question whether optical cues are necessary sig-
nals or just added as redundant indicators to in-
tensify the effect of the prosodic cues. 
 
Table 2: Main results of the analysis of some analyzed prosodic features. 
 
 
 
 
Acknowledgement 
We thank the test speakers for volunteering.  
References 
Adam Kendon. 1967. Some functions of gaze-
direction in social interaction. Acta Psychologica 
26: 22-63. 
Bengt Orestr?m. 1983. Turn-taking in English Con-
versation. Lund studies in english 66, Infotryck 
AB, Malm?. 
Harvey Sacks, Emanuel A. Schegloff, and Gail Jeffer-
son. 1974. A simplest systematics for the organisa-
tion for turn-taking for conversations. Language 
50: 396-735. 
Ilse Lehiste. 1975. The phonetic structure of para-
graphs. Structure and process in speech perception. 
Proceedings of the symposium of dynamic aspects 
of speech perception. Cohen / Nooteboom (Eds.), 
Springer Berlin / Heidelberg. 195-206. 
Ralph V. Exline, David Gray, and Dorothy Schuette. 
1965. Visual behavior in a dyad as affected by in-
terview content and sex of respondent. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology 1: 201-209. 
Starkey Duncan, Jr.. 1972. Some signals and rules for 
taking speaking turns in conversations. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology 23: 283-292. 
W. Geoffrey Beattie. 1981. The regulation of speaker 
turns in face-to-face conversation: Some implica-
tions for conversation in sound-only communica-
tion channels. Semiotica 34: 55-70. 
110
