Proceedings of the EACL 2009 Workshop on Language Technology and Resources for Cultural Heritage,
Social Sciences, Humanities, and Education ?LaTeCH ? SHELT&R 2009, pages 69?76,
Athens, Greece, 30 March 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
The Role of Metadata in the Longevity of Cultural Heritage Resources 
 
 
Milena Dobreva 
Centre for Digital Library Research, 
University of Strathclyde  
26 Richmond Street Glasgow, G1 
1XH, Scotland, United Kingdom 
milena.dobreva@strath.ac.uk 
Nikola Ikonomov 
Institute of Mathematics and  
Informatics 
bl. 8 Acad. G. Bonchev St.  
1113 Sofia, Bulgaria 
nikonomov@gmail.com 
 
  
 
Abstract 
Digital preservation is an integral part of 
the management of information and the 
institutions in the cultural heritage sector 
are seeking for ways to incorporate it into 
their everyday practice. While there are 
generic approaches to long-term preser-
vation, further research and development 
work is needed to address any specifics 
of the digital objects in the cultural heri-
tage domain. In this paper, we will take 
two case studies of recent projects and 
analyse to what extent the metadata ac-
companying digital objects contribute to 
guarantee longevity. We summarize this 
analysis in two scenarios for sustainabil-
ity of resources produced by small pro-
jects because compared to big institutions 
their digital assets are facing a higher risk 
not to be preserved properly. We also 
identify processes where natural lan-
guage technologies could be of help to 
make the preservation more efficient. 
1 Introduction 
An evaluation made in August 2008 in a recent 
Communication1 of the EC states that ?The ab-
sence of clear and comprehensive policies in 
many Member States was identified in the Rec-
ommendation as a threat to the survival of digi-
                                                 
1 Communication from the Commission to the Council, the Euro-
pean Parliament, the European Economic and Social Committee 
and the Committee of the Regions Europe?s cultural heritage at the 
click of a mouse. Progress on the digitisation and online accessibil-
ity of cultural material and digital preservation across the EU 
[SEC(08) 2372] of 11 August 2008. Available: 
http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/activities/digital_libraries/d
oc/communications/progress/communication_en.pdf 
tised and born-digital material?? It also pro-
vides a good practice example from the UK, the 
Digital Preservation Coalition. Although this 
British experience is given as an example of a 
successful approach, the implementation of pres-
ervation in the current digital repositories in the 
UK is far from being satisfactory. The recent 
final report of the DRAI project (see Daisy Ab-
bott 2008) on UK-based digital repositories iden-
tified that ?Of the 3,707collections aggregated, 
only 737 (20%) had evidence of a preservation 
policy, and of these the vast majority were from 
within the Arts and Humanities Data Service 
(AHDS) Collections Repository which, since 
March 2008, is no longer funded, leaving only 
6% of resources with ongoing policies for long 
term preservation.?  
Why the digital preservation which is recog-
nised to be of high importance, is still not im-
plemented widely? The Blue Ribbon Task Force 
Report (2008) summarized five major obstacles 
in building sustainable digital preservation pro-
grams: inadequacy of funding models to address 
long-term access and preservation needs; confu-
sion and/or lack of alignment between stake-
holders, roles, and responsibilities with respect to 
digital access and preservation; inadequate insti-
tutional, enterprise, and/or community incentives 
to support the collaboration needed to reinforce 
sustainable economic models; complacency that 
current practices are good enough; and fear that 
digital access and preservation is too big to take 
on. While these address mostly stakeholder-
related issues, a recent report (DPE: 2007) re-
viewed the progress of digital preservation re-
search world-wide. It concludes that ?The analy-
sis of the last 16 years of effort in the area of 
digital preservation? support our claim that 
while much work has been done on the periph-
ery, the central problems of digital preservation 
69
have yet to be resolved.? Automation in digital 
preservation is one of the ten areas named by this 
study as being in a need of accelerated research. 
These two reports identify two key areas 
which need attention: the organisational aspects 
and the research. Any institution which currently 
faces the preservation challenge has to make a 
difficult choice under the circumstances of the 
rapidly changing technological environment and 
the lack of a generally recommended and effec-
tive solution.  
However, the deeper reason why after two 
decades of efforts digital preservation still has 
not reached maturity, is the lack of consistent 
theoretical foundation. In 2001, James Cheney et 
al. articulated the need to develop a mathematical 
theory for the area of information preservation. 
Having such a theory should help to understand 
better the object models and the basic transfor-
mations which need to be supported in a preser-
vation system; it will also be of great benefit to 
automation because it would be much more clear 
what processes can be automated. In addition, a 
coherent theory would help to identify any gaps 
in procedures or data flows and thus would con-
tribute to the implementation of systems which 
behaviour could be consistently traced. However, 
since this first suggestion that a theory of preser-
vation is needed, there has not been much pro-
gress in developing one. Even the identification 
of the basic elements of a theory of preservation 
is not a trivial task. 
In addition to this methodological difficulty, 
the variety of domains where digital preservation 
is to be applied brings even more difficulties. It 
is still not clear whether a universal ?one-size-
fits-all? solution could be used in all different 
domains. For example, in the cultural heritage 
domain which is considered in this paper there 
are various curatorial situations with regard to 
digital objects. Resources prepared by small pro-
jects are in more danger with regard to their lon-
gevity compared to resources of large institutions 
if we consider that they are created but the life-
cycle for digital objects curation is not applied in 
full. In this paper it is not our aim to investigate 
what is the level of awareness and readiness of 
the whole range of cultural heritage institutions 
but we try to highlight what is the current state in 
the digital preservation field and what issues 
need to be addressed by projects in the cultural 
heritage domain. 
In 2002, the reference model for an open ar-
chival information system (OAIS) was published 
and one year later adopted in the international 
standard ISO 14721:2003, see (OAIS: 2003). It 
provides a functional approach which is helpful 
to understand and describe the processes in a 
preservation system. However, the specification 
of the minimum information which should ac-
company a digital object in order to guarantee its 
accessibility, interpretability and usability in the 
future, is not addressed in OAIS. 
There are different ongoing attempts to build a 
theory of preservation. Giorgos Flouris and Carlo 
Meghini in 2007 again suggested basing such a 
theory on firm mathematical foundations and 
such an effort will be made within the CASPAR2 
project. Paul Watry in 2007 presented the direc-
tions of future research of the SHAMAN3 project 
which aims to study the context which guaran-
tees that the essential properties of digital objects 
such as authenticity and integrity will be main-
tained over time. Reagan Moore and MacKenzie 
Smith suggested in 2007 a practical approach, 
which demonstrates how various requirements of 
the preservation systems can be implemented as 
sets of rules. 
Attempts to find an approach to building a co-
herent theory of preservation should also reflect 
the specific features of various subject domains. 
In Section 2 of this paper, we introduce the 
basic concepts of the ISO standard in the digital 
preservation domain OAIS4. Then in Section 3 
we discuss issues related to the use of metadata 
for preservation in the cultural heritage domain. 
We take two examples of resources under prepa-
ration in the TEXTE project5 and the KT-
DigiCult-BG6 project and suggest two scenarios 
for preservation of the products of small projects. 
In Section 4 we summarise the issues which need 
further development in the cultural heritage sec-
tor in order to address better the issue of longev-
ity of the digital resources. 
                                                 
2 CASPAR ?  Cultural, Artistic and Scientific knowledge 
for Preservation, Access and Retrieval ? an  Integrated Pro-
ject co-financed by the EU within FP6. 
http://www.casparpreserves.eu/caspar-project 
3 SHAMAN ? Sustaining Heritage Access through Multiva-
lent ArchiviNg an Integrated Project co-financed by the EU 
within FP7. http://shaman-ip.eu/  
4 Open archival information system, see OAIS 2003. 
5 TEXTE: Transfer of Expertise in Technologies of Editing, 
funded under the Marie Curie programme of FP6, 
http://www.nuigalway.ie/mooreinstitute/projects.php?projec
t=15 
6 Knowledge Transfer in Digitisation of Cultural and Scien-
tific Heritage to Bulgaria, funded under the Marie Curie 
programme of FP6, 
http://www.math.bas.bg/digi/indexen.html 
70
2 The Basic Standard in the Digital 
Preservation Domain: OAIS 
In response to the increased need for the intro-
duction of common practices in assuring long 
term digital preservation (DP) of digital objects, 
the International Standards Organisation (ISO) in 
the last decade developed a number of concep-
tual DP standards and also some technical guide-
lines. The most popular standard in the area is 
ISO 14721:2003 (Space data and information 
transfer systems ? Open archival information 
system ? Reference model), widely known as 
OAIS7. 
It is a conceptual framework which presents 
the main functional components and identifies 
the basic data flows within a digital preservation 
system. The development of OAIS8 arose from 
the need for a model which would specify the 
basic components of a system for long-term 
preservation of digital objects and their relation-
ships with the ?external world?. 
In Fig. 1, an OAIS is represented as a box 
which is connected to other entities from the en-
vironment. These are Producers, Consumers, 
and Management (OAIS is not suggesting what 
roles could be defined within the archive). A 
special class of Consumers is the Designated 
Community. The Designated Community is the 
set of Consumers who should be able to under-
stand the preserved information.?9 
 
Figure 1: The OAIS functional entities and  
environment10 
 
Within the cultural heritage domain, a special 
attention also should be paid to the concept of 
designated community which is essential for the 
understanding of resources in the future. Under-
standing the actual needs and the level of back-
                                                 
7 A webpage which provides information on the basic stages 
of its development is http://nost.gsfc.nasa.gov/isoas/.  
8 For a record of the activities see 
http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/nost/isoas/. 
9 Source: p.2.2-2.3, OAIS (2003). 
10 Source: Figure 4-1, page 4-1 (OAIS, 2003). 
ground knowledge of the designated community 
is not trivial in this domain, especially in the 
cases of creating scholarly resources. 
This in fact opens a new essential issue related 
to the dynamics of resources: while the resources 
created by memory institutions such as libraries, 
archives and museums are ?static? because they 
represent the resources of the institutions, the 
resources created by projects tend to be dynamic, 
because they could be enriched and extended. 
These resources usually do not cover a fixed set 
of holdings but are oriented towards a specific 
theme and after a core set of resources is avail-
able, more materials could be added at later 
stages. Being familiar with the model will help 
cultural heritage professionals to organize better 
the digital objects? lifecycle and take informed 
decisions on the preservation aspects of their re-
sources. 
In addition to the definition of these functional 
entities, an OAIS information model explains the 
data flows between the environment and the ar-
chive, and also within the functional components 
of the archive. 
Every act of submission of information to an 
OAIS by a Producer, as well as the dissemination 
of information to a Consumer, occurs either as a 
single discrete transmission, or as a series of 
transmissions. To describe the exchange of data, 
OAIS defines the concept of an Information 
Package as a ?container? of two types of infor-
mation: Content Information (CI) and Preser-
vation Description Information (PDI). The 
Content Information and PDI are viewed as be-
ing encapsulated and identifiable by the Packag-
ing Information (PI). 
OAIS defines three specialised types of infor-
mation packages (IP), namely:  
? Archival Information Package (AIP): An 
Information Package, consisting of the 
Content Information and the associated 
PDI, which is preserved within an OAIS. 
? Dissemination Information Package (DIP): 
The Information Package, derived from 
one or more AIPs, received by the Con-
sumer in response to a request to the 
OAIS. 
? Submission Information Package (SIP): 
An Information Package that is delivered 
by the Producer to the OAIS for use in the 
construction of one or more AIPs. 
PDI is divided into four types of preservation 
information called Provenance, Context, Refer-
71
ence, and Fixity. Provenance describes the source 
of the Content Information; Context describes 
how the CI relates to other information outside 
the Information Package. Reference provides 
identifiers, by which the CI may be uniquely 
identified. Fixity provides a wrapper, which pro-
tects the CI from undocumented alteration. A key 
point to note is that OAIS does not suggest any 
specific metadata as instantiations of PDI; so that 
there is no guidance on what constitutes a mini-
mum technical requirement in respect of repre-
senting and encoding PDI information within 
corresponding PDI data bitstreams. The defini-
tion of a minimum required set of data should be 
based on a study of what is required to assure a 
reliable, consistent, and measurable specification 
and implementation of a preservation system. 
The consequences for the cultural heritage 
domain is that currently there is no single and 
uniformly accepted set of elements which guar-
antee the longevity of resources; but every single 
institution and project should consider how to 
structure the different types of archival packages 
if it establishes and digital archive and also de-
cide what metadata need to be stored for preser-
vation purposes. 
In OAIS the closest analogue to the high-level 
notion of metadata can be found in the idea of 
representation information while on the imple-
mentation level PDI provides the closest notion 
to a particular instantiation of a set of metadata 
elements.  
Having a reference framework for long-term 
digital preservation systems had an essential im-
pact on the development of a common profes-
sional understanding and vocabulary. It has had a 
significant impact on the subsequent develop-
ment of standards and as a guide to the setting up 
of preservation systems. Yet, the complexity of 
the area allows for multiple interpretations of 
how the framework should be implemented in 
real life applications. This arguably gives rise to 
a need to develop implementation guidelines and 
also to adjust any practical solution to policy 
frameworks. 
3 Preservation-Related Metadata 
3.1 Metadata for Preservation vs. Preser-
vation of Existing Metadata 
There are two key issues which need to be con-
sidered vis-?-vis metadata and preservation. 
1. What metadata are needed for preservation 
purposes in the cultural heritage domain (be-
sides assuring a reliable preservation process, 
they should help the designated communities 
to understand the resources), and 
2. How to preserve the metadata accompanying 
existing digital objects. Since it is often the 
case that cultural heritage resources have ex-
tensive metadata and there are multiple 
schemes used, this issue also touches upon 
understanding and use of present metadata 
schemes in the future; this issue is very similar 
to interoperability of metadata schemes but 
considered as interoperability between now 
and the future. 
In the area of preservation metadata, the basic 
concern, as stated by Brian Lavoie and Richard 
Gartner, still seems to be the development of 
preservation elements? schemes (2005). How-
ever, presentation and interoperability issues are 
not the only concern: preservation metadata, as 
all other types of metadata are affected by the 
metadata bottleneck11, a metaphor which indi-
cates that the human efforts needed to create 
metadata can not cope with the pace of creation 
of new digital resources. 
Another disquieting example comes from a re-
cent evaluation of a German national digitisation 
programme which reveals ?insufficient metadata 
practice, endangering the usage of the digital 
documents, not to speak of their preservation: 
33% of the objects had no metadata at all, 33% 
bibliographic metadata only, 10% had both bib-
liographic and subject metadata (rest: no infor-
mation). Less than a third of the metadata was 
digital.?12 
To suggest an OAIS-compliant preservation 
metadata solution, in 2002 OCLC (Online Com-
puter Library Center, Inc.) and RLG (Research 
Libraries Group) created a working group to ex-
plore how a consensus between different projects 
and initiatives in the field of preservation meta-
data could be achieved. A body of recommended 
metadata for digital preservation was developed 
in the next years under the name PREMIS: 
PREservation Metadata Implementation Strate-
gies (see PREMIS (2008)). The effort of OCLC 
and RLG to define preservation metadata is a 
major development in the digital preservation 
field. However, it analyses only preservation 
metadata related to the digital object itself. A 
number of issues likely to appear in real imple-
                                                 
11 The term metadata bottleneck was coined by E. Liddy in 
2002. 
12 DELOS brainstorming on Metadata topics, Juan les Pins, 
05/12/2005, 
http://www.ukoln.ac.uk/ukoln/staff/t.koch/pres/Brainst2005
12-MDc.html 
72
mentation scenarios are not considered, for ex-
ample the preservation and re-use of descriptive 
and other metadata which might have been sup-
plied with the digital object which is of special 
importance in the cultural heritage domain. Such 
metadata could be of help in generating preserva-
tion metadata, or could be later used for search.  
Having all these in mind, preservation meta-
data area provides many challenges. What pres-
ervation metadata to use? What minimum set 
needs to be supplied in order to guarantee a reli-
able preservation process? How to automate the 
creation of preservation metadata? How to guar-
antee that the digital resources developed within 
a particular project are accompanied by sufficient 
preservation quality metadata? And how to guar-
antee interoperability between multiple existing 
schemes? It is not easy for any organisation or 
project to make decisions regarding the metadata 
in this situation. 
In the last years there were several metadata 
schemes developed dedicated to long-term pres-
ervation. In the domain of cultural heritage insti-
tutions these new kind of metadata have to be 
combined with existing descriptive metadata 
based on the traditionally used catalogue sys-
tems. Amongst those we are The Metadata En-
coding and Transmission Standard13 (METS), a 
container format for metadata and content files 
maintained by the Library of Congress (USA); 
and LMER (Long-term preservation Metadata 
for Electronic Resources)14 developed by the 
German National Library.  
Currently, researchers come to the conclusion 
that the practical preservation activities require to 
combine several various metadata schemes to 
achieve a reliable preservation process. For ex-
ample Angela Dappert and Markus Enders 
(2008) present an example of integrating METS, 
PREMIS, and MODS15 metadata in an OAIS-
compatible system which aims to ingest, store, 
and preserve eJournals in the British Library. 
They demonstrated that no single existing meta-
data schema accommodates the representation of 
descriptive, preservation and structural metadata 
necessary for such a system.  
                                                 
13 http://www.loc.gov/standards/mets/ 
14 LMER description and LMER schema: http://www.d-
nb.de/eng/standards/lmer/lmer.htm 
15 http://www.tei-c.org/index.xml 
3.2 Two Examples 
3.2.1. The TEXTE Project Digital Resources 
TEXTE is an ongoing project coordinated by 
The Moore Institute in the National University of 
Ireland, Galway. It combines four tasks which 
aim to illustrate how the current computer-
enhanced editing tools can be used to produce 
various types of high-quality scholarly editions 
(mediaeval manuscripts; correspondence; a set of 
journal issues and ephemera). The materials are 
digitised and then transcribed and encoded using 
the Guidelines of the Text Encoding Initiative16. 
The resulting resources are highly annotated 
scholarly editions, a combination of the original 
texts with the scholarly findings. 
All these resources are built using the same 
guidelines for text encoding. This common 
framework facilitates the development of the 
digital objects especially with regard to their on-
line publication and visualisation and to the an-
notation of resources from the same historical 
and cultural background.  
From digital preservation point of view, there 
are several issues which need to be taken into 
account: 
The TEI P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text 
Encoding and Interchange17 are not suggesting 
metadata elements to be used especially for pres-
ervation purposes. It is essential to have well-
formed <TEI.Header> and to document the prin-
ciples applied in the encoding of the text; these 
are prepared as a part of the project documenta-
tion. But the <TEI.Header> currently does not 
support elements which can help to trace the 
digital object?s authenticity, integrity and chain 
of custody ? these could be included as addi-
tions. But a difficulty for such projects is the lack 
of guidance on the significant properties of digi-
tal objects which need to be supported.  
Projects such as TEXTE developing textual 
resources would benefit from clear guidance on 
this matter; currently the project faces the need to 
find its own solution. The final product of TEXT 
will be a set of web resources but their inclusion 
into repository is still under question; if this hap-
pens additional effort will be needed to define 
SIPs and to transform currently available XML 
files into SIPs. 
                                                 
16 Metadata Object Description Schema, MODS, 
http://www.loc.gov/standards/mods/ 
17 http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-
doc/en/html/index-toc.html 
73
On the other metadata-related issue, the lon-
gevity of specific metadata schemes applied in 
the cultural heritage domain, the decision to use 
a widespread encoding framework might be seen 
as a guarantee of the future usability of re-
sources. This is based on the expectation that the 
TEI will be continuously supported in the future.  
3.2.2. The KT-DigiCult-BG Project Digital 
Resources 
The KT-DigiCult-BG project funded by the 
Marie Curie programme of FP6 was recently fin-
ished (in 2008) and one of its outcomes was the 
creation of the Digitisation Centre in the Institute 
of Mathematics and Mathematics at the Bulgar-
ian Academy of Sciences (IMI-BAS). This cen-
tre digitised a substantial number of various 
types of objects belonging to the Bulgarian cul-
tural and scientific heritage (see Table 2). One of 
the issues the project faced was the organisation 
and the long-term preservation of these objects. 
These resources were not deeply annotated and 
are intended for the most general type of users ? 
the citizens. In this case the metadata used in the 
mix of archival materials, old printed books, 
photographs and periodicals followed various 
encodings and were not encoded like the meta-
data of the TEXTE project using the same 
Guidelines. 
This heterogeneity of approaches leads to a 
different situation in the produced resources. 
Currently the digitisation centre team is planning 
to place all scientific resources into a repository 
using DSpace18 which will enable the use of its 
resources within the DRIVER19 project reposi-
tory. 
Preservation-wise, these resources will be 
transformed according to this larger initiative 
requirements and the relevant SIP will be built. 
In this scenario the preservation task with regard 
to the digitised documents prepared for access in 
PDF format stays with the repository while the 
digitisation centre will take care for the physical 
copying of the master files which are stored in 
TIFF format. This is a mixed approach where 
various bodies take care for the preservation of 
clusters of digital resources. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
18 http://www.dspace.org/ 
19 DRIVER: Networking European Scientific Repositories, 
http://www.driver-repository.eu/. 
Table 2. Digitised Resources in 2005-08 in IMI-BAS 
Type of material Size 
Old printed books (National Li-
brary Ivan Vazov, Plovdiv)  
17,000 pages 
State Archives 8,000 pages 
Research Archive of the Acad-
emy of Sciences  
24 archival 
units, 
1,000 pages 
Old periodicals (newspapers) 1,200 pages 
Musical periodicals 1,000 pages 
Archive of the Higher Attesta-
tion Commission 
8,500 pages 
Archive of IMI-BAS 18,000 pages 
Mathematical heritage (the heri-
tage of Prof. Obreshkov) 
2,000 pages 
Audio archive of Bulgarian dia-
lects 
7 hours 
Mathematical periodicals (1905 - 
1991) 
29,000 pages 
Old photographs 200 photographs 
TOTAL 85,900 units 
3.3 Two Emerging Scenarios for Digital 
Preservation of Small Projects? Outputs 
Two scenarios emerge from the analysis of the 
two case studies. 
Scenario 1. Preparation of stand-alone re-
sources. Under this scenario, the set of digital 
resources is prepared as a stand-alone collection 
and does not necessarily become a part of a digi-
tal repository.   
1. Such projects need to pay special attention to 
proper documentation of the decisions taken 
on the encoding applied within the project ? 
this is not only substantial for sustainability, 
but also for re-use of resources in the future 
as demonstrated by Claire Warwick et al 
(2009). Documentation which refers to a 
general standard like TEI or XML is not suf-
ficient because it does not guarantee future 
understanding and interoperability. 
2. A set of preservation metadata needs to be 
supplied for every single digital object. This 
is currently not a trivial requirement because 
there is no common view on the structure of 
preservation metadata. Again, the internal 
project decisions need to be well-
documented. 
3. The overall responsibility to document sig-
nificant properties of the digital objects 
which will allow checking authenticity and 
chain of custody stays with the project; it is 
unlikely to expect that anyone in the future 
will be able to fill in such gaps if they are 
present. 
74
Scenario 2. Preparation of resources which will 
be integrated into a larger digital repository. 
The following key considerations should be 
taken into account: 
1. It is essential to be familiar with the proc-
esses of ingest of digital objects into the re-
pository. 
2. The structure of the SIPs for ingest should be 
discussed in advance. 
3. The significant properties of digital objects 
need to be discussed with the digital reposi-
tory; it should guarantee to retain authentic-
ity and chain of custody related to the in-
gested objects. 
The following Analysis Matrix (see Table 3) 
summarizes what issues needs to be taken into 
account in these scenarios. 
 
Table 3. Summary of digital-preservation issues re-
flected in the two suggested scenarios 
Issue Scenario 1. 
(stand-alone re-
sources) 
Scenario 2. (re-
sources to be 
integrated into a 
digital repository) 
Digital ob-
ject 
The digital object 
is prepared com-
pletely and solely 
within the pro-
ject. 
The digital object 
is likely to be 
enriched in order 
to be ingested 
into a repository. 
This enrichment 
can be done by 
various parties 
according to the 
adopted proce-
dures for ingest 
into the reposi-
tory.  
Significant 
properties 
of the digi-
tal object 
Small projects 
usually do not 
consider signifi-
cant properties 
but they are es-
sential as future 
evidence of au-
thenticity, integ-
rity and chain of 
custody. 
The values of the 
significant prop-
erties which 
guarantee authen-
ticity, integrity 
and chain of cus-
tody need to be 
supplied jointly 
with the digital 
object when it is 
being ingested 
into the digital 
repository. 
Preservation 
actions 
The preservation 
actions e.g. copy-
ing of media or 
migration to 
newer file for-
mats will be ap-
plied within the 
host institution; it 
The preservation 
actions are ap-
plied within the 
repository. The 
creators of the 
collection do not 
have to plan for 
this but need to 
needs to plan for 
these otherwise 
the danger is that 
the collection as 
a whole (or sepa-
rate objects) will 
be lost because of 
media decay. 
make sure what 
are the digital 
repositories poli-
cies on physical 
copying and for-
mat migration. 
OAIS im-
plementa-
tion 
It is unlikely that 
small projects 
will implement 
the complete set 
of OAIS func-
tional entities. 
The repository 
hosting the pro-
ject outputs may 
implement a spe-
cific subset of 
OAIS functional 
entities; this 
should be dis-
cussed in advance 
as a sustainability 
guarantee. 
Possible 
application 
of natural 
language 
processing 
(NLP) tech-
nology 
NLP can be ap-
plied for auto-
mated generation 
of metadata, in-
cluding preserva-
tion metadata; we 
do not have evi-
dence of such 
attempts so far. 
 
An area of active 
research is the 
application of 
NLP for auto-
mated extraction 
of metadata from 
digital objects 
during ingest. 
This will help to 
overcome the 
metadata bottle-
neck.  
We hope that this succinct analysis will help 
projects to understand better the preservation-
related options they have. 
4 Conclusions 
Our presentation of digital preservation issues 
and the specifics of cultural heritage domain pin-
points several issues which are essential for fu-
ture implementations: 
1. The understanding of digital preservation 
standards and models is essential to organise a 
proper lifecycle management for the cultural 
heritage resources; there are examples of solu-
tions applied in the large memory institutions20 
but smaller projects and initiatives need to ad-
dress these issues when they develop their sus-
tainability plans. 
2. Widely used metadata standards in the cultural 
heritage domain, such as TEI, could offer bet-
ter guidance on metadata elements subset de-
signed especially to support long-term preser-
vation. TEI provides mechanisms for follow-
                                                 
20 The German National Library and the Royal Library in 
the Netherlands are examples of institutions which apply 
successfully digital preservation solutions. 
75
ing any changes in the digital object; it also 
could be used to encode information related to 
other copies made such as master or preserva-
tion copies and access or use copies; and pos-
sibly to record any processes applied to a re-
source, but this is not sufficient because it re-
flects the process of creation of an object but 
this is not sufficient to claim authenticity of 
this object. Currently there is no mechanism to 
check the integrity and the chain of custody of 
digital objects. However, TEI guidelines 
should suggest how correctly to represent 
these changes. For example Linda Cantara in 
2005 suggested to form an AIP for the re-
sources of the Tibet Oral History Archive Pro-
ject especially for digital preservation pur-
poses; more examples are needed in order to 
establish a good practices which could be in-
corporated in other cases.  
3. OAIS does not suggest any specific metadata 
as instantiations of preservation description in-
formation and in particular in the cultural heri-
tage domain there is no single and uniformly 
accepted set of elements which guarantee the 
longevity of resources; therefore it is neces-
sary to define what metadata need to be stored 
for preservation purposes. We can not offer a 
general solution to this problem because it re-
quires consensus of the communities of pro-
fessionals. 
We also have presented two scenarios on digi-
tal preservation derived from case studies on two 
EC-funded projects. This work shows that there 
is definitely a current need to suggest good prac-
tices for such endeavours, because while the pro-
jects tackle the preservation issue, it is very diffi-
cult to find individual good models to guarantee 
the longevity of resources.  
Reference 
Angela Dappert and Markus Enders. 2008. Using 
METS, PREMIS and MODS for Archiving eJour-
nals. In: D-Lib Magazine September/October 2008, 
Vol. 14, Number 9/10, ISSN 1082-9873 
Available: 
http://www.dlib.org/dlib/september08/dappert/09da
ppert.html 
Blue Ribbon. 2008. The Blue Ribbon Task Force on 
Sustainable Digital Preservation and Access 
(2008). Interim Report.  Available: 
http://brtf.sdsc.edu/biblio/BRTF_Interim_Report.p
df  
Brian Lavoie and Richard Gartner. 2005. Preservation 
metadata, DPC Technology Watch Series Report 
05-01. Available:   
http://www.dpconline.org/docs/reports/dpctw05-
01.pdf 
Claire Warwick, Isabel Galina, Jon Rimmer, Melissa 
Terras, Ann Blandford, Jeremy Gow, George Bu-
chanan (2009) Documentation and the Users of 
Digital Resources in the Humanities. Journal of 
Documentation, Vol. 65 (1), pp. 33-57. 
Daisy Abbott. 2008. JISC Final Report ? Digital Re-
positories and Archives Inventory Project, HATII, 
University of Glasgow, July 2008. 
DPE. 2007. Digital Preservation Europe (DPE) 
(2007). Access to and preservation of cultural and 
scientific resources: research roadmap. 
http://www.digitalpreservationeurope.eu/publicatio
ns/reports/dpe_research_roadmap_D72.pdf 
Giorgos Flouris and Carlo Meghini. 2007. Some Pre-
liminary Ideas Towards a Theory of Digital Preser-
vation, 2007, Proceedings of the 1st International 
Workshop on Digital Libraries Foundations 
(DLF1-07). Available:   
http://www.ite.gr/ics/isl/publications/paperlink/DL
F107.pdf 
James Cheney, Carl Lagoze and Peter Botticelli. 
2001. Towards a Theory of Information Preserva-
tion . In: Constantopoulos & I.T. S?lvberg (Eds.): 
ECDL 2001, LNCS 2163: 340?351, Springer-
Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. 
Linda Cantara. 2005. The Tibet Oral History Archive 
Project and Digital Preservation. ACH-ALLC 
2005 conference. Available:  
http://mustard.tapor.uvic.ca/cocoon/ach_abstracts/x
q/xhtml.xq?id=141 
OAIS. 2003. ISO 14721:2003 (Space data and infor-
mation transfer systems ? Open archival informa-
tion system ? Reference model). Available: 
http://public.ccsds.org/publications/archive/650x0b
1.pdf   
Paul Watry. (2007). Digital Preservation Theory and 
Application: Transcontinental Persistent Archives 
Testbed Activity. International Journal of Digital 
Curation 2(2). Available:  
http://www.ijdc.net/ijdc/article/view/43/0 
PREMIS. (2008) Data Dictionary for Preservation 
Metadata: PREMIS version 2.0, Available: 
http://www.loc.gov/standards/premis/v2/premis-2-
0.pdf. 
Reagan Moore and MacKenzie Smith. (2007). Auto-
mated Validation of Trusted Digital Repository 
Assessment Criteria. Journal of Digital Information 
8(2). Available:   
http://journals.tdl.org/jodi/article/view/198/181. 
76
