Human Language Technologies: The 2009 Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 137?145,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Without a ?doubt??
Unsupervised discovery of downward-entailing operators
Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Lillian Lee, and Richard Ducott
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853-7501
cristian@cs.cornell.edu, llee@cs.cornell.edu, rad47@cornell.edu
Abstract
An important part of textual inference is mak-
ing deductions involving monotonicity, that
is, determining whether a given assertion en-
tails restrictions or relaxations of that asser-
tion. For instance, the statement ?We know the
epidemic spread quickly? does not entail ?We
know the epidemic spread quickly via fleas?,
but ?We doubt the epidemic spread quickly?
entails ?We doubt the epidemic spread quickly
via fleas?. Here, we present the first algorithm
for the challenging lexical-semantics prob-
lem of learning linguistic constructions that,
like ?doubt?, are downward entailing (DE).
Our algorithm is unsupervised, resource-lean,
and effective, accurately recovering many DE
operators that are missing from the hand-
constructed lists that textual-inference sys-
tems currently use.
1 Introduction
Making inferences based on natural-language state-
ments is a crucial part of true natural-language un-
derstanding, and thus has many important applica-
tions. As the field of NLP has matured, there has
been a resurgence of interest in creating systems ca-
pable of making such inferences, as evidenced by
the activity surrounding the ongoing sequence of
?Recognizing Textual Entailment? (RTE) competi-
tions (Dagan, Glickman, and Magnini, 2006; Bar-
Haim, Dagan, Dolan, Ferro, Giampiccolo, Magnini,
and Szpektor, 2006; Giampiccolo, Magnini, Dagan,
and Dolan, 2007) and the AQUAINT knowledge-
based evaluation project (Crouch, Saur??, and Fowler,
2005).
The following two examples help illustrate the
particular type of inference that is the focus of this
paper.
1. ?We know the epidemic spread quickly?
2. ?We doubt the epidemic spread quickly?
A relaxation of ?spread quickly? is ?spread?; a re-
striction of it is ?spread quickly via fleas?. From
statement 1, we can infer the relaxed version, ?We
know the epidemic spread?, whereas the restricted
version, ?We know the epidemic spread quickly via
fleas?, does not follow. But the reverse holds for
statement 2: it entails the restricted version ?We
doubt the epidemic spread quickly via fleas?, but not
the relaxed version. The reason is that ?doubt? is a
downward-entailing operator;1 in other words, it al-
lows one to, in a sense, ?reason from sets to subsets?
(van der Wouden, 1997, pg. 90).
Downward-entailing operators are not restricted
to assertions about belief or to verbs. For example,
the preposition ?without? is also downward entail-
ing: from ?The applicants came without payment or
waivers? we can infer that all the applicants came
without payment. (Contrast this with ?with?, which,
like ?know?, is upward entailing.) In fact, there are
many downward-entailing operators, encompassing
many syntactic types; these include explicit nega-
tions like ?no? and ?never?, but also many other
terms, such as ?refuse (to)?, ?preventing?, ?nothing?,
?rarely?, and ?too [adjective] to?.
1Synonyms for ?downward entailing? include downward-
monotonic and monotone decreasing. Related concepts include
anti-additivity, veridicality, and one-way implicatives.
137
As the prevalence of these operators indicates and
as van der Wouden (1997, pg. 92) states, downward
entailment ?plays an extremely important role in
natural language? (van Benthem, 1986; Hoeksema,
1986; Sa?nchez Valencia, 1991; Dowty, 1994; Mac-
Cartney and Manning, 2007). Yet to date, only a few
systems attempt to handle the phenomenon in a gen-
eral way, i.e., to consider more than simple direct
negation (Nairn, Condoravdi, and Karttunen, 2006;
MacCartney and Manning, 2008; Christodoulopou-
los, 2008; Bar-Haim, Berant, Dagan, Greental,
Mirkin, Shnarch, and Szpektor, 2008). These sys-
tems rely on lists of items annotated with respect to
their behavior in ?polar? (positive or negative) envi-
ronments. The lists contain a relatively small num-
ber of downward-entailing operators, at least in part
because they were constructed mainly by manual
inspection of verb lists (although a few non-verbs
are sometimes also included). We therefore propose
to automatically learn downward-entailing opera-
tors2 ? henceforth DE operators for short ? from
data; deriving more comprehensive lists of DE op-
erators in this manner promises to substantially en-
hance the ability of textual-inference systems to han-
dle monotonicity-related phenomena.
Summary of our approach There are a num-
ber of significant challenges to applying a learning-
based approach. First, to our knowledge there do
not exist DE-operator-annotated corpora, and more-
over, relevant types of semantic information are ?not
available in or deducible from any public lexical
database? (Nairn et al, 2006). Also, it seems there
is no simple test one can apply to all possible candi-
dates; van der Wouden (1997, pg. 110) remarks, ?As
a rule of thumb, assume that everything that feels
negative, and everything that [satisfies a condition
described below], is monotone decreasing. This rule
of thumb will be shown to be wrong as it stands; but
2We include superlatives (?tallest?), comparatives (?taller?),
and conditionals (?if?) in this category because they have non-
default (i.e., non-upward entailing) properties ? for instance,
?he is the tallest father? does not entail ?he is the tallest man?.
Thus, they also require special treatment when considering en-
tailment relations. In fact, there have been some attempts
to unify these various types of non-upward entailing opera-
tors (von Fintel, 1999). We use the term downward entailing
(narrowly-defined) (DE(ND)) when we wish to specifically ex-
clude superlatives, comparatives, and conditionals.
it sort of works, like any rule of thumb.?
Our first insight into how to overcome these chal-
lenges is to leverage a finding from the linguistics lit-
erature, Ladusaw?s (1980) hypothesis, which can be
treated as a cue regarding the distribution of DE op-
erators: it asserts that a certain class of lexical con-
structions known as negative polarity items (NPIs)
can only appear in the scope of DE operators. Note
that this hypothesis suggests that one can develop
an unsupervised algorithm based simply on check-
ing for co-occurrence with known NPIs.
But there are significant problems with apply-
ing this idea in practice, including: (a) there is no
agreed-upon list of NPIs; (b) terms can be ambigu-
ous with respect to NPI-hood; and (c) many non-DE
operators tend to co-occur with NPIs as well. To
cope with these issues, we develop a novel unsuper-
vised distillation algorithm that helps filter out the
noise introduced by these problems. This algorithm
is very effective: it is accurate and derives many DE
operators that do not appear on pre-existing lists.
Contributions Our project draws a connection be-
tween the creation of textual entailment systems and
linguistic inquiry regarding DE operators and NPIs,
and thus relates to both language-engineering and
linguistic concerns.
To our knowledge, this work represents the first
attempt to aid in the process of discovering DE oper-
ators, a task whose importance we have highlighted
above. At the very least, our method can be used
to provide high-quality raw materials to help human
annotators create more extensive DE operator lists.
In fact, while previous manual-classification efforts
have mainly focused on verbs, we retrieve DE oper-
ators across multiple parts of speech. Also, although
we discover many items (including verbs) that are
not on pre-existing manually-constructed lists, the
items we find occur frequently ? they are not some-
how peculiar or rare.
Our algorithm is surprisingly accurate given that it
is quite resource- and knowledge-lean. Specifically,
it relies only on Ladusaw?s hypothesis as initial in-
spiration, a relatively short and arguably noisy list
of NPIs, and a large unannotated corpus. It does
not use other linguistic information ? for exam-
ple, we do not use parse information, even though
c-command relations have been asserted to play a
138
key role in the licensing of NPIs (van der Wouden,
1997).
2 Method
We mentioned in the introduction some significant
challenges to developing a machine-learning ap-
proach to discovering DE operators. The key insight
we apply to surmount these challenges is that in the
linguistics literature, it has been hypothesized that
there is a strong connection between DE operators
and negative polarity items (NPIs), which are terms
that tend to occur in ?negative environments?. An
example NPI is ?anymore?: one can say ?We don?t
have those anymore? but not ?We have those any-
more?.
Specifically, we propose to take advantage of the
seminal hypothesis of Ladusaw (1980, influenced by
Fauconnier (1975), inter alia):
(Ladusaw) NPIs only appear within the
scope of downward-entailing operators.
This hypothesis has been actively discussed, up-
dated, and contested by multiple parties (Linebarger,
1987; von Fintel, 1999; Giannakidou, 2002, inter
alia). It is not our intent to comment (directly) on its
overall validity. Rather, we simply view it as a very
useful starting point for developing computational
tools to find DE operators? indeed, even detractors
of the theory have called it ?impressively algorith-
mic? (Linebarger, 1987, pg. 361).
First, a word about scope. For Ladusaw?s hypoth-
esis, scope should arguably be defined in terms of c-
command, immediate scope, and so on (von Fintel,
1999, pg. 100). But for simplicity and to make our
approach as resource-lean as possible, we simply as-
sume that potential DE operators occur to the left of
NPIs,3 except that we ignore text to the left of any
preceding commas or semi-colons as a way to en-
force a degree of locality. For example, in both ?By
the way, we don?t have plants anymoreNPI because
they died? and ?we don?t have plants anymoreNPI?,
we look for DE operators within the sequence of
words ?we don?t have plants?. We refer to such se-
quences in which we seek DE operators as NPI con-
texts.
3There are a few exceptions, such as with the NPI ?for the
life of me? (Hoeksema, 1993).
Now, Ladusaw?s hypothesis suggests that we can
find DE operators by looking for words that tend to
occur more often in NPI contexts than they occur
overall. We formulate this as follows:
Assumption: For any DE operator d,
FbyNPIpdq ? F pdq.
Here, FbyNPIpdq is the number of occurrences of d
in NPI contexts4 divided by the number of words
in NPI contexts, and F pxq refers to the number of
occurrences of x relative to the number of words in
the corpus.
An additional consideration is that we would like
to focus on the discovery of novel or non-obvious
DE operators. Therefore, for a given candidate DE
operator c, we compute pFbyNPIpcq: the value of
FbyNPIpcq that results if we discard all NPI con-
texts containing a DE operator on a list of 10 well-
known instances, namely, ?not?, ?n?t?, ?no?, ?none?,
?neither?, ?nor?, ?few?, ?each?, ?every?, and ?without?.
(This list is based on the list of DE operators used by
the RTE system presented in MacCartney and Man-
ning (2008).) This yields the following scoring func-
tion:
Spcq : pFbyNPIpcqF pcq . (1)
Distillation There are certain terms that are not
DE operators, but nonetheless co-occur with NPIs as
a side-effect of co-occurring with true DE operators
themselves. For instance, the proper noun ?Milken?
(referring to Michael Milken, the so-called ?junk-
bond king?) occurs relatively frequently with the DE
operator ?denies?, and ?vigorously? occurs frequently
with DE operators like ?deny? and ?oppose?. We re-
fer to terms like ?milken? and ?vigorously? as ?pig-
gybackers?, and address the piggybackers problem
by leveraging the following intuition: in general, we
do not expect to have two DE operators in the same
NPI context.5 One way to implement this would be
to re-score the candidates in a winner-takes-all fash-
ion: for each NPI context, reward only the candidate
4Even if d occurs multiple times in a single NPI context we
only count it once; this way we ?dampen the signal? of func-
tion words that can potentially occur multiple times in a single
sentence.
5One reason is that if two DE operators are composed, they
ordinarily create a positive context, which would not license
NPIs (although this is not always the case (Dowty, 1994)).
139
with the highest score S. However, such a method
is too aggressive because it would force us to pick
a single candidate even when there are several with
relatively close scores? and we know our score S is
imperfect. Instead, we propose the following ?soft?
mechanism. Each sentence distributes a ?budget? of
total score 1 among the candidates it contains ac-
cording to the relative scores of those candidates;
this works out to yield the following new distilled
scoring function
Sdpcq 
?
NPIcontexts p
Spcq
nppq
Npcq , (2)
where nppq  ?cP p Spcq is an NPI-context normal-
izing factor and Npcq is the number of NPI con-
texts containing the candidate c. This way, plausi-
ble candidates that have high S scores relative to the
other candidates in the sentence receive enhanced Sd
scores. To put it another way: apparently plausible
candidates that often appear in sentences with mul-
tiple good candidates (i.e., piggybackers) receive a
low distilled score, despite a high initial score.
Our general claim is that the higher the distilled
score of a candidate, the better its chances of being
a DE operator.
Choice of NPIs Our proposed method requires ac-
cess to a set of NPIs. However, there does not ap-
pear to be universal agreement on such a set. Lichte
and Soehn (2007) mention some doubts regarding
approximately 200 (!) of the items on a roughly 350-
item list of German NPIs (Ku?rschner, 1983). For
English, the ?moderately complete?6 Lawler (2005)
list contains two to three dozen items; however,
there is also a list of English NPIs that is several
times longer (von Bergen and von Bergen, 1993,
written in German), and Hoeksema (1997) asserts
that English should have hundreds of NPIs, similarly
to French and Dutch.
We choose to focus on the items on these lists
that seem most likely to be effective cues for our
task. Specifically, we select a subset of the Lawler
NPIs, focusing mostly on those that do not have
a relatively frequent non-NPI sense. An example
discard is ?much?, whose NPI-hood depends on
6www-personal.umich.edu/jlawler/aue/
npi.html
what it modifies and perhaps on whether there
are degree adverbs pre-modifying it (Hoeksema,
1997). There are some ambiguous NPIs that we
do retain due to their frequency. For example,
?any? occurs both in a non-NPI ?free choice?
variant, as in ?any idiot can do that?, and in an
NPI version. Although it is ambiguous with re-
spect to NPI-hood, ?any? is also a very valuable
cue due to its frequency.7 Here is our NPI list:
any in weeks/ages/years budge yet
at all drink a drop red cent ever
give a damn last/be/take long but what bother to
do a thing arrive/leave until give a shit lift a finger
bat an eye would care/mind eat a bite to speak of
3 Experiments
Our main set of evaluations focuses on the precision
of our method at discovering new DE operators. We
then briefly discuss evaluation of other dimensions.
3.1 Setup
We applied our method to the entirety of the BLLIP
(Brown Laboratory for Linguistic Information Pro-
cessing) 1987?89 WSJ Corpus Release 1, available
from the LDC (LDC2000T43). The 1,796,379 sen-
tences in the corpus comprise 53,064 NPI contexts;
after discarding the ones containing the 10 well-
known DE operators, 30,889 NPI contexts were left.
To avoid sparse data problems, we did not consider
candidates with very low frequency in the corpus
(?150 occurrences) or in the NPI contexts (?10 oc-
currences).
Methodology for eliciting judgments The obvi-
ous way to evaluate the precision of our algorithm is
to have human annotators judge each output item as
to whether it is a DE operator or not. However, there
are some methodological issues that arise.
First, if the judges know that every term they are
rating comes from our system and that we are hoping
that the algorithm extracts DE operators, they may
be biased towards calling every item ?DE? regard-
less of whether it actually is. We deal with this prob-
lem by introducing distractors ? items that are not
produced by our algorithm, but are similar enough
to not be easily identifiable as ?fakes?. Specifically,
7It is by far the most frequent NPI, appearing in 36,554 of
the sentences in the BLLIP corpus (see Section 3).
140
for each possible part of speech of each of our sys-
tem?s outputs c that exists in WordNet, we choose a
distractor that is either in a ?sibling? synset (a hy-
ponym of c?s hypernym) or an antonym. Thus, the
distractors are highly related to the candidates. Note
that they may in fact also be DE operators.
The judges were made aware of the presence of
a substantial number of distractors (about 70 for the
set of top 150 outputs). This design choice did seem
to help ensure that the judges carefully evaluated
each item.
The second issue is that, as mentioned in the in-
troduction, there does not seem to be a uniform test
that judges can apply to all items to ascertain their
DE-ness; but we do not want the judges to impro-
vise excessively, since that can introduce undesir-
able randomness into their decisions. We therefore
encouraged the judges to try to construct sentences
wherein the arguments for candidate DE operators
were drawn from a set of phrases and restricted
replacements we specified (example: ?singing? vs
?singing loudly?). However, improvisation was still
required in a number of cases; for example, the can-
didate ?act?, as either a noun or a verb, cannot take
?singing? as an argument.
The labels that the judges could apply were
?DE(ND)? (downward entailing (narrowly-
defined)), ?superlative?, ?comparative?, ?condi-
tional?, ?hard to tell?, and ?not-DE? (= none of the
above). We chose this fine-grained sub-division
because the second through fourth categories are
all known to co-occur with NPIs. There is some
debate in the linguistics literature as to whether
they can be considered to be downward entailing,
narrowly construed, or not (von Fintel, 1999,
inter alia), but nonetheless, such operators call for
special reasoning quite distinct from that required
when dealing with upward entailing operators ?
hence, we consider it a success when our algorithm
identifies them.
Since monotonicity phenomena can be rather sub-
tle, the judges engaged in a collaborative process.
Judge A (the second author) annotated all items, but
worked in batches of around 10 items. At the end of
each batch, Judge B (the first author) reviewed Judge
A?s decisions, and the two consulted to resolve dis-
agreements as far as possible.
One final remark regarding the annotation: some
decisions still seem uncertain, since various factors
such as context, Gricean maxims, what should be
presupposed8 and so on come into play. However,
we take comfort in a comment by Eugene Charniak
(personal communication) to the effect that if a word
causes a native speaker to pause, that word is inter-
esting enough to be included. And indeed, it seems
reasonable that if a native speaker thinks there might
be a sense in which a word can be considered down-
ward entailing, then our system should flag it as a
word that an RTE system should at least perhaps
pass to a different subsystem for further analysis.
3.2 Precision Results
We now examine the 150 items that were most
highly ranked by our system, which were sub-
sequently annotated as just described. (For
full system output that includes the unannotated
items, see http://www.cs.cornell.edu/
cristian. We would welcome external anno-
tation help.) As shown in Figure 1a, which depicts
precision at k for various values of k, our system
performs very well. In fact, 100% of the first 60 out-
puts are DE, broadly construed. It is also interesting
to note the increasing presence of instances that the
judges found hard to categorize as we move further
down the ranking.
Of our 73 distractors, 46% were judged to be
members of one of our goal categories. The fact that
this percentage is substantially lower than our algo-
rithm?s precision at both 73 and 150 (the largest k we
considered) confirms that our judges were not mak-
ing random decisions. (We expect the percentage
of DE operators among the distractors to be much
higher than 0 because they were chosen to be simi-
lar to our system?s outputs, and so can be expected
to also be DE operators some fraction of the time.)
Table 1 shows the lemmas of just the DE(ND) op-
erators that our algorithm placed in its top 150 out-
puts.9 Most of these lemmas are new discoveries, in
the sense of not appearing in Ladusaw?s (1980) (im-
plicit) enumeration of DE operators. Moreover, the
8For example, ?X doubts the epidemic spread quickly? might
be said to entail ?X would doubt the epidemic spreads via fleas,
presupposing that X thinks about the flea issue?.
9By listing lemmas, we omit variants of the same word, such
as ?doubting? and ?doubted?, to enhance readability. We omit
superlatives, comparatives, and conditionals for brevity.
141
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 1500
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
k
Prec
ision
 at k
 
 DE(ND)S/C/CHard
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 1500
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
k
Prec
ision
 at k
 
 DE(ND)S/C/CHard
(a) (b)
Figure 1: (a) Precision at k for k divisible by 10 up to k  150. The bar divisions are, from the x-axis up,
DE(ND) (blue, the largest); Superlatives/Conditionals/Comparatives (green, 2nd largest); and Hard (red, sometimes
non-existent). For example, all of the first 10 outputs were judged to be either downward entailing (narrowly-defined)
(8 of 10, or 80%) or in one of the related categories (20%). (b) Precision at k when the distillation step is omitted.
not-DE Hard
almost firmly one-day approve
ambitious fined signal cautioned
considers liable remove dismissed
detect notify vowed fend
Table 3: Examples of words judged to be either not in
one of our monotonicity categories of interest (not-DE)
or hard to evaluate (Hard).
lists of DE(ND) operators that are used by textual-
entailment systems are significantly smaller than
that depicted in Table 1; for example, MacCartney
and Manning (2008) use only about a dozen (per-
sonal communication).
Table 3 shows examples of the words in our sys-
tem?s top 150 outputs that are either clear mistakes
or hard to evaluate. Some of these are due to id-
iosyncrasies of newswire text. For instance, we of-
ten see phrases like ?biggest one-day drop in ...?,
where ?one-day? piggybacks on superlatives, and
?vowed? piggybacks on the DE operator ?veto?, as
in the phrase ?vowed to veto?.
Effect of distillation In order to evaluate the im-
portance of the distillation process, we study how
the results change when distillation is omitted (thus
using as score function S from Equation 1 rather
than Sd). When comparing the results (summarized
in Figure 1b) with those of the complete system
(Figure 1a) we observe that the distillation indeed
has the desired effect: the number of highly ranked
words that are annotated as not-DE decreases after
distillation. This results in an increase of the preci-
sion at k ranging from 5% to 10% (depending on k),
as can be observed by comparing the height of the
composite bars in the two figures.10
Importantly, this improvement does indeed seem
to stem at least in part from the distillation process
handling the piggybacking problem. To give just a
few examples: ?vigorously? is pushed down from
rank 48 (undistilled scoring) to rank 126 (distilled
scoring), ?one-day? from 25th to 65th, ?vowed? from
45th to 75th, and ?Milken? from 121st to 350th.
3.3 Other Results
It is natural to ask whether the (expected) decrease
in precision at k is due to the algorithm assigning
relatively low scores to DE operators, so that they
do not appear in the top 150, or due to there be-
ing no more more true DE operators to rank. We
cannot directly evaluate our method?s recall because
no comprehensive list of DE operators exists. How-
ever, to get a rough impression, we can check how
our system ranks the items in the largest list we are
aware of, namely, the Ladusaw (implicit) list men-
tioned above. Of the 31 DE operator lemmas on this
list (not including the 10 well-known DE operators),
only 7 of those frequent enough to be considered by
our algorithm are not in its top 150 outputs, and only
10The words annotated ?hard? do not affect this increase in
precision.
142
absence of
absent from
anxious about 
to avoid (L)
to bar
barely
to block
cannot (L)
compensate for 
to decline
to defer
to deny (L)
to deter
to discourage
to dismiss
to doubt (L)
to eliminate
essential for 
to exclude
to fail (L)
hardly (L)
to lack
innocent of 
to minimize 
never (L)
nobody
nothing
to oppose
to postpone 
to preclude
premature to
to prevent
to prohibit
rarely (L)
to refrain from
to refuse (L)
regardless 
to reject
reluctant to (L)
to resist
to rule out
skeptical 
to suspend
to thwart
unable to
unaware of
unclear on
unlike
unlikely (L)
unwilling to
to veto
wary of
warned that (L)
whenever
withstand
Table 1: The 55 lemmas for the 90 downward entailing (narrowly-defined) operators among our algorithm?s top 150
outputs. (L) marks instances from Ladusaw?s list.  marks some of the more interesting cases. We have added
function words (e.g., ?to?, ?for?) to indicate parts of speech or subcategorization; our algorithm does not discover
multi-word phrases.
Original ? Restriction
Dan is unlikely to sing. ??
??{
Dan is unlikely to sing loudly.
Olivia compensates for eating by exercising. ??
??{
Olivia compensates for eating late by exercising.
Ursula refused to sing or dance. ??
??{
Ursula refused to sing.
Bob would postpone singing. ??
??{
Bob would postpone singing loudly.
Talent is essential for singing. ??
??{
Talent is essential for singing a ballad.
She will finish regardless of threats. ??
??{
She will finish regardless of threats to my career.
Table 2: Example demonstrations that the underlined expressions (selected from Table 1) are DE operators: the
sentences on the left entail those on the right. We also have provided??{ indicators because the reader might find it
helpful to reason in the opposite direction and see that these expressions are not upward entailing.
5 are not in the top 300. Remember that we only an-
notated the top 150 outputs; so, there may be many
other DE operators between positions 150 and 300.
Another way of evaluating our method would be
to assess the effect of our newly discovered DE op-
erators on downstream RTE system performance.
There are two factors to take into account. First, the
DE operators we discovered are quite prevalent in
naturally occurring text11 : the 90 DE(ND) operators
appearing in our algorithm?s top 150 outputs occur
in 111,456 sentences in the BLLIP corpus (i.e., in
6% of its sentences). Second, as previously men-
tioned, systems do already account for monotonic-
ity to some extent ? but they are limited by the fact
that their DE operator lexicons are restricted mostly
to well-known instances; to take a concrete example
with a publicly available RTE system: Nutcracker
(Bos and Markert, 2006) correctly infers that ?We
did not know the disease spread? entails ?We did not
know the disease spread quickly? but it fails to in-
11However, RTE competitions do not happen to currently
stress inferences involving monotonicity. The reasons why are
beyond the scope of this paper.
fer that ?We doubt the disease spread? entails ?We
doubt the disease spread quickly?. So, systems can
use monotonicity information but currently do not
have enough of it; our method can provide themwith
this information, enabling them to handle a greater
fraction of the large number of naturally occurring
instances of this phenomenon than ever before.
4 Related work not already discussed
Magnini (2008), in describing modular approaches
to textual entailment, hints that NPIs may be used
within a negation-detection sub-component.
There is a substantial body of work in the linguis-
tics literature regarding the definition and nature of
polarity items (Polarity Items Bibliography). How-
ever, very little of this work is computational. There
has been passing speculation that one might want
to learn polarity-inverting verbs (Christodoulopou-
los, 2008, pg. 47). There have also been a few
projects on the discovery of NPIs, which is the con-
verse of the problem we consider. Hoeksema (1997)
discusses some of the difficulties with corpus-based
determination of NPIs, including ?rampant? poly-
143
semy and the problem of ?how to determine inde-
pendently which predicates should count as nega-
tive?? a problemwhich our work addresses. Lichte
and Soehn (Lichte, 2005; Lichte and Soehn, 2007)
consider finding German NPIs using a method con-
ceptually similar in some respects to our own, al-
though again, their objective is the reverse of ours.
Their discovery statistic for single-word NPIs is the
ratio of within-licenser-clause occurrences to total
occurrences, where, to enhance precision, the list of
licensers was filtered down to a set of fairly unam-
biguous, easily-identified items. They do not con-
sider distillation, which we found to be an impor-
tant component of our DE-operator-detection algo-
rithm. Their evaluation scheme, unlike ours, did not
employ a bias-compensation mechanism. They did
employ a collocation-detection technique to extend
their list to multi-word NPIs, but our independent
experiments with a similar technique (not reported
here) did not yield good results.
5 Conclusions and future work
To our knowledge, this work represents the first at-
tempt to discover downward entailing operators. We
introduced a unsupervised algorithm that is moti-
vated by research in linguistics but employs simple
distributional statistics in a novel fashion. Our algo-
rithm is highly accurate and discovers many reason-
able DE operators that are missing from pre-existing
manually-built lists.
Since the algorithm is resource-lean ? requiring
no parser or tagger but only a list of NPIs? it can be
immediately applied to languages where such lists
exist, such as German and Romanian (Trawin?ski and
Soehn, 2008). On the other hand, although the re-
sults are already quite good for English, it would
be interesting to see what improvements could be
gained by using more sophisticated syntactic infor-
mation.
For languages where NPI lists are not extensive,
one could envision applying an iterative co-learning
approach: use the newly-derived DE operators to in-
fer new NPIs, and then discover even more new DE
operators given the new NPI list. (For English, our
initial attempts at bootstrapping from our initial NPI
list on the BLLIP corpus did not lead to substantially
improved results.)
In practice, subcategorization is an important fea-
ture to capture. In Table 1, we indicate which sub-
categorizations are DE. An interesting extension of
our work would be to try to automatically distin-
guish particular DE subcategorizations that are lex-
ically apparent, e.g., ?innocent? (not DE) vs. ?inno-
cent of? (as in ?innocent of burglary?, DE).
Our project provides a connection (among many)
between the creation of textual entailment systems
(the domain of language engineers) and the char-
acterization of DE operators (the subject of study
and debate among linguists). The prospect that our
method might potentially eventually be refined in
such a way so as to shed at least a little light on lin-
guistic questions is a very appealing one, although
we cannot be certain that any progress will be made
on that front.
Acknowledgments We thank Roy Bar-Haim, Cleo Con-
doravdi, and Bill MacCartney for sharing their systems? lists
and information about their work with us; Mats Rooth for
helpful conversations; Alex Niculescu-Mizil for technical as-
sistance; and Eugene Charniak for reassuring remarks. We also
thank Marisa Ferrara Boston, Claire Cardie, Zhong Chen, Yejin
Choi, Effi Georgala, Myle Ott, Stephen Purpura, and Ainur
Yessenalina at Cornell University, the UT-Austin NLP group,
Roy Bar-Haim, Bill MacCartney, and the anonymous review-
ers for for their comments on this paper. This paper is based
upon work supported in part by DHS grant N0014-07-1-0152,
National Science Foundation grant No. BCS-0537606, a Ya-
hoo! Research Alliance gift, a CU Provost?s Award for Distin-
guished Scholarship, and a CU Institute for the Social Sciences
Faculty Fellowship. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or
recommendations expressed are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views or official policies, either expressed
or implied, of any sponsoring institutions, the U.S. government,
or any other entity.
References
Roy Bar-Haim, Ido Dagan, Bill Dolan, Lisa Ferro, Danilo
Giampiccolo, Bernardo Magnini, and Idan Szpektor.
The second PASCAL Recognising Textual Entailment
challenge. In Proceedings of the Second PASCAL
Challenges Workshop on Recognising Textual Entail-
ment, 2006.
Roy Bar-Haim, Jonathan Berant, Ido Dagan, Iddo Green-
tal, Shachar Mirkin, Eyal Shnarch, and Idan Szpektor.
Efficient semantic deduction and approximate match-
ing over compact parse forests. In Proceedings of TAC,
2008.
Johan Bos and Katja Markert. Recognising textual en-
tailment with robust logical inference. In Quin?onero
Candela, Dagan, Magnini, and d?Alche? Buc (2006),
pages 404?426.
Christos Christodoulopoulos. Creating a natural logic in-
ference system with combinatory categorial grammar.
Master?s thesis, University of Edinburgh, 2008.
144
Dick Crouch, Roser Saur??, and Abraham Fowler.
AQUAINT pilot knowledge-based evalua-
tion: Annotation guidelines. http://www2.
parc.com/istl/groups/nltt/papers/
aquaint kb pilot evaluation guide.pdf,
2005.
Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini. The
PASCAL Recognising Textual Entailment challenge.
In Quin?onero Candela et al (2006), pages 177?190.
David Dowty. The role of negative polarity and con-
cord marking in natural language reasoning. In Mandy
Harvey and Lynn Santelmann, editors, Proceedings of
SALT IV, pages 114?144, Ithaca, New York, 1994.
Cornell University.
Gilles Fauconnier. Polarity and the scale principle. In
Proceedings of the Chicago Linguistic Society (CLS),
pages 188?199, 1975. Reprinted in Javier Gutierrez-
Rexach (ed.), Semantics: Critical Concepts in Linguis-
tics, 2003.
Danilo Giampiccolo, Bernardo Magnini, Ido Dagan, and
Bill Dolan. The third PASCAL Recognizing Textual
Entailment challenge. In Proceedings of the ACL-
PASCAL Workshop on Textual Entailment and Para-
phrasing, pages 1?9, 2007. URL http://www.
aclweb.org/anthology/W/W07/W07-1401.
Anastasia Giannakidou. Licensing and sensitivity in po-
larity items: from downward entailment to nonveridi-
cality. In Proceedings of the Chicago Linguistic Soci-
ety (CLS), 2002.
Jack Hoeksema. Monotonicity phenomena in natural lan-
guage. Linguistic Analysis, 16:25?40, 1986.
Jack Hoeksema. As (of) yet. Appears in Language and
Cognition 3, the 1992 yearbook of the research group
for theoretical and experimental linguistics of the Uni-
versity of Groningen, 1993. http://www.let.
rug.nl/hoeksema/asofyet.pdf.
Jack Hoeksema. Corpus study of negative polar-
ity items. IV-V Jornades de corpus linguistics
1996-1997, 1997. http://odur.let.rug.nl/
hoeksema/docs/barcelona.html.
Wilfried Ku?rschner. Studien zur Negation im Deutschen.
Narr, 1983.
William A. Ladusaw. Polarity Sensitivity as Inherent
Scope Relations. Garland Press, New York, 1980.
Ph.D. thesis date 1979.
John Lawler. Negation and NPIs. http://www.
umich.edu/jlawler/NPIs.pdf, 2005. Ver-
sion of 10/29/2005.
Timm Lichte. Corpus-based acquisition of complex neg-
ative polarity items. In ESSLLI Student Session, 2005.
Timm Lichte and Jan-Philipp Soehn. The retrieval and
classification of Negative Polarity Items using statisti-
cal profiles. In Sam Featherston and Wolfgang Sterne-
feld, editors, Roots: Linguistics in Search of its Ev-
idential Base, pages 249?266. Mouton de Gruyter,
2007.
Marcia Linebarger. Negative polarity and grammatical
representation. Linguistics and philosophy, 10:325?
387, 1987.
Bill MacCartney and Christopher D. Manning. Natural
logic for textual inference. In Proceedings of the ACL-
PASCAL Workshop on Textual Entailment and Para-
phrasing, pages 193?200, 2007.
Bill MacCartney and Christopher D. Manning. Mod-
eling semantic containment and exclusion in natu-
ral language inference. In Proceedings of the 22nd
International Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics (Coling 2008), pages 521?528, Manchester, UK,
August 2008. Coling 2008 Organizing Committee.
URL http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/
C08-1066.
Bernardo Magnini. Slides for a presentation entitled ?Se-
mantic Knowledge for Textual Entailment?. Sympo-
sium on Semantic Knowledge Discovery, Organiza-
tion and Use, New York University, November 14 and
15, 2008.
Rowan Nairn, Cleo Condoravdi, and Lauri Karttunen.
Computing relative polarity for textual inference. In
Proceedings of Inference in Computational Semantics
(ICoS), 2006.
Polarity Items Bibliography. The polarity items
bibliography. http://www.sfb441.
uni-tuebingen.de/a5/pib/XML2HTML/
list.html, 2008. Maintenance guaranteed only
through December 2008.
Joaquin Quin?onero Candela, Ido Dagan, Bernardo
Magnini, and Florence d?Alche? Buc, editors. Ma-
chine Learning Challenges, Evaluating Predictive Un-
certainty, Visual Object Classification and Recogniz-
ing Textual Entailment, First PASCAL Machine Learn-
ing Challenges Workshop, MLCW 2005, Southamp-
ton, UK, April 11-13, 2005, Revised Selected Papers,
volume 3944 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science
(LNCS), 2006. Springer.
V??ctor Sa?nchez Valencia. Studies on natural logic and
categorial grammar. PhD thesis, University of Ams-
terdam, 1991.
Beata Trawin?ski and Jan-Philipp Soehn. A Multilingual
Database of Polarity Items. In Proceedings of LREC
2008, May 28?30, Marrakech, Morocco, 2008.
Johan van Benthem. Essays in Logical Semantics. Reidel,
Dordrecht, 1986.
Ton van der Wouden. Negative contexts: Collocation,
polarity and multiple negation. Routledge, 1997.
Anke von Bergen and Karl von Bergen. Negative
Polarita?t im Englischen. Gunter Narr, 1993. List
extracted and compiled by Manfred Sailer, 2008,
http://www.sfs.uni-tuebingen.de/fr/
esslli/08/byday/english-npi.pdf.
Kai von Fintel. NPI licensing, Strawson entailment, and
context dependency. Journal of Semantics, 16:97?148,
1999.
145
