Human Language Technologies: The 2009 Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 486?493,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
An Iterative Reinforcement Approach for Fine-Grained 
Opinion Mining 
 
Weifu Du 
Haerbin Institute of Technology 
Haerbin, China 
duweifu@software.ict.ac.cn
Songbo Tan 
Institute of Computing Technology 
Beijing, China 
tansongbo@software.ict.ac.cn 
 
Abstract 
With the in-depth study of sentiment analysis 
research, finer-grained opinion mining, which 
aims to detect opinions on different review fea-
tures as opposed to the whole review level, has 
been receiving more and more attention in the 
sentiment analysis research community re-
cently. Most of existing approaches rely mainly 
on the template extraction to identify the ex-
plicit relatedness between product feature and 
opinion terms, which is insufficient to detect 
the implicit review features and mine the hid-
den sentiment association in reviews, which 
satisfies (1) the review features are not appear 
explicit in the review sentences; (2) it can be 
deduced by the opinion words in its context. 
From an information theoretic point of view, 
this paper proposed an iterative reinforcement 
framework based on the improved information 
bottleneck algorithm to address such problem. 
More specifically, the approach clusters prod-
uct features and opinion words simultaneously 
and iteratively by fusing both their semantic in-
formation and co-occurrence information. The 
experimental results demonstrate that our ap-
proach outperforms the template extraction 
based approaches. 
1 Introduction 
In the Web2.0 era, the Internet turns from a static 
information media into a platform for dynamic 
information exchanging, on which people can ex-
press their views and show their selfhood. More 
and more people are willing to record their feel-
ings (blog), give voice to public affairs (news re-
view), express their likes and dislikes on products 
(product review), and so on. In the face of the vol-
ume of sentimental information available on the 
Internet continues to increase, there is growing 
interest in helping people better find, filter, and 
manage these resources. 
Automatic opinion mining (Turney et al, 2003; 
Ku et al, 2006; Devitt et al, 2007) can play an 
important role in a wide variety of more flexible 
and dynamic information management tasks. For 
example, with the help of sentiment analysis sys-
tem, in the field of public administration, the ad-
ministrators can receive the feedbacks on one pol-
icy in a timelier manner; in the field of business, 
manufacturers can perform more targeted updates 
on products to improve the consumer experience. 
The research of opinion mining began in 1997, 
the early research results mainly focused on the 
polarity of opinion words (Hatzivassiloglou et al, 
1997) and treated the text-level opinion mining as 
a classification of either positive or negative on the 
number of positive or negative opinion words in 
one text (Turney et al, 2003; Pang et al, 2002; 
Zagibalov et al, 2008;). With the in-depth study of 
opinion mining, researchers committed their ef-
forts for more accurate results: the research of sen-
timent summarization (Philip et al, 2004; Hu et al, 
KDD 2004), domain transfer problem of the sen-
timent analysis (Kanayama et al, 2006; Tan et al, 
2007; Blitzer et al, 2007; Tan et al, 2008; An-
dreevskaia et al, 2008; Tan et al, 2009) and fine-
grained opinion mining (Hatzivassiloglou et al, 
2000; Takamura et al, 2007; Bloom et al, 2007; 
Wang et al, 2008; Titov et al, 2008) are the main 
branches of the research of opinion mining. In this 
paper, we focus on the fine-grained (feature-level) 
opinion mining.  
For many applications (e.g. the task of public 
affairs review analysis and the products review 
analysis), simply judging the sentiment orientation 
of a review unit is not sufficient. Researchers (Ku-
shal, 2003; Hu et al, KDD 2004; Hu et al, AAAI 
2004; Popescu et al, 2005) began to work on 
finer-grained opinion mining which predicts the 
sentiment orientation related to different review 
features. The task is known as feature-level opin-
ion mining. 
486
In feature-level opinion mining, most of the ex-
isting researches associate product features and 
opinion words by their explicit co-occurrence. 
Template extraction based method (Popescu et al, 
2005) and association rule mining based method 
(Hu et al, AAAI 2004) are the representative ones.  
These approaches did good jobs for identifying 
the review features that appear explicitly in re-
views, however, real reviews from customers are 
usually complicated. In some cases, the review 
features are implicit in the review sentences, but 
can be deduced by the opinion words in its context. 
The detection of such hidden sentiment association 
is a big challenge in feature-level opinion mining 
on Chinese reviews due to the nature of Chinese 
language (Qi et al, 2008). Obviously, neither the 
template extraction based method nor the associa-
tion rule mining based method is effective for such 
cases. Moreover, in some cases, even if the review 
features appear explicitly in the review sentences, 
the co-occurrence information between review 
features and opinion words is too quantitatively 
sparse to be utilized. So we consider whether it is a 
more sensible way to construct or cluster review 
feature groups and opinion words groups to mine 
the implicit or hidden sentiment association in the 
reviews. 
The general approach will cluster the two types 
of objects separately, which neglects the highly 
interrelationship. To address this problem, in this 
paper, we propose an iterative reinforcement 
framework, under which we cluster product fea-
tures and opinion words simultaneously and itera-
tively by fusing both their semantic information 
and sentiment link information. We take improved 
information bottleneck algorithm (Tishby, 1999) 
as the kernel of the proposed framework. 
The information bottleneck approach was pre-
sented by Tishby (1999). The basic idea of the ap-
proach is that it treats the clustering problems from 
the information compressing point of view, and 
takes this problem as a case of much more funda-
mental problem: what are the features of the vari-
able X that are relevant for the prediction of an-
other, relevance, variable Y? Based on the infor-
mation theory, the problem can be formulated as: 
find a compressed representation of the variable X, 
denoted C, such that the mutual information be-
tween C and Y is as high as possible, under a con-
straint on the mutual information between X and C. 
For our case, take the hotel reviews as example, X 
is one type of objects of review features (e.g. fa-
cilities, service, surrounding environment, etc) or 
opinion words (e.g. perfect, circumspect, quiet, 
etc), and Y is another one. Given some review fea-
tures (or opinion words) gained from review cor-
pus, we want to assemble them into categories, 
conserving the information about opinion words 
(or review features) as high as possible. 
The information bottleneck algorithm has some 
benefits, mainly including (1) it treats the trade-off 
of precision versus complexity of clustering model 
through the rate distortion theory, which is a sub-
field of information theory; (2) it defines the ?dis-
tance? or ?similarity? in a well-defined way based 
on the mutual information. The efficiency of in-
formation bottleneck algorithm (Slonim and 
Tishby, 2000) motivates us to take it as the kernel 
of our framework. As far as we know, this ap-
proach has not been employed in opinion mining 
yet. 
In traditional information bottleneck approach, 
the distance between two data objects is measured 
by the Jensen-Shannon divergence (Lin, 1991), 
which aims to measure the divergence between 
two probability distributions. We alter this meas-
ure to integrate more semantic information, which 
will be illustrated in detail in the following sec-
tions, and the experimental result shows the 
effectiveness of the alteration.  
It would be worthwhile to highlight several as-
pects of our work here:  
z We propose an iterative reinforcement 
framework, and under this framework, review 
feature words and opinion words are organized 
into categories in a simultaneous and iterative 
manner. 
z In the process of clustering, the semantic in-
formation and the co-occurrence information 
are integrated. 
z The experimental results on real Chinese 
web reviews demonstrate that proposed 
method outperforms the template extraction 
based algorithm. 
2 Proposed Algorithm 
2.1 The Problem  
In product reviews, opinion words are used to ex-
press opinion, sentiment or attitude of reviewers. 
Although some review units may express general 
opinions toward a product, most review units are 
487
regarding to specific features of the product. 
A product is always reviewed under a certain 
feature set F. Suppose we have got a lexical list O 
which includes all the opinion expressions and 
their sentiment polarities. For the feature-level 
opinion mining, identifying the sentiment associa-
tion between F and O is essential. The key points 
in the whole process are as follows: 
z get opinion word set O (with polarity labels) 
z get product feature set F 
z identify relationships between F and O 
The focus of the paper is on the latter two steps, 
especially for the case of hidden sentiment asso-
ciation that the review features are implicit in the 
review sentences, but can be deduced by the opin-
ion words in its context. In contrast to existing ex-
plicit adjacency approaches, the proposed 
approach detects the sentiment association 
between F and O based on review feature 
categories and opinion word groups gained from 
the review corpus. 
To this end, we first consider two sets of asso-
ciation objects: the set of product feature words F 
= {f1,f2,?,fm} and the set of opinion words O = 
{o1,o2,?on}. A weighted bipartite graph from F 
and O can be built, denoted by G = {F, O, R}. 
Here R = [rij] is the m*n link weight matrix con-
taining all the pair-wise weights between set F and 
O. The weight can be calculated with different 
weighting schemes, in this paper, we set rij by the 
co-appearance frequency of fi and oj in clause level. 
We take F and O as two random variables, and 
the question of constructing or clustering the ob-
ject groups can be defined as finding compressed 
representation of each variable that reserves the 
information about another variable as high as pos-
sible. Take F as an example, we want to find its 
compression, denoted as C, such that the mutual 
information between C and O is as high as possi-
ble, under a constraint on the mutual information 
between F and C.  
We propose an iterative reinforcement frame-
work to deal with the tasks. An improved informa-
tion bottleneck algorithm is employed in this 
framework, which will be illustrated in detail in 
the following sections. 
2.2 Information Bottleneck Algorithm 
The information bottleneck method (IB) was pre-
sented by Tishby et al (1999). According to Shan-
non?s information theory (Cover and Thomas, 
1991), for the two random variables X, Y, the mu-
tual information I(X;Y) between the random vari-
ables X, Y is given by the symmetric functional: 
,
( | )
( ; ) ( ) ( | ) log
( )x X y Y
p y x
I X Y p x p y x
p y? ?
= ?         (1) 
and the mutual information between them meas-
ures the relative entropy between their joint distri-
bution p(x, y) and the product of respective mar-
ginal distributions p(x)p(y), which is the only con-
sistent statistical measure of the information that 
variable X contains about variable Y (and vice 
versa). Roughly speaking, some of the mutual in-
formation will be lost in the process of compres-
sion, e.g. ( , ) ( , )I C Y I X Y?  (C is a compressed rep-
resentation of X). 
This representation is defined through a (possi-
bly stochastic) mapping between each value 
x X? to each representative value c C? . Formally, 
this mapping can be characterized by a conditional 
distribution p(c|x), inducing a soft partitioning of X 
values, Specifically, each value of X _is associated 
with all the codebook elements (C values), with 
some normalized probability. 
_ 
The IB method is based on the following simple 
idea. Given the empirical joint distribution of two 
variables, one variable is compressed so that the 
mutual information about the other variable is pre-
served as much as possible. The method can be 
considered as finding a minimal sufficient partition 
or efficient relevant coding of one variable with 
respect to the other one. This problem can be 
solved by introducing a Lagrange multiplier ? , 
and then minimizing the functional: 
[ ( | )] ( , ) ( , )L p c x I C X I C Y?= ?                       (2) 
This solution is given in terms of the three dis-
tributions that characterize every cluster c C? , the 
prior probability for this cluster, p(c), its member-
ship probabilities p(c|x), and its distribution over 
the relevance variable p(y|c). In general, the mem-
bership probabilities, p(c|x) is ?soft?, i.e. every 
x X? can be assigned to every c C? in some 
(normalized) probability. The information bottle-
neck principle determines the distortion measure 
between the points x and c to be 
the [ ] ( | )( | ) || ( | ) ( | )log
( | )KL y
p y x
D p y x p y c p y x
p y c
=? , the 
Kullback-Leibler divergence (Cover and Thomas, 
1991) between the conditional distributions p(y|x) 
488
and p(y|c). Specifically, the formal optimal solu-
tion is given by the following equations which 
must be solved together. 
( )
( | ) exp( [ ( | ) || ( | )])
( , )
1
( | ) ( | ) ( ) ( | )
( )
( ) ( | ) ( )
KL
x
x
p c
p c x D p y x p y c
Z x
p y c p c x p x p y x
p c
p c p c x p x
??
? = ???? =??? =??
?
?
 
(3) 
Where ( , )Z x? is a normalization factor, and the 
single positive (Lagrange) parameter ? determines 
the ?softness? of the classification. Intuitively, in 
this procedure the information contained in X 
about Y ?squeezed? through a compact ?bottleneck? 
of clusters C, that is forced to represent the ?rele-
vant? part in X w.r.t to Y.  
An important special case is the ?hard? cluster-
ing case where C is a deterministic function of X. 
That is, p(c|x) can only take values of zero or one, 
This restriction, which corresponds to the 
limit ? ?? in Eqs 3 meaning every x X?  is as-
signed to exactly one cluster c C?  with a prob-
ability of one and to all the others with a probabil-
ity of zero. This yields a natural distance measure 
between distributions which can be easily imple-
mented in an agglomerative hierarchical clustering 
procedure (Slonim and Tishby, 1999).  
1,
( | )
0,
1
( | ) ( , )
( )
( ) ( )
x c
x c
if x c
p c x
otherwise
p y c p x y
p c
p c p x
?
?
? ??= ?? ???? =??? =???
?
?
                              (4) 
The algorithm starts with a trivial partitioning 
into |X| singleton clusters, where each cluster con-
tains exactly one element of X. At each step we 
merge two components of the current partition into 
a single new component in a way that locally 
minimizes the loss of mutual information about the 
categories. Every merger, *( , )i jc c c? , is formally 
defined by the following equation: 
*
*
* *
*
1,
( | )
0,
( )( )
( | ) ( | ) ( | )
( ) ( )
( ) ( ) ( )
i j
ji
i j
i j
x c or x c
p c x
otherwise
p cp c
p y c p y c p y c
p c p c
p c p c p c
? ? ???=? ?????? = +??? = +???
     (5) 
The decrease in the mutual information I(C, Y) due 
to this merger is defined by  
( , ) ( , ) ( , )i j before afterI c c I C Y I C Y? ? ?               (6) 
When ( , )beforeI C Y  and ( , )afterI C Y are the informa-
tion values before and after the merger, respec-
tively. After a little algebra, one can see 
( )( , ) ( ) ( ) ( | ), ( | )i j i j JS i jI c c p c p c D p y c p y c? ? ?? + ? ? ?  (7)  
Where the functional DJS  is the Jensen-Shannon 
divergence (Lin, 1991), defined as  
^ ^
, || ||JS i j i KL i j KL jD p p D p p D p p? ?? ? ? ?? ? = +? ? ? ? ? ?? ? ? ?   (8) 
where in our case  
{ } { }
{ }
* *
^
, ( | ), ( | )
( )( )
, ,
( ) ( )
( | ) ( | )
i j i j
ji
i j
i i j j
p p p y c p y c
p cp c
p c p c
p p y c p y c
? ?
? ?
? ??? ? ?? ?? ? ?? ??? = +??
                     (9) 
By introducing the information optimization cri-
terion the resulting similarity measure directly 
emerges from the analysis. The algorithm is now 
very simple. At each step we perform ?the best 
possible merger?, i.e. merge the clusters { , }i jc c  
which minimize ( , )i jI c c? .  
2.3 Improved Information Bottleneck Algo-
rithm for Semantic Information 
In traditional information bottleneck approach, the 
distance between two data objects is measured by 
the difference of information values before and 
after the merger, which is measured by the Jensen-
Shannon divergence. This divergence aims to 
measure the divergence between two probability 
distributions. For our case, the divergence is based 
on the co-occurrence information between the two 
variables F and O. 
While the co-occurrence in corpus is usually 
quantitatively sparse; additionally, Statistics based 
489
on word-occurrence loses semantic related infor-
mation. To avoid such reversed effects, in the pro-
posed framework we combine the co-occurrence 
information and semantic information as the final 
distance between the two types of objects. 
( , ) ( , )
(1 ) ( , )
{ } { }
i j semantic i j
i j
i j i j
D X X D X X
I X X
where X F X F X O X O
?
? ?
=
+ ?
? ? ? ? ? ? ?
 
(10) 
In equation 10, the distance between two data 
objects Xi and Xj is denoted as a linear combination 
of semantic distance and information value differ-
ence. The parameter ?  reflects the contribution of 
different distances to the final distance. 
Input: Joint probability distribution p(f,o) 
Output: A partition of F into m clusters, ?m?
{1,?,|F|}, and a partition of O into n clusters ?
n?{1,?,|O|} 
1. t?0 
2. Repeat 
a. Construct CFt?Ft 
b. ?i, j=1,?,|CFt|, i<j, calculate 
         ( , ) (1 ) ( , )t t t t tij semantic i j i jd D cf cf I cf cf? ? ?? + ?
c. for m?|CFt|-1 to 1 
1) find the indices {i, j}, for which dijt is 
minimized 
2) merge {cfit, cfjt}into cf*t  
3) update CFt? {CFt -{cfit, cfjt}}U {cf*t} 
4) update dijt costs w.r.t cf*t 
d. Construct COt?Ot 
e. ?i, j=1,?,|COt|, i<j,calculate 
     ( , ) (1 ) ( , )t t t t tij semantic i j i jd D co co I co co? ? ?? + ?
f. for n?|COt|-1 to 1 
1) find the indices {i, j}, for which dijt is 
minimized 
2) merge {coit,cojt}into co*t  
3) update COt ? {COt -{coit,cojt}}U {co*t}
4) update dijt costs w.r.t co*t 
g. t?t+1 
3. until (CFt = CFt-1 and COt =COt-1) 
Figure 1: Pseudo-code of semantic information bot-
tleneck in iterative reinforcement framework  
 
The semantic distance can be got by the usage 
of lexicon, such as WordNet (Budanitsky and Hirst, 
2006). In this paper, we use the Chinese lexicon 
HowNet1. 
The basic idea of the iterative reinforcement 
principle is to propagate the clustered results be-
tween different type data objects by updating their 
inter-relationship spaces. The clustering process 
can begin from an arbitrary type of data object. 
The clustering results of one data object type up-
date the interrelationship thus reinforce the data 
object categorization of another type. The process 
is iterative until clustering results of both object 
types converge. Suppose we begin the clustering 
process from data objects in set F, and then the 
steps can be expressed as Figure 1. After the itera-
tion, we can get the strongest n links between 
product feature categories and opinion word 
groups. That constitutes our set of sentiment asso-
ciation. 
3 Experimental Setup 
In this section we describe our experiments and the 
data used in these experiments. 
3.1 Data 
Our experiments take hotel reviews (in Chinese) 
as example. The corpus used in the experiments is 
composed by 4000 editor reviews on hotel, includ-
ing 857,692 Chinese characters. They are extracted 
from www.ctrip.com. Each review contains a 
user?s rating represented by ?stars?, the number of 
the star denotes the user?s satisfaction. The de-
tailed information is illustrated in Table 1, 
 
Table 1: The detail information of corpus 
User?s rating Number 
1 star 555 
2 star 1375 
3 star 70 
4 star 2000 
 
Then we use ICTCLAS2, a Chinese word seg-
mentation software to extract candidate review 
features and opinion words.  
Usually, adjectives are normally used to express 
opinions in reviews. Therefore, most of the exist-
ing researches take adjectives as opinion words. In 
the research of Hu et al (2004), they proposed that 
                                                 
1 http://www.keenage.com/ 
2 www.searchforum.org.cn 
490
other components of a sentence are unlikely to be 
product features except for nouns and noun 
phrases. Some researchers (Fujii and Ishikawa, 
2006) targeted nouns, noun phrases and verb 
phrases. The adding of verb phrases caused the 
identification of more possible product features, 
while brought lots of noises. So in this paper, we 
follow the points of Hu?s, extracting nouns and 
noun phrases as candidate product feature words. 
Take the whole set of nouns and noun phrases 
as candidate features will bring some noise. In or-
der to reduce such adverse effects, we use the 
function of Named Entity Recognition (NER) in 
ICTCLAS to filter out named entities, including: 
person, location, organization. Since the NEs have 
small probability of being product features, we 
prune the candidate nouns or noun phrases which 
have the above NE taggers. 
 
Table 2: The number of candidate review features 
and opinion words in our corpus 
Extracted In-
stance Total 
Non-
Repeated 
Candidate re-
view feature 86,623 15,249 
Opinion word 26,721 1,231 
 
By pruning candidate product feature words, we 
get the set of product feature words F. And the set 
of opinion words O is composed by all the adjec-
tives in reviews. The number of candidate product 
feature words and opinion words extracted from 
the corpus are shown as Table 2: 
3.2 Experimental Procedure 
We evaluate our approach from two perspectives:  
1) Effectiveness of product feature category 
construction by mutual reinforcement based clus-
tering;  
2) Precision of sentiment association between 
product feature categories and opinion word 
groups;  
4 Experimental Results and Discussion 
4.1 Evaluation of Review Feature Category 
Construction 
To calculate agreement between the review feature 
category construction results and the correct labels, 
we make use of the Rand index (Rand, 1971). This 
allows for a measure of agreement between two 
partitions, P1 and P2, of the same data set D. Each 
partition is viewed as a collection of n*(n-1)/2 pair 
wise decisions, where n is the size of D. For each 
pair of points di and dj in D, Pi either assigns them 
to the same cluster or to different clusters. Let a be 
the number of decisions where di is in the same 
cluster as dj in P1 and in P2. Let b be the number of 
decisions where the two instances are placed in 
different clusters in both partitions. Total agree-
ment can then be calculated using 
1 2( , ) ( 1) / 2
a b
Rand P P
n n
+= ?                             (11)  
In our case, the parts of product feature words in 
the pre-constructed evaluation set are used to rep-
resent the data set D; a and b represent the parti-
tion agreements between the pairs of any two 
words in the parts and in the clustering results re-
spectively. 
In equation 10, the parameter ? reflects the re-
spective contribution of semantic information and 
co-occurrence information to the final distance. 
When 0? = or 1? = , the co-occurrence informa-
tion or the semantic information will be utilized 
alone. 
In order to get the optimal combination of the 
two type of distance, we adjust the parameter 
? from 0 to 1(stepped by 0.2), and the accuracy of 
feature category construction with different ? are 
shown in Figure 2: 
 
 
Figure 2: The accuracy of review feature category 
construction with the variation of the parameter ?  
 
From this figure, we can find that the semantic 
information (? =1) contributes much more to the 
accuracy of review feature category construction 
than the co-occurrence information ( ? =0), and 
when ? =0, the approach is equivalent to the tradi-
tional information bottleneck approach. We con-
sider this is due partly to the sparseness of the cor-
491
pus, by enlarging the scale of the corpus or using 
the search engine (e.g. google etc), we can get 
more accurate results.  
Additionally, by a sensible adjust on the pa-
rameter ? (in this experiment, we set ?  as 0.6), 
we can get higher accuracy than the two baselines 
( ? =0 and ? =1), which indicates the necessity 
and effectiveness of the integration of semantic 
information and co-occurrence information in the 
proposed approach. 
4.2 Evaluation of Sentiment Association  
We use precision to evaluate the performance of 
sentiment association. An evaluation set is con-
structed manually first, in which there are not only 
the categories that every review feature word be-
long to, but also the relationship between each 
category and opinion word. Then we define preci-
sion as: 
number of correctly associated pairs
Precision
number of detected pairs
=
                                                                          (12) 
A comparative result is got by the means of 
template-extraction based approach on the same 
test set. By the usage of regular expression, the 
nouns (phrase) and gerund (phrase) are extracted 
as the review features, and the nearest adjectives 
are extracted as the related opinion words. Because 
the modifiers of adjectives in reviews also contain 
rich sentiment information and express the view of 
customs, we extract adjectives and their modifiers 
simultaneously, and take them as the opinion 
words. 
 
Table 3: Performance comparison in sentiment asso-
ciation 
Approach Pairs Precision 
Template extraction 27,683 65.89% 
Proposed approach 141,826 78.90% 
 
Table 3 shows the advantage of our approach 
over the extraction by explicit adjacency. Using 
the same product feature categorization, our sen-
timent association approach get a more accurate 
pair set than the direct extraction based on explicit 
adjacency. The precision we obtained by the itera-
tive reinforcement approach is 78.90%, almost 13 
points higher than the adjacency approach. This 
indicates that there are a large number of hidden 
sentiment associations in the real custom reviews, 
which underlines the importance and value of our 
work. 
5 Conclusions and Further Work 
In this paper, we propose a novel iterative rein-
forcement framework based on improved informa-
tion bottleneck approach to deal with the feature-
level product opinion-mining problem. We alter 
traditional information bottleneck method by inte-
gration with semantic information, and the ex-
perimental result demonstrates the effectiveness of 
the alteration. The main contribution of our work 
mainly including:  
z We propose an iterative reinforcement in-
formation bottleneck framework, and in this 
framework, review feature words and opinion 
words are organized into categories in a simul-
taneous and iterative manner. 
z In the process of clustering, the semantic in-
formation and the co-occurrence information 
are integrated. 
z The experimental results based on real Chi-
nese web reviews demonstrate that our method 
outperforms the template extraction based al-
gorithm. 
Although our methods for candidate product 
feature extraction and filtering (see in 3.1) can 
partly identify real product features, it may lose 
some data and remain some noises. We?ll conduct 
deeper research in this area in future work. Addi-
tionally, we plan to exploit more information, such 
as background knowledge, to improve the per-
formance. 
6 Acknowledgments 
This work was mainly supported by two funds, i.e., 
0704021000 and 60803085, and one another pro-
ject, i.e., 2004CB318109. 
 
References  
A. Andreevskaia, S. Bergler. When Specialists and 
Generalists Work Together: Overcoming Domain 
Dependence in Sentiment Tagging. ACL 2008. 
A. Budanitsky and G. Hirst. Evaluating wordnetbased 
measures of lexical semantic relatedness. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 32(1):13?47, 2006. 
492
A. Devitt, K. Ahmad. Sentiment Polarity Identification 
in Financial News: A Cohesion-based Approach. 
ACL 2007. 
A. Fujii and T. Ishikawa. A system for summarizing 
and visualizing arguments in subjective documents: 
Toward supporting decision making. The Workshop 
on Sentiment and Subjectivity in Text ACL2006. 
2006. 
A. Popescu and O. Etzioni. Extracting product features 
and opinions from reviews. HLT-EMNLP 2005. 
B. Liu, M. Hu, and J. Cheng. Opinion observer: analyz-
ing and comparing opinions on the web. WWW 2005. 
B. Pang and L. Lee. Seeing stars: Exploiting class rela-
tionships for sentiment categorization with respect to 
rating scales. ACL 2005. 
B. Pang, L. Lee, and S. Vaithyanathan. Thumbs up? 
Sentiment classification using machine learning 
techniques. EMNLP 2002. 
B. Philip, T. Hastie, C. Manning, and S. Vaithyanathan. 
Exploring sentiment summarization. In AAAI Spring 
Symposium on Exploring Attitude and Affect in Text: 
Theories and Applications (AAAI tech report SS-04-
07). 2004. 
B. Wang, H. Wang. Bootstrapping Both Product Fea-
tures and Opinion Words from Chinese Customer 
Reviews with Cross-Inducing. IJCNLP 2008. 
D. Kushal, S. Lawrence, and D. Pennock. Mining the 
peanut gallery: Opinion extraction and semantic clas-
sification of product reviews. WWW 2003. 
H. Kanayama, T. Nasukawa. Fully Automatic Lexicon 
Expansion for Domain-oriented Sentiment Analysis. 
EMNLP 2006 
H. Takamura, T. Inui. Extracting Semantic Orientations 
of Phrases from Dictionary. NAACL-HLT 2007. 
I. Titov, R. McDonald. Modeling online reviews with 
multi-grain topic models. WWW 2008.  
L. Ku, Y. Liang and H. Chen. Opinion Extraction, 
Summarization and Tracking in News and Blog Cor-
pora. AAAI-CAAW 2006. 
J. Blitzer, M. Dredze, F. Pereira. Biographies, Bolly-
wood, Boom-boxes and Blenders: Domain Adapta-
tion for Sentiment Classification. ACL 2007. 
J. Lin. Divergence Measures Based on the Shannon 
Entropy. IEEE Transactions on Information theory, 
37(1):145?151, 1991. 
K. Bloom and N. Garg and S. Argamon. Extracting 
Appraisal Expressions. NAACL-HLT 2007. 
M. Hu and B. Liu. Mining and summarizing customer 
reviews. KDD 2004. 
M. Hu and B. Liu. Mining opinion features in customer 
reviews. AAAI 2004.  
N. Slonim, N. Tishby. Agglomerative information bot-
tleneck. NIPS 1999. 
N. Slonim and N. Tishby. Document Clustering Using 
word Clusters via the Information Bottleneck 
Method. SIGIR 2000. 
N. Slonim and N. Tishby. The power of word clusters 
for text classification. ECIR 2001. 
N. Tishby, F. Pereira, W. Bialek. The information bot-
tleneck method. 1999, arXiv: physics/0004057v1  
P. Turney. Thumbs up or thumbs down? Semantic ori-
entation applied to unsupervised classification of re-
views. ACL 2002. 
P. Turney and M. Littman. Measuring Praise and Criti-
cism: Inference of Semantic Orientation from Asso-
ciation. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, 
2003,21(4): 315-346. 
Q. Su, X. Xu, H. Guo, Z. Guo, X. Wu, X. Zhang, B. 
Swen and Z. Su. Hidden sentiment association in 
Chinese web opinion mining. WWW 2008. 
S. Tan, G. Wu, H. Tang and X. Cheng. A novel scheme 
for domain-transfer problem in the context of senti-
ment analysis. CIKM 2007. 
S. Tan, Y. Wang, G. Wu and X. Cheng. Using unla-
beled data to handle domain-transfer problem of 
semantic detection. SAC 2008. 
S. Tan, X. Cheng, Y. Wang and H. Xu. Adapting Naive 
Bayes to Domain Adaptation for Sentiment Analysis. 
ECIR 2009. 
T. Cover and J. Thomas. Elements of Information The-
ory. John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1991. 
T. Zagibalov, J. Carroll. Automatic Seed Word Selec-
tion for Unsupervised Sentiment Classification of 
Chinese Text. Coling 2008. 
V. Hatzivassiloglou and K. McKeown. Predicting the 
semantic orientation of adjectives. ACL 1997. 
V. Hatzivassiloglou and J. Wiebe. Effects of adjective 
orientation and gradability on sentence subjectivity. 
Coling 2000. 
W. Rand. Objective criteria for the evaluation of clus-
tering methods. Journal of the American Statistical 
Association, 66, 846-850. 1971 
 
493
