Proceedings of the ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Software Demonstrations, pages 5?8,
Suntec, Singapore, 3 August 2009.
c
?2009 ACL and AFNLP
LX-Center: a center of online linguistic services
Ant
?
onio Branco, Francisco Costa, Eduardo Ferreira, Pedro Martins,
Filipe Nunes, Jo
?
ao Silva and Sara Silveira
University of Lisbon
Department of Informatics
{antonio.branco, fcosta, eferreira, pedro.martins,
fnunes, jsilva, sara.silveira}@di.fc.ul.pt
Abstract
This is a paper supporting the demonstra-
tion of the LX-Center at ACL-IJCNLP-09.
LX-Center is a web center of online lin-
guistic services aimed at both demonstrat-
ing a range of language technology tools
and at fostering the education, research
and development in natural language sci-
ence and technology.
1 Introduction
This paper is aimed at supporting the demonstra-
tion of a web center of online linguistic services.
These services demonstrate language technology
tools for the Portuguese language and are made
available to foster the education, research and de-
velopment in natural language science and tech-
nology.
This paper adheres to the common format de-
fined for demo proposals: the next Section 2
presents an extended abstract of the technical con-
tent to be demonstrated; Section 3 provides a
script outline of the demo presentation; and the
last Section 4 describes the hardware and internet
requirements expected to be provided by the local
organizer.
2 Extended abstract
The LX-Center is a web center of online linguis-
tic services for the Portuguese language located at
http://lxcenter.di.fc.ul.pt. This is
a freely available center targeted at human users. It
has a counterpart in terms of a webservice for soft-
ware agents, the LXService, presented elsewhere
(Branco et al, 2008).
2.1 LX-Center
The LX-Center encompasses linguistic services
that are being developed, in all or part, and main-
tained at the University of Lisbon, Department of
Informatics, by the NLX-Natural Language and
Speech Group. At present, it makes available the
following functionalities:
? Sentence splitting
? Tokenization
? Nominal lemmatization
? Nominal morphological analysis
? Nominal inflection
? Verbal lemmatization
? Verbal morphological analysis
? Verbal conjugation
? POS-tagging
? Named entity recognition
? Annotated corpus concordancing
? Aligned wordnet browsing
These functionalities are provided by one or
more of the seven online services that integrate
the LX-Center. For instance, the LX-Suite service
accepts raw text and returns it sentence splitted,
tokenized, POS tagged, lemmatized and morpho-
logically analyzed (for both verbs and nominals).
Some other services, in turn, may support only one
of the functionalities above. For instance, the LX-
NER service ensures only named entity recogni-
tion.
These are the services offered by the LX-
Center:
? LX-Conjugator
? LX-Lemmatizer
? LX-Inflector
? LX-Suite
? LX-NER
? CINTIL concordancer
? MWN.PT browser
5
The access to each one of these services is ob-
tained by clicking on the corresponding button on
the left menu of the LX-Center front page.
Each of the seven services integrating the LX-
Center will be briefly presented in a different
subsection below. Fully fledged descriptions are
available at the corresponding web pages and in
the white papers possibly referred to there.
2.2 LX-Conjugator
The LX-Conjugator is an online service for fully-
fledged conjugation of Portuguese verbs. It takes
an infinitive verb form and delivers all the corre-
sponding conjugated forms. This service is sup-
ported by a tool based on general string replace-
ment rules for word endings supplemented by a list
of overriding exceptions. It handles both known
verbs and unknown verbs, thus conjugating neolo-
gisms (with orthographic infinitival suffix).
The Portuguese verbal inflection system is a
most complex part of the Portuguese morphology,
and of the Portuguese language, given the high
number of conjugated forms for each verb (ca. 70
forms in non pronominal conjugation), the num-
ber of productive inflection rules involved and the
number of non regular forms and exceptions to
such rules.
This complexity is further increased when the
so-called pronominal conjugation is taken into ac-
count. The Portuguese language has verbal clitics,
which according to some authors are to be ana-
lyzed as integrating the inflectional suffix system:
the forms of the clitics may depend on the Number
(Singular vs. Plural), the Person (First, Second,
Third or Second courtesy), the Gender (Masculine
vs. Feminine), the grammatical function which
they are in correspondence with (Subject, Direct
object or Indirect object), and the anaphoric prop-
erties (Pronominal vs. Reflexive); up to three cli-
tics (e.g. deu-se-lho / gave-One-ToHim-It) may be
associated with a verb form; clitics may occur in
so called enclisis, i.e. as a final part of the verb
form (e.g. deu-o / gave-It), or in mesoclisis, i.e.
as a medial part of the verb form (e.g. d?a-lo-ia
/ give-it-Condicional) ? when the verb form oc-
curs in certain syntactic or semantic contexts (e.g
in the scope of negation), the clitics appear in pro-
clisis, i.e. before the verb form (ex.: n?ao o deu /
NOT it gave); clitics follow specific rules for their
concatenation.
With LX-Conjugator, pronominal conjugation
can be fully parameterizable and is thus exhaus-
tively handled. Additionally, LX-Conjugator ex-
haustively handles a set of inflection cases which
tend not to be supported together in verbal conju-
gators: Compound tenses; Double forms for past
participles (regular and irregular); Past participle
forms inflected for number and gender (with tran-
sitive and unaccusative verbs); Negative impera-
tive forms; Courtesy forms for second person.
This service handles also the very few cases
where there may be different forms in different
variants: when a given verb has different ortho-
graphic representations for some of its inflected
forms (e.g. arguir in European vs. arg?uir in
American Portuguese), all such representations
will be displayed.
2.3 LX-Lemmatizer
The LX-Lemmatizer is an online service for fully-
fledged lemmatization and morphological analysis
of Portuguese verbs. It takes a verb form and de-
livers all the possible corresponding lemmata (in-
finitive forms) together with inflectional feature
values.
This service is supported by a tool based on
general string replacement rules for word endings
whose outcome is validated by the reverse proce-
dure of conjugation of the output and matching
with the original input. These rules are supple-
mented by a list of overriding exceptions. It thus
handles an open set of verb forms provided these
input forms bear an admissible verbal inflection
ending. Hence, this service processes both lexi-
cally known and unknown verbs, thus coping with
neologisms.
LX-Lemmatizer handles the same range of
forms handled and generated by the LX-
Conjugator. As for pronominal conjugation forms,
the outcome displays the clitic detached from
the lemma. The LX-Lemmatizer and the LX-
Conjugator can be used in ?roll-over? mode. Once
the outcome of say the LX-Conjugator on a given
input lemma is displayed, the user can click over
any one of the verbal forms in that conjugation ta-
ble. This activates the LX-Lemmatizer on that in-
put verb form, and then its possible lemmas, to-
gether with corresponding inflection feature val-
ues, are displayed. Now, any of these lemmas can
also be clicked on, which will activate back the
LX-Conjugator and will make the corresponding
conjugation table to be displayed.
6
2.4 LX-Inflector
The LX-Inflector is an online service for the
lemmatization and inflection of nouns and adjec-
tives of Portuguese. This service is also based on
a tool that relies on general rules for ending string
replacement, supplemented by a list of overrid-
ing exceptions. Hence, it handles both lexically
known and unknown forms, thus handling pos-
sible neologisms (with orthographic suffixes for
nominal inflection).
As input, this service takes a Portuguese nomi-
nal form ? a form of a noun or an adjective, in-
cluding adjectival forms of past participles ?, to-
gether with a bundle of inflectional feature values
? values of inflectional features of Gender and
Number intended for the output.
As output, it returns: inflectional features ?
the input form is echoed with the correspond-
ing values for its inflectional features of Gender
and Number, that resulted from its morphological
analysis; lemmata ? the lemmata (singular and
masculine forms when available) possibly corre-
sponding to the input form; inflected forms ? the
inflected forms (when available) of each lemma in
accordance with the values for inflectional features
entered. LX-Inflector processes both simple, pre-
fixed or non prefixed, and compound forms.
2.5 LX-Suite
The LX-Suite is an online service for the shal-
low processing of Portuguese. It accepts raw
text and returns it sentence splitted, tokenized,
POS tagged, lemmatized and morphologically an-
alyzed.
This service is based on a pipeline of a num-
ber of tools, including those supporting the ser-
vices described above. Those tools, for lemmati-
zation and morphological analysis, are inserted at
the end of the pipeline and are preceded by three
other tools: a sentence splitter, a tokenizer and a
POS tagger.
The sentence splitter marks sentence and para-
graph boundaries and unwraps sentences split over
different lines. An f-score of 99.94% was obtained
when testing it on a 12,000 sentence corpus.
The tokenizer segments the text into lexically
relevant tokens, using whitespace as the separator;
expands contractions; marks spacing around punc-
tuation or symbols; detaches clitic pronouns from
the verb; and handles ambiguous strings (con-
tracted vs. non contracted). This tool achieves an
f-score of 99.72%.
The POS tagger assigns a single morpho-
syntactic tag to every token. This tagger is based
on Hidden Markov Models, and was developed
with the TnT software (Brants, 2000). It scores
an accuracy of 96.87%.
2.6 LX-NER
The LX-NER is an online service for the recog-
nition of expressions for named entities in Por-
tuguese. It takes a segment of Portuguese text and
identifies, circumscribes and classifies the expres-
sions for named entities it contains. Each named
entity receives a standard representation.
This service handles two types of expressions,
and their subtypes. (i) Number-based expressions:
Numbers ? arabic, decimal, non-compliant, ro-
man, cardinal, fraction, magnitude classes; Mea-
sures ? currency, time, scientific units; Time ?
date, time periods, time of the day; Addresses ?
global section, local section, zip code; (ii) Name-
base expressions: Persons; Organizations; Loca-
tions; Events; Works; Miscellaneous.
The number-based component is built upon
handcrafted regular expressions. It was devel-
oped and evaluated against a manually constructed
test-suite including over 300 examples. It scored
85.19% precision and 85.91% recall. The name-
based component is built upon HMMs with the
help of TnT (Brants, 2000). It was trained over
a manually annotated corpus of approximately
208,000 words, and evaluated against an unseen
portion with approximately 52,000 words. It
scored 86.53% precision and 84.94% recall.
2.7 CINTIL Concordancer
The CINTIL-Concordancer is an online concor-
dancing service supporting the research usage of
the CINTIL Corpus.
The CINTIL Corpus is a linguistically inter-
preted corpus of Portuguese. It is composed of 1
Million annotated tokens, each one of which ver-
ified by human expert annotators. The annotation
comprises information on part-of-speech, lemma
and inflection of open classes, multi-word expres-
sions pertaining to the class of adverbs and to the
closed POS classes, and multi-word proper names
(for named entity recognition).
This concordancer permits to search for occur-
rences of strings in the corpus and returns them
together with their window of left and right con-
text. It is possible to search for orthographic forms
7
or through linguistic information encoded in their
tags. This service offers several possibilities with
respect to the format for displaying the outcome
of a given search (e.g. number of occurrences per
page, size of the context window, sorting the re-
sults in a given page, hiding the tags, etc.)
This service is supported by Poliqarp, a free
suite of utilities for large corpora processing
(Janus and Przepi?orkowski, 2006).
2.8 MWN.PT Browser
The MWN.PT Browser is an online service to
browse the MultiWordnet of Portuguese.
The MWN.PT is a lexical semantic network for
the Portuguese language, shaped under the on-
tological model of wordnets, developed by our
group. It spans over 17,200 manually validated
concepts/synsets, linked under the semantic rela-
tions of hyponymy and hypernymy. These con-
cepts are made of over 21,000 word senses/word
forms and 16,000 lemmas from both European
and American variants of Portuguese. They are
aligned with the translationally equivalent con-
cepts of the English Princeton WordNet and, tran-
sitively, of the MultiWordNets of Italian, Spanish,
Hebrew, Romanian and Latin.
It includes the subontologies under the concepts
of Person, Organization, Event, Location, and Art
works, which are covered by the top ontology
made of the Portuguese equivalents to all concepts
in the 4 top layers of the Princeton wordnet and
to the 98 Base Concepts suggested by the Global
Wordnet Association, and the 164 Core Base Con-
cepts indicated by the EuroWordNet project.
This browsing service offers an access point to
the MultiWordnet, browser
1
tailored to the Por-
tuguese wordnet. It offers also the possibility
to navigate the Portuguese wordnet diagrammat-
ically by resorting to Visuwords.
2
3 Outline
This is an outline of the script to be followed.
Step 1 : Presentation of the LX-Center.
Narrative: The text in Section 2.1 above.
Action: Displaying the page at
http://lxcenter.di.fc.ul.pt.
Step 2 : Presentation of LX-Conjugator.
Narrative: The text in Section 2.2 above.
Action: Running an example by selecting
1
http://multiwordnet.itc.it/
2
http://www.visuwords.com/
?see an example? option at the page
http://lxconjugator.di.fc.ul.pt.
Step 3 : Presentation of LX-Lemmatizer.
Narrative: The text in Section 2.3 above.
Action: Running an example by selecting
?see an example? option at the page
http://lxlemmatizer.di.fc.ul.pt;
clicking on one of the inflected forms in the
conjugation table generated; clicking on one
of the lemmas returned.
Step 4 : Presentation of LX-Inflector.
Narrative: The text in Section 2.4 above.
Action: Running an example by selecting
?see an example? option at the page
http://lxinflector.di.fc.ul.pt.
Step 5 : Presentation of LX-Suite.
Narrative: The text in Section 2.5 above.
Action: Running an example by selecting
?see an example? option at the page
http://lxsuite.di.fc.ul.pt.
Step 6 : Presentation of LX-NER.
Narrative: The text in Section 2.6 above.
Action: Running an example by copying one
of the examples in the page
http://lxner.di.fc..ul.pt
and hitting the ?Recognize? button.
Step 7 : Presentation of CINTIL Concordancer.
Narrative: The text in Section 2.7 above.
Action: Running an example by selecting
?see an example? option at the page
http://cintil.ul.pt.
Step 8 : Presentation of MWN.PT Browser.
Narrative: The text in Section 2.8 above.
Action: Running an example by selecting
?see an example? option at the page
http://mwnpt.di.fc.ul.pt/.
4 Requirements
This demonstration requires a computer (a laptop
we will bring along) and an Internet connection.
References
A. Branco, F. Costa, P. Martins, F. Nunes, J. Silva and
S. Silveira. 2008. ?LXService: Web Services of
Language Technology for Portuguese?. Proceed-
ings of LREC2008. ELRA, Paris.
D. Janus and A. Przepi?orkowski. 2006. ?POLIQARP
1.0: Some technical aspects of a linguistic search
engine for large corpora?. Proceedings PALC 2005.
T. Brants. 2000. ?TnT-A Statistical Part-of-speech
Tagger?. Proceedings ANLP2000.
8
