Building the Croatian Morphological Lexicon
MDUNR7$?,?
Department of Linguistics, Faculty of
Philosophy, University of Zagreb
,YDQD/X?L?D
Zagreb, Croatia, HR-10000
marko.tadic@ffzg.hr
Sanja FULGOSI
Institute of Linguistics, Faculty of
Philosophy, University of Zagreb
,YDQD/X?L?D
Zagreb, Croatia, HR-10000
sanja.fulgosi@ffzg.hr
Abstract
The paper presents the work being done so
far on the building of the Croatian Morpho-
logical Lexicon (CML). It has been collec-
ted since 2002 in the Institute of Linguistics,
Faculty of Philosophy, University of Zagreb.
The CML is planned to have two sub-lexi-
cons: derivative/compositional and inflec-
tional, both produced by a generator. The re-
sult of generation is lexicon as two distinct
lists of generated combinations of morph-
emes and complete word-forms both with
additional data that can be used in further
processing. The inflectional component is
presented more in detail in the second part
of the paper. At the end, the several possible
applications of CML are discussed.
Introduction
Our aim was to make a model of Croatian mor-
phological system in the form of lexicon stored
in a database. The lexicon, named Croatian Mor-
phological Lexicon (CML), would include all
combinations of morphemes according to mor-
photactic rules and generated by two morpho-
logical generators.
1 Theoretical background
The very idea of generating all possible com-
binations of morphemes appeared in Halle
(1973) for the first time in the framework of
generative grammar. Although at that time it
seemed that morphology could be represented as
a compact subcomponent of the lexicon in the
generative grammar, that concept posed several
theoretical problems. The most severe one was
defining the criteria for filtering-out non-estab-
lished, yet possible combinations of morphemes.
In fact this very approach negated the compact-
ness of morphology since the derivative mor-
phology was separated from inflectional.
Later research in generative and lexical pho-
QRORJ\FILQ0LKDOMHYL?VHSDUDWHG
derivative subcomponent from inflectional even
more by introducing several layers where differ-
ent types of rules appeared in different contexts
(prefixation, suffixation, composition, inflec-
tion...). Not only rules but also the mode of their
application resulted in different patterning
schemes, particularly on two poles of that con-
tinuum of layers (rigidness of paradigms vs.
non-rigidness of derivative system, symmetricity
of paradigms vs. non-symmetricity of derivative
system, cyclic rules in derivation vs. non-cyclic
rules in inflection etc.).
Recently, there has been several contributions
that were aimed at modeling the morphological
systems of other Slavic languages with lexicons
like Vetulani (2000) for Polish, Kl?mova and
Kocek (2000) and particularly Osolsob  et al
(2002) for Czech as well as Rojc et al (2002) for
Slovenian.
Our idea of modeling the morphology of Croa-
tian was somewhere along that track but we
wanted to keep the model as simple as possible
and use the computational data from the research
already completed for Croatian
2 Structure of the CML
Already described concept of dividing a model
of the morphological system of Croatian was
kept along but in its simplified form i.e. con-
sisting of only two components:
1. derivation/composition: modeled as a list
of lexical and a list of derivative morphemes
with rules for their combining.1 A derivatio-
nal generator could produce all possible
combinations of lexical with derivative
morphemes regardless of their existence in
real texts. Each combination is not inde-
pendent combination of morphemes (it
equals the stem in traditional grammar), but
it serves as the input for the second compo-
nent. The cumulative result of generation of
all possible combinations on that level could
be called ?derivative capacity? of a language
VHH7DGL?
2. inflection: modeled as a list of generated
stems and a list of inflectional morphemes
with rules for their combining. The inflec-
tional generator produces the final word-
forms along the paradigms and with regard
to inflectional patterns for Croatian as de-
fined and described in detail in Tadi?

Each generated morpheme combination (from
both components) should be accompanied by
additional data which could give us the possibil-
ity to backtrack the generation or use that data
for further processing.
Each of the sub-lexicons of CML has different
format covering different linguistic units and
accompanying data.
2.1 Stem lexicon
For stem lexicon the format is still under con-
sideration but it could look like this:
SUR_GD_Y_D?_LFGDS

OV

V

V

1$I
where SURGDYD?LF (roughly: selleress-) is
generated combination of morphemes, GD is
lexical morpheme or root, S

OV

V

V

 is a deri-
vational pattern describing the morphotactic
ordering of morphemes. The S

, O, V

, V

 and
V

 could serve in database as pointers to the lists
of morphemes. The 1$I is a tag denoting nomen
agentis of feminine gender. This system of deri-
vational tags is still under construction and it
should be submitted to further discussion and
possible cross-Slavic-language examination and,
                                                     
1
 Composition in this case is treated as special variety
of derivation because the combination of two (or in
some cases more) lexical morphemes behaves like a
single lexical morpheme in further derivative process.
hopefully, some standardization as well. Having
in mind the closeness of Slavic languages, it
seems that some kind of common recommenda-
tion may be achieved at least at the very basic
level of unified list of derivational patterns and
general semantic categories which are, in some
languages more and in some less systematically,
represented by certain derivational affixes. In-
troducing additional semantic information to
that kind of lexicon could also be important
because overlapping of derivational and seman-
tic system is not always uniform and there is no
exception-free 1:1 mapping. This kind of re-
source could be of a help to lexicographers,
lexical semanticians, terminologists etc.
2.2 Inflectional lexicon
Unlike derivation, for inflection there is already
established standard for inflectional lexicon and
tag system in the form of MulTextEast v2 rec-
ommendation (Erjavec 2001) with definition for
Croatian dated from 1998.
 DEHFHGD1FIVQ
DEHFHGHDEHFHGD1FIVJ
DEHFHGLDEHFHGD1FIVG
DEHFHGXDEHFHGD1FIVD
DEHFHGRDEHFHGD1FIVY
DEHFHGLDEHFHGD1FIVO
DEHFHGRPDEHFHGD1FIVL
DEHFHGHDEHFHGD1FISQ
DEHFHGDDEHFHGD1FISJ
DEHFHGDPDDEHFHGD1FISG
DEHFHGHDEHFHGD1FISD
DEHFHGHDEHFHGD1FISY
DEHFHGDPDDEHFHGD1FISO
DEHFHGDPDDEHFHGD1FISL
 DEROLFLMD1FIVQ
DEROLFLMHDEROLFLMD1FIVJ
DEROLFLMLDEROLFLMD1FIVG
DEROLFLMXDEROLFLMD1FIVD
DEROLFLMRDEROLFLMD1FIVY
DEROLFLMLDEROLFLMD1FIVO
DEROLFLMRPDEROLFLMD1FIVL
DEROLFLMHDEROLFLMD1FISQ
DEROLFLMDDEROLFLMD1FISJ
DEROLFLMDPDDEROLFLMD1FISG
DEROLFLMHDEROLFLMD1FISD
DEROLFLMHDEROLFLMD1FISY
DEROLFLMDPDDEROLFLMD1FISO
DEROLFLMDPDDEROLFLMD1FISL
Sample from MTE conformant generated list of
word-forms for nouns abeceda and abolicija.
3 Inflectional generation
While the derivational generator remains to be
constructed, the inflectional generator for the
whole inflectional system was constructed and
GHVFULEHG LQ 7DGL?  ,W FRQVLVWV RI WKUHH
lists: lemmas (lexicon), endings, and transforma-
tions.
3.1 Lexicon
In the lexicon, lemmas (as headwords) are ac-
companied by minimal amount of data: only
stems and inflectional pattern number(s). Addi-
tional data, when needed, are gender and infor-
mation on singularia/pluralia tantum.
DEGLNDFLMDDEGLNDFLM
DEHFHGDDEHFHG
DEROLFLMDDEROLFLM
DEUD]LMDDEUD]LM
DGDSWDFLMDDGDSWDFLM
DGPLUDODGPLUDO
DGRUDFLMDDGRUDFLM
DGUHVDWDGUHVDW
DGYHQWL]DPDGYHQWL]P
DGYRNDWDGYRNDW
DGYRNDWXUDDGYRNDWXU
DIHUDDIHU
DILUPDFLMDDILUPDFLM
DIRUL]DPDIRUL]P
$IUL?DQLQ$IUL?DQ
Sample from the lexicon with lemma, stem and
inflectional pattern where [\] denotes the
number of pattern: [ represents declension, \
conjugation and ] comparison. In total there are
613 inflectional patterns where 404 patterns are
for nouns, 42 for adjectives, 12 for comparison
and 155 for verbs. Up to three different inflec-
tional patterns (or paradigms) of the same type
are allowed per verbal lemma because there are
verbs which can change its word-forms accord-
ing to different patterns. Up to four different
patterns are allowed for lemmas that are nouns
and adjectives because there are instances of
parallel word-forms with the same MSD. For
adjectives with comparison, [ and ] are both
obligatory.
In order to keep the model flat and easily acces-
sible for further linguistic refinement, no opti-
mization has been done from the computational
point of view.
3.2 List of endings
Endings are represented like ordered n-tuples
including morphosyntactic categories with their
exact values realizing at certain position in in-
flectional pattern. For substantives it looks like
this:
HQGLQJ SDWSDUQXPFDV!
where pat is pattern (1-404), par is paradigm (1-
4), num is number (1-2) and cas is case (1-7).
For adjectives it is a bit more complicated:
HQGLQJ SDWSDUJHQQXPFDV!
with pattern (1-42) and addition of gender (1-3).
For verbs the endings are defined like this:
HQGLQJ SDWWHQQXPSHUJHQ!
with pattern (1-155), tense (1-9) which includes
participle forms, and person/gender (1-3) with
person appearing in finite forms (tenses 2-5) and
gender in participles (6-7).
The comparison endings are defined with:
HQGLQJ SDWJUD!
with pattern (1-12) and grade (1-3).
Endings are distributed by types in different
tables which are being accessed by usage of
coordinates described in n-tuples.
3.3 List of transformations
The transformations are allowed only on stems
and are closely connected with inflectional pat-
terns. Precise classification of patterns according
to the phonological composition of the stems
enables the controlled context of application of
quite simple transformational rules and keeps
their number as low as 35 for the whole inflec-
tional system. The order of applying transfor-
mation rules is also strictly defined.
The lists of transformations are stored in tables,
which are isomorphous to the tables with end-
ings and are being accessed the same way. Since
the transformations of the stems are pattern and
ending dependent, they can be done before final
concatenation with endings.
This system of transformations, coupled with
precise classification of inflectional patterns,
covered all allomorphy of Croatian inflectional
stems including the most complicated cases (e.g.
verbs of 1st class).
4 Implementation
For generation of inflectional lexicon the head-
ZRUGOLVWRI$QL?Croatian dictionary has
been used. Each headword was associated with
inflectional pattern thus forming a lexicon with
ca 36.000 lemmas (18.019 substantives, 7735
verbs, 5504 adjectives, 64 pronouns, 6517 ad-
verbs, etc.) The periphrastic verbal tenses were
not being generated in whole but only their par-
ticiple parts. Also no reflexive pronouns were
included in generation of reflexive verbs so on
that level there is no distinction between non-
reflexive and reflexive verbs.2 The main reason
for exclusion of periphrastic tenses and reflexive
verb word-forms was the in the idea to use in-
flectional lexicon in initial POS tagging of
Croatian texts. Coping with this verbal word-
forms would complicate the task at this point.
The generation of word-forms yielded 171380
word-forms for nouns, 232276 word-forms for
verbs, 1207786 word-forms for adjectives, and
11706 word-forms for adverbs.
4.1 Usage
The fully generated inflectional lexicon is being
submitted to thorough inspection in order to
correct possible errors. It will be used in
POS/MSD tagging of Croatian National Corpus
(HNK).3 The subset of HNK of 1 million tokens
is composed and it will be matched with inflec-
tional lexicon. Since there is no data of that kind
for Croatian yet, in this way all possible MSD
readings at the unigram level of each token will
be made available. The ?inflectional weight? and
                                                     
2
 The idea to exclude the periphrastic part of the
verbal paradigm from inflection completely and to
treate it on different level i.e. syntactically may not
sound so utterly heretic at this point. Since Slavic
languages are more-or-less free order languages, the
position of auxiliary is sometimes far away from the
participle and this can only lead to inflectional
analysis which has to take in account the sentence
structure. This idea has been tacitly adopted in
producing the most of inflectional generators.
3
 See in Tadi?
?homographic weight? could be calculated for
each token giving additional data for further
processing. After (semi-)manual disambiguation
and correction, that corpus will be used as a
training corpus for a tagger.4
4.2 Availability
The inflectional lexicon of CML will be avail-
able for querying at the Croatian HLT web-por-
tal5 giving all word-forms of requested lemma.
Beside linguists and other researchers, it will be
useful to students of Croatian who want to find
or check the proper inflection of words. It will
be useful even to a wider public as a tool for
web search because the output will allow simple
link to all word-forms in web-search query win-
dow thus enabling the inflectionally sensitive
search of Croatian web-pages.
Sample window with results of querying CML
Conclusion
The paper presented the work done so far on
building the Croatian Morphological Lexicon.
While derivative sublexicon was covered only
                                                     
4
 See the results for Slovene in Erjavec et al (2000).
The adaptation of tagset in several iterations or levels
of complexity will probably be necessary.
5
 At http://www.hnk.ffzg.hr/jthj.
with theoretical discussion, which needs further
cross-Slavic languages refinement and possible
standardization, the inflectional sublexicon was
presented in detail. This sublexicon is
MULTEXT-East conformant and uses MSD tags
defined in the scope of that project. Several pos-
sible uses of inflectional sublexicon were also
suggested, among which the most widely useful
can be the possibility to use all word-forms of a
lemma in the web-search engine such as Google,
AltaVista etc.
Acknowledgements
The work on CML presented here has been done
in the frame of the i-project 2002-100 granted by
the Ministry of Science and Technology of the
Republic of Croatia.
References
Ani? 9  5MH?QLN KUYDWVNRJD MH]LND 1RYL
OLEHU=DJUHE