Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Computational Semantics, pages 305?309,
Tilburg, January 2009. c?2009 International Conference on Computational Semantics
Application of Cognitive Strategies to Chinese
Noun Classifier E-learning
Wei Ni, Helena Hong Gao*, and Shixiao Ouyang
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{helenagao}@ntu.edu.sg
1 Introduction
Linguistically, a noun classifier is a morpheme or word used to classify a
noun according to its inherent semantic features. Noun classifiers in Chi-
nese are obligatory as a category of its own and used to specify a noun when
it is used with a determiner or a numeral. In other words, classifiers are
never used independently. It must occur with a numeral (e.g., yi ?one?, er
?two?, san ?three?) and/or a determiner (e.g., zhe ?this?, nei ?that?), or
certain quantifiers (e.g., ji ?how many?, mei ?every?) before the noun. Such
a combination is referred to as a classifier phrase. Its basic construction can
be illustrated in the following schema:
(Determiner) + Numeral + Classifier + Noun
zhe san ben zidian
this three dictionary
The counterparts in English for the above Chinese classifier phrase are
?these three dictionaries?. The determiner zhe ?this? is not obligatory in a
classifier phrase. The numeral san ?three? marks the object zidian ?dictio-
nary? as is in the state of being plural. The classifier ben inserted between
the numeral and the noun is a classifier for bound materials, such as books,
dictionaries, and magazines.
2 Cognitive strategies: top-down vs bottom-up
Bilingual Chinese children and L2 learners of the Chinese language often
encounter difficulties in their learning of Chinese noun classifiers [2, 3, 5].
305
This is mainly due to multiple categorization of a noun referent, i.e., a single
entity may belong to more than one category, depending on the properties
we attribute to it rather than on its intrinsic ones [6]. We expect this obstacle
in noun classifier acquisition to be overcome more effectively if attention to
pragmatic discourse is given on a cognitive basis. In practice, however, the
acquisition is further cumbered by the conventional focus on sentence level
practice rather than on pragmatic level discourse in the learning process.
Recently a replication comparative study of Gao?s 2001 study was con-
ducted on Chinese noun classifier production between a group of Swedish-
Chinese bilingual children and a group of Swedish L2 learners [5]. Same
as the observation of the previous study, the noun classifier production by
the bilingual children was higher than that by the adult L2 learners. The
Swedish L2 learners tended to ignore noun classifiers? semantic and cogni-
tive meanings, and to evaluate noun classifiers as merely syntactic terms.
Unable to make a semantic association between a classifier and a noun, they
were inclined to rely on their knowledge of measure words in Swedish and
rote memory of classifiers. Their top-down pattern in noun classifier acqui-
sition limited their horizon in understanding the more complicated yet more
meaningful semantic interpretations of noun classifiers on a cognitive basis.
In contrast, the bilingual children did not tackle noun classifiers with
strong top-down expectations. Their acquisition of noun classifiers was
based on the categorization schemes built from their semantic and cogni-
tive understanding of Chinese. They proceeded with classifier learning very
conservatively, in a bottom-up manner that relied largely on input. Taking
into consideration the semantic complexity of the noun classifier system, the
bilingual children?s bottom-up approach is more recommended.
3 Application in noun classifier e-learning
We describe an e-learning approach to enhance L2 learners? acquisition of
Chinese noun classifiers. Developed in the software environment of File-
Maker Pro 8.5, the e-learning tool is established on a database with classes
of nouns and classifiers stored in individual records..
The records in the database could be organized according to the lexical
meanings of the words and categorized into ?nature?, ?humans & body
parts?, ?animals?, ?vegetables & fruits? and ?man-made objects?. Such a
categorization appears explicit, but its top-down approach fails to reveal
the cognitive mapping between the noun classifier and the noun referent.
The objective of the e-learning approach, on the other hand, is to guide L2
306
learners to build their categorization scheme from the noun referents? salient
semantic features, specified by their shape, size, thickness, length, function,
etc.
Therefore, in light of the recommended bottom-up approach, the e-
learning tool urges users to learn the salient external or functional features
of the noun referents in a case-by-case fashion. In this way they could better
understand the point that a noun classifier reflects the cognitive classifica-
tion of its associated noun referent. Each individual record is thus designed
in the following format. It contains the noun as one of its data entries,
and it also provides in other data entries information of the corresponding
noun classifier(s) and its description. Most importantly, the salient semantic
feature of the noun referent is decomposed and illustrated explicitly in an
independent data entry.
For instance, tiao is the correct noun classifier for ?a rainbow?, ?a leg?,
?a snake?, ?a cucumber? and ?a scarf?. To decide the appropriate noun
classifier that occurs in these phrases, L2 learners need to understand that
tiao reflects the longitudinal property of ?rainbow?, ?leg?, ?snake?, ?cu-
cumber? and ?scarf?, which is perceptually salient. Tiao is chosen since
it matches with the longitudinal attribute the five noun referents have in
common, despite that the intrinsic properties of the five objects vary, which
is illustrated in Table 1.
English Chinese classifier phrase Properties
equivalent numeral classifier noun cognitive intrinsic
a rainbow yi tiao caihong longitudinal nature
a leg yi tiao tui longitudinal humans
a snake yi tiao she longitudinal animals
a cucumber yi tiao huanggua longitudinal vegetables
a scarf yi tiao weijin longitudinal man-made
Table 1: A Selection of Classifier Phrases of tiao
Compared with noun classifiers with specific applications (e.g., tiao for
snakes and ben for books), other classifiers are commonly used with more
generalized sets of nouns. These general noun classifiers are more semanti-
cally complex, since they are inhabited with multi-layer meanings. It hence
requires deeper cognitive understanding to master them. Erbaugh examined
the acquisition order of noun classifiers and suggested learners acquire noun
classifiers specific to single items before they acquire those of generalized
307
sets, such as ge applicable to both animate and inanimate noun referents of
most kinds and zhi to nouns of body-parts of humans and animals as well
as man-made objects [1]. L2 learners are recommended to follow the same
bottom-up approach to acquire general noun classifiers. In the e-learning
environment L2 learners are exposed to a selection of classifier phrases with
general noun classifiers. Take zhi for example. It is associated with nouns
such as ?bird?, ?bear?, ?hand? and ?ear?. Regarding which noun classifier
is associated with these four nouns, animacy is the critical semantic feature
of these noun referents, which is analyzed in each record of the nouns.
Besides utilizing textual explanations, this e-learning tool will also de-
velop a computer-based model of noun classifier acquisition for automatic
noun-classifier association. By implementing Holland?s agent-based model
[4], we aim to include in our prototype 150 nouns and 12 noun classifiers as
two groups of interactive agents. To design a semantic interface between the
two types of agents in a computational perspective, a tag is attached to each
agent. Each tag is a pseudo-binary bit string of {0, 1, #}, representing the
semantic features of the agent. ?#? is known as the ?doesn?t care? symbol,
and is used to indicate that the corresponding semantic feature is not critical
for the formulation of the classifier phrase, even though the noun referent
owns such a feature.
The first simple model is illustrated as follows. In this model each tag
consists of 4 pseudo-binary bits. The tag ?11##? is assigned to the agent
(noun) ?snake?. By this we represent the noun referent?s longitudinal se-
mantic feature with the first two symbols ?11?. Despite the noun referent
also has the cognitive property of animacy which could be indicated by the
last two symbols, it is not of primary importance for the concern of classifier
phrase composition, and is hence denoted by ?##?. When it is compared
with the tag ?1100? of the agent (noun classifier) tiao, the matching score is
reported high. This indicates tiao is likely to occur in the classifier phrase
of ?snake?. In contrast, its matching score with the tag ?0011? of the agent
(noun classifier) zhi is reported low, which implies an undesirable match.
Further simulation tests are required to verify the robustness of the pro-
posed model, with a more systematic classification of the agent?s semantic
features, a larger number of inputs, and closer scrutiny on those marginally
acceptable classifier phrases.
308
Acknowledgement
Research grants to H. H. Gao from Nanyang Technological University sup-
ported preparation of this paper.
References
[1] M. S. Erbaugh. Taking stock: The development of chinese noun clas-
sifiers historically and in young children. In C. Craig, editor, Noun
Classes and Categorization. John Benjamins, Amsterdam and Philadel-
phia, 1986.
[2] H. Gao. Understanding the concept of noun classifiers in chinese - a
comparative study of the acquisition of chinese noun classifiers between
swedish adults and bilingual chinese children. In Proceedings of Human-
istdagarna 2001. Lund University Press, 2001.
[3] H. H. Gao, P. D. Zelazo, and B. Sigurd. The acquisition of chinese noun
classifiers in bilingual children and adults. In 2005 Biennial Meeting of
Society for Research in Child Development, Atlanta, Georgia, U.S.A.,
2005.
[4] J. H. Holland. Hidden Order: How adaption builds complexity. Addison-
Wesley, 1995.
[5] S. Ouyang and H. H. Gao. Understanding chinese classifier acquisition:
A comparative study. In Proceedings of the URECA@NTU 2007-08,
2008.
[6] S. Rovira. The cognitive perspective in teaching chinese measure words.
In The XV Biennial Conference of the EACS, Heidelberg, Germany,
2004.
309
Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Computational Semantics, pages 316?319,
Tilburg, January 2009. c?2009 International Conference on Computational Semantics
Developing a Computer-facilitated Tool for
Acquiring Near-synonyms in Chinese and English
Shixiao Ouyang, Helena Hong Gao*, and Soo Ngee Koh
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{helenagao}@ntu.edu.sg
1 Introduction
This paper is a multi-disciplinary study on cognitive linguistics, computational
linguistics and language acquisition. It focuses on application issues of meaning,
semantic structures and pragmatics to near-synonyms in Chinese and English
languages. The near-synonyms of physical action verbs (PA Verbs) can be
distinctive from each other in the way in which their actions are depicted, but
in terms of language acquisition, it is not an easy task to identify the nuances
among near-synonyms. Normal dictionaries do not explain the differentiae that
are crucial for the choice among near-synonyms, and research on how to tackle
the nuances among near-synonyms of PA Verbs has hardly been done. We
aim to develop a computer-facilitated language-learning tool for L2 learners to
master different sub-classes of PA Verbs in both Chinese and English.
We believe that all the fractions of the arm movement and actions are per-
ceptibly the base for linguistic expressions of human physical actions. By em-
phasizing the specifications of the manners of action as the crucial semantic
components embedded in the verb roots, Gao [1] provided a demonstration of
her decomposition method for the semantic properties of near-synonyms of PA
Verbs (see Table 1). Differences between the members of each subclass are
marked by different notions found in PA Verbs, such as Bodypart Contact,
Instrument, Force, Motion Direction, Speed, Effect, and Intention. These are
considered to be the most important ones in projecting the lexical semantic
prominence in the classifications of a word?s meaning components among its
near-synonyms.
We assume that to thoroughly understand the nuances between the near-
synonyms of PA Verbs, the learners need to understand the perspectives from
which the action is depicted linguistically. Gao?s [1] work on semantic decompo-
sition of near-synonyms of PA Verbs provides a theoretical guideline and solid
ground for designing an e-learning tool for L2 learners.
316
Table 1: Specification of Semantic Properties for Verbs of Touching [1]
2 Methodology
A near-synonym database needs to be set up first. To make the semantic rep-
resentations abstract enough for computing purpose, a rule based model will be
applied to quantify the semantic properties of each word. The following is a
rule showing how the semantic meaning of the word peng ?touch? is written in
relation to its other class members. The rule representation follows a standard-
ized English Machinese according to certain conventions in machine translation
[2].
The rule above can be rendered in words as follows: There is a Chinese
lexical item peng classified as a physical action verb (pav). It has three near-
synonyms (peng3 ) with 9 semantic property types categorized in relation to
its synonyms (smc(c, 9)). The detailed rule for the 9 categories begins with
the agent?s body part involvement (bp), followed by the instrument used in
performing the action (ins), degree of the force used (for), the motion direction
of the action (md), the speed of the motion action (sp), duration of the action
317
(du), possible patient object that the action is executed on (po), the subjective
agent?s possible intention to perform the action (int), and the possible effect
caused to the objective patient (eff ).
The numbers given in the brackets such as (3/3 ) or (2/3 ) and in the angle
brackets such as <3/3> or <1/3> are mathematical expressions where the
digits in the denominator in both ( ) and < > indicate the number of near-
synonyms in the class. The digit in the numerator in the bracket ( ) refers
to the number of the class members that can be labeled as bearing the same
semantic property category, while the digit in the numerator in < > refers to the
number of the class members that share a particular semantic property specified
in square brackets [ ]. For instance, the actions depicted by all three near-
synonyms of touching verbs involve hand contact as the body part involvement
and thus this part of rule is written as {bp<3/3>,[hand]}.
The content in { } has a conditional relation: If the number in the numerator
is 3 in brackets < >, then the property specified in [ ], such as [hand] in the body
part involvement, must be met by all its class members. If the class member
bears or shares more than one semantic properties within one category, the
alternatives are given with a semicolon in between the bracket { }, as typically
shown in the motion direction (md) of the action. In the beginning and at the
end of the rule representation, brief comments or reminders of the next step
rules are given after % as conventionally used in Prolog programming [2].
The second step is to calculate the average degree of uniqueness of each word
in each of the 9 categories specified in the rule, representing the relative degree
of easiness or difficulty to differentiate the word from the rest of the group
within the category. Algorithm for calculating the average degree of uniqueness
is proposed below:
Step 1: For each of the 9 semantic property categories, a priority check is
conducted first to look for the digit ?1? in the numerator in < >. If ?1? is found
in the numerator in at least one < >, go to Step 2; otherwise go to Step 3.
Step 2: In case of ?1? found in the numerator in a < >, the average degree
of uniqueness is marked as unit ?1? , the highest degree of the semantic repre-
sentation in revealing the uniqueness of its kind in terms of semantic categories.
Step 3: If ?1? is not found as a unique property within any category, assign
the value of the numerator in each < > as A
1
, A
2
,..., A
n
, where n indicates the
total number of properties that the word owns in each respective category. The
average degree of uniqueness represented by this category can be expressed in
the following formula: (1/n)
n
?
i=1
1/A
i
.
The average degree has a maximum value of 1. For those words whose degree
of uniqueness is lower than 1, the higher the degree of uniqueness, the lower the
value for n or A
i
. With respect to distinguishing themselves from the rest of the
class members, they have fewer competitors, leading to larger probabilities of
differentiating the near-synonyms by the corresponding semantic property. The
near-synonym database will contain one main database linked to a number of
sub-tables, which can be more or less than the 9 categories illustrated above,
depending on the number of semantic property categories that each class falls
318
into, or whether the specifications are specified enough to be able to discriminate
a particular class of near-synonyms under consideration in the future. Values
of uniqueness owned by each word found in each semantic property are stored
in the sub-tables. The average values of uniqueness owned by each word on per
category basis are recorded both in its sub-table and the main table.
In creating the algorithm for the interface, the steps are in reverse order of
building up the database. The total value of uniqueness computed will be com-
pared on per category basis. The category with the highest sum will be chosen
as the sub-table for the first attempt of differentiation. Similarly, a primary
check of the existence of value ?1? is conducted in order to give priority to the
category where most ?1?s are found. Only when no value ?1? is found in any
field could the arithmetic summation be carried out. Multiple choices questions
will be prompted to allow users to select one property from the category that
matches his/her context most closely. The number of the word(s) that match
such property will be reflected by the value of the numerator in the <> of the
chosen property. The algorithm will continue to search for the next category
with the highest degree of uniqueness among the remaining near-synonyms, until
only one word is selected from the class.
3 Conclusion
With a solid ground of linguistic analysis and application of rule based computa-
tional methodologies, the e-learning program provides advanced L2 learners with
an effective interface in acquiring the nuances among near-synonyms with more
intuitional and cognitive understanding. This computational system serves as
a good starting point for exploring e-teaching and e-learning tools for advanced
learners.
Acknowledgements
Research grants to H. H. Gao and President Research Scholarship to S. Ouyang
from Nanyang Technological University supported preparation of this paper.
References
[1] H. H. Gao. The physical foundation of the patterning of physical action
verbs. Lund, Sweden: Lund University Press, 2001.
[2] B. Sigurd and H. Gao. Outline of a computerized chinese grammar enabling
english and swedish translation. In Working Papers, volume 47, pages 181?
199. Lund University Press, 1999.
319
Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of the Lexicon (CogALex 2010), pages 56?65,
Beijing, August 2010
Computational Lexicography: A Feature-based Approach in Designing an E-dictionary of Chinese Classifiers  
Helena H. Gao Nanyang Technological University 
helenagao@ntu.edu.sg  
Abstract 
Chinese noun classifiers are obligatory as a category in association with nouns. Conventional dictionaries include classifiers as lexical entries but explanations given are very brief and thus hardly helpful for L2 learners. This paper presents a new design of an e-dictionary of Chinese classifiers. The design is based on both theoretical studies of Chinese classifiers and empirical studies of Chinese classifier acquisition by both children and adults. My main argument with regards to Chinese classifier acquisition is that cognitive strategies with a bottom-up approach are the key to the understanding of the complexity of classifier and noun associations. The noun-dependent semantic features of classifiers are evidence to support my argument. These features are categorically defined and stored in a separated database in an e-learning environment linked to the e-dictionary. The aim of making such a design is to provide a platform for L2 learners to explore and learn with a bottom-up approach the associations of classifiers with nouns. The computational agent-based model that automatically links noun features to that of classifiers is the technical part of the design that will be described in detail in the paper. Future development of the e-dictionary will be discussed as well.  
1 Introduction 
Noun classifiers are a typical feature of Chinese that distinguishes itself from many other languages. In simple terms, a classifier is a morpheme or word used to classify a noun according to its inherent semantic features. Noun classifiers in Chinese are obligatory as a category of its own and used to specify a noun when it is 
used with a determiner or a numeral. In other words, A Chinese classifier is never used independently. It must occur before a noun with a numeral (e.g., yi ?one?, liang ?two?, san ?three?) and/or a determiner (e.g., zhe ?this?, nei ?that?), or certain quantifiers (e.g., ji ?how many?, mei ?every?). Such a combination is referred to as a classifier phrase.  However, the definition of Chinese classifiers is not a simple one. There are different types of classifiers in terms of their semantic functions. Some of them carry the unique features of the Chinese language; others are representatives of classifier languages, and yet al of them have the grammatical functions of measure words, which are a universal category in all languages. Due to the complexity of classifier functions, different definitions and classifications have been found. However, generally speaking, classifiers refer to common properties of noun objects across domains and common relations of objects in the world, rather than to categories having to do solely with language-internal relations (Lucy, 1992). Some researchers take a functional approach and define Chinese classifiers based on their grammatical functions. For example, Chao (1968) divides classifiers into nine categories. They are ?classifiers or individual measures?, ?classifiers associated with v-o?, ?group measures?, ?partitive measures?, ?container measures?, ?temporary measures?, ?standard measures?, ?quasi-measures or autonomous measures?, and ?measures for verbs of action?. From his classification we can see that he does not distinguish the concept of a classifier from that of a measure word. The advantage of such a classification is its inclusion of all the three types of classifiers mentioned above and being able to define them all as measure words, but the disadvantage is that those that are Chinese specific noun classifiers are all treated under the universal concept of measure words. This may be easy for learners to understand the grammatical functions of Chinese classifiers but the ontological nature of noun objects that classifiers are associated with are 
56
largely ignored. In recent decades, researchers have started to take a cognitive approach to understand the links between nouns and classifiers and found it necessary to make a distinction between classifiers and measure words. For instance, Tai & Wang (1990:38) state that ?A classifier categorizes a class of nouns by picking out some salient perceptual properties, either physically or functionally based, which are permanently associated with entities named by the class of nouns; a measure word does not categorize but denotes the quantity of the entity named by a noun. ? This definition makes a clear distinction between a classifier and a measure word, which is assumed to be helpful for L2 learners to have a better understanding of the cognitive basis of a classifier system. This is because there are no measure words in English or other European languages that can also function as classifiers in the same sense as Chinese classifiers. A recent study done by Gao (2010) has shown that Swedish adult learners of Chinese had a lower proficiency in classifier application than their general Chinese proficiency and that most of them were not aware of the difference between the concept of a classifier and that of a measure word.  Other previous studies on classifiers include descriptive and experimental studies of classifier systems of natural languages. For example, some descriptive studies make typological surveys of classifier systems in different languages (e.g. Allan, 1977; Lyons, 1977; Goddard, 1998); others provide semantic analysis of classifiers and their associated nouns (e.g. Downing, 1993; Huang & Ahrens, 2003; Matsumoto, 1993), and some also propose that there is an ontological base on which classifiers and nouns are associated with (Sowa 2000; Philpot et al, 2003; Nichols et al, 2005).    Experimental studies using computer technology to apply findings of classifier knowledge to natural language processing (NLP) have provided a new approach for the semantic analysis of classifiers (e.g. Nirenburg & Raskin, 2004; Hwang et al, 2007, Quek, 2010) and  for computer-assisted language learning (e.g. Guo & Zhong, 2005). However, no e-learning systems developed so far are found to be able to guide second language learners to use the semantic 
properties to understand the links between classifiers and their associated nouns.  The emergence of computer-assisted language learning (CALL) provides language learners with a user-friendly and flexible e-learning tool. CALL incorporates technology into the language learning process and also applies itself across a broad spectrum of teaching styles, textbooks, and courses (Donaldson & Haggstrom, 2006). Its bidirectional and individualized features makes it possible for learners to use it effectively to improve different aspects of language skills (e.g. Mallon 2006; Chang et al, 2008).  My idea of designing the e-dictionary of Chinese classifiers is similar to that of CALL. Empirical studies have shown that classifier learning is a big challenge for L2 learners of Chinese. My argument with regards to Chinese classifier acquisition is that cognitive strategies with a bottom-up approach are the key to the understanding of the complexity of classifier and noun associations. Therefore, the design of the e-dictionary has a focus on guiding learners to explore the cognitive foundations of classifier-noun relations. The e-learning system implemented in the e-dictionary is designed to promote self-paced accelerated learning. It consists of a database of the decomposed semantic features of classifiers and their associated nouns. These well-defined unique and non-unique features will help learners to take a cognitive approach to explore case by case the matched pairs of classifiers and nouns. Currently the e-dictionary has included 168 noun classifiers and 680 nouns, of which 80 classifiers and 560 nouns have been analysed and entered into the e-learning database. My aim is to define and include all Chinese classifiers and their associated nouns1 and eventually link them to the e-learning system.  
2 Multi-categorization of Classifiers 
In cognitive linguistics, categories are defined by groups of features and relationships within a same family. From this viewpoint, the                                                            1 Eleven classifier dictionaries are consulted (see References). The number of classifiers listed in them ranges from 143 to 422 and the number of associated nouns is from 388 to 8609. However, if we follow Tai and Wang?s (1990) definition of classifiers, 178 of them are true classifiers.  
57
occurrence of a noun with a particular classifier is dependent upon the categorical features of both nouns and classifiers. However, the internal semantic network of categories may be ambiguous due to historical and social factors, which makes categorization dependent on not only noun referents? intrinsic properties but also their functional and human perceptual ones. In other words, classifier and noun associations encode as well human cognitive understandings of the real world entities. As a result, classifiers are found to be able to link nouns cross-categorically. That is, one single classifier can associate itself with a number of nouns from different noun categories and at the same time one single noun from certain categories can be associated with not one but two classifiers. This multiple-categorization nature of classifiers complicates the classification of classifiers and nouns for the purpose of providing an effective learning strategy. It is also virtually impossible for linguists to build a meta-theory for a systematic organization of any clear logical classifier-noun categories and thus hard for lexicographers to find an effective way to illustrate the semantic connections between classifiers and nouns. However, one thing we are clear about is that the main obstacles in classifier acquisition are that the inhabited meaning associations in the nature of classifiers are opaque and that the complex classifier associations with nouns have caused noun categorizations to be linguistically unconventional. Yet, from a cognitive viewpoint, these associations and categorizations can provide cognitive motivations to learners if we can provide a learning tool that allows them to pay attention to the pragmatic use of classifiers on a cognitive basis. 
3 Semantic Decomposition of Classifiers and Nouns 
Table 1 is a demonstration of the semantic features of some most commonly used noun classifiers and their associated nouns. A total of 168 classifiers are collected and sorted out according to the number of noun categories each classifier is associated with. One special feature of this dictionary design is that the classifiers? associated nouns are grouped into categories based on the real-world entities as noun 
referents. Currently I have defined the following 11 categories in the e-dictionary:  ?nature, humans & body parts?, ?animals?, ?vegetables & fruits?, ?man-made objects?, ?buildings?, ?clothing?, ?food?, ?furniture?, ?tools? and ?vehicles?. A hierarchy of noun classifiers is built up according to the number of noun categories they enter into. For instance, the classifier liang occurs only in the ?vehicles? category, (e.g. car, lorry, bicycle, etc.). Out of the 168 classifiers, 149 occur in fewer than 3 noun categories. The cognitive mapping between these 149 classifiers and their associated nouns are straightforward. Hence it is relatively easy for users to quickly have a big picture of how a classifier is associated with certain type(s) of nouns. For the rest of 19 classifiers listed in Table 1, each occurs in at least 3 noun categories. At the current stage my work focuses on individual noun classifiers; the other types of classifiers will be added in the future when more people are involved in the project. In the e-learning part of the dictionary, I temporarily exclude the general classifier ge because cognitively it is not assumed to be a difficult one to learn. Through semantic decomposition, the cognitive mapping between a classifier and its associated nouns is revealed. Take the classifier tiao for example. It is associated with nouns such as rainbow, leg, snake, cucumber, road, scarf, potato chip, boat and necklace, which are from 9 of the 11 noun categories listed above. Despite of the different categories they belong to, the 9 nouns share one same cognitive property ? the shape of the noun referents that is defined as ?longitudinal?. This shows that the classifier tiao is inhabited with this semantic feature as a cognitive basis and links itself to the nouns accordingly. Similarly, the classifier gen is connected to the nouns such as stick, bone, banana, pillar, sausage, needle, and ribbon that belong to 7 noun categories respectively. These nouns possess the same ?longitudinal? feature as tiao. This shows that extracting one same feature from gen and tiao is not helpful enough for learners to understand the difference between the two classifiers, though classifying nouns into categories can constrain the interference to learners to some extent. What needs to be carried 
58
out is to define each noun with a unique feature of its own, no matter whether they are from its lexical semantic meanings, pragmatic functions, or human perceptions. For instance, besides ?longitudinal?, ?for supporting walking? is added as a feature to stick, ?a piece of human skeleton? to bone, ?turns from green to yellow when ripe? to banana, ?one end stuck to the ground? to pillar, etc. More are needed until finally each noun is distinguished from other nouns that are associated with the same classifier. These feature extractions and definitions are the core part of the database for the e-learning tool linked to the e-dictionary.  
4. Methodology 
4.1. Application of cognitive strategies in noun classifier acquisition  In this section we describe an approach that can enhance the practical use of the classifier dictionary. Developed in the software environment of FileMaker Pro 8.5 (see Figure 2), the dictionary is established within a database system. Categorical records created as data files are used to store the associated nouns. The records created so far include 11 categories of nouns described in Section 3. Such a categorization appears explicit, but its top-down approach fails to reveal the feature-based mapping between a classifier and its associated nouns. However, the e-learning part of the dictionary can guide learners to search for correct classifier and noun pairs by looking for the defined features of the noun referents in a different database, firstly from those broadly defined as ?animacy?, ?shape?, ?size?, ?thickness?, ?length?, ?function?, etc., to those specific ones extracted from each particular noun referent. With such a bottom-up approach, the e-dictionary allows users to learn the particular interrelated features of a classifier and its associated noun referents in a case-by-case fashion. In this way, learners can better understand the point that a classifier reflects the cognitive classification of its associated noun referents. Each individual record thus contains both general and specific information of a classifier and its associated nouns as data entries. The features decomposed from the noun 
referents are defined and recorded as independent data entries linked to the e-learning tool. For instance, if a learner wants to know which classifier is the correct one for boat, he can enter the word  boat, finds its category as ?vehicles?, choose its shape as ?longitudinal?. Then, tiao should automatically pop up in this case because boat is the only noun referent from the ?vehicles? category (see Table 2). In other cases where there are two or more items that are featured as ?longitudinal?, the learner will be guided to look for a more specific or unique feature with a few more clicks on the users? interface. The e-learning environment in the dictionary also provides learners the noun-classifier phrases that are commonly used but they may not be easy for learners to acquire. Take the noun classifier zhi for example. It is associated with noun referents that belong to ?animals and body-parts?, and ?man-made objects?, such as bird, hand, pen, etc. The unique perceptual features of these noun referents are identified and built into the e-learning system so that users can click different categories in the interface to make particular associations as long as they have some general knowledge of the entities, such as their functions and perceptual features, etc.  
4.2 Implementation of Agent-based Model in Classifier E-learning 
The e-learning tool in our classifier e-dictionary is targeted for automatic classifier-noun associations. By adopting an agent-based model (Holland, 1995), we2 have developed a classifier-noun network for learners to learn step by step classifier phrases. Included in the prototype model will be nouns and classifiers, divided into two groups of agents. To design a semantic interface between the two types of agents with a computational approach, a tag is attached to each agent. The tags are of opposite polarity, one to a noun, and the other to a classifier. Each tag is a pseudo-binary-bit string of {0, 1, #}, where ?#? is the ?doesn?t care? symbol. The position a symbol occupies in the string corresponds to a particular semantic feature of the agent, with ?#?                                                            2 Acknowledgements to Ni Wei my research assistant for his contributions to the technical experiment and grants from Nanyang Technological University that supported preparation of this paper.  
59
indicating that the corresponding feature is not critical for the formulation of the classifier phrase, even though the noun referent owns such a feature. When a noun agent meets a classifier agent, we line up the two tags and match the digits in one string with those in the other position by position. To report a match score at the end of this comparison, there are three match rules to follow: (i) it scores 1 given there is a match between two ?1?s or between two ?0?s; (ii) it scores 0 given there is a match between a ?1? and a ?#? or a ?0? and a ?#? or between two ?#?s; (iii) it scores -1 given there is a match between a ?1? and a ?0?. The aggregate match score indicates the likeliness of a correct classifier phrase with the involved classifier and the noun. More specifically, in this model each tag consists of 4 pseudo-binary bits. Out of the noun?s many semantic features, let?s selectively represent two of them: the first feature with the first two symbols, and the second with the last two. For example, a tag ?1100? is assigned to the agent (noun) leg to represent the noun?s features defined as ?longitudinal? and ?body-part? respectively. In this case, ?longitudinal? might be considered as the most salient feature of leg with regards to the selection of a classifier. Hence, it is represented by ?11?. On the other hand, if ?longitudinal? is by no means an external or internal feature of the associated noun referent, the symbols at the corresponding positions would be ?00?. Other possible combinations of symbols such as ?01? and ?10? are reserved for fuzzy states, which are associated with marginally accepted classifier phrases.  Besides, the noun referent leg also has a ?body-part? property listed, but it is not of primary importance for finding its classifier match. Therefore, it is represented by ?##? at the last two string positions, rather than explicitly indicated by any of the four combinations mentioned above.  We assign the tags to classifier agents in a similar way. For instance, ?11##? may be assigned to the classifier tiao, due to the fact that tiao often occurs in a classifier phrase with nouns defined as having ?longitudinal? features. On the other hand, ?##11? may be assigned to the noun classifier zhi, which is commonly applied to noun referents of body-part. 
Regarding the agent?s interaction with those agents of classifiers, when the tag ?1100? of leg is compared with the tag ?11##? of the agent tiao, the match score is 1+1+0+0 = 2. In contrast, its match score with the tag ?##11? of the agent zhi is reported as 0+0+0+0 = -2. The match score 2 indicates tiao is more likely to be linked to leg, and the match score -2 implies an undesirable match between leg and zhi. It is noteworthy, however, that if a user assigns ?1111? to leg, they will obtain a match score of 2 (0+0+1+1) with zhi. They will hence conclude that, beside tiao, zhi is another correct classifier for leg. In addition, we include the defined features of nouns and classifiers as a group of interactive agents. This group is designed to facilitate the learning process from learner?s perspective. Take L2 learners for example. First they may learn that tiao is the correct classifier for leg because the noun referent of leg has the longitudinal attribute. Next, they tend to look for other nouns with the longitudinal feature, such as necklace and snake, and to verify whether tiao is also the correct classifier for these nouns. By establishing the mapping between the defined features of nouns and classifiers, the agent-based model explicitly shows learners the possible connections between these groups of agents.  Among the semantic features, some are defined as unique features which distinguish their corresponding nouns from the rest of the nouns? group. For instance, we may define ?chained jewel? as the unique feature of a necklace, and ?limbless reptile, some of which produce venom? as that of a snake (see Figure 1). We assign two kinds of tags respectively, one for non-unique feature agents and the other for unique feature agents. Each non-unique feature agent is attached with an adhesion tag (Holland, 1995). This adhesion tag provides the possibility of forming multi-feature agent aggregates with individual unique feature agents. On the other hand, each unique semantic feature is attached with a two-segment tag. The first segment plays the same role as the classifier/noun tag, which controls the agent?s interaction with agents of other groups, i.e. nouns and noun classifiers. The second segment functions simply as an adhesion tag. To decide whether to form a multi-feature agent aggregate, we can match a non-unique feature agent?s adhesion tag and the second 
60
segment of a unique feature agent?s tag. The match score is calculated in a similar way with that between noun?s agents and classifier?s agents. To simplify the discussion, we assume that adhesion only occurs between one unique feature agent and one or more non-unique feature agents. In other words, adhesion does not occur between either two unique feature agents or two non-unique feature agents. To explicitly show the cognitive mapping between classifiers/nouns and their features, we use a collection of condition/action if-then rules (Holland, 1995). In our model, both the condition and the action are linguistic variables, which are in turn represented by pseudo-binary-bit strings. The rules represent the interconnection among the agent group of classifiers, the agent group of nouns, and the group of defined features. For instance, the same noun classifier tiao occurs in the classifier phrase yi tiao xianglian ?a necklace?. Let ?, ? and ? respectively denote the features of ?chained jewel?, ?man-made?, and ?longitudinal?, where ? is the unique feature to identify the noun referent of necklace. As discussed previously, the individual features 
?, ?, and ? can form a multi-feature agent aggregate, which we denote as ???. The if-then Rule 1 can be implemented as:  Rule 1: {If (???) Then (necklace)}.   Following the tag interaction approach discussed previously in this section, Rule 2 can be implemented to reflect the inter-agent communication between the noun and its classifier:  Rule 2: {If (necklace) Then (tiao)}.   Based on these two rules, Rule 3 can be implemented as   Rule 3: {If (???) Then (tiao)}.   Note that Rule 3 has the same input (condition) with Rule 1 and the same output (action) with Rule 2. Rule 1 outputs its action as a message, which is subsequently received by Rule 2 as its condition. This is an example of transitivity, a property of the rule-based network. The condition and action part in each of the three 
rules could also be exchanged to implement three inverse rules. Now let?s take a look at the noun snake and its classifier tiao. Given that ? represents ?animate? and ? represents ?limbless reptile, some of which produce venom?, we can retrieve 
?, ?, ? from the features? group and form them as another multi-feature agent aggregate as 
???. Here ? is the unique feature of snake. We add another three if-then rules concerned with snake and tiao as follows:  Rule 4: {If (???) Then (snake)}; Rule 5: {If (snake) Then (tiao)}; Rule 6: {If (???) Then (tiao)}.  So far only multi-feature agent aggregate, rather than single feature agents are used as conditions. It is also noteworthy that non-unique feature agents are incapable of interacting directly with noun agents or classifier agents, since their adhesion tags cannot be matched with the classifier/noun tags. The property of transitivity implies, however, that we can establish the mapping between nouns and non-unique feature agents indirectly. For example, we represent the relation between the noun necklace and the unique feature agent ? ?chained jewel? by Rule 7 as follows:  Rule 7: {If (necklace) Then (?)}  We also represent the relation between the noun snake and the unique feature agent ? ?limbless reptile, some of which produce venom? by Rule 8 as follows:  Rule 8: {If (snake) Then (?)}  Either ? or ? is related with the non-unique feature agent ? ?longitudinal?, which could be represented by Rule 9 & 10.  Rule 9: {If (?) Then (?)} Rule 10: {If (?) Then (?)}  The mapping between necklace/snake and the non-unique feature agent ? ?longitudinal? could then be implemented by Rule 11 & 12.  
61
Rule 11: {If (necklace) Then (?)} Rule 12: {If (snake) Then (?)}  In Rule 11 and 12, the noun is taken as the input and the non-unique semantic feature as the output. By swapping the two kinds of agents? roles in the message-processing rules, we may inversely implement Rule 13 by taking the non-unique feature as the input and the noun as the output. If a learner chooses ? as the single input agent, two possible outputs pop up for his/her selection.  Rule 13: {If (?) Then (necklace or snake)}  More rules could be added in the classifier network by selecting different agents from the three groups in a similar way as we implement Rule 1-13. In this way the if-then rule-based network explicitly shows the cognitive mapping between the classifiers and their associated nouns. Learners will find out the association between the target words and their features, which are essential for their classifier acquisition.  So far we have tested some commonly used classifiers and their associated nouns selected from the e-dictionary and tried within the agent-based model. The automatic matching is successful, though more pairs need to be tested.   
5. Conclusion 
This paper presents a feature-based approach in designing a classifier e-dictionary with an e-learning environment created for learners to use cognitive strategies to explore and learn the classifier phrases.  The current dictionary is based on a database with classes of nouns (11 classes at present) and classifiers (168 added) that are stored as individual records. The records are not organized according to the lexical meanings of the words. Instead, the classification scheme is based on the noun referents? semantic and salient external or functional features. The objective of the design is to use such features to set up a classifier network that can automatically associate all possible nouns. A computer-based model with such a design is expected to show learners of Chinese the cognitive base of linguistic combinations. The proposed agent-based model uses the match 
between pseudo-binary-bit strings to indicate the probability of interactions between agents. It hence predicts how likely a classifier and a noun occurs in a classifier phrase. The relations among the agent groups are shown within the framework of the if-then rule-based network. Learners can explore case by case, when using the dictionary?s e-learning function, the classifier and noun associations and the defined features that the associations are based on. The future task is to include the rest of the classifiers and all possible associated nouns. Linguistically, a challenge to carry out the task would be the definitions of the unique features of the noun referents and their classifiers that have fuzzy boundaries. Technically, the challenge would be the solution to making perfect matches of those cases where one classifier agent as input is expected to link automatically a number of noun agents as output, which should follow a step-by-step procedure that is interesting and effective from learners? perspective.  
References 
Adams, Karen L., and Nancy Faires Conklin. 1973. Toward A Theory Of Natural Classification. Papers from the Ninth Regional Meeting of the Chicago Linguistic Society, Univeristy of Chicago, 1-10. 
Allan, Keith. 1977. Classifiers. Language, 53(2), 285?311. 
Chang, Yu-Chia, Jason S. Chang, Hao-Jan Chen, and Hsien-Chin Liou. 2008. An Automatic Collocation Writing Assistant for Taiwanese EFL Learners: A Case of Corpus-based NLP Technology. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 21(3), 283-299 
Chao, Yuen Ren. 1968. A Grammar of Spoken Chinese. University of California Press. 
Donaldson, Randall P., and Margaret A. Haggstrom. 2006. Changing Language Education Through CALL. Routledge. 
Downing, Pamela. 1993. Pragmatic and Semantic Constraints on Numeral Quantifier Position in Japanese. Linguistics, 29, 65?93. 
Gao, H. H. (2010 to appear). A Study of the Swedish Speakers? Learning of Chinese 
62
Classifiers. Nordic Journal of Linguistics. Special Issue, Vol. 33. 
Goddard, Cliff. 1998. Semantic Analysis: A Practical Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Guo, Hui., and Huayan Zhong. 2005. Chinese Classifier Assignment Using SVMs. Paper presented at the 4th SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Processing, Jeju Island, pp. 25?31. 
Holland, John. H. 1995. Hidden Order: How Adaption Builds Complexity. Addison-Wesley. 
Huang, Chu-Ren, and Ahrens, Katherine. 2003. Individuals, Kinds and Events: Classifier Coercion of Nouns. Language Sciences, 25, 353?373 
Hwang, Soonhee, Ae-sun Yoon, and Hyuk-Chul Kwon. 2008. Semantic Representation of Korean Numeral Classifier and Its Ontology Building for HLT Applications. Language Resources and Evaluation, 42, 151?172. 
Lyons, John. 1977. Semantics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Mallon, Adrian. 2006. ELingua Latina: Designing a Classical-Language E-Learning Resource. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 19(4), 373-387. 
Matsumoto, Yo. 1993. Japanese Numeral Classifiers: A Study Of Semantic Categories and Lexical Organization. Linguistics, 31(4), 667?713. 
Nichols, Eric, Francis Bond, and Daniel Flickinger. 2005. Robust Ontology Acquisition from Machine-Readable Dictionaries. Paper Presented at the 19th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Edinburgh, pp. 1111?1116. 
Nirenburg, Sergei, and Victor Raskin. 2004. Ontological Semantics. Cambridge: MIT Press. 
Philpot, Andrew G., Michael Fleischman, and Eduard H. Hovy. 2003. Semi-automatic Construction of A General Purposeontology. 
Paper Presented at the International Lisp Conference, New York, pp. 1?8. 
Quek, See Ling. 2010. A Diachronic Semantic Study of the Two Collocations: ?Tiao + Ming? and ?Tiao + Xinwen?. The 10th Chinese Lexical Semantics workshop (CLSW2010), 21-23 May, 2010. Soochow University, China. 
Sowa, John. F. 2000. Knowledge Representation. Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks Cole Publishing Co. 
Tai, James H-Y., and Lianqing Wang. 1990. A Semantic Study of the Classifier Tiao. Journal of the Chinese Language Teachers Association, 25.1: 35-56.  
 
Classifier Dictionaries Consulted  
???????????????????
?????1988? 
???????????????????
??????1987? 
???????????????????
??????2002? 
????????????; ???????
?????2003? 
???????????????????
??1993? 
???????????????????
???2001? 
???????????????????
??????????????1989? 
???????????????????
????????1999? 
???????????????????
???????????1991? 
???????????????????
???????????2003? 
???????????????????
??????????2002?    
63
Classifier in Chinese 
Classifier  No. of categories the classifier occurs with Examples of nouns the classifier occurs with ? tiao 9 (nature, humans & body parts, animals, vegetables & fruits, buildings, clothing, food, vehicles, other man-made objects) 
rainbow, leg, snake, cucumber, road, scarf, potato chip, boat, necklace ? gen 7 (nature, humans & body parts, vegetables & fruits, buildings, food, tools, other man-made objects) stick, bone, banana, pillar, sausage, needle, ribbon ? kuai 6 (nature, humans & body parts, clothing, food, tools, other man-made objects) stone, scar, handkerchief, candy, eraser, soap ? ceng 5 (nature, humans & body parts, building, clothing, other man-made objects) wave/fog, skin, building storey, curtain, paper ? zhang 5 (humans & body parts, food, furniture, tool, other man-made objects) mouth, pancake, bed, bow, map ? zhi 5 (humans & body parts, animal, clothing, vehicle, other man-made objects) ear, tiger, sock, sailing boat, watch ? li 4 (nature, vegetables & fruits, food, other man-made objects) sand, cherry, rice, sleeping tablet ? duan 4 (nature, vegetables & fruits, building, other man-made objects) wood, lotus root, city wall, iron wire ? kou 4 (humans & body parts, animal, tools, other man-made objects) person(people), pig, sword, well ? mian 4 (buildings, tools, furniture, other man-made objects) wall, drum, mirror, flag ? jie 4 (building, food, tool, vehicle) chimney, sugarcane, battery, railway carriage ? dao 3 (nature, humans & body parts, building) lightening, eyebow, dam ? di 3 (nature, humans & body parts, other man-made objects) water/rain, blood, ink ? jian 3 (clothing, tools, other man-made objects) shirt, (music) instrument, toy ? ba 3 (furniture, tools, other man-made objects) chair, knife, cello ? jie 3 (nature, tools, other man-made objects) rope, pencil, pipe ? ke 3 (nature, humans & body parts, other man-made objects) star, tooth, artillery shell ? pian 3 (nature, food, other man-made objects) leaf, loaf, tablet ? zhi 3 (nature, tools, other man-made objects) rose, pen, arrow/rifle      Table 1. A Selection of classifiers sorted by how many noun categories they are associated with   
64
 Classifier phrase in Chinese Properties English equivalent of Chinese classifier phrase  numeral classifier noun cognitive intrinsic a rainbow yi tiao caihong longitudinal nature a leg yi tiao tui longitudinal human a snake yi tiao she longitudinal animal a cucumber yi tiao huanggua longitudinal vegetable a road yi tiao lu longitudinal building 
a scarf yi tiao weijin longitudinal clothing 
a potato chip yi tiao shutiao longitudinal food 
a boat yi tiao Chuan longitudinal vehicle 
a scarf yi tiao weijin longitudinal man-made  Table 2. A Selection of noun-classifier phrases of tiao.   
  Figure 1. Mapping among the tiers of classifiers, nouns, and defined features.   
  Figure 2. A display of the database in the e-learning environment 
65
