Proceedings of the EACL 2009 Workshop on Language Technology and Resources for Cultural Heritage,
Social Sciences, Humanities, and Education ?LaTeCH ? SHELT&R 2009, pages 35?42,
Athens, Greece, 30 March 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
A web-enabled and speech-enhanced parallel corpus 
of Greek - Bulgarian cultural texts 
 
 
Voula Giouli 
Institute for Language & Speech 
Processing Athens, Greece 
voula@ilsp.gr 
Nikos Glaros 
Institute for Language & Speech 
Processing Athens, Greece 
nglaros@ilsp.gr 
 
Kiril Simov 
Institute for Parallel Processing, 
BAS, Sofia, Bulgaria 
kivs@bultreebank.or 
Petya Osenova 
Institute for Parallel Processing, 
BAS, Sofia, Bulgaria 
petya@bultreebank.org 
 
Abstract 
This paper reports on completed work carried 
out in the framework of an EU-funded project 
aimed at (a) developing a bilingual collection 
of cultural texts in Greek and Bulgarian, (b) 
creating a number of accompanying resources 
that will facilitate study of the primary texts 
across languages, and (c) integrating a system 
which aims to provide web-enabled and 
speech-enhanced access to digitized bilingual 
Cultural Heritage resources. This simple user 
interface, which incorporates advanced search 
mechanisms, also offers innovative accessibil-
ity for visually impaired Greek and Bulgarian 
users. The rationale behind the work (and the 
relative resource) was to promote the com-
parative study of the cultural heritage of the 
two countries. 
1 Introduction 
The document describes a bilingual Greek (EL) 
and Bulgarian (BG) collection of literary and 
folklore texts along with the metadata that were 
deemed necessary for the efficient management 
and retrieval of the textual data. Section 2 out-
lines the project aims that guided selection and 
annotation of the texts, whereas Section 3 pre-
sents the primary data that comprise the bilingual 
textual collection and the methodology adopted 
for collecting them. Section 4 elaborates on the 
metadata scheme that has been implemented to 
describe the primary data and the linguistic anno-
tation tailored to facilitate search and retrieval at 
the document, phrase or word level. This scheme 
is compliant to widely accepted standards so as 
to ensure reusability of the resource at hand. Sec-
tion 5 presents the Language Technologies (LT) 
deployed in the project elaborating on the Greek 
and the Bulgarian text processing tools, and dis-
cusses the LT methods that have been (a) ex-
ploited in the course of the project to facilitate 
the web-interface construction and (b) integrated 
in the search and retrieval mechanisms to im-
prove the system performance. Finally, Section 6 
describes the main components of the web inter-
face and the way various features are exploited to 
facilitate users? access to the data. In the last sec-
tion, we present conclusions and future work. 
2 Project description 
The project aims at highlighting cultural re-
sources that, as of yet, remain non-exploited to 
their greatest extent, and at creating the neces-
sary infrastructure with the support of LT with a 
view to promoting the study of cultural heritage 
of the eligible neighboring areas and  raising 
awareness about their common cultural identity. 
To serve these objectives, the project had a con-
crete target, that is, the creation of a textual col-
lection and of accompanying material that would 
be appropriate for the promotion and study of the 
cultural heritage of the neighboring areas in 
Greece and Bulgaria (Thrace and the neighboring 
Smolyan, Blagoevgrad, Kardjali, Khaskovo ar-
eas), the focus being on literature, folklore and 
language. To this end, the main activities within 
the project life-cycle were to: 
? record and roadmap the literary production 
of the afore mentioned areas spanning from 
the 19th century till the present days along 
with written records on folk culture and folk-
tales from the eligible areas. These should 
form a pool of candidate texts from which 
35
the most appropriate for the project objec-
tives could be selected; 
? record and roadmap existing translations of 
literary works in both languages to serve for 
the creation of the parallel corpus; 
? select textual material representative of the 
two cultures, and thus, suitable for their 
comparative study; 
? digitize the selected (printed) material to a 
format suitable for long-term preservation; 
? collect meta-texts relevant to the selected 
literary and folklore texts, that is, texts about 
the literary works, biographies of the se-
lected authors, criticism, etc.; these comprise 
part of the accompanying material 
? document the data with any information 
deemed necessary for its preservation and 
exploitation, catering for their interrelation 
so as to highlight their common features and 
allow unified access to the whole set alng 
text types / genres and languages; 
? extract bilingual glossaries from the primary 
collection of literary and folklore texts also 
accounted for as accompanying material; the 
project caters for the extraction of EL and 
BG terms and names of Persons and Loca-
tions and their translation equivalents in the 
other language; 
? make the primary resource along with the 
accompanying material (meta-texts and glos-
saries) publicly available over the internet to 
all interested parties, ranging from the re-
search community to laypersons, school stu-
dents and people interested in finding out 
more about the particular areas; 
? facilitate access to the material that wouldn?t 
be hampered by users? computer literacy 
and/or language barriers. To cater for the lat-
ter, the web interface would be as simple as 
possible ? yet functional ? and the data 
should be available in both languages (Greek 
and Bulgarian) plus in English. 
3 The bilingual Greek ? Bulgarian Cul-
tural Corpus 
Along with the aforementioned lines, the col-
lection comprises parallel EL ? BG literary and 
folklore texts. The main specifications for the 
Greek - Bulgarian Cultural Corpus (GBCC) crea-
tion were: 
? to build a bilingual resource that could be 
used as a means to study cultural similarities 
and/or differences between the neighboring 
areas of Greece and Bulgaria the focus being 
on literature, folklore and folktales;  
? to provide a representative sample of (a) lit-
erature written by authors from Thrace -that 
is from the entire area of Thrace- or about 
Thrace, spanning between the 19th century - 
today, (b) folklore texts about Thrace, that 
would normally reflect cultural as well as 
linguistic elements either shared by the two 
people or unique to each culture, and (c) 
folktales and legends from Thrace, the latter 
being the intermediate between literature and 
folklore. 
In order to gather the candidate texts and au-
thors for such a collection we exploited both 
printed and digitized sources, i.e., (on-line and 
printed) anthologies of Bulgarian, Greek or Bal-
kan literature, digital archives, web resources and 
library material. The outcome of this extensive 
research was a wealth of literary works including 
titles by the most prominent authors in Bulgaria 
and Greece. The selection of the authors, who 
would finally participate in GBCC, was based on 
the following criteria: (a) author's impact to 
Greek or Bulgarian literature respectively; and 
(b) author's contribution to his county's folk 
study or other major sectors such as journalism 
and education.  
Additionally, to ensure corpus ?representa-
tiveness? to some extend, we tried to include the 
full range of the literary texts (poetry, fiction, 
short stories) and in proportion to the literary 
production with respect to the parameters of 
place, time and author. To this end, we think we 
have avoided biases and the corpus models all 
language varieties spoken in the areas and at dif-
ferent periods. 
Moreover, the "inner" content characteristics 
of texts were used as the basic criteria for text 
selection. To this end, we chose texts which 
demonstrate the two people's cultural similarities 
and affinity along with each author's most impor-
tant and representative works. Beyond the above, 
the availability of a translation in the other lan-
guage and IPR issues also influenced text selec-
tion. 
The collection of the primary data currently 
comprises of (135) literary works, (70) BG (Bul-
garian) and 65 EL (Greek). Moreover, (30) BG 
folk texts and 30 EL folk texts along with (25) 
BG folktales and 31 EL folktales were added in 
order to build a corpus as balanced as possible 
and representative of each country's culture. In 
terms of tokens, the corpus amounts to 700,000 
36
in total (circa 350,000 tokens per language): the 
literature part is about 550,000 tokens, whereas, 
the folklore and legend sub-corpus is about 
150,000 tokens. 
Moreover, to cater for the project requirement 
that the corpus should be bilingual, available 
translations of the primary EL ? BG literary 
works were also selected to form the parallel lit-
erary corpus. Additionally, an extensive transla-
tion work was also carried out by specialized 
translators where applicable (folklore texts and 
folktales). 
The collection covers EL and BG literary pro-
duction dating from the 19th century till the pre-
sent day, and also texts (both literary or folklore) 
that are written in the dialect(s) used in the eligi-
ble areas. This, in effect, is reflected in the lan-
guage varieties represented in the textual collec-
tion that range from contemporary to non-
contemporary, and from normal to dialectical or 
even mixed language. 
Finally, the collection of primary data was 
also coupled with accompanying material (con-
tent metadata) for each literary work (literary 
criticism) and for each author (biographical in-
formation, list of works, etc.). Along with all the 
above, texts about the common cultural elements 
were also included. 
4 Corpus Annotation 
After text selection, digitization and extended 
manual validation (where appropriate) were per-
formed. Normalization of the primary data was 
kept to a minimum so as to cater, for example, 
for the conversion from the Greek polytonic to 
the monotonic encoding system. Furthermore, to 
ensure efficient content handling and retrieval 
and also to facilitate access to the resource at 
hand via the platform that has been developed, 
metadata descriptions and linguistic annotations 
were added across two pillars: (a) indexing and 
retrieval, and (b) further facilitating the compara-
tive study of textual data. To this end, metadata 
descriptions and linguistic annotations compliant 
with internationally accepted standards were 
added to the raw material. The metadata scheme 
deployed in this project is compliant with inter-
nationally accredited standards with certain 
modifications that cater for the peculiarities of 
the data. 
More specifically, the metadata scheme im-
plemented in this project builds on XCES, the 
XML version of the Corpus Encoding Standard 
(XCES, http://www.cs.vassar.edu/XCES/ and 
CES, http://www.cs.vassar.edu/CES/CES1-
0.html), which has been proposed by EAGLES 
(http://www.ilc.cnr.it/EAGLES96/home.html) 
and is compliant with the specifications of the 
Text Encoding Initiative (http://www.tei-c.org, 
Text Encoding Initiative (TEI Guidelines for 
Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange). 
From the total number of elements proposed by 
these guidelines, the annotation of the parallel 
corpus at hand has been restricted to the recogni-
tion of structural units at the sentence level, 
which is the minimum level required for the 
alignment and term extraction processes. That 
means that the requirements of CES Level 1 con-
formance are met; as regards CES Level 2 the 
requirements (but not the recommendations) are 
also met, and from CES Level 3 requirements, 
annotation for sentence boundaries is met. 
Additionally, metadata elements have been 
deployed which encode information necessary 
for text indexing with respect to text title, author, 
publisher, publication date, etc. (bibliographical 
information) and for the classification of each 
text according to text type/genre and topic, the 
latter being applicable to folklore texts and folk 
tales. Classification of folklore texts is based on 
the widely accepted Aarne-Thompson classifica-
tion system (Aarne, 1961). 
To this end, to assure documentation com-
pleteness, and facilitate the inter-relation among 
primary data and the accompanying material (bi-
ographies, criticism, etc) the documentation 
scheme has been extended accordingly. The 
aforementioned metadata descriptions are kept 
separately from the data in an xml header that is 
to be deployed by the web interface for search 
and retrieval purposes. 
The external structural annotation (including 
text classification) of the corpus also adheres to 
the IMDI metadata scheme (IMDI, Metadata 
Elements for Session Descriptions, Version 
3.0.4, Sept. 2003). Adaptations proposed specifi-
cally concerning Written Language Resources 
have been taken into account. IMDI metadata 
elements for catalogue descriptions (IMDI, 
Metadata Elements for Catalogue Descriptions, 
Version 2.1, June 2001) were also taken into ac-
count to render the corpus compatible with exist-
ing formalisms (ELRA, and LDC). This type of 
metadata descriptions was added manually to the 
texts. 
To further enhance the capabili-
ties/functionalities of the final application, ren-
dering, thus the collection a useful resource to 
prospective users and researchers, further annota-
37
tions at various levels of linguistic analysis were 
integrated across two pillars: (a) efficient index-
ing and retrieval; and (b) further facilitating the 
comparative study of textual data by means of 
bilingual glossaries which were constructed 
semi-automatically, and via the visualization of 
aligned parallel texts.  
Text processing at the monolingual level com-
prises the following procedures: (a) handling and 
tokenization, (b) Part-of-Speech (POS) tagging 
and lemmatization, (c) surface syntactic analysis, 
(d) indexing with terms/keywords and 
phrases/Named Entities (NEs) pertaining to the 
types Location (LOC) and Person (PER). 
Annotations at these levels were added semi-
automatically, by deploying existing generic 
Natural Language Processing (NLP) tools that 
were developed for the languages at hand, 
whereas extensive and intensive validations were 
performed via several ways. Indeed, although the 
tools deployed have reported to achieve high ac-
curacy rates in the domains/genres they were 
intended for, the specific nature of the data led to 
a significant reduction. To this end, half of the 
annotations were checked manually. After the 
identification of the errors in this part of the cor-
pus, we have performed a manual check in the 
second part of the corpus only for these cases 
which were recognized as errors during the vali-
dation of the first part. For some of the cases 
relevant constraints in the systems were written, 
which automatically find places where some 
rules were not met. Tools customization was also 
performed by adding new rules applicable for the 
language varieties to be handled, and also by ex-
tending/modifying the resources used (word and 
name lists, etc.).  
Finally, alignment of parallel texts (primary 
source documents and their translations) has also 
been performed at both sentence and phrase 
level. As expected, poems posited the major dif-
ficulties due the fuzziness in identifying sentence 
boundaries, and alignments at the phrase level 
were favored instead. 
5 Language Technologies 
In what follows the Greek and Bulgarian Text 
Processing Components will be described. 
5.1 The Greek pipe-line 
In the case of the Greek data, text processing 
was applied via an existing pipeline of shallow 
processing tools for the Greek language. These 
include: 
? Handling and tokenization; following com-
mon practice, the Greek tokenizer makes use 
of a set of regular expressions, coupled with 
precompiled lists of abbreviations, and a set 
of simple heuristics (Papageorgiou et al, 
2002) for the recognition of word and sen-
tence boundaries, abbreviations, digits, and 
simple dates.  
? POS-tagging and lemmatization; a tagger 
that is based on Brill's TBL architecture 
(Brill, 1997), modified to address peculiari-
ties of the Greek language (Papageorgiou et 
al., 2000) was used in order to assign mor-
phosyntactic information to tokenized words. 
Furthermore, the tagger uses a PAROLE-
compliant tagset of 584 different part-of-
speech tags. Following POS tagging, lemmas 
are retrieved from a Greek morphological 
lexicon. 
? Surface syntactic analysis; the Greek chun-
ker is based on a grammar of 186 rules 
(Boutsis et al, 2000) developed for the 
automatic recognition of non-recursive 
phrasal categories: adjectives, adverbs, 
prepositional phrases, nouns, verbs (chunks) 
(Papageorgiou et al, 2002). 
? Term extraction; a Greek Term Extractor 
was used for spotting terms and idiomatic 
words (Georgantopoulos, Piperidis, 2000). 
Term Extractor's method proceeds in three 
pipelined stages: (a) morphosyntactic anno-
tation of the domain corpus, (b) corpus pars-
ing based on a pattern grammar endowed 
with regular expressions and feature-
structure unification, and (c) lemmatization. 
Candidate terms are then statistically evalu-
ated with an aim to skim valid domain terms 
and lessen the overgeneration effect caused 
by pattern grammars (hybrid methodology). 
Named Entity Recognition was then per-
formed using MENER (Maximum Entropy 
Named Entity Recognizer), a system compatible 
with the ACE (Automatic Content Extraction) 
scheme, catering for the recognition and classifi-
cation of the following types of NEs: person 
(PER), organization (ORG), location (LOC) and 
geopolitical entity (GPE) (Giouli et al, 2006). 
5.2 Bulgarian Tools 
In the processing of the Bulgarian part of the 
corpus we have been using generic language 
technology tools developed for Bulgarian. Here 
is the list of tools that we have used. They are 
38
implemented within the CLaRK System (Simov 
et al 2001) via:  
Tokenization, Morphosyntactic tagging, 
Lemmatization; Tokenization is implemented as 
a hierarchy of tokenizers within the CLaRK sys-
tem. Morphosyntactic tagging is done on the ba-
sis a morphological lexicon which covers the 
grammatical information of about 100 000 lex-
emes (1 600 000 word forms); a gazetteers of 
about 25000 names and 1500 abbreviations. We 
are using the BulTreeBank tagset, which is a 
more specialized version of Multext-east tagset. 
The disambiguation is done in two steps. Ini-
tially, a rule-based module solves the sure cases 
for which manual rules can be written. Then, for 
the next step, a neural-network-based disam-
biguator is being exploited (Simov and Osenova 
2001). Lemmatization is implemented as rules 
which convert each word form in the lemma. The 
rules are assigned to the word forms in the lexi-
con. This ensures very high level of accuracy. 
Partial Grammars have also been constructed 
for Sentence splitting, Named-entity recognition, 
and Chunking. 
5.3 Alignments 
To facilitate the comparative study of parallel 
documents, source texts were automatically 
aligned with their translations. Alignments at the 
sentence level were performed semi-
automatically by means of the ILSP Aligner, 
which is a language independent tool that uses 
surface linguistic information coupled with in-
formation about possible unit delimiters depend-
ing on the level at which the alignment is sought. 
The resulting translation equivalents were stored 
in files conformant to the internationally accred-
ited TMX standard (Translation Memory eX-
change, http://www.lisa.org/tmx/), which is 
XML-compliant, vendor-neutral open standard 
for storing and exchanging translation memories 
created by Computer Aided Translation (CAT) 
and localization tools. 
Moreover, terms pertaining to the folklore do-
main as well as names of Persons and Locations 
identified in the EL - BG parallel texts were 
semi-automatically aligned. The outcome of the 
process of text alignment at below the sentence 
level was then validated manually. 
5.4 Tools Customization and metadata 
harmonization 
As it has already been stated, the tools that 
were deployed for the linguistic processing are 
generic ones that were initially developed for 
different text types/genres. Moreover, the data at 
hand posed another difficulty that is, coping with 
older/obsolete language usage. In fact, some of 
the literary works were written in the 19th cen-
tury or the beginning of 20th century, and their 
language reflects the writing standards of the 
corresponding period. 
Therefore, as it was expected, the overall per-
formance of the afore-mentioned tools was lower 
than the one reported for the texts these tools 
were initially trained for. 
To this end, performance at POS-tagging level 
dropped from 97% to 77% for the Greek data 
since no normalization of the primary data was 
performed. On the other hand, the BG morpho-
logical analyzer coverage, whose benchmark per-
formance is 96% 
dropped to 92 % on poems and folktales and to 
94% on literary texts and legends. 
The reason was that the language of processed 
literary texts and legends came normalized from 
the sources, while the poems and folktales kept 
some percentage of archaic or dialect words. 
Thus, additionally to the guesser, a post POS 
processing was performed on the unknown 
words. Moreover, the accuracy of the neural 
network disambiguator and the rule-based one 
was 97 %. i.e. the same as for other applications. 
Processing at the levels of chunks and NEs were 
even lower. Within the project we had to tune the 
tools to the specific language types, such as dia-
chronically remote texts and domain specific 
texts (folklore). Also, some words with higher 
distribution in the target regions appear in some 
of the works. In order to deal with them we had 
to extend the used lexicons, to create a guesser 
for the unknown words and add new rules to the 
chunk grammar to handle some specific word 
order within the texts. 
Additionally, the deployment of tools that are 
specific to each language and compatible with 
completely distinct annotation standards brought 
about the issue of metadata harmonization. To 
this end, although the Greek tools were devel-
oped to confront to the afore-mentioned annota-
tion standards, this was not the case for Bulgar-
ian. The first encoding scheme followed the 
BulTreeBank morphological and chunk 
annotation scheme. Afterwards, the information 
was transferred into the project 
scheme in order to be consistent with the Greek 
data and applicable for web representation. As a 
result, the morphosyntactic features of the BG 
tagset, which is a more specialized version of the 
39
Multext-East tagset were mapped onto the rela-
tive PAROLE tags. 
6 The web interface 
All the data collected (being the primary liter-
ary or folklore texts or meta-documents, etc.) 
along with their translations, the multi-layered 
annotations, and the resulting glossaries were 
integrated in a database platform that was devel-
oped to serve as a content management system. 
Being the backbone of that platform, the meta-
data material facilitates the interlinking of similar 
documents, and the access to the primary data 
via the web. To this end, a specially designed 
web site was developed to satisfy the needs of 
end-users (the general public and the special 
groups of researchers and other scientists). The 
website features a trilingual interface (Greek, 
Bulgarian, English) as well as advanced search 
and retrieval mechanisms on the entire bilingual 
content or a user-specified part of it. The users 
can perform combined searches by author name, 
title, genre, etc. Furthermore, they can search for 
single keywords/wordforms or for two word-
forms that can be a user-specified number of 
words apart from each other. Searches by lemma 
and/or by phrase have been also implemented. 
The latter rely on a matcher, which tries to link 
the query word(s) with the stored lem-
mas/wordforms. Additionally, a stemmer for 
Greek and Bulgarian has been used for the on-
line stemming of queries, which will then be 
matched with the already stemmed corpus. When 
all the above fails, fuzzy matching techniques are 
being employed, facilitating, thus, effective 
query expansion functionality. Finally, apart 
from wordforms and lemmas, the collection can 
also be queried for morphosyntactic tags or any 
combination thereof; results, then, come in the 
form of concordances and statistics (frequency 
information), hence the relative document(s) can 
also be retrieved. Moreover, users can search the 
whole corpus or define a sub-corpus based on the 
classification and annotation parameters accom-
panying each text, thus, creating sub-corpora of a 
specific author, or belonging to a specific genre, 
text type, domain, time period, etc. 
In addition, the web interface lets the users to 
simultaneously view on screen both Greek and 
Bulgarian texts, aligned and in parallel,, so that 
to become acquainted with the comparative as-
pects of the two languages or perform specific 
linguistic, lexicographic or translation tasks. Al-
ternatively, the user can consult the bilingual 
glossary of terms and the aligned list of NEs. The 
latter is often very interesting, especially with 
respect to Location entities, since transliteration 
is usually non-adequate.  
The design of the web interface effectively 
blends simplicity and advanced functionality so 
that to fully support the intended usage scenarios 
(comparative study of literary and folklore texts 
equally by specialists, laymen or students, lan-
guage and/or literary teaching and learning, lexi-
cographic projects, etc.). Finally, the web inter-
face has been enhanced by integrating last gen-
eration of synthetic speech technology for both 
Greek and Bulgarian. This speech-enhanced user 
interface (S. Raptis et al 2005), offers innovative 
web accessibility for blind and vision impaired 
Greek and Bulgarian users as well as for other 
users who use speech as their preferable modal-
ity to information access. The key-feature of this 
web-speech technology is that it lets users to in-
teract with the underlying system; so that they 
can hear only the portions of a specific web page 
they are interested in, being able at the same time 
to navigate through the entire web site and visit 
only the web pages of their choice. 
7 Conclusions and future work  
We have described work targeted at the promo-
tion and study of the cultural heritage of the 
cross-border regions of Greece ? Bulgaria, the 
focus been on literature, folklore and language of 
the two people, by means of modern and techno-
logically advanced platforms. To this end, a digi-
tal collection of literary and folklore texts has 
been compiled along with accompanying mate-
rial selected from various (online and printed 
sources), which is integrated into a platform with 
advanced search and retrieval mechanisms. 
However, the cultural value of the bilingual cul-
tural Greek-Bulgarian corpus goes beyond the 
border areas that it was intended for, because it 
shows the similarities and the differences be-
tween the two neighboring countries. More spe-
cifically, it can be used for supporting the acqui-
sition of the other language in both countries. 
Also, it can be explored for comparing the cul-
tural and social attitudes in diachronic depth and 
genre variety. Apart from the usages from a hu-
manities point of view, the corpus can become a 
good base for testing taggers, parsers and align-
ers. It would especially challenge the processing 
of the regional dialects, the language of poems, 
and the language of non-contemporary works. 
40
Future work is being envisaged in the following 
directions: extending the corpus with more texts, 
and respectively the glossaries ? with more 
terms, adding more layers of linguistic analysis 
(predicate-argument structure, etc.), and further 
enhance search and retrieval with the construc-
tion and deployment of an applicable thesaurus. 
 
Acknowledgments 
We would like to thank the anonymous review-
ers for useful suggestions and comments. Most 
of the work presented in this paper was done in 
the framework of a project that was funded under 
the Community Initiative Programme INTER-
REG III A / PHARE CBC Greece ? Bulgaria. 
The project was implemented by the Institute for 
Language and Speech Processing (ILSP, 
www.ilsp.gr) and a group of academics and re-
searchers from the Sofia University St. Kliment 
Ohridski (www.uni-sofia.bg). 
References  
Antti Aarne. 1961. The Types of the Folktale: A Clas-
sification and Bibliography. Translated and 
Enlarged by Stith Thompson. 2nd rev. ed. Helsinki: 
Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia / FF Communications. 
Sotiris Boutsis, Prokopis Prokopidis, Voula Giouli 
and Stelios Piperidis. 2000. A Robust Parser for 
Unrestricted Greek Tex. In Proceedings of the 2nd 
Language and Resources Evaluation Conference, 
467-473, Athens, Greece. 
Michel G?n?reux. 2007. Cultural Heritage Digital 
Resources: From Extraction to Querying, Lan-
guage Technology for Cultural Heritage Data 
(LaTeCH 2007), Workshop at ACL 2007, June 
23rd?30th 2007, Prague, Czech Republic. 
Byron Georgantopoulos and Stelios Piperidis, 2000. 
Term-based Identification of Sentences for Text 
Summarization. In Proceedings of LREC2000 
Voula Giouli, Alexis Konstandinidis, Elina Desypri, 
Harris Papageorgiou. 2006. Multi-domain Multi-
lingual Named Entity Recognition: Revisiting & 
Grounding the resources issue. In Proceedings of 
LREC 2006. 
IMDI, Metadata Elements for Catalogue Descriptions, 
Version 2.1, June 2001 
IMDI, Metadata Elements for Session Descriptions, 
Version 3.0.4, Sept. 2003. 
Harris Papageorgiou, L. Cranias, Stelios 
Piperidis1994. Automatic alignment in parallel 
corpora. In Proceedings of ACL 1994. 
Harris Papageorgiou, Prokopis Prokopidis, Voula 
Giouli, Iasonas Demiros, Alexis Konstantinidis, 
and Stelios Piperidis. 2002. Multi-level XML-based 
Corpus Annotation. Proceedings of the 3nd Lan-
guage and Resources Evaluation Conference. 
Harris Papageorgiou, Prokopis Prokopidis, Voula 
Giouli, and Stelios Piperidis. 2000. A Unified POS 
Tagging Architecture and its Application to Greek. 
In Proceedings of the 2nd Language and Resources 
Evaluation Conference, Athens, Greece, pp 1455-
1462. 
Stelios Piperidis. 1995. Interactive corpus based 
translation drafting tool. In ASLIB Proceedings 
47(3), March 1995. 
Spyros Raptis, I. Spais and P. Tsiakoulis. 2005.  A 
Tool for Enhancing Web Accessibility: Synthetic 
Speech and Content Restructuring?. In Proc. HCII 
2005: 11th International Conference on Human-
Computer Interaction, 22-27 July, Las Vegas, Ne-
vada, USA. 
Kiril Simov, Z. Peev, M. Kouylekov, A. Simov, M. 
Dimitrov, and A. Kiryakov. 2001. CLaRK - an 
XML-based System for Corpora Development. 
Corpus Linguistics 2001 Conference. pp 558-560. 
Kiril Simov, and Petya Osenova. A Hybrid System for 
MorphoSyntactic Disambiguation in Bulgarian. In: 
Proc. of the RANLP 2001 Conference, Tzigov 
Chark, Bulgaria, 5-7 September 2001. pages 288-
290. 
Ren? Witte, Thomas Gitzinger, Thomas Kappler, and 
Ralf Krestel. 2008. A Semantic Wiki Approach to 
Cultural Heritage Data Management. Language 
Technology for Cultural Heritage Data (LaTeCH 
2008), Workshop at LREC 2008, June 1st, 2008, 
Marrakech, Morocco. 
41
