Proceedings of the EACL 2009 Workshop on Language Technologies for African Languages ? AfLaT 2009, pages 32?37,
Athens, Greece, 31 March 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Using Technology Transfer to Advance Automatic Lemmatisation for 
Setswana
Hendrik J. Groenewald
Centre for Text Technology (CTexT)
North-West University
Potchefstroom 2531, South Africa
handre.groenewald@nwu.ac.za
Abstract
South  African languages  (and  indigenous 
African languages in general) lag behind other 
languages  in terms of  the availability of  lin-
guistic  resources.  Efforts  to  improve or  fast-
track the development of linguistic resources 
are required to bridge this ever-increasing gap. 
In this paper we emphasize the advantages of 
technology transfer between two languages to 
advance  an  existing  linguistic  technology/re-
source. The advantages of technology transfer 
are  illustrated  by  showing  how  an  existing 
lemmatiser for Setswana can be improved by 
applying a methodology that was first used in 
the  development  of  a  lemmatiser  for 
Afrikaans.      
1 Introduction
South  Africa  has  eleven  official  languages.  Of 
these eleven languages, English is the only lan-
guage for which ample HLT resources exist. The 
rest  of  the  languages  can  be  classified  as  so-
called  ?resource  scarce  languages?,  i.e.  lan-
guages  for  which  few  digital  resources  exist. 
However,  this  situation  is  changing,  since  re-
search in the field of Human Language Techno-
logy (HLT) has enjoyed rapid growth in the past 
few years, with the support of the South African 
Government. Part of this development is a strong 
focus on the development of core linguistic re-
sources  and  technologies.  One  such  a  techno-
logy/resource is a lemmatiser.
   The focus of this article is on how technology 
transfer between two languages can help to im-
prove and fast track the development of an exist-
ing linguistic resource. This is illustrated in the 
way that an existing lemmatiser for Setswana is 
improved by applying the method that was first 
used  in  the  development  of  a  lemmatiser  for 
Afrikaans.      
   The rest of this paper is organised as follows: 
The  next  section  provides  general  introductory 
information  about  lemmatisation.  Section  3 
provides  specific  information  about  lemmatisa-
tion  and  the  concept  of  a  lemma  in  Setswana. 
Section 4 describes previous work on lemmatisa-
tion in Afrikaans. Section 5 gives an overview of 
memory  based  learning  (the  machine  learning 
techniques used in this study) and the generic ar-
chitecture developed for machine learning based 
lemmatisation.  Data  requirements  and  the  data 
preparation process  are  discussed in  Section 6. 
The implementation of a machine learning based 
lemmatiser for Setswana is explained in Section 
7, while some concluding remarks and future dir-
ections are provided in Section 8.
2 Lemmatisation
Automatic  Lemmatisation  is  an  important  pro-
cess  for  many  applications  of  text  mining  and 
natural language processing (NLP) (Plisson et al 
2004). Within the context of this research, lem-
matisation is defined as a simplified process of 
morphological  analysis  (Daelemans  and  Strik, 
2002),  through which  the  inflected  forms  of  a 
word are converted/normalised under the lemma 
or base-form. 
   For  example,  the  grouping  of  the  inflected 
forms 'swim',  'swimming'  and 'swam'  under the 
base-form 'swim' is seen as an instance of lem-
matisation. The last part of this definition applies 
to this research, as the emphasis is on recovering 
the  base-form  from  the  inflected  form  of  the 
word.  The base-form or  lemma  is  the  simplest 
form of a word as it would appear as headword 
in a dictionary (Erjavec and D?eroski, 2004).
   Lemmatisation should, however, not be con-
fused with stemming.  Stemming  is  the  process 
whereby a word is reduced to its stem by the re-
moval  of  both  inflectional  and  derivational 
morphemes (Plisson et al 2004). Stemming can 
thus be viewed as a "greedier" process than lem-
matisation,  because a  larger  number  of  morph-
32
emes are removed by stemming than lemmatisa-
tion.  Given  this  general  background,  it  would 
therefore  be  necessary  to  have  a  clear  under-
standing of the inflectional affixes to be removed 
during the process of lemmatisation for a particu-
lar language.
   There are essentially two approaches that can 
be followed in the development of lemmatisers, 
namely a rule-based approach (Porter, 1980) or a 
statistically/data-driven  approach  (Chrupala, 
2006).  The rule-based approach is  a traditional 
method  for  stemming/lemmatisation  (i.e.  affix 
stripping)  (Porter  1980;  Gaustad  and  Bouma, 
2002)  and  entails  the  use  of  language-specific 
rules to identify the base-forms (i.e. lemmas) of 
word forms.
3 Lemmatisation in Setswana
The first automatic lemmatiser for Setswana was 
developed by Brits (2006). As previously men-
tioned, one of the most important aspects of de-
veloping  a  lemmatiser  in  any  language  is  to 
define the inflectional affixes that need to be re-
moved during the  transformation from the sur-
face form to the lemma of a particular word. In 
response to this question, Brits (2006) found that 
only stems (and not roots) can act independently 
as words and therefore suggests that only stems 
should be accepted as lemmas in the context of 
automatic lemmatisation for Setswana. 
   Setswana has seven different parts of speech. 
Brits  (2006)  indicated  that  five  of  these  seven 
classes cannot be extended by means of regular 
morphological  processes.  The  remaining  two 
classes, namely nouns and verbs, require the im-
plementation of alternation rules to determine the 
lemma. Brits (2006) formalized rules for the al-
terations and implemented these rules as regular 
expressions in FSA 6 (Van Noord, 2002), to cre-
ate  finite  state  transducers.  These  finite  state 
transducers generated C++ code that was used to 
implement  the  Setswana lemmatiser.  This  lem-
matiser achieved a linguistic accuracy figure of 
62,17%, when evaluated on an evaluation subset 
of 295 randomly selected Setswana words. Lin-
guistic accuracy is defined as the percentage of 
words  in  the  evaluation  set  that  was  correctly 
lemmatised.
4 Lia: Lemmatiser for Afrikaans
In 2003,  a rule-based lemmatiser  for  Afrikaans 
(called  Ragel  ?  ?Re?lgebaseerde  Afrikaanse  
Grondwoord- en Lemma-identifiseerder?) [Rule-
Based Root and Lemma Identifier for Afrikaans] 
was  developed  at  the  North-West  University 
(RAGEL, 2003). Ragel  was developed by using 
traditional methods for stemming/lemmatisation 
(i.e.  affix  stripping)  (Porter,  1980;  Kraaij  and 
Pohlmann, 1994) and consists of  language-spe-
cific rules for identifying lemmas.  Although no 
formal evaluation of  Ragel  was done, it ob-
tained  a  disappointing  linguistic  accuracy 
figure of only 67% in an evaluation on a ran-
dom 1,000 word data set of complex words. 
This  disappointing  result  motivated  the  de-
velopment  of  another  lemmatiser  for 
Afrikaans. 
   This ?new? lemmatiser (named Lia ? ?Lemma-
identifiseerder  vir  Afrikaans?  [Lemmatiser  for 
Afrikaans])  was  developed  by  Groenewald 
(2006). The difference between Ragel and Lia is 
that Lia was developed by using a so-called data 
driven machine learning method. Machine learn-
ing requires large amounts of annotated data. For 
this  purpose,  a  data  set  consisting  of  73,000 
lemma-annotated  words  were  developed.  Lia 
achieves  a  linguistic  accuracy figure  of  92,8% 
when trained on this  data  set.  This  result  con-
firms that the machine learning based approach 
outperforms the rule-based approach for lemmat-
isation in Afrikaans.
   The increased linguistic accuracy figure ob-
tained with the machine learning based approach 
motivated  the  research  presented  in  this  paper. 
Since  Ragel and  the  rule-based  Setswana  lem-
matiser obtained comparable linguistic accuracy 
figures, the question arises whether the applica-
tion  of  machine  learning  techniques,  together 
with the methodology and architecture developed 
for  Lia,  can also be utilised to improve on the 
linguistic  accuracy figure  obtained  by  the  Set-
swana rule-based lemmatiser. 
5 Methodology 
5.1 Memory Based Learning
Memory  based  learning  (Aha  et  al,  1991)  is 
based  on  the  classical  k-NN  classification  al-
gorithm. k-NN has become known as a powerful 
pattern classification algorithm (Daelemans et al 
2007), and is considered the most basic instance-
based algorithm. The assumption here is that all 
instances  of  a  certain  problem  correspond  to 
points  in  the  n-dimensional  space  (Aha  et  al, 
1991).  The  nearest  neighbours  of  a  certain  in-
stance are computed using some form of distance 
metric (X,Y). This is done by assigning the most 
frequent  category within the found set  of  most 
33
similar example(s) (the  k-nearest neighbours) as 
the category of the new test example. In case of a 
tie amongst categories, a tie-breaking resolution 
method is used.
   The memory based learning system on which 
Lia is based, is called TiMBL (Tilburg Memory-
Based  Learner).  TiMBL  was  specifically  de-
veloped with NLP tasks in mind,  but it can be 
used successfully for classification tasks in other 
domains as well (Daelemans et al 2007).
5.2 Architecture
Start
Choose 
Algorithm
Compute 
Statistics on 
Training Data
Store Data in 
Memory
Classify 
Evaluation 
Data
Generate 
Lemma
Lemma
Evaluation 
Data
Training 
Data
Process
Decision
Data
Key
Figure 1. Generic Architecture of the Machine 
Learning Based Lemmatiser.
The architecture presented in this subsection was 
first developed and implemented for Lia, the ma-
chine learning based lemmatiser  for  Afrikaans. 
This same architecture was used for the develop-
ment of the machine learning based lemmatiser 
for Setswana. The first step in this ?generic? ar-
chitecture  consists  of  training  the  system with 
data. During this phase, the training data is ex-
amined  and  various  statistical  calculations  are 
computed that aid the system during classifica-
tion. This training data is then stored in memory 
as sets of data points. The evaluation instance(s) 
are then presented to the system and their class is 
computed  by  interpolation  to  the  stored  data 
points according to the selected algorithm and al-
gorithm parameters. The last step in the process 
consists of generating the correct lemma(s) of the 
evaluation instance(s), according to the class that 
was  awarded  during  the  classification  process. 
The generic architecture of the machine learning 
based lemmatiser is illustrated in Figure 1. 
6 Data
6.1 Data Size
A  negative  aspect  of  the  Machine  Learning 
method  for  developing  a  lemmatiser  is  that  a 
large amount of lemma-annotated training data is 
required. Currently, there is  a data set available 
that  contains  only  2,947  lemma-annotated  Set-
swana words. This is the evaluation data set con-
structed by Brits (2006) to evaluate the perform-
ance of the rule-based Setswana lemmatiser.  A 
data set of 2,947 words is considered to be very 
small in machine learning terms.    
6.2 Data Preparation
Memory based learning requires that lemmatisa-
tion be performed  as  a  classification task.  The 
training data should therefore consist of feature 
vectors  with  assigned  class  labels  (Chrupala, 
2006). The feature vectors for each instance con-
sist of the letters of the inflected word.  The class 
labels contain the information required to trans-
form the involved word form from the inflected 
form to the lemma.
   The class labels are automatically derived by 
determining the character string (and the position 
thereof) to be removed and the possible replace-
ment string during the transformation from word-
form to lemma. This is determined by firstly ob-
taining  the  longest  common  substring  between 
the  inflected  word  and  the  manually  identified 
lemma.  Once  the  longest  common  substring  is 
known, a comparison of the remaining strings in 
the inflected word form and the lemma indicates 
the strings that need to be removed (as well as 
the  possible  replacement  strings)  during  the 
transformation  from word form to lemma.  The 
positions of  the character string to be removed 
are annotated as L (left) or R (right). 
   If a word-form and its lemma are identical, the 
class  awarded  will  be  ?0?,  denoting  that  the 
word should be left in the same form. This an-
notation  scheme  yields  classes  like  in  column 
four of Table 1. 
34
Inflected Word-Form Manually Identified 
Lemma
Longest Common 
Substring
Automatically 
Derived Class
matlhwao letlhwao hwao Lma>le
menoganya menoga menoga Rya>
itebatsa lebala ba Lit>lRtsa>la
Table 1. Data Preparation and Classes.
For  example,  Table  1  shows  that  the  class  of 
?matlhwao?  is  Lma>le.  This  means  that  the 
string ?ma?  needs to  be replaced by the string 
?le? (at the left hand side of the word) during the 
transformation  from the inflected form ?matlh-
wao? to the lemma  ?letlhwao?. Accordingly, the 
class of the word ?menoganya? is  Rya>, denot-
ing  the  string  ?ya?  should  be  removed  at  the 
right-hand side of the inflected form during lem-
matisation. In this particular case, there is no re-
placement string. Some words like ?itebatsa? un-
dergo  alterations  to  both  sides  of  the  inflected 
form  during  lemmatisation.  The  class 
Lit>lRtsa>la indicates that  the string ?it? must 
be replaced at the left-hand side of the word with 
the letter ?l?, while the string ?tsa? should be re-
placed with the string ?la? at the right-hand side 
of the word.
   An example of the training of data of the lem-
matiser is shown in Figure 2. The data is presen-
ted  in  C4.5  format  (Quinlan,  1993)  to  the 
memory  based  learning  algorithm,  where  each 
feature is separated by a comma. The algorithm 
requires that every instance must have the same 
number  of  features.  In order to achieve this,  it 
was decided that each instance should contain 20 
features. 20 features were chosen, since less than 
1% of the words in the data contained more than 
20 letters. All instances were formatted to con-
tain  20  features  by  adding  underscores  to  the 
words that contained less than 20 features. The 
result of this process is displayed in Figure 2.
_,_,_,_,_,_,_,_,_,_,t,s,o,g,a,t,s,o,g,a,0
_,_,_,_,_,_,_,_,_,_,e,d,i,m,o,l,a,n,y,a,Rnya>
_,_,_,_,_,_,_,_,_,_,_,_,_,d,i,n,y,e,p,o,Ldi>
_,_,_,_,_,_,_,_,_,_,t,s,i,s,e,d,i,t,s,e,Ltsisedi>Rse>la
Figure 2. Training Data in C4.5 Format.
7 Implementation
Each of the 2,947 lemma-annotated words in the 
evaluation data of the rule-based Setswana lem-
matiser was formatted in C4.5 format. The data 
was then split up further into a training data set, 
consisting of 90% of all the data, with an evalu-
ation set consisting of 10% of all the data. A ma-
chine learning based lemmatiser was trained (by 
utilising  default  parameter  settings)  and  evalu-
ated with these two datasets. This lemmatiser ob-
tained an accuracy figure of  46.25%. This is  a 
disappointing result  when compared to  the lin-
guistic accuracy figure of 62.71% obtained with 
the rule-based Setswana lemmatiser when  evalu-
ated on the same data set. Algorithmic parameter 
optimisation  with  PSearch (Groenewald,  2008) 
resulted  in  an  improved  accuracy  figure  of 
58.98%. This represents an increase of 12.73%, 
but is still less than the accuracy figure obtained 
by the rule-based lemmatiser. 
   Error analysis indicated that in some cases the 
class  predicted  by  TiMBL  is  conspicuously 
wrong. This is evident from instances shown in 
Table  2,  where  the  assigned  classes  contain 
strings  that  need  to  be  removed  that  is  not 
present in the inflected forms. 
 
Inflected 
Word
Correct Class Assigned Class
tlamparele Re>a Lmm>bRele>a
phologileng Rileng>a Regileng>a
Table 2. Instances with Incorrectly Assigned 
Classes.
Inflected 
Word
Assigned Class Class Distribution
tlamparele Lmm>bRele>a
0 0.934098 
Re>a 1.82317
Rele>a 0.914829 
Lmm>bRele>a 
1.96103
phologileng
    
Regileng>a Rileng>a 3.00014 Relang>a 1.24030 
Regileng>a 4.20346
Table 3. Instances Containing Additional Class 
Distribution Information.
For example, the class assigned to the second in-
stance in Table 2, is Regileng>a. This means that 
the  string ?egileng? must  be  replaced with the 
35
character ?a? at the right-hand side of the word. 
However, the inflected word ?phologileng? does 
not  contain  the  string  ?egileng?,  which  means 
that  the  assigned  class  is  sure  to  be  incorrect. 
This  problem  was  overcome  by  utilizing  the 
TiMBL option (+v db) that adds class distribu-
tion  in  the  nearest  neighbour  set  to  the  output 
file. The result of this is an additional output that 
contains the class distribution information shown 
in  Table  3.  The  class  distribution  information 
contains the nearest classes with their associated 
distances from the involved evaluation instance.
   A post-processing script that automatically re-
cognises  this  type  of  incorrectly assigned class 
and replaces the incorrect class with the second 
most likely class (according to the class distribu-
tion) was developed. The result of this was a fur-
ther increase in accuracy to 64.06%. A summary 
of the obtained results is displayed in Table 4.
Method Linguistic 
Accuracy
Rule-based 62.17%
Machine Learning with de-
fault parameter settings
46.25%
Machine Learning with op-
timised parameter settings
58.9%
Machine Learning with op-
timised parameter settings 
and class distributions
64.06%.
Table 4. Summary of Results.
8 Conclusion
The best results obtained by the machine learn-
ing based Setswana lemmatiser was a linguistic 
accuracy figure of 64.06%. This represents an in-
crease of 1.9% on the accuracy figure obtained 
by the rule-based lemmatiser. This seems to be a 
small  increase  in  accuracy  compared  to  the 
25.8% increase obtained when using a machine 
learning based method for Afrikaans lemmatisa-
tion.  The  significance  of  this  result  becomes 
evident when considering the fact that it was ob-
tained  by  training  the  machine  learning  based 
Setswana  lemmatiser  with  a  training  data  set 
consisting of only 2,652 instances. This data set 
is very small in comparison with the 73,000 in-
stances contained in the training data of Lia.
The linguistic accuracy figure of 64.06% further-
more  indicates  that  a  machine  learning  based 
lemmatiser for Setswana that yields better results 
than a rule-based lemmatiser  can be developed 
with a relatively small data set. We are confident 
that  further increases in the linguistic accuracy 
figure will be obtained by enlarging the training 
data  set.  Future  work  will  therefore  entail  the 
employment  of  bootstrapping techniques to an-
notate more training data for improving the lin-
guistic accuracy of the machine learning based 
Setswana lemmatiser.
  The  most  important  result  of  the  research 
presented in this paper is, however, that existing 
methodologies  and  research  can  be  applied  to 
fast-track the development of linguistic resources 
or  improve  existing linguistic  resources  for  re-
source-scarce  languages,  a  result  that  is  espe-
cially significant in the African context.
Acknowledgments
The author wishes to acknowledge the work of 
Jeanetta H. Brits,  performed under the supervi-
sion  of  Rigardt  Pretorius  and  Gerhard  B.  van 
Huyssteen,  on  developing  the  first  automatic 
lemmatiser for Setswana.
References 
David W. Aha,  Dennis  Kibler  and Marc  K. Albert. 
1991.  Instance-Based  Learning  Algorithms.  Ma-
chine Learning,  6:37-66.
Jeanetta  H.  Brits.  2006.  Outomatiese  Setswana 
Lemma-identifisering  ?Automatic  Setswana  Lem-
matisation?.  Master?s  Thesis.  North-West  Uni-
versity, Potchefstroom, South Africa. 
Gregorz Chrupala.  2006.  Simple  Data-Driven  Con-
text-Sensitive  Lemmatization.  Proceedings  of  
SEPLN 2006.
Walter  Daelemans,  Antal  Van  den  Bosch,  Jakub 
Zavrel  and  Ko  Van  der  Sloot.  2007.  TiMBL: 
Tilburg MemoryBased Learner. Version 6.1, Ref-
erence Guide. ILK Technical Report 07-03.
Walter Daelemans and Helmer Strik. 2002. Actieplan 
Voor Het Nederlands in de Taal- en Spraaktechno-
logie:  Prioriteiten  Voor  Basisvoorzieningen. 
Report for the Nederlandse Taalunie. Nederlandse 
Taalunie.
Toma? Erjavec  and  Saso  D?eroski.  2004.  Machine 
Learning  of  Morphosyntactic  Structure:  Lemmat-
ising Unknown Slovene Words.  Applied Artificial  
Intelligence, 18(1):17-40.
Tanja  Gaustad  and  Gosse  Bouma.  2002.  Accurate 
Stemming  of  Dutch  for  Text  Classification. 
Language and Computers, 45 (1):104-117.
Hendrik J. Groenewald.  2007. Automatic Lemmatisa-
tion  for  Afrikaans.  Master?s  Thesis.  North-West 
University, Potchefstroom, South Africa.
36
Hendrik J. Groenewald. 2008.  PSearch 1.0.0. North-
West University, Potchefstroom, South Africa.
Wessel  Kraaij  and  Renee  Pohlmann.  1994.  Porter?s 
Stemming  Algorithm  for  Dutch. 
Informatiewetenschap  1994:  Wetenschaplike  
bijdraen  aan  de  derde  STINFON  Conferentie. 
1(1):167-180.
Joel Plisson, Nada Lavrac and Dunja Mladeni?. 2004. 
A Rule-based Approach to Word Lemmatization. 
Proceedings C of the 7th International Multi-Con-
ference Information Society IS 2004, 1(1):83-86.
Martin Porter. 1980. An Algorithm for Suffix Strip-
ping. Program, 14 (3):130-137.
John R. Quinlan. 1993. C4.5: Programs for Machine 
Learning. Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, USA.
RAGEL.  2003.  Re?lgebaseerde  Afrikaanse 
Grondwoord-  En  Lemma-identifiseerder  'Rule-
based  Afrikaans  Stemmer  and  Lemmatiser. 
http://www.puk.ac.za/opencms/export/PUK/html/f
akulteite/lettere/ctext/ragel.html.>  11  January 
2009.
Gertjan Van Noord. 2002. Finite State Utilities. 
< http://www.let.rug.nl/~vannoord/Fsa/>. 
12 January 2009.
37
