Proceedings of the ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Conference Short Papers, pages 369?372,
Suntec, Singapore, 4 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Predicting Unknown Time Arguments  
based on Cross-Event Propagation 
Prashant Gupta Heng Ji 
Indian Institute of Information  
Technology Allahabad 
Computer Science Department, Queens College and  
the Graduate Center, City University of New York 
Allahabad, India, 211012 New York, NY, 11367, USA 
greatprach@gmail.com hengji@cs.qc.cuny.edu 
 
  
 
Abstract 
Many events in news articles don?t include 
time arguments. This paper describes two 
methods, one based on rules and the other 
based on statistical learning, to predict the un-
known time argument for an event by the 
propagation from its related events. The re-
sults are promising ? the rule based approach 
was able to correctly predict 74% of the un-
known event time arguments with 70% preci-
sion. 
1 Introduction 
Event time argument detection is important to 
many NLP applications such as textual inference 
(Baral et al, 2005), multi-document text summa-
rization (e.g. Barzilay e al., 2002), temporal 
event linking (e.g. Bethard et al, 2007; Cham-
bers et al, 2007; Ji and Chen, 2009) and template 
based question answering (Ahn et al, 2006). It?s 
a challenging task in particular because about 
half of the event instances don?t include explicit 
time arguments. Various methods have been ex-
ploited to identify or infer the implicit time ar-
guments (e.g. Filatova and Hovy, 2001; Mani et 
al., 2003; Lapata and Lascarides, 2006; Eidelman, 
2008).  
Most of the prior work focused on the sen-
tence level by clustering sentences into topics 
and ordering sentences on a time line. However, 
many sentences in news articles include multiple 
events with different time arguments. And it was 
not clear how the errors of topic clustering tech-
niques affected the inference scheme. Therefore 
it will be valuable to design inference methods 
for more fine-grained events.  
In addition, in the previous approaches the lin-
guistic evidences such as verb tense were mainly 
applied for inferring the exact dates of implicit 
time expressions. In this paper we are interested 
in those more challenging cases in which an 
event mention and all of its coreferential event 
mentions do not include any explicit or implicit 
time expressions; and therefore its time argument 
can only be predicted based on other related e-
vents even if they have different event types. 
2 Terminology and Task 
In this paper we will follow the terminology de-
fined in the Automatic Content Extraction 
(ACE)1 program: 
entity: an object or a set of objects in one of the 
semantic categories of interest: persons, locations, 
organizations, facilities, vehicles and weapons. 
event: a specific occurrence involving participants. 
The 2005 ACE evaluation had 8 types of events, 
with 33 subtypes; for the purpose of this paper, we 
will treat these simply as 33 distinct event types. In 
contrast to ACE event extraction, we exclude ge-
neric, negative, and hypothetical events. 
event mention: a phrase or sentence within which 
an event is described. 
event argument: an entity involved in an event 
with some specific role. 
event time: an exact date normalized from time ex-
pressions and a role to indicate that an event occurs 
before/after/within the date. 
For any pair of event mentions <EMi, EMj>, if: 
? EMi includes a time argument time-arg; 
? EMj and its coreferential event mentions 
don?t include any time arguments; 
The goal of our task is to determine whether 
time-arg can be propagated into EMj or not. 
3 Motivation 
The events in a news document may contain a 
temporal or locative dimension, typical about an 
unfolding situation. Various situations are evolv-
ing, updated, repeated and corrected in different 
event mentions. Here later information may 
override earlier more tentative or incomplete 
                                                 
1 http://www.nist.gov/speech/tests/ace/ 
369
events. As a result, different events with particu-
lar types tend to occur together frequently, for 
example, the chains of ?Conflict?Life-Die/Life-
Injure? and ?Justice-Convict ? Justice-Charge-
Indict/Justice-Trial-Hearing? often appear within 
one document. To avoid redundancy, the news 
writers rarely provide time arguments for all of 
these events. Therefore, it?s possible to recover 
the time argument of an event by gleaning 
knowledge from its related events, especially if 
they are involved in a pre-cursor/consequence or 
causal relation. We present two examples as fol-
lows. 
? Example 1 
For example, we can propagate the time ?Sunday 
(normalized into ?2003-04-06?)? from a ?Con-
flict-Attack? EMi to a ?Life-Die? EMj because 
they both involve ?Kurdish/Kurds?: 
[Sentence including EMi]  
Injured Russian diplomats and a convoy of Amer-
ica's Kurdish comrades in arms were among unin-
tended victims caught in crossfire and friendly fire 
Sunday. 
[Sentence including EMj]  
Kurds said 18 of their own died in the mistaken 
U.S. air strike. 
? Example 2 
This kind of propagation can also be applied be-
tween two events with similar event types. For 
example, in the following we can propagate 
?Saturday? from a ?Justice-Convict? event to a 
?Justice-Sentence? event because they both in-
volve arguments ?A state security court/state? 
and ?newspaper/Monitor?: 
[Sentence including EMi]  
A state security court suspended a newspaper criti-
cal of the government Saturday after convicting it 
of publishing religiously inflammatory material. 
[Sentence including EMj]  
The sentence was the latest in a series of state ac-
tions against the Monitor, the only English lan-
guage daily in Sudan and a leading critic of condi-
tions in the south of the country, where a civil war 
has been waged for 20 years. 
4 Approaches 
Based on these motivations we have developed 
two approaches to conduct cross-event propaga-
tion.  Section 4.1 below will describe the rule-
based approach and section 4.2 will present the 
statistical learning framework respectively. 
4.1 Rule based Prediction 
The easiest solution is to encode rules based on 
constraints from event arguments and positions 
of two events. We design three types of rules in 
this paper. 
If  EMi has an event type typei and includes an 
argument argi with role rolei, while EMj has an 
event type typej and includes an argument argj 
with role rolej, they are not from two temporally 
separate groups of Justice events {Release-Parole, 
Appeal, Execute, Extradite, Acquit, Pardon} and 
{Arrest-Jail, Trial-Hearing, Charge-Indict, Sue, 
Convict, Sentence, Fine}2, and they match one of 
the following rules, then we propagate the time 
argument between them. 
? Rule1: Same-Sentence Propagation 
EMi and EMj are in the same sentence and 
only one time expression exists in the sen-
tence; This follows the within-sentence infer-
ence idea in (Lapata and Lascarides, 2006). 
? Rule2: Relevant-Type Propagation 
argi is coreferential with argj;  
typei= ?Conflict?, typej= ?Life-Die/Life-
Injure?; 
rolei=?Target? and rolej=?Victim?, or 
rolei=rolej=?Instrument?. 
? Rule3: Same-Type Propagation 
argi is coreferential with argj, typei= typej, 
rolei= rolej, and they match one of the Time-
Cue event type and argument role combina-
tions in Table 1. 
 
Event Typei Argument Rolei 
Conflict Target/Attacker/Crime 
Justice Defendant/Crime/Plantiff
Life-Die/Life-Injure Victim 
Life-Be-Born/Life-
Marry/Life-Divorce 
Person/Entity 
Movement-Transport Destination/Origin 
Transaction Buyer/Seller/Giver/ 
Recipient 
Contact Person/Entity 
Personnel Person/Entity 
Business Organization/Entity   
Table 1. Time-Cue Event Types and  
Argument Roles   
 
The combinations shown in Table 1 above are 
those informative arguments that are specific 
enough to indicate the event time, thus they are 
                                                 
2 Statistically there is often a time gap between these 
two groups of events. 
370
called ?Time-Cue? roles. For example, in a 
?Conflict-Attack? event, ?Attacker? and ?Tar-
get? are more important than ?Person? to indi-
cate the event time. The general idea is similar to 
extracting the cue phrases for text summarization 
(Edmundson, 1969). 
4.2 Statistical Learning based Prediction 
In addition, we take a more general statistical 
approach to capture the cross-event relations and 
predict unknown time arguments. We manually 
labeled some ACE data and trained a Maximum 
Entropy classifier to determine whether to 
propagate the time argument of EMi to EMj or 
not. The features in this classifier are most de-
rived from the rules in the above section 4.1. 
Following Rule 1, we build the following two 
features: 
? Feature1: Same-Sentence 
F_SameSentence: whether EMi and EMj are 
located in the same sentence or not. 
? Feature2: Number of Time Arguments 
F_TimeNum: if F_SameSentence = true, then 
assign the number of time arguments in the 
sentence, otherwise assign the feature value as 
?Empty?. 
For all the Time-Cue argument role pairs in 
Rule 2 and Rule 3, we construct a set of features: 
? Feature Set3: Time-Cue Argument Role 
Matching 
F_CueRoleij: Construct a feature for any pair 
of Time-Cue role types Rolei and Rolej in Rule 
2 and 3, assign the feature value as follows: 
if the argument argi in EMi has a role Rolei 
and the argument argj has a role Rolej: 
            if argi and argj are coreferential then 
F_CueRoleij = Coreferential,   
           else F_CueRoleij = Non-Coreferential. 
else F_CueRoleij = Empty. 
5 Experimental Results 
In this section we present the results of applying 
these two approaches to predict unknown event 
time arguments. 
5.1 Data and Answer-Key Annotation 
We used 47 newswire texts from ACE 2005 
training corpora to train the Maximum Entropy 
classifier, and conduct blind test on a separate set 
of 10 ACE 2005 newswire texts. For each docu-
ment we constructed any pair of event mentions 
<EMi, EMj> as a candidate sample if EMi in-
cludes a time argument while EMj and its 
coreferential event mentions don?t include any 
time arguments. We then manually labeled 
?Propagate/Not-Propagate? for each sample. The 
annotation for both training and test sets took one 
human annotator about 10 hours. We asked an-
other annotator to label the 10 test texts sepa-
rately and the inter-annotator agreement is above 
95%. There are 485 ?Propagate? samples and 
617 ?Not-Propagate? samples in the training set; 
and in total 212 samples in the test set. 
5.2 Overall Performance 
Table 2 presents the overall Precision (P), Recall 
(R) and F-Measure (F) of using these two differ-
ent approaches. 
 
     Method P (%) R (%) F(%)
Rule-based 70.40 74.06 72.18
Statistical Learning 72.48 50.94 59.83
 
Table 2. Overall Performance 
 
The results of the rule-based approach are 
promising: we are able to correctly predict 74% 
of the unknown event time arguments at about 
30% error rate. The most common correctly 
propagated pairs are:  
? From Conflict-Attack to Life-Die/Life-Injure 
? From Justice Convict to Justice-Sentence/ 
Justice-Charge-Indict 
? From Movement-Transport  to Contact-Meet 
? From Justice-Charge-Indict  to Justice-
Convict 
5.3 Discussion 
From Table 2 we can see that the rule-based ap-
proach achieved 23% higher recall than the sta-
tistical classifier, with only 2% lower precision. 
The reason is that we don?t have enough training 
data to capture all the evidences from different 
Time-cue roles. For instance, for the Example 2 
in section 3, Rule 3 is able to predict the time 
argument of the ?Justice-Sentence? event as 
?Saturday (normalized as 2003-05-10)? because 
these two events share the coreferential Time-cue 
?Defendant? arguments ?newspaper? and ?Moni-
tor?. However, there is only one positive sample 
matching these conditions in the training corpora, 
and thus the Maximum Entropy classifier as-
signed a very low confidence score for propaga-
tion.  We have also tried to combine these two 
approaches in a self-training framework ? adding 
the results from the propagation rules as addi-
tional training data and re-train the Maximum 
371
Entropy classifier, but it did not provide further 
improvement. 
The spurious errors made by the prediction 
rules reveal both the shortcomings of ignoring 
event reporting order and the restricted matching 
on event arguments. 
For example, in the following sentences: 
 [Context Sentence] 
American troops stormed a presidential palace and 
other key buildings in Baghdad as U.S. tanks rum-
bled into the heart of the battered Iraqi capital on 
Monday amid the thunder of gunfire and explo-
sions? 
[Sentence including EMj] 
At the palace compound, Iraqis shot <instru-
ment>small arms</instrument> fire from a clock 
tower, which the U.S. tanks quickly destroyed. 
[Sentence including EMi]  
The first one was on Saturday and triggered in-
tense <instrument>gun</instrument> battles, 
which according to some U.S. accounts, left at least 
2,000 Iraqi fighters dead. 
 
The time argument ?Saturday? was mistakenly 
propagated from the ?Conflict-Attack? event 
?battles? to ?shot? because they share the same 
Time-cue role ?instrument? (?small arms/gun?). 
However, the correct time argument for the 
?shot? event should be ?Monday? as indicated in 
the ?gunfire/explosions? event in the previous 
context sentence. But since the ?shot? event 
doesn?t share any arguments with ?gun-
fire/explosions?, our approach failed to obtain 
any evidence for propagating ?Monday?. In the 
future we plan to incorporate the distance and 
event reporting order as additional features and 
constraints. 
Nevertheless, as Table 2 indicates, the rewards 
of using propagation rules outweigh the risks 
because it can successfully predict a lot of un-
known time arguments which were not possible 
using the traditional time argument extraction 
techniques. 
6 Conclusion and Future Work 
In this paper we described two approaches to 
predict unknown time arguments based on the 
inference and propagation between related events. 
In the future we shall improve the confidence 
estimation of the Maximum Entropy classifier so 
that we could incorporate dynamic features from 
the high-confidence time arguments which have 
already been predicted. We also plan to test the 
effectiveness of this system in textual inference, 
temporal event linking and event coreference 
resolution. We are also interested in extending 
these approaches to the setting of cross-
document, so that we can predict more time ar-
guments based on the background knowledge 
from related documents.  
Acknowledgments 
This material is based upon work supported by 
the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency 
under Contract No. HR0011-06-C-0023 via 27-
001022, and the CUNY Research Enhancement 
Program and GRTI Program. 
References  
David Ahn, Steven Schockaert, Martine De Cock and 
Etienne Kerre. 2006. Supporting Temporal Ques-
tion Answering: Strategies for Offline Data Collec-
tion. Proc. 5th International Workshop on Infer-
ence in Computational Semantics (ICoS-5). 
Regina Barzilay, Noemie Elhadad and Kathleen 
McKeown. 2002. Inferring Strategies for Sentence 
Ordering in Multidocument Summarization. JAIR, 
17:35-55. 
Chitta Baral, Gregory Gelfond, Michael Gelfond and 
Richard B. Scherl. 2005. Proc. AAAI'05 Workshop 
on Inference for Textual Question Answering. 
Steven Bethard, James H. Martin and Sara Klingen-
stein. 2007. Finding Temporal Structure in Text: 
Machine Learning of Syntactic Temporal Relations. 
International Journal of Semantic Computing 
(IJSC), 1(4), December 2007. 
Nathanael Chambers, Shan Wang and Dan Jurafsky. 
2007. Classifying Temporal Relations Between 
Events. Proc. ACL2007. 
H. P. Edmundson. 1969. New Methods in Automatic 
Extracting. Journal of the ACM. 16(2):264-285. 
Vladimir Eidelman. 2008. Inferring Activity Time in 
News through Event Modeling. Proc. ACL-HLT 
2008.  
Elena Filatova and Eduard Hovy. 2001. Assigning 
Time-Stamps to Event-Clauses. Proc. ACL 2001 
Workshop on Temporal and Spatial Information 
Processing. 
Heng Ji and Zheng Chen. 2009. Cross-document 
Temporal and Spatial Person Tracking System 
Demonstration. Proc. HLT-NAACL 2009. 
Mirella Lapata and Alex Lascarides. 2006. Learning 
Sentence-internal Temporal Relations. Journal of 
Artificial Intelligence Research 27. pp. 85-117. 
Inderjeet Mani, Barry Schiffman and Jianping Zhang. 
2003. Inferring Temporal Ordering of Events in 
News. Proc. HLT-NAACL 2003. 
372
