Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 92?95,
Suntec, Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Resource Report: Building Parallel Text Corpora for                                      Multi-Domain Translation System   
Budiono, Hammam Riza, Chairil Hakim Science and Technology Network Information Center (IPTEKnet) Agency for the Assessment and Application of Technology (BPPT), Jakarta, INDONESIA budi@iptek.net.id, hammam@iptek.net.id, chairil@iptek.net.id    Abstract  Parallel text is one of the most valuable resources for development of statistical machine translation systems and other NLP applications. However, manual translations are very costly, and the number of known parallel text is limited. Hence, our research started with creating and collecting a large amount of parallel text resources for Indonesian-English. We describe in this paper the creation of parallel corpora: ANTARA News, BPPT-PANL and BTEC-ATR. In order to be useful, these resources must be available in reasonable quantities and qualities to be useful for statistical approaches to language processing. We describe problem and solution as well robust tools and annotation schema to build and process these corpora. 
1. Introduction In recent years, our research focuses in developing Open Source Toolkit for English-Indonesian translation system. We need to build a good quality with reasonable size of parallel corpus in Indonesian-English. We started by collecting Indonesian corpus and perform raw corpus cleaning, translation, alignment and XML tagging. The alignment at sentence levels makes parallel corpora both more interesting and more useful. As long as parallel corpora exist, sentence aligned parallel corpora is an issue which is solved by sentence aligners. In our case, the alignment is performed manually by hand while doing the actual translation.  The task that was carried out by us in gathering corpus was conducted in several stages. Until now, we had several collections 
from various resources. Among them is the collection of ANTARA News corpus, collection of BPPT-PANL corpus and collection of BTEC-ATR corpus. Respectively this work had various Domain (National News, International News, Business/Economy, Politics, Science, Technology, and Sport) and different sources (News agency, Online Publisher, International institution) leading toward different handling and process.    2. Collection of ANTARA Corpus  ANTARA is the national news agency of Indonesia that has a collection of news articles available in two languages, Bahasa Indonesia and English. ANTARA develop a large news collection for the last 10 years, for various domains, i.e. political news, economics news, international news, national news, sport news, science news and entertainment news. All of these news articles were stored in a database system (Oracle) as comparable corpora and the structure of the database did not have the key pairs between one news article written in Indonesian and the one in English news article.  At the beginning, we had a long tedious process for reaching an agreement between the two sides, ANTARA and BPPT.  We asked permission to use these data for our researches to develop automatic translation which in return will help ANTARA?s journalist and reporters for translation. In addition, the resulting work will benefit both ANTARA and BPPT in the form of alignment of news articles and key pairs for database improvement. The main problem is transforming this comparable corpus into parallel corpus. We should distinguish between Parallel Corpora with Comparable Corpora. The latter (comparable corpora) are texts in different 
92
languages with the same main topic. A set of news articles, from journals or news broadcast systems, as they refer the same event in different languages can be considered as Comparable Corpora. Consider a news item about the September 11 tragedy. Different newspapers, in different languages will refer the World Trade Center, airplanes, Bin Laden and a lot of other specific words. This is the case of Comparable Corpora which can be used by translators who know day-to-day language but need to learn how to translate a specific term.   
  Figure 1. ANTARA Corpus Processing   The number of data?s that was used is between the period of year 2000 to 2007 and the articles were taken in stages, in SQL format, amounting to 250.000 sentence pairs (2.5 Million words). These data, afterwards was processed by referring to the news title in respective article to become article pairs. After this article fitting was finished, the next step was to make the pairs of sentence and then the result was store in a new table of database. The work scheme of ANTARA corpus collection is given below in Figure 1. During the alignment process, the sentences were reviewed manually, by means of election against the quality of the translations. The toggle cleaning stage is used for the process of cleaning of the punctuation mark like [? ! ? ? ? ? : ; {}]. Afterwards, these sentences pairs was separated into two documents, each for Indonesian and English and put into SGML format. Attention has to be made to keep the consistency of translation from the comparable corpora into parallel corpora. The ANTARA corpus is used for building machine translation using an open source 
MOSES SMT. It can be reported here that the BLEU score of 0.76 can be reached by using 1 Million words training set.  3. Collection of BPPT-PANL Corpus  The creation of this corpus is divided into 3 steps [6]. First step is the translation of Indonesian corpus; the second step is the alignment process and resolving issues and followed by tagging of corpus using XML schema in step 3.  
 Figure 2. BPPT-PANL Corpus Development 3.1  Translation of Indonesian Corpus We have collected corpora in Bahasa Indonesia covering various domains. This corpus is collected from various online sources which we can apply Creative Commons IPR to its content [2].  Translation, in our project definition, is the semantic and syntactic transfer from a sentence written in Bahasa Indonesia to a sentence in English language. This definition is rigidly constructed, in order to preserve sentence alignment between the original text and the target text in English.  If we are going to translate and align sentences, then obviously we must clarify what we understand by sentence. While most people have strong intuitions about what is a sentence 
Creative Common Online Document ?Raw Corpus?  Corpus Article  Sentence Corpus  
Translator 1 Indonesian-English  Translator 2 Indonesian-English  
Translator Reviewer (E-I)  Alignment XML Tagging  Paralel Corpus Indonesian - English  
ANTARA News Agency (Oracle DB) Selection and transformation 
Selected DB (Comparable Corpora) Alignment sentences 
Pairs Corpus Indonesia-English 
Clean Corpus 
Toggle cleaning 
Conversion to text 
Indonesia text English text Conversion to SGML 
Indonesia SGML English SGML 
93
and what is not, there is no universal definition of that notion. Before we set out on devising one, however, it should be noted that because PANL-BPPT Corpus is primarily intended to be used as a training text for statistical machine translation systems, both the exact translation and the actual segmentation of the text that results from translation are crucially important. Our main concern in this regard was to come up with some guidelines for translation that would be both practical for the translators and aligners as well as it is useful for the end-users of the corpus. We started out with something relatively straightforward, which we then expanded as needed.  Of course, given the relative vagueness of the definitions of sentence and translation given above, it was clear that in many situations, arbitrary decisions would have to be made. Our human aligners were instructed to be as consistent as possible. But even then, because of the repetitive nature of the task, errors had to be expected. 3.2 Alignment of Parallel Texts A parallel text alignment describes the relations that exist between a text and its translation. These relations can be viewed at various levels of granularity: between text divisions, paragraphs, sentences, propositions, words, even characters. While it would certainly have been interesting to produce finer-grain alignments, it was decided that BPPT-PANL Corpus would record correspondences at the level of sentences. This decision was based on a number of factors. First, sentence-level alignments have so far proved very useful in a number of applications, which could be characterized as high recall, low precision applications, i.e. applications where it is more important to have all the answers to a specific question than to have only the good ones.  Secondly is the automatic acquisition of information about translation, as was proposed in [1] as part of a project to build a machine translation system entirely based on statistical knowledge. Such statistical models need to be trained with large quantities of parallel text. Intuitively, the ideal training material for this task would be parallel text aligned at the level of words. Yet, because these models picture the translation process in an extremely simplified 
manner, reliable statistical estimates can nevertheless be obtained from much less precise data, such as pairs of sentences. For all these reasons, we decided that it would be more appropriate initially to concentrate on sentence-level alignments. Furthermore, we decided to restrict ourselves to ?non-crossing? alignments, which is a parallel segmentation of the two texts, into an equal number of segments, such that the nth segment in one text and the nth segment in the other text are translations of one another [4]. It was suggested that all the texts would be aligned twice, each time by a different aligner. The resulting alignments would then be compared, so as to detect any discrepancies between the two. The aligners were then asked to conciliate these differences together. Because the entire BPPT-PANL corpus was aligned by the same two aligners, this way of proceeding not only minimized the number of errors; it also ensured that both aligners had the same understanding of the guidelines. 3.3  Corpus Tagging SGML and XML played a major part in the BNC project [3] which serve as an interchange medium between the various data-providers, as a target application-independent format; and as the vehicle for expression of metadata and linguistic interpretations encoded within the corpus. From the start of the project, it was recognized that we have to choose a standard format such as TEI P4 or XML in order to maintain the corpus for long term storage and also enable distribution of the data. The importance of XML as an application independent encoding format is also becoming apparent, as a wide range of applications for it begin to be realized. The basic structural mark up of texts may be summarized as follows. Each of the documents or text source articles making up the corpus is represented by a single <corpus> element, containing a header <domain> and <language>, and followed by sentence ID <number>. The header element contains detailed and richly structured metadata supplying a variety of contextual information about the document (its domain, source, encoding, etc., as defined by the Text Encoding Initiative). Sample tagging for English as follows:  
94
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="iso-8859-1" ?> <corpus>  <national>   <language>english</language>   <id>1</id>   <sentence>The Indian government is providing scholarships to 20 Indonesian students annually including for university graduate and post-graduate studies.</sentence>  </national> </corpus>   4. Collection of BTEC-ATR Corpus BTEC was the abbreviation from Basic Travel Expression Corpus.  This corpus this was the everyday normal conversational speech mostly use in traveling and tourism. The source corpus was in monolingual English belonging to NICT-ATR Japan.  As part of A-STAR project cooperation [5], our task was to do the manual translation from English to Indonesian. Similar to the method that was used in developing BPPT-PANL corpus collection; we developed 153.000 utterances into parallel corpora. Additionally, we developed POS Tagging, syllabification and word-stress into this corpus. The main difference was BPPT-PANL originated in monolingual Indonesian that was taken from the domain international, national, economics, sport and science whereas BTEC-ATR originated in speech of English in the travel domain.             5. Summary After many attempts for having a reasonable size of parallel text for statistical machine translation experiments, we are now having a good quality of parallel corpus collection in Bahasa Indonesia and English as follows:  Name Size Domain Origin Annotation Scheme 
ANTARA 250K sentences News (National Economy) ANTARA News Agency TEI P4 BPPT-PANL  500K words News (Busines, Science) Online Publisher TEI, XML, TMX BTEC-ATR 153K sentences Travel NICT-ATR XML INC-IX 100K sentences Parliament Report BPPT  GDA   References  [1] Brown, P. F., Pietra, S. A. D., Pietra, V. J. D., and Mercer, R. L. (1993). The Mathematics of Machine Translation: Parameter Estimation. Computational Linguistics, 19(2). [2] Wikipedia Creative Commons Website, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/, retrieved August 08 [3] Aston, G. and Burnard, L. The BNC Handbook Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press., 1998 [4] Simard, M. and Plamondon, P. (1996). Bilingual Sentence Alignment: Balancing Robustness and Accuracy. In Proceedings of AMTA-96, Montr?al, Canada. [5] Sakriani Sakti, Eka Kelana, Hammam Riza (BPPT), Satoshi Nakamura, Large Vocabulary ASR for Indonesian Language in the A-STAR Project, 2007. [6] Riza, Hammam, et.al, PAN Localization Project Report. BPPT, 2008-2009.  
95
Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, pages 9?13,
Beijing, China, 21-22 August 2010. c?2010 Asian Federation for Natural Language Processing
Collaborative Work on Indonesian Wordet through  
Asian Wordet (AW) 
Hammam Riza 
Agency for the Assessment 
and Application of 
Technology (BPPT), 
Indonesia 
hammam@iptek.net.id 
 
Budiono 
Agency for the Assessment 
and Application of 
Technology (BPPT), 
Indonesia 
budi@iptek.net.id 
Chairil Hakim 
Agency for the Assessment 
and Application of 
Technology (BPPT), 
Indonesia 
chairil@iptek.net.id 
Abstract 
 
This paper describes collaborative work 
on developing Indonesian WordNet in 
the AsianWordNet (AWN). We will de-
scribe the method to develop for colla-
borative editing to review and complete 
the translation of synset. This paper aims 
to create linkage among Asian languages 
by adopting the concept of semantic re-
lations and synset expressed in Word-
Net. 
 
1  Introduction 
 
Multilingual lexicons is of foremost importance 
for intercultural collaboration to take place, as 
multilingual lexicons are several multilingual 
application such as Machine Translation, 
terminology, multilingual computing.  
WordNet is the resource used to identify shallow 
semantic features that can be attached to lexical 
units. The original WordNet is English WordNet 
proposed and developed at Princeton University 
WordNet (PWN) by using bilingual dictionary.  
In the era of globalization, communication 
among languages becomes much more 
important. People has been hoping that natural 
language processing and speech processing. We 
can assist in smoothening the communication 
among people with different languages. 
However, especially for Indonesian language, 
there were only few researches in the past. 
The Princeton WordNet is one of the semantical-
ly English lexical banks containing semantic 
relationships between words. Concept mapping 
is a process of organizing to forming meaningful 
relationships between them. 
The goal of Indonesian AWN database man-
agement system is to share a multilingual lexical 
database of Indonesian language which are 
structured along the same lines as the AWN. 
AWN is the result of the collaborative effort in 
creating an interconnected Wordnet for Asian 
languages. AWN provides a free and public plat-
form for building and sharing among AWN. The 
distributed database system and user-friendly 
tools have been developed for user. AWN is 
easy to build and share. 
This paper describes manual interpretation me-
thod of Indonesian for AWN. Based on web ser-
vices architecture focusing on the particular 
cross-lingual distributed. We use collective in-
telligence approach to build this English equiva-
lent. In this sequel, in section 2 the collabora-
tions builders works on web interface at 
www.asianwordnet.org. In section 3, Interpretation 
of Indonesian AWN, short description of 
progress of English ? Indonesian translation and 
the obstacle of translation. 
 
2  Collaborative AW 
 
WordNet covers the vast majority of nouns, 
verbs, adjectives and adverbs from English lan-
guage. The words are organized in synonym sets 
called synset. Each synset represents a concept 
includes an impressive number of semantic rela-
tions defined across concepts. 
The information encoded in WordNet is used in 
several stages in the parsing process. For in-
stance, attribute relations, adjective/adverb clas-
sifications, and others are semantic features ex-
tracted from WordNet and stored together with  
the words, so that they can be directly used by 
the semantic parser. 
9
To build language WordNet there are two main 
of discussion; the merge approach and the ex-
pand approach. The merge approach is to build 
the taxonomies of the language (synset) using 
English equivalent words from bilingual dictio-
naries. The expand approach is to map translate 
local words the bilingual dictionaries. This ap-
proach show the relation between senses. The 
system manages the synset assignment accord-
ing to the preferred score obtained from the revi-
sion process. For the result, the community will 
be accomplish into original form of WordNet 
database. The synset can generate a cross lan-
guage result. 
AWN also introduce a web-based collaborative 
workbench, for revising the result of synset as-
signment and provide a framework to create 
AWN via linkage through PWN synset. AWN 
enables to connect and collaborate among indi-
vidual intelligence in order accomplish a text 
files.  
At present, there are ten Asian language in the 
community. The amount of the translated syn-
sets had been increased. Many language have 
collaboration in AWN. 
? Agency for the Assessment and 
Application of Technology (BPPT), 
Indonesia 
? National Institute of Information and 
Communications Technology (NICT), 
Japan 
? Thai Computational Linguistics 
Laboratory (TCL), Thailand 
? National Electronics and Computer 
Technology Center (NECTEC), 
Thailand 
? National University of Mongolia 
(NUM), Mongolia 
? Myanmar Computer Federation (MCF), 
Myanmar 
? National Authority of Science and 
Technology (NAST), Lao PDR 
? Madan Puraskar Pustakalaya (MPP), 
Nepal  
? University of Colombo School of 
Computing (UCSC), SriLanka 
? Vietnamese Academy of Science and 
Technology (VAST), Vietnam 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 1. Collaboration on Asian WordNet 
 
3  Interpretation of Indonesian AW 
 
Indonesian WordNet have been used as a gener-
al-purpose translation.   Our approach was to 
generate the query for the web services engine in 
English and then to translate every key element 
of the query (topic, focus, keywords) into Indo-
nesian without modifying the query. The dictio-
nary is distinguished by set of entry word cha-
racteristic, clear definitions, its guidance on 
usage. All dictionary information for entries is 
structured such as entry word, multiple word 
entries, notes, contemporary definitions, deriva-
tions, example sentence, idioms, etc. All dictio-
nary are implemented as text-files and as lin-
guistic databases connected to Indonesian AWN. 
The set of language tags consists of part of 
speech, case, gender, number, tense, person, 
voice, aspect, mood, form, type, reflexive, ani-
mation. 
 
3.1  Progress English ? Indonesian 
 
Indonesian WordNet is used Word Net Man-
agement System (WNMS) tools developed by 
AsianWordNet to create web services among 
Asia languages based on Princeton WordNet? 
version 3.0, Co-operation by TCL and BPPT 
establish on October 2007. 
As presented above, we follow the merge to 
create and share the Indonesian WordNet by 
translating the each synonym translation. We 
expand an appropriate synset to a lexical entry 
by considering its English equivalent. 
We plan to have reliable process to create and 
share Indonesian WordNet in AWN. We classify 
this work into four person AWN translators to 
participate in the project of Indonesian AWN. 
AsianWordNet 
Mongolia 
NUM 
Myanmar 
MCF 
Lao PDR 
NAST 
Nepal 
MPP 
Sri Langka 
UCSC 
Thailand TCL NEC-
Vietnam 
VAST 
Japan 
NICT 
Indonesia 
BPPT 
10
Each person was given a target translator in a 
month should reach at least 3000 sense so that 
the total achievement 12000 senses in a month. 
From 117.659 senses that there is expected to be 
completed within 10 months. On the process of 
mapping, a unique word will be generated for 
every lexical entry which contain. The grammat-
ical dictionaries contain normalized entry word 
with hyphenation paradigm plus grammatical 
tags. 
 
 Assignment TOTAL 
March April May sense 
Noun 10560 14199 16832 82115 
verb 6444 6444 6499 13767 
Adjective 1392 1392 1936 18156 
Adverb 481 481 488 3621 
Total 18877 22516 25755 117659 
 
Table 1. Statistic of synsets 
 
In the evaluation of our approach for synset as-
signment, we selected randomly sense from the 
the result of synset assignment to English ? In-
donesian dictionary for manually checking. The 
random set cover all types of part-of-speech. 
With the best information of English equivalents 
marked with CS=5. The word entry must be 
translated into the appropriate words by meaning 
explanation. 
Table 1. presents total assignment translated 
words into Indonesian for the second third 
month.  Following the manual to translate the 
English AWN to Indonesian, we resulted the 
progress of AWN at this time.  
We start to translate or edit from some group of 
base type in ?By Category?. These base types 
are based on categories from PWN. There is on-
ly 21.89% ( approved 25,755 of 117,659 senses ) 
of the total number of the synsets that were able 
to be assigned to lexical entry in the Indonesian 
? English Dictionary. 
 
3.2  Obstacle of Indonesian Translation 
 
Wordnet has unique meaning of word which is 
presented in synonym set. Each synset has glos-
sary which defines concept its representation. 
For examples word car, auto, automobile, and 
motorcar has one synset. 
An automatic compilation of dictionary in AWN 
have a translational issues. There are many cases 
in explanation sense. One word in English will 
be translated into a lot of Indonesian words, 
glossary can be express more than one Indone-
sian word (Ex. 1).  
One of the main obstacles in studying the ab-
sorption of English words in Indonesian words, 
is the fact that the original form of some words 
that have been removed due to Indonesian 
reform process, in which some words have been 
through an artificial process. There is no special 
character in Indonesian word, especially in tech-
nical word, so that means essentially the same as 
the English word (Ex. 2).  
  
Ex. 1. time frame  
 POS  noun time 
 synset  time_frame 
 gloss  a time period 
   during which 
   something 
   occurs or is  
   expected to occur; 
   an agreement can 
   be reached in 
   a reasonably  
   short time frame" 
 Indonesian jangka waktu, 
   selang waktu 
 
Ex. 2.  resolution 
 POS  noun phenomenon  
 synset  resolution  
 gloss  (computer science) 
    the number  
   of pixels per 
   square inch on 
   a computer   
   generated display;  
   the greater  
   the resolution, the  
   better the picture 
 Indonesian resolusi 
 
Using definitions from the WordNet electronic 
lexical database. A major problem in natural 
language processing is that of lexical ambiguity, 
be it syntactic. Each single words must be con-
tainer for some part of the linguistic knowledge 
need to ambiguous wordnet sense. Therefore, 
11
not only a single heuristic translate Indonesian 
words. The WordNet defined in some semantic 
relations, this categories using lexicographer file 
and glossary definitions relations are assigned to 
weight in the range. WordNet hierarchy for the 
first sense of the word ?empty? there are 10  
synset words (I take three of ten) that are related 
to the meaning are the following in ( Ex. 3.) 
Three concepts recur in WordNet literature that 
entail a certain amount of ambiguity : termino-
logical distance, semantic distance and concep-
tual distance. Terminological distance, by con-
trast, often appears to refer to the suitability of 
the word selected to express a given concept. 
Semantic distance is understood to mean the 
contextual factor of precision in meaning. And 
the conceptual distance between words, in which 
have relations proved. 
 
Ex. 3.  empty 
 POS  noun art  
 synset  empty  
 gloss  a container that  
   has been  
   emptied; "return  
   all empties to  
   the store" 
 Indonesian hampa 
 
 empty 
 POS  verb change  
 synset  empty, discharge 
 gloss  become empty or 
    void of its  
   content; "The  
   room emptied" 
 Indonesian mengosongkan 
 
 empty 
 POS  adjectives all 
 synset  empty 
 gloss  emptied of emotion; 
   "after  the violent 
   argument he felt  
empty" 
 Indonesian kosong, penat 
 
Disambiguation is unquestionably the most ab-
undant and varied application. It  precision and 
relevance in response to a query  inconsisten-
cies. Schematically the semantic disambiguation 
are selected in the glossaries of each noun, verb, 
and adjectives and its subordinates. 
WordNet information, whose objective is to 
build designs for the association between sen-
tences and coherence relations as well as to find 
lexical characteristics in coherence categories. 
WordNet became an ancillary tool for semantic 
ontology design geared to high quality informa-
tion extraction from the web services. 
A comparative analysis of trends in wordnet use 
: 
 
1. Support for the design of grammatical 
categories designed to classify 
information by aspects and traits, but in 
particular to design and classify 
semantic ontologies. 
2. Basis for the development of audio-
visual and multi-media information 
retrieval systems.  
 
4  Internet Viewer 
 
The pilot internet service based on Wordnet 3.0 
is published at http://id.asianwordnet.org. 
 
5  Discussion and Conclusion 
 
Any multilingual process such as cross-lingual 
information must involve resources and lan-
guage pair. Language specific can be applied in 
parallel to achieve best result.  
In this paper we describe manually sharing of 
Indonesian in the AWN by using  dictionaries. 
AWN provides a free and public platform for 
building and sharing among AWN. We want 
continue the work defined learning  the service 
matching system. Our future work on AWN will 
focuses in development platform WordNet and 
language technology web services. 
Although AWN application are going steadily, 
the limitations are: 
 
1. AWN designed for manual so 
authenticity can not be a reference. 
 
2. Classification was performed manually, 
which means that the reasons and depth 
of classification may not be consistent.  
 
 
12
References 
Valenina Balkova, Andrey Suhonogov, Sergey 
Yablonsky. 2004. Rusian WordNet: From          
UML-notation to Internet/Infranet Database  
Implementation. In Porceedings of the Second    
International WordNet Conference (GWC   
2004), 
Riza, H., Budiono,  Adiansya P., Henky M., 
(2008). I/ETS: Indonesian-English Machine 
Translation System using Collaborative P2P 
Corpus, Agency for the Assessment and 
Application of Technology (BPPT), 
Indonesia, University of North Texas. 
Shi, Lei., Rada Mehalcea, (2005), Putting Pieces 
Together : Combining FrameNet, VerbNet, 
and WordNet for Robust Semantic Parsing 
Thoongsup, S., Kergrit Robkop, Chumpol 
Mokarat, Tan Sinthurahat, (2009). Thai 
WordNet Construction.  Thai Computational 
Linguistics Lab., Thailand 
Virach Sornlertlamvanich., The 5th International 
Conference of the Global WordNet 
Association (GWC-2010), Mumbai, India , 
31st Jan. - 4th Feb., 2010. 
Fragos, Kostas, Yannis Maistros, Christos 
Skourlas, (2004). Word Sense Disambiguation 
using WORDNET relations. Dep. Of 
Computer Engineering  NTUA, Greece. 
www.asianwordnet.org 
 
13
