Proceedings of the EACL 2009 Workshop on Language Technologies for African Languages ? AfLaT 2009, pages 17?24,
Athens, Greece, 31 March 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Information Structure in African Languages: Corpora and Tools 
Christian Chiarcos*, Ines Fiedler**, Mira Grubic*, Andreas Haida**, Katharina 
Hartmann**, Julia Ritz*, Anne Schwarz**, Amir Zeldes**, Malte Zimmermann* 
 
* Universit?t Potsdam 
Potsdam, Germany 
{chiarcos|grubic| 
julia|malte}@ 
ling.uni-potsdam.de 
** Humboldt-Universit?t zu Berlin 
Berlin, Germany 
{ines.fiedler|andreas.haida| 
k.hartmann|anne.schwarz| 
amir.zeldes}@rz.hu-berlin.de 
 
Abstract 
In this paper, we describe tools and resources 
for the study of African languages developed 
at the Collaborative Research Centre ?Infor-
mation Structure?. These include deeply anno-
tated data collections of 25 subsaharan 
languages that are described together with 
their annotation scheme, and further, the cor-
pus tool ANNIS that provides a unified access 
to a broad variety of annotations created with a 
range of different tools. With the application 
of ANNIS to several African data collections, 
we illustrate its suitability for the purpose of 
language documentation, distributed access 
and the creation of data archives. 
1 Information Structure 
The Collaborative Research Centre (CRC) 
"Information structure: the linguistic means for 
structuring utterances, sentences and texts" 
brings together scientists from different fields of 
linguistics and neighbouring disciplines from the 
University of Potsdam and the Humboldt-
University Berlin. Our research comprises the 
use and advancement of corpus technologies for 
complex linguistic annotations, such as the 
annotation of information structure (IS). We 
define IS as the structuring of linguistic 
information in order to optimize information 
transfer within discourse: information needs to 
be prepared ("packaged") in different ways 
depending on the goals a speaker pursues within 
discourse.  
Fundamental concepts of IS include the 
concepts `topic?, `focus?, `background? and 
`information status?. Broadly speaking, the topic 
is the entity a specific sentence is construed 
about, focus represents the new or newsworthy 
information a sentence conveys, background is 
that part of the sentence that is familiar to the 
hearer, and information status refers to different 
degrees of familiarity of an entity.  
Languages differ wrt. the means of realization 
of IS, due to language-specific properties (e.g., 
lexical tone). This makes a typological 
comparison of traditionally less-studied 
languages to existing theories, mostly on 
European languages, very promising. Particular 
emphasis is laid on the study of focus, its 
functions and manifestations in different 
subsaharan languages, as well as the 
differentiation between different types of focus, 
i.e., term focus (focus on arguments/adjuncts), 
predicate focus (focus on verb/verb 
phrase/TAM/truth value), and sentence focus 
(focus on the whole utterance). 
We describe corpora of 25 subsaharan 
languages created for this purpose, together with 
ANNIS, the technical infrastructure developed to 
support linguists in their work with these data 
collections. ANNIS is specifically designed to 
support corpora with rich and deep annotation, as 
IS manifests itself on practically all levels of 
linguistic description. It provides user-friendly 
means of querying and visualizations for 
different kinds of linguistic annotations, 
including flat, layer-based annotations as used 
for linguistic glosses, but also hierarchical 
annotations as used for syntax annotation. 
2 Research Activities at the CRC 
Within the Collaborative Research Centre, there 
are several projects eliciting data in large 
amounts and great diversity. These data, 
originating from different languages, different 
modes (written and spoken language) and 
specific research questions characterize the 
specification of the linguistic database ANNIS. 
2.1 Linguistic Data Base 
The project ?Linguistic database for information 
structure: Annotation and Retrieval?, further 
17
database project, coordinates annotation 
activities in the CRC, provides service to projects 
in the creation and maintenance of data 
collections, and conducts theoretical research on 
multi-level annotations. Its primary goals, 
however, are the development and investigation 
of techniques to process, to integrate and to 
exploit deeply annotated corpora with multiple 
kinds of annotations. One concrete outcome of 
these efforts is the linguistic data base ANNIS 
described further below. For the specific 
facilities of ANNIS, its application to several 
corpora of African languages and its use as a 
general-purpose tool for the publication, 
visualization and querying of linguistic data, see 
Sect. 5. 
 
2.2 Gur and Kwa Languages 
 
Gur and Kwa languages, two genetically related 
West African language groups, are in the focus of 
the project ?Interaction of information structure 
and grammar in Gur and Kwa languages?, 
henceforth Gur-Kwa project. In a first research 
stage, the precise means of expression of the 
pragmatic category focus were explored as well 
as their functions in Gur and Kwa languages. For 
this purpose, a number of data collections for 
several languages were created (Sect. 3.1). 
Findings obtained with this data led to different 
subquestions which are of special interest from a 
cross-linguistic and a theoretical point of view.  
These concern (i) the analysis of syntactically 
marked focus constructions with features of 
narrative sentences (Schwarz & Fiedler 2007), 
(ii) the study of verb-centered focus (i.e., focus 
on verb/TAM/truth value), for which there are 
special means of realization in Gur and Kwa 
(Schwarz, forthcoming), (iii) the identification of 
systematic focus-topic-overlap, i.e., coincidence 
of focus and topic in sentence-initial nominal 
constituents (Fiedler, forthcoming). The project's 
findings on IS are evaluated typologically on 19 
selected languages. The questions raised by the 
project serve the superordinate goal to expand 
our knowledge of linguistically relevant 
information structural categories in the less-
studied Gur and Kwa languages as well as the 
interaction between IS, grammar and language 
type. 
2.3 Chadic Languages 
The project ?Information Structure in the Chadic 
Languages?, henceforth Chadic project, 
investigates focus phenomena in Chadic 
languages.  The Chadic languages are a branch of 
the Afro-Asiatic language family mainly spoken 
in northern Nigeria, Niger, and Chad. As tone 
languages, the Chadic languages represent an 
interesting subject for research into focus 
because here, intonational/tonal marking ? a 
commonly used means for marking focus in 
European languages ? is in potential conflict 
with lexical tone, and so, Chadic languages 
resort to alternative means for marking focus.  
The languages investigated in the Chadic 
project include the western Chadic languages 
Hausa, Tangale, and Guruntum and the central 
Chadic languages Bura, South Marghi, and Tera. 
The main research goals of the Chadic project 
are a deeper understanding of the following 
asymmetries: (i) subject focus is obligatorily 
marked, but marking of object focus is optional; 
(ii) in Tangale and Hausa there are sentences that 
are ambiguous between an object-focus 
interpretation and a predicate-focus 
interpretation, but in intonation languages like 
English and German, object focus and predicate 
focus are always marked differently from each 
other; (iii) in Hausa, Bole, and Guruntum there is 
only a tendency to distinguish different types of 
focus (new-information focus vs. contrastive 
focus), but in European languages like 
Hungarian and Finnish, this differentiation is 
obligatory. 
2.4 Focus from a Cross-linguistic 
Perspective 
The project "Focus realization, focus 
interpretation, and focus use from a cross-
linguistic perspective", further focus project, 
investigates the correspondence between the 
realization, interpretation and use of with an 
emphasis on focus in African and south-east 
Asian languages. It is structured into three fields 
of research: (i) the relation between differences 
in realization and differences in semantic 
meaning or pragmatic function, (ii) realization, 
interpretation and use of predicate focus, and (iii) 
association with focus.  
The relation between differences in realization 
and semantic/pragmatic differences (i) 
particularly pertains the semantic interpretation 
of focus: For Hungarian and Finnish, a 
differentiation between two semantic types of 
foci corresponding to two different types of 
focus realization was suggested, and we 
investigate whether the languages studied here 
have a similar distinction between two (or more) 
semantic focus types, whether this may differ 
18
from language to language, and whether 
differences in focus realization correspond to 
semantic or pragmatic differences.  
The investigation of realization, interpretation 
and use of predicate focus (ii) involves the 
questions why different forms of predicate focus 
are often realized in the same way, why they are 
often not obligatorily marked, and why they are 
often marked differently from term focus. 
Association with focus (iii) means that the 
interpretation of the sentence is influenced by the 
focusing of a particular constituent, marked by a 
focus-sensitive expression (e.g., particles like 
`only?, or quantificational adverbials like 
`always?), while usually, focus does not have an 
impact on the truth value of a sentence. The 
project investigates which focus-sensitive 
expressions there are in the languages studied, 
what kinds of constituents they associate with, 
how this association works, and whether it works 
differently for focus particles and 
quantificational adverbials. 
3 Collections of African Language Data 
at the CRC 
3.1 Gur and Kwa Corpora 
The Gur and Kwa corpora currently comprise  
data from 19 languages.  
Due to the scarceness of information available 
on IS in the Gur and Kwa languages, data had to 
be elicited, most of which was done during field 
research, mainly in West Africa, and some in 
Germany with the help of native speakers of the 
respective languages. The typologically diverse 
languages in which we elicited data by ourselves 
are: Baatonum, Buli, Byali, Dagbani, Ditammari, 
Gurene, Konkomba, Konni, Nateni, Waama, 
Yom (Gur languages) and Aja, Akan, Efutu, Ewe, 
Fon, Foodo, Lelemi, Anii (Kwa languages). 
The elicitation of the data based mainly on the 
questionnaire on information structure, 
developed by our research group (QUIS, see 
Section 4.2). This ensured that  comparable data 
for the typological comparison were obtained. 
Moreover, language-specific additional tasks and 
questionnaires tailored to a more detailed 
analysis or language-specific traits were 
developed. 
As the coding of IS varies across different 
types of texts, different text types were included 
in the corpus, such as (semi-)spontaneous 
speech, translations, mono- and dialogues. Most 
of the languages do not have a long literacy 
tradition, so that the corpus data mainly 
represents oral communication. 
In all, the carefully collected heterogeneous 
data provide a corpus that gives a comprehensive 
picture of IS, and in particular the focus systems, 
in these languages.  
3.2 Hausar Baka Corpus 
In the Chadic project, data from 6 Chadic 
languages are considered. 
One of the larger data sets annotated in the 
Chadic project is drawn from Hausar Baka 
(Randell, Bature & Schuh 1998), a collection of 
videotaped Hausa dialogues recording natural 
interaction in various cultural milieus, involving 
over fifty individuals of different age and gender. 
The annotated data set consists of approximately 
1500 sentences.  
The corpus was annotated according to the 
guidelines for Linguistic Information Structure 
Annotation (LISA, see Section 4.2). The Chadic 
languages show various forms of syntactic 
displacement, and in order to account for this, an 
additional annotation level was added: 
constituents are marked as ex-situ=?+?  if 
they occur displaced from their canonical, 
unmarked position. 
An evaluation of the focus type and the 
displacement status reveals tendencies in the 
morphosyntactic realization of different focus 
types, see Sect. 5.2. 
3.3 Hausa Internet Corpus 
Besides these data collections that are currently 
available in the CRC and in ANNIS, further 
resources are continuously created. As such, a 
corpus of written Hausa is created in cooperation 
with another NLP project of the CRC.   
The corpora previously mentioned mostly 
comprise elicited sentences from little-
documented languages with rather small 
language communities. Hausa, in contrast, is 
spoken by more than 24 million native speakers, 
with large amounts of Hausa material (some of it 
parallel to material in other, more-studied 
languages) available on the internet. This makes 
Hausa a promising language for the creation of 
resources that enable a quantitative study of 
information structure.  
The Hausa internet corpus is designed to cover 
different kinds of written language, including 
news articles from international radio stations 
(e.g., http://www.dw-world.de), religious texts, 
literary prose but also material similar to 
spontaneous spoken language (e.g., in chat logs). 
19
Parallel sections of the corpus comprise 
excerpts from the novel Ruwan Bagaja by 
Abubakar Imam, Bible and Qur?an sections, and 
the Declaration of Human Rights. As will be 
described in Section 4.3, these parallel sections 
open the possibility of semiautomatic 
morphosyntactic annotation, providing a unique 
source for the study of information structure in 
Hausa. Sect. 5.2 gives an example for 
bootstrapping  ex-situ constituents in 
ANNIS only on the basis of  morphosyntactic 
annotation. 
4 Data Elicitation and Annotation 
4.1 Elicitation with QUIS 
The questionnaire on information structure 
(Skopeteas et al, 2006) provides a tool for the 
collection of natural linguistic data, both spoken 
and written, and, secondly, for the elaboration of 
grammars of IS in genetically diverse languages. 
Focus information, for instance, is typically 
elicited by embedding an utterance in a question 
context. To avoid the influence of a mediator 
(working) language, the main body of QUIS is 
built on the basis of pictures and short movies 
representing a nearly culture- and language-
neutral context. Besides highly controlled 
experimental settings, less controlled settings 
serve the purpose of eliciting longer, cohesive, 
natural texts for studying categories such as 
focus and topic in a near-natural environment. 
4.2 Transcription and Manual Annotation 
In the CRC, the annotation scheme LISA has 
been developed with special respect to 
applicability across typologically different 
languages (Dipper et al, 2007). It comprises 
guidelines for the annotation of phonology, 
morphology, syntax, semantics and IS.  
The data mentioned above is, in the case of 
speech, transcribed according to IPA 
conventions, otherwise written according to 
orthographic conventions, and annotated with 
glosses and IS, a translation of each sentence into 
English or French, (optionally) additional notes, 
references to QUIS experiments, and references 
to audio files and metadata. 
4.3 (Semi-)automatic Annotation 
As to the automization of annotation, we pursue 
two strategies: (i) the training of classifiers on 
annotated data, and (ii) the projection of 
annotations on texts in a source language to 
parallel texts in a target language. 
Machine Learning. ANNIS allows to export 
query matches and all their annotated features to 
the table format ARFF which serves as input to 
the data mining tool WEKA (Witten & Frank, 
2005), where instances can be clustered, or used 
to train classifiers for any annotation level. 
Projection. Based on (paragraph-, sentence- 
or verse-) aligned sections in the Hausa internet 
corpus, we are about to project annotations from 
linguistically annotated English texts to Hausa, 
in a first step parts of speech and possibly  
nominal chunks. On the projected annotation, we 
will train a tagger/chunker to annotate the 
remaining, non-parallel sections of the Hausa 
internet corpus. Existing manual annotations 
(e.g. of the Hausar Baka corpus) will then serve 
as a gold standard for evaluation purposes. 
Concerning projection techniques, we expect 
to face a number of problems: (i) the question 
how to assign part of speech tags to categories 
existing only in the target language (e.g., the 
person-aspect complex in Hausa that binds 
together information about both the verb (aspect) 
and its (pronominal subject) argument),  (ii) 
issues of orthography: the official orthography 
Hausa (Boko) is systematically underspecified 
wrt. linguistically relevant distinctions. Neither 
vowel length nor different qualities of certain 
consonants (r) are represented, and also, there is 
no marking of tones (see Examples 1 and 2, fully 
specified word forms in brackets). To distinguish 
such homographs, however, is essential to the 
appropriate interpretation and linguistic analysis 
of  utterances.  
(1) ciki ? 1. [c?k?i, noun] 
stomach, 2. [c?k?, prep.] 
inside 
(2) dace ? 1. [d?ac?e, noun] 
coincidence, 2. [d?ac?e, verb] 
be appropriate 
 
We expect that in these cases, statistical 
techniques using context features may help to 
predict correct vowelization and tonal patterns. 
5 ANNIS ? the Linguistic Database of 
Information Structure Annotation 
5.1 Conception and Architecture 
ANNIS (ANNotation of Information Structure) 
is a web-based corpus interface built to query 
and visualize multilevel corpora. It allows the 
user to formulate queries on arbitrary, possibly 
nested annotation levels, which may be 
20
conflictingly overlapping or discontinuous. The 
types of annotations handled by ANNIS include, 
among others, flat, layer-based annotations (e.g., 
for glossing) and hierarchical trees (e.g., syntax). 
Source data. As an architecture designed to 
facilitate diverse and integrative research on IS, 
ANNIS can import formats from a broad variety 
of tools from NLP and manual annotation, the 
latter including EXMARaLDA (Schmidt, 2004), 
annotate (Brants and Plaehn, 2000), Synpathy 
(www.lat-mpi.eu/tools/synpathy/), MMAX2 
(M?ller and Strube, 2006), RSTTool (O'Donnell, 
2000), PALinkA (Orasan, 2003), Toolbox 
(Busemann & Busemann, 2008) etc. These tools 
allow researchers to annotate data for syntax, 
semantics, morphology, prosody, phonetics, 
referentiality, lexis and much more, as their 
research questions require. 
All annotated data are merged together via a 
general interchange format PAULA (Dipper 
2005, Dipper & G?tze 2005), a highly expressive 
standoff XML format that specifically allows 
further annotation levels to be added at a later 
time without disrupting the structure of existing 
annotations. PAULA, then, is the native format 
of ANNIS. 
Backend. The ANNIS server uses a relational 
database that offers many advantages including 
full Unicode support and regular expression 
searches. Extensive search functionalities are 
supported, allowing complex relations between 
individual word forms and annotations, such as 
all forms of overlapping, contained or adjacent 
annotation spans, dominance axes (children, 
ancestors etc., as well as common parent, left- or 
right-most child and more), etc. 
Search. In the user interface, queries can be 
formulated using the ANNIS Query Language 
(AQL). It is based on the definition of nodes to 
be searched for and the relationships between 
these nodes (see below for some examples). A 
graphical query builder is also included in the 
web interface to make access as easy as possible. 
Visualization. The web interface, realized as a 
window-based AJAX application written in Java, 
provides visualization facilities for search results. 
Available visualizations include token-based 
annotations, layered annotations, tree-like 
annotations (directed acyclic graphs), and a 
discourse view of entire texts for, e.g., 
coreference annotation. Multimodal data is 
represented using an embedded media player.  
Special features. By allowing queries on 
multiple, conflicting annotation levels 
simultaneously, the system supports the study of 
interdependencies between a potentially limitless 
variety of annotation levels.  
At the same time, ANNIS allows us to 
integrate and to search through heterogeneous 
resources by means of a unified interface, a 
powerful query language and a intuitive 
graphical query editor and is therefore 
particularly well-suited for the purpose of 
language documentation. In particular, ANNIS 
can serve as a tool for the publication of data 
collections via internet. A fine-grained user 
management allows granting privileged users 
access to specific data collections, to make a 
corpus available to the public, or to seal (but 
preserve) a resource, e.g., until legal issues 
(copyright) are settled. This also makes 
publishing linguistic data collections possible 
without giving them away. 
Moreover, ANNIS supports deep links to 
corpora and corpus queries. This means that 
queries and query results referred to in, e.g., a 
scientific paper, can be reproduced and quoted 
by means of (complex) links (see following 
example). 
5.2 Using ANNIS. An Example Query 
As an illustration for the application of ANNIS to 
the data collections presented above, consider a 
research question previously discussed in the 
study of object focus in Hausa. 
In Hausa, object focus can be realized in two 
ways: either ex-situ or in-situ (Section 3.2). It 
was found that these realizations do not differ in 
their semantic type (Green & Jaggar 2003, 
Hartmann & Zimmermann 2007): instead, the 
marked form signals that the focused constituent 
(or the whole speech act) is unexpected for the 
hearer (Zimmermann 2008). These assumptions 
are consistent with findings for other African 
languages (Fiedler et al 2006).  
In order to verify such claims on corpora with 
morphosyntactic and syntactic annotation for the 
example of Hausa, a corpus query can be 
designed on the basis of the Hausar Baka corpus 
that comprises not only annotations for 
grammatical functions and information-structural 
categories, but also an annotation of ex-situ 
elements. 
 
21
So, in (3), we look for ex-situ constituents 
(variable #1) in declarative sentences in the 
Hausa Bakar corpus, i.e., sentences that are not 
translated as questions (variable #2) such that 
#1 is included in #2 (#1 _i_ #2). 
(3) EX-SITU=?+? & 
TRANSLATION=?.*[^?]? &     #1 
_i_ #2 
Considering the first 25 matches for this query 
on Hausar Baka, 16 examples reveal to be 
relevant (excluding interrogative pronouns and 
elliptical utterances). All of these are directly 
preceded by a period (sentence-initial) or a 
comma (preceded by ee ?yes?, interjections or 
exclamations), with one exception, preceded by a 
sentence initial negation marker. 
Only seven examples are morphologically 
marked by focus particles (nee, cee), focus-
sensitive adverbs (kaw?i ?only?) or quantifiers 
(koomee ?every?). In nine cases, a personal 
pronoun follows the ex-situ constituent, followed 
by the verb. Together, these constraints describe 
all examples retrieved, and as a generalization, 
we can now postulate a number of patterns that 
only make use of morphosyntactic and syntactic 
annotation (token tok, morphological 
segmentation MORPH, parts of speech CLASS, 
nominal chunks CHUNK) with two examples 
given below: 
 
 (4) tok=/[,.!?]/ & 
CHUNK=?NC? & MORPH=/[cn]ee/ & 
#1 . #2 & #2 . #3 
 (5) tok=/[,.!?]/ & 
CHUNK=?NC? & CLASS=/PRON.*/ & 
CLASS=/V/ & #1 . #2 &   #2 . 
#3 & #3 . #4 
 
In (4), we search for a nominal chunk 
following a punctuation sign and preceding a 
focus particle (cee or nee), in (5), we search for a 
nominal chunk preceding a sequence of 
pronoun/aspect marker and  verb.  
One example matching template (5) from the 
Hausar Baka corpus is given in Fig. 1. 
While AQL can be used in this way to help 
linguists understand the grammatical realization 
of certain phenomena, and the grammatical 
context they occur in, patterns like (5) above are 
probably not too readable to an interested user. 
This deficit, however, is compensated by the 
graphical query builder that allows users to 
create AQL queries in a more intuitive way, cf. 
Fig. 2. 
Of course, these patterns are not exhaustive 
and overgenerate. However, they can be directly 
evaluated against the manual ex-situ annotation 
in the Hausar Baka corpus and further refined.  
So, the manual annotation of ex-situ 
constituents in the Hausar Baka corpus provides 
templates for the semi-automatic detection of ex-
situ constituents in a morphosyntactically 
annotated corpus of Hausa: The patterns generate 
a set of candidate examples from which a human 
annotator can then choose real ex-situ 
constituents. Indeed, for a better understanding 
of ex-situ object focus, a study with a larger 
database of more natural language would be of 
great advantage, and this pattern-based approach 
represents a way to create such a database of ex-
situ constructions in Hausa. 
Finally, it would also help find instances of 
predicate focus. When a V(P) constituent is 
focused in Hausa, it is nominalized, and fronted 
like a focused nominal constituent (Hartmann & 
Zimmermann 2007). 
5.3 Related Corpus Tools 
Some annotation tools come with search 
facilities, e.g. Toolbox (Busemann & Busemann, 
2008), a system for annotating, managing and 
 
Figure 2: ANNIS Query Builder, cf. example (5). 
 
Figure 1: ANNIS partitur view, Hausar Baka corpus. 
22
analyzing language data, mainly geared to 
lexicographic use, and ELAN (Hellwig et al, 
2008), an annotation tool for audio and video 
data.  
In contrast, ANNIS is not intended to provide 
annotation functionality. The main reason behind 
this is that both Toolbox and ELAN are problem-
specific annotation tools with limited capabilities 
for application to different phenomena than they 
were designed for. Toolbox provides an intuitive 
annotation environment and search facilities for 
flat, word-oriented annotations; ELAN, on the 
other hand, for annotations that stand in a 
temporal relation to each other. 
These tools ? as well as the other annotation 
tools used within the CRC ? are tailored to a 
particular type of annotation, neither of them 
being capable of sufficiently representing the 
data from all other tools. Annotation on different 
levels, however, is crucial for the investigation of 
information structural phenomena. In order to fill 
in this gap, ANNIS was designed primarily with 
the focus on visualization and querying of multi-
layer annotations. In particular, ANNIS allows to 
integrate annotations originating from different 
tools (e.g., syntax annotation created with 
Synpathy, coreference annotation created with 
MMAX2, and flat, time-aligned annotations 
created with ELAN) that nevertheless refer to the 
same primary data. In this respect, ANNIS, 
together with the data format PAULA and the 
libraries created for the work with both, is best 
compared to general annotation frameworks such 
as ATLAS, NITE and LAF.  
Taking the NITE XML Toolkit as a 
representative example for this kind of 
frameworks, it provides an abstract data model, 
XML-based formats for data storage and 
metadata, a query language, and a library with 
JAVA routines for data storage and manipulation, 
querying and visualization. Additionally, a set of 
command line tools and simple interfaces for 
corpus querying and browsing are provided, 
which illustrates how the libraries can be used to 
create one's own, project-specific corpus 
interfaces and tools.  
Similarly to ANNIS, NXT supports time-
aligned, hierarchical and pointer-based 
annotation, conflicting hierarchies and the 
embedding of multi-modal primary data. The 
data storage format is based on the bundling of 
multiple XML files similar to the standoff 
concept employed in LAF and PAULA.  
One fundamental difference between NXT and 
ANNIS, however, is to be seen in the primary 
clientele it targets: The NITE XML Toolkit is 
aimed at the developer and allows to build more 
specialized displays, interfaces, and analyses as 
required by their respective end users when 
working with highly structured data annotated on 
multiple levels.  
As compared to this, ANNIS is directly 
targeted at the end user, that is, a linguist trying 
to explore and to work with a particular set of 
corpora. Therefore, an important aspect of the 
ANNIS implementation is the integration with a 
data base and convenient means for visualization 
and querying.  
6 Conclusion 
In this paper, we described the Africanist projects 
of the CRC ?Information Structure? at the 
University of Potsdam and the Humboldt 
University of Berlin/Germany, together with 
their data collections from currently 25 
subsaharan languages. Also, we have presented 
the linguistic database ANNIS that can be used to 
publish, access, query and visualize these data 
collections. As one specific example of our work, 
we have described the design and ongoing 
construction of a corpus of written Hausa, the 
Hausa internet corpus, sketched the relevant NLP 
techniques for (semi)automatic morphosyntactic 
annotation, and the application of the ANNIS 
Query Language to filter out ex-situ constituents 
and their contexts, which are relevant with regard 
to our goal, a better understanding of focus and 
information structure in Hausa and other African 
languages. 
References  
T. Brants, O. Plaehn. 2000. Interactive Corpus 
Annotation. In: Proc. of LREC 2000, Athens, 
Greece. 
A. Busemann, K. Busemann. 2008. Toolbox 
Self-Training. Technical Report (Version 1.5.4 
Oct 2008)  http://www.sil.org/ 
J. Carletta, S. Evert, U. Heid, J. Kilgour, J. 
Robertson, H. Voormann. 2003. The NITE 
XML Toolkit: Flexible Annotation for Multi-
modal Language Data. Behavior Research 
Methods, Instruments, and Computers 35(3), 
353-363. 
J. Carletta, S. Evert, U. Heid, J. Kilgour. 2005. 
The NITE XML Toolkit: data model and 
query. Language Resources and Evaluation 
Journal, 313-334. 
23
S. Dipper. 2005. XML-based Stand-off 
Representation and Exploitation of Multi-
Level Linguistic Annotation. In: Proc. of 
Berliner XML Tage 2005 (BXML 2005), 
Berlin, Germany, 39-50. 
S. Dipper, M. G?tze. 2005. Accessing 
Heterogeneous Linguistic Data - Generic 
XML-based Representation and Flexible 
Visualization. In Proc. of the 2nd Language & 
Technology Conference: Human Language 
Technologies as a Challenge for Computer 
Science and Linguistics. Poznan, Poland, 206-
210. 
S. Dipper, M. G?tze, S. Skopeteas (eds.). 2007. 
Information structure in cross-linguistic 
corpora: Annotation guidelines for phonology, 
morphology, syntax, semantics and 
information structure. Interdisciplinary 
Studies on Information Structure 7,  147-187. 
Potsdam: University of Potsdam. 
I. Fiedler. forthcoming. Contrastive topic 
marking in Gbe. In Proc. of the 18th 
International Conference on Linguistics, 
Seoul, Korea, 21. - 26. July 2008. 
I. Fiedler, K. Hartmann, B. Reineke, A. Schwarz, 
M. Zimmermann.. forthcoming. Subject Focus 
in West African Languages. In M. 
Zimmermann, C. F?ry (eds.), Information 
Structure. Theoretical, Typological, and 
Experimental Perspectives. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. . 
M. Green, P. Jaggar. 2003. Ex-situ and in-situ 
focus in Hausa: syntax, semantics and 
discourse. In J. Lecarme et al (eds.), Research 
in Afroasiatic Grammar 2 (Current Issues in 
Linguistic Theory). Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins. 187-213. 
K. Hartmann, M. Zimmermann. 2004. Nominal 
and Verbal Focus in the Chadic Languages. In 
F. Perrill et al (eds.), Proc. of the Chicago 
Linguistics Society. 87-101. 
K. Hartmann, M. Zimmermann. 2007. In Place - 
Out of Place? Focus in Hausa. In K. Schwabe, 
S. Winkler (eds.), On Information Structure, 
Meaning and Form: Generalizing Across 
Languages. Benjamins, Amsterdam: 365-403. 
B. Hellwig, D. Van Uytvanck, M. Hulsbosch. 
2008. ELAN ? Linguistic Annotator. Technical 
Report (as of 2008-07-31). http://www.lat-
mpi.eu/tools/elan/ 
?. Kiss.  1998. Identificational Focus Versus 
Information Focus. Language 74: 245-273. 
M. Krifka. 1992. A compositional semantics for 
multiple focus constructions, in Jacobs, J: 
Informationsstruktur und Grammatik, 
Opladen, Westdeutscher Verlag, 17-53. 
C. M?ller, M. Strube. 2006. Multi-Level 
Annotation of Linguistic Data with MMAX2. 
In: S. Braun et al (eds.), Corpus Technology 
and Language Pedagogy. New Resources, 
New Tools, New Methods. Frankfurt: Peter 
Lang, 197?214. 
M. O?Donnell. 2000. RSTTool 2.4 ? A Markup 
Tool for Rhetorical Structure Theory. In: Proc. 
of the International Natural Language 
Generation Conference (INLG'2000), 13-16 
June 2000, Mitzpe Ramon, Israel, 253?256. 
C. Orasan. 2003. Palinka: A Highly 
Customisable Tool for Discourse Annotation. 
In: Proc. of the 4th SIGdial Workshop on 
Discourse and Dialogue, Sapporo, Japan. 
R. Randell, A. Bature, R. Schuh. 1998. Hausar 
Baka.   http://www.humnet.ucla.edu/humnet/ 
aflang/hausarbaka/ 
T. Schmidt. 2004. Transcribing and Annotating 
Spoken Language with Exmaralda. In: Proc. 
of the LREC-Workshop on XML Based Richly 
Annotated Corpora, Lisbon 2004. Paris: 
ELRA. 
A. Schwarz. Verb and Predication Focus Markers 
in Gur. forthcoming. In I. Fiedler, A. Schwarz 
(eds.), Information structure in African 
languages (Typological Studies in Language),  
307-333. Amsterdam, Philadelphia: John 
Benjamins. 
A. Schwarz, I. Fiedler. 2007. Narrative focus 
strategies in Gur and Kwa. In E. Aboh et al 
(eds.): Focus strategies in Niger-Congo and 
Afroasiatic ? On the interaction of focus and 
grammar in some African languages, 267-286. 
Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. 
S. Skopeteas, I. Fiedler, S. Hellmuth, A. 
Schwarz, R. Stoel, G. Fanselow, C. F?ry, M. 
Krifka. 2006. Questionnaire on information 
structure (QUIS). Interdisciplinary Studies on 
Information Structure 4.  Potsdam: University 
of Potsdam. 
I. H. Witten, E. Frank, Data mining: Practical 
machine learning tools and techniques, 2nd 
edn, Morgan Kaufman, San Francisco, 2005. 
M. Zimmermann. 2008. Contrastive Focus and 
Emphasis. In Acta Linguistica Hungarica 55: 
347-360.  
24
