Proceedings of NAACL HLT 2009: Short Papers, pages 57?60,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Spherical Discriminant Analysis in Semi-supervised Speaker Clustering?
Hao Tang
Dept. of ECE
University of Illinois
Urbana, IL 61801, USA
haotang2@ifp.uiuc.edu
Stephen M. Chu
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA
schu@us.ibm.com
Thomas S. Huang
Dept. of ECE
University of Illinois
Urbana, IL 61801, USA
huang@ifp.uiuc.edu
Abstract
Semi-supervised speaker clustering refers to
the use of our prior knowledge of speakers
in general to assist the unsupervised speaker
clustering process. In the form of an in-
dependent training set, the prior knowledge
helps us learn a speaker-discriminative fea-
ture transformation, a universal speaker prior
model, and a discriminative speaker subspace,
or equivalently a speaker-discriminative dis-
tance metric. The directional scattering pat-
terns of Gaussian mixture model mean su-
pervectors motivate us to perform discrimi-
nant analysis on the unit hypersphere rather
than in the Euclidean space, which leads to
a novel dimensionality reduction technique
called spherical discriminant analysis (SDA).
Our experiment results show that in the
SDA subspace, speaker clustering yields su-
perior performance than that in other reduced-
dimensional subspaces (e.g., PCA and LDA).
1 Introduction
Speaker clustering is a critical part of speaker di-
arization (a.k.a. speaker segmentation and cluster-
ing) (Barras et al, 2006; Tranter and Reynolds,
2006; Wooters and Huijbregts, 2007; Han et al,
2008). Unlike speaker recognition, where we have
the training data of a set of known speakers and thus
recognition can be done supervised, speaker cluster-
ing is usually performed in a completely unsuper-
vised manner. The output of speaker clustering is the
internal labels relative to a dataset rather than real
?This work was funded in part by DARPA contract HR0011-
06-2-0001.
speaker identities. An interesting question is: Can
we do semi-supervised speaker clustering? That is,
can we make use of any available information that
can be helpful to speaker clustering?
Our answer to this question is positive. Here,
semi-supervision refers to the use of our prior
knowledge of speakers in general to assist the un-
supervised speaker clustering process. In the form
of an independent training set, the prior knowledge
helps us learn a speaker-discriminative feature trans-
formation, a universal speaker prior model, and a
discriminative speaker subspace, or equivalently a
speaker-discriminative distance metric.
2 Semi-supervised Speaker Clustering
A general pipeline of speaker clustering consists
of four essential elements, namely feature extrac-
tion, utterance representation, distance metric, and
clustering. We incorporate our prior knowledge
of speakers into the various stages of this pipeline
through an independent training set.
2.1 Feature Extraction
The most popular speech features are spectrum-
based acoustic features such as mel-frequency cep-
stral coefficients (MFCCs) and perceptual linear pre-
dictive (PLP) coefficients. In order to account for
the dynamics of spectrum changes over time, the
basic acoustic features are often supplemented by
their first and second derivatives. We pursue a dif-
ferent avenue in which we augment the basic acous-
tic features of every frame with those of the neigh-
boring frames. Specifically, the acoustic features
of the current frame and those of the KL frames
57
to the left and KR frames to the right are con-
catenated to form a high-dimensional feature vec-
tor. In the context-expanded feature vector space, we
learn a speaker-discriminative feature transforma-
tion by linear discriminant analysis (LDA) based on
the known speaker labels of the independent training
set. The resulting low-dimensional feature subspace
is expected to provide optimal speaker separability.
2.2 Utterance Representation
Deviating from the mainstream ?bag of acoustic fea-
tures? representation where the extracted acoustic
features are represented by a statistical model such
as a Gaussian mixture model (GMM), we adopt the
GMM mean supervector representation which has
emerged in the speaker recognition area (Campbell
et al, 2006). Such representation is obtained by
maximum a posteriori (MAP) adapting a universal
background model (UBM), which has been finely
trained with all the data in the training set, to a
particular utterance. The component means of the
adapted GMM are stacked to form a column vector
conventionally called a GMM mean supervector. In
this way, we are allowed to represent an utterance
as a point in a high-dimensional space where tra-
ditional distance metrics and clustering techniques
can be naturally applied. The UBM, which can be
deemed as a universal speaker prior model inferred
from the independent training set, imposes generic
speaker constraints to the GMM mean supervector
space.
2.3 Distance Metric
In the GMM mean supervector space, a naturally
arising distance metric is the Euclidean distance
metric. However, it is observed that the supervec-
tors show strong directional scattering patterns. The
directions of the data points seem to be more indica-
tive than their magnitudes. This observation moti-
vates us to favor the cosine distance metric over the
Euclidean distance metric for speaker clustering.
Although the cosine distance metric can be used
in the GMM mean supervector space, it is optimal
only if the data points are uniformly spread in all di-
rections in the entire space. In a high-dimensional
space, most often the data lies in or near a low-
dimensional manifold or subspace. It is advanta-
geous to learn an optimal distance metric from the
data directly.
The general cosine distance between two data
points x and y can be defined and manipulated as
follows.
d(x,y) = 1? xTAy?
xTAx
?
yTAy
(1)
= 1? (A1/2x)T (A1/2y)?
(A1/2x)T (A1/2x)
?
(A1/2y)T (A1/2y)
= 1? (WTx)T (WTy)?
(WTx)T (WTx)
?
(WTy)T (WTy)
The general cosine distance can be casted as the
cosine distance between two transformed data points
W Tx and W Ty where W T = A1/2. In this sense,
learning an optimal distance metric is equivalent to
learning an optimal linear subspace of the original
high-dimensional space.
3 Spherical Discriminant Analysis
Most existing linear subspace learning techniques
(e.g. PCA and LDA) are based on the Euclidean
distance metric. In the GMM mean supervector
space, we seek to perform discriminant analysis in
the cosine distance metric space. We coin the phrase
?spherical discriminant analysis? to denote discrim-
inant analysis on the unit hypersphere. We define
a projection from a d-dimensional hypersphere to a
d?-dimensional hypersphere where d? < d
y = W
Tx
?W Tx? (2)
We note that such a projection is nonlinear. How-
ever, under two mild conditions, this projection can
be linearized. One is that the objective function for
learning the projection only involves the cosine dis-
tance. The other is that only the cosine distance is
used in the projected space. In this case, the norm of
the projected vector y has no impact on the objective
function and distance computation in the projected
space. Thus, the denominator term of Equation 2
can be safely dropped, leading to a linear projection.
3.1 Formulation
The goal of SDA is to seek a linear transformation
W such that the average within-class cosine similar-
ity of the projected data set is maximized while the
58
average between-class cosine similarity of the pro-
jected data set is minimized. Assuming that there are
c classes, the average within-class cosine similarity
can be written in terms of the unknown projection
matrix W and the original data points x
SW = 1c
c?
i=1
Si (3)
Si = 1|Di||Di|
?
yj ,yk?Di
yTj yk?
yTj yj
?
yTk yk
= 1
|Di||Di|
?
xj ,xk?Di
xTj WWTxk?
xTj WWTxj
?
xTk WWTxk
where |Di| denotes the number of data points in the
ith class. Similarly, the average between-class co-
sine similarity can be written in terms of W and x
SB = 1c(c? 1)
c?
m=1
c?
n=1
Smn (m 6= n) (4)
Smn = 1|Dm||Dn|
?
yj?Dm
yk?Dn
yTj yk?
yTj yj
?
yTk yk
= 1
|Dm||Dn|
?
xj?Dm
xk?Dn
xTj WWTxk?
xTj WWTxj
?
xTk WWTxk
where |Dm| and |Dn| denote the number of data
points in the mth and nth classes, respectively.
The SDA criterion is to maximize SW while min-
imizing SB
W = argmax
W
(SW ? SB) (5)
Our SDA formulation is similar to the work of Ma
et al (2007). However, we solve it efficiently in a
general dimensionality reduction framework known
as graph embedding (Yan et al, 2007).
3.2 Graph Embedding Solution
In graph embedding, a weighted graph with vertex
set X and similarity matrix S is used to characterize
certain statistical or geometrical properties of a data
set. A vertex in X represents a data point and an
entry sij in S represents the similarity between the
data points xi and xj . For a specific dimensional-
ity reduction algorithm, there may exist two graphs.
The intrinsic graph {X,S(i)} characterizes the data
properties that the algorithm aims to preserve and
the penalty graph {X,S(p)} characterizes the data
properties that the algorithm aims to avoid. The goal
of graph embedding is to represent each vertex in X
as a low dimensional vector that preserves the simi-
larities in S. The objective function is
W=argminW
?
i 6=j ?f(xi,W )?f(xj ,W )?2(s
(i)
ij ?s
(p)
ij ) (6)
where f(x,W ) is a general projection with param-
eters W . If we take the projection to be of the form
in Equation 2, the objective function becomes
W=argminW
?
i6=j
????
WT xi
?WT xi?
? W
T xj
?WT xj?
????
2
(s(i)ij ?s
(p)
ij ) (7)
It is shown that the solution to the graph embed-
ding problem of Equation 7 may be obtained by
a steepest descent algorithm (Fu et al, 2008). If
we expand the L2 norm terms of Equation 7, it is
straightforward to show that Equation 7 is equiva-
lent to Equation 5 provided that the graph weights
are set to proper values, as follows.
s(i)jk ?
1
c|Di||Di|
if xj ,xk ? Di, i = 1, ..., c
s(p)jk ?
1
c(c? 1)|Dm||Dn| if xj ? Dm,xk ? Dn
m,n = 1, ..., c,m 6= n (8)
That is, by assigning appropriate values to the
weights of the intrinsic and penalty graphs, the SDA
optimization problem in Equation 5 can be solved
within the elegant graph embedding framework.
4 Experiments
Our speaker clustering experiments are based on a
test set of 630 speakers and 19024 utterances se-
lected from the GALE database (Chu et al, 2008),
which contains about 1900 hours of broadcasting
news speech data collected from various TV pro-
grams. An independent training set of 498 speak-
ers and 18327 utterances is also selected from the
GALE database. In either data set, there are an aver-
age of 30-40 utterances per speaker and the average
duration of the utterances is about 3-4 seconds. Note
that there are no overlapping speakers in the two data
59
sets ? speakers in the test set are not present in the
independent training set.
The acoustic features are 13 basic PLP features
with cepstrum mean subtraction. In computing the
LDA feature transformation using the independent
training set, KL and KR are both set to 4, and the di-
mensionality of the low-dimensional feature space is
set to 40. The entire independent training set is used
to train a UBM via the EM algorithm, and a GMM
mean supervector is obtained for every utterance in
the test set via MAP adaptation. The trained UBM
has 64 mixture components. Thus, the dimension of
the GMM mean supervectors is 2560.
We employ the hierarchical agglomerative clus-
tering technique with the ?ward? linkage method.
Our experiments are carried out as follows. In each
experiment, we perform 4 cases, each of which is as-
sociated with a specific number of test speakers, i.e.,
5, 10, 20, and 50, respectively. In each case, the
corresponding number of speakers are drawn ran-
domly from the test set, and all the utterances from
the selected speakers are used for clustering. For
each case, 100 trials are run, each of which involves
a random draw of the test speakers, and the average
of the clustering accuracies across the 100 trials is
recorded.
First, we perform speaker clustering in the orig-
inal GMM mean supervector space using the Eu-
clidean distance metric and the cosine distance met-
ric, respectively. The results indicate that the cosine
distance metric consistently outperforms the Eu-
clidean distance metric. Next, we perform speaker
clustering in the reduced-dimensional subspaces us-
ing the eigenvoice (PCA) and fishervoice (LDA)
approaches, respectively. The results show that
the fishervoice approach significantly outperforms
the eigenvoice approach in all cases. Finally, we
perform speaker clustering in the SDA subspace.
The results demonstrate that in the SDA subspace,
speaker clustering yields superior performance than
that in other reduced-dimensional subspaces (e.g.,
PCA and LDA). Table 1 presents these results.
5 Conclusion
This paper proposes semi-supervised speaker clus-
tering in which we learn a speaker-discriminative
feature transformation, a universal speaker prior
Metric Subspace 5 10 20 50
Euc
Orig 85.0 82.6 78.1 69.4
PCA 85.5 82.9 79.3 69.9
LDA 94.0 90.8 86.6 79.6
Cos Orig 90.7 86.5 82.2 77.7SDA 98.0 94.7 90.0 85.9
Table 1: Average speaker clustering accuracies (unit:%).
model, and a speaker-discriminative distance metric
through an independent training set. Motivated by
the directional scattering patterns of the GMM mean
supervectors, we peroform discriminant analysis on
the unit hypersphere rather than in the Euclidean
space, leading to a novel dimensionality reduction
technique ?SDA?. Our experiment results indicate
that in the SDA subspace, speaker clustering yields
superior performance than that in other reduced-
dimensional subspaces (e.g., PCA and LDA).
References
C. Barras, X. Zhu, S. Meignier, and J. Gauvain. 2006.
Multistage speaker diarization of broadcast news.
IEEE Trans. ASLP, 14(5):1505?1512.
W. Campbell, D. Sturim, D. Reynolds. 2006. Support
vector machines using GMM supervectors for speaker
verification. Signal Processing Letters 13(5):308-311.
S. Chu, H. Kuo, L. Mangu, Y. Liu, Y. Qin, and Q. Shi.
2008. Recent advances in the IBM GALE mandarin
transcription system. Proc. ICASSP.
Y. Fu, S. Yan and T. Huang. 2008. Correlation Met-
ric for Generalized Feature Extraction. IEEE Trans.
PAMI 30(12):2229?2235.
K. Han, S. Kim, and S. Narayanan. 2008. Strategies to
Improve the Robustness of Agglomerative Hierarchi-
cal Clustering under Data Source Variation for Speaker
Diarization. IEEE Trans. SALP 16(8):1590?1601.
Y. Ma, S. Lao, E. Takikawa, and M. Kawade. 2007. Dis-
criminant Analysis in Correlation Similarity Measure
Space. Proc. ICML (227):577?584.
S. Tranter and D. Reynolds. 2006. An Overview of
Automatic Speaker Diarization Systems. IEEE Trans.
ASLP, 14(5):1557?1565.
C. Wooters and M. Huijbregts. 2007. The ICSI RT07s
Speaker Diarization System. LNCS.
S. Yan, D. Xu, B. Zhang, H. Zhang, Q. Yang, S. Lin.
2007. Graph Embedding and Extensions: A Gen-
eral Framework for Dimensionality Reduction. IEEE
Trans. PAMI 29(1):40?51.
60
Coling 2010: Poster Volume, pages 630?638,
Beijing, August 2010
Enhancing Multi-lingual Information Extraction
via Cross-Media Inference and Fusion 
Adam Lee, Marissa Passantino, Heng Ji 
Computer Science Department 
Queens College and Graduate Center 
City University of New York 
hengji@cs.qc.cuny.edu
Guojun Qi, Thomas Huang 
Department of Electrical and Computer  
Engineering & Beckman Institute 
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
huang@ifp.uiuc.edu
Abstract
We describe a new information fusion 
approach to integrate facts extracted 
from cross-media objects (videos and 
texts) into a coherent common represen-
tation including multi-level knowledge 
(concepts, relations and events). Beyond 
standard information fusion, we ex-
ploited video extraction results and sig-
nificantly improved text Information Ex-
traction. We further extended our meth-
ods to multi-lingual environment (Eng-
lish, Arabic and Chinese) by presenting 
a case study on cross-lingual comparable 
corpora acquisition based on video com-
parison.
1 Introduction 
An enormous amount of information is widely 
available in various data modalities (e.g. speech, 
text, image and video). For example, a Web 
news page about ?Health Care Reform in 
America? is composed with texts describing 
some events (e.g., Final Senate vote for the 
reform plans, Obama signs the reform 
agreement), images (e.g., images about various 
government involvements over decades) and 
videos/speech (e.g. Obama?s speech video about 
the decisions) containing additional information 
regarding the real extent of the events or 
providing evidence corroborating the text part. 
These cross-media objects exist in redundant 
and complementary structures, and therefore it 
is beneficial to fuse information from various 
data modalities. The goal of our paper is to 
investigate this task from both mono-lingual and 
cross-lingual perspectives. 
  The processing methods of texts and 
images/videos are typically organized into two 
separate pipelines. Each pipeline has been 
studied separately and quite intensively over the 
past decade. It is critical to move away from 
single media processing, and instead toward 
methods that make multiple decisions jointly 
using cross-media inference. For example, video 
analysis allows us to find both entities and 
events in videos, but it?s very challenging to 
specify some fine-grained semantic types such 
as proper names (e.g. ?Obama Barack?) and 
relations among concepts; while the speech 
embedded and the texts surrounding these 
videos can significantly enrich such analysis. On 
the other hand, image/video features can 
enhance text extraction.  For example, entity 
gender detection from speech recognition output 
is challenging because of entity mention 
recognition errors. However, gender detection 
from corresponding images and videos can 
achieve above 90% accuracy (Baluja and Rowley, 
2006). In this paper, we present a case study on 
gender detection to demonstrate how text and 
video extractions can boost each other. 
  We can further extend the benefit of cross-
media inference to cross-lingual information 
extraction (CLIE). Hakkani-Tur et al (2007) 
found that CLIE performed notably worse than 
monolingual IE, and indicated that a major 
cause was the low quality of machine translation 
(MT). Current statistical MT methods require 
large and manually aligned parallel corpora as 
input for each language pair of interest. Some 
recent work (e.g. Munteanu and Marcu, 2005; Ji, 
2009) found that MT can benefit from multi-
lingual comparable corpora (Cheung and Fung, 
2004), but it is time-consuming to identify pairs 
of comparable texts; especially when there is 
630
lack of parallel information such as news release 
dates and topics. However, the images/videos 
embedded in the same documents can provide 
additional clues for similarity computation 
because they are ?language-independent?. We 
will show how a video-based comparison 
approach can reliably build large comparable 
text corpora for three languages: English, 
Chinese and Arabic. 
2 Baseline Systems 
We apply the following state-of-the-art text and 
video information extraction systems as our 
baselines. Each system can produce reliable 
confidence values based on statistical models. 
2.1 Video Concept Extraction 
The video concept extraction system was 
developed by IBM for the TREC Video 
Retrieval Evaluation (TRECVID-2005) 
(Naphade et al, 2005). This system can extract 
2617 concepts defined by TRECVID, such as 
"Hospital", "Airplane" and "Female-Person". It 
uses support vector machines to learn the 
mapping between low level features extracted 
from visual modality as well as from transcripts 
and production related meta-features. It also 
exploits a Correlative Multi-label Learner (Qi et 
al., 2007), a Multi-Layer Multi-Instance Kernel 
(Gu et al, 2007) and Label Propagation through 
Linear Neighborhoods (Wang et al, 2006) to 
extract all other high-level features. For each 
classifier, different models are trained on a set 
of different modalities (e.g., the color moments, 
wavelet textures, and edge histograms), and the 
predictions made by these classifiers are 
combined together with a hierarchical linearly-
weighted fusion strategy across different 
modalities and classifiers. 
2.2 Text Information Extraction 
We use a state-of-the-art IE system (Ji and 
Grishman, 2008) developed for the Automatic 
Content Extraction (ACE) program1 to process 
texts and automatic speech recognition output. 
The pipeline includes name tagging, nominal 
mention tagging, coreference resolution, time 
expression extraction and normalization, rela-
tion extraction and event extraction. Entities 
1 http://www.nist.gov/speech/tests/ace/ 
include coreferred persons, geo-political entities 
(GPE), locations, organizations, facilities, vehi-
cles and weapons; relations include 18 types 
(e.g. ?a town some 50 miles south of Salzburg?
indicates a located relation.); events include the 
33 distinct event types defined in ACE 2005 
(e.g. ?Barry Diller on Wednesday quit as chief 
of Vivendi Universal Entertainment.? indicates a 
?personnel-start? event). Names are identified 
and classified using an HMM-based name tag-
ger. Nominals are identified using a maximum 
entropy-based chunker and then semantically 
classified using statistics from ACE training 
corpora. Relation extraction and event extraction 
are also based on maximum entropy models, 
incorporating diverse lexical, syntactic, semantic 
and ontological knowledge. 
3 Mono-lingual Information Fusion 
and Inference 
3.1 Mono-lingual System Overview 
                                                 
                        
                         
Figure 1. Mono-lingual Cross-Media  
Information Fusion and Inference Pipeline 
Figure 1 depicts the general procedure of our 
mono-lingual information fusion and inference 
Multi-media  
Document 
Enhanced  
Concepts/Entities 
Relations/Events
Texts
Text Information
Extraction
Video Concept 
Extraction 
Entities/ 
Relations/Events
Concepts 
Partitioning 
Multi-level Concept Fusion 
ASR
Global Inference 
Speech Videos/Images 
631
approach. After we apply two baseline systems 
to the multi-media documents, we use a novel 
multi-level concept fusion approach to extract a 
common knowledge representation across texts 
and videos (section 3.2), and then apply a global 
inference approach to enhance fusion results 
(section 3.3). 
3.2 Cross-media Information Fusion 
? Concept Mapping 
For each input video, we apply automatic speech 
recognition to obtain background texts. Then we 
use the baseline IE systems described in section 
2 to extract concepts from texts and videos. We 
construct mappings on the overlapped facts 
across TRECVID and ACE. For example, 
?LOC.Water-Body? in ACE is mapped to 
?Beach, Lakes, Oceans, River, River_Bank? in 
TRECVID.
  Due to different characteristics of video clips 
and texts, these two tasks have quite different 
granularities and focus. For example, 
?PER.Individual? in ACE is an open set includ-
ing arbitrary names, while TRECVID only cov-
ers some famous proper names such as 
?Hu_Jintao? and ?John_Edwards?. Geopolitical 
entities appear very rarely in TRECVID because 
they are more explicitly presented in back-
ground texts. On the other hand, TRECVID de-
fined much more fine-grained nominals than 
ACE, for example, ?FAC.Building-Grounds? in 
ACE can be divided into 52 possible concept
types such as ?Conference_Buildings? and 
?Golf_Course? because they can be more easily 
detected based on video features. We also notice 
that TRECVID concepts can include multiple 
levels of ACE facts, for example 
?WEA_Shooting? concept can be separated into 
?weapon? entities and ?attack? events in ACE. 
These different definitions bring challenges to 
cross-media fusion but also opportunities to ex-
ploit complementary facts to refine both pipe-
lines. We manually resolved these issues and 
obtained 20 fused concept sets. 
? Time-stamp based Multi-level Projection 
After extracting facts from videos and texts, we 
conduct information fusion at all possible levels: 
name, nominal, coreference link, relation or 
event mention. We rely on the timestamp infor-
mation associated with video keyframes or shots 
(sequential keyframes) and background speech 
to align concepts. During this fusion process, we 
compare the normalized confidence values pro-
duced from two pipelines to resolve the follow-
ing three types of cases:
? Contradiction ? A video fact contradicts a 
text fact; we only keep the fact with higher 
confidence.
? Redundancy ? A video fact conveys the 
same content as (or entails, or is entailed by) 
a text fact; we only keep the unique parts of 
the facts. 
? Complementary ? A video fact and a text 
fact are complementary; we merge these 
two to form more complete fact sets. 
? A Common Representation 
In order to effectively extract compact informa-
tion from large amounts of heterogeneous data, 
we design an integrated XML format to repre-
sent the facts extracted from the above multi-
level fusion. We can view this representation as 
a set of directed ?information graphs? G={Gi
(Vi, Ei)}, where Vi is the collection of concepts 
from both texts and videos, and Ei is the collec-
tion of edges linking one concept to the other, 
labeled by relation or event attributes. An exam-
ple is presented in Figure 2. This common rep-
resentation is applied in both mono-lingual and 
multi-lingual information fusion tasks described 
in next sections. 
Figure 2. An example for cross-media common 
fact representation  
3.3 Cross-media Information Inference 
? Uncertainty Problem in Cross-Media Fu-
sion
However, such a simple merging approach usu-
ally leads to unsatisfying results due to uncer-
tainty. Uncertainty in multimedia is induced 
from noise in the data acquisition procedure 
Child 
PLO
British 
Mandate of
Palestine 
Safed
Mahmoud 
Abbas
Leader
Birth-Place
Located
Amina Abbas 
Spouse
Yasser
 Abbas
PLO
Elected/
2008-11-23 
632
(e.g., noise in automatic speech recognition re-
sults and low-quality camera surveillance vid-
eos) as well as human errors and subjectivity. 
Unstructured texts, especially those translated 
from foreign languages, are difficult to interpret. 
In addition, automatic IE systems for both vid-
eos and texts tend to produce errors.  
? Case Study on Mention Gender Detection 
We employ cross-media inference methods to 
reduce uncertainty. We will demonstrate this 
approach on a case study of gender detection for 
persons. Automatic gender detection is crucial 
to many natural language processing tasks such 
as pronoun reference resolution (Bergsma, 
2005). Gender detection for last names has 
proved challenging; Gender for nominals can be 
highly ambiguous in various contexts. Unfortu-
nately most state-of-the-art approaches discover 
gender information without considering specific 
contexts in the document. The results were 
stored either as a knowledge base with prob-
abilities (e.g. Ji and Lin, 2009) or as a static 
gazetteer (e.g. census data). Furthermore, speech 
recognition normally performs poorly on names, 
which brings more challenges to gender detec-
tion for mis-spelled names.   
  We consider two approaches as our baselines. 
The first baseline is to discover gender knowl-
edge from Google N-grams using specific lexi-
cal patterns (e.g. ?[mention] and 
his/her/its/their?) (Ji and Lin, 2009). The other 
baseline is a gazetteer matching approach based 
on census data including person names and gen-
der information, as used in typical text IE sys-
tems.  
  We introduce the third method based on 
male/female concept extraction from associated 
background videos. These concepts are detected 
from context-dependent features (e.g. face rec-
ognition). If there are multiple persons in one 
snippet associated with one shot, we propagate 
gender information to all instances.
  We then linearly combine these three methods 
based on confidence values. For example, the 
confidence of predicting a name mention n as a 
male (M) can be computed by combining prob-
abilities P(n, M, method):
confidence(n,male)=?1*P(n,M,ngram)+
?2*P(n,M,census) +?3*P(n,M,video)
  In this paper we used?1=0.1, ?2=0.1 
and?3=0.8 which are optimized from a devel-
opment set. 
4 Cross-lingual Comparable Corpora 
Acquisition
In this section we extend the information fusion 
approach to a task of discovering comparable 
corpora.
4.1 Comparable Documents  
Figure 3 presents an example of cross-lingual 
comparable documents. They are both about the 
rescue activities for the Haiti earthquake. 
Figure 3. An example for cross-lingual  
multi-media comparable documents 
Figure 4. Cross-lingual Comparable Text  
Corpora Acquisition based on
Video Similarity Computation 
Multi-media  
Document in 
Language j
Multi-media 
Document in
Language i
Facts-Vi
Similarity Computation 
Text T i Video V i
Concept 
Extraction 
Facts-Vj
Video V i 
Concept 
Extraction 
Text T j
Similarity>??
Comparable Docu-
ments <Ti, Tj>
633
  Traditional text translation based methods tend 
to miss such pairs due to poor translation quality 
of informative words (Ji et al, 2009). However, 
the background videos and images are language-
independent and thus can be exploited to iden-
tify such comparable documents. This provides 
a cross-media approach to break language bar-
rier.
4.2 Cross-lingual System Overview 
Figure 4 presents the general pipeline of discov-
ering cross-lingual comparable documents based 
on background video comparison. The detailed 
video similarity computation method is pre-
sented in next section. 
4.3 Video Concept Similarity Computation 
Most document clustering systems use represen-
tations built out of the lexical and syntactic at-
tributes. These attributes may involve string 
matching, agreement, syntactic distance, and 
document release dates. Although gains have 
been made with such methods, there are clearly 
cases where shallow information will not be suf-
ficient to resolve clustering correctly. Therefore, 
we should therefore expect a successful docu-
ment comparison approach to exploit world 
knowledge, inference, and other forms of se-
mantic information in order to resolve hard 
cases. For example, if two documents include 
concepts referring to male-people, earthquake 
event, rescue activities, and facility-grounds 
with similar frequency information, we can de-
termine they are likely to be comparable. In this 
paper we represent each video as a vector of 
semantic concepts extracted from videos and 
then use standard vector space model to com-
pute similarity.  
  Let A=(a1, ?a|?|) and B=(b1, ?b|?|) be such 
vectors for a pair of videos, then we use cosine 
similarity to compute similarity: 
| |
1
| | | |2 2
1 1
cos( , ) i ii
i ii i
a b
A B
a b
=
= =
?
=
? ?
?
? ?
,
where |? | contains all possible concepts. We 
use traditional TF-IDF (Term Frequency-Inverse 
Document Frequency) weights for the vector 
elements ai and bi. Let C be a unique concept, V
is a video consisting of a series of k shots V = 
{S1, ?, Sk}, then: 
1
( , ) ( , )
k
ii
tf C V tf C S k
=
=?
Let p(C, Si) denote the probability that C is ex-
tracted from Si, we define two different ways to 
compute term frequency tf (C, Si):
(1) ( , ) ( , )i itf C S confidence C S=
and
(2) ( , )( , ) iconfidence C Sitf C S ?=
Where Confidence (C, Si) denotes the probabil-
ity of detecting a concept C in a shot Si:
( , ) ( , )i iconfidence C S p C S= if ( , )ip C S ?> ,
                                       otherwise 0. 
Let: ( , ) 1idf C S = if ( , )ip C S ?> , otherwise 0, 
assuming there are j shots in the entire corpus, 
we calculate idf as follows: 
1
( , ) log / ( , )
j
i
i
idf C V j df C S
=
? ?
= ? ?
? ?
?
5 Experimental Results 
This section presents experimental results of all 
the three tasks described above. 
5.1 Data
We used 244 videos from TRECVID 2005 data 
set as our test set. This data set includes 133,918 
keyframes, with corresponding automatic 
speech recognition and translation results (for 
foreign languages) provided by LDC.   
5.2 Information Fusion Results 
Table 1 shows information fusion results for 
English, Arabic and Chinese on multiple levels. 
It indicates that video and text extraction pipe-
lines are complementary ? almost all of the 
video concepts are about nominals and events; 
while text extraction output contains a large 
amount of names and relations. Therefore the 
results after information fusion produced much 
richer knowledge. 
634
Annotation Lev-
els
English Chinese Arabic 
# of videos 104 84 56 
Video Concept 250880 221898 197233 
Name 17350 22154 20057 
Nominal 31528 21852 16253 
Relation 9645 20880 16584 
Text
Event 31132 10348 7148 
Table 1. Information Fusion Results  
  It?s also worth noting that the number of con-
cepts extracted from videos is similar across 
languages, while much fewer events are ex-
tracted from Chinese or Arabic because of 
speech recognition and machine translation er-
rors. We took out 1% of the results to measure 
accuracy against ground-truth in TRECVID and 
ACE training data respectively; the mean aver-
age precision for video concept extraction is 
about 33.6%. On English ASR output the text-
IE system achieved about 82.7% F-measure on 
labeling names, 80.5% F-measure on nominals 
(regardless of ASR errors), 66% on relations 
and 64% on events. 
5.3 Information Inference Results 
From the test set, we chose 650 persons (492 
males and 158 females) to evaluate gender dis-
covery. For baselines, we used Google n-gram 
(n=5) corpus Version II including 1.2 billion 5-
grams extracted from about 9.7 billion sentences 
(Lin et al, 2010) and census data including  
5,014 person names with gender information. 
  Since we only have gold-standard gender in-
formation on shot-level (corresponding to a 
snippet in ASR output), we asked a human an-
notator to associate ground-truth with individual 
persons. Table 2 presents overall precision (P), 
recall (R) and F-measure (F).  
Methods P R F 
Google N-gram 89.1% 70.2% 78.5%
Census 96.2% 19.4% 32.4%
Video Extraction 88.9% 73.8% 80.6%
Combined 89.3% 80.4% 84.6%
Table 2.  Gender Discovery Performance 
  Table 2 shows that video extraction based ap-
proach can achieve the highest recall among all 
three methods. The combined approach 
achieved statistically significant improvement 
on recall. 
  Table 3 presents some examples (?F? for fe-
male and ?M? for male). We found that most 
speech name recognition errors are propagated 
to gender detection in the baseline methods, for 
example, ?Sala Zhang? is mis-spelled in speech 
recognition output (the correct spelling should 
be ?Sarah Chang?) and thus Google N-gram 
approach mistakenly predicted it as a male. 
Many rare names such as ?Wu Ficzek?, 
?Karami? cannot be predicted by the baselines,  
  Error analysis on video extraction based ap-
proach showed that most errors occur on those 
shots including multiple people (males and fe-
males). In addition, since the data set is from 
news domain, there were many shots including 
reporters and target persons at the same time. 
For example, ?Jiang Zemin? was mistakenly 
associated with a ?female? gender because the 
reporter is a female in that corresponding shot. 
5.4 Comparable Corpora Acquisition Re-
sults
For comparable corpora acquisition, we meas-
ured accuracy for the top 50 document pairs. 
Due to lack of answer-keys, we asked a bi-
lingual human annotator to judge results manu-
ally. The evaluation guideline generally fol-
lowed the definitions in (Cheung and Fung, 
2004). A pair of documents is judged as compa-
rable if they share a certain amount of informa-
tion (e.g. entities, events and topics). 
Without using IDF, for different parameter ?
and ? in the similarity metrics, the results are 
summarized in Figure 5. For comparison we 
present the results for mono-lingual and cross- 
lingual separately. Figure 5 indicates that as the 
threshold and normalization values increase, the 
accuracy generally improves. It?s not surprising 
that mono-lingual results are better than cross-
lingual results, because generally more videos 
with comparable topics are in the same language.   
635
Mention
Google
N-gram 
Census
Video
Extraction
Correct
Answer
Context Sentence 
Zhang
Sala
M: 1 
F: 0 
-
F: 0.699 
M: 0.301 
F
World famous meaning violin soloist 
Zhang Sala recently again to Toronto sym-
phony orchestra... 
Peter
M: .979 
F: 0.021 
M: 1 
M: 0.699 
F: 0.301 
M
Iraq, there are in Lebanon Paris pass Peter
after 10 five Dar exile without peace... 
Wu
Ficzek
-
M: 0.699 
F: 0.301 
M
If you want to do a good job indeed Wu
Ficzek
President
M: .953 
F: 0.047 
-
M: 0.704 
F: 0.296 
M
Labor union of Arab heritage publishers 
president to call for the opening of the 
Arab Book Exhibition. 
Jiang
Zemin 
M: 1 
F: 0 
-
F: 0.787 
M: 0.213 
M
It has never stopped the including the for-
mer CPC General Secretary Jiang Zemin? 
Karami 
M: 1 
F: 0 
-
M: 0.694 
F: 0.306 
M
all the Gamal Ismail introduced the needs 
of the Akkar region, referring to the desire 
on the issue of the President Karami to 
give priority disadvantaged areas 
Table 3. Examples for Mention Gender Detection 
Figure 5. Comparable Corpora Acquisition  
without IDF 
  We then added IDF to the optimized threshold 
and obtained results in Figure 6. The accuracy 
for both languages was further enhanced. We can 
see that under any conditions our approach can 
discover comparable documents reliably. In or-
der to measure the impact of concept extraction 
errors, we also evaluated the results for using 
ground-truth concepts as shown in Figure 6. Sur-
prisingly it didn?t provide much higher accuracy 
than automatic concept extraction, mainly be-
cause the similarity can be captured by some 
dominant video concepts. 
Figure 6. Comparable Corpora Acquisition with 
IDF (?=0.6)
6 Related Work 
A large body of prior work has focused on multi-
media information retrieval and document classi-
fication (e.g. Iria and Magalhaes, 2009).  State-
of-the-art information fusion approaches can be 
divided into two groups: formal ?top-down? 
methods from the generic knowledge fusion 
community and quantitative ?bottom-up? tech-
niques from the Semantic Web community (Ap-
priou et al, 2001; Gregoire, 2006). However, 
very limited research methods have been ex-
636
plored to fuse automatically extracted facts from 
texts and videos/images. Our idea of conducting 
information fusion on multiple semantic levels is 
similar to the kernel method described in (Gu et 
al., 2007). 
  Most previous work on cross-media information 
extraction focused on one single domain (e.g. e-
Government (Amato et al, 2010); soccer game 
(Pazouki and Rahmati, 2009)) and struc-
tured/semi-structured texts (e.g. product cata-
logues (Labsky et al, 2005)). Saggion et al 
(2004) described a multimedia extraction ap-
proach to create composite index from multiple 
and multi-lingual sources. We expand the task to 
the more general news domain including unstruc-
tured texts and use cross-media inference to en-
hance extraction performance. 
  Some recent work has exploited analysis of as-
sociated texts to improve image annotation (e.g. 
Deschacht and Moens, 2007; Feng and Lapata, 
2008). Some recent research demonstrated cross-
modal integration can provide significant gains 
in improving the richness of information. For 
example, Oviatt et al (1997) showed that speech 
and pen-based gestures can provide complemen-
tary capabilities because basic subject, verb, and 
object constituents almost always are spoken, 
whereas those describing locative information 
invariably are written or gestured. However, not 
much work demonstrated an effective method of 
using video/image annotation to improve text 
extraction. Our experiments provide some case 
studies in this new direction. Our work can also 
be considered as an extension of global back-
ground inference (e.g. Ji and Grishman, 2008) to 
cross-media paradigm. 
  Extensive research has been done on video clus-
tering. For example, Cheung and Zakhor (2000)
used meta-data extracted from textual and hyper-
link information to detect similar videos on the 
web; Magalhaes et al (2008) described a seman-
tic similarity metric based on key word vectors 
for multi-media fusion. We extend such video 
similarity computing approaches to a multi-
lingual environment. 
7 Conclusion and Future Work 
Traditional Information Extraction (IE) ap-
proaches focused on single media (e.g. texts), 
with very limited use of knowledge from other 
data modalities in the background. In this paper 
we propose a new approach to integrate informa-
tion extracted from videos and texts into a coher-
ent common representation including multi-level 
knowledge (concepts, relations and events). Be-
yond standard information fusion, we attempted 
global inference methods to incorporate video 
extraction and significantly enhanced the per-
formance of text extraction. Finally, we extend 
our methods to multi-lingual environment (Eng-
lish, Arabic and Chinese) by presenting a case 
study on cross-lingual comparable corpora acqui-
sition.
  We used a dataset which includes videos and 
associated speech recognition output (texts), but 
our approach is applicable to any cases in which 
texts and videos appear together (from associated 
texts, captions etc.). The proposed common rep-
resentation will provide a framework for many 
byproducts. For example, the monolingual fused 
information graphs can be used to generate ab-
stractive summaries. Given the fused information 
we can also visualize the facts from background 
texts effectively. We are also interested in using 
video information to discover novel relations and 
events which are missed in the text IE task. 
Acknowledgement 
This work was supported by the U.S. Army Re-
search Laboratory under Cooperative Agreement 
Number W911NF-09-2-0053, the U.S. NSF 
CAREER Award under Grant IIS-0953149, 
Google, Inc., DARPA GALE Program, CUNY 
Research Enhancement Program, PSC-CUNY 
Research Program, Faculty Publication Program 
and GRTI Program. The views and conclusions 
contained in this document are those of the au-
thors and should not be interpreted as represent-
ing the official policies, either expressed or im-
plied, of the Army Research Laboratory or the 
U.S. Government. The U.S. Government is au-
thorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for 
Government purposes notwithstanding any copy-
right notation here on. 
References 
Amato, F., Mazzeo, A.,  Moscato, V. and Picariello, 
A.  2010. Information Extraction from Multimedia 
Documents for e-Government Applications. 
Information Systems: People, Organizations, Insti-
tutions, and Technologies. pp. 101-108. 
637
Appriou A., A. Ayoun, Benferhat, S., Besnard, P., 
Cholvy, L., Cooke, R., Cuppens, F., Dubois, D., 
Fargier, H., Grabisch, M., Kruse, R., Lang, J. 
Moral, S., Prade, H., Saffiotti, A., Smets, P., Sos-
sai, C. 2001. Fusion: General concepts and charac-
teristics. International Journal of Intelligent Sys-
tems 16(10).
Baluja, S. and Rowley, H. 2006. Boosting Sex Identi-
fication Performance. International Journal of 
Computer Vision. 
Bergsma, S. 2005. Automatic Acquisition of Gender 
Information for Anaphora Resolution. Proc. Cana-
dian AI 2005. 
Cheung, P. and Fung P. 2004. Sentence Alignment in 
Parallel, Comparable, and Quasi-comparable Cor-
pora. Proc.  LREC 2004. 
Cheung, S.-C.  and Zakhor, A. 2000. Efficient video 
similarity measurement and search. Proc. IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Image Processing. 
Deschacht K. and Moens M. 2007. Text Analysis for 
Automatic Image Annotation. Proc. ACL 2007. 
Feng, Y. and Lapata, M. 2008. Automatic Image An-
notation Using Auxiliary Text Information. Proc. 
ACL 2008. 
Gregoire, E. 2006. An unbiased approach to iterated 
fusion by weakening. Information Fusion. 7(1). 
Gu, Z., Mei, T., Hua, X., Tang, J., Wu, X. 2007. 
Multi-Layer Multi-Instance Kernel for Video Con-
cept Detection. Proc. ACM Multimedia 2007. 
Hakkani-Tur, D., Ji, H. and Grishman, R. 2007. Using 
Information Extraction to Improve Cross-lingual 
Document Retrieval. Proc. RANLP 2007 Workshop 
on Multi-Source Multi-lingual Information Extrac-
tion and Summarization.
Iria, J. and Magalhaes, J. 2009. Exploiting Cross-
Media Correlations in the Categorization of Mul-
timedia Web Documents. Proc. CIAM 2009. 
Ji, H. and Grishman, R. 2008. Refining Event Extrac-
tion Through Cross-document Inference. Proc. 
ACL 2008. 
Ji, H. 2009. Mining Name Translations from Compa-
rable Corpora by Creating Bilingual Information 
Networks. Proc. ACL-IJCNLP 2009 workshop on 
Building and Using Comparable Corpora (BUCC 
2009): from parallel to non-parallel corpora.
Ji, H., Grishman, R., Freitag, D., Blume, M., Wang, 
J., Khadivi, S., Zens, R., and Ney, H. 2009. Name 
Translation for Distillation. Handbook of Natural 
Language Processing and Machine Translation: 
DARPA Global Autonomous Language Exploita-
tion. Springer. 
Ji, H. and Lin, D. 2009. Gender and Animacy Knowl-
edge Discovery from Web-Scale N-Grams for Un-
supervised Person Mention Detection. Proc. PA-
CLIC 2009. 
Oviatt, S. L., DeAngeli, A., & Kuhn, K. 1997. Inte-
gration and synchronization of input modes during 
multimodal human-computer interaction. Proceed-
ings of Conference on Human Factors in Comput-
ing Systems (CHI?97), 415-422. New York: ACM 
Press.
Labsky, M., Praks, P., Sv?atek1, V., and Svab, O. 
2005. Multimedia Information Extraction from 
HTML Product Catalogues. Proc. 2005 
IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on Web 
Intelligence. pp. 401 ? 404.   
Lin, D., Church, K.,  Ji, H., Sekine, S., Yarowsky, D.,  
Bergsma, S., Patil, K., Pitler, E., Lathbury, R., Rao, 
V., Dalwani, K. and Narsale, S. 2010. New Data, 
Tags and Tools for Web-Scale N-grams. Proc. 
LREC 2010. 
Magalhaes, J., Ciravegna, F. and Ruger, S. 2008. Ex-
ploring Multimedia in a Keyword Space. Proc. 
ACM Multimedia 2008. 
Munteanu, D. S. and Marcu D. 2005. Improving Ma-
chine Translation Performance by Exploiting Non-
Parallel Corpora. Computational Linguistics. Vol-
ume 31, Issue 4. pp. 477-504. 
Naphade, M. R., Kennedy, L., Kender, J. R., Chang, 
S.-F., Smith, J. R., Over, P., and Hauptmann, A. A 
light scale concept ontology for multimedia under-
standing for TRECVID 2005. Technical report, 
IBM, 2005. 
Pazouki, E. and Rahmati, M. 2009. A novel multime-
dia data mining framework for information extrac-
tion of a soccer video stream. Intelligent Data 
Analysis. pp. 833-857. 
Qi,G.-J., Hua,X.-S., Rui, Y., Tang, J., Mei, T., and 
Zhang,H.-J. 2007. Correlative Multi-label Video 
Annotation. Proc. ACM Multimedia 2007.
Saggion, H., Cunningham, H., Bontcheva, K., 
Maynard, D., Hamza, O., and Wilks, Y. 2004. Mul-
timedia indexing through multi-source and multi-
language information extraction: the MUMIS pro-
ject. Data Knowlege Engineering, 48, 2, pp. 247-
264. 
Wang, F. and Zhang, C. 2006. Label propagation 
through linear neighborhoods. Proc. ICML 2006.
638
Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, pages 74?81,
Dublin, Ireland, August 23-29 2014.
Cross-media Cross-genre Information Ranking Multi-media Information
Networks
Tongtao Zhang
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
zhangt13@rpi.edu
Haibo Li
Nuance
lihaibo.c@gmail.com
Hongzhao Huang
R.P.I.
huangh9@rpi.edu
Heng Ji
R.P.I.
jih@rpi.edu
Min-Hsuan Tsai
mtsai2@illinois.edu
Shen-Fu Tsai
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
stsai8@illinois.edu
Thomas Huang
huang@ifp.uiuc.edu
Abstract
Current web technology has brought us a scenario that information about a certain topic is widely dis-
persed in data from different domains and data modalities, such as texts and images from news and social
media. Automatic extraction of the most informative and important multimedia summary (e.g. a ranked
list of inter-connected texts and images) from massive amounts of cross-media and cross-genre data can
significantly save users? time and effort that is consumed in browsing. In this paper, we propose a novel
method to address this new task based on automatically constructed Multi-media Information Networks
(MiNets) by incorporating cross-genre knowledge and inferring implicit similarity across texts and im-
ages. The facts from MiNets are exploited in a novel random walk-based algorithm to iteratively propagate
ranking scores across multiple data modalities. Experimental results demonstrated the effectiveness of our
MiNets-based approach and the power of cross-media cross-genre inference.
1 Introduction
Recent development on web technology ? especially on fast connection and large-scale storage systems ? has
enabled social and news media to fulfill their jobs more efficiently in time and depth. However, such development
also raises some problems such as overwhelming social media information and distracting news media contents.
In emergent scenarios such as facing an incoming disaster (e.g., Hurricane Irene in 2011 or Sandy in 2012), tweets
and news are often repeatedly spread and forwarded in certain circles and contents are often overlapped by each
other. However, browsing these messages and pages is almost unpleasant and inefficient. Therefore, an automatic
summarization on piles of tweets and news is always necessary and welcomed, among which ranking is the most
intuitive way to inform the users about the most informative content.
A passive solution is prompting the users to add more key words when typing the search query as most search
engines do. However, without prior knowledge or due to the word limit, it is never trivial for the users to establish
a satisfied ranking list for topics which attract more public attention. Recent changes on some Google Search have
integrated image search and adopted some heterogenous content analysis, nevertheless, the connection between
image and the keywords are still arbitrarily determined by the users, thus it is still far from optimal.
Active solutions which attempt to summarize information only focused on single data modalities. For example,
Zanzotto et al. (2011) provided a comprehensive comparison about summarization methods for tweets. Zhao et al.
(2011) developed a context-sensitive topical PageRank (Brin and Page, 1998) method to extract topical key phrase
from Twitter as a way to summarize twitter content. As a new prospective, Feng and Lapata (2010) used LDA to
annotate images, but this does not firmly integrate the information across different data types. Huang et al. (2012)
presented a tweet ranking approach but only focused on single data modality (i.e., text).
Other conventional solutions towards analyzing the relationship or links between the instances have long been
proposed and applied, such as PageRank (Brin and Page, 1998)and VisualRank (Jing and Baluja, 2008). The
former is excessively used in heterogeneous networks (i.e., webpages and resources) but they are mainly based on
linkage itself. VisualRank, which is based on PageRank, is a content-based linkage method but is confined with
homogeneous networks.
Above all, our goal is to integrate cross-media inference and create the linkage among the information extracted
from those heterogenous data. Our novel Multi-media Information Networks (MiNets) representation initializes
our idea about a basic ontology of the ranking system.
The main contribution of this work is to fill in the domain gaps across different network genres and bridge them
in a principled method. In this work, we manage to discover the hidden links or structures between the heteroge-
neous networks in different genres. We combine joint inference to resolve information conflicts across multi-genre
This work is licenced under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. Page numbers and proceedings footer
are added by the organizers. License details: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
74
networks. We can also effectively measure, share and transfer complementary information and knowledge across
multi-genre networks using structured correspondence.
The work is presented in sections as follows. We firstly introduce an overview of our system in Section 2.
Detailed approaches in information extraction and constructing meta-information network are then followed in
Section 3. Measurement across the multimedia information are proposed in Section 4 and 5. In Section 6 we
demonstrate the results and performance gain.
2 Approach Overview
Within the context of an event where users generate a vast amount of multi-media messages in forms of tweets and
images, we aim to provide a ranked subset of the most informative ones. Given a set of tweets T = {t
1
, ..., t
n
},
and a set of images P = {p
1
, ..., p
m
} as input, our approach provides ordered lists of the most informative tweets
or images (a.k.a objects) so that the informativeness of an object in position i is higher than or equal to that of an
object in position i + 1. We consider the degree of informativeness of a certain object as the extent to which it
provides valuable information to people who are involved in or tracking the event in question.
During emergent events, there are tight correlations between social media and web documents. Important infor-
mation shared in social media tends to be posted in web documents. Therefore we also integrate information in a
formal genre such as web documents to enhance the ranking quality of tweets and images. It consists of two main
sub-tasks:
? Multimedia Information Network (MiNet) Construction:
Construct MiNet from cross-media and cross-genre information (i.e. tweets, images, sentences of web doc-
uments). Given a set of tweets and images on a specific topic as input, the formal genre web documents and
images from the embedded URLs in those tweets are retrieved. Afterwards, a set of sentences and images are
extracted from the web documents. Then we exploit advanced text Information Extraction and image Concept
Extraction techniques to extract meta-information and construct the meta-information network. Together with
three sets of heterogeneous input data, MiNet is constructed.
? MiNet-Based Information Ranking: Rank the tweets and images. By extending and adapting Tri-
HITS (Huang et al., 2012), we propose EN-Tri-HITs, an random walk-based propagation algorithm which
iteratively propagate ranking scores for sentences, tweets, and images across MiNet to refine the tweet and
image rankings.
3 Meta-information Network
When integrating information from different data modalities, meta-information network plays a pivotal role for
representing interesting concepts and relations between them. We automatically construct the initial informa-
tion networks using our state-of-the-art information extraction and image concept extraction techniques. A meta-
information network is a heterogeneous network including a set of ?information graphs? which is formally defined
as: G = {G
i
: G
i
= (V
i
, E
i
)}, where V
i
is the collection of concept nodes, and E
i
is the collection of edges
linking one concept to the other. An example is depicted in Figure 1. The meta-information network contains
human knowledge pertaining to the target domain that could improve the performance of text process and image
analysis. In this paper, we first construct meta-information networks separately from texts and images, and then
fuse and enrich them through effective cross-media linking methods.
3.1 Information Extraction from Texts
Extracting salient types of facts for a meta-information network is challenging. In this paper we tackle this problem
from two angles to balance the trade-off between quality and granularity/annotation cost. On one hand, to reveal
deep semantics in meta-information network, we focus on achieving high-quality extraction for pre-defined fine-
grained types such as those in NIST Automatic Content Extraction (ACE)
1
. For example, a ?Person/Individual?
node may include attributes such as ?Birth-Place?, and a ?Organization/Employee? node may include attributes
such as ?City-of-Headquarter?. These two nodes may be connected via a ?Employment/End-Position? link.
We apply an Information Extraction (IE) system (Li et al., 2013) to extract entities, relations and events defined
in ACE2005. There are 7 types of entities, 18 types of relations and 33 types of events. This system is based
on a joint framework using structured perceptron with efficient beam-search and incorporating diverse lexical,
syntactic, semantic and ontological features. We convert the IE output into the graph structured representation of
meta-information network by mapping each entity as a node, and link entity nodes by semantic relations or events
they are involved. For example, the relations between entities are naturally mapped to links in the meta-information
network, such as the ?employment? relation between ?Bill Read? and ?Hurricane Center?. In addition, if an event
1
http://www.itl.nist.gov/iad/894.01/tests/ace/
75
flood
Multimedia information Networks
Meta-information Networks
ORG
flooding from Irene killed one person Puerto RicoBill Read Hurricane Center said
Employment
Speaker
Agent Subject
Clause Subject
PlaceAgent
Victim
storm
Wikipedia
Verifiedby wiki Verifiedby wiki Verifiedby wiki
Verified Entity Concepts
Tweets Sentences of web documents Images
Contents Structured information
PER GPEEvent TriggerPredicate Predicate Noun phrase Noun phrase
Example:SRL
IE concept
type
Conceptfrom image Concept from image
Figure 1: An example of meta-information network. Sentence: ?Bill Read, Hurricane Center director, said that
flooding from Irene killed at least one person in Puerto Rico?
argument is an entity, we also add an ?Event Argument? link between the event trigger and the entity, such as the
link between ?Irene? and ?killed?.
On the other hand, in order to enrich the meta-information network, we extract more coarse-grained salient
fact types based on Semantic Role Labeling (SRL) (Pradhan et al., 2008). For example, given the sentence ?In
North Carolina, 10 counties are being evacuated.?, the ?evacuation? event is not included in ACE. However, the
SRL system can successfully detect the predicate (?evacuated?) and its semantic roles (?10 counties? and ?North
Carolina?). These argument heads and predicates are added into the meta-information network as vertices, and
edges are added between each predicate-argument pairs.
We merge entity mentions across tweets and web documents based on a cross-document entity clustering system
described in (Chen and Ji, 2011). Moreover, for the same type of nodes from the SRL system, we also merge them
by string matching across documents.
3.2 Concept Extraction from Images
We also developed a concept modeling approach by extending the similar framework in previous work (Tsai et al.,
2012), Probabilistic Logical Tree (PLT), to extract semantic concepts from images. PLT integrates the logical and
statistical inferences in a unifying framework where the existing primitive concepts are connected into a potentially
unlimited vocabulary of high-level concepts by basic logical operations. In contrast, most existing image concept
extraction algorithms either only learn a flat correlative concept structure, or a simple hierarchical structure without
logical connections.
With an efficient statistical learning algorithm, the complex concepts in upper level of PLT are modeled upon
some logically connected primitive concepts. This statistical learning approach is very flexible, where each concept
in PLT can be modeled from distinctive feature spaces with the most suitable feature descriptors (e.g., visual
features such as color and shape for scenery concepts).
For our case study on ?Hurricane Irene? scenario, we apply this algorithm to extract the hierarchical concept
trees with roots ?flood? or ?storm? from all the images in web documents whose URLs are contained in tweets.
The main problem is the classifications of the concepts such that it may be properly be placed onto an ontology.
In order to enrich the hierarchy, we seek to classify these linkages through the use of the semi-structured and
structured data that exists on Wikipedia. We use pattern matching to extract is-a relations from the first paragraphs
of Wikipedia articles. For example, starting from our initial concept ?Hurricane Irene?, we can find its is-a relation
with ?Tropical Cyclone?, and then climb up one more level to ?Storm? where we can further mine lower concepts
such as ?Tornado? and ?Snow Storm?.
76
4 Multi-media Information Networks
A Multimedia Information Network (MINet) is a structured collection made up of a set of multimedia documents
(e.g., texts and images) and links between these documents. Each link corresponds to a specific relationship
between nodes, such as hyperlinks between web documents or similarity links between tweets. In this paper, we
construct our MINet based on two forms of contents from different domains: tweets, web documents (plain texts)
and images.
4.1 Within-media Linking
4.1.1 Text-Text Similarity
Taking web document for example, we construct the meta-information network G = {G
i
: G
i
= (V
i
, E
i
)} for all
web documents D, in which each web document d
i
? D corresponds to G
i
. Given the meta-information network
G, we compute the weight of each vertex v
j
? V
i
as weight
v
j
=
nf(v
j
,d)
AV E(D)
,
where nf(v
j
, d) is the mention number of node v
j
appearing in a document d and AV E(D) is the average
number of mentions in a document d, which is defined as AV E(D) =
?
d?D
concept mentions in d
|D|
.
Similarly, we define the weight of each link e
k
? E
i
as weight
e
k
=
nf(e
k
,d)
AV E(D)
, where nf(e
k
, d) is the mention
number of the node e
k
in a document d and AV E(D) is the average number of mentions in a document d, which
is defined as AV E(D) =
?
d?D
relation mentions in d
|D|
.
If two edges share the same type and link nodes corresponding to the same tokens, we consider them as two
mentions involved in a relation. Based on the weight of each concept mention and relation mention, we count their
frequencies and transform them into vectors. Finally, we compute cosine similarity between every two vectors.
4.1.2 Image-Image Similarity
We extract Histogram of Oriented Gradients (HOG) features (Dalal and Triggs, 2005) from patches in images and
apply Hierarchical Gaussianization (Zhou et al., 2009) to those HOG feature vectors. We learn a Gaussian mixture
model (GMM) to obtain the statistics of the patches of an image by adapting the distribution of the extracted HOG
features from these image patches and each image is represented by a super-vector. Based on the obtained image
representation, the image-image similarity is simply a cosine similarity between two HG super-vectors.
4.2 Cross-media Linking
In order to obtain cross-media similarity, we propose a method based on transfer learning technique (Qi et al.,
2012). Given a set of m points [p
1
, p
2
, . . . , p
m
] in the source (image) domain P , a set of n points [t
1
, t
2
, . . . , t
n
]
in the target (text) domain T , and a set of N corresponding pairs C = {(p
a
i
, t
b
i
}
N
i=1
in these two domains, we aim
to find a cross-media similarity function:
G(p, t) = `((Up)
T
(V t)) = `(p
T
St)), (1)
where U and V are the linear embedding of P and T , respectively. S = U
T
V is the cross-domain similarity
matrix and `(?) =
1
1+e
??
is the logistic sigmoid function.
The key to S in Equation 1 is to solve the optimization problem blow:
min
S
?
L
s
(S) + ?
?
L
d
(S) + ?
?
?(S), (2)
where
?
L
s
(S) =
?
(x,y)?C
log(1 + exp(?p
T
St)), and
?
?(S) = ?S?
?
is the nuclear norm that is the surrogate of
the matrix rank. Also, we have
?
L
d
(S) =
1
2
?
K
P
(p, p
?
)d
T
(p, p
?
) +
1
2
?
K
T
(t, t
?
)d
P
(t, t
?
),
where K(?, ?) is the similarity matrix among the points in a single domain and d(?, ?) defines the distance between
two points due to the transfer.
Taking one step further, we have
?
L
d
(S) = tr(L
T
Q
T
(S)
T
K
P
Q
P
(S)) + tr(L
X
Q
P
(S)
T
K
T
Q
T
(S)),
where L
P
and L
T
are the Laplacian matrices for K
P
and K
T
, respectively.
To solve the optimization problem (2) with nuclear norm regularization we follow the proximal gradient method
(Toh and Yun, 2010) with the following gradients:
5
?
L
s
(S) = P (J
C
?H)P
T
,5
?
L
d
(S) = P ((K
P
Q
P
L
T
+ L
P
Q
T
K
T
) ?H)P
T
(3)
77
JC
is an m ? n matrix with its (i, j)-th entry 1 if (p
i
, t
j
) ? C, otherwise 0. H is also an m ? n matrix whose
(i, j)-th entry where H
ij
= `
?
(p
T
i
St
j
).
Hence we have
5
?
L(S) = P (G ?H)T
T
, (4)
where G = J
C
+ ?K
P
Q
P
L
T
+ ?L
P
Q
T
K
T
. With the gradient in (4), one can solve the problem (2) using the
proximal gradient method.
5 MiNet-Based Information Ranking: EN-Tri-HITs
5.1 Initializing Ranking Scores
1 Input: A set of tweets (T ), and images (P ) and web documents (W ) on a given topic.
2 Output: Ranking scores (S
t
) for T and (S
p
) for P .
1: Use TextRank to compute initial ranking scores S
0
p
for P ,
S
0
t
for T and S
0
w
for W ;
2: Construct multimedia information networks across P , T
and W ;
3: k ? 0, diff ? 10e6;
4: while k < MaxIteration and diff > MinThreshold do
5: Use Eq. (5) (6) and (7) to compute S
k+1
p
, S
k+1
t
and S
k+1
w
;
6: Normalize S
k+1
p
, S
k+1
t
and S
k+1
w
;
7: diff ? max(
?
(|S
k+1
t
? S
k
t
|),
?
(|S
k+1
p
? S
k
p
|));
8: k ? k + 1
9: end while
Algorithm 1: EN-Tri-HITS: Random walk on multimedia information networks
Graph-based ranking algorithms have been widely used to analyze relations between vertices in graphs. In
this paper, we adapted PageRank (Brin and Page, 1998; Mihalcea and Tarau, 2004; Jing and Baluja, 2008) to
compute initial ranking scores in tweet-only and image-only networks where edges between tweets or images are
determined by their cosine similarity.
The ranking score is computed as follows:
S(V
i
) = (1? d) + d ?
?
V
j
?In(V
i
)
w
ji
?
V
k
?Out(V
j
)
w
jk
S(V
j
),
where V
i
is a vertex with S(V
i
) as its ranking score; In(V
i
) and Out(V
i
) are the incoming edge set and outgoing
edge set of V
i
, respectively; w
ij
is the weight for the edge between two vertices V
i
and V
j
. An edge links two
vertices that represent text units when their cosine similarity of shared content exceeds or equals to a predefined
threshold ?
t
.
5.2 Random Walk on Multimedia Information Networks
We introduce a novel algorithm to incorporate both initial ranking scores and global evidence from multimedia
information networks. It propagates ranking scores across MiNets iteratively. Our algorithm is a natural extension
of Tri-HITS (Huang et al., 2012) based on the mutual reinforcement to boost linked objects.
By extending Tri-HITS, we develop enhanced Tri-HITS (EN-Tri-HITs) to handle multimedia information net-
works with three types of objects: Tweets (T ), sentences of web documents (W ) and images (P ). EN-Tri-HITs
is able to handle more complicated network structure with more links. Given the similarity matrices M
tw
(be-
tween tweets and sentences of web documents), M
wp
(between sentences of web documents and images) andM
tp
(between tweets and images), and initial ranking scores of S
0
(p), S
0
(t) and S
0
(w), we aim to refine the initial
ranking scores and obtain the final ranking scores S(w), S(t) and S(p). Starting from images S(p), the update
process considers both the initial score S
0
(p) and the propagation from connected tweets S(t) and web documents
S(w), which can be expressed as:
?
S
w
(p
j
) =
?
i?W
m
wp
ij
S(w
i
),
?
S
t
(p
j
) =
?
k?T
m
tp
kj
S(t
k
),
S(p
j
) = (1? ?
wp
? ?
tp
)S
0
(p
j
) + ?
wp
?
S
w
(p
j
)
?
j
?
S
w
(p
j
)
+ ?
tp
?
S
t
(p
j
)
?
j
?
S
t
(p
j
)
, (5)
78
Set ID Tweets
Web Doc
Images
(Sentences)
1 1171 41(1272) 183
2 1116 47(1634) 265
3 1184 69(1639) 346
All 3471 157(4545) 794
Table 1: Data Statistics: Numbers of each item in
the dataset.
word word word word
+IE +SRL +IE+SRL
I+W 0.545 0.539 0.521 0.583
I+T 0.422 0.436 0.407 0.489
I+W+T 0.526 0.513 0.492 0.541
Table 2: NDCG@5 of Images. The image ranking
baseline performance is 0.421. I stands for Image;
W Web Documents; T Tweets
where ?
wp
, ?
tp
? [0, 1] (?
wp
+ ?
tp
? 1) are the parameters to balance between initial and propagated ranking
scores. Similar to Tri-HITS, EN-Tri-HITS normalizes the propagated ranking scores
?
S
w
(p
i
) and
?
S
t
(p
i
).
Similarly, we define the propagations from images and web documents to tweets as follows:
?
S
p
(t
k
) =
?
i?P
m
pt
ik
S(p
i
),
?
S
w
(t
k
) =
?
j?W
m
wt
jk
S(w
j
),
S(t
k
) = (1? ?
wt
? ?
pt
)S
0
(t
k
) + ?
wt
?
S
p
(t
k
)
?
k
?
S
p
(t
k
)
+ ?
pt
?
S
w
(t
k
)
?
k
?
S
w
(t
k
)
, (6)
where M
pt
is the transpose of M
tp
, ?
pt
and ?
wt
are parameters to balance between initial and propagated ranking
scores.
Each sentence of web documents S(w
j
) may be influenced by the propagation from both tweets and images:
?
S
t
(w
i
) =
?
k?T
m
tw
ki
S(t
k
),
?
S
p
(w
i
) =
?
i?P
m
pw
ji
S(p
j
),
S(w
i
) = (1? ?
tw
? ?
pw
)S
0
(w
i
) + ?
tw
?
S
t
(w
i
)
?
i
?
S
t
(w
i
)
+ ?
pw
?
S
p
(w
i
)
?
i
?
S
p
(w
i
)
, (7)
where M
pw
is the transpose of M
wp
, ?
tw
and ?
pw
are parameters to balance between initial and propagated
ranking scores.
Algorithm 1 summarizes En-Tri-HITS.
6 Experiments
6.1 Data and Scoring Metric
Currently there are no information ranking related benchmark data sets publicly available, therefore we build our
own data set and network ontology.
We crawled 3471 tweets during a three-hour period and extracted key phrases from these tweets, then we use
the key phrases as image search queries. The image search queries are submitted to Bing Image Search API and
we take the top 10 images for each query. We extract a 512-d GIST feature from each image for meta information
training. For image similarity metrics, we resize images to a maximum of 240 ? 240 and segmented into patches
with three different sizes (16, 25 and 31) by a 6-pixel step size. A 128-d Histogram of Oriented Gradients (HOG)
feature is extracted from each patch and followed by a PCA dimension reduction to 80-d. The size of dimension
of the final feature vector for each image is 42,496.
We create the ground truth based on human assessment of informativeness on a 5-star likert scale, with grade 5
as the most informative and 1 as the least informative. Table 1 presents an overview on our data sets. We conduct
3-fold cross-validation for our experiments.
To evaluate tweet ranking, we use nDCG as our evaluation metric (J?arvelin and Kek?al?ainen, 2002), which
considers both the informativeness and the position of a tweet:
nDCG(?, k) =
1
|?|
|?|
?
i=1
DCG
ik
IDCG
ik
, DCG
ik
=
k
?
j=1
2
rel
ij
? 1
log(1 + j)
,
where ? is the set of documents in the test set, with each document corresponding to an hour of tweets in our case,
rel
ij
is the human-annotated label for the tweet j in the document i, and IDCG
ik
is the DCG score of the ideal
ranking. The average nDCG score for the top k tweets is: Avg@k =
?
k
i=1
nDCG(?, i)/k. To favor diversity of
top ranked tweets, redundant tweets are penalized to lower down the final score.
79
6.2 Impact of Cross-media Inference
Table 2 and Figure 2 present the image ranking results. The results indicate that methods integrating heterogeneous
networks outperform the baseline of image ranking (0.421). When web documents are aligned with images (row
1), the ranking quality improves significantly, proving that web documents can help detect informative images by
adding support from text media of formal genre. However, the text media of informal genre, such as tweets, almost
cannot help improve the ranking performance.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 00 . 20 . 30 . 40 . 50 . 60 . 7
0 . 80 . 91 . 0NDCG@N N
 I m a g e + T w e e t + W e b  D o c + W e b  D o c & T w e e t
Figure 2: NDCG@n score of Images with Various n
word word word word
+IE +SRL +IE+SRL
T 0.675 0.691 0.697 0.700
T+W 0.766 0.771 0.757 0.809
T+I 0.675 0.691 0.667 0.700
T+W+I 0.722 0.771 0.757 0.809
Table 3: NDCG@5 of Tweets
6.3 Impact of Cross-genre Inference
Methods that integrate heterogeneous networks after filtering, outperform the baseline TextRank, as shown in
Table 3. When tweets are aligned with web documents, the ranking quality improves significantly, proving that
web documents can help infer informative tweets by adding support from a formal genre. The fact that tweets with
low initial ranking scores are aligned with web documents helps promote their ranking positions. For example,
the ranking of the tweet ?Hurricane Irene: City by City Forecasts http://t.co/x1t122A? is improved compared to
TextRank, benefitting from the fact that 10 retrieved web documents are about this topic.
6.4 Remaining Error Analysis
Enhanced Tri-HITS shows encouraging improvements in ranking quality with respect to a state-of-the-art model
such as TextRank. However, there are still some issues to be addressed for further improvements.
(i) Long tweets preferred. We tracked tweets containing the keywords ?Hurricane? and ?Irene?. Using such a
query might also return tweets that are not related to the event being followed. This may occur either because
the terms are ambiguous, or because of spam being injected into trending conversations to make it visible. For
example, the tweet ?Hurricane Kitty: http://t.co/cdIexE3? is an advertisement, which is not topically related to
Irene.
(ii) Deep semantic analysis of the content, especially for images. We rely on distinct terms to refer to the
same concept. More extensive semantic analyses of text can help identify those terms, possibly enhancing the
propagation process. For example, we can explore existing text dictionaries such as WordNet (Miller, 1995) to
mine synonym/hypernym/hyponym relations, and Brown clusters (Brown et al., 1992) to mine other types of
relations in order to enrich the concepts extracted from images.
7 Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we propose a comprehensive information ranking approach which facilitates measurement on cross-
media/cross-genre informativeness based on a novel multi-media information network representation MiNet. We
establish links via information extraction method from text and images and verification with Wikipedia. In ad-
dition, we propose similarity measurement on intra-media and cross-media using transfer learning techniques.
We also introduce a novel En-Tri-Hits algorithm to evaluate the ranking scores across MiNet. Experiments have
demonstrated that our cross-media/cross-genre ranking method is able to significantly boost the performance of
multi-media tweet ranking. In the future, we aim to focus on enhancing the quality of concept extraction by
exploiting cross-media inference that goes beyond simple fusion.
Acknowledgement
This work was supported by the U.S. Army Research Laboratory under Cooperative Agreement No. W911NF-
09-2-0053 (NS-CTA), U.S. NSF CAREER Award under Grant IIS-0953149, U.S. DARPA Award No. FA8750-
13-2-0041 in the ?Deep Exploration and Filtering of Text? (DEFT) Program, IBM Faculty award and RPI faculty
start-up grant. The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not
be interpreted as representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of the U.S. Government. The
80
U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Government purposes notwithstanding any
copyright notation here on.
References
Sergey Brin and Lawrence Page. 1998. The anatomy of a large-scale hypertextual web search engine. Computer
Networks, 30(1-7):107?117.
Peter F. Brown, Peter V. deSouza, Robert L. Mercer, Vincent J. Della Pietra, and Jenifer C. Lai. 1992. Class-based
n-gram models of natural language. Computational Linguistics, 18:467?479.
Zheng Chen and Heng Ji. 2011. Collaborative ranking: A case study on entity linking. In Proc. EMNLP2011.
Navneet Dalal and Bill Triggs. 2005. Histograms of oriented gradients for human detection. In In CVPR, pages
886?893.
Yansong Feng and Mirella Lapata. 2010. Topic models for image annotation and text illustration. In Human
Language Technologies: The 2010 Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, HLT ?10, pages 831?839, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Hongzhao Huang, Arkaitz Zubiaga, Heng Ji, Hongbo Deng, Dong Wang, Hieu Le, Tarek Abdelzaher, Jiawei Han,
Alice Leung, John Hancock, and Clare Voss. 2012. Tweet ranking based on heterogeneous networks. In Proc.
COLING 2012, pages 1239?1256, Mumbai, India. The COLING 2012 Organizing Committee.
Kalervo J?arvelin and Jaana Kek?al?ainen. 2002. Cumulated gain-based evaluation of ir techniques. ACM Trans. Inf.
Syst., 20(4):422?446, October.
Yushi Jing and Shumeet Baluja. 2008. Visualrank: Applying pagerank to large-scale image search. IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., 30(11):1877?1890.
Qi Li, Heng Ji, and Liang Huang. 2013. Joint event extraction via structured prediction with global features. In
Proc. ACL2013, pages 73?82.
R. Mihalcea and P. Tarau. 2004. Textrank: Bringing order into texts. In Proceedings of EMNLP, volume 4.
Barcelona: ACL.
George A. Miller. 1995. Wordnet: A lexical database for english. COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM, 38:39?41.
Sameer Pradhan, Wayne Ward, and James H. Martin. 2008. Towards robust semantic role labeling. In Computa-
tional Linguistics Special Issue on Semantic Role Labeling, volume 34, pages 289?310.
Guo-Jun Qi, Charu C. Aggarwal, and Thomas S. Huang. 2012. Transfer learning of distance metrics by cross-
domain metric sampling across heterogeneous spaces. In SDM, pages 528?539.
Kim-Chuan Toh and Sangwoon Yun. 2010. An accelerated proximal gradient algorithm for nuclear norm regular-
ized linear least squares problems. Pacific Journal of Optimization.
Shen-Fu Tsai, Henry Hao Tang, Feng Tang, and Thomas S. Huang. 2012. Ontological inference framework
with joint ontology construction and learning for image understanding. In IEEE International Conference on
Multimedia and Expo (ICME) 2012.
Fabio Massimo Zanzotto, Marco Pennacchiotti, and Kostas Tsioutsiouliklis. 2011. Linguistic redundancy in
twitter. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP ?11,
pages 659?669, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Wayne X. Zhao, Jing Jiang, Jing He, Yang Song, Palakorn Achananuparp, Ee P. Lim, and Xiaoming Li. 2011.
Topical keyphrase extraction from Twitter. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies - Volume 1, HLT ?11, pages 379?388, Stroudsburg,
PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Xi Zhou, Na Cui, Zhen Li, Feng Liang, and Thomas S. Huang. 2009. Hierarchical gaussianization for image
classification. In ICCV, pages 1971?1977.
81
