Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1133?1141,
Singapore, 6-7 August 2009.
c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Real-time decision detection in multi-party dialogue
Matthew Frampton, Jia Huang, Trung Huu Bui and Stanley Peters
Center for the Study of Language and Information
Stanford University
Stanford, CA, 94305, USA
{frampton|jiahuang|thbui|peters}@stanford.edu
Abstract
We describe a process for automatically
detecting decision-making sub-dialogues
in multi-party, human-human meetings in
real-time. Our basic approach to decision
detection involves distinguishing between
different utterance types based on the roles
that they play in the formulation of a de-
cision. In this paper, we describe how this
approach can be implemented in real-time,
and show that the resulting system?s per-
formance compares well with other detec-
tors, including an off-line version.
1 Introduction
In collaborative and organized work environ-
ments, people share information and make de-
cisions through multi-party conversations, com-
monly referred to as meetings. The demand for
automatic methods that process, understand and
summarize information contained in audio and
video recordings of meetings is growing rapidly,
as evidenced by on-going projects which are fo-
cused on this goal, (Waibel et al, 2003; Janin et
al., 2004). Our research is part of a general effort
to develop a system that can automatically extract
and summarize information such as conversational
topics, action items, and decisions.
This paper concerns the development of a real-
time decision detector ? a system which can de-
tect and summarize decisions as they are made
during a meeting. Such a system could provide
a summary of all of the decisions which have been
made up until the current point in the meeting,
and this is something which we expect will help
users to enjoy more productive meetings. Cer-
tainly, good decision-making relies on access to
relevant information, and decisions made earlier
in a meeting often have a bearing on the current
topic of discussion, and so form part of this rele-
vant information. However, in a long and winding
meeting, participants might not have these earlier
decisions at the forefront of their minds, and so
an accurate and succinct reminder, as provided by
a real-time decision detector, could potentially be
very useful. A record of earlier decisions could
also help users to identify outstanding issues for
discussion, and to therefore make better use of the
remainder of the meeting.
Our approach to decision detection uses an an-
notation scheme which distinguishes between dif-
ferent types of utterance based on the roles which
they play in the decision-making process. Such a
scheme facilitates the detection of decision discus-
sions (Fern?andez et al, 2008), and by indicating
which utterances contain particular types of infor-
mation, it also aids their summarization. To auto-
matically detect decision discussions, we use what
we refer to as hierarchical classification. Here, in-
dependent binary sub-classifiers detect the differ-
ent decision dialogue acts, and then based on the
sub-classifier hypotheses, a super-classifier deter-
mines which dialogue regions are decision discus-
sions. In this paper then, we address the chal-
lenges for applying this approach in real-time, and
produce a system which is able to detect decisions
soon after they are made, (for example within a
minute). We conduct tests and compare this sys-
tem?s performance with other detectors, including
an off-line equivalent.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows.
Section 2 describes related work, and Section 3 de-
scribes our annotation scheme for decision discus-
sions, and our experimental data. Next, Section
4 explains the hierarchical classification approach
in more detail, and Section 5 considers how it can
be applied in real-time. Section 6 describes the
experiments in which we test the real-time detec-
tor, and finally, Section 7 presents conclusions and
ideas for future work.
1133
2 Related Work
Decisions are one of the most important meet-
ing outputs. User studies (Lisowska et al, 2004;
Banerjee et al, 2005) have confirmed that meeting
participants consider this to be the case, and Whit-
taker et al (2006) found that the development of
an automatic decision detection component is crit-
ical to the re-use of meeting archives. As a result,
with the new availability of substantial meeting
corpora such as the ISL (Burger et al, 2002), ICSI
(Janin et al, 2004) and AMI (McCowan et al,
2005) Meeting Corpora, recent years have seen an
increasing amount of research on decision-making
dialogue.
This recent research has tackled issues such
as the automatic detection of agreement and dis-
agreement (Hillard et al, 2003; Galley et al,
2004), and of the level of involvement of conver-
sational participants (Wrede and Shriberg, 2003;
Gatica-Perez et al, 2005). In addition, Verbree
et al (2006) created an argumentation scheme in-
tended to support automatic production of argu-
ment structure diagrams from decision-oriented
meeting transcripts. Only very recent research has
specifically investigated the automatic detection of
decisions, namely (Hsueh and Moore, 2007) and
(Fern?andez et al, 2008).
Hsueh and Moore (2007) used the AMI Meeting
Corpus, and attempted to automatically identify
dialogue acts (DAs) in meeting transcripts which
are ?decision-related?. Within any meeting, the
authors decided which DAs were decision-related
based on two different kinds of manually created
summary: the first was an extractive summary of
the whole meeting, and the second, an abstrac-
tive summary of the decisions which were made.
Those DAs in the extractive summary which sup-
port any of the decisions in the abstractive sum-
mary were manually tagged as decision-related.
Hsueh and Moore (2007) then trained a Maxi-
mum Entropy classifier to recognize this single
DA class, using a variety of lexical, prosodic, dia-
logue act and conversational topic features. They
achieved an F-score of 0.35, which gives an indi-
cation of the difficulty of this task.
Unlike Hsueh and Moore (2007), Fern?andez
et al (2008) made an attempt at modelling the
structure of decision-making dialogue. They de-
signed an annotation scheme that takes account of
the different roles which different utterances play
in the decision-making process ? for example,
their scheme distinguishes between decision DAs
(DDAs) which initiate a discussion by raising a
topic/issue, those which propose a resolution, and
those which express agreement for a proposed res-
olution and cause it to be accepted as a decision.
The authors applied the annotation scheme to a
portion of the AMI corpus, and then took what
they refer to as a hierarchical classification ap-
proach in order to automatically identify decision
discussions and their component DAs. Here, one
binary Support Vector Machine (SVM) per DDA
class hypothesized occurrences of that DDA class,
and then based on the hypotheses of these so-
called sub-classifiers, a super-classifier, (a further
SVM), determined which regions of dialogue rep-
resented decision discussions. This approach pro-
duced better results than the kind of ?flat classi-
fication? approach pursued by Hsueh and Moore
(2007) where a single classifier looks for exam-
ples of a single decision-related DA class. Using
manual transcripts, and a variety of lexical, utter-
ance, speaker, DA and prosodic features for the
sub-classifiers, the super-classifier?s F1-score was
0.58 according to a lenient match metric. Note that
(Purver et al, 2007) had previously pursued the
same basic approach as Fern?andez et al (2008) in
order to detect action items.
While both Hsueh and Moore (2007), and
Fern?andez et al (2008) attempted off-line decision
detection, in this paper, we attempt real-time deci-
sion detection. We take the same basic approach
as Fern?andez et al (2008), and make changes to
its implementation so that it can work effectively
in real-time.
3 Data
The AMI corpus (McCowan et al, 2005), is a
freely available corpus of multi-party meetings
containing both audio and video recordings, as
well as a wide range of annotated information
including dialogue acts and topic segmentation.
Conversations are all in English, but participants
can include non-native English speakers. All of
the meetings in our sub-corpus last around 30 min-
utes, and are scenario-driven, wherein four partic-
ipants play different roles in a company?s design
team: project manager, marketing expert, inter-
face designer and industrial designer. The discus-
sions concern how to design a remote control.
We used the off-line version of the Decipher
speech recognition engine (Stolcke et al, 2008) in
1134
order to obtain off-line ASR transcripts for these
17 meetings, and the real-time version, to ob-
tain real-time ASR transcripts. Decipher gener-
ates the transcripts by first producing Word Con-
fusion Networks (WCNs) and then extracting their
best paths. The real-time recognizer generates
?live? transcripts with 5 to 15 seconds of latency
for immediate display. In processing completed
meetings, the off-line system makes seven recog-
nition passes, including acoustic adaptation and
language model rescoring, in about 4.2 times real-
time (on a 4-score 2.6 GHz Opteron server). In
general usage with multi-party dialogue, the word
error rate (WER) for the off-line version of De-
cipher is approximately 23%, and for the real-
time version, approximately 35%
1
. Stolcke et al
(2008) report a WER of 26.9% for the off-line ver-
sion on AMI meetings.
The real-time ASR transcripts for the 17 meet-
ings contain a total of 8440 utterances/dialogue
acts, (around 496 per meeting), and the off-line
ASR transcripts, 7495 utterances/dialogue acts,
(around 441 per meeting).
3.1 Modelling Decision Discussions
We use the same annotation scheme as
(Fern?andez et al, 2008) in order to model
decision-making dialogue. As stated in Section 2,
this scheme distinguishes between a small number
of dialogue act types based on the role which they
perform in the formulation of a decision. Recall
that using this scheme in conjunction with hierar-
chical classification produced better decision de-
tection than a ?flat classification? approach with a
single ?decision-related? DA class. Since it indi-
cates which utterances contain particular types of
information, such a scheme also aids the summa-
rization of decision discussions.
The annotation scheme (see Table 1 for a sum-
mary) is based on the observation that a decision
discussion contains the following main structural
components: (a) a topic or issue requiring resolu-
tion is raised, (b) one or more possible resolutions
are considered, (c) a particular resolution is agreed
upon, that is, it becomes the decision. Hence the
scheme distinguishes between three correspond-
ing decision dialogue act (DDA) classes: Issue (I),
Resolution (R), and Agreement (A). Class R is fur-
ther subdivided into Resolution Proposal (RP) and
1
This information was obtained through personal commu-
nication.
Resolution Restatement (RR). Note that an utter-
ance can be assigned to more than one of these
DDA classes, and that within a decision discus-
sion, more than one utterance may correspond to a
particular DDA class.
Here we use the sample decision discussion
below in 1 in order to provide examples of the
different DDA types. I utterances introduce the
topic of the decision discussion, examples be-
ing ?Are we going to have a backup?? and ?But
would a backup really be necessary?? On the
other hand, R utterances specify the resolution
which is ultimately adopted as the decision. RP
utterances propose this resolution (e.g. ?I think
maybe we could just go for the kinetic energy. . . ?),
while RR utterances close the discussion by con-
firming/summarizing the decision (e.g. ?Okay,
fully kinetic energy?). Finally, A utterances agree
with the proposed resolution, so causing it to be
adopted as the decision, (e.g. ?Yeah?, ?Good?
and ?Okay?.
(1) A: Are we going to have a backup?
Or we do just?
B: But would a backup really be necessary?
A: I think maybe we could just go for the
kinetic energy and be bold and innovative.
C: Yeah.
B: I think? yeah.
A: It could even be one of our selling points.
C: Yeah ?laugh?.
D: Environmentally conscious or something.
A: Yeah.
B: Okay, fully kinetic energy.
D: Good.
2
3.2 Experimental data for real-time decision
detection
Originally, two individuals used the annotation
scheme described above in order to annotate the
manual transcripts of 9 and 10 meetings respec-
tively. The annotators overlapped on two meet-
ings, and their kappa inter-annotator agreement
ranged from 0.63 to 0.73 for the four DDA classes.
The highest agreement was obtained for class RP,
and the lowest for class A. Although these kappa
values are not extremely high, if we used a single,
less homogeneous ?decision-related? DA class
like Hsueh and Moore (2007), then its kappa score
2
This example was extracted from the AMI dialogue
ES2015c and has been modified slightly for presentation pur-
poses.
1135
key DDA class description
I issue utterances introducing the issue or topic under discussion
R resolution utterances containing the resolution adopted as the decision
RP ? proposal ? utterances where the decision is originally proposed
RR ? restatement ? utterances where the decision is confirmed or restated
A agreement utterances explicitly signalling agreement with the decision
Table 1: Set of decision dialogue act (DDA) classes
would probably be significantly lower. The de-
cision discussion annotations used by Hsueh and
Moore (2007) are part of the AMI corpus, and are
for the manual transcriptions. The reader can find
a comparison between these annotations and our
own manual transcript annotations in (Fern?andez
et al, 2008).
After obtaining the new off-line and real-time
ASR transcripts, we transferred the DDA annota-
tions from the manual transcripts. In both sets of
ASR transcripts, each meeting contains on aver-
age around 26 DAs tagged with one or more of the
DDA sub-classes in Table 1. DDAs are thus very
sparse, corresponding to only 5.3% of utterances
in the real-time transcripts, and 6.0% in the off-
line. In the real-time transcripts, Issue utterances
make up less than 1.2% of the total number of ut-
terances in a meeting, while Resolution utterances
are around 1.6%: 1.2% are RP and less than 0.4%
are RR on average. Almost half of DDA utterances
(slightly over 2.6% of all utterances on average)
are tagged as belonging to class Agreement. In the
off-line transcripts, the percentages are fairly sim-
ilar: 1.6% of utterances are Issue DDAs, 2.0% are
RP, 0.5% are RR, and 2.4% are A.
We now move on to describe the hierarchical
classification approach which we use to try to au-
tomatically detect decision sub-dialogues and their
component DDAs.
4 Hierarchical Classification
Hierarchical classification is designed to exploit
the fact that within decision discussions, our
DDAs can be expected to co-occur in particular
types of patterns. It involves two different types of
classifier:
1. Sub-classifier: One independent binary sub-
classifier per DDA class classifies each utter-
ance.
2. Super-classifier: A sliding window shifts
through the meeting one utterance at a time,
and following each shift, a binary super-
classifier determines whether the region of
dialogue within the window is part of a de-
cision discussion.
In our decision detectors, the sub-classifiers run
in parallel in order to reduce processing time.
For each utterance, the sub-classifiers use fea-
tures which are derived from the properties of
that utterance in context. On the other hand,
the super-classifier?s features are the hypothesized
class labels and confidence scores for the utter-
ances within the window. In various experiments,
we have found that a suitable size for the window,
is the average length of a decision discussion in
our data in utterances. The super-classifier also
?corrects? the sub-classifiers. This means that if a
DA is classified as positive by a sub-classifier, but
does not fall within a region classified as part of
a decision discussion by the super-classifier, then
the sub-classifier?s hypothesis is changed to nega-
tive.
We now move on to consider how this basic ap-
proach to decision detection can be implemented
in a real-time system.
5 Design considerations for our real-time
system
A real-time decision detector should detect deci-
sions as soon after they are made as possible. It is
for this reason that we have set our real-time de-
tector to automatically run at frequent and regular
intervals during a meeting. An alternative would
be to give the user (a meeting participant) respon-
sibility for instructing the detector when to run.
However, a user may sometimes leave substantial
gaps between giving run commands. When this
happens, the detector will have to process a large
number of utterances in a single run, and so the
user may wait some time before being presented
with any results. In addition, giving the user re-
sponsibility for instructing the detector when to
1136
Figure 1: Decision discussion regions hypothesized by
consecutive runs overlap (D
1
to D
3
and D
2
to D
4
) and so
are merged.
run means burdening the user with an extra task to
perform during the meeting, and this goes against
the general philosophy behind the system?s devel-
opment. The system is intended to be as unobtru-
sive as possible during the meeting, and to relieve
users of tasks which distract their attention away
from the current discussion (e.g. note-taking), not
to create new tasks, however small.
Obviously, on the first occasion that the detector
runs during a meeting, it can only process ?new?
(previously unprocessed) utterances, but on sub-
sequent runs, it has the option to reprocess some
number of ?old? utterances (utterances which it
has already processed in a previous run). Cer-
tainly, the detector should reprocess some of the
most recent old utterances because it is possible
that a decision discussion straddles these utter-
ances and new utterances. However, the number of
old utterances that are reprocessed should be lim-
ited. If the meeting has lasted a while already, then
the processing of a large portion of the earlier old
utterances is likely to be redundant ? it will sim-
ply produce the same results for these utterances
as the previous run.
The fact that the real-time detector processes re-
cent old utterances means that consecutive runs
can produce hypotheses for decision discussion re-
gions which overlap, or which are duplicates. Fig-
ure 1 gives an example of the former. We deal with
overlapping hypotheses by merging them into one,
so forming a larger single decision discussion re-
gion. Figure 2 gives an example of duplicate hy-
potheses. Here, on run n, the detector hypothe-
sizes decision discussion D
1
to D
2
, and then on
run n+1, since the bounds of this original hypoth-
esis are now wholly contained within the region of
Figure 2: Consecutive runs hypothesize the same decision
discussion region D
1
to D
2
, and so one of the duplicates is
discarded.
old reprocessed utterances, the detector hypothe-
sizes a duplicate. We deal with such cases by dis-
carding the duplicate.
6 Experiments
We conducted various experiments related to real-
time decision detection, our goal being to produce
a system which:
? relative to alternative versions, detects deci-
sion discussions accurately,
? generates results for any portion of dialogue
very soon after that portion of dialogue has
ended.
The current version of our real-time detector is set
to process the same number of old and new utter-
ances on each run. Here, we refer to this value as i,
and hence on each run the system processes a total
of 2i utterances (i old and i new). Another of the
system?s characteristics is that runs take place ev-
ery i utterances, meaning that as we decrease i, the
system provides new results more frequently and
is hence ?more real-time?. One of the things we
investigate here then, is what to set i to in order
to best satisfy the two design goals given above.
Having found this value, we compare the hierar-
chical real-time detector?s performance with alter-
native detectors, these being:
? an off-line detector applied to off-line ASR
transcripts,
? a flat real-time detector,
? an off-line detector applied to the real-time
ASR transcripts.
1137
Lexical unigrams after text normalization
Utterance length in words, duration in
word rate
Speaker speaker ID & AMI speaker role
Context features as above for utterances
u +/- 1. . .u +/- 5
Table 2: Features for decision DA detection
Note that the off-line detectors use hierarchical
classification, and that the flat real-time detec-
tor uses a single binary classifier which treats all
DDAs as members of a single merged DDA class.
6.1 Classifiers and features
All classifiers (sub and super-classifiers) in all de-
tectors are linear-kernel Support Vector Machines
(SVMs), produced using SVMlight (Joachims,
1999). For the sub-classifiers, we are obviously re-
stricted to using features which can be computed
in a very short period of time, and in the experi-
ments here, we use lexical, utterance and speaker
features. These are summarized in Table 2. An
utterance?s lexical features are the words in its
transcription, its utterance features are its dura-
tion, number of words, and word rate (number of
words divided by duration), and its speaker fea-
tures are the speaker?s role (see Section 3) and ID.
We also use lexical features for the previous and
where available, next utterances: the I, RP and RR
sub-classifiers use the lexical features for the pre-
vious/next utterance and the A sub-classifier, those
from the previous/next 5 utterances. These set-
tings produced the best results in preliminary ex-
periments. We do not use DA features because
we lack an automatic DA tagger, nor do we use
prosodic features because (Fern?andez et al, 2008)
was unable to derive any value from them with
SVMs.
6.2 Evaluation
We evaluate each of our decision detectors in 17-
fold cross validations, where in each fold, the de-
tector trains on 16 meetings and then tests on the
remaining one. Evaluation can be made at three
levels:
1. The sub-classifiers? detection of each of the
DDA classes.
2. The sub-classifiers? detection of each of the
DDA classes after correction by the super-
classifier.
Figure 3: The relationship between the number of old/new
utterances processed in a single run, and the super-classifier?s
F1-score. Here the sub-classifiers use only lexical features.
3. The super-classifier?s detection of decision
discussion regions.
For 1 and 2, we use the same lenient-match met-
ric as (Fern?andez et al, 2008; Hsueh and Moore,
2007), which allows a margin of 20 seconds pre-
ceding and following a hypothesized DDA. Note
that here we only give credit for hypotheses based
on a 1-1 mapping with the gold-standard labels.
For 3, we follow (Fern?andez et al, 2008; Purver et
al., 2007) and use a windowed metric that divides
the dialogue into 30-second windows and evalu-
ates on a per window basis.
6.3 Results and analysis
Here, Section 6.3.1 will present results for differ-
ent values of i, the number of old/new utterances
processed in a single run. Section 6.3.2 then com-
pares the performance of the real-time and off-line
systems, (and also real-time systems which use hi-
erarchical vs. flat classification), and Section 6.3.3
presents some feature analysis.
6.3.1 Varying the number of old/new
utterances processed in a run
Figure 3 shows the relationship between i, the set-
ting for the number of old/new utterances pro-
cessed in a single run, and the super-classifier?s
F1-score. Here, the sub-classifiers are using only
lexical features. We can see from the graph that
as i increases to 15, the super-classifier?s F1-score
also increases, but thereafter, it plateaus. Hence
15 is apparently the value which best satisfies the
two design goals given at the start of Section 6.
It should also be noted that 15 is the mean length
of a decision discussion in our data, and so per-
1138
sub-classifiers super
I RP RR A classifier
Re .73 .73 .84 .71 .82
Pr .08 .09 .03 .15 .40
F1 .15 .16 .06 .25 .54
Table 3: Results for the hierarchical real-time
decision detector, using lexical, utterance and
speaker features.
sub-classifiers super
I RP RR A classifier
Re .51 .51 .10 .63 .83
Pr .12 .11 .04 .15 .41
F1 .19 .19 .05 .24 .55
Table 4: Results for the hierarchical off-line de-
cision detector on off-line ASR transcripts, using
lexical, utterance and speaker features.
haps this is a transferable finding. The mean du-
ration of a run when i = 15 is approximately 4
seconds, while the mean duration of 15 utterances
in our data-set is approximately 60 seconds, mean-
ing that for the average case, the detector returns
the results for the current run, long before it is
due to make the next. Significant lee-way is per-
haps necessary here, because the final version of
the real-time detector will include a summariza-
tion component which extracts key phrases from
Issue/Resolution utterances, and its processing can
last some time, even for a single decision.
We should say then, that the system is not
strictly real-time because in general, it detects de-
cisions soon after they are made (for example
within a minute), rather than immediately after. In
the future we intend to modify the system so that
it can run more frequently than once every i ut-
terances. However it is important that runs do not
occur too frequently ? for example, if i = 15 and
the system runs after every utterance, then the ex-
tra processing will cause it to gradually fall further
and further behind the meeting.
6.3.2 Real-time vs. off-line results
Table 3 shows the results achieved by a hierarchi-
cal real-time decision detector whose run settings
are as described above, and whose sub-classifiers
3
use lexical, utterance and speaker features. These
results compare well with those of an equivalent
3
In Tables 3 to 6, sub-classifier results are post-correction
(see Section 6.2).
sub-classifiers super
I RP RR A classifier
Re .50 .51 .09 .63 .83
Pr .11 .11 .03 .14 .41
F1 .19 .18 .05 .23 .55
Table 5: Results for the hierarchical off-line de-
tector on real-time ASR transcripts, using lexical,
utterance and speaker features.
sub-classifiers super
I RP RR A classifier
Re .67 .74 .84 .66 .85
Pr .07 .08 .03 .14 .41
F1 .13 .15 .05 .24 .55
Table 6: Results for the hierarchical real-time de-
cision detector, using lexical features only.
off-line detector, which are shown in Table 4. The
F1-scores for the real-time and off-line decision
super-classifiers are .54 and .55 respectively, and
the difference is not statistically significant. This
may indicate that the hierarchical classification ap-
proach is fairly robust to increasing ASR Word
Error Rates (WERs). Combining the output from
each of the independent sub-classifiers might com-
pensate somewhat for any decreases in their indi-
vidual accuracy, as there was here for the I and RP
sub-classifiers.
The hierarchical real-time detector?s F1-score is
also 10 points higher than a flat classifier (.54 vs.
.44). Hence, while Fern?andez et al (2008) demon-
strated that the hierarchical classification approach
could improve off-line decision detection, we have
demonstrated here that it can also improve real-
time decision detection.
Table 5 shows the results when an off-line
detector is applied to real-time ASR transcripts.
Here, the super-classifier obtains an F1-score of
.55, one point higher than the real-time detector,
but again, the difference is not statistically signifi-
cant.
6.3.3 Feature analysis
We also investigated the contribution of the ut-
terance and speaker features. Table 6 shows the
results for the hierarchical real-time decision de-
tector when its sub-classifiers use only lexical fea-
tures. The sub-classifier F1-scores are all slightly
lower than when utterance and speaker features
are used (see Table 3), and the super-classifier
1139
score is only 1 point different. None of these dif-
ferences are statistically significant.
Since lexical features are important, we used in-
formation gain in order to investigate which words
are predictive of each DDA type. Due to differ-
ences in the transcripts, the predictive words for
the off-line and real-time systems are not the same,
but we can find commonalities, and these com-
monalities make sense given the DDA definitions.
Firstly in Resolution and particularly Issue DAs,
some of the most predictive words could be used
to define discussion topics, and so we might ex-
pect to find them in the meeting agenda. Exam-
ples are ?energy?, and ?color?. Predictive words
for Resolutions also include semantically-related
words which are key in defining the decision (?ki-
netic?,?green?). Additional predictive words for
RPs are the personal pronouns ?I? and ?we?,
and the verbs, ?think? and ?like?, and for RRs,
words which we would associate with summing
up (?consensus?, ?definitely?, and ?okay?). Un-
surprisingly, for Agreements, ?yeah? and ?okay?
both score very highly.
7 Conclusion
(Fern?andez et al, 2008) described an approach
to decision detection in multi-party meetings and
demonstrated how it could work relatively well in
an off-line system. The approach has two defining
characteristics. The first is its use of an annota-
tion scheme which distinguishes between differ-
ent utterance types based on the roles which they
play in the decision-making process. The second
is its use of hierarchical classification, whereby
binary sub-classifiers detect instances of each of
the decision DAs (DDAs), and then based on the
sub-classifier hypotheses, a super-classifier deter-
mines which regions of dialogue are decision dis-
cussions.
In this paper then, we have taken the same ba-
sic approach to decision detection as Fern?andez et
al. (2008), but changed the way in which it is im-
plemented so that it can work effectively in real-
time. Our implementation changes include run-
ning the detector at regular and frequent intervals
during the meeting, and reprocessing recent utter-
ances in case a decision discussion straddles these
and brand new utterances. The fact that the de-
tector reprocesses utterances means that on con-
secutive runs, overlapping and duplicate hypothe-
sized decision discussions are possible. We have
therefore added facilities to merge overlapping hy-
potheses and to remove duplicates.
In general, the resulting system is able to detect
decisions soon after they are made (for example
within a minute), rather than immediately after. It
has performed well in testing, achieving an F1-
score of .54, which is only one point lower than
an equivalent off-line system, and in any case, the
difference was not statistically significant. A flat
real-time detector achieved .44.
In future work, we plan to extend the decision
discussion annotation scheme and try to extract
supporting arguments for decisions. We will also
experiment with using sequential models in order
to try to exploit any sequential ordering patterns in
the occurrence of the DDAs.
Acknowledgements This material is based
upon work supported by the Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency (DARPA) under Con-
tract No. FA8750-07-D-0185/0004, and by the
Department of the Navy Office of Naval Research
(ONR) under Grants No. N00014-05-1-0187 and
N00014-09-1-0106. Any opinions, findings and
conclusions or recommendations expressed in
this material are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of DARPA or ONR.
We are grateful to the three anonymous EMNLP
reviewers for their helpful comments and sugges-
tions, and to our partners at SRI International who
provided us with off-line and real-time transcripts
for our meeting data.
References
Satanjeev Banerjee, Carolyn Ros?e, and Alex Rudnicky.
2005. The necessity of a meeting recording and
playback system, and the benefit of topic-level anno-
tations to meeting browsing. In Proceedings of the
10th International Conference on Human-Computer
Interaction.
Susanne Burger, Victoria MacLaren, and Hua Yu.
2002. The ISL Meeting Corpus: The impact of
meeting type on speech style. In Proceedings of the
7th International Conference on Spoken Language
Processing (INTERSPEECH - ICSLP), Denver, Col-
orado.
Raquel Fern?andez, Matthew Frampton, Patrick Ehlen,
Matthew Purver, and Stanley Peters. 2008. Mod-
elling and detecting decisions in multi-party dia-
logue. In Proc. of the 9th SIGdial Workshop on Dis-
course and Dialogue.
Michel Galley, Kathleen McKeown, Julia Hirschberg,
and Elizabeth Shriberg. 2004. Identifying agree-
1140
ment and disagreement in conversational speech:
Use of Bayesian networks to model pragmatic de-
pendencies. In Proceedings of the 42nd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (ACL).
Daniel Gatica-Perez, Ian McCowan, Dong Zhang, and
Samy Bengio. 2005. Detecting group interest level
in meetings. In IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP).
Dustin Hillard, Mari Ostendorf, and Elisabeth
Shriberg. 2003. Detection of agreement vs. dis-
agreement in meetings: Training with unlabeled
data. In Companion Volume of the Proceedings of
HLT-NAACL 2003 - Short Papers, Edmonton, Al-
berta, May.
Pey-Yun Hsueh and Johanna Moore. 2007. Automatic
decision detection in meeting speech. In Proceed-
ings of MLMI 2007, Lecture Notes in Computer Sci-
ence. Springer-Verlag.
Adam Janin, Jeremy Ang, Sonali Bhagat, Rajdip
Dhillon, Jane Edwards, Javier Marc??as-Guarasa,
Nelson Morgan, Barbara Peskin, Elizabeth Shriberg,
Andreas Stolcke, Chuck Wooters, and Britta Wrede.
2004. The ICSI meeting project: Resources and re-
search. In Proceedings of the 2004 ICASSP NIST
Meeting Recognition Workshop.
Thorsten Joachims. 1999. Making large-scale SVM
learning practical. In B. Sch?olkopf, C. Burges, and
A. Smola, editors, Advances in Kernel Methods ?
Support Vector Learning. MIT Press.
Agnes Lisowska, Andrei Popescu-Belis, and Susan
Armstrong. 2004. User query analysis for the spec-
ification and evaluation of a dialogue processing and
retrieval system. In Proceedings of the 4th Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation.
Iain McCowan, Jean Carletta, W. Kraaij, S. Ashby,
S. Bourban, M. Flynn, M. Guillemot, T. Hain,
J. Kadlec, V. Karaiskos, M. Kronenthal, G. Lathoud,
M. Lincoln, A. Lisowska, W. Post, D. Reidsma, and
P. Wellner. 2005. The AMI Meeting Corpus. In
Proceedings of Measuring Behavior, the 5th Inter-
national Conference on Methods and Techniques in
Behavioral Research, Wageningen, Netherlands.
Matthew Purver, John Dowding, John Niekrasz,
Patrick Ehlen, Sharareh Noorbaloochi, and Stanley
Peters. 2007. Detecting and summarizing action
items in multi-party dialogue. In Proceedings of the
8th SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue,
Antwerp, Belgium.
Andreas Stolcke, Xavier Anguera, Kofi Boakye,
?
Ozg?ur
C?etin, Adam Janin, Matthew Magimai-Doss, Chuck
Wooters, and Jing Zheng. 2008. The ICSI-SRI
Spring 2007 meeting and lecture recognition system.
In Proc. of CLEAR 2007 and RT2007.
Daan Verbree, Rutger Rienks, and Dirk Heylen. 2006.
First steps towards the automatic construction of
argument-diagrams from real discussions. In Pro-
ceedings of the 1st International Conference on
Computational Models of Argument, volume 144,
pages 183?194. IOS press.
A. Waibel, T. Schultz, M. Bett, M. Denecke, R. Malkin,
I. Rogina, R. Stiefelhagen, and J. Yang. 2003.
SMaRT: The smart meeting room task at ISL. In
ICASSP.
Steve Whittaker, Rachel Laban, and Simon Tucker.
2006. Analysing meeting records: An ethnographic
study and technological implications. In S. Renals
and S. Bengio, editors, Machine Learning for Multi-
modal Interaction: Second International Workshop,
MLMI 2005, Revised Selected Papers, volume 3869
of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 101?
113. Springer.
Britta Wrede and Elizabeth Shriberg. 2003. Spotting
?hot spots? in meetings: Human judgements and
prosodic cues. In Proceedings of the 9th European
Conference on Speech Communication and Technol-
ogy, Geneva, Switzerland.
1141
