AnyQ: Answer Set based Information Retrieval System
Hyo-Jung Oh, Myung-Gil Jang Moon-Soo Chang
Electronics and Telecommunications Department of Software
Research Institute (ETRI) Seokyeong University
Daejeon, Korea Seoul, Korea
{ohj, mgjang}@etri.re.kr cosmos@skuniv.ac.kr
1. Introduction
The goal of Information Retrieval (IR) is finding
answer suited to user question from massive
document collections with satisfied response time.
With the exponential growth of information on the
Web, user is expecting to find answer more fast with
less effort. Current IR systems especially focus on
improving precision the result rather than recall. A
notable trend in IR is to provide more accurate,
immediately usable information as in Question
Answering systems(Q/A) [1] or in some systems
using pre-constructed question/answer document
pairs [2, 3], known ?answer set driven? system.
While traditional search engine uses term indexing,
i.e. tf*idf, answer approaches use syntactic, semantic
and pragmatic knowledge provided expert, i.e.
WordNet[4]. Another difference comes from the fact
that answer approach returns ?answer set? distilled
information need of user as retrieval result, not just
document appeared query terms.
The TREC Q/A track [1, 5, 6] which has
motivated much of the recent work in the field
focuses on fact-based, short-answer question type, e.g.
?Who is Barbara Jordan?? or ?What is Mardi Gras?.
The Q/A runs find an actual answer in TREC
collection, rather than a ranked list of documents, in
response to a question. On the other hand, user
queries in answer set driven system, like
AskJeeves[2], are more implicit and conceptual.
These system was developed targeting the Web [7, 8],
is larger than the TREC Q/A document collection.
Whereas the user gives incomplete query to system,
they need not only answers but related information.
Sometimes the user even has uncertainty what
exactly they need. For example, the user query just
?Paris? is answered by gathering information
including Paris city guide, photographs of Paris, and
so on. To catch information need of user, these
system have pre-defined query pattern and prepared
correct answers belonging to each question. Since it
is still considered difficult, if not impossible, to
capture semantics and pragmatics of sentences in user
queries and documents, such systems require
knowledge bases built manually so that a certain level
of quality can be guaranteed. Needless to say, this
knowledge base construction process is labor-
intensive, typically requiring significant and
continuous human efforts [9].
This paper rests on the both directions: a new type
of IR and its operational experience. Our system,
named ?AnyQ?1, attempts to provide high quality
answer documents to user queries by maintaining a
knowledge base consisting of expected queries and
corresponding answer document. We defined the
semantic category of the answer as attributes and the
1 http://anyq.etri.re.kr in korean
Abstract
The accuracy of IR result continues to grow on
importance as exponential growth of WWW, and
it is therefore increasingly important that
appropriate retrieval technologies be developed
for the web. We explore a new type of IR,
?answer set based IR?, and its operational
experience. Our proposed approach attempts to
provide high quality answer documents to user by
maintaining a knowledge base with expected
queries and corresponding answer document. We
will elaborate on our architecture and the
experimental results.
Keywords: answer set driven IR, attribute-
based classification, automatic knowledge base
construction,.
Figure 1. System architecture of Answer Set based IR
documents associated with each attributes as answer
set. In order to reduce the cost of manually
constructing and maintaining answer sets, we have
devised a new method of automating the answer
document selection process by using the automatic
text categorization, reported ABC(Attribute-Based
Classification)[10].
The rest of the paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 presents overviews of our answer set driven
retrieval system and knowledge base. In Section 3
and 4 elaborates on answer set construction and its
retrieval process. Section 5 details experiment results
for our method. After discussing the limitations of
our approach in Section 6, we conclude by
summarizing our contributions and describing future
works.
2. Answer Set based IR System
2.1. System Overview
Several approaches to find answer using
informative knowledge from expert were reported [1,
2, 3]. Most recent research proposed a new method of
capturing the semantics of the question and then
presents the document as answer, named ?answer set
driven IR. The goal of these systems is to explore
how does map user question into answer document
that might be contain pertinent information. In these
systems, it is crucial to devise a method to construct a
high-quality knowledge base. In our system, we take
a hybrid approach of using a human-generated
concept hierarchy and automatic classification
techniques to make it more feasible to build an
operational system.
Our system analyzes a user query to extract
concept and attribute terms that can be matched
against the knowledge base where a set of answer
documents can be found. As such, it has three parts:
answer set construction, answer set search, answer
presentation, as illustrated in Figure 1. The answer
set construction part, which is seemed indexing part
in traditional IR system, employees both manual and
automatic methods to build the knowledge base. The
answer set search part processes a natural language
query, extracts concepts and attributes, and maps
them to the knowledge base so that the answer
documents associated with the <concept, attribute>
pairs can be retrieve. In the answer presentation part,
the search result is presented with highlighted
paragraphs considered to contain the answer to the
query.
docum ents
Answer Set Construction
M anual Collection
Auto Construction
W ith ABC*
Query Analys is
Query ? AS
M atching
Answer Set Searching
Docum ent Analys is
Answer Presentation
Answ er E xtraction
Answ er
Info rm ation
Natural Langu age
Query
Know ledge Base
Concept
Netw ork
Attribute
Answ er Set
*ABC: A ttribute-Based Classif ication
Figure 2. Concept, Attribute, and Documents
Group of concepts in concept network hierarchy and Distribution of attributes for concepts
Table 1. Distribution of attributes for concepts in an equivalence class(?-relation)
attributes
concepts
D
ef
in
iti
on
Po
lic
y
Pa
y
Co
n
su
lta
tio
n
ca
se
Pr
o
bl
em
s
K
in
ds
Pu
rp
os
e
Cu
rr
en
t
sit
ua
tio
n
R
eg
ul
at
io
ns
M
er
its
Ca
lc
u
la
tio
n
m
et
ho
ds
N
eg
ot
ia
tio
n
#
at
tr
ib
u
te
s
Incentives O O O O O O O O O O 10
Hourly wage O O O O O O 6
Basic salary O O O O 4
Service allowance O O O O O O O O 8
Ability allowance O O O O O O O 7
Bonus O O O O O O O O 8
2.2. Knowledge Base
Our knowledge base consists of three parts: a
concept network, attributes associated with each
concept, and answer set belonging to each <concept,
attribute> pair.
The concept network contains about 50,000
conceptual word2 as in WordNet [11] with 6 lexico-
semantic relations that are used to form a synset
hierarchy. By using the concept network, as already
well-know in the WordNet-related research [1, 4, 6],
a semantic processing of questions becomes possible.
The information mined from concept network guides
process of bridging inference between the query and
the expected answer. Finding a place, i.e. concept
node, in the network for a query can be construed as
understanding the meaning of the query. Attribute set
an intermediary as connecting concept network with
2 Include 14,700 conceptual word in economy domain
answer documents. The answer-set driven retrieval
system maps a user query into one or more concepts
and further down to one or more attributes where
associated documents can be picked up as the answer
set. Attributes play the role in subcategorizing the
documents belonging to the concept node. A set of
attributes chosen for a particular concept specifies
various aspects often mentioned in the documents
bearing the concept and serves as an intermediary
between a concept and high-precision answer
documents. It should be noted that attributes are not
inherently associated with a concept, but found in the
documents addressing the concept. For instance, as in
Figure 2, the concept node for ?angel investment?
would have attributes, ?definition?, ?strategy?,
?prospects? and ?merits?, that are aspects or
characteristics of ?angel investment? often mentioned
in relevant documents.
Figure 2 and table 1 represent groups of concepts
from different levels of the concept network and the
distribution of attributes, showing that some
Financial Activities
SavingsInvestmentTransaction
Angel
InvestmentDistributive
Investment Investment of
Foreigners
Hedge Trade
Cyber
Stock Trade
Off-board
Transaction
Foreign
Currency Deposit
Fixed-Period
Deposit
Joint
Investment
Concept Network
Attributes
Answer Set
Definition Merits ProspectsStrategyDefinition Merits Problems
attributes are shared by some concepts while others
are unique to a concept. The fact that some attributes
are shared by all or most of the concepts belonging to
a higher level concept allow us to assume that related
concepts share the same set of attributes. Another
assumption we employ is that because of the
observation that attributes tend to be found in the
neighborhoods of some concept, the training data for
a particular attribute under a given concept can be
used for the same attribute under another concept.
With these assumptions, we devised a method of
minimizing the training data construction efforts
required for attribute-based classification, which is
essential to select documents to be associated with
<concept, attribute> pairs. In order to re-use the
training data constructed for a particular <concept,
attribute> pair, we define ?-relation between two
concepts. Two concepts are said to have an ?-
relation when the sets of associated attributes are
sufficiently similar to each other. A later section
describes how this relation is used for the knowledge
base construction process.
3. Answer Set Construction
Attributes are defined to exist for concepts
corresponding to categories in subject-based
classification. Documents classified to a concept are
considered to possess one or more attributes that
reveal some characteristics or aspects of a document.
Considering attributes as a different type of
categories, we can define an attribute-based classifier
for documents. While we employ the same learning-
based and rule-based classification techniques for
attribute-based classification, we underscore the way
it is used for automatic knowledge-base construction,
together with traditional subject-based classification.
It works on reducing human efforts dramatically to
knowledge base construction.
Our attribute-based classification method [10],
at least as it is now, is no different from traditional
text classification methods in that it uses training
documents. However, the task of knowledge base
construction for the answer set based retrieval system
calls for unusual requirements. Whereas categories
are pretty much fixed in traditional classification
systems, the number of attributes (i.e. categories) for
a given concept may change in our context. Another
difference comes from the fact that it is not easy to
have a sufficient number of training documents for
each category since there are so many <concept,
attribute> pairs that correspond to categories.
In order to address the issues mentioned above,
we decided to add two additional steps to the
ordinary statistical classification:
- use of pattern rules in conjunction with the
usual learning-based classification
- selective use of words that may not be
specific for attributes
- use of ?-relation
While the first and second were chosen to
improve precision of the classifier, the third was
devised to widen the coverage of <concept, attribute>
pairs for which training documents are provided. In
other words, the use of ?-relation allow us to re-use a
classifier learned from a set of training documents
belonging to a concept for the same attribute class
under a different concept.
To improve upon accuracy of our attribute-based
classifier, we have employed both rule-based and
learning-based approaches. Unlink the case of
subject-based classification, attribute class
boundaries are sometimes hard to detect if only
words are used as features. As such, we decided to
use patterns of word sequences, not just single words.
We have defined rules from train documents, which
express the characteristics of a given attribute class.
Rules may include single words, phrases, sentences,
or even paragraphs. The pattern rules3 are used to
complement the errors made by the machine learning
method, and further it is reused in query processing.
We take the approach of a hybrid system combining
rule-based classification and learning-based
classification, with different weights are applied to
different attributes. Besides we detect that some
terms are not good at discriminate attribute since they
are too specific to concept, whereas these terms are
helpful to classify in concept. Therefore we eliminate
the terms that concept-dependent word which
frequently appearing in a certain concept area.
Another challenging problem in an operational
setting is to define useful attributes to each of the
concept nodes and collect training documents for
each attribute under a concept node. It would be too
expensive and time-consuming to collect a sufficient
number of training documents for all the classes
represented by <concept, attribute> pairs. Currently
the number of classes is more than 250,0004. We need
a method by which we can assign an attribute to a
new document without separate training documents
for that particular <concept, attribute> pair. Our
approach to this problem is to use a special kind of
relation, named ?-relation, defined over the concepts
3 Currently, we define 83 kind of attributes and 1,938 attribute
pattern rule.
4 More precisely, 14700*18, the number of concept nodes times
the average number of attribute number of attributes under each
concept.
Figure 3. Retrieval Process
in the network. The main idea is to build a classifier
for only one concept among the many belonging to
an equivalence class based on the ?-relation, and use
it for other concepts. That is, we only need training
documents for the representative class. Table 1 shows
a distribution of attributes among the concept in ?-
relation. Once the attributes are identified for the first
two concepts, ?Incentives? and ?Hourly wage?, and
training documents are selected for them, all the
attributes except for the last one, ?negotiation?, can
be considered having training documents. If we
define attributes up to the third concept, ?Basic
salary?, all the attributes are covered. The classifier
learned from a single set of documents belonging to
the concept would have the capability of classifying
documents to the attribute classes belonging to other
concepts if the concepts are all ?-related.
We first construct a training document set5 only
for a single concept node representing all those nodes
with the same attributes, using meta-search engine
and document clustering. So we can build a classifier
for those attributes that manifest themselves in the
training set. If some documents fail to be assigned to
an attribute, they are assigned to one of the remaining
attributes. If a concept node other than the
representative node in the equivalence class needs a.
new attribute, we simply look for training documents
for that attribute only. This kind of incremental
process is based on our assumption that although
attributes are associated with individual concept
nodes, they share the common characteristics
regardless of their parent concept nodes. Undoubtedly,
however, this assumption does not always hold.
5 It is only 3% of total amount of training set we needed.
4. Retrieval Process
4.1. Answer Set Search
The main task of answer set search process is
capturing a <concept, attribute> pair from natural
language query, and mapping them to the knowledge
base so that the answer documents can be retrieve.
User query is represented as natural language so that
imply semantic information need, not just single term.
The query processing distinguishes between the main
and additional terms from query. The former covey
the essence of the query, reflected <concept,
attribute> pairs. The latter help to convey the
meaning of the query but can be omitted without
changing the essence of the meaning. The secondary
terms are useful clue for extracting answer sentence
in answer document. Predefined patterns are also
important for query processing. As noted earlier, we
defined attribute pattern rules for improving accuracy
of attribute-based classification. Then we rebuild
these patterns as query-attribute pattern6, expecting
appeared pattern in interrogative form. Query
processing consists of following part: 1) linguistic
analyzing, 2) concept focusing, and 3) determining
attribute, as illustrated in Figure 3.
Given a query, ?what is the problem of angel
investment??, we analyze the sentence structure, such
as conjunction structure and parallel phrases. We
segment complex query into simple sentence. We
distinguish the main terms in query by matching the
longest term in concept network for focusing concept.
To determine attribute of query we first plainly look
6 It was extended 2,170 query-attribute pattern.
?
Knowledge Base
Concept
Network
Attribute
Answer Set
Query Linguistic analyzing
Concept focusing
Determining attribute
Main concept
<concept, attribute> pair
answer set
Highlighted paragraph
Scoring sentence
Selecting candidate
additional query terms
expanded concepts
Expanded answer set
Main attribute
User!
Table 2. Result of Answer Set Construction
Attribute sets
All attributes
(no ?-relations
used)
Pre-selected
attributes
(with ?-relation)
Precision .5025 .6020
Recall .4662 .6696
F-score .4835 .6358(+31.4%)
Time 4 1
Table 3. Result of Answer Set Retrieval
AS based IR Web IR
Total Top 5 Top 5 Top 10
Precision 0.584 0.769 0.291 0.2864
Recall 0.391 0.655 0.291 0.315
F-score 0.468 0.797 0.291 0.3
Highlighting
MRR 0.78
for the term in attribute synset, which included title
attribute representing all those synonym, i.e.
?Problems? is title of set {Warning, danger, abuse,
damage}. If not, we classify the question into one of
83 categories, each of mapped to a particular set of
query-attribute pattern. Our example query map
<angel investment, problem> pair.
After extracting appropriate <concept, attribute>
pair, query expansion is generated, connecting with
related concept in concept network. This expansion is
based on the assessment of similarity between
distances of concept network. The main advantage of
connecting related concept is that the user can be
traverse concept network through semantic path.
Thus continuous search feedback can be possible.
Expanded query map to knowledge base so that the
documents corresponding the <concept, attribute>
pairs can be retrieve as answer set. The results were
ranked using attributed-based classification score in
answer set construction processing.
4.2. Result Presentation: Highlighting
Answer Sentence
Finding answer to a natural language question
involves not only knowing what the answer is but
also where the answer is. The answer set that
produced initial searching step is considered to
include the candidate answer sentence. For detecting
answer sentence, we extract all the possible <concept,
attribute> pairs each sentence in answer document.
The sentence was not include query pairs was discard
so that we can get candidate sentences where answer
is appeared. Similarly query expansion, candidate
sentences calculate score of match additional query
words, which is generated in query processing.
Highest scoring sentence was highlighted including
its former and latter sentence. Right side box in
Figure 3 shows our retrieval process.
5. Experiments
Whereas traditional Q/A and IR system have
competition conference, like TREC, so that they can
start with standard retrieval test collection, to explore
how useful the proposed approach, we evaluate
performance of answer document and candidate
answer sentence. Another difference comes from the
fact that result units for these systems are different.
That is Q/A system returns exactly relevant answer
(50 byte or 250 byte), while IR system returns
document scored by ranking mechanism. Our system
returns ?answer set? distilled semantic knowledge as
retrieval result
5.1. Automatic Answer Set Construction
Before evaluating our retrieval system, we were
interested in knowing how effective and efficient the
proposed knowledge base construction method. We
tested the attribute-based classification for automatic
construction method with 4,599 documents, 120
concepts, and 83 attributes. For performance
comparisons, we used the standard precision, recall,
and F-score [12]. Table 2 shows that the scores for
using ?-relation are higher than that of not using the
relation. We gain a 31.4% increase in F-score and
400% in speed by using the knowledge. The potential
advantage of using the ?-relation is the ability to
minimize the efforts not only required training set
co
th
ch
au
gr
5.
op
A
83
do
av
43
an
pe
qunstruction but also new answer set construction. On
e other hand, a disadvantage is that it has a less
ance to assign new attributes. The result our
tomatic answer set construction was to establish a
ound work for further experiments.
2. Performance of Answer set retrieval
For our experimental evaluations we constructed
erational system in Web, named ?AnyQ?. Our
nyQ system currently consists of 14,700 concepts,
unique attributes, and more than 1.8 million web
cuments in the economy domain for Korean. The
erage number of document under each concept is
.4, the average number of answer document is 25,
d the average number of attribute is 18. To measure
rformance of retrieving answer set, we build 110
ery-relevant answer set, judged by 4 assessor. Our
assessors team with 2 people. For performance
comparisons, we used the P, R, F-score and MRR[5]
for highlighted sentence. All retrieval runs are
completely automatic, starting with queries, retrieve
answer documents, and finally generating a ranked
list of 5 candidate answer sentence.
We build traditional Web IR system on the same
document set for baseline system. The Web IR
system uses 2-poisson model for term indexing and
vector space model for document retrieving. Table 3
summarized the effectiveness of our initial search
step, answer set search. As expected, we obtained
better results progressively as answer set based
approach. The accuracy of Web IR become higher
top10(0.31) to top5(0.291) when we determine more
number of documents retrieved. By contrast, AS
based IR has improvement both precision(0.769) and
recall(0.655) when we assess less number of
documents on top ranked. Even when all documents
was considered(0.468) is higher than Web IR top
10(0.3). It comes from the fact that Web IR retrieves
massive documents appeared term query. But AS
based IR handled prepared answer set. That is, AS
based IR tend to set highly relevant documents on top
result. In other words, answer set based approach can
be easier for user to find information they need with
less effort.
To evaluate highlighted paragraphs, we generate
a ranked list of 5 candidate answer sentences
considered to contain the answer to the query. The
score is 0.78 MRR. As mentioned before, our result is
not the same type as TREC answer. But we can say
that highlighted sentences are helpful to satisfy user
information need.
We further realized that the query pattern as
attribute was not sufficient for finding answer.
Moreover, Korean has characteristic, various
variation of same pattern, its duplicate over the
attributes. It brings the fact that query processing has
ambiguity. Another weakness of our system is that
the accuracy of retrieval depends on knowledge base
granularity. That is, the effectiveness of attribute-
based classification influences whole process of our
approach.
Unfortunately, Our experience cannot compare
with other commercial system since there is no
standard test collection. By the way AskJeeves was
published their accuracy of retrieval is over
30~40%[7], however, this is not absolute contrast.
6. Conclusion
The accuracy of IR result continues to grow on
importance as exponential growth of WWW, and it is
therefore increasingly important that appropriate
retrieval technologies be developed for the web. We
have introduced a new type of IR, ?Answer Set based
IR?, attempts to provide high quality answer
documents to user queries.
In the context of answer set-driven text retrieval,
it is crucial to capture semantics and pragmatics of
sentences in user queries and documents. In our case,
we defined the semantic category of the answer as
attributes, the documents associated with each
attributes as answer set. We attempted to provide
more accurate answers by attaching attributes to
individual concepts in concept network. In order to
construct knowledge bases, a certain level of quality
is guaranteed, we developed a new method for
attributed-based classifier(ABC) and built attribute
pattern for improving accuracy of ABC and query
processing both. In retrieval, we process a natural
language query, extract concepts and attributes, and
map them to the knowledge base so that the answer
documents associated with the <concept, attribute>
pairs can be retrieve.
Our proposed IR ranked highly relevant
document on top result, thus it helps reducing human
efforts dramatically to find answer. By established
operational system, named ?AnyQ?, our experiment
showed realistic possibility of our approach
systematically.
While our experiments were designed carefully,
and comparisons made thoroughly, it has limitations.
Our current work depends on the domain of the
concept network. It is not clear how the proposed
method can be extended to other domains. Our
assumption, reflecting semantics in sentence to
<concept, attribute> pairs, needs to be tested further.
More fundamentally, we need a certain amount of
manual work to initially construct the knowledge
base such as the concept hierarchy and the initial
training documents. We will have to see how the
initial manual process influences the latter processes
and what kind of performance degradation occurs
when smaller efforts are used for the initial
construction.
7. Reference
[1] Dan Moldovan, Sanda Harabagiu, et al ?LCC
Tool for Question Answering?, Proc of Text
Retrieval Conference (TREC-11), November,
2002.
[2] Ask Jeevestm,
http://www.jeevessolutions.com/technology/
[3] M. G. Jang, H. J. Oh, M. S. Chang, et al
?Semantic Based Information Retrieval?, Korea
Information Science Society review, 19(10):7-18,
October 2001.
[4] Marius Pasca and Sanda M. Harabagiu, ?The
Informative Role of WordNet in Open-Domain
Question Answering?, Proc of the NAACL 2001
Workshop on WordNet and Other Lexical
Resource, pp 138-143, CMU, Pittsburge PA,
June 2001
[5] Ellen M. Voorhees, ?Overview of the TREC 2000
Question Answering Track?, Proc of Text
Retrieval Conference (TREC-11), November,
2002
[6] Eduard Hovy, Ulf Hermjakob, and Chin-Yew Lin,
?The Use of External Knowledge in Factoid QA?,
Proc of Text Retrieval Conference (TREC-10),
November, 2001
[7] Cody C. T. Kwok, Oren Etzioni, and Daniel S.
Weld, ?Scaling Question Answering to the
Web?, , Proc. of the 10th annual international
ACM WWW10, pp. 150-161, 2001
[8] Susan Dumais, Michele Banko, Eric Brill, Jimmy
Lin, and Andrew Ng, ?Web Question Answering:
Is More Always Better??, Proc. of the 25th
annual international ACM SIGIR ?2002, pp. 291-
298, Tampere, Finland, 2002
[9] Andrew McCallum, Kamal Nigam, et al, ?A
Machine Learning Approach to Building
Domain-Specific Search Engines?, Proc. of the
16th IJCAI Conference, pp 662-667, 1999
[10] Hyo-Jung Oh, Moon-Su Chang, Myung-Gil Jang,
and Sung-Hyon Myaeng, ?Integrating Attribute-
Based Classification for Answer Set
Construction?, Proc. of the 25th annual
international ACM SIGIR ?2002 2nd workshop
on Operational Text Classification, Tampere,
Finland, 2002
[11] Christiane Fellbaum, ?WordNet : An Electronic
Lexical Database?, The MIT press, 1998
[12] Ricardo Baeza-Yates, Berthier Ribeiro-Neto,
?Modern Information Retrieval?, Yiming Yang
and Xin Liu, ?A Re-examination Of Text
Categorization Methods?, pp. 73~98, Addition-
Wesley Published, ACM press New York, 1999.
