Proceedings of the Third Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 154?157,
Suntec, Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Ingesting the Auslan Corpus into the DADA Annotation Store
Steve Cassidy
Centre for Language Technology,
Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia
Steve.Cassidy@mq.edu.au
Trevor Johnston
Department of Linguistics
Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia
Trevor.Johnston@mq.edu.au
Abstract
The DADA system is being developed to
support collaborative access to and anno-
tation of language resources over the web.
DADA implements an abstract model of
annotation suitable for storing many kinds
of data from a wide range of language re-
sources. This paper describes the process
of ingesting data from a corpus of Aus-
tralian Sign Language (Auslan) into the
DADA system. We describe the format of
the RDF data used by DADA and the is-
sues raised in converting the ELAN anno-
tations from the corpus.
1 Background
The DADA system is being developed to support
collaborative access to and annotation of language
resources over the web. DADA provides a web
accessible annotation store that delivers both a hu-
man browsable version of a corpus and a machine
accessible API for reading and writing annota-
tions. DADA is able to ingest data from a number
of different annotation formats and the data model
it supports is intended to be a general model of
annotation data. This paper reports on our efforts
to ingest data from the Australian Sign Language
(Auslan) corpus which has been annotated with
the ELAN tool1. The primary goal of this project
is to provide a read-only web-accessible version
of the corpus but a longer term goal is to allow re-
search groups to collaborate in extending the an-
notation.
DADA follows the principle of linked data
(Bizer et al, 2008), every object (e.g. annotation)
within the store is associated with a URL and ac-
cessing that URL generates a description of the
object which includes links to the URLs of related
objects. So, accessing the URL of an annotation
might return a web page describing that annotation
linked to its parent or the annotation set or corpus
that it is part of. Linked data is an emerging design
pattern in semantic web research which is being
1http://www.lat-mpi.eu/tools/elan/
used to enable data discovery and general purpose
browsing tools. For our purposes, the idea that ev-
ery component of a corpus has a web-accessible
URL is very powerful; it means that individual an-
notations could be cited in publications and opens
up a whole new range of possibilities in commu-
nicating results and analysis.
There have been a number of earlier projects
that aimed to develop web accessible versions of
data annotated in ELAN. EOPAS (Thieberger and
Schroeter, 2006) aimed to provide a means of ex-
ploring ethnographic data on the web. Various
kinds of annotation data, including ELAN, could
be ingested into the EOPAS XML format using
stylesheets. The flexibility of an XML database
was used to allow the web views of data to be gen-
erated via calls to XSLT and XQuery scripts. Be-
cause of the nature of the data being displayed,
EOPAS developed views particularly suited to
interlinear text although the same infrastructure
could be used to generate other kind of display.
Like EOPAS, DADA makes use of an indus-
try standard data store, however we choose RDF
instead of XML because of the very close fit be-
tween the RDF data model (a directed graph) and
the data model that has been shown to be needed
to represent annotation data (Bird and Liberman,
2001).
The choice of RDF also allows us to leverage
existing work on annotation on the web. The An-
notea project at the W3C and the later Vannotea
project (R.Schroeter et al, 2003) define an RDF
format for storing annotations on media on the
web. The models developed for DADA owe a lot
to these earlier systems but build on them to pro-
vide an appropriate data model for linguistic an-
notation.
1.1 The Auslan Corpus
The Auslan corpus is a digital video archive of
Australian Sign Language (Auslan) (Johnston and
Schembri, 2006). The archive is the product of
an Endangered Languages Documentation Project
funded through the Hans Rausing Endangered
Languages Documentation Program (ELDP) at the
154
School of Oriental and African Studies (SOAS),
University of London (grant #MDP0088 awarded
to Trevor Johnston). The corpus brings together
into one digital archive a representative sam-
ple of Auslan in video recordings to which are
added metadata files and annotation files created
in ELAN. It is consists of two sub-corpora: data
collected through the ELDP and data collected
as part of the Sociolinguistic Variation in Auslan
Project (SVIAP) conducted by Adam Schembri
and Trevor Johnston (ARC #LP0346973). Both
datasets are based on language recording sessions
conducted with deaf native or early learner/near-
native users of Auslan.
Many tiers are needed in an ELAN file to an-
notate a text in a signed language because sign
languages can have several simultaneous levels of
linguistically significant behavior. For example,
each hand may utter a separate manual sign at
the same time, or grammatically important body
movements and facial expressions (which are not
unlike prosody) may co-occur with the production
of individual manual signs. All this needs to be
identified and time aligned.
2 Mapping ELAN to RDF
RDF, the Resource Description Framework, is
the core language of the semantic web used to
make assertions about resources, describing them
in terms of properties and relations to other re-
sources. DADA stores annotations as RDF in
a dedicated database called a triple store and
uses semantic web technologies to manipulate and
present data. To represent annotations, DADA de-
fines a core ontology that maps to the data struc-
tures inherent in annotation data. The ontology is
designed to be able to represent many kinds of an-
notation data and as such owes much to similar
lingua franca efforts such as Annotation Graphs
(Bird and Liberman, 2001) and the Linguistic An-
notation Format (Ide and Suderman, 2007).
To ingest the annotations from the Auslan Cor-
pus into DADA requires transcoding of ELAN
XML annotation files into the RDF format. This
section provides an overview of the DADA RDF
ontology and then discusses the issues raised by
mapping ELAN data.
The core object types within the DADA ontol-
ogy are: the corpus, a collection of annotation
sets; the annotation set, a collection of annota-
tions on one or more media files denoting a sin-
gle event or stimulus; the annotation, the basic
unit of annotation associated with a region within
the source media and the anchor, an abstraction
of the idea of a location within a source media
file. Each of these written in this paper as, for
example, dada:Annotation but this is short-
hand for a URL (http://purl.org/dada/
schema/0.1#Annotation) which provides a
unique name for the property. Each of these ob-
ject types can have arbitrary properties and rela-
tions defined from the DADA or other ontologies.
DADA properties define the basic structure of an-
notations; an example is given in Figure 1. In the
figure the lines between nodes define the named
relations; for example, the offset times of the an-
chors are defined by relations denoting the units
of measurement (time:seconds). The data as-
sociated with the annotation is encoded by one or
more relations (e.g. auslan:RH ID gloss); in
this way, each annotation is associated with a fea-
ture structure that can encode multiple properties
of the annotation.
dada:Annotation
a123
rdf:type S123Milk
dada:AnnotationSet
rdf:type
dada:partof
anch12 anch13dada:startdada:end
12.3time:seconds
12.5time:seconds
cat
auslan:RH_ID_gloss
Figure 1: An example annotation structure in
RDF.
The mapping between the ELAN EAF format
used by the Auslan Corpus and the DADA RDF
format is relatively straightforward. EAF stores
annotations for a single media file (or group of
related media) in an XML format which can be
transformed into the RDF/XML format via an
XSLT stylesheet. ELAN annotations exist on a set
of tiers which have associated type information;
for example, Auslan uses the RH ID Gloss tier to
represent the sign being made by the right hand.
The type of annotation on a tier is defined by
the associated linguistic type which gives a name
for the type and defines it as one of five stereo-
155
types that describe how the annotation divides the
timeline and relates to other annotations. There
are a number of stereotypes defined by ELAN but
the Auslan corpus only makes use of two: a sim-
ple time aligned type and a symbolic association
type. The simple time aligned tiers form the base
of the annotation and denote the start and end of
signs and other events in the video stream. Sym-
bolic association tiers provide additional informa-
tion about these base level annotations; each an-
notation on one of these tiers is associated with a
base level annotation which defines its start and
end points. This is modeled in RDF by addi-
tional properties denoting the associated annota-
tions. For example, Auslan defines the RH ID
Gloss tier as a base segmentation of the video
timeline and has associated tiers RH gram cls and
RH loc among others. Instead of building separate
annotations for each of these, they are modeled in
RDF as three properties of a single annotation as
illustrated in Figure 2.
da:A
nooti1 23rifypnoeSnMlkcoh
s.
m5luMauslan:RH-loc
auslan:RH-gram_cls
auslan:RH_ID_gloss
Figure 2: Conversion of associated tiers in ELAN
to RDF properties
ELAN does support other types of inter-tier re-
lationships, in particular one tier can be a symbolic
subdivision of its parent. In this case, additional
annotations must be made for each tier and the
RDF model becomes a little more complex. This
is not discussed further here as it is not required
for modeling annotations in the Auslan corpus.
Since the RDF representation of annotations re-
quires us to use formal relation names for prop-
erties corresponding to tiers, we are required to
define these names in an ontology specific to the
style of annotation being used in the corpus. While
ELAN does not provide a mechanism to define a
schema ? definitions of a set of tiers ? for a cor-
pus, most corpora will use the same tiers in every
file. As a side effect of importing a set of ELAN
files into the DADA RDF format we generate an
RDF schema that defines the linguistic types be-
ing used. These types form a point of reference for
the corpus and can form a useful part of the doc-
umentation of the annotation system being used.
In the longer term, the availability of such pub-
lic documented linguistic types might lead to more
effective sharing of annotation types between cor-
pora. While these are stored as RDF documents,
it is easy to generate template ELAN annotation
files or indeed templates for other annotation tools
from the same data.
While the current definitions of linguistic types
are generated entirely from the ELAN source file,
there is scope to link these to external ontologies
being developed for linguistic analysis. Relatedly,
ELAN supports linking to external controlled vo-
cabularies (Sloetjes and Wittenburg, 2008) such
as the ISO Data Category Registry (ISO 12620)
which allows sharing of terms (such as Verb,
Noun) that might be used as annotation labels.
3 Publishing on the Web
Once ingested into the RDF store, the ELAN an-
notations can be manipulated by the DADA sys-
tem using standard interfaces such as the SPARQL
query language. The primary interface to DADA
is via the web, either through a standard web
browser or via the well defined HTTP based in-
terface for application programs. This interface
presents machine-readable versions of the anno-
tation data in well known formats; for example,
returning an ELAN or Transcriber XML format-
ted version of a set of annotations or even a lower
level XML representation. The application would
not generally see the annotations in raw RDF form
although such an interface can be supported if
needed.
The primary view of the annotation data on the
web is via HTML pages generated by the server
that can contain any data derived from the anno-
tation store. We have developed a set of generic
displays for each kind of object (corpus, annota-
tion set, etc) that are generated in response to a re-
quest for the appropriate URI from a web browser.
These display all of the relevant data for the object
and could be customised to provide an appropriate
view of different kinds of data.
The web browser is not the only kind of client
156
that can retrieve data from the DADA server over
the web. DADA makes use of HTTP content ne-
gotiation between the client and the server to en-
able a client to request one of a number of alter-
nate forms of data. For example, the server can
generate an ELAN format XML file which closely
mirrors the original data ingested into the system.
Since the output is generated via templates, other
formats could also be generated to feed into al-
ternate tools. In addition to generating existing
XML formats it is also useful to generate data in
a form that is easily consumed by custom applica-
tions. JSON (Javascript Object Notation2) is a data
format that is frequently used to transport data in
modern web applications and is easily parsed by
libraries in many target languages. The DADA
JSON interface will deliver descriptions of any
kind of object in the data store in a way that makes
it easy to implement clients that present interactive
displays of the data.
4 A Javascript Client
As a demonstration of the web based API allow-
ing remote clients to read annotation data from the
server, we have implemented a Javascript based
browser for annotation data that is able to show
data aligned with the source video data. The
Javascript client can be hosted on a website un-
related to the DADA server since it gains access to
data purely via HTTP requests for JSON format-
ted data.
The client provides a web interface that is en-
tirely dynamic, allowing the user to choose from
a list of corpora hosted on the server, then choose
an annotation set and finally select a type of anno-
tation to display. The client also queries the server
for details of the media files associated with the
annotation set and embeds the web accessible FLV
formatted video in the page. The user is able to in-
teract with the page and navigate through the video
via links from the annotation.
5 Summary
The DADA system aims to provide general pur-
pose infrastructure for collaborative annotation of
language resources. Built on core semantic web
technologies it provides a server based solution
that is able to ingest annotation data from a num-
ber of sources and deliver them both to human
browsers and to client applications. In the first
2http://www.json.org/
Figure 3: A screenshot from the Javascript client
phase of development the emphasis is on deliver-
ing views of existing corpora on the web.
A demonstration version of the DADA server is
hosted at http://dada.ics.mq.edu.au/
and contains a link to the Auslan data described
here. More information on the Auslan corpus can
be found at http://www.auslan.org.au/.
References
S. Bird and M. Liberman. 2001. A Formal Framework for
Linguistics Annotation. Speech Communication.
Christian Bizer, Tom Heath, Kingsley Idehen, and Tim
Berners-Lee. 2008. Linked data on the web (ldow2008).
In WWW ?08: Proceeding of the 17th international con-
ference on World Wide Web, pages 1265?1266, New York,
NY, USA. ACM.
N. Ide and K. Suderman. 2007. GrAF: A Graph-based For-
mat for Linguistic Annotations. In Proceedings of the
Linguistic Annotation Workshop, held in conjunction with
ACL 2007, Prague. http://www.cs.vassar.edu/
?ide/papers/LAW.pdf.
T. Johnston and A. Schembri. 2006. Issues in the creation
of a digital archive of a signed language. In L. Barwick
and N. Thieberger, editors, Sustainable data from digital
fieldwork: Proceedings of the conference held at the Uni-
versity of Sydney, pages 7?16, Sydney, December. Sydney
University Press.
R.Schroeter, J.Hunter, and D.Kosovic. 2003. Vannotea A
Collaborative Video Indexing, Annotation and Discussion
System for Broadband Networks. In Proceedings of the
Knowledge Markup and Semantic Annotation Workshop,
K-CAP, Sanibel, Florida, Oct.
Han Sloetjes and Peter Wittenburg. 2008. Annotation by
category: Elan and iso dcr. In European Language Re-
sources Association (ELRA), editor, Proceedings of the
Sixth International Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC?08), Marrakech, Morocco, may.
Nicholas Thieberger and Ronald Schroeter. 2006. EOPAS,
the EthnoER online representation of interlinear text. In
Linda Barwick and Nicholas Thieberger, editors, Sustain-
able Data from Digital Fieldwork, pages 99?124, Univer-
sity of Sydney, December.
157
