Human Language Technologies: The 2009 Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 245?253,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Using a Dependency Parser to Improve SMT for Subject-Object-Verb
Languages
Peng Xu, Jaeho Kang, Michael Ringgaard and Franz Och
Google Inc.
1600 Amphitheatre Parkway
Mountain View, CA 94043, USA
{xp,jhkang,ringgaard,och}@google.com
Abstract
We introduce a novel precedence reordering
approach based on a dependency parser to sta-
tistical machine translation systems. Similar
to other preprocessing reordering approaches,
our method can efficiently incorporate linguis-
tic knowledge into SMT systems without in-
creasing the complexity of decoding. For a set
of five subject-object-verb (SOV) order lan-
guages, we show significant improvements in
BLEU scores when translating from English,
compared to other reordering approaches, in
state-of-the-art phrase-based SMT systems.
1 Introduction
Over the past ten years, statistical machine transla-
tion has seen many exciting developments. Phrase-
based systems (Och, 2002; Koehn et.al., 2003;
Och and Ney, 2004) advanced the machine transla-
tion field by allowing translations of word sequences
(a.k.a., phrases) instead of single words. This ap-
proach has since been the state-of-the-art because of
its robustness in modeling local word reordering and
the existence of an efficient dynamic programming
decoding algorithm.
However, when phrase-based systems are used
between languages with very different word or-
ders, such as between subject-verb-object (SVO)
and subject-object-verb (SOV) languages, long dis-
tance reordering becomes one of the key weak-
nesses. Many reordering methods have been pro-
posed in recent years to address this problem in dif-
ferent aspects.
The first class of approaches tries to explicitly
model phrase reordering distances. Distance based
distortion model (Och, 2002; Koehn et.al., 2003) is
a simple way of modeling phrase level reordering.
It penalizes non-monotonicity by applying a weight
to the number of words between two source phrases
corresponding to two consecutive target phrases.
Later on, this model was extended to lexicalized
phrase reordering (Tillmann, 2004; Koehn, et.al.,
2005; Al-Onaizan and Papineni, 2006) by applying
different weights to different phrases. Most recently,
a hierarchical phrase reordering model (Galley and
Manning, 2008) was proposed to dynamically deter-
mine phrase boundaries using efficient shift-reduce
parsing. Along this line of research, discrimina-
tive reordering models based on a maximum entropy
classifier (Zens and Ney, 2006; Xiong, et.al., 2006)
also showed improvements over the distance based
distortion model. None of these reordering models
changes the word alignment step in SMT systems,
therefore, they can not recover from the word align-
ment errors. These models are also limited by a
maximum allowed reordering distance often used in
decoding.
The second class of approaches puts syntactic
analysis of the target language into both modeling
and decoding. It has been shown that direct model-
ing of target language constituents movement in ei-
ther constituency trees (Yamada and Knight, 2001;
Galley et.al., 2006; Zollmann et.al., 2008) or depen-
dency trees (Quirk, et.al., 2005) can result in signifi-
cant improvements in translation quality for translat-
ing languages like Chinese and Arabic into English.
A simpler alternative, the hierarchical phrase-based
245
approach (Chiang, 2005; Wu, 1997) also showed
promising results for translating Chinese to English.
Similar to the distance based reordering models, the
syntactical or hierarchical approaches also rely on
other models to get word alignments. These mod-
els typically combine machine translation decoding
with chart parsing, therefore significantly increase
the decoding complexity. Even though some re-
cent work has shown great improvements in decod-
ing efficiency for syntactical and hierarchical ap-
proaches (Huang and Chiang, 2007), they are still
not as efficient as phrase-based systems, especially
when higher order language models are used.
Finally, researchers have also tried to put source
language syntax into reordering in machine trans-
lation. Syntactical analysis of source language
can be used to deterministically reorder input sen-
tences (Xia and McCord, 2004; Collins et.al., 2005;
Wang et.al., 2007; Habash, 2007), or to provide mul-
tiple orderings as weighted options (Zhang et.al.,
2007; Li et.al., 2007; Elming, 2008). In these
approaches, input source sentences are reordered
based on syntactic analysis and some reordering
rules at preprocessing step. The reordering rules
can be either manually written or automatically ex-
tracted from data. Deterministic reordering based on
syntactic analysis for the input sentences provides
a good way of resolving long distance reordering,
without introducing complexity to the decoding pro-
cess. Therefore, it can be efficiently incorporated
into phrase-based systems. Furthermore, when the
same preprocessing reordering is performed for the
training data, we can still apply other reordering ap-
proaches, such as distance based reordering and hi-
erarchical phrase reordering, to capture additional
local reordering phenomena that are not captured by
the preprocessing reordering. The work presented in
this paper is largely motivated by the preprocessing
reordering approaches.
In the rest of the paper, we first introduce our de-
pendency parser based reordering approach based on
the analysis of the key issues when translating SVO
languages to SOV languages. Then, we show exper-
imental results of applying this approach to phrase-
based SMT systems for translating from English to
five SOV languages (Korean, Japanese, Hindi, Urdu
and Turkish). After showing that this approach can
also be beneficial for hierarchical phrase-based sys-
John can hit ballthe
?? ? ??
? ????? 
.
.
Figure 1: Example Alignment Between an English and a
Korean Sentence
tems, we will conclude the paper with future re-
search directions.
2 Translation between SVO and SOV
Languages
In linguistics, it is possible to define a basic word
order in terms of the verb (V) and its arguments,
subject (S) and object (O). Among all six possible
permutations, SVO and SOV are the most common.
Therefore, translating between SVO and SOV lan-
guages is a very important area to study. We use
English as a representative of SVO languages and
Korean as a representative for SOV languages in our
discussion about the word orders.
Figure 1 gives an example sentence in English and
its corresponding translation in Korean, along with
the alignments between the words. Assume that we
split the sentences into four phrases: (John , t@),
(can hit , `  ????), (the ball , ? ?D)
and (. , .). Since a phrase-based decoder generates
the translation from left to right, the following steps
need to happen when we translate from English to
Korean:
? Starts from the beginning of the sentence,
translates ?John? to ?t@?;
? Jumps to the right by two words, translates ?the
ball? to ???D?;
? Jumps to the left by four words, translates ?can
hit? to ?`?????;
? Finally, jumps to the right by two words, trans-
lates ?.? to ?.?.
It is clear that in order for the phrase-based decoder
to successfully carry out all of the reordering steps, a
very strong reordering model is required. When the
sentence gets longer with more complex structure,
the number of words to move over during decod-
ing can be quite high. Imagine when we translate
246
Figure 2: Dependency Parse Tree of an Example English
Sentence
the sentence ?English is used as the first or second
language in many countries around the world .?.
The decoder needs to make a jump of 13 words in
order to put the translation of ?is used? at the end
of the translation. Normally in a phrase-based de-
coder, very long distance reordering is not allowed
because of efficiency considerations. Therefore, it
is very difficult in general to translate English into
Korean with proper word order.
However, knowing the dependency parse trees of
the English sentences may simplify the reordering
problem significantly. In the simple example in Fig-
ure 1, if we analyze the English sentence and know
that ?John? is the subject, ?can hit? is the verb and
?the ball? is the object, we can reorder the English
into SOV order. The resulting sentence ?John the
ball can hit .? will only need monotonic translation.
This motivates us to use a dependency parser for En-
glish to perform the reordering.
3 Precedence Reordering Based on a
Dependency Parser
Figure 2 shows the dependency tree for the example
sentence in the previous section. In this parse, the
verb ?hit? has four children: a subject noun ?John?,
an auxiliary verb ?can?, an object noun ?ball? and a
punctuation ?.?. When transforming the sentence to
SOV order, we need to move the object noun and the
subtree rooted at it to the front of the head verb, but
after the subject noun. We can have a simple rule to
achieve this.
However, in reality, there are many possible chil-
dren for a verb. These children have some relative
ordering that is typically fixed for SOV languages.
In order to describe this kind of ordering, we pro-
pose precedence reordering rules based on a depen-
dency parse tree. All rules here are based English
and Korean examples, but they also apply to other
SOV languages, as we will show later empirically.
A precedence reordering rule is a mapping from
T to a set of tuples {(L,W,O)}, where T is the
part-of-speech (POS) tag of the head in a depen-
dency parse tree node, L is a dependency label for
a child node, W is a weight indicating the order of
that child node and O is the type of order (either
NORMAL or REVERSE). The type of order is only
used when we have multiple children with the same
weight, while the weight is used to determine the
relative order of the children, going from largest to
smallest. The weight can be any real valued num-
ber. The order type NORMAL means we preserve
the original order of the children, while REVERSE
means we flip the order. We reserve a special label
self to refer to the head node itself so that we can
apply a weight to the head, too. We will call this
tuple a precedence tuple in later discussions. In this
study, we use manually created rules only.
Suppose we have a precedence rule: VB ?
(nsubj, 2, NORMAL), (dobj, 1, NORMAL), (self,
0, NORMAL). For the example shown in Figure 2,
we would apply it to the ROOT node and result in
?John the ball can hit .?.
Given a set of rules, we apply them in a depen-
dency tree recursively starting from the root node. If
the POS tag of a node matches the left-hand-side of
a rule, the rule is applied and the order of the sen-
tence is changed. We go through all children of the
node and get the precedence weights for them from
the set of precedence tuples. If we encounter a child
node that has a dependency label not listed in the set
of tuples, we give it a default weight of 0 and de-
fault order type of NORMAL. The children nodes
are sorted according to their weights from highest to
lowest, and nodes with the same weights are ordered
according to the type of order defined in the rule.
3.1 Verb Precedence Rules
Verb movement is the most important movement
when translating from English (SVO) to Korean
(SOV). In a dependency parse tree, a verb node can
potentially have many children. For example, aux-
iliary and passive auxiliary verbs are often grouped
together with the main verb and moved together with
it. The order, however, is reversed after the move-
ment. In the example of Figure 2, the correct Korean
247
     
??
? ??
? ????? 
   
??? ?
.
Figure 3: Dependency Parse Tree with Alignment for a
Sentence with Preposition Modifier
word order is ?` (hit)  ????(can) . Other
categories that are in the same group are phrasal verb
particle and negation.
If the verb in an English sentence has a preposi-
tional phrase as a child, the prepositional phrase is
often placed before the direct object in the Korean
counterpart. As shown in Figure 3, ?)?t \?
(?with a bat?) is actually between ?t@? (?John?)
and ???D? (?the ball?).
Another common reordering phenomenon is
when a verb has an adverbial clause modifier. In that
case, the whole adverbial clause is moved together to
be in front of the subject of the main sentence. Inside
the adverbial clause, the ordering follows the same
verb reordering rules, so we recursively reorder the
clause.
Our verb precedence rule, as in Table 1, can cover
all of the above reordering phenomena. One way
to interpret this rule set is as follows: for any node
whose POS tag is matches VB* (VB, VBZ, VBD,
VBP, VBN, VBG), we group the children node that
are phrasal verb particle (prt), auxiliary verb (aux),
passive auxiliary verb (auxpass), negation (neg) and
the verb itself (self) together and reverse them. This
verb group is moved to the end of the sentence. We
move adverbial clause modifier to the beginning of
the sentence, followed by a group of noun subject
(nsubj), preposition modifier and anything else not
listed in the table, in their original order. Right be-
fore the verb group, we put the direct object (dobj).
Note that all of the children are optional.
3.2 Adjective Precedence Rules
Similar to the verbs, adjectives can also take an aux-
iliary verb, a passive auxiliary verb and a negation
T (L, W, O)
VB*
(advcl, 1, NORMAL)
(nsubj, 0, NORMAL)
(prep, 0, NORMAL)
(dobj, -1, NORMAL)
(prt, -2, REVERSE)
(aux, -2, REVERSE)
(auxpass, -2, REVERSE)
(neg, -2, REVERSE)
(self, -2, REVERSE)
JJ or JJS or JJR
(advcl, 1, NORMAL)
(self, -1, NORMAL)
(aux, -2, REVERSE)
(auxpass, -2, REVERSE)
(neg, -2, REVERSE)
(cop, -2, REVERSE)
NN or NNS
(prep, 2, NORMAL)
(rcmod, 1, NORMAL)
(self, 0, NORMAL)
IN or TO (pobj, 1, NORMAL)(self, -1, NORMAL)
Table 1: Precedence Rules to Reorder English to SOV
Language Order (These rules were extracted manually by
a bilingual speaker after looking at some text book exam-
ples in English and Korean, and the dependency parse
trees of the English examples.)
as modifiers. In such cases, the change in order from
English to Korean is similar to the verb rule, except
that the head adjective itself should be in front of the
verbs. Therefore, in our adjective precedence rule in
the second panel of Table 1, we group the auxiliary
verb, the passive auxiliary verb and the negation and
move them together after reversing their order. They
are moved to right after the head adjective, which is
put after any other modifiers.
For both verb and adjective precedence rules,
we also apply some heuristics to prevent exces-
sive movements. In order to do this, we disallow
any movement across punctuation and conjunctions.
Therefore, for sentences like ?John hit the ball but
Sam threw the ball?, the reordering result would be
?John the ball hit but Sam the ball threw?, instead
of ?John the ball but Sam the ball threw hit?.
3.3 Noun and Preposition Precedence Rules
In Korean, when a noun is modified by a preposi-
tional phrase, such as in ?the way to happiness?,
the prepositional phrase is usually moved in front of
the noun, resulting in ??? (happiness)<\ ?
8 (to the way)? . Similarly for relative clause mod-
ifier, it is also reordered to the front of the head noun.
For preposition head node with an object modifier,
248
the order is the object first and the preposition last.
One example is ?with a bat? in Figure 3. It corre-
sponds to ?)?t (a bat) \(with)?. We handle
these types of reordering by the noun and preposi-
tion precedence rules in the third and fourth panel of
Table 1.
With the rules defined in Table 1, we now show a
more complex example in Figure 4. First, the ROOT
node matches an adjective rule, with four children
nodes labeled as (csubj, cop, advcl, p), and with
precedence weights of (0, -2, 1, 0). The ROOT node
itself has a weight of -1. After reordering, the sen-
tence becomes: ?because we do n?t know what the
future has Living exciting is .?. Note that the whole
adverbial phrase rooted at ?know? is moved to the
beginning of the sentence. After that, we see that
the child node rooted at ?know? matches a verb rule,
with five children nodes labeled as (mark, nsubj,
aux, neg, ccomp), with weights (0, 0, -2, -2, 0). In
this case, the verb itself also has weight -2. Now
we have two groups of nodes, with weight 0 and -2,
respectively. The first group has a NORMAL order
and the second group has a REVERSE order. Af-
ter reordering, the sentence becomes: ?because we
what the future has know n?t do Living exciting
is .?. Finally, we have another node rooted at ?has?
that matches the verb rule again. After the final re-
ordering, we end up with the sentence: ?because we
the future what has know n?t do Living exciting
is .?. We can see in Figure 4 that this sentence has an
almost monotonic alignment with a reasonable Ko-
rean translation shown in the figure1.
4 Related Work
As we mentioned in our introduction, there have
been several studies in applying source sentence re-
ordering using syntactical analysis for statistical ma-
chine translation. Our precedence reordering ap-
proach based on a dependency parser is motivated by
those previous works, but we also distinguish from
their studies in various ways.
Several approaches use syntactical analysis to
provide multiple source sentence reordering options
through word lattices (Zhang et.al., 2007; Li et.al.,
2007; Elming, 2008). A key difference between
1We could have improved the rules by using a weight of -3
for the label ?mark?, but it was not in our original set of rules.
their approaches and ours is that they do not perform
reordering during training. Therefore, they would
need to rely on reorder units that are likely not vio-
lating ?phrase? boundaries. However, since we re-
order both training and test data, our system oper-
ates in a matched condition. They also focus on ei-
ther Chinese to English (Zhang et.al., 2007; Li et.al.,
2007) or English to Danish (Elming, 2008), which
arguably have less long distance reordering than be-
tween English and SOV languages.
Studies most similar to ours are those preprocess-
ing reordering approaches (Xia and McCord, 2004;
Collins et.al., 2005; Wang et.al., 2007; Habash,
2007). They all perform reordering during prepro-
cessing based on either automatically extracted syn-
tactic rules (Xia and McCord, 2004; Habash, 2007)
or manually written rules (Collins et.al., 2005; Wang
et.al., 2007). Compared to these approaches, our
work has a few differences. First of all, we study
a wide range of SOV languages using manually ex-
tracted precedence rules, not just for one language
like in these studies. Second, as we will show in
the next section, we compare our approach to a
very strong baseline with more advanced distance
based reordering model, not just the simplest distor-
tion model. Third, our precedence reordering rules,
like those in Habash, 2007, are more flexible than
those other rules. Using just one verb rule, we can
perform the reordering of subject, object, preposi-
tion modifier, auxiliary verb, negation and the head
verb. Although we use manually written rules in
this study, it is possible to learn our rules automat-
ically from alignments, similarly to Habash, 2007.
However, unlike Habash, 2007, our manually writ-
ten rules handle unseen children and their order nat-
urally because we have a default precedence weight
and order type, and we do not need to match an often
too specific condition, but rather just treat all chil-
dren independently. Therefore, we do not need to
use any backoff scheme in order to have a broad cov-
erage. Fourth, we use dependency parse trees rather
than constituency trees.
There has been some work on syntactic word or-
der model for English to Japanese machine transla-
tion (Chang and Toutanova, 2007). In this work, a
global word order model is proposed based on fea-
tures including word bigram of the target sentence,
displacements and POS tags on both source and tar-
249
                  
??? ???
  ?????????? ? ?
?
? ??
??? ???
.
we the Livingwhatfuture knowhas n't do excitingbecause is .
csubj cop detmarkROOT auxnsubj neg advcl nsubjdobj ccomp p
Living is thebecauseexciting dowe n't know futurewhat has
.
VBG VBZ DTINJJ VBPPRP RB VB NNWP VBZ
.
Label
Token
POS
Figure 4: A Complex Reordering Example (Reordered English sentence and alignments are at the bottom.)
get sides. They build a log-linear model using these
features and apply the model to re-rank N -best lists
from a baseline decoder. Although we also study the
reordering problem in English to Japanese transla-
tion, our approach is to incorporate the linguistically
motivated reordering directly into modeling and de-
coding.
5 Experiments
We carried out all our experiments based on a state-
of-the-art phrase-based statistical machine transla-
tion system. When training a system for English
to any of the 5 SOV languages, the word alignment
step includes 3 iterations of IBM Model-1 training
and 2 iterations of HMM training. We do not use
Model-4 because it is slow and it does not add much
value to our systems in a pilot study. We use the
standard phrase extraction algorithm (Koehn et.al.,
2003) to get al phrases up to length 5. In addition
to the regular distance distortion model, we incor-
porate a maximum entropy based lexicalized phrase
reordering model (Zens and Ney, 2006) as a fea-
ture used in decoding. In this model, we use 4 re-
ordering classes (+1, > 1, ?1, < ?1) and words
from both source and target as features. For source
words, we use the current aligned word, the word
before the current aligned word and the next aligned
word; for target words, we use the previous two
words in the immediate history. Using this type of
features makes it possible to directly use the maxi-
mum entropy model in the decoding process (Zens
and Ney, 2006). The maximum entropy models are
trained on all events extracted from training data
word alignments using the LBFGS algorithm (Mal-
ouf, 2002). Overall for decoding, we use between 20
System Source Target
English?Korean 303M 267M
English?Japanese 316M 350M
English?Hindi 16M 17M
English?Urdu 17M 19M
English?Turkish 83M 76M
Table 2: Training Corpus Statistics (#words) of Systems
for 5 SOV Languages
to 30 features, whose weights are optimized using
MERT (Och, 2003), with an implementation based
on the lattice MERT (Macherey et.al., 2008).
For parallel training data, we use an in-house col-
lection of parallel documents. They come from var-
ious sources with a substantial portion coming from
the web after using simple heuristics to identify po-
tential document pairs. Therefore, for some doc-
uments in the training data, we do not necessarily
have the exact clean translations. Table 2 shows the
actual statistics about the training data for all five
languages we study. For all 5 SOV languages, we
use the target side of the parallel data and some more
monolingual text from crawling the web to build 4-
gram language models.
We also collected about 10K English sentences
from the web randomly. Among them, 9.5K are used
as evaluation data. Those sentences were translated
by humans to all 5 SOV languages studied in this
paper. Each sentence has only one reference trans-
lation. We split them into 3 subsets: dev contains
3,500 sentences, test contains 1,000 sentences and
the rest of 5,000 sentences are used in a blindtest
set. The dev set is used to perform MERT training,
while the test set is used to select trained weights
due to some nondeterminism of MERT training. We
use IBM BLEU (Papineni et al, 2002) to evaluate
250
our translations and use character level BLEU for
Korean and Japanese.
5.1 Preprocessing Reordering and Reordering
Models
We first compare our precedence rules based prepro-
cessing reordering with the maximum entropy based
lexicalized reordering model. In Table 3, Baseline
is our system with both a distance distortion model
and the maximum entropy based lexicalized reorder-
ing model. For all results reported in this section,
we used a maximum allowed reordering distance of
10. In order to see how the lexicalized reordering
model performs, we also included systems with and
without it (-LR means without it). PR is our pro-
posed approach in this paper. Note that since we ap-
ply precedence reordering rules during preprocess-
ing, we can combine this approach with any other
reordering models used during decoding. The only
difference is that with the precedence reordering, we
would have a different phrase table and in the case
of LR, different maximum entropy models.
In order to implement the precedence rules, we
need a dependency parser. We choose to use a
deterministic inductive dependency parser (Nivre
and Scholz, 2004) for its efficiency and good ac-
curacy. Our implementation of the deterministic
dependency parser using maximum entropy models
as the underlying classifiers achieves 87.8% labeled
attachment score and 88.8% unlabeled attachment
score on standard Penn Treebank evaluation.
As our results in Table 3 show, for all 5 lan-
guages, by using the precedence reordering rules as
described in Table 1, we achieve significantly bet-
ter BLEU scores compared to the baseline system.
In the table, We use two stars (??) to mean that
the statistical significance test using the bootstrap
method (Koehn, 2004) gives an above 95% signif-
icance level when compared to the baselie. We mea-
sured the statistical significance level only for the
blindtest data.
Note that for Korean and Japanese, our prece-
dence reordering rules achieve better absolute
BLEU score improvements than for Hindi, Urdu and
Turkish. Since we only analyzed English and Ko-
rean sentences, it is possible that our rules are more
geared toward Korean. Japanese has almost exactly
the same word order as Korean, so we could assume
Language System dev test blind
Korean
BL 25.8 27.0 26.2
-LR 24.7 25.6 25.1
-LR+PR 27.3 28.3 27.5**
+PR 27.8 28.7 27.9**
Japanese
BL 29.5 29.3 29.3
-LR 29.2 29.0 29.0
-LR+PR 30.3 31.0 30.6**
+PR 30.7 31.2 31.1**
Hindi
BL 19.1 18.9 18.3
-LR 17.4 17.1 16.4
-LR+PR 19.6 18.8 18.7**
+PR 19.9 18.9 18.8**
Urdu
BL 9.7 9.5 8.9
-LR 9.1 8.6 8.2
-LR+PR 10.0 9.6 9.6**
+PR 10.0 9.8 9.6**
Turkish
BL 10.0 10.5 9.8
-LR 9.1 10.0 9.0
-LR+PR 10.5 11.0 10.3**
+PR 10.5 10.9 10.4**
Table 3: BLEU Scores on Dev, Test and Blindtest for En-
glish to 5 SOV Languages with Various Reordering Op-
tions (BL means baseline, LR means maximum entropy
based lexialized phrase reordering model, PR means
precedence rules based preprocessing reordering.)
the benefits can carry over to Japanese.
5.2 Reordering Constraints
One of our motivations of using the precedence re-
ordering rules is that English will look like SOV lan-
guages in word order after reordering. Therefore,
even monotone decoding should be able to produce
better translations. To see this, we carried out a con-
trolled experiment, using Korean as an example.
Clearly, after applying the precedence reordering
rules, our English to Korean system is not sensitive
to the maximum allowed reordering distance any-
more. As shown in Figure 5, without the rules, the
blindtest BLEU scores improve monotonically as
the allowed reordering distance increases. This indi-
cates that the order difference between English and
Korean is very significant. Since smaller allowed
reordering distance directly corresponds to decod-
ing time, we can see that with the same decoding
speed, our proposed approach can achieve almost
5% BLEU score improvements on blindtest set.
5.3 Preprocessing Reordering and
Hierarchical Model
The hierarchical phrase-based approach has been
successfully applied to several systems (Chiang,
251
1 2 4 6 8 10Maximum Allowed Reordering Distance
0.23
0.24
0.25
0.26
0.27
0.28
Blindt
est BL
EU Sc
ore No LexReorderBaselineNo LexReorder, with ParserReorderWith ParserReorder
Figure 5: Blindtest BLEU Score for Different Maximum
Allowed Reordering Distance for English to Korean Sys-
tems with Different Reordering Options
2005; Zollmann et.al., 2008). Since hierarchical
phrase-based systems can capture long distance re-
ordering by using a PSCFG model, we expect it to
perform well in English to SOV language systems.
We use the same training data as described in the
previous sections for building hierarchical systems.
The same 4-gram language models are also used for
the 5 SOV languages. We adopt the SAMT pack-
age (Zollmann and Venugopal, 2006) and follow
similar settings as Zollmann et.al., 2008. We allow
each rule to have at most 6 items on the source side,
including nonterminals and extract rules from initial
phrases of maximum length 12. During decoding,
we allow application of all rules of the grammar for
chart items spanning up to 12 source words.
Since our precedence reordering applies at pre-
processing step, we can train a hierarchical system
after applying the reordering rules. When doing so,
we use exactly the same settings as a regular hier-
archical system. The results for both hierarchical
systems and those combined with the precedence re-
ordering are shown in Table 4, together with the best
normal phrase-based systems we copy from Table 3.
Here again, we mark any blindtest BLEU score that
is better than the corresponding hierarchical system
with confidence level above 95%. Note that the hier-
archical systems can not use the maximum entropy
based lexicalized phrase reordering models.
Except for Hindi, applying the precedence re-
ordering rules in a hierarchical system can achieve
statistically significant improvements over a normal
hierarchical system. We conjecture that this may be
because of the simplicity of our reordering rules.
Language System dev test blind
Korean
PR 27.8 28.7 27.9
Hier 27.4 27.7 27.9
PR+Hier 28.5 29.1 28.8**
Japanese
PR 30.7 31.2 31.1**
Hier 30.5 30.6 30.5
PR+Hier 31.0 31.3 31.1**
Hindi
PR 19.9 18.9 18.8
Hier 20.3 20.3 19.3
PR+Hier 20.0 19.7 19.3
Urdu
PR 10.0 9.8 9.6
Hier 10.4 10.3 10.0
PR+Hier 11.2 10.7 10.7**
Turkish
PR 10.5 10.9 10.4
Hier 11.0 11.8 10.5
PR+Hier 11.1 11.6 10.9**
Table 4: BLEU Scores on Dev, Test and Blindtest for En-
glish to 5 SOV Languages in Hierarchical Phrase-based
Systems (PR is precedence rules based preprocessing re-
ordering, same as in Table 3, while Hier is the hierarchi-
cal system.)
Other than the reordering phenomena covered by
our rules in Table 1, there could be still some local or
long distance reordering. Therefore, using a hierar-
chical phrase-based system can improve those cases.
Another possible reason is that after the reordering
rules apply in preprocessing, English sentences in
the training data are very close to the SOV order. As
a result, EM training becomes much easier and word
alignment quality becomes better. Therefore, a hier-
archical phrase-based system can extract better rules
and hence achievesbetter translation quality.
We also point out that hierarchical phrase-based
systems require a chart parsing algorithm during de-
coding. Compared to the efficient dynamic pro-
gramming in phrase-based systems, it is much
slower. This makes our approach more appealing
in a realtime statistical machine translation system.
6 Conclusion
In this paper, we present a novel precedence re-
ordering approach based on a dependency parser.
We successfully applied this approach to systems
translating English to 5 SOV languages: Korean,
Japanese, Hindi, Urdu and Turkish. For all 5 lan-
guages, we achieve statistically significant improve-
ments in BLEU scores over a state-of-the-art phrase-
based baseline system. The amount of training data
for the 5 languages varies from around 17M to more
than 350M words, including some noisy data from
252
the web. Our proposed approach has shown to be
robust and versatile. For 4 out of the 5 languages,
our approach can even significantly improve over a
hierarchical phrase-based baseline system. As far as
we know, we are the first to show that such reorder-
ing rules benefit several SOV languages.
We believe our rules are flexible and can cover
many linguistic reordering phenomena. The format
of our rules also makes it possible to automatically
extract rules from word aligned corpora. In the fu-
ture, we plan to investigate along this direction and
extend the rules to languages other than SOV.
The preprocessing reordering like ours is known
to be sensitive to parser errors. Some preliminary
error analysis already show that indeed some sen-
tences suffer from parser errors. In the recent years,
several studies have tried to address this issue by us-
ing a word lattice instead of one reordering as in-
put (Zhang et.al., 2007; Li et.al., 2007; Elming,
2008). Although there is clearly room for improve-
ments, we also feel that using one reordering during
training may not be good enough either. It would be
very interesting to investigate ways to have efficient
procedure for training EM models and getting word
alignments using word lattices on the source side of
the parallel data. Along this line of research, we
think some kind of tree-to-string model (Liu et.al.,
2006) could be interesting directions to pursue.
References
Yaser Al-Onaizan and Kishore Papineni 2006. Distortion Models for
Statistical Machine Translation In Proceedings of ACL
Pi-Chuan Chang and Kristina Toutanova 2007. A Discriminative Syn-
tactic Word Order Model for Machine Translation In Proceedings
of ACL
David Chiang 2005. A Hierarchical Phrase-based Model for Statistical
Machine Translation In Proceedings of ACL
Michael Collins, Philipp Koehn and Ivona Kucerova 2005. Clause
Restructuring for Statistical Machine Translation In Proceedings of
ACL
Jakob Elming 2008. Syntactic Reordering Integrated with Phrase-
based SMT In Proceedings of COLING
Michel Galley and Christopher D. Manning 2008. A Simple and Ef-
fective Hierarchical Phrase Reordering Model In Proceedings of
EMNLP
Michel Galley, Jonathan Graehl, Kevin Knight, Daniel Marcu, Steve
DeNeefe, Wei Wang and Ignacio Thayer 2006. Scalable Inference
and Training of Context-Rich Syntactic Translation Models In Pro-
ceedings of COLING-ACL
Nizar Habash 2007. Syntactic Preprocessing for Statistical Machine
Translation In Proceedings of 11th MT Summit
Liang Huang and David Chiang 2007. Forest Rescoring: Faster De-
coding with Integrated Language Models, In Proceedings of ACL
Philipp Koehn 2004. Statistical Significance Tests for Machine Trans-
lation Evaluation In Proceedings of EMNLP
Philipp Koehn, Amittai Axelrod, Alexandra Birch Mayne, Chris
Callison-Burch, Miles Osborne and David Talbot 2005. Edinborgh
System Description for the 2005 IWSLT Speech Translation Evalu-
ation In International Workshop on Spoken Language Translation
Philipp Koehn, Franz J. Och and Daniel Marcu 2003. Statistical
Phrase-based Translation, In Proceedings of HLT-NAACL
Chi-Ho Li, Dongdong Zhang, Mu Li, Ming Zhou, Minghui Li and Yi
Guan 2007. A Probabilistic Approach to Syntax-based Reordering
for Statistical Machine Translation, In Proceedings of ACL
Yang Liu, Qun Liu and Shouxun Lin 2006. Tree-to-string Alignment
Template for Statistical Machine Translation, In Proceedings of
COLING-ACL
Wolfgang Macherey, Franz J. Och, Ignacio Thayer and Jakob Uszkoreit
2008. Lattice-based Minimum Error Rate Training for Statistical
Machine Translation In Proceedings of EMNLP
Robert Malouf 2002. A comparison of algorithms for maximum en-
tropy parameter estimation In Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop
on Computational Language Learning (CoNLL-2002)
Joakim Nivre and Mario Scholz 2004. Deterministic Dependency Pars-
ing for English Text. In Proceedings of COLING
Franz J. Och 2002. Statistical Machine Translation: From Single Word
Models to Alignment Template Ph.D. Thesis, RWTH Aachen, Ger-
many
Franz J. Och. 2003. Minimum Error Rate Training in Statistical Ma-
chine Translation. In Proceedings of ACL
Franz J. Och and Hermann Ney 2004. The Alignment Template Ap-
proach to Statistical Machine Translation. Computational Linguis-
tics, 30:417-449
Kishore Papineni, Roukos, Salim et al 2002. BLEU: A Method for
Automatic Evaluation of Machine Translation. In Proceedings of
ACL
Chris Quirk, Arul Menezes and Colin Cherry 2005. Dependency Tree
Translation: Syntactically Informed Phrasal SMT In Proceedings of
ACL
Christoph Tillmann 2004. A Block Orientation Model for Statistical
Machine Translation In Proceedings of HLT-NAACL
Chao Wang, Michael Collins and Philipp Koehn 2007. Chinese Syntac-
tic Reordering for Statistical Machine Translation In Proceedings of
EMNLP-CoNLL
Dekai Wu 1997. Stochastic Inversion Transduction Grammars and
Bilingual Parsing of Parallel Corpus In Computational Linguistics
23(3):377-403
Fei Xia and Michael McCord 2004. Improving a Statistical MT Sys-
tem with Automatically Learned Rewrite Patterns In Proceedings of
COLING
Deyi Xiong, Qun Liu and Shouxun Lin 2006. Maximum Entropy
Based Phrase Reordering Model for Statistical Machine Translation
In Proceedings of COLING-ACL
Kenji Yamada and Kevin Knight 2001. A Syntax-based Statistical
Translation Model In Proceedings of ACL
Yuqi Zhang, Richard Zens and Hermann Ney 2007. Improve Chunk-
level Reordering for Statistical Machine Translation In Proceedings
of IWSLT
Richard Zens and Hermann Ney 2006. Discriminative Reordering
Models for Statistical Machine Translation In Proceedings of the
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, HLT-NAACL pages
55-63
Andreas Zollmann and Ashish Venugopal 2006. Syntax Augmented
Machine Translation via Chart Parsing In Proceedings of NAACL
2006 - Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation
Andreas Zollmann, Ashish Venugopal, Franz Och and Jay Ponte
2008. A Systematic Comparison of Phrase-Based, Hierarchical and
Syntax-Augmented Statistical MT In Proceedings of COLING
253
