Proceedings of the 12th Conference of the European Chapter of the ACL, pages 415?423,
Athens, Greece, 30 March ? 3 April 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Automatic Single-Document Key Fact Extraction from Newswire Articles
Itamar Kastner
Department of Computer Science
Queen Mary, University of London, UK
itk1@dcs.qmul.ac.uk
Christof Monz
ISLA, University of Amsterdam
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
christof@science.uva.nl
Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of ex-
tracting the most important facts from a
news article. Our approach uses syntac-
tic, semantic, and general statistical fea-
tures to identify the most important sen-
tences in a document. The importance
of the individual features is estimated us-
ing generalized iterative scaling methods
trained on an annotated newswire corpus.
The performance of our approach is evalu-
ated against 300 unseen news articles and
shows that use of these features results in
statistically significant improvements over
a provenly robust baseline, as measured
using metrics such as precision, recall and
ROUGE.
1 Introduction
The increasing amount of information that is avail-
able to both professional users (such as journal-
ists, financial analysts and intelligence analysts)
and lay users has called for methods condensing
information, in order to make the most important
content stand out. Several methods have been pro-
posed over the last two decades, among which
keyword extraction and summarization are the
most prominent ones. Keyword extraction aims
to identify the most relevant words or phrases in
a document, e.g., (Witten et al, 1999), while sum-
marization aims to provide a short (commonly 100
words), coherent full-text summary of the docu-
ment, e.g., (McKeown et al, 1999). Key fact ex-
traction falls in between key word extraction and
summarization. Here, the challenge is to identify
the most relevant facts in a document, but not nec-
essarily in a coherent full-text form as is done in
summarization.
Evidence of the usefulness of key fact extraction
is CNN?s web site which since 2006 has most of its
news articles preceded by a list of story highlights,
see Figure 1. The advantage of the news highlights
as opposed to full-text summaries is that they are
much ?easier on the eye? and are better suited for
quick skimming.
So far, only CNN.com offers this service and we
are interested in finding out to what extent it can
be automated and thus applied to any newswire
source. Although these highlights could be eas-
ily generated by the respective journalists, many
news organization shy away from introducing an
additional manual stage into the workflow, where
pushback times of minutes are considered unac-
ceptable in an extremely competitive news busi-
ness which competes in terms of seconds rather
than minutes. Automating highlight generation
can help eliminate those delays.
Journalistic training emphasizes that news arti-
cles should contain the most important informa-
tion in the beginning, while less important infor-
mation, such as background or additional details,
appears further down in the article. This is also
the main reason why most summarization systems
applied to news articles do not outperform a sim-
ple baseline that just uses the first 100 words of an
article (Svore et al, 2007; Nenkova, 2005).
On the other hand, most of CNN?s story high-
lights are not taken from the beginning of the ar-
ticles. In fact, more than 50% of the highlights
stem from sentences that are not among the first
100 words of the articles. This makes identify-
ing story highlights a much more challenging task
than single-document summarization in the news
domain.
In order to automate story highlight identifica-
tion we automatically extract syntactic, semantic,
415
Figure 1: CNN.com screen shot of a story excerpt
with highlights.
and purely statistical features from the document.
The weights of the features are estimated using
machine learning techniques, trained on an anno-
tated corpus. In this paper, we focus on identify-
ing the relevant sentences in the news article from
which the highlights were generated. The system
we have implemented is named AURUM: AUto-
matic Retrieval of Unique information with Ma-
chine learning. A full system would also contain
a sentence compression step (Knight and Marcu,
2000), but since both steps are largely indepen-
dent of each other, existing sentence compression
or simplification techniques can be applied to the
sentences identified by our approach.
The remainder of this paper is organized as fol-
lows: The next section describes the relevant work
done to date in keyfact extraction and automatic
summarization. Section 3 lays out our features
and explains how they were learned and estimated.
Section 4 presents the experimental setup and our
results, and Section 5 concludes with a short dis-
cussion.
2 Related Work
As mentioned above, the problem of identifying
story highlight lies somewhere between keyword
extraction and single-document summarization.
The KEA keyphrase extraction system (Witten
et al, 1999) mainly relies on purely statistical
features such as term frequencies, using the tf.idf
measure from Information Retrieval,1 as well as
on a term?s position in the text. In addition to tf.idf
scores, Hulth (2004) uses part-of-speech tags and
NP chunks and complements this with machine
learning; the latter has been used to good results
in similar cases (Turney, 2000; Neto et al, 2002).
The B&C system (Barker and Cornacchia, 2000),
also used linguistic methods to a very limited ex-
tent, identifying NP heads.
INFORMATIONFINDER (Krulwich and Burkey,
1996) requires user feedback to train the system,
whereby a user notes whether a given document
is of interest to them and specifies their own key-
words which are then learned by the system.
Over the last few years, numerous single-
as well as multi-document summarization ap-
proaches have been developed. In this paper we
will focus mainly on single-document summariza-
tion as it is more relevant to the issue we aim to
address and traditionally proves harder to accom-
plish. A good example of a powerful approach is
a method named Maximum Marginal Relevance
which extracts a sentence for the summary only
if it is different than previously selected ones,
thereby striving to reduce redundancy (Carbonell
and Goldstein, 1998).
More recently, the work of Svore et al (2007)
is closely related to our approach as it has also ex-
ploited the CNN Story Highlights, although their
focus was on summarization and using ROUGE
as an evaluation and training measure. Their ap-
proach also heavily relies on additional data re-
sources, mainly indexed Wikipedia articles and
Microsoft Live query logs, which are not readily
available.
Linguistic features are today used mostly in
summarization systems, and include the standard
features sentence length, n-gram frequency, sen-
tence position, proper noun identification, similar-
ity to title, tf.idf, and so-called ?bonus?/?stigma?
words (Neto et al, 2002; Leite et al, 2007; Pol-
lock and Zamora, 1975; Goldstein et al, 1999).
On the other hand, for most of these systems, sim-
ple statistical features and tf.idf still turn out to be
the most important features.
Attempts to integrate discourse models have
also been made (Thione et al, 2004), hand in hand
with some of Marcu?s (1995) earlier work.
1tf(t, d) = frequency of term t in document d.
idf(t,N) = inverse frequency of documents d containing
term t in corpus N , log( |N||dt| )
416
Regarding syntax, it seems to be used mainly
in sentence compression or trimming. The algo-
rithm used by Dorr et al (2003) removes subor-
dinate clauses, to name one example. While our
approach does not use syntactical features as such,
it is worth noting these possible enhancements.
3 Approach
In this section we describe which features were
used and how the data was annotated to facilitate
feature extraction and estimation.
3.1 Training Data
In order to determine the features used for pre-
dicting which sentences are the sources for story
highlights, we gathered statistics from 1,200 CNN
newswire articles. An additional 300 articles were
set aside to serve as a test set later on. The arti-
cles were taken from a wide range of topics: poli-
tics, business, sport, health, world affairs, weather,
entertainment and technology. Only articles with
story highlights were considered.
For each article we extracted a number of n-
gram statistics, where n ? {1, 2, 3}.
n-gram score. We observed the frequency and
probability of unigrams, bigrams and trigrams ap-
pearing in both the article body and the highlights
of a given story. An important phrase (of length
n ? 3) in the article would likely be used again
in the highlights. These phrases were ranked and
scored according to the probability of their appear-
ing in a given text and its highlights.
Trigger phrases. These are phrases which cause
adjacent words to appear in the highlights. Over
the entire set, such phrases become significant. We
specified a limit of 2 words to the left and 4 words
to the right of a phrase. For example, the word ac-
cording caused other words in the same sentence
to appear in the highlights nearly 25% of the time.
Consider the highlight/sentence pair in Table 1:
highlight: 61 percent of those polled now say it was not
worth invading Iraq, poll says
Text: Now, 61 percent of those surveyed say it was
not worth invading Iraq, according to the poll.
Table 1: Example highlight with source sentence.
The word according receives a score of 3 since
{invading, Iraq, poll} are all in the highlight. It
should be noted that the trigram {invading Iraq
according} would receive an identical score, since
{not, worth, poll} are in the highlights as well.
Spawned phrases. Conversely, spawned
phrases occur frequently in the highlights and in
close proximity to trigger phrases. Continuing
the example in Table 1, {invading, Iraq, poll, not,
worth} are all considered to be spawned phrases.
Of course, simply using the identities of words
neglects the issue of lexical paraphrasing, e.g.,
involving synonyms, which we address to some
extent by using WordNet and other features de-
scribed in this Section. Table 2 gives an example
involving paraphrasing.
highlight: Sources say men were planning to shoot sol-
diers at Army base
Text: The federal government has charged five al-
leged Islamic radicals with plotting to kill U.S.
soldiers at Fort Dix in New Jersey.
Table 2: An example of paraphrasing between a
highlight and its source sentence.
Other approaches have tried to select linguistic
features which could be useful (Chuang and Yang,
2000), but these gather them under one heading
rather than treating them as separate features. The
identification of common verbs has been used both
as a positive (Turney, 2000) and as a negative
feature (Goldstein et al, 1999) in some systems,
whereas we score such terms according to a scale.
Turney also uses a ?final adjective? measure. Use
of a thesaurus has also shown to improve results in
automatic summarization, even in multi-document
environments (McKeown et al, 1999) and other
languages such as Portuguese (Leite et al, 2007).
3.2 Feature Selection
By manually inspecting the training data, the lin-
guistic features were selected. AURUM has two
types of features: sentence features, such as the
position of the sentence or the existence of a nega-
tion word, receive the same value for the entire
sentence. On the other hand, word features are
evaluated for each of the words in the sentence,
normalized over the number of words in the sen-
tence.
Our features resemble those suggested by previ-
ous works in keyphrase extraction and automatic
summarization, but map more closely to the jour-
nalistic characteristics of the corpus, as explained
in the following.
417
Figure 2: Positions of sentences from which high-
lights (HLs) were generated.
3.2.1 Sentence Features
These are the features which apply once for each
sentence.
Position of the sentence in the text. Intuitively,
facts of greater importance will be placed at the
beginning of the text, and this is supported by the
data, as can be seen in Figure 2. Only half of the
highlights stem from sentences in the first fifth of
the article. Nevertheless, selecting sentences from
only the first few lines is not a sure-fire approach.
Table 3 presents an article in which none of the
first four sentences were in the highlights. While
the baseline found no sentences, AURUM?s perfor-
mance was better.
The sentence positions score is defined as pi =
1 ? (log i/logN), where i is the position of the
sentence in the article and N the total number of
sentences in the article.
Numbers or dates. This is especially evident
in news reports mentioning figures of casualties,
opinion poll results, or financial news.
Source attribution. Phrasings such as accord-
ing to a source or officials say.
Negations. Negations are often used for intro-
ducing new or contradictory information: ?Kelly
is due in a Chicago courtroom Friday for yet an-
other status hearing, but there?s still no trial date
in sight.2? We selected a number of typical nega-
tion phrases to this end.
Causal adverbs. Manually compiled list of
phrases, including in order to, hoping for and be-
cause.
2This sentence was included in the highlights
Temporal adverbs. Manually compiled list of
phrases, such as after less than, for two weeks and
Thursday.
Mention of the news agency?s name. Journal-
istic scoops and other exclusive nuggets of infor-
mation often recall the agency?s name, especially
when there is an element of self-advertisement
involved, as in ?. . . The debates are being held
by CNN, WMUR and the New Hampshire Union
Leader.? It is interesting to note that an opposite
approach has previously been taken (Goldstein et
al., 1999), albeit involving a different corpus.
Story Highlights:
?Memorial Day marked by parades, cookouts, cer-
emonies
? AAA: 38 million Americans expected to travel at
least 50 miles during weekend
? President Bush gives speech at Arlington National
Cemetery
? Gulf Coast once again packed with people cele-
brating holiday weekend
First sentences of article:
1. Veterans and active soldiers unfurled a 90-by-
100-foot U. S. flag as the nation?s top commander
in the Middle East spoke to a Memorial Day crowd
gathered in Central Park on Monday.
2. Navy Adm. William Fallon, commander of U. S.
Central Command, said America should remember
those whom the holiday honors.
3. ?Their sacrifice has enabled us to enjoy the things
that we, I think in many cases, take for granted,?
Fallon said.
4. Across the nation, flags snapped in the wind over
decorated gravestones as relatives and friends paid
tribute to their fallen soldiers.
Sentences the Highlights were derived from:
5. Millions more kicked off summer with trips to
beaches or their backyard grills.
6. AAA estimated 38 million Americans would
travel 50 miles or more during the weekend ? up
1.7 percent from last year ? even with gas aver-
aging $3.20 a gallon for self-service regular.
7. In the nation?s capital, thousands of motorcy-
cles driven by military veterans and their loved ones
roared through Washington to the Vietnam Veterans
Memorial.
9. President Bush spoke at nearby Arlington Na-
tional Cemetery, honoring U. S. troops who have
fought and died for freedom and expressing his re-
solve to succeed in the war in Iraq.
21. Elsewhere, Alabama?s Gulf Coast was once
again packed with holiday-goers after the damage
from hurricanes Ivan and Katrina in 2004 and 2005
kept the tourists away.
Table 3: Sentence selection outside the first four
sentences (correctly identified sentence by AURUM
in boldface).
418
3.2.2 Word Features
These features are tested on each word in the sen-
tence.
?Bonus? words. A list of phrases similar to sen-
sational, badly, ironically, historic, identified from
the training data. This is akin to ?bonus?/?stigma?
words (Neto et al, 2002; Leite et al, 2007; Pol-
lock and Zamora, 1975; Goldstein et al, 1999).
Verb classes. After exploring the training data
we manually compiled two classes of verbs,
each containing 15-20 inflected and uninflected
lexemes, talkVerbs and actionVerbs.
talkVerbs include verbs such as {report, men-
tion, accuse} and actionVerbs refer to verbs
such as {provoke, spend, use}. Both lists also con-
tain the WordNet synonyms of each word in the
list (Fellbaum, 1998).
Proper nouns. Proper nouns and other parts of
speech were identified running Charniak?s parser
(Charniak, 2000) on the news articles.
3.2.3 Sentence Scoring
The overall score of a sentence is computed as the
weighted linear combination of the sentence and
word scores. The score ?(s) of sentence s is de-
fined as follows:
?(s) = wposppos(s) +
n?
k=1
wkfk +
|s|?
j=1
m?
k=1
wkgjk
Each of the sentences s in the article was tested
against the position feature ppos(s) and against
each of the sentence features fk, see Section 3.2.1,
where pos(s) returns the position of sentence s.
Each word j of sentence s is tested against all ap-
plicable word features gjk, see Section 3.2.2. A
weight (wpos and wk) is associated with each fea-
ture. How to estimate the weights is discussed
next.
3.3 Parameter Estimation
There are various optimization methods that allow
one to estimate the weights of features, includ-
ing generalized iterative scaling and quasi-Newton
methods (Malouf, 2002). We opted for general-
ized iterative scaling as it is commonly used for
other NLP tasks and off-the-shelf implementations
exist. Here we used YASMET.3
3A maximum entropy toolkit by Franz Josef Och, http:
//www.fjoch.com/YASMET.html
We used a development set of 240 news arti-
cles to train YASMET. As YASMET is a supervised
optimizer, we had to generate annotated data on
which it was to be trained. For each document in
the development set, we labeled each sentence as
to whether a story highlight was generated from it.
For instance, in the article presented in Figure 3,
sentences 5, 6, 7, 9 and 21 were marked as high-
light sources, whereas all other sentences in the
document were not.4
When annotating, all sentences that were di-
rectly relevant to the highlights were marked, with
preference given to those appearing earlier in the
story or containing more precise information. At
this point it is worth noting that while the over-
lap between different editors is unknown, the high-
lights were originally written by a number of dif-
ferent people, ensuring enough variation in the
data and helping to avoid over-fitting to a specific
editor.
4 Experiments and Results
The CNN corpus was divided into a training set
and a development and test set. As we had
only 300 manually annotated news articles and we
wanted to maximize the number of documents us-
able for parameter estimation, we applied cross-
folding, which is commonly used for situations
with limited data. The dev/test set was randomly
partitioned into five folds. Four of the five folds
were used as development data (i.e. for parame-
ter estimation with YASMET), while the remaining
fold was used for testing. The procedure was re-
peated five times, each time with four folds used
for development and a separate one for testing.
Cross-folding is safe to use as long as there are
no dependencies between the folds, which is safe
to assume here.
Some statistics on our training and develop-
ment/test data can be found in Table 4.
Corpus subset Dev/Test Train
Documents 300 1220
Avg. sentences per article 33.26 31.02
Avg. sentence length 20.62 20.50
Avg. number of highlights 3.71 3.67
Avg. number of highlight sources 4.32 -
Avg. highlight length in words 10.26 10.28
Table 4: Characteristics of the evaluation corpus.
4The annotated data set is available at: http://www.
science.uva.nl/?christof/data/hl/.
419
Most summarization evaluation campaigns,
such as NIST?s Document Understanding Confer-
ences (DUC), impose a maximum length on sum-
maries (e.g., 75 characters for the headline gen-
eration task or 100 words for the summarization
task). When identifying sentences from which
story highlights are generated, the situation is
slightly different, as the number of story highlights
is not fixed. On the other hand, most stories have
between three and four highlights, and on aver-
age between four and five sentences per story from
which the highlights were generated. This varia-
tion led to us to carry out two sets of experiments:
In the first experiment (fixed), the number of
highlight sources is fixed and our system always
returns exactly four highlight sources. In the sec-
ond experiment (thresh), our system can return
between three and six highlight sources, depend-
ing on whether a sentence score passes a given
threshold. The threshold ? was used to allocate
sentences si of article a to the highlight list HL
by first finding the highest-scoring sentence for
that article ?(sh). The threshold score was thus
? ? ?(sh) and sentences were judged accordingly.
The algorithm used is given in Figure 3.
initialize HL, sh
sort si in s by ?(si)
set sh = s0
for each sentence si in article a:
if |HL| < 3
include si
else if (? ? ?(sh) ? ?(si))&& (|HL| ? 5)
include si
else
discard si
return HL
Figure 3: Procedure for selecting highlight
sources.
All scores were compared to a baseline, which
simply returns the first n sentences of a news
article. n = 4 in the fixed experiment.
For the thresh experiment, the baseline al-
ways selected the same number of sentences as
AURUM-thresh, but from the beginning of the
article. Although this is a very simple baseline, it
is worth reiterating that it is also a very compet-
itive baseline, which most single-document sum-
marization systems fail to beat due to the nature of
news articles.
Since we are mainly interested in determining
to what extent our system is able to correctly iden-
tify the highlight sources, we chose precision and
recall as evaluation metrics. Precision is the per-
centage of all returned highlight sources which are
correct:
Precision =
|R ? T |
|R|
where R is the set of returned highlight sources
and T is the set of manually identified true sources
in the test set. Recall is defined as the percentage
of all true highlight sources that have been cor-
rectly identified by the system:
Recall =
|R ? T |
|T |
Precision and recall can be combined by using the
F-measure, which is the harmonic mean of the
two:
F-measure =
2(precision ? recall)
precision+ recall
Table 5 shows the results for both experiments
(fixed and thresh) as an average over the
folds. To determine whether the observed differ-
ences between two approaches are statistically sig-
nificant and not just caused by chance, we applied
statistical significance testing. As we did not want
to make the assumption that the score differences
are normally distributed, we used the bootstrap
method, a powerful non-parametric inference test
(Efron, 1979). Improvements at a confidence level
of more than 95% are marked with ???.
We can see that our approach consistently
outperforms the baseline, and most of the
improvements?in particular the F-measure
scores?are statistically significant at the 0.95
level. As to be expected, AURUM-fixed
achieves higher precision gains, while
AURUM-thresh achieves higher recall gains. In
addition, for 83.3 percent of the documents, our
system?s F-measure score is higher than or equal
to that of the baseline.
Figure 4 shows how far down in the documents
our system was able to correctly identify highlight
sources. Although the distribution is still heavily
skewed towards extracting sentences from the be-
ginning of the document, it is so to a lesser extent
than just using positional information as a prior;
see Figure 2.
In a third set of experiments we measured the
n-gram overlap between the sentences we have
identified as highlight sources and the actual story
highlights in the ground truth. To this end we use
420
System Recall Precision F-Measure Extracted
Baseline-fixed 40.69 44.14 42.35 240
AURUM-fixed 41.88 (+2.96%?) 45.40 (+2.85%) 43.57 (+2.88%?) 240
Baseline-thresh 42.91 41.82 42.36 269
AURUM-thresh 44.49 (+3.73%?) 43.30 (+3.53%) 43.88 (+3.59%?) 269
Table 5: Evaluation scores for the four extraction systems.
System ROUGE-1 ROUGE-2
Baseline-fixed 47.73 15.98
AURUM-fixed 49.20 (+3.09%?) 16.53 (+3.63%?)
Baseline-thresh 55.11 19.31
AURUM-thresh 56.73 (+2.96%?) 19.66 (+1.87%)
Table 6: ROUGE scores for AURUM-fixed, returning 4 sentences, and AURUM-thresh, returning
between 3 and 6 sentences.
Figure 4: Position of correctly extracted sources
by AURUM-thresh.
ROUGE (Lin, 2004), a recall-oriented evaluation
package for automatic summarization. ROUGE
operates essentially by comparing n-gram co-
occurrences between a candidate summary and a
number of reference summaries, and comparing
that number in turn to the total number of n-grams
in the reference summaries:
ROUGE-n =
?
S?References
?
ngramn?S
Match(ngramn)
?
S?References
?
ngramn?S
Count(ngramn)
Where n is the length of the n-gram, with lengths
of 1 and 2 words most commonly used in current
evaluations. ROUGE has become the standard tool
for evaluating automatic summaries, though it is
not the optimal system for this experiment. This is
due to the fact that it is geared towards a different
task?as ours is not automatic summarization per
se?and that ROUGE works best judging between
a number of candidate and model summaries. The
ROUGE scores are shown in Table 6.
Similar to the precision and recall scores, our
approach consistently outperforms the baseline,
with all but one difference being statistically sig-
nificant. Furthermore, in 76.2 percent of the doc-
uments, our system?s ROUGE-1 score is higher
than or equal to that of the baseline, and like-
wise for 85.2 percent of ROUGE-2 scores. Our
ROUGE scores and their improvements over the
baseline are comparable to the results of Svore
et al (2007), who optimized their approach to-
wards ROUGE and gained significant improve-
ments from using third-party data resources, both
of which our approach does not require.5
Table 7 shows the unique sentences extracted by
every system, which are the number of sentences
one system extracted correctly while the other did
not; this is thus an intuitive measure of how much
two systems differ. Essentially, a system could
simply pick the first two sentences of each arti-
cle and might thus achieve higher precision scores,
since it is less likely to return ?wrong? sentences.
However, if the scores are similar but there is a
difference in the number of unique sentences ex-
tracted, this means a system has gone beyond the
first 4 sentences and extracted others from deeper
down inside the text.
To get a better understanding of the impor-
tance of the individual features we examined the
weights as determined by YASMET. Table 8 con-
tains example output from the development sets,
with feature selection determined implicitly by
the weights the MaxEnt model assigns, where
non-discriminative features receive a low weight.
5Since the test data of (Svore et al, 2007) is not publicly
available we were unable to carry out a more detailed com-
parison.
421
Clearly, sentence position is of highest impor-
tance, while trigram ?trigger? phrases were quite
important as well. Simple bigrams continued to
be a good indicator of data value, as is often
the case. Proper nouns proved to be a valuable
pointer to new information, but mention of the
news agency?s name had less of an impact than
originally thought. Other particularly significant
features included temporal adjectives, superlatives
and all n-gram measures.
System Unique highlight sources Baseline
AURUM-fixed 11.8 7.2
AURUM-thresh 14.2 7.6
Table 7: Unique recall scores for the systems.
Feature Weight Feature Weight
Sentence pos. 10.23 Superlative 4.15
Proper noun 5.18 Temporal adj. 1.75
Trigger 3-gram 3.70 1-gram score 2.74
Spawn 2-gram 3.73 3-gram score 3.75
CNN mention 1.30 Trigger 2-gram 3.74
Table 8: Typical weights learned from the data.
5 Conclusions
A system for extracting essential facts from a news
article has been outlined here. Finding the data
nuggets deeper down is a cross between keyphrase
extraction and automatic summarization, a task
which requires more elaborate features and param-
eters.
Our approach emphasizes a wide variety of fea-
tures, including many linguistic features. These
features range from the standard (n-gram fre-
quency), through the essential (sentence position),
to the semantic (spawned phrases, verb classes and
types of adverbs).
Our experimental results show that a combina-
tion of statistical and linguistic features can lead
to competitive performance. Our approach not
only outperformed a notoriously difficult baseline
but also achieved similar performance to the ap-
proach of (Svore et al, 2007), without requiring
their third-party data resources.
On top of the statistically significant improve-
ments of our approach over the baseline, we see
value in the fact that it does not settle for sentences
from the beginning of the articles.
Most single-document automatic summariza-
tion systems use other features, ranging from
discourse structure to lexical chains. Consider-
ing Marcu?s conclusion (2003) that different ap-
proaches should be combined in order to create
a good summarization system (aided by machine
learning), there seems to be room yet to use ba-
sic linguistic cues. Seeing as how our linguis-
tic features?which are predominantly semantic?
aid in this task, it is quite possible that further in-
tegration will aid in both automatic summarization
and keyphrase extraction tasks.
References
Ken Barker and Nadia Cornacchia. 2000. Using noun
phrase heads to extract document keyphrases. In
Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the CSCSI,
AI 2000, volume 1882 of Lecture Notes in Artificial
Intelligence, pages 40?52.
Jaime G. Carbonell and Jade Goldstein. 1998. The
use of MMR, diversity-based reranking for reorder-
ing documents and producing summaries. In Pro-
ceedings of SIGIR 1998, pages 335?336.
Eugene Charniak. 2000. A maximum-entropy-
inspired parser. In Proceedings of the First Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 132?139.
Wesley T. Chuang and Jihoon Yang. 2000. Extracting
sentence segments for text summarization: A ma-
chine learning approach. In Proceedings of the 23rd
ACM SIGIR, pages 152?159.
Bonnie Dorr, David Zajic, and Richard Schwartz.
2003. Hedge Trimmer: A parse-and-trim approach
to headline generation. In Proceedings of the HLT-
NAACL 03 Summarization Workshop, pages 1?8.
Brad Efron. 1979. Bootstrap methods: Another look
at the jackknife. Annals of Statistics, 7(1):1?26.
Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet: An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database. MIT Press.
Jade Goldstein, Mark Kantrowitz, Vibhu Mittal, and
Jaime Carbonell. 1999. Summarizing text docu-
ments: Sentence selection and evaluation metrics.
In Proceedings of the 22nd annual international
ACM SIGIR on Research and Development in IR,
pages 121?128.
Anette Hulth. 2004. Combining Machine Learn-
ing and Natural Language Processing for Automatic
Keyword Extraction. Ph.D. thesis, Department of
Computer and Systems Sciences, Stockholm Uni-
versity.
Kevin Knight and Daniel Marcu. 2000. Statistics-
based summarization?step one: Sentence compres-
sion. In Proceedings of AAAI 2000, pages 703?710.
422
Bruce Krulwich and Chad Burkey. 1996. Learning
user information interests through the extraction of
semantically significant phrases. In M. Hearst and
H. Hirsh, editors, AAAI 1996 Spring Symposium on
Machine Learning in Information Access.
Daniel S. Leite, Lucia H.M. Rino, Thiago A.S. Pardo,
and Maria das Grac?as V. Nunes. 2007. Extrac-
tive automatic summarization: Does more linguis-
tic knowledge make a difference? In TextGraphs-2:
Graph-Based Algorithms for Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 17?24, Rochester, New York, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. ROUGE: a package for auto-
matic evaluation of summaries. In Proceedings of
the Workshop on Text Summarization Branches Out
(WAS 2004), Barcelona, Spain.
Robert Malouf. 2002. A comparison of algorithms
for maximum entropy parameter estimation. In Pro-
ceedings of the Sixth Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Learning (CoNLL-2002), pages 49?55.
Daniel Marcu. 1995. Discourse trees are good in-
dicators of importance in text. In Inderjeet Mani
and Mark T. Maybury, editors, Advances in Auto-
matic Text Summarization, pages 123?136, Cam-
bridge, MA. MIT Press.
Daniel Marcu. 2003. Automatic abstracting. In Ency-
clopedia of Library and Information Science, pages
245?256.
Kathleen McKeown, Judith Klavans, Vasileios Hatzi-
vassiloglou, Regina Barzilay, and Eleazar Eskin.
1999. Towards multidocument summarization by
reformulation: Progress and prospects. In Proceed-
ing of the 16th national conference of the American
Association for Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-1999),
pages 453?460.
Ani Nenkova. 2005. Automatic text summarization of
newswire: Lessons learned from the document un-
derstanding conference. In 20th National Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI 2005).
J. Larocca Neto, A.A. Freitas, and C.A.A Kaestner.
2002. Automatic text summarization using a ma-
chine learning approach. In XVI Brazilian Symp. on
Artificial Intelligence, volume 2057 of Lecture Notes
in Artificial Intelligence, pages 205?215.
J. J. Pollock and Antonio Zamora. 1975. Automatic
abstracting research at chemical abstracts service.
Journal of Chemical Information and Computer Sci-
ences, 15(4).
Krysta M. Svore, Lucy Vanderwende, and Christo-
pher J.C. Burges. 2007. Enhancing single-
document summarization by combining RankNet
and third-party sources. In Proceedings of the 2007
Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing and Computational Natural
Language Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL), pages 448?
457.
Gian Lorenzo Thione, Martin van den Berg, Livia
Polanyi, and Chris Culy. 2004. Hybrid text sum-
marization: Combining external relevance measures
with structural analysis. In Proceedings of the ACL-
04, pages 51?55.
Peter D. Turney. 2000. Learning algorithms
for keyphrase extraction. Information Retrieval,
2(4):303?336.
Ian H. Witten, Gordon W. Paynter, Eibe Frank, Carl
Gutwin, and Craig G. Nevill-Manning. 1999. Kea:
Practical automatic keyphrase extraction. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACM Conference on Digital Li-
braries (DL-99).
423
