Proceedings of the 2009 Workshop on Language Generation and Summarisation, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 59?62,
Suntec, Singapore, 6 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Visual Development Process for  
Automatic Generation of Digital Games Narrative Content  
 
Maria Fernanda Caropreso1 Diana Inkpen1 Shahzad Khan2 Fazel Keshtkar1 
 
1University of Ottawa 
{caropres,diana}@site.uottawa.ca 
akesh081@uottawa.ca 
2DISTIL Interactive 
s.khan2@distilinteractive.com 
 
Abstract 
Users of Natural Language Generation 
systems are required to have sophisti-
cated linguistic and sometimes even pro-
gramming knowledge, which has hin-
dered the adoption of this technology by 
individuals outside the computational 
linguistics research community. We have 
designed and implemented a visual envi-
ronment for creating and modifying NLG 
templates which requires no program-
ming ability and minimum linguistic 
knowledge. It allows specifying tem-
plates with any number of variables and 
dependencies between them. Internally, it 
uses SimpleNLG to provide the linguistic 
background knowledge. We tested the 
performance of our system in the context 
of an interactive simulation game. We 
describe the templates used for testing 
and show examples of sentences that our 
system generates from these templates. 
1 Introduction 
Natural Language Generation (NLG) is the proc-
ess of constructing outputs from non-linguistic 
inputs (Bateman, 2002) (Dalianis, 1996) (Reiter 
and Dale, 2000). 
NLG systems are useful in systems in which 
verbal or textual interaction with the users is re-
quired, as for example Gaming, Robotics, and 
Automatic Help Desks. Using NLG systems in-
stead of manually authored sentences would en-
able the software to adapt the expressed mes-
sages to the context of the conversation, and ex-
press past and future actions that may form this 
interaction. 
However, the use of the available NLG sys-
tems is far from simple. The most complete sys-
tems often require extensive linguistic knowl-
edge. Some systems also require programming 
knowledge. This knowledge cannot be assumed 
for the content and subject matter experts who 
are members of a development team. However, 
these individuals do need to interact with the 
NLG system in order to make use of the message 
generation capability to support their product 
development efforts. It is then necessary to pro-
vide them with an environment that will allow 
them to have access in a simpler way to the fea-
tures they need of a specific NLG system.  
There are two widely adopted approaches to 
NLG, the ?deep-linguistic? and the ?template-
based? (van Deemter et al, 2005). The deep-
linguistic approach attempts to build the sen-
tences up from a wholly logical representation. 
The template-based NLG systems provide scaf-
folding in the form of templates that contain a 
predefined structure and perhaps some of the 
final text.  
SimpleNLG is an NLG system that allows the 
user to specify a sentence by giving its content 
words and its grammatical roles (such as subject 
or verb). SimpleNLG also permits the user to 
specify several features for the main verb, such 
as: tense (present, past or future); whether or not 
it is subjective, progressive, passive or perfect; 
whether or not it is in interrogative form; wheth-
er or not it is negated; and which, if any, modal 
to use (i.e. could, must).While some of these fea-
tures affect only the verb, others affect the struc-
ture of the whole sentence, as for example when 
it has to be expressed in the passive voice.  
SimpleNLG is implemented as a java library 
and it requires java programming knowledge to 
be used. Because of the programming nature of 
SimpleNLG, it allows the user to define flexible 
templates by using programming variables in the 
sentence specification. The variable parts of the 
templates could be filled with different values. 
When templates are defined using SimpleNLG 
they keep all the functionality of the NLG system 
(for example, being able to modify the verb fea-
59
tures or the output format, and making use of the 
grammatical knowledge), while also allowing for 
the variable values to change. 
We have designed an environment that pro-
vides simple access to the use of the SimpleNLG 
system in order to generate sentences with vari-
able parts or templates. We developed this NLG 
Template Authoring Environment guided by the 
need of templates required for generating content 
for digital-based training games at DISTIL Inter-
active1. An early prototype of the tool, with a 
text-only interface, is presented in (Caropreso et 
al., 2009). 
In training games the player is typically pre-
sented with challenging situations and is encour-
aged to practice different strategies at dealing 
with them, in a safe, virtual environment. 
Through tips and feedback, the player develops 
an understanding of the problem and what are the 
successful ways of confronting it (French et al, 
1999). 
In training games there is usually an explosion 
of possible scenarios and situations. The narra-
tive should ideally reflect the past events and 
decisions taken. The considerable amount of tex-
tual information required in order to keep the 
feedback consistent with the updated narrative 
can be a burden on the game designers. It is then 
necessary to include templates that statically 
provide the basic information, combined with 
variable parts that adapt the narrative to the cir-
cumstances. 
The goal of the NLG Template Authoring En-
vironment was to provide the game content de-
signers with an accessible tool they could use to 
create and manipulate the NLG templates, and 
thus generate sentences that would support the 
narrative progression of the game.  
In the rest of this paper we describe our NLG 
Template Authoring Environment, its design, 
implementation and capabilities. We describe the 
templates that we used to test the system and we 
explain the user?s knowledge required in order to 
create them. We finish the paper presenting our 
conclusions and future work. 
2 Template Authoring Environment 
The NLG Template Authoring Environment 
asks for a model sentence and allows the user to 
mark the sections that are variable. For each va-
riable indicated, the user has to specify its type 
(i.e., personal pronoun, possessive pronoun, Em-
                                               
1
 http://www.distilinteractive.com/ 
ployee_type) and which values of that type are 
allowed (i.e., all personal pronouns, or only 
?she? and ?he?). Additionally, the user can also 
indicate dependencies between variable elements 
and information for the verb (i.e., tense, form, 
modals). The system then shows the user all the 
possible sentences that could be generated from 
the given template by calculating all the possible 
combinations of variable values that respect the 
specified dependencies and follow the verb se-
lections. The user can then refine the template by 
changing the given example or the specified va-
riables, dependencies or verb options, in order to 
adjust the generated sentences to the needs of the 
game.  
The NLG Template Authoring Environment 
has been implemented in Java. The SimpleNLG 
library was used to automatically generate cor-
rect sentences and provide the user with the pos-
sibility of exploring different attributes to the 
verb. It has a user-friendly intuitive graphical 
interface, part of which is shown in Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1: Graphical Interface 
 
 
After entering an example sentence and click-
ing on Analyze, the user indicates that a section 
is variable by giving a type or semantic class to 
the word in that section. The values of a semantic 
class are stored in a text file, which allows the 
user to create new semantic classes as needed. 
These files contain all the possible values and 
their respective syntactic information (person, 
number and gender) which will be used for 
agreement with the verb and for dependency be-
tween variables purposes. Restrictions to the val-
ues that a variable can take are also indicated 
60
through the graphical interface. Dependencies 
can be indicated only between already declared 
variables. The main verb and all its options are 
indicated in the section at the bottom of the 
graphical interface. 
In the template shown in Figure 1, the exam-
ple sentence is ?I walk my dog?, ?I? is a variable 
of type personal pronoun, ?walk? is the main 
verb, ?my? is a variable of type possessive pro-
noun, ?dog? is a variable of type animal and 
there is a dependency between ?I? and ?my? 
(which will allow to make their values agree in 
person, number and gender when generating all 
possible combinations). 
In Figure 1 we also see that the user has se-
lected the values ?present and past? for the verb 
tense and ?normal? and ?imperative? for the verb 
form. Therefore, four sentences will be generated 
for each combination of the variables? values 
(one sentence for each combination of the tense 
and form selections). All these sentences will 
have the verb negated and will use the perfect 
tenses (as indicated by the extra verb options). 
3 Testing the NLG Template Authoring 
Environment 
In order to verify the correct functioning of the 
NLG Template Authoring Environment, we se-
lected a set of sentence templates from the game 
?Business in Balance: Implementing an Envi-
ronmental Management System? from DISTIL 
Interactive. The templates were selected manu-
ally, while keeping in mind the need to cover 
different aspects, as for example the number and 
type of the variables and dependencies. The test-
ing of these examples covers for many more 
templates of the same type. The five selected 
sentence templates that form our testing set are 
displayed in Table 1 and are identified in the rest 
of this section by their reference number or order 
in the table.  
Table 1. Testing examples 
Ref.  
number 
Template 
1 The ACTORS (ME/US) could help 
DEPARTMENTS. 
2 The ACTORS IS/ARE now avail-
able to help. 
3 I/WE struggled because of 
MY/OUR lack of knowledge. 
4 I/WE AM/ARE pleased to report 
that I/WE completed the task 
TASKS. 
5 I/WE WAS/WERE not the great-
est choice for keeping things 
moving along quickly. 
 
In these template examples, we show in capi-
tals the variable parts of the templates. ACTORS, 
DEPARTMENTS and TASKS refer to one of several 
possible nouns previously defined for each of the 
classes with those names. The terms in capitals 
separated by a ?/? already display all the ac-
cepted values for that variable (for example 
I/WE represent a variable of type personal pro-
noun which could take only the selected values 
?I? or ?we? and the rest are filtered out). 
The first template example has two variables 
of predefined closed class nouns, ACTORS and 
DEPARTMENTS. The latter is independent, while 
the former has a dependency with a variable of 
type personal pronoun (in objective case form) 
that could only take the values ?me? or ?us?. 
This template is used in the game when the ac-
tor/character available to help is the same ac-
tor/character that is providing the information. 
This template can be successfully generated with 
our system by declaring the variables, restricting 
the values of the pronoun variable, and establish-
ing the dependency. When filtering non-valid 
sentences, the system will eliminate those cases 
where the value?s number of the variable ACTOR 
and the personal pronoun do not agree (i.e., it 
will only allow sentences that use ?me? if the 
actor is singular, and sentences that use ?us?, if 
the actor is plural). When creating this template, 
the user will have to be aware that the main verb 
is ?to help? and indicate ?could? as a modal to be 
used. This is important as otherwise SimpleNLG 
will modify the main verb in order to agree with 
the number of the subject. It is also necessary in 
case some of the options to change the main verb 
are specified. 
Two examples of the generated sentences us-
ing the first template are shown below. 
? The HR Training Manager (me) could 
help the Design Department. 
? The Implementation Team (us) could 
help the Deputy Management Represen-
tative. 
The second template is one that found a prob-
lem with our system and provided us with a rea-
son and an opportunity to improve it. This exam-
ple template also uses a variable of the closed 
class noun ACTOR together with the verb ?to be? 
in the present tense, agreeing in number with the 
actor. It might seem trivial to indicate this de-
pendency between the actor variable and the 
verb. But in our system the verbs are not treated 
as a regular variable (even when their values can 
be variable), but they are left for SimpleNLG to 
find the correct verb form. We needed then to 
61
inform SimpleNLG the number to which the 
verb should agree (by default it would assume 
singular). In this case we needed to inform Sim-
pleNLG that the number to agree with would be 
the number of the variable ACTOR. We also have 
to consider the case when the subject number 
does not depend on a variable and is plural, as 
for example in a template where the subject is 
?The members of DEPARTMENT?. To accom-
modate for these cases, we improved our system 
by asking the user to indicate in a pull down 
menu whether the template?s verb should agree 
with a variable value or it should be always used 
in plural or in singular. (This option is displayed 
in the bottom right corner of the interface and not 
shown in the partial screen shot on Figure 1.) 
The third template presents a dependency be-
tween a variable of type personal pronoun in the 
subjective case form, and a variable of type pos-
sessive pronoun in the complement. Both vari-
ables accept only a pair of their possible values, 
and the dependency between them establishes 
that they have to agree in person, number and 
gender. That is not a problem for our system. 
With respect to the verb, the user has to indicate 
the past tense as the only option.  
In the fourth and fifth template, there is a per-
sonal pronoun variable taking the place of the 
subject, which should agree in person and num-
ber with the verb. This is, as mentioned before, 
left to SimpleNLG to solve. As the subject in 
these cases consists of only a personal pronoun 
and SimpleNLG can detect this fact, no extra 
information is required. In the fourth template, 
there is also a dependency between the personal 
pronoun variable in the subject role and the per-
sonal pronoun variable in the complement. Once 
again the person and number of these two vari-
ables have to agree, and the sentences not satis-
fying this restriction are filtered out by our sys-
tem. Finally, for the fifth template the user is 
forced to specify that the verb ?to be? has to be 
used in its past tense. 
4 Conclusions and Future Work 
We have identified the need for an NLG Tem-
plate Authoring Environment that allows game 
content designers without linguistic and pro-
gramming background to experiment with and 
finally create language templates.  
We have designed and implemented a system 
that allows the user to specify an example sen-
tence together with variables, its dependencies, 
and verb options that complete the template. This 
system shows the user all the possible sentences 
that could be generated with the specified tem-
plate. It can be used to refine the template until it 
satisfies the user?s needs.  
The system makes use of the SimpleNLG java 
library which provides us with correct sentences 
and the possibility of including many verb varia-
tions, such as tense, form and modals. 
We have evaluated our NLG Template Au-
thoring Environment in a set of sentence tem-
plates from a digital-based interactive simulation 
game that covered different characteristics.  
We have implemented a user-friendly intuitive 
graphical interface for the system. The conven-
ience of use of this interface will be evaluated in 
the context of the development of a new game. 
Acknowledgements 
This work is supported by the Ontario Centres of 
Excellence (OCE) and Precarn Incorporated. 
References 
J. A. Bateman. 2002. Natural Language Generation: 
an introduction and open-ended review of the state 
of the art. 
M. F. Caropreso, D. Inkpen, S. Khan and F. Keshtkar. 
2009. Novice Friendly Natural Language Genera-
tion Template Authoring Environment. Proceeding 
of the Canadian Artificial Intelligence Conference 
2009, Kelowna, BC, pp.195-198. 
H. Dalianis. 1996. Concise Natural Language Genera-
tion from Formal Specifications, Ph.D. Thesis, 
(Teknologie Doktorsavhandling), Department of 
Computer and Systems Sciences, Royal Institute of 
Technology/ Stockholm University. Report Series 
No. 96-008, ISSN 1101-8526, SRN SU-
KTH/DSV/R 96/8 SE.  
K. van Deemter, E. Krahmer and M. Theune. 2005. 
Real versus Template-Based Natural Language 
Generation: A False Opposition? In Computational 
Linguistics, 31(1): 15-24.  
D. French, C. Hale, C. Johnson and G. Farr. 1999. 
Internet Based Learning: An introduction and 
framework for higher education and business. Lon-
don, UK: Kogan Page.  
E. Reiter and R. Dale. 2000. Building Natural Lan-
guage Generation Systems (Studies in Natural 
Language Processing), Cambridge University 
Press. 
E. Reiter. 2007. SimpleNlg package: 
http://www.csd.abdn.ac.uk/ereiter/simplnlg 
62
