Proceedings of the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and the 4th IJCNLP of the AFNLP, pages 879?887,
Suntec, Singapore, 2-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Comparing Objective and Subjective Measures of Usability
in a Human-Robot Dialogue System
Mary Ellen Foster and Manuel Giuliani and Alois Knoll
Informatik VI: Robotics and Embedded Systems
Technische Universita?t Mu?nchen
Boltzmannstra?e 3, 85748 Garching bei Mu?nchen, Germany
{foster,giuliani,knoll}@in.tum.de
Abstract
We present a human-robot dialogue sys-
tem that enables a robot to work together
with a human user to build wooden con-
struction toys. We then describe a study in
which na??ve subjects interacted with this
system under a range of conditions and
then completed a user-satisfaction ques-
tionnaire. The results of this study pro-
vide a wide range of subjective and ob-
jective measures of the quality of the in-
teractions. To assess which aspects of the
interaction had the greatest impact on the
users? opinions of the system, we used a
method based on the PARADISE evalua-
tion framework (Walker et al, 1997) to de-
rive a performance function from our data.
The major contributors to user satisfac-
tion were the number of repetition requests
(which had a negative effect on satisfac-
tion), the dialogue length, and the users?
recall of the system instructions (both of
which contributed positively).
1 Introduction
Evaluating the usability of a spoken language dia-
logue system generally requires a large-scale user
study, which can be a time-consuming process
both for the experimenters and for the experimen-
tal subjects. In fact, it can be difficult even to
define what the criteria are for evaluating such a
system (cf. Novick, 1997). In recent years, tech-
niques have been introduced that are designed to
predict user satisfaction based on more easily mea-
sured properties of an interaction such as dialogue
length and speech-recognition error rate. The de-
sign of such performance methods for evaluating
dialogue systems is still an area of open research.
The PARADISE framework (PARAdigm for
DIalogue System Evaluation; Walker et al (1997))
describes a method for using data to derive a per-
formance function that predicts user-satisfaction
scores from the results on other, more easily com-
puted measures. PARADISE uses stepwise mul-
tiple linear regression to model user satisfaction
based on measures representing the performance
dimensions of task success, dialogue quality, and
dialogue efficiency, and has been applied to a wide
range of systems (e.g., Walker et al, 2000; Litman
and Pan, 2002; Mo?ller et al, 2008). If the result-
ing performance function can be shown to predict
user satisfaction as a function of other, more eas-
ily measured system properties, it will be widely
applicable: in addition to making it possible to
evaluate systems based on automatically available
data from log files without the need for extensive
experiments with users, for example, such a per-
formance function can be used in an online, incre-
mental manner to adapt system behaviour to avoid
entering a state that is likely to reduce user satis-
faction, or can be used as a reward function in a
reinforcement-learning scenario (Walker, 2000).
Automated evaluation metrics that rate sys-
tem behaviour based on automatically computable
properties have been developed in a number of
other fields: widely used measures include BLEU
(Papineni et al, 2002) for machine translation and
ROUGE (Lin, 2004) for summarisation, for exam-
ple. When employing any such metric, it is cru-
cial to verify that the predictions of the automated
evaluation process agree with human judgements
of the important aspects of the system output. If
not, the risk arises that the automated measures do
not capture the behaviour that is actually relevant
for the human users of a system. For example,
Callison-Burch et al (2006) presented a number of
879
counter-examples to the claim that BLEU agrees
with human judgements. Also, Foster (2008) ex-
amined a range of automated metrics for evalua-
tion generated multimodal output and found that
few agreed with the preferences expressed by hu-
man judges.
In this paper, we apply a PARADISE-style pro-
cess to the results of a user study of a human-robot
dialogue system. We build models to predict the
results on a set of subjective user-satisfaction mea-
sures, based on objective measures that were either
gathered automatically from the system logs or de-
rived from the video recordings of the interactions.
The results indicate that the most significant con-
tributors to user satisfaction were the number of
system turns in the dialogues, the users? ability to
recall the instructions given by the robot, and the
number of times that the user had to ask for in-
structions to be repeated. The former two mea-
sures were positively correlated with user satisfac-
tion, while the latter had a negative impact on user
satisfaction; however the correlation in all cases
was relatively low. At the end of the paper, we
discuss possible reasons for these results and pro-
pose other measures that might have a larger effect
on users? judgements.
2 Task-Based Human-Robot Dialogue
This study makes use of the JAST human-robot
dialogue system (Rickert et al, 2007) which sup-
ports multimodal human-robot collaboration on a
joint construction task. The user and the robot
work together to assemble wooden construction
toys on a common workspace, coordinating their
actions through speech, gestures, and facial dis-
plays. The robot (Figure 1) consists of a pair
of manipulator arms with grippers, mounted in
a position to resemble human arms, and an an-
imatronic talking head (van Breemen, 2005) ca-
pable of producing facial expressions, rigid head
motion, and lip-synchronised synthesised speech.
The system can interact in English or German.
The robot is able to manipulate objects in the
workspace and to perform simple assembly tasks.
In the system that was used in the current study,
the robot instructs the user on building a partic-
ular compound object, explaining the necessary
assembly steps and retrieving pieces as required,
with the user performing the actual assembly ac-
tions. To make joint action necessary for success
in the assembly task, the workspace is divided into
Figure 1: The JAST dialogue robot
SYSTEM First we will build a windmill. Okay?
USER Okay.
SYSTEM To make a windmill, we must make a
snowman.
SYSTEM [picking up and holding out red cube]
To make a snowman, insert the green bolt
through the end of this red cube and screw
it into the blue cube.
USER [takes cube, performs action] Okay.
SYSTEM [picking up and holding out a small
slat] To make a windmill, insert the yellow
bolt through the middle of this short slat and
the middle of another short slat and screw it
into the snowman.
USER [takes slat, performs action] Okay.
SYSTEM Very good!
Figure 2: Sample human-robot dialogue
880
(a) Windmill (b) Snowman (c) L Shape (d) Railway signal
Figure 3: The four target objects used in the experiment
two areas?one belonging to the robot and one to
the user?so that the robot must hand over some
pieces to the user. Figure 2 shows a sample dia-
logue in which the system explains to the user how
to build an object called a ?windmill?, which has a
sub-component called a ?snowman?.
3 Experiment Design
The human-robot system was evaluated via a user
study in which subjects interacted with the com-
plete system; all interactions were in German. As
a between-subjects factor, we manipulated two as-
pects of the generated output: the strategy used by
the dialogue manager to explain a plan to the user,
and the type of referring expressions produced by
the system. Foster et al (2009) give the details
of these factors and describes the effects of each
individual manipulation. In this paper, we concen-
trate on the relationships among the different fac-
tors that were measured during the study: the effi-
ciency and quality of the dialogues, the users? suc-
cess at building the required objects and at learn-
ing the construction plans for new objects, and the
users? subjective reactions to the system.
3.1 Subjects
43 subjects (27 male) took part in this experi-
ment; the results of one additional subject were
discarded due to technical problems with the sys-
tem. The mean age of the subjects was 24.5, with a
minimum of 14 and a maximum of 55. Of the sub-
jects who indicated an area of study, the two most
common areas were Informatics (12 subjects) and
Mathematics (10). On a scale of 1?5, subjects
gave a mean assessment of their knowledge of
computers at 3.4, of speech-recognition systems
at 2.3, and of human-robot systems at 2.0. The
subjects were compensated for their participation
in the experiment.
3.2 Scenario
In this experiment, each subject built the same
three objects in collaboration with the system,
always in the same order. The first target
was a ?windmill? (Figure 3a), which has a sub-
component called a ?snowman? (Figure 3b). Once
the windmill was completed, the system then
walked the user through building an ?L shape?
(Figure 3c). Finally, the robot instructed the user
to build a ?railway signal? (Figure 3d), which com-
bines an L shape with a snowman. During the con-
struction of the railway signal, the system asked
the user if they remembered how to build a snow-
man and an L shape. If the user did not remember,
the system explained the building process again; if
they did remember, the system simply told them to
build another one.
3.3 Dependent Variables
We gathered a wide range of dependent measures:
objective measures derived from the system logs
and video recordings, as well as subjective mea-
sures based on the users? own ratings of their ex-
perience interacting with the system.
3.3.1 Objective Measures
We collected a range of objective measures from
the log files and videos of the interactions. Like
Litman and Pan (2002), we divided our objective
measures into three categories based on those used
in the PARADISE framework: dialogue efficiency,
dialogue quality, and task success.
The dialogue efficiency measures concentrated
on the timing of the interaction: the time taken to
complete the three construction tasks, the number
of system turns required for the complete interac-
tion, and the mean time taken by the system to re-
spond to the user?s requests.
We considered four measures of dialogue qual-
ity. The first two measures looked specifically for
signs of problems in the interaction, using data au-
881
tomatically extracted from the logs: the number of
times that the user asked the system to repeat its
instructions, and the number of times that the user
failed to take an object that the robot attempted to
hand over. The other two dialogue quality mea-
sures were computed based on the video record-
ings: the number of times that the user looked at
the robot, and the percentage of the total inter-
action that they spent looking at the robot. We
considered these gaze-based measures to be mea-
sures of dialogue quality since it has previously
been shown that, in this sort of task-based interac-
tion where there is a visually salient object, par-
ticipants tend to look at their partner more often
when there is a problem in the interaction (e.g.,
Argyle and Graham, 1976).
The task success measures addressed user suc-
cess in the two main tasks undertaken in these in-
teractions: assembling the target objects following
the robot?s instructions, and learning and remem-
bering to make a snowman and an L shape. We
measured task success in two ways, correspond-
ing to these two main tasks. The user?s success in
the overall assembly task was assessed by count-
ing the proportion of target objects that were as-
sembled as intended (i.e., as in Figure 3), which
was judged based on the video recordings. To
test whether the subjects had learned how to build
the sub-components that were required more than
once (the snowman and the L shape), we recorded
whether they said yes or no when they were asked
if they remembered each of these components dur-
ing the construction of the railway signal.
3.3.2 Subjective Measures
In addition to the above objective measures, we
also gathered a range of subjective measures. Be-
fore the interaction, we asked subjects to rate their
current level on a set of 22 emotions (Ortony
et al, 1988) on a scale from 1 to 4; the subjects
then rated their level on the same emotional scales
again after the interaction. After the interaction,
the subjects also filled out a user-satisfaction ques-
tionnaire, which was based on that used in the user
evaluation of the COMIC dialogue system (White
et al, 2005), with modifications to address spe-
cific aspects of the current dialogue system and the
experimental manipulations in this study. There
were 47 items in total, each of which requested
that the user choose their level of agreement with
a given statement on a five-point Likert scale. The
items were divided into the following categories:
Mean (Stdev) Min Max
Length (sec) 305.1 (54.0) 195.2 488.4
System turns 13.4 (1.73) 11 18
Response time (sec) 2.79 (1.13) 1.27 7.21
Table 1: Dialogue efficiency results
Opinion of the robot as a partner 21 items ad-
dressing the ease with which subjects were
able to interact with the robot
Instruction quality 6 items specifically address-
ing the quality of the assembly instructions
given by the robot
Task success 11 items asking the user to rate how
well they felt they performed on the various
assembly tasks
Feelings of the user 9 items asking users to rate
their feelings while using the system
At the end of the questionnaire, subjects were also
invited to give free-form comments.
4 Results
In this section, we present the results of each of
the individual dependent measures; in the follow-
ing section, we examine the relationship among
the different types of measures. These results are
based on the data from 40 subjects: we excluded
results from two subjects for whom the video data
was not clear, and from one additional subject who
appeared to be ?testing? the system rather than
making a serious effort to interact with it.
4.1 Objective Measures
Dialogue efficiency The results on the dialogue
efficiency measures are shown in Table 1. The
average subject took 305.1 seconds?that is, just
over five minutes?to build all three of the objects,
and an average dialogue took 13 system turns to
complete. When a user made a request, the mean
delay before the beginning of the system response
was about three seconds, although for one user this
time was more than twice as long. This response
delay resulted from two factors. First, prepar-
ing long system utterances with several referring
expressions (such as the third and fourth system
turns in Figure 2) takes some time; second, if a
user made a request during a system turn (i.e., a
?barge-in? attempt), the system was not able to re-
spond until the current turn was completed.
882
Mean (Stdev) Min Max
Repetition requests 1.86 (1.79) 0 6
Failed hand-overs 1.07 (1.35) 0 6
Looks at the robot 23.55 (8.21) 14 50
Time looking at robot (%) 27 (8.6) 12 51
Table 2: Dialogue quality results
These three measures of efficiency were cor-
related with each other: the correlation between
length and turns was 0.38; between length and re-
sponse time 0.47; and between turns and response
time 0.19 (all p < 0.0001).
Dialogue quality Table 2 shows the results for
the dialogue quality measures: the two indica-
tions of problems, and the two measures of the
frequency with which the subjects looked at the
robot?s head. On average, a subject asked for an
instruction to be repeated nearly two times per
interaction, while failed hand-overs occurred just
over once per interaction; however, as can be seen
from the standard-deviation values, these mea-
sures varied widely across the data. In fact, 18
subjects never failed to take an object from the
robot when it was offered, while one subject did so
five times and one six times. Similarly, 11 subjects
never asked for any repetitions, while five subjects
asked for repetitions five or more times.1 On aver-
age, the subjects in this study spent about a quarter
of the interaction looking at the robot head, and
changed their gaze to the robot 23.5 times over
the course of the interaction. Again, there was a
wide range of results for both of these measures:
15 subjects looked at the robot fewer than 20 times
during the interaction, 20 subjects looked at the
robot between 20 to 30 times, while 5 subjects
looked at the robot more than 30 times.
The two measures that count problems were
mildly correlated with each other (R2 = 0.26, p <
0.001), as were the two measures of looking at the
robot (R2 = 0.13, p < 0.05); there was no correla-
tion between the two classes of measures.
Task success Table 3 shows the success rate for
assembling each object in the sequence. Objects
in italics represent sub-components, as follows:
the first snowman was constructed as part of the
windmill, while the second formed part of the rail-
way signal; the first L-shape was a goal in itself,
1The requested repetition rate was significantly affected
by the description strategy used by the dialogue manager; see
Foster et al (2009) for details.
Object Rate Memory
Snowman 0.76
Windmill 0.55
L shape 0.90
L shape 0.90 0.88
Snowman 0.86 0.70
Railway signal 0.71
Overall 0.72 0.79
Table 3: Task success results
while the second was also part of the process of
building the railway signal. The Rate column indi-
cates subjects? overall success at building the rel-
evant component?for example, 55% of the sub-
jects built the windmill correctly, while both of
the L-shapes were built with 90% accuracy. For
the second occurrence of the snowman and the L-
shape, the Memory column indicates the percent-
age of subjects who claimed to remember how to
build it when asked. The Overall row at the bottom
indicates subjects? overall success rate at building
the three main target objects (windmill, L shape,
railway signal): on average, a subject built about
two of the three objects correctly.
The overall correct-assembly rate was corre-
lated with the overall rate of remembering objects:
R2 = 0.20, p < 0.005. However, subjects who said
that they did remember how to build a snowman or
an L shape the second time around were no more
likely to do it correctly than those who said that
they did not remember.
4.2 Subjective Measures
Two types of subjective measures were gath-
ered during this study: responses on the user-
satisfaction questionnaire, and self-assessment of
emotions. Table 4 shows the mean results for each
category from the user-satisfaction questionnaire
across all of the subjects, in all cases on a 5-point
Likert scale. The subjects in this study gave a
generally positive assessment of their interactions
with the system?with a mean overall satisfaction
score of 3.75?and rated their perceived task suc-
cess particularly highly, with a mean score of 4.1.
To analyse the emotional data, we averaged all
of the subjects? emotional self-ratings before and
after the experiment, counting negative emotions
on an inverse scale, and then computed the differ-
ence between the two means. Table 5 shows the re-
sults from this analysis; note that this value was as-
sessed on a 1?4 scale. While the mean emotional
883
Question category Mean (Stdev)
Robot as partner 3.63 (0.65)
Instruction quality 3.69 (0.71)
Task success 4.10 (0.68)
Feelings 3.66 (0.61)
Overall 3.75 (0.57)
Table 4: User-satisfaction questionnaire results
Mean (Stdev) Min Max
Before the study 2.99 (0.32) 2.32 3.68
After the study 3.05 (0.32) 2.32 3.73
Change +0.06 (0.24) ?0.55 +0.45
Table 5: Mean emotional assessments
score across all of the subjects did not change over
the course of the experiment, the ratings of indi-
vidual subjects did show larger changes. As shown
in the final row of the table, one subject?s mean rat-
ing decreased by 0.55 over the course of the inter-
action, while that of another subject increased by
0.45. There was a slight correlation between the
subjects? description of their emotional state after
the experiment and their responses to the question-
naire items asking for feelings about the interac-
tion: R2 = 0.14, p < 0.01.
5 Building Performance Functions
In the preceding section, we presented results on a
number of objective and subjective measures, and
also examined the correlation among measures of
the same type. The results on the objective mea-
sures varied widely across the subjects; also, the
subjects generally rated their experience of using
the system positively, but again with some varia-
tion. In this section, we examine the relationship
among measures of different types in order to de-
termine which of the objective measures had the
largest effect on users? subjective reactions to the
dialogue system.
To determine the relationship among the fac-
tors, we employed the procedure used in the
PARADISE evaluation framework (Walker et al,
1997). The PARADISE model uses stepwise mul-
tiple linear regression to predict subjective user
satisfaction based on measures representing the
performance dimensions of task success, dialogue
quality, and dialogue efficiency, resulting in a pre-
dictor function of the following form:
Satisfaction =
n
?
i=1
wi ?N (mi)
The mi terms represent the value of each measure,
while the N function transforms each measure
into a normal distribution using z-score normali-
sation. Stepwise linear regression produces coef-
ficients (wi) describing the relative contribution of
each predictor to the user satisfaction. If a predic-
tor does not contribute significantly, its wi value is
zero after the stepwise process.
Using stepwise linear regression, we computed
a predictor function for each of the subjective mea-
sures that we gathered during our study: the mean
score for each of the individual user-satisfaction
categories (Table 4), the mean score across the
whole questionnaire (the last line of Table 4), as
well as the difference between the users? emo-
tional states before and after the study (the last line
of Table 5). We included all of the objective mea-
sures from Section 4.1 as initial predictors.
The resulting predictor functions are shown in
Table 6. The following abbreviations are used for
the factors that occur in the table: Rep for the num-
ber of repetition requests, Turns for the number of
system turns, Len for the length of the dialogue,
and Mem for the subjects? memory for the com-
ponents that were built twice. The R2 column in-
dicates the percentage of the variance that is ex-
plained by the performance function, while the
Significance column gives significance values for
each term in the function.
Although the R2 values for the predictor func-
tions in Table 6 are generally quite low, indicat-
ing that the functions do not explain most of the
variance in the data, the factors that remain after
stepwise regression still provide an indication as
to which of the objective measures had an effect
on users? opinions of the system. In general, users
who had longer interactions with the system (in
terms of system turns) and who said that they re-
membered the robot?s instructions tended to give
the system higher scores, while users who asked
for more instructions to be repeated tended to give
it lower scores; for the robot-as-partner questions,
the length of the dialogue in seconds also made a
slight negative contribution. None of the other ob-
jective factors contributed significantly to any of
the predictor functions.
6 Discussion
That the factors included in Table 6 were the most
significant contributors to user satisfaction is not
surprising. If a user asks for instructions to be re-
884
Measure Function R2 Significance
Robot as partner 3.60+0.53?N (Turns)?0.39?N (Rep)?0.18?N (Len) 0.12 Turns: p < 0.01,
Rep: p < 0.05,
Length: p? 0.17
Instruction quality 3.66?0.22?N (Rep) 0.081 Rep: p < 0.05
Task success 4.07+0.20?N (Mem) 0.058 Mem: p? 0.07
Feelings 3.63+0.34?N (Turns)?0.32?N (Rep) 0.044 Turns: p? 0.06, Rep:
p? 0.08
Overall 3.73?0.36?N (Rep)+0.31?N (Turns) 0.062 Rep: p < 0.05,
Turns: p? 0.06
Emotion change 0.07+0.14?N (Turns)+0.11?N (Mem)?0.090?N (Rep) 0.20 Turns: p < 0.05,
Mem: p < 0.01,
Rep: p? 0.17
Table 6: Predictor functions
peated, this is a clear indication of a problem in
the dialogue; similarly, users who remembered the
system?s instructions were equally clearly having
a relatively successful interaction.
In the current study, increased dialogue length
had a positive contribution to user satisfaction; this
contrasts with results such as those of Litman and
Pan (2002), who found that increased dialogue
length was associated with decreased user satis-
faction. We propose two possible explanations for
this difference. First, the system analysed by Lit-
man and Pan (2002) was an information-seeking
dialogue system, in which efficient access to the
information is an important criterion. The current
system, on the other hand, has the goal of joint task
execution, and pure efficiency is a less compelling
measure of dialogue quality in this setting. Sec-
ond, it is possible that the sheer novelty factor of
interacting with a fully-embodied humanoid robot
affected people?s subjective responses to the sys-
tem, so that subjects who had longer interactions
also enjoyed the experience more. Support for this
explanation is provided by the fact that dialogue
length was only a significant factor in the more
?subjective? parts of the questionnaire, but did not
have a significant impact on the users? judgements
about instruction quality or task success. Other
studies of human-robot dialogue systems have also
had similar results: for example, the subjects in the
study described by Sidner et al (2005) who used
a robot that moved while talking reported higher
levels of engagement in the interaction, and also
tended to have longer conversations with the robot.
While the predictor functions give useful in-
sights into the relative contribution of the objective
measures to the subjective user satisfaction, the
R2 values are generally lower than those found in
other PARADISE-style evaluations. For example,
Walker et al (1998) reported an R2 value of 0.38,
the values reported by Walker et al (2000) on the
training sets ranged from 0.39 to 0.56, Litman and
Pan (2002) reported an R2 value of 0.71, while
the R2 values reported by Mo?ller et al (2008)
for linear regression models similar to those pre-
sented here were between 0.22 and 0.57. The low
R2 values from this analysis clearly suggest that,
while the factors included in Table 6 did affect
users? opinions?particularly their opinion of the
robot as a partner and the change in their reported
emotional state?the users? subjective judgements
were also affected by factors other than those cap-
tured by the objective measures considered here.
In most of the previous PARADISE-style stud-
ies, measures addressing the performance of the
automated speech-recognition system and other
input-processing components were included in the
models. For example, the factors listed by Mo?ller
et al (2008) include several measures of word er-
ror rate and of parsing accuracy. However, the sce-
nario that was used in the current study required
minimal speech input from the user (see Figure 2),
so we did not include any such input-processing
factors in our models.
Other objective factors that might be relevant
for predicting user satisfaction in the current study
include a range of non-verbal behaviour from the
users. For example, the user?s reaction time to in-
structions from the robot, the time the users need
to adapt to the robot?s movements during hand-
over actions (Huber et al, 2008), or the time taken
for the actual assembly of the objects. Also, other
measures of the user?s gaze behaviour might be
885
useful: more global measures such as how often
the users look at the robot arms or at the objects on
the table, as well as more targeted measures exam-
ining factors such as the user?s gaze and other be-
haviour during and after different types of system
outputs. In future studies, we will also gather data
on these additional non-verbal behaviours, and we
expect to find higher correlations with subjective
judgements.
7 Conclusions and Future Work
We have presented the JAST human-robot dia-
logue system and described a user study in which
the system instructed users to build a series of tar-
get objects out of wooden construction toys. This
study resulted in a range of objective and subjec-
tive measures, which were used to derive perfor-
mance functions in the style of the PARADISE
evaluation framework. Three main factors were
found to affect the users? subjective ratings: longer
dialogues and higher recall performance were as-
sociated with increased user satisfaction, while di-
alogues with more repetition requests tended to be
associated with lower satisfaction scores. The ex-
plained variance of the performance functions was
generally low, suggesting that factors other than
those measured in this study contributed to the
user satisfaction scores; we have suggested several
such factors.
The finding that longer dialogues were associ-
ated with higher user satisfaction disagrees with
the results of many previous PARADISE-style
evaluation studies. However, it does confirm and
extend the results of previous studies specifically
addressing interactions between users and embod-
ied agents: as in the previous studies, the users in
this case seem to view the agent as a social entity
with whom they enjoy having a conversation.
A newer version of the JAST system is currently
under development and will shortly undergo a user
evaluation. This new system will support an ex-
tended set of interactions where both agents know
the target assembly plan, and will will also in-
corporate enhanced components for vision, object
recognition, and goal inference. When evaluat-
ing this new system, we will include similar mea-
sures to those described here to enable the eval-
uations of the two systems to be compared. We
will also gather additional objective measures in
order to measure their influence on the subjective
results. These additional measures will include
those mentioned at the end of the preceding sec-
tion, as well as measures targeted at the revised
scenario and the updated system capabilities?for
example, an additional dialogue quality measure
will assess how often the goal-inference system
was able to detect and correctly respond to an error
by the user.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Euro-
pean Commission through the JAST2 (IST-
FP6-003747-IP) and INDIGO3 (IST-FP6-045388)
projects. Thanks to Pawel Dacka for his help in
running the experiment and analysing the data.
References
M. Argyle and J. A. Graham. 1976. The Cen-
tral Europe experiment: Looking at persons and
looking at objects. Environmental Psychology
and Nonverbal Behavior, 1(1):6?16. doi:10.
1007/BF01115461.
A. J. N. van Breemen. 2005. iCat: Experimenting
with animabotics. In Proceedings of the AISB
2005 Creative Robotics Symposium.
C. Callison-Burch, M. Osborne, and P. Koehn.
2006. Re-evaluating the role of BLEU in ma-
chine translation research. In Proceedings of
EACL 2006. ACL Anthology E06-1032.
M. E. Foster. 2008. Automated metrics that agree
with human judgements on generated output for
an embodied conversational agent. In Proceed-
ings of INLG 2008. ACL Anthology W08-1113.
M. E. Foster, M. Giuliani, A. Isard, C. Matheson,
J. Oberlander, and A. Knoll. 2009. Evaluating
description and reference strategies in a coop-
erative human-robot dialogue system. In Pro-
ceedings of IJCAI 2009.
M. Huber, M. Rickert, A. Knoll, T. Brandt, and
S. Glasauer. 2008. Human-robot interaction in
handing-over tasks. In Proceedings of IEEE
RO-MAN 2008. doi:10.1109/ROMAN.2008.
4600651.
C. Y. Lin. 2004. ROUGE: A package for auto-
matic evaluation of summaries. In Proceedings
of the ACL 2004 Workshop on Text Summariza-
tion. ACL Anthology W04-1013.
2http://www.euprojects-jast.net/
3http://www.ics.forth.gr/indigo/
886
D. J. Litman and S. Pan. 2002. Designing and
evaluating an adaptive spoken dialogue sys-
tem. User Modeling and User-Adapted Inter-
action, 12(2?3):111?137. doi:10.1023/A:
1015036910358.
S. Mo?ller, K.-P. Engelbrecht, and R. Schleicher.
2008. Predicting the quality and usability of
spoken dialogue systems. Speech Communica-
tion, 50:730?744. doi:10.1016/j.specom.
2008.03.001.
D. G. Novick. 1997. What is effective-
ness? In Working notes, CHI ?97 Work-
shop on HCI Research and Practice Agenda
Based on Human Needs and Social Responsi-
bility. http://www.cs.utep.edu/novick/
papers/eff.chi.html.
A. Ortony, G. L. Clore, and A. Collins. 1988. The
Cognitive Structure of Emotions. Cambridge
University Press.
K. Papineni, S. Roukos, T. Ward, and W.-J. Zhu.
2002. BLEU: A method for automatic evalua-
tion of machine translation. In Proceedings of
ACL 2002. ACL Anthology P02-1040.
M. Rickert, M. E. Foster, M. Giuliani, T. By,
G. Panin, and A. Knoll. 2007. Integrating lan-
guage, vision and action for human robot dialog
systems. In Proceedings of HCI International
2007. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-73281-5_
108.
C. L. Sidner, C. Lee, C. D. Kidd, N. Lesh, and
C. Rich. 2005. Explorations in engagement
for humans and robots. Artificial Intelligence,
166(1?2):140?164. doi:10.1016/j.artint.
2005.03.005.
M. Walker, C. Kamm, and D. Litman. 2000. To-
wards developing general models of usability
with PARADISE. Natural Language Engineer-
ing, 6(3?4):363?377.
M. A. Walker. 2000. An application of reinforce-
ment learning to dialogue strategy selection in
a spoken dialogue system for email. Journal of
Artificial Intelligence Research, 12:387?416.
M. A. Walker, J. Fromer, G. D. Fabbrizio, C. Mes-
tel, and D. Hindle. 1998. What can I say?: Eval-
uating a spoken language interface to email.
In Proceedings of CHI 1998. doi:10.1145/
274644.274722.
M. A. Walker, D. J. Litman, C. A. Kamm, and
A. Abella. 1997. PARADISE: A framework for
evaluating spoken dialogue agents. In Proceed-
ings of ACL/EACL 1997. ACL Anthology P97-
1035.
M. White, M. E. Foster, J. Oberlander, and
A. Brown. 2005. Using facial feedback to en-
hance turn-taking in a multimodal dialogue sys-
tem. In Proceedings of HCI International 2005.
887
Situated Reference in a Hybrid Human-Robot Interaction System
Manuel Giuliani1 and Mary Ellen Foster2 and Amy Isard3
Colin Matheson3 and Jon Oberlander3 and Alois Knoll1
1Informatik VI: Robotics and Embedded Systems, Technische Universita?t Mu?nchen
2School of Mathematical and Computer Sciences, Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh
3Institute for Communicating and Collaborative Systems, School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
Abstract
We present the situated reference genera-
tion module of a hybrid human-robot in-
teraction system that collaborates with a
human user in assembling target objects
from a wooden toy construction set. The
system contains a sub-symbolic goal in-
ference system which is able to detect the
goals and errors of humans by analysing
their verbal and non-verbal behaviour. The
dialogue manager and reference genera-
tion components then use situated refer-
ences to explain the errors to the human
users and provide solution strategies. We
describe a user study comparing the results
from subjects who heard constant refer-
ences to those who heard references gener-
ated by an adaptive process. There was no
difference in the objective results across
the two groups, but the subjects in the
adaptive condition gave higher subjective
ratings to the robot?s abilities as a conver-
sational partner. An analysis of the objec-
tive and subjective results found that the
main predictors of subjective user satisfac-
tion were the user?s performance at the as-
sembly task and the number of times they
had to ask for instructions to be repeated.
1 Introduction
When two humans jointly carry out a mutual task
for which both know the plan?for example, as-
sembling a new shelf?it frequently happens that
one makes an error, and the other has to assist
and to explain what the error was and how it can
be solved. Humans are skilled at spotting errors
committed by another, as well as errors which
they made themselves. Recent neurological stud-
ies have shown that error monitoring?i.e., ob-
serving the errors made by oneself or by others?
plays an important role in joint activity. For ex-
ample, Bekkering et al (2009) have demonstrated
that humans show the same brain activation pat-
terns when they make an error themselves and
when they observe someone else making an error.
In this paper, we describe a human-robot inter-
action (HRI) system that is able both to analyse
the actions and the utterances of a human part-
ner to determine if the human made an error in
the assembly plan, and to explain to the human
what went wrong and what to do to solve the prob-
lem. This robot combines approaches from sub-
symbolic processing and symbolic reasoning in a
hybrid architecture based on that described in Fos-
ter et al (2008b).
During the construction process, it is frequently
necessary to refer to an object which is being used
to assemble the finished product, choosing an un-
ambigious reference to distinguish the object from
the others available. The classic reference gen-
eration algorithm, on which most subsequent im-
plementations are based, is the incremental algo-
rithm of Dale and Reiter (1995), which selects
a set of attributes of a target object to single it
out from a set of distractor objects. In real-world
tasks, the speaker and hearer often have more con-
text in common than just the knowledge of object
attributes, and several extensions have been pro-
posed, dealing with visual and discourse salience
(Kelleher and Kruijff, 2006) and the ability to pro-
duce multimodal references including actions such
as pointing (van der Sluis, 2005; Kranstedt and
Wachsmuth, 2005).
Foster et al (2008a) noted another type of mul-
timodal reference which is particularly useful in
embodied, task-based contexts: haptic-ostensive
reference, in which an object is referred to as it
is being manipulated by the speaker. Manipulat-
ing an object, which must be done in any case as
part of the task, also makes an object more salient
and therefore affords linguistic references that in-
Figure 1: The dialogue robot
dicate the increased accessibility of the referent.
This type of reference is similar to the placing-for
actions noted by Clark (1996).
An initial approach for generating referring ex-
pressions that make use of haptic-ostensive refer-
ence was described in (Foster et al, 2009a). With
this system, a study was conducted comparing the
new reference strategy to the basic Dale and Reiter
incremental algorithm. Na??ve users reported that it
was significantly easier to understand the instruc-
tions given by the robot when it used references
generated by the more sophisticated algorithm. In
this paper, we perform a similar experiment, but
making use of a more capable human-robot in-
teraction system and a more complete process for
generating situated references.
2 Hybrid Human-Robot Dialogue
System
The experiment described in this paper makes use
of a hybrid human-robot dialogue system which
supports multimodal human-robot collaboration
on a joint construction task. The robot (Figure 1)
has a pair of manipulator arms with grippers,
mounted in a position to resemble human arms,
and an animatronic talking head (van Breemen,
2005) capable of producing facial expressions,
rigid head motion, and lip-synchronised synthe-
sised speech. The subject and the robot work to-
gether to assemble wooden construction toys on
a common workspace, coordinating their actions
through speech (English or German), gestures, and
facial expressions.
The robot can pick up and move objects in the
workspace and perform simple assembly tasks. In
the scenario considered here, both of the partici-
pants know the assembly plan and jointly execute
it. The robot assists the human, explains necessary
assembly steps in case the human makes an error,
and offers pieces as required. The workspace is di-
vided into two areas?one belonging to the robot
and one to the human?to make joint action nec-
essary for task success.
The system has components which use both
sub-symbolic and symbolic processing. It in-
cludes a goal inference module based on dynamic
neural fields (Erlhagen and Bicho, 2006; Bicho
et al, 2009), which selects the robot?s next actions
based on the human user?s actions and utterances.
Given a particular assembly plan and the knowl-
edge of which objects the user has picked up, this
module can determine when the user has made
an error. The system also incorporates a dialogue
manager based on the TrindiKit dialogue manage-
ment toolkit (Larsson and Traum, 2000), which
implements the information-state based approach
to dialogue management. This unique combina-
tion of abilities means that when the robot detects
that its human partner has made an error?for ex-
ample, picking up or requesting an assembly piece
that is not needed in the current step of the building
plan?it can explain to the human what the error
was and what can be done to correct the mistake?
for example by picking up or indicating the correct
assembly piece.
Messages from all of the system?s input chan-
nels (speech, object recognition, and gesture
recognition) are processed and combined by a
multimodal fusion component based on (Giuliani
and Knoll, 2008), which is the link between the
symbolic and the sub-symbolic parts of the sys-
tem. The fusion component then communicates
with the goal inference module, which calculates
the next action instructions for the robot and also
determines if the user made an error. From there,
fusion combines the information from goal infer-
ence with the input data and sends unified hy-
potheses to the dialogue manager.
When it receives the fusion hypotheses, the dia-
logue manager uses the dialogue history and the
physical and task context to choose a response.
It then sends a high-level specification of the de-
1. System First we will build a windmill.
2. User Okay.
3. User {picks up a yellow cube, unnecessary piece for a
windmill}
4. System You don?t need a yellow cube to build a windmill.
5. System To build a windmill, you first need to build a
tower.
6. System [picking up and holding out red cube] To build
the tower, insert the green bolt through the end of this
red cube and screw it into the blue cube.
7. User [takes cube, performs action] Okay.
Figure 2: Sample human-robot dialogue, showing
adaptively-generated situated references
sired response to the output planner, which in turn
sends commands to each output channel: linguis-
tic content (including multimodal referring ex-
pressions), facial expressions and gaze behaviours
of the talking head, and actions of the robot ma-
nipulators. The linguistic outputs are realised us-
ing the OpenCCG surface realiser (White, 2006).
3 Reference Generation
In this system, two strategies were implemented
for generating references to objects in the world:
a constant version that uses only the basic incre-
mental algorithm (Dale and Reiter, 1995) to se-
lect properties, and an adaptive version that uses
more of the physical, dialogue and task context
to help select the references. The constant sys-
tem can produce a definite or indefinite reference,
and the most appropriate combination of attributes
according to the incremental algorithm. The adap-
tive system also generates pronominal and deictic
references, and introduces the concept of multiple
types of distractor sets depending on context.
Figure 2 shows a fragment of a sample interac-
tion in which the user picks up an incorrect piece:
the robot detects the error and describes the correct
assembly procedure. The underlined references
show the range of output produced by the adap-
tive reference generation module; for the constant
system, the references would all have been ?the
red cube?. The algorithms used by the adaptive
reference generation module are described below.
3.1 Reference Algorithm
The module stores a history of the referring ex-
pressions spoken by both the system and the user,
and uses these together with distractor sets to se-
lect referring expressions. In this domain there are
two types of objects which we need to refer to:
concrete objects in the world (everything which is
on the table, or in the robot?s or user?s hand), and
objects which do not yet exist, but are in the pro-
cess of being created. For non-existent objects we
do not build a distractor set, but simply use the
name of the object. In all other cases, we use one
of three types of distractor set:
? all the pieces needed to build a target object;
? all the objects referred to since the last men-
tion of this object; or
? all the concrete objects in the world.
The first type of set is used if the object under
consideration (OUC) is a negative reference to a
piece in context of the creation of a target object.
In all other cases, the second type is used if the
OUC has been mentioned before and the third type
if it has not.
When choosing a referring expression, we first
process the distractor set, comparing the proper-
ties of the OUC with the properties of all distrac-
tors. If a distractor has a different type from the
OUC, it is removed from the distractor set. With
all other properties, if the distractor has a different
value from the OUC, it is removed from the dis-
tractor set, and the OUC?s property value is added
to the list of properties to use.
We then choose the type of referring expression.
We first look for a previous reference (PR) to the
OUC, and if one exists, determine whether it was
in focus. Depending on the case, we use one of the
following reference strategies.
No PR If the OUC does not yet exist or we are
making a negative reference, we use an indef-
inite article. If the robot is holding the OUC,
we use a deictic reference. If the OUC does
exist and there are no distractors, we use a
definite; if there are distractors we use an in-
definite.
PR was focal If the PR was within the same turn,
we choose a pronoun for our next reference.
If it was in focus but in a previous turn, if
the robot is holding the OUC we use a deictic
reference, and if the robot is not holding it,
we use a pronoun.
PR was not focal If the robot is holding the
OUC, we make a deictic reference. Other-
wise, if the PR was a pronoun, definite, or de-
ictic, we use a definite article. If the PR was
indefinite and there are no distractors, we use
a definite article, if there are distractors, we
use an indefinite article.
If there are any properties in the list, and the
reference chosen is not a pronoun, we add them.
3.2 Examples of the Reference Algorithm
We will illustrate the reference-selection strategy
with two cases from the dialogue in Figure 2.
Utterance 4 ?a yellow cube?
This object is going to be referred to in a negative
context as part of a windmill under construction,
so the distractor set is the set of objects needed to
make a windmill: {red cube, blue cube, small slat,
small slat, green bolt, red bolt}.
We select the properties to use in describing the
object under consideration, processing the distrac-
tor set. We first remove all objects which do not
share the same type as our object under considera-
tion, which leaves {red cube, blue cube}. We then
compare the other attributes of our new object with
the remaining distractors - in this case ?colour?.
Since neither cube shares the colour ?yellow? with
the target object, both are removed from the dis-
tractor set, and ?yellow? is added to the list of
properties to use.
There is no previous reference to this object,
and since we are making a negative reference,
we automatically choose an indefinite article. We
therefore select the reference ?a yellow cube?.
Utterance 6 ?it? (a green bolt)
This object has been referred to before, earlier in
the same utterance, so the distractor set is all the
references between the earlier one and this one?
{red cube}. Since this object has a different type
from the bolt we want to describe, the distractor
set is now empty, and nothing is added to the list
of properties to use.
There is a previous definite reference to the ob-
ject in the same utterance: ?the green bolt?. This
reference was focal, so we are free to use a pro-
noun if appropriate. Since the previous reference
was definite, and the object being referred to does
exist, we choose to use a pronoun. We therefore
select the reference ?it?.
4 Experiment Design
In the context of the HRI system, a constant refer-
ence strategy is sufficient in that it makes it possi-
ble for the robot?s partner to know which item is
needed. On the other hand, while the varied forms
produced by the more complex mechanism can in-
crease the naturalness of the system output, they
may actually be insufficient if they are not used
in appropriate current circumstances?for exam-
ple, ?this cube? is not a particularly helpful refer-
ence if a user has no way to tell which ?this? is.
As a consequence, the system for generating such
references must be sensitive to the current state
of joint actions and?in effect?of joint attention.
The difference between the two systems is a test of
the adaptive version?s ability to adjust expressions
to pertinent circumstances. It is known that peo-
ple respond well to reduced expressions like ?this
cube? or ?it? when another person uses them ap-
propriately (Bard et al, 2008); we need to see if
the robot system can also achieve the benefits that
situated reference could provide.
To address this question, the human-robot di-
alogue system was evaluated through a user study
in which subjects interacted with the complete sys-
tem. Using a between-subjects design, this study
compared the two reference strategies, measuring
the users? subjective reactions to the system along
with their overall performance in the interaction.
Based on the findings from the user evaluation de-
scribed in (Foster et al, 2009a)?in which the pri-
mary effect of varying the reference strategy was
on the users? subjective opinion of the robot?the
main prediction for this study was as follows:
? Subjects who interact with a system using
adaptive references will rate the quality of
the robot?s conversation more highly than the
subjects who hear constant references.
We made no specific prediction regarding the
effect of reference strategy on any of the objec-
tive measures: based on the results of the user
evaluation mentioned above, there is no reason to
expect an effect either way. Note that?as men-
tioned above?if the adaptive version makes in-
correct choices, that may have a negative impact
on users? ability to understand the system?s gener-
ated references. For this reason, even a finding of
(a) Windmill (b) Railway signal
Figure 3: Target objects for the experiment
no objective difference would demonstrate that the
adaptive references did not harm the users? ability
to interact with the system, as long as it was ac-
companied by the predicted improvement in sub-
jective judgements.
4.1 Subjects
41 subjects (33 male) took part in this experiment.
The mean age of the subjects was 24.5, with a min-
imum of 19 and a maximum of 42. Of the subjects
who indicated an area of study, the two most com-
mon areas were Mathematics (14 subjects) and In-
formatics (also 14 subjects). On a scale of 1 to 5,
subjects gave a mean assessment of their knowl-
edge of computers at 4.1, of speech-recognition
systems at 2.0, and of human-robot systems at 1.7.
Subjects were compensated for their participation
in the experiment.
4.2 Scenario
This study used a between-subjects design with
one independent variable: each subject interacted
either with a system that used a constant strategy
to generate referring expressions (19 subjects), or
else with a system that used an adaptive strategy
(22 subjects).1
Each subject built two objects in collaboration
with the system, always in the same order. The
first target object was the windmill (Figure 3a);
after the windmill was completed, the robot and
human then built a railway signal (Figure 3b). For
both target objects, the user was given a building
plan (on paper). To induce an error, both of the
plans given to the subjects instructed them to use
an incorrect piece: a yellow cube instead of a red
cube for the windmill, and a long (seven-hole) slat
instead of a medium (five-hole) slat for the rail-
1The results of an additional three subjects in the constant-
reference condition could not be analysed due to technical
difficulties.
way signal. The subjects were told that the plan
contained an error and that the robot would cor-
rect them when necessary, but did not know the
nature of the error.
When the human picked up or requested an in-
correct piece during the interaction, the system de-
tected the error and explained to the human what
to do in order to assemble the target object cor-
rectly. When the robot explained the error and
when it handed over the pieces, it used referring
expressions that were generated using the constant
strategy for half of the subjects, and the adaptive
strategy for the other half of the subjects.
4.3 Experimental Set-up and Procedure
The participants stood in front of the table facing
the robot, equipped with a headset microphone for
speech recognition. The pieces required for the
target object?plus a set of additional pieces in or-
der to make the reference task more complex?
were placed on the table, using the same layout
for every participant. The layout was chosen to
ensure that there would be points in the interaction
where the subjects had to ask the robot for build-
ing pieces from the robot?s workspace, as well as
situations in which the robot automatically handed
over the pieces. Along with the building plan men-
tioned above, the subjects were given a table with
the names of the pieces they could build the ob-
jects with.
4.4 Data Acquisition
At the end of a trial, the subject responded to
a usability questionnaire consisting of 39 items,
which fell into four main categories: Intelligence
of the robot (13 items), Task ease and task suc-
cess (12 items), Feelings of the user (8 items),
and Conversation quality (6 items). The items on
the questionnaire were based on those used in the
user evaluation described in (Foster et al, 2009b),
but were adapted for the scenario and research
questions of the current study. The questionnaire
was presented using software that let the subjects
choose values between 1 and 100 with a slider. In
addition to the questionnaire, the trials were also
video-taped, and the system log files from all tri-
als were kept for further analysis.
5 Results
We analysed the data resulting from this study in
three different ways. First, the subjects? responses
Table 1: Overall usability results
Constant Adaptive M-W
Intell. 79.0 (15.6) 74.9 (12.7) p = 0.19, n.s.
Task 72.7 (10.4) 71.1 (8.3) p = 0.69, n.s.
Feeling 66.9 (15.9) 66.8 (14.2) p = 0.51, n.s.
Conv. 66.1 (13.6) 75.2 (10.7) p = 0.036, sig.
Overall 72.1 (11.2) 71.8 (9.1) p = 0.68, n.s.
to the questionnaire items were compared to de-
termine if there was a difference between the re-
sponses given by the two groups. A range of sum-
mary objective measures were also gathered from
the log files and videos?these included the dura-
tion of the interaction measured both in seconds
and in system turns, the subjects? success at build-
ing each of the target objects, the number of times
that the robot had to explain the construction plan
to the user, and the number of times that the users
asked the system to repeat its instructions. Finally,
we compared the results on the subjective and ob-
jective measures to determine which of the objec-
tive factors had the largest influence on subjective
user satisfaction.
5.1 Subjective Measures
The subjects in this study gave a generally positive
assessment of their interactions with the system on
the questionnaire?with a mean overall satisfac-
tion score of 72.0 out of 100?and rated the per-
ceived intelligence of the robot particularly highly
(overall mean of 76.8). Table 1 shows the mean
results from the two groups of subjects for each
category on the user-satisfaction questionnaire, in
all cases on a scale from 0?100 (with the scores
for negatively-posed questions inverted).
To test the effect of reference strategy on the
usability-questionnaire responses, we performed a
Mann-Whitney test comparing the distribution of
responses from the two groups of subjects on the
overall results, as well as on each sub-category of
questions. For most categories, there was no sig-
nificant difference between the responses of the
two groups, with p values ranging from 0.19 to
0.69 (as shown in Table 1). The only category
where a significant difference was found was on
the questionnaire items that asked the subjects to
assess the robot?s quality as a conversational part-
ner; for those items, the mean score from sub-
jects who heard the adaptive references was sig-
nificantly higher (p < 0.05) than the mean score
from the subjects who heard references generated
by the constant reference module. Of the six ques-
Table 2: Objective results (all differences n.s.)
Measure Constant Adaptive M-W
Duration (s.) 404.3 (62.8) 410.5 (94.6) p = 0.90
Duration (turns) 29.8 (5.02) 31.2 (5.57) p = 0.44
Rep requests 0.26 (0.45) 0.32 (0.78) p = 0.68
Explanations 2.21 (0.63) 2.41 (0.80) p = 0.44
Successful trials 1.58 (0.61) 1.55 (0.74) p = 0.93
tions that were related to the conversation quality,
the most significant impact was on the two ques-
tions which assessed the subjects? understanding
of what they were able to do at various points dur-
ing the interaction.
5.2 Objective Measures
Based on the log files and video recordings, we
computed a range of objective measures. These
measures were divided into three classes, based
on those used in the PARADISE dialogue-system
evaluation framework (Walker et al, 2000):
? Two dialogue efficiency measures: the mean
duration of the interaction as measured both
in seconds and in system turns;
? Two dialogue quality measures: the number
of times that the robot gave explanations, and
the number of times that the user asked for
instructions to be repeated; and
? One task success measure: how many of the
(two) target objects were constructed as in-
tended (i.e., as shown in Figure 3).
For each of these measures, we tested whether the
difference in reference strategy had a significant
effect, again via a Mann-Whitney test. Table 2 il-
lustrates the results on these objective measures,
divided by the reference strategy.
The results from the two groups of subjects
were very similar on all of these measures: on
average, the experiment took 404 seconds (nearly
seven minutes) to complete with the constant strat-
egy and 410 seconds with the adaptive, the mean
number of system turns was close to 30 in both
cases, just over one-quarter of all subjects asked
for instructions to be repeated, the robot gave just
over two explanations per trial, and about three-
quarters of all target objects (i.e. 1.5 out of 2)
were correctly built. The Mann-Whitney test con-
firms that none of the differences between the two
groups even came close to significance on any of
the objective measures.
5.3 Comparing Objective and Subjective
Measures
In the preceding sections, we presented results on
a number of objective and subjective measures.
While the subjects generally rated their experi-
ence of using the system positively, there was
some degree of variation, most of which could not
be attributed to the difference in reference strat-
egy. Also, the results on the objective measures
varied widely across the subjects, but again were
not generally affected by the reference strategy.
In this section, we examine the relationship be-
tween these two classes of measures in order to
determine which of the objective measures had the
largest effect on users? subjective reactions to the
HRI system.
Being able to predict subjective user satisfac-
tion from more easily-measured objective proper-
ties can be very useful for developers of interac-
tive systems: in addition to making it possible to
evaluate systems based on automatically available
data without the need for extensive experiments
with users, such a performance function can also
be used in an online, incremental manner to adapt
system behaviour to avoid entering a state that is
likely to reduce user satisfaction (Litman and Pan,
2002), or can be used as a reward function in a
reinforcement-learning scenario (Walker, 2000).
We employed the procedure used in the PAR-
ADISE evaluation framework (Walker et al,
2000) to explore the relationship between the sub-
jective and objective factors. The PARADISE
model uses stepwise multiple linear regression to
predict subjective user satisfaction based on mea-
sures representing the performance dimensions of
task success, dialogue quality, and dialogue effi-
ciency, resulting in a predictor function of the fol-
lowing form:
Satisfaction =
n
?
i=1
wi ?N (mi)
The mi terms represent the value of each measure,
while the N function transforms each measure
into a normal distribution using z-score normali-
sation. Stepwise linear regression produces coef-
ficients (wi) describing the relative contribution of
each predictor to the user satisfaction. If a predic-
tor does not contribute significantly, its wi value is
zero after the stepwise process.
Table 3 shows the predictor functions that were
derived for each of the classes of subjective mea-
sures in this study, using all of the objective mea-
sures from Table 2 as initial factors. The R2 col-
umn indicates the percentage of the variance in the
target measure that is explained by the predictor
function, while the Significance column gives sig-
nificance values for each term in the function.
In general, the two factors with the biggest in-
fluence on user satisfaction were the number of
repetition requests (which had a uniformly neg-
ative effect on user satisfaction), and the num-
ber of target objects correctly built by the user
(which generally had a positive effect). Aside
from the questions on user feelings, the R2 values
are generally in line with those found in previous
PARADISE evaluations of other dialogue systems
(Walker et al, 2000; Litman and Pan, 2002), and
in fact are much higher than those found in a pre-
vious similar study (Foster et al, 2009b).
6 Discussion
The subjective responses on the relevant items
from the usability questionnaire suggest that
the subjects perceived the robot to be a bet-
ter conversational partner if it used contextually
varied, situationally-appropriate referring expres-
sions than if it always used a baseline, constant
strategy; this supports the main prediction for this
study. The result also agrees with the findings of
a previous study (Foster et al, 2009a)?this sys-
tem did not incorporate goal inference and had a
less-sophisticated reference strategy, but the main
effect of changing reference strategy was also on
the users? subjective opinions of the robot?s inter-
active ability. These studies together support the
current effort in the natural-language generation
community to devise more sophisticated reference
generation algorithms.
On the other hand, there was no significant dif-
ference between the two groups on any of the
objective measures: the dialogue efficiency, dia-
logue quality, and task success were nearly iden-
tical across the two groups of subjects. A de-
tailed analysis of the subjects? gaze and object-
manipulation behaviour immediately after various
forms of generated references from the robot also
failed to find any significant differences between
the various reference types. These overall results
are not particularly surprising: studies of human-
human dialogue in a similar joint construction task
(Bard et al, In prep.) have demonstrated that the
collaborators preserve quality of construction in
Table 3: PARADISE predictor functions for each category on the usability questionnaire
Measure Function R2 Significance
Intelligence 76.8+7.00?N (Correct)?5.51?N (Repeats) 0.39 Correct: p < 0.001,
Repeats: p < 0.005
Task 72.4+3.54?N (Correct)?3.45?N (Repeats)?2.17?N (Explain) 0.43 Correct: p < 0.005,
Repeats: p < 0.01,
Explain: p? 0.10
Feeling 66.9?6.54?N (Repeats)+4.28?N (Seconds) 0.09 Repeats: p < 0.05,
Seconds: p? 0.12
Conversation 71.0+5.28?N (Correct)?3.08?N (Repeats) 0.20 Correct: p < 0.01,
Repeats: p? 0.10
Overall 72.0+4.80?N (Correct)?4.27?N (Repeats) 0.40 Correct: p < 0.001,
Repeats: p < 0.005
all cases, though circumstances may dictate what
strategies they use to do this. Combined with the
subjective findings, this lack of an objective effect
suggests that the references generated by the adap-
tive strategy were both sufficient and more natural
than those generated by the constant strategy.
The analysis of the relationship between the
subjective and objective measures analysis has
also confirmed and extended the findings from a
similar analysis (Foster et al, 2009b). In that
study, the main contributors to user satisfaction
were user repetition requests (negative), task suc-
cess, and dialogue length (both positive). In the
current study, the primary factors were similar,
although dialogue length was less prominent as
a factor and task success was more prominent.
These findings are generally intuitive: subjects
who are able to complete the joint construction
task are clearly having more successful interac-
tions than those who are not able to complete the
task, while subjects who need to ask for instruc-
tions to be repeated are equally clearly not hav-
ing successful interactions. The findings add ev-
idence that, in this sort of task-based, embodied
dialogue system, users enjoy the experience more
when they are able to complete the task success-
fully and are able to understand the spoken contri-
butions of their partner, and also suggest that de-
signers should concentrate on these aspects of the
interaction when designing the system.
7 Conclusions
We have presented the reference generation mod-
ule of a hybrid human-robot interaction system
that combines a goal-inference component based
on sub-symbolic dynamic neural fields with a
natural-language interface based on more tradi-
tional symbolic techniques. This combination of
approaches results in a system that is able to work
together with a human partner on a mutual con-
struction task, interpreting its partner?s verbal and
non-verbal behaviour and responding appropri-
ately to unexpected actions (errors) of the partner.
We have then described a user evaluation of this
system, concentrating on the impact of different
techniques for generating situated references in
the context of the robot?s corrective feedback. The
results of this study indicate that using an adaptive
strategy to generate the references significantly in-
creases the users? opinion of the robot as a con-
versational partner, without having any effect on
any of the other measures. This result agrees with
the findings of the system evaluation described in
(Foster et al, 2009a), and adds evidence that so-
phisticated generation techniques are able to im-
prove users? experiences with interactive systems.
An analysis of the relationship between the ob-
jective and subjective measures found that the
main contributors to user satisfaction were the
users? task performance (which had a positive ef-
fect on most measures of satisfaction), and the
number of times the users had to ask for instruc-
tions to be repeated (which had a generally neg-
ative effect). Again, these results agree with the
findings of a previous study (Foster et al, 2009b),
and also suggest priorities for designers of this
type of task-based interactive system.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Euro-
pean Commission through the JAST2 (IST-
FP6-003747-IP) and INDIGO3 (IST-FP6-045388)
projects. Thanks to Pawel Dacka and Levent Kent
for help in running the experiment and analysing
the data.
2http://www.jast-project.eu/
3http://www.ics.forth.gr/indigo/
References
E. G. Bard, R. Hill, and M. E. Foster. 2008. What
tunes accessibility of referring expressions in
task-related dialogue? In Proceedings of the
30th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society (CogSci 2008). Chicago.
E. G. Bard, R. L. Hill, M. E. Foster, and M. Arai.
In prep. How do we tune accessibility in joint
tasks: Roles and regulations.
H. Bekkering, E.R.A. de Bruijn, R.H. Cuijpers,
R. Newman-Norlund, H.T. van Schie, and
R. Meulenbroek. 2009. Joint action: Neurocog-
nitive mechanisms supporting human interac-
tion. Topics in Cognitive Science, 1(2):340?
352.
E. Bicho, L. Louro, N. Hipolito, and W. Erlhagen.
2009. A dynamic field approach to goal infer-
ence and error monitoring for human-robot in-
teraction. In Proceedings of the Symposium on
?New Frontiers in Human-Robot Interaction?,
AISB 2009 Convention. Heriot-Watt University
Edinburgh.
H. H. Clark. 1996. Using Language. Cambridge
University Press.
R. Dale and E. Reiter. 1995. Computational inter-
pretations of the Gricean maxims in the genera-
tion of referring expressions. Cognitive Science,
19(2):233?263.
W. Erlhagen and E. Bicho. 2006. The dynamic
neural field approach to cognitive robotics.
Journal of Neural Engineering, 3(3):R36?R54.
M. E. Foster, E. G. Bard, R. L. Hill, M. Guhe,
J. Oberlander, and A. Knoll. 2008a. The roles
of haptic-ostensive referring expressions in co-
operative, task-based human-robot dialogue. In
Proceedings of HRI 2008.
M. E. Foster, M. Giuliani, A. Isard, C. Matheson,
J. Oberlander, and A. Knoll. 2009a. Evaluating
description and reference strategies in a coop-
erative human-robot dialogue system. In Pro-
ceedings of IJCAI-09.
M. E. Foster, M. Giuliani, and A. Knoll. 2009b.
Comparing objective and subjective measures
of usability in a human-robot dialogue system.
In Proceedings of ACL-IJCNLP 2009.
M. E. Foster, M. Giuliani, T. Mu?ller, M. Rickert,
A. Knoll, W. Erlhagen, E. Bicho, N. Hipo?lito,
and L. Louro. 2008b. Combining goal inference
and natural-language dialogue for human-robot
joint action. In Proceedings of the 1st Interna-
tional Workshop on Combinations of Intelligent
Methods and Applications at ECAI 2008.
M. Giuliani and A. Knoll. 2008. MultiML:
A general-purpose representation language for
multimodal human utterances. In Proceedings
of ICMI 2008.
J. D. Kelleher and G.-J. M. Kruijff. 2006. Incre-
mental generation of spatial referring expres-
sions in situated dialog. In Proceedings of
COLING-ACL 2006.
A. Kranstedt and I. Wachsmuth. 2005. Incremen-
tal generation of multimodal deixis referring to
objects. In Proceedings of ENLG 2005.
S. Larsson and D. Traum. 2000. Information state
and dialogue management in the TRINDI dia-
logue move engine toolkit. Natural Language
Engineering, 6(3&4):323?340.
D. J. Litman and S. Pan. 2002. Designing and
evaluating an adaptive spoken dialogue system.
User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction,
12(2?3):111?137.
A. J. N. van Breemen. 2005. iCat: Experimenting
with animabotics. In Proceedings of AISB 2005
Creative Robotics Symposium.
I. F. van der Sluis. 2005. Multimodal Reference:
Studies in Automatic Generation of Multimodal
Referring Expressions. Ph.D. thesis, University
of Tilburg.
M. Walker, C. Kamm, and D. Litman. 2000. To-
wards developing general models of usability
with PARADISE. Natural Language Engineer-
ing, 6(3?4):363?377.
M. A. Walker. 2000. An application of reinforce-
ment learning to dialogue strategy selection in
a spoken dialogue system for email. Journal of
Artificial Intelligence Research, 12:387?416.
M. White. 2006. Efficient realization of co-
ordinate structures in Combinatory Categorial
Grammar. Research on Language and Compu-
tation, 4(1):39?75.
