A State of the Art of Thai Language Resources
and
Thai Language Behavior Analysis and Modeling
Asanee Kawtrakul, Mukda  Suktarachan, Patcharee Varasai,
Hutchatai Chanlekha
Department of Computer Engineering,
Faculty of Engineering, Kasetsart University, Bangkok, Thailand 10900.
E-mail: ak, mukda, pom, aim@vivaldi.cpe.ku.ac.th,
Abstract
As electronic communications is now increasing, the term Natural Language Processing should be
considered in the broader aspect of Multi-Language processing system. Observation of the language
behavior will provide a good basis for design of computational language model and also creating cost-
effective solutions to the practical problems. In order to have a good language modeling, the language
resources are necessary for the language behavior analysis.
This paper intended to express what we have and what we have done by the desire to make a bridge
between the languages and to share and make maximal use of the existing lexica, corpus and the tools.
Three main topics are, then, focussed: A State of the Art of Thai language Resources, Thai language
behaviors and their computational models.
1. Introduction
As electronic communications are now
increasing, the term Natural Language Processing
should be considered in the broader aspect of
Multi- Language Processing system. An important
phase in the system development process is
requirement engineering, which can define as the
process of analyzing the problems in a certain
language. An essential part of the requirement-
engineering phase is computational language
modeling which is an abstract representation of
the behavior of the language.  In order to have a
good language model for creating cost-effective
solutions to the practical problems, the language
resources are necessary for the language behavior
analysis.
This paper intended to express what we
have and what we have done by the desire to
make a bridge between the languages and to
share and make maximal use of the existing
lexica, corpus and the tools. Three main topics
are, then, focussed:
? A State of the Art of Thai language
Resources that will give an overview of what we
have in Corpus, Lexicon and tools for corpus
processing and analysis.
? Thai language behaviors (only in word
and phrase level) analyzed from the varieties
of corpus which consist of Lexicon growth,
New word formation and Phrase/Sentence
construction, and
?  The computational models providing
for those behaviors, which consist of Unknown
Word Extraction and Name Entities identification,
New word generation and Noun phrase
recognition.
The remainder of the paper is organized as
follows. In section 2, we give the gateway of Thai
language resources.  Thai Language behaviors are
discussed in section 3. In section 4, then, provides
Thai Language Computational Modeling as a
basis for creating cost-effective solutions to those
practical problems.
2. A State of the Art of Thai Language
Resource
 This section gives a survey of a state of the
art of Thai Language Resources consisting of
Corpus, Lexicon and Tools. Here, we will present
only the resources that open for public access.
2.1 Corpus
The existing Thai corpus is divided into 2 
types; speech and text corpus developed by many 
Thai Universities. Thai Language Audio Resource 
Center of Thammasart University (ThaiARC) 
(http:// thaiarc.ac.th) developed speech corpus 
aimed to provide digitized audio information for 
dissemination via Internet. The project pioneers 
the production and collection of various types of 
audio information and various styles of Thai 
speech, such as royal speeches, academic lectures, 
oral literature, etc.
For Text corpus, originally, the goal of the 
corpus collecting is used only inside the 
laboratory.  Until 1996, National Electronics and 
Computer Technology Center (NECTEC) and 
Communications Research Laboratory (CRL) had 
a collaboration project with the purpose of 
preparing Thai language corpus from technical 
proceedings for language study and application 
research. It named ORCHID corpus (NECTEC, 
1997). NAiST Corpus began in 1996 with the 
primary aim of collecting document from 
magazines for training and testing program in 
Written Production Assistance (Asanee, 1995). 
The existing corpus can be summarized as shown 
in Table 1.
Table 1: The List of Thai Corpus
List Corpus Type Amount Status
NECTEC Orchid
Corpus
POS-
Tagged Text
2,560,000
words
Online
Kasetsart
Univ.
NAiST
Corpus Text
60,511,974
words Online
Thammasart
Univ.
Thai
ARC
Digitized
audio
4000
words++ online
2.2 Lexicon
There are a number of Thai lexicons, which
has been developed as shown in Table 2.
Table 2: The List of Thai Dictionaries
Dictionary Type Size
(word)
status Web site
Royal
Institute
Dictionary
Mono 33,582 Online http://rirs3.royin.
go.th/riThdict/loo
kup.html
Lexitron Bi 50,000 Online http://www.links.
nectec.or.th/lexit/
lex_t.html
NaiST
Lexibase
Mono 15,000 Online http://beethoven.
cpe.ku.ac.th/
So
Sethaputra
Dictionary
Bi - 48,000
Eng
words
- 38,000
Thai
words
Online http://www.thais
oftware.co.th/
Dictionary Type Size
(word)
status Web site
Narin?s
Thailand
homepage
Bi - Online http://www.wiwi.
uni-
frankfurt.de/~sas
cha/thailand/dicti
onary/dictionary
_index.html
Saikam
online
Bi 133,524 Online http://saikam.nii.
ac.jp/.
Lao-Thai-
English Dic.
Multi 5,000 Offline -
From the table 2, Only Lexitron (from
NECTEC) and NAiST Lexibase (from Kasetsart
University) that were applied to NLP. NAiST
Lexibase has been developed based on relational
model for managing and maintaining easily in the
future. It contains 15,000 words list with their
syntax and the semantic concept information in
the concept code.
2.3 Corpus and Language Analysis
Tools
Corpus is not only the resource of Linguistic 
Knowledge but is used for training, improving and 
evaluating the NLP systems. The tools for corpus 
manipulation and knowledge acquisition become 
necessary.
NAiST Lab. has developed the toolkit for 
sharing via the Internet. It has been designed for 
corpus collecting, annotating, maintaining and 
analyzing. Additionally, it has been designed as 
the engine, which the end user could use with their 
data. (See a service on http://naist.cpe.ku.ac.th).
3. Thai Language Behavior Analysis
In order to have a good language model for
creating cost-effective solutions to the practical
problems in application development, language
behavior must be observed. Next is Thai language
behavior analysis based on NAiST corpus
consisting of Lexicon growth, Thai word
formation and Phrase construction.
3.1 Lexicon Growth
The lexicon growth is studied by using Word 
list Extraction tool to extract word lists from a 
large-scale corpus and mapping to the Royal 
Institute Dictionary (RID). It is noticeable that 
there are two types of lexicon: common and 
unknown words. The common word lists are some 
words in RID, which occur in almost every 
document, and use in daily life. They are primitive 
c3c4c5
c1c2c3c4c5
c1c2
c4c5c1c2c3
words but not being proper names or colloquial 
words. The unknown or new words occur much in 
the real document such as Proper names, 
Colloquial words, Abbreviations, and Foreign 
words.
The lexicon growth is observed from corpus 
size, 400,000, 2,154,700 and 60,511,974 words 
from Newspaper, Magazine and Agriculture text. 
We found that common word lists increased from 
111,954 to 839,522 and 49,136,408 words 
according to the corpus size, while the unknown 
word lists increased from 288,046 to 1,315,178 
and 11,375,566 words respectively as shown in 
table3.
Table 3 : Lexicon-growth
Size of Corpus/ words Common words Unknown
words
400,000 111,954 288,046
2,154,700 839,522 1,315,178
60,511,974 49,136,408 11,375,566
Regarding to 60,511,974 words corpus in the 
table 3, it composes of 35,127,012 words from 
Newspaper, 18,359,724 words from Magazine and 
7,025,238 words from Agricultural Text. 
Unknown words occur in each category as shown 
in table 4.
Table 4: The Categories of Unknown words 
according to the various corpus genres
Types of
unknown word
Newspaper
(words)
Magazine
(words)
Agricultural
Text (words)
Proper name 4,809,160 1,272,747 1,170,076
Spoken words 58,335 8,787 0
Abbreviation 70,109 43,056 0
Foreign words 304,519 239,107 3,399,670
Total 5,242,123 1,563,697 4,569,746
According to table 3 and 4, we could observe that 
not only unknown words increase but common 
words also increase and the main categories of 
increasing unknown word are proper names and 
foreign words. Consequently, a computational 
model of unknown word extraction and name 
entity identification has been developed and also 
of new word construction.
3.2 New Word Formation and Core
Noun
Regarding to the growth of common word
shown in table 3, we studied how the new words
come from.
3.2.1 Basic Information about Thai
Thai words are multi-syllabic words which
stringing together could form a new word. Since
Thai has no inflection and no word delimiters,
Thai morphological processing is mainly to
recognize word boundaries instead of recognizing
a lexical form from a surface form as in English.
Let  C  be a sequence of characters
C  = c1c2c3?cn : n>=1
Let  W  be a sequence of words
W = w1w2w3?wm : m>=1
Where wi = c1ic2i?ci r: i>=1, r>=2
Since Thai sentences are formed with a
sequence of words with a stream of characters,
i.e., c1c2c3?cn mostly without explicit
delimiters, the word boundary in ?c1c2c3c4c5?
pattern as shown below could have two
ambiguous forms. One is ?c1c2? and  ?c3c4c5?.
The other one is  ?c1c2c3? and  ?c4c5?
(Kawtrakul, 1997)
Stream of characters
Figure 1: Word Boundary Ambiguity
F gure 1, i acters  grouped
differ meaning ords w hanged
too. For example, ????? n be gr  to ????-
??(fold one's arms across the chest)?
clump of flower)?. From our corp
that the sentence with 45 chara
combinations of words sequence.
3.2.2 New word construction
Almost all-Thai new words ar
means of compounding and nomi
using a set of prefixes.
3.2.2.1 Nominalization
Nominalization is a process by 
can be formed as a noun by using p
Noun words formed by using prefix
and ?????(khwa:m)?are nouns which 
action. Words formed by using pref
????(t?ha:w)?  and ????(nak)?are noun
human or profession.
Prefix ? ???(ka:n)? ? ????(khwa:m
the process of forming a noun fromill be c
oupedrom the fi
ently, the  of w
?? caweref char and ???-??? (a
us, we found
cters has 30
e formed by
nalization, by
which a word
refixes added.
es ????(ka:n)?
signal state or
ixes ????(phu:)?
s which signal
)?  are used in
 verb or verb
phrase and sometimes from noun
(Nominalization). ???(ka:n) that co-occur with
noun, represents the meaning about duty or
function of noun it relates to. ???(ka:n) that co-
occur with verbs, always occur with action verbs.
????(khwa:m) always co-occur with state verbs.
Prefix ? ???(phu:) ? ? ???(nak)? and ????(t?ha:w)?
are used in the process of new word formation. ???
(phu:)  and ???(nak) co-occur with verb phrase. ???
(nak) sometimes can occur with a few fields of
nouns, such as sport and music. So at the first time
we kept words, which constructed from prefix ????
(nak)? plus noun in the lexicon for solving the
problem. Prefix ????(t?ha:w)? can co-occur with
noun only.
3.2.2.2 Compounding
Thai new words can, also, be combined to
form compound nouns and are invented almost
daily. They normally have at least two parts. The
first part represents a pointed object or person
such as ??(man), ????(pot), ???(tail), ???(plant). The
second part identifies what kind of object or
person it is, or what its purpose is like ?????(drive a
car), ???????(cook rice), ????(tiger), ??? ?(water). Table 5
shows the examples of compound noun in Thai.
Table 5: The Examples of Thai Compound Noun
What or who What type / what purpose
??(man) ?????(drive a car),
????(pot) ???????(cook rice)
???(tail) ????(tiger)
???(plant) ??? ?(water)
Table 6 shows the patterns of compound noun.
Table 6: Compound noun pattern
Compound
noun
structure
Examples Meaning
n + n
???(tail)????(tiger)
???(plant)??? ?(water)
Rudder
Water Plant
n + v
????(room)???(sleep)
???????(chair)???(rock)
Bedroom
rocking chair
n + v + n
??(man)???(drive)?? (car)
????(pot)???(cook)????(rice)
Driver
A Pot For Cooking Rice
n + n + v
????(child)??(hair)???(long)
??(human)??(leg)???(lame)
A Long Hair Child
A Lame Man
n + n + n
????(home)???(shape)???
(Thai)
????(rice)??(leg)???(pig)
Thai Style House
A kind of dishes
n + v + v
??(leaf)???(drive)???(ride)
????(room)????(sit)????(play)
Driving License
Living Room
From Table 6, it has shown that some
compound nouns maintain some parts of those
primitive word meaning but some changed to a
new meaning. In this paper, we are only interested
in compound noun grouping from primitive words
which were changed the meaning to more abstract
but still maintain some parts of those primitive
word meanings, e.g. ?????(driver) ??????(cooker)
etc.? The word ???? maintains its meaning which
has a concept of human, but when it was
compounded with ???(car)? and ?????(kitchen)?,
their meanings have changed to the occupation by
the word relation in the equivalent level. In case of
compound noun that change a whole meaning
such as ???????? (a boy scout)?, it will be kept in the
lexicon.
3.2.2.3 Compound noun extraction problems
There are three non-trivial problems
? Compound Noun VS Sentence Distinction
? Compound Noun Boundary Ambiguity
? Core noun Detection
Compound Noun VS Sentence
Several NP structures have the same pattern as
sentences. Since Thai language is flexible and has
no word derivation, including to preposition in
compound noun can be omitted, etc. This causes a
compound noun having the same pattern as
sentence.  Thus, Thai NP analysis in IR system is
more difficult than English. (See Figure 2)
Figure 2: The comparison of noun phrase and
sentence structure
In figure 2, compound noun ????????????? (a
dining table) actually omit the preposition ??? ?????
(for)?, which is a relation that point to the purpose
of the first noun ?????(table)?.
The Compound Noun Boundary Ambiguity
After we have extracted noun phrase aiming
for enhancing the IR system, we have to segment
Sentence: ??????????   (birds eat fruit)
In Thai: ?? ??? ?????
 Birds eat fruit
Syntactic cn          tv cn
Category
Compound Noun: ??????????? (a dining table)
In Thai: ????(?? ?????) ??? ????
table  eat rice
Syntactic cn  tv cn
Category 
that noun phrase into sub noun phrase or
compound noun in order to specify the core noun
as index and its modifier as sub-index. For
example, compound noun with ?noun + noun +
verb? structure: ????(child/N)??(hair/N)??? (long/V)
etc. In this case, the second noun and verb have to
be grouped firstly since it behaves similarly to a
modifier by omitting the relative pronoun that
represents its purpose, i.e., ?who has?.
Another case of Compound Noun Boundary
Ambiguity is word combination. Consider the
sequence of words as the example of NP that
composes of four words as follows:
NP = N1N2N3N4
There are 8 word combinations of compound
noun as shown in figure 3.
In figure 3, word string has to be grouped
correctly for the correct meaning.
The ambiguity of noun phrase boundary has
also directly effected the efficiency of text
retrieval.
Core Noun detection
Due to the Information Retrieval, a head or
core of noun phrase detection is necessary. In this
paper, core noun refers to the most important and
specific word that the information retrieval and
extraction can directly retrieve or extract without
over generating candidate words.  However, by
the observation, the core of noun phrase needs not
to be the initial words. Some of them are at the
final position and some have word relation in the
equivalent level (As shown in Table 7).
Table 7: The examples of core noun in NP
Noun phrase(NP) Core noun
     W1              W2
????????? + ??????
structure   +  sentence
  W1       W2
???   +   ?? ??
stain        annual ring
W1        W2         W3
?? + ?????? + ???
fruit     papaya    green
be W1 located at the initial position
be W2 located at the final position
be W2 located at the second
position
As mentioned above, the models of New Word
Generation and Noun Phrase Recognition become
one of the interesting works in Thai processing.
3.3 Phrase and Sentence Construction
Next, we will indicate the main problems that 
influence to MT, IE and IR system. These are 
constituent movement, zero anaphora and iterative 
relative clause.
3.3.1 Constituent Movement
      Constituent is the relationship between lexicon 
units, which are parts of a larger unit. 
Constituency is usually shown by a tree diagram 
or by square brackets:
Ex.      [[???????????????????]  [????????????]]
         [[meeting committee] [very smoothly]].
Constituent acts as a chunk that can be moved 
together and it often occurs in Thai language (see 
Fig. 4). The constituents can be moved to the 
front, the middle or the end of the sentence.
S =
Figure 4 The movements of constituent
Ex.:      ???????  ????????  ???????  ?????
In the morning, the fisherman goes to catch the fish
????????  ???????  ?????  ???????
The fisherman goes to catch the fish in the morning.
????????  ???????  ???????  ?????
The fisherman goes to in the morning, catch the fish
???????  ?????  ????????  ???????
In the morning, catch the fish, the fisherman goes to.
Noun, adverb, and prepositional phrase are 
often move while verb phrases are.
3.3.2 Zero Anaphora
To make the cohesion in the discourse, the 
anaphora is used as a reference to ?point back? to 
some entities called referent or antecedent, given 
in the preceding discourse. Halliday, M.A.K. and 
Hasan, Rugaiya (1976) divided cohesion in 
English into 5 categories as shown in Table 8:
Table 8: Categories of anaphora
Reference - Personal Reference, Demonstrative 
Reference, Comparative Reference
Substitution - Nominal Substitution, Verbal Substitution, 
Causal Substitution
Ellipsis - Nominal Ellipsis, Verbal Ellipsis, Causal 
Ellipsis
Conjunction - Additive, Adversative, Casual, Temporal
Lexical Cohesion - Reiteration(Repetition, Synonym or Near 
Synonym, Super ordinate, General word)
- Collocation
Figure 3: Patterns of noun phrase analysis
C1 C2 C3 C4
Observing from the corpus in: news, magazine 
and agricultural text, there are 4 types of 
anaphora. Ellipsis or zero anaphora was found 
most frequently in Thai documents and other 
anaphora happened as show in table 9.
Table 9: Types of reference
Type of Anaphora Magazine news agriculture
Zero anaphora 49.88% 52.38% 50.04%
repetition 32.04% 27.78% 34.49%
personal reference 12.18% 12.70% 1.87%
nominal substitution 5.90% 6.08% 13.60%
Zero anaphora is the use of a gap, in a phrase 
or clause that has an anaphoric function similar to 
a pro-form. It is often described as ?referring 
back? to an expression that supplies the 
information necessary for interpreting the gap
The following is a sentence that illustrates 
zero anaphora:
????????????????????   ????????? ???????????????????
? There are two roads to eternity, straight 
but narrow, and broad but crooked.
In this sentence, the gaps in straight but 
narrow [gap], and broad but crooked [gap] have 
a zero anaphoric relationship to two roads to 
eternity.
Table 10 also shows the occurrence of zero 
anaphora in various parts of a sentence.
Table 10: Position of reference in sentences
Position Frequency
Subject 49.88%
Object 32.04%
Possessive Pronoun 12.18%
Following a Preposition 5.90%
It is noticeable that zero anaphora in the 
position of the subject occurs with high frequency 
(49.88%). It shows that in Thai language, the 
position of subject is the most commonly 
replaced.
3.3.3 Iterative Relative Clause
Thai relative pronouns ????? (thi) ?????(sung)? and ?
???(un)?  relate to group of nouns or other pronouns 
(The student  ????? (thi)  studies hardest usually does 
the best.). The word  ????? (thi) connects or relates 
the subject, student, to the verb within the 
dependent clause (studies). Generally, we use ?????
(thi)  and  ? ?????(sung)? to introduce clauses that are 
parenthetical in nature (i.e., that can be removed 
from the sentence without changing the essential 
meaning of the sentence. The pronoun ????? (thi) and ?????(sung)? refers to things and people and ????(un)?
usually refers to things, but it can also refer to 
event in general.
The relative pronoun is sometimes omitted 
because it makes the sentence more efficient and 
elegant.? ???????    ???/????    ???     ????????   ??? ????????  ?????????????? 2
???????
The book that you ordered from that shop arrived two days
later.
Sometimes relative pronoun refers to an event 
that takes place repeatedly in a phrase.
Figure 5 The structure of relative clause
Ex.    [???????]N  [(???) ??????????????? ??????]Rel Cl.
         [The chef] [who won the cooking competition]
[(????) ????????????????????????] Rel Cl.   [(???) ?????????] Rel Cl.
        [which compete at France]              [that I employ]
Although a sentence, which has several
clauses inside, will be grammatical, but it is not a
good style in writing and always causes a problem
for parser and noun phrase recognition.
4. The Computational Model
The computational models in word and phrase
level are developed according to the phenomena
mentioned in section 3.
4.1 Unknown Word Extraction
Unknown word extraction model composes of
2 sub-modules: unknown word recognition and
name entity identification.
4.1.1 Unknown word recognition
The hybrid model approach has been used for
unknown word recognition. The approach is the
combination of a statistical model and a set of
context based rules. A statistical model is used to
identify unknown word?s boundary. The set of
context based rules, then, will be used to extract
the unknown word?s semantic concept. If the
unknown word has no context, a set of unknown
word information, which has defined through
corpus analysis, will be generated and the best one
will be selected, as its semantic concept, by using
the semantic tagging model. Unknown word
recognition process is shown in figure 6.
N RELATIVECL.
RELATIVE
CL.
RELATIVE
CL.
Probabilistic
Semantic
Tagging
Model
w1 w2 UNK1 w3 UNK2
Extract and Record a
New word(or error)
STOP
? Lexi Base? Heuristic
Rule Base
Domain Specific
Dictionary
START
Unknown Word
Recognition Process
Guessing the
boundary of Unk
Generating information and
replace it to Unk
Computing probabilist
semantic chain
Figure 6: Unknown word recognition process
4.1.2 Name Entity Identification
After unknown words have been extracted,
Named Entity (NE) Identification will define the
category of unknown word. The model based on
heuristic rules and mutual information. Mutual
information or statistical analysis of word
collocation is used to solve boundary ambiguity
when names were composed with known and
unknown words. We use Knowledge based such
as list of known name (such as country names),
clue word list (such as person?s title) to support
the heuristic rules. Using clue word or common
noun that precedes the name can specify NE
categorization. Based on the case grammar, NE
categories can also defined. Moreover, the lists of
the names from predefined NE Ontology can be
used for predicting category too. The overview of
our system is shown in figure 7. More detail sees
(Chanlekha, H. et al 2002)
4.2 New Word Generation
Word formation is proposed to reduce the
lexicon size by constructing new words or
compound noun from the existing words. Based
on word formation rules and common dictionary,
the shallow parser will extract a set of candidate
compound nouns. Then probabilistic approach
based on syntactic structure and statistical data is
used to solve the problem of over- and under-
generation of new word construction and prune
the erroneous of compound noun from the
candidate set. The process of new word
construction is shown in figure 8. See more detail
in (Pengphon, N. et al 2002)
Figure 8 : New Word Construction process
4.3 Noun Phrase Recognition
Entities or concepts are usually described by
noun phrases. This indicates that text chunks like
noun phrases play an important role in human
language processing. In order to analyze NP, both
statistical and linguistic data are used. The model
of NP analysis system is shown in figure 9. More
detail sees (Pengphon, N. et al 2002)
Raw text
Morphological
Analysis
Word formation
Relation extraction
NP boundary
identification
NP segmentation
Knowledge Base? Dictionary? Prohibit pattern? Heuristic rule? Word formation rules? probabilistic? NP Rules? Ignore word lists? Clue word
Output
Figure 9 The architecture of system
Compound nouns
List of candidate
compound nouns
Parser
Syntactic Structure &
Statistical Analysis
- Word formation
rules
- Lexicon data
Figure 7 : Named Entity Recognition System
NE recognition
Word tokenization &
POS tagging
NE identification and
boundary detection
NE categorization
- NE lexicon
- Heuristic rules
Extracted NE matching
Figure 11: Noun phrase relation
Head modifier   ; f1 > f2, f3, f4
w1w2w3w4
 f1 f2 f3 f4
w1  w2w3w4
Compound        ; f1 = f2 = f3 = f4
   w1w2w3w4
The first step is morphological analysis for
word segmentation and POS tagging. At the
second step, the compound word is grouped into
one word by using word formation module (see
4.2). The third step, statistical-based technique is
used to identify phrase boundary. This step was
provided for identifying the phrase boundary by
using NP rules. Next step is Noun Phrase
Segmentation. The condition of noun phrase
segmentation is shown in figure 10.
After noun phrase is correctly detected, the
relation in noun phrases will be extracted. There
are 2 types of relation: head-head noun phrase and
head-modifier noun phrase. The process is based
on statistical techniques by considering the
frequency (fi) of each word (wi) in the document
(See figure 11).
5. Conclusion
The computational language models for
Thai in word and phrase level, consisting of
Unknown Word Extraction and Name Entities
identification, New word generation and Noun
phrase recognition, are studied on the basis of
their behavior analysis from the varieties of
corpus. We expected that it could create cost-
effective solutions to the practical problems in the
application developments especially in Thai
Information Retrieval and Information extraction
system. We also give the gateway to access Thai
language resources with hoping that it could be
the bridge of the international collaboration for
developing Multi-Language Processing
applications.
Acknowledgement
This project has been supported by NECTEC.
Reference
[1]  Bourigault, D.?Surface Grammatical Analysis
for the Extraction of Terminological Noun
Phrases?. Proc. COLING 1992, 1992.
[2]  Chen Kuang-hua and Chen Hsin-His,
?Extracting Noun Phrases from large-scale
Texts: A Hybrid Approach and Its Automatic
Evaluation?, Proc. of the 32nd ACL Annual
Meeting, 1994.
[3]   Chanlekha, H. et al ? Statistical and
Heuristic Rule Based Model for Thai Named
Entity Recognition?, Proc. of SNLP 2002,
2002.
[4]  G. Salton, ?Automatic Text Processing. The
Transformation, Analysis, and Retrieval of
Information by Computer?, Singapore:
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 1989.
[5]  Halliday,M.A.K and Hasan,Rugaiya.
?Cohesion in English?. Longman Group,
London, 1976.
[6]  Kawtrakul, A.et.al., ?Automatic Thai
Unknown Word Recognition?, Proc.of the
Natural Language Processing Pacific Rim
Symposium, Phuket,1997.
[7]  Kawtrakul, A.et.al.,?Backward Transliteration
for Thai Document Retrieval?, Proc.of
The1998 IEEE Asia-Pacific Conference on
Circuits and Systems, Chiangmai, 1998.
[8]  Kawtrakul, A. et.al., ?Toward Automatic
Multilevel Indexing for Thai Text retrieval
System?, In Proceedings of The 1998 IEEE
Asia-Pacific Conference on Circuits and
Systems, Chiangmai, 1998.
[9]  Kawtrakul, A.?A Lexibase Model for Writing
Production Assistant System? Proc.SNLP?95,
1995.
[10] Kawtrakul, A.?Anaphora Resolution Based
On Context Model Approach In Database-
Oriented Discourse?. A Doctoral Thesis to
The Department of Information Engineering,
School of Engineering, Nagoya University,
Japan, 1991.
[11]  Pengphon, N. et al ?Word Formation
Approach and Noun Phrase Analysis for
Thai? ?, Proc. of SNLP 2002, 2002.
[12]  Sornlertlamvanich, V. et.al., ?ORCHID:
THAI Part of Speech Tagged Corpus.
Technical Report of NECTEC, 1997.
[13] WEBSITE : http:// thaiarc.ku.ac.th
Figure 10 Noun phrase Segmentation
{w1,w2,R12}
w2 ? clue word set
R12 < threshold
; w2=start sub np
; w2= start sub np
else ; w1w2 is one unit
