Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Computational Semantics, pages 316?319,
Tilburg, January 2009. c?2009 International Conference on Computational Semantics
Developing a Computer-facilitated Tool for
Acquiring Near-synonyms in Chinese and English
Shixiao Ouyang, Helena Hong Gao*, and Soo Ngee Koh
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{helenagao}@ntu.edu.sg
1 Introduction
This paper is a multi-disciplinary study on cognitive linguistics, computational
linguistics and language acquisition. It focuses on application issues of meaning,
semantic structures and pragmatics to near-synonyms in Chinese and English
languages. The near-synonyms of physical action verbs (PA Verbs) can be
distinctive from each other in the way in which their actions are depicted, but
in terms of language acquisition, it is not an easy task to identify the nuances
among near-synonyms. Normal dictionaries do not explain the differentiae that
are crucial for the choice among near-synonyms, and research on how to tackle
the nuances among near-synonyms of PA Verbs has hardly been done. We
aim to develop a computer-facilitated language-learning tool for L2 learners to
master different sub-classes of PA Verbs in both Chinese and English.
We believe that all the fractions of the arm movement and actions are per-
ceptibly the base for linguistic expressions of human physical actions. By em-
phasizing the specifications of the manners of action as the crucial semantic
components embedded in the verb roots, Gao [1] provided a demonstration of
her decomposition method for the semantic properties of near-synonyms of PA
Verbs (see Table 1). Differences between the members of each subclass are
marked by different notions found in PA Verbs, such as Bodypart Contact,
Instrument, Force, Motion Direction, Speed, Effect, and Intention. These are
considered to be the most important ones in projecting the lexical semantic
prominence in the classifications of a word?s meaning components among its
near-synonyms.
We assume that to thoroughly understand the nuances between the near-
synonyms of PA Verbs, the learners need to understand the perspectives from
which the action is depicted linguistically. Gao?s [1] work on semantic decompo-
sition of near-synonyms of PA Verbs provides a theoretical guideline and solid
ground for designing an e-learning tool for L2 learners.
316
Table 1: Specification of Semantic Properties for Verbs of Touching [1]
2 Methodology
A near-synonym database needs to be set up first. To make the semantic rep-
resentations abstract enough for computing purpose, a rule based model will be
applied to quantify the semantic properties of each word. The following is a
rule showing how the semantic meaning of the word peng ?touch? is written in
relation to its other class members. The rule representation follows a standard-
ized English Machinese according to certain conventions in machine translation
[2].
The rule above can be rendered in words as follows: There is a Chinese
lexical item peng classified as a physical action verb (pav). It has three near-
synonyms (peng3 ) with 9 semantic property types categorized in relation to
its synonyms (smc(c, 9)). The detailed rule for the 9 categories begins with
the agent?s body part involvement (bp), followed by the instrument used in
performing the action (ins), degree of the force used (for), the motion direction
of the action (md), the speed of the motion action (sp), duration of the action
317
(du), possible patient object that the action is executed on (po), the subjective
agent?s possible intention to perform the action (int), and the possible effect
caused to the objective patient (eff ).
The numbers given in the brackets such as (3/3 ) or (2/3 ) and in the angle
brackets such as <3/3> or <1/3> are mathematical expressions where the
digits in the denominator in both ( ) and < > indicate the number of near-
synonyms in the class. The digit in the numerator in the bracket ( ) refers
to the number of the class members that can be labeled as bearing the same
semantic property category, while the digit in the numerator in < > refers to the
number of the class members that share a particular semantic property specified
in square brackets [ ]. For instance, the actions depicted by all three near-
synonyms of touching verbs involve hand contact as the body part involvement
and thus this part of rule is written as {bp<3/3>,[hand]}.
The content in { } has a conditional relation: If the number in the numerator
is 3 in brackets < >, then the property specified in [ ], such as [hand] in the body
part involvement, must be met by all its class members. If the class member
bears or shares more than one semantic properties within one category, the
alternatives are given with a semicolon in between the bracket { }, as typically
shown in the motion direction (md) of the action. In the beginning and at the
end of the rule representation, brief comments or reminders of the next step
rules are given after % as conventionally used in Prolog programming [2].
The second step is to calculate the average degree of uniqueness of each word
in each of the 9 categories specified in the rule, representing the relative degree
of easiness or difficulty to differentiate the word from the rest of the group
within the category. Algorithm for calculating the average degree of uniqueness
is proposed below:
Step 1: For each of the 9 semantic property categories, a priority check is
conducted first to look for the digit ?1? in the numerator in < >. If ?1? is found
in the numerator in at least one < >, go to Step 2; otherwise go to Step 3.
Step 2: In case of ?1? found in the numerator in a < >, the average degree
of uniqueness is marked as unit ?1? , the highest degree of the semantic repre-
sentation in revealing the uniqueness of its kind in terms of semantic categories.
Step 3: If ?1? is not found as a unique property within any category, assign
the value of the numerator in each < > as A
1
, A
2
,..., A
n
, where n indicates the
total number of properties that the word owns in each respective category. The
average degree of uniqueness represented by this category can be expressed in
the following formula: (1/n)
n
?
i=1
1/A
i
.
The average degree has a maximum value of 1. For those words whose degree
of uniqueness is lower than 1, the higher the degree of uniqueness, the lower the
value for n or A
i
. With respect to distinguishing themselves from the rest of the
class members, they have fewer competitors, leading to larger probabilities of
differentiating the near-synonyms by the corresponding semantic property. The
near-synonym database will contain one main database linked to a number of
sub-tables, which can be more or less than the 9 categories illustrated above,
depending on the number of semantic property categories that each class falls
318
into, or whether the specifications are specified enough to be able to discriminate
a particular class of near-synonyms under consideration in the future. Values
of uniqueness owned by each word found in each semantic property are stored
in the sub-tables. The average values of uniqueness owned by each word on per
category basis are recorded both in its sub-table and the main table.
In creating the algorithm for the interface, the steps are in reverse order of
building up the database. The total value of uniqueness computed will be com-
pared on per category basis. The category with the highest sum will be chosen
as the sub-table for the first attempt of differentiation. Similarly, a primary
check of the existence of value ?1? is conducted in order to give priority to the
category where most ?1?s are found. Only when no value ?1? is found in any
field could the arithmetic summation be carried out. Multiple choices questions
will be prompted to allow users to select one property from the category that
matches his/her context most closely. The number of the word(s) that match
such property will be reflected by the value of the numerator in the <> of the
chosen property. The algorithm will continue to search for the next category
with the highest degree of uniqueness among the remaining near-synonyms, until
only one word is selected from the class.
3 Conclusion
With a solid ground of linguistic analysis and application of rule based computa-
tional methodologies, the e-learning program provides advanced L2 learners with
an effective interface in acquiring the nuances among near-synonyms with more
intuitional and cognitive understanding. This computational system serves as
a good starting point for exploring e-teaching and e-learning tools for advanced
learners.
Acknowledgements
Research grants to H. H. Gao and President Research Scholarship to S. Ouyang
from Nanyang Technological University supported preparation of this paper.
References
[1] H. H. Gao. The physical foundation of the patterning of physical action
verbs. Lund, Sweden: Lund University Press, 2001.
[2] B. Sigurd and H. Gao. Outline of a computerized chinese grammar enabling
english and swedish translation. In Working Papers, volume 47, pages 181?
199. Lund University Press, 1999.
319
