Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 1?8,
Suntec, Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Enhancing the Japanese WordNet
Francis Bond,? Hitoshi Isahara,? Sanae Fujita,?
Kiyotaka Uchimoto,? Takayuki Kuribayashi? and Kyoko Kanzaki?
? NICT Language Infrastructure Group, ? NICT Language Translation Group
<bond@ieee.org,{isahara,uchimoto,kuribayashi,kanzaki}@nict.go.jp>
? Sanae Fujita, NTT Communications Science Laboratory
<sanae@kecl.cslab.ntt.co.jp>
Abstract
The Japanese WordNet currently has
51,000 synsets with Japanese entries. In
this paper, we discuss three methods of
extending it: increasing the cover, linking
it to examples in corpora and linking it
to other resources (SUMO and GoiTaikei).
In addition, we outline our plans to make
it more useful by adding Japanese defini-
tion sentences to each synset. Finally, we
discuss how releasing the corpus under an
open license has led to the construction
of interfaces in a variety of programming
languages.
1 Introduction
Our goal is to make a semantic lexicon of
Japanese that is both accesible and usable. To
this end we are constructing and releasing the
Japanese WordNet (WN-Ja) (Bond et al, 2008a).
We have almost completed the first stage,
where we automatically translated the English
and Euro WordNets, and are hand correcting it.
We introduce this in Section 2. Currently, we
are extending it in three main areas: the first
is to add more concepts to the Japanese Word-
Net, either by adding Japanese to existing En-
glish synsets or by creating new synsets (? 3).
The second is to link the synsets to text exam-
ples (? 4). Finally, we are linking it to other re-
sources: the Suggested Upper Merged Ontology
(SUMO) (Niles and Pease, 2001), the Japanese
semantic lexicon GoiTaikei (Ikehara et al, 1997),
and a collection of illustrations taken from the
Open ClipArt Library (Phillips, 2005) (? 5).
2 Current State
Currently, the WN-Ja consists of 157,000 senses
(word-synset pairs) 51,000 concepts (synsets) and
81,000 unique Japanese words (version 0.91). The
relational structure (hypernym, meronym, do-
main, . . . ) is based entirely on the English Word-
Net 3.0 (Fellbaum, 1998). We have Japanese
words for 43.0% of the synsets in the English
WordNet. Of these synsets, 45% have been
checked by hand, 8% were automatically cre-
ated by linking through multiple languages and
46% were automatically created by adding non-
ambiguous translations, as described in Bond
et al (2008a). There are some 51,000 synsets with
Japanese candidate words that have not yet been
checked. For up-to-date information on WN-Ja
see: nlpwww.nict.go.jp/wn-ja.
An example of the entry for the synset
02076196-n is shown in Figure 1. Most fields
come from the English WordNet. We have added
the underlined fields (Ja Synonyms, Illustration,
links to GoiTaikei, SUMO) and are currently
adding the translated definition (Def (Ja)). In
the initial automatic construction there were 27
Japanese words associated with the synset,1 in-
cluding many inappropriate translations for other
senses of seal (e.g., ?? hanko ?stamp?). These
were reduced to three after checking: ????,
?? azarashi ?seal? and ?? ? shi-ru ?seal?.
Synsets with? in their names are those for which
there is currently no Japanese entry in the Word-
Net.
The main focus of this year?s work has been
this manual trimming of badly translated words.
The result is a WordNet with a reasonable cov-
erage of common Japanese words. The precision
per sense is just over 90%. We have aimed at high
coverage at the cost of precision for two reasons:
(i) we think that the WordNet must have a rea-
1????, ???, ????, ??, ?, ??, ??, ?
?, ??, ?, ??, ??, ??, ??, ??, ??, ??, ?
?, ???, ?, ???, ??, ??, ??, ??, ?? ?, ?
?, ??, ??, ??, ??, ??, ??,??,?, ??, ??
1
sonable coverage to be useful for NLP tasks and
(ii) we expect to continue refining the accuracy
over the following years. Our strategy is thus dif-
ferent from Euro WordNet (Vossen, 1998), where
initial emphasis was on building a consistent and
complete upper ontology.
3 Increasing Coverage
We are increasing the coverage in two ways. The
first is to continue to manually correct the auto-
matically translated synsets. This is being done
both by hand, as time permits, and also by com-
paring against other resources such as GoiTaikei
and Wikipedia. When we check for poor candi-
dates, we also add in missing words as they occur
to us.
More interestingly, we wish to add synsets for
Japanese concepts that may not be expressed in
the English WordNet. To decide which new con-
cepts to add, we will be guided by the other tasks
we are doing: annotation and linking. We intend
to create new synsets for words found in the cor-
pora we annotate that are not currently covered,
as well as for concepts that we want to link to.
An example for the first is the concept ?? go-
han ?cooked rice?, as opposed to the grain ?
kome ?rice?. An example of the second is???
? ?shinguru ?single: a song usually extracted
from a current or upcoming album to promote
the album?. This is a very common hypernym in
Wikipedia but missing from the English Word-
Net.
As far as possible, we want to coordinate the
creation of new synsets with other projects: for
example KorLex: the Korean WordNet aleady
makes the cooked rice/grain distinction, and the
English WordNet should also have a synset for
this sense of single.
4 Text Annotation
We are in the process of annotating four texts
(Table 1). The first two are translations of Word-
Net annotated English Texts (SemCor and the
WordNet definitions), the third is the Japanese
newspaper text that forms the Kyoto Corpus
and the fourth is an open corpus of bilingual
Japanese-English sentences (Tanaka). In 2009,
we expect to finish translating and annotate all
of SemCor, translate the WordNet definitions and
Name Sentences Words Content Words
SemCor 12,842 224,260 120,000
Definitions 165,977 1,468,347 459,000
Kyoto 38,383 969,558 527,000
Tanaka 147,190 1,151,892 360,000
Table 1: Corpora to be Sense Tagged
start annotation on the Kyoto and Tanaka Cor-
pora.
This annotation is essential for finding missing
senses in the Japanese WordNet, as well as get-
ting the sense distributions that are needed for
supervised word sense disambiguation.
4.1 SemCor
SemCor is a textual corpus in which words have
been both syntactically and semantically tagged.
The texts included in SemCor were extracted
from the Brown corpus (Francis and Kucera,
1979) and then linked to senses in the English
WordNet. The frequencies in this corpus were
used to give the sense frequencies in WordNet
(Fellbaum, 1998). A subset of this corpus (Mul-
tiSemCor) was translated into Italian and used
as a corpus for the Italian WordNet (Bentivogli
et al, 2004). We are translating this subset into
Japanese.
In the same way as Bentivogli et al (2004), we
are exploiting Cross-Language Annotation Trans-
fer to seed the Japanese annotation. For exam-
ple, consider (1)2. The content words answer,
was, simple, honest are tagged in SemCor. They
can be aligned with their translations ?? ko-
tae ?answer?, ?? kantan ?simple?, ?? soc-
choku ?honest? and ??? datta ?was?. This
allows us to tag the Japanese translation with
the same synsets as the English, and thus disam-
biguate them.
(1) His answeri wasj simplek but honestl .
??i ? ??k ???? ??l ? ??
???j ?
However, just because all the English words
have sysnets in WordNet, it is not always the
case for the translations. For example, the En-
glish phrase last night can be translated into ?
? zen?ya ?last-night?. Here the two English
words (and synsets) link to a single Japanese
2Sentence 96 in b13.
2
??
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
Synset 02076196-n
Synonyms
?
?
ja ??, ????, ???
en seal9
fr phoque
?
? Illustration
animal/seal.png
Def (en) ?any of numerous marine mammals that come on shore to breed; chiefly of cold regions?
Def (ja) ???????????????????????????????
Hypernyms ?????/pinniped
Hyponyms ?/crabeater seal ?/eared seal ??/earless seal
GoiTaikei ??537:beast??
SUMO ? Carnivore
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
Figure 1: Example Entry for Seal/??
word which has no suitable synset in the English
WordNet. In this case, we need to create a new
synset unique to the Japanese WordNet.3
We chose a translated SemCor as the basis of
annotation for two main reasons: (i) the cor-
pus can be freely redistributed ? we expect
the glosses to be useful as an aligned corpus of
Japanese-English-Italian and (ii) it has other an-
notations associated with it: Brown corpus POS
annotation, Penn Treebank syntactic annotation.
4.2 WordNet Definitions
Our second translated corpus is formed from
the WordNet definitions (and example sentences)
themselves (e.g., the def field shown in Figure 1).
The English definitions have been annotated with
word senses in the Princeton WordNet Gloss Cor-
pus. In the same way that we do for SemCor, we
are translating the definitions and examples, and
using the existing annotation to seed our annota-
tion.
Using the definitions as the base for a sense
annotated corpus is attractive for the following
reasons: (i) the translated corpus can be freely
redistributed ? we expect the definitions to be
useful as an aligned corpus and also to be useful
for many other open lexicons; (ii) the definitions
are useful for Japanese native speakers using the
WordNet, (iii) the definitions are useful for unsu-
pervised sense disambiguation techniques such as
LESK (Baldwin et al, 2008); (iv) other projects
3Arguably, the fact that one says last night (not yester-
day night) for the night proceeding today and tomorrow
night (not next night) for the night following today sug-
gests that these multi-word expressions are lexicalized and
synsets should be created for them in the English Word-
Net. However, in general we expect to create some synsets
that will be unique to the Japanese WordNet.
have also translated synset definitions (e.g. Span-
ish and Korean), so we can hope to create a multi-
lingual corpus here as well and (v) the definitions
can be used as a machine readable dictionary, and
various information extracted from there (Barn-
brook, 2002; Nichols et al, 2006)
4.3 Kyoto Text Corpus
The Kyoto Text Corpus consists of newspaper
text from the Mainichi Newspaper (1995), seg-
mented and annotated with Japanese POS tags
and dependency trees (Kurohashi and Nagao,
2003). The corpus is made up of two parts. The
first consists of 17 full days of articles and the sec-
ond of one year?s editorials. We hope to annotate
at least parts of it during 2009.
Even though the Kyoto Text Corpus is not
freely redistributable, we have chosen to anno-
tate it due to the wealth of annotation associated
with it: dependency trees, predicate-argument re-
lations and co-reference (Iida et al, 2007), trans-
lations into English and Chinese (Uchimoto et al,
2004) and sense annotations from the Hinoki
project (Bond et al, 2006). We also felt it was
important to tag some native Japanese text, not
only translated text.
4.4 Tanaka Corpus
Finally, we will also tag the Tanaka Corpus, an
open corpus of Japanese-English sentence pairs
compiled by Professor Yasuhito Tanaka at Hyogo
University and his students (Tanaka, 2001) and
released into the public domain. The corrected
version we use has around 140,000 sentence pairs.
This corpus is attractive for several reasons.
(i) it is freely redistributable; (ii) it has been in-
dexed to entries in the Japanese-English dictio-
3
nary JMDict (Breen, 2003); (iii) part of it has
also been used in an open HPSG-based treebank
(Bond et al, 2008b); (iv) further, translations in
other languages, most notably French, have been
added by the TATOEBA project.4 Our plan is
to tag this automatically using the tools devel-
oped for the Kyoto corpus annotation, and then
to open the data to the community for refinement.
We give a typical example sentence in (2).
(2) ??????????????????
?Some birds are sitting on the branch of that
tree.? (en)
?Des oiseaux se reposent sur la branche de cet
arbre.? (fr)
5 Linking to other resources
We currently link the Japanese WordNet to three
other resources: the Suggested Upper Merged
Ontology; GoiTaikei, a Japanese Lexicon; and a
collection of pictures from the Open Clip Art Li-
brary (OCAL: Phillips (2005)).
For SUMO we used existing mappings. For the
other resources, we find confident matches auto-
matically and then generalize from them. We find
matches in three ways:
MM Monosemous monolingual matches
e.g. cricket bat or ?? azarashi ?seal?
MB Monosemous bilingual matches
e.g. ????seal?
HH Hypernym/Hyponym pairs
e.g. ?seal ? mammal?
We intend to use the same techniques to link
other resources, such as the concepts from the
EDR lexicon (EDR, 1990) and the automati-
cally extracted hypernym-hyponym links from
Torishiki-kai (Kuroda et al, 2009).
5.1 SUMO
The Suggested Upper Merged Ontology (SUMO)
is a large formal public ontology freely released
by the IEEE (Niles and Pease, 2001).
Because the structure of the Japanese Word-
Net is closely linked to that of the English Word-
Net, we were able to take advantage of the ex-
isting mappings from the English WordNet to
SUMO. There are 102,669 mappings from SUMO
4wwwcyg.utc.fr/tatoeba/
Carnivore Business Competition
Figure 2: SUMO illustrations
to WordNet: 3,593 equivalent, 10,712 where the
WordNet synset subsumes the SUMO concept,
88,065 where the SUMO concept subsumes the
WordNet concept, 293 where the negation of the
SUMO concept subsumes the WordNet synset
and 6 where the negation of the SUMO concept
is equivalent to the WordNet synset. According
to the mapping, synset 02076196-n ?? azarashi
?seal?, shown in Figure 1 is subsumed by the
SUMO concept ??Carnivore??. There is no link
between seal and carnivore in WordNet, which
shows how different ontologies can complement
each other.
Linking to SUMO also allowed us to use the
SUMO illustrations.5 These consist of 12,237
links linking 4,607 concepts to the urls of 10,993
illustrations. These are mainly taken from
from Wikimedia (upload.wikimedia.org), with
around 1,000 from other sources. The pictures
can be linked quite loosely to the concepts. For
example, ??Carnivore?? is illustrated by a lion eat-
ing meat, and ??BusinessCompetition?? by a pic-
ture of Wall Street.
As we wanted our illustrations to be more con-
crete, we only use SUMO illustrations where the
SUMO-WordNet mapping is equivalence. This
gave 4,384 illustrations for 999 synsets.
5.2 GoiTaikei
Linking Goi-Taikei, we used not only the
Japanese dictionary published in Ikehara et al
(1997), but also the Japanese-English dictionary
used in the machine translation system ALT-J/E
(Ikehara et al, 1991). We attempted to match
synsets to semantic categories by matching the
5Available at http://sigmakee.cvs.sourceforge.
net/viewvc/sigmakee/KBs/pictureList.kif, thanks to
Adam Pease for letting us know about them.
4
Japanese, English and English-Japanese pairs to
unambiguous entries in Goi-Taikei. For example,
the synset shown in Figure 1 was automatically
assigned the semantic category ??537:beast??, as
?? appears only once in WN-Ja, with the synset
shown, and once in the Japanese dictionary for
ALT-J/E with a single semantic category.
We are currently evaluating our results against
an earlier attempt to link WordNet and GoiTaikei
that also matched synset entries to words in Goi-
Taikei (Asanoma, 2001), but did not add an extra
constraint (that they must be either monosemous
or match as a hypernym-hyponym pair).
Once we have completed the mapping, we will
use it to check for inconsistencies in the two re-
sources.
5.3 Open ClipArt Library
In order to make the sense distinctions more vis-
ible we have semi-automatically linked synsets
to illustrations from the Open Clip Art Library
(OCAL: Phillips (2005)) using the mappings pro-
duced by Bond et al (2008a).
We manually checked the mappings and added
a goodness score. Illustrations are marked as:
3 the best out of multiple illustrations
2 a good illustration for the synset
1 a suitable illustration, but not perfect
This tag was used for black and white im-
ages, outlines, and so forth.
After the scoring, there were 874 links for 541
synsets (170 scored 1, 642 scored 2 and 62 scored
3). This is only a small subset of illustrations in
OCAL and an even smaller proportion of word-
net. However, because any illustrated synset alo
(in theory) illustrates its hypernyms, we have in-
directly illustrated far more than 541 synsets:
these figures are better than they seem.
There are far fewer OCAL illustrations than
the SUMO linked illustrations. However, they are
in general more representative illustrations (espe-
cially those scored 2 and above), and the source of
the clipart is available as SVG source so it is easy
to manipulate them. We think that this makes
them particularly useful for a variety of tasks.
One is pedagogical ? it is useful to have pic-
tures in learners? dictionaries. Another is in cross-
cultural communication - for example in Pangea,
where children use pictons (small concept repre-
senting pictures) to write messages (Takasaki and
Mori, 2007).
The OCAL illustrations mapped through
WordNet to 541 SUMO concepts. We have given
these links to the SUMO researchers.
6 Interfaces
We released the Japanese WordNet in three for-
mats: tab-delimited text, XML and as an SQLite
database. The license was the same as English
WordNet. This is a permissive license, the data
can be reused within proprietary software on the
condition that the license is distributed with that
software (similar to the MIT X license). The
license is also GPL-compatible, meaning that
the GPL permits combination and redistribution
with software that uses it.
The tab delimited format consists of just a list
of synsets, Japanese words and the type of link
(hand, multi-lingual or monosemous):
02076196-n ?? hand
02076196-n ???? hand
02076196-n ??? hand
We also output in WordNet-LMF (Francopoulo
et al, 2006; Soria et al, 2009), to make the
program easily available for other WordNet re-
searchers. In this case the synset structure was
taken from the English WordNet and the lem-
mas from the Japanese WordNet. Because of the
incomplete coverage, not all synsets contain lem-
mas. This format is used by the Kyoto Project,
and we expect it to become the standard ex-
change format for WordNets (Vossen et al, 2008).
Finally, we also created an SQL database. This
contains information from the English WordNet,
the Japanese WordNet, and links to illustra-
tions. We chose SQLite,6 a self-contained, zero-
configuration, SQL database engine whose source
code is in the public domain. The core structure
is very simple with six tables, as shown in Fig-
ure 3.
As we prepared the release we wrote a perl
module for a basic interface. This was used to
develop a web interface: Figure 4 shows a screen-
shot.
6http://www.sqlite.org
5
word
wordid 
 lang 
 lemma 
 pron 
 pos 
sense
synset 
 wordid 
 lang 
 rank 
 lexid 
 freq 
 src 
1..*1
synset
pos 
 name 
 src 
11..*
synsetDef
synset 
 lang 
 def 
 sid 
11
synlink
synset1 
 synset2 
 link 
 src 
1 1..*
xlink
synset 
 resource 
 xref 
 misc 
 confidence
1 1..*
Figure 3: Database Schema
Figure 4: Web Search Screenshot
6
7 Discussion
In contrast to earlier WordNets, the Japanese
WordNet was released with two known major im-
perfections: (i) the concept hierarchy was en-
tirely based on English with no adaptation to
Japanese and (ii) the data was released with some
unchecked automatically created entries. The re-
sult was a WordNet that did not fully model the
lexical structure of Japanese and was known to
contain an estimated 5% errors. The motivation
behind this was twofold. Firstly, we wanted to try
and take advantage of the open source model. If
the first release was good enough to be useful, we
hoped to (a) let people use it and (b) get feedback
from them which could then be incorporated into
the next release. This is the strategy known as
release early, release often (Raymond, 1999).
Secondly, we anticipated the most common use
of the WordNet to be in checking whether one
word is a hypernym of another. In this case, even
if one word is wrong, it is unlikely that the other
will be, so a small percentage of errors should be
acceptable.
From the practical point of view, the early re-
lease appears to have been a success. The SQL
database proved very popular, and within two
weeks of the first release someone produced a
python API. This was soon followed by inter-
faces in java, ruby, objective C and gauche. We
also received feedback on effective indexing of the
database and some corrections of entries ? these
have been included in the most recent release
(0.91).
The data from the Japanese WordNet has al-
ready been incorporated into other projects. The
first was the Multi-Lingual Semantic Network
(MLSN) (Cook, 2008) a WordNet based net-
work of Arabic, Chinese, English, German and
Japanese. Because both the Japanese WordNet
and MLSN use very open licenses, it is possible
to share entries directly. We have already re-
ceived useful feedback and over a thousand new
entries from MLSN. The second project using our
data is the Asian WordNet (Charoenporn et al,
2008). They have a well developed interface for
collaborative development of linguistic resources,
and we hope to get corrections and additions
from them in the future. Another project us-
ing the Japanese WordNet data is the Language
Grid (Ishida, 2006) which offers the English and
Japanese WordNets as concept dictionaries.
We have also been linked to from other re-
sources. The Japanese-English lexicon project
JMDict (Breen, 2004) now links to the Japanese
WordNet, and members of that project are us-
ing WordNet to suggest new entries. We used
JMDict in the first automatic construction stage,
so it is particularly gratifying to be able to help
JMDict in turn.
Finally, we believe that data about language
should be shared ? language is part of the com-
mon heritage of its speakers. In our case, the
Japanese WordNet was constructed based on the
work that others made available to us and thus we
had a moral obligation to make our results freely
available to others. Further, projects that create
WordNets but do not release them freely hinder
research on lexical semantics in that language ?
people cannot use the unreleased resource, but it
is hard to get funding to duplicate something that
already exists.
In future work, in addition to the planned ex-
tensions listed here, we would like to work on
the following: Explicitly marking lexical variants;
linking to instances in Wikipedia; adding deriva-
tional and antonym links; using the WordNet for
word sense disambiguation.
8 Conclusion
This paper presents the current state of the
Japanese WordNet (157,000 senses, 51,000 con-
cepts and 81,000 unique Japanese words, with
links to SUMO, Goi-Taikei and OCAL) and out-
lined our plans for further work (more words,
links to corpora and other resources). We hope
that WN-Ja will become a useful resource not only
for natural language processing, but also for lan-
guage education/learning and linguistic research.
References
Naoki Asanoma. 2001. Alignment of ontologies:wordnet
and goi-taikei. In NAACL Wokshop on WordNet &
Other Lexical Resources, pages 89?94. Pittsburgh, USA.
Timothy Baldwin, Su Nam Kim, Francis Bond, Sanae Fu-
jita, David Martinez, and Takaaki Tanaka. 2008. MRD-
based word sense disambiguation: Further extending
Lesk. In Proc. of the 3rd International Joint Conference
on Natural Language Processing (IJCNLP-08), pages
775?780. Hyderabad, India.
Geoff Barnbrook. 2002. Defining Language ? A local
7
grammar of definition sentences. Studies in Corpus Lin-
guistics. John Benjamins.
Luisa Bentivogli, Pamela Forner, and Emanuele Pianta.
2004. Evaluating cross-language annotation transfer in
the MultiSemCor corpus. In 20th International Con-
ference on Computational Linguistics: COLING-2004,
pages 364?370. Geneva.
Francis Bond, Sanae Fujita, and Takaaki Tanaka.
2006. The Hinoki syntactic and semantic treebank of
Japanese. Language Resources and Evaluation, 40(3?
4):253?261. (Special issue on Asian language technol-
ogy).
Francis Bond, Hitoshi Isahara, Kyoko Kanzaki, and Kiy-
otaka Uchimoto. 2008a. Boot-strapping a WordNet
using multiple existing WordNets. In Sixth Interna-
tional conference on Language Resources and Evalua-
tion (LREC 2008). Marrakech.
Francis Bond, Takayuki Kuribayashi, and Chikara
Hashimoto. 2008b. Construction of a free Japanese
treebank based on HPSG. In 14th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Natural Language Processing, pages
241?244. Tokyo. (in Japanese).
James W. Breen. 2003. Word usage examples in an elec-
tronic dictionary. In Papillon (Multi-lingual Dictionary)
Project Workshop. Sapporo.
James W. Breen. 2004. JMDict: a Japanese-multilingual
dictionary. In Coling 2004 Workshop on Multilingual
Linguistic Resources, pages 71?78. Geneva.
Thatsanee Charoenporn, Virach Sornlerlamvanich,
Chumpol Mokarat, and Hitoshi Isahara. 2008. Semi-
automatic compilation of Asian WordNet. In 14th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 1041?1044. Tokyo.
Darren Cook. 2008. MLSN: A multi-lingual semantic net-
work. In 14th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Natural Language Processing, pages 1136?1139. Tokyo.
EDR. 1990. Concept dictionary. Technical report, Japan
Electronic Dictionary Research Institute, Ltd.
Christine Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic
Lexical Database. MIT Press.
W. Nelson Francis and Henry Kucera. 1979. BROWN
CORPUS MANUAL. Brown University, Rhode Island,
third edition.
Gil Francopoulo, Monte George, Nicoletta Calzolari, Mon-
ica Monachini, Nuria Bel, Mandy Pet, and Claudia So-
ria. 2006. Lexical markup framework (LMF). In Pro-
ceedings of the 5th International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2006). Genoa,
Italy.
Ryu Iida, Mamoru Komachi, Kentaro Inui, and Yuji
Matsumoto. 2007. Annotating a Japanese text cor-
pus with predicate-argument and coreference relations.
In ACL Workshop: Linguistic Annotation Workshop,
pages 132?139. Prague.
Satoru Ikehara, Masahiro Miyazaki, Satoshi Shirai, Akio
Yokoo, Hiromi Nakaiwa, Kentaro Ogura, Yoshifumi
Ooyama, and Yoshihiko Hayashi. 1997. Goi-Taikei ?
A Japanese Lexicon. Iwanami Shoten, Tokyo. 5 vol-
umes/CDROM.
Satoru Ikehara, Satoshi Shirai, Akio Yokoo, and Hiromi
Nakaiwa. 1991. Toward an MT system without pre-
editing ? effects of new methods in ALT-J/E ?. In
Third Machine Translation Summit: MT Summit III,
pages 101?106. Washington DC.
Toru Ishida. 2006. Language grid: An infrastructure for in-
tercultural collaboration. In IEEE/IPSJ Symposium on
Applications and the Internet (SAINT-06), pages 96?
100. (keynote address).
Kow Kuroda, Jae-Ho Lee, Hajime Nozawa, Masaki Mu-
rata, and Kentaro Torisawa. 2009. Manual cleaning of
hypernyms in Torishiki-Kai. In 15th Annual Meeting of
The Association for Natural Language Processing, pages
C1?3. Tottori. (in Japanese).
Sadao Kurohashi and Makoto Nagao. 2003. Building a
Japanese parsed corpus ? while improving the parsing
system. In Anne Abeille?, editor, Treebanks: Building
and Using Parsed Corpora, chapter 14, pages 249?260.
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Eric Nichols, Francis Bond, Takaaki Tanaka, Sanae Fu-
jita, and Daniel Flickinger. 2006. Robust ontology ac-
quisition from multiple sources. In Proceedings of the
2nd Workshop on Ontology Learning and Population:
Bridging the Gap between Text and Knowledge, pages
10?17. Sydney.
Ian Niles and Adam Pease. 2001. Towards a standard
upper ontology. In Chris Welty and Barry Smith, edi-
tors, Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on
Formal Ontology in Information Systems (FOIS-2001).
Maine.
Jonathan Phillips. 2005. Introduction to the open
clip art library. http://rejon.org/media/writings/
ocalintro/ocal_intro_phillips.html. (accessed
2007-11-01).
Eric S. Raymond. 1999. The Cathedral & the Bazaar.
O?Reilly.
Claudia Soria, Monica Monachini, and Piek Vossen. 2009.
Wordnet-LMF: fleshing out a standardized format for
wordnet interoperability. In Second International Work-
shop on Intercultural Collaboration (IWIC-2009). Stan-
ford.
Toshiyuki Takasaki and Yumiko Mori. 2007. Design and
development of a pictogram communication system for
children around the world. In First International Work-
shop on Intercultural Collaboration (IWIC-2007), pages
144?157. Kyoto.
Yasuhito Tanaka. 2001. Compilation of a multilingual par-
allel corpus. In Proceedings of PACLING 2001, pages
265?268. Kyushu.
Kiyotaka Uchimoto, Yujie Zhang, Kiyoshi Sudo, Masaki
Murata, Satoshi Sekine, and Hitoshi Isahara. 2004.
Multilingual aligned parallel treebank corpus reflecting
contextual information and its applications. In Gilles
Se?rasset, editor, COLING 2004 Multilingual Linguistic
Resources, pages 57?64. COLING, Geneva, Switzerland.
P Vossen, E. Agirre, N. Calzolari, C. Fellbaum, S. Hsieh,
C. Huang, H. Isahara, K. Kanzaki, A. Marchetti,
M. Monachini, F. Neri, R. Raffaelli, G. Rigau, and
M. Tescon. 2008. KYOTO: A system for mining,
structuring and distributing knowledge across languages
and cultures. In Proceedings of the Sixth International
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC?08). Mar-
rakech, Morocco.
Piek Vossen, editor. 1998. Euro WordNet. Kluwer.
8
