Proceedings of the Workshop on BioNLP, pages 55?62,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Selecting an Ontology for Biomedical Text Mining
He Tan, Patrick Lambrix
Department of Computer and Information Science
Linko?pings universitet, Sweden
Abstract
Text mining for biomedicine requires a sig-
nificant amount of domain knowledge. Much
of this information is contained in biomedical
ontologies. Developers of text mining appli-
cations often look for appropriate ontologies
that can be integrated into their systems, rather
than develop new ontologies from scratch.
However, there is often a lack of documen-
tation of the qualities of the ontologies. A
number of methodologies for evaluating on-
tologies have been developed, but it is diffi-
cult for users by using these methods to se-
lect an ontology. In this paper, we propose
a framework for selecting the most appropri-
ate ontology for a particular text mining appli-
cation. The framework comprises three com-
ponents, each of which considers different as-
pects of requirements of text mining applica-
tions on ontologies. We also present an ex-
periment based on the framework choosing an
ontology for a gene normalization system.
1 Introduction
With the explosive growth of the volume of pub-
lished biomedical research, it is challenging to keep
up to date with the underlying knowledge avail-
able in the form of free text. The necessity of un-
derstanding actions of individual biological compo-
nents in system context rather than in isolation, ex-
tends the coverage of literature far beyond the ca-
pabilities of individual scientists. Text mining is an
emerging field that attempts to deal with these chal-
lenges (Ananiadou and McHought, 2006; Cohen
and Hersh, 2005; Spasic et al, 2005). Text mining
requires a significant amount of domain knowledge.
A large number of biomedical ontologies already ex-
ist, and hold much of the information. Some of the
ontologies have been designed for modeling domain
knowledge, e.g. FMA (Rosse and Mejino, 2003) and
GO (Ashburner et al, 2000), others are developed
for potential applications, e.g. MeSH (Lowe and
Barnett, 1994) for indexing the medical literature.
Whatever purposes the ontologies were built for,
they are used to support text mining for tasks such as
access to text, natural language processing, and in-
formation integration. Developers of text mining ap-
plications often look for appropriate ontologies that
can be integrated into their systems, rather than de-
velop new ontologies from scratch. The choice of
ontology may, however, have a major impact on the
performance of the text mining system, including
the quality of the results.
Selecting an appropriate ontology relies on eval-
uation and comparison of the available ontologies.
Unfortunately, there is often a lack of documenta-
tion of the qualities of the ontologies. A number of
methodologies for evaluating ontologies have been
proposed, mainly for evaluating one ontology at a
time. However, it is difficult for users by using these
methods to make a decision on ontology selection.
The various evaluation methods can be classified
into three main categories: 1) Those that evaluate
ontologies against a set of criteria defined by hu-
man (e.g. (Lozano and Go?mez, 2004) suggests 160
criteria). Most of the evaluation criteria are from
the point of view of ontology building. They are
not applicable for the selection of ontologies for a
particular application. 2) Those that include meth-
ods to gather statistics about the nature of ontolo-
gies (e.g. (Gangemi et al, 2006) proposes 32 mea-
sures for depth, width, fan-out, etc). The problem
55
for this kind of methods is that it is not clear how to
use these statistics for ontology selection among al-
ternatives. 3) Those that are application-dependent
evaluations. For example, ontologies are evaluated
against a corpus in (Brewster et al, 2004) regarding
the domain of an IE system, and (Porzel and Malaka,
2004) evaluates the quality of an ontology regard-
ing a relation tagging task by using gold standard
data tagged by human. While evaluating ontologies
for the particular application is a relatively straight-
forward method, evaluations may be sensitive to the
test dataset, and it may also be expensive to perform
evaluations for many ontologies.
In this paper we propose a framework for select-
ing the most appropriate ontology for a particular
text mining application. The framework comprises
three components for selection, and uses and ex-
tends some of existing ontology evaluation and val-
idation methods regarding the requirements of text
mining in the area. After a brief overview of the re-
lated work, we introduce our framework in section
3. In section 4 we show how to use the framework
in the setting of selecting an ontology for the gene
normalization system described in (Tan, 2008).
2 Related Work
Not much work has been done yet for ontology se-
lection in the biomedical area. Bioportal (Biopor-
tal, 2.0) is an ontology library, currently mainly
for browsing and navigating biomedical ontologies.
The system also allows users of ontologies to submit
information about their applications and comments
on the content of ontologies, and stores mappings
between concepts of ontologies in the library. This
information may help users to select ontologies from
the repository.
Some work has been done for ontology selection
for the Semantic Web. In (Sabou et al, 2006), au-
thors indicate the challenges for ontology evalua-
tion posed by ontology selection for the Semantic
Web, such as the need for automation and good per-
formance. Two examples of ontology selection for
the Semantic Web are OntoSelect (Buitelaar et al,
2004) and AKTiveRank (Alani and Brewster, 2005).
Both are mainly based on the second category of on-
tology evaluation methods. OntoSelect is an ontol-
ogy library that gives a functionality for selecting
ontologies for a given knowledge markup task. The
selection relies on measuring the number of con-
cepts and properties, and popularity of ontologies.
The ontology selection algorithm in AKTiveRank
combines the measures of coverage of an ontology
given search terms, and locations of the terms and
semantic similarity between the terms in the struc-
ture of the ontology.
OntoMetric is a hierarchical framework proposed
in (Lozano and Go?mez, 2004) for general ontology
selection. The tool offers a default hierarchy of cri-
teria to evaluate ontologies from the point of view of
building ontologies, and also allows users to adapt it
for their needs. The selection is based on a weighted
addition of value of each criteria.
3 The Framework
In principle biomedical ontologies provide formal
representations of domain knowledge for text min-
ing in the area, but they are used for different pur-
poses such as providing a model for storing, search-
ing and querying a repository of text; providing do-
main knowledge for natural language processing;
providing a framework for information integration;
or several of the above purposes.
Based on a literature study and experience in
building systems, in this section we suggest crite-
ria for selecting an ontology for a given biomedical
text mining application. The criteria are organized
in three components of a framework.
Component 1
In the first component the criteria for ontology selec-
tion are given in two dimensions: content and sup-
porting technologies. The combined requirements
from the two dimensions lead to a list of candidate
ontologies.
Content What are the requirements on the content
of ontology given an application? We propose three
characteristics to be considered,
- Type What is the kind of the ontology required
in the scenario? Ontologies can be distin-
guished into three basic types (Stenzhorn et al,
2005): top ontologies, e.g. BFO (Smith, 2004),
contain only a restricted set of highly general
classes, such as Function and Object, which are
not tied to any particular domain of interest;
56
top-domain ontologies, e.g. BioTop (Stenzhorn
et al, 2005), contain all classes that are essen-
tially needed to describe a certain domain, such
as Organism, Cell and Tissue in the case of bi-
ology; and domain ontologies, e.g. GO (Ash-
burner et al, 2000), contain classes that com-
prehensively describe a certain domain of in-
terest. For example, for natural language pro-
cessing tasks such as entity recognition, a top-
domain ontology may be sufficient.
- Scope What are the main subjects that need to
be covered in a top-domain or domain ontology
required by the application? For example, gene
and disease are the domains that concern (Hris-
tovski et al, 2005).
- Representation What kind of information needs
to be present in the ontology? From a knowl-
edge representation point of view, ontologies
can have the following components: concepts,
which represent sets or classes of entities in a
domain; relations between concepts, instances,
which represent the actual entities; and axioms,
which represent facts that are always true in
the topic area of the ontology (Lambrix et al,
2007). Which components should be present
in the ontology, depends to some extent on the
purpose of the ontology in the application. For
example, if an ontology is used as resource for
NLP in the application, components concepts
and instances both may be necessary, but not
relations and axioms.
Supporting technologies Three questions are con-
sidered in this dimension:
1. What technologies are needed to support the
use of the ontology in the scenario? Support-
ing technologies may include ontology repre-
sentation languages, ontology browsers, tools
for ontology alignment, reasoning services, and
ontology-driven NLP tools.
2. Are tools available to provide the supporting
technologies for the ontology? For example,
ontology alignment systems, e.g. (Lambrix and
Tan, 2008) are available for biomedical ontolo-
gies in OWL and OBO format.
3. What is the cost to develop new tools to support
the use of an ontology if there is no existing
tools? Does the cost meet the expectations of
the application?
Component 2
In this level the criteria for selection focus on de-
tailed content of candidate ontologies which are con-
sidered in two aspects: verification and evaluation.
Verification Considering the maturity level of cur-
rent biomedical ontologies, verification of taxo-
nomic knowledge in candidate ontologies is valu-
able for selection. Reasoners, such as Racer, Pellet,
and FaCT++, can check consistency, incompleteness
and redundancy in ontologies.
Evaluation First, we list a set of characteristics of
ontologies that are of interest for text mining appli-
cations,
- Coverage Does an ontology cover the concepts
or/and relations concerned in the application?
Do their definitions meet the expected scope?
- Taxonomic Knowledge The two relations is-a
and part-of have a central role in almost all on-
tologies (Smith et al, 2005). Do the locations
of essential concepts in the is-a and part-of hi-
erarchies meet the expectation?
- Instance The instantiation of concepts and the
number of instances for each concept could ef-
fect greatly the performance of many text min-
ing tasks such as entity recognition. Do they
satisfy the requirements?
These characteristics may be evaluated,
- against domain experts or references if they ex-
ist. For example, if an ontology involves inte-
gration of literature with data from biological
databases, schemas of databases can be the ref-
erences.
- among candidate ontologies. There is no gold
standard in this situation and therefore the can-
didate ontologies are compared directly to each
other. For instance, aligning the ontologies can
provide information about their similarities and
differences regarding their coverage.
57
Component 3
The results from component 1 and 2 may not lead to
a direct and confident decision. Also, in many cases
there exist gold standards or benchmarks which we
can use to evaluate our application. Therefore, the
purpose of component 3 is to evaluate the use of on-
tologies in a real system. This component could pro-
vide a relatively straightforward method for evaluat-
ing the quality of ontologies for use in the applica-
tion.
The field of biomedical text mining has ex-
pended considerable effort in building evaluation re-
sources. A number of challenges, such as TREC Ge-
nomics track, BioCreative, BioNLP/JNLPBA 2004
and LLL05, have been organized in the community.
They contribute to the creation of shared gold stan-
dard datasets, prepared by domain experts and also
suggest evaluation measures. Comparison of the
system individually bundled with candidate ontolo-
gies can be performed by using these gold standard
datasets and measures.
4 Experiment
In this section we present an experiment in which we
use our framework to select a biomedical ontology
for the gene normalization task.
4.1 Scenario
The purpose of gene normalization (GN) is to link
genes and proteins mentioned in the literature to
their entries in structured databases of biological
data. It has a substantial impact on tasks such as re-
trieval of relevant documents, identification of inter-
esting genes and proteins, and relationships between
them. The task is challenging even for scientists,
since there is no community wide agreement on how
a particular gene and gene product should be named.
Heavy use of short forms (acronyms or abbrevia-
tions) in biomedical literature makes the problem
worse. In (Tan, 2008) we developed an ontology-
centred system for gene normalization. It relies on
information about gene candidates, contexts of the
symbol and external knowledge sources. Informa-
tion about gene candidates is extracted from gene
databases. Ontologies are used for semantic inter-
pretation of contexts of gene symbols and identifi-
cation of their relevance to gene candidate informa-
ontologies
mapper
matching
disambiguated gene symbols
m
apping
similarity
N
ER
annotated
gene DBs
+ candidatestext
gene symbols
candidate
gene
retrieval
disambiguation
ranking
gene
symbolstext
Figure 1: The components and data flows of the system
tion. Normalization is based on matching contexts
of the symbol to relevant information about gene
candidates.
Figure 1 illustrates the components and data flows
of the system. The system receives a raw text as the
input, and yields database entries of genes appear-
ing in the text: 1) Mapper receives the ontology and
schemas of gene databases, and outputs a list of con-
cepts from the ontology and their mappings to cat-
egories of information stored in gene databases. 2)
Named Entity Recognizer (NER) recognizes relevant
biomedical entities in text by linking them to the
concepts of the ontology which have been mapped
to categories of gene information in mapper. 3)
Gene candidate retrieval retrieves gene candidates
for each gene symbol. The categories of information
about each gene candidate are collected. 4) Match-
ing includes various algorithms that match contexts
of a gene symbol to information about its gene can-
didates according to the mappings obtained in map-
per, and returns similarity values between them. 5)
Normalization ranking ranks gene candidates based
on results of Matching for each gene symbol appear-
ing in a text.
4.2 Selecting the ontology
In this application the components NER and Map-
per count on the deployment of ontologies. The
ontology-driven NER component involves associat-
ing text with the correct concepts in the ontology by
means of associating mentions in the text with in-
stances in the ontology. The ontology provides the
formal representation of domain knowledge for the
NER. The component Mapper involves mapping the
58
ontology to database schemas. The ontology pro-
vides the model to link information extracted from
literature and data in biological databases.
Component 1
Following the criteria of the component 1, we define
the requirements on the ontology.
Type Based on studies of categories of information
stored in gene databases such as EntrezGene (Ma-
gloot et al, 2005), we decide that top-domain on-
tologies are suitable for our application.
Scope The ontology should represent domain knowl-
edge about genes and gene products. The ontol-
ogy must contain concepts covering the categories
of gene information, e.g. location, functions, and
biological process.
Representation In order to support the task of NER,
the ontology must at least have concepts and in-
stances.
Supporting Technologies In the system the support-
ing technologies include an ontology-driven NLP
tool that support the task of NER, and ontology
alignment algorithms, that can be used to map the
ontology to categories of information in databases.
We look for suitable ontologies by searching
OBO (OBO, 2009) and Bioportal, and reviewing lit-
erature on biomedical ontologies. There are a few
ontologies covering genes and gene products such as
GO, MeSH, the Unified Medical Language System
(UMLS) knowledge sources (Lingberg et al, 1993)
and ontologies from the GENIA project (Kim et al,
2003). Only two of these meet al the above require-
ments, the UMLS knowledge sources and the GE-
NIA ontologies. The UMLS Semantic Network and
GENIA entity and event ontologies can be seen as
top-domain ontologies, of which the concepts are on
the level of the requirement. The UMLS Metathe-
saurus is primarily concerned with names used in
the domain. It contains a huge number of biomedical
entities and events (called concepts in the Metathe-
saurus) and their various names from more than 100
biomedical vocabularies. All of the concepts are as-
signed to at least one semantic type in the Semantic
Network. The MetaMap program (Aronson, 2001)
is available to map text to the concepts and seman-
tic type. The GENIA project collects a set of MED-
LINE articles concerning transcription factors in hu-
man blood cells. Every biomedical entity and event
appearing in the articles are identified with a con-
cept in the GENIA ontology. Several NLP tools,
e.g. LingPipe (LingPipe, 3.7.0), support statistical
name entity recognition by using the GENIA corpus
as training data.
Component 2
Verification We checked the consistency and redun-
dancy in the UMLS Semantic Network and GE-
NIA ontologies, respectively, by translating them
into OWL format and then sending to the reasoner,
Racer. Both of them are consistent and have mini-
mal representations.
Evaluation We perform two evaluations. The first
evaluation is to investigate the coverage of concepts
of the two ontologies against categories of Entrez-
Gene. The coverage determines the extent of infor-
mation that can be used for gene normalization. In
the second one we compare biomedical entities and
events belonging to concepts of the two ontologies,
since they influence the performance of NER.
- Evaluation 1 Manually, we identify a list of cate-
gories of EntrezGene that are used for gene normal-
ization. Evaluation is performed by aligning con-
cepts of the two ontologies to the categories. A first
observation is that UMLS covers more topics than
GENIA and therefore may give better results for
NER. The topics of the GENIA corpus can be repre-
sented by a query using human, blood cell, transcrip-
tion factor. To be able to compare the coverage of
UMLS and GENIA on an overlapping piece of a do-
main we align the two ontologies based on the GE-
NIA topics. The evaluation is based on an instance-
based strategy proposed in (Tan et al, 2006). The al-
gorithm consists of the following steps: 1) Instance
collection: We retrieve a list of human genes from
the database using human, blood cell, and transcrip-
tion factor. All entities appearing in the categories of
information are collected as instances. 2) Classifica-
tion: For each ontology, each instance is classified
to concepts by a NLP tool. The MetaMap program
is used for the UMLS Semantic Network, and the
LingPipe entity recognition program is used for the
GENIA ontology. An instance can be classified to
more than one concept. 3) Calculation: The simi-
larity between a concept from an ontology (A) and
a category from the EntrezGene (Bj) is determined
by the extent to which the instances of the category
59
EntrezGene UMLS (value) GENIA (value)
Name/Syn. Gene or Genome (0,66) protein molecule (0,83)
Chromosome Cell Component (1.0) protein molecule (1.0)
Map Location Nucleotide Sequence (1.0) DNA domain or region (0,5)
protein molecule (0,4)
Protein Gene or Genome (0,42) protein molecule (0,60)
Amino Acid, Peptide,
or Protein (0,25)
Pathway Molecular Function (0,29) other name (0,76)
Cell Function (0,24)
GOA function Molecular Function (0,75) other name (0,85)
GOA component Cell Component (0,96) cell component (0,40)
other name ( 0,15)
GOA process Cell Function (0,49) other name (0,78)
Molecular Function (0,16)
Table 1: Comparison: EntrezGene, UMLS and GENIA
support the concept. The similarity value is calcu-
lated as: sim(A,Bj) =
Pn
i=1 S(ai,Bj)
Pm
k=1
Pn
i=1 S(ai,Bk)
, where ai
are the instances belonging to A, n is the number of
instances belonging to A, m is the number of cate-
gories, and S is a function calculating the degree to
which an instance of an ontology concept supports a
category from EntrezGene. S is defined as:
S(ai, Bj) =
8
<
:
0 if ai does not associate with Bj
1
p otherwise; p is the number of categories Bk
that ai associates with
Table 1 shows the alignment results. The left col-
umn gives the categories of gene information we use
for normalization. If the similarity value between a
category and the UMLS semantic type or GENIA
concept is higher than 0.6, they are considered as
corresponding to the category. If no similarity value
is higher than 0.6, we list the two semantic types
or concepts with the highest values. Three of eight
alignments fall into this situation for UMLS seman-
tic types, and two for GENIA concepts. We also
note that the GENIA concept other name appears 4
times, but the meaning of this concept is not well-
defined. Most other categories are aligned to pro-
tein molecule, although the categories are very dif-
ferent. In this evaluation, it is more likely that the
UMLS semantic network is more appropriate than
the GENIA ontology for our system.
- Evaluation 2 35,515 entities of interest in the bi-
ological domain are identified in the GENIA entity
corpus, 7,089 entities of which have been found in
the UMLS Metathesaurus. Since we could not ob-
tain all the UMLS Metathesaurus concepts for each
semantic type, we decided to compare the UMLS
semantic types and GENIA concepts that appear
in the first evaluation, based on these 7,089 shared
instances. The comparison is based on the same
instance-based alignment strategy used in the first
evaluation. Tables 2 and 3 show the alignment re-
sults. In table 2 the value illustrates the extent
to which instances of GENIA concepts support the
UMLS semantic types. We list the three concepts
with the highest values in the table, if they ex-
ist. The concepts in italics are event concepts, the
others are entities. All the UMLS semantic types
cover instances from more than one GENIA con-
cept belonging to a subtree. For example, Gene or
Genome could be aligned to the three GENIA con-
cepts DNA family or group, DNA domain or region
and RNA molecule, which are leaves of the subtree
Nucleotide acid compound. The granularity of the
part of the GENIA ontology concerning the appli-
cation is finer than the corresponding part of the
UMLS semantic network. Table 3 shows the dis-
tribution of the instances of GENIA concepts when
they support UMLS semantic types. Instances of
DNA domain or region and cell component mainly
support Gene or Genome and Cell Component, re-
spectively, which is consistent with our observation
in table 1. Another observation from this table is
that protein molecule covers both Gene or Genome
and Amino Acid, Peptide, or Protein. The result also
shows that other name is not well defined. However,
this evaluation does not give a conclusive answer to
which ontology supports the task of NER better.
Component 3
Since component 1 and 2 could not lead to a di-
rect and confident decision, we evaluate the use of
the two ontologies in our system We use a train-
ing dataset from the BioCreative II gene normal-
ization task (Morgan et al, 2008) in the evaluation.
The BioCreative datasets contain Medline abstracts
along with the EntrezGene identifiers corresponding
to the human genes and direct gene products ap-
pearing in the abstracts. The training dataset con-
tain 281 Medline abstracts and 640 human genes.
The MetaMap program is the NLP tool that uses the
UMLS Semantic Network, and the LingPipe entity
recognition program employs GENIA ontology.
Table 4 illustrates the quality of normalization in
the two systems. The quality is measured in terms of
precision, recall and f-measure. Recall (Re.) is de-
fined as the number of correctly disambiguated gene
symbols divided by the number of the gene sym-
bols to be disambiguated. Precision is measured in
60
GENIA UMLS value
DNA family or group Gene or Genome 0.63
DNA domain or region Gene or Genome 0.54
RNA molecule Gene or Genome 0.44
DNA N/A Nucleotide Sequence 0.23
DNA substructure Nucleotide Sequence 0.23
DNA domain or region Nucleotide Sequence 0.17
cell component Cell Component 0.76
RNA N/A Cell Component 0.50
DNA molecule Cell Component 0.46
protein family or group Amino Acid, Peptide, or Protein 0.37
protein subunit Amino Acid, Peptide, or Protein 0.33
amino acid monomer Amino Acid, Peptide, or Protein 0.33
protein domain or region Amino Acid Sequence 0.42
Cellular physiological process Cell Function 0.26
Cell communication Cell Function 0.24
Cell differentiation Cell Function 0.19
Protein amino acid deacetylation Molecular Function 1.0
Protein amino acid dephosphorylation Molecular Function 0.80
Protein ubiquitination Molecular Function 0.50
Table 2: Comparison: UMLS and GENIA (1)
GENIA UMLS value
protein molecule Gene or Genome 0.30
protein molecule Amino Acid, Peptide, or Protein 0.29
protein molecule Biologically Active Substance 0.10
DNA domain or region Gene or Genome 0.54
DNA domain or region Biologically Active Substance 0.07
DNA domain or region Nucleotide Sequence 0.06
cell component Cell Component 0.76
cell component Biomedical or Dental Material 0.03
cell component Amino Acid, Peptide, or Protein 0.02
other name Disease or Syndrome 0.15
other name Cell Function 0.09
other name Neoplastic Process 0.08
Table 3: Comparison: UMLS and GENIA (2)
two ways. Pre.-1 is defined as the number of gene
symbols correctly and uniquely identified to the real
gene, divided by the total number of genes proposed
in the result regarding the whole data set. Pre.-2 is
computed as the average of the precision of disam-
biguation for each gene symbol. F-measure is the
evenly weighted harmonic mean of precision and re-
call. Pre.-1 and Pre.-2 are used in the computation
of Fm.-1 and Fm.-2, respectively. For both datasets
the quality of normalization from the system bun-
dled with the UMLS is better than the one with the
GENIA ontology.
Result
Overall, the UMLS knowledge source can be con-
sidered as the ontology that is most appropriate for
our gene normalization system. The ontology cov-
ers the subject, genes and gene products, well. The
meaning of the concepts is defined well enough for
the use in the application. The granularity of the
part of the ontology meets the need of the task. The
system bundled with the UMLS and its supporting
technologies produced better results in a gold stan-
dard dataset than the other one.
KB Dataset Pre.-1 Pre.-2 Re. Fm.-1 Fm.-2
GENIA dataset 1 0.45 0.65 0.78 0.57 0.71
dataset 2 0.50 0.63 0.72 0.59 0.67
UMLS dataset 1 0.48 0.69 0.82 0.61 0.75
dataset 2 0.52 0.67 0.78 0.62 0.72
Table 4: Quality of normalization
Although we have not run additional expirements
to confirm that the we have indeed made the right se-
lection for our gene normalization system, the tests
do corrobarate our results. The chosen ontology
leads to a better result for both datasets that we used.
Therefore, each dataset can be seen as a confirma-
tion of the framework where we only used the other
dataset.
5 Conclusions
In this paper we proposed a framework for select-
ing an appropriate ontology for a particular biomed-
ical text mining application. The framework deals
with ontology selection in three components, each
of which considers different aspects of requirements
of text mining applications on ontologies. Then we
present an experiment in which we select a biomedi-
cal ontology for a gene normalization system, using
the framework. Within the framework, evaluation
results lead us to a relatively concrete choice of an
ontology for our system.
In the future we want to evaluate our framework
with more applications and ontologies. Further, cur-
rently there is no service to support ontology selec-
tion for biomedical text mining. Therefore, an im-
portant track for future work is to build or extend an
existing portal with information about the ontologies
and their use in text mining applications that is struc-
tured according to our framework. The information
in such a portal will constitute valuable data and ex-
periences regarding ontology selection that will be
useful for future applications.
Acknowledgments
We thank Bo Servenius for comments on the project,
Qiang Liu for generating part of the data and David
Byers for proof-reading the paper. We also acknowl-
edge the financial support of the Center for Indus-
trial Information Technology.
61
References
Alani H, Brewster C. (2005) Ontology Ranking based on
the Analysis of Concept Structures. Proceedings of the
3th International Conference on Knowledge Capture,
51-58.
Alias-i. 2008. LingPipe 3.7.0. http://alias-i.com/lingpipe
Ananiadou S, McNaught J. (editors) (2006) Text Mining
for Biology and Biomedicine. Artech House.
Aronson AR. (2001) Effective mapping of biomedical
text to the UMLS Metathesaurus: the MetaMap pro-
gram. Proceedings of the AMIA Symposium, 17-21.
Ashburner M, Ball CA, Blake JA, Botstein D, Butler H,
Cherry JM, Davis AP, Dolinski K, Dwight SS, Eppig
JT, Harris MA, Hill DP, Issel-Tarver L, Kasarskis A,
Lewis S, Matese JC, Richardson JE, Ringwald M, Ru-
bin GM, Sherlock G. (2000) Gene ontology: tool for
the unification of biology. The Gene Ontology Consor-
tium. Nature Genetics, 25(1):25-9.
Bioportal. http://bioportal.bioontology.org/
Brewster C, Alani H, Dasmahapatra S, Wilks Y. (2004)
Data Driven Ontology Evaluation. International Con-
ference on Language Resources and Evaluation.
Buitelaar P, Eigner T, Declerck T. (2004) OntoSelect: A
Dynamic Ontology Library with Support for Ontology
Selection. Proceedings of the Demo Session at the In-
ternational Semantic Web Conference.
Cohen AM, Hersh WR. (2005) A survey of current work
in biomedical text mining. Briefings in Bioinformatics,
6:57-71.
Gangemi A, Catenacci C, Ciaramita M, Lehmann J.
(2006) Modelling Ontology Evaluation and Valida-
tion. Proceedings of the 2006 European Semantic Web
Conference.
Hristovski D, Peterlin B, Mitchell JA, Humphrey SM.
(2005) Using literature-based discovery to identify dis-
ease candidate genes. International Journal of Medical
Informatics, 74(2-4):289-298.
Kim J-D, Tomoko O, Yuka T, Tsujii J. (2003). GE-
NIA corpus - a semantically annotated corpus for bio-
textmining. Bioinformatics, 19(suppl. 1):180-182.
Lambrix P, Tan H, Jakoniene V, Stro?mba?ck L. (2007) Bi-
ological Ontologies. Chapter 4 in Baker, Cheung (eds),
Semantic Web: Revolutionizing Knowledge Discovery
in the Life Sciences, 85-99, Springer.
Lambrix P, Tan H. (2008) Ontology alignment and merg-
ing. Chapter 6 in Burger, Davidson, Baldock, (eds),
Anatomy Ontologies for Bioinformatics: Principles
and Practice, 133-150, Springer.
Lindberg DA, Humphreys BL, McCray AT.(1993) The
Unified Medical Language System. Methods of Infor-
mation in Medicine, 32:281 -91.
Lowe HJ, Barnett GO. (1994) Understanding and using
the medical subject headings (MeSH) vocabulary to
perform literature searches. Journal of the American
Medical Association, 271(14):1103-1108.
Lozano-Tello A, Go?mez-Pe?rez A. (2004) ONTOMET-
RIC: A Method to Choose the Appropriate Ontology.
Journal of Database Management. Special Issue on
Ontological Analysis, Evaluation, and Engineering of
Business Systems Analysis Methods, 15(2):1-18.
Maglott D, Ostell J, Pruitt KD, Tatusova T. (2005) En-
trez Gene: gene-centered information at NCBI. Nu-
cleic Acids Research. 33:D54-8.
Morgan AA, Lu Z, Wang X, Cohen AM, Fluck J, Ruch
P, Divoli A, Fundel K, Leaman R, Hakenberg J, Sun
C, Liu HH, Torres R, Krauthammer M, Lau WW, Liu
H, Hsu CN, Schuemie M, Cohen KB, Hirschman L.
(2008) Overview of BioCreative II gene normaliza-
tion. Genome Biology, 9(Suppl 2):S3.
OBO. http://obofoundry.org/
Porzel R, Malaka R. (2004) A task-based approach for
ontology evaluation. ECAI 2004 Workshop Ontology
Learning and Population .
Rosse C, Mejino JL Jr. (2003) A reference ontol-
ogy for biomedical informatics: the foundational
model of anatomy. Journal of Biomedical Informatics,
36(6):478-500.
Sabou M, Lopez V, Motta E, Uren V. (2006) Ontology
Selection: Ontology Evaluation on the Real Semantic
Web. Proceedings of the 4th International EON Work-
shop, Evaluation of Ontologies for the Web.
Smith B. (2004) Beyond concepts: ontology as reality
representation. Proceedings of Formal Ontology and
Information Systems, 73-78.
Smith B, Ceusters W, Klagges B, Ko?hler J, Kumar A,
Lomax J, Mungall C, Neuhaus F, Rector AL, Rosse
C. (2005) Relations in biomedical ontologies. Genome
Biology, 6(5):R46.
Spasic I, Ananiadou S, McNaught J, Kumar A. (2005)
Text mining and ontologies in biomedicine: mak-
ing sense of raw text. Briefings in Bioinformatics,
6(3):239-251.
Stenzhorn H, Schulz S, Bei?wanger E. (2007) Towards
a Top-Domain Ontology for Linking Biomedical On-
tologies Proceedings of the 12th World Congress on
Health (Medical) Informatics.
Tan H. (2008) Knowledge-based Gene Symbol Disam-
biguation. CIKM: Proceedings of the 2nd interna-
tional workshop on Data and text mining in bioinfor-
matics, 73-76.
Tan H, Jakoniene V, Lambrix P, Aberg J, Shahmehri
N. (2006) Alignment of Biomedical Ontologies using
Life Science Literature. Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Workshop on Knowledge Discovery in Life Sci-
ence Literature, 1-17.
62
