Proceedings of the Workshop on BioNLP: Shared Task, pages 107?110,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Multi-Phase Approach to Biomedical Event Extraction
Hyoung-Gyu Lee, Han-Cheol Cho, Min-Jeong Kim
Joo-Young Lee, Gumwon Hong, Hae-Chang Rim
Department of Computer and Radio Communications Engineering
Korea University
Seoul, South Korea
{hglee,hccho,mjkim,jylee,gwhong,rim}@nlp.korea.ac.kr
Abstract
In this paper, we propose a system for biomed-
ical event extraction using multi-phase ap-
proach. It consists of event trigger detector,
event type classifier, and relation recognizer
and event compositor. The system firstly iden-
tifies triggers in a given sentence. Then, it
classifies the triggers into one of nine pre-
defined classes. Lastly, the system examines
each trigger whether it has a relation with
participant candidates, and composites events
with the extracted relations. The official score
of the proposed system recorded 61.65 preci-
sion, 9.40 recall and 16.31 f-score in approxi-
mate span matching. However, we found that
the threshold tuning for the third phase had
negative effect. Without the threshold tuning,
the system showed 55.32 precision, 16.18 re-
call and 25.04 f-score.
1 Introduction
As the volume of biomedical literature grows expo-
nentially, new biomedical terms and their relations
are also generated. However, it is still not easy for
researchers to access necessary information quickly
since it is lost within large volumes of text. This is
the reason that the study of information extraction
is receiving the attention of biomedical and natural
language processing (NLP) researchers today.
In the shared task, the organizers provide partic-
ipants with raw biomedical text, tagged biomedical
terms (proteins), and the analyzed data with various
NLP techniques such as tokenization, POS-tagging,
phrase structure and dependency parsing and so on.
The expected results are the events, which exist in
the given text, consisting of a trigger and its partici-
pant(s) (Kim et al, 2009).
The proposed system consists of three phases;
event trigger detection phase(TD phase), event type
classification phase(TC phase), relation recognition
and event composition phase(RE phase). It works in
the following manner. Firstly, it identifies triggers of
a given biomedical sentence. Then, it classifies trig-
gers into nine pre-defined classes. Lastly, the sys-
tem finds the relations between triggers and partic-
ipant candidates by examining each trigger whether
it has relations with participant candidates, and com-
posites events with the extracted relations. In the
last phase, multiple relations of the same trigger
can be combined into an event for Binding event
type. In addition, multiple relations can be com-
bined and their participant types can be classified
into not only theme but also cause for three Regu-
lation event types.
In this paper, we mainly use dependency pars-
ing information of the analyzed data because sev-
eral previous studies for SRL have improved their
performance by using features extracted from this
information (Hacioglu, 2004; Tsai et al, 2006).
In the experimental results, the proposed system
showed 68.46 f-score in TD phase, 85.20 accuracy
in TC phase, 89.91 f-score in the initial step of RE
phase and 81.24 f-score in the iterative step of RE
phase, but officially achieved 61.65 precision, 9.40
recall and 16.31 f-score in approximate span match-
ing. These figures were the lowest among twenty-
four shared-task participants. However, we found
that the threshold tuning for RE phase had caused
a negative effect. It deteriorates the f-score of the
107
Event Trigger Detector
Event Type Classifier
Relation Recognizer &
Event Compositor
Initial Step
Iterative Step
Source Data
Analyzed Data
Result of Event Extraction
Figure 1: System Architecture
proposed system by enlarging the gap between pre-
cision and recall. With the default threshold, the sys-
tem showed better result in the final test data, 55.32
precision, 16.18 recall and 25.04 f-score with the
rank 17th among 24 teams.
2 System Description
Figure 1 shows our bio-event extraction system
which consists of Event Trigger Detector, Event
Type Classifier and Relation Recognizer & Event
Compositor. Each component includes single or
multiple Maximum Entropy models trained by gold
annotation data. The inputs of the system are source
data and analyzed data. The former is raw text with
entity annotation, and the latter is tokenized, POS
tagged and parsed data of the raw text.1
Because the event type is useful to recognize the
relation, we perform TC phase before RE phase.
One of important characteristics of bio-event is
that one event as well as a protein may participate
in another event. Considering this, we designed the
system in which the Relation Recognizer be per-
formed through two steps. In the initial step, the sys-
tems examines each trigger whether it has the rela-
tions with only proteins, and composites events with
recognized relations. In the iterative step, it repeat-
edly examines remained triggers in the same man-
1We used the GDep result provided by organizers of the
shared task as analyzed data.
ner. This step allows the system to extract chain-
style events, which means that one event participates
in another one and the other participates in the for-
mer.
To increase the f-score, we tuned a threshold for
RE phase which is a binary classification task; de-
ciding whether a given relation candidate is correct
one or not. When the output probability of a maxi-
mum entropy model is lower than the threshold, we
discard a relation candidate.
2.1 Event Trigger Detection
We assume that an event trigger is a single word.
In other words, we do not consider the multi-word
trigger detection. Because the trigger statistic in
the training data showed that about 93% of triggers
are single word, we concentrated on the single word
trigger detection.
This phase is simply defined as the task that clas-
sify whether each token is a trigger or not in a doc-
ument. It is necessary to select targets to classify
among all tokens, because a set of all tokens includes
too many negative examples. For this, the follow-
ing filtering rules are applied to each token. Though
these rules filtered out 69.5% of tokens, the trigger
recall was 94.8%.
? Filter out tokens whose POS tag is not matched
to anything among NN, NNS, VB, VBD, VBG,
VBN, VBP, VBZ, JJ and JJR.
? Filter out tokens that are a biomedical named
entity.
? Filter out sentences that do not have any pro-
teins.
Proposed features for the binary classification of
tokens include both features similar to those used in
(Hacioglu, 2004; Tsai et al, 2006; Ahn, 2006) and
novel ones. The selected feature set is showed in
Table 1.
2.2 Event Type Classification
In TC phase, tokens recognized as trigger are clas-
sified into nine pre-defined classes. Although more
than a dozen features had been tested, the features
except word and lemma features hardly contributed
to the performance improvement. The tuned feature
set is showed in Table 2.
108
Word level features
- Token word
- Token lemma
- Token POS
- POSs of previous two tokens
- Distance, word and POS of the nearest protein
- Positional independence: Whether a noun or a
verb is adjacent to the current token
Dependency level features
- Dependency label path of the nearest protein
- The existence of protein in family: This feature is
motivated by the study in (Hacioglu, 2004)
- A boolean feature which is true if token?s child is
a proposition and the chunk of the child include a
protein
- A boolean feature which is true if token?s child is
a protein and its dependency label is OBJ
Table 1: Features for event trigger detection
Features for the event type classification
- Trigger word
- Trigger lemma
- A boolean feature which is true if a protein exists
within left and right two words
Table 2: Features for event type classification
We found that TC phase showed relatively high
precision and recall with simple lexical features in
the experiment. However, it was quite difficult to
find additional features that could improve the per-
formance.
2.3 Relation Recognition and Event
Composition
In the last phase, the system examines each trigger
whether it has relations with participant candidates,
and composites events with the extracted relations.
(A relation consists of one trigger and one partici-
pant)
We devised a two-step process, consisting of ini-
tial and iterative steps, because a participant candi-
date can be a protein or an event. In the initial step,
the system finds relations between triggers and pro-
tein participant candidates. Features are explained
in Table 3. Then, it generates one event with one
relation for event types that have only one partici-
pant. For Binding event type, the system combines
at most three relations of the same trigger into one
Word level features
- Trigger word
- Trigger lemma
- Trigger type (I-1)
- Entity word
- Entity type (I-2)
- Word sequence between T&P (I-1)
- Word distance
- Existence of another trigger between T&P
- The number of triggers of above feature
- Existence of another participant candidate
- The number of participants of above feature
Dependency level features
- Trigger dependency label (I-1)
- Entity dependency label
- Lemma of trigger?s head word (I-1)
- POS of trigger?s head word
- Lemma of entity?s head word (I-1)
- POS of entity?s head word
- Lemma of trigger?s head word + Lemma of en-
tity?s head word
- Right lemma of trigger?s head word
- 2nd right lemma of trigger?s head word (I-1)
- Right lemma of entity?s head word
- 2nd right lemma of entity?s head word (I-1)
- Dependency path between T&P
- Dependency distance between T&P
- Direct descendant: a participant candidate is a di-
rect descendant of a given trigger
Table 3: Features for relation recognition between a trig-
ger and a participant (T&P)
event. For Regulation event types, we trained a bi-
nary classifier to classify participants of a Regulation
event into theme or cause. Features for participant
type classification is explained in Table 4. Among
multiple participants of a Regulation event, only two
participants having highest probabilities for theme
and cause constitute one event.
In the iterative step, the system finds relations be-
tween triggers and event participant candidates that
were extracted in the previous step, and generates
events in the same manner. The system performs it-
erative steps three times to find chain events.
Features are basically common in the initial (I-1)
step and the iterative (I-2) step, but some features
improve the performance only in one step. In order
to represent the difference in Table 3, we indicate (I-
1) when a feature is used in the initial step only, and
indicate (I-2) when it used in the iterative step only.
109
Word level features
- Trigger word
- Trigger lemma
- Participant words - event?s trigger words if a par-
ticipant is an event
- Left lemma of a participant
- Right lemma of a participant
- Trigger word + Participant words
- Trigger lemma + Participant lemmas
- Participant lemmas
- Right lemma of a trigger
- 2nd right lemma of a trigger
- Right lemma of a participant
- 2nd left lemma of a participant
Dependency level features
- Dependency path
- Dependency relation to trigger?s head
- Dependency relation to participant?s head
- POS pattern of common head chunk of a trigger
and a participant
- POS pattern of common head chunk of a trigger
and a participant + The presence of an object word
in dependency path
Table 4: Features of the participant type classifier for
Regulation events
3 Experimental Result
Table 5 shows the official results of the final test
data. After the feature selection, we have performed
the experiments with the development data to tune
the threshold to be used in RE phase. The work im-
proved the performance slightly. The new thresh-
old discovered by the work was 0.65 rather than
the default value, 0.5. However, we found that the
tuned threshold was over-fitted to development data.
When we tested without any threshold change, the
proposed system showed better f-score by reducing
the gap between precision and recall. Table 6 shows
the performance in this case.
Nevertheless, recall is still quite lower than preci-
sion in Table 6. The reason is that many triggers are
not detected in TD phase. The recall of the trigger
detector was 63% with the development data. An-
alyzing errors of TD phase, we found that the sys-
tem missed terms such as role, prevent while it easily
detected bio-terms such as phosphorylation, regula-
tion. It implies that the word feature causes not only
high precision but also low recall in TD phase.
Event equality recall precision f-score
Strict 8.99 58.97 15.60
Approximate Span 9.40 61.65 16.31
Table 5: The official results with threshold tuning
Event equality recall precision f-score
Strict 15.46 52.85 23.92
Approximate Span 16.18 55.32 25.04
Table 6: The results without threshold tuning
4 Conclusion
In this paper, we have presented a biomedical
event extraction system consisting of trigger detec-
tor, event type classifier and two-step participant rec-
ognizer. The system uses dependency parsing and
predicate argument information as main sources for
feature extraction.
For future work, we would like to increase the
performance of TD phase by adopting two-step
method similar to RE phase. We also will exploit
more analyzed data such as phrase structure parsing
information to improve the performance.
References
Kadri Hacioglu. 2004. Semantic Role Labeling Using
Dependency Trees. In Proceedings of COLING-2004,
Geneva, Switzerland.
Richard Tzong-Han Tsai, Wen-Chi Chou, Yu-Chun Lin,
Cheng-Lung Sung, Wei Ku, Ying-shan Su, Ting-Yi
Sung and Wen-Lian Hsu. 2006. BIOSMILE: Adapt-
ing Semantic Role Labeling for Biomedical Verbs: An
Exponential Model Coupled with Automatically Gen-
erated Template Features. In Proceedings of BioNLP-
2006.
Mihai Surdeanu, Sanda Harabagiu, John Williams and
Paul Aarseth. 2003. Using Predicate-Argument Struc-
tures for Information Extraction. In Proceedings of
ACL-2003, Sapporo, Japan.
David Ahn. 2006. The stages of event extraction. In Pro-
ceedings of Workshop On Annotating And Reasoning
About Time And Events.
Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, Sampo Pyysalo, Yoshi-
nobu Kano and Jun?ichi Tsujii. 2009. Overview
of BioNLP?09 Shared Task on Event Extraction.
In Proceedings of Natural Language Processing in
Biomedicine (BioNLP) NAACL 2009 Workshop.
110
