Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval-2007), pages 264?267,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
PNNL: A Supervised Maximum Entropy Approach to Word Sense 
Disambiguation
Stephen Tratz, Antonio Sanfilippo, Michelle Gregory, Alan Chappell, Christian 
Posse, Paul Whitney
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
902 Battelle Blvd, PO Box 999
Richland, WA 99352, USA
{stephen.tratz, antonio.sanfilippo, michelle, alan.chap-
pell, christian.posse, paul.whitney}@pnl.gov
Abstract
In  this  paper,  we  described  the  PNNL 
Word Sense Disambiguation system as ap-
plied  to  the  English  all-word  task  in  Se-
mEval 2007. We use a supervised learning 
approach,  employing  a  large  number  of 
features and using Information Gain for di-
mension  reduction.  The  rich  feature  set 
combined with a Maximum Entropy classi-
fier  produces results  that  are significantly 
better than baseline and are the highest F-
score  for  the  fined-grained  English  all-
words subtask of SemEval.
1 Introduction
Accurate  word  sense  disambiguation  (WSD)  can 
support  many  natural  language  processing  and 
knowledge management  tasks.  The  main goal  of 
the  PNNL  WSD system  is  to  support  Semantic 
Web applications, such as semantic-driven search 
and  navigation,  through  a  reliable  mapping  of 
words  in  naturally  occurring  text  to  ontological 
classes.  As described  in  Sanfilippo et  al.  (2006), 
this goal is achieved by defining a WordNet-based 
(Fellbaum,  1998)  ontology that  offers  a manage-
able set of concept classes, provides an extensive 
characterization of concept class in terms of lexical 
instances, and integrates an automated class recog-
nition algorithm. We found that the same features 
that are useful for predicting word classes are also 
useful in distinguishing individual word senses. 
Our main objective in this paper is to predict in-
dividual word senses using a large combination of 
features  including contextual,  semantic,  and syn-
tactic information. In our earlier paper (Sanfilippo 
et al, 2006), we reported that the PNNL WSD sys-
tem exceeded the performance of the best perform-
ers  for  verbs  in  the  SENSEVAL-3  English  all-
words task dataset. SemEval 2007 is our first op-
portunity  to  enter  a  word  sense  disambiguation 
competition.
2 Approach
While many unsupervised word sense disambigua-
tion systems have been created, supervised systems 
have generally produced superior  results  (Snyder 
and Palmer, 2004; Mihalcea et al, 2004). Our sys-
tem is based on a supervised WSD approach that 
uses  a  Maximum  Entropy  classifier  to  predict 
WordNet senses.
We  use  SemCor1,  OMWE 1.0  (Chklovski  and 
Mihalcea, 2002), and example sentences in Word-
Net  as  the  training  corpus.  We  utilize  the 
OpenNLP MaxEnt  implementation2 of  the  maxi-
mum  entropy  classification  algorithm  (Berger  et 
al.,  1996)  to  train  classification  models  for  each 
lemma and part-of-speech combination in the train-
ing  corpus.  These  models  are  used  to  predict 
WordNet  senses  for  words found in natural  text. 
For  lemma  and  part-of-speech  combinations  that 
are not present in the training corpus, the PNNL 
WSD system defaults to the most frequent Word-
Net sense.
2.1 Features
We use a rich set of features to predict individual 
word senses.  A large number of  features are ex-
tracted for each word sense instance in the training 
data.  Following  Dang & Palmer  (2005)  and Ko-
homban & Lee (2005), we use contextual, syntac-
tic and semantic  information to inform our word 
1
 http://www.cs.unt.edu/~rada/downloads.html. 
2
 http://maxent.sourceforge.net/.
264
sense disambiguation system. However,  there are 
significant  differences  between the specific  types 
of contextual,  syntactic  and semantic information 
we use in our system and those proposed by Dang 
& Palmer  (2005)  and Kohomban  & Lee (2005). 
More specifically,  we employ novel  features  and 
feature combinations, as described below. 
? Contextual information. The contextual infor-
mation we use includes the word under analy-
sis plus the three tokens found on each side of 
the word, within sentence boundaries. Tokens 
include both words and punctuation.
? Syntactic information. We include grammatical 
dependencies  (e.g.  subject,  object)  and  mor-
pho-syntactic  features such as part of speech, 
case, number and tense. We use the Connexor 
parser3 (Tapanainen and J?rvinen, 1997) to ex-
tract lemma information, parts of speech, syn-
tactic  dependencies,  tense,  case,  and  number 
information.  A sample output  of  a  Connexor 
parse is given in Table 1. Features are extract-
ed  for  all  tokens  that  are  related  through no 
more than 3 levels of dependency to the word 
to be disambiguated. 
? Semantic  information.  The semantic  informa-
tion  we  incorporate  includes  named  entity 
types (e.g. PERSON, LOCATION, ORGANI-
ZATION) and hypernyms. We use OpenNLP4 
and  LingPipe5 to  identify  named  entities,  re-
placing the strings identified as named entities 
(e.g., Joe Smith) with the corresponding entity 
type  (PERSON).  We also  substitute  personal 
pronouns  that  unambiguously  denote  people 
with the entity type PERSON. Numbers in the 
text  are  replaced  with  type  label  NUMBER. 
Hypernyms  are  retrieved  from WordNet  and 
added to the feature set for all noun tokens se-
lected by the contextual and syntactic rules. In 
contrast to Dang & Palmer (2005), we only in-
clude  the  hypernyms  of  the  most  frequent 
sense,  and  we  include  the  entire  hypernym 
chain (e.g. motor, machine, device, instrumen-
tality, artifact, object, whole, entity).
To address feature extraction processes specific 
to  noun and verbs,  we add the  following  condi-
tions.
3
 http://www.connexor.com/.
4
 http://opennlp.sourceforge.nt/.
5
 http://www.alias-i.com/lingpipe/.
? Syntactic  information  for  verbs.  If  the  verb 
does not have a subject, the subject of the clos-
est ancestor verb in the syntax tree is used in-
stead.
? Syntactic information for nouns. The first verb 
ancestor in the syntax tree is also used to gen-
erate features. 
? Semantic information for nouns. A feature in-
dicating whether a token is capitalized for each 
of the tokens used to generate features.
A sample of the resulting feature vectors that are 
used by the PNNL word sense disambiguation sys-
tem is presented in Table 2.
ID Word Lemma Grammatical 
Dependen-
cies
Morphosyntactic 
Features
1
2
3
4
5
6
the
engine
throbbe
d
into
life
.
the
engine
throb
into
life
.
det:>2
subj:>3
main:>0
goa:>3
pcomp:>4
@DN> %>N DET
@SUBJ %NH N NOM SG
@+FMAINV %VA V PAST
@ADVL %EH PREP
@<P %NH N NOM SG
Table 1. Connexor sample output for the sentence 
?The engine throbbed into life?.
the pre:2:the, pre:2:pos:DET, det:the, det:pos:DET, 
hassubj:det:
engine pre:1:instrumentality, pre:1:object, pre:1:artifact,
 pre:1:device, pre:1:engine, pre:1:motor, pre:1:whole, 
pre:1:entity, pre:1:machine, pre:1:pos:N, 
pre:1:case:NOM, 
pre:1:num:SG,subj:instrumentality,subj:object, subj:arti-
fact, subj:device, subj:engine, subj:motor, subj:whole, 
subj:entity, subj:machine, subj:pos:N, hassubj:, 
subj:case:NOM, subj:num:SG,
throbbed haspre:1:,haspre:2:,haspost:1:, haspost:2:, haspost:3:,
self:throb, self:pos:V, main:,throbbed, self:tense:PAST
into post:1:into, post:1:pos:PREP, goa:into, goa:pos:PREP, 
life post:2:life, post:2:state, post:2:being, post:2:pos:N, 
post:2:case:NOM, post:2:num:SG, hasgoa:, pcomp:life, 
pcomp:state, pcomp:being, pcomp:pos:N, 
hasgoa:pcomp:, goa:pcomp:case:NOM, 
goa:pcomp:num:SG
. post:3:.
Table  2. Feature  vector  for  throbbed in the sen-
tence ?The engine throbbed into life?.
As the example in Table 2 indicates, the combi-
nation of contextual, syntactic, and semantic infor-
mation types results in a large number of features. 
Inspection  of  the  training data  reveals  that  some 
features may be more important than others in es-
tablishing word sense assignment for each choice 
of word lemma. We use a feature selection proce-
265
dure to reduce the full set of features to the feature 
subset that is most relevant to word sense assign-
ment for each lemma. This practice improves the 
efficiency of our word sense disambiguation algo-
rithm. The feature selection procedure we adopted 
consists of scoring each potential feature according 
to  a  particular  feature  selection  metric,  and  then 
taking the best k features.
We choose Information Gain as our feature se-
lection metric. Information Gain measures the de-
crease in entropy when the feature is given versus 
when it is absent. Yang and Pederson (1997) report 
that  Information Gain outperformed other feature 
selection  approaches  in  their  multi-class  bench-
marks,  and  Foreman  (2003)  showed  that  it  per-
formed amongst the best for his 2-class problems. 
3 Evaluation
To evaluate our approach and feature set, we ran 
our  model  on  the  SENSEVAL-3  English  all-words 
task test data. Using data provided by the SENSE-
VAL website6, we were able to compare our results 
for  verbs  to  the  top  performers  on  verbs  alone. 
Upali S. Kohomban and Wee Sun Lee provided us 
with  the  results  file  for  the  Simil-Prime  system 
(Kohomban and Lee, 2005). As reported in Sanfil-
ippo et al (2006) and shown in table 3, our results 
for verbs rival those of top performers. We had a 
significant  improvement  (p-value<0.05)  over  the 
baseline of  52.9%, a marginal  improvement  over 
the second best performer (SenseLearner) (Mihal-
cea and Faruque, 2004), and we were as good as 
the top performer (GAMBL) (Decadt et al, 2004).7
System Precision Fraction of 
Recall
Our system 61% 22%
GAMBL 59.0% 21.3%
SenseLearner 56.1% 20.2%
Baseline 52.9% 19.1%
Table 3. Results for verb sense disambiguation on 
SENSEVAL-3 data, adapted from Sanfilippo et al 
(2006).
Since then, we have expanded our evaluation to 
all parts of speech. Table 4 provides the evaluation 
6
 http://www.senseval.org/.
7
 The 2% improvement in precision which our system 
showed as  compared to GAMBL was not statistically 
significant (p=0.21).
of our system as compared  to  the three top per-
formers on the SENSEVAL-3 data and the baseline. 
The baseline of 0.631 F-score8 was computed us-
ing the most frequent WordNet sense. The PNNL 
WSD system performs significantly better than the 
baseline (p-value<0.05) and rivals the top perform-
ers.  The performance of the PNNL WSD system 
relative to the other three systems and the baseline 
remains unchanged when the unknown sense an-
swers  (denoted  by a  ?U?)  are  excluded  from the 
evaluation.
System Precision Recall
PNNL 0.670 0.670
Simil-Prime 0.661 0.663
GAMBL 0.652 0.652
SenseLearner 0.646 0.646
Baseline 0.631 0.631
Table 4. SENSEVAL-3 English all-words.
System Recall Precision 
PNNL 0.669 0.671
GAMBL 0.651 0.651
Simil-Prime 0.644 0.657
SenseLearner 0.642 0.651
Baseline 0.631 0.631
Table 5. SENSEVAL-3 English all-words, No ?U?.
4 Experimental  results  on  SemEval  all-
words subtask
This was our first opportunity to test our model in 
a WSD competition. For this competition, we fo-
cused our efforts  on the fine-grained English all-
words task because our system was set up to per-
form fine-grained WordNet  sense  prediction.  We 
are  pleased that  our  system achieved the  highest 
score for this subtask. Our results for the SemEval 
dataset as compared to baseline are reported in Ta-
ble 6. The PNNL WSD system did not assign the 
unknown sense, ?U?, to any word instances in the 
SemEval dataset.
8
 This baseline is slightly higher than that reported by 
others (Snyder and Palmer 2004).
266
System F-score
PNNL 0.591
Baseline 0.514
p-value <0.01
Table 6. SemEval Results.
5 Discussion
Although these results are promising, there is still 
much work to be done. For example, we need to 
investigate the contribution of each feature to the 
overall performance of the system in terms of pre-
cision and recall. Such a feature sensitivity analysis 
will provide us with a better understanding of how 
the algorithm can be further improved and/or made 
more efficient by leaving out features whose con-
tribution is negligible. 
Another important point to make is that, while 
our system shows the best precision/recall results 
overall,  we  can  only  claim  statistical  relevance 
with  reference  to  the  baseline  and  results  worse 
than  baseline.  The  size  of  the  SemEval  data  set 
(N=465) is too small to establish whether the dif-
ference in precision/recall results with the other top 
systems is statistically significant. 
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Upali  S. Kohomban and 
Wee Sun Lee for  providing us with their  SENSE-
VAL-3 English all-words task results file for Simil-
Prime. Many thanks also to Patrick Paulson, Bob 
Baddeley, Ryan Hohimer, and Amanda White for 
their  help  in  developing  the  word  class  disam-
biguation system on which the work presented in 
this paper is based.
References
Berger, A., S. Della Pietra and V. Della Pietra (1996) A 
Maximum  Entropy  Approach  to  Natural  Language 
Processing.  Computational  Linguistics,  volume  22, 
number 1, pages 39-71.
Chklovski, T. and R. Mihalcea (2002) Building a sense 
tagged corpus with open mind word expert. In  Pro-
ceedings of the ACL-02 workshop on Word sense dis-
ambiguation: recent successes and future directions.
Dang, H. T. and M. Palmer (2005) The Role of Semant-
ic Roles in Disambiguating Verb Senses. In Proceed-
ings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association  
for Computational Linguistics,  Ann Arbor MI, June 
26-28, 2005. 
Decadt,  B., V. Hoste,  W. Daelemans and A. Van den 
Bosch (2004) GAMBL, genetic  algorithm optimiza-
tion of memory-based WSD. SENSEVAL-3: Third In-
ternational Workshop on the Evaluation of Systems  
for the Semantic Analysis of Text. Barcelona, Spain. 
Fellbaum,  C.,  editor.  (1998)  WordNet:  An  Electronic 
Lexical Database. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Foreman, G. (2003) An Extensive Empirical Study of 
Feature  Selection  Metrics  for  Text  Classification. 
Journal  of  Machine  Learning  Research,  3,  pages 
1289-1305. 
Kohomban, U. and  W. Lee (2005) Learning semantic 
classes  for  word sense disambiguation.  In Proceed-
ings of the 43rd Annual meeting of the Association for  
Computational Linguistics, Ann Arbor, MI.
Mihalcea,  R.,  T.  Chklovski,  and  A.  Kilgarriff  (2004) 
The  SENSEVAL-3  English   Lexical  Sample  Task, 
SENSEVAL-3: Third International Workshop on the  
Evaluation of  Systems for the Semantic Analysis of  
Text. Barcelonna, Span.
Mihalcea,  R.  and  E.  Faruque   (2004)  SenseLearner: 
Minimally supervised word sense disambiguation for 
all words in open text.  SENSEVAL-3: Third Interna-
tional Workshop on the Evaluation of Systems for the 
Semantic Analysis of Text. Barcelona, Spain.
Sanfilippo, A.,  S.  Tratz,  M. Gregory, A.  Chappell,  P. 
Whitney, C. Posse, P. Paulson, B. Baddeley, R. Hohi-
mer,  A.  White  (2006)  Automating  Ontological  An-
notation with WordNet. Proceedings to the Third In-
ternational WordNet Conference, Jan 22-26, Jeju Is-
land, Korea.
Snyder,  B.   and  M.  Palmer.  2004.  The  English  All-
Words  Task.  SENSEVAL-3:  Third  International 
Workshop on the Evaluation of  Systems for the Se-
mantic Analysis of Text. Barcelona, Spain. 
Tapanainen, P. and Timo J?rvinen (1997) A nonproject-
ive  dependency  parser.  In  Proceedings  of  the  5th 
Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing, 
pages 64?71, Washington D.C. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Yang,  Y.  and  J.  O.  Pedersen  (1997)  A  Comparative 
Study on Feature Selection in Text Categorization. In 
Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on  
Machine Learning (ICML), pages 412-420, 1997.
267
