Proceedings of the Workshop on BioNLP, pages 10?18,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Distinguishing Historical from Current Problems in Clinical      
Reports?Which Textual Features Help?  
 
Danielle L. Mowery MS, Henk Harkema PhD, John N. Dowling MS MD,  
Jonathan L. Lustgarten PhD, Wendy W. Chapman PhD 
Department of Biomedical Informatics 
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pa 15260, USA 
dlm31@pitt.edu, heh23@pitt.edu, dowling@pitt.edu, jll47@pitt.edu, wec6@pitt.edu 
 
 
Abstract 
Determining whether a condition is historical 
or recent is important for accurate results in 
biomedicine. In this paper, we investigate four 
types of information found in clinical text that 
might be used to make this distinction. We 
conducted a descriptive, exploratory study us-
ing annotation on clinical reports to determine 
whether this temporal information is useful 
for classifying conditions as historical or re-
cent. Our initial results suggest that few of 
these feature values can be used to predict 
temporal classification. 
1 Introduction 
Clinical applications for decision support, biosur-
veillance and quality of care assessment depend on 
patient data described in unstructured, free-text 
reports.  For instance, patient data in emergency 
department reports contain valuable indicators for 
biosurveillance applications that may provide early 
signs and symptoms suggestive of an outbreak. 
Quality assurance departments can use free-text 
medical record data to assess adherence to quality 
care guidelines, such as determining whether an 
MI patient was given an aspirin within twenty-four 
hours of arrival. In either application, one must 
consider how to address the question of time, but 
each of the applications requires a different level of 
temporal granularity: the biosurveillance system 
needs a coarse-grained temporal model that dis-
cerns whether the signs and symptoms are histori-
cal or recent. In contrast, the quality assurance 
system needs a fine-grained temporal model to 
identify the admission event, when (or if) aspirin 
was given, and the order and duration of time be-
tween these events. One important problem in nat-
ural language processing is extracting the appro-
priate temporal granularity for a given task. 
Many solutions exist for extracting temporal in-
formation, and each is designed to address ques-
tions of various degrees of temporal granularity, 
including determining whether a condition is his-
torical or recent, identifying explicit temporal ex-
pressions, and identifying temporal relations 
among events in text. (Chapman et al, 2007; Zhou 
et al, 2008; Irvine et al, 2008;  Verhagen and Pus-
tejovsky, 2008; Bramsen et al, 2006). We pre-
viously extended the NegEx algorithm in ConText, 
a simple algorithm that relies on lexical cues to 
determine whether a condition is historical or re-
cent (Chapman et al, 2007). However, ConText 
performs with moderate recall (76%) and precision 
(75%) across different report types implying that 
trigger terms and simple temporal expressions are 
not sufficient for the task of identifying historical 
conditions.  
In order to extend work in identifying historical 
conditions, we conducted a detailed annotation 
study of potentially useful temporal classification 
features for conditions found in six genres of clini-
cal text. Our three main objectives were: (1) cha-
racterize the temporal similarity and differences 
found in different genres of clinical text; (2) de-
termine which features successfully predict wheth-
er a condition is historical, and (3) compare 
ConText to machine learning classifiers that ac-
count for this broader set of temporal features. 
2 Temporality in Clinical Text 
For several decades, researchers have been study-
ing temporality in clinical records (Zhou and 
Hripcsak, 2007). Readers use a variety of clues to 
distinguish temporality from the clinical narrative, 
and we wanted to identify features from other tem-
10
poral models that may be useful for determining 
whether a condition is historical or recent.  
There are a number of automated systems for 
extracting, representing, and reasoning time in a 
variety of text. One system that emerged from the 
AQUAINT workshops for temporal modeling of 
newspaper articles is TARSQI. TARSQI processes 
events annotated in text by anchoring and ordering 
them with respect to nearby temporal expressions 
(Verhagen and Pustejovsky, 2008). A few recent 
applications, such as TimeText and TN-TIES 
(Zhou et al, 2008; Irvine et al, 2008), identify 
medically relevant events from clinical texts and 
use temporal expressions to order the events. One 
method attempts to order temporal segments of 
clinical narratives (Bramsen et al, 2006). One key 
difference between these previous efforts and our 
work is that these systems identify all temporal 
expressions from the text and attempt to order all 
events. In contrast, our goal is to determine wheth-
er a clinical condition is historical or recent, so we 
focus only on temporal information related to the 
signs, symptoms, and diseases described in the 
text. Therefore, we ignore explicit temporal ex-
pressions that do not modify clinical conditions. If 
a condition does not have explicit temporal mod-
ifiers, we still attempt to determine the historical 
status for that condition (e.g., ?Denies cough?). In 
order to improve the ability to determine whether a 
condition is historical, we carried out this annota-
tion study to identify any useful temporal informa-
tion related to the clinical conditions in six clinical 
genres. Building on work in this area, we explored 
temporal features used in other temporal annota-
tion studies. 
TimeML is a well-known standard for complex, 
temporal annotation. TimeML supports the annota-
tion of events defined as ?situations that happen or 
occur? and temporal expressions such as dates and 
durations in order to answer temporal questions 
about these events and other entities in news text 
(Saur??, et al, 2006). One notable feature of the 
TimeML schema is its ability to capture verb tense 
such as past or present and verb aspect such as 
perfective or progressing. We annotated verb tense 
and aspect in medical text according to the Time-
ML standard. 
Within the medical domain, Zhou et al (2006) 
developed an annotation schema used to identify 
temporal expressions and clinical events. They 
measured the prevalence of explicit temporal ex-
pressions and key medical events like admission or 
transfer found in discharge summaries. We used 
the Zhou categorization scheme to explore tempor-
al expressions and clinical events across genres of 
reports. 
A few NLP systems rely on lexical cues to ad-
dress time. MediClass is a knowledge-based sys-
tem that classifies the content of an encounter 
using both free-text and encoded information from 
electronic medical records (Hazelhurst et al, 
2005). For example, MediClass classifies smoking 
cessation care delivery events by identifying the 
status of a smoker as continued, former or history 
using words like continues. ConText, an extension 
of the NegEx algorithm, temporally classifies con-
ditions as historical, recent, or hypothetical using 
lexical cues such as history, new, and if, respec-
tively (Chapman et al, 2007). Drawing from these 
applications, we used state and temporal trigger 
terms like active, unchanged, and history to cap-
ture coarse, temporal information about a condi-
tion.  
Temporal information may also be implied in 
the document structure, particularly with regards to 
the section in which the condition appears. SecTag 
marks explicit and implicit sections found 
throughout patient H&P notes (Denny et al, 2008). 
We adopted some section headers from the SecTag 
terminology to annotate sections found in reports.  
Our long-term goal is to build a robust temporal 
classifier for information found in clinical text 
where the output is classification of whether a con-
dition is historical or recent (historical categoriza-
tion). An important first step in classifying 
temporality in clinical text is to identify and cha-
racterize temporal features found in clinical re-
ports. Specifically, we aim to determine which 
expressions or features are predictive of historical 
categorization of clinical conditions in dictated 
reports. 
3 Historical Assignment and Temporal 
Features 
We conducted a descriptive, exploratory study of 
temporal features found across six genres of clini-
cal reports. We had three goals related to our task 
of determining whether a clinical condition was 
historical or recent. First, to develop a temporal 
classifier that is generalizable across report types, 
we compared temporality among different genres 
11
of clinical text. Second, to determine which fea-
tures predict whether a condition is historical or 
recent, we observed common rules generated by 
three different rule learners based on manually an-
notated temporal features we describe in the fol-
lowing section. Finally, we compared the 
performance of ConText and automated rule learn-
ers and assessed which features may improve the 
ConText algorithm.  
Next, we describe the temporal features we as-
sessed for identification of historical signs, symp-
toms, or diseases, including temporal expressions, 
lexical cues, verb tense and aspect, and sections.  
(1) Temporal Expressions: Temporal expres-
sions are time operators like dates (May 5th 2005) 
and durations (for past two days), as well as clini-
cal processes related to the encounter (discharge, 
transfer). For each clinical condition, we annotated 
whether a temporal expression modified it and, if 
so, the category of temporal expression. We used 
six major categories from Zhou et al (2006) in-
cluding: Date and Time, Relative Date and Time, 
Durations, Key Events, Fuzzy Time, and No Tem-
poral Expression. These categories also have 
types. For instance, Relative Date and Time has a 
type Yesterday, Today or Tomorrow.  For the con-
dition in the sentence ?The patient had a stroke in 
May 2006?, the temporal expression category is 
Date and Time with type Date. Statements without 
a temporal expression were annotated No Tempor-
al Expression with type N/A. 
(2) Tense and Aspect: Tense and aspect define 
how a verb is situated and related to a particular 
time. We used TimeML Specification 1.2.1 for 
standardization of tense and aspect where exam-
ples of tense include Past or Present and aspect 
may be Perfective, Progressive, Both or None as 
found in Saur??, et al (2006). We annotated the 
verb that scoped a condition and annotated its tense 
and aspect. The primary verb may be a predicate 
adjective integral to interpretation of the condition 
(Left ventricle is enlarged), a verb preceding the 
condition (has hypertension), or a verb following a 
condition (Chest pain has resolved). In ?her chest 
pain has resolved,? we would mark ?has resolved? 
with tense Present and aspect Perfective. State-
ments without verbs (e.g., No murmurs) would be 
annotated Null for both.  
(3) Trigger Terms: We annotated lexical cues 
that provide temporal information about a condi-
tion. For example, in the statement, ?Patient has 
past history of diabetes,? we would annotate ?his-
tory? as Trigger Term: Yes and would note the ex-
act trigger term. 
     (4) Sections: Sections are ?clinically meaning-
ful segments which act independently of the 
unique narrative? for a patient (Denny et al 2008). 
Examples of report sections include Review of Sys-
tems (Emergency Department), Findings (Opera-
tive Gastrointestinal and Radiology) and 
Discharge Diagnosis (Emergency Department and 
Discharge Summary).  
We extended Denny?s section schema with ex-
plicit, report-specific section headers not included 
in the original terminology. Similar to Denny, we 
assigned implied sections in which there was an 
obvious change of topic and paragraph marker. For 
instance, if the sentence ?the patient is allergic to 
penicillin? followed the Social History section, we 
annotated the section as Allergies, even if there 
was not a section heading for allergies. 
4 Methods 
4.1 Dataset Generation 
We randomly selected seven reports from each of 
six genres of clinical reports dictated at the Univer-
sity of Pittsburgh Medical Center during 2007 
These included Discharge Summaries, Surgical 
Pathology, Radiology, Echocardiograms, Opera-
tive Gastrointestinal, and Emergency Department 
reports. The dataset ultimately contained 42 clini-
cal reports and 854 conditions. Figure 1 show our 
annotation process, which was completed in 
GATE, an open-source framework for building 
NLP systems (http://gate.ac.uk/). A physician 
board-certified in internal medicine and infectious 
diseases annotated all clinical conditions in the set 
and annotated each condition as either historical or 
recent. He used a general guideline for annotating 
a condition as historical if the condition began 
more than 14 days before the current encounter and 
as recent if it began or occurred within 14 days or 
during the current visit. However, the physician 
was not bound to this definition and ultimately 
used his own judgment to determine whether a 
condition was historical. 
Provided with pre-annotated clinical conditions 
and blinded to the historical category, three of the 
authors annotated the features iteratively in groups 
of six (one of each report type) using guidelines we 
12
developed for the first two types of temporal fea-
tures (temporal expressions and trigger terms.) 
Between iterations, we resolved disagreements 
through discussion and updated our guidelines. 
Cohen?s kappa for temporal expressions and trig-
ger terms by the final iteration was at 0.66 and 0.69 
respectively. Finally, one author annotated sec-
tions, verb tense, and aspect.  Cases in which as-
signing the appropriate feature value was unclear 
were resolved after consultation with one other 
author-annotator.  
4.2 Data Analysis 
 
We represented each condition as a vector with  
temporal features and their manually-assigned val-
ues as input features for predicting the binary out-
come value of historical or recent. We trained three 
rule learning algorithms to classify each condition 
as historical or recent: J48 Decision Tree, Ripper, 
and Rule Learner (RL) (Witten and Frank, 2005; 
Clearwater and Provost, 1990). Rule learners per-
form well at classification tasks and provide expli-
cit rules that can be viewed, understood, and 
potentially implemented in existing rule-based ap-
plications. We used Weka 3.5.8, an openly-
available machine learning application for predic-
tion modeling, to implement the Decision Tree 
(J48) and Ripper (JRip) algorithms, and we applied 
an in house version of RL retrieved from 
www.dbmi.pitt.edu\probe. For all rule learners, we 
used the default settings and ran ten-fold cross-
validation. The J48 algorithm produces mutually 
exclusive rules for predicting the outcome value. 
Thus, two rules cannot cover or apply to any one 
case. In contrast, both JRip and RL generate non-
mutually-exclusive rules for predicting the out-
come value. Although J48 and JRip are sensitive to 
bias in outcome values, RL accounts for skewed 
distribution of the data.  
We also applied ConText to the test cases to 
classify them as historical or recent. ConText looks 
for trigger terms and a limited set of temporal ex-
pressions within a sentence. Clinical conditions 
within the scope of the trigger terms are assigned 
the value indicated by the trigger terms (e.g., his-
torical for the term history). Scope extends from 
the trigger term to the end of the sentence or until 
the presence of a termination term, such as pre-
senting. For instance, in the sentence ?History of 
CHF, presenting with chest pain,? CHF would be 
annotated as historical.  
5 Evaluation 
To characterize the different reports types, we es-
tablished the overall prevalence and proportion of 
conditions annotated as historical for each clinical 
report genre.  We assessed the prevalence of each 
feature (temporal expressions, trigger terms, tense 
and aspect, and sections) by report genre to deter-
mine the level of similarity or difference between 
genres. To determine which features values are 
predictive of whether a condition is historical or 
recent, we observed common rules found by more 
than one rule learning algorithm. Amongst com-
mon rules, we identified new rules that could im-
prove the ConText algorithm.  
We also measured predictive performance with 
95% confidence intervals of the rule learners and 
ConText by calculating overall accuracy, as well as 
recall and precision for historical classifications 
and recall and precision for recent classifications.  
Table 1 describes equations for the evaluation me-
trics. 
 
Table 1. Description of evaluation metrics. RLP = rule 
learner prediction. RS = Reference Standard 
 
 
Figure 1. Annotation process for dataset and objectives 
for evaluation. 
13
Recall:                 number of TP              
(number of TP + number of FN) 
 
Precision:           number of TP              
(number of TP + number of FP) 
 
Accuracy:   number of instances correctly classified 
                      total number of possible instances  
6 Results 
Overall, we found 854 conditions of interest across 
all six report genre. Table 2 illustrates the preva-
lence of conditions across report genres. Emergen-
cy Department reports contained the highest 
concentration of conditions. Across report genres, 
87% of conditions were recent (741 conditions). 
All conditions were recent in Echocardiograms, in 
contrast to Surgical Pathology reports in which 
68% were recent.  
 
Table 2. Prevalence and count of conditions by temporal 
category and report genre. DS = Discharge Summary, 
Echo = Echocardiogram, ED = Emergency Department, 
GI = Operative Gastrointestinal, RAD = Radiology and 
SP = Surgical Pathology. (%) = percent; Ct = count.  
 
6.1 Prevalence of Temporal Features 
Table 3 shows that most conditions were not mod-
ified by a temporal expression or a trigger term. 
Conditions were modified by a temporal expres-
sion in Discharge Summaries more often than in 
other report genres. Similarly, Surgical Pathology 
had the highest prevalence of conditions modified 
by a trigger term. Operative Gastrointestinal and 
Radiology reports showed the lowest prevalence of 
both temporal expressions and trigger terms. Nei-
ther temporal expressions nor trigger terms oc-
curred in Echocardiograms. Overall, the 
prevalence of conditions scoped by a verb varied 
across report types ranging from 46% (Surgical 
Pathology) to 81% (Echocardiogram). 
Table 3. Prevalence of conditions modified by temporal 
features. All conditions were assigned a section and are 
thereby excluded. TE = temporal expression; TT = trig-
ger term; V = scoped by verb.  
 
6.2 Common Rules 
Rule learners generated a variety of rules. The J48 
Decision Tree algorithm learned 27 rules, six for 
predicting conditions as historical and the remain-
ing for classifying the condition as recent. The 
rules predominantly incorporated the trigger term 
and verb tense and aspect feature values. JRip 
learned nine rules, eight for classifying the histori-
cal temporal category and one ?otherwise? rule for 
the majority class. The JRip rules most heavily 
incorporated the section feature. The RL algorithm 
found 79 rules, 18 of which predict the historical 
category. Figure 2 illustrates historical rules 
learned by each rule learner. JRip and RL pre-
dicted the following sections alone can be used to 
predict a condition as historical: Past Medical His-
tory, Allergies and Social History. Both J48 and 
RL learned that trigger terms like previous, known 
and history predict historical. There was only one 
common, simple rule for the historical category 
found amongst all three learners: the trigger term 
no change predicts the historical category. All al-
gorithms learned a number of rules that include 
two features values; however, none of the com-
pound rules were common amongst all three algo-
rithms.    
 
Figure 2. Historical rules learned by each rule learner 
algorithm. Black dots represent simple rules whereas 
triangles represent compound rules. Common rules 
shared by each algorithm occur in the overlapping areas 
of each circle. 
14
6.3 Predictive Performance 
Table 4 shows predictive performance for each 
rule learner and for ConText. The RL algorithm 
outperformed all other algorithms in almost all 
evaluation measures. The RL scores were com-
puted based on classifying the 42 cases (eight his-
torical) for which the algorithm did not make a 
prediction as recent. ConText and J48, which ex-
clusively relied on trigger terms, had lower recall 
for the historical category.  
All of the rule learners out-performed ConText. 
JRip and RL showed substantially higher recall for 
assigning the historical category, which is the most 
important measure in a comparison with ConText, 
because ConText assigns the default value of re-
cent unless there is textual evidence to indicate a 
historical classification. Although the majority 
class baseline shows high accuracy due to high 
prevalence of the recent category, all other classifi-
ers show even higher accuracy, achieving fairly 
high recall and precision for the historical cases 
while maintaining high performance on the recent 
category. 
 
Table 4. Performance results with 95% confidence in-
tervals for three rule learners trained on manually anno-
tated features and ConText, which uses automatically 
generated features. Bolded values do not have overlap-
ping confidence intervals with ConText. MCB = Ma-
jority Class Baseline (recent class)   
 
7 Discussion 
Our study provides a descriptive investigation of 
temporal features found in clinical text. Our first 
objective was to characterize the temporal similari-
ties and differences amongst report types. We 
found that the majority of conditions in all report 
genres were recent conditions, indicating that a 
majority class classifier would produce an accura-
cy of about 87% over our data set.  According to 
the distributions of temporal category by report 
genre (Table 2), Echocardiograms exclusively de-
scribe recent conditions. Operative Gastrointestinal 
and Radiology reports contain similar proportions 
of historical conditions (9% and 6%). Echocardio-
grams appear to be most similar to Radiology re-
ports and Operative Gastrointestinal reports, which 
may be supported by the fact that these reports are 
used to document findings from tests conducted 
during the current visit. Emergency Department 
reports and Discharge Summaries contain similar 
proportions of historical conditions (17% and 19% 
respectively), which might be explained by the fact 
that both reports describe a patient?s temporal pro-
gression throughout the stay in the Emergency De-
partment or the hospital.  
Surgical Pathology reports may be the most 
temporally distinct report in our study, showing the 
highest proportion of historical conditions. This 
may seem counter-intuitive given that Surgical 
Pathology reports also facilitate the reporting of 
findings described from a recent physical speci-
men. However, we had a small sample size (28 
conditions in seven reports), and most of the his-
torical conditions were described in a single ad-
dendum report. Removing this report decreased the 
prevalence of historical conditions to 23% (3/13).  
Discharge Summaries and Emergency Depart-
ment reports displayed more variety in the ob-
served types of temporal expressions (9 to 14 
subtypes) and trigger terms (10 to 12 terms) than 
other report genres. This is not surprising consider-
ing the range of events described in these reports. 
Other reports tend to have between zero and three 
subtypes of temporal expressions and zero and 
seven different trigger terms. In all report types, 
temporal expressions were mainly subtype past, 
and the most frequent trigger term was history. 
Our second objective was to identify which fea-
tures predict whether a condition is historical or 
recent. Due to high prevalence of the recent cate-
gory, we were especially interested in discovering 
temporal features that predict whether a condition 
is historical. With one exception (date greater than 
four weeks prior to the current visit), temporal ex-
pression features always occurred in compound 
rules in which the temporal expression value had to 
co-occur with another feature value. For instance, 
any temporal expression in the category key event 
had to also occur in the secondary diagnosis sec-
tion to classify the condition as historical. For ex-
15
ample, in ?SECONDARY DIAGNOSIS: Status 
post Coronary artery bypass graft with complica-
tion of mediastinitis? the key event is the coronary 
artery bypass graft, the section is secondary diag-
nosis, and the correct classification is historical.  
Similarly, verb tense and aspect were only use-
ful in conjunction with other feature values. One 
rule predicted a condition as historical if the condi-
tion was modified by the trigger term history and 
fell within the scope of a present tense verb with 
no aspect. An example of this is ?The patient is a 
50 year old male with history of hypertension.? 
Intuitively, one would think that a past tense verb 
would always predict historical; however, we 
found the presence of a past tense verb with no 
aspect was a feature only when the condition was 
in the Patient History section.  Sometimes the ab-
sence of a verb in conjunction with another feature 
value predicted a condition as historical. For ex-
ample, in the sentences ?PAST MEDICAL 
HISTORY: History of COPD. Also diabetes?? 
also functioned as a trigger term that extended the 
scope of a previous trigger term, history, in the 
antecedent sentence.  
A few historical trigger terms were discovered 
as simple rules by the rule learners: no change, 
previous, known, status post, and history. A few 
rules incorporated both a trigger term and a partic-
ular section header value. One rule predicted his-
torical if the trigger term was status post and the 
condition occurred in the History of Present Illness 
section. This rule would classify the condition 
CABG as historical in ?HISTORY OF PRESENT 
ILLNESS: The patient is...status post CABG.? 
One important detail to note is that a number of the 
temporal expressions categorized as Fuzzy Time 
also act as trigger terms, such as history and status 
post?both of which were learned by J48. A histor-
ical trigger term did not always predict the catego-
ry historical. In the sentence ?No focal sensory or 
motor deficits on history,? history may suggest that 
the condition was not previously documented, but 
was interpreted as not presently identified during 
the current physical exam.   
Finally, sections appeared in the majority of 
JRip and RL historical rules: 4/8 simple rules and 
13/18 compound rules. A few sections were con-
sistently classified as historical: Past Medical His-
tory, Allergies, and Social History.  One important 
point to address is that these sections were manual-
ly annotated.  
Our results revealed a few unexpected observa-
tions. We found at least two trigger terms indicated 
in the J48 rules, also and status post, which did not 
have the same predictive ability across report ge-
nres.  For instance, in the statement ?TRANSFER 
DIAGNOSIS: status post coiling for left posterior 
internal carotid artery aneurysm,? status post indi-
cates the reason for the transfer as an inpatient 
from the Emergency Department and the condition 
is recent. In contrast, status post in a Surgical Pa-
thology report was interpreted to mean historical 
(e.g., PATIENT HISTORY: Status post double 
lung transplant for COPD.) In these instances, 
document knowledge of the meaning of the section 
may be useful to resolve these cases.  
One other unexpected finding was that the trig-
ger term chronic was predictive of recent rather 
than historical. This may seem counterintuitive; 
however, in the statement ?We are treating this as 
chronic musculoskeletal pain with oxycodone?, the 
condition is being referenced in the context of the 
reason for the current visit. Contextual information 
surrounding the condition, in this case treating or 
administering medication for the condition, may 
help discriminate several of these cases.  
Our third objective was to assess ConText in re-
lation to the rules learned from manually annotated 
temporal features. J48 and ConText emphasized 
the use of trigger terms as predictors of whether a 
condition was historical or recent and performed 
with roughly the same overall accuracy. JRip and 
RL learned rules that incorporated other feature 
values including sections and temporal expres-
sions, resulting in a 12% increase in historical re-
call over ConText and a 31% increase in historical 
recall over J48. 
Many of the rules we learned can be easily ex-
tracted and incorporated into ConText (e.g., trigger 
terms previous and no change). The ConText algo-
rithm largely relies on the use of trigger terms like 
history and one section header, Past Medical His-
tory. By incorporating additional section headers 
that may strongly predict historical, ConText could 
potentially predict a condition as historical when a 
trigger term is absent and the header title is the 
only predictor as in the case of ?ALLERGIES: 
peanut allergy?. Although these sections header 
may only be applied to Emergency Department 
and Discharge Summaries, trigger terms and tem-
poral expressions may be generalizable across ge-
nre of reports.  Some rules do not lend themselves 
16
to ConText?s trigger-term-based approach, particu-
larly those that require sophisticated representation 
and reasoning. For example, ConText only reasons 
some simple durations like several day history. 
ConText cannot compute dates from the current 
visit to reason that a condition occurred in the past 
(e.g., stroke in March 2000).  The algorithm per-
formance would gain from such a function; how-
ever, such a task would greatly add to its 
complexity.   
8 Limitations 
The small sample size of reports and few condi-
tions found in three report genres (Operative Ga-
strointestinal, Radiology, and Surgical Pathology) 
is a limitation in this study. Also, annotation of 
conditions, temporal category, sections, verb tense 
and aspect were conducted by a single author, 
which may have introduced bias to the study. Most 
studies on temporality in text focus on the temporal 
features themselves. For instance, the prevalence 
of temporal expressions reported by Zhou et al 
(2006) include all temporal expressions found 
throughout a discharge summary, whereas we an-
notated only those expressions that modified the 
condition. This difference makes comparing our 
results to other published literature challenging.  
9 Future Work  
Although our results are preliminary, we be-
lieve our study has provided a few new insights 
that may help improve the state of the art for his-
torical categorization of a condition. The next step 
to building on this work includes automatically 
extracting the predictive features identified by the 
rule learners. Some features may be easier to ex-
tract than others. Since sections appear to be strong 
indicators for historical categorization we may start 
by implementing the SecTag tagger. Often a sec-
tion header does not exist between text describing 
the past medical history and a description of the 
current problem, so relying merely on the section 
heading is not sufficient. The SecTag tagger identi-
fies both implicit and explicit sections and may 
prove useful for this task. To our knowledge, Sec-
Tag was only tested on Emergency Department 
reports, so adapting it to other report genres will be 
necessary. Both JRip and RL produced high per-
formance, suggesting a broader set of features may 
improve historical classification; however, because 
these features do not result in perfect performance, 
there are surely other features necessary for im-
proving historical classification. For instance, hu-
mans use medical knowledge about conditions that 
are inherently chronic or usually experienced over 
the course of a patient?s life (i.e., HIV, social ha-
bits like smoking, allergies etc). Moreover, physi-
cians are able to integrate knowledge about chronic 
conditions with understanding of the patient?s rea-
son for visit to determine whether a chronic condi-
tion is also a recent problem. An application that 
imitated experts would need to integrate this type 
of information. We also need to explore adding 
features captured at the discourse level, such as 
nominal and temporal coreference. We have begun 
work in these areas and are optimistic that they 
will improve historical categorization.  
10 Conclusion 
Although most conditions in six clinical report ge-
nres are recent problems, identifying those that are 
historical is important in understanding a patient?s 
clinical state. A simple algorithm that relies on lex-
ical cues and simple temporal expressions can 
classify the majority of historical conditions, but 
our results indicate that the ability to reason with 
temporal expressions, to recognize tense and as-
pect, and to place conditions in the context of their 
report sections will improve historical classifica-
tion. We will continue to explore other features to 
predict historical categorization. 
 
Acknowledgments 
 
This work was funded by NLM grant 1 
R01LM009427-01, ?NLP Foundational Studies 
and Ontologies for Syndromic Surveillance from 
ED Reports?.  
References 
 
Philip Bramsen, Pawan Deshpande, Yoong Keok Lee, 
and Regina Barzilay. 2006. Finding Temporal Order 
in Discharge Summaries. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 
2006; 81?85 
Wendy W Chapman, David Chu, and John N. Dowling. 
2007. ConText: An Algorithm for Identifying Contex-
tual Features from Clinical Text. Association for 
Computational Linguistics, Prague, Czech Republic 
17
Scott H. Clearwater and Foster J. Provost. 1990. RL4: A 
Tool for Knowledge-Based Induction. Tools for Ar-
tificial Intelligence, 1990. Proc of the 2nd Intern 
IEEE Conf: 24-30. 
Joshua C. Denny, Randolph A. Miller, Kevin B. John-
son, and Anderson Spickard III. 2008. Development 
and Evaluation of a Clinical Note Section Header 
Terminology. SNOMED. AMIA 2008 Symp. Pro-
ceedings: 156-160. 
Brian Hazlehurst, H. Robert Frost, Dean F. Sittig, and 
Victor J. Stevens. 2005. MediClass: A system for de-
tecting and classifying encounter-based clinical 
events in any electronic medical record. J Am Med 
Inform Assoc 12(5): 517-29 
Ann K. Irvine, Stephanie W. Haas, and Tessa Sullivan. 
2008. TN-TIES: A System for Extracting Temporal 
Information from Emergency Department Triage 
Notes. AMIA 2008 Symp Proc: 328-332. 
Roser Saur??, Jessica Littman, Bob Knippen, Robert 
Gaizauskas, Andrea Setzer, and James Pustejovsky. 
2006. TimeML Annotation Guidelines Version 1.2.1. 
at: 
http://www.timeml.org/site/publications/timeMLdocs
/annguide_1.2.1.pdf 
Marc Verhagen and James Pustejovsky. 2008. Temporal 
Processing with TARSQI Toolkit. Coling 2008: Com-
panion volume ? Posters and Demonstrations, Man-
chester, 189?192 
Ian H. Witten and Eibe Frank. 2005. Data Mining: 
Practical machine learning tools and techniques, 2nd 
Edition, Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, 2005. 
Li Zhou, Genevieve B. Melton, Simon Parsons and 
George Hripcsak. 2006. A temporal constraint struc-
ture for extracting temporal information from clini-
cal narrative. J Biomed Inform 39(4): 424-439. 
Li Zhou and George Hripcsak. 2007. Temporal reason-
ing with medical data--a review with emphasis on 
medical natural language processing. J Biomed In-
form Apr; 40(2):183-202. 
Li Zhou, Simon Parson, and George Hripcsak. 2008. 
The Evaluation of a Temporal Reasoning System in 
Processing Discharge Summaries. J Am Med Inform 
Assoc 15(1): 99?106.  
 
18
