Proceedings of the ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Software Demonstrations, pages 21?24,
Suntec, Singapore, 3 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
MARS: Multilingual Access and Retrieval System with Enhanced 
Query Translation and Document Retrieval 
 
 
Lianhau Lee, Aiti Aw, Thuy Vu, Sharifah Aljunied Mahani, Min Zhang, Haizhou Li 
Institute for Infocomm Research 
1 Fusionopolis Way, #21-01 Connexis, Singapore 138632 
{lhlee, aaiti, tvu, smaljunied, mzhang, hli} 
@i2r.a-star.edu.sg 
 
  
 
Abstract 
In this paper, we introduce a multilingual ac-
cess and retrieval system with enhanced query 
translation and multilingual document retrieval, 
by mining bilingual terminologies and aligned 
document directly from the set of comparable 
corpora which are to be searched upon by us-
ers. By extracting bilingual terminologies and 
aligning bilingual documents with similar con-
tent prior to the search process provide more 
accurate translated terms for the in-domain 
data and support multilingual retrieval even 
without the use of translation tool during re-
trieval time. This system includes a user-
friendly graphical user interface designed to 
provide navigation and retrieval of information 
in browse mode and search mode respectively.  
1 Introduction 
Query translation is an important step in the 
cross-language information retrieval (CLIR). 
Currently, most of the CLIR system relies on 
various kinds of dictionaries, for example Word-
Nets (Luca and Nurnberger, 2006; Ranieri et al, 
2004), in query translation. Although dictionaries 
can provide effective translation on common 
words or even phrases, they are always limited in 
the coverage. Hence, there is a need to expand 
the existing collections of bilingual terminologies 
through various means. 
Recently, there has been more and more re-
search work focus on bilingual terminology ex-
traction from comparable corpora. Some promis-
ing results have been reported making use of sta-
tistics, linguistics (Sadat et al, 2003), translitera-
tion (Udupa et al, 2008), date information (Tao 
and Zhai, 2005) and document alignment ap-
proach (Talvensaari et al, 2007). 
In this paper, we introduce our Multilingual 
Access and Retrieval System ? MARS which 
addresses the query translation issue by using in-
domain bilingual terminologies extracted directly 
from the comparable corpora which are to be 
accessed by users. And at the same time, bilin-
gual documents are paired up prior to the search 
process based on their content similarities to 
overcome the limitation of traditional keyword 
matching based on the translated terms. These 
would provide better retrieval experiences as not 
only more accurate in-domain translated term 
will be used to retrieve the documents but also 
provide a new perspective of multilingual infor-
mation retrieval to process the time-consuming 
multilingual document matching at the backend. 
The following sections of this paper will de-
scribe the system architecture and the proposed 
functionalities of the MARS system. 
2 MARS System 
The MARS system is designed to enhance query 
translation and document retrieval through min-
ing the underlying multilingual structures of 
comparable corpora via a pivot language. There 
are three reasons for using a pivot language. 
Firstly, it is appropriate to use a universal lan-
guage among potential users of different native 
languages. Secondly, it reduces the backend data 
processing cost by just considering the pair-wise 
relationship between the pivot language and any 
other languages. Lastly, the dictionary resources 
between the pivot language and all the other lan-
guages are more likely to be available than oth-
erwise. 
There are two main parts in this system, 
namely data processing and user interface. The 
data processing is an offline process to mine the 
underlying multilingual structure of the compa-
21
rable corpora to support retrieval. The structure 
of the comparable corpora is presented visually 
in the user interface under browse mode and 
search mode to facilitate navigation and retrieval 
of information respectively. 
3 Data Processing  
For demo purpose, three different language 
newspapers from the year 1995 to 2006 pub-
lished by Singapore Press Holding (SPH), 
namely Strait Times1 (English), ZaoBao2 (Chi-
nese) and Berita Harian3  (Malay), are used as 
comparable corpora. In these particular corpora, 
English is chosen as the pivot language and noun 
terms are chosen as the basic semantic unit as 
they represent a huge amount of significant in-
formation. Our strategy is to organize and ma-
nipulate the corpora in three levels of abstraction 
? clusters, documents and terms. And our key 
task over here is to find the underlying associa-
tions of documents or terminologies in each level 
across different languages. 
First, monolingual documents are grouped into 
clusters by k-means algorithm using simple word 
vectors. Then, monolingual noun terms are ex-
tracted from each cluster using linguistic patterns 
and filtered by occurrence statistics globally 
(within cluster) and locally (within document), so 
that they are good representatives for cluster as a 
whole as well as individual documents (Vu et al, 
2008). The extracted terms are then used in 
document clustering in a new cycle and the 
whole process is repeated until the result con-
verges. 
Next, cluster alignment is carried out between 
the pivot language (English) and the other lan-
guages (Chinese, Malay). Clusters can be con-
ceptualized as the collection of documents with 
the same themes (e.g. finance, politics or sports) 
and their alignments as the correspondents in the 
other languages. Since there may be overlaps 
among themes, e.g. finance and economy, each 
cluster is allowed to align to more than one clus-
ter with varying degree of alignment score. 
After that, document alignment is carried out 
between aligned cluster pairs (Vu et al, 2009). 
Note that the corpora are comparable, thus the 
aligned document pairs are inherently compara-
                                                 
1 http://www.straitstimes.com/ an English news agency in 
Singapore. Source ? Singapore Press Holdings Ltd. 
2 http://www.zaobao.com/ a Chinese news agency in 
Singapore. Source ? Singapore Press Holdings Ltd. 
3 http://cyberita.asia1.com.sg/ a Malay news agency in 
Singapore. Source ? Singapore Press Holdings Ltd. 
ble, i.e. they are similar in contents but not iden-
tical as translation pairs. Also as important to 
note that, document alignment harvested over 
here is independent of user query. In other 
words, document alignment is not simply deter-
mined by mere occurrence of certain keyword 
and its absence does not hinder documents to be 
aligned. Hence mining of document alignment 
beforehand improves document retrieval after-
ward. 
Finally, term alignment is likewise generated 
between aligned document pairs. The aligned 
terms are expected to be in-domain translation 
pairs since they are both derived from documents 
of similar contents, and thus they have similar 
contexts. By making use of the results provided 
by each other, document alignment and term 
alignment can be improved over iterations. 
All the mentioned processes are done offline 
and the results are stored in a relational database 
which will handle online queries generated in the 
user interface later on. 
4 User Interface  
As mentioned, there are two modes provided in 
the user interface to facilitate navigation and re-
trieval of information, namely browse mode and 
search mode. Both modes can be switched sim-
ply by clicking on the respective tabs in the user 
interface. In the following, the functionalities of 
the browse mode and the search mode will be 
explained in details. 
4.1 Browse Mode 
Browse mode provides a means to navigate 
through the complex structures underneath an 
overwhelming data with an easily-understood, 
user-friendly graphical interface. In the figure 1, 
the graph in the browse mode gives an overall 
picture of the distribution of documents in vari-
ous clusters and among the different language 
collections. The outer circles represent the lan-
guage repositories and the inner circles represent 
the clusters. The sizes of the clusters are depend-
ing on the number of contained documents and 
the color represents the dominant theme. The 
labels of the highlighted clusters, characterized 
by a set of five distinguished words, are shown in 
the tooltips next to them. By clicking on a clus-
ter, the links depicting the cluster alignments will 
show up. The links to the clusters in the other 
languages are all propagated through the pivot 
language. 
22
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1 Browse mode in the MARS System 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2 Search mode in the MARS System 
23
The right hand side of the browse panel pro-
vides the detail information about the selected 
cluster using three sub-panels, i.e. top, middle 
and bottom. The top panel displays a list of ex-
tracted terms from the selected cluster. User may 
narrow down the list of interested terms by using 
the search-text column on top. By clicking on a 
term in the list, its translations in other lan-
guages, if any, will be displayed in the middle 
sub-panel and the document containing the term 
will be listed in the bottom sub-panel. The 
?Search? buttons next to the term translations 
provide a short-cut to jump to the search mode 
with the corresponding term translation being cut 
and pasted over. Last but not least, user may 
simply click on any document listed in the bot-
tom sub-panel to read the content of the docu-
ment and its aligned documents in a pop-up win-
dow. 
4.2 Search Mode 
Search mode provides a means for comprehen-
sive information retrieval. Refer to the figure 2, 
user may enter query in any of the selected lan-
guages to search for documents in all languages. 
The main difference is that query translation is 
done via bilingual terms extracted via the term 
alignment technology discussed earlier. For each 
retrieved document, documents with similar con-
tent in the other languages are also provided to 
supplement the searched results. This enables 
documents which are potentially relevant to the 
users be retrieved as some of these retrieved 
documents may not contain the translated terms 
at all. 
On top of the query translation, other informa-
tion such as related terms and similar terms to 
the query are shown at the tab panel on the right. 
Related terms are terms that correlate statistically 
with the query term and they are arranged by 
cluster, separated by dotted line in the list. Simi-
lar terms are longer terms that contains the query 
term in itself. Both the related terms and the 
similar terms provide user additional hints and 
guides to improve further queries. 
5 Conclusion  
The MARS system is developed to enable user to 
better navigate and search information from mul-
tilingual comparable corpora in a user-friendly 
graphical user interface. Query translation and 
document retrieval is enhanced by utilizing the 
in-domain bilingual terminologies and document 
alignment acquired from the comparable corpora 
itself, without limited by dictionaries and key-
word matching. 
Currently, the system only support simple 
query. Future work will improve on this to allow 
more general query. 
References  
Ernesto William De Luca, and Andreas Nurnberger. 
2006. A Word Sense-Oriented User Interface 
for Interactive Multilingual Text Retrieval, In 
Proceedings of the Workshop Information Re-
trieval, Hildesheim.  
M. Ranieri, E. Pianta, and L. Bentivogli. 2004. 
Browsing Multilingual Information with the 
MultiSemCor Web Interface, In Proceedings of 
the LREC-2004 Workshop ?The amazing utility of 
parallel and comparable corpora?, Lisban, Portu-
gal. 
Fatiha Sadat, Masatoshi Yoshikawa, Shunsuke Ue-
mura. 2003. Learning bilingual translations 
from comparable corpora to cross-language 
information retrieval: hybrid statistics-based 
and linguistics-based approach, In Proceedings 
of the 6th international workshop on Information 
Retrieval with Asian Languages, vol. 1: pp. 57-64. 
 Raghavendra Udupa, K. Saravanan, A. Kumaran, 
Jagadeesh Jagarlamudi. 2008. Mining named en-
tity transliteration equivalents from compara-
ble corpora. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM con-
ference on Information and knowledge manage-
ment. 
Tao Tao, and ChengXiang Zhai. 2005. Mining com-
parable bilingual text corpora for cross-
language information integration. In Proceed-
ings of the 11th ACM SIGKDD international con-
ference on Knowledge discovery in data mining. 
Tuomas Talvensaari, Jorma Laurikkala, Kalervo Jar-
velin, Martti Juhola, Heikki Keskustalo. 2007. 
Creating and exploiting a comparable corpus 
in cross-language information retrieval. ACM 
Transactions on Information System (TOIS), vol. 
25(1):  Article No 4. 
Thuy Vu, Aiti Aw, Min Zhang. 2008. Term extrac-
tion through unithood and termhood unifica-
tion. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Joint 
Conference on Natural Language Processing 
(IJCNLP-08), Hyderabad, India. 
Thuy Vu, Aiti Aw, Min Zhang. 2009. Feature-based 
Method for Document Alignment in Compara-
ble News Corpora. In Proceedings of the 12th 
Conference of the European Chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics (EACL-09), 
Athens, Greece. 
24
