Proceedings of the 2009 Workshop on Graph-based Methods for Natural Language Processing, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 5?13,
Suntec, Singapore, 7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Network analysis reveals structure indicative of syntax in the corpus of 
undeciphered Indus civilization inscriptions 
Sitabhra Sinha 
Institute of Mathematical Sciences  
Taramani, Chennai 600113, India 
sitabhra@imsc.res.in 
Raj Kumar Pan 
Institute of Mathematical Sciences 
Taramani, Chennai 600113 
rajkp@imsc.res.in 
 
Nisha Yadav 
Tata Institute of Fundamental Re-
search, Homi Bhabha Road, Mumbai 
400005, India 
Y_nisha@tifr.res.in 
 
Mayank Vahia 
Tata Institute of Fundamental Re-
search, Homi Bhabha Road, Mumbai 
40005, India 
vahia@tifr.res.in 
 
Iravatham Mahadevan 
Indus Research Center,  
Taramani, Chennai 600113, India 
 
 
iravatham@vsnl.net  
 
Abstract 
 
Archaeological excavations in the sites of the 
Indus Valley civilization (2500-1900 BCE) in 
Pakistan and northwestern India have un-
earthed a large number of artifacts with in-
scriptions made up of hundreds of distinct 
signs. To date, there is no generally accepted 
decipherment of these sign sequences, and 
there have been suggestions that the signs 
could be non-linguistic. Here we apply com-
plex network analysis techniques on the data-
base of available Indus inscriptions, with the 
aim of detecting patterns indicative of syntac-
tic structure in this sign system. Our results 
show the presence of regularities, e.g., in the 
segmentation trees of the sequences, that sug-
gest the existence of a grammar underlying the 
construction of the sequences. 
1 Introduction 
The recent interest in complex networks among 
physicists over the past few years has meant that 
the graph theoretic paradigm has been applied to 
many different areas, including networks defined 
in corpora of textual units (Mehler, 2008), and 
has often revealed hitherto unsuspected patterns. 
While graph-based representation of texts had 
been used for some time in natural language 
processing tasks, such as, text parsing, disam-
biguation and clustering (Radev and Mihalcea, 
2008), the approach based on the new physics of 
complex networks often asks questions from a 
different perspective that can shed new light on 
the organization of linguistic structure. For ex-
ample, networks constructed on the basis of co-
occurrence of words in sentences have been seen 
to exhibit the small-world effect, i.e., a small av-
erage distance between any pair of arbitrarily 
chosen words, and, a scale-free distribution of 
the number of words a given word is connected 
to (i.e., its degree) (Ferrer i Cancho and Sole, 
2001). These properties have been proposed to 
reflect the evolutionary history of lexicons and 
the origin of their flexibility and combinatorial 
nature. Note that, a recent study of a lexical net-
work of words that are phonological neighbors 
has found that the degree distribution might be 
better fit by an exponential rather than a power-
law function (Vitevitch, 2008). A theoretical 
model for such word co-occurrence network, 
which treats language as a self-organizing net-
work of interacting words, has led to the sugges-
tion that languages may have a core (the ?kernel 
lexicon?) that does not vary as the language 
evolves (Dorogovtsev and Mendes, 2001). How-
ever, even though text and speech are sequential, 
the local correlation between immediately con-
secutive words may not describe natural lan-
guages well ? due to the presence of non-local 
relations between words that occur apart from 
each other in a sentence. Therefore, network 
5
analysis has been extended to syntactic depend-
ency networks, where two words are connected if 
they have been related syntactically in a number 
of sentences (Ferrer i Cancho et al 2003). The 
theory of complex networks has also been used 
to investigate the structure of meaningful con-
cepts in the written texts of individual authors, 
which have been seen to have small-world as 
well as scale-free characteristics (Caldeira et al 
2006). The conceptual network of a language has 
been explored by using the semantic relatedness 
of words as defined by a thesaurus, and this net-
work too is seen to have small-world nature with 
scale-free degree distribution (Motter et al 
2002).  
 
 
In this article, we look at a corpus of inscriptions 
obtained through archaeological excavations car-
ried out in the ruins of the Indus valley civiliza-
tion. The sequences comprise signs, of which 
there are more than four hundred unique and dis-
tinct types. Since discovery in the early part of 
the 20th century, there have been attempts at de-
ciphering them. However, to date there is no 
generally accepted method of interpreting these 
inscriptions. We analyze a representative data-
base of these sequences using techniques in-
spired by complex network theory. Our aim is to 
see whether such methods can reveal the exis-
tence of patterns suggesting syntactic organiza-
tion in the sign sequences. In the next section, we 
briefly introduce the historical context of the In-
dus inscriptions, while in Section 3, we discuss 
the dataset on which analysis has been carried 
out. Our results are reported in Section 4, and we 
finally conclude with a discussion of unresolved 
questions and further work that needs to be car-
ried out. 
2 The Indus inscriptions 
The Indus civilization, also known as the Mature 
Harappan civilization (2500-1900 BCE), was 
geographically spread over what is now Pakistan 
and northwestern India, covering approximately 
a million square kilometers (Possehl, 2002). It 
was marked by urbanization centered around 
large planned cities, as evidenced in the ruins of 
Harappa and Mohenjo-daro. Craft specialization 
and long-distance trade with Mesopotamia and 
Central Asia have been well-demonstrated. This 
civilization came to an end early in the 2nd mil-
lennium BC. There were no historical records of 
its existence until archaeological excavations in 
the late 19th and early 20th century uncovered 
artifacts, and some of the ruined urban centers 
(Marshall, 1931).  
 
Among the artifacts uncovered during these dis-
coveries were a variety of objects (especially 
seals) that were inscribed with a variety of signs 
arranged in sequences (Fig. 1). Although found 
primarily on seals and their impressions (seal-
ings), inscriptions with similar signs have also 
been discovered on miniature tablets, pottery, 
copper tablets, bronze implements, etc. Unsur-
prisingly, given the high sophistication of the 
civilization and the level of social complexity it 
implies, with the concomitant requirements of 
coordination and communication, these inscrip-
tions have been interpreted as corresponding to 
writing. However, despite periodic claims about 
decipherment of this writing system, there has as 
yet been no generally accepted interpretation of 
the signs. The failure of decipherment is partly 
due to lack of knowledge about the language 
which the signs encode and the lack of any bilin-
gual texts such as the Rosetta stone which was 
crucial in deciphering Egyptian hieroglyphs. 
While there is disagreement on the exact number 
of unique and distinct signs that occur in the in-
scriptions, there is overall agreement that they lie 
in the range of a few hundred. This rules out the 
possibility of the signs belonging either to an 
alphabetic system, which contains on average 
 
Fig. 1: A typical example of Indus sign sequence 
(having 8 distinct signs) occurring at the top of a 
seal, with the picture of a ?unicorn? in the fore-
ground (i.e., the field symbol), one of the com-
mon animal motifs observed in such artifacts.  
 
Fig. 1: A typical example of Indus sign sequence 
(having 8 distinct signs) occurring at the top of a 
seal, with the picture of a ?unicorn? in the fore-
ground (i.e., the field symbol), one of the com-
mon animal motifs observed in such artifacts. 
Note that, on seals, the conventional order in 
which the signs are read (right to left) is reversed. 
6
about 25 letters (such as English) or an ideo-
graphic (e.g., Chinese) writing system, compris-
ing more than 50,000 characters. The brevity of 
the inscriptions (the longest that occurs on a sin-
gle line has 14 signs) and the existence of a large 
number of signs that occur with very low fre-
quency have led to some alternative suggestions 
regarding the meaning of the sign sequences. 
These include the possibilities that, e.g., (i) the 
signs correspond to a label specifying an indi-
vidual and his belongings, in the manner of he-
raldic badges (Fairservis, 1971) and (ii) the signs 
are ritual or religious symbols which do not en-
code speech nor serve as mnemonic devices, 
much as the Vinca signs or emblems in Near 
Eastern artifacts (Farmer et al 2004). The latter 
possibility implies the absence of any syntactic 
structure in the Indus inscriptions, a possibility 
that can be tested without making any a priori 
assumptions about the meaning of the signs. 
 
3 Description of dataset  
The database for Indus sign sequences that we 
have used is based on the electronic concordance 
constructed by Mahadevan (1977), referred here 
as M77. This is based on the study of a total of 
3573 sequences recorded from 2906 distinct arti-
facts and it identifies 417 unique signs. In the 
following we identify each sign in a sign se-
quence by its corresponding identification num-
ber (1, ?, 417) in M77. Most of the inscriptions 
seem to have been written from right to left. 
However, according to the convention we use, 
the sequence of numbers representing each text 
is read from left to right (i.e., the leftmost num-
ber in the sequence is read as the first sign in the 
inscription). Yadav et al(2008) have constructed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
an Extended Basic Unique Data Set (EBUDS) by 
removing from M77 all sequences that are in-
complete, because of the presence of signs that 
are damaged, lost, illegible or not unambiguously 
identified. Further, only sequences which are 
written on a single line are retained. This is to 
remove the ambiguity regarding the interpreta-
tion of sequences with multiple lines, namely, 
whether the different lines should be considered 
as independent sequences or whether they form 
one continuous sequence. Moreover, if the same 
sequence is found in multiple artifacts, it is rep-
resented only once in EBUDS. Following these 
operations, the original number of 3573 se-
quences in M77 is reduced to 1548 sequences in 
EBUDS. Moreover, 40 of the 417 unique signs in 
M77, which occur with relatively very low fre-
quency, do not have any representation in 
EBUDS ? so that latter dataset comprises 377 
unique signs. However, it has been verified by 
Yadav et al(2008) that the frequency distribu-
tions of signs in the two datasets are qualitatively 
similar. 
4 Results 
In the following sections we report the results 
of applying network analysis techniques to the 
sign sequences in EBUDS. We should note at 
this point that, the distributions of the in- and 
out- strengths of all the nodes (i.e., the sum of 
the weights of the incoming and outgoing links, 
Fig. 2: The directed network of 377 distinct Indus 
signs in EBUDS, with arrows pointing from a 
preceding sign to a sign that follows it in the cor-
pus of empirically observed sign sequences. Links 
are weighted by the frequency of occurrence of 
that particular sign pair. 
 
Fig. 3: The subnetwork of connections between 
the 10 highest frequency signs in EBUDS. Differ-
ent colors are used to represent the two different 
orientations possible for arrows between a nodal 
pair (e.g., the pairs 342-162 and 162-342 are both 
possible and are indicated by a blue and a black 
arrow, respectively). Loops indicate successive 
occurrences of the same sign. 
7
respectively) do not show a scale-free distribu-
tion.  
4.1 The directed network of signs 
To have a graphical view of the entire sign sys-
tem, we first construct the directed network of 
Indus signs (Fig. 2). This has 377 nodes corre-
sponding to the distinct, uniquely identified 
signs. Node i has a directed link to node j, if sign 
j immediately follows sign i in any of the inscrip-
tions included in EBUDS. The link between i 
and j is weighted by the frequency of occurrence 
of *ij* in the corpus (?*? is a wildcard character 
that may be substituted by any of the 377 signs 
or blank space). 
 
We note immediately that only 1.5% (=2178) of 
the 377?377 possible directed pairs are seen to 
occur in the actual inscriptions. Furthermore, 
most of the signs are connected to only one or 
two other signs. The connectance (probability of 
link between any given pair) is only around 0.01, 
implying that the network is extremely sparse. 
However, if we plot the sub-network of connec-
tions between nodes corresponding to the 10 mo-
st common signs in EBUDS (i.e., the ones occur-
ring with the highest frequency), we note that 
they are strongly inter-connected (Fig. 3). There-
fore the adjacency matrix of the sign network is 
far from homogeneous, with patches of dense 
connectivity in certain regions.  
 
As the above evidence indicates that there exists 
a core set of signs which occur very frequently as 
pairs, a natural question is whether the network  
 
 
generated from EBUDS has a core-periphery 
organization. This would imply the existence of a 
densely connected central core (central in terms 
of graph distance) and a larger class of sparsely 
connected peripheral nodes, like that seen in the 
case of geographically embedded transportation 
networks (Holme, 2005). To obtain such a de-
composition of the network we use a pruning 
algorithm that successively peels away layers of 
a given core-order of the network. The k-core of 
a network is defined as the subnetwork contain-
ing all nodes that have degree at least equal to k. 
Thus, to obtain it, we have to iteratively remove 
all nodes having degree less than k. In particular, 
the 2-core of a network is obtained by eliminat-
ing all nodes that do not form part of a loop (i.e., 
a closed path through a subset of the connected 
nodes). For a k-core, there exist at least k paths 
between any pair of nodes belonging to it. It is 
obvious that for any network, there exists an in-
nermost core of maximum order which cannot 
exceed the highest degree of the network.  
 
In a directed network, one can define a k-core 
either in terms of the in-degree (number of con-
nections arriving at the node) or the out-degree 
(number of connections sent from the node). For 
the EBUDS network, the innermost core turns 
out to have order 8, regardless of the type of 
network considered (Fig. 4). Fig. 5 shows the 
innermost core for the in-degree network. Even a 
casual inspection shows that many of the com-
mon sign pairs in the database belong to this 
subnetwork. Thus, a large part of the corpus can 
 
Fig. 4: Core-decomposition of the undirected 
and directed networks of Indus signs. For the 
latter, both the in-degree (circles) and out-
degree (squares) cores are shown, while the 
undirected cores are represented with dia-
monds. All three core decompositions show an 
innermost core of order 8. 
 
Fig. 5: The innermost (order 8) in-degree core of 
the Indus sign network with 26 signs. Grayscale 
color of each link corresponds to the frequency of 
occurrence of a particular pair (e.g., 391-99 and 
336-89 are the commonest pairs). 
8
be generated by using members of these ?kernel 
lexicons?. 
 
4.2 Modularity of the network  
Many networks that we see in nature are modu-
lar, i.e., they comprise several subnetworks (of-
ten called communities) whose members are 
more densely connected to each other than with 
the rest of the network. In several systems, such 
structural modules are often associated with 
functional modularity, with each community be-
ing identified as being responsible for certain 
specific functions (e.g., in the protein interaction 
network). In the EBUDS network, existence of 
modules will imply that certain sets of signs oc-
cur together far more often than would be ex-
pected had their frequencies of appearance in the 
corpus been statistically independent. 
 
The unambiguous identification of communities 
in a network is a problem that still has not been 
solved to complete satisfaction. However, sev-
eral near-optimal algorithms exist. The technique 
we use was proposed in Newman and Girvan 
(2004) and involves calculating the following 
measure of modularity of a network: 
? ???
?
???
? ??
???
?
?=
s
ss
L
d
L
LQ
2
2
, 
where, L is the total number of links in the net-
work, Ls is the number of links between nodes 
within a module s and ds is the sum of the de-
grees for nodes belonging to module s. By defi-
nition, this gives a large value when the network 
has an unambiguous partition into several com-
munities. Thus, the method for finding the mod-
ules involves carrying out many trial divisions of 
the network into modules and calculating the 
corresponding Q. The partition for which Q is 
maximum will correspond to the true modular 
partition of the system. Needless to say, a brute 
force method for finding the best partition is im-
possible for modest sized networks, and we use 
an extremal optimization technique for this pur-
pose. We obtain 8 communities whose sizes 
range from 6 to 87 nodes.  
 
Having identified the communities in the sign 
network, the obvious question is whether they 
correspond to sign groups that occur in a particu-
lar context, e.g., commercial or religious. With 
this aim in view we have examined the correla-
tion between the modules and (i) artifact types, 
(ii) nature of the field symbols and (iii) site of 
excavation. None of them show any significant 
correlation with the modules, implying that the 
signs are not simple attributes of either artifact or 
symbol portrayed in a seal, nor were the use of 
certain sign subsets confined exclusively to cer-
tain regions. The latter point underlines the sur-
prising homogeneity of sign usage over the vast 
area that the Indus civilization covered. Let us 
stress that we are looking at correlation between 
groups of signs (that have a strong probability of 
co-occurrence) and specific contexts, rather than 
the significant frequency of occurrence of an in-
dividual sign in a specific context, of which there 
 
Fig. 6: Rank-frequency distribution of Indus sign 
occurrences, shown on a double logarithmic scale. 
The two lines indicate power law fits to different 
regions of the distribution, with distinct expo-
nents. The latter are calculated using Maximum 
Likelihood Estimation (MLE). Neither equal 1, as 
would have been the case for a simple Zipf distri-
bution. 
 
 
Fig. 7: The probability of occurrence of the sign 
pair 267-99 in EBUDS compared against the cor-
responding distribution for the randomized corpus 
(obtained by considering a million realizations). 
The large deviation of the empirical value of the 
pair occurrence probability from the randomized 
corpus indicates that this is a statistically signifi-
cant sign pair.
9
are several examples. By focusing on correlation 
patterns at the level of groups of signs, rather 
than individual signs, we aim to arrive at results 
that are robust with respect to fluctuations in in-
dividual sign frequencies occurring as a result of 
further archaeological excavations. 
 
4.3 Network of ?significant? links 
So far we had placed all sign pairs that occur in 
EBUDS on an equal footing. However, certain 
pairs may occur with high probability simply 
because the individual signs that make up the 
pair occur with high frequency. Fig. 6 shows that 
the frequency distribution of sign occurrence in 
EBUDS has an approximately power law distri-
bution. This implies that the few commonest 
signs will occur over a very large number of 
cases (the most frequent sign appearing as many 
as 715 times, which is 10% of the total of 7000 
occurrences of the 377 signs in EBUDS). By us-
ing the information about the probability of oc-
currence for individual signs in EBUDS we can 
investigate significant sign relations, i.e., sign 
combinations that occur far more frequently than 
that expected from the individual probabilities of 
the component signs. 
 
Thus, if sign i occurs with a probability p(i) and j 
with p(j), then the pair ij is significant if p(ij) >> 
p(i)p(j). To measure by how much p(ij) has to be 
larger than the product of p(i) and p(j) in order to 
be ?significant?, we need to compare the empiri-
cal joint occurrence probability against the corre-
sponding value for randomized surrogates. The 
randomized corpus is generated by shuffling the 
sign sequences in the dataset so that, while the 
individual sign frequencies are unchanged, all 
pair correlations in the original inscriptions are 
lost. The shuffling can be done over either (i) the 
entire corpus, or (ii) over each individual seal.  
 
Fig. 7 shows a comparison between the empirical 
probability of a certain significant sign pair, and 
the corresponding probability distribution ob-
tained upon corpus randomization. It is evident 
that the pair would never have been observed 
with the actual EBUDS frequency had the two 
signs been independent, i.e., had there been no 
dependency relation between them. This devia-
tion can be quantified by computing the z-score, 
which is the difference between the empirical 
sign pair probability and the mean of the ran-
domized cases, divided by the standard deviation 
for the randomizations. The distribution of z-
scores for all 377?377 possible pairs are shown 
in Fig. 8. We note that there are 284 sign pairs 
with z-score larger than 10, while 46 pairs have 
z-score more than 20. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As an example, using the individual seal shuffled 
randomization we obtain significant relations 
among 22 signs for a specified z-score threshold 
(Fig. 9). There are 6 isolated clusters in this sub-
network, with the longest cluster containing 8 
signs including sign 342 (the commonest sign in 
the corpus). Out of the 16 most frequently ap-
pearing signs in the database, 13 appear in this 
group, indicating that some of the common signs 
have significant relations with each other. While 
most pair relations are between such common 
signs, one exception is the cluster of signs no. 51 
(35th most common sign), no. 149 (50th most 
 
 
Fig. 8: Distribution of z-scores for all 377 ? 377 
possible sign pairs. Note that many potential sign 
pairs are not observed in EBUDS at all, which are 
responsible for the negative z-score values. The 
randomization is over the entire corpus, and the 
mean and standard deviation are calculated over a 
million random realizations. 
 
Fig. 9: The network of significant sign pairs as 
obtained after comparison with the randomized 
corpus constructed by shuffling signs in each seal. 
10
common sign) and no. 130 (59th most common 
sign). As the individual signs are themselves not 
very common, the observed sign relation is in-
deed quite intriguing and possibly has some 
functional significance in terms of interpreting 
the sign sequences.  
 
4.4 ?Syntactic? tree generation 
We will finally attempt to reveal structure indica-
tive of syntactic trees by ?parsing? the longest 
sign sequences. We do this by generating seg-
mentation trees of the sign sequences based on 
the relative frequency of sign combination occur-
rences. Given a inscription of length n, sign pairs 
are iteratively merged to form meta-signs, with 
the first merge being done for the sign pair with 
the highest z-score among all pairs in that se-
quence. This merged sign is then included as a 
meta-sign and assigned a new number. The re-
duced sequence of length n-1 is now again 
scanned for the pair of signs or meta-signs that is 
most ?significant? and merged together. This 
process continues until the entire sign sequence 
reduces to a single meta-sign. In case of a tie be-
tween two or more pairs at any stage, one pair is 
randomly chosen. The resulting segmentation 
tree of the sign sequence is shown schematically 
in Fig. 10. The height of the tree is an indicator 
of the presence of significant recursive structure 
in the sign sequence. In particular, if the signs 
are all independent of each other, then the seg-
mentation tree has essentially the same height as 
the length of the sequence (Fig. 10, top). On the 
other hand, if for long sequences, there exists 
subsequences that also appear in the corpus as 
separate sequences in their own right, this is in-
dicative of recursion. The corresponding tree 
height is substantially reduced as compared to 
the sequence length (Fig. 10, bottom). 
 
We use this criterion to seek signature of recur-
sive, and hence syntactic, structure in the 
EBUDS network. For shorter length sequences, it 
becomes difficult to obtain subsequences that 
also appear as sequences in the database. We 
have thus confined our attention to inscriptions 
having 10 or more signs. Arranging the heights 
of the segmentation trees of these sequences in 
descending order (for seals of each specific 
length), we see that the average tree height is 
around 5 (Fig. 11). Such a characteristic length 
scale indicates that the longer sequences may 
actually be composed of multiple smaller se-
quences, each of which has a particular syntactic 
relation among its constituent signs. 
  
5 Discussion 
In this paper we have used complex network 
analysis techniques on the sign network con-
structed from a subset of the corpus of inscrip-
tions obtained in Indus civilization excavations. 
Our results suggest that though these sign se-
quences are yet to be deciphered, they have a 
highly structured arrangement which is sugges-
tive of the existence of syntax. The inference of a 
set of rules (i.e., the grammar) for arranging 
these signs in a particular order, so as to be able 
 
Fig. 10: Schematic segmentation trees for a sign 
sequence of length 8, representing two alternative 
possibilities. The top example is a relatively un-
structured sign sequence, with the tree height be-
ing almost identical to the sequence length. The 
bottom example shows significant recursive struc-
ture and a corresponding lower tree height. 
 
Fig. 11: Segmentation tree height for all se-
quences (of length 10 or more) in EBUDS ar-
ranged in descending order. 
11
to create pseudotexts that are indistinguishable 
from the excavated ones is the eventual aim of 
the analysis described here. However, prior to 
this several open problems need to be addressed. 
One of the extensions of the present work has to 
do with looking beyond sign pairs to sign trip-
lets, quadruplets, etc. Preliminary analysis of 
networks of meta-signs by us indicates that, 
combinations beyond four signs may not have 
statistical significance. A detailed comparison 
between the sign network described here and the 
meta-sign network may provide clues about the 
possible hierarchical arrangement of subse-
quences in the longer sequences. Evidence of this 
is already seen from the construction of segmen-
tation trees of individual sequences based on 
relative pair frequencies.  
 
It is also possible that there are non-local correla-
tions between signs in a given inscription. To 
analyze this, we need to redefine the links in the 
network as being connections between all signs 
that occur in the same inscription. Again, pre-
liminary analysis seems to suggest that this does 
not provide substantially new results from those 
reported here. 
 
Based on the number of distinct signs (more than 
400) there have been several suggestions that, as 
the number is too high to be an alphabetic system 
but too small to be an ideographic system, the 
inscriptions could well be written in a logo-
syllabic system. Such a writing system combines 
both logograms (morphemic signs) and syllabic 
(or phonetic) signs without inherent meaning. In 
future work, we plan to investigate the differ-
ences that arise in the network structure of lan-
guages belonging to these very different systems, 
in order to make an inference on the nature of the 
writing system used in the Indus inscriptions. 
 
One of the most controversial aspects of Indus 
decipherment is the question of how many dis-
tinct signs are there. M77 identified 417 signs, 
but other researchers have come up with a wide 
range of different numbers. Therefore, an impor-
tant open issue that needs to be settled in the fu-
ture is the robustness of these results, with re-
spect to analysis based on another sign list, e.g., 
that created by B. K. Wells (Wells, 2006).  
 
Our analysis of correlations, or rather, the lack 
of it, between the modules of the network (i.e., 
groups of signs that have a high probability of 
co-occurrence) and contexts such as site of exca-
vation, artifact types and field symbols, indicates 
that the patterns seen in the sequence organiza-
tion are intrinsic to the sign usage system and not 
so much dependent on the context in which they 
arise. This supports the long-held belief that the 
signs encode writing, or, at least, proto-writing.  
 
Acknowledgments 
We would like to thank Bryan K. Wells for care-
fully reading through the manuscript and making 
numerous suggestions for improvement. We are 
grateful to the anonymous referees for several 
helpful suggestions. Ashraf M. Izhar helped in 
preparing Figures 7 and 8. We would also like to 
thank P. P. Divakaran for his constant encour-
agement. 
 
References  
S. M. G. Caldeira, T. C. Petit Lobao, R. F. S. Andrade 
A. Neme and J. G. V. Miranda. 2006. The network 
of concepts in written texts. European Physical 
Journal B, 49(4):523-529.  
S. N. Dorogovtsev and J. F. Mendes. 2001. Language 
as an evolving word web. Proceedings of the 
Royal Society of London B, 268(1485):2603-
2606.  
W. A. Fairservis. 1971. The Roots of Ancient India, 
George Allen and Unwin, London. 
S. Farmer, R. Sproat and M. Witzel. 2004. The col-
lapse of the Indus-script thesis. Electronic Jour-
nal of Vedic Studies, 11(2):19-57.  
R. Ferrer i Cancho,  and R. V. Sole. 2001. The small 
world of human language. Proceedings of the 
Royal Society of London B, 268(1482): 2261-
2265.  
R. Ferrer i Cancho, R. V. Sole and R. Kohler. 2003. 
Patterns in syntactic dependency networks. Physi-
cal Review E, 69(5): 051915 (1-8).  
P. Holme. 2005. Core-periphery organization of com-
plex networks. Physical Review E, 72(4): 046111 
(1-4).  
I. Mahadevan. 1977. The Indus Script: Texts, Con-
cordances and Tables, Archaeological Survey of 
India, New Delhi.  
J. Marshall. 1931. Mohenjo-daro and the Indus 
Civilization, Arthur Probsthain, London. 
A. Mehler. 2008. Large text networks as an object of 
corpus linguistic studies. In A. Ludeling and K. 
Marja (Eds) Corpus Linguistics: An Interna-
12
tional Handbook, Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin, 
328-382.  
A. E. Motter, A. P. S. De Moura, Y-C. Lai and P. 
Dasgupta. 2002. Topology of the conceptual net-
work of language. Physical Review E, 
65(6):065102 (1-4).  
M. E. J. Newman and M. Girvan. 2004. Finding and 
evaluating community structure in networks. 
Physical Review E, 69(2):026113 (1-15).  
A. Parpola. 1994. Deciphering the Indus Script, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
G. Possehl. 2002. The Indus Civilization: A Con-
temporary Perspective, AltaMira Press, Lanham, 
MD. 
D. R. Radev and R. Mihalcea. 2008. Networks and 
natural language processing. AI Magazine, 
29(3):16-28. 
M. S. Vitevitch. 2008. What can graph theory tell us 
about word learning and lexical retrieval. Journal 
of Speech, Language and Hearing Research, 
51(2):408-422.  
B. K. Wells. 2006. Epigraphic Approaches to In-
dus Writing, PhD thesis, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, Mass. 
N. Yadav, M. N. Vahia, I. Mahadevan and H. Jogel-
kar. 2008. A statistical approach for pattern search 
in Indus writing. International Journal of Dra-
vidian Linguistics, 37(1):39-52.  
13
Commentary and Discussion
Entropy, the Indus Script, and Language:
A Reply to R. Sproat
Rajesh P. N. Rao?
University of Washington
Nisha Yadav??
Tara Institute of Fundamental Research
Mayank N. Vahia??
Tara Institute of Fundamental Research
Hrishikesh Joglekar?
Ronojoy Adhikari?
The Institute of Mathematical Sciences
Iravatham Mahadevan?
Indus Research Centre
1. Introduction
In a recent LastWords column (Sproat 2010), Richard Sproat laments the reviewing prac-
tices of ?general science journals? after dismissing our work and that of Lee, Jonathan,
and Ziman (2010) as ?useless? and ?trivially and demonstrably wrong.? Although we
expect such categorical statements to have already raised some red flags in the minds
of readers, we take this opportunity to present a more accurate description of our work,
point out the straw man argument used in Sproat (2010), and provide a more complete
characterization of the Indus script debate. A separate response by Lee and colleagues
in this issue provides clarification of issues not covered here.
2. The Indus Script Debate
The Indus script refers to the approximately 4,000 inscriptions on seals, miniature
tablets, pottery, stoneware, copper plates, tools, weapons, and wood left behind by
? Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
E-mail: rao@cs.washington.edu.
?? Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, Tara Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai 400005,
India.
? 14 Dhus Wadi, Thakurdwar, Mumbai 400002, India.
? The Institute of Mathematical Sciences, Chennai 600113, India.
? Indus Research Centre, Roja Muthiah Research Library, Chennai 600113, India.
? 2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 4
the Indus civilization, which flourished ca. 2600?1900 BCE in South Asia. The existing
inscriptions (see Figure 1(a) for examples) are relatively short, the average length being
5 signs and the longest inscription on a single surface being 17 signs. The number
of different symbols in the script is estimated to be about 400. This large number of
symbols, coupled with archaeological evidence indicating extensive use of the script
for a variety of purposes, led scholars to suggest that the script was probably a logosyl-
labic form of writing, each sign representing a word or syllable (Parpola 1994; Possehl
1996).
In 2004, Sproat and colleagues published in the Electronic Journal of Vedic Studies an
article whose title makes the unconditional pronouncement ?The Collapse of the Indus
script thesis: The myth of a literate Harappan civilization? (Farmer, Sproat, and Witzel
2004). The article goes on to list arguments for why the authors believe the Indus script
is nonlinguistic (the arguments are said to amount to a ?proof? [Farmer 2005]). They
propose that the script is a collection of religious or political symbols.
Sproat (2010) states that their arguments ?have been accepted by many archae-
ologists and linguists,? without actually citing who these ?many archaeologists and
linguists? are. In fact, a number of respected scholars, not just those who have ?spent
most of their careers trying to decipher the symbols? (Sproat 2010), have voiced strong
disagreement (Kenoyer 2004; Possehl 2004; Mahadevan 2009). Several have published
point-by-point rebuttals (Parpola 2005; Vidale 2007; McIntosh 2008). Parpola, who is
widely regarded as the leading authority on the Indus script, writes that the arguments
of Sproat and co-workers ?can be easily controverted? and goes on to expose the
inadequacies of each of these arguments (Parpola 2005, 2008). McIntosh, in a recent book
on the ancient Indus valley, also discusses the evidence against the arguments of Sproat
and colleagues (McIntosh 2008, pages 372?374). Vidale, a well-known archaeologist,
notes that the paper (Farmer, Sproat, and Witzel 2004) ?is constructed by repeatedly
advancing hypotheses and sometimes wild speculation presented as serious scientific
evidence? and concludes by saying: ?I see no acceptable scientific demonstration of
the non-scriptural nature of the Indus sign system; therefore, I see no collapse of such
?thesis?? (Vidale 2007, page 362).
3. Fallacies Resolved
Under a section entitled ?The Fallacies,? Sproat (2010) describes a result from our article
in Science (Rao et al 2009a) which presents evidence against the thesis of Farmer, Sproat,
andWitzel (2004). In our article, we show that the conditional entropy of the Indus script
is similar to various linguistic sequences. The impression conveyed by Sproat (2010) is
that we are claiming such similarity by itself is sufficient to prove that the Indus script,
or indeed any symbol system, is linguistic. We do not make such a claim; instead, we
only note in Rao et al (2009a) that our result increases the evidence for the linguistic
hypothesis, when one takes into account other language-like properties of the script
(see detailed explanation in Section 4 herein).
To set up his criticism of our work, Sproat (2010) presents Figure 1A from our
Science paper but never mentions the results presented in Figure 1B in the same paper.
Nor does he describe our more recent block entropy result (Rao 2010b), even though
he cites this paper (this new result extends the conditional entropy work). Both of
these results include data from demonstrably nonlinguistic sequences, namely, DNA,
protein sequences, and Fortran code. To present our work as ?simple experiments
involving randomly generated texts? is, to say the least, a gross misrepresentation of our
work.
796
Rao et al Entropy, the Indus Script, and Language
Figure 1
(a) Examples of the Indus script. Three square stamp seals, each with an Indus text at the top.
Last image: three rectangular seals and three miniature tablets with inscriptions (image credit:
J. M. Kenoyer/Harappa.com). (b) Block entropy scaling of the Indus script compared to natural
languages and other sequences. Symbols were signs for the Indus script; bases for DNA; amino
acids for proteins; change in pitch for music; characters for English; words for English, Tagalog,
and Fortran; symbols in abugida (alphasyllabic) scripts for Tamil and Sanskrit; and symbols in
the cuneiform script for Sumerian (see Rao et al 2009a; Rao 2010a for details). The values for
music are from Schmitt and Herzel (1997). To compare sequences over different alphabet sizes L,
the logarithm in the entropy calculation was taken to base L (417 for Indus, 4 for DNA, etc.). The
resulting normalized block entropy is plotted as a function of block size. Error bars denote one
standard deviation above/below mean entropy and are negligibly small except for block size 6.
(c) Log likelihood under a first-order Markov model for the Indus corpus for four texts (A
through D) found in foreign lands compared to average log likelihood for a random set of
50 Indus region texts not included in the training data (error bar denotes ?1 standard error of
mean). The unusual sequencing of signs in the foreign texts, noted earlier by Parpola (1994), is
reflected here in their significantly lower likelihood values.
797
Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 4
To correct this misrepresentation, we present in Figure 1(b) the block entropy result
(adapted from Rao 2010b). Block entropy generalizes Shannon entropy (Shannon 1948,
1951) and the measure of bigram conditional entropy used in Rao et al (2009a) to blocks
of N symbols. Block entropy for block size N is defined as:
HN = ?
?
i
p
(N)
i log p
(N)
i (1)
where p
(N)
i are the probabilities of sequences (blocks) of N symbols. Thus, for N = 1,
block entropy is simply the standard unigram entropy and for N = 2, it is the entropy
of bigrams. Block entropy is useful because it provides a measure of the amount of
flexibility allowed by the syntactic rules generating the analyzed sequences (Schmitt
and Herzel 1997): The more restrictive the rules, the smaller the number of syntactically
correct combinations of symbols and lower the entropy. Correlations between symbols
are reflected in a sub-linear growth of HN with N (e.g., H2 < 2H1).
Figure 1(b) plots the block entropies of various types of symbol sequences as the
block size is increased from N = 1 to N = 6 symbols. To counter the problems posed
by the small sample size of the Indus corpus (about 1,550 lines of text and 7,000 sign
occurrences), we employed a Bayesian entropy estimation technique known as the NSB
estimator (Nemenman, Shafee, and Bialek 2002), which has been shown to provide
good estimates of entropy for undersampled discrete data. Details regarding the NSB
parameter settings and the data sets used for Figure 1(b) can be found in Rao (2010a).
As seen in Figure 1(b), the block entropies of the Indus texts remain close to those
of a variety of natural languages and far from the entropies for unordered and rigidly
ordered sequences (Max Ent and Min Ent, respectively). Also shown in the plot for
comparison are the entropies for a computer program written in the formal language
Fortran, a music sequence (Beethoven?s Sonata no. 32; data from Schmitt and Herzel
[1997]), and two sample biological sequences (DNA and proteins). The biological se-
quences and music have noticeably higher block entropies than the Indus script and
natural languages; the Fortran code has lower block entropies.
Does the similarity in block entropies with linguistic systems in Figure 1(b) prove
that the Indus script is linguistic? We do not believe so. In fact, we contend that barring
a full decipherment, one cannot prove either the linguistic or nonlinguistic thesis,
unlike Sproat and colleagues who have previously claimed to have ?proof? for the
nonlinguistic hypothesis (Farmer, Sproat, and Witzel 2004, pages 34 and 37; Farmer
2005). What we do claim, as we state in our Science paper and as explained inmore detail
subsequently, is that results such as the similarity in entropy in Figure 1(b) increase the
evidence for the linguistic hypothesis, given other language-like properties of the Indus
script.
However, Sproat, Liberman, and Shalizi (in a blog by Liberman [2009]) and Sproat
at EMNLP?09 undertake the exercise of knocking down the straw man (?similarity in
conditional entropy by itself implies language?) and present artificial counterexamples
(e.g., having Zipfian distribution) with conditional independence for bigrams (Sproat
2010). First, such an exercise misses the point: as stated earlier, we do not claim that
entropic similarity by itself is a sufficient condition for language. Second, these ?coun-
terexamples? ignore the fact that the unigram and bigram entropies are markedly dif-
ferent for both the Indus script and the linguistic systems, as is obvious from comparing
Figures 1 and S1 in our Science paper (Rao et al 2009a). More importantly, these artificial
examples fail to exhibit the scaling of block entropies beyond unigrams and bigrams
exhibited by the Indus script and linguistic systems in Figure 1(b).
798
Rao et al Entropy, the Indus Script, and Language
Sproat (2010) criticizes our classification of ?Type 1? and ?Type 2? nonlinguistic sys-
tems (corresponding to systems near Max Ent andMin Ent, respectively, in Figure 1(b)),
saying these do not characterize any natural nonlinguistic systems. It is clear from
Figure 1(b) that there do exist natural ?Type 1? nonlinguistic sequences (DNA, protein
sequences). The analogous result for conditional entropy was given in Figure 1B in Rao
(2010b), which was omitted in Sproat (2010). As for ?Type 2? systems, Vidale (2007)
provides a number of examples of ancient nonlinguistic systems fromCentral and South
Asia whose properties are in line with such systems. Section 6 herein discusses these
systems as well as the specific cases of Vinc?a and kudurru sequencesmentioned in Sproat
(2010). Sproat, Farmer, and colleagues have objected to the use of artificial data sets in
Rao et al (2009a) to demarcate the Max Ent and Min Ent limits: This objection is a red
herring and does not change the result that the Indus script is entropically similar to
linguistic scripts. Finally, the allusion in Sproat (2010) that we may be ?confused? about
the difference between ?random? and ?equiprobable? is unwarranted and not worthy
of comment here. The related issue of artificially generated examples with quasi-Zipfian
distributions has already been discussed in this response.
We conclude by noting here that the extension of our original conditional entropy
result to block entropies directly addresses the objections of Pereira (2009), who stressed
the need to go beyond bigram statistics, which Figure 1(b) does for N up to 6. Beyond
N = 6, the entropy estimates become less reliable due to the small sample size of the
Indus corpus.
4. Inductive Inference
The correct way of interpreting the block entropy result in Figure 1(b) (and likewise the
conditional entropy result) is to view it within an inductive framework (rather than in
a deductive sense as Sproat and others do in Liberman [2009]). Given that we cannot
answer the ontological question ?Does the Indus script represent language?? without a
true decipherment, we formulate the question as an epistemological problem, namely,
one of estimating the posterior probability of the hypothesis HL that an unknown
symbol sequence represents language, given various properties P1,P2,P3, . . . of the
unknown sequence. Using a Bayesian formalism, the posterior P(HL|P1,P2,P3, . . .) is
proportional to P(P1,P2,P3, . . . |HL)P(HL).
Building on prior work (Hunter 1934; Knorozov, Volchok, and Gurov 1968;
Mahadevan 1977; Parpola 1994), we have sought to quantitatively characterize various
properties P1,P2,P3, . . . of the Indus script (Yadav et al 2008a, 2008b, 2010; Rao et al
2009a, 2009b; Rao 2010b). In each case, we compare these properties with those of
linguistic systems to ascertain whether the property tilts the evidence towards or away
from the linguistic hypothesis HL.
We find these properties to be as follows: (1) Linearity: The Indus texts are linearly
written, like the vast majority of linguistic scripts (and unlike nonlinguistic systems
such as medieval heraldry, Boy Scout merit badges, or highway/airport signs, systems
frequently mentioned by Sproat and colleagues). (2) Directionality: There is clear evi-
dence for directionality in the script: Texts were usually written from right to left, a fact
that can be inferred, for example, from a sign being overwritten by another on its left
on pottery (Lal 1966). Directionality is a universal characteristic of linguistic systems
but not necessarily of nonlinguistic systems (e.g., heraldry, Boy Scout badges). (3) Use
of Diacritical Marks: Indus symbols are often modified by the addition of specific sets
of marks over, around, or inside a symbol. Multiple symbols are sometimes combined
799
Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 4
(?ligatured?) to form a single glyph. This is similar to linguistic scripts, including later
Indian scripts which use such ligatures and diacritical marks above, below, or around a
symbol to modify the sound of a root consonant or vowel symbol. (4) Zipf?Mandelbrot
Law: The script obeys the Zipf?Mandelbrot law, a power-law distribution on ranked
data, which is often considered a necessary (though not sufficient) condition for language
(Yadav et al 2010). (5) Syntactic Structure: The script exhibits distinct language-like
syntactic structure including equivalence classes of symbols with respect to positional
preference, classes of symbols that function as beginners and enders, symbol clusters
that prefer particular positions within texts, etc. (Hunter 1934; Parpola 1994; Yadav et al
2008a, 2008b). This structure is evident in both short texts as well as longer texts that
are up to 17 symbols long. (6) Diverse usage: The script was used on a wide range of
media (from seals, tablets, and pottery to copper plates, tools, clay tags, and at least one
large wooden board), suggesting a diverse usage similar to linguistic scripts, and unlike
nonlinguistic systems such as pottery markings, deity symbols on boundary stones, and
so on, whose use is typically limited to one type of medium. (7) Use in Foreign Lands:
Indus texts have been discovered as far west as Mesopotamia and the Persian Gulf.
These texts typically use the same signs as texts found in the Indus region but alter
their ordering. As shown in Figure 1(c), these ?foreign? texts have low likelihood values
compared to Indus region texts, even after taking into account regional variation across the
Indus region (see error bar in Figure 1(c)) (Rao et al 2009b; Rao 2010b). This suggests
that, like other linguistic scripts, the Indus script may have been versatile enough to
represent different subject matter or a different language in foreign regions.
Note that although one may find a nonlinguistic system that exhibits one of these
properties (e.g., Zipfian distribution) and another that exhibits a different property (e.g.,
ligaturing), it would be highly unusual for a nonlinguistic system to exhibit a confluence
of all of these properties.
To these properties, we add the property in Figure 1(b) that the Indus script shows
the same type of entropic scaling as linguistic systems. To estimate the prior probability
P(HL), one could take into account, as a number of scholars have (Vidale 2007; Parpola
2008; Mahadevan 2009), the archaeological evidence regarding the cultural sophistica-
tion of the Indus civilization, contact with other literate societies, and the extensive use
of the script for trade and other purposes. These factors suggest that P(HL) is higher than
chance. Considering the properties discussed previously and our estimate of P(HL), the
product P(P1,P2,P3, . . . |HL)P(HL) suggests a higher posterior probability for the linguistic
hypothesis than the nonlinguistic alternative. Given our current data and knowledge
about the script, we believe this is the kind of statement one can make about the Indus
script, rather than statements about the ?collapse? of one thesis or another (Farmer,
Sproat, and Witzel 2004).
To claim to have ?proof? of the nonlinguistic thesis (Farmer, Sproat, and Witzel
2004, pages 34 and 37; Farmer 2005) would amount to showing a posterior probability
of zero for the linguistic hypothesis. This is clearly not possible given our current state
of knowledge about the script and the lack of an accepted decipherment.
Could the result in Figure 1(b) be an artifact of our particular entropy estimation
method?We do not think so. A similar block entropy result was obtained independently
by Schmitt and Herzel (1997) using an entirely different entropy estimation method (see
Figure 8 in their paper). The overall result is also confirmed by other methods, as dis-
cussed by Schmitt and Herzel: ?This order?DNA, music, human language, computer
language?when ordered by decreasing entropy, is confirmed by the calculation of the
Lempel-Ziv complexity (Lempel and Ziv 1976) which also serves as an estimation of the
entropy of the source? (Schmitt and Herzel 1997, page 376).
800
Rao et al Entropy, the Indus Script, and Language
5. Comparison with Ancient Nonlinguistic Systems
Sproat contends that results such as the similarity in entropy scaling in Figure 1(b)
are ?useless? without analyzing a sizeable number of ?ancient nonlinguistic systems?
(Sproat 2010). As mentioned earlier, Sproat ignores the fact that the results already
include nonlinguistic systems: DNA and protein sequences (perhaps the two ?most
ancient? nonlinguistic systems!) as well as man-made sequences (Fortran code and
music in Figure 1(b)).
We believe entropic results such as Figure 1(b) to be both interesting and useful. An
analogy may be apt here: If, in the dim surroundings of a jungle, you notice something
moving and then spot some stripes, your belief that what is lurking is a tiger will likely
go up, even though it could also be a zebra, a man wearing a tiger costume, or any of a
number of possibilities. The observation you made that the object under consideration
has stripes is certainly not ?useless? in this case, just because you haven?t ascertained
whether antelopes or elephants in the jungle also have stripes. In other words, we now
know that various types of symbol sequences, from natural sequences such as DNA
and proteins to man-made systems such as music and Fortran, occupy quite different
entropic ranges compared to linguistic systems (Figure 1(b); Figure 8 in Schmitt and
Herzel [1997]). Given this knowledge, the finding that Indus sequences occupy the same
entropic range as linguistic sequences, although not proving that the Indus script is
linguistic, certainly increases the posterior probability of the linguistic hypothesis, just
as the observation of stripes increases the posterior probability of the ?tiger? hypothesis
in our earlier example.1 As to where ancient nonlinguistic systems may lie among the
entropic ranges in Figure 1(b), we discuss this in the next section.
6. Countless Nonlinguistic Sign Systems?
Sproat and colleagues have stated that the properties observed in the Indus script are
also seen in ?countless nonlinguistic sign systems? (Farmer, Sproat, and Witzel 2004,
page 21). Let us consider some of these nonlinguistic systems (Sproat 2010; Farmer,
Sproat, and Witzel 2004). Medieval European heraldry, Boy Scout merit badges, and
airport/highway signs are not linear juxtapositions of symbols that can be up to 17
symbols long, as we find in the case of the Indus script, nor do they exhibit a conflu-
ence of script-like properties as enumerated herein. We invite the reader to compare
examples of heraldry (Parker 1894), Boy Scout badges (Boy Scouts of America 2010),
and airport/highway signs with the Indus script sequences in Figure 1(a) and judge for
themselves whether such a comparison bears merit.
Another nonlinguistic system mentioned in Sproat (2010) is the Vinc?a sign system,
which refers to the markings on pottery and other artifacts from the Vinc?a culture of
southeastern Europe of ca. 6000?4000 BCE. Sproat believes there is order in the Vinc?a
system and states that we ?mis-cite? Winn. To set the record straight, here is what Winn
has to say in his article in a section on Sign Groups (Winn 1990, page 269):
Neither the order nor the direction of the signs in these (sign) groups is generally
determinable: judging by the frequent lack of arrangement, precision in the order
probably was unimportant . . .Miniature vessels also possess sign-like clusters
(Figure 12.2j), which are characteristically disarranged.
1 Under certain assumptions, one can derive a quantitative estimate of the increase in posterior probability
from a result such as Figure 1(b). We refer the reader to Siddharthan (2009) for details.
801
Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 4
This contradicts Sproat (2010) and suggests that the Vinc?a system, if it indeed lacks
precision in the order of signs, would be closer to the maximum entropy (Max Ent)
range than to the linguistic scripts in Figure 1(b). The actual amount of lack of precision
unfortunately cannot be quantified in entropic terms because a large enough data set of
Vinc?a sequences does not exist.
Sproat also draws attention to the carvings of deities on Mesopotamian boundary
stones known as kudurrus. He declares that our statement regarding kudurru deity
sequences obeying rigid rules of ordering compared to linguistic scripts is ?clearly
false.? To shed more light on this issue, we cite here the work of several scholars in
this field. Slanski, in a recent in-depth study of the form and function of kudurrus, states
(Slanski 2003, page 163):
Hierarchical deployment of the divine symbols. Seidl (1989) observed that, to a certain
extent, the divine symbols were deployed upon the Entitlement naru?s (kudurrus)
according to the deities? relative positions in the pantheon. The symbols for the higher
gods of the pantheon . . . are generally found upon or toward the top and most
prominent part of the monument. Deities lower in the pantheon are deployed toward
the bottom of the relief field.
A similar statement on the hierarchical ordering of symbols on kudurrus can be found
in Black and Green (1992, page 114). The reader will probably agree that a system with
even a rough hierarchical ordering among its symbols is more rigid than most linguistic
systems. Linguistic systems have no such hierarchy imposed on characters or words,
and there is considerable flexibility in where such symbols may be placed within a
sequence. Therefore, as originally suggested in Rao et al (2009a), we expect the entropy
of the kudurru sequences to be lower than linguistic systems and perhaps slightly above
the minimum entropy (Min Ent) range in Figure 1(b). Again, the actual entropy values
cannot be estimated because, as admitted in Sproat (2010), a large enough data set of
kudurru sequences does not exist.
Sproat (2010) says that no one has done the ?legwork? of putting together a large
data set of ancient nonlinguistic systems. This ignores the work of Vidale (2007), who
did put together a set of ten such systems. Vidale questions the relevance of the non-
linguistic systems suggested by Sproat and colleagues because they are neither of the
same time period nor from the same geographical region as the Indus script. To rectify
this oversight, Vidale lists ten nonlinguistic systems from Central and South Asia that
were roughly contemporaneous with the Indus script (Table 1 in Vidale 2007). For this
set of much more relevant nonlinguistic systems, Vidale demonstrates that the average
number of different signs is only about 44, a far cry from the 400 or so signs in the Indus
script.
Are the kind of positional regularities found in the Indus script also found in
countless nonlinguistic sign systems (Farmer, Sproat, and Witzel 2004, page 21)? Vidale
states that the archaeological data lead us to question this ?superficial claim? (Vidale
2007, page 344). In the ten nonlinguistic systems roughly contemporary with the Indus
script, positional regularities can either be ?largely ruled out? (e.g., in potters? markings
where signs occur mostly in isolation and rarely in couples) or the regularities take
the form of ?systematic, large-scale redundancy? (e.g., constant repetition of the same
symbols). Such systems would fall roughly in the ?Type 2? category of nonlinguistic
systems suggested in our Science paper (Rao et al 2009a), lying closer to the mini-
mum entropy (Min Ent) range in Figure 1(b) than to the Indus script and linguistic
systems.
802
Rao et al Entropy, the Indus Script, and Language
7. Implications of the Linguistic versus Nonlinguistic Hypotheses
If the Indus script does encode language, what might the content of the inscriptions
be? A majority of the Indus texts are found on stamp seals (Figure 1(a)), which were
typically used in Bronze Age cultures for regulating trade. Seals were pressed onto
clay used to seal packages of goods. Indeed, a number of such clay tags have been
found at various sites in the Indus civilization, bearing seal impressions on one side and
impressions of woven cloth, reed matting or other packing material on the other. These
archaeological observations suggest that the short Indus texts on seals (Figure 1(a)),
like their other Bronze age counterparts, probably represent the contents, the origin or
destination, the type or amount of goods being traded, name and title of the owner,
or some combination of these. Similar linguistic explanations can be found for the
inscriptions on other media.
If, on the other hand, as Sproat and colleagues propose, the script merely represents
religious or political symbols, one is hard pressed to explain: (1) how and why were
sequences of such symbols, with syntactic rules entropically similar to linguistic scripts
(Figure 1(b)), used in trade in a manner strikingly similar to other literate Bronze age
cultures? and (2) why did the Indus people use these symbols in consistent sequences
in their native region and alter their ordering when in a foreign land (Figure 1(c))?
As pointed out by other authors (Vidale 2007; Parpola 2008; Mahadevan 2009), such
incongruities are more the norm than the exception if one accepts the nonlinguistic
thesis espoused by Sproat and colleagues. The principle of Occam?s razor then suggests
that we reject the nonlinguistic hypothesis in favor of the simpler linguistic one.
8. Conclusion
A large number of identification problems are amenable to statistical tests, and represent
perhaps the only way to solve these problems. Practical examples include separating
e-mail from spam and recognizing faces in digital camera images. Even though we
may not have a perfect test for any of these problems, the statistical methods that are
used can be quite useful, even if they are fallible (we all rely on spam detectors for
e-mail even if they occasionally let a spam e-mail through; we do not discard these
detectors as ?useless?). An important goal of our work (Rao et al 2009a, 2009b; Rao
2010b; Yadav et al 2010) has been to develop better statistical tests for linguistic systems.
As with other statistical tests, it would be foolhardy to expect that a single such test is
infallible, as assumed by Sproat and others in their quest to find ?counterexamples?
(Sproat 2010). The observation that a single statistical test by itself is insufficient was
the primary motivation for the inductive framework adopted in our research, where we
apply a range of tests and estimate the posterior probability that an unknown sequence
represents language (Section 4).
In the concluding remarks of his Last Words column, Sproat says it is not clear if
editors of prominent science journals ?even know that there are people who spend their
lives doing statistical and computational analyses of text? (Sproat 2010). We find such a
statement surprising because it fails to acknowledge both the impressive achievements
of the field of computational linguistics in recent years and the wide coverage of these
accomplishments in the popular press (Fletcher [2010] and Lohr and Markoff [2010], to
give two recent examples).
Computational linguistics is playing an important role in our understanding of
ancient scripts (Koskenniemi 1981; Knight and Yamada 1999; Rao et al 2009a, 2009b;
Snyder, Barzilay, and Knight 2010; Yadav et al 2010). Rather than representing a ?misuse
803
Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 4
of the methods of the field of computational linguistics? (Sproat 2010), techniques from
the field are providing new insights into the structure and function of undeciphered
scripts such as the Indus script. For example, we now know that the kind of regularities
found in the Indus script can be exploited by statistical models to fill in missing or
illegible inscriptions with most likely predictions (Rao et al 2009b; Yadav et al 2010).
Recent n-gram analysis of the Indus script has revealed that there are interesting de-
pendencies between signs that go beyond just pairs of signs (Yadav et al 2010). Addi-
tionally, these statistical models have allowed us to quantify the differences between
Indus inscriptions found in West Asia and those found in the Indus region (Figure 1(c)),
suggesting the script may have been flexible enough to represent different content or
even a different language in foreign regions.
Indus script research has benefited immensely from the application of ideas
and methods from computational linguistics for almost four decades (Koskenniemi,
Parpola, and Parpola 1970; Koskenniemi 1981; Parpola 1994). We believe computational
linguistics will continue to make important contributions to Indus script research in the
years to come.
References
Black, Jeremy and Anthony Green. 1992.
Gods, Demons and Symbols of Ancient
Mesopotamia. British Museum Press,
London.
Boy Scouts of America. 2010. Introduction to
merit badges. http://www.scouting.org/
scoutsource/BoyScouts/Advancementand
Awards/MeritBadges.aspx.
Farmer, Steve. 2005. Simple proof against the
?Indus script?. http://www.safarmer.com/
indus/simpleproof.html.
Farmer, Steve, Richard Sproat, and Michael
Witzel. 2004. The collapse of the Indus
script thesis: The myth of a literate
Harappan civilization. Electronic Journal of
Vedic Studies, 11(2):19?57.
Fletcher, Owen. 2010. Microsoft mines Web
to hone language tool.Wall Street Journal,
August 3. http://online.wsj.com/
article/SB100014240527487035456045754
06771145298614.html.
Hunter, Gerald. 1934. The Script of Harappa
and Mohenjodaro and Its Connection with
Other Scripts. Kegan Paul, London.
Kenoyer, Mark. 2004. Quoted in Lawler,
Andrew. 2004. The Indus script: Write
or wrong? Science, 306:2026?2029;
page 2026.
Knight, Kevin and Kenji Yamada. 1999. A
computational approach to deciphering
unknown scripts. Proc. of ACL Workshop
on Unsup. Learning in Natural Lang.
Processing.
Knorozov, Yuri, Volchok, B. Y., and Gurov,
N. V. 1968. Proto-Indica: Brief Report on the
Investigation of the Proto-Indian Texts.
Academy of Sciences of the USSR,
Moscow.
Koskenniemi, Kimmo. 1981. Syntactic
methods in the study of the Indus script.
Studia Orientalia, 50:125?136.
Koskenniemi, Seppo, Asko Parpola, and
Simo Parpola. 1970. A method to classify
characters of unknown ancient scripts.
Linguistics, 61:65?91.
Lal, B. B. 1966. The direction of writing in the
Harappan script. Antiquity, XL:52?55.
Lee, Rob, Philip Jonathan, and Pauline
Ziman. 2010. Pictish symbols revealed as a
written language through application of
Shannon entropy. Proceedings of the Royal
Society A, 466:2545?2560.
Lempel, Abraham and Jacob Ziv. 1976. On
the complexity of finite sequences. IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory,
22:75?81.
Liberman, Mark. 2009. Conditional entropy
and the Indus script. http://
languagelog.ldc.upenn.edu/
nll/?p=1374.
Lohr, Steve and John Markoff. 2010.
Computers learn to listen, and some talk
back. New York Times, June 24. http://
www.nytimes.com/2010/06/25/
science/25voice.html.
Mahadevan, Iravatham. 1977. The Indus
Script: Texts, Concordance and Tables.
Archaeological Survey of India, Calcutta.
Mahadevan, Iravatham. 2009. The Indus
non-script is a non-issue. The Hindu,
May 3. http://www.hindu.com/mag/2009/
05/03/stories/2009050350010100.htm.
McIntosh, Jane. 2008. The Ancient Indus
Valley: New Perspectives. ABC CLIO, Santa
Barbara, CA.
Nemenman, Ilya, Fariel Shafee, and William
Bialek. 2002. Entropy and inference,
804
Rao et al Entropy, the Indus Script, and Language
revisited. In T. G. Dietterich, S. Becker,
and Z. Ghahramani, editors, Advances
in Neural Information Processing
Systems 14. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
pages 471?478.
Parker, James. 1894. A glossary of terms
used in heraldry. http://www.heraldsnet.
org/saitou/parker/gallery/Page.html.
Parpola, Asko. 1994. Deciphering the Indus
script. Cambridge University Press,
New York.
Parpola, Asko. 2005. Study of the Indus
script. Proceedings of the International
Conference of Eastern Studies, 50:28?66.
Parpola, Asko. 2008. Is the Indus script
indeed not a writing system? In
Airavati: Felicitation Volume in honor of
Iravatham Mahadevan. Varalaaru.com
publishers, India, pages 111?131.
http://www.harappa.com/script/
indus-writing.pdf.
Pereira, Fernando. 2009. Falling for the magic
formula. http://earningmyturns.
blogspot.com/2009/04/falling-for-
magic-formula.html.
Possehl, Gregory. 1996. The Indus Age: The
Writing System. University of Pennsylvania
Press, Philadelphia.
Possehl, Gregory. 2004. Quoted in Lawler,
Andrew. 2004. The Indus script: Write or
wrong? Science, 306:2026?2029.
Rao, Rajesh. 2010a. Block entropy analysis of
the Indus script and natural languages.
http://www.cs.washington.edu/
homes/rao/BlockEntropy.html.
Rao, Rajesh. 2010b. Probabilistic analysis of
an ancient undeciphered script. IEEE
Computer, 43(4):76?80.
Rao, Rajesh, Nisha Yadav, Mayank Vahia,
Hrishikesh Joglekar, R. Adhikari, and
Iravatham Mahadevan. 2009a. Entropic
evidence for linguistic structure in the
Indus script. Science, 324:1165.
Rao, Rajesh, Nisha Yadav, Mayank Vahia,
Hrishikesh Joglekar, R. Adhikari, and
Iravatham Mahadevan. 2009b. A Markov
model of the Indus script. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences (PNAS),
106:13685?13690.
Schmitt, Armin and Hanspeter Herzel. 1997.
Estimating the entropy of DNA sequences.
Journal of Theoretical Biology, 1888:369?377.
Seidl, Ursula. 1989. Die babylonischen
Kudurru-Reliefs. Symbole mesopotamischer
Gottheiten. Universita?tsverlag Freiburg,
Freiburg.
Shannon, Claude. 1948. A mathematical
theory of communication. Bell System
Technical Journal, 27:379?423, 623?656.
Shannon, Claude. 1951. Prediction and
entropy of printed English. Bell System
Technical Journal, 30:50?64.
Siddharthan, Rahul. 2009. More Indus
thoughts and links. http://
horadecubitus.blogspot.com/
2009/05/more-indus-thoughts-and-
links.html.
Slanski, Kathryn. 2003. The Babylonian
Entitlement Naru?s (kudurrus): A Study
in Their Form and Function. American
Schools of Oriental Research,
Boston, MA.
Snyder, Benjamin, Regina Barzilay, and
Kevin Knight. 2010. A statistical model
for lost language decipherment.
Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 1048?1057, Uppsala.
Sproat, Richard. 2010. Ancient symbols,
computational linguistics, and the
reviewing practices of the general science
journals. Computational Linguistics,
36(3):585?594.
Vidale, Massimo. 2007. The collapse melts
down: A reply to Farmer, Sproat and
Witzel. East and West, 57:333?366.
Winn, Shan. 1990. A Neolithic sign system in
southeastern Europe. In M. L. Foster and
L. J. Botscharow, editors, The Life of
Symbols. Westview Press, Boulder, CO,
pages 269?271.
Yadav, Nisha, Hrishikesh Joglekar, Rajesh
Rao, Mayank Vahia, Ronojoy Adhikari,
and Iravatham Mahadevan. 2010.
Statistical analysis of the Indus script
using n-grams. PLoS One, 5(3):e9506.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0009506.
Yadav, Nisha, Mayank Vahia, Iravatham
Mahadevan, and Hrishikesh Joglekar.
2008a. Segmentation of Indus texts.
International Journal of Dravidian Linguistics,
37(1):53?72.
Yadav, Nisha, Mayank Vahia, Iravatham
Mahadevan, and Hrishikesh Joglekar.
2008b. A statistical approach for pattern
search in Indus writing. International
Journal of Dravidian Linguistics,
37(1):39?52.
805

