Proceedings of the Third Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 150?153,
Suntec, Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Annotating Semantic Relations Combining Facts and Opinions
Koji Murakami? Shouko Masuda?? Suguru Matsuyoshi?
Eric Nichols? Kentaro Inui? Yuji Matsumoto?
?Nara Institute of Science and Technology
8916-5, Takayama, Ikoma, Nara 630-0192 JAPAN
?Osaka Prefecture University
1-1, Gakuen, Naka-ku, Sakai, Osaka 599-8531 JAPAN
{kmurakami,shouko,matuyosi,eric-n,inui,matsu}@is.naist.jp
Abstract
As part of the STATEMENT MAP project,
we are constructing a Japanese corpus an-
notated with the semantic relations bridg-
ing facts and opinions that are necessary
for online information credibility evalua-
tion. In this paper, we identify the se-
mantic relations essential to this task and
discuss how to efficiently collect valid ex-
amples from Web documents by splitting
complex sentences into fundamental units
of meaning called ?statements? and an-
notating relations at the statement level.
We present a statement annotation scheme
and examine its reliability by annotating
around 1,500 pairs of statements. We are
preparing the corpus for release this win-
ter.
1 Introduction
The goal of the STATEMENT MAP project (Mu-
rakami et al, 2009) is to assist internet users with
evaluating the credibility of online information by
presenting them with a comprehensive survey of
opinions on a topic and showing how they relate
to each other. However, because real text on the
Web is often complex in nature, we target a sim-
pler and more fundamental unit of meaning which
we call the ?statement.? To summarize opinions
for the statement map users, we first convert all
sentences into statements and then, organize them
into groups of agreeing and conflicting opinions
that show the logical support for each group.
For example, a user who is concerned about po-
tential connections between vaccines and autism
would be presented with a visualization of the
opinions for and against such a connection to-
gether with the evidence supporting each view as
shown in Figure 1.
When the concerned user in our example looks
at this STATEMENT MAP, he or she will see that
some opinions support the query ?Do vaccines
cause autism?? while other opinions do not, but
it will also show what support there is for each of
these viewpoints. So, STATEMENT MAP can help
user come to an informed conclusion.
2 Semantic Relations between
Statements
2.1 Recognizing Semantic Relations
To generate STATEMENT MAPs, we need to an-
alyze a lot of online information retrieved on a
given topic, and STATEMENT MAP shows users
a summary with three major semantic relations.
AGREEMENT to group similar opinions
CONFLICT to capture differences of opinions
EVIDENCE to show support for opinions
Identifying logical relations between texts is the
focus of Recognizing Textual Entailment (RTE).
A major task of the RTE Challenge (Dagan et al,
2005) is the identification of [ENTAILMENT] or
[CONTRADICTION] between Text (T) and Hy-
pothesis (H). For this task, several corpora have
been constructed over the past few years, and an-
notated with thousands of (T,H) pairs.
While our research objective is to recognize se-
mantic relations as well, our target domain is text
from Web documents. The definition of contradic-
tion in RTE is that T contradicts H if it is very un-
likely that both T and H can be true at the same
time. However, in real documents on the Web,
there are many examples which are partially con-
tradictory, or where one statement restricts the ap-
plicability of another like in the example below.
(1) a. Mercury-based vaccines actually cause autism in
children.
150
!Mercury-based vaccine preservatives actually have caused autism in 
children. 
!It?s biologically plausible that the MMR vaccine causes autism. 
VACCINES CAUSE AUTISM 
!There is no valid scientific evidence that vaccines  
cause autism. 
!The weight of the evidence indicates that vaccines  
are not associated with autism. 
VACCINES DON?T CAUSE AUTISM 
!My son then had the MMR, and then when he was three he was 
diagnosed with autism. 
!He then had the MMR, and then when he was three he was  
diagnosed with autism. 
MY CHILD WAS DIAGNOSED WITH AUTISM 
RIGHT AFTER THE VACCINE 
!Vaccinations are given around the same time  
children can be first diagnosed. 
!The plural of anecdote is not data.  
ANECDOTES ARE NOT EVIDENCE 
[CONFLICT]!
[FOCUS]!
[EVIDENCE]!
[EVIDENCE]!
Query : Do vaccines cause autism?!
[CONFLICT]!
Figure 1: An example STATEMENT MAP for the query ?Do vaccines cause autism??
b. Vaccines can trigger autism in a vulnerable subset of
children.
While it is difficult to assign any relation to this
pair in an RTE framework, in order to construct
statement maps we need to recognize a contradic-
tion between (1a) and (1b).
There is another task of recognizing relations
between sentences, CST (Cross-Document Struc-
ture Theory) which was developed by Radev
(2000). CST is an expanded rhetorical structure
analysis based on RST (Mann and Thompson,
1988), and attempts to describe relations between
two or more sentences from both single and mul-
tiple document sets. The CSTBank corpus (Radev
et al, 2003) was constructed to annotate cross-
document relations. CSTBank is divided into clus-
ters in which topically-related articles are gath-
ered. There are 18 kinds of relations in this corpus,
including [EQUIVALENCE], [ELABORATION],
and [REFINEMENT].
2.2 Facts and Opinions
RTE is used to recognize logical and factual re-
lations between sentences in a pair, and CST is
used for objective expressions because newspa-
per articles related to the same topic are used as
data. However, the task specifications of both RTE
and CST do not cover semantic relations between
opinions and facts as illustrated in the following
example.
(2) a. There must not be a connection between vaccines
and autism.
b. I do believe that there is a link between vaccinations
and autism.
Subjective statements, such as opinions, are re-
cently the focus of many NLP research topics,
such as review analysis, opinion extraction, opin-
ion QA, or sentiment analysis. In the corpus con-
structed by the MPQA Project (Multi-Perspective
Question Answering) (Wiebe et al, 2005), indi-
vidual expressions are marked that correspond to
explicit mentions of private states, speech events,
and expressive subjective elements.
Our goal is to annotate instances of the three
major relation classes: [AGREEMENT], [CON-
FLICT] and [EVIDENCE], between pairs of state-
ments in example texts. However, each relation
has a wide range, and it is very difficult to define
a comprehensive annotation scheme. For exam-
ple, different kinds of information can act as clues
to recognize the [AGREEMENT] relations. So,
we have prepared a wide spectrum of semantic re-
lations depending on different types of informa-
tion regarded as clues to identify a relation class,
such as [AGREEMENT] or [CONFLICT]. Table 1
shows the semantic relations needed for carry-
ing out the anotation. Although detecting [EVI-
DENCE] relations is also essential to the STATE-
MENT MAP project, we do not include them in our
current corpus construction.
3 Constructing a Japanese Corpus
3.1 Targeting Semantic Relations Between
Statements
Real data on the Web generally has complex sen-
tence structures. That makes it difficult to rec-
ognize semantic relations between full sentences.
but it is possible to annotate semantic relation be-
tween parts extracted from each sentence in many
cases. For example, the two sentences A and B
in Figure 2 cannot be annotated with any of the
semantic relations in Table 1, because each sen-
tence include different types of information. How-
ever, if two parts extracted from these sentences C
and D are compared, the parts can be identified as
[EQUIVALENCE] because they are semantically
close and each extracted part does not contain a
different type of information. So, we attempt to
break sentences from the Web down into reason-
able text segments, which we call ?statements.?
When a real sentence includes several pieces of se-
151
Table 1: Definition of semantic relations and example in the corpus
Relation Class Relation Label Example
AGREEMENT
Equivalence A: The overwhelming evidence is that vaccines are unrelated to autism.B: There is no link between the MMR vaccine and autism.
Equivalent Opinion
A: We think vaccines cause autism.
B: I am the mother of a 6 year old that regressed into autism because of his 18
month vaccinations.
Specific A: Mercury-based vaccine preservatives actually have caused autism in children.B: Vaccines cause autism.
CONFLICT
Contradiction A: Mercury-based vaccine preservatives actually have caused autism in children.B: Vaccines don?t cause autism.
Confinement A: Vaccines can trigger autism in a vulnerable subset of children.B: Mercury-based vaccine actually have caused autism in children.
Conflicting Opinion A: I don?t think vaccines cause autism.B: I believe vaccines are the cause of my son?s autism.
According to Department 
of Medicine, there is no 
link between the MMR 
vaccine and autism.!
There is no link between the 
MMR vaccine and autism.!
The weight of the 
evidence indicates that 
vaccines are not 
associated with autism.!
Vaccines are not 
associated with autism.!
(A) Real sentence (1) (B) Real sentence (2)!
(C) Statement (1)! (D) Statement (2)!(E) [EQUIVALENCE]!
Figure 2: Extracting statements from sentences
and annotating a semantic relation between them
mantic segments, more than one statement can be
extracted. So, a statement can reflect the writer?s
affirmation in the original sentence. If the ex-
tracted statements lack semantic information, such
as pronouns or other arguments, human annota-
tors manually add the missing information. Fi-
nally we label pairs of statements with either one
of the semantic relations from Table 1 or with ?NO
RELATION,? which means that two sentences (1)
are not semantically related, or (2) have a relation
other than relations defined in Table 1.
3.2 Corpus Construction Procedure
We automatically gather sentences on related top-
ics by following the procedure below:
1. Retrieve documents related to a set number of
topics using a search engine
2. Extract real sentences that include major sub-
topic words which are detected based on TF or
DF in the document set
3. Reduce noise in data by using heuristics to
eliminate advertisements and comment spam
4. Reduce the search space for identifying sen-
tence pairs and prepare pairs, which look fea-
sible to annotate.
Dolan and Brockett (2005) proposed a method
to narrow the range of sentence pair candidates
and collect candidates of sentence-level para-
phrases which correspond [EQUIVALENCE] in
[AGREEMENT] class in our task. It worked well
for collecting valid sentence pairs from a large
cluster which was constituted by topic-related sen-
tences. The method also seem to work well for
[CONFLICT] relations, because lexical similar-
ity based on bag-of-words (BOW) can narrow the
range of candidates with this relation as well.
We calculate the lexical similarity between the
two sentences based on BOW. We also used hy-
ponym and synonym dictionaries (Sumida et al,
2008) and a database of relations between predi-
cate argument structures (Matsuyoshi et al, 2008)
as resources. According to our preliminary exper-
iments, unigrams of KANJI and KATAKANA ex-
pressions, single and compound nouns, verbs and
adjectives worked well as features, and we calcu-
late the similarity using cosine distance. We did
not use HIRAGANA expressions because they are
also used in function words.
4 Analyzing the Corpus
Five annotators annotated semantic relations ac-
cording to our specifications in 22 document sets
as targets. We have annotated target statement
pairs with either [AGREEMENT], [CONFLICT]
or [NO RELATION]. We provided 2,303 real
sentence pairs to human annotators, and they
identified 1,375 pairs as being invalid and 928
pairs as being valid. The number of annotated
statement pairs are 1,505 ([AGREEMENT]:862,
[CONFLICT]:126, [NO RELATION]:517).
Next, to evaluate inter annotator agreement, 207
randomly selected statement pairs were annotated
by two human annotators. The annotators agreed
in their judgment for 81.6% of the examples,
which corresponds to a kappa level of 0.49. The
annotation results are evaluated by calculating re-
call and precision in which one annotation result
is treated as a gold standard and the other?s as the
output of the system, as shown in Talbe 2.
152
Table 2: Inter-annotator agreement for 2 annota-
tors
Annotator A
AGR. CON. NONE TOTAL
AGR. 146 7 9 162
Anno- CON. 0 13 1 14
tator B NONE 17 4 10 31
TOTAL 163 24 20 207
5 Discussion
The number of sentence pairs that annotators iden-
tified as invalid examples shows that around 60%
of all pairs were invalid, showing that there is still
room to improve our method of collecting sen-
tence pairs for the annotators. Developing more
effective methods of eliminating sentences pairs
that are unlikely to contain statements with plau-
sible relations is important to improve annotator
efficiency. We reviewed 50 such invalid sentence
pairs, and the results indicate two major consider-
ations: (1) negation, or antonyms have not been re-
garded as key information, and (2) verbs in KANJI
have to be handled more carefully. The polarities
of sentences in all pairs were the same although
there are sentences which can be paired up with
opposite polarities. So, we will consider the po-
larity of words and sentences as well as similarity
when considering candidate sentence pairs.
In Japanese, the words which consist of
KATAKANA expressions are generally nouns, but
those which contain KANJI can be nouns, verbs,
or adjectives. Sharing KATAKANA words was
the most common way of increasing the simi-
larity between sentences. We need to assign a
higher weight to verbs and adjectives that contain
KANJI, to more accurately calculate the similarity
between sentences.
Another approach to reducing the search space
for statement pairs is taken by Nichols et al
(2009), who use category tags and in-article hyper-
links to organize scientific blog posts into discus-
sions on the same topic, making it easier to iden-
tify relevant statements. We are investigating the
applicability of these methods to the construction
of our Japanese corpus but suffer from the lack of
a richly-interlinked data source comparable to En-
glish scientific blogs.
6 Conclusion
In this paper, we described the ongoing construc-
tion of a Japanese corpus consisting of statement
pairs annotated with semantic relations for han-
dling web arguments. We designed an annotation
scheme complete with the necessary semantic re-
lations to support the development of statement
maps that show [AGREEMENT], [CONFLICT],
and [EVIDENCE] between statements for assist-
ing users in analyzing credibility of information
in Web. We discussed the revelations made from
annotating our corpus, and discussed future direc-
tions for refining our specifications of the corpus.
We are planning to annotate relations for more
than 6,000 sentence pairs in this summer, and the
finished corpus will consist of around 10,000 sen-
tence pairs. The first release of our annotation
specifications and the corpus will be made avail-
able on the Web1 this winter.
Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the National Institute
of Information and Communications Technology
Japan.
References
Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini. 2005.
The pascal recognising textual entailment challenge. In
Proc. of the PASCAL Challenges Workshop on RTE.
Bill Dolan and Chris Brockett. 2005. Automatical ly con-
structing a corpus of sentential paraphrases. In Proc. of
the IWP 2005, pages 9?16.
William Mann and Sandra Thompson. 1988. Rhetorical
structure theory: towards a functional theory of text or-
ganization. Text, 8(3):243?281.
Suguru Matsuyoshi, Koji Murakami, Yuji Matsumoto, , and
Kentaro Inui. 2008. A database of relations between
predicate argument structures for recognizing textual en-
tailment and contradiction. In Proc. of the ISUC 2008.
Koji Murakami, Eric Nichols, Suguru Matsuyoshi, Asuka
Sumida, Shouko Masuda, Kentaro Inui, and Yuji Mat-
sumoto. 2009. Statement map: Assisting information
credibility analysis by visualizing arguments. In Proc. of
the WICOW 2009, pages 43?50.
Eric Nichols, Koji Murakami, Kentaro Inui, and Yuji Mat-
sumoto. 2009. Constructing a scientific blog corpus for
information credibility analysis. In Proc. of the Annual
Meeting of ANLP.
Dragomir Radev, Jahna Otterbacher, and Zhu Zhang.
2003. CSTBank: Cross-document Structure Theory Bank.
http://tangra.si.umich.edu/clair/CSTBank.
Dragomir R. Radev. 2000. Common theory of informa-
tion fusion from multiple text sources step one: Cross-
document structure. In Proc. of the 1st SIGdial workshop
on Discourse and dialogue, pages 74?83.
Asuka Sumida, Naoki Yoshinaga, and Kentaro Torisawa.
2008. Boosting precision and recall of hyponymy rela-
tion acquisition from hierarchical layouts in wikipedia. In
Proc. of the LREC 2008.
Janyce Wiebe, Theresa Wilson, and Claire Cardie. 2005.
Annotating expressions of opinions and emotions in lan-
guage. Language Resources and Evaluation, 39(2-
3):165?210.
1http://cl.naist.jp/stmap/corpus/ja
153
Recognizing Confinement in Web Texts
Megumi Ohki?
Suguru Matsuyoshi?
Junta Mizuno?
Kentaro Inui?
Nara Insutitute of Science and Technology?
Eric Nichols?
Koji Murakami??
Shouko Masuda?
Yuji Matsumoto?
Tohoku University?
{megumi-o,shouko,matuyosi,matsu}@is.naist.jp
{eric,junta-m,inui}@tohoku.ac.jp
koji.murakami@mail.rakuten.co.jp
Abstract
In the Recognizing Textual Entailment (RTE) task, sentence pairs are classified into one of three se-
mantic relations: ENTAILMENT, CONTRADICTION or UNKNOWN. While we find some sentence pairs
hold full entailments or contradictions, there are a number of pairs that partially entail or contradict one
another depending on a specific situation. These partial contradiction sentence pairs contain useful infor-
mation for opinion mining and other such tasks, but it is difficult for Internet users to access this knowledge
because current frameworks do not differentiate between full contradictions and partial contradictions. In
this paper, under current approaches to semantic relation recognition, we define a new semantic relation
known as CONFINEMENT in order to recognize this useful information. This information is classified as
either CONTRADICTION or ENTAILMENT. We provide a series of semantic templates to recognize CON-
FINEMENT relations in Web texts, and then implement a system for recognizing CONFINEMENT between
sentence pairs. We show that our proposed system can obtains a F-score of 61% for recognizing CON-
FINEMENT in Japanese-language Web texts, and it outperforms a baseline which does not use a manually
compiled list of lexico-syntactic patterns to instantiate the semantic templates.
1 Introduction
On the Internet, there are various kinds of documents, and they often include conflicting opinions or
differing information on a single topic. Collecting and organizing this diverse information is an important
part of multi-document summarization.
When searching with a particular query on the Internet, we want information that tells us what other
people think about the query: e.g. do they believe it is true or not; what are the necessary conditions
for it to apply. For example, consider the hypothetical search results for the query given in (1). You get
opinion (2a), which supports the query, and opinion (2b) which opposes it.
(1) Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay.
(2) a. Xylitol can prevent tooth decay.
b. Xylitol is not effective at all at preventing tooth decay.
A major task in the Recognizing Textual Entailment (RTE) Challenge (Giampiccolo et al (2007)) is
classifying the semantic relation between a Text and a Hypothesis into ENTAILMENT, CONTRADICTION,
or UNKNOWN. Murakami et al (2009) report on the STATEMENT MAP project, the goal of which is
to help Internet users evaluate the credibility of information sources by analyzing supporting evidence
from a variety of viewpoints on their topics of interest and presenting them to users together with the
supporting evidence in a way that makes it clear how they are related. A variety of techniques have been
successfully employed in the RTE Challenge in order to recognize instances of textual entailment.
?Current afflication: Rakuten Institute of Technology
215
However, as far as we know, there have been no studies on recognizing sentences which specify condi-
tions under which a query applies, despite the fact that these relations are useful information for Internet
users. Such useful sentences are plentiful on the Web. Consider the following examples of CONTRA-
DICTION and ENTAILMENT.
(3) a. Xylitol can not prevent tooth decay if it not at least 50%.
b. The effect of Xylitol on preventing tooth decay is limited.
In example (3a), the necessary condition to prevent tooth decay by Xylitol is ?it contains at least fifty
percent Xylitol?. That condition is expressed by the phrase in bold in (3a). This sentence informs users
that if they want to prevent tooth decay, the products they use must contain a certain amount of Xylitol to
be effective. In example (3b), we obtain information on uncertainty of Xylitol?s tooth decay prevention
effectiveness from the phrase ?is limited?. It tells that Xylitol is not necessarily effective at preventing
tooth decay, and thus it is not completely in agreement with or contradiction to the original sentence (1).
It is important to recognize the semantic relation shown in (3) because it provides more specific infor-
mation about the query or specifies the conditions under which the statement holds or does not. This is
valuable information for Internet users and needs to be distinguished from fully contradicting or agreeing
opinions.
We call this semantic relation CONFINEMENT because it confines the situation under which a query
applies. In this paper, we give a language independent definition of the CONFINEMENT relation in pred-
icate logic and provide a framework for detecting the relation through a series of semantic templates that
take logical and semantic features as input. We implement a system that detects CONFINEMENT rela-
tions between sentence pairs in Japanese by instantiating the semantic templates using rules and a list of
lexico-semantic patterns. Finally, we conduct empirical evaluation of recognition of the CONFINEMENT
relation between queries and sentences in Japanese-language Web texts.
2 Related Work
In RTE research, only three types of relations are defined: ENTAILMENT, CONTRADICTION, and
UNKNOWN. RTE is an important task and has been the target of much research (Szpektor et al (2007);
Sammons et al (2009)). However, none of the previous research has introduced relations corresponding
to CONFINEMENT.
Cross-document Structure Theory (CST, Radev (2000)) is another approach to recognizing semantic
relations between sentences. CST is an extended rhetorical structure analysis based on Rhetorical Struc-
ture Theory (RST). It attempts to describe the semantic relations between two or more sentences from
different source documents that are related to the same topic. It defines 18 kinds of semantic relations
between sentences. Etoh and Okumura (2005) constructed a Japanese Cross-document Relation Corpus
and defined 14 kinds of semantic relations. It is difficult to consider CONFINEMENT relations in the
CST categorical semantic relations because it focuses on comparing sentences in terms of equivalence
and difference between sentences. At first glance, CONFINEMENT may seem to be defined in terms of
difference between sentences, but this approach does not capture the idea of restriction on a sentence?s
applicability. Thus, it is beyond the scope of CST.
In the field of linguistics, Nakagawa and Mori (1995) discussed restrictions as represented in the
four Japanese subordinate clause patterns. Abe (1996) researched the role of quantifiers in quantitative
restrictions and the role of ??? (only).? There is much other researches on expressions representing
?confinement? in a sentence in linguistics. These expressions are useful in order to recognize phrases
which contradict each other. However, as far as we know, there is no research on the relation of CON-
FINEMENT between two sentences in the linguistics literature. The absence of related research makes
defining and recognizing CONFINEMENT a very challenging task.
3 The CONFINEMENT Relation
We present the definition of the CONFINEMENT relation and describe its differences from ENTAIL-
MENT and CONTRADICTION. In essence, a pair of sentences is in the CONFINEMENT relation if either
the premise or consequent of the second sentence has a certain condition or restriction, and without such
condition or restriction the pair is equivalent to either ENTAILMENT or CONTRADICTION.
216
Consider an example of CONFINEMENT setence pair: (2a) and (3a). The statement ?it (Xylitol) is not at
least 50%? is a condition of the statement ?Xylitol can not prevent tooth decay.? It is a CONTRADICTION
if the conditional statement is satisfied. Because the truth value of the whole statement depends on
various conditions to be satisfied, it is important to properly define a framework to define them.
3.1 A Logical Definition of CONFINEMENT
We present a definition of CONFINEMENT in predicate logic. We define CONFINEMENT as a semantic
relation between two sentences, where the first sentence corresponds to RTE?s Hypothesis, or the user
Query, and the second sentence corresponds to RTE?s Text that has some semantic relation with the
Query, which we want to identify.
Here we consider sentence pairs where the Query matches the logical pattern ?x(P (x) ? C(x)),
where we call P (x) the Premise and C(x) the Consequence. There are many ways of representing
sentences as logical expressions, and we think that the logical pattern (?(P (x) ? C(x))) can cover a
variety of queries. For example, the sentence ?Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay.? can be
represented as ?x(isXylitol(x) ? effectiveAtPreventingToothDecay(x)). Consider the case where one
sentence contains only a Consequence. This case can be regarded as a special case of the above formula.
We write such a sentence as ?x(T ? C(x)) showing that the Premise is always True.
In this paper, we limit discussion of the CONFINEMENT relation to the Query matching to the above
logical pattern. Recognizing CONFINEMENT between the Text and the Query having more complex
semantic patterns is an area of future work. Here, we split the definition of CONFINEMENT into subtypes
according to: (i) conditions to satisfy in addition to the Premise, and (ii) limitations on the degree of the
Consequence.
Premise side Additional conditions for achieving the Consequence
Explicit constraint
Some conditional sentences use an expression correspoinding to logical ?only if,? which explicitly
means two way conditions as the following formula.
?x((P (x) ?AdditionalCondition(x) ? C(x)) (1)
?(P (x) ? ?AdditionalCondition(x) ? ?C(x)))
For example, S1 in Table 1, ?Xylitol is effective at preventing cavities only when it is 100%?,
explicitly specify that Xylitol is effective if it is 100% and is not effective if it is not 100%. So,
we assume the form of the above formula for this type of statement.
Implicit constraint
This type of sentence specifies an additional condition on the Premise and is represented by the
following formula. The Premise needs to be satisfied for the consequence to be achieved.
?x((P (x) ?AdditionalCondition(x) ? C(x)) (2)
Example S5 in Table 1 says ?Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay if it is 100%?, which
is assumed by Formula (2). S5 does not contain an expression such as ?only (??)?, which
explicitly specifies that C(x) does not hold when an additional condition is not satisfied. One may
understand that it implicitly means ?Xylitol is not effective at preventing tooth decay if it is not
100%,? but S5 does not structly require this.
Consequence side Constraints on the degree of achieving the Consequence
There are sentences in partial entailment or contradiction where the degree of achieving of the Con-
sequence is limited. To represent these limitations on the Consequence side, we define a CONFINE-
MENT relation where the degrees of the Consequence are limited as in Example (3b). We define the
following formula to represent these limitations on the Consequence side.
?x((P (x) ? Cr(x)) (3)
Cr(x) represents C(x) with additional restriction. For example, S3 in Table 1 says that Xylitol is
somewhat effective at preventing tooth decay, which means that there are cases in which Xylitol can
not prevent tooth decay. In the case of S3, Cr(x) is ?is a bit effective?. This type of CONFINE-
MENT provides valuable information about Xylitol?s limited ability to promote dental hygiene in S3.
217
All CONFINEMENTs on the Consequence side are of type EXPLICIT CONFINEMENT, because they
explicitly mean that a part of the Consequence is achieved but no other parts are achieved.
3.2 Semantic Templates
We propose a series of semantic templates to classify sentence pairs into one of the CONFINEMENT
relation subtypes we define. The semantic templates take a set of features as input and use their values
to categorize the sentence pair. In Section 4, we evaluate the coverage of the semantic templates by
classifying a small set of sentence pairs using manually set feature values. In Section 6, we provide
more realistic evaluation by using a proposed system to set the feature values automatically and classify
sentence pairs as ENTAILMENT / CONTRADICTION, or CONFINEMENT.
We assume that each sentence consists of a Premise and Consequence, and that each sentence pair
which has a CONFINEMENT relation contains at least one additional condition or one additional limitation
as defined in Section 3.1.
We know that there are a variety of expressions that indicate the presence of a CONFINEMENT relation.
For example, both ?Only 100% pure Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay.? and ?Xylitol is not
effective at preventing tooth decay unless it is 100% pure.? are CONFINEMENTs of ?Xylitol is effective
at preventing tooth decay.? Since it is impossible to handle all possible expressions that indicate CON-
FINEMENT, we focus on covering as many as possible with three features: (1) the type of constraint, (2)
the type of Premise, and (3) the type of Consequence. The features are defined in more detail below.
IF-Constraint This feature indicates the type of logical constraint in the Text sentence. Its values can
be ?IF,? ?ONLY-IF.?
Premise This feature indicates the type of Premise in the Text sentence. The value ?P+A? or ?notP+A?
means there is an Additional Condition on the Premise. The value ?P? or ?notP? means there is just
a Premise. ?not? represents the Premise have a negation.
Consequence This feature indicates the type of Consequence. Its possible values are ?C? (just a Conse-
quence), ?notC? (negated Consequence), ?Cr? or ?notCr? (certain partial Consequence).
Semantic templates consist of a tuple of four feature values and a mapping to the confinement type they
indicate. A full list of templates is given in Table 1. In the templates, a wildcard asterisk ?*? indicates
that any feature value can match in that slot of the template. The abbreviations ENT, CONT and CONF
stand for ENTAILMENT, CONFINEMENT and CONFINEMENT respectively.
Semantic templates are applied in turn from top pattern by determining the value of each feature and
looking up the corresponding relation type in Table 1. We give a classification examples below. The user
query is sentence S0. Sentences S1 are Web texts.
Query : S0. Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay.
Text [ONLY-IF P(x) ? AC(x) then C(x) ]: S1. Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay when you
take it every day without fail.
In Example, IF-Constraint is ?ONLY-IF?, Premise is ?P+A?, and the type of Consequence is ?C?.
This instance has an additional condition and the Consequence matches the Query, so it is identified as
an EXPLICIT CONFINEMENT.
4 Verifying Semantic Templates
In this section, we verify the effectiveness of semantic templates in recognizing CONFINEMENT rela-
tions by testing them on real-world data in Japanese. To directly evaluate the quality of the templates,
we construct a small data set of sentence pairs and manually annotate them with the correct values for
each of the features defined in Section 3.2.
4.1 Data
We constructed the Development set and the Open-test set of sample Japanese user queries and Inter-
net text pairs following the methodology of Murakami et al (2009). However, Murakami et al (2009)
annotated Query-Text pairs with coarse-grained AGREEMENT and CONFLICT relations that subsume the
218
Table 1: Semantic templates for recognizing CONFINEMENT
Semantic features Relation Number of Number of Example
IF-constraint Premise Consequence positive negative S0:?????????????????.
example example Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay.
ONLY-IF P+A * EXPLICIT 8 0 S1:??????? 100%?????????????????.
CONF Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay only when it is 100%.
ONLY-IF notP+A * EXPLICIT 0 0 S2:??????? 50%??????????????????????.
CONF Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay only when it is not under 50%.
* * Cr EXPLICIT 11 0 S3:??????????????????????.
CONF Xylitol is a bit effective at preventing tooth decay.
* * notCr EXPLICIT 12 0 S4:????????????????????????.
CONF Xylitol is not almost of effective at preventing tooth decay.
IF P+A * IMPLICT 62 0 S5:??????? 100%???????????????.
CONF Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay if it is 100%.
IF notP+A * IMPLICIT 1 0 S6:??????? 100%???????????????????.
CONF Xylitol is not effective at preventing tooth decay if it is not 100%
IF P C ENT 279 0 S7:???????????????????????.
Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay if it is eaten.
IF notP C CONT 0 0 S8:????????????????????????.
Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay if it is not eaten.
IF P notC CONT 13 0 S9:????????????????????????.
Xylitol is not effective at preventing tooth decay if it is eaten.
IF notP notC ENT 0 0 S10:????????????????????????.
Xylitol is not effective at preventing tooth decay if it is not eaten.
ONLY-IF P C ENT 3 0 S11:??????????????????????????.
Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay only when it is eaten.
ONLY-IF notP C CONT 0 0 S12:?????????????????????????????.
Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay only when it is not eaten.
ONLY-IF P notC CONT 0 0 S13:??????????????????????????.
Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay only when it is eaten.
ONLY-IF notP notC ENT 0 0 S14:?????????????????????????????.
Xylitol is not effective at preventing tooth decay only when it is not eaten.
Table 2: Data set (Counts of sentences out of parenthesis and statements in parentheses)
Entailment Contradiction Confinement All
Development 258 (282) 8 (13) 79 (94) 345 (389)
Open-test 230 170 200 600
RTE relations of ENTAILMENT and CONTRADICTION. As our task is to discriminate between CON-
FINEMENT and RTE relations, we annotate each sentence pair or each statement1 pair with one of the
following relations instead: ENTAILMENT, CONTRADICTION, or CONFINEMENT. In the case of CON-
FINEMENT, we annotate Query-Text pairs which are not full ENTAILMENT or CONTRADICTION but
these Text partially agrees and disagrees with the Query. Annotations were checked by two native speak-
ers of Japanese, and any sentence pair where annotation agreement is not reached was discarded. Table
2 shows that how many sentences or statements are in each data set. Annotated statements counts are
written in parentheses. We use the Development set for evaluation of verifying semantic templates and
develop list of lexical and syntactic patterns for semantic features extraction, and the Open-test set for
evaluation in Section 6.
4.2 Verification Result
After the data was prepared, we annotated it with the correct feature values for use with the semantic
templates. This was done by manually checking for words or phrases in the sentences that indicated one
of the features in Table 1. Once the features were set, we used them to classify each sentence pair.
We give the numbers of instances that we could confirm for each pattern in the sixth column of Table
1 and the numbers of negative instances in the seventh column, which satisfy semantic template but does
not agree Relation values in the fifth column. As a result we find that there were no statement pairs that
could not be successfully classified. We grasp CONFINEMENT relation with semantic templates for the
most part. This verification data does not cover all combinations of patterns in our semantic templates, so
we can not rule out the possibility of existence of an exception that cannot be classified by the semantic
templates. However, we find these results to be an encouraging indication of the usefulness of semantic
templates. Here are some example classifications found in the verification data.
Coordinate clauses Combining multiple of IMPLICIT CONFINEMENTs results in an EXPLICIT CON-
FINEMENT relation
(4)S0. ????????????.
Steroid has side-effects.
S1. ???????????????????????????????????????
1Murakami et al define a ?statement? as the smallest unit that can convey a complete thought or viewpoint. In practice, this
can be a sentence or something smaller such as a clause.
219
???????????????????.
Long-term use of steroid causes side-effects, but there is no need to worry about side-effects
in short-term usage.
In Example (4), S1 is an EXPLICIT CONFINEMENT for S0. This is derived from the combination of
CONFINEMENT of the two coordinate clauses of S1: the former phrase ?Long-term use of steroid causes
side-effects? of S1 is an IMPLICIT CONFINEMENT for S0 by our semantic templates and the latter phrase
is an IMPLICIT CONFINEMENT for S0.
Additional information for whole Query Combining of a CONTRADICTION and an IMPLICIT CON-
FINEMENT result in an EXPLICIT CONFINEMENT
(5)S0. ????????????????.
Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay.
S1. ??????????????????????,???????????????????????????????????????.
Tooth decay can not be prevented with Xylitol alone, but it can be fundamentally prevented
with an appropriate diet and by taking Xylitol after every meal.
The first clause before the comma in S1 of Example (5) corresponds to the entire sentence of S0. The
second clause after the comma helps us recognize that it is a CONFINEMENT relation. This instance
is also a combination of semantic templates, so we need to recognize negation of each statement and
adversative conjunction but we do not need to add new features to Table 1.
5 Proposed System
We propose a system which uses semantic templates for recognizing CONFINEMENT consists of six
steps: (I) linguistic analysis, (II) structural alignment, (III) Premise and Consequence identification,
(IV) semantic feature extraction, (V) adversative conjunction identification, and (VI) semantic template
application. Figure 1 shows the work flow of the system. This system takes as input corresponding to S0
and S1, and return a semantic relation.
5.1 I. Linguistic Analysis
In linguistic analysis, we conduct word segmentation, POS tagging, dependency parsing, and extended
modality analysis. This linguistic analysis acts as the basis for alignment and semantic feature extrac-
tion. For syntactic analysis, we identify words and POS tags with the Japanese morphological analyser
Mecab2, and we use the Japanese dependency parser CaboCha (Kudo and Matsumoto (2002)) to pro-
duce dependency trees. We also conduct extended modality analysis using the resources provided by
Matsuyoshi et al (2010).
5.2 II. Structural Alignment
To identify the consequence of S0 in S1, we use Structural Alignment (Mizuno et al (2010)). In Struc-
tural Alignment, dependency parent-child links are aligned across sentences using a variety of resources
to ensure semantic relatedness.
5.3 III. Premise and Consequence identification
In this step, we identify the Premise and the Consequence in S1. When a sentence pair satisfies all
items is satisfying, we can identify a focused chunk as the Consequence in S1:
1. A chunk?s modality in S0 is assertion, this chunk is the Consequence in S0
2. A chunk in S1 align with the Consequence in S0
We identify the Premise in S1 when a sentence pair satisfies first, and either second or third item of
the following conditions:
1. A case particle of chunks in S0 is either ?? (agent marker)? or ?? (topic marker)? and these chunks
are children of the Consequence in S0?s dependency tree
2. The subject in S0 aligns with the subject of S1
3. All of the dependants of the expression ??? (to, for)? have alignments in S0 dependency tree
2http://chasen.org/taku/ software/mecab/.
220
Figure 1: An overview of a proposal system to recognize CONFINEMENT
5.4 IV. Semantic Feature Extraction
We extract features for the semantic templates using a list of lexical and syntactic patterns. These
patterns were manually compiled using the development data set introduced in Section 4. Features for
the semantic templates are then automatically extracted by applying these patterns to input sentence
pairs. The following overviews our extraction approach for each feature.
5.4.1 IF-Constraint Feature Extraction
Using CaboCha, we manually constructed lists of words and their POS that are indicators of the
semantic condition under which a Premise occurs. We extract as features any words in the input sentences
that appear in the list with the corresponding POS. The ?IF? lexical type lists conjunctions that are the
results of a conditional chunk or noun phrases that indicate a case or situation. The ?ONLY-IF? lexical
type is used to represent the most constraining situations. The following is our list of expressions.
? IF: ?? (in case),?/??/? (when),?/??/?? (if),? (with)
? ONLY-IF: ??/??? (for this time), ??/??/?? (only), ??? (for the first time), ?? (to,
for)
5.4.2 Premise Feature Extraction
We treat the words or phrases which are extracted from the constraint as conditions, and need to decide
whether a given condition is the Premise or an additional condition for the Premise. The Premise is set
to ?P? when first step and either the second or third step of the following conditions are satisfied, and it
is set to ?P+A? otherwise:
1. ? The condition have children in the S1?s dependency tree or the condition?s children are not aligned
to chunks in S0
2. ? The condition?s parent in S0?s dependency tree has any chunk with a child aligned with the Conse-
quence in S0, or the condition?s parent is not aligned with chunks in S0
3. ? The condition?s parent does not have any expression with the meaning of ?use? in the S0?s depen-
dency tree
When these step are satisfied and negation exists in conditional chunks, Premise is set to ?notP+A,? if
these step are not satisfied, Premise is set to ?notP.? In the third step, we identify expressions with the
meaning of ?use? with our lexical list. For example ?? (use), ??? (eat), ?? (take) and so on. If
the condition?s parent has words in our lexical list, we identify that ?Xylitol? and ?eating Xylitol? and
?using Xylitol? are equivalent.
5.4.3 Consequence Feature Extraction
This feature is used to indicate the semantic relationship between Consequences of the sentences pair.
Sentences with Consequences that share a certain amount of similarity in polarity and syntax are judged
to have ENTAILMENT, otherwise they are in CONTRADICTION. In order to be judged as ENTAILMENT,
the following conditions must all be true:
1. The modality of the Consequences must be identical.
2. The polarity of the Consequences must be identical as indicated by the resources in (Sumida et al
(2008))
3. The Premises of both sentences must align with each other
221
4. ? The sentences must not contain expressions that limit range or degree such as ????? (almost)?
or ??? (degree)?
When all item are satisfied, the Consequence is set to ?C?, otherwise it is set to ?notC.? We identify
whether the consequence has expressions which limit the degree or not. The Consequence is set to ?Cr?
or ?notCr? when the following all conditions is satisfied:
1. Any of the children of the Consequence align with a chunk in S0?s dependency tree.
2. ? There are expressions limiting the degree of the Consequence or the siblings in S1?s dependency
tree
When this two steps are satisfied and the all four steps to judge whether sentence pairs is ENTAILMENT
or not are not satisfied, Consequence is set to ?notCr.?
5.5 V. Adversative Conjunction Identification
We manually compiled a list of target expressions including conjunctions such as ?? (but).? When a
S1 chunk containing an adversative conjunction that aligns with the Premise of S0 or the S0?s Premise
depends on S1 chunk containing an adversative conjunction, we set each feature set in a chunk before an
adversative conjunction and after an adversative conjunction to semantic templates.
5.6 VI. Semantic Template Application
We apply semantic feature extracted in Step IV to semantic templates. If S1 matches multiple semantic
templates with an adversative conjunction from Step V, we combine the semantic templates. We get a
relation for a sentence pair in this step.
5.7 Example of Semantic Features Extraction
Feature extraction is illustrated in greater detail in the examples S0 which is the query and S1 in
Table 1. First, we identify words represented IF-Constraint is ?ONLY-IF?: ?? (when)? is in S1 and the
conditional chunk has a word ??? (only).? Next, we evaluate each the type of Premise of each chunk to
determine if it is a premise or an additional condition. The subject word ?Xylitol? align between S0 and
S1, and the conditional chunk?s sibling in dependency tree of S1 is a chunk which has the subject. And
the conditional chunk have a child which is not aligned any chunk in S0, it is ?100%? (100%).? And the
conditional chunk has no negations. So, Premise is set to ?P+A.? Finally, we check if the consequences
to the conditions are aligned to the verbs and nouns indicating consequences in S0: ?prevent? and ?is
effective? are aligned, the modality and polarity of the Consequence are identical, these depended on by
the condition, and the Consequence has no expressions which limited range or degree. Consequence is
set to ?C.?We set the semantic template features and get a result which the sentences relation is EXPLICIT
CONFINEMENT. Ideally patterns for setting semantic feature for semantic templates should be learned
automatically, but this remains an area of future work. Nonetheless, our current experiment gives a good
measure of the effectiveness of semantic templates in recognizing CONFINEMENT relations.
6 Evaluation
In Section 4, we verified that the semantic templates defined in Section 3.2 can successfully classify
semantic relations as CONFINEMENT given the correct feature values. In this Section, we present the
results of an experiment in a more realistic setting by using semantic templates together with the features
automatically extracted as described with our proposed system in Section 5 to determine whether or not
a sentence pair has a CONFINEMENT relation.
6.1 Setting up Evaluation
While more research on recognizing ENTAILMENT or CONTRADICTION between sentences pairs is
necessary, it is important to recognize new relations that cannot be analysed in existing frameworks in
order to provide Internet users with the information they need. Thus, We assume that unrelated sentence
pairs will be discarded before classification, in this experiment we focus only on the recognition of
CONFINEMENT relations. So our goal in this experiment is to classify between CONFINEMENT and NOT
CONFINEMENT. We will evaluate determining whether CONFINEMENT sentence pairs are Explicit or
Implicit in future. In our experiment, we used a gold data for structural alignment to evaluate semantic
feature extraction.
222
Table 3: Results of recognizing confinement relations with our proposal system
Recall Precision F-Score
proposed system 0.65(129/200) 0.57(129/225) 0.61
baseline system 0.96(192/200) 0.34(192/562) 0.50
Table 4: Instances of incorrect classification
S0 S1
A ???????????????. ??????????????????????????????.
False A person can regain their health with isoflavon. Excess intake of isoflavon to boost its health effects is prohibited.
Negative B ?????????????????. ?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????.
Xylitol has effects on preventing tooth decay. The use of xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay when done while eating properly and brushing one?s
teeth regularly.
C ????????????????????. ?????????????????????????????????????.
Xylitol can prevent tooth decay. It is a big mistake to think that one can prevent tooth decay if they put Xylitol in ? their mouth.
False D ??????????????. ???????????????????????????.
Positive Steroids can cure illnesses. Atrophic dermatitis will heal completely if steroid use is stopped.
E ???????????????. ?????????????????????????????????????????????.
Side effects are a worry for steroids. The amount of steroids or period of time that causes side effects differs from person to person.
6.2 Baseline System
We developed a baseline system that does not use our manually-compiled lexico-syntactic patterns
in order to act as a point of comparison for the proposed system in evaluating their contribution to
CONFINEMENT recognition.
The baseline system consists of performing all of the steps from of our proposed system that do not
rely on manually compiled lexico-syntactic patterns. Step relying on these resources are marked with a
? in Section 5 and are skipped in the baseline. Essentially, we conduct Steps I, II, and III, the parts of
Step IV that can be done without manually-compiled patterns, and, finally, Step VI.
In Step IV, we determine if there are any limitations on the Consequence in the Consequence Feature
subset, but we do not judge whether the Consequence is ENTAILMENT or CONTRADICTION in the
baseline system.
6.3 Result and Error Analysis
The results are given in Table 3. We find that our system has much higher precision than the baseline,
improving by over 20%. In our system, the list of semantic patterns is effective at recognizing CON-
FINEMENT. On the other hand recall has gone down compared to the baseline. The baseline judged that
almost sentences are CONFINEMENT, so the list of semantic patterns employed in our rule-based system
is useful at eliminating false positives. Table 4 shows some instances of incorrect classification. Each
instance is a pair (S0, S1).
Example A-S1 means ?Excess intake of isoflavon can not boost one?s health? and ?excess intake? is
an additional condition for A-S1. In this case ?excess? is a lexical specifier of the specific condition and
is indicated by the particle ???. The particle ?? (topic marker)? is not currently used as a feature in the
semantic templates since it is very noisy, so this instance can not be detected. We need to expand our
method of acquiring semantic patterns to better handle such cases.
The additional condition phrase in Example B-S1 modifies ?The use of Xylitol? instead of ?is effective
at preventing tooth decay?, preventing us from properly recognizing the limiting condition in this case.
We need to conduct deeper scopal analysis to determine when the modifier of an embedded chunk should
be considered as an additional condition.
Example C-S1 is an instance where the system fails to recognize that ?put in their mouth? is an expres-
sion meaning ?use? since our lists of lexical words for features did not have it. We should increase our
ability to recognize synonyms of ?to use? by automatically mining data for paraphrases or approaching
it as a machine learning task in order to handle examples like C-S1. On the other hands ?if steroid use
is stopped? in example D-S1 is the premise which should indicate an IF condition and Negation exists,
however we can not recognize it correctly since the phrase lacks negation. We will make a list of words
and phrases that are antonyms of ?use? in order to recognize such instances.
The condition in example E-S1 is about how side-effects appear, and not a condition for the other
sentence example E-S0. This instance requires detailed semantic analysis and cannot be solved with
alignment-based approaches. It represents a very difficult class of problems.
223
7 Conclusion
On theWeb, much of the information and opinions we encounter indicates the conditions or limitations
under which a statement is true. This information is important to Internet users who are interested in
determining the validity of a query of interest, but such information cannot be represented under the
prevalent RTE framework containing only ENTAILMENT and CONTRADICTION.
In this paper, we provided a logical definition of the CONFINEMENT relation and showed how it
could be used to represent important information that is omitted under an RTE framework. We also
proposed a set of semantic templates that use set of features extracted from sentences pairs to recognize
CONFINEMENT relations between two sentences. Preliminary investigations showed that given correct
feature input, semantic templates could effectively recognize CONFINEMENT relations.
In addition, we presented empirical evaluation of the effectiveness of semantic templates and
automatically-extracted features at recognizing CONFINEMENT between user queries and Web text pairs,
and conducted error analysis of the results. Currently, our system does not deal with unknown instances
well since it extracts features for semantic template using manually constructed lexical patterns. In fu-
ture work, we will learn features for the semantic templates directly from data to better handle unknown
instances.
Acknowledgment
This work is supported by the National Institute of Information and Communications Technology
Japan.
References
Abe, T. (1996). Restriction with? dake ?and modification with quantifier. Tsukuba Japanese Research 1, 4?20. in Japanese.
Etoh, J. and M. Okumura (2005). Cross-document relationship between sentences corpus. In Proceedings of the 14th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Natural Language Processing, pp. 482?485. (in Japanese).
Giampiccolo, D., B. Magnini, I. Dagan, and B. Dolan (2007). The third pascal recognizing textual entailment challenge. In
Proceedings of the ACL-PASCAL Workshop on Textual Entailment and Paraphrasing, RTE ?07, Morristown, NJ, USA, pp.
1?9. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Kudo, T. and Y. Matsumoto (2002). Japanese dependency analysis using cascaded chunking. In CoNLL 2002: In Proceedings
of the 6th Conference on Natural Language Learning 2002 (COLING 2002 Post-Conference Workshops), pp. 63?69.
Matsuyoshi, S., M. Eguchi, C. Sao, K. Murakami, K. Inui, and Y. Matsumoto (2010). Annotating event mentions in text
with modality, focus, and source information. In Proceedings of the 7th International Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC?10).
Mizuno, J., H. Goto, Y. Watanabe, K. Murakami, K. Inui, and Y. Matsumoto (2010). Local Structural Alignment for Recogniz-
ing Semantic Relations between Sentences. In Proceedings of IPSJ-NL196. (in Japanese).
Murakami, K., S. Matsuyoshi, K. Inui, and Y. Matsumoto (2009). A corpus of statement pairs with semantic relations in
Japanese. In Proceedings of the 15th Annual Meeting of the Association for Natural Language Processing.
Murakami, K., E. Nichols, S. Matsuyoshi, A. Sumida, S. Masuda, K. Inui, and Y. Matsumoto (2009). Statement map: As-
sisting information credibility analysis by visualizing arguments. In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM Workshop on Information
Credibility on the Web (WICOW 2009), pp. 43?50.
Nakagawa, H. and T. Mori (1995). Pragmatic analysis of aspect morphemes in manual sentences in Japanese. The Association
for Natural Language Processing 2(4), 19 ? 36. in Japanese.
Radev, D. R. (2000). Common theory of information fusion from multiple text sources step one: Cross-document structure. In
Proceedings of the 1st SIGdial workshop on Discourse and dialogue, pp. 74?83.
Sammons, M., V. G. V. Vydiswaran, T. Vieira, N. Johri, M.-W. Chang, D. Goldwasser, V. Srikumar, G. Kundu, Y. Tu, K. Small,
J. Rule, Q. Do, and D. Roth (2009). Relation alignment for textual entailment recognition. In Proceedings of Recognizing
Textual Entailment 2009.
Sumida, A., N. Yoshinaga, and K. Torisawa (2008). Boosting precision and recall of hyponymy relation acquisition from
hierarchical layouts in Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 6th International Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC?08).
Szpektor, I., E. Shnarch, and I. Dagan (2007). Instance-based evaluation of entailment rule acquisition. In Proceedings of the
45th Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics, pp. 456?463.
224
