Proceedings of the NAACL HLT Workshop on Software Engineering, Testing, and Quality Assurance for Natural Language Processing, pages 22?30,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Integrated NLP Evaluation System for Pluggable Evaluation Metrics 
with Extensive Interoperable Toolkit 
 
 
Yoshinobu Kano1   Luke McCrohon1   Sophia Ananiadou2   Jun?ichi Tsujii1,2 
 
1 Department of Computer Science, University of Tokyo 
Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033 Tokyo 
 
2School of Computer Science, University of Manchester and National Centre for 
Text Mining, 131 Princess St, M1 7DN, UK 
  
[kano,tsujii]@is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp 
luke.mccrohon@gmail.com 
sophia.ananiadou@manchester.ac.uk 
 
  
 
Abstract 
To understand the key characteristics of NLP 
tools, evaluation and comparison against dif-
ferent tools is important. And as NLP applica-
tions tend to consist of multiple semi-
independent sub-components, it is not always 
enough to just evaluate complete systems, a 
fine grained evaluation of underlying compo-
nents is also often worthwhile. Standardization 
of NLP components and resources is not only 
significant for reusability, but also in that it al-
lows the comparison of individual components 
in terms of reliability and robustness in a wid-
er range of target domains.  But as many eval-
uation metrics exist in even a single domain, 
any system seeking to aid inter-domain eval-
uation needs not just predefined metrics, but 
must also support pluggable user-defined me-
trics. Such a system would of course need to 
be based on an open standard to allow a large 
number of components to be compared, and 
would ideally include visualization of the dif-
ferences between components. We have de-
veloped a pluggable evaluation system based 
on the UIMA framework, which provides vi-
sualization useful in error analysis. It is a sin-
gle integrated system which includes a large 
ready-to-use, fully interoperable library of 
NLP tools. 
1 Introduction 
When building NLP applications, the same sub-
tasks tend to appear frequently while construct-
ing different systems.  Due to this, the reusability 
of tools designed for such subtasks is a common 
design consideration; fine grained interoperabili-
ty between sub components, not just between 
complete systems. 
In addition to the benefits of reusability, inte-
roperability is also important in evaluation of 
components. Evaluations are normally done by 
comparing two sets of data, a gold standard data 
and test data showing the components perfor-
mance. Naturally this comparison requires the 
two data sets to be in the same data format with 
the same semantics. Comparing of "Apples to 
Apples" provides another reason why standardi-
zation of NLP tools is beneficial. Another advan-
tage of standardization is that the number of gold 
standard data sets that can be compared against is 
also increased, allowing tools to be tested in a 
wider range of domains. 
The ideal is that all components are standar-
dized to conform to an open, widely used intero-
perability framework. One possible such frame-
work is UIMA; Unstructured Information Man-
agement Architecture (Ferrucci et al, 2004), 
which is an open project of OASIS and Apache. 
We have been developing U-Compare (Kano et 
al., 2009)1, an integrated testing an evaluation 
platform based on this framework. 
                                                 
1 Features described in this paper are integrated as U-
Compare system, publicly available from:  
http://u-compare.org/ 
22
Although U-Compare already provided a wide 
range of tools and NLP resources, its inbuilt 
evaluation mechanisms were hard coded into the 
system and were not customizable by end users. 
Furthermore the evaluation metrics used were 
based only on simple strict matchings which se-
verely limited its domains of application. We 
have extended the evaluation mechanism to al-
low users to define their own metrics which can 
be integrated into the range of existing evalua-
tion tools.  
The U-Compare library of interoperable tools 
has also been extended; especially with regard to 
resources related to biomedical named entity ex-
traction. U-Compare is currently providing the 
world largest library of type system compatible 
UIMA components. 
In section 2 of this paper we first look at the 
underlying technologies, UIMA and 
U-Compare. Then we describe the new plugga-
ble evaluation mechanism in section 3 and our 
interoperable toolkit with our type system in sec-
tion 4 and 5. 
 
2 Background 
2.1 UIMA 
UIMA is an open framework specified by OA-
SIS2. Apache UIMA provides a reference im-
plementation as an open source project, with 
both a pure java API and a C++ development kit . 
UIMA itself is intended to be purely a frame-
work, i.e. it does not intend to provide specific 
tools or type system definitions. Users should 
develop such resources themselves. In the fol-
lowing subsections, we briefly describe the basic 
concepts of UIMA, and define keywords used to 
explain our system in later sections. 
2.1.1 CAS and Type System 
The UIMA framework uses the ?stand-off anno-
tation? style (Ferrucci et al, 2006). The underl-
ing raw text of a document is generally kept un-
changed during analysis, and the results of 
processing the text are added as new stand-off 
annotations with references to their positions in 
the raw text. A Common Analysis Structure 
(CAS) holds a set of such annotations. Each of 
which is of a given type as defined in a specified 
                                                 
                                                
2 http://www.oasis-open.org/committees/uima/ 
hierarchical type system. Annotation3 types may 
define features, which are themselves typed. 
Apache UIMA provides definitions of a range of 
built in primitive types, but a more complete type 
system should be specified by developers. The 
top level Apache UIMA type is referred to as 
TOP, other primitive types include. int, String, 
Annotation and FSArray (an array of any annota-
tions). 
2.1.2 Component and Capability 
UIMA components receive and update CAS one 
at a time. Each UIMA component has a capabili-
ty property, which describes what types of anno-
tations it takes as input and what types of anno-
tations it may produce as output.  
UIMA components can be deployed either lo-
cally, or remotely as SOAP web services. Re-
motely deployed web service components and 
locally deployed components can be freely com-
bined in UIMA workflows. 
2.1.3 Aggregate Component and Flow Con-
troller 
UIMA components can be either primitive or 
aggregate. Aggregate components include other 
components as subcomponents. Subcomponents 
may themselves be aggregate. In the case where 
an aggregate has multiple subcomponents these 
are by default processed in linear order. This or-
dering can be customized by implementing a 
custom flow controller. 
2.2 U-Compare 
U-Compare is a joint project of the University of 
Tokyo, the Center for Computational Pharma-
cology at the University of Colorado School of 
Medicine, and the UK National Centre for Text 
Mining. 
U-Compare provides an integrated platform 
for users to construct, edit and compare 
workflows compatible with any UIMA compo-
nent. It also provides a large, ready-to-use toolkit 
of interoperable NLP components for use with 
any UIMA based system. This toolkit is currently 
the world largest repository of type system com-
patible components. These all implement the U-
Compare type system described in section 3. 
 
3  In the UIMA framework, Annotation is a base 
type which has begin and end offset values. In this paper 
we call any objects (any subtype of TOP) as annotations. 
23
2.2.1 Related Works 
There also exist several other public UIMA 
component repositories: CMU UIMA component 
repository, BioNLP UIMA repository (Baum-
gartner et al, 2008), JCoRe (Hahn et al, 2008), 
Tsujii Lab Component Repository at the Univer-
sity of Tokyo (Kano et al, 2008a), etc. Each 
group uses their own type system, and so com-
ponents provided by each group are incompatible. 
Unlike U-Compare these repositories are basical-
ly only collections of UIMA components, U-
Compare goes further by providing a fully inte-
grated set of UIMA tools and utilities. 
2.2.2 Integrated Platform 
U-Compare provides a variety of features as part 
of an integrated platform. The system can be 
launched with a single click in a web browser; all 
required libraries are downloaded and updated 
automatically in background.  
The Workflow Manager GUI helps users to 
create workflows in an easy drag-and-drop fa-
shion. Similarly, import/export of workflows, 
running of workflows and saving results can all 
be handled via a graphical interface.  
U-Compare special parallel aggregate compo-
nents allow combinations of specified compo-
nents to be automatically combined and com-
pared based on their I/O capabilities (Kano et al, 
2008b). When workflows are run, U-Compare 
shows statistics and visualizations of results ap-
propriate to the type of workflow. For example 
when workflows including parallel aggregate 
components are run comparison statistics be-
tween all possible parallel component combina-
tions are given. 
3 Integrated System for Pluggable 
Evaluation Metrics  
While U-Compare already has a mechanism to 
automatically create possible combinations of 
components for comparison from a specified 
workflow, the comparison (evaluation) metric 
itself was hard coded into the system. Only com-
parison based on simple strict matching was 
possible. 
However, many different evaluation metrics 
exist, even for the same type of annotations. For 
example, named entity recognition results are 
often evaluated based on several different anno-
tation intersection criteria: exact match, left/right 
only match, overlap, etc. Evaluation metrics for 
nested components can be even more complex 
(e.g. biomedical relations, deep syntactic struc-
tures). Sometimes new metrics are also required 
for specific tasks. Thus, a mechanism for plugg-
able evaluation metrics in a standardized way is 
seen as desirable. 
3.1 Pluggable Evaluation Component 
Our design goal for the evaluation systems is to 
do as much of the required work as possible and 
to provide utilities to reduce developer?s labor. 
We also want our design to be generic and fix 
within existing UIMA standards. 
The essential process of evaluation can be ge-
neralized and decomposed as follows: 
 
(a) prepare a pair of annotation sets which 
will be used for comparison, 
(b) select annotations which should be in-
cluded in the final evaluation step, 
(c) compare selected annotations against 
each other and mark matched pairs. 
For example, in the case of the Penn Treebank 
style syntactic bracket matching, these steps cor-
respond to (a) prepare two sets of constituents 
and tokens, (b) select only the constituents (re-
moving null elements if required), (c) compare 
constituents between the sets and return any 
matches. 
In our new design, step (a) is performed by the 
system, (b) and (c) are performed by an evalua-
tion component. The evaluation component is 
just a normal UIMA component, pluggable based 
on the UIMA standard. This component is run on 
a CAS which was constructed by the system dur-
ing step (a). This CAS includes an instance of 
ComparisonSet type and its features GoldAnno-
tationGroup and TestAnnotationGroup. Corres-
ponding to step (b), based on this input the com-
parison component should make a selection of 
annotations and store them as FSArray for both 
GoldAnnotations and TestAnnotations. Finally 
for step (c), the component should perform a 
matching and store the results as MatchedPair 
instances in the MatchedAnnotations feature of 
the ComparisonSet. 
Precision, recall, and F1 scores are calculated 
by U-Compare based on the outputted Compari-
sonSet. These calculation can be overridden and 
customized if the developer so desires. 
Implementation of the compare() method of 
the evaluation component is recommended. It is 
used by the system when showing instance based 
evaluations of what feature values are used in 
24
matching, which features are matched, and which 
are not. 
3.2 Combinatorial Evaluation and Er-
ror Analysis 
By default, evaluation statistics are calculated by 
simply counting the numbers of gold, test, 
matched annotations in the returned Compari-
sonSet instance. Then precision, recall, and F1 
scores for each CAS and for the complete set of 
CASes are calculated. Users can specify which 
evaluation metrics are used for each type of an-
notations based on the input specifications they 
set for supplied evaluation components. 
Normally, precision, recall, and F1 scores are 
the only evaluation statistics used in the NLP 
community. It is often the case in many research 
reports that a new tool A performs better than 
another tool B, increasing the F1 score by 1%. In 
such cases it is important to analysis what pro-
portion of annotations are shared between A, B, 
and the gold standard. Is A a strict 1% increase 
over B? Or does it cover 2% of instances B 
doesn?t but miss a different 1%? Our system 
provides these statistics as well. 
Further, our standardized evaluation system 
makes more advanced evaluation available. 
Since the evaluation metrics themselves are more 
or less arbitrary, we should carefully observe the 
results of evaluations. When two or more metrics 
are available for the same type of annotations, 
we can compare the results of each to analyze 
and validate the individual evaluations. 
An immediate application of such comparison 
would be in a voting system, which takes the 
results of several tools as input and selects com-
mon overlapping annotations as output. 
U-Compare also provides visualizations of 
evaluation results allowing instance-based error 
analysis. 
4 U-Compare Type System 
U-Compare currently provides the world largest 
set of type system compatible UIMA compo-
nents. We will describe some of these in section 
5. In creating compatible components in UIMA a 
key task is their type system definitions. 
The U-Compare type system is designed in a 
hierarchical fashion with distinct types to achieve 
a high level of interoperability. It is intended to 
be a shared type system capable of mapping 
types originally defined as part of independent 
type systems (Kano et al, 2008c). In this section 
we describe the U-Compare type system in detail. 
4.1 Basic Types 
While most of the U-Compare types are inherit-
ing a UIMA built-in type, Annotation (Figure 1), 
there are also types directly extending the TOP 
type; let us call these types as metadata types.  
AnnotationMetadata holds a confidence value, 
which is common to all of the U-Compare anno-
tation types as a feature of BaseAnnotation type. 
BaseAnnotation extends DiscontinuousAnnota-
tion, in which fragmental annotations can be 
stored as a FSArray of Annotations, if any.  
ExternalReference is another common meta-
data type where namespace and ID are stored, 
referring to an external ontology entity outside 
UIMA/U-Compare. Because it is not realistic to 
represent everything like such a detailed ontolo-
gy hierarchy in a UIMA type system, this meta-
data is used to recover original information, 
which are not expressed as UIMA types. Refe-
renceAnnotation is another base annotation type, 
which holds an instance of this ExternalRefe-
rence.  
UniqueLabel is a special top level type for ex-
plicitly defined finite label sets, e.g. the Penn 
Treebank tagset. Each label in such a tagset is 
mapped to a single type where UniqueLabel as its 
BaseAnnotation 
<AnnotationMetadata> 
SyntacticAnnotation 
Token
POSToken
<POS> 
RichToken
<String>base
Sentence Dependency 
<DependencyLabel> 
Stanford 
Dependency 
TreeNode 
<TOP>parent 
<FSArray>children
AbstractConstituent
NullElement 
<NullElementLabel>
<Constituent> 
Constituent 
<ConstituentLabel>
FunctionTaggedConstituent 
<FunctionLabel> 
TemplateMappedConstituent 
<Constituent> 
TOP
Coordinations
<FSArray>
Figure 2. Syntactic Types in U-Compare. 
25
ancestor, putting middle level types if possible 
(e.g. Noun type for the Penn Treebank POS tag-
set). These types are omitted in the figure.  
4.2 Syntactic Types 
SyntacticAnnotation is the base type of all syn-
tactic types (Figure 2). POSToken holds a POS 
label, RichToken additionally holds a base form. 
Dependency is used by dependency parsers, 
while TreeNode is for syntactic tree nodes. Con-
stituent, NullElement, FunctionTaggedConsti-
tiuent, TemplateMappedConstituent are designed 
to fully represent all of the Penn Treebank style 
annotations. Coordination is a set of references to 
coordinating nodes (currently used by the Genia 
Treebank). We are planning on extending the set 
of syntactic types to cover the outputs of several 
deep parsers. 
4.3 Semantic Types  
SemanticAnnotation is the base type for semantic 
annotations; it extends ReferenceAnnotation by 
holding the original reference.  
SemanticClassAnnotation is a rather complex 
type designed to be somewhat general. In many 
cases, semantic annotations may reference other 
semantic annotations, e.g. references between 
biological events. Such references are often la-
beled with their roles which we express with the 
ExternalReference type. Such labeled references 
are expressed by LinkingAnnotationSet. As a role 
may refer to more than one annotation, Linkin-
gAnnotationSet has an FSArray of SemanticAn-
notation as a feature. 
There are several biomedical types included in 
Figure 3, e.g. DNA, RNA, Protein, Gene, Cel-
lLine, CellType, etc. It is however difficult to 
decide which ontological entities should be in-
cluded in such a type system. One reason for this 
is that such concepts are not always distinct; dif-
ferent ontologies may give overlapping defini-
tions of these concepts. Further, the number of 
possible substance level entities is infinite; caus-
ing difficult in their expression as individual 
types. The current set of biomedical types in the 
U-Compare type system includes types which are 
frequently used for evaluation in the BioNLP 
research. 
4.4 Document Types  
DocumentAnnotation is the base type for docu-
ment related annotations (Figure 4). It extends 
DocumentClassAnnotation 
<FSArray:DocumentAttribute> 
<FSArray:ReferenceAnnotation> 
DocumentAttribute 
<ExternalReference> 
DocumentAnnotation 
DocumentReferenceAttribute
<ReferenceAnnotation>
DocumentValueAttribute
<String>value 
ReferenceAnnotation TOP
Figure 4. Document types in the U-Compare type system. 
SemanticAnnotation
ReferenceAnnotation
SemanticClassAnnotation 
<FSArray:LinkedAnnotationSet>
NamedEntity EventAnnotation
CellType CellLine GeneOrGeneProductRNADNAProper 
Name
Title 
Place Protein GenePerson 
ProteinRegion
DNARegion
LinkingAnnotationSet 
<ExternalReference> 
<FSArray:SemanticAnnotation>
CoreferenceAnnotation DiscourseEntity Expression
Negation 
TOP 
Speculation
Figure 3. Semantic types in the U-Compare type system. 
26
ReferenceAnnotation to reference the full exter-
nal type in the same way as SemanticAnnotation.  
187 
The document length in bytes is 
output in the first line (end with 
new line),  
DocumentClassAnnotation together with Do-
cumentAttribute are intended to express XML 
style data. XML tags may have fields storing 
their values, and/or idref fields refering to other 
tags. DocumentValueAttiributerepresents simple 
value field, while DocumentReferenceAttribute 
represents idref type fields. A DocumentClas-
sAnnotation corresponds to the tag itself. 
then the raw text follows as is 
(attaching a new line in the end), 
finally annotations follow line by 
line. 
0 187 Document id="u1" 
0 3 POSToken id="u2" pos="DT" 
.... 
Although these types can represent most doc-
ument structures, we still plan to add several 
specific types such as Paragraph, Title, etc. 
Figure 5. An example of the U-Compare simple I/O 
format. 
 
5 Interoperable Components and Utili-
ties 
In this section, we describe our extensive toolkit 
of interoperable components and the set of utili-
ties integrated into the U-Compare system. All of 
the components in our toolkit are compatible 
with the U-Compare type system described in the 
previous section. 
5.1 Corpus Reader Components  
In the UIMA framework, a component which 
generates CASes is called a Collection Reader. 
We have developed several collection readers 
which read annotated corpora and generates an-
notations using the U-Compare type system.  
Because our primary target domain was bio-
medical field, there are corpus readers for the 
biomedical corpora; Aimed corpus (Bunescu et 
al., 2006) reader and BioNLP ?09 shared task 
format reader generate event annotations like 
protein-protein interaction annotations; Readers 
for BIO/IOB format, Bio1 corpus (Tateisi et al, 
2000), BioCreative (Hirschman et al, 2004) task 
1a format, BioIE corpus (Bies et al, 2005), 
NLPBA shared task dataset (Kim et al, 2004), 
Texas Corpus (Bunescu et al, 2005), Yapex 
Corpus (Kristofer Franzen et al, 2002), generate 
biomedical named entities, and Genia Treebank 
corpus (Tateisi et al, 2005) reader generates 
Penn Treebank (Marcus et al, 1993) style brack-
eting and part-of-speech annotations. Format 
readers require users to prepare annotated data, 
while others include corpora themselves, auto-
matically downloaded as an archive on users? 
demand. 
In addition, there is File System Collection 
Reader from Apache UIMA which reads files as 
plain text. We have developed an online interac-
tive text reader, named Input Text Reader. 
5.2 Analysis Engine Components  
There are many tools covering from basic syn-
tactic annotations to the biomedical annotations. 
Some of the tools are running as web services, 
but users can freely mix local services and web 
services. 
For syntactic annotations: sentence detectors 
from GENIA, LingPipe, NaCTeM, OpenNLP 
and Apache UIMA; tokenizers from GENIA tag-
ger (Tsuruoka et al, 2005), OpenNLP, Apache 
UIMA and Penn Bio Tokenizer; POS taggers 
from GENIA tagger, LingPipe, OpenNLP and 
Stepp Tagger; parsers from OpenNLP (CFG), 
Stanford Parser (dependency) (de Marneffe et al, 
2006), Enju (HPSG) (Miyao et al, 2008). 
For semantic annotations: ABNER (Settles, 
2005) for NLPBA/BioCreative trained models, 
GENIA Tagger, NeMine, MedT-NER, LingPipe 
and OpenNLP NER, for named entity recogni-
tions. Akane++ (S?tre et al, 2007) for protein-
protein interaction detections. 
5.3 Components for Developers  
Although Apache UIMA provides APIs in both 
Java and C++ to help users develop UIMA com-
ponents, a level of understanding of the UIMA 
framework is still required. Conversion of exist-
ing tools to the UIMA framework can also be 
difficult, particularly when they are written in 
other programming languages. 
We have designed a simple I/O format to 
make it easy for developers who just want to 
provide a UIMA wrapper for existing tools.  
Input of this format consists of two parts: raw 
text and annotations The first line of the raw text 
section is an integer of byte count of the length 
of the text. The raw text then follows with a new-
line character appended at the end. Annotations 
are then included; one annotation per line, some-
times referring another annotation by assigned 
ids (Figure 5). A line consists of begin position, 
27
end position, type name, unique id, and feature 
values if any. Double newlines indicates an end 
of a CAS. 
Output of the component is lines of annota-
tions if any created by the component. 
U-Compare provides a wrapper component 
which uses this I/O format, communicating with 
wrapped tools via standard I/O streams. 
5.4 Type System Converters 
As U-Compare is a joint project, the U-Compare 
toolkit includes UIMA components originally 
developed using several different type systems. 
In order to integrate these components into the 
U-Compare type system, we have developed 
type system converter components for each ex-
ternal type system. 
The CCP team at the University of Colorado 
made a converter between their CCP type system 
and our type system. We also developed conver-
ters for OpenNLP components and Apache UI-
MA components. These converters remove any 
original annotations not compatible with the U-
Compare type system. This prevents duplicated 
converters from translating external annotation 
multiple times in the same workflow. 
We are providing such non U-Compare com-
ponents by aggregating with type system conver-
ters, so users do not need to aware of the type 
system conversions. 
5.5 Utility Tools  
We have developed and integrated several utility 
tools, especially GUI tools for usability and error 
analysis. 
Figure 6 is showing our workflow manager 
GUI, which provides functions to create a user 
workflow by an easy drag-and-drop way. By 
clicking ?Run Workflow? button in that manager 
window, statistics will be shown (Figure 8).  
Figure 6. A s
There are also a couple of annotation visuali-
zation tools. Figure 7 is showing a viewer for 
tree structures and HPSG feature structures. Fig-
ure 9 is showing a general annotation viewer, 
when annotations have complex inter-
dependencies. 
6 Summary and Future Directions  
We have designed and developed a pluggable 
evaluation system based on the UIMA frame-
work. This evaluation system is integrated with 
the U-Compare combinatorial comparison me-
chanism which makes evaluation of many factors 
available automatically. 
creenshot of Workflow Manager 
GUI and Component Library. 
Since the system behavior is dependent on the 
type system used, we have carefully designed the 
U-Compare type system to cover a broad range 
of concepts used in NLP applications. Based di-
rectly on this type system, or using type system 
converters, we have developed a large toolkit of 
type system compatible interoperable UIMA 
component. All of these features are integrated 
into U-Compare. 
Figure 7. A screenshot of HPSG feature structure 
viewer, showing a skeleton CFG tree, feature values 
and head/semhead links. 
28
In future we are planning to increase the num-
ber of components available, e.g. more syntactic 
parsers, corpus readers, and resources for lan-
guages other than English. This will also re-
quired enhancements to the existing type system 
to support additional components. Finally we 
also hope to add integration with machine learn-
ing tools in the near future. 
 
Acknowledgments 
onal Centre for Text Mining is 
Figure 8. A screenshot of a comparison statistics showing number of instances (gold, test, and
matched), F1, precision, and recall scores of two evaluation metrics on the same data. 
 
We wish to thank Dr. Lawrence Hunter?s text 
mining group at Center for Computational Phar-
macology, University of Colorado School of 
Medicine, for helping build the type system and 
for making their tools available for this research. 
This work was partially supported by Grant-in-
Aid for Specially Promoted Research (MEXT, 
Japan). The Nati
funded by JISC. 
W.
ning sys-
tems. J Biomed Discov Collab, 3(1), 1. 
An
ie in the Sky, ACL, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, USA. 
Ra
tificial Intelligence in Medi-
cine, 33(2), 139-155. 
References  
 A. Baumgartner, Jr., K. B. Cohen, and L. Hunter. 
2008. An open-source framework for large-scale, 
flexible evaluation of biomedical text mi
n  Bies, Seth Kulick, and Mark Mandel. 2005. Pa-
rallel entity and treebank annotation. In Proceed-
ings of the the Workshop on Frontiers in Corpus 
Annotations II: P
zvan  Bunescu, Ruifang Ge, Rohit J. Kate, Edward 
M. Marcotte, Raymond J. Mooney, Arun Kumar 
Ramani, et al 2005. Comparative experiments on 
learning information extractors for proteins and 
their interactions. ArFigure 9. A screenshot of a visualization of com-
plex annotations. 
29
Razvan Bunescu, and Raymond Mooney. 2006. Sub-
sequence Kernels for Relation Extraction. In Y. 
Weiss, B. Scholkopf and J. Platt (Eds.), Advances 
in Neural Information Processing Systems 18 (171-
-178). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Bill MacCartney, and 
Christopher D. Manning. 2006. Generating typed 
dependency parses from phrase structure parses. 
In Proceedings of the the 5th International Confe-
rence on Language Resources and Evaluation 
(LREC 2006). 
David Ferrucci, and Adam Lally. 2004. Building an 
example application with the Unstructured Infor-
mation Management Architecture. Ibm Systems 
Journal, 43(3), 455-475. 
David Ferrucci, Adam Lally, Daniel Gruhl, and Ed-
ward Epstein. 2006. Towards an Interoperability 
Standard for Text and Multi-Modal Analytics. 
U. Hahn, E. Buyko, R. Landefeld, M. M?hlhausen, M.  
Poprat, K.  Tomanek, et al 2008, May. An Over-
view of JCoRe, the JULIE Lab UIMA Component 
Repository. In Proceedings of the LREC'08 Work-
shop, Towards Enhanced Interoperability for Large 
HLT Systems: UIMA for NLP, Marrakech, Moroc-
co. 
Lynette Hirschman, Alexander Yeh, Christian 
Blaschke, and Antonio Valencia. 2004. Overview 
of BioCreAtIvE: critical assessment of information 
extraction for biology. BMC Bionformatics, 
6(Suppl 1:S1). 
Yoshinobu Kano, William A Baumgartner, Luke 
McCrohon, Sophia Ananiadou, Kevin B Cohen, 
Lawrence Hunter, et al 2009. U-Compare: share 
and compare text mining tools with UIMA. Bioin-
formatics, accepted. 
Yoshinobu Kano, Ngan Nguyen, Rune S?tre, Keiichi-
ro Fukamachi, Kazuhiro Yoshida, Yusuke Miyao, 
et al 2008c, January. Sharable type system design 
for tool inter-operability and combinatorial com-
parison. In Proceedings of the the First Internation-
al Conference on Global Interoperability for Lan-
guage Resources (ICGL), Hong Kong. 
Yoshinobu Kano, Ngan Nguyen, Rune S?tre, Kazuhi-
ro Yoshida, Keiichiro Fukamachi, Yusuke Miyao, 
et al 2008b, January. Towards Data And Goal 
Oriented Analysis: Tool Inter-Operability And 
Combinatorial Comparison. In Proceedings of the 
3rd International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing (IJCNLP), Hyderabad, India. 
Yoshinobu Kano, Ngan Nguyen, Rune S?tre, Kazuhi-
ro Yoshida, Yusuke Miyao, Yoshimasa Tsuruoka, 
et al 2008a, January. Filling the gaps between 
tools and users: a tool comparator, using protein-
protein interaction as an example. In Proceedings 
of the Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing (PSB), 
Hawaii, USA. 
Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, Yoshimasa Tsuruoka, 
Yuka Tateisi, and Nigel Collier. 2004. Introduction 
to the Bio-Entity Recognition Task at JNLPBA. In 
Proceedings of the International Workshop on Nat-
ural Language Processing in Biomedicine and its 
Applications (JNLPBA-04), Geneva, Switzerland. 
Kristofer Franzen, Gunnar Eriksson, Fredrik Olsson, 
Lars Asker, Per Liden, and Joakim Coster. 2002. 
Protein names and how to find them. International 
Journal of Medical Informatics, 67(1-3), 49-61. 
Mitchell P. Marcus, Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz, and 
Beatrice Santorini. 1993. Building a large anno-
tated corpus of English: the penn treebank. Com-
putational Linguistics, 19(2), 313-330. 
Yusuke Miyao, and Jun'ichi Tsujii. 2008. Feature 
Forest Models for Probabilistic HPSG Parsing. 
Computational Linguistics, 34(1), 35-80. 
Rune S?tre, Kazuhiro Yoshida, Akane Yakushiji, 
Yusuke Miyao, Yuichiro Matsubayashi, and To-
moko Ohta. 2007, April. AKANE System: Protein-
Protein Interaction Pairs in BioCreAtIvE2 Chal-
lenge, PPI-IPS subtask. In Proceedings of the 
Second BioCreative Challenge Evaluation Work-
shop. 
Burr Settles. 2005. ABNER: an open source tool for 
automatically tagging genes, proteins and other 
entity names in text. Bioinformatics, 21(14), 3191-
3192. 
Yuka Tateisi, Tomoko Ohta, Nigel Collier, Chikashi 
Nobata, and Jun'ichi Tsujii. 2000, August. Building 
an Annotated Corpus from Biology Research Pa-
pers. In Proceedings of the COLING 2000 Work-
shop on Semantic Annotation and Intelligent Con-
tent, Luxembourg. 
Yuka Tateisi, Akane Yakushiji, Tomoko Ohta, and 
Jun'ichi Tsujii. 2005, October. Syntax Annotation 
for the GENIA Corpus. In Proceedings of the the 
Second International Joint Conference on Natural 
Language Processing (IJCNLP '05), Companion 
volume, Jeju Island, Korea. 
Yoshimasa Tsuruoka, Yuka Tateishi, Jin Dong Kim, 
Tomoko Ohta, J. McNaught, Sophia Ananiadou, et 
al. 2005. Developing a robust part-of-speech tag-
ger for biomedical text. In Advances in Informatics, 
Proceedings (Vol. 3746, 382-392). Berlin: Sprin-
ger-Verlag Berlin. 
 
30
