Proceedings of the NAACL HLT Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications, pages 34?42,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Supporting the Adaptation of Texts for Poor Literacy Readers: a Text 
Simplification Editor for Brazilian Portuguese 
 
Arnaldo Candido Jr., Erick Maziero, Caroline Gasperin, Thiago A. S. Pardo, Lucia Specia, and Sandra M. Aluisio  
 
Center of Computational Linguistics (NILC) / Department of Computer Sciences, University of S?o Paulo 
Av. Trabalhador S?o-Carlense, 400. 13560-970 - S?o Carlos/SP, Brazil 
arnaldoc@icmc.usp.br, egmaziero@gmail.com, {cgasperin,taspardo,lspecia,sandra}@icmc.usp.br 
 
Abstract 
In this paper we investigate the task of text 
simplification for Brazilian Portuguese. Our 
purpose is three-fold: to introduce a 
simplification tool for such language and its 
underlying development methodology, to 
present an on-line authoring system of 
simplified text based on the previous tool, and 
finally to discuss the potentialities of such 
technology for education. The resources and 
tools we present are new for Portuguese and 
innovative in many aspects with respect to 
previous initiatives for other languages.  
1 Introduction 
In Brazil, according to the index used to measure 
the literacy level of the population (INAF - National 
Indicator of Functional Literacy), a vast number of 
people belong to the so called rudimentary and basic 
literacy levels. These people are only able to find 
explicit information in short texts (rudimentary 
level) or process slightly longer texts and make 
simple inferences (basic level). INAF reports that 
68% of the 30.6 million Brazilians between 15 and 
64 years who have studied up to 4 years remain at 
the rudimentary literacy level, and 75% of the 31.1 
million who studied up to 8 years remain at the 
rudimentary or basic levels. 
Reading comprehension entails three elements: 
the reader who is meant to comprehend; the text that 
is to be comprehended and the activity in which 
comprehension is a part of (Snow, 2002). In 
addition to the content presented in the text, the 
vocabulary load of the text and its linguistic 
structure, discourse style, and genre interact with the 
reader?s knowledge. When these factors do not 
match the reader?s knowledge and experience, the 
text becomes too complex for the comprehension to 
occur. In this paper we will focus on the text and the 
aspects of it that make reading difficult or easy. One 
solution to ease the syntactic structure of a text is 
via Text Simplification (TS) facilities.  
TS aims to maximize the comprehension of 
written texts through the simplification of their 
linguistic structure. This may involve simplifying 
lexical and syntactic phenomena, by substituting 
words that are only understood by a few people with 
words that are more usual, and by breaking down 
and changing the syntactic structure of the sentence, 
respectively. As a result, it is expected that the text 
can be more easily understood both by humans and 
computer systems (Mapleson, 2006; Siddharthan, 
2003, Max, 2006). TS may also involve dropping 
parts or full sentences and adding some extra 
material to explain a difficult point. This is the case, 
for example, of the approach presented by Petersen 
and Ostendorf (2007), in which abridged versions of 
articles are used in adult literacy learning. 
It has already been shown that long sentences, 
conjoined sentences, embedded clauses, passives, 
non-canonical word order, and use of low-frequency 
words, among other things, increase text complexity 
for language-impaired readers (Siddharthan, 2002; 
Klebanov et al, 2004; Devlin and Unthank, 2006). 
The Plain English initiative makes available 
guidelines to make texts easier to comprehend: the 
Plain Language1. In principle, its recommendations 
can be applied to any language. Although some of 
them are directly useful for TS systems (e.g., 
subject-verb-object order and active voice), others 
are difficult to specify (e.g., how simple each 
syntactic construction is and which words are 
simple). 
In this paper we present the results of a study of 
syntactic simplification for Brazilian Portuguese 
(BP) and a rule-based syntactic simplification 
system for this language that was developed based 
on this study ? the first of this kind for BP. We also 
present an on-line authoring tool for creating 
simplified texts. One possible application of this 
tool is to help teachers to produce instructional texts 
                                                 
1
 http://www.plainlanguage.gov 
34
to be used in classrooms. The study is part of the 
PorSimples project2 (Simplification of Portuguese 
Text for Digital Inclusion and Accessibility), which 
aims at producing text simplification tools for 
promoting digital inclusion and accessibility for 
people with different levels of literacy, and possibly 
other kinds of reading disabilities. 
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 
we present related approaches for text simplification 
with educational purposes. In Section 3 we describe 
the proposed approach for syntactic simplification, 
which is used within an authoring tool described in 
Section 4. In Section 5 we discuss possible uses of 
text simplification for educational purposes.  
2 Related work 
Burstein (2009) presents an NLP-based application 
for educational purposes, named Text Adaptor, 
which resembles our authoring tool. It includes 
complex sentence highlighting, text elaboration 
(word substitutions by easier ones), text 
summarization and translation. The system does not 
perform syntactic simplification, but simply 
suggests, using a shallow parser, that some 
sentences might be too complex. Specific hints on 
the actual source of complexity are not provided. 
Petersen (2007) addresses the task of text 
simplification in the context of second-language 
learning. A data-driven approach to simplification is 
proposed using a corpus of paired articles in which 
each original sentence does not necessarily have a 
corresponding simplified sentence, making it 
possible to learn where writers have dropped or 
simplified sentences. A classifier is used to select 
the sentences to simplify, and Siddharthan?s 
syntactic simplification system (Siddharthan, 2003) 
is used to split the selected sentences. In our 
approach, we do not drop sentences, since we 
believe that all the content must be kept in the text. 
Siddharthan proposes a syntactic simplification 
architecture that relies on shallow text analysis and 
favors time performance. The general goal of the 
architecture is to make texts more accessible to a 
broader audience; it has not targeted any particular 
application. The system treats apposition, relative 
clauses, coordination and subordination. Our 
method, on the other hand, relies on deep parsing 
(Bick, 2000). We treat the same phenomena as 
                                                 
2
 http://caravelas.icmc.usp.br/wiki/index.php/Principal 
Siddharthan, but also deal with Subject-Verb-Object 
ordering (in Portuguese sentences can be written in 
different orders) and passive to active voice 
conversion. Siddharthan's system deals with non-
finite clauses which are not handled by our system 
at this stage. 
Lal and Ruger?s (2002) created a bayesian 
summarizer with a built-in lexical simplification 
module, based on WordNet and MRC psycho-
linguistic database3. The system focuses on 
schoolchildren and provides background 
information about people and locations in the text, 
which are retrieved from databases. Our rule-based 
simplification system only replaces discourse 
markers for more common ones using lexical 
resources built in our project, instead of inserting 
additional information in the text. 
Max (2005, 2006) applies text simplification in 
the writing process by embedding an interactive text 
simplification system into a word processor. At the 
user?s request, an automatic parser analyzes an 
individual sentence and the system applies 
handcrafted rewriting rules. The resulting suggested 
simplifications are ranked by a score of syntactic 
complexity and potential change of meaning. The 
writer then chooses their preferred simplification. 
This system ensures accurate output, but requires 
human intervention at every step. Our system, on 
the other hand, is autonomous, even though the user 
is able to undo any undesirable simplification or to 
choose alternative simplifications. These alternative 
simplifications may be produced in two cases: i) to 
compose a new subject in simplifications involving 
relatives and appositions and ii) to choose among 
one of the coordinate or subordinate simplifications 
when there is ambiguity regarding to conjunctions. 
Inui et al (2003) proposes a rule-based system 
for text simplification aimed at deaf people. The 
authors create readability assessments based on 
questionnaires answered by teachers about the deaf. 
With approximately one thousand manually created 
rules, the authors generate several paraphrases for 
each sentence and train a classifier to select the 
simpler ones. Promising results are obtained, 
although different types of errors on the paraphrase 
generation are encountered, such as problems with 
verb conjugation and regency. In our work we 
produce alternative simplifications only in the two 
cases explained above. 
                                                 
3
 http://www.psych.rl.ac.uk/ 
35
Caseli et al (2009) developed an annotation 
editor to support the building of parallel corpora of 
original and simplified texts in Brazilian 
Portuguese. The tool was used to build a corpus of 
simplified texts aimed at people with rudimentary 
and basic literacy levels. We have used the parallel 
corpus to evaluate our rule-based simplification 
system. The on-line authoring system presented in 
this paper evolved from this annotation editor. 
There are also commercial systems like Simplus4 
and StyleWriter5, which aim to support Plain 
English writing.  
3 A rule-based syntactic simplification 
system 
Our text simplification system comprises seven 
operations (see Sections 3.1 and 3.2), which are 
applied to a text in order to make its syntactic 
structure simpler. These operations are applied 
sentence by sentence, following the 3-stage 
architecture proposed by Siddharthan (2002), which 
includes stages of analysis, transformation and 
regeneration. In Siddharthan?s work, the analysis 
stage performs the necessary linguistic analyses of 
the input sentences, such as POS tagging and 
chunking; the transformation stage applies 
simplification rules, producing simplified versions 
of the sentences; the regeneration stage performs 
operations on the simplified sentences to make them 
readable, like referring expressions generation, cue 
words rearrangement, and sentence ordering. 
Differently from such architecture, currently our 
regeneration stage only includes the treatment of 
cue words and a surface forms (GSF) generator, 
which is used to adjust the verb conjugation and 
regency after some simplification operations. 
As a single sentence may contain more than 
one complex linguistic phenomenon, simplification 
operations are applied in cascade to a sentence, as 
described in what follows. 
3.1 Simplification cases and operations 
As result of a study on which linguistic phenomena 
make BP text complex to read and how these 
phenomena could be simplified, we elaborated a 
manual of BP syntactic simplification (Aluisio et al, 
2008). The rule-based text simplification system 
                                                 
4
 http://www.linguatechnologies.com/english/home.html  
5
 http://www.editorsoftware.com/writing-software 
developed here is based on the specifications in this 
manual. According to this manual, simplification 
operations should be applied when any of the 22 
linguistic phenomena presented in Table 1 is 
detected. 
The possible operations suggested to be applied 
in order to simplify these phenomena are: (a) split 
the sentence, (b) change a discourse marker by a 
simpler and/or more frequent one (the indication is 
to avoid the ambiguous ones), (c) change passive to 
active voice, (d) invert the order of the clauses, (e) 
convert to subject-verb-object ordering, (f) change 
topicalization and detopicalization of adverbial 
phrases and (g) non-simplification.  
Table 1 shows the list of all simplification 
phenomena covered by our manual, the clues used 
to identify the phenomena, the simplification 
operations that should be applied in each case, the 
expected order of clauses in the resulting sentence, 
and the cue phrases (translated here from 
Portuguese) used to replace complex discourse 
markers or to glue two sentences. In column 2, we 
consider the following clues: syntactic information 
(S), punctuation (P), and lexicalized clues, such as 
conjunctions (Cj), relative pronouns (Pr) and 
discourse markers (M), and semantic information 
(Sm, and NE for named entities). 
3.2 Identifying simplification cases and 
applying simplification rules 
Each sentence is parsed in order to identify cases for 
simplification. We use parser PALAVRAS (Bick, 
2000) for Portuguese. This parser provides lexical 
information (morphology, lemma, part-of-speech, 
and semantic information) and the syntactic trees for 
each sentence. For some operations, surface 
information (such as punctuation or lexicalized cue 
phrases) is used to identify the simplification cases, 
as well as to assist simplification process. For 
example, to detect and simplify subjective non-
restrictive relative clauses (where the relative 
pronoun is the subject of the relative clause), the 
following steps are performed: 
1. The presence of a relative pronoun is verified. 
2. Punctuation is verified in order to distinguish it 
from restrictive relative clauses: check if the 
pronoun occurs after a comma or semicolon.  
3. Based on the position of the pronoun, the next 
punctuation symbol is searched to define the 
boundaries of the relative clause. 
36
4. The first part of the simplified text is generated, 
consisting of the original sentence without the 
embedded relative clause. 
5. The noun phrase in the original sentence to 
which the relative clause refers is identified. 
6. A second simplified sentence is generated, 
consisting of the noun phrase (as subject) and 
the relative clause (without the pronoun). 
The identification of the phenomena and the 
application of the operations are prone to errors 
though. Some of the clues that indicate the 
occurrence of the phenomena may be ambiguous. 
For example, some of the discourse markers that are 
used to identify subordinate clauses can indicate 
more than one type of these: for instance, ?como? 
(in English ?like?, ?how? or ?as?) can indicate 
reason, conformative or concessive subordinate 
clauses. Since there is no other clue that can help us 
disambiguate among those, we always select the 
case that occurs more frequently according to a 
corpus study of discourse markers and the rhetoric 
relations that they entitle (Pardo and Nunes, 2008). 
However, we can also treat all cases and let the user 
decide the simplifications that is most appropriate. 
 
Phenomenon Clues Op Clause Order Cue phrase Comments 
1.Passive voice S c   Verb may have to be adapted 
2.Embedded appositive S a Original/ 
App. 
 Appositive: Subject is the head of original + 
to be in present tense + apposition 
3.Asyndetic coordinate clause S a Keep order   New sentences: Subjects are the head of the 
original subject 
4.Additive coordinate clause S, Cj a Keep order Keep marker Marker appears in the beginning of the new 
sentence 
5.Adversative coordinate clause M a, b Keep order But  
6.Correlated coordinate clause M a, b Keep order Also Original markers disappear 
7.Result coordinate clause S, M a, b Keep order As a result  
8.Reason coordinate clause S, M a, b Keep order This happens 
because 
May need some changes in verb 
9.Reason subordinate clause M a, b, 
d 
Sub/Main With this To keep the ordering cause, result 
M a, b Main/Sub Also Rule for such ... as, so ... as markers  10.Comparative subordinate clause 
M g   Rule for the other markers or short sentences 
M a, b, 
d 
Sub/Main But ?Clause 1 although clause 2? is changed to 
?Clause 2. But clause 1? 
11.Concessive subordinate clause 
M a, b Main/Sub This happens 
even if 
Rule for hypothetical sentences 
12.Conditional subordinate clause S, M d Sub/Main  Pervasive use in simple accounts 
13. Result subordinate clause M a, b Main/Sub Thus May need some changes in verb 
14.Final/Purpose subordinate clause S, M a, b Main/Sub The goal is  
15.Confirmative subordinate clause M a, b, 
d 
Sub/Main Confirms 
that 
May need some changes in verb 
M a Sub/Main  May need some changes in verb 16.Time subordinate clause 
M a, b  Then Rule for markers: after that, as soon as  
17. Proportional Subordinate Clause M g    
18. Non-finite subordinate clause S g    
19.Non-restrictive relative clause S, P, Pr a Original/ 
Relative 
 Relative: Subject is the head of original + 
relative (subjective relative clause) 
20.Restrictive relative clause S, Pr a Relative/ 
Original 
 Relative: Subject is the head of original + 
relative  (subjective relative clause) 
21.Non Subject-Verb-Object order S e   Rewrite in Subject-Verb-Object order 
22. Adverbial phrases in theme 
position 
S, NE, 
Sm  
f In study  In study 
Table 1: Cases, operations, order and cue phrases 
Every phenomenon has one or more 
simplification steps associated with it, which are 
applied to perform the simplification operations. 
Below we detail each operation and discuss the 
challenges involved and our current limitations in 
their implementing. 
a) Splitting the sentence - This operation is the 
most frequent one. It requires finding the split point 
37
in the original sentence (such as the boundaries of 
relative clauses and appositions, the position of 
coordinate or subordinate conjunctions) and the 
creation of a new sentence, whose subject 
corresponds to the replication of a noun phrase in 
the original sentence. This operation increases the 
text length, but decreases the length of the 
sentences. With the duplication of the term from the 
original sentence (as subject of the new sentence), 
the resulting text contains redundant information, 
but it is very helpful for people at the rudimentary 
literacy level. 
When splitting sentences due to the presence of 
apposition, we need to choose the element in the 
original sentence to which it is referring, so that this 
element can be the subject of the new sentence. At 
the moment we analyze all NPs that precede the 
apposition and check for gender and number 
agreement. If more than one candidate passes the 
agreement test, we choose the closest one among 
these; if none does, we choose the closest among all 
candidates. In both cases we can also pass the 
decision on to the user, which we do in our 
authoring tool described in Section 4. 
For treating relative clauses we have the same 
problem as for apposition (finding the NP to which 
the relative clause is anchored) and an additional 
one: we need to choose if the referent found should 
be considered the subject or the object of the new 
sentence. Currently, the parser indicates the 
syntactic function of the relative pronoun and that 
serves as a clue. 
b) Changing discourse marker - In most cases 
of subordination and coordination, discourse 
markers are replaced by most commonly used ones, 
which are more easily understood. The selection of 
discourse markers to be replaced and the choice of 
new markers (shown in Table 1, col. 4) are done 
based on the study of Pardo and Nunes (2008). 
c) Transformation to active voice - Clauses in 
the passive voice are turned into active voice, with 
the reordering of the elements in the clause and the 
modification of the tense and form of the verb. Any 
other phrases attached to the object of the original 
sentence have to be carried with it when it moves to 
the subject position, since the voice changing 
operation is the first to be performed. For instance, 
the sentence: 
?More than 20 people have been bitten by gold piranhas 
(Serrasalmus Spilopleura), which live in the waters of the 
Sanchuri dam, next to the BR-720 highway, 40 km from 
the city.? 
is simplified to: 
?Gold piranhas (Serrasalmus Spilopleura), which live in 
the waters of the Sanchuri dam, next to the BR-720 
highway, 40 km from the city, have bitten more than 20 
people.? 
After simplification of the relative clause and 
apposition, the final sentence is: 
?Gold piranhas have bitten more than 20 people. Gold 
piranhas live in the waters of the Sanchuri dam, next to 
the BR-720 highway, 40 km from the city. Gold piranhas 
are Serrasalmus Spilopleura.? 
d) Inversion of clause ordering - This operation 
was primarily designed to handle subordinate 
clauses, by moving the main clause to the beginning 
of the sentence, in order to help the reader 
processing it on their working memory (Graesser et 
al., 2004). Each of the subordination cases has a 
more appropriate order for main and subordinate 
clauses (as shown in Table 1, col. 3), so that 
?independent? information is placed before the 
information that depends on it. In the case of 
concessive subordinate clauses, for example, the 
subordinate clause is placed before the main clause. 
This gives the sentence a logical order of the 
expressed ideas. See the example below, in which 
there is also a change of discourse marker and 
sentence splitting, all operations assigned to 
concessive subordinate clauses:  
?The building hosting the Brazilian Consulate was also 
evacuated, although the diplomats have obtained 
permission to carry on working.? 
Its simplified version becomes:  
?The diplomats have obtained permission to carry on 
working. But the building hosting the Brazilian Consulate 
was also evacuated.? 
e) Subject-Verb-Object ordering - If a sentence 
is not in the form of subject-verb-object, it should be 
rearranged. This operation is based only on 
information from the syntactic parser. The example 
below shows a case in which the subject is after the 
verb (translated literally from Portuguese, 
preserving the order of the elements): 
?On the 9th of November of 1989, fell the wall that for 
almost three decades divided Germany.? 
Its simplified version is: 
?On the 9th of November of 1989, the wall that for almost 
three decades divided Germany fell.? 
Currently the only case we are treating is the non-
canonical order Verb-Object-Subject. We plan to 
treat other non-canonical orderings in the near 
future. Besides that, we still have to define how to 
deal with elliptic subjects and impersonal verbs 
(which in Portuguese do not require a subject). 
38
When performing this operation and the previous 
one, a generator of surface forms (GSF) is used to 
adjust the verb conjugation and regency. The GSF is 
compiled from the Apertium morphological 
dictionaries enhanced with the entries of Unitex-BP 
(Muniz et al, 2005), with an extra processing to 
map the tags of the parser to those existing in 
morphological dictionaries (Caseli et al, 2007) to 
obtain an adjusted verb in the modified sentence. 
f) Topicalization and detopicalization - This 
operation is used to topicalize or detopicalize an 
adverbial phrase. We have not implemented this 
operation yet, but have observed that moving 
adverbial phrases to the end or to the front of 
sentences can make them simpler in some cases. For 
instance, the sentence in the last example would 
become: 
?The wall that for almost three decades divided Germany fell 
on the 9th of November of 1989.? 
We are still investigating how this operation 
could be applied, that is, which situations require 
(de)topicalization. 
3.3 The cascaded application of the rules 
As previously mentioned, one sentence may contain 
several phenomena that could be simplified, and we 
established the order in which they are treated. The 
first phenomenon to be treated is passive voice. 
Secondly, embedded appositive clauses are 
resolved, since they are easy to simplify and less 
prone to errors. Thirdly, subordinate, non-restrictive 
and restrictive relative clauses are treated, and only 
then the coordinate clauses are dealt with.  
As the rules were designed to treat each case 
individually, it is necessary to apply the operations 
in cascade, in order to complete the simplification 
process for each sentence. At each iteration, we (1) 
verify the phenomenon to be simplified following 
the standard order indicated above; (2) when a 
phenomenon is identified, its simplification is 
executed; and (3) the resulting simplified sentence 
goes through a new iteration. This process continues 
until there are no more phenomena. The cascade 
nature of the process is crucial because the 
simplified sentence presents a new syntactic 
structure and needs to be reparsed, so that the 
further simplification operations can be properly 
applied. However, this process consumes time and 
is considered the bottleneck of the system.  
3.4 Simplification evaluation 
We have so far evaluated the capacity of our rule-
based simplifier to identify the phenomena present 
in each sentence, and to recommend the correct 
simplification operation. We compared the 
operations recommended by the system with the 
ones performed manually by an annotator in a 
corpus of 104 news articles from the Zero Hora 
newspaper, which can be seen in our Portal of 
Parallel Corpora of Simplified Texts6. Table 2 
presents the number of occurrences of each 
simplification operation in this corpus. 
Simplification Operations # Sentences 
Non-simplification 2638 
Subject-verb-object ordering 44 
Transformation to active voice 154 
Inversion of clause ordering 265 
Splitting sentences 1103 
Table 2. Statistics on the simplification operations 
The performance of the system for this task is 
presented in Table 3 in terms of precision, recall, 
and F-measure for each simplification operation.  
Operation P R F 
Splitting sentences 64.07 82.63 72.17 
Inversion of clause ordering 15.40 18.91 16.97 
Transformation to active voice 44.29 44.00 44.14 
Subject-verb-object ordering 1.12 4.65 1.81 
ALL 51.64 65.19 57.62 
Non-simplification 64.69 53.58 58.61 
Table 3. Performance on defining simplification 
operations according to syntactic phenomena 
These results are preliminary, since we are still 
refining our rules. Most of the recall errors on the 
inversion of clause ordering are due to the absence 
of a few discourse markers in the list of markers that 
we use to identify such cases. The majority of recall 
errors on sentence splitting are due to mistakes on 
the output of the syntactic parser and to the number 
of ordering cases considered and implemented so 
far. The poor performance for subject-verb-object 
ordering, despite suffering from mistakes of the 
parser, indicates that our rules for this operation 
need to be refined. The same applies to inversion of 
clause ordering. 
We did not report performance scores related to 
the ?changing discourse marker? operation because 
in our evaluation corpus this operation is merged 
with other types of lexical substitution. However, in  
                                                 
6
 http://caravelas.icmc.usp.br/portal/index.php 
39
order to assess if the sentences were correctly 
simplified, it is necessary to do a manual evaluation, 
since it is not possible to automatically compare the 
output of the rule-based simplifier with the 
annotated corpus, as the sentences in the corpus 
have gone through operations that are not performed 
by the simplifier (such as lexical substitution). We 
are in the process of performing such manual 
evaluation. 
4 Simplifica editor: supporting authors 
We developed Simplifica7 (Figure 1), an authoring 
system to help writers to produce simplified texts. It 
employs the simplification technology described in 
the previous section. It is a web-based WYSIWYG 
editor, based on TinyMCE web editor8.  
The user inputs a text in the editor, customizes 
the simplification settings where one or more 
simplifications can be chosen to be applied in the 
text and click on the ?simplify? button. This triggers 
the syntactic simplification system, which returns an 
XML file containing the resulting text and tags 
indicating the performed simplification operations. 
After that, the simplified version of the text is 
shown to the user, and he/she can revise the 
automatic simplification. 
4.1 The XML representation of simplification 
operations 
Our simplification system generates an XML file 
                                                 
7
 http://www.nilc.icmc.usp.br/porsimples/simplifica/ 
8
 http://tinymce.moxiecode.com/ 
describing all simplification operations applied to a 
text. This file can be easily parsed using standard 
XML parsers. Table 5 presents the XML annotation 
to the ?gold piranhas? example in Section 3.2. 
  
<simplification type="passive"> 
<simplification type="appositive"> 
<simplification type="relative"> 
Gold piranhas have bitten more than 20 people. Gold 
piranhas live in the waters of the Sanchuri dam, next to 
the BR-720 highway, 40 km from the city. 
</simplification> 
Gold piranhas are Serrasalmus Spilopleura. 
</simplification> 
</simplification> 
Table 5. XML representation of a simplified text 
In our annotation, each sentence receives a 
<simplification> tag which describes the simplified 
phenomena (if any); sentences that did not need 
simplification are indicated with a <simplification 
type=?no?> tag. The other simplification types refer 
to the eighteen simplification cases presented in 
Table 1. Nested tags indicate multiple operations 
applied to the same sentence. 
4.2 Revising the automatic simplification 
Once the automatic simplification is done, a review 
screen shows the user the simplified text so that 
he/she can visualize all the modifications applied 
and approve or reject them, or select alternative 
simplifications. Figure 1 shows the reviewing screen 
and a message related to the simplification 
performed below the text simplified. 
The user can revise simplified sentences one at a 
time; the selected sentence is automatically 
highlighted. The user can accept or reject a 
 
Figure 1: Interface of the Simplifica system 
40
simplified sentence using the buttons below the text. 
In the beginning of the screen ?Mais op??es?, 
alternative simplifications for the sentence are 
shown: this facility gives the user the possibility to 
resolve cases known to be ambiguous (as detailed in 
Sections 2 and 3.2) for which the automatic 
simplification may have made a mistake. In the 
bottom of the same screen we can see the original 
sentence (?Senten?a original?) to which the 
highlighted sentence refers.  
For the example in Figure 1, the tool presents 
alternative simplifications containing different 
subjects, since selecting the correct noun phrase to 
which an appositive clause was originally linked 
(which becomes the subject of the new sentence) 
based on gender and number information was not 
possible.  
At the end of the process, the user returns to the 
initial screen and can freely continue editing the text 
or adding new information to it. 
5 Text Simplification for education 
Text simplification can be used in several 
applications. Journalists can use it to write simple 
and straightforward news texts. Government 
agencies can create more accessible texts to a large 
number of people. Authors of manuals and technical 
documents can also benefit from the simplification 
technology. Simplification techniques can also be 
used in an educational setting, for example, by a 
teacher who is creating simplified texts to students. 
Classic literature books, for example, can be quite 
hard even to experienced readers. Some genres of 
texts already have simplified versions, even though 
the simplification level can be inadequate to a 
specific target audience. For instance, 3rd and 7th 
grade students have distinct comprehension levels. 
In our approach, the number and type of 
simplification operations applied to sentences 
determine its appropriateness to a given literacy 
level, allowing the creation of multiple versions of 
the same text, with different levels of complexity, 
targeting special student needs. 
The Simplifica editor allows the teacher to adopt 
any particular texts to be used in the class, for 
example, the teacher may wish to talk about current 
news events with his/her students, which would not 
be available via any repository of simplified texts. 
The teacher can customize the text generating 
process and gradually increase the text complexity 
as his/her students comprehension skills evolve. The 
use of the editor also helps the teacher to develop a 
special awareness of the language, which can 
improve his/her interaction with the students.  
Students can also use the system whenever they 
have difficulties to understand a text given in the 
classroom. After a student reads the simplified text, 
the reading of the original text becomes easier, as a 
result of the comprehension of the simplified text. In 
this scenario, reading the original text can also help 
the students to learn new and more complex words 
and syntactic structures, which would be harder for 
them without reading of the simplified text. 
6 Conclusions 
The potentialities of text simplification systems for 
education are evident. For students, it is a first step 
for more effective learning. Under another 
perspective, given the Brazilian population literacy 
levels, we consider text simplification a necessity. 
For poor literacy people, we see text simplification 
as a first step towards social inclusion, facilitating 
and developing reading and writing skills for people 
to interact in society. The social impact of text 
simplification is undeniable. 
In terms of language technology, we not only 
introduced simplification tools in this paper, but also 
investigated which linguistic phenomena should be 
simplified and how to simplify them. We also 
developed a representation schema and designed an 
on-line authoring system. Although some aspects of 
the research are language dependent, most of what 
we propose may be adapted to other languages. 
Next steps in this research include practical 
applications of such technology and the 
measurement of its impact for both education and 
social inclusion. 
Acknowledgments 
We thank the Brazilian Science Foundation FAPESP 
and Microsoft Research for financial support. 
References 
Alu?sio, S.M., Specia, L., Pardo, T.A.S., Maziero, E.G., 
Fortes, R. 2008. Towards Brazilian Portuguese 
Automatic Text Simplification Systems. In the 
Proceedings of the 8th ACM Symposium on Document 
Engineering, pp. 240-248. 
Bick, E. 2000. The parsing system ?Palavras?: 
41
Automatic grammatical analysis of Portuguese in a 
constraint grammar framework. PhD Thesis 
University of ?rhus, Denmark. 
Burstein, J. 2009. Opportunities for Natural Language 
Processing Research in Education. In the  Proceedings 
of CICLing, pp. 6-27.  
Caseli, H., Pereira, T.F., Specia, L., Pardo, T.A.S., 
Gasperin, C., Aluisio, S. 2009. Building a Brazilian 
Portuguese Parallel Corpus of Original and Simplified 
Texts. In the Proceedings of CICLing. 
Caseli, H.M.; Nunes, M.G.V.; Forcada, M.L. 2008. 
Automatic induction of bilingual resources from 
aligned parallel corpora: application to shallow-
transfer machine translation. Machine Translation, V. 
1, p. 227-245. 
Devlin, S., Unthank, G. 2006. Helping aphasic people 
process online information. In the Proceedings of the 
ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and 
Accessibility, pp. 225-226. 
Graesser, A., McNamara, D. S., Louwerse, M., Cai, Z. 
2004. Coh-Metrix: Analysis of text on cohesion and 
language. Behavioral Research Methods, Instruments, 
and Computers, V. 36, pp. 193-202. 
Inui, K., Fujita, A., Takahashi, T., Iida, R., Iwakura, T. 
2003. Text Simplification for Reading Assistance: A 
Project Note. In the Proceedings of the Second 
International Workshop on Paraphrasing, 9 -16.  
Klebanov, B., Knight, K., Marcu, D. 2004. Text 
Simplification for Information-Seeking Applications. 
On the Move to Meaningful Internet Systems. LNCS, 
V.. 3290, pp. 735-747. 
Lal, P., Ruger, S. 2002. Extract-based summarization with 
simplification. In the Proceedings of DUC.  
Mapleson, D.L. 2006. Post-Grammatical Processing for 
Discourse Segmentation. PhD Thesis. School of 
Computing Sciences, University of East Anglia, 
Norwich. 
Max, A. 2005. Simplification interactive pour la 
production de textes adapt es aux personnes souffrant 
de troubles de la compr ehension. In the Proceedings 
of Traitement Automatique des Langues Naturelles 
(TALN).  
Max, A. 2006. Writing for language-impaired readers. In 
the  Proceedings of CICLing, pp. 567-570.  
Muniz, M.C., Laporte, E. Nunes, M.G.V. 2005. UNITEX-
PB, a set of flexible language resources for Brazilian 
Portuguese. In Anais do III Workshop em Tecnologia 
da Informa??o e da Linguagem Humana, V. 1, pp. 1-
10. 
Pardo, T.A.S.  and Nunes, M.G.V. 2008. On the 
Development and Evaluation of a Brazilian 
Portuguese Discourse Parser. Journal of Theoretical 
and Applied Computing, V. 15, N. 2, pp. 43-64. 
Petersen, S.E. 2007. Natural Language Processing Tools 
for Reading Level Assessment and Text Simplification 
for Bilingual Education. PhD Thesis, University of 
Washington.  
Petersen, S.E. and Ostendorf, M. 2007. Text 
Simplification for Language Learners: A Corpus 
Analysis. In the Proceedings of the Speech and 
Language Technology for Education Workshop, pp. 
69-72. 
Specia, L., Alu?sio, S.M., Pardo, T.A.S. 2008. Manual de 
simplifica??o sint?tica para o portugu?s. Technical 
Report NILC-TR-08-06, NILC. 
Siddharthan, A. 2002. An Architecture for a Text 
Simplification System. In the Proceedings of the 
Language Engineering Conference, pp. 64-71. 
Siddharthan, A. 2003. Syntactic Simplification and Text 
Cohesion. PhD Thesis. University of Cambridge. 
Snow, C. 2002. Reading for understanding: Toward an 
R&D program in reading comprehension. Santa 
Monica, CA. 
 
42
