Proceedings of the ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Conference Short Papers, pages 169?172,
Suntec, Singapore, 4 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Toward finer-grained sentiment identification in product reviews 
through linguistic and ontological analyses 
 
 
Hye-Jin Min 
Computer Science Department 
KAIST, Daejeon, KOREA 
hjmin@nlp.kiast.ac.kr 
Jong C. Park 
Computer Science Department 
KAIST, Daejeon, KOREA 
park@nlp.kaist.ac.kr 
 
  
 
Abstract 
 
We propose categories of finer-grained polari-
ty for a more effective aspect-based sentiment 
summary, and describe linguistic and ontolog-
ical clues that may affect such fine-grained po-
larity. We argue that relevance for satisfaction, 
contrastive weight clues, and certain adver-
bials work to affect the polarity, as evidenced 
by the statistical analysis. 
1 Introduction 
Sentiment analysis have been widely conducted 
in several domains such as movie reviews, prod-
uct reviews, news and blog reviews (Pang et al, 
2002; Turney, 2002). The unit of the sentiment 
varies from a document level to a sentence level 
to a phrase-level, where a more fine-grained ap-
proach has been receiving more attention for its 
accuracy. Sentiment analysis on product reviews 
identifies or summarizes sentiment from reviews 
by extracting relevant opinions about certain 
attributes of products such as their parts, or prop-
erties (Hu and Liu, 2004; Popescu and Etzioni, 
2005). Aspect-based sentiment analysis summa-
rizes sentiments with diverse attributes, so that 
customers may have to look more closely into 
analyzed sentiments (Titov and McDonald, 
2008). However, there are additional problems.  
First, it is rather hard to choose the right level 
of detail. If concepts corresponding to attributes 
are too general, the level of detail may not be so 
much finer than the ones on a document level. 
On the other hand, if concepts are too specific, 
there may be some attributes that are hardly men-
tioned in the reviews, resulting in the data 
sparseness problem. Second, there are cases 
when some crucial information is lost. For ex-
ample, suppose that two product attributes are 
mentioned in a sentence with a coordinated or 
subordinated structure. In this case, the informa-
tion about their relation may not be shown in the 
summary if they are classified into different up-
per-level attributes. Consider (1).  
 
(1) a. ?? ???/?? ??, ??? ?? 
????. osun macciman, sayksangi nemwu 
etwuweyo. ?It fits me okay, but the color is too 
dark.? (size: barely positive, color: negative)  
b. ???? ? ???, ?? ?? ?? 
??? ?? ???? ???. sayngkakpota 
com yalpciman, aney patchye ipnun kenikka 
nalum kwaynchanhunke kathayo. ?It?s a bit 
thinner than I thought, but it is good enough 
for layering.? (thickness: negative but accepta-
ble, overall: positive) 
 
Example (1) shows sample customer reviews 
about clothes, each first in Korean, followed by a 
Yale Romanized form, and an English translation. 
Note that the weight of the polarity in the senti-
ment about size e.g. in (1a) is overcome by the 
one about color. However, if the overall senti-
ment is computed by considering only the num-
ber of semantically identical phrases in the re-
views, it misses the big picture.  
In particular, when opinions regarding 
attributes are described with respect to expres-
sions whose polarities are dependent on the spe-
cific contexts such as the weather or user prefe-
rence, an overestimated or underestimated 
weight of the sentiment for each attribute may be 
assigned. In our example, ??/yalpta/?thin? has 
an ambiguous polarity, i.e., either positive or 
negative, whose real value depends on the ex-
pected utility of the clothes. In this case, the neg-
ative polarity is the intended one, as shown in 
(1b). In order to reflect this possibility, we need 
to adjust the weight of each polarity accordingly.   
In this paper, we propose to look into the kind 
of linguistic and ontological clues that may in-
169
fluence the use of polarities, or the relevance for 
?satisfaction of purchase? inspired by Kano?s 
theory of quality element classification (Huisko-
nen and Pirttila, 1998), the conceptual granulari-
ties, and such syntactic and lexical clues as con-
junction items and adverbs. They may play sig-
nificant roles in putting together the identified 
polarity information, so as to assess correctly 
what the customers consider most important. We 
conducted several one-way Analysis of Variance 
(ANOVA) tests to identify the effects of each 
clue on deriving categories of polarity and quan-
tification method 2 to see whether these clues 
can distinguish fine-grained polarities correctly.  
Section 2 introduces categories of polarity. 
Section 3 analyzes ontological and linguistic 
clues for identifying the proper category. Section 
4 describes our method to extract such clues for a 
statistical analysis. Section 5 discusses the results 
of the analysis and implications of the results. 
Section 6 concludes the paper. 
2 Categories of polarity 
We suggest two more fine-grained categories of 
polarity, or ?barely positive? (BP) and ?accepta-
bly negative? (AN), in addition to positive (P), 
negative (N) and neutral (NEU). We distinguish 
?barely positive? from normal positive and dis-
tinguish ?acceptably negative? from normal nega-
tive in order to derive finer-grained sentiments. 
Wilson and colleagues (2006) identified the 
strength of news articles in the MPQA corpus, 
where they separated intensity (low, medium, 
high) from categories (private states). For the 
purpose of identifying each attribute?s contribu-
tion to the satisfaction after purchase, we believe 
that it is not necessary to have so many degrees 
of intensity. We argue that the polarity of ?barely 
positive? may hold attributes that must be satis-
fied and that ?acceptably negative? may hold 
those that are somewhat optional.  
3 Linguistic and Ontological Analyses  
In this section, we discuss linguistic and ontolog-
ical clues that influence the process of identify-
ing finer-grained polarity. For the purpose of ex-
position, we build hierarchical and aspect-based 
review structure as shown in Figure 1. Major 
aspects include Price, Delivery, Service, and 
Product. If we go down another level, Product is 
divided into Quality and Comfortableness. In 
defining relevant attributes, we consider all the 
lower-level concepts of major aspects, which 
contain the characteristics of the product with a 
description of the associated sentiment. 
 
 
Figure 1. Review structure 
 
Relevance for Satisfaction: We consider re-
levant attributes that affect the quality and satis-
faction of the products as one of the important 
clues. Quality elements classified by Kano as 
shown in Table 1 can be base indicators of rele-
vant attributes for satisfaction in real review text. 
For example, while completeness of the product 
may become crucial if the product has a defect, it 
is usually not the case that it would contribute 
much to the overall satisfaction of the customer.  
 
Quality Elements  Example features 
Must-be Quality (MQ) Durability, Completeness
1-dimension Quality (1DQ) Design, Color, Material 
Attractive Quality (AQ) Luxurious look 
Table 1. Kano's Quality Elements  
 
Conceptual Granularity: The concepts cor-
responding to attributes have a different level of 
detail. If the customer wants to comment on 
some attributes in detail, she could use a fine-
grained concept (e.g., the width of the thigh part 
of the pants) rather than a coarse-grained one 
(e.g., just the size of the pants). To deal properly 
with the changing granularity of such concepts, 
we constructed a domain specific semi-
hierarchical network for clothes of the Clothing-
Type structure, in addition to the Review struc-
ture, by utilizing hierarchical category informa-
tion in online shopping malls.  Figure 2 shows an 
example for ?pants?.  
 
ClothingType
Bottom
Pants
Sub_f Sub_p
Thigh CalfWaistHip
Length+
Material+
Design:
Line+
Design:
Pattern*
Design:
Style*
Color
Size
Design:
Detail*
 
Figure 2. ClothingType structure for pants 
 
Syntactic and Lexical Clues: Descriptions of 
each attribute in the reviews are often expressed 
170
in a phrase or clause, so that conjunctions, or 
endings of a word with a conjunctive marker in 
Korean, play a significant role in connecting one 
attribute to another. They also convey a subtle 
meaning of the sentiment about relations be-
tween two or more connected attributes. We 
classified such syntactic clues into 4 groups of 
likeness (L), contrary (C), cause-effect (CE), and 
contrary with contrastive markers (CC).  
Wilson and colleagues (2006) selected some 
syntactic clues as features for intensity classifica-
tion. The selected features are shown to improve 
the accuracy, but the set of clues may vary to the 
nature of the given corpus, so that some other-
wise useful clues that reflect a particular focused 
structure may not be selected. We argue that 
some syntactic clues such as the use of certain 
conjunctions can be identified manually to make 
up for the limitation of feature selection.    
Adverbs modifying adjectives or verbs such as 
too, and very also strengthen the polarity of a 
given sentiment, so such clues work to differen-
tiate normal positive or negative from ?barely 
positive? and ?acceptably negative?. Table 2 
summarizes linguistic clues in the present analy-
sis. 
 
Clues  Examples 
CONJ/ 
END 
L -? -ko ?and? 
C -?? -ciman ?but?, 
??? kulena ?however? 
CE -?? -ese ?so?, ??? 
kulayse ?therefore? 
CC -? ??? -kin -ciman  ?It?s 
?, ?but?, ?though? 
ADV Strong ?? maywu ?very?, 
?? nemwu ?too?  
Mild ? com ?a little? 
Table 2. Syntactic and Lexical Clues 
 
All these three types of clue that appear in the 
review text may interact with one another. For 
example, attributes with ?barely positive? tend to 
be described with a concept on a coarse level, 
and may belong to Must-be Quality (e,g.,  size in 
(1a)). However, if such attributes are negative, 
customers may explain them with a very fine-
grained concept (e.g., the width of thigh is okay, 
but the calf part is too wide; interaction between 
relevance for satisfaction and conceptual granu-
larity). They may also use adverbs such as ?too? 
to emphasize such unexpected polarity informa-
tion. For emphasis, a contrastive structure can be 
used to indicate which attribute has a more 
weight (e.g., ?A but B?; interaction between syn-
tactic clues and relevance for satisfaction). In 
addition, an unfocused attribute A may be the 
attribute with ?acceptably negative? if the polari-
ty of the attribute B is positive. We believe that 
the interaction between lexical and syntactic 
clues and relevance for satisfaction are the most 
important and that this correlation information 
may be utilized with such fine-grained polarity 
as ?barely positive? or ?acceptably negative?.  
4 Clue Acquisition 
We acquired data semi-automatically for each 
clue from the extracted attributes and their de-
scriptions from 500 product reviews of several 
types of pants and annotated polarities manually. 
We obtained raw text reviews from one of the 
major online shopping malls in Korea1 and per-
formed a morphology analysis and POS-tagging. 
After POS-tagging, we collected all the noun 
phrases as candidates of attributes. We regarded 
some of them as attributes with the following 
guidelines and filtered out the rest: 1) NP with 
frequent adjectives 2) NP with frequent non-
functional and intransitive verbs. In the case of 
subject omission, we converted adjectives or 
verbs into their corresponding nouns, such as 
?thin? into ?thickness?. Hu and Liu (2004) identi-
fied attributes of IT products based on frequent 
noun phrases and Popescu and Etzioni (2005) 
utilized PMI values between product class (ho-
tels and scanners) and some phrases including 
product. In our case, we used attributes that be-
long only to the Product concept in the Review 
structure, because most attributes we consider 
are sub-types or sub-attribute of Product. The 
total number of <attribute, polarity> pairs is 474. 
For relevance for satisfaction, we converted 
extracted attributes into one of the types of Ka-
no?s quality elements by the mapping table we 
built. For conceptual granularity we regarded all 
the attributes with a depth less than 2 as ?coarse? 
and those more than 2 as ?fine?. Syntactic and 
lexical clues are identified from the context in-
formation around extracted adjective or verbs by 
the patterns based on POS information. 
5 Statistical Analysis and Discussion 
We conducted one-way Analysis of Variance 
(ANOVA) tests using relevance for satisfaction 
(ReV), conceptual granularity (Granul), and two 
linguistic clues, ADV and CONJ/END, in order 
to assess the effects of each clue on identifying 
categories of polarity. The ANOVA suggests 
                                                 
1 http://www.11st.co.kr 
171
reliable effects of ReV (F(2,474) = 22.2; p 
= .000), ADV (F(2, 474) = 41.3; p = .000), and 
CONJ/END (F(3, 474) = 6.1; p = .000).  We also 
performed post-hoc tests to test significant dif-
ferences. For ReV, there are significant differ-
ences between ?MQ? and ?1DQ? (p=.000), and 
between ?MQ? and ?AQ? (p =.032). AQ is related 
to ?positive? and MQ to ?acceptably negative? by 
the result. For ADV, there are significant differ-
ences between all pairs (p <.05). For CONJ/END, 
there are significant differences between ?like-
ness? and ?contrary? (p = .015), and between 
?likeness? and ?contrary with contrastive mark-
ers? (p = .025).  The ?contrary? and ?contrary 
with contrastive markers? types of conjunctions 
are related to ?acceptably negative?.  
We also conducted Quantification method 2 to 
see if these clues can discriminate between BP 
and P and discriminate between AN and N. The 
regression equation for distinguishing AN from 
N is statistically significant at the 5% level 
(F(7,177) = 12,2; R2=0.335; Std. error of the es-
timate =  0.821; error rate for discriminant = 
0.21). The coefficients for ?mild? (t2=30.8), ?con-
trary? (t2=17.8) and ?contrary with contrastive 
markers? (t2=14.1) are significant.  
The results lead us to conclude that we can 
identify ?acceptably negative? from the clothes 
reviews by extracting the particular lexical clue, 
adverbs of ?mild? category and syntactic clue, 
such as conjunctions of ?contrary?, and ?contrary 
with contrastive markers?, or contrastive weight. 
This clue may convey the customer?s argumenta-
tive intention toward the product, or argumenta-
tive orientation, for instance, A and B in ?A but B. 
C? have different influence on the following dis-
course C (Elhadad and McKeown, 1990). 
Although ?contrary with contrastive markers? 
plays an important role in identifying ?acceptably 
negative?, it could also be used to identify anoth-
er type of ?positive? as shown in  example (2).  
 
(2) ? ???? ??? ???. ??? 
???? ???. com twukkeptanun sayng-
kaki tupnita. kulayto ttattushakin haneyyo. ?It 
is a bit thick, but it keeps me warm.? 
 
It is a positive feature, but neither fully positive 
nor barely positive. It seems to be somewhere in-
between. The order of appearance in reviews 
may also affect the strength of polarity.  In addi-
tion, particular cue phrases such as ~?? 
??/kesman ppayko/?except that ?? can also 
convey ?acceptably negative?, too.  
  In the future, we need to assess the importance 
of each proposed clue relative to others and to 
the existing ones. We also need to investigate the 
nature of interactions among linguistic, ontologi-
cal and relevance for satisfaction clues, which 
may influence the actual performance for identi-
fying finer-grained polarity.  
6 Conclusion and Future Work 
We proposed further categories of polarity in 
order to make aspect-based sentiment summary 
more effective. Our linguistic and ontological 
analyses suggest that there are clues, such as ?re-
levance for satisfaction?, ?contrastive weight? and 
certain adverbials, that work to affect polarity in 
a more subtle but crucial manner, as evidenced 
also by the statistical analysis.  We plan to find 
out product attributes that contribute most to 
modeling the interaction among the proposed 
clues in effective sentiment summarization. 
 
Acknowledgments 
This work was funded in part by the Intelligent 
Robotics Development Program, a 21st Century 
Frontier R&D Program by the Ministry of 
Knowledge Economy in Korea, and in part by 
the 2nd stage of the Brain Korea 21 project. 
References  
Ana-Maria Popescu and Oren Etzioni 2005. Extract-
ing Product Features and Opinions from Reviews. 
Proc. HLT/EMNLP 2005, 339-346. 
Bo Pang, Lillian Lee, and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan. 
2002. Thumbs up? Sentiment classification using 
machine learning techniques. Proc. EMNLP. 
Ivan Titov and Ryan McDonald  2008. A Joint Model 
of Text and Aspect Ratings for Sentiment Summari-
zation. Proc.  ACL-08: HLT, 308-316. 
Janne Huiskonen and Timo Pirttila. 1998. Sharpening 
logistic customer service strategy planning by ap-
plying Kano?s quality element classification. Inter-
national Journal of Producion Economics, 56-57, 
253-260, Elsevier Science B.V. 
Michael Elhadad and Kathleen R. McKeown. 1990. 
Generating Connectives. Proc. COLING?97-101. 
Minqing Hu and Bing Liu. 2004. Mining and summa-
rizing customer reviews. Proc. ACM SIGKDD, 
168?177. ACM Press. 
Peter D. Turney. 2002. Thumbs up or thumbs down? 
Sentiment orientation applied to unsupervised 
classification of reviews. Proc. ACL, 417-424. 
Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Rebecca Hwa. 
2006. Recognizing Strong and Weak Opinion 
Clauses. Computational Linguistics, 22 (2): 73-99. 
172
