Proceedings of the EACL 2009 Workshop on Language Technologies for African Languages ? AfLaT 2009, pages 74?80,
Athens, Greece, 31 March 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Interlinear glossing and its role in theoretical and descriptive studies of
African and other lesser-documented languages
Dorothee Beermann
Norwegian University of Science
and Technology
Trondheim, Norway
dorothee.beermann@hf.ntnu.no
Pavel Mihaylov
Ontotext,
Sofia, Bulgaria
pavel@ontotext.com
Abstract
In a manuscript William Labov (1987)
states that although linguistics is a field
with a long historical tradition and with
a high degree of consensus on basic cat-
egories, it experiences a fundamental de-
vision concerning the role that quantita-
tive methods should play as part of the
research progress. Linguists differ in the
role they assign to the use of natural lan-
guage examples in linguistic research and
in the publication of its results. In this pa-
per we suggest that the general availabil-
ity of richly annotated, multi-lingual data
directly suited for scientific publications
could have a positive impact on the way
we think about language, and how we ap-
proach linguistics.We encourage the sys-
tematic generation of linguistic data be-
yond what emerges from fieldwork and
other descriptive studies and introduce an
online glossing tool for textual data anno-
tation. We argue that the availability of
such an online tool will facilitate the gen-
eration of in-depth annotated linguistic ex-
amples as part of linguistic research. This
in turn will allow the build-up of linguis-
tic resources which can be used indepen-
dent of the research focus and of the the-
oretical framework applied. The tool we
would like to present is a non-expert-user
system designed in particular for the work
with lesser documented languages. It has
been used for the documentation of several
African languages, and has served for two
projects involving universities in Africa.
1 Introduction
The role that digital tools play in all fields of mod-
ern linguistics can not be underestimated. This is
partially due to the success of computational lin-
guistics and its involvement in fields such as lex-
icography, corpus linguistics and syntactic pars-
ing, to just name some. Most crucially however
this development is due to the success of IT in
general and in particular to the World Wide Web
which has created new standards also for linguis-
tic research. Through the internet our perception
of ?data? and publication of linguistic results has
changed drastically only in a matter of a few years.
Although the development of language resources
and language technology for African languages is
increasing steadily, the digital revolution and the
resources and possibilities it offers to linguistics
are mostly seized by researchers in the First World
connected to work centering around the key lan-
guages. For this paper we would like to con-
ceive of this situation in terms of lost opportuni-
ties: At present formal linguistics and linguistic
research conducted on Third World languages are
mostly undertaken with very little knowledge of
each other and hardly any exchange of research
results. Likewise, language documentation, which
has roots in language typology and computational
linguistics, only partially coincides with work in
African linguistics. Yet, it is evident that the
general availability of linguistic material from a
bigger sample of languages will eventually not
only affect the way in which we think about lan-
guage, but also might have an impact on linguistic
methodology and on the way we go about linguis-
tic research. If you are only a few mouse clicks
away from showing that a certain generalization
only holds for a limited set of languages, but truly
fails to describe a given phenomenon for a wider
sample, statements claiming linguistic generality
have to be phrased much more carefully. Our per-
ception of the nature of language could truly ben-
efit from general access to representative multi-
lingual data. It therefore would seem a linguistic
goal in itself to (a) work towards a more general
74
and more straightforward access to linguistic re-
sources, (b) encourage the systematic generation
of linguistic data beyond what emerges from field-
work and other descriptive studies and (c) advo-
cate the generation of a multi-lingual data pool for
linguistic research.
2 Annotation tools in linguistic research
It is well known that the generation of natural lan-
guage examples enriched by linguistic informa-
tion in the form of symbols is a time consuming
enterprise quite independent of the form that the
raw material has and the tools that were chosen.
Equally well known are problems connected to
the generation and storage of linguistic data in the
form of standard document files or spread sheets
(Bird and Simons 2003). Although it is generally
agreed on that linguistic resources must be kept in
a sustainable and portable format, it remains less
clear, how a tool should look that would help the
linguist to accomplish these goals. For the individ-
ual researcher it is not easy to decide which of the
available tools serve his purpose best. To start with
it is often not clear which direction research will
take, which categories of data are needed and in
which form the material should be organized and
stored. But perhaps even more importantly most
tools turn out to be so complex that the goal of
mastering them becomes an issue in its own right.
Researchers that work together with communities
that speak an endangered or lesser documented
language experience that digital tools used for lan-
guage documentation can be technically too de-
manding.Training periods for annotators become
necessary together with technical help and main-
tenance by experts which not necessarily are lin-
guists themselves. In this way tool management
develops into an issue in itself taking away re-
sources from the original task at hand - the lin-
guistic analysis.Linguists too often experience that
some unlucky decision concerning technical tools
gets data locked in systems which cannot be ac-
cessed anymore after a project, and the technical
support coming along with it,has run out of fund-
ing.
2.1 TypeCraft an overview
In the following we would like to introduce a lin-
guistic tool for text annotation called TypeCraft,
which we have created through combining several
well-understood tools of knowledge management.
Needless to say, TypeCraft will not solve all the
problems mentioned above, yet it has some new
features that make data annotation an easier task
while adding discernibility and general efficiency.
That one can import example sentences directly
into research papers is one of these features. In
addition TypeCraft is a collaboration and knowl-
edge sharing tool, and, combined with database
functionality, it offers some of the most important
functions we expect to see in a digital language
documentation tool.
In the following we will address glossing and il-
lustrate present day glossing standards with exam-
ples from Akan, a Kwa language spoken in Ghana,
to then turn to a more detailed description of Type-
Craft. However, a brief overview over the main
features of TypeCraft seems in order at this point.
TypeCraft is a relational database for natural
language text combined with a tabular text editor
for interlinearized glossing, wrapped into a wiki
which is used as a collaborative tool and for on-
line publication. The system, which has at present
50 users and a repository of approximately 4000
annotated phrases, is still young. Table 1 gives a
first overview of TypeCraft?s main functionalities.
3 Glossing
The use of glosses in the representation of primary
data became a standard for linguistic publications
as late as in the 1980s (Lehmann, 2004) where
interlinear glosses for sample sentences started
to be required for all language examples except
those coming from English. However, the use of
glossed examples in written research was, and still
is, not accompanied by a common understanding
of its function, neither concerning its role in re-
search papers nor its role in research itself. It
seems that glosses, when occurring in publica-
tions, are mostly seen as a convenience to the
reader. Quite commonly information essential to
the understanding of examples is given in sur-
rounding prose, and often without any appropriate
reflection in the glosses themselves.
Let us look at a couple of examples with in-
terlinear glosses taken at random from the list
of texts containing Akan examples. These ex-
amples are taken from the online database Odin
at Fresno State University. The Odin database
(http:/www.csufresno.edu/odin/) is a repository of
interlinear glossed texts which have been extracted
mainly from linguistic papers. The database it-
75
Annotation Collaboration Data Migration
tabular interface for word level
glossing - automatic sentence
break-up
individual work spaces for users
that would like to keep data pri-
vate
manual import of text and indi-
vidual sentence
drop down reference list of lin-
guistic symbols
data sharing for predefined
groups such a research collabo-
rations
export of annotated sentence to-
kens (individual tokens or sets)
to Microsoft Word, Open Office
and LaTEX
word and morpheme deletion
and insertion
data export from the TypeCraft
database to the TypeCraft wiki
export of XML (embedded
DTD) for further processing of
data
lazy annotation mode (sentence
parsing)
access to tag sets and help pages
from the TypeCraft wiki
customized sets of sentence
level tags for the annotation of
construction level properties
access to information laid out by
other annotators or projects.
Table 1: Overview over TypeCraft Functionalities
self consists of a list of URLs ordered by language
leading the user to the texts of interest.
3.1 The glossing of Akan - an example
Akan is one of the Kwa languages spoken in
Ghana. The first example from the Odin database,
here given as (1), comes from a paper by (Haspel-
math, 2001)
(1) A?ma?
Ama
ma`a`
give
me`
1SG
s?`ka?.
money
?Ama gave me money. ?
The second example is extracted from a paper
by (Ameka, 2001):
(2) A?ma?
Ama
de`
take
s?`ka?
money
no?
the
ma?a?
give
me`.
1SG
?Ama gave me the money?
(Lit: ?Ame took money gave me?)
The third example is quoted in a manuscript by
(Wunderlich, 2003):
(3) O-fEmm
3sg-lent
me
1sg
ne
3sgP
pOflnkono.
horse that
?He lent me a horse?
and the forth one comes from a manuscript by
(Drubig, 2000) who writes about focus construc-
tions:
(4) Hena
who
na
FOC
Ama
Ama
rehwehwE?
is-looking-for?
?Who is it that Ama is looking for??
Except for Ameka, the authors quote Akan ex-
amples which are excerpted from the linguistic lit-
erature. Often examples coming from African lan-
guages have a long citation history and their val-
idation is in most cases nearly impossible. When
we compare (1) ? (4) we notice a certain incon-
sistency for the annotation of no? which is glossed
as ?the? (1), ?that? (3) and as DEF (2) respec-
tively. This difference could indicate that Akan
does not make a lexical distinction between defi-
niteness and deixis, most likely however we sim-
ply observe a ?glossing figment?. The general lack
of part of speech information in all examples eas-
ily leads us astray; should we for example assume
that na in example (4) is a relative pronoun? The
general lack of proper word level glossing makes
the data for other linguists quite useless, in par-
ticular if they are not themselves native speakers
or experts in exactly this language.Ma`a` is a past
form, but that tense marking is derived by suffixa-
tion is only indicated in (2) via a hyphen between
the translational gloss and the PAST tag. Like-
wise rehwehwEin(4)is a progressive form, yet the
lack of morpheme boundaries, and consistent an-
notation prevents that these and similarly glossed
serve as a general linguistic resource. Purely trans-
lational glosses might be adequate for text strings
which serve as mere illustrations; however, for lin-
guistic data,that is those examples that are (a) ei-
ther crucial for the evaluation of the theoretical
developxment reported on, or (b) portray linguis-
tic pattern of general interest, to provide morpho-
76
syntactic and morpho-functional as well as part of
speech information would seem best practice.
It seems that linguists underestimate the role
that glossing, if done properly,could play as part of
linguist research. Symbolic rewriting and formal-
grammar development are two distinct modes of
linguistic research. Yet there is no verdict that
forces us to express descriptive generalizations ex-
clusively by evoking a formal apparatus of consid-
erable depth. Instead given simplicity and parsi-
mony of expression it might well be that symbolic
rewriting serves better for some research purposes
than theoretical modeling. One can not replace
one by the other. Yet which form of linguistic
rendering is the best in a given situation should
be a matter of methodological choice. Essential
is that we realize that we have a choice. Sizing
the opportunity that lies in the application of sym-
bolic rewriting, of which interlinear glossing is
one form, could make us realize that the genera-
tion of true linguistic resources is not exclusively
a matter best left to computational linguists.
4 A short description of TypeCraft
Typecraft is an interlinear ?glosser? designed for
the annotation of natural language phrases and
small corpora. The TypeCraft wiki serves as an
access point to the TypeCraft database. We use
standard wiki functionality to direct the TypeCraft
user from the index page of the TypeCraft wiki to
the TC interface of the database, called My Texts.
My Texts is illustrated in Figure 1.The interface
is taken from a user that not only possesses pri-
vate data (Own texts), but who also shares data
with other users (Shared Texts). At present shar-
ing of text is a feature set by the database admin-
istrator, but in the near future the user will be able
to choose from the TypeCraft user list the peo-
ple with whom he wants to share his data. Note
that data is stored as texts which consist of anno-
tated tokens, standardly sentences. ?Text? in Type-
Craft does not necessarily entail coherent text, but
may also refer to any collection of individual to-
kens that the user has grouped together. A Type-
Craft user can publish his data online; yet his own
texts are by default ?private?, that is, only he as the
owner of the material can see the data and change
it. To share data within the system or online is a
function that can be selected by the user.
Different from Toolbox, which is a linguistic
data management system known to many African-
ists, TypeCraft is a relational database and there-
fore by nature has many advantages over file
based systems like Toolbox. This concerns both,
data integrity and data migration. In addition
databases in general offer a greater flexibility for
data search.For example, it is not only possible
to extract all serial verb constructions for all (or
some) languages known to TypeCraft, it is also
possible to use the gloss index to find all se-
rial verb constructions where a verb receives a
marking specific to the second verb in an SVC.
The other mayor difference between Toolbox and
TypeCraft is that TypeCraft is an online system
which brings many advantages, but also some dis-
advantages. An online database is a multi-user
system, that is, many people can access the same
data at the same time independent of were they
physically are. Distributive applications are effi-
cient tools for international research collaboration.
TypeCraft is designed to allow data sharing and
collaboration during the process of annotation. Yet
although there are many advantages to an online
tool, to be only online is at the same time a major
disadvantage. Not all linguists work with a stable
internet connection, and in particular for work in
the field TypeCraft is not suitable.
TypeCraft uses Unicode, so that every script
that the user can produce on his or her PC can
be entered into the browser,1 which for Type-
Craft must be Mozilla Firefox. Different from
Toolbox TypeCraft insists on a set of linguistic
glosses, reflecting standards advocated for exam-
ple by the Leipzig Convention distributed by the
Max Planck Institute for Evaluationary Anthro-
pology or an initiative such a GOLD (Farrar and
Lewis, 2005).Yet, TypeCraft still allows a user-
driven flexibility when it comes to the extension
of the tag-set, as explained in the next section.
5 Glossing with TypeCraft
TypeCraft supports word-to-word glossing on
eight tiers as shown in Figure 2. After having
imported a text and run it through the sentence
splitter, a process that we will not describe here,
the user can select via mouse click one of the
phrases and enter the annotation mode. The sys-
tem prompts the user for the Lazy Annotation
Mode (in Toolbox called sentence parsing) which
will automatically insert (on a first choice ba-
1Note however that self-defined characters or characters
that are not Unicode will also cause problems in TypeCraft
77
Figure 1: My texts in TypeCraft
sis) the annotation of already known words into
the annotation table. TypeCraft distinguishes be-
tween translational, functional and part-of-speech
glosses. They are visible to the annotator as dis-
tinct tiers called Meaning, Gloss and POS. Ev-
ery TypeCraft phrase, which can be either a lin-
guistic phrase or a sentence, is accompanied by
a free translation. In addition the specification
of construction parameters is possible. Although
the user is restricted to a set of pre-defined tags,
the TypeCraft glossery is negogiable. User dis-
cussion on the TCwiki, for example in the context
of project work, or by individual users, has led to
an extension of the TypeCraft tag set. Although
TypeCraft endorses standardization, the system is
user-driven. Glosses are often rooted in traditional
grammatical terminology, which we would like
to set in relation to modern linguistic terminol-
ogy. The TCwiki is an adaquate forum to discuss
these traditions and to arrive at a annotation stan-
dard which is supported by the users of the sys-
tem. Under annotation the user has access a drop-
down menu, showing standard annotation sym-
bols. These symbols together with short explana-
tions can also be accessed from the TypeCraft wiki
so that they can be kept open in tabs during annota-
tion. In Figure 2 we also see the effect of ?mousing
over? symbols, which displays their ?long-names?.
Some symbols have been ordered in classes. In
Figure 2 we see for example that the feature past
is a subtype of the feature Tense. This classifica-
tion will in the future also inform search. Further
features of the annotation interface that we cannot
describe here are the easy representation of non-
Latin scripts, deletion and insertion of words and
morphemes during annotation, the accessibility of
several phrases under annotation and the grouping
of tokens into texts.
6 Data Migration
Export of data to the main text editors is one of
the central functions of TypeCraft. TC tokens can
be exported to Microsoft Word, OpenOffice.org
Writer and LaTeX. This way the user can store his
data in a database, and when the need arises, he
can integrate it into his research papers. Although
annotating in TypeCraft is time consuming, even
in Lazy Annotation Mode, the resusablity of data
stored in TypeCraft will on the long run pay off.
Export can be selected from the text editing win-
dow or from the SEARCH interface.After import
the examples can still be edited in case small ajust-
ments are necessery.Example (5) is an example ex-
ported from TypeCraft.
(5)
Omu nju hakataahamu abagyenyi
o`mu` nju` ha`ka`ta`a`ha`mu` a`ba`gye?ngy?`
Omu
in
n ju
CL9 house
ha ka taah a mu
CL16 PST enter IND LOC
a ba gyenyi
IV CL2 visitor
PREP N V N
?In the house entered visitors?
(5) illustrates locative inversion in Runyakitara,
a Bantu language spoken in Uganda. The trans-
lational and functional glosses, which belong to
two distinct tiers in the TypeCraft annotation inter-
face, appear as one line when imported to one of
the word processing programs supported by Type-
78
Figure 2: Glossing in TypeCrat
Craft. Although glossing on several tiers is con-
ceptually more appropriate, linguistic publications
require a more condensed format. As for now we
have decided on an export which displays 6 tiers.
Next to export to the main editors, TypeCraft al-
lows XML export which allows the exchange of
data with other applications. Figure 3 gives an
overview over the top 15 languages in TypeCraft.
In January 2009 Lule Sami with 2497 phrases
and Runyakitara (Runyankore Rukiga)with 439
phrases were the top two languages. At present
the database contains approximately 4000 from 30
languages.Most of the smaller language (with 300
t0 40 sentences) are African languages.
7 Conclusion
In this paper we suggest that the general availabil-
ity of richly annotated, multi-lingual data directly
suited for scientific publication could have a pos-
itive impact on the way we think about language,
and how we approach linguistics. We stress the
opportunity that lies in the application of sym-
bolic rewriting, of which interlinear glossing is
one form, and encourage the systematic generation
of linguistic data beyond what emerges from field-
work and other descriptive studies. With Type-
Craft we introduce an online glossing tool for tex-
tual data which has two main goals (a) to allow
linguists to gloss their data without having to learn
how to install software and without having to un-
dergo a long training period before the can use
the tool and (b) to make linguistically annotated
Lule Sami (2497)Runyankore-Rukiga (439)Norwegian (411)Akan (314)Nyanja (192)Ganda (114)German (94)Sekpele (87)Abron (77)Bini (71)Koyraboro Senni Songhai (64)Tumbuka (64)English (60)Icelandic (56)Ga (55)
Figure 3: Top 15 TypeCraft languages by number
of phrases
data available to a bigger research community. We
hope that the use of this tool will add to the stan-
dardization of language annotation. We further
hope that TypeCraft will be used as a forum for
linguistic projects that draw attention to the lesser-
studied languages of the World.
79
References
Felix K. Ameka. 2001. Multiverb constructions in
a west african areal typological perspective. In
Dorothee Beermann and Lars Hellan, editors, On-
line Proceedings of TROSS ? Trondheim Summer
School 2001.
Hans Bernhard Drubig. 2000. Towards a typology of
focus and focus constructions. In Manuscript, Uni-
versity of Tu?bingen, Germany.
Scott Farrar and William D. Lewis. 2005. The gold
community of practice: An infrastructure for lin-
guistic data on the web. In In Proceedings of the
EMELD 2005 Workshop on Digital Language Doc-
umentation: Linguistic Ontologies and Data Cate-
gories for Language Resources.
Martin Haspelmath. 2001. Explaining the ditransi-
tive person-role constraint: A usage-based approach.
In Manuscript Max-Planck-Institut fu?r evolutiona?re
Anthropologie.
William Labov. 1987. Some observations on the foun-
dation of linguistics. In Unpublished manuscript,
University of Pennsylvania, USA.
Christian Lehmann, 2004. Morphologie: Ein Inter-
nationales Handbuch zur Flexion und Wortbildung,
chapter Interlinear morphological glossing. DeGry-
ter Berlin-New York.
Dieter Wunderlich. 2003. Was geschieht mit dem
dritten argument? In Manuscript University of
Du?sseldorf, Germany.
80
Coling 2010: Demonstration Volume, pages 49?52,
Beijing, August 2010
Cloud Computing for Linguists
Dorothee Beermann
Norwegian University of Science and Technology
dorothee.beermann@hf.ntnu.no pavel@ontotext.com
Pavel Mihaylov
Ontotext
Abstract
The system presented is a web applica-
tion designed to aid linguistic research
with data collection and online publish-
ing. It is a service mainly for linguists
and language experts working with lan-
guage description of less-documented and
less-resourced languages. When the cen-
tral concern is in-depth linguistic analy-
sis, maintaining and administering soft-
ware can be a burden. Cloud computing
offers an alternative. At present mainly
used for archiving, we extend linguistic
web applications to allow creation, search
and storage of interlinear annotated texts.
By combining a conceptually appealing
online glosser with an SQL database and
a wiki, we make the online publication of
linguistic data an easy task also for non-
computationally oriented researchers.
1 General description of TypeCraft
TypeCraft (or TC in short) is a multilingual on-
line database of linguistically-annotated natural
language texts, embedded in a collaboration and
information tool. It is an online service which al-
lows users (projects as well as individuals) to cre-
ate, store and retrieve structured data of the kind
mainly used in natural language research. In a
system featuring graded access the user may cre-
ate his own domain, invite others, as well as share
his data with the public. The kernel of TypeCraft
is morphological word level annotation in a rela-
tional database setting, wrapped into a wiki which
is used as a communication and information gath-
ering and sharing tool. TypeCraft allows the im-
port of raw text for storage and annotation and
export of annotated data to MS Word, OpenOf-
fice.org, LATEX and XML. The online system is
complemented by an offline client which is a Java
application offering the same functionality as the
online version. This allows a seamless exchange
of data between the server and the user?s own
computer.
2 Online system internals
The online system is supported by a central server
running the following modules: TypeCraft server
proper, an SQL database, Apache, MediaWiki.
The client side consists of the TypeCraft editor in-
terface and a wiki environment (content produced
by MediaWiki on the server). Users perceive the
wiki and the editor interface as a single TypeCraft
web application.
The TypeCraft server proper is a Java appli-
cation running inside a Java application server.
TypeCraft uses a PostgreSQL database for data
storage. The data mapping between Java ob-
jects and database tables is managed by Hibernate,
so the system is not bound to any specific SQL
database. TypeCraft data can be divided into two
distinct groups: common data, shared between all
annotated tokens and users, such as the word and
sentence level tag sets and an ISO 639-3 speci-
fication, and individual data, by which we mean
specific texts, phrases, words and morphemes. In-
dividual data references common data types. This
for example means that all users of the system
making use of the part of speech tag N share the
reference to a single common tag N.
3 Digital linguistic data
It is well known that generation of linguistic an-
notation of any kind is a time consuming enter-
prise quite independent of the form the primary
data has and the tools chosen for processing this
data. Equally well known are problems connected
to the generation and storage of linguistic data.
49
Standard word processing programs do not func-
tion well as linguistic tools and private computers
are not a safe place to store linguistic resources
(Bird and Simons, 2003). Although it is generally
agreed that linguistic resources should be kept in
a sustainable and portable format, it is less clear
what that really means in practice. For the indi-
vidual researcher it is not easy to decide which
of the available tools serve his purpose best. To
start with, it is often unclear which direction the
research will take, which categories of data are
needed and in which form the material should be
organised and stored. We experience that it is too
time consuming or requires expert knowledge to
convert otherwise useful data into an acceptable
?resource format?. It is perhaps even more impor-
tant that many tools turn out to be so complex that
the goal of mastering them becomes an issue in
its own right. Researchers working together with
local communities on less-documented languages
experience that linguistic software can be techni-
cally too demanding.
In fact, researchers in all non-computational fields
of linguistics encounter problems similar to those
just described for field-oriented research. Con-
cerned with timely publication, for which lin-
guistic data mainly takes the form of Interlinear
Glosses (IG), the efficiency with which linguistic
data can be created is an important issue. Sev-
eral factors will affect which form linguistic data
management will take, namely the standardisation
of data beyond the field of NLP, non-expert user
IT solutions allowing the efficient creation of lin-
guistic data, and finally, improved availability of
linguistic data for human consumption in research
and publication.
4 Linguistic services and public
linguistic data
Within linguistics the idea of cloud computing is
relatively new: the basic concept is that users of
digital technology no longer need to maintain the
software they use, instead the maintenance of the
technological infrastructure is left to services on-
line. Already a success in commercial applica-
tions, IT services have also become a reality in
research. Within linguistics and specifically lan-
guage documentation, cloud computing facilities
are at present mainly restricted to online archives.
Yet, online services can be extended to provide
tools for databasing and annotation of data. Sci-
entific data exchange is an issue in biochemistry
(Leser, 2009), but as far as we know it has not
been an issue in linguistics. The question is not
so much why we should share data but rather how
and what. The linguistic tool that we would like
to demonstrate gives a concrete answer to these
questions. Table 1 presents a short overview of
the main functionalities of the TypeCraft web ap-
plication.
5 Creation, storage, migration and
representation of IGs in TypeCraft
The TypeCraft web application can be used on-
line at http://www.typecraft.org/. The
TC wiki serves as the central hub of the applica-
tion. The TC database is accessed through My
Texts which displays the user?s repository of IG
collections, called Texts. My Texts is illustrated in
Figure 1. Graded access is one of the design prop-
erties of TypeCraft. My Texts has two sections
consisting of private data (data readable only be
the user), and shared data. Shared data are Texts
owned by groups of TC users. After being as-
signed to a group, the user can decide which data
to share with which of his groups. Data can also
be made public so that anyone on the net can read
and export (but not edit) it.
TypeCraft is like the well known Linguist?s
Toolbox (International, 2010) an interlinear
glosser. However, different from Toolbox, Type-
Craft is a relational database and therefore by na-
ture has many advantages over file-based systems
like Toolbox; this not only concerns data integrity
but also data migration. In addition, databases in
general offer greater flexibility for search and re-
trieval. The other major difference between Tool-
box and TypeCraft is that TypeCraft is an online
service which frees the users from all the prob-
lems arising from maintaining an application on
their own computer. Online databases like Type-
Craft are multiuser systems, i.e. many people can
access the same data at the same time indepen-
dently of where they are located. Users adminis-
ter their own data, either in a private domain or
publicly, and they can make use of other users?
50
Table 1: Overview over TypeCraft Functionalities
Annotation Collaboration Data Migration
sentence tokenisation graded access manual text import
interactive table cells tool internal user commu-
nication
export of annotated
phrases to MS Word,
OpenOffice.org and LATEXLazy Annotation Mode user pages for background
information
XML semi-automatic ex-
port to the TC wiki
extensive search function-
ality
sharing of data sets be-
tween user groups
automatic update of data
exported to the TC wiki
Figure 1: My texts in TypeCraft
data. Sharing information and data is an issue of
mutual interest. Using standard wiki functional-
ity, users discuss annotation issues. A TC inter-
nal email function allows users to communicate
directly within the application. User pages func-
tion to personalise information and to create a TC
user community. Social networking within a sci-
entific tool plays a crucial role for the improve-
ment of data validity. Information given by an-
notators, such as native language and professional
background, increase the trust in TC data.
The TC wiki features interactive Google maps (a
MediaWiki extension) which can be used to lo-
cate a language geographically. Isoglosses can be
shown on the map too.
It is not always possible to work online. The
TC online database is complemented by the TC
offline client which can be downloaded from the
project website for free. As a Java application it
runs on multiple platforms, and allows the user
to work offline in an environment familiar to him
from the web application. The offline client offers
the same functionality as the online service. The
user can import data either locally or from the cen-
tral TC database.
6 Glossing with TypeCraft
TypeCraft supports word-to-word glossing on
eight tiers. After having imported a text and run
it through a simple sentence splitter, the user can
51
click on a phrase and enter annotation mode. The
system prompts the user for lazy annotation (in
Toolbox called sentence parsing) which will au-
tomatically insert the annotation of already known
words into the annotation table.
The user is restricted to a set of predefined tags
which can be accessed from the TC wiki navi-
gation bar where they are automatically updated
when the database changes. TypeCraft is a mul-
tilingual database hosting languages from distinct
language families and grammar traditions. It is
therefore crucial to have standards that are ex-
tendible.
The TypeCraft tag set is mapped to the Gen-
eral Ontology for Linguistic Description (GOLD).
GOLD (Farrar and Langendoen, 2003) has been
created to facilitate a more standardised use of
basic grammatical features. As an OWL ontol-
ogy GOLD allows a representation of grammati-
cal features in terms of categories and their rela-
tions. By mapping TC tags to GOLD, the user
can make use of the information in the GOLD
system which allows him to relate tags to more
general grammatical concepts. The TypeCraft?
GOLD mapping allows the user direct access to
standards and necessary background information
to associate glosses with the grammatical cate-
gories they are meant to express. GOLD in many
cases provides definitions of concepts and impor-
tant bibliographic resources related to the use of
the term.
Annotated TC tokens can be exported to Mi-
crosoft Word, OpenOffice.org Writer and LATEX.
Example (1) is exported to LATEX from TypeCraft.
It illustrates locative relativisation in Runyakitara,
a Bantu language spoken in Uganda:
(1)
Omu nju ei abagyenyi baataahiremu ekasya
?m? nj? ?? ?b?gy?ny? b??t?h?r?m? ?k?sy?
Omu
in
n ju
CL9 house
ei
which
a ba gyenyi
IV CL2 visitor
ba a taah ire mu
CL2 PRS.PERF enter PERF LOC
e ka sya
CL9 PST burn
PREP N REL N V V
?The house in which visitors entered burned?
Next to export to the main text processing sys-
tems, TypeCraft supports XML export which al-
lows the exchange of data with other applications.
7 Conclusion
Interlinear Glosses are the most common form of
linguistic data annotated by humans. In this pa-
per we have presented an online linguistic service
which allows the creation, storage and retrieval of
IGs, thus granting them the status of an indepen-
dent language resource. Reusability of data has
become an issue also in the non-computational
fields of linguistics. Although not sufficiently re-
warded at the moment, already now the creation
and sharing of linguistic data online is an efficient
way for the creation and propagation of annotated
texts in form of Interlinear Glosses. Since the
TypeCraft web application provides off-the-shelf
data for linguistic publications already formatted
for all main text processing systems, data creation
and retrieval with TypeCraft is time efficient. This
makes linguistic work more data oriented and en-
ables reasonable scientific turnover rate.
References
Bird, Steven and Gary Simons. 2003. Seven dimen-
sions of portability for language documentation and
description. Languages, 73(3):557?582.
Farrar, Scott and D. Terence Langendoen. 2003. A
linguistic ontology for the semantic web. GLOT In-
ternational, 7(3):97?100.
International, SIL. 2010. http://www.sil.org/, January.
Leser, Ulf. 2009. Social issues in scientific data ex-
change. Manuscript Humboldt Universit?t, Berlin.
52
Proceedings of the 5th ACL-HLT Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities, pages 24?32,
Portland, OR, USA, 24 June 2011. c?2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
e-Research for Linguists
Dorothee Beermann
Norwegian University of Science
and Technology
Trondheim, Norway
dorothee.beermann@hf.ntnu.no
Pavel Mihaylov
Ontotext,
Sofia, Bulgaria
pavel@ontotext.com
Abstract
e-Research explores the possibilities offered
by ICT for science and technology. Its goal is
to allow a better access to computing power,
data and library resources. In essence e-
Research is all about cyberstructure and being
connected in ways that might change how we
perceive scientific creation. The present work
advocates open access to scientific data for lin-
guists and language experts working within
the Humanities. By describing the modules of
an online application, we would like to out-
line how a linguistic tool can help the lin-
guist. Work with data, from its creation to
its integration into a publication is not rarely
perceived as a chore. Given the right tools
however, it can become a meaningful part of
the linguistic investigation. The standard for-
mat for linguistic data in the Humanities is In-
terlinear Glosses. As such they represent a
valuable resource even though linguists tend
to disagree about the role and the methods
by which data should influence linguistic ex-
ploration (Lehmann, 2004). In describing the
components of our system we focus on the po-
tential that this tool holds for real-time data-
sharing and continuous dissemination of re-
search results throughout the life-cycle of a
linguistic project.
1 Introduction
Within linguistics the management of research data
has become of increasing interest. This is partially
due to the growing number of linguists that feel
committed to the documentation and preservation
of endangered and minority languages (Rice, 1994).
Modern approaches to Language Description and
Documentation are not possible without the tech-
nology that allows the creation, retrieval and stor-
age of diverse data types. A field whose main aim
is to provide a comprehensive record of language
constructions and rules (Himmelmann, 1998) is cru-
cially dependent on software that supports the effort.
Talking to the language documentation community
Bird (2009) lists as some of the immediate tasks that
linguists need help with; interlinearization of text,
validation issues and, what he calls, the handling
of uncertain data. In fact, computers always have
played an important role in linguistic research. Start-
ing out as machines that were able to increase the
efficiency of text and data management, they have
become tools that allow linguists to pursue research
in ways that were not previously possible.1 Given an
increased interest in work with naturally occurring
language, a new generation of search engines for on-
line corpora have appeared with more features that
facilitate a linguistic analysis (Biemann et al, 2004).
The creation of annotated corpora from private data
collections, is however, still mainly seen as a task
that is only relevant to smaller groups of linguists
and anthropologists engaged in Field Work. Shoe-
box/Toolbox is probably the oldest software espe-
cially designed for this user group.Together with the
Fieldwork Language Explorer (FLEx), also devel-
1We would like to cite Tognini-Bonelli (2001) who speaks
for corpus linguistics and (Bird, 2009) who discusses Natural
Language Processing and its connection to the field of Lan-
guage Documentation as sources describing this process.
24
oped by SIL2, and ELAN3 which helps with multi-
media annotation, this group of applications is prob-
ably the best known set of linguistic tools specialised
in supporting Field Linguists.
A central task for linguistic field workers is
the interlinearization of text which is needed for
the systematisation of hand-written notes and
transcripts of audio material. The other central
concern of linguists working with small and en-
dangered languages is the creation of lexica. FLEx
therefore integrates a lexicon (a word component),
and a grammar (a text interlinearization component).
The system that is described here, assists with the
creation of interlinear glosses. However, the focus
is on data exchange and data excavation. Data from
the Humanities, including linguistic data, is time-
consuming to produce. However, in spite of the ef-
fort, this data is often not particularly reusable. Stan-
dardly it exists exclusively as an example in a pub-
lication. Glosses tend to be elementary and relative
to a specific research question. Some grammatical
properties are annotated but others that are essential
for the understanding of the examples in isolation
might have been left out, or are only mentioned in
the surrounding text. Source information is rarely
provided.
The tool presented in this paper tries to facilitate
the idea of creating re-usable data gathered from
standard linguistic practices, including collections
reflecting the researcher?s intuition and her linguis-
tic competence, as well as data derived from directed
linguistic interviews and discussions with other lin-
guists or native speakers resulting in sentence collec-
tion derived from hand-written notes or transcripts
of recordings. Different from natural language pro-
cessing tools and on a par with other linguistic tools
our target user group is ?non-technologically ori-
ented linguists? (Schmidt, 2010) who tend to work
with small, noisy data collections.
2 General system description
Our tool consists of a relational database combined
with a tabular text editor for the manual creation of
2SIL today stands for International Partners in Language
Development.
3http://www.lat-mpi.eu/tools/elan/
text annotations wrapped into a wiki which serves as
a general entrance port and collaboration tool. The
system is loaded in a browser. The customised wiki
serves as an access point to the database. Using
standard wiki functionality we direct the user to the
database via New text, My texts, and Text- or Phrase
search. My texts displays the user?s repository of
annotations called ?Texts?. The notion of Text does
not only refer to coherent texts, but to any collection
of individual phrases. My texts, the user?s private
space, is divided into two sections: Own texts and
Shared texts. This reflects the graded access design
of the system. Users administer their own data in
their private space, but they can also make use of
other users? shared data. In addition texts can be
shared within groups of users.4
Interlinear Glosses can be loaded to the sys-
tems wiki where they can be displayed publically
or printed out as part of a customized wiki page.
As an additional feature the exported data automat-
ically updates when the natural language database
changes.
Comparing the present tool with other linguis-
tic tools without a RDBMS in the background, it
seems that the latter tools falter when it comes to
data queries. Although both the present system and
FLEx share some features, technically they are quite
distinct. FLEx is a single-user desktop system with a
well designed integration of interlinear glossing and
dictionary creation facilities (Rogers, 2010), while
the present system is an online application for the
creation of interlinear glosses specialised in the ex-
change of interlinear glosses. The system not only
?moves data around? easily, its Interlinear Glosser,
described in the following section, makes also data
creation easier. The system tries to utilise the ef-
fect of collaboration between individual users and
linguistic resource integration to support the fur-
ther standardisation of linguistic data. Our tag sets
for word and morpheme glossing are rooted in the
Leipzig Glossing Rules, but have been extended and
connected to ontological grammatical information.
In addition we offer sentence level annotations.
Glossing rules are conventional standards and one
way to spread them is (a) to make already existing
4At present data sets can only be shared with one pre-defined
group of users at the time.
25
standards easily accessible at the point where they
are actively used and (b) to connect the people en-
gaged in e-Research to create a community. Gloss-
ing standards as part of linguistic research must be
pre- defined, yet remain negotiable. Scientific data
in the Humanities is mainly used for qualitative anal-
ysis and has an inbuilt factor of uncertainty, that is,
linguists compare, contrast and analyse data where
where uncertainty about the relation between actual
occurring formatives and grammatical concepts is
part of the research process and needs to be accom-
modated also by annotation tools and when it comes
to standardisation.
2.1 Interlinear Glossing Online
After having imported a text into the Editor which is
easily accessed from the site?s navigation bar (New
text), the text is run through a simple, but efficient
sentence splitter. The user can then select via mouse
click one of the phrases and in such a way enter into
the annotation mode. The editor?s interface is shown
in Figure 1.
The system is designed for annotation in a multi-
lingual setting. The user starts annotating by choos-
ing the language for the text that she has loaded
to the system from an integrated ISO-language list.
Many languages of Africa are known under differ-
ent names and it therefore is useful to find a direct
link to the web version of Ethnologue, a SIL Inter-
national resource. Ethnologue can for example help
with identifying alternative language names and of-
fers useful pointers to SIL publications. The present
system distinguishes between different levels of an-
notation. Free translational glosses, standard for
all interlinear glosses, and what we call construc-
tion descriptions are sentence level annotations; so
is Global Tagging. These global tags can be selected
in the form of eight construction parameters
Construction kernel: transitiveVerb, reflexive-
Verb, multiplePredicate, transitiveOblique-
Verb,...
Situation: causation, intention, communication,
emotional-experienced, ...
Frame alternation: passive, middle, reflexive, pas-
sive+applicative, ...
Secondary predicates: infinitivial, free gerund, re-
sultative,...
Discourse function: topicalisation, presentation-
als, rightReordering,...
Modality: deontic, episthemic, optative, realis, ir-
realis,...
Force: declarative, hortative, imperative, ...
Polarity: positive, negative
The field Construction description is meant for
keeping notes, for example in those cases where the
categorisation of grammatical units poses problems
for the annotator. Meta data information is not en-
tered using the Interlinear Glosser but the systems
wiki where it is stored relative to texts. The texts
can then fully or partially be loaded to the Interlin-
ear Glosser. Using the wiki?s Corpus namespace the
user can import texts up to an individual size of 3500
words. We use an expandable Metadata template to
prompt to user for the standard bibliographic infor-
mation, as well as information about Text type, An-
notator and Contributor. At present the corpus texts
and the annotated data needs to be linked manually.
Word- and morpheme level annotation represents
the centre piece of the annotation interface which ap-
pears as a simple table. Information is ordered hor-
izontally and vertically, so that words and morphs
are aligned vertically with their Baseform, Meaning,
Gloss and Part of speech information. From the an-
notation table the user can chose one of the words
and mark it as Head adding some basic syntactic in-
formation. Annotation can be partial and the idea is
that free class morphemes are annotated for mean-
ing while closed class items receive a gloss. Morphs
may be accompanied by null to many glosses lead-
ing to enumerations of gloss symbols when neces-
sary.
Each phrase has a unique identifier. This means
that a data token can be shared freely online. The
use case in Figure 2 illustrates this point.
Next to real-time data-sharing it is mainly the easy
access to the relevant linguistic resources that facili-
tates manual annotation.5
5With the Lazy Annotation Mode (LAM) we offer an ad-
ditional function that automatically enriches annotation tables
26
Figure 1: The Interlinear Glosser
Three users of our system work together on the Bantu language Runyankore-Rukiga, a Bantu language spoken in Uganda. The language has no
digital resources and annotated text is hard to come by. The group members experience a a lot of uncertainty in the selection of gloss values. While
one of them is a lecturer at Makerere University in Kampala the other two study abroad. Mulogo attends class today, the topic is Tense and Aspect.
He remembers that Ojore who tends to work at home has recently annotated his Field Work transcripts for his thesis on Tense and Aspect. Ojore
happens to be online. Mulogo quickly asks Ojore if he could link him the two examples that he had mentioned the other day. They illustrated the
co-occurrences of the immediate past and the perfective marker -ire. Ojore links him the tokens in Skype. Mulogo opens them in his browser and
asks the teacher if he could project the examples after the break for some discussion. Meanwhile Ojore discovers that Dembe had in some contexts
identified a morpheme that he has glossed as the immediate past as a present tense marker. Dembe is not online right now, so he links the two
crucial examples to her in an e-mail. Normally they talk online in the morning when the connection to Kampala is better. He also adds a note to the
construction description of the tokens for Mulogo and Dembe to read later.
Figure 2: A use case illustrating real-time data sharing
27
First of all lists over tags can be accessed from
the wiki navigation bar where they are automatically
updated when the database changes. The tag lists
can be ordered either according to Gloss class or al-
phabetically. Short explanations for the glosses are
provided. We have grouped all glosses into annota-
tion classes and mapped them to the GOLD (Gen-
eral Ontology for Linguistic Description) ontology
(See Figure 3). The idea behind Gold (Farrar and
Langendoen, 2003) is to facilitate a more standard-
ised use of basic grammatical features. As an OWL
ontology it presents features in terms of categories
and their relations. At this point the integration with
GOLD is only light-weight and meant to give users
of the system direct access to an ontology over gram-
matical types supplemented by bibliographic infor-
mation and further examples showing the use of cat-
egories. This way essential information is made
available at the point where it is needed. Uncertainty
about the meaning of gloss can be reduced this way.
An important feature of the Interlinear Glosser is
that it allows export of data to some of the main text
editors - Microsoft Word, OpenOffice.org Writer
and LaTeX. The example below illustrates an ex-
ported interlinear gloss. In addition to export from
the Interlinear Glosser, individual or sets of interlin-
ear glosses can be exported from the SEARCH inter-
face which we will discuss in the next section. Offer-
ing a solution to the issue of wrapping (Bow et al,
2003), which arises for the representation of inter-
linear glosses for long sentences,6 the system allows
a clean representation of annotated sentences of any
length. In general the alignment of morphemes and
glosses (optionally indicated by a dotted line) forms
the body of the interlinear gloss, while the original
string and the free translation are wrapped indepen-
dently
with word related information already known to the database.
LAM annotations need to be evaluated by the human annota-
tor. They have only a limited value for languages with a rich
system of allomorphic variation, but they are quite helpful oth-
erwise even for languages with a rich portmanteau morphemes.
In Toolbox this function is called ?sentence parsing?
6What is a long sentence is a relative issue which is not only
determined by the number of words that a sentence consists of,
but also by the length of the enumeration of gloss tags that are
aligned with each of the individual morphemes.
Omu nju hakataahamu abagyenyi
m nj hkthm bgyngy
Omu
in
n ju
CL9 house
ha ka taah a mu
CL16 PST enter IND LOC
a ba gyenyi
IV CL2 visitor
PREP N V N
?In the house entered visitors?
The example illustrates locative inversion in
Ruyankore-Rukiga, a Bantu language spoken in
Uganda. The translational and functional glosses,
which belong to two distinct tiers in our editor, ap-
pear as one line when imported to a word-processor.
Although glossing on several tiers is conceptually
more appropriate, linguistic publications require a
more condensed format.
Although to annotate manually is time consuming,
it is the re-usability of the data that pays off. The
ease with which already existing data can be ex-
ported from the system in order to be integrated into
publications is one way to make this point.
In addition to export to Text Editors the system
allows also from the graphical user interface the ex-
port of XML. The Akan sentence a`kye?rEw n`ho`ma?
no` , meaning ?he has written the letter? (see Figure
1) is given as an XML structure in Figure 4. No-
tice that Construction descriptions and Global tags
are exported together with the word- and morpheme
annotations. Used for machine to machine commu-
nication, the XML rendering of interlinear glossses
has interested the linguistic community (see for ex-
ample (Bow et al, 2003)) as a means to find a gen-
eralised model for interlinear text.
2.2 Search
Data queries operate on phrases, which means that
the result of a query is a phrase level representation.
Each line (or block) of the search result represents
an individual sentence.7 Lists of sentences, as the
result of a search, are more easily evaluated by hu-
man observers than lines of concordances. Search
results come as either lines of sentences which al-
low a first quick scan of the data or as blocks of
interlinear glosses. This latter search output gives
the linguist access to the sentence internal annota-
tions. Using general browser functionality search
results can easily be scanned. The system allows for
complex searches from the graphical interface where
word or morpheme queries can relatively freely be
combined with a search for specific glosses or com-
7or sentence fragment such as a noun phrase
28
Figure 3: Mapping between system-tags and GOLD concepts
Figure 4: XML export
29
binations of glosses. Search for portmanteau mor-
phemes as well as for word-level co-occurrences of
glosses is facilitated by allowing the user to deter-
mine the scope of gloss-co-occurrence which can
either be the morph, the word or the phrase level.
Queries are used to establish inter-annotator consis-
tency, as well as to which degree an annotator is con-
sistent in her annotations. For example, a search
of 1154 Runyankore-Rukiga sentences, annotated
by three different native-speakers in the context of
different linguistic projects, shows that the annota-
tors disagree on the meaning of the morpheme -ire.
It is mainly annotated as PERF(ective) Aspect, but
also as PAST, ANT(erior) and STAT(ive). However,
when the same morpheme occurs in a negative con-
text -ire is in 51 out of the 53 negative sentences
annotated as expressing the perfective Aspect.8 Al-
though at present aggregate functions for the SQL
queries can not be executed from the graphical user
interface, the search offered by the system is already
at this point a useful tool for linguistic data manage-
ment.
3 Free data sharing and linguistic
discovery
Collaborative databases where individual re-
searchers or groups of researchers own portions of
the data have their own dynamics and requirements
for maintaining data sharing, recovery and integrity.
They can be used with profit as an in-class tool or
by research projects, and each of these uses requires
a different set of rules for ensuring data quality and
privacy. Annotations made by language specialists
working on their own research reflect differences in
interest and linguistic expertise.
Interesting data trends can be noticed by looking
at the annotations made by annotators independently
working on the same language. We will briefly illus-
trate this point with an example.
We have analysed the interlinear texts of four an-
notators working on individual linguistic projects in
Akan, a Kwa language of Ghana. Together their
work represents an annotated 3302 word corpus. We
have analysed which glosses9 were used and how
frequently each of the glosses occurred. The most
8Date of query 03-03-2011
9The present survey does not cover pos tags.
frequently used tags for Akan were SBJ and OBJ
standing for subject and object, respectively. Com-
paring the Akan data with data coming from other
users working on typologically distinct languages,
we observe that the relative frequency in which the
users annotate for the grammatical core relations
?subject? and ?object? differed from language to lan-
guage.
As shown in Table 1 the absolute number of anno-
tated morphemes and the relative frequency of SBJ
and OBJ tags is highest for the two most configu-
rational languages in our sample. This data has to
be seen in the context of a possible use case not
as the result of an empirical study. Other data ten-
dencies indicative of annotator behaviour as much
as of data properties can be observed too. Looking
at Tense or Aspect within the same dataset shows
that Akan which is a predominantly Aspect marking
language (Boadi, 2008) (Osam, 2003) is by all four
annotators mostly annotated for Aspect, with few
tags for present tense. Between the Aspect tags we
find HAB (habitual), as well as PRF and COMPL.
The two latter glosses, referring to the perfective and
the completive Aspect, where ?completive Aspect?
means according to Bybee ?to do something thor-
oughly and to completion?, might have been used to
refer to a completed event. In the nominal domain it
is the frequent use of the DEF gloss, as opposed to
the very few uses of the gloss INDEF, that highlights
that Akan marks definiteness but not indefiniteness.
Interesting is that deixis is hardly marked although
the definite marker in Akan has been claimed to have
a deictic interpretation (Appiah Amfo, 2007).
The success of real-time data sharing depends on
the trust that data consumers have in the data qual-
ity. All public data can be traced back to the an-
notator through the system?s Text search. As part
of the first-time login procedure, each annotator is
asked to contribute a small bio to her user page on
the system?s wiki. In this way ?data about the data?
is created and can be used to judge the data?s ori-
gin and authenticity. In addition an Advisory Board
of senior linguists can be contacted for data review.
Also, the list of Advisors can be viewed from the
system?s wiki.
However, the kernel of all efforts is to assure that
the data quality conforms to established criteria and
procedures in the field. One way to accomplish this
30
Language SUBJ OBJ units SBJ % OBJ %
German 5 2 1680 0,29 0,12
Norwegian 328 144 1787 18,35 8,05
Akan 470 393 4700 10 8,36
Kistaninya 0 0 737 0 0
R.-
Rukiga
25 5 5073 0,50 0,10
Table 1: Relative frequency of core relational tags for 5 languages
is to link annotations to an ontology of grammati-
cal concepts that reflects our present knowledge of
grammatical categories and their relations. While
we can work towards data validity, data complete-
ness for a collaborative database will always depend
on the linguistic goals pursued by the individual an-
notators.
It has been suggested by the GOLD community
that the creation of Language profiles (Farrar and
Lewis, 2005) could be a way to account for the
morpho-syntactic categories of a specific language
by using concepts found in GOLD under annotation.
Given our own experience with the present integra-
tion of GOLD a mapping from the system?s gloss
sets to the GOLD ontology could be equally inter-
esting. As an exercise in Ontology Extraction the
mapping of annotation profiles from the present sys-
tem to GOLD could as a first step allow the filling of
category gaps. For the category CASE the equative
is not yet known to GOLD, likewise Deixis and its
forms such as proximate, distal, medial and remote
are not currently represented.10 It would be inter-
esting to develop an algorithm which would allow
to (a) build a model that can predict the ?class? of
a certain gloss tag and (b) let ontological categories
inform data search in the system presented here.
4 Conclusion
Data annotation and real-time data sharing requires
a tool that is suitable for work in the Humanities.
The system discussed here represents linguistically
annotated data in the form of interlinear glosses,
a well established format within philology and
the structural and generative fields of linguistics.
The present system is novel in that is allows the
exchange of research data within linguistics proper.
10Gold 2010 Data of search: 03/29/2011
The systems?s design has a clear focus on real-time
data sharing combined with simplicity of use and
familiarity of representation. It allows its users
to concentrate on the linguistic task at hand. The
system is particularly suitable for the creation of
corpora of less documented languages.
While linguistic software makes use of forums,
blogs and other social software, the present system
IS social software. It is a powerful tool, however, its
real potential resides in a growing user community
and the effect that the community approach might
have on data quality and the use of standards.
Standards are ignored if not disseminated through
an attractive public site that makes it easy for
annotators to use them.With its relative longevity,
and its institutional support, the system has two of
the main characteristics of a digital tool that can
serve as part of the cyberinfrastructure which is
needed to support e-Research for the humanities
(Nguyen and Shilton, 2008).
References
Nana Appiah Amfo. 2007. Akan demonstratives. In
Doris L. Payne and Jaime Pea, editors, Selected Pro-
ceedings of the 37th Annual Conference on African
Linguistics.
Chris Biemann, Uwe Quasthoff, and Christian Wolff.
2004. Linguistic corpus search. In Proceedings
Fourth International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation, Lissabon.
Steven Bird. 2009. Natural language processing
and linguistic fieldwork. Computational Linguistics,
35(3):469?474.
Lawrence A. Boadi. 2008. Tense, aspect and mood in
Akan. In Felix K. Ameka and Mary Esther Kropp
Dakubu, editors, Tense and Aspect in Kwa Languages.
John Benjamins.
31
Cathy Bow, Baden Hughes, and Steven Bird. 2003. To-
wards a general model of interlinear text. In Proceed-
ings of EMELD Workshop 2003: Digitizing & An-
notating Texts & Field Recordings. Electronic Metas-
tructure for Endangered Language Data. (EMELD)
Project, May.
Scott Farrar and Terence Langendoen. 2003. A linguistic
ontology for the semantic web. GLOT International,
7(3):97?100.
Scott Farrar and William D. Lewis. 2005. The gold
community of practice: An infrastructure for linguistic
data on the web. In Proceedings of the EMELD 2005
Workshop on Digital Language Documentation: Lin-
guistic Ontologies and Data Categories for Language
Resources.
Nikolaus P. Himmelmann. 1998. Documentary and de-
scriptive linguistics. Linguistics, 36.
Christian Lehmann. 2004. Data in linguistics. The Lin-
guistic Review, 21(3-4):175?210.
Lilly Nguyen and Katie Shilton. 2008. Tools for Human-
ists. In D. Zorich, editor, A Survey of Digital Human-
ities Centres in the United States. Council on Library
and Information Resources.
Emmanuel Kweku Osam. 2003. An Introduction to the
Verbal and Multi-Verbal System of Akan. In Dorothee
Beermann and Lars Hellan, editors, Proceedings of
the workshop on Multi-Verb Constructions Trondheim
Summer School 2003.
Keren. Rice. 1994. Language documentation: Whose
ethics? In Lenore A. Grenobel and N. Louanna
Furbee-Losee, editors, Language Documentation:
Practice and values. John Benjamins.
Chris Rogers. 2010. Review of fieldworks language ex-
plorer (flex) 3.0. Language Documentation & Conser-
vation, 04:78?84.
Thomas Schmidt. 2010. Linguistic tool development be-
tween community practices and technology standards.
In Proceedings of the LREC Workshop Language Re-
source and Language Technology Standards state of
the art, emerging needs, and future developments, Val-
letta, Malta, May. European Language Resources As-
sociation (ELRA).
Elena Tognini-Bonelli. 2001. Corpus linguistics at work.
Amsterdam: Benjamins.
32
