Proceedings of SIGDIAL 2009: the 10th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group in Discourse and Dialogue, pages 298?301,
Queen Mary University of London, September 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
  Eliciting interactional phenomena in human-human dialogues 
Joakim Gustafson 
 
KTH Speech Music & Hearing  
jocke@speech.kth.se 
    Miray Merkes 
 
    KTH Speech Music & Hearing  
   miray@kth.se 
Abstract 
In order to build a dialogue system that can inte-
ract with humans in the same way as humans in-
teract with each other, it is important to be able 
to collect conversational data. This paper intro-
duces a dialogue recording method where an 
eavesdropping human operator sends instruc-
tions to the participants in an ongoing human-
human task-oriented dialogue. The purpose of 
the instructions is to control the dialogue pro-
gression or to elicit interactional phenomena. 
The recordings were used to build a Swedish 
synthesis voice with disfluent diphones. 
1 Background 
Our research group have a long-standing interest in 
human conversational behaviour and a special in-
terest in its mimicry and evaluation in spoken dia-
logue systems (Edlund et al, 2008). In human-
human conversations both parties continuously and 
simultaneously contribute actively and interac-
tively to the conversation. Listeners actively con-
tribute by providing feedback during the other?s 
speech, and speakers continuously monitor the re-
actions to their utterances (Clark, 1996). If spoken 
dialogue systems are to achieve the responsiveness 
and flexibility found in human-human interaction, 
it is essential that they process information incre-
mentally and continuously rather than in turn sized 
chunks (Dohsaka & Shimazu, 1997, Skantze & 
Schlangen, 2009). These systems need to be able to 
stop speaking in different manners depending on 
whether it has finished what it planned to say or if 
it was interrupted mid-speech by the user. In order 
to be responsive, the system might also need to 
start talking before it has decided exactly what to 
say. In this case it has to be able to generate inter-
actional cues that restrain the user from start speak-
ing while the system plans the last part.  
To date very few spoken dialogues systems can 
generate crucial and commonly used interactional 
cues. Adell et al (2007) have developed a set of 
rules for synthesizing filled pauses and repetitions 
with PSOLA. Unit selection synthesizers are often 
used in dialogue systems, but a problem with these 
is that even though most databases have been care-
fully designed and read, they are not representative 
of ?speech in use? (Campbell & Mokhiari, 2003). 
There are examples of synthesizers that have been 
trained on speech in use, like Sundaram & Naraya-
nan (2003) that used a limited-domain dialogue 
corpus of transcribed human utterances as input for 
offline training of a machine learning system that 
could insert fillers and breathing at the appropriate 
places in new domain-related texts. However, these 
were synthesized with a unit selection voice that 
had been trained on lecture speech.  
When modelling talk-in-use it is important to 
study representative data. The problem with study-
ing real dialogues is that the interesting interac-
tional phenomena often are sparsely occurring and 
very context dependent. When conducting research 
on spontaneous speech you have the option to use 
controlled or uncontrolled conditions. Anderson et 
al., 1991) recorded unscripted conversations in a 
map task exercise that had been carefully designed 
to elicit interactional phenomena. When using con-
trolled conditions in a study you risk to manipulate 
the data, while in uncontrolled conditions there?s a 
risk that the conversation goes out of hand which 
leads to a lot of unnecessary material (Bock, 1996). 
Bock suggests a set of eliciting methods to be used 
when studying disfluent speech. If the goal is to 
study speech errors and interruptions, a situation 
with two competing humans is useful. If the goal is 
to study hesitations and self-interruptions, distract-
ing events can be used to disrupt the flow of 
speech.  
298
Say nothing at pauses Talk slowly 
The Wizard?s GUI 
Say nothing at pauses Talk slowly 
  The Shopkeeper?s GUI      The Customer?s GUI                                        
Figure 1. The GUIs used by the wizard and subjects. 
This paper presents a new method for elicitation of 
interactional phenomena, with the goal of reducing 
the amount of necessary dialogue recordings. In 
this method an eavesdropping human operator 
sends instructions two subjects as they engage in a 
task-oriented dialogue. The purpose of these in-
structions is either to control the dialogue progres-
sion or to elicit certain interactional phenomena. 
The recordings from two sessions were used to 
build a synthesis voice with disfluent diphones. In 
a small synthesis study on generation of disfluent 
conversational utterances this voice was compared 
with a commercial Swedish diphone voice based 
on read speech. The subjects rated the created 
voice as more natural than the commercial voice.  
2 Method 
A dialogue collection environment has been devel-
oped that allows a human operator (Wizard) to ea-
vesdrop an ongoing computer-mediated human-
human conversation. It also allows the Wizard to 
send instructions to the interlocutors during their 
conversation, see Figure 1. The purpose of the in-
structions is to control the progression of the task-
oriented dialogue and to elicit interactional pheno-
mena, e.g. interruptions and hesitations. The Wizard 
has access to graphical and textual instructions. 
Graphical instructions are pictures that are manipu-
lated or text labels that are changed. Textual instruc-
tions are scrolled in from the right at the bottom of 
the screen. They can be of three categories: Emo-
tional instructions that tell the receiver to act emo-
tional (e.g. act grumpy); Task-related instructions 
that require the receiver to initiate a certain sub-
tasks (e.g. buy a red car); and Dialogue flow related 
instructions that tell the receiver to change his way 
of speaking, (e.g. speak fast, do not pause). 
3 The pilot study 
The DEAL system is a speech-enabled computer 
game currently under development, that will be 
used for conversational training for second lan-
guage learners of Swedish (Hjalmarsson, 2008). In 
this system an embodied conversational character 
(ECA) acts as a shopkeeper in a flea trade-market 
and the user is a customer. The developed envi-
ronment was adapted to the DEAL domain, and in 
a pilot study two human subjects were instructed to 
act as shopkeeper and customer. They were given 
written persona descriptions and were then placed 
in separate rooms. They interacted via a three-party 
Skype call, which allowed the Wizard to eavesdrop 
their conversation. In order to get a situation that 
was similar to the DEAL system, the subjects saw 
an avatar with lip movements driven by, and in 
synchrony with, the other subjects? speech. In or-
der to achieve this, the SynFace system was used, 
which introduced a 200 ms delay in each direction 
(Beskow et al, 2004). Apart from the avatar the 
interfaces also contained pictures of objects cur-
rently for sale with accompanying prices, see Fig-
ure 1. At the bottom of the screen there was a black 
area where the subjects got the textual instructions 
from the Wizard.     
The eavesdropping Wizard was placed in a 
third room, with an interface that allowed her to 
control the current set of objects and prices on the 
subjects? screens. The Wizard interface also con-
tained an area for the textual instructions. In order 
to distort the dialogue flow some of the instruc-
tions involved sending instructions to both subjects 
at the same time. A main idea is to instruct one of 
the interlocutors to display a verbal behavior that 
will elicit interactional phenomena in the other di-
alogue partner's contributions. Table 1 shows some 
examples of the different types of textual instruc-
tions to the subjects and their intended effect on 
the shopkeeper party in an ongoing conversation. 
The Wizard interface also gave access to auto-
mated instructions that follows a pre-scripted ma-
nuscript in order to facilitate consistent instructions 
across different sessions. This also made it possible 
to transmit multiple successive instructions with 
high speed and a minimum risk of mistakes.  
299
 Shopkeeper 
reaction 
Graphical Emotional Task related Dialog flow related 
Hesitation Show an ambiguous 
picture (S) 
Be wining and talk about 
how unfair life is (S) 
Sell blue car (S) 
Buy red car (C)  
Talk slowly (S) 
Say nothing at pauses (C) 
Interruption Change picture in mid 
speech (S) 
Be a annoying customer (C) Tell your price (S) 
Tell your price (C)  
Speak without pauses (S) 
Try to speak all the time (C) 
Change of 
sub-task  
Show a picture (S) Discuss the advantages of a 
certain item (S) 
Sell the red car (S) Ask a lot of questions (C) 
Answer with questions (S) 
Table 1. Examples of instruction types and their intended reaction in the shopkeeper?s subsequent turn(s). The re-
ceiver of the instruction is indicated by S (Shopkeeper) and C (Customer).  
 
4 The effect of the Wizard?s instruction 
Two half-hour conversations were recorded where 
the same male subject (acting as shopkeeper) inte-
racted with two different female subjects (acting as 
customers). The audio recordings were synchro-
nized with the instructions that had been submitted 
by the Wizard during the conversation. The effects 
of the instructions were analyzed by inspecting 
both subjects? turns following an instruction from 
the Wizard. The analysis was focused on the dis-
ruptive effect of the instructions, and it showed 
that they often lead to turns that contained hesita-
tions, interruptions and pauses. The task-related 
instructions lead to disfluent speech in half of the 
succeeding turns, while the dialogue flow related 
instructions, the emotional instructions and the 
graphical instructions led to disfluent turns in two 
thirds of the cases. The analysis of the instructions? 
effect on the disfluency rates revealed that the ones  
that changed the task while the subjects talked 
were very efficient, e.g. changing the price while it 
was discussed. The effect on the disfluency rates 
was most substantial when contradictive instruc-
tions were given to both subjects at the same time.  
In order to get a baseline of disfluency rates in 
human-human dialogues in the current domain, the 
dialogue data was compared with data recorded in 
a previous DEAL recording. In this study 8 dialo-
gues were recorded where two subjects role-played 
as a shopkeeper and a customer, but without the 
controlling Wizard used in the present study 
(Hjalmarsson, 2008). In these recordings approx-
imately one third of the turns contained disfluent 
speech. This indicates that the disfluency rates 
found after the instructions in the current study are 
a higher than in the previous DEAL recording. Fi-
nally we analyzed the effect of the instructions on 
the dialogue progression. The instructions were 
very helpful in keeping the discussion going and 
the task oriented instructions provided useful guid-
ance to the subjects in their role-playing. 
5 A speech synthesis experiment 
In a second experiment the goal was to evaluate two 
methods for collecting conversational data for build-
ing a corpus-based conversational speech synthesiz-
er: collecting a controlled human-human role-
playing dialogue or a recording a human that reads a 
dialogue transcription with tags for interruptions and 
hesitations. In this experiment the recordings of the 
male subject that acted as shopkeeper were used. 20 
of his utterances that contained hesitations, inter-
ruptions and planned pauses were selected. New 
versions of these utterances were created, where 
the disruptions were removed. In order to verify 
that the disruptive sections could be synthesized in 
new places a set of test sentences were constructed 
that included their immediate contexts. Finally, 
new versions of the new test sentences were 
created, that had added tags for disruptions. All 
types of utterances were read by the original male 
speaker. Both the original dialogue recordings and 
the read utterances were phonetically transcribed 
and aligned in order to build a small diphone voice 
with the EXPROS tool (Gustafson & Edlund, 2008). 
This diphone voice contained fillers, truncated pho-
nemes and audible breathing.  
All types of utterances were re-synthesized with 
the newly created voice and with a Swedish com-
mercial diphone voice that was trained on clear 
read speech. While re-synthesizing the original 
recordings all prosodic features (pitch, duration 
and loudness) were kept. The main difference be-
tween the two voices was the voice quality: the 
commercial voice is trained on clear read speech, 
while the new voice was created from the dialogue 
recordings contains both reduced and truncated 
diphones.  
Secondly, a number of utterances were synthe-
sized, where disfluent sections were inserted into 
fluently read sentences. For both voices the disflu-
ent sections? original pitch, duration and loudness 
were kept. As in the previous case the main differ-
300
ence between the two cases is that the newly 
created also made use of its disfluent diphones. 
The disfluent sections were either taken from the 
original dialogue recordings or from the set of read 
sentences with tags for disfluencies. 
 
6 Preliminary synthesis evaluation 
16 subjects participated in a listening test, where 
they were told to focus on the disrupted parts of the 
utterances. They were instructed to indicate when 
they could detect the following disruptions: hesita-
tion, pause, interruption and correction. They were 
also asked to assess on a six-graded likert scale 
how natural these sounded and how easy it was to 
detect the disrupted parts. Results show that dis-
rupted utterances that were synthesized with the 
new voice were rated as natural in two thirds of the 
cases, while the ones that were generated with 
commercial synthesis voice, that lacked disfluent 
diphones, was rated as natural in half of the cases. 
Kruskal-Wallis rank sums were performed, and the 
interrupted utterances generated by new voice was 
significantly more natural than those generated 
with the commercial voice (p=0.001). When com-
paring how easy it was to detect the disrupted parts 
both versions are comparable (90% of them were 
easy to detect, with no significant difference).   
In order to analyze the difference between real 
and pretended disruptions, the subjects were asked 
to compare re-synthesis of the of disrupted dialo-
gue turns with corresponding read versions. They 
were asked to judge which of the two they thought 
contained a pretended disruption. When comparing 
re-synthesis of complete utterances from either of 
these types they were able to detect the version 
with pretended disruptions in 60% of the cases. In 
cases where the disfluent parts were moved to new 
fluently read sentences the users could not tell 
which version contained a pretended disruption. 
This is probably because they rated how the whole 
sentence sounded, rather than only the disrupted 
part. These differences were significant according 
to a chi-square test. Finally, the subjects? ability to 
identify the different types of disfluencies when 
synthesized by the two voices was compared. For 
both voices, about 80% of the hesitations and inter-
ruptions were correctly identified, while only 70% 
of the planned pauses were correctly identified. For 
both voices about 85% of the missed pauses were 
instead identified as hesitations or interruptions. 
For the new voice most of them were identified as 
hesitations, while they were mostly misinterpreted 
as interruptions for the commercial voice. The 
share of inserted interruptions is the only signifi-
cant identification difference between the two 
voices. This is not surprising since they both used 
the pitch, power and durations from the original 
human recordings, while only the new voice also 
had access to truncated diphones. 
This pilot study showed that the instructions 
from the Wizards were useful both to control the 
dialogue flow and to elicit interactional phenome-
na. Finally, the male participant reported that it 
was hard to pretend to be disfluent while reading 
dialogue transcripts where this was tagged.  
Acknowledgements 
This research is supported by MonAMI, an Integrated 
Project under the European Commission (IP-035147). 
References 
Adell, J., Bonafonte, A., & Escudero, D. (2007). Filled pauses 
in speech synthesis: towards conversational speech. In Proc. 
of Conference on Text, Speech and Dialogue( LNAI 07) 
Anderson, A., Bader, M., Bard, E., Boyle, E., Doherty, G., 
Garrod, S., Isard, S., Kowtko, J., McAllister, J., Miller, J., 
Sotillo, C., Thompson, H., & Weinert, R. (1991). The 
HCRC Map Task corpus. Language and Speech, 34(4). 
Beskow, J., Karlsson, I., Kewley, J., & Salvi, G. (2004). 
SYNFACE - A talking head telephone for the hearing-
impaired. In Miesenberger, K., Klaus, J., Zagler, W., & 
Burger, D. (Eds.), Computers Helping People with Special 
Needs. Springer-Verlag. 
Bock, K. (1996). Language production: Methods and metho-
dologies. In Psychonomic Bulletin and Review.  
Campbell, N., & Mokhiari, P. (2003). Using a Non-
Spontaneous Speech Synthesiser as a Driver for a Spontane-
ous Speech Synthesiser. In Proceedings of ISCA & IEEE 
Workshop on Spontaneous Speech Processing and Recogni-
tion. Tokyo, Japan. 
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge, UK: Cam-
bridge University Press. 
Dohsaka, K., & Shimazu, A. (1997). System architecture for 
spoken utterance production in collaborative dialogue. In 
Working Notes of IJCAI 1997 Workshop on Collaboration, 
Cooperation and Conflict in Dialogue Systems.  
Edlund, J., Gustafson, J., Heldner, M., & Hjalmarsson, A. 
(2008). Towards human-like spoken dialogue systems. 
Speech Communication, 50(8-9). 
Gustafson, J., & Edlund, J. (2008). expros: a toolkit for explo-
ratory experimentation with prosody in customized diphone 
voices. In Proceedings of PIT 2008.  
Hjalmarsson, A. (2008). Speaking without knowing what to 
say... or when to end. In Proceedings of SIGDial 2008. 
Skantze, G., & Schlangen, D. (2009). Incremental dialogue 
processing in a micro-domain. In Proceedings of EACL-09. 
Sundaram, S., & Narayanan, S. (2003). An empirical text 
transformation method for spontaneous speech synthesizers. 
In Proceedings of Interspeech 2003, Switzerland. 
301
