Proceedings of the Thirteenth Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning (CoNLL), pages 210?218,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Using Encyclopedic Knowledge for Automatic Topic Identification
Kino Coursey
University of North Texas and Daxtron Laboratories, Inc.
kino@daxtron.com
Rada Mihalcea and William Moen
University of North Texas
rada,wemoen@unt.edu
Abstract
This paper presents a method for automatic
topic identification using an encyclopedic
graph derived from Wikipedia. The sys-
tem is found to exceed the performance of
previously proposed machine learning algo-
rithms for topic identification, with an annota-
tion consistency comparable to human anno-
tations.
1 Introduction
With exponentially increasing amounts of text be-
ing generated, it is important to find methods that
can annotate and organize documents in meaning-
ful ways. In addition to the content of the document
itself, other relevant information about a document
such as related topics can often enable a faster and
more effective search or classification. Document
topics have been used for a long time by librarians to
improve the retrieval of a document, and to provide
background or associated information for browsing
by human users. They can also assist search, back-
ground information gathering and contextualization
tasks, and enhanced relevancy measures.
The goal of the work described in this paper is to
automatically find topics that are relevant to an input
document. We refer to this task as ?topic identifica-
tion? (Medelyan and Witten, 2008). For instance,
starting with a document on ?United States in the
Cold War,? we want to identify relevant topics such
as ?history,? ?Global Conflicts,? ?Soviet Union,? and
so forth. We propose an unsupervised method for
topic identification, based on a biased graph cen-
trality algorithm applied to a large knowledge graph
built from Wikipedia.
The task of topic identification goes beyond key-
word extraction (Mihalcea and Csomai, 2007), since
relevant topics may not be necessarily mentioned in
the document, and instead have to be obtained from
some repositories of external knowledge. The task
is also different from text classification (Gabrilovich
and Markovitch, 2006), since the topics are either
not known in advance or are provided in the form of
a controlled vocabulary with thousands of entries,
and thus no classification can be performed. In-
stead, with topic identification, we aim to find topics
(or categories1) that are relevant to the document at
hand, which can be used to enrich the content of the
document with relevant external knowledge.
2 Dynamic Ranking of Topic Relevance
Our method is based on the premise that external
encyclopedic knowledge can be used to identify rel-
evant topics for a given document.
The method consists of two main steps. In the first
step, we build a knowledge graph of encyclopedic
concepts based on Wikipedia, where the nodes in the
graph are represented by the entities and categories
that are defined in this encyclopedia. The edges be-
tween the nodes are represented by their relation of
proximity inside the Wikipedia articles. The graph
is built once and then it is stored offline, so that it
can be efficiently use for the identification of topics
in new documents.
In the second step, for each input document, we
first identify the important encyclopedic concepts in
the text, and thus create links between the content of
the document and the external encyclopedic graph.
Next, we run a biased graph centrality algorithm on
the entire graph, so that all the nodes in the exter-
nal knowledge repository are ranked based on their
relevance to the input document. We use a variation
1Throughout the paper, we use the terms ?topic? and ?cate-
gory? interchangeably.
210
of the PageRank (Brin and Page, 1998) algorithm,
which accounts for both the relation between the
nodes in the document and the encyclopedic graph,
as well as the relation between the nodes in the en-
cyclopedic graph itself.
In the following, we first describe the structure
of Wikipedia, followed by a brief description of the
Wikify! system that automatically identifies the en-
cyclopedic concepts in a text, and finally a descrip-
tion of the dynamic ranking process on the encyclo-
pedic graph.
2.1 Wikipedia
Wikipedia (http://wikipedia.org) is a free online en-
cyclopedia, representing the outcome of a continu-
ous collaborative effort of a large number of vol-
unteer contributors. Virtually any Internet user can
create or edit a Wikipedia webpage, and this ?free-
dom of contribution? has a positive impact on both
the quantity (fast-growing number of articles) and
the quality (potential mistakes are quickly corrected
within the collaborative environment) of this re-
source.
Wikipedia has grown to become one of the largest
online repositories of encyclopedic knowledge, with
millions of articles available for a large number of
languages. In fact, Wikipedia editions are available
for more than 250 languages, with a number of en-
tries varying from a few pages to close to three mil-
lion articles per language.
The basic entry in Wikipedia is an article (or
page), which defines an entity or an event, and con-
sists of a hypertext document with hyperlinks to
other pages within or outside Wikipedia. The role
of the hyperlinks is to guide the reader to pages
that provide additional information about the enti-
ties or events mentioned in an article. Each article
in Wikipedia is uniquely referenced by an identifier,
which consists of one or more words separated by
spaces or underscores, and occasionally a parenthet-
ical explanation. The current version of the English
Wikipedia consists of about 2.75 million articles.
In addition to articles, Wikipedia also includes a
large number of categories, which represent topics
that are relevant to a given article (the July 2008 ver-
sion of Wikipedia includes about 390,000 such cate-
gories). The category links are organized hierarchi-
cally, and vary from broad topics such as ?history?
or ?games? to highly focused topics such as ?mili-
tary history of South Africa during World War II? or
Figure 1: A snapshot from the encyclopedic graph.
?role-playing game publishing companies.?
We use the entire English Wikipedia to build an
encyclopedic graph for use in the topic identifica-
tion process. The nodes in the graph are represented
by all the article and category pages in Wikipedia,
and the edges between the nodes are represented by
their relation of proximity inside the articles. The
graph contains 5.8 million nodes, and 65.5 million
edges. Figure 1 shows a small section of the knowl-
edge graph, as built starting with the article on ?Cor-
pus Linguistics?.
2.2 Wikify!
In order to automatically identify the important en-
cyclopedic concepts in an input text, we use the un-
supervised system Wikify! (Mihalcea and Csomai,
2007), which identifies the concepts in the text that
are likely to be highly relevant (i.e., ?keywords?)
for the input document, and links them to Wikipedia
concepts.
Wikify! works in three steps, namely: (1) candi-
date extraction, (2) keyword ranking, and (3) word
sense disambiguation. The candidate extraction step
parses the input document and extracts all the pos-
sible n-grams that are also present in the vocabulary
used in the encyclopedic graph (i.e., anchor texts for
links inside Wikipedia or article or category titles).
Next, the ranking step assigns a numeric value to
each candidate, reflecting the likelihood that a given
candidate is a valuable keyword. Wikify! uses a
?keyphraseness? measure to estimate the probabil-
ity of a term W to be selected as a keyword in a
211
document, by counting the number of documents
where the term was already selected as a keyword
count(Dkey) divided by the total number of docu-
ments where the term appeared count(DW ). These
counts are collected from all the Wikipedia articles.
P (keyword|W ) ? count(Dkey)count(DW )
(1)
This probability can be interpreted as ?the more
often a term was selected as a keyword among its
total number of occurrences, the more likely it is that
it will be selected again.?
Finally, a simple word sense disambiguation
method is applied, which identifies the most likely
article in Wikipedia to which a concept should
be linked to. This step is trivial for words or
phrases that have only one corresponding article in
Wikipedia, but it requires an explicit disambiguation
step for those words or phrases that have multiple
meanings (e.g., ?plant?) and thus multiple candidate
pages to link to. The algorithm is based on statistical
methods that identify the frequency of meanings in
text, combined with symbolic methods that attempt
to maximize the overlap between the current docu-
ment and the candidate Wikipedia articles. See (Mi-
halcea and Csomai, 2007) for more details.
2.3 Biased Ranking of the Wikipedia Graph
Starting with the graph of encyclopedic knowledge,
and knowing the nodes that belong to the input doc-
ument, we want to rank all the nodes in the graph
so that we obtain a score that indicates their impor-
tance relative to the given document. We can do this
by using a graph-ranking algorithm biased toward
the nodes belonging to the input document.
Graph-based ranking algorithms such as PageR-
ank are a way of deciding the importance of a vertex
within a graph, based on global information recur-
sively drawn from the entire graph. One formula-
tion is in terms of a random walk through a directed
graph. A ?random surfer? visits nodes of the graph,
and has some probability of jumping to some other
random node of the graph, and the remaining proba-
bility of continuing their walk from the current node
to one in its outdegree list. The rank of a node is an
indication of the probability that the surfer would be
found at that node at any given time.
Formally, let G = (V,E) be a directed graph with
the set of vertices V and set of edges E, where E is
a subset of V ? V . For a given vertex Vi, let In(Vi)
be the set of vertices that point to it (predecessors),
and let Out(Vi) be the set of vertices that vertex Vi
points to (successors). The score of a vertex Vi is
defined as follows (Brin and Page, 1998):
S(Vi) = (1? d) + d ?
?
j?In(Vi)
1
|Out(Vj)|
S(Vj) (2)
where d is a damping factor usually set to 0.85.
Given the ?random surfer? interpretation of the
ranking process, the (1 ? d) portion represents the
probability that a surfer will jump to a given node
from any other node at random, and the summation
portion indicates that the process will enter the node
via edges directly connected to it.
We introduce a bias in this graph-based rank-
ing algorithm by extending the framework of per-
sonalization of PageRank proposed by (Haveliwala,
2002). We modify the formula so that the (1 ? d)
component also accounts for the importance of the
concepts found in the input document, and it is sup-
pressed for all the nodes that are not found in the
input document.
S(Vi) = (1?d)?Bias(Vi)+d?
?
j?In(Vi)
1
|Out(Vj)|
S(Vj)
(3)
where Bias(Vi) is only defined for those nodes ini-
tially identified in the input document:
Bias(Vi) = f(Vi)?
j?InitalNodeSet
f(Vj)
and 0 for all other nodes in the graph.
InitalNodeSet is the set of nodes belonging
to the input document.
Note that f(Vi) can vary in complexity from a de-
fault value of 1 to a complex knowledge-based es-
timation. In our implementation, we use a combi-
nation of the ?keyphraseness? score assigned to the
node Vi and its distance from the ?Fundamental?
category in Wikipedia.
The use of the Bias assigned to each node means
the surfer random jumps will be limited to only those
nodes connected to the original query. Thus the
graph-ranking process becomes biased and focused
on those topics directly related to the input. It also
accumulates activation at those nodes not directly
found in the input text, but linked through indirect
means, thus reinforcing the nodes where patterns of
activation intersect and creating a constructive in-
terference pattern in the network. These reinforced
nodes are the ?implied related topics? of the text.
212
3 Illustration
To illustrate the ranking process, consider as an ex-
ample the following sentence ?The United States
was involved in the Cold War.?
First the text is passed through the Wikify! sys-
tem, which returns the articles ?United States? and
?Cold War.? Taking into account their ?keyphrase-
ness? as calculated by Wikify!, the selections are
given an initial bias of 0.5492 (?United States?) and
0.4508 (?Cold War?).
After the first iteration the initial activation
spreads out into the encyclopedic graph, the nodes
find a direct connection to one another, and cor-
respondingly their scores are changed to 0.3786
(?United States?) and 0.3107 (?Cold War?). After
the second iteration, new nodes are identified from
the encyclopedic graph, a subset of which is shown
in Figure2. The process will eventually continue for
several iterations until the scores of the nodes do not
change. The nodes with the highest scores in the
final graph are considered to be the most closely re-
lated to the input sentence, and thus selected as rel-
evant topics.
Figure 2: Sub-graph between ?United States? and ?Cold
War?
In order to see the effect of the initial bias, con-
sider as an example the ranking of the nodes in
the encyclopedic graph when biased with the sen-
tence ?The United States was involved in the Cold
War,? versus the sentence ?Microsoft applies Com-
puter Science.? A comparison between the scores of
the nodes when activated by each of these sentences
is shown in Table 1.
Wikipedia entry US/CW MS/CS Diff.
A: United States 0.393636 0.006578 0.387058
C: Computer Science 0.000004 0.003576 -0.003571
A: World War II 0.007102 0.003674 0.003428
A: United Kingdom 0.005346 0.002670 0.002676
C: Microsoft 0.000001 0.001839 -0.001837
C: Cold War 0.001695 0.000006 0.001689
C: Living People 0.000835 0.002223 -0.001387
C: Mathematics 0.000029 0.001337 -0.001307
C: Computing 0.000008 0.001289 -0.001280
C: Computer Pioneers 0.000002 0.001238 -0.001235
Table 1: Node ranking differences when the encyclo-
pedic graph is biased with different inputs: (1) ?United
States? and ?Cold War? (US/CW) vs. (2) ?Microsoft?
and ?Computer Science? (MS/CS). The nodes are either
article pages (A) or category pages (C).
4 Experiments
In order to measure the effectiveness of the topic
ranking process, we run three sets of experiments,
aimed at measuring the relevancy of the automati-
cally identified topics with respect to manually an-
notated gold standard data sets.
In the first experiment, the identification of the
important concepts in the input text (used to bias the
topic ranking process) is performed manually, by the
Wikipedia users. In the second and third experiment,
the identification of these important concepts is done
automatically, by the Wikify! system. In all the ex-
periments, the ranking of the concepts from the en-
cyclopedic graph is done automatically by using the
dynamic ranking process described in Section 2.
In the first two experiments, we use a data set
consisting of 150 articles from Wikipedia, which
have been explicitly removed from the encyclope-
dic graph. All the articles in this data set include
manual annotations of the relevant categories, as as-
signed by the Wikipedia users, against which we
can measure the quality of the automatic topic as-
signments. The 150 articles have been randomly se-
lected while following the constraint that they each
contain at least three article links and at least three
category links. Our task is to rediscover the relevant
categories for each page. Note that the task is non-
trivial, since there are approximately 390,000 cate-
gories to choose from. We evaluate the quality of
our system through the standard measures of preci-
213
sion and recall.
4.1 Manual Annotation of the Input Text
In this first experiment, the articles in the gold stan-
dard data set alo include manual annotations of the
important concepts in the text, i.e., the links to other
Wikipedia articles as created by the Wikipedia users.
Thus, in this experiment we only measure the accu-
racy of the dynamic topic ranking process, without
interference from the Wikify! system.
There are two main parameters that can be set dur-
ing a system run. First, the set of initial nodes used
as bias in the ranking can include: (1) the initial set
of articles linked to by the original document (via
the Wikipedia links); (2) the categories listed in the
articles linked to by the original document2; and (3)
both. Second, the dynamic ranking process can be
run through propagation on an encyclopedic graph
that includes (1) all the articles from Wikipedia; (2)
all the categories from Wikipedia; or (3) all the arti-
cles and the categories from Wikipedia.
Figures 3, 4 and 5 show the precision, recall and
F-measure obtained for the various settings. In the
plots, Bias and Propagate indicate the selections
made for the two parameters, which can be each set
to Articles, Categories, or Both. Each of these
correspond to the options listed before.
 0
 0.02
 0.04
 0.06
 0.08
 0.1
 0.12
 0.14
 0.16
 0.18
 0  20  40  60  80  100
P
re
ci
si
on
Top N topics returned
BiasArticles- PropCategories
BiasCategories- PropArticles PropCategories
BiasArticles BiasCategories- PropCategories
BiasArticles- PropArticles PropCategories
BiasArticles BiasCategories- PropArticles
BiasCategories- PropArticles
BiasArticles- PropArticles
BiasArticles BiasCategories- PropArticles PropCategories
BiasCategories- PropCategories
Baseline
Figure 3: Precision for manual input text annotations.
As seen in the figures, the best results are obtained
for a setting where both the initial bias and the prop-
agation include all the available nodes, i.e., both ar-
ticles and categories. Although the primary task is
2These should not be confused with the categories included
in the document itself, which represent the gold standard anno-
tations and are not used at any point.
 0
 0.05
 0.1
 0.15
 0.2
 0.25
 0.3
 0.35
 0.4
 0.45
 0.5
 0  20  40  60  80  100
R
ec
al
l
Top N topics returned
BiasArticles- PropCategories
BiasCategories- PropArticles PropCategories
BiasArticles BiasCategories- PropCategories
BiasArticles- PropArticles PropCategories
BiasArticles BiasCategories- PropArticles
BiasCategories- PropArticles
BiasArticles- PropArticles
BiasArticles BiasCategories- PropArticles PropCategories
BiasCategories- PropCategories
Baseline
Figure 4: Recall for manual input text annotations.
 0
 0.02
 0.04
 0.06
 0.08
 0.1
 0.12
 0.14
 0.16
 0.18
 0  20  40  60  80  100
F
-M
ea
su
re
Top N topics returned
BiasArticles- PropCategories
BiasCategories- PropArticles PropCategories
BiasArticles BiasCategories- PropCategories
BiasArticles- PropArticles PropCategories
BiasArticles BiasCategories- PropArticles
BiasCategories- PropArticles
BiasArticles- PropArticles
BiasArticles BiasCategories- PropArticles PropCategories
BiasCategories- PropCategories
Baseline
Figure 5: F-measure when using Wikipedia article anno-
tations.
the identification of the categories, the addition of
the article links improves the system performance.
To place results in perspective, we also calculate a
baseline (labeled as ?Baseline? in the plots), which
selects by default all the categories listed in the arti-
cles linked to by the original document. Each base-
line article assigns 1/N to each of its N possible
categories, with categories pointed to by multiple ar-
ticles receiving the summation.
4.2 Automatic Annotation of the Input Text
The second experiment is similar to the first one, ex-
cept that rather than using the manual annotations
of the important concepts in the input document,
we use instead the Wikify! system that automat-
ically identifies these important concepts by using
the method briefly described in Section 2.2. The ar-
ticle links identified by Wikify! are treated in the
same way as the human anchor annotations from the
previous experiment. In this experiment, we have
214
an additional parameter, which consists of the per-
centage of links selected by Wikify! out of the total
number of words in the document. We refer to this
parameter as keyRatio. The higher the keyRatio, the
more terms are added, but also the higher the poten-
tial of noise due to mis-disambiguation.
Figures 6, 7 and 8 show the effect of varying the
value of the keyRatio parameter used by Wikify! has
on the precision, recall and F-measure of the system.
Note that in this experiment, we only use the best
setting for the other two parameters as identified in
the previous experiment, namely an initial bias and
a propagation step that include all available nodes,
i.e., both articles and categories.
 0
 0.05
 0.1
 0.15
 0.2
 0.25
 0  20  40  60  80  100
P
re
ci
si
on
Top N topics returned
keyRatio= 0.02
keyRatio= 0.04
keyRatio= 0.08
keyRatio= 0.16
Baseline keyRatio= 0.04
Figure 6: Precision for automatic input text annotations
(Wikipedia data set)
 0
 0.05
 0.1
 0.15
 0.2
 0.25
 0.3
 0.35
 0  20  40  60  80  100
R
ec
al
l
Top N topics returned
keyRatio= 0.02
keyRatio= 0.04
keyRatio= 0.08
keyRatio= 0.16
Baseline keyRatio= 0.04
Figure 7: Recall for automatic input text annotations
(Wikipedia data set)
The system?s best performance occurs for a
keyRatio of 0.04 to 0.06, which coincides with the
ratio found optimal in previous experiments using
the Wikify! system (Mihalcea and Csomai, 2007).
 0.01
 0.02
 0.03
 0.04
 0.05
 0.06
 0.07
 0.08
 0.09
 0.1
 0.11
 0  20  40  60  80  100
F
-M
ea
su
re
Top N topics returned
keyRatio= 0.02
keyRatio= 0.04
keyRatio= 0.08
keyRatio= 0.16
Baseline keyRatio= 0.04
Figure 8: F-measure for automatic input text annotations
(Wikipedia data set)
As before, we also calculate a baseline, which se-
lects by default all the categories listed in the articles
linked to by the original document, with the links
being automatically identified with the Wikify! sys-
tem. The baseline is calculated for a keyRatio of
0.04, which is one of the values that were found to
work well for the ranking system itself and in previ-
ous Wikify! experiments.
Overall, the system manages to find many relevant
topics for the documents in the evaluation data set,
despite the large number of candidate topics (close
to 390,000). Our system exceeds the baseline by a
large margin, demonstrating the usefulness of using
the biased ranking on the encyclopedic graph.
4.3 Article Selection for Computer Science
Texts
In the third experiment, we use again the Wikify!
system to annotate the input documents, but this
time we run the evaluations on a data set consist-
ing of computer science documents. We use the data
set introduced in previous work on topic identifica-
tion (Medelyan and Witten, 2008), where 20 doc-
uments in the field of computer science were inde-
pendently annotated by 15 teams of two computer
science undergraduates. The teams were asked to
read the texts and assign to each of them the title
of the five Wikipedia articles they thought were the
most relevant and the other groups would also se-
lect. Thus, the consistency of the annotations was
an important measure for this data set. (Medelyan
and Witten, 2008) define consistency as a measure
of agreement:
Consistency = 2CA+B
215
where A and B are the number of terms assigned
by two indexing teams, and C is the number of
terms they have in common. In the annotations ex-
periments reported in (Medelyan and Witten, 2008),
the human teams consistency ranged from 21.4% to
37.1%, with 30.5% being the average.3
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 0  20  40  60  80  100
P
re
ci
si
on
Top N topics returned
keyRatio= 0.02
keyRatio= 0.04
keyRatio= 0.08
keyRatio= 0.16
Baseline keyRatio= 0.04
Figure 9: Precision for automatic input text annotations
(Waikato data set)
 0
 0.05
 0.1
 0.15
 0.2
 0.25
 0.3
 0.35
 0.4
 0.45
 0  20  40  60  80  100
R
ec
al
l
Top N topics returned
keyRatio= 0.02
keyRatio= 0.04
keyRatio= 0.08
keyRatio= 0.16
Baseline keyRatio= 0.04
Figure 10: Recall for automatic input text annotations
(Waikato data set)
Figures 10, 9, 11 and 12 show the performance
of our system on this data set, by using the Wikify!
annotations for the initial bias, and then propagat-
ing to both articles and categories. The plots also
show a baseline that selects all the articles automat-
ically identified in the original document by using
the Wikify! system with a keyRatio set to 0.04.
3The consistency for one team is measured as the average of
the consistencies with the remaining 14 teams.
 0
 0.05
 0.1
 0.15
 0.2
 0.25
 0.3
 0  20  40  60  80  100
F
-M
ea
su
re
Top N topics returned
keyRatio= 0.02
keyRatio= 0.04
keyRatio= 0.08
keyRatio= 0.16
Baseline keyRatio= 0.04
Figure 11: F-measure for automatic input text annota-
tions (Waikato data set)
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0  20  40  60  80  100
C
on
si
st
en
cy
Top N topics returned
keyRatio= 0.02
keyRatio= 0.04
keyRatio= 0.08
keyRatio= 0.16
Baseline keyRatio= 0.04
Figure 12: Consistency for automatic input text annota-
tions (Waikato data set)
When selecting the top five topics returned by our
system (the same number of topics as provided by
the human teams), the average consistency with re-
spect to the 15 human teams was measured at 34.5%,
placing it between the 86% and 93% percentile of
the human participants, with only two human teams
doing better. We can compare this result with the
one reported in previous work for the same data
set. Using a machine learning system, (Medelyan
and Witten, 2008) reported a consistency of 30.5%.
Thus, our result of 34.5% is significantly better, de-
spite the fact that our method is unsupervised.
In a second evaluation, we also considered the
union of all the terms assigned by the 15 teams. On
average, each document was assigned 35.5 differ-
ent terms by the human teams. If allowed to pro-
vide more annotations, our system peaks with a con-
216
sistency of 66.6% for the top 25 topics returned.
The system has the ability to identify possible rele-
vant alternative topics using the comprehensive cata-
log of Wikipedia computer science articles and their
possible associations. A human team may not nec-
essarily consider all of the possibilities or even be
aware that some of the articles, possibly known and
used by the other teams, exist.
5 Related Work
The work closest to ours is perhaps the one de-
scribed in (Medelyan and Witten, 2008), where top-
ics relevant to a given document are automatically
selected by using a machine learning system. Unlike
our unsupervised approach, (Medelyan and Witten,
2008) learn what makes a good topic by training on
previously annotated data.
Also related is the Wikify! system concerned
with the automatic annotation of documents with
Wikipedia links (Mihalcea and Csomai, 2007).
However, Wikify! is purely extractive, and thus it
cannot identify important topics or articles that are
not explicitly mentioned in the input text.
Explicit semantic analysis (Gabrilovich and
Markovitch, 2006) was also introduced as a way to
determine the relevancy of the Wikipedia articles
with respect to a given input text. The resulting
vector however is extremely large, and while it was
found useful for the task of text classification with a
relatively small number of categories, it would be
difficult to adapt for topic identification when the
number of possible topics grows beyond the approx-
imately 390,000 under consideration. In a similar
line of work, (Bodo et al, 2007) examined the use
of Wikipedia and latent semantic analysis for the
purposes of text categorization, but reported nega-
tive results when used for the categorization of the
Reuters-21578 dataset.
Others are exploring the use of graph propagation
for deriving semantic information. (Hughes and Ra-
mage, 2007) described the use of a biased PageRank
over the WordNet graph to compute word pair se-
mantic relatedness using the divergence of the prob-
ability values over the graph created by each word.
(Ollivier and Senellart, 2007) describes a method to
determine related Wikipedia article using a Markov
chain derived value called the green measure. Dif-
ferences exist between the PageRank based meth-
ods used as a baseline in their work and the method
proposed here, since our system can use the content
of the article, multiple starting points, and tighter
control of the random jump probability via the bias
value. Finally, (Syed et al, 2008) reported positive
results by using various methods for topic prediction
including the use of text similarity and spreading ac-
tivation. The method was tested by using randomly
selected Wikipedia articles, where in addition to the
categories listed on a Wikipedia page, nearby sub-
suming categories were also included as acceptable.
6 Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper, we introduced a system for automatic
topic identification, which relies on a biased graph
centrality algorithm applied on a richly intercon-
nected encyclopedic graph built from Wikipedia.
Experiments showed that the integration of ency-
clopedic knowledge consistently adds useful infor-
mation when compared to baselines that rely exclu-
sively on the text at hand. In particular, when tested
on a data set consisting of documents manually an-
notated with categories by Wikipedia users, the top-
ics identified by our system were found useful as
compared to the manual annotations. Moreover, in
a second evaluation on a computer science data set,
the system exceeded the performance of previously
proposed machine learning algorithms, which is re-
markable given the fact that our system is unsuper-
vised. In terms of consistency with manual anno-
tations, our system?s performance was found to be
comparable to human annotations, with only two out
of 15 teams scoring better than our system.
The system provides a means to generate a dy-
namic ranking of topics in Wikipedia within a
framework that has the potential to utilize knowl-
edge or heuristics through additional resources (like
ontologies) converted to graph form. This capabil-
ity is not present in resources like search engines
that provide access to a static ranking of Wikipedia.
Future work will examine the integration of addi-
tional knowledge sources and the application of the
method for metadata document annotations.
Acknowledgments
This work has been partially supported by an award
#CR72105 from the Texas Higher Education Coor-
dinating Board and by an award from Google Inc.
The authors are grateful to the Waikato group for
making their data set available.
217
References
Z. Bodo, Z. Minier, and L. Csato. 2007. Text categoriza-
tion experiments using Wikipedia. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Knowledge Engineer-
ing ,Principles and Techniques, Cluj-Napoca (Roma-
nia).
S. Brin and L. Page. 1998. The anatomy of a large-scale
hypertextual Web search engine. Computer Networks
and ISDN Systems, 30(1?7).
E. Gabrilovich and S. Markovitch. 2006. Overcoming
the brittleness bottleneck using Wikipedia: Enhancing
text categorization with encyclopedic knowledge. In
Proceedings of the National Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (AAAI), Boston.
T. Haveliwala. 2002. Topic-sensitive PageRank. In
Proceedings of the Eleventh International World Wide
Web Conference, May.
T. Hughes and D. Ramage. 2007. Lexical semantic
knowledge with random graph walks. In Proceedings
of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, Prague, Czech Republic.
O. Medelyan and I. H. Witten. 2008. Topic indexing
with Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the AAAI WikiAI
workshop.
R. Mihalcea and A. Csomai. 2007. Wikify!: linking doc-
uments to encyclopedic knowledge. In Proceedings
of the Sixteenth ACM Conference on Information and
Knowledge Management, Lisbon, Portugal.
Y. Ollivier and P. Senellart. 2007. Finding related pages
using green measures: An illustration with wikipedia.
In Association for the Advancement of Artificial In-
telligence Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI
2007).
Z. Syed, T. Finin, and A. Joshi. 2008. Wikipedia as an
Ontology for Describing Documents. In Proceedings
of the Second International Conference on Weblogs
and Social Media. AAAI Press, March.
218
