Proceedings of the NAACL HLT Workshop on Computational Approaches to Linguistic Creativity, pages 55?62,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Curveship: An Interactive Fiction System for Interactive Narrating 
 
 Nick Montfort 
Program in Writing and Humanistic Studies 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA 
nickm@nickm.com 
 
 
 
Abstract 
Interactive fiction (often called ?IF?) is a ven-
erable thread of creative computing that in-
cludes Adventure, Zork, and the computer 
game The Hitchhiker?s Guide to the Galaxy as 
well as innovative recent work. These pro-
grams are usually known as ?games,? appro-
priately, but they can also be rich forms of 
text-based computer simulation, dialog sys-
tems, and examples of computational literary 
art. Theorists of narrative have long distin-
guished between the level of underlying con-
tent or story (which can usefully be seen as 
corresponding to the simulated world in inter-
active fiction) and that of expression or dis-
course (corresponding to the textual exchange 
between computer and user). While IF devel-
opment systems have offered a great deal of 
power and flexibility to author/programmers 
by providing a computational model of the 
fictional world, previous systems have not 
systematically distinguished between the tell-
ing and what is told. Developers were not able 
to control the content and expression levels 
independently so that they could, for instance, 
have a program relate events out of chrono-
logical order or have it relate events from the 
perspective of different characters. Curveship 
is an interactive fiction system which draws 
on narrative theory and computational linguis-
tics to allow the transformation of the narrat-
ing in these ways. This talk will briefly 
describe interactive fiction, narrative varia-
tion, and how Curveship provides new capa-
bilities for interactive fiction authors. 
 
1 Curveship and Its Contexts 
This paper addresses those interested in aesthetic 
and computational, work with language, whether 
or not they are familiar with interactive fiction or 
narrative theory. I describe the twofold motivation 
behind Curveship, explaining why I find interac-
tive fiction compelling and why I find narrative 
variation a worthwhile capability for a literary 
computer system. I then sketch the way that 
Curveship works, pointing to aspects of the system 
that will, I hope, interest interactive fiction authors 
and also have relevance beyond interactive fiction. 
Several histories of interactive fiction are avail-
able, including book-length (Montfort 2003) and 
briefer ones (Nelson 2001, Montfort 2007a). This 
paper focuses on how interactive fiction works, 
and on explaining its conventions, rather than on 
detailing the history of the first interactive fiction, 
Adventure (written in 1976 by Will Crowther and 
Don Woods), the ?mainframe? games that 
followed, interactive fiction in the commercial 
marketplace (including the many notable 
contributions of Infocom), and the surge in 
development by individual, non-commercial inter-
active fiction authors. This paper also doesn?t pro-
vide any information about how to download or 
run interactive fiction, and very little about how to 
play it, although several FAQs and other resources 
are available online with that information (IFWiki 
2009, Aiken 2008, Cadre n.d.). 
After offering some of the motivation for this 
work, this paper provides a high-level introduction 
to Curveship and its capabilities. The details on 
narrative variation and on how it has been imple-
mented computationally are available in the 
55
author?s dissertation (Montfort 2007b). While the 
interface to the system has been streamlined and 
other changes are being made to facilitate the use 
of Curveship by interactive fiction authors, the ap-
proach to narrative variation that is described there 
remains current. 
2  The Interactive Fiction Tradition 
Since the release of the first work of interactive 
fiction in 1976, those working in the form have 
developed conventions and traditions and have 
undertaken many different sorts of exploration and 
innovation. 
A snippet of a transcript from this author?s 
Book and Volume  (2005) gives a basic idea of what 
interaction is like: 
 
Your Apartment Building?s Lobby 
Clean, if not homey. The doorman waits in a 
Plexiglas cube that looks curiously bullet-
proof. 
 
>leave 
Onward, into the intentional city. nWare 
crafted it well -- built from the ground up 
with security and scalability in mind, it?s 
fully pedestrianized but hums, almost full-
size, like a city center. 
 
The night sky is completely cloudless. The 
dry warmth of the air hints at the desert that 
surrounds nTopia. 
 
Abalone & Fifth 
Your apartment building is on the southwest 
corner. Opposite it is a windowless, blocky 
building. On the southeast corner Pharmico-
pia sprawls. Otto?s Automat is to the north-
west. 
 
A window pops up in the lower right corner 
of your nLap. In it, the uncanny red stapler 
wiggles its hinged head to the accompani-
ment of a cheery robot voice: 
 
I see you?re outside! Hey, the nice thing 
about this city is that it uses the grid system, 
so you can just go NO RTH, EAST, SO UTH, 
or WEST, and you?ll pretty much always end 
up somewhere else! 
 
The window winks away. 
 
>go to the automat 
 
Otto?s Automat 
Someone, perhaps nWare?s monarchically 
wealthy founder, shellf, really got into Dark 
City.  There couldn?t be any other excuse for 
this combination vending machine and cafe-
teria, even though it may strain to look mod-
ern and appetizing. Pixelated smiley faces in 
an urgent red decorate everything, even the 
edges of the food-dispensing wall. 
 
The opportunity to avoid social contact dur-
ing food selection is appealing. 
 
>buy some food 
Food does seem like a good idea. You select 
something palatable from the food-
dispensing wall and begin to consume it, 
face flickering with mammalian happiness.      
 
A guy you met during new employee reori-
entation -- Knut, you think his name is -- fur-
tively joins you as you?re dining. He looks 
even more feverish and high-strung than he 
did a few days ago. 
 
?Hi. Hi again. Gotta tell. Tell you some-
thing.? 
 
Here, the player character ? the one controlled by 
the player via textual commands ? begins in the 
lobby of his apartment building. The player then 
types a command for that character to ?leave,? 
which he does, ending up outside at an intersec-
tion. Because the player character happens to be 
carrying his laptop computer, which is turned on, 
an annoying animated agent appears and dispenses 
some advice. The next command, ?go to the auto-
mat,? directs the character to enter a different 
building. (?Go northwest,? ?walk northwest,? 
?northwest,? or simply ?nw? would have all done 
the same thing.) Finally, the character is com-
manded to ?buy some food,? which the character 
does ? something that is only possible because the 
character has his electronic cash device, isn?t sated, 
and is in place where food is sold. Although these 
are not dramatically interesting actions, they, in 
56
this game and in others, can be part of figuring out 
the nature of an unusual world. 
Of course, not every input works as smoothly 
as these did in this context. Actions often work if 
they are warranted by the situation in some way; so 
?buy some food? is appropriate in an automat 
while ?donate my organs to science? isn?t. A char-
acter can be commanded to walk in a particular 
direction, or to enter a building that is nearby, but 
not, usually, to ?go to Tangiers.? And there is usu-
ally no need for fine-grained positioning or de-
scribing the manner in which an action is done, so 
instead of issuing the command ?hop spryly over 
to the coffee table? to prepare for setting down 
one?s mug, it?s fine to just go directly to typing 
?put my mug on the coffee table.? 
Moving a character around using compass di-
rections is a very notable convention originating 
with Adventure, although there were other ways to 
get around in that game. However it?s done, trav-
ersing a virtual space is very important to interac-
tive fiction. 
There are four important characteristics of in-
teractive fiction that make it interesting from a re-
search standpoint as well as from the standpoint of 
poetics. A work of interactive fiction is: 
? A limited domain that serves as a simu-
lated ?microworld.? It has a complete model of the 
things that can be manipulated in the simulation 
and can be usefully talked about. 
? A dialog system. Natural language is pro-
vided as output, and the system accepts commands 
that, although simple and short, are instances of 
English text. 
? A computer game, providing enjoyment 
and fun. Although not the preeminent form of 
computer entertainment today, as it was around 
1980, interactive fiction is something that many 
people find enjoyable and interact with for its own 
sake.  
? A form of aesthetic expression and literary 
art. As with any form or medium, only a few use a 
significant amount of this potential. But the com-
putational, literary nature of interactive fiction 
gives it the capability to do aesthetic work that 
could not otherwise be done. 
Since many people don?t realize that interactive 
fiction extends beyond the cave setting and fantasy 
genre, it?s worth mentioning a few examples of 
work from the last few years, work that gives an 
idea of the range of interactive fiction today ? all 
of which is available for free download and easily 
found online: 
Anchorhead, by Michael Gentry, 1998: An ex-
pansive interactive fiction with deep secrets and 
action that runs over several days, inspired in tone 
and style by H. P. Lovecraft. 
Bad Machine,  by Dan Shovitz, 1998: Manifest-
ing itself as confusing a mix of status reports, error 
messages, this interactive fiction takes place in a 
strange robot-run factory. 
Narcolepsy,  by Adam Cadre, 2003: A seem-
ingly contemporary, ordinary interactive fiction 
that branches hilariously into strange genre scenar-
ios. 
Slouching toward Bedlam,  by Star C. Foster 
and Daniel Ravipinto, 2003: A steampunk science 
fiction piece set in an asylum and involving tech-
nological and kabbalistic themes. 
Savoir-Faire,  by Emily Short, 2002: The return 
to a childhood home provides opportunities to re-
member the past and requires that the player figure 
out an intricate system of sympathetic magic. 
S pider and Web,  by Andrew Plotkin, 1998: A 
science-fiction spy thriller that has the player reen-
act past events to the satisfaction of an interroga-
tor. 
Interactive fiction as it exists now is a type of 
virtual reality, a simulation of not only a space and 
the characters and things in that space but also of 
physical and metaphysical laws that obtain in a 
world. Furthermore, it?s a virtual reality that works 
well, one in which conventions have evolved about 
the level of abstraction and the types of commands 
that will work. An effective way of interacting has 
been negotiated. 
Although more could be done to better simulate 
a world and to better understand language in inter-
active fiction, the Curveship project has a different 
goal. Curveship is being developed to add to inter-
active fiction?s well-established capability for 
simulation a new capability for narration, one that 
will allow the telling to be parametrically varied. 
3  Narrative Variation 
For more than three decades, interactive fiction 
programs have simulated fictional worlds. By al-
lowing control over settings, characters, and the 
57
incidents that happen, they have provided very use-
ful facilities. However, literary works are not pow-
erful and compelling merely because of what 
happens in them. They also rely on these events 
being told in an interesting way, on the different 
types of narrating that can be done. The interactive 
fiction system I am describing, Curveship, uses 
natural language generation to allow the narrating 
to be varied parametrically. To understand why 
this is a significant capability, it is worth turning to 
non-digital novels, stories, and narrative poems to 
see how they accomplish their effects. 
We may consider different novels, stories, and 
poems to be ?great? ? powerful, affecting, trans-
forming, deeply pleasing to read ? but whichever 
ones we prefer, it is unlikely that we appreciate 
them simply because of what happens in them. The 
way these events are narrated is also important. A 
paraphrase or summary is generally not considered 
to be as interesting as is a great work of literature, 
even an ancient one. A timeline of events would 
hardly compare to The Odyssey , in which Odys-
seus tells some of the events himself, in which he 
weeps as he hears a bard, who does not know 
Odysseus?s identity, relating the events of the Tro-
jan War and his own exploits to him. This is not to 
say that there can be no interesting retellings of 
The Odyssey,  only that any telling will be interest-
ing or not based on how the narrating is done. 
The study of narrating, of how the same under-
lying events can be told in different ways, has been 
undertaken systematically in the field of narrative 
theory or narratology , in which the distinction be-
tween story/content and discourse, between that 
which is narrated the narrative itself, has been 
central. Specifically, the model that G?rard Genette 
presents in Figures III,  translated into English as 
Narrative Discourse (Genette 1980) and later re-
vised in Narrative Discourse Revisited (Genette 
1988), has provided the basis for narrative varia-
tion in  Curveship. 
A variant of a simple story given as an example 
by E. M. Foster is represented in figure 1. There 
are five underlying events: The death of the king, 
the grieving of the queen, the death of the queen, 
the usurping of the throne by a clown, and the 
laughing of the jester. These can be told one after 
another in their chronological order, as the top part 
of the diagram shows. But it is also possible to nar-
rate the same underlying contest by saying ?The 
king and queen died. The jester laughed ? after 
the clown usurped the throne.? This telling repre-
sented in the bottom part of the diagram, and cor-
responds to changes in three of Genette?s 
categories: frequency  (whether there is one telling 
per event, one for several events, or several for one 
event), speed  (how rapidly or slowly events are 
related), and order (the sequence in which events 
are represented as compared to their chronological 
order in the story world). In this case, the king and 
queen?s death are both narrated with a single 
statement, a change in frequency; the queen?s grief 
is skipped over as rapidly as is possible and thus 
omitted entirely, a change in speed; and the 
clown?s usurping of the throne is mentioned last, 
after the jester?s laughter, which it apparently oc-
casioned ? a change in order. 
Genette describes several other categories of 
variation, two of which are important for this pa-
per. The time of narrating  describes the temporal 
relationship between the narrating and the events 
of the story. For instance, in ?I was driving down 
the road and it started raining frogs? the narrating 
is happening after the events, but a different (and 
still perfectly plausible) telling of this story, ?So 
I?m driving down the road and all of the sudden it 
starts raining frogs,? the narrating and the events 
take place at the same time, giving a more immedi-
ate feel to the narrative. We could gloss this differ-
ent as one of ?past tense? and ?present tense,? but 
this simple reference to grammar breaks down as a 
story gets more complex. If the narrator-character 
were to continue by noting ?I had just had the 
wiper blades replaced? in the first case and ?I just 
had the wiper blades replaced,? the story would no 
 
 
Figure 1.  The same underlying events can be repre-
sented in a straightforward chronological way (above) 
or with different frequency,  speed, and order (below). 
58
longer be entirely in the simple present or simple 
past. The important difference here, although it is 
reflected in the grammar, is actually a narrative 
one. 
Focalization, briefly, describes the way that the 
information available to the narrator is regulated. If 
the narrative follows a character and tells us only 
what that character knows, it is focalized by that 
character. Whether the character is referred to in 
the main level of the narrative as ?I,? in the third 
person (as in a typical Hemingway story), or even 
as ?you? (the standard case in interactive fiction) is 
a separate matter. Specifically, that has to do with 
who the narrator and naratee are and if there are 
characters within the story who have this role. 
4  The Architecture of Curveship 
State-of-the-art IF systems (including TADS 3 
and Inform 7) have innovated in many ways, but 
they are similar in offering two main modules, the 
?parser,? which deals with recognizing intended 
actions based on typed user input, and the rest of 
the program, which handles both the simulation of 
the IF world and the narrating of events and 
description of existents in that world. 
Curveship has a parser as well (the Recognizer) 
but, as shown in figure 2, it is further separated 
into modules that deal with different functions the 
interactive fiction system and program have to 
carry out. Significantly, it has separate Simulator 
and Narrator modules. The Simulator is potentially 
independent of the human language of a particular 
interactive fiction, although Curveship has only 
been implemented in English as yet. It updates the 
world models to reflect the new state of the under-
lying simulated world and the new theories that 
characters have about this world. Then, the Narra-
tor module, which is quite specific to a particular 
human language, builds a narrative reply using a 
 
Figure 2.  The architecture of Curveship. Each module is res ponsible for one more or less complex function; for 
instance, the Joker allows for save, restore, restart, and similar manipulation of the game state. The Simulator 
determines what events transpire in the IF world, while the Narrator deals with how to represent those events. 
59
world model and a plan for narrating. The Simula-
tor is the only module that updates the world mod-
els. Similarly, the discourse model is written only 
by the Recognizer (which updates this model to 
reflect the user?s contributions to the discourse) 
and the Narrator (which produces the system?s 
contributions to the discourse and updates the 
model to reflect these). 
Curveship?s somewhat unusual name is meant 
to call attention to how the system models the es-
sential qualities of variation ? the curve of a story 
through its telling ? just as friendship and author-
ship represent the essence of being a friend and 
author.1 The word ?curveship? was coined by Hart 
Crane (1899-1932) in the last line of his poem ?To 
Brooklyn Bridge,? in which he addresses the 
bridge: ?And of the curveship lend a myth to God.? 
5  Order and Time of Narrating 
The order of events as narrated does not have to 
correspond to the order of events in a fictional, 
simulated, or historical world. Genette represents 
the order of events in the narrating as a sequqnce, 
of the form ?3451267,? but he also notes that 
events can be reordered in many different ways, 
for different purposes and to different effects. For 
instance, in ?3451267,? the earliest two events, 
?12,? may have been narrated as what is com-
monly called flashback (which Genette calls an 
analepsis). But perhaps not: perhaps ?345,? ?12,? 
and ?67? all fell into different categories, and the 
narration was done according to these categories 
? using syllepsis, in Genette?s system. Or, per-
haps the events have been jumbled at random to 
confuse the reader about their temporal relation-
ship; this is called achrony. Cue words and tense 
will be used differently in these three cases, so 
?3451267? is not an adequate representation when 
text is to be generated, rather than just analyzed. 
Instead of representing the order of events in the 
narrative as a sequence, Curveship uses an ordered 
tree representation called a reply structure. It de-
scribes not only the sequence of events but also 
which level each event is at and what its relation-
ship is to the level above. To determine the tense, 
the system uses a theory that relates how three 
                                                           
1 This may seem like an obscure name, but at least it?s better 
than the name the system previously had, during the main 
phase of my research work: ?nn.? People often couldn?t even 
identify this as a word, whether it was spoken or written. 
points in time ? speech time (S), reference time 
(R), and event time (E) ? correspond to a particu-
lar grammatical tense (Reichenbach 1947). Event 
time is supplied by the simulator; the other two 
times are determined based on the plan for narrat-
ing and the reply structure as text generation are 
done. The reply structure representation allows for 
different orderings to be composed, so, for in-
stance, within a flashforward, the events can be 
jumbled achronously, and within each sylleptic 
category the narration can be done in a different 
temporal way. 
6  Focalization 
Curveship implements a system for changing fo-
calization based on Marie Laure-Ryan?s concept of 
a Fictional Actual World which the reader re-
centers upon (Ryan 2001). In the formulation of 
this concept for interactive fiction, it is useful to 
consider an Interactive Fiction Actual World that 
 
 
Figure 3.  The reply structures corresponding to three 
different orderings, all of which would look the same 
if a simple sequence were used as a representation. 
60
represents what is actual, or real, to the characters 
in the game. Each character, then ? each potential 
focalizer ? has his or her own world model, a the-
ory of this world which may be mistaken and al-
most certainly is partial. The Narrator, then, never 
even sees the underlying simulation, but instead 
relates events based on the focalizer?s current the-
ory of the world. 
Because the Narrator may tell about things that 
happened before the current state of the world, 
each focalizer maintains not only a current theory 
of the world but also a history of how the world 
appeared in the past. 
7  Text Generation in Curveship 
The Narrator, which does text generation in Curve-
ship, is organized into a standard three-stage pipe-
line. First comes the highest-level operation of 
content selection and ordering, which is done by 
the Reply Planner (essentially a document planner, 
but here part of a discourse is being planned). 
Then, the Microplanner determines the grammati-
cal specifics of the output based on the plan for 
narrating. Finally,  the Realizer accepts the para-
graph proposals from the Microplanner and pro-
duces a string. 
The problem of authoring for generation is a 
difficult one. Interactive fiction authors would like 
to be able to write as they do now, simply associat-
ing strings with objects and events. This represen-
tation is not suitable for the generation task, 
however. Something more general is needed to 
allow narrative variation to be automatically pro-
duced. 
Advanced research and commercial text genera-
tion system use highly abstract representations of 
sentences (different ones for each system) to allow 
text to be flexibly transformed, aggregated, and 
changed in tense, aspect, and person. While the 
power of this approach is unquestionable, taking 
this direction is also unsuitable, because it would 
require a tremendous investment on the part of 
authors, who would spend perhaps a hundred times 
the time and effort to create the same textual out-
put that they could jot off in the typical interactive 
fiction system. It is unlikely that anyone would 
undertake this voluntarily, and, if people did, it 
would almost certainly disrupt the authorship proc-
ess. 
As a compromise, Curvseship uses a string-
with-slots representation that offers significant 
flexibility in generation without the extreme com-
plexity of most sentence representations. It allows 
authors to ?cheat? and indicate that something 
should be treated as an entity in the discourse even 
if there is no model of it in the simulation. For in-
stance, the text at the beginning of Adventure can 
be generated from the following strings: 
 
?S_FC V_stand_PROG at the_end of 
a_road before 
a_small_brick_building? 
?a_small_stream V_flow_S out of 
the_building and down a_gully? 
 
The first slot, S_FC, indicates that the focaliz-
ing character is to be named there (pronominalized 
if appropriate) and will be the subject of the sen-
tence. The next, V_stand_PROG, says that the verb 
?stand? is to appear in the progressive. It is not 
necessary to specify the number; without such a 
specification, the verb will agree in number with 
the subject. The rest of th e first string looks ordi-
nary, except that noun phrases have been con-
nected with underscores. This indicates that they 
should be treated as entities in the discourse even 
though they are not simulated: The system will, for 
instance, output ?a road? the first time around and, 
since the road is then given in the discourse, it will 
 
Figure 4.  The Narrator module uses a standard 
three-stage pipeline for text generation. 
 
61
output ?the road? afterwards. Finally, in the second 
string, there is the slot V_flow_S. The subject of 
the sentence is not indicated, but it is not neces-
sary, since the ?_S? indicates that the verb ?flow? 
should be output in the singular. 
Depending on the plan for narrating and the 
state of the discourse, this can produce: 
You are standing at the end of a road before a 
small brick building. A small stream flows out 
of the building and down a gully. 
As well as: 
You were standing at the end of the road be-
fore the small brick building. The small stream 
flowed out of the building and down the gully. 
Along with more exotic strings that result from 
unusual narrative settings and the use of text fil-
ters. 
References 
Aiken, Jim. ?Getting Started with Interactive Fiction,? 
2008. http://www.musicwor ds.net/if/if_getting_ 
started.htm 
Cadre, Adam. ?Interactive Fiction ? Getting Started.? 
http://adamcadre.ac/content/if.txt 
Genette, G?rard. Narrative Discourse: An Essay in 
Method.  Trans. J. E. Lewin. Ithaca, NY:  Cornell 
University Press. 1980. 
Genette, G?rard. Narrative Discourse Revisited.  Trans. 
J. E. Lewin. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 
1988. 
IFWiki. ?Interactive Fiction FAQ,? 2009. 
http://ifwiki.org/index.php/FAQ 
Montfort, Nick. Twisty Little Passages: An Approach to 
Interactive Fiction . The MIT Press, 2003. 
Montfort, Nick. ?Generating Narrative Variation in In-
teractive Fiction.? Dissertation, University of Penn-
sylvania, 2007a. 
Montfort, Nick. ?Riddle Machines: The History and 
Nature of Interactive Fiction.? In A Companion to 
Digital Literary Studies, pp. 267?282. Editors, Ray 
Siemens and Susan Schreibman. Basil Blackwell, 
2007b. 
Nelson, Graham. ?A short hist ory of interactive fiction.? 
The Inform Designer?s Manual  section 46, 4 th edi-
tion, 2001. http://www.inform-
fiction.org/manual/html/s46.html 
Reichenbach, Hans. Elements of Symbolic Logic.  New 
York: Macmillan. 1947. 
Ryan, Marie-Laure. Narrative as Virtual Reality.  Balti-
more: Johns Hopkins University Press. 2001. 
62
