Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 180?189,
Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Sentiment Analysis of Conditional Sentences 
 
 
Ramanathan Narayanan 
Dept. of EECS 
Northwestern University 
ramanathan.an@gmail.com 
Bing Liu * 
Dept. of Computer Science
Univ. of Illinois at Chicago
liub@cs.uic.edu 
Alok Choudhary 
Dept. of EECS 
Northwestern University 
alokchoudhary01@gmail.com
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper studies sentiment analysis of condi-
tional sentences. The aim is to determine 
whether opinions expressed on different topics 
in a conditional sentence are positive, negative 
or neutral. Conditional sentences are one of the 
commonly used language constructs in text. In 
a typical document, there are around 8% of 
such sentences. Due to the condition clause, 
sentiments expressed in a conditional sentence 
can be hard to determine. For example, in the 
sentence, if your Nokia phone is not good, buy 
this great Samsung phone, the author is posi-
tive about ?Samsung phone? but does not ex-
press an opinion on ?Nokia phone? (although 
the owner of the ?Nokia phone? may be nega-
tive about it). However, if the sentence does 
not have ?if?, the first clause is clearly nega-
tive. Although ?if? commonly signifies a con-
ditional sentence, there are many other words 
and constructs that can express conditions. 
This paper first presents a linguistic analysis of 
such sentences, and then builds some super-
vised learning models to determine if senti-
ments expressed on different topics in a condi-
tional sentence are positive, negative or neu-
tral. Experimental results on conditional sen-
tences from 5 diverse domains are given to 
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed 
approach. 
1 Introduction  
Sentiment analysis (also called opinion mining) 
has been an active research area in recent years. 
There are many research directions, e.g., senti-
ment classification (classifying an opinion doc-
ument as positive or negative) (e.g., Pang, Lee 
and Vaithyanathan, 2002; Turney, 2002), subjec-
tivity classification (determining whether a sen-
tence is subjective or objective, and its associated 
opinion) (Wiebe and Wilson, 2002; Yu and Hat-
zivassiloglou, 2003; Wilson et al 2004; Kim and 
Hovy, 2004; Riloff and Wiebe, 2005), fea-
ture/topic-based sentiment analysis (assigning 
positive or negative sentiments to topics or prod-
uct features) (Hu and Liu 2004; Popescu and Et-
zioni, 2005; Carenini et al, 2005; Ku et al, 
2006; Kobayashi, Inui and Matsumoto, 2007; 
Titov and McDonald. 2008). Formal definitions 
of different aspects of the sentiment analysis 
problem and discussions of major research direc-
tions and algorithms can be found in (Liu, 2006; 
Liu, 2009). A comprehensive survey of the field 
can be found in (Pang and Lee, 2008).  
Our work is in the area of topic/feature-based 
sentiment analysis or opinion mining (Hu and 
Liu, 2004). The existing research focuses on 
solving the general problem. However, we argue 
that it is unlikely to have a one-technique-fit-all 
solution because different types of sentences ex-
press sentiments/opinions in different ways. A 
divide-and-conquer approach is needed, e.g., fo-
cused studies on different types of sentences. 
This paper focuses on one type of sentences, i.e., 
conditional sentences, which have some unique 
characteristics that make it hard to determine the 
orientation of sentiments on topics/features in 
such sentences. By sentiment orientation, we 
mean positive, negative or neutral opinions. By 
topic, we mean the target on which an opinion 
has been expressed. In the product domain, a top-
ic is usually a product feature (i.e., a component 
or attribute). For example, in the sentence, I do 
not like the sound quality, but love the design of 
this MP3 player, the product features (topics) are 
?sound quality? and ?design? of the MP3 player 
as opinions have been expressed on them. The 
sentiment is positive on ?design? but negative on 
?sound quality?.  
Conditional sentences are sentences that de-
scribe implications or hypothetical situations and 
their consequences. In the English language, a 
variety of conditional connectives can be used to 
form these sentences. A conditional sentence 
contains two clauses: the condition clause and 
*  This work was done when Bing Liu was on sabbatical 
leave at Northwestern University. 
180
the consequent clause, that are dependent on 
each other. Their relationship has significant im-
plications on whether the sentence describes an 
opinion. One simple observation is that senti-
ment words (also known as opinion words) (e.g., 
great, beautiful, bad) alone cannot distinguish an 
opinion sentence from a non-opinion one. A 
conditional sentence may contain many senti-
ment words or phrases, but express no opinion.  
Example 1: If someone makes a beautiful and 
reliable car, I will buy it expresses no sentiment 
towards any particular car, although ?beautiful? 
and ?reliable? are positive sentiment words.  
This, however, does not mean that a condition-
al sentence cannot express opinions/sentiments.  
Example 2: If your Nokia phone is not good, 
buy this great Samsung phone is positive about 
the ?Samsung phone? but does not express an 
opinion on the ?Nokia phone? (although the 
owner of the ?Nokia phone? may be negative 
about it). Clearly, if the sentence does not have 
?if?, the first clause is negative. Hence, a method 
for determining sentiments in normal sentences 
will not work for conditional sentences. The ex-
amples below further illustrate the point.  
In many cases, both the condition and conse-
quent together determine the opinion. 
Example 3: If you are looking for a phone 
with good voice quality, don?t buy this Nokia 
phone is negative about the ?voice quality? of the 
?Nokia phone?, although there is a positive sen-
timent word ?good? in the conditional clause 
modifying ?voice quality?. However, in the fol-
lowing example, the opinion is just the opposite.    
Example 4: If you want a phone with good 
voice quality, buy this Nokia phone is positive 
about the ?voice quality? of the ?Nokia phone?.  
As we can see, sentiment analysis of condi-
tional sentences is a challenging problem.  
One may ask whether there is a large percen-
tage of conditional sentences to warrant a fo-
cused study. Indeed, there is a fairly large pro-
portion of such sentences in evaluative text. They 
can have a major impact on the sentiment analy-
sis accuracy. Table 1 shows the percentage of 
conditional sentences (sentences containing the 
words if, unless, assuming, etc) and also the total 
number of sentences from which we computed 
the percentage in several user-forums. The fig-
ures definitely suggest that there is considerable 
benefit to be gained by developing techniques 
that can analyze conditional sentences. 
To the best of our knowledge, there is no fo-
cused study on conditional sentences. This paper 
makes such an attempt. Specifically, we deter-
mine whether a conditional sentence (which is 
also called a conditional in the linguistic litera-
ture) expresses positive, negative or neutral opi-
nions on some topics/features. Since our focus is 
on studying how conditions and consequents af-
fect sentiments, we assume that topics are given, 
which are product attributes since our data sets 
are user comments on different products.  
Our study is conducted from two perspectives. 
We start with the linguistic angle to gain a good 
understanding of existing work on different types 
of conditionals. As conditionals can be expressed 
with other words or phrases than if, we will study 
how they behave compared to if. We will also 
show that the distribution of these conditionals 
based on our data sets.  
With the linguistic knowledge, we perform a 
computational study using machine learning. A 
set of features for learning is designed to capture 
the essential determining information. Note that 
the features here are data attributes used in learn-
ing rather than product attributes or features. 
Three classification strategies are designed to 
study how to best perform the classification task 
due to the complex situation of two clauses and 
their interactions in conditional sentences. These 
three classification strategies are clause-based, 
consequent-based and whole-sentence-based. 
Clause-based classification classifies each clause 
separately and then combines their results. Con-
sequent-based classification only uses conse-
quents for classification as it is observed that in 
conditional sentences, it is often the consequents 
that decide the opinion. Whole-sentence-based 
classification treats the entire sentence as a whole 
in classification. Experimental results on condi-
tional sentences from diverse domains demon-
strate the effectiveness of these classification 
models. The results indicate that the whole-
sentence-based classifier performs the best.  
Since this paper only studies conditional sen-
tences, a natural question is whether the pro-
posed technique can be easily integrated into an 
overall sentiment analysis or opinion mining sys-
tem. The answer is yes because a large propor-
tion of conditional sentences can be detected us-
ing conditional connectives. Keyword search is 
Table 1: Percent of conditional sentences  
Source % of cond. (total #. of sent.)  
Cellphone 8.6 (47711) 
Automobile 5.0 (8113) 
LCD TV 9.92 (258078) 
Audio Systems 8.1 (5702) 
Medicine 8.29 (160259) 
181
thus sufficient to identify such sentences for spe-
cial handling using the proposed approach. There 
are, however, some subtle conditionals which do 
not use normal conditional connectives and will 
need an additional module to identify them, but 
such sentences are very rare as Table 2 indicates. 
2 The Problem Statement  
The paper follows the feature-based sentiment 
analysis model in (Hu and Liu 2004; Popescu 
and Etzioni, 2005). We are particularly interested 
in sentiments on products and services, which are 
called objects or entities. Each object is de-
scribed by its parts and attributes, which are col-
lectively called features in (Hu and Liu, 2004; 
Liu, 2006). For example, in the sentence, If this 
camera has great picture quality, I will buy it, 
?picture quality? is a feature of the camera. For 
formal definitions of objects and features, please 
refer to (Liu, 2006; Liu, 2009). In this paper, we 
use the term topic to mean feature as the feature 
here can confuse with the feature used in ma-
chine learning. The term topic has also been used 
by some researchers (e.g., Kim and Hovy, 2004; 
Stoyanov and Cardie, 2008).  
Our objective is to predict the sentiment 
orientation (positive, negative or neutral) on each 
topic that has been commented on in a sentence.  
The problem of automatically identifying fea-
tures or topics being spoken about in a sentence 
has been studied in (Hu and Liu, 2004; Popescu 
and Etzioni, 2005; Stoyanov and Cardie, 2008). 
In this work, we do not attempt to identify such 
topics automatically. Instead, we assume that 
they are given because our objective is to study 
how the interaction of the condition and conse-
quent clauses affects sentiments. For this pur-
pose, we manually identify all the topics.    
3 Conditional Sentences  
This section presents the linguistic perspective of 
conditional sentences.  
3.1 Conditional Connectives  
A large majority of conditional sentences are 
introduced by the subordinating conjunction If. 
However, there are also many other conditional 
connectives, e.g., even if, unless, in case, assum-
ing/supposing, as long as, etc. Table 2 shows the 
distribution of conditional sentences with various 
connectives in our data. Detailed linguistic dis-
cussions of them are beyond the scope of this 
paper. Interested readers, please refer to (Dec-
lerck and Reed, 2001). Below, we briefly discuss 
some important ones and their interpretations.  
If: This is the most commonly used conditional 
connective. In addition to its own usage, it can 
also be used to replace other conditional connec-
tives, except some semantically richer connec-
tives (Declerck and Reed, 2001). Most (but not 
all) conditional sentences can be logically ex-
pressed in the form ?If P then Q?, where P is the 
condition clause and Q is the consequent clause. 
For practical purposes, we can automatically 
segment the condition and consequent clauses 
using simple rules generated by observing 
grammatical and linguistic patterns. 
Unless: Most conditional sentences containing 
unless can be replaced with equivalent sentences 
with an if and a not. For example, the sentence 
Unless you need clarity, buy the cheaper model 
can be expressed with If you don?t need clarity, 
buy the cheaper model.  
Even if: Linguistic theories claim that even if is 
a special case of a conditional which may not 
always imply an if-then relationship (Gauker 
2005). However, in our datasets, we have ob-
served that the usage of even if almost always 
translates into a conditional. Replacing even if by 
if will yield a sentence that is semantically simi-
lar enough for the purpose of sentiment analysis. 
Only if, provided/providing that, on condition 
that: Conditionals involving these phrases typi-
cally express a necessary condition, e.g., I will 
buy this camera only if they can reduce the price. 
In such sentences, only usually does not affect 
whether the sentence is opinionated or not.  
In case: Conditional sentences containing in 
case usually describe a precaution (I will close 
the window in case it rains), prevention (I wore 
sunglasses in case I was recognized), or a relev-
ance conditional (In case you need a car, you can 
rent one). Identifying the conditional and conse-
quent clauses is not straightforward in many cas-
es. Further, in these instances, replacing in case 
with if may not convey the intended meaning of 
the conditional. We have ignored these cases in 
Table 2: Percentage of sentences with some main 
conditional connectives 
Conditional Connective % of sentences 
If 6.42 
Unless 0.32 
Even if 0.17 
Until 0.10 
As (so) long as 0.09 
Assuming/supposing 0.04 
In case 0.04 
Only if 0.03 
182
our analysis as we believe that they need a sepa-
rate study, and also such sentences are rare.  
As (so) long as: Sentences with these connec-
tives behave similarly to if and can usually be 
replaced with if.  
Assuming/Supposing: These are a category of 
conditionals that behave quite differently. The 
participles supposing and assuming create condi-
tional sentences where the conditional clause and 
the consequent clause can be syntactically inde-
pendent. It is quite difficult to distinguish those 
conditional sentences which contain an explicit 
consequent clause and fit within our analysis 
framework. In our data, most of such sentences 
have no consequent, thus representing assump-
tions rather than opinions. We omit these sen-
tences in our study (they are also rare). 
3.2 Types of Conditionals  
There are extensive studies of conditional sen-
tences (also known as conditionals) in linguis-
tics. Various theories have led to a number of 
classification systems. Popular types of condi-
tionals include actualization conditionals, infe-
rential conditionals, implicative conditionals, etc 
(Declerck and Reed, 2001). However, these clas-
sifications are mainly based on semantic mean-
ings which are difficult to recognize by a com-
puter program. To build classification models, 
we instead exploit canonical tense patterns of 
conditionals, which are often used in pedagogic 
grammar books. They are defined based on tense 
and are associated with general meanings. How-
ever, as described in (Declerck and Reed, 2001), 
their meanings are much more complex and nu-
merous than their associated general meanings. 
However, the advantage of this classification is 
that different types can be detected easily be-
cause they depend on tense which can be pro-
duced by a part-of-speech tagger. As we will see 
in Section 5, canonical tense patterns help senti-
ment classification significantly. Below, we in-
troduce the four canonical tense patterns.  
Zero Conditional:  This conditional form is 
used to describe universal statements like facts, 
rules and certainties. In a zero conditional, both 
the condition and consequent clauses are in the 
simple present tense. An example of such sen-
tences is: If you heat water, it boils. 
First Conditional: Conditional sentences of 
this type are also called potential or indicative 
conditionals. They are used to express a hypo-
thetical situation that is probably true, but the 
truth of which is unverified. In the first condi-
tional, the condition is in the simple present 
tense, and the consequent can be either in past 
tense or present tense, usually with a modal aux-
iliary verb preceding the main verb, e.g., If the 
acceleration is good, I will buy it. 
Second Conditional: This is usually used to 
describe less probable situations, for stating pre-
ferences and imaginary events. The condition 
clause of a second conditional sentence is in the 
past subjunctive (past tense), and the consequent 
clause contains a conditional verb modifier (like 
would, should, might), in addition to the main 
verb, e.g., If the cell phone was robust, I would 
consider buying it. 
Third conditional: This is usually used to de-
scribe contrary-to-fact (impossible) past events. 
The past perfect tense is used in the condition 
clause, and the consequent clause is in the 
present perfect tense, e.g., If I had bought the 
a767, I would have hated it. 
Based on the above definitions, we have devel-
oped approximate part-of-speech (POS) tags 1 for 
the condition and the consequent of each pattern 
(Table 3), which do not cover all sentences, but 
overall they cover a majority of the sentences. 
For those not covered cases, the problem is 
mainly due to incomplete sentences and wrong 
grammars, which are typical for informal writ-
ings in forum postings and blogs. For example, 
the sentence, Great car if you need powerful ac-
celeration, does not fall into any category, but it 
actually means It is a great car if you need po-
werful acceleration, which is a zero conditional. 
To handle such sentences, we designed a set of 
rules to assign them some default types: 
 If condition contains VB/VBP/VBZ ? 0 conditional 
 If consequent contains VB/VBP/VBS ? 0 conditional 
 If condition contains VBG ? 1st conditional 
 If condition contains VBD ? 2nd conditional 
 If conditional contains VBN ? 3rd conditional.  
                                                 
1 The list of Part-Of-Speech (POS) tags can be found at: 
http://www.ling.upenn.edu/courses/Fall_2003/ling001/ 
penn_treebank_pos.html 
Table 3: Tenses for identifying conditional types 
Type Linguistic Rule Condition  
POS tags 
Consequent
POS tags
0 If + simple present
? simple present 
VB/VBP/VBZ VB/VBP/
VBZ 
1 If + simple present
? will + bare infinitive
VB/VBP/VBZ
/VBG 
MD + VB
2 If + past tense
? would + infinitive
VBD MD + VB
3 If + past perfect
? present perfect
VBD+VBN MD + VBD
183
By using these rules, we can increase the sen-
tence coverage from 73% to 95%.  
4 Sentiment Analysis of Conditionals 
We now describe our computational study. We 
take a machine learning approach to predict sen-
timent orientations. Below, we first describe fea-
tures used and then classification strategies.  
4.1 Feature construction  
I.  Sentiment words/phrases and their locations: 
Sentiment words are words used to express 
positive or negative opinions, which are in-
strumental for sentiment classification for ob-
vious reasons. We obtained a list of over 6500 
sentiment words gathered from various 
sources. The bulk of it is from 
http://www.cs.pitt.edu/mpqa. We also added 
some of our own. Our list is mainly from the 
work in (Hu and Liu, 2004; Ding, Liu and Yu, 
2008). In addition to words, there are phrases 
that describe opinions. We have identified a 
set of such phrases. Although obtaining these 
phrases was time-consuming, it was only a 
one-time effort. We will make this list availa-
ble as a community resource. It is possible 
that there is a better automated method for 
finding such phrases, such as the methods in 
(Kanayama and Nasukawa, 2006; Breck, Choi  
and Cardie, 2007). However, automatically 
generating sentiment phrases has not been the 
focus of this work as our objective is to study 
how the two clauses interact to determine 
opinions given the sentiment words and 
phrases are known. Our list of phrases is by 
no means complete and we will continue to 
expand it in the future.  
For each sentence, we also identify wheth-
er it contains sentiment words/phrases in its 
condition or consequent clause. It was ob-
served that the presence of a sentiment 
word/phrase in the consequent clause has 
more effect on the sentiment of a sentence.  
II.  POS tags of sentiment words: Sentiment 
words may be used in several contexts, not all 
of which may correspond to an opinion. For 
example, I trust Motorola and He has a trust 
fund both contain the word trust. But only the 
former contains an opinion. In such cases, the 
POS tags can provide useful information. 
III. Words indicating no opinion: Similar to how 
sentiment words are related to opinions, there 
are also a number of words which imply the 
opposite. Words like wondering, thinking, de-
bating are used when the user is posing a 
question or expressing doubts. Thus such 
phrases usually do not contribute an opinion, 
especially if they are in the vicinity of the if 
connective. We search a window of 3 words 
on either side of if to determine if there is any 
such word. We have compiled a list of these 
words as well and use it in our experiments.  
IV. Tense patterns: These are the canonical tense 
patterns in Section 3.2. They are used to gen-
erate a set of features. We identify the first 
verb in both the condition and consequent 
clauses by searching for the relevant POS tags 
in Table 3. We also search for the words pre-
ceding the main verb to find modal auxiliary 
verbs, which are also used as features.  
V. Special characters: The presence or absence 
of ??? and ?!?. 
VI. Conditional connectives: The conditional 
connective used in the sentence (if, even if, 
unless, only if, etc) is also taken as a feature. 
VII. Length of condition and consequent clauses: 
Using simple linguistic and punctuation rules, 
we automatically segment a sentence into 
condition and consequent clauses. The num-
bers of words in the condition and consequent 
clauses are then used as features. We ob-
served that when the condition clause is short, 
it usually has no impact on whether the sen-
tence expresses an opinion.   
VIII. Negation words: The use of negation words 
like not, don?t, never, etc, often alter the sen-
timent orientation of a sentence. For example, 
the addition of not before a sentiment word 
can change the orientation of a sentence from 
positive to negative. We consider a window of 
3-6 words before an opinion word, and search 
for these kinds of words. 
The following two features are singled out for 
easy reference later. They are only used in one 
classification strategy. The first feature is an in-
dicator, and the second feature has a parameter 
(which will be evaluated separately). 
(1). Topic location: This feature indicates wheth-
er the topic is in the conditional clause or the 
consequent clause.  
(2). Opinion weight: This feature considers only 
sentiment words in the vicinity of the topic, 
since they are more likely to influence the 
opinion on the topic. A window size is used 
to control what we mean by vicinity. The fol-
lowing formula is used to assign a weight to 
each sentiment word, which is inversely pro-
portional to the distance (Dop) of the senti-
ment word to the topic mention. Sentiment 
184
value is +1 for a positive word and -1 for a 
negative word. Sentwords are the set of 
known sentiment words and phrases.  
}{,
1
sentwordsop
D
weight
op op
???=?   
4.2 Classification Strategies 
Since we are interested in topic-based sentiment 
analysis, how to perform classification becomes 
an interesting issue. Due to the two clauses, it 
may not be sufficient to classify the whole sen-
tence as positive or negative as in the same sen-
tence, some topics may be positive and some 
may be negative. We propose three strategies.  
Clause-based classification: Since there are two 
clauses in a conditional sentence, in this case 
we build two classifiers, one for the condition 
and one for the consequent.  
Condition classifier: This method classifies the 
condition clause as expressing positive, nega-
tive or neutral opinion.  
Training data: Each training sentence is 
represented as a feature vector. Its class is posi-
tive, negative or neutral depending on whether 
the conditional clause is positive, negative or 
neutral while considering both clauses.  
Testing: For each test sentence, the resulting 
classifier predicts the opinion of the condition 
clause.  
Topic class prediction: To predict the opi-
nion on a topic, if the topic is in the condition 
clause, it takes the predicted class of the 
clause.  
Consequent classifier: This classifier classi-
fies the consequent clause as expressing posi-
tive, negative or neutral opinion. 
Training data: Each training sentence is 
represented as a feature vector. Its class is posi-
tive, negative or neutral depending on whether 
the consequent clause is positive, negative or 
neutral while considering both clauses.  
Testing: For each test sentence, the resulting 
classifier predicts the opinion of the conse-
quent clause.  
Topic class prediction: To predict the opi-
nion on a topic, if the topic is in the consequent 
clause, it takes the predicted class of the 
clause.  
The combination of these two classifiers is 
called the clause-based classifier. It works as 
follows: If a topic is in the conditional clause, 
the condition classifier is used, and if a topic is 
in the consequent clause, the consequent clas-
sifier is used.  
Consequent-based classification: It is observed 
that in most cases, the condition clause con-
tains no opinion whereas the consequent clause 
reflects the sentiment of the entire sentence. 
Thus, this method uses (in a different way) on-
ly the above consequent classifier. If it classi-
fies the consequent of a testing conditional 
sentence as positive, all the topics in the whole 
sentence are assigned the positive orientation, 
and likewise for negative and neutral.  
Whole-sentence-based classification: In this 
case, a single classifier is built to predict the 
opinion on each topic in a sentence.  
Training data: In addition to the normal fea-
tures, the two features (1) and (2) in Section 
4.1 are used for this classifier. If a sentence 
contains multiple topics, multiple training in-
stances of the same sentence are created in the 
training data. Each instance represents one 
specific topic. The class of the instance de-
pends on whether the opinion on the topic is 
positive, negative or neutral.  
Testing: For each topic in each test sentence, 
the resulting classifier predicts its opinion.  
Topic class prediction: This is not needed as 
the prediction has been done in testing.  
5 Results and Discussions 
5.1 Data sets 
Our data consists of conditional sentences from 5 
different user forums: Cellphone, Automobile, 
LCD TV, Audio systems and Medicine. We ob-
tained user postings from these forums and ex-
tracted the conditional sentences. We then ma-
nually annotated 1378 sentences from this cor-
pus. We also annotated the conditional and con-
sequent clauses and identified the topics (or 
product features) being commented upon, and 
their sentiment orientations. In our annotation, 
we observed that sentences with no sentiment 
words or phrases almost never express opinions, 
i.e., only around 3% of them express opinions. 
There are around 26% sentences containing no 
sentiment words or phrases in our data. To make 
the problem challenging, we restrict our attention 
to only those sentences that contain at least one 
sentiment word or phrase. We have annotated 
topics from around 900 such sentences. Table 4 
shows the class distributions of this data. At the 
clause level (topics are not considered), we ob-
serve that conditional clauses contain few opi-
nions. At the topic-level, 43.5% of the topics 
have positive opinions, 26.4% of the topics have 
negative opinions, and the rest have no opinions.  
185
Table 4: Distribution of classes  
For the annotation of data, we assume that 
topics are known. One student annotated the top-
ics first. Then two students annotated the senti-
ments on the topics. If a student found that a top-
ic annotation is wrong, he will let us know. Some 
mistakes and missing topics were found but there 
were mainly due to oversights rather than disa-
greements. The agreement on sentiment annota-
tions were computed using the Kappa score. We 
achieved the Kappa score of 0.63, which indi-
cates strong agreements. The conflicting cases 
were then solved through discussion to reach 
consensus. We did not find anything that the an-
notators absolutely disagree with each other.   
5.2 Experimental results 
We now present the results for different combi-
nations of features and classification strategies. 
For model building, we used Support Vector 
Machines (SVM), and the LIBSVM implementa-
tion (Chang and Lin, 2001) with a Gaussian ker-
nel, which produces the best results. All the re-
sults are obtained via 10-fold cross validation.  
Two-class classification: We first discuss the 
results for a simpler version of the problem that 
involves only sentences with positive or negative 
orientations on some topics (at least one of the 
clauses must have a positive/negative opinion on 
a topic). Neutral sentences are not used (~28% of 
the total). The results of all three classifiers are 
given in Table 5. The feature sets have been de-
scribed in Section 4.1. For all the experiments 
below, features (1) and (2) are only used by the 
whole-sentence-based classifier, but not used by 
the other two classifiers for obvious reasons.   
{I+II}: This setting uses sentiment words and 
phrases, their positions and POS tags as features 
(we used Brill?s POS tagger). This can be seen as 
the baseline. We observe that both the conse-
quent-based and whole-sentence-based classifiers 
perform dramatically better than the clause-based 
classifier. The consequent-based classifier and 
the whole-sentence-based classifier perform si-
milarly (with the latter being slightly better). The 
precision, recall, and F-score are computed as the 
average of the two classes.  
{I+II+III}: In this setting, the list of special 
non-sentiment related words is added to the fea-
ture set. All three classifiers improve slightly.  
{I+II+III+IV}: This setting includes all the ca-
nonical tense based features. We see marked im-
provements for the consequent-based and whole-
sentence-based classifiers both in term of accura-
cy and F-score, which are statistically significant 
compared to those of {I+II+III} at the 95% con-
fidence level based on paired t-test.  
All: When all the features are used, the results 
of all the classifiers improve further.  
Two main observations worth mentioning: 
1. Both the consequent-based and whole-
sentence-based classifiers outperform the 
clause-based classifier dramatically. This con-
firms our observation that the consequent 
usually plays the key role in determining the 
sentiment of the sentence. This is further rein-
forced by the fact that the consequent-based 
classifier actually performs similarly to the 
whole-sentence-based classifier. The condi-
tion clause seems to give no help.  
2. The second observation is that the linguistic 
knowledge of canonical tense patterns helps 
significantly. This shows that the linguistic 
knowledge is very useful.  
We also noticed that many misclassifications are 
caused by grammatical errors, use of slang 
phrases and improper punctuations, which are 
typical of postings on the Web. Due to language 
irregularities (e.g., wrong grammar, missing 
punctuations, sarcasm, exclamations), the POS 
tagger makes many mistakes as well causing 
some errors in the tense based features.  
Three-class classification: We now move to the 
more difficult and realistic case of three classes: 
positive, negative and neutral (no-opinion). Ta-
ble 6 shows the results. The trend is similar ex-
cept that the whole-sentence-based classifier now 
performs markedly better than the consequent-
based classifier. We believe that this is because 
the neutral class needs information from both the 
condition and consequent clauses. This is evident 
from the fact that there is little or no improve-
ment after {I+II} for the consequent-based clas-
sifier. We also observe that the accuracies and F-
scores for the three-class classification are lower 
than those for the two-class classification. This is 
understandable due to the difficulty of determin-
ing whether a sentence has opinion or not. Again, 
statistical test shows that the canonical tense-
based features help significantly.  
As mentioned in Section 4.1, the whole-
sentence-based classifier only considers those 
sentiment words in the vicinity of the topic under 
 Positive Negative Neutral 
Condition 6.9% 6.7% 86.4% 
Consequent 49.3% 16.5% 34% 
Topic-level 43.5% 26.4% 29.9% 
186
investigation. For this, we search a window of n 
words on either side of the topic mention. To 
study the effect of varying n, we performed an 
experiment with various values of the window 
size and measured the overall accuracy for each 
case. Table 7 shows how the accuracy changes as 
we increase the window size. We found that a 
window size of 6-10 yielded good accuracies. 
This is because lower values of n lead to loss of 
information regarding sentiment words as some 
sentiment words could be far from the topic. We 
finally used 8, which gave the best results.  
We also investigated ways of using the nega-
tion word in the sentence to correctly predict the 
sentiment. One method is to use the negation 
word as a feature, as described in Section 4.1. 
Another technique is to reverse the orientation of 
the prediction for those sentences which contain 
negation words. We found that the former tech-
nique yielded better results. The results reported 
so far are based on the former approach.  
6 Related Work  
There are several research directions in sentiment 
analysis (or opinion mining). One of the main 
directions is sentiment classification, which clas-
sifies the whole opinion document (e.g., a prod-
uct review) as positive or negative (e.g., Pang et 
al, 2002; Turney, 2002; Dave et al 2003; Ng et 
al. 2006; McDonald et al 2007). It is clearly dif-
ferent from our work as we are interested in con-
ditional sentences. 
Another important direction is classifying 
sentences as subjective or objective, and classify-
ing subjective sentences or clauses as positive or 
negative (Wiebe et al 1999; Wiebe and Wilson, 
2002, Yu and Hatzivassiloglou, 2003; Wilson et 
al, 2004; Kim and Hovy, 2004; Riloff and 
Wiebe, 2005; Gamon et al2005; McDonald et al 
2007). Although these works deal with sen-
tences, they aim to solve the general problem. 
This paper argues that there is unlikely a one-
technique-fit-all solution, and advocates dealing 
with specific types of sentences differently by 
exploiting their unique characteristics. Condi-
tional sentences are the focus of this paper. To 
the best of our knowledge, there is no focused 
study on them.  
Several researchers also studied feature/topic-
based sentiment analysis (e.g., Hu and Liu, 2004; 
Popescu and Etzioni, 2005; Ku et al 2006; Care-
nini et al 2006; Mei et al 2007; Ding, Liu and 
Yu, 2008; Titov and R. McDonald, 2008; Stoya-
nov and Cardie, 2008; Lu and Zhai, 2008). Their 
objective is to extract topics or product features 
in sentences and determine whether the senti-
ments expressed on them are positive or nega-
tive. Again, no focused study has been made to 
handle conditional sentences. Effectively han-
dling of conditional sentences can help their ef-
fort significantly.  
Table 5: Two-class classification ? positive and negative 
 Clause-based  
classifier
Consequent-based  
classifier 
Whole-sentence-based 
classifier 
Acc. Prec. Rec. F Acc. Prec. Rec. F Acc. Prec. Rec. F 
I+II (senti. words+POS) 39.9 42.8 34.0 37.9 69.1 72.9 67.1 69.8 68.9 73.7 68.13 70.8
I+II+III (+ non-senti. words)  41.5 44.9 37.1 40.6 69.3 73.9 66.3   69.9 69.2 73.7 63.5 71.0
I+II+III+IV (+ tenses) 42.7 45.2 38.5 41.6 72.7 76.4 72.0 74.1   71.1 77.9 72.2 74.9
All 43.2 46.1 38.9 42.2 73.3 77.0 72.7 74.8 72.3 77.8 73.6 75.6
Table 6: Three-class classification ? positive, negative and neutral (no opinion) 
 Clause-based  
classifier
Consequent-based  
classifier 
Whole-sentence-based 
classifier 
Acc. Prec. Rec. F Acc. Prec. Rec. F Acc. Prec. Rec. F 
I+II (senti. words+POS) 45.2 41.3 35.1 37.9 54.6 57.7 52.9 55.2 59.1 58.1 56.4 57.2
I+II+III (+ non-senti. words)  46.9 42.8 37.8 40.1 55.3 60.0 51.3 55.3 61.4 60.1 60.8 60.4
I+II+III+IV (+ tenses) 50.3 48.7 40.9 44.5 57.3 64.0 50.0 56.1 64.6 63.3 63.9 63.6
All 53.3 49.8 44.1 46.8 58.7 64.5 50.1 56.4 67.8 66.9 65.1 66.0
Table 7: Accuracy of the whole-sentence-based classifier with varying window sizes (n) 
Window size 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
Accuracy 66.1 62.6 64.1 64.8 65.3 65.7 66.3 67.3 66.9 66.8 
187
In this work, we used many sentiment words 
and phrases. These words and phrases are usually 
compiled using different approaches (Hatzivassi-
loglou and McKeown, 1997; Kaji and Kitsure-
gawa, 2006; Kanayama and Nasukawa, 2006; 
Esuli and Sebastiani, 2006; Breck et al 2007; 
Ding, Liu and Yu. 2008; Qiu et al 2009). There 
are several existing lists produced by researchers. 
We used the one from the MPQA corpus 
(http://www.cs.pitt.edu/mpqa) with added phras-
es of our own from (Ding, Liu and Yu. 2008). In 
our work, we also assume that the topics are 
known. (Hu and Liu, 2004; Popescu and Etzioni, 
2005; Kobayashi, Inui and Matsumoto, 2007; 
Stoyanov and Cardie, 2008) have studied top-
ic/feature extraction. 
One existing focused study is on comparative 
and superlative sentences (Jindal and Liu, 2006; 
Bos and Nissim, 2006; Fiszman et al 2007; Ga-
napathibhotla and Liu, 2008). Their work identi-
fies comparative sentences, extracts comparative 
relations in the sentences and analyzes compara-
tive opinions (Ganapathibhotla and Liu, 2008). 
An example comparative sentence is ?Honda 
looks better than Toyota?. As we can see, com-
parative sentences are entirely different from 
conditional sentences. Thus, their methods can-
not be directly applied to conditional sentences.  
7 Conclusion  
To perform sentiment analysis accurately, we 
argue that a divide-and-conquer approach is 
needed, i.e., focused study on each type of sen-
tences. It is unlikely that there is a one-size-fit-all 
solution. This paper studied one type, i.e., condi-
tional sentences, which have some unique cha-
racteristics that need special handling. Our study 
was carried out from both the linguistic and 
computational perspectives. In the linguistic 
study, we focused on canonical tense patterns, 
which have been showed useful in classification. 
In the computational study, we built SVM mod-
els to automatically predict whether opinions on 
topics are positive, negative or neutral. Experi-
mental results have shown the effectiveness of 
the models.  
In our future work, we will further improve 
the classification accuracy and study related 
problems, e.g., identifying topics/features. Al-
though there are some special conditional sen-
tences that do not use easily recognizable condi-
tional connectives and identifying them are use-
ful, such sentences are very rare and spending 
time and effort on them may not be cost-effective 
at the moment.  
Acknowledgements  
This work was supported in part by DOE SCI-
DAC-2: Scientific Data Management Center for 
Enabling Technologies (CET) grant DE-FC02-
07ER25808, DOE FASTOS award number DE-
FG02-08ER25848, NSF HECURA CCF-
0621443, NSF SDCI OCI-0724599, and NSF 
ST-HEC CCF-0444405. 
References  
J. Bos, and M. Nissim. 2006. An Empirical Ap-
proach to the Interpretation of Superlatives. 
EMNLP-2006. 
E. Breck, Y. Choi, and C. Cardie. 2007. Identify-
ing expressions of opinion in context, IJCAI-
2007.  
C.-C. Chang and C.-J. Lin. 2001. LIBSVM: a 
library for support vector machines. 
http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw /~cjlin/libsvm 
G. Carenini, R. Ng, and A. Pauls. 2006. Interac-
tive Multimedia Summaries of Evaluative 
Text. IUI-2006. 
C. Gauker. 2005. Conditionals in Context. MIT 
Press. 
D. Dave, A. Lawrence, and D. Pennock. 2003. 
Mining the Peanut Gallery: Opinion Extrac-
tion and Semantic Classification of Product 
Reviews. WWW-2003. 
R. Declerck, and S. Reed. 2001. Conditionals: A 
Comprehensive Empirical Analysis. Berlin: 
Mouton de Gruyter.  
X. Ding, B. Liu, and P. S. Yu. 2008. A holistic 
lexicon-based approach to opinion mining. 
WSDM-2008.  
A. Esuli, and F. 2006. Sebastiani. Determining 
term subjectivity and term orientation for opi-
nion mining, EACL-2006.  
M. Fiszman, D. Demner-Fushman, F. Lang, P. 
Goetz, and T. Rindflesch. 2007. Interpreting 
Comparative Constructions in Biomedical 
Text. BioNLP-2007.  
M. Gamon, A. Aue, S. Corston-Oliver, S. and E. 
Ringger. 2005. Pulse: Mining customer opi-
nions from free text. IDA-2005. 
G. Ganapathibhotla and B. Liu. 2008. Identifying 
Preferred Entities in Comparative Sentences. 
COLING-2008.  
V. Hatzivassiloglou, and K. McKeown, K. 1997. 
188
Predicting the Semantic Orientation of Adjec-
tives. ACL-EACL-1997.  
M. Hu and B. Liu. 2004. Mining and summariz-
ing customer reviews. KDD-2004.  
N. Jindal, and B. Liu. 2006. Mining Comparative 
Sentences and Relations. AAAI-2006. 
N. Kaji, and M. Kitsuregawa. 2006. Automatic 
construction of polarity-tagged corpus from 
HTML documents. ACL-2006. 
H. Kanayama, and T. Nasukawa. 2006. Fully 
Automatic Lexicon Expansion for Domain-
Oriented Sentiment Analysis. EMNLP-2006. 
S. Kim and E. Hovy. 2004. Determining the Sen-
timent of Opinions. COLING-2004.  
N. Kobayashi, K. Inui and Y. Matsumoto. 2007. 
Extracting Aspect-Evaluation and Aspect-of 
Relations in Opinion Mining. EMNLP-2007. 
L.-W. Ku, Y.-T. Liang, and H.-H. Chen. 2006, 
Opinion Extraction, Summarization and 
Tracking in News and Blog Corpora. AAAI-
CAAW. 
B. Liu. 2006. Web Data Mining: Exploring 
Hyperlinks, Content and Usage Data. Sprin-
ger.  
B. Liu. 2009. Sentiment Analysis and Subjectivi-
ty. To appear in Handbook of Natural Lan-
guage Processing, Second Edition, (editors: 
N. Indurkhya and F. J. Damerau), 2009 or 
2010. 
Y. Lu, and C. X. Zhai. 2008. Opinion integration 
through semi-supervised topic modeling. 
WWW-2008. 
R. McDonald, K. Hannan, T. Neylon, M. Wells, 
and J. Reynar. 2007. Structured models for 
fine-to-coarse sentiment analysis.  ACL-2007 
Q. Mei, X. Ling, M. Wondra, H. Su, and C. X.  
Zhai. 2007. Topic Sentiment Mixture: Model-
ing Facets and Opinions in Weblogs. WWW-
2007.  
V. Ng, S. Dasgupta, and S. M. Niaz Arifin. 2006. 
Examining the role of linguistic knowledge 
sources in the automatic identification and 
classification of reviews. ACL-2006. 
B. Pang and L. Lee. 2008. Opinion Mining and 
Sentiment Analysis. Foundations and Trends 
in Information Retrieval 2(1-2), pp. 1?135, 
2008. 
B. Pang, L. Lee. and S. Vaithyanathan. 2002. 
Thumbs up? Sentiment Classification Using 
Machine Learning Techniques. EMNLP-
2002.  
A-M. Popescu, and O. Etzioni. 2005. Extracting 
Product Features and Opinions from Reviews. 
EMNLP-2005.  
G. Qiu, B. Liu, J. Bu and C. Chen. 2009. Ex-
panding Domain Sentiment Lexicon through 
Double Propagation. IJCAI-2009. 
E. Riloff, and J. Wiebe. 2003. Learning extrac-
tion patterns for subjective expressions. 
EMNLP-2003.  
V. Stoyanov, and C. Cardie. 2008. Topic Identi-
fication for fine-grained opinion analysis. 
COLING-2008.  
I. Titov and R. McDonald. 2008. A Joint Model 
of Text and Aspect Ratings for Sentiment 
Summarization. ACL-2008.  
P. Turney. 2002. Thumbs Up or Thumbs Down? 
Semantic Orientation Applied to Unsuper-
vised Classification of Reviews. ACL-2002.  
J. Wiebe, R. Bruce, and T. O?Hara. 1999. Devel-
opment and use of a gold standard data set for 
subjectivity classifications. ACL-1999. 
J. Wiebe, and T. Wilson. 2002. Learning to Dis-
ambiguate Potentially Subjective Expressions. 
CoNLL-2002. 
T. Wilson, J. Wiebe. and R. Hwa. 2004. Just how 
mad are you? Finding strong and weak 
opinion clauses. AAAI-2004. 
H. Yu, and Y. Hatzivassiloglou. 2003. Towards 
answering opinion questions: Separating facts 
from opinions and identifying the polarity of 
opinion sentences. EMNLP-2003.  
 
 
 
189
