Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Computational Semantics, pages 305?309,
Tilburg, January 2009. c?2009 International Conference on Computational Semantics
Application of Cognitive Strategies to Chinese
Noun Classifier E-learning
Wei Ni, Helena Hong Gao*, and Shixiao Ouyang
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{helenagao}@ntu.edu.sg
1 Introduction
Linguistically, a noun classifier is a morpheme or word used to classify a
noun according to its inherent semantic features. Noun classifiers in Chi-
nese are obligatory as a category of its own and used to specify a noun when
it is used with a determiner or a numeral. In other words, classifiers are
never used independently. It must occur with a numeral (e.g., yi ?one?, er
?two?, san ?three?) and/or a determiner (e.g., zhe ?this?, nei ?that?), or
certain quantifiers (e.g., ji ?how many?, mei ?every?) before the noun. Such
a combination is referred to as a classifier phrase. Its basic construction can
be illustrated in the following schema:
(Determiner) + Numeral + Classifier + Noun
zhe san ben zidian
this three dictionary
The counterparts in English for the above Chinese classifier phrase are
?these three dictionaries?. The determiner zhe ?this? is not obligatory in a
classifier phrase. The numeral san ?three? marks the object zidian ?dictio-
nary? as is in the state of being plural. The classifier ben inserted between
the numeral and the noun is a classifier for bound materials, such as books,
dictionaries, and magazines.
2 Cognitive strategies: top-down vs bottom-up
Bilingual Chinese children and L2 learners of the Chinese language often
encounter difficulties in their learning of Chinese noun classifiers [2, 3, 5].
305
This is mainly due to multiple categorization of a noun referent, i.e., a single
entity may belong to more than one category, depending on the properties
we attribute to it rather than on its intrinsic ones [6]. We expect this obstacle
in noun classifier acquisition to be overcome more effectively if attention to
pragmatic discourse is given on a cognitive basis. In practice, however, the
acquisition is further cumbered by the conventional focus on sentence level
practice rather than on pragmatic level discourse in the learning process.
Recently a replication comparative study of Gao?s 2001 study was con-
ducted on Chinese noun classifier production between a group of Swedish-
Chinese bilingual children and a group of Swedish L2 learners [5]. Same
as the observation of the previous study, the noun classifier production by
the bilingual children was higher than that by the adult L2 learners. The
Swedish L2 learners tended to ignore noun classifiers? semantic and cogni-
tive meanings, and to evaluate noun classifiers as merely syntactic terms.
Unable to make a semantic association between a classifier and a noun, they
were inclined to rely on their knowledge of measure words in Swedish and
rote memory of classifiers. Their top-down pattern in noun classifier acqui-
sition limited their horizon in understanding the more complicated yet more
meaningful semantic interpretations of noun classifiers on a cognitive basis.
In contrast, the bilingual children did not tackle noun classifiers with
strong top-down expectations. Their acquisition of noun classifiers was
based on the categorization schemes built from their semantic and cogni-
tive understanding of Chinese. They proceeded with classifier learning very
conservatively, in a bottom-up manner that relied largely on input. Taking
into consideration the semantic complexity of the noun classifier system, the
bilingual children?s bottom-up approach is more recommended.
3 Application in noun classifier e-learning
We describe an e-learning approach to enhance L2 learners? acquisition of
Chinese noun classifiers. Developed in the software environment of File-
Maker Pro 8.5, the e-learning tool is established on a database with classes
of nouns and classifiers stored in individual records..
The records in the database could be organized according to the lexical
meanings of the words and categorized into ?nature?, ?humans & body
parts?, ?animals?, ?vegetables & fruits? and ?man-made objects?. Such a
categorization appears explicit, but its top-down approach fails to reveal
the cognitive mapping between the noun classifier and the noun referent.
The objective of the e-learning approach, on the other hand, is to guide L2
306
learners to build their categorization scheme from the noun referents? salient
semantic features, specified by their shape, size, thickness, length, function,
etc.
Therefore, in light of the recommended bottom-up approach, the e-
learning tool urges users to learn the salient external or functional features
of the noun referents in a case-by-case fashion. In this way they could better
understand the point that a noun classifier reflects the cognitive classifica-
tion of its associated noun referent. Each individual record is thus designed
in the following format. It contains the noun as one of its data entries,
and it also provides in other data entries information of the corresponding
noun classifier(s) and its description. Most importantly, the salient semantic
feature of the noun referent is decomposed and illustrated explicitly in an
independent data entry.
For instance, tiao is the correct noun classifier for ?a rainbow?, ?a leg?,
?a snake?, ?a cucumber? and ?a scarf?. To decide the appropriate noun
classifier that occurs in these phrases, L2 learners need to understand that
tiao reflects the longitudinal property of ?rainbow?, ?leg?, ?snake?, ?cu-
cumber? and ?scarf?, which is perceptually salient. Tiao is chosen since
it matches with the longitudinal attribute the five noun referents have in
common, despite that the intrinsic properties of the five objects vary, which
is illustrated in Table 1.
English Chinese classifier phrase Properties
equivalent numeral classifier noun cognitive intrinsic
a rainbow yi tiao caihong longitudinal nature
a leg yi tiao tui longitudinal humans
a snake yi tiao she longitudinal animals
a cucumber yi tiao huanggua longitudinal vegetables
a scarf yi tiao weijin longitudinal man-made
Table 1: A Selection of Classifier Phrases of tiao
Compared with noun classifiers with specific applications (e.g., tiao for
snakes and ben for books), other classifiers are commonly used with more
generalized sets of nouns. These general noun classifiers are more semanti-
cally complex, since they are inhabited with multi-layer meanings. It hence
requires deeper cognitive understanding to master them. Erbaugh examined
the acquisition order of noun classifiers and suggested learners acquire noun
classifiers specific to single items before they acquire those of generalized
307
sets, such as ge applicable to both animate and inanimate noun referents of
most kinds and zhi to nouns of body-parts of humans and animals as well
as man-made objects [1]. L2 learners are recommended to follow the same
bottom-up approach to acquire general noun classifiers. In the e-learning
environment L2 learners are exposed to a selection of classifier phrases with
general noun classifiers. Take zhi for example. It is associated with nouns
such as ?bird?, ?bear?, ?hand? and ?ear?. Regarding which noun classifier
is associated with these four nouns, animacy is the critical semantic feature
of these noun referents, which is analyzed in each record of the nouns.
Besides utilizing textual explanations, this e-learning tool will also de-
velop a computer-based model of noun classifier acquisition for automatic
noun-classifier association. By implementing Holland?s agent-based model
[4], we aim to include in our prototype 150 nouns and 12 noun classifiers as
two groups of interactive agents. To design a semantic interface between the
two types of agents in a computational perspective, a tag is attached to each
agent. Each tag is a pseudo-binary bit string of {0, 1, #}, representing the
semantic features of the agent. ?#? is known as the ?doesn?t care? symbol,
and is used to indicate that the corresponding semantic feature is not critical
for the formulation of the classifier phrase, even though the noun referent
owns such a feature.
The first simple model is illustrated as follows. In this model each tag
consists of 4 pseudo-binary bits. The tag ?11##? is assigned to the agent
(noun) ?snake?. By this we represent the noun referent?s longitudinal se-
mantic feature with the first two symbols ?11?. Despite the noun referent
also has the cognitive property of animacy which could be indicated by the
last two symbols, it is not of primary importance for the concern of classifier
phrase composition, and is hence denoted by ?##?. When it is compared
with the tag ?1100? of the agent (noun classifier) tiao, the matching score is
reported high. This indicates tiao is likely to occur in the classifier phrase
of ?snake?. In contrast, its matching score with the tag ?0011? of the agent
(noun classifier) zhi is reported low, which implies an undesirable match.
Further simulation tests are required to verify the robustness of the pro-
posed model, with a more systematic classification of the agent?s semantic
features, a larger number of inputs, and closer scrutiny on those marginally
acceptable classifier phrases.
308
Acknowledgement
Research grants to H. H. Gao from Nanyang Technological University sup-
ported preparation of this paper.
References
[1] M. S. Erbaugh. Taking stock: The development of chinese noun clas-
sifiers historically and in young children. In C. Craig, editor, Noun
Classes and Categorization. John Benjamins, Amsterdam and Philadel-
phia, 1986.
[2] H. Gao. Understanding the concept of noun classifiers in chinese - a
comparative study of the acquisition of chinese noun classifiers between
swedish adults and bilingual chinese children. In Proceedings of Human-
istdagarna 2001. Lund University Press, 2001.
[3] H. H. Gao, P. D. Zelazo, and B. Sigurd. The acquisition of chinese noun
classifiers in bilingual children and adults. In 2005 Biennial Meeting of
Society for Research in Child Development, Atlanta, Georgia, U.S.A.,
2005.
[4] J. H. Holland. Hidden Order: How adaption builds complexity. Addison-
Wesley, 1995.
[5] S. Ouyang and H. H. Gao. Understanding chinese classifier acquisition:
A comparative study. In Proceedings of the URECA@NTU 2007-08,
2008.
[6] S. Rovira. The cognitive perspective in teaching chinese measure words.
In The XV Biennial Conference of the EACS, Heidelberg, Germany,
2004.
309
