Proceedings of the NAACL HLT Student Research Workshop and Doctoral Consortium, pages 84?89,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Towards Unsupervised Recognition of Dialogue Acts
Nicole Novielli
Dept. of Informatics, University of Bari
via Orabona 4
I-70125 Bari, Italy
novielli@di.uniba.it
Carlo Strapparava
FBK-irst
via Sommarive, Povo
I-38050 Trento, Italy
strappa@fbk.eu
Abstract
When engaged in dialogues, people per-
form communicative actions to pursue specific
communicative goals. Speech acts recogni-
tion attracted computational linguistics since
long time and could impact considerably a
huge variety of application domains. We study
the task of automatic labeling dialogues with
the proper dialogue acts, relying on empiri-
cal methods and simply exploiting lexical se-
mantics of the utterances. In particular, we
present some experiments in supervised and
unsupervised framework on both an English
and an Italian corpus of dialogue transcrip-
tions. The evaluation displays encouraging re-
sults in both languages, especially in the unsu-
pervised version of the methodology.
1 Introduction
People proceed in their conversations through a se-
quence of dialogue acts to yield some specific com-
municative goal. They can ask for information,
agree or disagree with their partner, state some facts
and express opinions.
Dialogue Acts (DA) attracted linguistics (Austin,
1962; Searle, 1969) and computational linguistics
research (Core and Allen, 1997; Traum, 2000) since
long time. With the advent of the Web, a large
amount of material about natural language inter-
actions (e.g. blogs, chats, conversation transcripts)
has become available, raising the attractiveness of
empirical methods analyses on this field. There is
a large number of application domains that could
benefit from automatically labeling DAs: e.g. con-
versational agents for monitoring and supporting
human-human remote conversations, blogs, forums
and chat logs analysis for opinion mining, interper-
sonal stances modeling by mean of conversational
analysis, automatic meeting summarizations and so
on. These applications require a deep understanding
of the conversational structure and the ability of the
system to understand who is telling what to whom.
This study defines a method for automatically la-
beling dialogues with the proper speech acts by re-
lying on empirical methods. Even if prosody and
intonation surely play a role (e.g. (Stolcke et al,
2000; Warnke et al, 1997)), nonetheless language
and words are what the speaker uses to convey the
communicative message and are just what we have
at disposal when we consider texts found on the
Web. Hence, we decided to simply exploit lexical
semantics of the sentences. We performed some ex-
periments in a supervised and unsupervised frame-
work on both an English and an Italian corpora of
dialogue transcriptions, achieving good results in all
settings. Unsupervised performance is particularly
encouraging, independently from the used language.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives
a brief sketch of the NLP background on Dialogue
Acts recognition. In Section 3 we introduce the En-
glish and Italian corpora of dialogues, their charac-
teristics and DA labeling. In Section 4 we describe
the preprocessing of the data sets. Then Section 5
explains the supervised and unsupervised settings,
showing the experimental results obtained on the
two corpora and providing an error analysis. Finally,
in Section 6 we conclude the paper with a brief dis-
cussion and some directions for future work.
84
Speaker Dialogue Act Utterance
A OPENING Hello Ann.
B OPENING Hello Chuck.
A STATEMENT Uh, the other day, I attended a conference here at Utah State University on recycling
A STATEMENT and, uh, I was kind of interested to hear cause they had some people from the EPA and
lots of different places, and, uh, there is going to be a real problem on solid waste.
B OPINION Uh, I didn?t think that was a new revelation.
A AGREE /ACCEPT Well, it?s not too new.
B INFO-REQUEST So what is the EPA recommending now?
Table 1: An excerpt from the Switchboard corpus
2 Background
A DA can be identified with the communicative goal
of a given utterance (Austin, 1962). Researchers use
different labels and definitions to address this con-
cept: speech act (Searle, 1969), adjacency pair part
(Schegloff, 1968) (Sacks et al, 1974), game move
(Power, 1979)
Traditionally, the NLP community has employed
DA definitions with the drawback of being do-
main or application oriented. Recently some efforts
have been made towards unifying the DA annotation
(Traum, 2000). In the present study we refer to a
domain-independent framework for DA annotation,
the DAMSL architecture (Dialogue Act Markup in
Several Layers) by (Core and Allen, 1997).
Recently, the problem of DA recognition has
been addressed with promising results: Poesio and
Mikheev (1998) combine expectations about the
next likely dialogue ?move? with information de-
rived from the speech signal features; Stolcke et
al. (2000) employ a discourse grammar, formal-
ized in terms of Hidden Markov Models, combining
also evidences about lexicon and prosody; Keizer et
al. (2002) make use of Bayesian networks for DA
recognition in dutch dialogues; Grau et al (2004)
consider naive Bayes classifiers as a suitable ap-
proach to the DA classification problem; a partially
supervised framework has also been explored by
Venkataraman et al (2005)
Regardless of the model they use (discourse
grammars, models based on word sequences or on
the acoustic features or a combination of all these)
the mentioned studies are developed in a supervised
framework. In this paper, one goal is to explore also
the use of a fully unsupervised methodology.
3 Data Sets
In the experiments of the present paper we exploit
two corpora, both annotated with DAs labels. We
aim at developing a recognition methodology as
general as possible, so we selected corpora which
are different in content and language: the Switch-
board corpus (Godfrey et al, 1992), a collection
of transcriptions of spoken English telephone con-
versations about general interest topics, and an Ital-
ian corpus of dialogues in the healthy-eating domain
(Clarizio et al, 2006).
In this section we describe the two corpora, their
features, the set of labels used for annotating the di-
alogue acts with their distributions and the data pre-
processing.
3.1 Description
The Switchboard corpus is a collection of English
human-human telephone conversations (Godfrey et
al., 1992) between couples of randomly selected
strangers. They were asked to choose one general
interest topic and to talk informally about it. Full
transcripts of these dialogues are distributed by the
Linguistic Data Consortium. A part of this cor-
pus is annotated (Jurafsky et al, 1997) with DA
labels (overall 1155 conversations, for a total of
205,000 utterances and 1.4 million words)1. Table
1 shows a short sample fragments of dialogues from
the Switchboard corpus.
The Italian corpus had been collected in the scope
of some previous research about Human-ECA inter-
action. A Wizard of Oz tool was employed (Clarizio
et al, 2006) and during the interaction, a conver-
sational agent (i.e. the ?wizard?) played the role of
1ftp.ldc.upenn.edu/pub/ldc/public\_data/
swb1\_dialogact\_annot.tar.gz
85
Label Description Example Italian English
INFO-REQUEST Utterances that are pragmatically, semantically,
and syntactically questions
?What did you do when your kids
were growing up??
34% 7%
STATEMENT Descriptive, narrative, personal statements ?I usually eat a lot of fruit? 37% 57%
S-OPINION Directed opinion statements ?I think he deserves it.? 6% 20%
AGREE-ACCEPT Acceptance of a proposal, plan or opinion ?That?s right? 5% 9%
REJECT Disagreement with a proposal, plan, or opinion ?I?m sorry no? 7% .3%
OPENING Dialogue opening or self-introduction ?Hello, my name is Imma? 2% .2%
CLOSING Dialogue closing (e.g. farewell and wishes) ?It?s been nice talking to you.? 2% 2%
KIND-ATT Kind attitude (e.g. thanking and apology) ?Thank you very much.? 9% .1%
GEN-ANS Generic answers to an Info-Request ?Yes?, ?No?, ?I don?t know? 4% 4%
total cases 1448 131,265
Table 2: The set of labels employed for Dialogue Acts annotation and their distribution in the two corpora
an artificial therapist. The users were free to inter-
act with it in natural language, without any partic-
ular constraint. This corpus is about healthy eating
and contains (overall 60 dialogues, 1448 users? ut-
terances and 15,500 words).
3.2 Labelling
Both corpora are annotated following the Dialogue
Act Markup in Several Layers (DAMSL) annotation
scheme (Core and Allen, 1997). In particular the
Switchboard corpus employs a revision (Jurafsky et
al., 1997).2
Table 2 shows the set of labels employed with
their definitions, examples and distributions in the
two data sets. The categories maintain the DAMSL
main characteristic of being domain-independent
and can be easily mapped back into SWBD-DAMSL
ones, and maintain their original semantics. Thus,
the original SWBD-DAMSL annotation had been
automatically converted into the categories included
in our markup language.3
4 Data preprocessing
To reduce the data sparseness, we used a POS-tagger
and morphological analyzer (Pianta et al, 2008) for
preprocessing both corpora. So we considered lem-
mata instead of tokens in the format lemma#POS. In
addition, we augment the features of each sentence
with a set of linguistic markers, defined according to
2The SWBD-DAMSL modifies the original DAMSL frame-
work by further specifying some categories or by adding extra
features (mainly prosodic) which were not originally included
in the scheme.
3Also we did not consider the utterances formed only by
non-verbal material (e.g. laughter).
the semantic of the DA categories. We hypothesize,
in fact, these features could play an important role
in defining the linguistic profile of each DA. The ad-
dition of these markers is performed automatically,
by just exploiting the output of the POS-tagger and
of the morphological analyzer, according to the fol-
lowing rules:
? WH-QTN, used whenever an interrogative de-
terminer (e.g. ?what?) is found, according to the
output of the POS-tagger;
? ASK-IF, used whenever an utterance presents
the pattern of a ?Yes/No? question. ASK-IF and
WH-QTN markers are supposed to be relevant
for the INFO-REQUEST category;
? I-PERS, used for all declarative utterances
whenever a verb is in the first person form, sin-
gular or plural (relevant for the STATEMENT);
? COND, used for conditional form is detected.
? SUPER, used for superlative adjectives.
? AGR-EX, used whenever an agreement ex-
pression (e.g.?You?re right?, ?I agree?) is de-
tected (relevant for AGREE-ACCEPT);
? NAME, used whenever a proper name follows
a self-introduction expression (e.g. ?My name
is?) (relevant for the OPENING);
? OR-CLAUSE, used for or-clauses, that is ut-
terance starting by ?or? (should be helpful for
the characterization of the INFO-REQUEST);
? VB, used only for the Italian, when a dialectal
form of agreement expression is detected.
5 Dialogue Acts Recognition
We conducted some experiments both in a super-
vised and unsupervised settings.
86
5.1 Supervised
Regarding the supervised experiments, we used
Support Vector Machines (Vapnik, 1995), in partic-
ular SVM-light package (Joachims, 1998) under its
default configuration. We randomly split the two
corpora into 80/20 training/test partitions. SVMs
have been used in a large range of problems, in-
cluding text classification, image recognition tasks,
bioinformatics and medical applications, and they
are regarded as the state-of-the-art in supervised
learning. We got .71 and .77 of F1 measures respec-
tively for the Italian and English corpus. Table 4
reports the performance for each direct act.
5.2 Unsupervised
It is not always easy to collect large training, partly
because of manual labeling effort and moreover be-
cause often it is not possible to find it.
Schematically, our unsupervised methodology is:
(i) building a semantic similarity space in which
words, set of words, text fragments can be repre-
sented homogeneously, (ii) finding seeds that prop-
erly represent dialogue acts and considering their
representations in the similarity space, and (iii)
checking the similarity of the utterances.
To get a similarity space with the required charac-
teristics, we used Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA),
a corpus-based measure of semantic similarity pro-
posed by Landauer (Landauer et al, 1998). In LSA,
term co-occurrences in a corpus are captured by
means of a dimensionality reduction operated by a
singular value decomposition (SVD) on the term-by-
document matrix T representing the corpus.
SVD decomposes the term-by-document matrix
T into three matrices T = U?kVT where ?k is
the diagonal k ? k matrix containing the k singu-
lar values of T, ?1 ? ?2 ? . . . ? ?k, and U
and V are column-orthogonal matrices. When the
three matrices are multiplied together the original
term-by-document matrix is re-composed. Typically
we can choose k?  k obtaining the approximation
T ' U?k?VT .
LSA can be viewed as a way to overcome some
of the drawbacks of the standard vector space model
(sparseness and high dimensionality). In fact, the
LSA similarity is computed in a lower dimensional
space, in which second-order relations among terms
and texts are exploited. The similarity in the result-
ing vector space is then measured with the standard
cosine similarity. Note also that LSA yields a vec-
tor space model that allows for a homogeneous rep-
resentation (and hence comparison) of words, sen-
tences, and texts. For representing a word set or
a sentence in the LSA space we use the pseudo-
document representation technique, as described by
Berry (1992). In practice, each text segment is repre-
sented in the LSA space by summing up the normal-
ized LSA vectors of all the constituent words, using
also a tf.idf weighting scheme (Gliozzo and Strappa-
rava, 2005).
Label Seeds
INFO-REQ WH-QTN, Question Mark, ASK-IF, huh
STATEMENT I-PERS, I
S-OPINION Verbs which directly express opinion or
evaluation (guess, think, suppose, affect)
AGREE-ACC AGR-EX, yep, yeah, absolutely, correct
REJECT Verbs which directly express disagreement
(disagree, refute)
OPENING Greetings (hi, hello), words and markers re-
lated to self-introduction (name, NAME)
CLOSING Interjections/exclamations ending dis-
course (alright, okeydoke), Expressions
of thanking (thank) and farewell (bye,
bye-bye, goodnight, goodbye)
KIND-ATT Wishes (wish), apologies (apologize),
thanking (thank) and sorry-for (sorry,
excuse)
GEN-ANS no, yes, uh-huh, nope
Table 3: The seeds for the unsupervised experiment
The methodology is completely unsupervised.
We run the LSA using 400 dimensions (i.e. k?, as
suggested by (Landauer et al, 1998)) respectively
on the English and Italian corpus, without any DA
label information. Starting from a set of seeds
(words) representing the communicative acts (see
the complete sets in Table 3), we build the corre-
sponding vectors in the LSA space and then we com-
pare the utterances to find the communicative act
with higher similarity. To compare with SVM, the
performance is measured on the same test set parti-
tion used in the supervised experiment (Table 4).
We defined seeds by only considering the commu-
nicative goal and the specific semantic of every sin-
gle DA, just avoiding as much as possible the over-
lapping between seeds groups. We wanted to design
87
Italian English
SVM LSA SVM LSA
Label prec rec f1 prec rec f1 prec rec f1 prec rec f1
INFO-REQ .92 .99 .95 .96 .88 .92 .92 .84 .88 .93 .70 .80
STATEMENT .85 .68 .69 .76 .66 .71 .79 .92 .85 .70 .95 .81
S-OPINION .28 .42 .33 .24 .42 .30 .66 .44 .53 .41 .07 .12
AGREE-ACC .50 .80 .62 .56 .50 .53 .69 .74 .71 .68 .63 .65
REJECT - - - .09 .25 .13 - - - .01 .01 .01
OPENING .60 1.00 .75 .55 1.00 .71 .96 .55 .70 .20 .43 .27
CLOSING .67 .40 .50 .25 .40 .31 .83 .59 .69 .76 .34 .47
KIND-ATT .82 .53 .64 .43 .18 .25 .85 .34 .49 .09 .47 .15
GEN-ANS .20 .63 .30 .27 .38 .32 .56 .25 .35 .54 .33 .41
micro .71 .71 .71 .66 .66 .66 .77 .77 .77 .69 .69 .69
Table 4: Evaluation of the two methods on both corpora
an approach which is as general as possible, so we
did not consider domain words. The seeds are the
same for both languages, which is coherent with our
goal of defining a language-independent method.
5.3 Experimental Results and Discussion
We evaluate the performance of our method in terms
of precision, recall and f1-measure (see Table 4) ac-
cording to the DA labels given by annotators in the
datasets. As baselines we consider (i) most-frequent
label assignment (respectively 37% for Italian, 57%
for English) for the supervised setting, and (ii) ran-
dom DA selection (11%) for the unsupervised one.
Results are quite satisfying (Table 4). In particu-
lar, the unsupervised technique is largely above the
baselines, for both the Italian and the English exper-
iments. The methodology is independent from the
language and the domain: the Italian corpus is a col-
lection of dialogue about a very restricted domain
while the Switchboard conversations are essentially
task-free. Moreover, in the unsupervised setting we
use in practice the same seed definitions. Secondly,
it is independent on the differences in the linguis-
tic style due to the specific interaction scenario and
input modality. Finally, the performance is not af-
fected by the difference in size of the two data sets.
Error analysis. After conducting an error analy-
sis, we noted that many utterances are misclassi-
fied as STATEMENT. One possible reason is that
statements usually are quite long and there is a high
chance that some linguistic markers that character-
ize other dialogue acts are present in those sen-
tences. On the other hand, looking at the corpora we
observed that many utterances which appear to be
linguistically consistent with the typical structure of
statements have been annotated differently, accord-
ing to the actual communicative role they play. For
similar reasons, we observed some misclassifica-
tion of S-OPINION as STATEMENT. The only sig-
nificative difference between the two labels seems
to be the wider usage of ?slanted? and affectively
loaded lexicon when conveying an opinion. Another
cause of confounding is the confusion among the
backchannel labels (GEN-ANS, AGREE-ACC and
REJECT) due to the inherent ambiguity of common
words like yes, no, yeah, ok.
Recognition of such cases could be improved (i)
by enabling the classifiers to consider not only the
lexical semantics of the given utterance (local con-
text) but also the knowledge about a wider context
window (e.g. the previous n utterances), (ii) by en-
riching the data preprocessing (e.g. by exploiting in-
formation about lexicon polarity and subjectivity pa-
rameters). We intend to follow both these directions
in our future research.
6 Conclusions and Future Work
This study aims at defining a method for Dialogue
Acts recognition by simply exploiting the lexical se-
mantics of dialogue turns. The technique had to
be independent from some important features of the
corpus being used such as domain, language, size,
interaction scenario. In a long-term perspective, we
will employ the technique in conversational analysis
for user attitude classification (Martalo et al, 2008).
The methodology starts with automatically en-
88
riching the corpus with additional features, such as
linguistic markers. Then the unsupervised case con-
sists of defining a very simple and intuitive set of
seeds that profiles the specific dialogue acts, and
subsequently performing a similarity analysis in a
latent semantic space. The performance of the unsu-
pervised experiment has been compared with a su-
pervised state-of-art technique such as Support Vec-
tor Machines, and the results are quite encouraging.
Regarding future developments, we will investi-
gate how to include in the framework a wider con-
text (e.g. the previous n utterances), and the intro-
duction of new linguistic markers by enriching the
preprocessing techniques. In particular, it would be
interesting to exploit the role of slanted or affective-
loaded lexicon to deal with the misclassification of
opinions as statements. Along this perspective, DA
recognition could serve also as a basis for conver-
sational analysis aimed at improving a fine-grained
opinion mining in dialogues.
References
J. Austin. 1962. How to do Things with Words. Oxford
University Press, New York.
M. Berry. 1992. Large-scale sparse singular value com-
putations. International Journal of Supercomputer
Applications, 6(1).
G. Clarizio, I. Mazzotta, N. Novielli, and F. deRosis.
2006. Social attitude towards a conversational char-
acter. In Proceedings of the 15th IEEE International
Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Commu-
nication, pages 2?7, Hatfield, UK, September.
M. Core and J. Allen. 1997. Coding dialogs with the
DAMSL annotation scheme. In Working Notes of the
AAAI Fall Symposium on Communicative Action in
Humans and Machines, Cambridge, MA.
A. Gliozzo and C. Strapparava. 2005. Domains kernels
for text categorization. In Proceedengs of (CoNLL-
2005), University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, June.
J. Godfrey, E. Holliman, and J. McDaniel. 1992.
SWITCHBOARD: Telephone speech corpus for re-
search and development. In Proceedings of ICASSP-
92, pages 517?520, San Francisco, CA. IEEE.
S. Grau, E. Sanchis, M. J. Castro, and D. Vilar. 2004. Di-
alogue act classification using a bayesian approach. In
Proceedings of SPECOM-04, pages 495?499, Saint-
Petersburg, Russia, September.
T. Joachims. 1998. Text categorization with Support
Vector Machines: learning with many relevant fea-
tures. In Proceedings of the European Conference on
Machine Learning.
D. Jurafsky, E. Shriberg, and D. Biasca. 1997. Switch-
board SWBD-DAMSL shallow-discourse-function an-
notation coders manual, draft 13. Technical Report
97-01, University of Colorado.
S. Keizer, R. op den Akker, and A. Nijholt. 2002. Dia-
logue act recognition with bayesian networks for dutch
dialogues. In K. Jokinen and S. McRoy, editors, Pro-
ceedings 3rd SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Di-
alogue, pages 88?94, Philadelphia, PA, July.
T. K. Landauer, P. Foltz, and D. Laham. 1998. Introduc-
tion to latent semantic analysis. Discourse Processes,
25.
A. Martalo, N. Novielli, and F. deRosis. 2008. Attitude
display in dialogue patterns. In AISB 2008 Conven-
tion on Communication, Interaction and Social Intel-
ligence, Aberdeen, Scotland, April.
E. Pianta, C. Girardi, and R. Zanoli. 2008. The TextPro
tool suite. In Proceedings of LREC, Marrakech (Mo-
rocco), May.
M. Poesio and A. Mikheev. 1998. The predictive power
of game structure in dialogue act recognition: Experi-
mental results using maximum entropy estimation. In
Proceedings of ICSLP-98, Sydney, December.
R. Power. 1979. The organisation of purposeful dia-
logues. Linguistics, 17:107?152.
H. Sacks, E. Schegloff, and G. Jefferson. 1974. A sim-
plest systematics for the organization of turn-taking for
conversation. Language, 50(4):696?735.
E. Schegloff. 1968. Sequencing in conversational open-
ings. American Anthropologist, 70:1075?1095.
J. Searle. 1969. Speech Acts: An Essay in the Philoso-
phy of Language. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, London.
A. Stolcke, N. Coccaro, R. Bates, P. Taylor, C. Van Ess-
Dykema, K. Ries, E. Shriberg, D. Jurafsky, R. Mar-
tin, and M. Meteer. 2000. Dialogue act modeling for
automatic tagging and recognition of conversational
speech. Computational Linguistics, 26(3):339?373.
D. Traum. 2000. 20 questions for dialogue act tax-
onomies. Journal of Semantics, 17(1):7?30.
V. Vapnik. 1995. The Nature of Statistical Learning The-
ory. Springer-Verlag.
A. Venkataraman, Y. Liu, E. Shriberg, and A. Stol-
cke. 2005. Does active learning help automatic dia-
log act tagging in meeting data? In Proceedings of
EUROSPEECH-05, Lisbon, Portugal.
V. Warnke, R. Kompe, H. Niemann, and E. No?th. 1997.
Integrated dialog act segmentation and classification
using prosodic features and language models. In Pro-
ceedings of 5th European Conference on Speech Com-
munication and Technology, volume 1, pages 207?
210, Rhodes, Greece.
89
