Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Computational Semantics, pages 305?309,
Tilburg, January 2009. c?2009 International Conference on Computational Semantics
Application of Cognitive Strategies to Chinese
Noun Classifier E-learning
Wei Ni, Helena Hong Gao*, and Shixiao Ouyang
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{helenagao}@ntu.edu.sg
1 Introduction
Linguistically, a noun classifier is a morpheme or word used to classify a
noun according to its inherent semantic features. Noun classifiers in Chi-
nese are obligatory as a category of its own and used to specify a noun when
it is used with a determiner or a numeral. In other words, classifiers are
never used independently. It must occur with a numeral (e.g., yi ?one?, er
?two?, san ?three?) and/or a determiner (e.g., zhe ?this?, nei ?that?), or
certain quantifiers (e.g., ji ?how many?, mei ?every?) before the noun. Such
a combination is referred to as a classifier phrase. Its basic construction can
be illustrated in the following schema:
(Determiner) + Numeral + Classifier + Noun
zhe san ben zidian
this three dictionary
The counterparts in English for the above Chinese classifier phrase are
?these three dictionaries?. The determiner zhe ?this? is not obligatory in a
classifier phrase. The numeral san ?three? marks the object zidian ?dictio-
nary? as is in the state of being plural. The classifier ben inserted between
the numeral and the noun is a classifier for bound materials, such as books,
dictionaries, and magazines.
2 Cognitive strategies: top-down vs bottom-up
Bilingual Chinese children and L2 learners of the Chinese language often
encounter difficulties in their learning of Chinese noun classifiers [2, 3, 5].
305
This is mainly due to multiple categorization of a noun referent, i.e., a single
entity may belong to more than one category, depending on the properties
we attribute to it rather than on its intrinsic ones [6]. We expect this obstacle
in noun classifier acquisition to be overcome more effectively if attention to
pragmatic discourse is given on a cognitive basis. In practice, however, the
acquisition is further cumbered by the conventional focus on sentence level
practice rather than on pragmatic level discourse in the learning process.
Recently a replication comparative study of Gao?s 2001 study was con-
ducted on Chinese noun classifier production between a group of Swedish-
Chinese bilingual children and a group of Swedish L2 learners [5]. Same
as the observation of the previous study, the noun classifier production by
the bilingual children was higher than that by the adult L2 learners. The
Swedish L2 learners tended to ignore noun classifiers? semantic and cogni-
tive meanings, and to evaluate noun classifiers as merely syntactic terms.
Unable to make a semantic association between a classifier and a noun, they
were inclined to rely on their knowledge of measure words in Swedish and
rote memory of classifiers. Their top-down pattern in noun classifier acqui-
sition limited their horizon in understanding the more complicated yet more
meaningful semantic interpretations of noun classifiers on a cognitive basis.
In contrast, the bilingual children did not tackle noun classifiers with
strong top-down expectations. Their acquisition of noun classifiers was
based on the categorization schemes built from their semantic and cogni-
tive understanding of Chinese. They proceeded with classifier learning very
conservatively, in a bottom-up manner that relied largely on input. Taking
into consideration the semantic complexity of the noun classifier system, the
bilingual children?s bottom-up approach is more recommended.
3 Application in noun classifier e-learning
We describe an e-learning approach to enhance L2 learners? acquisition of
Chinese noun classifiers. Developed in the software environment of File-
Maker Pro 8.5, the e-learning tool is established on a database with classes
of nouns and classifiers stored in individual records..
The records in the database could be organized according to the lexical
meanings of the words and categorized into ?nature?, ?humans & body
parts?, ?animals?, ?vegetables & fruits? and ?man-made objects?. Such a
categorization appears explicit, but its top-down approach fails to reveal
the cognitive mapping between the noun classifier and the noun referent.
The objective of the e-learning approach, on the other hand, is to guide L2
306
learners to build their categorization scheme from the noun referents? salient
semantic features, specified by their shape, size, thickness, length, function,
etc.
Therefore, in light of the recommended bottom-up approach, the e-
learning tool urges users to learn the salient external or functional features
of the noun referents in a case-by-case fashion. In this way they could better
understand the point that a noun classifier reflects the cognitive classifica-
tion of its associated noun referent. Each individual record is thus designed
in the following format. It contains the noun as one of its data entries,
and it also provides in other data entries information of the corresponding
noun classifier(s) and its description. Most importantly, the salient semantic
feature of the noun referent is decomposed and illustrated explicitly in an
independent data entry.
For instance, tiao is the correct noun classifier for ?a rainbow?, ?a leg?,
?a snake?, ?a cucumber? and ?a scarf?. To decide the appropriate noun
classifier that occurs in these phrases, L2 learners need to understand that
tiao reflects the longitudinal property of ?rainbow?, ?leg?, ?snake?, ?cu-
cumber? and ?scarf?, which is perceptually salient. Tiao is chosen since
it matches with the longitudinal attribute the five noun referents have in
common, despite that the intrinsic properties of the five objects vary, which
is illustrated in Table 1.
English Chinese classifier phrase Properties
equivalent numeral classifier noun cognitive intrinsic
a rainbow yi tiao caihong longitudinal nature
a leg yi tiao tui longitudinal humans
a snake yi tiao she longitudinal animals
a cucumber yi tiao huanggua longitudinal vegetables
a scarf yi tiao weijin longitudinal man-made
Table 1: A Selection of Classifier Phrases of tiao
Compared with noun classifiers with specific applications (e.g., tiao for
snakes and ben for books), other classifiers are commonly used with more
generalized sets of nouns. These general noun classifiers are more semanti-
cally complex, since they are inhabited with multi-layer meanings. It hence
requires deeper cognitive understanding to master them. Erbaugh examined
the acquisition order of noun classifiers and suggested learners acquire noun
classifiers specific to single items before they acquire those of generalized
307
sets, such as ge applicable to both animate and inanimate noun referents of
most kinds and zhi to nouns of body-parts of humans and animals as well
as man-made objects [1]. L2 learners are recommended to follow the same
bottom-up approach to acquire general noun classifiers. In the e-learning
environment L2 learners are exposed to a selection of classifier phrases with
general noun classifiers. Take zhi for example. It is associated with nouns
such as ?bird?, ?bear?, ?hand? and ?ear?. Regarding which noun classifier
is associated with these four nouns, animacy is the critical semantic feature
of these noun referents, which is analyzed in each record of the nouns.
Besides utilizing textual explanations, this e-learning tool will also de-
velop a computer-based model of noun classifier acquisition for automatic
noun-classifier association. By implementing Holland?s agent-based model
[4], we aim to include in our prototype 150 nouns and 12 noun classifiers as
two groups of interactive agents. To design a semantic interface between the
two types of agents in a computational perspective, a tag is attached to each
agent. Each tag is a pseudo-binary bit string of {0, 1, #}, representing the
semantic features of the agent. ?#? is known as the ?doesn?t care? symbol,
and is used to indicate that the corresponding semantic feature is not critical
for the formulation of the classifier phrase, even though the noun referent
owns such a feature.
The first simple model is illustrated as follows. In this model each tag
consists of 4 pseudo-binary bits. The tag ?11##? is assigned to the agent
(noun) ?snake?. By this we represent the noun referent?s longitudinal se-
mantic feature with the first two symbols ?11?. Despite the noun referent
also has the cognitive property of animacy which could be indicated by the
last two symbols, it is not of primary importance for the concern of classifier
phrase composition, and is hence denoted by ?##?. When it is compared
with the tag ?1100? of the agent (noun classifier) tiao, the matching score is
reported high. This indicates tiao is likely to occur in the classifier phrase
of ?snake?. In contrast, its matching score with the tag ?0011? of the agent
(noun classifier) zhi is reported low, which implies an undesirable match.
Further simulation tests are required to verify the robustness of the pro-
posed model, with a more systematic classification of the agent?s semantic
features, a larger number of inputs, and closer scrutiny on those marginally
acceptable classifier phrases.
308
Acknowledgement
Research grants to H. H. Gao from Nanyang Technological University sup-
ported preparation of this paper.
References
[1] M. S. Erbaugh. Taking stock: The development of chinese noun clas-
sifiers historically and in young children. In C. Craig, editor, Noun
Classes and Categorization. John Benjamins, Amsterdam and Philadel-
phia, 1986.
[2] H. Gao. Understanding the concept of noun classifiers in chinese - a
comparative study of the acquisition of chinese noun classifiers between
swedish adults and bilingual chinese children. In Proceedings of Human-
istdagarna 2001. Lund University Press, 2001.
[3] H. H. Gao, P. D. Zelazo, and B. Sigurd. The acquisition of chinese noun
classifiers in bilingual children and adults. In 2005 Biennial Meeting of
Society for Research in Child Development, Atlanta, Georgia, U.S.A.,
2005.
[4] J. H. Holland. Hidden Order: How adaption builds complexity. Addison-
Wesley, 1995.
[5] S. Ouyang and H. H. Gao. Understanding chinese classifier acquisition:
A comparative study. In Proceedings of the URECA@NTU 2007-08,
2008.
[6] S. Rovira. The cognitive perspective in teaching chinese measure words.
In The XV Biennial Conference of the EACS, Heidelberg, Germany,
2004.
309
Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Computational Semantics, pages 316?319,
Tilburg, January 2009. c?2009 International Conference on Computational Semantics
Developing a Computer-facilitated Tool for
Acquiring Near-synonyms in Chinese and English
Shixiao Ouyang, Helena Hong Gao*, and Soo Ngee Koh
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{helenagao}@ntu.edu.sg
1 Introduction
This paper is a multi-disciplinary study on cognitive linguistics, computational
linguistics and language acquisition. It focuses on application issues of meaning,
semantic structures and pragmatics to near-synonyms in Chinese and English
languages. The near-synonyms of physical action verbs (PA Verbs) can be
distinctive from each other in the way in which their actions are depicted, but
in terms of language acquisition, it is not an easy task to identify the nuances
among near-synonyms. Normal dictionaries do not explain the differentiae that
are crucial for the choice among near-synonyms, and research on how to tackle
the nuances among near-synonyms of PA Verbs has hardly been done. We
aim to develop a computer-facilitated language-learning tool for L2 learners to
master different sub-classes of PA Verbs in both Chinese and English.
We believe that all the fractions of the arm movement and actions are per-
ceptibly the base for linguistic expressions of human physical actions. By em-
phasizing the specifications of the manners of action as the crucial semantic
components embedded in the verb roots, Gao [1] provided a demonstration of
her decomposition method for the semantic properties of near-synonyms of PA
Verbs (see Table 1). Differences between the members of each subclass are
marked by different notions found in PA Verbs, such as Bodypart Contact,
Instrument, Force, Motion Direction, Speed, Effect, and Intention. These are
considered to be the most important ones in projecting the lexical semantic
prominence in the classifications of a word?s meaning components among its
near-synonyms.
We assume that to thoroughly understand the nuances between the near-
synonyms of PA Verbs, the learners need to understand the perspectives from
which the action is depicted linguistically. Gao?s [1] work on semantic decompo-
sition of near-synonyms of PA Verbs provides a theoretical guideline and solid
ground for designing an e-learning tool for L2 learners.
316
Table 1: Specification of Semantic Properties for Verbs of Touching [1]
2 Methodology
A near-synonym database needs to be set up first. To make the semantic rep-
resentations abstract enough for computing purpose, a rule based model will be
applied to quantify the semantic properties of each word. The following is a
rule showing how the semantic meaning of the word peng ?touch? is written in
relation to its other class members. The rule representation follows a standard-
ized English Machinese according to certain conventions in machine translation
[2].
The rule above can be rendered in words as follows: There is a Chinese
lexical item peng classified as a physical action verb (pav). It has three near-
synonyms (peng3 ) with 9 semantic property types categorized in relation to
its synonyms (smc(c, 9)). The detailed rule for the 9 categories begins with
the agent?s body part involvement (bp), followed by the instrument used in
performing the action (ins), degree of the force used (for), the motion direction
of the action (md), the speed of the motion action (sp), duration of the action
317
(du), possible patient object that the action is executed on (po), the subjective
agent?s possible intention to perform the action (int), and the possible effect
caused to the objective patient (eff ).
The numbers given in the brackets such as (3/3 ) or (2/3 ) and in the angle
brackets such as <3/3> or <1/3> are mathematical expressions where the
digits in the denominator in both ( ) and < > indicate the number of near-
synonyms in the class. The digit in the numerator in the bracket ( ) refers
to the number of the class members that can be labeled as bearing the same
semantic property category, while the digit in the numerator in < > refers to the
number of the class members that share a particular semantic property specified
in square brackets [ ]. For instance, the actions depicted by all three near-
synonyms of touching verbs involve hand contact as the body part involvement
and thus this part of rule is written as {bp<3/3>,[hand]}.
The content in { } has a conditional relation: If the number in the numerator
is 3 in brackets < >, then the property specified in [ ], such as [hand] in the body
part involvement, must be met by all its class members. If the class member
bears or shares more than one semantic properties within one category, the
alternatives are given with a semicolon in between the bracket { }, as typically
shown in the motion direction (md) of the action. In the beginning and at the
end of the rule representation, brief comments or reminders of the next step
rules are given after % as conventionally used in Prolog programming [2].
The second step is to calculate the average degree of uniqueness of each word
in each of the 9 categories specified in the rule, representing the relative degree
of easiness or difficulty to differentiate the word from the rest of the group
within the category. Algorithm for calculating the average degree of uniqueness
is proposed below:
Step 1: For each of the 9 semantic property categories, a priority check is
conducted first to look for the digit ?1? in the numerator in < >. If ?1? is found
in the numerator in at least one < >, go to Step 2; otherwise go to Step 3.
Step 2: In case of ?1? found in the numerator in a < >, the average degree
of uniqueness is marked as unit ?1? , the highest degree of the semantic repre-
sentation in revealing the uniqueness of its kind in terms of semantic categories.
Step 3: If ?1? is not found as a unique property within any category, assign
the value of the numerator in each < > as A
1
, A
2
,..., A
n
, where n indicates the
total number of properties that the word owns in each respective category. The
average degree of uniqueness represented by this category can be expressed in
the following formula: (1/n)
n
?
i=1
1/A
i
.
The average degree has a maximum value of 1. For those words whose degree
of uniqueness is lower than 1, the higher the degree of uniqueness, the lower the
value for n or A
i
. With respect to distinguishing themselves from the rest of the
class members, they have fewer competitors, leading to larger probabilities of
differentiating the near-synonyms by the corresponding semantic property. The
near-synonym database will contain one main database linked to a number of
sub-tables, which can be more or less than the 9 categories illustrated above,
depending on the number of semantic property categories that each class falls
318
into, or whether the specifications are specified enough to be able to discriminate
a particular class of near-synonyms under consideration in the future. Values
of uniqueness owned by each word found in each semantic property are stored
in the sub-tables. The average values of uniqueness owned by each word on per
category basis are recorded both in its sub-table and the main table.
In creating the algorithm for the interface, the steps are in reverse order of
building up the database. The total value of uniqueness computed will be com-
pared on per category basis. The category with the highest sum will be chosen
as the sub-table for the first attempt of differentiation. Similarly, a primary
check of the existence of value ?1? is conducted in order to give priority to the
category where most ?1?s are found. Only when no value ?1? is found in any
field could the arithmetic summation be carried out. Multiple choices questions
will be prompted to allow users to select one property from the category that
matches his/her context most closely. The number of the word(s) that match
such property will be reflected by the value of the numerator in the <> of the
chosen property. The algorithm will continue to search for the next category
with the highest degree of uniqueness among the remaining near-synonyms, until
only one word is selected from the class.
3 Conclusion
With a solid ground of linguistic analysis and application of rule based computa-
tional methodologies, the e-learning program provides advanced L2 learners with
an effective interface in acquiring the nuances among near-synonyms with more
intuitional and cognitive understanding. This computational system serves as
a good starting point for exploring e-teaching and e-learning tools for advanced
learners.
Acknowledgements
Research grants to H. H. Gao and President Research Scholarship to S. Ouyang
from Nanyang Technological University supported preparation of this paper.
References
[1] H. H. Gao. The physical foundation of the patterning of physical action
verbs. Lund, Sweden: Lund University Press, 2001.
[2] B. Sigurd and H. Gao. Outline of a computerized chinese grammar enabling
english and swedish translation. In Working Papers, volume 47, pages 181?
199. Lund University Press, 1999.
319
