Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval-2007), pages 422?425,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
UPAR7: A knowledge-based system for headline sentiment tagging 
 
Fran?ois-R?gis Chaumartin 
Lattice/Talana ? Universit? Paris 7 
30, rue du ch?teau des rentiers - 75013 Paris - France 
fchaumartin@linguist.jussieu.fr / frc@proxem.com  
 
Abstract 
For the Affective Text task at SemEval-
2007, University Paris 7?s system first 
evaluates emotion and valence on all words 
of a news headline (using enriched versions 
of SentiWordNet and a subset of WordNet-
Affect). We use a parser to find the head 
word, considering that it has a major im-
portance. We also detect contrasts (be-
tween positive and negative words) that 
shift valence. Our knowledge-based system 
achieves high accuracy on emotion and va-
lence annotation. These results show that 
working with linguistic techniques and a 
broad-coverage lexicon is a viable ap-
proach to sentiment analysis of headlines. 
1 Introduction 
1.1 Objectives 
The detection of emotional connotations in texts is 
a recent task in computational linguistics. Its 
economic stakes are promising; for example, a 
company could detect, by analyzing the blo-
gosphere, people?s opinion on its products. 
The goal of the SemEval task is to annotate 
news headlines for emotions (using a predefined 
list: anger, disgust, fear, joy, sadness & surprise), 
and for valence (positive or negative). A specific 
difficulty here is related to the small number of 
words available for the analysis. 
1.2 Overall architecture 
Our system is mainly rule-based and uses a lin-
guistic approach. From a macroscopic point of 
view, we follow the hypothesis that, in a news title, 
all the words potentially carry emotions. If linguis-
tic resources make it possible to detect these emo-
tions individually, how can we deal with headlines 
where bad and good emotions appear at once? 
Our objective is to identify the expression which 
carries the main topic of the title. One can consider 
that this expression has a primary importance. 
We also seek to lay down rules for detecting 
specific emotions. For instance, surprise some-
times comes from the contrast between good and 
bad news. And sometimes, simple lexical elements 
are characteristic of an emotion; a negation or a 
modal auxiliary in a title may be a relevant indica-
tor of surprise. 
We describe here the techniques we imple-
mented to address all these points. 
2 Components & resources used 
The system we employed for the Affective Text 
evaluation consists of the following components1: 
? The SS-Tagger (a Part-of-Speech tagger)2, 
? The Stanford Parser. 
We also used several lexical resources: 
? WordNet version 2.1, 
? A subset of WordNet-Affect, 
? SentiWordNet. 
As the SS-Tagger is straightforward, we will not 
say more about it here. We will, however, discuss 
the remaining components and resources below. 
                                                 
1  We used them through the Antelope NLP framework 
(www.proxem.com), which makes them easy to use. 
2 This fast PoS tagger uses an extension of Maximum Entropy 
Markov Models. See (Tsuruoka, Tsujii, 2005). 
422
2.1 Choice of the Stanford Parser 
We wished to use a syntactic parser for this task. 
We hesitated between two parsers producing a 
dependency graph, the Link Grammar Parser 
(Sleator, Temperley, 1991) and the Stanford 
Parser (Manning, Klein, 2002). 
As a news title is sometimes reduced to a nomi-
nal group, without a verb, our experiments showed 
that we should modify the title to make it ?gram-
matically correct?. Such a step is essential to 
obtain accurate results with a rule-based analyzer 
such as the Link Grammar Parser. On the other 
hand, a statistical analyzer like the Stanford Parser 
is more tolerant with constructions which are not 
grammatically correct. That is why we chose it. 
2.2 WordNet 
We used WordNet (Miller, 1995) as a semantic 
lexicon. This well-known project, started in 1985 
at Princeton, offers a broad-coverage semantic 
network of the English language, and is probably 
one of the most popular NLP resources. 
In WordNet, words are grouped into sets of 
synonyms. Various semantic relations exist be-
tween these synsets (for example, hypernymy and 
hyponymy, antonymy, derivation?). 
2.3 WordNet-Affect 
WordNet-Affect (Strapparava, Valitutti, 2004) is a 
hierarchy of ?affective domain labels?, with which 
the synsets representing affective concepts are 
further annotated. We used the subset of WordNet-
Affect provided as emotions lists by the SemEval 
organizers. To improve it, we manually added to 
the emotion lists new words that we found impor-
tant on the task trial data. 
 Nouns Verbs Adjectives Adverbs
Anger 37 26 16 0
Disgust 35 19 9 0
Fear 71 26 20 4
Joy 50 22 14 1
Sadness 88 37 29 4
Surprise 16 29 13 2
Table 1: Counting of new words for each emotion. 
Nouns Verbs Adjectives Adverbs 
cancer 
danger 
poverty 
demolish 
injure 
kidnap 
comatose 
nuclear 
violent 
bloody 
dead 
worse 
Table 2: Some words added for ?fear? emotion. 
The synsets of emotions lists were considered as 
seeds; our system recursively propagated their 
emotions to their neighbor synsets3.  
SentiWordNet 
SentiWordNet (Esuli, Sebastiani, 2006) describes 
itself as a lexical resource for opinion mining. 
SentiWordNet assigns to each synset of WordNet 
three sentiment scores 4 : positivity, negativity, 
objectivity, the sum of which always equals 1.0. 
This resource has been created with a mix of 
linguistics and statistics (using classifiers). The 
advantage of this approach is to allow the auto-
matic generation of emotion values for all the 
synsets of WordNet. The disadvantage is that, as 
all the results are not manually validated, some 
resulting classifications can appear incorrect5. 
We recursively propagate the positivity and 
negativity values throughout neighbor synsets6. 
3 UPAR7 Affective Text system 
3.1 ?De-capitalization? of common words 
A preliminary problem that we had to solve was 
related to the Anglo-Saxon habit of putting initial 
capital letters in all the words of a title. 
The first pass of our system thus detected news 
titles that were ?improperly? capitalized, and ?de-
capitalizes? their common words. 
For that, we used the SS-Tagger on the title; ac-
cording to the part of speech of each word, infor-
mation found in WordNet, and some hand-crafted 
rules7, the system chooses or not to keep the initial. 
The impact of this processing step is far from 
negligible, from the point of view of the Stanford 
Parser. Indeed, let us have a look at the difference 
between the parsing of the title, before (figure 1) 
and after (figure 2) this processing. 
                                                 
3 Following relations such as Hyponym, Derivation, Adjective 
Similar, Adjective Participle, Derivation and Pertainym. 
4 For instance, the synset ESTIMABLE#1 (deserving of respect 
or high regard) has: Positivity = 0.75, Negativity = 0.00, 
Objectivity = 0.25. 
5  For example, RAPE#3 (the crime of forcing a woman to 
submit to sexual intercourse against her will) is classified with 
Positivity=0.25 and Negativity=0.0 despite the presence of the 
word ?crime? in its gloss. 
6 Using WordNet?s relations such as Hyponym (for noun and 
verb), Antonym and Derivation. For antonyms, positivity and 
negativity values are exchanged. 
7 For instance, a word that cannot be any form of a WordNet 
lemma is probably a proper noun, and then we keep its initial. 
423
 
Figure 1 : Output of the Stanford Parser with a title that is ?improperly? capitalized. 
 
 
Figure 2 : Output of the Stanford Parser with a title that is ?properly? capitalized. 
(Words are tagged with the right part-of-speech, and dependencies are now correct.) 
 
3.2 Individual words rating 
For the moment, we consider the output of the 
Stanford Parser as an array of PoS-tagged words. 
We use WordNet?s morphology functions to find 
the possible base form of each word. 
At this stage, an important question arose: was 
lexical disambiguation possible? We thought not, 
because with short sentences, few relevant heuris-
tics apply. We chose another solution, by consider-
ing that the emotion and valence values of a word 
were the linear combination of that of all its possi-
ble meanings, balanced by the frequency of each 
lemma. 
We detected emotion and valence values for 
each word, by using our enriched version of 
WordNet-Affect and SentiWordNet. 
 
In fact, we also detected some extra information: 
? An additional 7th emotion, that looks like 
?compassion for people needing protection?. 
Our assumption is that certain words express 
a subjacent need for protection. For exam-
ple, there is ?student? behind ?school?, and 
?child? behind ?adoption?. So, we built a list 
of words designating something that needs 
protection; we also include in this list words 
such as ?troops?, ?shoppers?? 
? We tried to detect acronyms relating to 
technology; for this, we defined a list of 
high-tech companies and a very basic regu-
lar expression rule saying that a word (not in 
WordNet) containing numbers, or capitals 
not in first position, should be something 
high-tech. (This very basic rule seems to 
work nicely on PS3, iPod, NASA?). We 
use these high-tech indications to increase 
the ?joy? emotion. 
? We counted lexical elements that we think 
are good indicators of surprise: negations, 
modal auxiliaries, question marks. 
At this stage, we begin some post-processing on 
individual words. Which factors cause anger rather 
that sadness? We believe that human intention (to 
harm) causes the former emotion, while natural 
factors such as disease or climatic catastrophes 
cause the latter. So, we used a few rules related to 
the WordNet noun hierarchy, based on the fact that 
when a noun is a hyponym of a given synset, we 
boost some emotions: 
Does noun inherit from? Emotions to boost 
UNHEALTHINESS Fear, sadness 
ATMOSPHERIC PHENOME-
NON 
Fear, sadness 
AGGRESSION, HOSTILITY, 
WRONGFUL CONDUCT 
Anger, fear, sadness, 
disgust 
WEAPONRY, WEAPON 
SYSTEM 
Anger, fear, sadness 
UNFORTUNATE PERSON Sadness, ?compassion? 
HUMAN WILL Anger 
Table 3: Hypernyms triggering an emotion boost. 
Then, the emotions found serve to update the 
valence, by increasing positivity or negativity: 
Emotion Positivity Negativity
Joy ++ -- 
Anger, disgust, sadness, 
fear, ?compassion? 
-- ++ 
Table 4: Emotions that change valence. 
424
3.3 Global sentence rating 
At this stage, our system tries to find the main 
subject of the news title. Again, we use the output 
of the Stanford Parser, but this time, we make use 
of the dependency graph. We consider that the 
main word is the root of the dependency graph, i.e. 
the word that is never a dependant word. (For 
instance, in figure 2, the main word is ?predicts?.) 
We think that the contribution of this main word 
is much more important than that of the other 
words of the title8. So, we multiply its individual 
valence and emotion by 6. 
The last important part of linguistic processing 
is the detection of contrasts and accentuations 
between ?good? or ?bad? things. We search pat-
terns like [noun?subject?verb] or [verb?direct 
object?noun] in the dependency graph, with verbs 
that increase or decrease a quantity9 . Using the 
valence of the given noun, this gives our system 
the ability to detect very good news (?boosts 
(brain) power?) or good news where something 
bad gets less important (?reduces risk?, ?slows 
decline?, ?hurricane weakens??). 
4 Results 
Coase-grained Fine-grained 
Pearson Accuracy Precision Recall 
Anger 32.33 93.60 16.67 1.66
Disgust 12.85 95.30 0.00 0.00
Fear 44.92 87.90 33.33 2.54
Joy 22.49 82.20 54.54 6.66
Sadness 40.98 89.00 48.97 22.02
Surprise 16.71 88.60 12.12 1.25
Table 5: Results of the emotion annotation. 
Our rule-based system detects the six emotions 
in news headlines with an average accuracy reach-
ing 89.43% (coarse-grained evaluation). However, 
recall is low. 
Coase-grained Fine-grained 
Pearson Accuracy Precision Recall 
Valence 36.96 55.00 57.54 8.78
Table 6: Results of the valence annotation. 
                                                 
8 In sentences like ?study says??, ?scientists say??, ?police 
affirm??, the main head word is the verb of the relative. 
9 We ?rediscovered? valence shifters (words that modify the 
sentiment expressed by a sentiment-bearing word, see (Po-
lanyi and Zaenen, 2006)). 
The valence detection accuracy (55% in coarse-
grained evaluation) is lower than in emotion anno-
tation. We attribute this difference to the fact that it 
is easier to detect emotions (that are given by 
individual words) rather than valence, which needs 
a global understanding of the sentence. 
5 Conclusion 
Emotion and valence tagging is a complex and 
interesting task. For our first attempt, we designed 
and developed a linguistic rule-based system, using 
WordNet, SentiWordNet and WordNet-Affect 
lexical resources, that delivers high accuracy 
results. In our future work, we will explore the 
potential of simultaneously using a statistical 
approach, in order to improve recall of sentiment 
annotation. 
References 
Andrea Esuli, Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2006. SentiWordNet: 
A Publicly Available Lexical Resource for Opinion 
Mining. Proceedings of LREC 2006, fifth interna-
tional conference on Language Resources and Evalu-
ation, pp. 417-422. 
Christopher Manning, Dan Klein. 2002. Fast Exact 
Inference with a Factored Model for Natural Lan-
guage Parsing. Advances in Neural Information 
Processing Systems 15 (NIPS 2002). 
George Miller. 1995. WordNet: A lexical database. Acts 
of ACM 38, 39-41. 
Livia Polanyi, Annie Zaenen. 2006. Contextual Valence 
Shifters. In J. G. Shanahan, Y. Qu, and J. Wiebe, edi-
tors, Computing Attitude and Affect in Text: Theory 
and Application. Springer Verlag. 
Daniel Sleator, Davy Temperley. 1991. Parsing English 
with a Link Grammar. Acts of Third International 
Workshop on Parsing Technologies. 
Carlo Strapparava, Alessandro Valitutti. 2004. Word-
Net-Affect: an affective extension of WordNet. Pro-
ceedings of the 4th International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2004), pp. 
1083-1086. 
Yoshimasa Tsuruoka, Jun'ichi Tsujii. 2005. Bidirec-
tional Inference with the Easiest-First Strategy for 
Tagging Sequence Data. Proceedings of 
HLT/EMNLP 2005, pp. 467-474. 
425
