Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 179?186,
Suntec, Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Word Segmentation Standard in Chinese, Japanese and Korean 
 
Key-Sun Choi 
KAIST 
Daejeon Korea 
kschoi@kaist.ac.kr 
Hitoshi Isahara 
NICT 
Kyoto Japan 
isahara@nict.go.jp 
Kyoko Kanzaki
NICT 
Kyoto Japan 
kanzaki@nict.go.jp
Hansaem Kim
National Inst. 
Korean Lang.
Seoul  Korea
thesis00@korea.kr
Seok Mun Pak 
Baekseok Univ. 
Cheonan Korea 
smpark@bu.ac.kr 
Maosong Sun 
Tsinghua Univ.
Beijing China 
sms@tsinghua.edu.cn
 
Abstract 
Word segmentation is a process to divide a 
sentence into meaningful units called ?word 
unit? [ISO/DIS 24614-1]. What is a word 
unit is judged by principles for its internal in-
tegrity and external use constraints. A word 
unit?s internal structure is bound by prin-
ciples of lexical integrity, unpredictability 
and so on in order to represent one syntacti-
cally meaningful unit. Principles for external 
use include language economy and frequency 
such that word units could be registered in a 
lexicon or any other storage for practical re-
duction of processing complexity for the fur-
ther syntactic processing after word segmen-
tation. Such principles for word segmentation 
are applied for Chinese, Japanese and Korean, 
and impacts of the standard are discussed. 
1 Introduction 
Word segmentation is the process of dividing of 
sentence into meaningful units. For example, 
?the White House? consists of three words but 
designates one concept for the President?s resi-
dence in USA. ?Pork? in English is translated 
into two words ?pig meat? in Chinese, Korean 
and Japanese. In Japanese and Korean, because 
an auxiliary verb must be followed by main verb, 
they will compose one word unit like ?tabetai? 
and ?meoggo sipda? (want to eat). So the word 
unit is defined by a meaningful unit that could be 
a candidate of lexicon or of any other type of 
storage (or expanded derived lexicon) that is use-
ful for the further syntactic processing. A word 
unit is more or less fixed and there is no syntactic 
interference in the inside of the word unit. In the 
practical sense, it is useful for the further syntac-
tic parsing because it is not decomposable by 
syntactic processing and also frequently occurred 
in corpora.  
There are a series of linguistic annotation 
standards in ISO: MAF (morpho-syntactic anno-
tation framework), SynAF (syntactic annotation 
framework), and others in ISO/TC37/SC4 1 . 
These standards describe annotation methods but 
not for the meaningful units of word segmenta-
tion. In this aspect, MAF and SynAF are to anno-
tate each linguistic layer horizontally in a stan-
dardized way for the further interoperability. 
Word segmentation standard would like to rec-
ommend what word units should be candidates to 
be registered in some storage or lexicon, and 
what type of word sequences called ?word unit? 
should be recognized before syntactic processing. 
In section 2, principles of word segmentation 
will be introduced based on ISO/CD 24614-1. 
Section 3 will describe the problems in word 
segmentation and what should be word units in 
each language of Chinese, Japanese and Korean. 
The conclusion will include what could be 
shared among three languages for word segmen-
tation. 
2 Word Segmentation: Framework and 
Principles 
Word unit is a layered pre-syntactical unit. That 
means that a word unit consists of the smaller 
word units. But the maximal word unit is fre-
quently occurred in corpora under the constraints 
that the syntactic processing will not refer the 
internal structure of the word unit 
Basic atoms of word unit are word form, mor-
pheme including bound morpheme, and non-
lexical items like punctuation mark, numeric 
string, foreign character string and others as 
shown in Figure 1. Usually we say that ?word? is 
lemma or word form. Word form is a form that a 
lexeme takes when used in a sentence. For ex-
ample, strings ?have?, ?has?, and ?having? are 
word forms of the lexeme HAVE, generally dis-
tinguished by the use of capital letters. [ISO/CD 
24614-1] Lemma is a conventional form used to 
represent a lexeme, and lexeme is an abstract 
unit generally associated with a set of word 
forms sharing a common meaning. 
                                                 
1 Refer to http://www.tc37sc4.org/ for documents 
MAF, SynAF and so on. 
179
 
Figure 1. Configuration of Word Unit 
 
BNF of word unit is as follows: 
<word unit> ::= <word form> | <morpheme> | 
<non lexical items> | <word unit>, 
where <word unit> is recursively defined be-
cause a longer word unit contains smaller word 
units. 
Bunsetsu in Japanese is the longest word unit, 
which is an example of layered maximized pre-
syntactical unit. Eojeol in Korean is a spacing 
unit that consists of one content word (noun, 
verb, adjective or adverb) plus a sequence of 
functional elements. Such language-specific 
word units will be described in section 3.  
Principles for word segmentation will set the 
criteria to validate each word unit, to recognize 
its internal structure and non-lexical word unit, to 
be a candidate of lexicon, and other consistency 
to be necessitated by practical applications for 
any text in any language. The meta model of 
word segmentation will be explained in the 
processing point of view, and then their prin-
ciples of word units in the following subsections.  
2.1 Metamodel of Word Segmentation 
A word unit has a practical unit that will be later 
used for syntactic processing. While the word 
segmentation is a process to identify the longest 
word unit and its internal structure such that the 
word unit is not the object to interfere any syn-
tactic operation, ?chunking? is to identify the 
constituents but does not specify their internal 
structure. Syntactic constituent has a syntactic 
role, but the word unit is a subset of syntactic 
constituent. For example, ?blue sky? could be a 
syntactic constituent but not a word unit. Figure 
2 shows the meta model of word segmentation. 
[ISO CD 24614-1]  
2.2 Principles of Word Unit Validation 
Principles for validating a word unit can be ex-
plained by two perspectives: one is linguistic one 
and the other is processing-oriented practical 
perspective.   
In ISO 24614-1, principles from a linguistic 
perspective, there are five principles: principles 
of (1) bound morpheme, (2) lexical integrity, (3) 
unpredictability, (4) idiomatization, and (5) un-
productivity.  
First, bound morpheme is something like ?in? 
of ? inefficient? . The principle of bound mor-
pheme says that each bound morpheme plus 
word will make another word. Second, principle 
of lexical integrity means that any syntactic 
processing cannot refer the internal structure of 
word (or word unit). From the principle, we can 
say that the longest word unit is the maximal 
meaningful unit before syntactic processing. 
Third, another criterion to recognize a word is 
the principle of unpredictability. If we cannot 
infer the real fact from the word, we consider it 
as a word unit. For example, we cannot image 
what is the colour of blackboard because some is 
green, not black. [ISO 24614-1] The fourth prin-
ciple is that the idiom should be one word, which 
could be a subsidiary principle that follows the 
principle of unpredictability. In the last principle, 
unproductivity is a stronger definition of word; 
there is no pattern to be copied to generate an-
other word from this word formation. For exam-
ple, in ????  (white vegetable) in Chinese, 
there is no other coloured vegetable like ?blue 
vegetable.? 
Another set of principles is derived from the 
practical perspective. There are four principles: 
frequency, Gestalt, prototype and language 
economy. Two principles of frequency and lan-
guage economy are to recognize the frequent 
occurrence in corpora. Gestalt and prototype 
principles are the terms in cognitive science 
about what are in our mental lexicon, and what 
are perceivable words.  
Principle of language economy is to say about 
very practical processing efficiency: ?if the in-
clusion of a word (unit) candidate into the lex-
icon can decrease the difficulty of linguistic 
analysis for it, then it is likely to be a word 
(unit).? 
Gestalt principle is to perceive as a whole. ?It 
supports some perceivable phrasal compounds 
into the lexicon even though they seem to be free 
combinations of their perceivable constituent 
parts,? [ISO/CD 24614-1] where the phrasal 
compound is frequently used linguistic unit and 
its meaning is predictable from its constituent 
elements. Similarly, principle of prototype pro-
180
vides a rationale for including some phrasal 
compounds into lexicon, and phrasal compounds 
serve as prototypes in a productive word forma-
tion pattern, like ?apple pie? with the pattern 
?fruit + pie? into the lexicon.  
 
 
Figure 2. Meta model of word segmentation proess 
[ISO/CD 24614-1] 
2.3 Principles for Word Unit Formation 
As a result of word segmentation of sentence, we 
will get word units. These principles will de-
scribe the internal structure of word unit. They 
have four principles: granularity, scope maximi-
zation of affixations, scope maximization of 
compounding, and segmentation for other strings. 
In the principle of granularity, a word unit has its 
internal structure, if necessary for various appli-
cation of word segmentation.  
Principles of scope maximization of affixa-
tions and compounding are to recognize the 
longest word unit as one word unit even if it is 
composed of stem + affixes or compound of 
word units. For example, ?unhappy? or ?happy? 
is one word unit respectively. ?Next generation 
Internet? is one word unit. The principle of seg-
mentation for other strings is to recognize non-
lexical strings as one word unit if it carries some 
syntactic function, for example, 2009 in ?Now 
this year is 2009.?  
3 Word Segmentation for Chinese, Jap-
anese and Korean 
If the word is derived from Chinese characters, 
three languages have common characteristics. If 
their word in noun consists of two or three Chi-
nese characters, they will be one word unit if 
they are ?tightly combined and steadily used.? 
Even if it is longer length, it will be a word unit 
if it is fixed expression or idiom. But if the first 
character is productive with the following num-
eral, unit word or measure word, it will be seg-
mented. If the last character is productive in a 
limited manner, it forms a word unit with the 
preceding word, for example, ????? (Tokyo 
Metropolis), ?8?? (August) or ????? (acce-
lerator). But if it is a productive suffix like plural 
suffix and noun for locality, it is segmented in-
dependently in Chinese word segmentation rule, 
for example, ???|?? (friends), ???|??? 
(north of the Yangtzi River ) or ???|?? (on 
the table) in Chinese. They may have different 
phenomena in each language. 
Negation character of verb and adjective is 
segmented independently in Chinese, but they 
form one word unit in Japanese. For example, 
?yasashikunai? (?????, not kind) is one 
word unit in Japanese, but ??|?? (not to write),  
??| ?? (cannot),  ??|??? (did not research) 
and ?? | ??? (not completed) will be seg-
mented independently in Chinese. In Korean, 
?chinjeolhaji anhta? (???? ??, not kind) 
has one space inserted between two eojeols but it 
could be one word unit. ?ji anhta? makes nega-
tion of adjectival stem ?chinjeolha?.  
We will carefully investigate what principles 
of word units will be applied and what kind of 
conflicts exists. Because the motivation of word 
segmentation standard is to recommend what 
word units should be registered in a type of lex-
icon (where it is not the lexicon in linguistics but 
any kind of practical indexed container for word 
units), it has two possibly conflicting principles. 
For example, principles of unproductivity, fre-
quency, and granularity could cause conflicts 
because they have different perspectives to de-
fine a word unit.  
3.1 Word Segmentation for Chinese 
For convenience of description, the specification 
in this section follows the convention that classi-
fies words into 13 types: noun, verb, adjective, 
pronoun, numeral, measure word, adverb, prepo-
sition, conjunction, auxiliary word, modal word, 
exclamation word, imitative word. 
3.1.1 Noun 
There is word unit specification for common 
nouns as follows: 
- Two-character word or compact two-character 
noun phrase, e.g., ??(beef) ??(steel) 
181
- Noun phrase with compact structure, if violate 
original meaning after segmentation, e.g., ??
?? (Active power) 
- Phrase consisting of adjective with noun, e.g., 
?? (green leave) 
- The meaning changed phrase consisting of ad-
jective, e.g., ???(young wife)  
- Prefix with noun, e.g., ??(elder brother) ?
? (old eagle) ??? (nonmetal)  ???
(ultrasonic) 
- Noun segmentation unit with following postfix 
(e.g. ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?), e.g., ???
(scientist) 
- Noun segmentation unit with prefix and postfix, 
e.g., ???(superconductance) 
- Time noun or phrase, e.g., ??(May), 11 ? 
42 ? 8 ?(forty two minutes and eight seconds 
past eleven), ??(the day before yesterday), 
??(First day of a month in the Chinese lunar 
calendar )   
But the followings are independent word 
units for noun of locality (e.g., ??|? (on the 
table), ??|?? (north of the Yangtzi River)), 
and the ??? suffix referring to from a plural of 
front noun (e.g., ?? ?(friends) ) except ??
??, ?????(pals),  ?????(guys), etc. Prop-
er nouns have similar specification. 
3.1.2 Verb 
The following verb forms will be one word unit 
as: 
- Various forms of reiterative verb, e.g., ??
(look at), ????(come and go) 
- Verb?object structural word, or compact and 
stably used verb phrase, e.g., ??(meeting)  ?
?(dancing) 
- Verb?complement structural word (two-
character), or stably used Verb-complement 
phrase (two-character), e.g., ??(improve) 
- Adjective with noun word, and compact, and 
stably used adjective with noun phrase, e.g., ?
?(make trouble) ,  ??(talk nonsense) 
- Compound directional verb, e.g., ??(go out)  
??(come in). 
But the followings are independent word 
units: 
- ?AAB, ABAB? or ?A? A, A? A, A?? A?, 
e.g., ??|??(have a discuss), ?|?|? (have 
a good chat) 
- Verb delimited by a negative meaning charac-
ters, e.g., ?|?(not to write)   ?|?(cannot)    
?|??(did not research)    ?|??(not com-
pleted) 
- ?Verb + a negative meaning Chinese character 
+  the same verb" structure, e.g., ??|?|?(say 
or not say)?? 
- Incompact or verb?object structural phrase with 
many similar structures, e.g., ? |?(Eat fish)    
?|??(learn skiing) 
- ?2with1? or ?1with2? structural verb- comple-
ment phrase, e.g., ??|?(clean up), ?|??
(speak clearly),  ??|??(explain clearly) 
- Verb-complement word for phrase, if inserted 
with ?? or ??, e.g., ?|?|? (able to knock 
down), and compound directional verb of direc-
tion, e.g., ?|?|?(able to go out) 
- Phrase formed by verb with directional verb, 
e.g., ?|?(send), ?|?|?(run out) 
- Combination of independent single verbs with-
out conjunction, e.g., ?|?(cover with), ?|?,  
?|? (listen, speaking, read and write) 
- Multi-word verb without conjunction, e.g., ?
?|??(investigate and research) 
3.1.3 Adjective 
One word unit shall be recognized in the follow-
ing cases: 
- Adjective in reiterative form of ?AA, AABB, 
ABB, AAB, A+"?"+AB?, e.g., ??(big), ?
???(careless), except the adjectives in rei-
terative form of ?ABAB?, e.g., ?? |??
(snowy white)     
- Adjective phrase in from of ?? A? B??
A? B?? A? B?? A? B?? A? B?, 
e.g., ????(wholeheartedly) 
- Two single-character adjectives with word fea-
tures varied, ?? (long-short)  ?? (deep-
shallow)  ??(big-small) 
- Color adjective word or phrase, e.g., ??(light 
yellow)   ???(olive green) 
But the followings are segmented as indepen-
dent word units: 
- Adjectives in parataxis form and maintaining 
original adjective meaning, e.g., ? |???
(size), ?? |??(glory) 
- Adjective phrase in positive with negative form 
to indicate question, e.g., ??| ?| ??(easy 
or not easy), except the brachylogical one like 
????(easy or not). 
3.1.4 Pronoun 
The followings shall be one word unit: 
182
- Single-character pronoun with ???, e.g.,?? 
(we) 
- ??????? with unit word ??? or ???
????????, e.g., ??(this) 
- Interrogative adjective or phrase, e.g., ??
(how many) 
But, the following will be independent word 
units: 
- ???????  with numeral , unit word or 
noun word segmentation unit, e.g., ? |? ?
(these 10 days), ?| ?(that person) 
- Pronoun of ???????????????, 
etc. shall be segmented from followed measure 
word or noun, e.g., ?| ? (each country), ?| 
?(each type). 
3.1.5 Numeral 
The followings will be one word unit: 
- Chinese digit word, e.g., ?????????
???(180,040,723) 
- ???? percent in fractional number, e.g., ? 
???(third fifth) 
- Paratactic numerals indicating approximate 
number, e.g., ?? ??(eight or nine kg) 
On the other hand, Independent word unit cas-
es are as follows: 
- Numeral shall be segmented from measure 
word, e.g., ?| ?(three) 
- Ordinal number of ???  shall be segmented 
from followed numeral, e.g., ? ? (first) 
- ?????????????, used after adjec-
tive or verb for indicating approximate number. 
3.1.6 Measure word 
Reiterative measure word and compound meas-
ure word or phrase is a word unit, e.g., ??
(every year), ?? man/year. 
3.1.7 Adverb 
Adverb is one word unit. But????????
???, etc. acting as conjunction shall be seg-
mented, e.g., ? ? ? ?(sweet yet savory). 
3.1.8 Preposition 
It is one word unit. For example, ??(be born 
in), and  ????(according to the regulations). 
3.1.9 Conjunction 
Conjunction shall be deemed as segmentation 
unit. 
3.1.10 Auxiliary word 
Structural auxiliary word ????????? 
and tense auxiliary word ??????? are one 
word unit, e.g., ? |? |?  (his book), ? |?
(watched). But the auxiliary word ??? shall be 
segmented from its followed verb, e.g., ?  ?
(what one thinks).  
3.1.11 Modal word 
It is one word unit, e.g., ???? (How are 
you?). 
3.1.12 Exclamation word 
Exclamation word shall be deemed as segmenta-
tion unit. For example, ??????? (How 
beautiful it is!) 
3.1.13 Imitative word 
It is one word unit like ???? (tinkle).  
3.2 Word Segmentation for Japanese 
For convenience of description, the specification 
in this section follows the convention that classi-
fies words into mainly 10 types: meishi (noun), 
doushi (verb), keiyoushi (adjective), rentaishi 
(adnominal noun: only used in adnominal usage), 
fukushi (adverb), kandoushi (exclamation), set-
suzoushi (conjunction), setsuji (affix), joshi (par-
ticle), and jodoushi (auxiliary verb). These parts 
of speech are divided into more detailed classes 
in terms of grammatical function. 
The longest "word segmentation" corresponds 
to ?Bunsetsu? in Japanese. 
3.2.1 Noun 
When a noun is a member constituting a sentence, 
it is usually followed by a particle or auxiliary 
verb (e.g. ???? (neko_ga) which is composed 
from ?Noun + a particle for subject marker?). 
Also, if a word like an adjective or adnominal 
noun modifies a noun, then a modifier (adjec-
tives, adnominal noun, adnominal phrases) and a 
modificand (a noun) are not segmented. 
3.2.2 Verb 
A Japanese verb has an inflectional ending. The 
ending of a verb changes depending on whether 
it is a negation form, an adverbial form, a base 
form, an adnominal form, an assumption form, or 
an imperative form. Japanese verbs are often 
used with auxiliary verbs and/or particles, and a 
verb with auxiliary verbs and/or particles is con-
sidered as a word segmentation unit (e.g. ???
??? ? (aruki_mashi_ta) is composed from 
?Verb + auxiliary verb for politeness + auxiliary 
verb for tense?). 
3.2.3 Adjective 
A Japanese adjective has an inflectional ending. 
Based on the type of inflectional ending, there 
183
are two kinds of adjectives, "i_keiyoushi" and 
"na_keiyoushi". However, both are treated as 
adjectives. 
In terms of traditional Japanese linguistics, 
?keiyoushi? refers to ?i_keiyoushi?(e.g. ???, 
utsukushi_i) and ?keiyoudoushi?(e.g. ??? , 
shizuka_na) refers to ?na_keiyoushi.? In terms of 
inflectional ending of ?na_keiyoushi,? it is some-
times said to be considered as ?Noun + auxiliary 
verb (da)?. 
The ending of an adjective changes depending 
on whether it is a negation form, an adverbial 
form, a base form, an adnominal form, or an as-
sumption form. Japanese adjectives in predica-
tive position are sometimes used with auxiliary 
verbs and/or particles, and they are considered as 
a word segmentation unit. 
3.2.4 Adnominal noun 
An adnominal noun does not have an inflectional 
ending; it is always used as a modifier. An ad-
nominal noun is considered as one segmentation 
unit. 
3.2.5 Adverb 
An adverb does not have an inflectional ending; 
it is always used as a modifier of a sentence or a 
verb. It is considered as one segmentation unit. 
3.2.6 Conjunction 
A conjunction is considered as one segmentation 
unit. 
3.2.7 Exclamation 
An exclamation is considered as one segmenta-
tion unit. 
3.2.8 Affix 
A prefix and a suffix used as a constituent of a 
word should not be segmented as a word unit. 
3.2.9 Particle 
Particles can be divided into two main types. 
One is a case particle which serves as a case 
marker. The other is an auxiliary particle which 
appears at the end of a phrase or a sentence. 
Auxiliary particles represent a mood and a 
tense. 
Particles should not be segmented from a word. 
A particle is always used with a word like a noun, 
a verb, or an adjective, and they are considered 
as one segmentation unit. 
3.2.10 Auxiliary verb 
Auxiliary verbs represent various semantic func-
tions such as a capability, a voice, a tense, an 
aspect and so on. An auxiliary verb appears at 
the end of a phrase or a sentence. Some linguist 
consider ??? (da), which is Japanese copura, as 
a specific category such as ???(hanteishi).   
An auxiliary verb should not be segmented 
from a word. An auxiliary verb is always used 
with a word like a noun, a verb, or an adjective, 
and is considered as one segmentation unit. 
3.2.11 Idiom and proverb 
Proverbs, mottos, etc. should be segmented if 
their original meanings are not violated after 
segmentation. For example: 
Kouin yano  gotoshi 
noun  noun+particle auxiliary verb 
time  arrow  like (flying) 
Time flies fast. 
3.2.12 Abbreviation 
An abbreviation should not be segmented. 
3.3 Word Segmentation for Korean 
For convenience of description, the specification 
in this section follows the convention that classi-
fies words into 12 types: noun, verb, adjective, 
pronoun, numeral, adnominal, adverb, exclama-
tion, particle, auxiliary verb, auxiliary adjective, 
and copula. The basic parts of speech can be di-
vided into more detailed classes in terms of 
grammatical function. Classification in this paper 
is in accord with the top level of MAF. 
In addition, we treat some multi-Eojeol units 
as the word unit for practical purpose. Korean 
Eojeol is a spacing unit that consists of one con-
tent word (like noun, verb) and series of func-
tional elements (particles, word endings). Func-
tional elements are not indispensable. Eojeol is 
similar with Bunsetsu from some points, but an 
Eojeol is recognized by white space in order to 
enhance the readability that enables to use only 
Hangul alphabet in the usual writing.  
3.3.1 Noun 
When a noun is a member constituting a sentence, 
it is usually followed by a particle. (e.g. 
???_?? (saja_ga, ?a lion is?) which is com-
posed from ?Noun + a particle for subject mark-
er?). Noun subsumes common noun, proper noun, 
and bound noun.  
If there are two frequently concatenated Eoje-
ols that consist of modifier (an adjective or an 
adnominal) and modificand (a noun), they can be 
one word unit according to the principle of lan-
guage economy. Other cases of noun word unit 
are as follows: 
1) Compound noun that consists of two more 
nouns can be a word unit. For example, 
184
???? (son_mok, ?wrist?) where son+mok 
= ?hand?+?neck?. 
2) Noun phrase that denotes just one concept 
can be a word unit. For example, ???? 
??? (yesul_ui jeondang, ?sanctuary of the 
arts? that is used for the name of concert 
hall). 
3.3.2 Verb  
A Korean verb has over one inflectional endings. 
The endings of a verb can be changed and at-
tached depending on grammatical function of 
verb (e.g. ??/??/?/?/?/?/?? (break 
[+emphasis] [+polite] [+past] [+conjectural] final 
ending [+polite]). Compound verb (verb+verb, 
noun+verb, adverb+verb) can be a segmentation 
unit by right. For example, ?????? (dola-
ga-da, ?pass away?) is literally translated into 
?go+back? (verb+verb).  ????? (bin-na-da, 
?be shiny?) is derived from ?light + come out? 
(noun+verb). ?????? (baro-jap-da, ?cor-
rect?) is one word unit but it consists of 
?rightly+hold? (adverb+verb).  
3.3.3 Adjective 
A Korean adjective has inflectional endings like 
verb. For example, in ???/?/?/?/?/?? 
(pretty [+polite] [+past] [+conjectural] final end-
ing [+polite]), one adjective has five endings. 
Compound adjective can be a segmentation unit 
by right. (e.g. ????? (geom-buk-da, ?be 
blackish red?)) 
3.3.4 Adnominal  
An adnominal is always used as a modifier for 
noun. Korean adnominal is not treated as noun 
unlike Japanese one. (e.g. ?? ?? (sae jip, ?new 
house?)? which consist of ?adnominal + noun?). 
3.3.5 Adverb 
An adverb does not have an inflectional ending; 
it is always used as a modifier of a sentence or a 
verb. In Korean, adverb includes conjunction. It 
is considered as one segmentation unit. Com-
pound adverb can be a segmentation unit by right. 
Examples are ???? (bam-nat, ?day and night?), 
and ???? (gotgot, ?everywhere? whose literal 
translation is ?where where?). 
3.3.6 Pronoun 
A pronoun is considered as one segmentation 
unit. Typical examples are ??? (na, ?I?), ??? 
(neo, ?you?), and ???? (uri, ?we). Suffix of 
plural ??? (deul, ?-s?) can be attached to some 
of pronouns in Korean. (e.g. ????? (neohui-
deul, ?you+PLURAL?), ???? (geu-deul, ?they? 
= ?he/she+PLURAL?)). 
3.3.7 Numeral 
A numeral is considered as one segmentation 
unit: e.g. ???? (hana, ?one?), ???? (cheojjae, 
?first?). Also figures are treated as one unit like 
?2009?? (the year 2009). 
3.3.8 Exclamation 
An exclamation is considered as one segmenta-
tion unit. 
3.3.9 Particle 
Korean particles can not be segmented from a 
word just like Japanese particles. A particle is 
always used with a word like a noun, a verb, or 
an adjective, but it is considered as one segmen-
tation unit. 
Particles can be divided into two main types. 
One is a case particle that serves as a case marker. 
The other is an auxiliary particle that appears at 
the end of a phrase or a sentence. Auxiliary par-
ticle represents a mood and a tense. 
3.3.10 Auxiliary verb 
A Korean auxiliary verb represents various se-
mantic functions such as a capability, a voice, a 
tense, an aspect and so on.  
Auxiliary verb is only used with a verb plus 
endings with special word ending depending on 
the auxiliary verb. For example, ???? (boda, 
?try to?), an auxiliary verb has the same inflec-
tional endings but it should follow a main verb 
with a connective ending ??? (eo) or ??? (?go?).  
Consider ?try to eat? in English where ?eat? is a 
main verb, and ?try? is an auxiliary verb with 
specialized connective ?to?. In this case, we need 
two Korean Eojeols that corresponds to ?eat + 
to? and ?try?. Because ?to? is a functional ele-
ment that is attached after main verb ?eat?, it 
constitutes one Eojeol. It causes a conflict be-
tween Eojeol and word unit. That means every 
Eojeol cannot be a word unit. What are the word 
units and Eojeols in this case? There are two 
choices: (1) ?eat+to? and ?try?, (2) ?eat?+ ?to 
try?. According to the definition of Eojeol, (1) is 
correct for two concatenated Eojeols. But if the 
syntactic processing is preferable, (2) is more 
likely to be a candidate of word units.  
3.3.11 Auxiliary adjective 
Unlike Japanese, there is auxiliary adjective in 
Korean. Function and usage of it are very similar 
to auxiliary verb. Auxiliary adjective is consi-
dered as one segmentation unit. 
185
Auxiliary verb can be used with a verb or ad-
jective plus endings with special word ending 
depending on the auxiliary adjective. For exam-
ple, in ??? ??? (meokgo sipda, ?want to 
eat?), sipda is an auxiliary adjective whose mean-
ing is ?want? while meok is a main verb ?want? 
and go corresponds to ?to?; so meokgo is ?to eat?.  
3.3.12 Copula 
A copula is always used for changing the func-
tion of noun. After attaching the copula, noun 
can be used like verb. It can be segmented for 
processing. 
3.3.13 Idiom and proverb 
Proverbs, mottos, etc. should be segmented if 
their original meanings are not violated after 
segmentation like Chinese and Japanese. 
3.3.14 Ending 
Ending is attached to the root of verb and adjec-
tive. It means honorific, tense, aspect, modal, etc. 
There are two endings: prefinal ending and fi-
nal ending. They are functional elements to 
represent honorific, past, or future functions in 
prefinal position, and declarative (-da) or con-
cessive (-na)-functions in final ending. Ending is 
not a segmentation unit in Korean. It is just a unit 
for inflection. 
3.3.15 Affix 
A prefix and a suffix used as a constituent of a 
word should not be segmented as a word unit. 
4 Conclusion 
Word segmentation standard is to recommend 
what type of word sequences should be identified 
as one word unit in order to process the syntactic 
parsing. Principles of word segmentation want to 
provide the measure of such word units. But 
principles of frequency and language economy 
are based on a statistical measure, which will be 
decided by some practical purpose.  
Word segmentation in each language is 
somewhat different according to already made 
word segmentation regulation, even violating one 
or more principles of word segmentation. In the 
future, we have to discuss the more synchronized 
word unit concept because we now live in a mul-
ti-lingual environment. For example, consider 
figure 3. Its English literal translation is ?white 
vegetable and pig meat?, where ?white vegeta-
ble? (??) is an unproductive word pattern and 
forms one word unit without component word 
units, and ?pig meat? in Chinese means one Eng-
lish word ?pork?. So ?pig meat? (??) is the 
longest word unit in this case. But in Japanese 
and Korean, ?pig meat? in Chinese characters 
cannot be two word units, because each compo-
nent character is not used independently. 
 
Figure 3. Basic segmentation and word segmenta-
tion [ISO/CD 24614-1] 
What could be shared among three languages 
for word segmentation? The common things are 
not so much among CJK. The Chinese character 
derived nouns are sharable for its word unit 
structure, but not the whole. On the other hand, 
there are many common things between Korean 
and Japanese. Some Korean word endings and 
Japanese auxiliary verbs have the same functions. 
It will be an interesting study to compare for the 
processing purpose.  
The future work will include the role of word 
unit in machine translation. If the corresponding 
word sequences have one word unit in one lan-
guage, it is one symptom to recognize one word 
unit in other languages. It could be ?principle of 
multi-lingual alignment.?   
The concept of ?word unit? is to broaden the 
view about what could be registered in lexicon of 
natural language processing purpose, without 
much linguistic representation. In the result, we 
would like to promote such language resource 
sharing in public, not just dictionaries of words 
in usual manner but of word units. 
Acknowledgement 
This work has been supported by ISO/TC37, 
KATS and Ministry of Knowledge Economy 
(ROKorea), CNIS and SAC (China), JISC (Ja-
pan) and CSK (DPRK) with special contribution 
of Jeniffer DeCamp (ANSI) and Kiyong Lee. 
References 
ISO CD24614-1, Language Resource Management ? 
Word segmentation of written texts for monolin-
gual and multilingual information processing ? Part 
1: Basic concepts and general principles, 2009.  
ISO WD24614-2, ? Part 2: Word segmentation for 
Chinese, Japanese and Korean, 2009. 
186
