Proceedings of the Workshop on BioNLP: Shared Task, pages 99?102,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
BioEve: Bio-Molecular Event Extraction from Text Using Semantic
Classification and Dependency Parsing
Syed Toufeeq Ahmed, Radhika Nair, Chintan Patel and Hasan Davulcu
School of Computing and Informatics
Arizona State University
Tempe, Arizona
{toufeeq, ranair1, chpatel, hdavulcu}@asu.edu
Abstract
In this paper, we present BioEve a fully auto-
mated event extraction system for bio-medical
text. It first semantically classifies each sen-
tence to the class type of the event mentioned
in the sentence, and then using high coverage
hand-crafted rules, it extracts the participants
of that event. We participated in Task 1 of
BioNLP 2009 Shared task, and the final eval-
uation results are described here. Our exper-
imentation with different approaches to clas-
sify a sentence to bio-interaction classes are
also shared.
1 Introduction
Human genome sequencing marked beginning of the
era of large-scale genomics and proteomics, which
in turn led to large amount of information. Lots
of that exists (or generated) as unstructured text of
published literature. The first step towards extract-
ing event information, in biomedical domain, is to
recognize the names of proteins (Fukuda et al,
1998; Blaschke et al, 1999), genes, drugs and other
molecules. The next step is to recognize relation-
ship between such entities (Blaschke and Valen-
cia, 2002; Ono et al, 2001; Fundel et al, 2007)
and then to recognize the bio-molecular interaction
events with these entities as participants (Yakushiji
et al, 2001; Tateisi et al, 2004). The BIONLP?09
shared task involved recognition of bio-molecular
events, which appear in the GENIA corpus. We
mainly focused on task 1, which was detection of
an event and its participants.
Figure 1: BioEve System Architecture
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In
Section 2 we describe BioEve system, sentence level
classification and event extraction using dependency
parse tree of the sentence. Sections 3 describes ex-
periments with classification approaches and evalu-
ation results for shared task 1. Section 4 concludes
the paper.
2 BioEve: Bio-Molecular Event Extractor
BioEve architecture is shown in Figure 1. First
the biomedical abstracts are split into sentences,
before being sent to sentence level classifier. We
used Na?ive Bayes Classifier to classify sentences
into different event class types. Classification at
sentence level is a difficult task, as sentences have
lesser information as compared to the whole doc-
ument. To help event extraction module, each of
these sentences are then semantically labeled with
additional keywords. We created a dictionary-based
99
labeler, which included trigger words from train-
ing data, along with the corresponding event type.
These labeled sentences are parsed using a depen-
dency parser to identify argument-predicate
roles. For each event class type, we hand crafted
high coverage extraction rules, similar to Fundel et
al. (2007), to identity all event participants. For
BioNLP shared task, the event-participant output
was formatted to GENIA format.
2.1 Sentence Level Classification and Semantic
Labeling
We used Na?ive Bayes Classifier from Weka 1 library
to classify sentences into different event class types.
Classification at sentence level is a difficult task, as
sentences have lesser information as compared to the
whole document. We tried different approaches for
classification : 1) Na?ive Bayes Classifier using bag-
of-words, 2) Na?ive Bayes Classifier using bag-of-
words and parts-of-speech tags and 3) SVM Classi-
fier for Weka library.
BioEve event extraction module depends on class
labels for extraction. To help with this task, we
needed to improve sentence labeling with correct
class type information. For this, we employed dic-
tionary based semantic class labeling by identifying
trigger (or interaction) words, which clearly indicate
presence of a particular event. We used ABNER 2
gene name recognizer to enrich the sentences with
gene mentions.
There have been cases in the training data where
the same trigger word is associated with more than
one event type. To resolve such cases, the trigger
words were mapped to the most likely event type
based on their occurrence count in the training data.
We labeled trigger words in each sentence with their
most likely event type. These tagged words served
as a starting point for the extraction of event par-
ticipants. This was done to speed-up the extraction
process, as event extraction module now only needs
to focus on the parts of the sentences related to these
tagged trigger words.
1http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/
2http://pages.cs.wisc.edu/ bsettles/abner/
2.2 Event Extraction Using Dependency
Parsing
The sentences, after being class labeled and tagged,
are parsed using a dependency parser (Stanford
parser3) to identify argument-predicate
roles. Words in the sentence and the relationships
between these words form the dependency parse
tree of the sentence. For our system, we used
typed-dependency representation output format
from Stanford parser which is a simple tuple,
reln(gov, dep), where reln is the depen-
dency relation, gov is the governor word and dep
is the dependent word. Consider the following
example sentence:
We investigated whether PU.1 binds
and activates the M-CSF receptor
promoter.
After this sentence is class labeled and tagged:
We investigated whether
T7 binds/BINDING and
activates/POSITIVE REGULATION the
T8 promoter.
The tagged sentence is parsed to obtain dependency
relations as shown below:
nsubj(investigated-2, We-1)
complm(binds-5, whether-3)
nsubj(binds-5, T7-4)
ccomp(investigated-2, binds-5)
conj and(binds-5, activates-7)
det(promoter-10, the-8)
nn(promoter-10, T8-9)
dobj(binds-5, promoter-10)
This sentence mentions two separate events, bind-
ing and positive regulation. Let?s consider the ex-
tracting the event binding and its participants. Fig-
ure 2 shows the parse tree representation and the part
of the tree that needs to be identified for extracting
event binding.
For each event class type, we carefully hand
crafted rules, keeping theme of the event, number
of participants, and their interactions into consider-
ation. Table 1 lists these extraction rules. In an ex-
traction rule, T represents the occurrence of protein
in sentence. If multiple proteins are involved, then
subscripts, Tn, are used to represent this. The rule
3http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/lex-parser.shtml
100
Figure 2: Dependency Parse tree, and event ?binding?
and its participants are shown.
is triggered when it matches I (for an interaction
word, or trigger word ) in the sentence. Some de-
pendency relations and rule predicates are explained
below:
? obj(verb/I, T) :- The matching protein is a di-
rect object of the interaction word
? prep(I, T) :- The matching protein is con-
nected to its interaction word by a preposition
? T1 (I) T2 : ? The interaction word occurs in
between the two matching interacting proteins
? conj(T1, T2 ) The two matching proteins are be
connected to each other using conjugates such
as ?and?
? ConnectedRule :- The interaction word and the
matching protein should be directly connected
with a single edge ( dependency relation)
? NearestRule :- The interaction word and the
matching protein should be connected to each
other, directly or indirectly within 5 edge hops,
in either direction
Algorithm 1 shows the steps to extract event par-
ticipants using the rules given in Table 1.
3 Experiments and Evaluations
BioEve shared task evaluation results for Task 1 are
shown in Table 2. Event extraction for classes gene-
expression, protein-catabolism and phosphoryla-
tion performed better comparatively, where as, for
Input: Abstract tagged with interaction words
and class labels
Output: Bio Events with interaction words and
the participants
foreach abstract do Iterate over each abstract
foreach sentence in current abstract do
retrieve all the interaction words in
current sentence;
sort them according to precedence of the
event class type;
foreach interaction word in the sentence
do
extract the participants by matching
the corresponding event?s rule to the
sentence?s dependency parse;
end
end
end
Algorithm 1: BioEve Event Extraction algorithm
classes transcription, regulation, positive-regulation
and negative-regulation, it was below par. The rea-
son noticed (in training examples) was that, most
of the true example sentences of positive-regulation
or negative-regulation class type were mis-classified
as either phosphorylation or gene-expression. This
calls for further improvement of sentence classifier
accuracy. Experiments with different approaches
for sentence level classification are shown in Ta-
ble 3. Classifiers were trained on training data and
tested on development data. Interestingly, simple
Na?ive Bayes Classifier (NBC) (using just bag-of-
words (BOW)) showed better results (up to 10% bet-
ter) compared to other approaches, even SVM clas-
sifier.
4 Conclusions
In this paper, BioEve?s Task 1 evaluation results
were described, with additional results from differ-
ent approaches experimented to semantically clas-
sify a sentence to the event type. Event ex-
traction performed better for some categories, but
clearly needs re-compiling extraction rules for some.
Where as classification results showed simple Na?ive
Bayes Classifier performing better than other ap-
proaches.
101
Event Class Extraction Rules Event Class Extraction Rules
Positive Regulation
a) obj(verb/I , T )
Negative Regulation
a) obj(verb/I , T )
b) prep(I , T ) b) prep(I , T )
c) ConnectedRule c) ConnectedRule
d) NearestRule d) NearestRule
Regulation
a) prep(I , T )
Binding
a) T1 (I) T2
b) ConnectedRule b) prep(I , T1); prep(T1, T2)
c) NearestRule c) prep(I , T1); conj(T1, T2)
Phosphorylation
a) prep(I , T ) d) obj(verb/I , T )
b) T (connecting-word) I e) prep(I , T )
c) ConnectedRule f) ConnectedRule
d) NearestRule g) NearestRule
Gene Expression a) ConnectedRule Protein Catabolism
a) prep(I , T )
b) NearestRule b) ConnectedRule
Transcription
a) prep(I , T ) c) NearestRule
b) T (connecting-word) I
Localization
a) prep(I , T )
c) ConnectedRule b) ConnectedRule
d) NearestRule c) NearestRule
Table 1: Extraction rules for each class type. Rules are fired in the order they are listed for each class.
Approach recall precision f-score
Localization 27.59 33.57 30.28
Binding 16.71 30.53 21.60
Gene-expression 44.04 39.55 41.68
Transcription 10.95 11.28 11.11
Prot-catabolism 57.14 27.59 37.21
Phosphorylation 50.37 63.55 56.20
Regulation 9.28 5.18 6.65
Pos-regulation 10.48 7.34 8.63
Neg-regulation 12.93 10.19 11.40
All Total 21.81 18.21 19.85
Table 2: BioNLP Shared Task Evaluation: Task 1 Results
using approximate span matching.
Sentence Classifier Correct Incorrect
NBC(BOW) 60.45% 39.54%
NBC(BOW+POS) 43.12% 56.87%
SVM 50.14% 49.85%
Table 3: Sentence Classifier results for different ap-
proaches: 1) Na?ive Bayes Classifier (NBC) (using bag-
of-words (BOW)), 2) Na?ive Bayes Classifier(using BOW
+ Parts-of-speech(POS) tags) and 3) SVM Classifier. To-
tal number of instances =708.
References
Christian Blaschke and Alfonso Valencia. 2002. The
frame-based module of the suiseki information extrac-
tion system. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 17(2):14?20.
C. Blaschke, MA. Andrade, C. Ouzounis, and A. Valen-
cia. 1999. Automatic extraction of biological infor-
mation from scientific text: protein-protein interaction.
In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on Intelligent
Systems in Molecular Biology, pages 60?7. AAAI.
K. Fukuda, A. Tamura, T. Tsunoda, and T. Takagi. 1998.
Toward information extraction: identifying protein
names from biological papers. In Pac Symp Biocom-
put, volume 707, page 18.
Katrin Fundel, Robert Ku?ffner, and Ralf Zimmer. 2007.
Relex?relation extraction using dependency parse
trees. Bioinformatics, 23(3):365?371.
Toshihide Ono, Haretsugu Hishigaki, Akira Tanigami,
and Toshihisa Takagi. 2001. Automated extraction
of information on protein-protein interactions from the
biological literature. Bioinformatics, 17(2):155?161.
Y. Tateisi, T. Ohta, and J. Tsujii. 2004. Annotation
of predicate-argument structure of molecular biology
text. In JCNLP-04 workshop on Beyond Shallow Anal-
yses.
Akane Yakushiji, Yuka Tateisi, Yusuke Miyao, and Jun
ichi Tsujii. 2001. Event extraction from biomedical
papers using a full parser. In Pac. Symp. Biocomput,
pages 408?419.
102
