Proceedings of the ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Conference Short Papers, pages 181?184,
Suntec, Singapore, 4 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
An Ontology?Based Approach for Key Phrase Extraction 
 
Chau Q. Nguyen 
HCM University of Industry 
12 Nguyen Van Bao St, Go Vap Dist, 
HCMC, Vietnam 
chauqn@hui.edu.vn 
Tuoi T. Phan 
HCMC University of Technology 
268 Ly Thuong Kiet St, Dist 10, 
HCMC, Vietnam 
tuoi@cse.hcmut.edu.vn 
 
  
 
Abstract 
Automatic key phrase extraction is funda-
mental to the success of many recent digital 
library applications and semantic information 
retrieval techniques and a difficult and essen-
tial problem in Vietnamese natural language 
processing (NLP). In this work, we propose a 
novel method for key phrase extracting of 
Vietnamese text that exploits the Vietnamese 
Wikipedia as an ontology and exploits spe-
cific characteristics of the Vietnamese lan-
guage for the key phrase selection stage. We 
also explore NLP techniques that we propose 
for the analysis of Vietnamese texts, focusing 
on the advanced candidate phrases recogni-
tion phase as well as part-of-speech (POS) 
tagging. Finally, we review the results of sev-
eral experiments that have examined the im-
pacts of strategies chosen for Vietnamese key 
phrase extracting.  
1 Introduction 
Key phrases, which can be single keywords or 
multiword key terms, are linguistic descriptors of 
documents. They are often sufficiently informa-
tive to allow human readers get a feel for the es-
sential topics and main content included in the 
source documents. Key phrases have also been 
used as features in many text-related applications 
such as text clustering, document similarity 
analysis, and document summarization. Manu-
ally extracting key phrases from a number of 
documents is quite expensive. Automatic key 
phrase extraction is a maturing technology that 
can serve as an efficient and practical alternative. 
In this paper, we present an ontology-based ap-
proach to building a Vietnamese key phrase ex-
traction system for Vietnamese text. The rest of 
the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 
states the problem as well as describes its scope, 
Section 3 introduces resources of information in 
Wikipedia that are essential for our method, Sec-
tion 4 describes extraction of titles and its cate-
gories from Wikipedia to build a dictionary, Sec-
tion 5 proposes a methodology for the Vietnam-
ese key phrase extraction model, Section 6 
evaluates our approach on many Vietnamese 
query sentences with different styles of texts, and 
finally the conclusion is presented in Section 7. 
2 Background 
The objective of our research is to build a system 
that can extract key phrases in Vietnamese que-
ries in order to meet the demands associated with 
information searching and information retriev-
ing, especially to support search engines and 
automatic answer systems on the Internet. For 
this purpose, we provide the following defini-
tion:  
    Key phrases in a sentence are phrases that 
express meaning completely and also express the 
purpose of the sentence to which they are as-
signed. 
For an example, we have a query sentence as 
follows:?Laptop Dell E1405 c? gi? bao nhi?u??. 
That means ?How much does a Dell E1405 lap-
top cost? ?. 
Key phrases are ?Laptop Dell E1405?, ?gi??, and 
?bao nhi?u?. In this case, the interrogative word 
?bao nhi?u? is used to add a meaning for the two 
rest noun phrases, making the query of users 
clear, wanting to know the numeral aspect about 
the ?price? of a  ?Laptop Dell E1405?. 
3 Wikipedia  
Wikipedia is a multilingual, web-based, freely 
available encyclopedia, constructed as a collabo-
rative effort of voluntary contributors on the 
web. Wikipedia grows rapidly, and with ap-
proximately 7.5 million articles in more than 253 
languages, it has arguably become the world's 
largest collection of freely available knowledge. 
181
Wikipedia contains a rich body of lexical seman-
tic information, the aspects of which are compre-
hensively described in (Zesch et al, 2007). Addi-
tionally, the redirect system of Wikipedia articles 
can be used as a dictionary for synonyms, spell-
ing variations and abbreviations. 
A PAGE. A basic entry in Wikipedia is a page 
that represents either a normal Wikipedia article, 
a redirect to an article, or a disambiguation page. 
Each page object provides access to the article 
text (with markup information or as plain text), 
the assigned categories, the ingoing and outgoing 
article links as well as all redirects that link to the 
article. 
A LINK. Each page consists of many links 
which function not only to point from the page to 
others, but also to guide readers to pages that 
provide additional information about the entries 
mentioned. Each link is associated with an an-
chor text that denotes an ambiguous name or is 
an alternative name, instead of a canonical name. 
CATEGORY. Category objects represent 
Wikipedia categories and allow access to the ar-
ticles within each category. As categories in 
Wikipedia form a thesaurus, a category object 
also provides means to retrieve parent and child 
categories as well as siblings and all recursively 
collected descendants. 
REDIRECT PAGE. A redirect page typically 
contains only a reference to an entry or a concept 
page. The title of the redirect page is an alterna-
tive name for that entity or concept. 
DISAMBIGUATION PAGE. A disambiguation 
page is created for an ambiguous name that de-
notes two or more entities in Wikipedia. It con-
sists of links to pages that define different enti-
ties with the same name. 
4 Building a dictionary 
Based on the aforementioned resources of infor-
mation, we follow the method presented in 
(Bunescu and Pasca, 2006) to build a dictionary 
called ViDic. Since our research focuses on Key 
phrases, we first consider which pages in 
Wikipedia define concepts or objects to which 
key phrases refer. The key phrases are extracted 
from the title of the page. We consider a page 
has key phrases if it satisfies one of the following 
steps: 
1. If its title is a word or a phrase then the title 
is key phrase. 
2. If its title is a sentence then we follow the 
method presented in (Chau and Tuoi, 2007)  
to extract key phrases of the sentence.  
Following this method, the ViDic is constructed 
so that the set of entries in the ViDic consists of 
all strings that denote a concept. In particular, if 
c is a concept, its key phrases, its title name, its 
redirect name and its category are all added as 
entries in the ViDic. Then each entry string in the 
ViDic is mapped to a set of entries that the string 
may denote in Wikipedia. As a result, a concept 
c is included in the set if, and only if, the string 
has key phrases which is extracted from the title 
name, redirect name, or disambiguation name of 
c.  
Although we utilize information from Wikipedia 
to build the ViDic, our method can be adapted 
for an ontology or knowledge base in general.  
5 Proposed method 
We consider the employment of a set of NLP 
techniques adequate for dealing with the Viet-
namese key phrase extraction problem. We pro-
pose the following general Vietnamese key 
phrase extraction model (see Figure 1). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.1 Pre-processing  
The input of pre-processing is user?s queries and 
the output is a list of words and their POS labels. 
Because of the effectiveness and convenience 
associated with integrating two stages of word 
segmentation and POS tagging, we proposed two 
modules for the pre-processing stage. The pur-
poses of two modules are as follows: 
?  Word Segmentation: The main function of 
this segmentation module is to identify and 
separate the tokens present in the text in such a 
way that every individual word, as well as 
every punctuation mark, will be a different to-
ken. The segmentation module considers 
words, numbers with decimals or dates in nu-
Figure 1. The general Vietnamese key phrase 
extraction model. 
Key phrases 
Patterns 
Ontology 
ViO &ViDic 
Key phrases 
extraction 
 Candidate phrases 
identification 
Vietnamese texts 
Pre-processing 
POS Tagging 
  Segmentation 
182
merical format in order not to separate the dot, 
the comma or the slash (respectively) from the 
preceding and/or following elements.  
?  POS tagging: The output of the segmentation 
module is taken as input by the POS tagging 
module. Almost any kind of POS tagging 
could be applied. In our system, we have pro-
posed a hybrid model for the problem of Viet-
namese POS Tagging (Chau and Tuoi, 2006). 
This model combines a rule-based method and 
a statistical learning method. With regard to 
data, we use a lexicon with information about 
possible POS tags for each word, a manually 
labeled corpus, syntax and context of texts.  
5.2 Candidate phrases identification 
The input of the candidate phrase identification 
is a list of words and their POS labels, and the 
output is a list of words and their chunking la-
bels. The idea underlying this method (Chau and 
Tuoi, 2007) for the Vietnamese key phrase ex-
traction is based on a number of grammatical 
constructions in Vietnamese. The method con-
sists of pattern-action rules executed by the fi-
nite-state transduction mechanism. It recognizes 
entities such as noun phrases. In order to accom-
plish the noun phrases recognition, we have de-
veloped over 434 patterns of noun phrase groups 
that cover proper noun constructs. 
5.3 Key phrases extraction 
In this section, we focus on the description of a 
methodology for key phrase extraction. This 
method combines a pattern-based method and a 
statistical learning method. Both methods will 
complement each other to increase the expected 
performance of the model. In particular, the 
method has the following steps: 
? Step 1: We propose a method that exploits 
specific characteristics of Vietnamese (Chau and 
Tuoi, 2007). At the heart of this method is the 
idea of building a Vietnamese words set that re-
flects semantic relationships among objects. For 
example, consider the sentence that follows: 
?M?y t?nh n?y c? dung lng RAM ln nht l? 
bao nhi?u ?? that means ?What is the largest 
RAM capacity for this computer?? 
  In this sentence, we have two objects ?M?y 
t?nh?(this computer) and ?RAM? in real world. 
Respectively, two noun phrases are ?M?y 
t?nh?(this computer) and ?dung lng RAM ln 
nht? (the largest RAM capacity). We consider 
the meanings of words per the above example; 
we will recognize ?c??, a meaning word in our 
meaning word set, which reflects a possessive 
relationship between ?M?y t?nh? and ?dung 
lng RAM ln nht?. This has identified ?dung 
lng RAM ln nht? representing the meaning 
of the sentence. 
This meaning word-based approach provides a 
set of semantic relationships (meaning words) 
between phrases to support key phrase extrac-
tion, which does not require building a hierarchy 
or semantic networkof objects in the Vietnamese 
language. 
? Step 2:  In case the sentence has no meaning 
word among phrases, the key phrase extracting 
process is based on the ViO ontology via concept 
matching. In particular, this step has the follow-
ing phases: 
1. every candidate phrase in the sentence is 
matched to an entry in the VicDic dictionary 
especially when new phrases are not a con-
cern or do not exist in the dictionary. Be-
cause a partial matching dilemma usually ex-
ists, we apply several strategies to improve 
the matching process, including maximum 
matching, minimum-matching, forward-
matching, backward-matching and bi-
directional matching. 
2. if the matching process is successful, then 
we retrieve categories for the entries respec-
tively via the category system in the ViO on-
tology; if the candidate phrase has the most 
specific category, then the phrase is the key 
phrase of the sentence indicated in Step 3. 
3. if the matching process is not successful, 
then we find a semantic similarity concept in 
the ViO ontology as Step 4. After that, the 
key phrase extracting process will go to 
phase 2. 
? Step 3: The idea of the most specific category 
identification process based on the ViO ontology 
is shown as pseudo-code, such as 
Algorithm: the most specific category identification 
     - Input: C1, C2 categories, and  the ViO Ontology 
     - Output: C1 or C2 or both C1 and C2 
1. begin 
2. if C1& C2  have a synonyms relationship in ViO 
3. then  C1 & C2 are the most specific categories 
4. else if C1 has isa relationship of C2 then C1 is the 
most specific category. 
5. to traverse the ViO ontology  from C1 & C2  to 
find the nearest common ancestor node (C?). 
Calculate  the distance between C1 and C? (h1),  
distance C2  and C? (h2). 
6. if  h1 > h2 then C1 is the most specific category 
7. else if  h1 < h2 then C2 is the most specific      
183
category 
8. else C1 & C2 are the most specific categories 
9. end;    
? Step 4: To find the semantic similarity concept 
for each concept t that is still unknown after 
phase 2, we traverse the ontology hierarchy from 
its root to find the best node. We choose the se-
mantic similarity that was described as in 
(Banerjee and Pederson, 2003). However, we do 
not use the whole formula. In particular , we use 
a similar formula that is specified as follows: 
   Acu_Sim(w, c) = Sim(w, c) + Sim(w, c?) 
in which, w is the phrase that needs to be anno-
tated, c is the candidate concept and c? is the 
concept that is related to c. 
At the current node c while traversing, the simi-
larity values between t and all children of c are 
calculated. If the maximum of similarity values 
is less than similarity value between t and c, then 
c is the best node corresponding to t. Otherwise, 
continue the procedure with the current node as 
the child node with the maximum similarity 
value. The procedure stops when the best node is 
found or it reaches a leaf node. 
6 Evaluation 
 To evaluate the result of the proposed model, we 
use recall and precision measures that are de-
fined as in (Chau & Tuoi, 2007). In order to test 
the model we selected a questions set from 
sources on the web as follows:  
? TREC (Text REtrieval Conference) 
(http://trec.nist.gov/data/): TREC-07 (con-
sisting of 446 questions); TREC-06 (consist-
ing of 492 questions); and TREC-02 (con-
sisting of 440 questions). 
? The web page www.lexxe.com: consisting of 
701 questions. 
After that, the question set (consisting of  2079 
questions) is translated into a Vietnamese ques-
tions set, we called D1 dataset. All key phrases of 
the D1 dataset are manually extracted by two lin-
guists for the quality of the dataset. Then we 
have two versions respectively, V1 and V2. The 
results of our system is shown as follows: 
Ver R A Ra Precision Recall 
V1 3236 3072 2293 74.6% 70.8% 
V2 3236 3301 2899 89.6% 87.8% 
Table 1. Results of Vietnamese key phrase extraction. 
7 Conclusion 
We have proposed an original approach to key 
phrase extraction. It is a hybrid and incremental 
process for information searching for search en-
gines and automatic answer systems in Vietnam-
ese. We achieved precision of around 89.6% for 
our system. The experimental results have show 
that our method achieves high accuracy.  
Currently, Wikipedia editions are available for 
approximately 253 languages, which means that 
our method can be used to build key phrase sys-
tems for a large number of languages. In spite of 
the exploitation of Wikipedia as a Vietnamese 
ontology, our method can be adapted for any on-
tology and knowledge base in general. 
Furthermore, we had to construct all necessary 
linguistic resources and define all data structures 
from scratch, while enjoying some advantages 
derived from the many existent methodologies 
for morpho-syntactic annotation and the high 
consciousness of a standardization tendency. 
Specifically, we built a set with 434 noun phrase 
patterns and a rules set for Vietnamese key 
phrase identification. Our patterns and rules set 
can be easily readjusted and extended. The re-
sults obtained lay the foundation for further re-
search in NLP for Vietnamese including text 
summarization, information retrieval, informa-
tion extraction, etc. 
References 
Bunescu, R., Pasca, M. 2006. Using encyclopedic 
knowledge for name entity disambiguation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 11th Conference of EACL:9-16. 
Banerjee S.,Pederson T., 2003. Extended Gloss Over-
laps as a Measure of Semantic Relatedness, In Pro-
ceedings of the 18th International Joint Conference 
on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-03): 805?810. 
Chau Q.Nguyen, Tuoi T.Phan. 2007. A Pattern-based 
Approach to Vietnamese Key Phrase Extraction, In 
Addendum Contributions of the 5th International 
IEEE Conference on Computer Sciences- RIVF?07: 
41-46. 
Chau Q.Nguyen, Tuoi T.Phan. 2006. A Hybrid Ap-
proach to Vietnamese Part-Of-Speech Tagging. In 
Proceedings of the 9th International Oriental CO-
COSDA Conference (O-COCOSDA?06), Malay-
sia:157-160. 
Zesch, T., Gurevych, I. 2007. Analysis of the Wikipe-
dia Category Graph for NLP Applications. In Pro-
ceedings of the TextGraphs-2 Workshop (NAACL-
HLT 2007):1?8. 
184
