Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 334?342,
Singapore, 6-7 August 2009.
c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
It?s Not You, it?s Me: Detecting Flirting and its Misperception in
Speed-Dates
Rajesh Ranganath
Computer Science Department
Stanford University
rajeshr@cs.stanford.edu
Dan Jurafsky
Linguistics Department
Stanford University
jurafsky@stanford.edu
Dan McFarland
School of Education
Stanford University
dmcfarla@stanford.edu
Abstract
Automatically detecting human social in-
tentions from spoken conversation is an
important task for dialogue understand-
ing. Since the social intentions of the
speaker may differ from what is perceived
by the hearer, systems that analyze human
conversations need to be able to extract
both the perceived and the intended social
meaning. We investigate this difference
between intention and perception by using
a spoken corpus of speed-dates in which
both the speaker and the listener rated the
speaker on flirtatiousness. Our flirtation-
detection system uses prosodic, dialogue,
and lexical features to detect a speaker?s
intent to flirt with up to 71.5% accuracy,
significantly outperforming the baseline,
but also outperforming the human inter-
locuters. Our system addresses lexical fea-
ture sparsity given the small amount of
training data by using an autoencoder net-
work to map sparse lexical feature vectors
into 30 compressed features. Our analy-
sis shows that humans are very poor per-
ceivers of intended flirtatiousness, instead
often projecting their own intended behav-
ior onto their interlocutors.
1 Introduction
Detecting human social meaning is a difficult task
for automatic conversational understanding sys-
tems. One cause of this difficulty is the pervasive
difference between intended social signals and the
uptake by the perceiver. The cues that a speaker
may use to attempt to signal a particular social
meaning may not be the cues that the hearer fo-
cuses on, leading to misperception.
In order to understand the impact of this dif-
ference between perception and intention, in this
paper we describe machine learning models that
can detect both the social meaning intended by the
speaker and the social meaning perceived by the
hearer. Automated systems that detect and model
these differences can lead both to richer socially
aware systems for conversational understanding
and more sophisticated analyses of conversational
interactions like meetings and interviews.
This task thus extends the wide literature on
social meaning and its detection, including the
detection of emotions such as annoyance, anger,
sadness, or boredom (Ang et al, 2002; Lee and
Narayanan, 2002; Liscombe et al, 2003), speaker
characteristics such as charisma (Rosenberg and
Hirschberg, 2005), personality features like ex-
troversion or agreeability (Mairesse et al, 2007;
Mairesse and Walker, 2008), speaker depression
or stress (Rude et al, 2004; Pennebaker and Lay,
2002; Cohn et al, 2004), and dating willingness
or liking (Madan et al, 2005; Pentland, 2005).
We chose to work on the domain of flirtation
in speed-dating. Our earlier work on this cor-
pus showed that it is possible to detect whether
speakers are perceived as flirtatious, awkward, or
friendly with reasonable accuracy (Jurafsky et al,
2009). In this paper we extend that work to de-
tect whether speakers themselves intended to flirt,
explore the differences in these variables, and ex-
plore the ability and inability of humans to cor-
rectly perceive the flirtation cues.
While many of the features that we use to build
these detectors are drawn from the previous liter-
ature, we also explore new features. Conventional
methods for lexical feature extraction, for exam-
ple, generally consist of hand coded classes of
words related to concepts like sex or eating (Pen-
nebaker et al, 2007). The classes tend to per-
form well in their specific domains, but may not
be robust across domains, suggesting the need for
unsupervised domain-specific lexical feature ex-
traction. The naive answer to extracting domain-
334
specific lexical features would just be to throw
counts for every word into a huge feature vector,
but the curse of dimensionality rules this method
out in small training set situations. We propose
a new solution to this problem, using an unsuper-
vised deep autoencoder to automatically compress
and extract complex high level lexical features.
2 Dataset
Our experiments make use of the SpeedDate Cor-
pus collected by the third author, and described
in Jurafsky et al (2009). The corpus is based
on three speed-dating sessions run at an Ameri-
can university in 2005, inspired by prior speed-
dating research (Madan et al, 2005). The grad-
uate student participants volunteered to be in the
study and were promised emails of persons with
whom they reported mutual liking. All partici-
pants wore audio recorders on a shoulder sash,
thus resulting in two audio recordings of the ap-
proximately 1100 4-minute dates. Each date was
conducted in an open setting where there was sub-
stantial background noise. This noisy audio was
thus hand-transcribed and turn start and end were
hand-aligned with the audio. In addition to the au-
dio, the corpus includes various attitude and de-
mographic questions answered by the participants.
Each speaker was also asked to report how of-
ten their date?s speech reflected different conver-
sational styles (awkward, flirtatious, funny, as-
sertive) on a scale of 1-10 (1=never, 10=con-
stantly): ?How often did the other person behave
in the following ways on this ?date???. In addition
they were also asked to rate their own intentions:
?How often did you behave in the following ways
on this ?date??? on a scale of 1-10.
In this study, we focus on the flirtation ratings,
examining how often each participant said they
were flirting, as well as how often each participant
was judged by the interlocutor as flirting.
Of the original 1100 dates only 991 total dates
are in the SpeedDate corpus due to various losses
during recording or processing. The current study
focuses on 946 of these, for which we have com-
plete audio, transcript, and survey information.
3 Experiment
To understand how the perception of flirting dif-
fers from the intention of flirting, we trained bi-
nary classifiers to predict both perception and in-
tention. In each date, the speaker and the inter-
locutor both labeled the speaker?s behavioral traits
on a Likert scale from 1-10. To generate binary
responses we took the top ten percent of Likert
ratings in each task and labeled those as positive
examples. We similarly took the bottom ten per-
cent of Likert ratings and labeled those as negative
examples. We ran our binary classification exper-
iments to predict this output variable. Our experi-
ments were split by gender. For the female exper-
iment the speaker was female and the interlocu-
tor was male, while for the male experiment the
speaker was male and the interlocutor was female.
For each speaker side of each 4-minute conver-
sation, we extracted features from wavefiles and
transcripts, as described in the next section. We
then trained four separate binary classifiers (for
each gender for both perception and intention).
4 Feature Descriptions
We used the features reported by Jurafsky et
al. (2009), which are briefly summarized here.
The features for a conversation side thus indicate
whether a speaker who talks a lot, laughs, is more
disfluent, has higher F0, etc., is more or less likely
to consider themselves flirtatious, or be considered
flirtatious by the interlocutor. We also computed
the same features for the alter interlocutor. Al-
ter features thus indicate the conversational behav-
ior of the speaker talking with an interlocutor they
considered to be flirtatious or not.
4.1 Prosodic Features
F0 and RMS amplitude features were extracted us-
ing Praat scripts (Boersma and Weenink, 2005).
Since the start and end of each turn were time-
marked by hand, each feature was easily extracted
over a turn, and then averages and standard devia-
tions were taken over the turns in an entire conver-
sation side. Thus the feature F0 MIN for a conver-
sation side was computed by taking the F0 min of
each turn in that side (not counting zero values of
F0), and then averaging these values over all turns
in the side. F0 MIN SD is the standard deviation
across turns of this same measure.
4.2 Dialogue and Disfluency Features
A number of discourse features were extracted,
following Jurafsky et al (2009) and the dialogue
literature. The dialog acts shown in Table 2
were detected by hand-built regular expressions,
based on analyses of the dialogue acts in the
335
F0 MIN minimum (non-zero) F0 per turn, averaged
over turns
F0 MIN SD standard deviation from F0 min
F0 MAX maximum F0 per turn, averaged over turns
F0 MAX SD standard deviation from F0 max
F0 MEAN mean F0 per turn, averaged over turns
F0 MEAN SD standard deviation (across turns) from F0
mean
F0 SD standard deviation (within a turn) from F0
mean, averaged over turns
F0 SD SD standard deviation from the f0 sd
PITCH RANGE f0 max - f0 min per turn, averaged over
turns
PITCH RANGE SD standard deviation from mean pitch range
RMS MIN minimum amplitude per turn, averaged
over turns
RMS MIN SD standard deviation from RMS min
RMS MAX maximum amplitude per turn, averaged
over turns
RMS MAX SD standard deviation from RMS max
RMS MEAN mean amplitude per turn, averaged over
turns
RMS MEAN SD standard deviation from RMS mean
TURN DUR duration of turn in seconds, averaged over
turns
TIME total time for a speaker for a conversation
side, in seconds
RATE OF
SPEECH
number of words in turn divided by dura-
tion of turn in seconds, averaged over turns
Table 1: Prosodic features from Jurafsky et al
(2009) for each conversation side, extracted using
Praat from the hand-segmented turns of each side.
hand-labeled Switchboard corpus of dialog acts.
Collaborative completions, turns where a speaker
completes the utterance begun by the alter, were
detected by finding sentences for which the first
word of the speaker was extremely predictable
from the last two words of the previous speaker,
based on a trigram grammar trained on the Tree-
bank 3 Switchboard transcripts. Laughter, disflu-
encies, and overlap were all marked in the tran-
scripts by the transcribers.
4.3 Lexical Features
We drew our lexical features from the LIWC lex-
icons of Pennebaker et al (2007), the standard
for social psychological analysis of lexical fea-
tures. We chose ten LIWC categories that have
proven useful in detecting personality-related fea-
tures (Mairesse et al, 2007): Anger, Assent, In-
gest, Insight, Negemotion, Sexual, Swear, I, We,
and You. We also added two new lexical features:
?past tense auxiliary?, a heuristic for automati-
cally detecting narrative or story-telling behavior,
and Metadate, for discussion about the speed-date
itself. The features are summarized in Table 3.
4.4 Inducing New Lexical Features
In Jurafsky et al (2009) we found the LIWC lex-
ical features less useful in detecting social mean-
ing than the dialogue and prosodic features, per-
haps because lexical cues to flirtation lie in differ-
ent classes of words than previously investigated.
We therefore investigated the induction of lexical
features from the speed-date corpus, using a prob-
abilisitic graphical model.
We began with a pilot investigation to see
whether lexical cues were likely to be useful; with
a small corpus, it is possible that lexical fea-
tures are simply too sparse to play a role given
the limited data. The pilot was based on us-
ing Naive Bayes with word existence features (bi-
nomial Naive Bayes). Naive Bayes assumes all
features are conditionally independent given the
class, and is known to perform well with small
amounts of data (Rish, 2001). Our Naive Bayes
pilot system performed above chance, suggesting
that lexical cues are indeed informative.
A simple approach to including lexical fea-
tures in our more general classification system
would be to include the word counts in a high di-
mensional feature vector with our other features.
This method, unfortunately, would suffer from
the well-known high dimensionality/small train-
ing set problem. We propose a method for build-
ing a much smaller number of features that would
nonetheless capture lexical information. Our ap-
proach is based on using autoencoders to con-
struct high level lower dimension features from the
words in a nonlinear manner.
A deep autoencoder is a hierarchichal graphical
model with multiple layers. Each layer consists of
a number of units. The input layer has the same
number of units as the output layer, where the out-
put layer is the model?s reconstruction of the input
layer. The number of units in the intermediate lay-
ers tends to get progressively smaller to produce a
compact representation.
We defined our autoencoder with visible units
modeling the probabilities of the 1000 most com-
mon words in the conversation for the speaker
and the probabilities of the 1000 most common
words for the interlocutor (after first removing
a stop list of the most common words). We
train a deep autoencoder with stochastic nonlin-
ear feature detectors and linear feature detectors
in the final layer. As shown in Figure 1, we used
a 2000-1000-500-250-30 autoencoder. Autoen-
336
BACKCHANNELS number of backchannel utterances in side (Uh-huh., Yeah., Right., Oh, okay.)
APPRECIATIONS number of appreciations in side (Wow, That?s true, Oh, great)
QUESTIONS number of questions in side
NTRI repair question (Next Turn Repair Indicator) (Wait, Excuse me)
COMPLETION (an approximation to) utterances that were ?collaborative completions?
LAUGH number of instances of laughter in side
TURNS total number of turns in side
DISPREFERRED (approximation to) dispreferred responses, beginning with discourse marker well
UH/UM total number of filled pauses (uh or um) in conversation side
RESTART total number of disfluent restarts in conversation side
OVERLAP number of turns in side which the two speakers overlapped
Table 2: Dialog act and disfluency features from Jurafsky et al (2009).
TOTAL WORDS total number of words
PAST TENSE uses of past tense auxiliaries was, were, had
METADATE horn, date, bell, survey, speed, form, questionnaire, rushed, study, research
YOU you, you?d, you?ll, your, you?re, yours, you?ve (not counting you know)
WE lets, let?s, our, ours, ourselves, us, we, we?d, we?ll, we?re, we?ve
I I?d, I?ll, I?m, I?ve, me, mine, my, myself (not counting I mean)
ASSENT yeah, okay, cool, yes, awesome, absolutely, agree
SWEAR hell, sucks, damn, crap, shit, screw, heck, fuck*
INSIGHT think*/thought, feel*/felt, find/found, understand*, figure*, idea*, imagine, wonder
ANGER hate/hated, hell, ridiculous*, stupid, kill*, screwed, blame, sucks, mad, bother, shit
NEGEMOTION bad, weird, hate, crazy, problem*, difficult, tough, awkward, boring, wrong, sad, worry,
SEXUAL love*, passion*, virgin, sex, screw
INGEST food, eat*, water, bar/bars, drink*, cook*, dinner, coffee, wine, beer, restaurant, lunch, dish
Table 3: Lexical features from Jurafsky et al (2009). Each feature value is a total count of the words in
that class for each conversation side; asterisks indicate including suffixed forms (e.g., love, loves, loving).
All except the first three are from LIWC (Pennebaker et al, 2007) (modified slightly, e.g., by removing
you know and I mean). The last five classes include more words in addition to those shown.
coders tend to perform poorly if they are initialized
incorrectly, so we use the Restricted Boltzmann
Machine (RBM) pretraining procedure described
in Hinton and Salakhutdinov (2006) to initialize
the encoder. Each individual RBM is trained using
contrastive divergence as an update rule which has
been shown to produce reasonable results quickly
(Hinton et al, 2006). Finally, we use backpropa-
gation to fine tune the weights of our encoder by
minimizing the cross entropy error. To extract fea-
tures from each conversation, we sample the code
layer (30 unit layer in our encoder) with the visi-
ble units corresponding to the most common word
probabilities from that document, creating 30 new
features that we can use for classification. The
conditional distributions of the first layer features
can be given by the softmax of the activations for
each gender:
p(v
i
|h) =
exp(bias
i
+
?
j
h
j
? w
ij
)
?
k?K
exp(bias
k
+
?
j
v
j
? w
kj
)
(1)
p(h
j
|v) =
1
1 + exp(bias
(
j) +
?
i
v
i
? w
ij
)
(2)
where K is the set of all the units representing the
same speaker as i
1
, v
i
is the ith visible unit, h
j
is
the jth hidden unit, w
ij
is the weight between visi-
ble unit i and hidden unit j, and bias
m
is the offset
of unit m. Intuitively, this means that the proba-
bility that a hidden unit is activated by the visible
layer is sigmoid of the weighted sum of all the vis-
ible units plus the unit?s bias term. Similarly, the
visible units are activated through a weighted sum
of the hidden units, but they undergo an additional
normalization (softmax) over all the other visible
units from the speaker to effectively model the
multinomial distribution from each speaker. Since
in a RBM hidden units are conditionally indepen-
dent given the visible units, and visible units are
1
The visible unit i models word probabilities of either the
speaker or the interlocutor, so the softmax is done over the
distribution of words for the speaker that unit i is modeling.
337
conditionally independent given hidden layer, the
above equations completely specify the first layer
of the model.
To account for the fact that each visible unit in
the first layer contained 1000 observations from
the underlying distribution we upweighted our fea-
tures by that factor. During pretraining the ?train-
ing data? for the higher layers is the activation
probabilities of the hidden units of layer directly
below when driven by that layer?s input data. The
intermediate layers in the model are symmetric
where the activation probabilities for both the vis-
ible and hidden units are of the same form as
p(h
j
|v) in layer 1. To produce real valued features
in the code layer we used linear hidden units. In
addition to the likelihood portion of the objective
we penalized large weights by using l2 regulariza-
tion and penalize all weights by applying a small
constant weight cost that gets applied at every up-
date. After training to find a good initial point
for the autoencoder we unroll the weights and use
backpropogation to fine tune our autoencoder.
While interpreting high level nonlinear features
can be challenging, we did a pilot analysis of one
of the 30 features fixing a large (positive or neg-
ative) weight on the feature unit (code layer) and
sampling the output units.
The top weighted words for a positive weight
are: O did, O live, S did, S friends, S went,
O live, S lot, S wait, O two, and O wasn?t (S for
speaker and O for interlocutor). The top weighted
words for a negative weight are: S long, O school,
S school, S phd, O years, S years, O stanford,
S lot, O research, O interesting and O education.
At least for this one feature, a large positive value
seemed to indicate the prevalence of questions
(wait, did) or storytelling (
em live, wasn?t). A large negative weight indicates
the conversation focused on the mundane details
of grad student life.
5 Classification
Before performing the classification task, we pre-
processed the data in two ways. First, we stan-
dardized all the variables to have zero mean and
unit variance. We did this to avoid imposing a
prior on any of the features based on their numer-
ical values. Consider a feature A with mean 100
and a feature B with mean .1 where A and B are
correlated with the output. Since the SVM prob-
lem minimizes the norm of the weight vector, there
2000
2000
1000
500
500
250
250
30
1000
2000
1000
500
500
250
250
30
1000
2000
1000
500
500
250
250
30
1000
Dialogue:
F: ...
M: ...
F: ...
Dialogue: 
F: ...
M: ...
F: ...
Diaogue:
F: ...
M: ...
F: ...
Reconstruct
Dialogue:
F: ...
M: ...
Reconstruct
Dialogue:
F: ...
M: ...
W
1
W
2
W
3
W
4
W
5
W
1
W
2
W
3
W
4
W
T
5
W
T
4
W
5
2000 2000
W
T
3
W
T
2
RBM
RBM
RBM
 RBM
Code layer
Decoder
Encoder
Pretraining
Unrolling
Fine-tuning
W
T
1
W
1
+?
1
W
2
+?
2
W
3
+?
3
W
4
+?
4
W
5
+?
5
W
T
5
+?
6
W
T
4
+?
7
W
T
3
+?
8
W
T
2
+?
9
W
T
1
+?
10
Figure 1: Pretraining is a fully unsupervised pro-
cedure that trains an RBM at each layer. Once the
pretraining of one layer is complete, the top layer
units are used as input to the next layer. We then
fine-tune our weights using backprop. The 30 fea-
tures are extracted from the code layer.
is a bias to put weight on feature A because intu-
itively the weight on feature B would need to be
1000 times larger to carry the same effect. This
argument holds similarly for the reduction to unit
variance. Second, we removed features correlated
greater than .7. One goal of removing correlated
features was to remove as much colinearity as pos-
sible from the regression so that the regression
weights could be ranked for their importance in the
classification. In addition, we hoped to improve
classification because a large number of features
require more training examples (Ng, 2004). For
example for perception of female flirt we removed
the number of turns by the alter (O turns) and the
number of sentence from the ego (S sentences) be-
cause they were highly correlated with S turns.
To ensure comparisons (see Section 7) between
the interlocutors? ratings and our classifier (and
because of our small dataset) we use k-fold cross
validation to learn our model and evaluate our
model. We train our binary model with the top
ten percent of ratings labeled as positive class ex-
amples and bottom ten percent of ratings as the
negative class examples. We used five-fold cross
validation in which the data is split into five equal
folds of size 40. We used four of the folds for
training and one for test. K-fold cross validation
does this in a round robin manner so every exam-
338
ple ends up in the test set. This yields a datasplit
of 160 training examples and 40 test examples. To
ensure that we were not learning something spe-
cific to our data split, we randomized our data or-
dering.
For classification we used a support vector ma-
chine (SVM). SVMs generally do not produce ex-
plicit feature weights for analysis because they are
a kernelized classifier. We solved the linear C-
SVM problem. Normally the problem is solved
in the dual form, but to facilitate feature analysis
we expand back to the primal form to retrieve w,
the weight vector. Our goal in the C-SVM is to
solve, in primal form,
min
?,w,b
1
2
||w||
2
+ C
m
?
i=1
?
i
s.t. y
(i)
(w
T
x
(i)
+ b) ? 1? ?
i
, i = 1, . . . ,m
?
i
? 0, i = 1, . . . ,m (3)
where m is the number of training examples, x
(i)
is the ith training examples, and y
(i)
is the ith class
(1 for the positive class, -1 for the negative class).
The ?
i
are the slack variables that allow this algo-
rithm to work for non linearly separable datasets.
A test example is classified by looking at the
sign of y(x) = w
T
x
(test)
+ b. To explore mod-
els that captured interactions, but do not allow for
direct feature analysis we solved the C-SVM prob-
lem using a radial basis function (RBF) as a kernel
(Scholkopf et al, 1997). Our RBF kernel is based
on a Gaussian with unit variance.
K(x
(i)
, x
(j)
) = exp(
?||x
(i)
? x
(j)
||
2
2?
) (4)
In this case predictions can be made by looking
at y(x
(test)
) =
?
m
i=1
?
(i)
y
(i)
rbf(x
(i)
, t
(test)
) + b,
where each ?
(i)
, for i = 1, . . . ,m is a member
of the set of dual variables that comes from trans-
forming the primal form into the dual form. The
SVM kernel trick allows us to explore higher di-
mensions while limiting the curse of dimensional-
ity that plagues small datasets like ours.
We evaluated both our linear C-SVM and our
radial basis function C-SVM using parameters
learned on the training sets by computing the ac-
curacy on the test set. Accuracy is the number of
correct examples / total number of test examples.
We found that the RBM classifier that handled in-
teraction terms outperformed linear methods like
logistic regression.
For feature weight extraction we aggregated the
feature weights calculated from each of the test
folds by taking the mean between them.
2
6 Results
We report in Table 4 the results for detecting flirt
intention (whether a speaker said they were flirt-
ing) as well as flirt perception (whether the listener
said the speaker was flirting).
Flirt Intention Flirt Perception
by M by F of M of F
RBM SVM 61.5% 70.0% 77.0% 59.5%
+autoencoder 69.0% 71.5% 79.5% 68.0%
features
Table 4: Accuracy of binary classification of each
conversation side, where chance is 50%. The first
row uses all the Jurafsky et al (2009) features for
both the speaker and interlocutor. The second row
adds the new autoencoder features.
In our earlier study of flirt perception, we
achieved 71% accuracy for men and 60% for
women (Jurafsky et al, 2009). Our current num-
bers for flirt perception are much better for both
men (79.5%), and women (68.0%). The improve-
ment is due both to the new autoencoder features
and the RBF kernel that considers feature inter-
actions (feature interactions were not included in
the logistic regression classifiers of Jurafsky et al
(2009)).
Our number for flirt intention are 69.0% for men
and 71.5% for women. Note that our accuracies
are better for detecting women?s intentions as well
as women?s perceptions (of men) than men?s in-
tentions and perceptions.
7 Feature Analysis
We first considered the features that helped clas-
sification of flirt intention. Table 5 shows feature
weights for the features (features were normed so
weights are comparable), and is summarized in the
following paragraphs:
? Men who say they are flirting ask more ques-
tions, and use more you and we. They laugh more,
and use more sexual, anger, and negative emo-
tional words. Prosodically they speak faster, with
higher pitch, but quieter (lower intensity min).
2
We could not use the zero median criteria used in Juraf-
sky et al (2009) because C-SVMs under the l-2 metric pro-
vide no sparse weight guarantees.
339
FEMALE FLIRT MALE FLIRT
O backchannel -0.0369 S you 0.0279
S appreciation -0.0327 S negemotion 0.0249
O appreciation -0.0281 S we 0.0236
O question 0.0265 S anger 0.0190
O avimin -0.0249 S sexual 0.0184
S turns -0.0247 O negemotion 0.0180
S backchannel -0.0245 O avpmax 0.0174
O you 0.0239 O swear 0.0172
S avtndur 0.0229 O laugh 0.0164
S avpmin -0.0227 O wordcount 0.0151
O rate 0.0212 S laugh 0.0144
S laugh 0.0204 S rate 0.0143
S wordcount 0.0192 S well 0.0131
S well 0.0192 S question 0.0131
O negemotion 0.019 O sexual 0.0128
S repair q 0.0188 S completion 0.0128
O sexual 0.0176 S avpmax 0.011
O overlap -0.0176 O completion 0.010
O sdpmean 0.0171 O sdimin 0.010
O avimax -0.0151 O metatalk -0.012
S avpmean -0.015 S sdpsd -0.015
S question -0.0146 S avimin -0.015
O sdimin 0.0136 S backchannel -0.022
S avpmax 0.0131
S we -0.013
S I 0.0117
S assent 0.0114
S metatalk -0.0107
S sexual 0.0105
S avimin -0.0104
O uh -0.0102
Table 5: Feature weights (mean weights of the ran-
domized runs) for the predictors with |weight| >
0.01 for the male and female classifiers. An S pre-
fix indicates features of the speaker (the candidate
flirter) while an O prefix indicates features of the
other. Weights for autoencoder features were also
significant but are omitted for compactness.
Features of the alter (the woman) that helped
our system detect men who say they are flirting
include the woman?s laughing, sexual words or
swear words, talking more, and having a higher
f0 (max).
?Women who say they are flirting have a much
expanded pitch range (lower pitch min, higher
pitch max), laugh more, use more I and well, use
repair questions but not other kinds of questions,
use more sexual terms, use far less appreciations
and backchannels, and use fewer, longer turns,
with more words in general. Features of the alter
(the man) that helped our system detect women
who say they are flirting include the male use of
you, questions, and faster and quieter speech.
We also summarize here the features for the per-
ception classification task; predicting which peo-
ple will be labeled by their dates as flirting. Here
the task is the same as for Jurafsky et al (2009)
and the values are similar.
? Men who are labeled by their female date as
flirting present many of the same linguistic behav-
iors as when they express their intention to flirt.
Some of the largest differences are that men are
perceived to flirt when they use less appreciations
and overlap less, while these features were not sig-
nificant for men who said they were flirting. We
also found that fast speech and more questions are
more important features for flirtation perception
than intention.
? Women who are labeled by their male date
as flirting also present much of the same linguis-
tic behavior as women who intend to flirt. Laugh-
ter, repair questions, and taking fewer, longer turns
were not predictors of women labeled as flirting,
although these were strong predictors of women
intending to flirt.
Both genders convey intended flirtation by
laughing more, speaking faster, and using higher
pitch. However, we do find gender differences;
men ask more questions when they say they are
flirting, women ask fewer, although they do use
more repair questions, which men do not. Women
use more ?I? and less ?we?; men use more ?we?
and ?you?. Men labeled as flirting are softer, but
women labeled as flirting are not. Women flirting
use much fewer appreciations; appreciations were
not a significant factor in men flirting.
8 Human Performance on this task
To evaluate the performance of our classifiers we
compare against human labeled data.
We used the same test set as for our machine
classifier; recall that this was created by taking the
top ten percent of Likert ratings of the speaker?s
intention ratings by gender and called those posi-
tive for flirtation intention. We constructed nega-
tive examples by taking the bottom ten percent of
intention Likert ratings. We called the interlocu-
tor correct on the positive examples if the inter-
locutor?s rating was greater than 5. Symmetrically
for the negative examples, we said the interlocutor
was correct if their rating was less than or equal
to 5. Note that this metric is biased somewhat to-
ward the humans and against our systems, because
we do not penalize for intermediate values, while
the system is trained to make binary predictions
only on extremes. The results of the human per-
ceivers on classifying flirtation intent are shown in
Table 6.
340
Male speaker Female speaker
(Female perceiver) (Male perceiver)
62.2% 56.2%
Table 6: Accuracy of human listeners at labeling
speakers as flirting or not.
We were quite surprised by the poor quality of
the human results. Our system outperforms both
men?s performance in detecting women flirters
(system 71.5% versus human 56.2%) and also
women?s performance in detecting male flirters
(system 69.0% versus human 62.2%).
Why are humans worse than machines at detect-
ing flirtation? We found a key insight by examin-
ing how the participants in a date label themselves
and each other. Table 7 shows the 1-10 Likert val-
ues for the two participants in one of the dates,
between Male 101 and Female 127. The two par-
ticipants clearly had very different perspectives on
the date. More important, however, we see that
each participant labels their own flirting (almost)
identically with their partner?s flirting.
I am flirting Other is flirting
Male 101 says: 8 7
Female 127 says: 1 1
Table 7: Likert scores for the date between Female
127 and Male 101.
We therefore asked whether speakers in general
tend to assign similar values to their own flirting
and their partner?s flirting. The Pearson correla-
tion coefficient between these two variables (my
perception of my own flirting, and my perception
of other?s flirting) is .73. By contrast, the poor per-
formance of subjects at detecting flirting in their
partners is coherent with the lower (.15) correla-
tion coefficient between those two variables (my
perception of the other?s flirting, and the other?s
perception of their own flirting). This discrepancy
is summarized in boldface in Table 8.
Since the speed-date data was also labeled for
three other variables, we then asked the same
question about these variables. As Table 8 shows,
for all four styles, speakers? perception of others
is strongly correlated with the speakers? percep-
tion of themselves, far more so than with what the
others actually think they are doing.
3
3
This was true no matter how the correlations were run,
whether with raw Likert values, with ego-centered (trans-
formed) values and with self ego-centered but other raw.
Variable Self-perceive-Other
& Self-perceive-Self
Self-perceive-Other &
Other-perceive-Other
Flirting .73 .15
Friendly .77 .05
Awkward .58 .07
Assertive .58 .09
Table 8: Correlations between speaker intentions
and perception for all four styles.
Note that although perception of the other does
not correlate highly with the other?s intent for any
of the styles, the correlations are somewhat bet-
ter (.15) for flirting, perhaps because in the speed-
date setting speakers are focusing more on detect-
ing this behavior (Higgins and Bargh, 1987). It is
also possible that for styles with positive valence
(friendliness and flirting) speakers see more simi-
larity between the self and the other than for nega-
tive styles (awkward and assertive) (Krah?e, 1983).
Why should this strong bias exist to link self-
flirting with perception of the other? One pos-
sibility is that speakers are just not very good at
capturing the intentions of others in four minutes.
Speakers instead base their judgments on their
own behavior or intentions, perhaps because of a
bias to maintain consistency in attitudes and rela-
tions (Festinger, 1957; Taylor, 1970) or to assume
there is reciprocation in interpersonal perceptions
(Kenny, 1998).
9 Conclusion
We have presented a new system that is able to
predict flirtation intention better than humans can,
despite humans having access to vastly richer in-
formation (visual features, gesture, etc.). This sys-
tem facilitates the analysis of human perception
and human interaction and provides a framework
for understanding why humans perform so poorly
on intention prediction.
At the heart of our system is a core set of
prosodic, dialogue, and lexical features that al-
low for accurate prediction of both flirtation inten-
tion and flirtation perception. Since previous word
lists don?t capture sufficient lexical information,
we used an autoencoder to automatically capture
new lexical cues. The autoencoder shows potential
for being a promising feature extraction method
for social tasks where cues are domain specific.
Acknowledgments: Thanks to the anonymous review-
ers and to a Google Research Award for partial funding.
341
References
J. Ang, R. Dhillon, A. Krupski, E. Shriberg, and
A. Stolcke. 2002. Prosody-Based Automatic De-
tection of Annoyance and Frustration in Human-
Computer Dialog. In INTERSPEECH-02.
Paul Boersma and David Weenink. 2005. Praat: doing
phonetics by computer (version 4.3.14). [Computer
program]. Retrieved May 26, 2005, from http://
www.praat.org/.
M. A. Cohn, M. R. Mehl, and J. W. Pennebaker.
2004. Linguistic markers of psychological change
surrounding September 11, 2001. Psychological
Science, 15:687?693.
Leon Festinger. 1957. A Theory of Cognitive Disso-
nance. Row, Peterson, Evanston, IL.
E. Tory Higgins and John A. Bargh. 1987. Social cog-
nition and social perception. Annual Review of Psy-
chology, 38:369?425.
G. E. Hinton and R. R Salakhutdinov. 2006. Reduc-
ing the dimensionality of data with neural networks.
Science, 313(5786):504?507.
G. E. Hinton, S. Osindero, and Y. Teh. 2006. A
fast learning algorithm for deep belief nets. Neural
Computation, 18:1527?1554.
Dan Jurafsky, Rajesh Ranganath, and Dan McFarland.
2009. Extracting social meaning: Identifying inter-
actional style in spoken conversation. In NAACL
HLT 2009, Boulder, CO.
David Kenny. 1998. Interpersonal Perception: A So-
cial Relations Analysis. Guilford Press, New York,
NY.
B. Krah?e. 1983. Self-serving biases in perceived simi-
larity and causal attributions of other people?s per-
formance. Social Psychology Quarterly, 46:318?
329.
C. M. Lee and Shrikanth S. Narayanan. 2002. Com-
bining acoustic and language information for emo-
tion recognition. In ICSLP-02, pages 873?876,
Denver, CO.
Jackson Liscombe, Jennifer Venditti, and Julia
Hirschberg. 2003. Classifying Subject Ratings
of Emotional Speech Using Acoustic Features. In
INTERSPEECH-03.
Anmol Madan, Ron Caneel, and Alex Pentland. 2005.
Voices of attraction. Presented at Augmented Cog-
nition, HCI 2005, Las Vegas.
Franc?ois Mairesse and Marilyn Walker. 2008. Train-
able generation of big-five personality styles through
data-driven parameter estimation. In ACL-08,
Columbus.
Franc?ois Mairesse, Marilyn Walker, Matthias Mehl,
and Roger Moore. 2007. Using linguistic cues for
the automatic recognition of personality in conver-
sation and text. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Re-
search (JAIR), 30:457?500.
Andrew Y. Ng. 2004. Feature selection, L1 vs. L2
regularization, and rotational invariance. In ICML
2004.
J. W. Pennebaker and T. C. Lay. 2002. Language use
and personality during crises: Analyses of Mayor
Rudolph Giuliani?s press conferences. Journal of
Research in Personality, 36:271?282.
J. W. Pennebaker, R.E. Booth, and M.E. Francis. 2007.
Linguistic inquiry and word count: LIWC2007 op-
erator?s manual. Technical report, University of
Texas.
Alex Pentland. 2005. Socially aware computation and
communication. Computer, pages 63?70.
Irina Rish. 2001. An empirical study of the naive
bayes classifier. In IJCAI 2001 Workshop on Em-
pirical Methods in Artificial Intelligence.
Andrew Rosenberg and Julia Hirschberg. 2005.
Acoustic/prosodic and lexical correlates of charis-
matic speech. In EUROSPEECH-05, pages 513?
516, Lisbon, Portugal.
S. S. Rude, E. M. Gortner, and J. W. Pennebaker.
2004. Language use of depressed and depression-
vulnerable college students. Cognition and Emo-
tion, 18:1121?1133.
B. Scholkopf, K.K. Sung, CJC Burges, F. Girosi,
P. Niyogi, T. Poggio, and V. Vapnik. 1997. Com-
paring support vector machines with Gaussian ker-
nels to radialbasis function classifiers. IEEE Trans-
actions on Signal Processing, 45(11):2758?2765.
Howard Taylor. 1970. Chapter 2. In Balance in
Small Groups. Von Nostrand Reinhold Company,
New York, NY.
342
Human Language Technologies: The 2009 Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 638?646,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Extracting Social Meaning: Identifying Interactional Style in Spoken
Conversation
Dan Jurafsky
Linguistics Department
Stanford University
jurafsky@stanford.edu
Rajesh Ranganath
Computer Science Department
Stanford University
rajeshr@cs.stanford.edu
Dan McFarland
School of Education
Stanford University
dmcfarla@stanford.edu
Abstract
Automatically extracting social meaning and
intention from spoken dialogue is an impor-
tant task for dialogue systems and social com-
puting. We describe a system for detecting
elements of interactional style: whether a
speaker is awkward, friendly, or flirtatious.
We create and use a new spoken corpus of 991
4-minute speed-dates. Participants rated their
interlocutors for these elements of style. Us-
ing rich dialogue, lexical, and prosodic fea-
tures, we are able to detect flirtatious, awk-
ward, and friendly styles in noisy natural con-
versational data with up to 75% accuracy,
compared to a 50% baseline. We describe sim-
ple ways to extract relatively rich dialogue fea-
tures, and analyze which features performed
similarly for men and women and which were
gender-specific.
1 Introduction
How can we extract social meaning from speech, de-
ciding if a speaker is particularly engaged in the con-
versation, is uncomfortable or awkward, or is partic-
ularly friendly and flirtatious? Understanding these
meanings and how they are signaled in language is
an important sociolinguistic task in itself. Extracting
them automatically from dialogue speech and text
is crucial for developing socially aware computing
systems for tasks such as detection of interactional
problems or matching conversational style, and will
play an important role in creating more natural dia-
logue agents (Pentland, 2005; Nass and Brave, 2005;
Brave et al, 2005).
Cues for social meaning permeate speech at every
level of linguistic structure. Acoustic cues such as
low and high F0 or energy and spectral tilt are impor-
tant in detecting emotions such as annoyance, anger,
sadness, or boredom (Ang et al, 2002; Lee and
Narayanan, 2002; Liscombe et al, 2003), speaker
characteristics such as charisma (Rosenberg and
Hirschberg, 2005), or personality features like extro-
version (Mairesse et al, 2007; Mairesse and Walker,
2008). Lexical cues to social meaning abound.
Speakers with links to depression or speakers who
are under stress use more first person singular pro-
nouns (Rude et al, 2004; Pennebaker and Lay, 2002;
Cohn et al, 2004), positive emotion words are cues
to agreeableness (Mairesse et al, 2007), and neg-
ative emotion words are useful cues to deceptive
speech (Newman et al, 2003). The number of words
in a sentence can be a useful feature for extroverted
personality (Mairesse et al, 2007). Finally, dia-
log features such as the presence of disfluencies
can inform listeners about speakers? problems in ut-
terance planning or about confidence (Brennan and
Williams, 1995; Brennan and Schober, 2001).
Our goal is to see whether cues of this sort are
useful in detecting particular elements of conversa-
tional style and social intention; whether a speaker
in a speed-dating conversation is judged by the in-
terlocutor as friendly, awkward, or flirtatious.
2 The Corpus
Our experiments make use of a new corpus we have
collected, the SpeedDate Corpus. The corpus is
based on three speed-dating sessions run at an elite
638
private American university in 2005 and inspired
by prior speed-dating research (Madan et al, 2005;
Pentland, 2005). The graduate student participants
volunteered to be in the study and were promised
emails of persons with whom they reported mutual
liking. Each date was conducted in an open setting
where there was substantial background noise. All
participants wore audio recorders on a shoulder sash,
thus resulting in two audio recordings of the approx-
imately 1100 4-minute dates. In addition to the au-
dio, we collected pre-test surveys, event scorecards,
and post-test surveys. This is the largest sample we
know of where audio data and detailed survey infor-
mation were combined in a natural experiment.
The rich survey information included date per-
ceptions and follow-up interest, as well as gen-
eral attitudes, preferences, and demographic infor-
mation. Participants were also asked about the
conversational style and intention of the interlocu-
tor. Each speaker was asked to report how of-
ten their date?s speech reflected different conversa-
tional styles (awkward, friendly, flirtatious, funny,
assertive) on a scale of 1-10 (1=never, 10=con-
stantly): ?How often did the other person behave in
the following ways on this ?date???. We chose three
of these five to focus on in this paper.
We acquired acoustic information by taking the
acoustic wave file from each recorder and manually
segmenting it into a sequence of wavefiles, each cor-
responding to one 4-minute date. Since both speak-
ers wore microphones, most dates had two record-
ings, one from the male recorder and one from the
female recorder. Because of mechanical, opera-
tor, and experimenter errors, some recordings were
lost, and thus some dates had only one recording.
Transcribers at a professional transcription service
used the two recordings to create a transcript for
each date, and time-stamped the start and end time
of each speaker turn. Transcribers were instructed
to mark various disfluencies as well as some non-
verbal elements of the conversation such as laughter.
Because of noise, participants who accidentally
turned off their mikes, and some segmentation and
transcription errors, a number of dates were not pos-
sible to analyze. 19 dates were lost completely, and
for an additional 130 we lost one of the two audio
tracks and had to use the remaining track to extract
features for both interlocutors. The current study fo-
cuses on the 991 remaining clean dates for which
we had usable audio, transcripts, and survey infor-
mation.
3 The Experiments
Our goal is to detect three of the style variables, in
particular awkward, friendly, or flirtatious speakers,
via a machine learning classifier. Recall that each
speaker in a date (each conversation side) was la-
beled by his or her interlocutor with a rating from
1-10 for awkward, friendly, or flirtatious behavior.
For the experiments, the 1-10 Likert scale ratings
were first mean-centered within each respondent so
that the average was 0. Then the top ten percent of
the respondent-centered meaned Likert ratings were
marked as positive for the trait, and the bottom ten
percent were marked as negative for a trait. Thus
each respondent labels the other speaker as either
positive, negative, or NA for each of the three traits.
We run our binary classification experiments to
predict this output variable.
For each speaker side of each 4-minute conversa-
tion, we extracted features from the wavefiles and
the transcript, as described in the next section. We
then trained six separate binary classifiers (for each
gender for the 3 tasks), as described in Section 5.
4 Feature Extraction
In selecting features we drew on previous research
on the use of relatively simple surface features that
cue social meaning, described in the next sections.
Each date was represented by the two 4-minute
wavefiles, one from the recorder worn by each
speaker, and a single transcription. Because of the
very high level of noise, the speaker wearing the
recorder was much clearer on his/her own recording,
and so we extracted the acoustic features for each
speaker from their own microphone (except for the
130 dates for which we only had one audio file). All
lexical and discourse features were extracted from
the transcripts.
All features describe the speaker of the conversa-
tion side being labeled for style. The features for
a conversation side thus indicate whether a speaker
who talks a lot, laughs, is more disfluent, has higher
F0, etc., is more or less likely to be considered flir-
tatious, friendly, or awkward by the interlocutor. We
639
also computed the same features for the alter inter-
locutor. Alter features thus indicate the conversa-
tional behavior of the speaker talking with an inter-
locutor they considered to be flirtatious, friendly, or
awkward.
4.1 Prosodic Features
F0 and RMS amplitude features were extracted us-
ing Praat scripts (Boersma and Weenink, 2005).
Since the start and end of each turn were time-
marked by hand, each feature was easily extracted
over a turn, and then averages and standard devia-
tions were taken over the turns in an entire conversa-
tion side. Thus the feature F0 MIN for a conversation
side was computed by taking the F0 min of each turn
in that conversation side (not counting zero values of
F0), and then averaging these values over all turns in
the side. F0 MIN SD is the standard deviation across
turns of this same measure.
Note that we coded four measures of f0 varia-
tion, not knowing in advance which one was likely
to be the most useful: F0 MEAN SD is the deviation
across turns from the global F0 mean for the con-
versation side, measuring how variable the speakers
mean f0 is across turns. F0 SD is the standard devia-
tion within a turn for the f0 mean, and then averaged
over turns, hence measures how variable the speak-
ers f0 is within a turn. F0 SD SD measures how much
the within-turn f0 variance varies from turn to turn,
and hence is another measure of cross-turn f0 vari-
ation. PITCH RANGE SD measures how much the
speakers pitch range varies from turn to turn, and
hence is another measure of cross-turn f0 variation.
4.2 Lexical Features
Lexical features have been widely explored in the
psychological and computational literature. For
these features we drew mainly on the LIWC lexicons
of Pennebaker et al (2007), the standard for social
psychological analysis of lexical features. From the
large variety of lexical categories in LIWC we se-
lected ten that the previous work of Mairesse et al
(2007) had found to be very significant in detect-
ing personality-related features. The 10 LIWC fea-
tures we used were Anger, Assent, Ingest, Insight,
Negemotion, Sexual, Swear, I, We, and You. We also
added two new lexical features, ?past tense auxil-
iary?, a heuristic for automatically detecting narra-
F0 MIN minimum (non-zero) F0 per turn, av-
eraged over turns
F0 MIN SD standard deviation from F0 min
F0 MAX maximum F0 per turn, averaged over
turns
F0 MAX SD standard deviation from F0 max
F0 MEAN mean F0 per turn, averaged over turns
F0 MEAN SD standard deviation (across turns) from
F0 mean
F0 SD standard deviation (within a turn)
from F0 mean, averaged over turns
F0 SD SD standard deviation from the f0 sd
PITCH RANGE f0 max - f0 min per turn, averaged
over turns
PITCH RANGE
SD
standard deviation from mean pitch
range
RMS MIN minimum amplitude per turn, aver-
aged over turns
RMS MIN SD standard deviation from RMS min
RMS MAX maximum amplitude per turn, aver-
aged over turns
RMS MAX SD standard deviation from RMS max
RMS MEAN mean amplitude per turn, averaged
over turns
RMS MEAN SD standard deviation from RMS mean
TURN DUR duration of turn in seconds, averaged
over turns
TIME total time for a speaker for a conversa-
tion side, in seconds
RATE OF
SPEECH
number of words in turn divided by
duration of turn in seconds, averaged
over turns
Table 1: Prosodic features for each conversation side,
extracted using Praat from the hand-segmented turns of
each side.
tive or story-telling behavior, and Metadate, for dis-
cussion about the speed-date itself. The features are
summarized in Table 2.
4.3 Dialogue Act and Adjacency Pair Features
A number of discourse features were extracted,
drawing from the conversation analysis, disfluency
and dialog act literature (Sacks et al, 1974; Juraf-
sky et al, 1998; Jurafsky, 2001). While discourse
features are clearly important for extracting social
meaning, previous work on social meaning has met
with less success in use of such features (with the
exception of the ?critical segments? work of (Enos
et al, 2007)), presumably because discourse fea-
640
TOTAL WORDS total number of words
PAST TENSE uses of past tense auxiliaries was, were, had
METADATE horn, date, bell, survey, speed, form, questionnaire, rushed, study, research
YOU you, you?d, you?ll, your, you?re, yours, you?ve (not counting you know)
WE lets, let?s, our, ours, ourselves, us, we, we?d, we?ll, we?re, we?ve
I I?d, I?ll, I?m, I?ve, me, mine, my, myself (not counting I mean)
ASSENT yeah, okay, cool, yes, awesome, absolutely, agree
SWEAR hell, sucks, damn, crap, shit, screw, heck, fuck*
INSIGHT think*/thought, feel*/felt, find/found, understand*, figure*, idea*, imagine, wonder
ANGER hate/hated, hell, ridiculous*, stupid, kill*, screwed, blame, sucks, mad, bother, shit
NEGEMOTION bad, weird, hate, crazy, problem*, difficult, tough, awkward, boring, wrong, sad, worry,
SEXUAL love*, passion*, loves, virgin, sex, screw
INGEST food, eat*, water, bar/bars, drink*, cook*, dinner, coffee, wine, beer, restaurant, lunch, dish
Table 2: Lexical features. Each feature value is a total count of the words in that class for each conversation side;
asterisks indicate that suffixed forms were included (e.g., love, loves, loving). All except the first three are from LIWC
(Pennebaker et al, 2007) (modified slightly, for example by removing you know and I mean). The last five classes
include more words in addition to those shown.
tures are expensive to hand-label and hard to auto-
matically extract. We chose a suggestive discourse
features that we felt might still be automatically ex-
tracted.
Four particular dialog acts were chosen as shown
in Table 3. Backchannels (or continuers) and ap-
preciations (a continuer expressing positive affect)
were coded by hand-built regular expressions. The
regular expressions were based on analysis of the
backchannels and appreciations in the hand-labeled
Switchboard corpus of dialog acts (Jurafsky et al,
1997). Questions were coded simply by the pres-
ence of question marks.
Finally, repair questions (also called NTRIs; next
turn repair indicators) are turns in which a speaker
signals lack of hearing or understanding (Schegloff
et al, 1977). To detect these, we used a simple
heuristic: the presence of ?Excuse me? or ?Wait?, as
in the following example:
FEMALE: Okay. Are you excited about that?
MALE: Excuse me?
A collaborative completion is a turn where a
speaker completes the utterance begun by the alter
(Lerner, 1991; Lerner, 1996). Our heuristic for iden-
tifying collaborative completions was to select sen-
tences for which the first word of the speaker was
extremely predictable from the last two words of the
previous speaker. We trained a word trigram model1
1interpolated, with Good Turing smoothing, trained on the
Treebank 3 Switchboard transcripts after stripping punctuation.
and used it to compute the probability p of the first
word of a speaker?s turn given the last two words
of the interlocutor?s turn. We arbitrarily chose the
threshold .01, labeling all turns for which p > .01 as
collaborative completions and used the total number
of collaborative completions in a conversation side
as our variable. This simple heuristic was errorful,
but did tend to find completions beginning with and
or or (1 below) and wh-questions followed by an NP
or PP phrase that is grammatically coherent with the
end of the question (2 and 3):
(1) FEMALE: The driving range.
(1) MALE: And the tennis court, too.
(2) MALE: What year did you graduate?
(2) FEMALE: From high school?
(3) FEMALE: What department are you in?
(3) MALE: The business school.
We also marked aspects of the preference struc-
ture of language. A dispreferred action is one in
which a speaker avoids the face-threat to the inter-
locutor that would be caused by, e.g., refusing a
request or not answering a question, by using spe-
cific strategies such as the use of well, hesitations, or
restarts (Schegloff et al, 1977; Pomerantz, 1984).
Finally, we included the number of instances of
laughter for the side, as well as the total number of
turns a speaker took.
4.4 Disfluency Features
A second group of discourse features relating to re-
pair, disfluency, and speaker overlap are summarized
641
BACKCHANNELS number of backchannel utterances in side (Uh-huh., Yeah., Right., Oh, okay.)
APPRECIATIONS number of appreciations in side (Wow, That?s true, Oh, great)
QUESTIONS number of questions in side
NTRI repair question (Next Turn Repair Indicator) (Wait, Excuse me)
COMPLETION (an approximation to) utterances that were ?collaborative completions?
DISPREFERRED (an approximation to) dispreferred responses, beginning with discourse marker well
LAUGH number of instances of laughter in side
TURNS total number of turns in side
Table 3: Dialog act/adjacency pair features.
in Table 4. Filled pauses (um, uh) were coded by
UH/UM total number of filled pauses (uh or
um) in conversation side
RESTART total number of disfluent restarts in
conversation side
OVERLAP number of turns in side which the two
speakers overlapped
Table 4: Disfluency features
regular expressions (the transcribers had been in-
structed to transcribe all filled pauses). Restarts are
a type of repair in which speakers begin a phrase,
break off, and then restart the syntactic phrase. The
following example shows a restart; the speaker starts
a sentence Uh, I and then restarts, There?s a group...:
Uh, I?there?s a group of us that came in?
Overlaps are cases in which both speakers were
talking at the same time, and were marked by the
transcribers in the transcripts:
MALE: But-and also obviously?
FEMALE: It sounds bigger.
MALE: ?people in the CS school are not
quite as social in general as other?
5 Classifier Training
Before performing the classification task, we prepro-
cessed the data in two ways. First, we standardized
all the variables to have zero mean and unit variance.
We did this to avoid imposing a prior on any of the
features based on their numerical values.2 Second,
2Consider a feature A with mean 100 and a feature B with
mean .1 where A and B are correlated with the output. Since
regularization favors small weights there is a bias to put weight
on feature A because intuitively the weight on feature B would
we removed features correlated greater than .7. One
goal of removing correlated features was to remove
as much colinearity as possible from the regression
so that the regression weights could be ranked for
their importance in the classification. In addition,
we hoped to improve classification because a large
number of features require more training examples
(Ng, 2004). For example for male flirt we removed
f0 range (highly correlated with f0 max), f0 min sd
(highly correlated with f0 min), and Swear (highly
correlated with Anger).
For each classification task due to the small
amounts of data we performed k-fold cross vali-
dation to learn and evaluate our models. We used
a variant of k-fold cross validation with five folds
where three folds are used for training, one fold is
used for validation, and one fold is used as a test set.
This test fold is not used in any training step. This
yields a datasplit of 60% for training, 20% for val-
idation, and 20% for testing, or 120 training exam-
ples, 40 validation examples, and 40 test examples.
To ensure that we were not learning something spe-
cific to our data split, we randomized our data order-
ing and repeated the k-fold cross validation variant
25 times.
We used regularized logistic regression for clas-
sification. Recall that in logistic regression we train
a vector of feature weights ? ? Rn so as to make
the following classification of some output variable
y for an input observation x:3
p(y|x; ?) = 11 + exp(??Tx) (1)
In regularized logistic regression we find the
need to be 1000 times larger to carry the same effect. This ar-
gument holds similarly for the reduction to unit variance.
3Where n is the number of features plus 1 for the intercept.
642
weights ? which maximize the following optimiza-
tion problem:
argmax
?
?
i
log p(yi|xi; ?)? ? ?R(?) (2)
R(?) is a regularization term used to penalize
large weights. We chose R(?), the regularization
function, to be the L1 norm of ?. That is, R(?) =
||?||1 =?ni=1 |?i|.
In our case, given the training set Strain, test set
Stest, and validation set Sval, we trained the weights
? as follows:
argmax
?
accuracy(??, Sval) (3)
where for a given sparsity parameter ?
?? = argmax
?
?
i
log p(yi|xi; ?)? ? ?R(?) (4)
We chose L1-regularization because the number of
training examples to learn well grows logarithmi-
cally with the number of input variables (Ng, 2004),
and to achieve a sparse activation of our features
to find only the most salient explanatory variables.
This choice of regularization was made to avoid the
problems that often plague supervised learning in
situations with large number of features but only a
small number of examples. The search space over
the sparsity parameter ? is bounded around an ex-
pected sparsity to prevent overfitting.
Finally, to evaluate our model on the learned ?
and ?? we used the features X of the test set Stest to
compute the predicted outputs Y using the logistic
regression model. Accuracy is simply computed as
the percent of correct predictions.
To avoid any data ordering bias, we calculated
a ?? for each randomized run. The output of the
runs was a vector of weights for each feature. We
kept any feature if the median of its weight vector
was nonzero.4 A sample boxplot for the highest
weighted ego features for predicting male flirt can
be found in Figure 1.
4We also performed a t-test to find salient feature values
significantly different than zero; the non-zero median method
turned out to be a more conservative measure in practice (intu-
itively, because L1 normed regression pushes weights to 0).
-1   -0.8  -0.6  -0.4  -0.2    0    0.2    0.4   0.6   0.8    1
question
f0 mean std
you
rate
intensity min
backchannel
appreciation
repair quest
intensity max
laugh
I
Figure 1: An illustrative boxplot for flirtation in men
showing the 10 most significant features and one not
significant (?I?). Shown are median values (central red
line), first quartile, third quartile, outliers (red X?s) and
interquartile range (filled box).
6 Results
Results for the 6 binary classifiers are presented in
Table 5.
Awk Flirt Friendly
M F M F M F
Speaker 63% 51% 67% 60% 72% 68%
+other 64% 64% 71% 60% 73% 75%
Table 5: Accuracy of binary classification of each con-
versation side, where chance is 50%. The first row uses
features only from the single speaker; the second adds all
the features from the interlocutor as well. These accu-
racy results were aggregated from 25 randomized runs of
5-fold cross validation.
The first row shows results using features ex-
tracted from the speaker being labeled. Here, all
conversational styles are easiest to detect in men.
The second row of table 5 shows the accuracy
when using features from both speakers. Not sur-
prisingly, adding information about the interlocutor
tends to improve classification, and especially for
women, suggesting that male speaking has greater
sway over perceptions of conversational style. We
discuss below the role of these features.
We first considered the features that helped clas-
sification when considering only the ego (i.e., the re-
sults in the first row of Table 5). Table 6 shows fea-
ture weights for the features (features were normed
so weights are comparable), and is summarized in
the following paragraphs:
? Men who are labeled as friendly use you, col-
643
MALE FRIENDLY MALE FLIRT
backchannel -0.737 question 0.376
you 0.631 f0 mean sd 0.288
intensity min sd 0.552 you 0.214
f0 sd sd -0.446 rate 0.190
intensity min -0.445 intensity min -0.163
completion 0.337 backchannel -0.142
time -0.270 appreciation -0.136
Insight -0.249 repair question 0.128
f0 min -0.226 intensity max -0.121
intensity max -0.221 laugh 0.107
overlap 0.213 time -0.092
laugh 0.192 overlap -0.090
turn dur -0.059 f0 min 0.089
Sexual 0.059 Sexual 0.082
appreciation -0.054 Negemo 0.075
Anger -0.051 metadate -0.041
FEMALE FRIENDLY FEMALE FLIRT
intensity min sd 0.420 f0 max 0.475
intensity max sd -0.367 rate 0.346
completion 0.276 intensity min sd 0.269
repair question 0.255 f0 mean sd 0.21
appreciation 0.253 Swear 0.156
f0 max 0.233 question -0.153
Swear -0.194 Assent -0.127
wordcount 0.165 f0 min -0.111
restart 0.172 intensity max 0.092
uh 0.241 I 0.073
I 0.111 metadate -0.071
past -0.060 wordcount 0.065
laugh 0.048 laugh 0.054
Negemotion -0.021 restart 0.046
intensity min -0.02 overlap -0.036
Ingest -0.017 f0 sd sd -0.025
Assent 0.0087 Ingest -0.024
f0 max sd 0.0089
MALE AWK
restart 0.502 completion -0.141
f0 sd sd 0.371 intensity max -0.135
appreciation -0.354 f0 mean sd -0.091
turns -0.292 Ingest -0.079
uh 0.270 Anger 0.075
you -0.210 repair question -0.067
overlap -0.190 Insight -0.056
past -0.175 rate 0.049
intensity min sd -0.173
Table 6: Feature weights (median weights of the random-
ized runs) for the non-zero predictors for each classifier.
Since our accuracy for detecting awkwardness in women
based solely on ego features is so close to chance, we
didn?t analyze the awkwardness features for women here.
laborative completions, laugh, overlap, but don?t
backchannel or use appreciations. Their utterances
are shorter (in seconds and words) and they are qui-
eter and their (minimum) pitch is lower and some-
what less variable.
? Women labeled as friendly have more collab-
orative completions, repair questions, laughter, and
appreciations. They use more words overall, and use
I more often. They are more disfluent (both restarts
and uh) but less likely to swear. Prosodically their f0
is higher, and there seems to be some pattern involv-
ing quiet speech; more variation in intensity mini-
mum than intensity max.
? Men who are labeled as flirting ask more ques-
tions, including repair questions, and use you. They
don?t use backchannels or appreciations, or overlap
as much. They laugh more, and use more sexual and
negative emotional words. Prosodically they speak
faster, with higher and more variable pitch, but qui-
eter (lower intensity max).
? The strongest features for women who are la-
beled as flirting are prosodic; they speak faster and
louder with higher and more variable pitch. They
also use more words in general, swear more, don?t
ask questions or use Assent, use more I, laugh more,
and are somewhat more disfluent (restarts).
?Men who are labeled as awkward are more dis-
fluent, with increased restarts and filled pauses (uh
and um). They are also not ?collaborative? conversa-
tionalists; they don?t use appreciations, repair ques-
tions, collaborative completions, past-tense, or you,
take fewer turns overall, and don?t overlap. Prosod-
ically the awkward labels are hard to characterize;
there is both an increase in pitch variation (f0 sd sd)
and a decrease (f0 mean sd). They don?t seem to get
quite as loud (intensity max).
The previous analysis showed what features of the
ego help in classification. We next asked about fea-
tures of the alter, based on the results using both
ego and alter features in the second row of Table 5.
Here we are asking about the linguistic behaviors of
a speaker who describes the interlocutor as flirting,
friendly, or awkward.
While we don?t show these values in a table, we
offer here an overview of their tendencies. For
example for women who labeled their male in-
terlocutors as friendly, the women got much qui-
eter, used ?well? much more, laughed, asked more
644
repair questions, used collaborative completions,
and backchanneled more. When a man labeled a
woman as friendly, he used an expanded intensity
range (quieter intensity min, louder intensity max).
laughed more, used more sexual terms, used less
negative emotional terms, and overlapped more.
When women labeled their male interlocutor as
flirting, the women used many more repair ques-
tions, laughed more, and got quieter (lower intensity
min). By contrast, when a man said his female inter-
locutor was flirting, he used more Insight and Anger
words, and raised his pitch.
When women labeled their male interlocutor as
awkward, the women asked a lot of questions, used
well, were disfluent (restarts), had a diminished
pitch range, and didn?t use I. In listening to some
of these conversations, it was clear that the conver-
sation lagged repeatedly, and the women used ques-
tions at these points to restart the conversations.
7 Discussion
The results presented here should be regarded with
some caution. The sample is not a random sample of
English speakers or American adults, and speed dat-
ing is not a natural context for expressing every con-
versational style. Therefore, a wider array of studies
across populations and genres would be required be-
fore a more general theory of conversational styles is
established.
On the other hand, the presented results may
under-reflect the relations being captured. The qual-
ity of recordings and coarse granularity (1 second)
of the time-stamps likely cloud the relations, and as
the data is cleaned and improved, we expect the as-
sociations to only grow stronger.
Caveats aside, we believe the evidence indicates
that the perception of several types of conversational
style have relatively clear signals across genders, but
with some additional gender contextualization.
Both genders convey flirtation by laughing more,
speaking faster, and using higher and more variable
pitch. Both genders convey friendliness by laughing
more, and using collaborative completions.
However, we do find gender differences; men asl
more questions when (labeled as) flirting, women
ask fewer. Men labeled as flirting are softer, but
women labeled as flirting are louder. Women flirt-
ing swear more, while men are more likely to use
sexual vocabulary. Gender differences exist as well
for the other variables. Men labeled as friendly use
you while women labeled as friendly use I. Friendly
women are very disfluent; friendly men are not.
While the features for friendly and flirtatious
speech overlap, there are clear differences. Men
speaker faster and with higher f0 (min) in flirtatious
speech, but not faster and with lower f0 (min) in
friendly speech. For men, flirtatious speech involves
more questions and repair questions, while friendly
speech does not. For women, friendly speech is
more disfluent than flirtatious speech, and has more
collaborative style (completions, repair questions,
appreciations).
We also seem to see a model of collaborative con-
versational style (probably related to the collabo-
rative floor of Edelsky (1981) and Coates (1996)),
cued by the use of more collaborative completions,
repair questions and other questions, you, and laugh-
ter. These collaborative techniques were used by
both women and men who were labeled as friendly,
and occurred less with men labeled as awkward.
Women themselves displayed more of this collab-
orative conversational style when they labeled the
men as friendly. For women only, collaborative style
included appreciations; while for men only, collabo-
rative style included overlaps.
In addition to these implications for social sci-
ence, our work has implications for the extraction of
meaning in general. A key focus of our work was on
ways to extract useful dialog act and disfluency fea-
tures (repair questions, backchannels, appreciations,
restarts, dispreferreds) with very shallow methods.
These features were indeed extractable and proved
to be useful features in classification.
We are currently extending these results to predict
date outcomes including ?liking?, extending work
such as Madan and Pentland (2006).
Acknowledgments
Thanks to three anonymous reviewers, Sonal Nalkur and
Tanzeem Choudhury for assistance and advice on data
collection, Sandy Pentland for a helpful discussion about
feature extraction, and to Google for gift funding.
645
References
J. Ang, R. Dhillon, A. Krupski, E. Shriberg, and A. Stol-
cke. 2002. Prosody-Based Automatic Detection of
Annoyance and Frustration in Human-Computer Dia-
log. In INTERSPEECH-02.
P. Boersma and D. Weenink. 2005. Praat: doing pho-
netics by computer (version 4.3.14). [Computer pro-
gram]. Retrieved May 26, 2005, from http://www.
praat.org/.
S. Brave, C. Nass, and K. Hutchinson. 2005. Comput-
ers that care: Investigating the effects of orientation
of emotion exhibited by an embodied conversational
agent. International Journal of Human-Computer
Studies, 62(2):161?178.
S. E. Brennan and M. F. Schober. 2001. How listen-
ers compensate for disfluencies in spontaneous speech.
Journal of Memory and Language, 44:274?296.
S. E. Brennan and M. Williams. 1995. The feeling of
another?s knowing: Prosody and filled pauses as cues
to listeners about the metacognitive states of speakers.
Journal of Memory and Language, 34:383?398.
J. Coates. 1996. Women Talk. Blackwell.
M. A. Cohn, M. R. Mehl, and J. W. Pennebaker. 2004.
Linguistic markers of psychological change surround-
ing September 11, 2001. Psychological Science,
15:687?693.
C. Edelsky. 1981. Who?s got the floor? Language in
Society, 10:383?421.
F. Enos, E. Shriberg, M. Graciarena, J. Hirschberg, and
A. Stolcke. 2007. Detecting Deception Using Critical
Segments. In INTERSPEECH-07.
D. Jurafsky, E. Shriberg, and D. Biasca. 1997. Switch-
board SWBD-DAMSL Labeling Project Coder?s Man-
ual, Draft 13. Technical Report 97-02, University of
Colorado Institute of Cognitive Science.
D. Jurafsky, E. Shriberg, B. Fox, and T. Curl. 1998. Lex-
ical, prosodic, and syntactic cues for dialog acts. In
Proceedings, COLING-ACL Workshop on Discourse
Relations and Discourse Markers, pages 114?120.
D. Jurafsky. 2001. Pragmatics and computational lin-
guistics. In L. R. Horn and G. Ward, editors, Hand-
book of Pragmatics. Blackwell.
C. M. Lee and S. S. Narayanan. 2002. Combining acous-
tic and language information for emotion recognition.
In ICSLP-02, pages 873?876, Denver, CO.
G. H. Lerner. 1991. On the syntax of sentences-in-
progress. Language in Society, 20(3):441?458.
G. H. Lerner. 1996. On the ?semi-permeable? character
of grammatical units in conversation: Conditional en-
try into the turn space of another speaker. In E. Ochs,
E. A. Schegloff, and S. A. Thompson, editors, Interac-
tion and Grammar, pages 238?276. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
J. Liscombe, J. Venditti, and J. Hirschberg. 2003. Clas-
sifying Subject Ratings of Emotional Speech Using
Acoustic Features. In INTERSPEECH-03.
A. Madan and A. Pentland. 2006. Vibefones: Socially
aware mobile phones. In Tenth IEEE International
Symposium on Wearable Computers.
A. Madan, R. Caneel, and A. Pentland. 2005. Voices
of attraction. Presented at Augmented Cognition, HCI
2005, Las Vegas.
F. Mairesse and M. Walker. 2008. Trainable generation
of big-five personality styles through data-driven pa-
rameter estimation. In ACL-08, Columbus.
F. Mairesse, M. Walker, M. Mehl, and R. Moore. 2007.
Using linguistic cues for the automatic recognition of
personality in conversation and text. Journal of Artifi-
cial Intelligence Research (JAIR), 30:457?500.
C. Nass and S. Brave. 2005. Wired for speech: How
voice activates and advances the human-computer re-
lationship. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
M. L. Newman, J. W. Pennebaker, D. S. Berry, and J. M.
Richards. 2003. Lying words: Predicting deception
from linguistic style. Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy Bulletin, 29:665?675.
A. Y. Ng. 2004. Feature selection, L1 vs. L2 regulariza-
tion, and rotational invariance. In ICML 2004.
J. W. Pennebaker and T. C. Lay. 2002. Language use and
personality during crises: Analyses of Mayor Rudolph
Giuliani?s press conferences. Journal of Research in
Personality, 36:271?282.
J. W. Pennebaker, R. Booth, and M. Francis. 2007. Lin-
guistic inquiry and word count: LIWC2007 operator?s
manual. Technical report, University of Texas.
A. Pentland. 2005. Socially aware computation and
communication. Computer, pages 63?70.
A. M. Pomerantz. 1984. Agreeing and disagreeing with
assessment: Some features of preferred/dispreferred
turn shapes. In J. M. Atkinson and J. Heritage, edi-
tors, Structure of Social Action: Studies in Conversa-
tion Analysis. Cambridge University Press.
A. Rosenberg and J. Hirschberg. 2005. Acous-
tic/prosodic and lexical correlates of charismatic
speech. In EUROSPEECH-05, pages 513?516, Lis-
bon, Portugal.
S. S. Rude, E. M. Gortner, and J. W. Pennebaker. 2004.
Language use of depressed and depression-vulnerable
college students. Cognition and Emotion, 18:1121?
1133.
H. Sacks, E. A. Schegloff, and G. Jefferson. 1974.
A simplest systematics for the organization of turn-
taking for conversation. Language, 50(4):696?735.
E. A. Schegloff, G. Jefferson, and H. Sacks. 1977. The
preference for self-correction in the organization of re-
pair in conversation. Language, 53:361?382.
646
