Proceedings of the EACL 2009 Workshop on GEMS: GEometical Models of Natural Language Semantics, pages 104?111,
Athens, Greece, 31 March 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Semantic Density Analysis: 
Comparing word meaning across time and phonetic space 
 
Eyal Sagi 
Northwestern University 
Evanston, Illinois, USA 
eyal@u.northwestern.edu 
 
Stefan Kaufmann 
Northwestern University 
Evanston, Illinois, USA 
kaufmann@northwestern.edu 
Brady Clark 
Northwestern University 
Evanston, Illinois, USA 
bzack@northwestern.edu 
 
 
  
Abstract 
This paper presents a new statistical method 
for detecting and tracking changes in word 
meaning, based on Latent Semantic Analysis. 
By comparing the density of semantic vector 
clusters this method allows researchers to 
make statistical inferences on questions such 
as whether the meaning of a word changed 
across time or if a phonetic cluster is asso-
ciated with a specific meaning. Possible appli-
cations of this method are then illustrated in 
tracing the semantic change of ?dog?, ?do?, and 
?deer? in early English and examining and 
comparing phonaesthemes. 
1 Introduction 
The increase in available computing power over 
the last few decades has led to an explosion in 
the application of statistical methods to the anal-
ysis of texts. Researchers have applied these me-
thods to a wide range of tasks, from word-sense 
disambiguation (Levin et al, 2006) to the sum-
marization of texts (Marcu, 2003) and the auto-
matic scoring of student essays (Riedel et al, 
2006). However, some fields of linguistics that 
have traditionally employed corpora as their 
source material, such as historical semantics, 
have yet to benefit from the application of these 
statistical methods.  
In this paper we demonstrate how an existing 
statistical tool (Latent Semantic Analysis) can be 
adapted and used to automate and enhance some 
aspects of research in historical semantics and 
other fields whose focus is on the comparative 
analysis of word meanings within a corpus. Our 
method allows us to assess the semantic variation 
within the set of individual occurrences of a giv-
en word type. This variation is inversely related 
to a property of types that we call density ? intui-
tively, a tendency to occur in highly similar con-
texts. In terms of our LSA-based spatial semantic 
model, we calculate vectors representing the con-
text of each occurrence of a given term, and es-
timate the term?s cohesiveness as the density 
with which these token context vectors are 
?packed? in space. 
2 The method 
Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) is a collective 
term for a family of related methods, all of which 
involve building numerical representations of 
words based on occurrence patterns in a training 
corpus. The basic underlying assumption is that 
co-occurrence within the same contexts can be 
used as a stand-in measure of semantic related-
ness (see Firth, 1957; Halliday and Hasan, 1976; 
Hoey, 1991, for early articulations of this idea). 
The success of the method in technical applica-
tions such as information retrieval and its popu-
larity as a research tool in psychology, education, 
linguistics and other disciplines suggest that this 
hypothesis holds up well for the purposes of 
those applications. 
The relevant notion of ?context? varies. The 
first and still widely used implementation of the 
idea, developed in Information Retrieval and 
originally known as Latent Semantic Indexing 
(Deerwester et al, 1990), assembles a term-
document matrix in which each vocabulary item 
(term) is associated with an n-dimensional vector 
recording its distribution over the n documents in 
the corpus. In contrast, the version we applied in 
this work measures co-occurrence in a way that 
is more independent of the characteristics of the 
documents in the training corpus, building in-
104
stead a term-term matrix associating vocabulary 
items with vectors representing their frequency 
of co-occurrence with each of a list of ?content-
bearing? words. This approach originated with 
the ?WordSpace? paradigm developed by 
Sch?tze (1996). The software we used is a ver-
sion of the ?Infomap? package developed at 
Stanford University and freely available (see also 
Takayama et al, 1999). We describe it and the 
steps we took in our experiments in some detail 
below. 
2.1 Word vectors 
The information encoded in the co-occurrence 
matrix, and thus ultimately the similarity meas-
ure depends greatly on the genre and subject 
matter of the training corpus (Takayama et al, 
1999; Kaufmann, 2000). In our case, we used the 
entire available corpus as our training corpus. 
The word types in the training corpus are ranked 
by frequency of occurrence, and the Infomap 
system automatically selects (i) a vocabulary ?  
for which vector representations are to be col-
lected, and (ii) a set ? of 1,000 ?content-bearing? 
words whose occurrence or non-occurrence is 
taken to be indicative of the subject matter of a 
given passage of text. Usually, these choices are 
guided by a stoplist of (mostly closed-class) lexi-
cal items that are to be excluded, but because we 
were interested in tracing changes in the meaning 
of lexical items we reduced this stoplist to a bare 
minimum. To compensate, we increased the 
number of ?content-bearing? words to 2,000. The 
vocabulary ? consisted of the 40,000 most fre-
quent non-stoplist words. The set ? of content-
bearing words contained the 50th through 2,049th 
most frequent non-stoplist words. This method 
may seem rather blunt, but it has the advantage 
of not requiring any human intervention or ante-
cedently given information about the domain. 
The cells in the resulting matrix of 40,000 
rows and 2,000 columns were filled with co-
occurrence counts recording, for each 
pair  ?, ? ? ? ? ?, the number of times a token 
of ? occurred in the context of a token of ? in 
the corpus.1 The ?context? of a token ??  in our 
                                                 
1 Two details are glossed over here: First, the Infomap sys-
tem weighs this raw count with a ??. ??? measure of the 
column label c, calculated as follows: ??. ??? ? = ?? ? ?
 ??? ? + 1 ? ??? ?? ?    where ?? and ?? are the number 
of occurrences of ? and the number of documents in which 
? occurs, respectively, and ? is the total number of docu-
ments. Second, the number in each cell is replaced with its 
square root, in order to approximate a normal distribution of 
counts and attenuate the potentially distorting influence of 
implementation is the set of tokens in a fixed-
width window from the 15th item preceding ??  
to the 15th item following it (less if a document 
boundary intervenes). The matrix was trans-
formed by Singular Value Decomposition 
(SVD), whose implementation in the Infomap 
system relies on the SVDPACKC package 
(Berry, 1992; Berry et al, 1993). The output was 
a reduced 40,000 ? 100 matrix. Thus each item 
? ? ? is associated with a 100-dimensional 
vector ?   . 
2.2 Context vectors 
Once the vector space is obtained from the 
training corpus, vectors can be calculated for any 
multi-word unit of text (e.g. paragraphs, queries, 
or documents), regardless of whether it occurs in 
the original training corpus or not, as the normal-
ized sum of the vectors associated with the words 
it contains. In this way, for each occurrence of a 
target word type under investigation, we calcu-
lated a context vector from the 15 words preced-
ing and the 15 words following that occurrence. 
Context vectors were first used in Word Sense 
Discrimination by Sch?tze (1998). Similarly to 
that application, we assume that these ?second-
order? vectors encode the aggregate meaning, or 
topic, of the segment they represent, and thus, 
following the reasoning behind LSA, are 
indicative of the meaning with which it is being 
used on that particular occurrence. Consequently, 
for each target word of interest, the context 
vectors associated with its occurrences constitute 
the data points. The analysis is then a matter of 
grouping these data points according to some 
criterion (e.g., the period in which the text was 
written) and conducting an appropriate statistical 
test. In some cases it might also be possible to 
use regression or apply a clustering analysis. 
2.3 Semantic Density Analysis 
Conducting statistical tests comparing groups of 
vectors is not trivial. Fortunately, some questions 
can be answered based on the similarity of vec-
tors within each group rather than the vectors 
themselves. The similarity between two vectors 
?   , ?  is measured as the cosine between them:2 
                                                                          
high base frequencies (cf. Takayama, et al 1998; Widdows, 
2004). 
2 While the cosine measure is the accepted measure of simi-
larity, the cosine function is non-linear and therefore prob-
lematic for many statistical methods. Several transforma-
tions can be used to correct this (e.g., Fisher?s z). In this 
paper we will use the angle, in degrees, between the two 
vectors (i.e., ????1) because it is easily interpretable. 
105
??? ?   , ?  =
?   ? ? 
 ?     ?  
 
 
The average similarity of a group of vectors is 
indicative of its density ? a dense group of highly 
similar vectors will have a high average cosine 
(and a correspondingly low average angle) 
whereas a sparse group of dissimilar vectors will 
have an average cosine that approaches zero (and 
a correspondingly high average angle).3 Thus 
since a word that has a single, highly restricted 
meaning (e.g. ?palindrome?) is likely to occur in 
a very restricted set of contexts, its context vec-
tors are also likely to have a low average angle 
between them, compared to a word that is highly 
polysemous or appears in a large variety of con-
texts (e.g. ?bank?, ?do?). From this observation, it 
follows that it should be possible to compare the 
cohesiveness of groups of vectors in terms of the 
average pairwise similarity of the vectors of 
which they are comprised. Because the number 
of such pairings tends to be prohibitively large 
(e.g., nearly 1,000,000 for a group of 1,000 vec-
tors), it is useful to use only a sub-sample in any 
single analysis. A Monte-Carlo analysis in which 
n pair-wise similarity values are chosen at ran-
dom from each group of vectors is therefore ap-
propriate.4 
However, there is one final complication to 
consider in the analysis. The passage of time in-
fluences not only the meaning of words, but also 
styles and variety of writing. For example, texts 
in the 11th century were much less varied, on av-
erage, than those written in the 15th century.5 
This will influence the calculation of context 
vectors as those depend, in part, on the text they 
are taken from. Because the document as a whole 
is represented by a vector that is the average of 
all of its words, it is possible to predict that, if no 
other factors exist, two contexts are likely to be 
related to one another to the same degree that 
their documents are. Controlling for this effect 
can therefore be achieved by subtracting from 
                                                 
3
 Since the cosine ranges from -1 to +1, it is possible in 
principle to obtain negative average cosines. In practice, 
however, the overwhelming majority of vocabulary items 
have a non-negative cosine with any given target word, 
hence the average cosine usually does not fall below zero. 
4
 It is important to note that the number of independent 
samples in the analysis is determined not by the number of 
similarity values compared but by the number of individual 
vectors used in the analysis. 
5 Tracking changes in the distribution of the document 
vectors in a corpus over time might itself be of interest to 
some researchers but is beyond the scope of the current 
paper. 
the angle between two context vectors the angle 
between the documents in which they appear.  
3 Applications to Research 
3.1 A Diachronic Investigation: Semantic 
Change 
One of the central questions of historical seman-
tics is the following (Traugott, 1999):6 
 
Given the form-meaning pair ? (lexeme) what 
changes did meaning ? undergo? 
 
For example, the form as long as underwent 
the change `equal in length? > `equal in time? > 
`provided that?. Evidence for semantic change 
comes from written records, cognates, and struc-
tural analysis (Bloomfield, 1933).  Traditional 
categories of semantic change include (Traugott, 
2005: 2-4; Campbell, 2004:254-262; Forston, 
2003: 648-650): 
? Broadening (generalization, extension, 
borrowing): A restricted meaning becomes less 
restricted (e.g. Late Old English docga `a (spe-
cific) powerful breed of dog? > dog `any member 
of the species Canis familiaris? 
? Narrowing (specialization, restriction): A 
relatively general meaning becomes more specif-
ic (e.g. Old English deor `animal? > deer) 
? Pejoration (degeneration): A meaning be-
comes more negative (e.g. Old English s?lig 
`blessed, blissful? > sely `happy, innocent, pitia-
ble? > silly `foolish, stupid?) 
 
Semantic change results from the use of lan-
guage in context, whether linguistic or extralin-
guistic. Later meanings of forms are connected to 
earlier ones, where all semantic change arises by 
polysemy, i.e. new meanings coexist with earlier 
ones, typically in restricted contexts. Sometimes 
new meanings split off from earlier ones and are 
no longer considered variants by language users 
(e.g. mistress `woman in a position of authority, 
head of household? > `woman in a continuing 
extra-marital relationship with a man?). 
Semantic change is often considered unsyste-
matic (Hock and Joseph, 1996: 252). However, 
recent work (Traugott and Dasher, 2002) sug-
gests that there is, in fact, significant cross-
linguistic regularity in semantic change. For ex-
                                                 
6 This is the semasiological perspective on semantic change. 
Other perspectives include the onomasiological perspective 
(?Given the concept ?, what lexemes can it be expressed 
by??). See Traugott 1999 for discussion. 
106
ample, in the Invited Inferencing Model of Se-
mantic Change proposed by Traugott and Dasher 
(2002) the main mechanism of semantic change 
is argued to be the semanticization of conversa-
tional implicatures, where conversational impli-
catures are a component of speaker meaning that 
arises from the interaction between what the 
speaker says and rational principles of communi-
cation (Grice, 1989 [1975]). Conversational im-
plicatures are suggested by an utterance but not 
entailed. For example, the utterance Some stu-
dents came to the party strongly suggests that 
some but not all students came to the party, even 
though the utterance would be true strictly speak-
ing if all students came to the party. According to 
the Invited Inferencing Model, conversational 
implicatures become part of the semantic poly-
semies of particular forms over time. 
Such changes in meaning should be evident 
when examining the contexts in which the lex-
eme of interest appears. In other words, changes 
in the meaning of a type should translate to dif-
ferences in the contexts in which its tokens are 
used. For instance, semantic broadening results 
in a meaning that is less restricted and as a result 
can be used in a larger variety of contexts. In a 
semantic space that encompasses the period of 
such a change, this increase in variety can be 
measured as a decrease in vector density across 
the time span of the corpus. This decrease trans-
lates into an increase in the average angle be-
tween the context vectors for the word. For in-
stance, because the Old English word ?docga? 
applied to a specific breed of dog, we predicted 
that earlier occurrences of the lexemes ?docga? 
and ?dog?, in a corpus of documents of the ap-
propriate time period, will show less variety than 
later occurrences. 
An even more extreme case of semantic broa-
dening is predicted to occur as part of the process 
of grammaticalization (Traugot and Dasher, 
2002) in which a content word becomes a func-
tion word. Because, as a general rule, a function 
word can be used in a much larger variety of 
contexts than a content word, a word that under-
went grammaticalization should appear in a sub-
stantially larger variety of contexts than it did 
prior to becoming a function word. One well stu-
died case of grammaticalization is that of periph-
rastic ?do?. While in Old English ?do? was used 
as a verb with a causative and habitual sense 
(e.g. ?do you harm?), later in English it took on a 
functional role that is nearly devoid of meaning 
(e.g. ?do you know him??). Because this change 
occurred in Middle English, we predicted that 
earlier occurrences of ?do? will show less variety 
than later ones. 
In contrast with broadening, semantic narrow-
ing results in a meaning that is more restricted, 
and is therefore applicable in fewer contexts than 
before. This decrease in variety results in an in-
crease in vector density and can be directly 
measured as a decrease in the average angle be-
tween the context vectors for the word. As an 
example, the Old English word ?deor? denoted a 
larger group of living creatures than does the 
Modern English word ?deer?. We therefore pre-
dicted that earlier occurrences of the lexemes 
?deor? and ?deer?, in a corpus of the appropriate 
time period, will show more variety than later 
occurrences. 
We tested our predictions using a corpus de-
rived from the Helsinki corpus (Rissanen, 1994). 
The Helsinki corpus is comprised of texts span-
ning the periods of Old English (prior to 
1150A.D.), Middle English (1150-1500A.D.), 
and Early Modern English (1500-1710A.D.). 
Because spelling in Old English was highly vari-
able, we decided to exclude that part of the cor-
pus and focused our analysis on the Middle Eng-
lish and Early Modern English periods. The re-
sulting corpus included 504 distinct documents 
totaling approximately 1.1 million words. 
To test our predictions regarding semantic 
change in the words ?dog?, ?do?, and ?deer?, we 
collected all of the contexts in which they appear 
in our subset of the Helsinki corpus. This re-
sulted in 112 contexts for ?dog?, 4298 contexts 
for ?do?, and 61 contexts for ?deer?. Because 
there were relatively few occurrences of ?dog? 
Table 1 - Mean angle between context vectors for target words in different periods in the Helsinki 
corpus (standard deviations are given in parenthesis) 
 
n 
Unknown composi-
tion date 
(<1250) 
Early Middle 
English 
(1150-1350) 
Late Middle 
English 
(1350-1500) 
Early Modern 
English 
(1500-1710) 
dog 112   15.47 (14.19) 24.73(10.43) 
do 4298  10.31(13.57) 13.02 (9.50) 24.54 (11.2) 
deer 61 38.72 (17.59) 20.6 (18.18)  20.5 (9.82) 
science 79   13.56 (13.33) 28.31 (12.24) 
 
107
and ?deer? in the corpus it was practical to com-
pute the angles between all possible pairs of con-
text vectors. As a result, we elected to forgo the 
Monte-Carlo analysis for those two words in fa-
vor of a full analysis. The results of our analysis 
for all three words are given in Table 1. These 
results were congruent with our prediction: The 
density of the contexts decreases over time for 
both ?dog? (t(110) = 2.17, p < .05) and ?do? 
(F(2,2997)=409.41, p < .01) while in the case of 
?deer? there is an increase in the density of the 
contexts over time (t(36) = 3.05, p < .01). 
Furthermore, our analysis corresponds with 
the data collected by Elleg?rd (1953). Elleg?rd 
traced the grammaticalization of ?do? by manual-
ly examining changes in the proportions of its 
various uses between 1400 and 1700. His data 
identifies an overall shift in the pattern of use 
that occurred mainly between 1475 and 1575. 
Our analysis identifies a similar shift in patterns 
between the time periods spanning 1350-1500 
and 1500-1570. Figure 1 depicts an overlay of 
both datasets. The relative scale of the two sets 
was set so that the proportions of ?do? uses at 
1400 and 1700 (the beginning and end of El-
leg?rd?s data, respectively) match the semantic 
density measured by our method at those times. 
Finally, our method can be used not only to 
test predictions based on established cases of 
semantic change, but also to identify new ones. 
For instance, in examining the contexts of the 
word ?science? we can identify that it underwent 
semantic broadening shortly after it first ap-
peared in the 14th century (t(77) = 4.51, p < .01). 
A subsequent examination of the contexts in 
which the word appears indicated that this is 
probably the result of a shift from a meaning re-
lated to generalized knowledge (e.g., ??and 
learn science of school?, John of Trevisa's Polyc-
hronicon, 1387) to one that can also be used to 
refer to more specific disciplines (e.g., ??of the 
seven liberal sciences?, Simon Forman?s Diary, 
1602). 
Our long term goal with respect to this type of 
analysis is to use this method in a computer-
based tool that can scan a diachronic corpus and 
automatically identify probable cases of semantic 
change within it. Researchers can then use these 
results to focus on identifying the specifics of 
such changes, as well as examine the overall pat-
terns of change that exist in the corpus. It is our 
belief that such a use will enable a more rigorous 
testing and refinement of existing theories of se-
mantic change. 
3.2 A Synchronic Investigation: Phonaes-
themes 
In addition to examining changes in meaning 
across time, it is also possible to employ our me-
thod to examine how the semantic space relates 
to other possible partitioning of the lexemes 
represented by it. For instance, while the rela-
tionship between the phonetic representation and 
semantic content is largely considered to be arbi-
trary, there are some notable exceptions. One 
interesting case is that of phonaesthemes (Firth, 
1930), sub-morphemic units that have a predict-
able effect on the meaning of the word as a 
whole. In English, one of the more frequently 
mentioned phonaesthemes is a word-initial gl- 
which is common in words related to the visual 
modality (e.g., ?glance?, ?gleam?). While there 
have been some scholastic explorations of these 
non-morphological relationships between sound 
and meaning, they have not been thoroughly ex-
plored by behavioral and computational research 
(with some notable exceptions; e.g. Hutchins, 
1998; Bergen, 2004). Recently, Otis and Sagi 
(2008) used the semantic density of the cluster of 
words sharing a phonaestheme as a measure of 
10
30
50
70
10
20
30
1200 1300 1400 1500 1600 1700
%
 o
f 
p
e
ri
p
h
ra
st
ic
 ?d
o
? u
se
s
(E
lle
g?
rd
, 1
9
5
3
)
M
e
an
 A
n
gl
e
 b
e
tw
e
e
n
 v
e
ct
o
rs
(c
u
rr
e
n
t 
st
u
d
y)
Year
Current Study Ellegard's data
Figure 1 ? A comparison of the rise of periphrastic 'do' as measured by semantic density in our study and 
the proportion of periphrastic 'do' uses by Elleg?rd (1953). 
 
108
the strength of the relationship between the pho-
netic cluster and its proposed meaning.  
Otis and Sagi used a corpus derived from 
Project Gutenberg (http://www.gutenberg.org/) 
as the basis for their analysis. Specifically, they 
used the bulk of the English language literary 
works available through the project?s website. 
This resulted in a corpus of 4034 separate docu-
ments consisting of over 290 million words.  
The bulk of the candidate phonaesthemes they 
tested were taken from the list used by Hutchins 
(1998), with the addition of two candidate pho-
naesthemes (kn- and -ign). Two letter combina-
tions that were considered unlikely to be pho-
naesthemes (br- and z-) were also included in 
order to test the method?s capacity for discrimi-
nating between phonaesthemes and non-
phonaesthemes. Overall Otis and Sagi (2008) 
examined 47 possible phonaesthemes. 
In cases where a phonetic cluster represents a 
phonaestheme, it intuitively follows that pairs of 
words sharing that phonetic cluster are more 
likely to share some aspect of their meaning than 
pairs of words chosen at random. Otis and Sagi 
tested whether this was true for any specific can-
didate phonaestheme using a Monte-Carlo analy-
sis. First they identified all of the words in the 
corpus sharing a conjectured phonaestheme7 and 
chose the most frequent representative word 
form for each stem, resulting in a cluster of word 
types representing each candidate phonaes-
theme.8 Next they tested the statistical signific-
ance of this relationship by running 100 t-test 
comparisons. Each of these tests compared the 
relationship of 50 pairs of words chosen at ran-
dom from the conjectured cluster with 50 pairs of 
words chosen at random from a similarly sized 
cluster, randomly generated from the entire cor-
pus. The number of times these t-tests resulted in 
a statistically significant difference (? = .05) was 
recorded. This analysis was repeated 3 times for 
each conjectured phonaestheme and the median 
value was used as the final result. 
To determine whether a conjectured phonaes-
theme was statistically supported by their analy-
sis Otis and Sagi compared the overall frequency 
                                                 
7 It is important to note that due to the nature of a written 
corpus, the match was orthographical rather than phonetic. 
However, in most cases the two are highly congruent. 
8 Because, in this case, Otis and Sagi were not interested in 
temporal changes in meaning, they used the overall word 
vectors rather than look at each context individually. As a 
result, each of the vectors used in the analysis is based on 
occurrences in many different documents and there was no 
need to control for the variability of the documents.  
of statistically significant t-tests with the binomi-
al distribution for their ? (.05). After applying a 
Bonferroni correction for performing 50 compar-
isons, the threshold for statistical significance of 
the binomial test was for 14 t-tests out of 100 to 
turn out as significant, with a frequency of 13 
being marginally significant. Therefore, if the 
significance frequency (#Sig below) of a candi-
date phonaestheme was 15 or higher, that pho-
naestheme was judged as being supported by 
statistical evidence. Significance frequencies of 
13 and 14 were considered as indicative of a 
phonaestheme for which there was only marginal 
statistical support. 
Among Hutchins? original list of 44 possible 
phonaesthemes, 26 were found to be statistically 
reliable and 2 were marginally reliable. Overall 
the results were in line with the empirical data 
collected by Hutchins. By way of comparing the 
two datasets, #Sig and Hutchins? average rating 
measure were well correlated (r = .53). Neither 
of the unlikely phonaestheme candidates we ex-
amined were statistically supported phonaes-
themes (#Sigbr- = 6; #Sigz- = 5), whereas both of 
our newly hypothesized phonaesthemes were 
statistically supported (#Sigkn- = 28; #Sig-ign = 
23). In addition to being able to use this measure 
as a decision criterion as to whether a specific 
phonetic cluster might be phonaesthemic, it can 
also be used to compare the relative strength of 
two such clusters. For instance, in the Gutenberg 
corpus the phonaesthemic ending ?owl (e.g., 
?growl?, ?howl?; #Sig=97) was comprised of a 
cluster of words that were more similar to one 
another than ?oop (e.g., ?hoop?, ?loop?; #Sig=32).  
Such results can then be used to test the cogni-
tive effects of phonaesthemes. For instance, fol-
lowing the comparison above, we might hypo-
thesize that the word ?growl? might be a better 
semantic prime for ?howl? than the word ?hoop? 
is for the word ?loop?. In contrast, because a 
word-initial br- is not phonaesthemic, the word 
?breeze? is unlikely to be a semantic prime for 
the word ?brick?. In addition, it might be interest-
ing to combine the diachronic analysis from the 
previous section with the synchronic analysis in 
this section to investigate questions such as when 
and how phonaesthemes come to be part of a 
language and what factors might affect the 
strength of a phonaestheme. 
4 Discussion 
While the method presented in this paper is 
aimed towards quantifying semantic relation-
109
ships that were previously difficult to quantify, it 
also raises an interesting theoretical issue, name-
ly the relationship between the statistically com-
puted semantic space and the actual semantic 
content of words. On the one hand, simulations 
based on Latent Semantic Analysis have been 
shown to correlate with cognitive factors such as 
the acquisition of vocabulary and the categoriza-
tion of texts (cf. Landauer & Dumais, 1997). On 
the other hand, in reality speakers? use of lan-
guage relies on more than simple patterns of 
word co-occurrence ? For instance, we use syn-
tactic structures and pragmatic reasoning to sup-
plement the meaning of the individual lexemes 
we come across (e.g., Fodor, 1995; Grice, 1989 
[1975]). It is therefore likely that while LSA cap-
tures some of the variability in meaning exhi-
bited by words in context, it does not capture all 
of it. Indeed, there is a growing body of methods 
that propose to integrate these two disparate 
sources of linguistic information (e.g., Pado and 
Lapata, 2007; Widdows, 2003) 
Certainly, the results reported in this paper 
suggest that enough of the meaning of words and 
contexts is captured to allow interesting infe-
rences about semantic change and the relatedness 
of words to be drawn with a reasonable degree of 
certainty. However, it is possible that some im-
portant aspects of meaning are systematically 
ignored by the analysis. For instance, it remains 
to be seen whether this method can distinguish 
between processes like pejoration and amerliora-
tion as they require a fine grained distinction be-
tween ?good? and ?bad? meanings. 
Regardless of any such limitations, it is clear 
that important information about meaning can be 
gathered through a systematic analysis of the 
contexts in which words appear. Furthermore, 
phenomena such as the existence of phonaes-
themes and the success of LSA in predicting vo-
cabulary acquisition rates, suggest that the acqui-
sition of new vocabulary involves the gleaning of 
the meaning of words through their context. The 
role of context in semantic change is therefore 
likely to be an active one ? when a listener en-
counters a word they are unfamiliar with they are 
likely to use the context in which it appears, as 
well as its phonetic composition, as clues to its 
meaning. Furthermore, if a word is likewise en-
countered in context in which it is unlikely, this 
unexpected observation may induce the listener 
to adjust their representation of both the context 
and the word in order to increase the overall co-
herence of the utterance or sentence. As a result, 
it is possible that examining the contexts in 
which a word is used in different documents and 
time periods might be useful not only as a tool 
for examining the history of a semantic change 
but also as an instrument for predicting its future 
progress. Overall, this suggests a dynamic view 
of the field of semantics ? semantics as an ever-
changing landscape of meaning. In such a view, 
semantic change is the norm as the perceived 
meaning of words keeps shifting to accommo-
date the contexts in which they are used. 
References  
Bergen, B. (2004). The Psychological Reality of 
Phonaesthemes.  Language, 80(2), 291-311. 
Berry, M. W. (1992) SVDPACK: A Fortran-77 
software library for the sparse singular value 
decomposition. Tech. Rep. CS-92-159, Knox-
ville, TN: University of Tennessee. 
Berry, M. W., Do, T., O?Brien, G. Vijay, K. Va-
radh an, S. (1993) SVDPACKC (Version 1.0) 
User?s Guide, Tech. Rep. UT-CS-93-194, 
Knoxville, TN: University of Tennessee. 
Bloomfield, L. (1933). Language. New York, 
NY: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.  
Campbell, L. (2004) Historical linguistics: An 
introduction 2nd ed. Cambridge, MA: The MIT 
Press.  
Deerwester, S., Dumais, S. T., Furnas, G. W., 
Landauer, T. K., and Harshman, R. (1990) In-
dexing by Latent Semantic Analysis. Journal 
of the American Society for Information 
Science, 41, 391-407. 
Elleg?rd, A. (1953) The Auxiliary Do: the Estab-
lishment and Regulation of its Use in English. 
Gothenburg Studies in English, 2. Stockholm: 
Almqvist and Wiksell. 
Firth, J. (1930) Speech. London: Oxford Univer-
sity Press. 
Firth, J. (1957) Papers in Linguistics, 1934-1951, 
Oxford University Press. 
Fodor, J. D. (1995) Comprehending sentence 
structure. In L. R. Gleitman and M. Liberman, 
(Eds.), Invitation to Cognitive Science, volume 
1. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 209-246. 
Forston, B. W. (2003) An Approach to Semantic 
Change. In B. D. Joseph and R. D. Janda 
(Eds.), The Handbook of Historical Linguis-
tics. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing. 648-
666. 
110
Grice, H. P. (1989) [1975]. Logic and Conversa-
tion. In Studies in the Way of Words. Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 22-40. 
Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (1976) Cohe-
sion in English. London: Longman. 
Hock, H. H., and Joseph, B. D. (1996) Language 
History, Language Change, and Language Re-
lationship: An Introduction to Historical and 
Comparative Linguistics. Berlin: Mouton de 
Gruyter. 
Hoey, M. (1991) Patterns of Lexis in Text. Lon-
don: Oxford University Press. 
Hutchins, S. S. (1998). The psychological reality, 
variability, and compositionality of English 
phonesthemes. Dissertation Abstracts Interna-
tional, 59(08), 4500B. (University Microfilms 
No. AAT 9901857). 
Infomap [Computer Software]. (2007). 
http://infomap-nlp.sourceforge.net/ Stanford, 
CA. 
Kaufmann, S. (2000) Second-order cohesion. 
Computational Intelligence. 16, 511-524. 
Landauer, T. K., & Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solu-
tion to Plato's problem: The Latent Semantic 
Analysis theory of the acquisition, induction, 
and representation of knowledge. Psychologi-
cal Review, 104, 211-240. 
Levin, E., Sharifi, M., & Ball, J. (2006) Evalua-
tion of utility of LSA for word sense discrimi-
nation. In Proceedings of the Human Lan-
guage Technology Conference of the NAACL, 
Companion Volume: Short Papers, New York 
City. 77-80.  
Marcu, D (2003) Automatic Abstracting, Encyc-
lopedia of Library and Information Science, 
Drake, M. A., ed. 245-256. 
Otis K., & Sagi E. (2008) Phonaesthemes: A 
Corpora-based Analysis. In B. C. Love, K. 
McRae, & V. M. Sloutsky (Eds.), Proceedings 
of the 30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive 
Science Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive 
Science Society. 
Pado, S. & Lapata, M. (2007) Dependency-based 
Construction of Semantic Space Models. 
Computational Linguistics, 33, 161-199. 
Riedel E., Dexter S. L., Scharber C., Doering A. 
(2006) Experimental Evidence on the Effec-
tiveness of Automated Essay Scoring in 
Teacher Education Cases. Journal of Educa-
tional Computing Research, 35, 267-287. 
Rissanen, M. (1994) The Helsinki Corpus of 
English Texts. In Kyt?, M., Rissanen, M. and 
Wright S. (eds), Corpora Across the Centu-
ries: Proceedings of the First International 
Colloquium on English Diachronic Corpora. 
Amsterdam: Rodopi. 
Sch?tze, H. (1996) Ambiguity in language learn-
ing: computational and cognitive models. CA: 
Stanford. 
Sch?tze, H. (1998) Automatic word sense dis-
crimination. Computational Linguistics 
24(1):97-124. 
Takayama, Y., Flournoy R., & Kaufmann, S. 
(1998) Information Mapping: Concept-Based 
Information Retrieval Based on Word 
Associations. CSLI Tech Report. CA: 
Stanford. 
Takayama, Y., Flournoy, R., Kaufmann, S. & 
Peters, S. (1999). Information retrieval based 
on domain-specific word associations. In Cer-
cone, N. and Naruedomkul K. (eds.), Proceed-
ings of the Pacific Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (PACLING?99), Waterloo, 
Canada. 155-161. 
Traugott, E. C. (1999) The Role of Pragmatics in 
Semantic Change. In J. Verschueren (ed.), 
Pragmatics in 1998:  Selected Papers from the 
6th International Pragmatics Conference, vol. 
II. Antwerp: International Pragmatics Associa-
tion. 93-102. 
Traugott, E. C. (2005) Semantic Change. In En-
cyclopedia of Language and Linguistics, 2nd 
ed., Brown K. ed. Oxford: Elsevier. 
Traugott, E. C., and Dasher R. B. (2002) Regu-
larity in Semantic Change. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press. 
Widdows, D. (2003) Unsupervised methods for 
developing taxonomies by combining syntactic 
and statistical information. In Proceedings of 
the joint Human Language Technology Confe-
rence and Annual Meeting of the North Ameri-
can Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics. Edmonton, Canada: 
Wiemer-Hastings. 197-204. 
Widdows, D. (2004) Geometry and Meaning. 
CSLI Publications, CA: Stanford. 
 
111
Proceedings of the First Workshop on Metaphor in NLP, pages 21?26,
Atlanta, Georgia, 13 June 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Relational words have high metaphoric potential  Anja Jamrozik Eyal Sagi Northwestern University Northwestern University Department of Psychology - 2029 Sheridan Road Kellogg School - 2001 Sheridan Road Evanston, IL 60208-2710, USA Evanston, IL 60208-2710, USA a.jamrozik@u.northwestern.edu eyal@u.northwestern.edu  Micah Goldwater Dedre Gentner Northwestern University Northwestern University Department of Psychology - 2029 Sheridan Road Department of Psychology - 2029 Sheridan Road Evanston, IL 60208-2710, USA Evanston, IL 60208-2710, USA micahbg@gmail.com gentner@northwestern.edu   Abstract What influences the likelihood that a word will be used metaphorically? We tested whether the likelihood of metaphorical use is related to the relationality of a word?s mean-ing. Relational words name relations between entities. We predicted that relational words, such as verbs (e.g., speak) and relational nouns (e.g., marriage) would be more likely to be used metaphorically than words that name entities (e.g., item). In two experiments, we collected expert ratings of metaphoricity for uses of verbs, relational nouns, and entity nouns collected from a corpus search. As pre-dicted, uses of relational words were rated as more metaphorical than uses of entity words. We discuss how these findings could inform NLP models of metaphor.  1 Introduction Our goal is to assess the metaphoric potential of words and word classes?by which we mean the likelihood that the word (or word class) will be used metaphorically. By metaphorical use, we mean the use of a word to convey ideas that are not part of its basic or standard meaning. We note that metaphoric potential does not equate to metaphoric salience. Many common metaphorical uses are not particularly salient. These include non-spatial, ab-stract uses of prepositions (e.g., in love, between assignments) and metaphorical uses of verbs (e.g., run for office, fall behind).  One could question whether it is useful to iden-tify the kind of metaphorical uses just mentioned. Shutova, Tuefel, & Korhonen (2012) point out that 
it may not be relevant to NLP applications to iden-tify highly conventionalized or ?dead? metaphori-cal uses, ones for which a metaphorical sense has become dominant and earlier literal senses have become obsolete. An example is the verb impress, which was originally used in printing contexts and meant ?to make a mark with pressure? but now is typically used to mean ?to produce admiration in someone?. While we agree that identifying such ?dead? metaphors may not be useful, we note that there are many conventional metaphors that also retain a healthy literal sense; and in these cases, identifying their metaphorical uses can be chal-lenging. An example is the word glow, which can be used literally (The lamp glows dimly) as well as metaphorically (Her face glows with joy). In our research, we will consider both conventional and novel extensions of a word?s meaning but will fo-cus more on conventional metaphorical uses. Many factors influence a word?s metaphoric po-tential?including its conventionality as a prior metaphoric source, its familiarity, and whether it belongs to a conceptual system whose other mem-bers are often used metaphorically1. We focus here on a relatively unexplored factor: namely, the rela-tionality of the word?s meaning. Relational words are words that take more than one argument. These include verbs (KNOW(Sue, Ida)), prepositions (ON(fence, hill)), and relational                                                  1 For example, one might be able to say ?Let me slide this to him? meaning ?Let me communicate this to him in a smooth manner),? because the ?conduit? metaphoric system (Reddy, 1979; Lakoff & Johnson, 1980) includes other instances of caused-physical-motion verbs used to convey communication of ideas (e.g., ?Is this message getting across to you??). 
21
nouns2 (FRIEND OF(John, George). Relational nouns (e.g., guest, host, party). which name rela-tions or systems of relations, can be contrasted with entity nouns (e.g., zebra, thing), which name entities defined by their intrinsic properties (see Gentner & Kurtz, 2005; Goldwater Markman & Stilwell, 2011, and Markman & Stilwell, 2001). Goldwater and Willits (2010) explored ways to distinguish relational from entity nouns based on their distributional patterns. All of the nouns from the Goldwater et al (2011), Gentner & Kurtz (2005) and Gentner & Asmuth (2008) studies were normed for their relationality by na?ve participants, who rated to what degree each word expressed re-lational or entity meanings. Goldwater and Willits analyzed the distributions of the top 50 highest rated relational nouns and top 25 entity nouns on a 10,000 word corpus from Wikipedia.com. The two kinds of nouns were found to have distinct dis-tributional patterns. For relational nouns, the most frequent immediate following word is a preposition connecting the noun to another term (as in ?propor-tion of X? or ?barrier to X?)3. In contrast, the most frequent immediate follower for entity nouns is and4. These distributional patterns can be used to predict noun type. Given two words, their distribu-tional similarity can predict whether they are of the same noun type or different noun type with close to 90% accuracy. Although further study is needed of how well these results extend to a larger sample of nouns, we believe this is a promising direction.  Our hypothesis that metaphorical potential is re-lated to relationality is supported by evidence that relational words are more mutable than entity words?that is, the meanings of relational words adjust more to fit their contexts than do the mean-ings of entity nouns (Gentner, 1981). Psycholin-guistic studies of sentence interpretation have found this pattern both across word classes (nouns vs. verbs) and within the noun class (entity nouns vs. relational nouns). For example, when partici-                                                 2 A common test for relational nouns involves the use of geni-tive of (Barker and Dowty, 1993).  For example, friend is a relational noun, and "friend of John" and "John's friend" are both grammatical and interchangeable.  The of form is not grammatical for non-relational nouns (e.g., John?s truck, *truck of John) (Barker, 1995). 3 Goldwater and Willits found that relational nouns were most frequently followed by of, but distributional approaches could be extended to other common role-bearing terms.  
pants were asked to paraphrase semantically strained sentences in which the noun did not meet the argument specification of the verb (e.g., The car laughed), their paraphrases were far more likely to preserve the meanings of the nouns than of the verbs (Gentner & France, 1988) (e.g., ?The automobile sputtered and refused to start?). Further evidence comes from studies testing recognition memory of nouns and verbs (Kersten & Earles, 2004). Verbs were recognized better if found in the same context as at encoding, but nouns were rec-ognized equally well whether in the same context or in a new context. Kersten and Earles suggested that this difference stemmed from the greater mu-tability of verbs (Gentner, 1981). Because the meanings of verbs adjust more to their contexts than do the meanings of nouns, a verb may be in-terpreted as having very different meanings at en-coding and at test. This made it difficult for participants to recognize that the same word was used in both cases.  There is also evidence that relational nouns have greater mutability than entity nouns. Using a simi-lar paradigm to the one used by Kersten and Earles (2004), Asmuth and Gentner (2005) gave partici-pants conceptual combinations consisting of one relational noun and one entity noun (e.g., a truck limitation, a barrier peanut) and later tested their recognition memory for the individual nouns, which were either presented in the old context (the same context as at encoding) or in a new context. Overall, recognition of entity nouns was better than recognition of relational nouns. Additionally, rec-ognition for relational nouns was more impaired by a shift to a new context than was recognition of entity nouns. This is consistent with the mutability claim that relational nouns are encoded in a con-text-dependent manner.  To summarize, the evidence that relational words are more mutable than entity words suggest that they should have greater metaphoric potential. If a word?s meaning readily adjusts to its context, this can result in metaphoric extensions that go beyond the word?s basic or standard meaning. Since relational words are more mutable than en-tity words, they should be more likely to be ex-tended in this way.  We test this prediction both across and within word classes. Comparing across word classes, we predict that verbs will have greater metaphoric po-tential than nouns. Comparing within word class, 
22
we predict that relational nouns will have greater metaphoric potential than entity nouns. There is already evidence for the predicted dif-ference between word classes: metaphorical uses of verbs have been found to be more common than metaphorical uses of nouns in poetry (Brooke-Rose, 1958), in classroom discourse (e.g., Cam-eron, 2003), and across various spoken and written genres (e.g., Shutova & Teufel, 2010; Steen, Dorst, Herrmann, Kaal, Krennmayr, & Pasma, 2010).  In the studies that follow, we tested our predic-tions using data collected from a corpus search. We randomly sampled uses of verbs, relational nouns, and entity nouns and collected novelty and metaphoricity ratings for each of these uses. We were particularly interested in the pattern among conventional metaphorical uses, which are the most challenging to identify with NLP methods. 2 Experiment 1 2.1 Materials The materials consisted of 20 uses each of nine entity nouns, eighteen relational nouns5, and nine verbs.  The entity and relational nouns were se-lected based on data from a previous rating task (the same as provided Goldwater and Willits with their sample). The entity nouns we selected were rated as conveying an entity meaning to a higher degree than the relational nouns, and vice versa, all ps < .001. The nine verbs were selected to match the frequencies of the nouns, using data from the Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA) (Davies, 2008-). There were no differ-ences in the frequencies of the word types, F(3, 32) = .857, p = .474. We collected a random sample of 20 uses of each of the 36 words from COCA, with an equal number from the spoken, fiction, magazine, news, and academic registers. We used the following cri-teria to determine whether a word use would be included in the sample. First, the word had to be used as a noun or verb, depending on its prese-lected word type6 (e.g., for the verb talk, we only                                                  5 There were two different kinds of relational nouns (schema nouns, which refer to relational systems, e.g., party, and role nouns, which refer to roles within such systems, e.g., guest), but we do not distinguish them in the analyses that follow. 6 We reserve the use of the term word class for accepted syn-tactic distinctions (e.g., nouns vs. verbs) and use the term 
collected uses in which talk was used as a verb). Second, the word had to be used in a full sentence or phrase, so as to give sufficient context to deter-mine how metaphorical the use was. Third, the sentence had to be a statement, not a question. Fi-nally, the word could only appear once in the sen-tence. 2.2 Rating Task The three raters were Ph.D. students of English or Comparative Literature. They were chosen be-cause they had extensive experience identifying figurative language and would be able to identify metaphors that may not have been particularly sa-lient to average readers.  The raters were given sets of sentences with the key terms bolded and underlined: e.g.,  The human mind, the only device capable of traveling through time, tends to want to stay in its own time.  A smartphone or other technological device used dur-ing worship also can be a distraction.  They were instructed to rate the metaphoricity and the novelty of the indicated words, on two separate scales from 1 (not at all novel /metaphorical) to 6 (very novel/metaphorical). The separate ratings were used to ensure that raters were not conflating novelty and metaphoricity. For each item, we calculated the average of the indi-vidual novelty and metaphoricity scores assigned by the raters. 2.3 Results As predicted, we found that the metaphor ratings differed across word types. We conducted an ANOVA with the average metaphor ratings for each use as the dependent variable. The type of word rated (Entity Noun, Relational Noun, or Verb) was the independent variable and the spe-cific word was a random effect. This resulted in a marginally significant effect of word type, F(2, 684) = 3.22, p = .053. Post-hoc Tukey HSD tests revealed that uses of verbs (M = 1.77, SD = 0.76) and relational nouns (M = 1.75, SD = 0.91) were rated as more metaphorical than uses of entity nouns (M = 1.27, SD = 0.61), ps < .001.  The difference between word types was also                                                                              word type to differentiate the kinds of words compared in these experiments. 
23
marginal when analyzing only conventional uses (i.e., those rated ?1? for novelty), F(2, 437) = 2.80, p = .075. Uses of verbs (M = 1.36, SD = 0.33) and relational nouns (M = 1.27, SD = 0.41) were rated as more metaphorical than uses of entity nouns (M = 1.16, SD = 0.29), ps < .01. No differences in metaphoricity were observed between word types for novel uses (i.e., those rated higher than ?1? for novelty), F(2, 213) = 1.49, p = 0.24.  While these results are only marginally signifi-cant, they provide encouragement that relationality might influence the metaphoric potential of a word.  2.4 Concreteness, imageability and meta-phoric potential One concern regarding Experiment 1 is that we did not control for concreteness or imeageability of the words. Previous research is conflicted about what effects concreteness and imageability should have on a word?s metaphorical potential. On the one hand, it has been argued that greater concreteness (e.g., Katz, 1989) and imageability (e.g., Goatly, 2011) should result in greater metaphoricity. How-ever, previous work by Gentner and Asmuth (2008) has shown that relational words, which we found to have greater metaphorical potential, tend to be less concrete and imageable than entity words. In accordance with these findings, we found that concreteness and imageability of the words (using data from MRC Psycholinguistic Da-tabase - Coltheart, 1981) varied across word types (concreteness: F(2, 26) = 27.36, p < .001; image-ability: F(2, 26) = 15.71, p < .001). Entity nouns were more concrete and imageable than relational nouns and verbs, all ps < .001.  The entity nouns were more concrete and im-ageable than the relational words, but their uses were less metaphorical. Thus in our sample, the relationship between concreteness, imageability, and metaphoricity was the opposite of that pre-dicted by Katz (1989) and Goatly (2011)7: more concrete words were rated as less metaphorical, r(27) = -.43, p = .021. (The relationship between imageability and metaphoricity was not significant (r(27) = -.30, p = .117)). Because of these findings, in the next experiment we controlled for concrete-ness and imageability across word classes.                                                  7 It is possible that Katz?s and Goatly?s predictions drew on different contexts of use from those in our corpus.  
3 Experiment 2 3.1 Materials The materials consisted of 20 uses each of eight entity nouns, sixteen relational nouns, and eight verbs. The words were selected in the same man-ner as those in Experiment 1, except that in addi-tion to controlling for frequency across word types, we also controlled for concreteness and imageabil-ity. In the resulting sets, there were no differences in the concreteness of the word types (Coltheart, 1981), F(2, 29) = .745, p = .484, in the imageabil-ity of the word types (Coltheart, 1981), F(2, 29) = .043, p = .958, nor in the frequencies of the word types (using frequency data from COCA), F(2, 29) = .144, p = .867.  3.2 Rating task  The raters were three Ph.D. students of English or Comparative Literature who had not participated in the first experiment. The raters received the same instructions and followed the same procedure as in the first experiment. 3.3 Results  Overall, as predicted, we found that uses of rela-tional words were rated as more metaphorical than uses of entity words. An ANOVA like that used in Experiment 1 showed that the average metaphor ratings differed across word types, F(2, 608) = 3.77, p < .05. Uses of verbs (M = 2.35, SD = 1.69) were rated as more metaphorical than uses of entity nouns (M = 1.47, SD = 1.08) and relational nouns (M = 1.67, SD = 1.21), ps < .001.  However (in contrast to the first study) relational nouns were not significantly more metaphorical overall than entity nouns (p = .17).  The pattern was stronger when we looked only within conventional uses8 (i.e., those rated ?1? for novelty), F(2, 513) = 4.22, p < .05. Conventional uses of verbs were rated as more metaphorical (M = 2.19, SD = 1.59) than uses of entity nouns (M = 1.16, SD = 0.56) and relational nouns (M = 1.42, SD = 0.96), all ps < .001. Uses of relational nouns were also rated as more metaphorical than uses of entity nouns, p < .05. As in the first study, there were no differences                                                  8 Conventional uses made up 85% (545/640) of the sample. 
24
between word types for the novel uses (i.e., those rated higher than ?1? for novelty), F(2, 70) = 1.22, p = 0.31. 4 Discussion The results of two experiments provide support for the hypothesis that relational words have greater metaphoric potential than entity words. In the first experiment, verbs and relational nouns were rated as marginally more metaphorical than entity nouns. In the second experiment, in which concreteness and imageability were equated across the word types, verbs were rated more metaphorical than nouns.  Within conventional uses, verbs were rated as more metaphorical than nouns, and relational nouns were rated more metaphorical than entity nouns.  4.1 Relationality and language change These findings accord with our prediction that rela-tional words have greater metaphorical potential than entity words, and that this pattern is stronger for conventional uses. Why is this the case? We conjecture that there may be two paths at work here. First, metaphor conventionalization may re-sult in words acquiring relational senses. Accord-ing to the Career of Metaphor hypothesis (Bowdle & Gentner, 1999, 2005; Gentner, Bowdle, Wolff, & Boronat, 2001; Gentner & Wolff, 1997) when a word is used in a novel metaphoric way, the use is processed by aligning the literal target and base of the metaphor in order to abstract their common structure. If the base term is repeatedly paired with other similar target terms, the structure abstracted through alignment may become another conven-tional meaning of the base term. Providing some initial support for this idea, Zharikov and Gentner (2002) traced the meanings of current relational words (e.g., bridge), and found that their relational meanings had evolved from earlier concrete, entity meanings.  This idea also fits with accounts that argue that metaphoric use is one of the mecha-nisms precipitating semantic shifts in meaning (e.g., Traugott, 2004). A second conjecture is that because relational words often identify deep relations among their arguments, uses of relational words across domains should result in more apt and relevant metaphors, which may therefore be more readily accepted.  
This means that metaphorical uses of relational words may be more likely to become conventional-ized than metaphorical uses of entity words. 4.2 Applications to NLP The metaphoric uses we found in our experiments were in general not high-salient, striking figures of speech. Moreover, these metaphoric uses co-existed with literal uses of the same word (conven-tional non-metaphoric language was still the most common form). It is these unstriking, conventional metaphorical uses that pose a challenge for NLP (Shutova, Tuefel, & Korhonen, 2012). How can NLP models of metaphor utilize our results? One possibility is to use differences in metaphoric potential among word types to inform searches for metaphoric language in corpora. Such an application would naturally also require a method for identifying relational words. Of course, since verbs appear to have a higher metaphoric potential than nouns, just using grammatical cate-gory information that is already available can make a substantial gain. Moreover, the distributional findings discussed earlier offer a potential way to distinguish relational from entity nouns (Goldwater & Willits, 2010). Assuming their results general-ize, it might be feasible to distinguish relational nouns from entity nouns using distributional in-formation. In sum, we believe that taking into account the relationality of words has the potential to improve NLP models of metaphor. We look forward to the research that would come from uniting this psy-chological research with current research in NLP. Acknowledgments The research described here was conducted in the Spatial Intelligence and Learning Center (SILC), a center funded by NSF grant SBE-0541957. We thank the six raters who participated in our rating tasks and the Cognition and Language Lab. 
25
References   Asmuth, J. & Gentner, D. (2005). Context sensitivity of relational nouns. Proceedings of the Twenty-seventh Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 163-168. Barker, C. (1995). Possessive Descriptions. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications. Barker, C., & Dowty, D. (1993). Non-verbal thematic proto-roles. Proceedings of the North East Linguistic Society 23, 49-62.  Brooke-Rose, C. (1958). A grammar of metaphor. Lon-don: Seeker & Warburg.  Bowdle, B., & Gentner, D. (1999). Metaphor compre-hension: From comparison to categorization. Pro-ceedings of the Twenty-First Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 90-95. Bowdle, B., & Gentner, D. (2005). The career of meta-phor. Psychological Review, 112(1), 193-216. Cameron, L. (2003). Metaphor in educational dis-course. New York: Continuum. Coltheart, M. (1981). The MRC Psycholinguistic Data-base. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 33A, 497-505. Davies, M. (2008-) The Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA): 425 million words, 1990-present. Available online at http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/. Gentner, D. (1981). Some interesting differences be-tween nouns and verbs. Cognition and Brain Theory, 4, 161-178. Gentner, D., & Asmuth, J. (2008). Can relationality be distinguished from abstractness in noun mutability? Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 863-868. Gentner, D., Bowdle, B., Wolff, P., & Boronat, C. (2001). Metaphor is like analogy. In D. Gentner, K. J. Holyoak, & B. N. Kokinov (Eds.), The analogical mind: Perspectives from cognitive science (pp. 199-253). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Gentner, D., & France, I. M. (1988). The verb mutabil-ity effect: Studies of the combinatorial semantics of nouns and verbs. In S. L. Small, G. W. Cottrell, & M. K. Tanenhaus (Eds.), Lexical ambiguity resolution: Perspectives from psycholinguistics, neuropsychol-ogy, and artificial intelligence (pp. 343-382). San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann. Gentner, D., & Kurtz, K. (2005). Relational categories. In W. K. Ahn, R. L. Goldstone, B. C. Love, A. B. Markman & P. W. Wolff (Eds.), Categorization in-side and outside the lab. (pp. 151-175). Washington, DC: APA. Gentner, D., & Wolff, P. (1997). Alignment in the proc-essing of metaphor. Journal of Memory and Lan-guage, 37, 331-355. 
Goatly, A. (2011). The language of metaphors (2nd ed.). London: Routledge. Goldwater, M. B., Markman, A. B, Stilwell, C. H. (2011). The empirical case for role-governed catego-ries. Cognition, 118, 359-376. Goldwater, M. B., & Willits, J. (2010). The Linguistic Distribution of Relational Categories. Poster pre-sented at the 32nd annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society, Portland, Oregon. Kersten, A.W., & Earles, J.L. (2004). Semantic context influences memory for verbs more than memory for nouns. Memory & Cognition, 32, 198-211. Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press. Markman, A. B., & Stilwell, C. H. (2001). Role-governed categories. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Intelligence, 13, 329-358. Reddy, M. J. (1979). The conduit metaphor: A case of frame conflict in our language about language. In A. Ortony (Ed.), Metaphor and thought, 1st ed. (pp. 284-324). Cambridge, England: Cambridge Univer-sity Press. Shutova, E., & Teufel, S. (2010). Metaphor corpus an-notated for source-target domain mappings. Proceed-ings of LREC 2010, 3255-3261. Shutova, E., Teufel, S. & Korhonen, A. (2012). Statisti-cal metaphor processing. Computational Linguistics, 39(2), 1-53.  Steen, G.J., Dorst, A.G., Herrmann, J.B., Kaal, A.A., Krennmayr, T., & Pasma, T. (2010). A method for linguistic metaphor identification: From MIP to MIPVU. Philadelphia: John Benjamins. Traugott, E. C. (2004). Semantic Change. In K. Brown (Ed.) Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics (2nd ed.). Oxford: Elsevier.  Zharikov, S., & Gentner, D. (2002). Why do metaphors seem deeper than similes? Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 976-981.  
26
