Proceedings of the 2009 Workshop on Language Generation and Summarisation, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 72?76,
Suntec, Singapore, 6 August 2009.
c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Creating an Annotated Corpus for Generating Walking Directions
Stephanie Schuldes
?
Michael Roth
?
?EML Research gGmbH
Heidelberg, Germany
http://www.eml-research.de/nlp
Anette Frank
?
Michael Strube
?
?Department of Computational Linguistics
University of Heidelberg, Germany
http://www.cl.uni-heidelberg.de
Abstract
This work describes first steps towards
building a system that synchronously gen-
erates multimodal (textual and visual)
route directions for pedestrians. We pur-
sue a corpus-based approach for building a
generation model that produces natural in-
structions in multiple languages. We con-
ducted an empirical study to collect ver-
bal route directions, and annotated the ac-
quired texts on different levels. Here we
describe the experimental setting and an
analysis of the collected data.
1 Introduction
Route directions guide a person unfamiliar with
the environment to their designated goal. We plan
to generate route instructions that are similar to
those given by humans by referring to landmarks
and by structuring the route in a way that it is easy
to memorize (Denis, 1997).
We develop a system for synchronously gen-
erating natural language route directions and 3D
scenes of a route. The core of the architecture
is a unified representation providing information
for both verbal and graphical output. The direct
correspondence between linguistic references and
shown objects facilitates the identification of the
visual scene in the real world and the choice of the
correct action while following the route. To cre-
ate a reusable system that is adaptable to different
navigational domains and languages, we use ma-
chine learning techniques to build a statistical gen-
eration model from annotated corpora. We report
on an empirical study to collect human-produced
walking directions to be used for statistical gener-
ation from underlying semantic structures. While
our scenario is ultimately multilingual, here we
give an analysis of the German dataset.
2 Related Work
The task of analyzing and generating cognitively
adequate route instructions has been addressed by
a number of authors (Taylor & Tversky, 1996;
Tappe, 2000; Habel, 2003; Richter, 2008; Vi-
ethen & Dale, 2008; Kelleher & Costello, 2009).
Marciniak & Strube (2005) showed that a system
for generating route directions can be successfully
trained on a small set of 75 route direction texts
(8418 tokens). In their approach directions are
represented in a graph, which encodes informa-
tion on various conceptual levels. While their ap-
proach is restricted to reproducing directions for
the learned graphs, we will generate directions for
a wide range of possible routes. Dale et al (2005)
developed a system that takes GIS data as input
and uses a pipeline architecture to generate verbal
route directions. In contrast to their approach, our
approach will be based on an integrated architec-
ture allowing for more interaction between the dif-
ferent stages of generation. The idea of combining
verbal directions with scenes from a virtual 3D en-
vironment has recently lead to a new framework
for evaluating NLG systems: The Challenge on
Generating Instructions in Virtual Environments
(GIVE) (Byron et al, 2009) is planned to become
a regular event for the NLG community.
3 Corpus Acquisition
For collecting naturally produced route instruc-
tions, we conducted a study with 29 native speak-
ers of German (66% female and 33% male). The
participants in our study were students from var-
ious fields aged between 20 and 34 years. We
designed two different settings: one on-site set-
ting, in which participants walked around in a real
world situation (specifically our university cam-
pus), and one desk-based setting, in which they
interacted with a web application. The former
was further divided into indoor and outdoor routes,
72
32
1
7
6
4
5
Figure 1: Example route from the indoor setting
(first task), leading from a room with photocopiers
(1) across an open space and downstairs (3) to a
students? union room (6), passing an information
board (4) and a coffee machine (5). A lecture room
(2) and a glass wall (7) are visible from the route.
while the latter was restricted to an outdoor sce-
nario. This design enables us to study possible
differences and commonalities between linguistic
realizations obtained for different environments as
well as different presentation modes.
For both scenarios, the task was to give written
directions to a person unfamiliar with the area as
to how to get to the destination the participants just
reached, taking the same route. First, participants
were led along a route to a given destination point
(on-site). Each participant was asked to give di-
rections for two routes inside buildings of the uni-
versity campus (e.g. from an office to a seminar
room, cf. Figure 1), and one outside route (e.g.
from the building entrance to a bus stop).
Second, participants were shown a web appli-
cation that guided them along a route by means of
a 2D animation (desk-based). Subjects were al-
lowed to use all information displayed by the web
application: named places, buildings, street and
bridge names, etc. (cf. Figure 2).
Setting GM CI CO Total
physical routes 9 6 3 18
directions 59 58 28 145
tokens 5353 4119 2674 12146
tokens/dir. (?) 91 71 96
Table 1: Number of routes, directions, and tokens
for the different settings. GM = Google Maps, CI
= Campus Indoor, CO = Campus Outdoor.
4 Corpus Annotation
The acquired texts were processed in several steps.
To ensure that all route directions consist of syn-
tactically and semantically correct sentences, we
Figure 2: Web application used in the second task.
Landmarks were introduced successively via pop-
ups as the animated walker encountered them.
manually corrected spelling mistakes, omissions
resulting in grammatical errors, and removed el-
liptical and unclear directions.
The preprocessed texts were annotated on the
following three levels:
pos lemma ? part-of-speech and lemma
syn dep ? dependency relations
sem frame ? frames and semantic roles
For the pos lemma and syn dep levels, we used
TreeTagger (Schmid, 1997) and XLE (Maxwell
& Kaplan, 1993). The corpus was parsed
with the German ParGram LFG grammar (Forst,
2007). The outputs were corrected manually
by two annotators. On the sem frame level an-
notation was carried out using the annotation
tool SALTO (Burchardt et al, 2006) and fol-
lowing the definiton of the FrameNet frames
SELF MOTION, PERCEPTION, BEING LOCATED
and LOCATIVE RELATION (Baker et al, 1998). In
terms of accuracy for unlabeled/labeled relations,
the annotation agreement was 78.88%/65.17% on
the syn dep level and 79.27%/68.39% for frames
and semantic roles.
5 Data Analysis
5.1 Corpus Statistics
We examined word frequencies with respect to the
experimental settings in order to determine simi-
larities and dissimilarities in lexical choice. Table
2 shows the three most frequent verbs and nouns
found in each corpus part.
The data reveals that the most frequent verbs are
typical among all settings. However, we found a
number of lower-frequency verbs that are rather
73
Top verbs (Campus) GM CI CO
gehen ?to walk? 11% 18% 14%
sein ?to be? 3.9% 8.2% 6.6%
stehen ?to stand? 0.0% 6.3% 5.3%
Top verbs (GM) GM CI CO
folgen ?to follow? 12% 2.9% 2.6%
gehen ?to walk? 11% 18% 14%
abbiegen ?to turn into? 9.0% 3.8% 8.9%
Top nouns (Campus) GM CI CO
T?ur ?door? 0.0% 12% 0.9%
Treppe ?stairs? 0.0% 8.3% 0.0%
Gang ?hallway? 0.0% 6.6% 0.0%
Top nouns (GM) GM CI CO
...stra?e ?. . . Street? 28% 0.0% 2.2%
Richtung ?direction? 3.5% 2.8% 2.6%
...platz ?. . . Square? 3.4% 0.0% 6.1%
Table 2: Relative frequency of the three most com-
mon verbs and nouns in both studies
scenario-specific. In many cases, the occurrence
or absence of a verb can be attributed to a verb?s
selectional restrictions. For example, some of
the verbs describing movements along streets (e.g.
folgen ?to follow?, abbiegen ?to turn into?) do not
occur within the indoor corpus whereas verbs de-
scribing ?3D movements? (e.g. durchqueren ?to
walk through?, hinuntergehen ?to walk down?) are
not mentioned with the Google Maps setting.
The most frequent nouns significantly differ be-
tween the indoor and outdoor settings. This corre-
lation does not come as a surprise, as most of the
mentioned objects cannot be found in all scenar-
ios. On the other hand, nouns that are common
to both indoor and outdoor scenarios can be di-
vided into two categories: Nouns denoting (1) ob-
jects that appear in both scenarios (e.g. Geb?aude
?building?) and (2) abstract concepts typical for
route directions in general, e.g. Richtung ?direc-
tion?, Nummer ?number?, Ziel ?goal?, and Start-
punkt ?starting point?.
5.2 Landmark Alignment
Landmark alignment serves the purpose of de-
tecting objects that are most frequently men-
tioned across directions, and how the same ob-
ject is referred to differently. We created a graph-
based representation of the landmarks mentioned
in each route instruction (single route representa-
tion, SRR) for use in two types of alignment. Fig-
ure 3 shows an example from the indoor study.
First, we created a combined graph for each phys-
ical route by merging the respective SRRs, taking
into account several criteria:
String matching of landmark names;
Semantic similarity using GermaNet (Lemnitzer
& Kunze, 2002), a lexical-semantic network
for German similar to WordNet;
Frequency of references across all directions;
Spatio-temporal proximity of references to the
same object;
Number of landmarks mentioned in a single di-
rection (i.e. length of the SRR).
The combined graphs show that there are strong
correspondences between the directions for the
same route. We also found that, in the campus
settings, there was a small number of frequently
used general objects and a large number of less
frequently used specific objects. This facilitates
merging and shows the importance of the objects
for people?s orientation, and at the same time sup-
ports our claim that other modalities are needed
to disambiguate references during navigation. For
generating informative referential expressions, the
combined graph needs to be refined so that object
properties are represented (Krahmer et al, 2003).
Second, we aligned the SRRs with the physical
route graph. Comparing the landmarks mentioned
in the campus settings revealed that, in 97.8% of
the cases, people adhere to the sequence in which
objects are encountered. Reversed order was only
found in special cases like distant objects.
5.3 Discourse Phenomena
We analyzed the use of anaphora, the temporal or-
der of instructions, and occurrences of prototypi-
cal event chains in the collected texts in order to
identify coherence-inducing elements.
Spatio-temporal adverbials: Most anaphors
mention intermediate goals on the route in order
to refer to the starting point of a new action (e.g.
da/hier ?here?, dort ?there?). This finding goes
hand in hand with the observation that the col-
lected route directions are typically structured in
a linear temporal order (cf. Table 3) as for ex-
ample indicated by the use of adverbs indicat-
ing temporal succession (e.g. jetzt ?now?, dann
?then? and danach ?afterwards?) and conjunctions
(e.g. bis ?until?, wenn ?when?). Interestingly, a re-
versed order can be found in a few cases, where
74
R?cken Raum Kopierer Treppe Treppe Brett Getr?nkeautomat
Treppe
H?rsaal
Treppe Kaffeeautomat T?r Fachschaft
Kopierer Treppe
H?rsaal
Brett S?ule
Glast?r
Getr?nkeautomat T?r
Fachschafts-
raum
Druckerraum Theoretikum 180-Grad-Kurve Fachschaftstafel
Glaswand Glaswand
Kopf
Medizin-
Fachschaft
Kopierzentrum R?cken Treppe Treppe Richtung
Glasfenster Glasfront
Eingang Fachschaft
3
2
1
7
64 5
Figure 3: Each line shows one SRR for the route in Figure 1. Correspondences are indicated by identical
node shapes, black dots substitute non-matched tokens. The bottom graph shows the physical route seen
as sequence of landmarks. Node size reflects the importance of the referred object as conveyed by SRRs.
Adverbs >
t
GM CI CO
dann ?then? 55 43 30
jetzt ?now? 4 7 5
danach ?afterwards? 12 5 3
Adverbs <
t
GM CI CO
vorher ?beforehand? 0 1 0
davor ?before? 1 0 2
Table 3: Frequencies of temporal adverbs indicat-
ing linear (>
t
) and reversed linear order (<
t
)
the following action or situation is not supposed
to take place (e.g. Gehen Sie vorher rechts ?be-
forehand turn right?).
Backward-looking event anaphors and refer-
ences to result states: We also found explicit
references to past events (e.g. Nach dem Durch-
queren ?after traversing?) and result states of
events, e.g. the adverbial phrase unten angekom-
men (here: ?downstairs?) was frequently used fol-
lowing an instruction to ?walk downstairs?.
6 Conclusions and Future Work
The lexical corpus analysis confirms our hypoth-
esis that there are strong commonalities in lexi-
cal choice for directions that persist across sce-
narios and presentation modes, with a small num-
ber of focused differences, and obvious domain-
dependent lexical differences regarding the nature
of objects in the respective scenarios. While our
current corpus data is rather broad, environment-
specific data can be extended quickly by setting up
web studies using 2D and 3D environments.
The alignment of the physical routes and ver-
bal instructions shows a clear tendency that linear
route structure is observed in verbal realization,
with only few exceptions. Since temporal order
is observed by default, temporal annotation can be
restricted to capture exceptional orderings, which
are recoverable from linguistic cues. The study of
discourse coherence effects yielded a number of
elements that will be given special attention in the
surface generation model. We observed a variety
of coherence-inducing elements that are generic
in nature and thus seem well-suited for a corpus-
based generation model. As other languages are
known to exhibit differences in verbal realization
of directions (von Stutterheim et al, 2002), we
have to extend our data collection in order to gen-
erate systematic linguistic variations from a single
underlying semantic structure for all languages.
The linguistic annotation levels of frames and
roles, syntactic dependencies, and basic word cat-
egories have been tested successfully with a sim-
ilar corpus (Roth & Frank, 2009). The next steps
will consist in the alignment of physical routes and
landmarks with semantic representations in an in-
tegrated generation architecture.
Acknowledgements: This work is supported by
the DFG-financed innovation fund FRONTIER as
part of the Excellence Initiative at Heidelberg Uni-
versity (ZUK 49/1) and partially funded by the
Klaus Tschira Foundation, Heidelberg, Germany.
We thank the participants in our study, our anno-
tators Tim Krones and Anna Schmidt, and student
assistants Jonathan Geiger and Carina Silberer.
75
References
Baker, Collin F., Charles J. Fillmore & John B. Lowe (1998).
The Berkeley FrameNet Project. In Proceedings of the
17th International Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics and 36th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, Montr?eal, Qu?ebec, Canada, 10?14
August 1998, pp. 86?90.
Burchardt, Aljoscha, Katrin Erk, Anette Frank, Andrea
Kowalski & Sebastian Pado (2006). SALTO: A versatile
multi-level annotation tool. In Proceedings of the 5th In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation, Genoa, Italy, 22?28 May 2006, pp. 517?520.
Byron, Donna, Alexander Koller, Kristina Striegnitz, Justine
Cassell, Robert Dale, Johanna Moore & Jon Oberlander
(2009). Report on the First NLG Challenge on Generating
Instructions in Virtual Environments (GIVE). In Proceed-
ings of the 12th European Workshop on Natural Language
Generation (ENLG 2009), Athens, Greece, 30-31 March
2009, pp. 165?173.
Dale, Robert, Sabine Geldof & Jean-Philippe Prost (2005).
Using natural language generation in automatic route de-
scription. Journal of Research and Practice in Information
Technology, 37(1):89?106.
Denis, Michel (1997). The description of routes: A cognitive
approach to the production of spatial discourse. Current
Psychology of Cognition, 16:409?458.
Forst, Martin (2007). Filling statistics with linguistics ?
Property design for the disambiguation of German LFG
parses. In Proceedings of the ACL 2007 Workshop on
Deep Linguistic Processing, Prague, Czech Republic, 28
June 2007, pp. 17?24.
Habel, Christopher (2003). Incremental generation of mul-
timodal route instructions. In Reva Freedman & Charles
Callaway (Eds.), Working Papers of the 2003 AAAI Spring
Symposium on Natural Language Generation in Spoken
and Written Dialogue, pp. 44?51. Menlo Park, California:
AAAI Press.
Kelleher, John D. & Fintan J. Costello (2009). Applying com-
putational models of spatial prepositions to visually situ-
ated dialog. Computational Linguistics, 35(2):271?306.
Krahmer, Emiel, Sebastiaan van Erk & Andr?e Verleg (2003).
Graph-based generation of referring expressions. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 29(1):53?72.
Lemnitzer, Lothar & Claudia Kunze (2002). GermaNet ? rep-
resentation, visualization, application. In Proceedings of
the 3rd International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation, Las Palmas, Canary Islands, Spain, 29?31
May 2002, pp. 1485?1491.
Marciniak, Tomacz & Michael Strube (2005). Beyond the
pipeline: Discrete optimization in NLP. In Proceedings of
the 9th Conference on Computational Natural Language
Learning, Ann Arbor, Mich., USA, 29?30 June 2005, pp.
136?145.
Maxwell, John T. & Ronald M. Kaplan (1993). The inter-
face between phrasal and functional constraints. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 19(4):571?590.
Richter, Kai-Florian (2008). Context-Specific Route Direc-
tions ? Generation of Cognitively Motivated Wayfinding
Instructions. Amsterdam: IOS Press.
Roth, Michael & Anette Frank (2009). A NLG-based appli-
cation for walking directions. In Companion Volume to
the Proceedings of the 47th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics and the 4th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
of the Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing,
Singapore, 2-7 August 2009. To appear.
Schmid, Helmut (1997). Probabilistic Part-of-Speech tagging
using decision trees. In Daniel Jones & Harold Somers
(Eds.), New Methods in Language Processing, pp. 154?
164. London, U.K.: UCL Press.
Tappe, Heike (2000). Perspektivenwahl in Beschreibun-
gen dynamischer und statischer Wegeskizzen. [Choice of
perspective in descriptions of dynamic and static sketch-
maps]. In Christopher Habel & Christiane v. Stutterheim
(Eds.), R?aumliche Konzepte und sprachliche Strukturen,
pp. 69?97. T?ubingen: Niemeyer.
Taylor, Holly & Barbara Tversky (1996). Perspective in
spatial descriptions. Journal of Memory and Language,
35:371?391.
Viethen, Jette & Robert Dale (2008). The use of spatial re-
lations in referring expression generation. In Proceedings
of the Fifth International Natural Language Generation
Conference, Salt Fork OH, USA, 12?14 June 2008, pp.
59?67.
von Stutterheim, Christiane, Ralf N?use & Jorge M. Serra
(2002). Crosslinguistic differences in the conceptuali-
sation of events. In Hilde Hasselg?ard, Stig Johansson,
Bergljot Behrens & Cathrine Fabricius-Hansen (Eds.), In-
formation Structure in a Cross-lingustic Perspective, pp.
179?198. Amsterdam: Rodopi.
76
