Proceedings of the 12th Conference of the European Chapter of the ACL, pages 728?736,
Athens, Greece, 30 March ? 3 April 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Frequency Matters: Pitch Accents and Information Status
Katrin Schweitzer, Michael Walsh, Bernd Mo?bius,
Arndt Riester, Antje Schweitzer, Hinrich Schu?tze
University of Stuttgart
Stuttgart, Germany
<firstname>.<surname>@ims.uni-stuttgart.de
Abstract
This paper presents the results of a series
of experiments which examine the impact
of two information status categories (given
and new) and frequency of occurrence on
pitch accent realisations. More specifi-
cally the experiments explore within-type
similarity of pitch accent productions and
the effect information status and frequency
of occurrence have on these productions.
The results indicate a significant influence
of both pitch accent type and information
status category on the degree of within-
type variability, in line with exemplar-
theoretic expectations.
1 Introduction
It seems both intuitive and likely that prosody
should have a significant role to play in marking
information status in speech. While there are well
established expectations concerning typical asso-
ciations between categories of information status
and categories of pitch accent, e.g. rising L?H
accents are often a marker for givenness, there
is nevertheless some variability here (Baumann,
2006). Furthermore, little research has focused on
how pitch accent tokens of the same type are re-
alised nor have the effects of information status
and frequency of occurrence been considered.
From the perspective of speech technology, the
tasks of automatically inferring and assigning in-
formation status clearly have significant impor-
tance for speech synthesis and speech understand-
ing systems.
The research presented in this paper examines a
number of questions concerning the relationship
between two information status categories (new
and given), and how tokens of associated pitch ac-
cent types are realised. Furthermore the effect of
frequency of occurrence is also examined from an
exemplar-theoretic perspective.
The questions directly addressed in this paper
are as follows:
1. How are different tokens of a pitch accent
type realised?
Does frequency of occurrence of the pitch ac-
cent type play a role?
2. What effect does information status have on
realisations of a pitch accent type?
Does frequency of occurrence of the informa-
tion status category play a role?
3. Does frequency of occurrence in pitch ac-
cents and in information status play a role,
i.e. is there a combined effect?
In examining the realisation of pitch accent to-
kens, their degree of similarity is the characteristic
under investigation. Similarity is calculated by de-
termining the cosine of the angle between pairs of
pitch accent vector representations (see section 6).
The results in this study are examined from
an exemplar-theoretic perspective (see section 3).
The expectations within that framework are based
upon two different aspects. Firstly, it is expected
that, since all exemplars are stored, exemplars of
a type that occur often, offer the speaker a wider
selection of exemplars to choose from during pro-
duction (Schweitzer and Mo?bius, 2004), i.e. the
realisations are expected to be more variable than
those of a rare type. However, another aspect of
Exemplar Theory has to be considered, namely en-
trenchment (Pierrehumbert, 2001; Bybee, 2006).
The central idea here is that frequently occurring
behaviours undergo processes of entrenchment,
they become in some sense routine. Therefore re-
alisations of a very frequent type are expected to
be realised similar to each other. Thus, similarity
and variability are expressions of the same charac-
teristic: the higher the degree of similarity of pitch
accent tokens, the lower their realisation variabil-
ity.
728
The structure of this paper is as follows: Sec-
tion 2 briefly examines previous work on the in-
teraction of information status categories and pitch
accents. Section 3 provides a short introduction to
Exemplar Theory. In this study similarity of pitch
accent realisations on syllables, annotated with the
information status categories of the words they be-
long to, is examined using the parametric intona-
tion model (Mo?hler, 1998) which is outlined in
Section 4. Section 5 discusses the corpus em-
ployed. Section 6 introduces a general methodol-
ogy which is used in the experiments in Sections 7,
8 and 9. Section 10 then presents some discussion,
conclusions and opportunities for future research.
2 Information Status and Intonation
It is commonly assumed that pitch accents are the
main correlate of information status1 in speech
(Halliday, 1967). Generally, accenting is said
to signal novelty while deaccenting signals given
information (Brown, 1983), although there is
counter evidence: various studies note given in-
formation being accented (Yule, 1980; Bard and
Aylett, 1999). Terken and Hirschberg (1994) point
out that new information can also be deaccented.
As for the question of which pitch accent type
(in terms of ToBI categories (Silverman et al,
1992)) is typically assigned to different degrees of
givenness, Pierrehumbert and Hirschberg (1990)
find H? to be the standard novelty accent for En-
glish, a finding which has also been confirmed by
Baumann (2006) and Schweitzer et al (2008) for
German. Given information on the other hand, if
accented at all, is found to carry L? accent in En-
glish (Pierrehumbert and Hirschberg, 1990). Bau-
mann (2006) finds deaccentuation to be the most
preferred realisation for givenness in his experi-
mental phonetics studies on German. However,
Baumann (2006) points out that H+L? has also
been found as a marker of givenness in a German
corpus study. Previous findings on the corpus used
in the present study found L?H being the typical
marker for givenness (Schweitzer et al, 2008).
Leaving the phonological level and examining
correlates of information status in acoustic detail,
Kohler (1991) reports that in a falling accent, an
early peak indicates established facts, while a me-
dial peak is used to mark novelty. In a recent
1The term information status is used in (Prince, 1992) for
the first time. Before that the terms givenness, novelty or in-
formation structure were used for these concepts.
study Ku?gler and Fe?ry (2008) found givenness to
lower the high tones of prenuclear pitch accents
and to cancel them out postnuclearly. These find-
ings among others (Ku?gler and Fe?ry, 2008) moti-
vate an examination of the acoustic detail of pitch
accent shape across different information status
categories.
The experiments presented here go one step fur-
ther, however, in that they also investigate poten-
tial exemplar-theoretic effects.
3 Exemplar Theory
Exemplar Theory is concerned with the idea that
the acquisition of language is significantly facil-
itated by repeated exposure to concrete language
input, and it has successfully accounted for a num-
ber of language phenomena, including diachronic
language change and frequency of occurrence ef-
fects (Bybee, 2006), the emergence of gram-
matical knowledge (Abbot-Smith and Tomasello,
2006), syllable duration variability (Schweitzer
and Mo?bius, 2004; Walsh et al, 2007), entrench-
ment and lenition (Pierrehumbert, 2001), among
others. Central to Exemplar Theory are the notions
of exemplar storage, frequency of occurrence, re-
cency of occurrence, and similarity. There is an
increasing body of evidence which indicates that
significant storage of language input exemplars,
rich in detail, takes place in memory (Johnson,
1997; Croot and Rastle, 2004; Whiteside and Var-
ley, 1998). These stored exemplars are then em-
ployed in the categorisation of new input percepts.
Similarly, production is facilitated by accessing
these stored exemplars. Computational models of
the exemplar memory also argue that it is in a con-
stant state of flux with new inputs updating it and
old unused exemplars gradually fading away (Pier-
rehumbert, 2001).
Up to now, virtually no exemplar-theoretic re-
search has examined pitch accent prosody (but
see Marsi et al (2003) for memory-based predic-
tion of pitch accents and prosodic boundaries, and
Walsh et al (2008)(discussed below)) and to the
authors? knowledge this paper represents the first
attempt to examine the relationship between pitch
accent prosody and information status from an
exemplar-theoretic perspective. Given the consid-
erable weight of evidence for the influence of fre-
quency of occurrence effects in a variety of other
linguistic domains it seems reasonable to explore
such effects on pitch accent and information sta-
729
tus realisations. For example, what effect might
givenness have on a frequently/infrequently occur-
ring pitch accent? Does novelty produce a similar
result?
The search for possible frequency of occur-
rence effects takes place with respect to pitch ac-
cent shapes captured by the parametric intonation
model discussed next.
4 The Parametric Representation of
Intonation Events - PaIntE
The model approximates stretches of F0 by em-
ploying a phonetically motivated model function
(Mo?hler, 1998). This function consists of the sum
of two sigmoids (rising and falling) with a fixed
time delay which is selected so that the peak does
not fall below 96% of the function?s range. The re-
sulting function has six parameters which describe
the contour and were employed in the analysis: pa-
rameters a1 and a2 express the gradient of the ac-
cent?s rise and fall, parameter b describes the ac-
cent?s temporal alignment (which has been shown
to be crucial in the description of an accent?s shape
(van Santen and Mo?bius, 2000)), c1 and c2 model
the ranges of the rising and falling amplitude of
the accent?s contour, respectively, and parameter d
expresses the peak height of the accent.2 These six
parameters are thus appropriate to describe differ-
ent pitch accent shapes.
For the annotation of intonation the GToBI(S)
annotation scheme (Mayer, 1995) was used. In
earlier versions of PaIntE, the approximation of
the F0-contour for H?L and H? was carried out on
the accented and post?accented syllables. How-
ever, for these accents the beginning of the rise is
likely to start at the preaccented syllable. In the
current version of PaIntE the window used for the
approximation of the F0-contour for H?L and H?
accents has been extended to the preaccented syl-
lable, so that the parameters are calculated over
the span of the accented syllables and its immedi-
ate neighbours (unless it is followed by a boundary
tone which causes the window to end at the end of
the accented syllable).
5 Corpus
The experiments that follow (sections 7, 9 and 8),
were carried out on German pitch accents from the
2Further information and illustrations concerning the me-
chanics of the PaIntE model can be found in Mo?hler and
Conkie (1998).
IMS Radio News Corpus (Rapp, 1998). This cor-
pus was automatically segmented and manually la-
belled according to GToBI(S) (Mayer, 1995). In
the corpus, 1233 syllables are associated with an
L?H accent, 704 with an H?L accent and 162 with
an H? accent.
The corpus contains data from three speakers,
two female and a male one, but the majority of the
data is produced by the male speaker (888 L?H
accents, 527 H?L accents and 152 H? accents). In
order to maximise the number of tokens, all three
speakers were combined. Of the analysed data,
77.92% come from the male speaker. However,
it is not necessarily the case that the same percent-
age of the variability also comes from this speaker:
Both, PaIntE and z-scoring (cf. section 6) nor-
malise across speakers, so the contribution from
each individual speaker is unclear.
The textual transcription of the corpus was an-
notated with respect to information status using
the annotation scheme proposed by Riester (2008).
In this taxonomy information status categories re-
flect the default contexts in which presuppositions
are resolved, which include e. g. discourse context,
environment context or encyclopaedic context.
The annotations are based solely on the written
text and follow strict semantic criteria. Given that
textual information alone (i.e. without prosodic
or speech related information) is not necessarily
sufficient to unambiguously determine the infor-
mation status associated with a particular word,
there are therefore cases where words have mul-
tiple annotations, reflecting underspecification of
information status. However, it is important to
note that in all the experiments reported here, only
unambiguous cases are considered.
The rich annotation scheme employed in the
corpus makes establishing inter-annotator agree-
ment a time-consuming task which is currently un-
derway. Nevertheless, the annotation process was
set up in a way to ensure a maximal smoothing of
uncertainties. Texts were independently labelled
by two annotators. Subsequently, a third, more ex-
perienced annotator compared the two results and,
in the case of discrepancies, took a final decision.
In the present study the categories given and
new are examined. These categories do not rep-
resent a binary distinction but are two extremes
from a set of clearly distinguished categories. For
the most part they correspond to the categories tex-
tually given and brand-new that are used in Bau-
730
mann (2006), but their scope is more tightly con-
strained. The information status annotations are
mapped to the phonetically transcribed speech sig-
nals, from which individual syllable tokens bear-
ing information status are derived.
Syllables for which one of the PaIntE-
parameters was identified as an outlier, were re-
moved. Outliers were defined such that the upper
2.5 percentile as well as the lower 2.5 percentile
of the data were excluded. This led to a reduced
number of pitch accent tokens: 1021 L?H accents,
571H?L accents and 134H? accents. Thus, there
is a continuum of frequency of occurrence, high to
low, from L?H to H?.
With respect to information status, 102 L?H ac-
cents, 87H?L accents and 21H? accents were un-
ambiguously labelled as new. For givenness the
number of tokens is: 114 L?H accents, 44H?L ac-
cents and 10H? accents.
6 General Methodology
In the experiments the general methodology for
calculation of similarity detailed in this section
was employed.
For tokens of the pitch accent types L?H, H?L
and H?, each token was modelled using the full
set of PaIntE parameters. Thus, each token was
represented in terms of a 6-dimensional vector.
For each of the pitch accent types the following
steps were carried out:
? For each 6-dimensional pitch accent category
token calculate the z-score value for each di-
mension. The z-score value represents the
number of standard deviations the value is
away from the mean value for that dimension
and allows comparison of values from differ-
ent normal distributions. The z-score is given
by:
z ? scoredim =
valuedim ?meandim
sdevdim
(1)
Hence, at this point each pitch accent is repre-
sented by a 6-dimensional vector where each
dimension value is a z-score.
? For each token z-scored vector calculate how
similar it is to every other z-scored vector
within the same pitch accent category, and,
in Experiment 2 and 3, with the same infor-
mation status value (e.g. new), using the co-
sine of the angle between the vectors. This is
given by:
cos(~i,~j) =
~i ?~j
?~i ?? ~j ?
(2)
where i and j are vectors of the same pitch ac-
cent category and ? represents the dot prod-
uct.
Each comparison between vectors yields a
similarity score in the range [-1,1], where -1
represents high dissimilarity and 1 represents
high similarity.
The experiments that follow examine distribu-
tions of token similarity. In order to establish
whether distributions differ significantly two dif-
ferent levels of significance were employed, de-
pending on the number of pairwise comparisons
performed.
When comparing two distributions (i.e. per-
forming one test), the significance level was set to
? = 0.05. In those cases where multiple tests were
carried out (Experiment 1 and Experiment 3), the
level of significance was adjusted (Bonferroni cor-
rection) according to the following formula:
? = 1? (1? ?1)
1
n (3)
where ?1 represents the target significance level
(set to 0.05) and n represents the number of tests
being performed. The Bonferroni correction is of-
ten discussed controversially. The main criticism
concerns the increased likelihood of type II errors
that lead to non-significance of actually significant
findings (Pernegger, 1998). Although this conser-
vative adjustment was applied, the statistical tests
in this study resulted in significant p-values indi-
cating the robustness of the findings.
7 Experiment 1: Examining frequency of
occurrence effects in pitch accents
In accordance with the general methodology set
out in section 6, the PaIntE vectors of pitch ac-
cent tokens of types L?H, H?L, and H? were all
z-scored and, within each type, every token was
compared for similarity against every other token
of the same type, using the cosine of the angle be-
tween their vectors. In essence, this experiment
illustrates how similarly pitch accents of the same
type are realised.
Figure 1 depicts the results of the analysis. It
shows the density plot for each distribution of
cosine-similarity comparison values, whereby the
731
?1.0 ?0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Frequency of Occurrence Effects in Pitch Accents
Cosine?Similarity Comparison Values
Den
sity
H*LL*HH*
Figure 1: Density plots for similarity within pitch ac-
cent types. All distributions differ significantly from each
other. There is a trend towards greater similarity from high-
frequency L?H to low-frequency H?.
distributions can be compared directly ? irrespec-
tive of the different number of data points.
An initial observation is that L?H tokens tend
to be realised fairly variably, the main portion
of the distribution is centred around zero. To-
kens of H?L tend to be produced more simi-
larly (i.e. the distribution is centred around a
higher similarity value), and tokens of H? more
similarly again. These three distributions were
tested against each other for significance using the
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (? = 0.017), yielding
p-values of p  0.001. Thus there are significant
differences between these distributions.
What is particularly noteworthy is that a de-
crease in frequency of occurrence across pitch ac-
cent types co-occurs significantly with an increase
in within-type token similarity.
While the differences between the graphed dis-
tributions do not appear to be highly marked
the frequency of occurrence effect is nevertheless
in keeping with exemplar-theoretic expectations
as posited by Bybee (2006) and Schweitzer and
Mo?bius (2004), that is, the high frequency of oc-
currence entails a large number of stored exem-
plars, giving the speaker the choice from among
a large number of production targets. This wider
choice leads to a broader range of chosen targets
for different productions and thus to more variable
realisations of tokens of the same type.
?1.0 ?0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
H*L: Frequency of Occurrence Effects 
  in Information Status Categories
Cosine?Similarity Comparison Values
Den
sity
givennew
Figure 2: Density plots for similarity of H?L tokens. To-
kens of the low-frequency information status category given
display greater similarity to each other than those of the high-
frequency information status category new.
Walsh et al (2008) also reported significant
differences between these distributions, however,
there did not appear to be a clear frequency of oc-
currence effect. The results in the present study
differ from their results because the distributions
centre around different ranges of the similarity
scale clearly indicating that each accent type be-
haves differently in terms of similarity/variability
between the tokens of the respective type. The dif-
ferences between the two findings can be ascribed
to the augmented PaIntE model (section 4).
Given the results from this experiment, the next
experiment seeks to establish what relationship, if
any, exists between information status and pitch
accent production variability.
8 Experiment 2: Examining frequency of
occurrence effects in information
status categories
This experiment was carried out in the same man-
ner as Experiment 1 above with the exception that
in this experiment a subset of the corpus was em-
ployed: only syllables that were unambiguously
labelled with either the information status cate-
gory new or the category given were included in
the analyses. The experiment aims to investigate
the effect of information status on the similar-
ity/variability of tokens of different pitch accent
types. For each pitch accent type, tokens that were
labelled with the information status category new
732
?1.0 ?0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
L*H: Frequency of Occurrence Effects 
  in Information Status Categories
Cosine?Similarity Comparison Values
Den
sity
givennew
Figure 3: Density plots for similarity of L?H tokens. The
curves differ significantly, a trend towards greater similarity
is not observable. The number of tokens for both information
status categories is comparable.
were compared to tokens labelled as given. Again,
a pairwise Kolmogorov-Smirnov test was applied
for each comparison (? = 0.05). Figure 2 depicts
the results for H?L accents. The K-S test yielded a
highly significant difference between the two dis-
tributions (p  0.001), reflecting the clearly visi-
ble difference between the two curves. It is note-
worthy here that for H?L the information status
category new is more frequent than the category
given. Indeed, approximately twice as many are
labelled as new than those labelled given. Figure 2
illustrates that new H?L accents are realised more
variably than given ones. That is, again, an in-
crease in frequency of occurrence co-occurs with
an increase in similarity, this time at the level of
information status.
Figure 3 depicts the difference in similar-
ity/variability for L?H between new tokens and
given tokens. It is clearly visible that the two
curves do not differ as much as those under the
H?L condition. Both curves centre around zero re-
flecting the fact that for both types the tokens are
variable. Although the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test
indicates significance (? = 0.05, p = 0.044), the
nature of the impact that information status has in
this case is unclear.
Here again an effect of frequency of occurrence
might be the reason for this result. The high fre-
quency of L?H accents in general results in a rel-
ative high frequency of given L?H tokens. So the
?1.0 ?0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Effect of Information Status Category "new" 
 across Pitch Accent Types
Cosine?Similarity Comparison Values
Den
sity
H*LL*HH*
Figure 4: Density plots for similarity of new tokens across
three pitch accent types. In comparison to fig. 1 the trend
towards greater similarity from high-frequency L?H to low-
frequency H? is even more pronounced.
token number for both types is similar (102 new
L?H tokens vs. 114 given L?H tokens), there is
high frequency in both cases, hence variability.
These results, particularly in the case of H?L
(fig. 2) indicate that information status affects
pitch accent realisation. The next experiment
compares the effect across different pitch accent
types.
9 Experiment 3: Examining the effect of
information status across pitch accent
types
This experiment was carried out in the same man-
ner as Experiments 1 and 2 above. For each pitch
accent type, figure 4 depicts within-type pitch ac-
cent similarity for tokens unambiguously labelled
as new.
As with Experiments 1 and 2, frequency of
occurrence once more appears to play a signifi-
cant role. Again, all Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests
yielded significant results (p < 0.017 in all cases).
Indeed, the difference between the distributions
of L?H, H?L, and H? similarity plots appears to
be considerably more prominent than in Experi-
ment 1 (see fig. 1). This indicates that under the
condition of novelty the frequency of occurrence
effect is more pronounced. In other words, there is
a considerably more noticeable difference across
the distributions of L?H, H?L and H?, when nov-
733
?1.0 ?0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Effect of Information Status Category "given" 
 across Pitch Accent Types
Cosine?Similarity Comparison Values
Den
sity
H*LL*HH*
Figure 5: Density plots for similarity of given tokens across
three pitch accent types. Mid-frequency H?L displays greater
similarity than high-frequency L?H. For lowest frequency H?
(only 10 tokens) the trend cannot be observed.
elty is considered: novelty compounds the fre-
quency of occurrence effect.
Figure 5 illustrates results of the same analysis
methodology but applied to tokens of pitch accents
unambiguously labelled as given. Once again
there is a considerable difference between the dis-
tributions of L?H and H?L tokens (p < 0.017).
And again, this difference reflects a more pro-
nounced frequency of occurrence effect for given
tokens than for all accents pooled (as described
in Experiment 1): the information status category
given compounds the frequency of occurrence ef-
fect for L?H and H?L.
For H? the result is not as clear as for the two
more frequent accents. The comparison between
H? and L?H results in a significant difference
(p < 0.017) whereas the comparison between H?
and H?L is slightly above the conservative signif-
icance level (p = 0.0186). Moreover, the dis-
tribution is centred between the distributions for
L?H and H?L and it is thus not clear how to inter-
pret this result with respect to a possible frequency
of occurrence effect. However, having only ten
instances of given H?, the explanatory power of
these comparisons is questionable.
10 Discussion
The experiments discussed above yield a num-
ber of interesting results with implications for re-
search in prosody, information status, the interac-
tion between the two domains, and for exemplar
theory.
Returning to the first question posed at the out-
set in section 1, it is quite clear from Experiment 1
that a certain amount of variability exists when
different tokens of the same pitch accent type are
produced. It is also clear, from the same experi-
ment, that the frequency of occurrence of the pitch
accent type does indeed play a role: with an in-
crease in frequency comes an increase in vari-
ability. This result is in line with the exemplar-
theoretic view that since all exemplars are stored,
exemplars of a type that occur often are more vari-
able because they offer the speaker a wider se-
lection of exemplars to choose from during pro-
duction (Schweitzer and Mo?bius, 2004). How-
ever, with respect to entrenchment (Pierrehum-
bert, 2001; Bybee, 2006), i.e. the idea that fre-
quently occurring behaviours undergo processes
of entrenchment, in Experiment 1 one might ex-
pect to see greater similarity in the realisations of
L?H. However, it is important to note that while
tokens of L?H are not particularly similar to each
other (the bulk of the distribution is around zero
(see figure 1)), they are not too dissimilar either.
That is, they rest at the midpoint of the similar-
ity continuum produced by cosine calculation, in
quite a normal looking distribution. This is not
at odds with the idea of entrenchment. As pro-
ductions of a pitch accent type become more fre-
quent, the distribution of similarity spreads from
the right side of the graph (where infrequent and
highly similar H? tokens lie) leftwards (through
H?L) to the point where the L?H distribution is
found. Beyond this point tokens are excessively
different.
The second question posed in section 1, and ad-
dressed in Experiment 2, sought to ascertain the
impact, if any, information status has on pitch ac-
cent realisation. Distributions of given and new
H?L similarity scores differed significantly, as
did distributions of given and new L?H similar-
ity scores, indicating that information status af-
fects realisation. In other words, for both pitch
accent types, given and new tokens behave dif-
ferently. Concerning the frequency of occurrence
of the information status categories, certainly in
the case of H?L the higher frequency new tokens
exhibited more variability. In the case of L?H
similar numbers of new and given tokens, possi-
bly due to the high frequency of L?H in general,
734
?1.0 ?0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Combined Frequency of Occurrence Effect 
 on L*H and H*L
Cosine?Similarity Comparison Values
Den
sity
given L*H new L*Hnew H*Lgiven H*L
Figure 6: Density plots for similarity of combinations of
information status categories given and new with pitch ac-
cent types L?H and H?L. The distributions show a clear
trend towards greater similarity form high-frequency ?given
L?H? and ?new L?H? to mid-frequency ?new H?L? and
low-frequency ?given H?L?.
led to visually similar yet significantly different
distributions. Once again sensitivity to frequency
of occurrence seems to be present, in line with
exemplar-theoretic predictions.
The final question concerns the possibility of a
combined effect of pitch accent frequency of oc-
currence and information status frequency of oc-
currence. Figures 4 and 5 depict a clear com-
pounding effect of both information status cate-
gories across the different pitch accent types (and
their inherent frequencies) when compared to fig-
ure 1. Interestingly, the less frequently occurring
given appears to have a greater impact, particularly
on high frequency L?H.
Figure 6 displays all possible combinations of
L?H, H?L, given and new. H? is omitted in this
graph because of the small number of tokens (10
given, 21 new) and the resulting lack of explana-
tory power. It is evident that an overall frequency
of occurrence effect can be observed: ?given L?H?
and ?new L?H?, which have a similar number of
instances (114 vs. 102 tokens) both centre around
zero and are thus the most leftward skewed curves
in the graph. The distribution of ?new H?L? (87
tokens) shows a trend towards the right hand side
of the graph and thus represents greater similarity
of the tokens. The distribution of similarity values
for the least frequent combination of pitch accent
and information status, ?given H?L? (44 tokens),
centres between 0.5 and 1.0 and is thus the most
rightward curve in the graph, reflecting the high-
est similarity between the tokens.
These results highlight an intricate relationship
between pitch accent production and information
status. The information status of the word influ-
ences not only the type and shape of the pitch ac-
cent (Pierrehumbert and Hirschberg, 1990; Bau-
mann, 2006; Ku?gler and Fe?ry, 2008; Schweitzer et
al., 2008) but also the similarity of tokens within a
pitch accent type. Moreover, this effect is well ex-
plainable within the framework of Exemplar The-
ory as it is subject to frequency of occurrence:
tokens of rare types are produced more similar to
each other than tokens of frequent types.
In the context of speech technology, unfortu-
nately the high variability in highly frequent pitch
accents has a negative consequence, as the correla-
tion between a certain pitch accent or a certain in-
formation status category and the F0 contour is not
a one-to-one relationship. However, forewarned
is forearmed and perhaps a finer grained contex-
tual analysis might yield more context specific so-
lutions.
11 Future Work
The methodology outlined in section 6 gives a lu-
cid insight into the levels of similarity found in
pitch accent realisations. Further insights, how-
ever, could be gleaned from a fine-grained exam-
ination of the PaIntE parameters. For example,
which parameters differ and under what conditions
when examining highly variable tokens? Informa-
tion status evidently plays a role in pitch accent
production but the contexts in which this takes
place have yet to be examined. In addition, the
role of information structure (focus-background,
contrast) also needs to be investigated. A further
line of research worth pursuing concerns the im-
pact of information status on the temporal struc-
ture of spoken utterances and possible compound-
ing with frequency of occurrence effects.
References
Kirsten Abbot-Smith and Michael Tomasello. 2006.
Exemplar-learning and schematization in a usage-
based account of syntactic acquisition. The Linguis-
tic Review, 23(3):275?290.
Ellen G. Bard and M. P. Aylett. 1999. The dissocia-
tion of deaccenting, givenness, and syntactic role in
735
spontaneous speech. In Proceedings of ICPhS (San
Francisco), volume 3, pages 1753?1756.
Stefan Baumann. 2006. The Intonation of Givenness
? Evidence from German., volume 508 of Linguis-
tische Arbeiten. Niemeyer, Tu?bingen. Ph.D. thesis,
Saarland University.
Gillian Brown. 1983. Prosodic structure and the
given/new distinction. In Anne Cutler and D. Robert
Ladd, editors, Prosody: Models and Measurements,
pages 67?77. Springer, New York.
Joan Bybee. 2006. From usage to grammar: The
mind?s response to repetition. Language, 84:529?
551.
Karen Croot and Kathleen Rastle. 2004. Is there
a syllabary containing stored articulatory plans for
speech production in English? In Proceedings of the
10th Australian International Conference on Speech
Science and Technology (Sydney), pages 376?381.
Michael A. K. Halliday. 1967. Intonation and Gram-
mar in British English. Mouton, The Hague.
Keith Johnson. 1997. Speech perception without
speaker normalization: An exemplar model. In
K. Johnson and J. W. Mullennix, editors, Talker
Variability in Speech Processing, pages 145?165.
Academic Press, San Diego.
Klaus J. Kohler. 1991. Studies in german intonation.
AIPUK (Univ. Kiel), 25.
Frank Ku?gler and Caroline Fe?ry. 2008. Pitch accent
scaling on given, new and focused constituents in
german. Journal of Phonetics.
Erwin Marsi, Martin Reynaert, Antal van den Bosch,
Walter Daelemans, and Ve?ronique Hoste. 2003.
Learning to predict pitch accents and prosodic
boundaries in dutch. In Proceedings of the ACL-
2003 Conference (Sapporo, Japan), pages 489?496.
Jo?rg Mayer. 1995. Transcribing German In-
tonation ? The Stuttgart System. Technical
report, Universita?t Stuttgart. http://www.ims.uni-
stuttgart.de/phonetik/joerg/labman/STGTsystem.html.
Gregor Mo?hler and Alistair Conkie. 1998. Paramet-
ric modeling of intonation using vector quantization.
In Third Intern. Workshop on Speech Synth (Jenolan
Caves), pages 311?316.
Gregor Mo?hler. 1998. Describing intonation with a
parametric model. In Proceedings ICSLP, volume 7,
pages 2851?2854.
T. V. Pernegger. 1998. What?s wrong with Bonferroni
adjustment. British Medical Journal, 316:1236?
1238.
Janet Pierrehumbert and Julia Hirschberg. 1990. The
meaning of intonational contours in the interpreta-
tion of discourse. In P. R. Cohen, J. Morgan, and
M. E. Pollack, editors, Intentions in Communication,
pages 271?311. MIT Press, Cambridge.
Janet Pierrehumbert. 2001. Exemplar dynamics: Word
frequency, lenition and contrast. In Joan Bybee and
Paul Hopper, editors, Frequency and the Emergence
of Linguistic Structure, pages 137?157. Amsterdam.
Ellen F. Prince. 1992. The ZPG Letter: Subjects, Def-
initeness and Information Status. In W. C. Mann
and S. A. Thompson, editors, Discourse Descrip-
tion: Diverse Linguistic Analyses of a Fund-Raising
Text, pages 295?325. Amsterdam.
Stefan Rapp. 1998. Automatisierte Erstellung von Ko-
rpora fu?r die Prosodieforschung. Ph.D. thesis, IMS,
Universita?t Stuttgart. AIMS 4 (1).
Arndt Riester. 2008. A Semantic Explication of In-
formation Status and the Underspecification of the
Recipients? Knowledge. In Atle Gr?nn, editor, Pro-
ceedings of Sinn und Bedeutung 12, Oslo.
Antje Schweitzer and Bernd Mo?bius. 2004. Exemplar-
based production of prosody: Evidence from seg-
ment and syllable durations. In Speech Prosody
2004 (Nara, Japan), pages 459?462.
Katrin Schweitzer, Arndt Riester, Hans Kamp, and
Grzegorz Dogil. 2008. Phonological and acoustic
specification of information status - a semantic and
phonetic analysis. Poster at ?Experimental and The-
oretical Advances in Prosody?, Cornell University.
Kim Silverman, Mary Backman, John Pitrelli, Mari
Ostendorf, Colin Wightman, Patti Price, Janet Pier-
rehumbert, and Julia Hirschberg. 1992. Tobi: A
standard for Labeling English Prosody. In Proceed-
ings of ICSLP (Banff, Kanada), volume 2, pages
867?870, Banff, Canada.
Jacques Terken and Julia Hirschberg. 1994. Deaccen-
tuation of words representing ?given? information:
effects of persistence of grammatical function and
surface position. Language and Speech, 37:125?
145.
Jan P. H. van Santen and BerndMo?bius. 2000. A quan-
titative model of F0 generation and alignment. In
A. Botinis, editor, Intonation?Analysis, Modelling
and Technology, pages 269?288. Kluwer.
Michael Walsh, Hinrich Schu?tze, Bernd Mo?bius, and
Antje Schweitzer. 2007. An exemplar-theoretic ac-
count of syllable frequency effects. In Proceedings
of ICPhS (Saarbru?cken), pages 481?484.
Michael Walsh, Katrin Schweitzer, Bernd Mo?bius, and
Hinrich Schu?tze. 2008. Examining pitch-accent
variability from an exemplar-theoretic perspective.
In Proceedings of Interspeech 2008 (Brisbane).
Sandra P. Whiteside and Rosemary A. Varley. 1998.
Dual-route phonetic encoding: Some acoustic evi-
dence. In Proceedings of ICSLP (Sydney), volume 7,
pages 3155?3158.
George Yule. 1980. Intonation and Givenness in Spo-
ken Discourse. Studies in Language, pages 271?
286.
736
