Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Computational Semantics, pages 210?221,
Tilburg, January 2009. c?2009 International Conference on Computational Semantics
Reliable Discourse Markers for Contrast Relations
Jennifer Spenader and Anna Lobanova
Department of Artificial Intelligence
University of Groningen
{j.spenader|a.lobanova}@ai.rug.nl
Abstract
Using the RST annotated corpus [Carlson et al, 2003], we use sim-
ple statistics on the distribution of discourse markers or cue phrases
as evidence of the three-way distinction of Contrast relations, Con-
trast, Antithesis and Concession, recognized in standard Rhetor-
ical Structure Theory (RST, Mann and Thompson 1987). We also
show that however, an intuitive marker of Contrast, is not actually
used statistically significantly more often in Contrast relations than in
Cause-Effect relations. These results highlight the need for empirically
based discourse marker identification rather than the intuitive method
that is the current norm.
1 Introduction
Contrast is a central rhetorical relation. It is one of the most frequent, as
shown by discourse annotation projects. It seems to have a clear, intuitive
semantic meaning, and has been argued to interact with other linguistic
structures like VP-ellipsis (see e.g. Kehler 2000). Finally, it is instinctively
associated with several very clear discourse markers, such as e.g. however,
although and but.
However, there is a lack of consensus about whether or not there are qual-
itatively different Contrast relations: RST (Rhetorical Structure Theory)
recognizes three different types: Contrast proper, Antithesis and Con-
cession, Wolf and Gibson [2005] recognize two, denial of expectation and
contrast, and Segmented Discourse Representation Theory (SDRT, Asher
and Lascarides 2003) recognizes one: Contrast.
In this paper we use the annotated RST corpus [Carlson et al, 2003]
and simple lexical cooccurrance statistics to determine if intuitive discourse
markers of contrast reliably identify Contrast from Cause-Effect relations
210
and if the markers also distinguish between the three-way distinction made
in RST. The distribution of markers shows that intuition can be surpris-
ingly wrong, e.g. however was not a reliable marker of Contrast. We also
found that the different RST Contrast relations can be distinguished by their
markers. These results illustrate the need for empirically testing intuitively
identified rhetorical relation markers, and argue against collapsing the Con-
trast distinctions, as has been done in many discourse annotation schemes.
2 Contrast as a rhetorical relation
Theoretically, RST leaves the number of relations recognized up to the an-
notator [Mann and Thompson, 1987], but in the manually annotated RST
corpus [Carlson et al, 2003] 78 relations are stipulated, including three Con-
trast relations: Contrast, Antithesis and Concession. As mentioned
above, Wolf and Gibson [2005] recognize two Contrast relations among the
11 relations they distinguish between, `violated expectation' and `contrast', a
distinction which seems to have been inherited from Hobbs [1985], who may
have in turn taken it from Lakoff [1971]. In the manual Reese et al [2007]
for the annotation of texts according to SDRT, there is only one contrast
relation among the 14 relations recognized. Thus RST recognizes the great-
est number of contrast types, but there is no empirical evidence supporting
these or any other distinctions.
The distinctions between different types of Contrast found in current
discourse annotation schemes seem to have been adapted from theoretical
linguistic work on contrast that sought to characterize the way in which the
conjunction but differs from and. Lakoff [1971] made a distinction between
what she called denial of expectation contrast and semantic opposition uses
of but, e.g.
(1) It's raining but I'm taking an umbrella.
(2) John is tall but Bill is short. (Lakoff 1971: 133)
Denial of expectation has semantically been interpreted as a case where
the first conjunct implicates a proposition that the second conjunct denies,
e.g. in (1) It's raining implicates the speaker will get wet, while having an
umbrella negates this implication. Semantic opposition contrast on the other
hand is characterized by the fact that the conjuncts have parallel elements
contrasted along one dimension, e.g. in (2), John and Bill are humans
contrasted according to their height.
211
The three RST relations seem to preserve the same the distinction. An-
tithesis and Contrast are described as having contrast happen in only
one or few respects, while everything else can remain the same in other re-
spects. (Annotation manual, [Carlson and Marcu, 2001] same wording in
both definitions.), clearly echoing the definition of semantic opposition: An-
tithesis and Contrast only differ in terms of symmetry, realized in terms
of nuclearity in RST. In multinuclear Contrast neither of the conjuncts
should be more prominent or more connected with the rest of the discourse
than the other, but in a mononuclear Antithesis relation the nucleus will
be more prominent.
ANTITHESIS 1 [Although Exxon spent heavily during the latest quarter to
clean up the Alaskan shoreline blackened by its huge oil spill,]
1A
[those ex-
penses as well as the cost of a continuing spill-related program are covered
by $880 million in charges taken during the first half.]
1B
(wsj
1311
)
ANTITHESIS 2 [A hearing is set for Nov. 15,]
2A
[but participants don't expect
a resolution until July 1990.]
2B
(wsj
1145
)
CONTRAST 3 [Import values are calculated on a cost, insurance and freight
(c.i.f.) basis,]
3A
[while exports are accounted for on a free-on-board (f.o.b.)
basis.]
3B
(wsj
0615
)
CONTRAST 4 [The clash of ideologies survives this treatment,]
4A
[but the
nuance and richness of Gorky's individual characters have vanished in the
scue.]
4B
(wsj
0615
)
For a Concession relation the contrast is argued to be the result of
an unexpected situation, and the definition even says it involves a denial of
expectation.
The situation indicated in the nucleus is contrary to expecta-
tion in the light of the information presented in the satellite. In
other words, a Concession relation is always characterized by a
violated expectation. (Compare to Antithesis.) In some cases,
which text span is the satellite and which is the nucleus do not
depend on the semantics of the spans, but rather on the intention
of the writer. (Annotation manual, Carlson and Marcu [2001])
Examining two examples from the corpus below what we can see is that
we should not have the kind of parallel elements typical of Contrast and
Antithesis.
212
CONCESSION 5 [Its 1,400-member brokerage operation reported an estimated
$5 million loss last year,]
5A
[although Kidder expects it to turn a profit
this year.]
5B
(wsj
0604
)
CONCESSION 6 [While there have been no reports of similar sudden unex-
plained deaths among diabetics in the U.S.,]
6A
[Dr. Sobel said the FDA
plans to examine Dr. Toseland's evidence and is considering its own study
here.]
6B
(wsj
0690
)
However, these two categories are hard to apply straightforwardly to
many examples. Further, numerous linguistic papers (e.g. Foolen 1991,
Winter and Rimon 1994 and Spenader and Stulp 2007)have argued that the
distinction between denial of expectation and semantic opposition is artificial,
and that to correctly interpret a sentence such as (2) in a discourse it is
necessary to have a context such as e.g. All Dutch people aren't giants,
the interpretation becomes the same as for a denial of expectation.
Just how easy is it to distinguish an Antithesis relation from Con-
trast orConcession? Carlson et al [2003] present kappa scores for subsets
of the corpus ranging from 0.6 to 0.79 for the set of 78 relations, and scores
up to 0.82 for a simpler annotation scheme where the 78 categories were col-
lapsed into 16 supersets, including one Contrast set. But they don't report
scores for the entire corpus or for sets of particular relations in isolation, so
all we can do is evaluate individual examples. Contrast 3 and Contrast
4 do seem to display parallel elements but what about Antithesis 2. Why
isn't the fact that it will take so long to reach a verdict considered a kind
of denial of expectation? Are the dates the parallel elements in Antithesis
2? The annotation doesn't require explicitly identifying these structures but
the definitions imply they should be present. In many ways, Antithesis 2
seems to share more with Concession 6. For Concession 5 we could also
easily argue that the brokerage operation and Kidder are parallel elements
while profits or losses is the measure of comparison.
In the end, the corpus has a similar problem to all materials with anno-
tations where there is no clear, objective method of categorization. We have
to simply accept the annotation as reliable and see if the results we obtain
with it makes sense.
3 Previous research analyzing cue words
Taboada [2006] used the RST corpus and a corpus of task oriented dialogues
that she annotated with RST relations to identify the most frequently used
213
discourse markers for a number of RST relations. Most relevant for the cur-
rent work are her results for unembedded Concession relations. In the RST
corpus she found that 90.35% of the relations were marked with some recog-
nisable discourse marker, with the words but and although contributing to
50% of the marked relations. Other markers she identified were though, de-
spite, while, even though, however, still, even if, even when, even yet, whether
and whereas. Another relevant result concerns the distribution of discourse
markers across nuclei and satellites. She found that for Concession, the
markers were equally likely to occur in the nucleus or satellite.
The main problem with this study is that it relies on intuition for the
initial identification of the Concession markers, and then the frequency
with which they intuitively seem to be signaling contrast is used as evidence
of the correctness of the initial intuition. But this means that relevant mark-
ers might be missed. An even greater problem is that the method does not
insure that identified markers are actually characteristic of the relation; they
might very well occur just as frequently in other relations. The frequency
with which but and although occur in the Concession relations and intu-
ition makes a strong case for considering these markers of Concession, but
markers like e.g. while, might be just as likely to occur with a Result or a
Cause relation.
Marcu and Echihabi [2002] used machine learning to develop an auto-
matic classifier for a number of super categories of discourse relations, in-
cluding Contrast, Cause-Explanation-Evidence, Condition and Elaboration.
First, they made a set of patterns based on intuitively identified discourse
markers for each discourse relation. They then used these markers to auto-
matically extracted large numbers of examples from two corpora totally more
than 42 million English sentences. For example, sentences with a sentence-
initial but were considered Contrast examples, and sentences with because
as Cause-Explanation-Evidence. For training, all discourse markers were re-
moved and the stripped sentences were used to train a family of Na?ve Bayes
classifiers. One reported results was that the classifier that distinguished be-
tween Cause-Explanation-Evidence and Contrast had an accuracy
of 87.1%. The level of accuracy is impressive, and surely supports the au-
thors' claim that automatical extraction is a reliable method for finding large
number of examples of certain coherence relations. On the other hand, it is
not clear what could be achieved, and making more fine-grained distinctions
might require less noisy data. For such investigations, intuitively identified
discourse markers might not be reliable enough.
Sporleder and Lascarides [2008] compared the performance of rhetorical
relation classifiers trained on data with marked and unmarked discourse re-
214
lations. They chose a subset of five discourse relations including Contrast,
Result, Summary, Explanation and Continuation and a total of 55
discourse markers that according to them unambiguously indicated each of
the relations. For example, but, although, however, whereas and yet were con-
sidered to be unambiguous markers of Contrast because following SDRT
definition Sporleder and Lascarides [2008] assumed that there is only one
type of Contrast. The choice of discourse markers was based on Oates [2000]
and authors' introspection of randomly extracted examples. What is relevant
to our research is that both studies (Marcu and Echihabi 2002 and Sporleder
and Lascarides 2008) extracted explicitly marked rhetorical relations using
a set of discourse markers selected by intuition, without any empirical evi-
dence that the markers are reliable. In addition, no fine-grained distinctions
between types of relations (e.g. Concession vs Antithesis) were made.
One way to determine if discourse markers are reliable indicators of the
relations we assume they mark is to see if the qualitative difference postu-
lated between the Contrast relations seems to manifest in a distributional
difference in the discourse markers used in Contrast relations. An immediate
potential objection to this methods is the fact that the RST corpus anno-
tation manual lists a number of intuitively identified discourse markers as
potential indicators for many of the relations, including the Contrast rela-
tions. For example, it says that the discourse markers although and despite
are discourse markers for Concession and Antithesis, while however is a
discourse marker for Antithesis and Contrast.
Indeed, if we only find evidence that these markers pattern with the
mentioned relations, then we cannot determine if this is because the rela-
tions themselves are best marked with these markers, or if the annotators
were simply influenced by the manual. If, however, we do find some other
consistent pattern of discourse markers correlating with each of the Contrast
relations, then this would be evidence that these qualitative distinctions are
real, rather than merely stipulated by the coding scheme.
A final note, RST allows relations to be embedded in other relations, a
feature that seems to be unique to RST, and the RST corpus among other
discourse annotated corpora. We think it is important to look both at simple
relations and at embedded relations, but in this we depart from much of the
earlier work done on studying discourse markers. This has a disadvantage in
that it can inflate the counts, because a discourse marker inside a Contrast
relation that is in turn embedded inside another Contrast relation will be
counted twice as marking Contrast relations. On the other hand, there is no
other way to count discourse markers and still take embedded contexts into
account.
215
Contrast Cause-
set Effect
(%) set (%)
p though 0.11 0.05
even 0.18 0.11
despite 0.06 0.02
p although 0.10 0.02
p but 0.85 0.44
however 0.09 0.06
p still 0.14 0.05
p while 0.15 0.09
only 0.15 0.17
too 0.08 0.04
Table 1: Set of three Contrast relations compared with three Cause-Effect relations.
Words in bold occur significantly more often in one relation than the other to the degree
of p ? 0.05. When a `p' precedes the word p ? 0.009. The relation in which the word
occurred significantly more frequently in has the percent marked in bold. Thus though
occurred 84 times in the three Contrast relations. The three relations had 75,552 words,
so though occurred with a frequency of 0.0011, or made up 0.11% of the total words. All
tables present the data according to this pattern.
4 Experiments
We used the annotated RST corpus as data [Carlson et al, 2003]. This cor-
pus has approximately 176,000 words composed of 385 articles from the Wall
Street Journal portion of the Penn Treebank. We extracted all Contrast,
Antithesis, Concession, Evidence, Cause and Result relations,
1
in-
cluding relations that contained embedded relations. We then use ?
2
tests
to check for statistically significant correlations between lexical items and
the different coherence relations. We only report results for a small set of
closed class words that are particularly likely to be discourse markers.
First, from the results in Table 1 we can see that many terms considered
to be typical markers of Contrast do in fact distinguish Contrast relations
from Cause-Effect relations. A somewhat surprising result is that however,
stereotypically considered a marker of contrast, is not used significantly more
often in Contrast than in Cause-Effect relations. Also, a number of lexical
items that are not generally recognized as discourse markers but which do
tend to contribute to Contrast are in fact significant. These include even,
still and the parallel marker too.
1
Concession was the smallest relation, with 15,346 words. Contrast was the largest
with 35,859. Antithesis relations contained 24,347 words.
216
Antithesis+ Contrast
Concesssion
(%) (%)
p though 0.16 0.05
p even 0.22 0.13
p despite 0.08 0.03
p although 0.15 0.04
but 0.85 0.44
however 0.09 0.06
still 0.17 0.11
while 0.18 0.12
only 0.17 0.13
too 0.09 0.04
Table 2: Nuclearity compared: Mononu-
clear Antithesis and Concession com-
pared with multinuclear Contrast.
Antithesis+ Concession
Contrast
(%) (%)
p though 0.07 0.27
p even 0.14 0.33
p despite 0.04 0.13
p although 0.08 0.17
but 0.89 0.44
however 0.09 0.08
still 0.13 0.18
while 0.16 0.14
only 0.14 0.22
too 0.08 0.06
Table 3: Contrast types compared: An-
tithesis and Contrast versus Conces-
sion.
Next, we examined different groupings of the contrast relations to see if
there is evidence that the three categories of contrast distinguished by RST
actually show a different distribution of discourse markers.
The three Contrast relations can be further grouped along two features,
their nuclearity and the way in which they create the contrastive meaning.
Antithesis and Concession are both mononuclear relations while Con-
trast is multinuclear. Are either of these features reflected in the type of
discourse markers the relations cooccur with? It is highly possible that nu-
clearity would limit which discourse markers cooccur with which relations
given that nuclearity to a certain degree correlates with the coordinating and
subordinating conjunction distinction. To test this question we compared
Antithesis and Concession to Contrast. The results are in Table 2.
The first thing to notice is that but and too are no longer significant:
they mark Antithesis and Concession equally as well as they mark Con-
trast. We also see that a number of markers that were useful for distin-
guishing Contrast from Cause-Effect relations are also useful for distinguish-
ing Antithesis and Concession from Contrast, occurring significantly
more often in Antithesis and Concession, i.e. though, although, despite,
even, still and while.
What if we instead group the three relations by the way in which they
seem to establish contrast? Remember, from the definitions Concession
has to do with a violated expectation between the two discourse units,
whereas both Contrast and Antithesis should be characterized by a
comparison along `one or more respects'.
217
Antithesis Concession
(%) (%)
p though 0.10 0.27
p even 0.15 0.33
p despite 0.05 0.13
although 0.14 0.17
but 0.93 0.72
however 0.12 0.08
still 0.16 0.18
while 0.20 0.15
only 0.14 0.22
too 0.10 0.06
Table 4: Antithesis compared with Con-
cession
Contrast Concession
(%) (%)
p though 0.05 0.27
p even 0.13 0.33
p despite 0.03 0.13
p although 0.04 0.17
but 0.86 0.72
however 0.08 0.08
still 0.11 0.18
while 0.12 0.15
only 0.13 0.22
too 0.07 0.06
Table 5: Contrast compared with Con-
cession
The results in Table 3 show that Concession can be distinguished from
Antithesis and Contrast by the typical markers though, although, even
and despite, as well as only. The markers while and still are no longer signif-
icant. These results, combined with the results above seem to suggest that
Concession is quite different from Antithesis and Contrast. Probably
these markers are actually just markers of Concession. We can check this
by comparing Concession with Antithesis (Table 4) and Concession
with Contrast (Table 5). What we then see is that though, even and
despite distinguish Concession from Antithesis and Concession from
Contrast. Table 5 shows that although also distinguishes Concession
from Contrast but because this cue does not distinguish Antithesis from
Concession we can guess that it is equally as characteristic of Antithesis
as it is of Concession. This also explains why it was significantly different
from Contrast when we collapsed Antithesis with Concession. The
same holds for still.
5 Discussion and Conclusions
Our first conclusion is that we seem to have found that each relation has a
distinctive discourse marker profile and that these results support the three-
way distinction, that otherwise seems to be stipulated. Further, in terms
of the discourse markers that distinguish them it seems that Concession
is much more different from Antithesis and Contrast, suggesting that
the way in which the contrast relation is established is more relevant to
218
Antithesis Contrast
(%) (%)
though 0.10 0.05
even 0.15 0.13
despite 0.05 0.03
p although 0.14 0.04
but 0.93 0.86
however 0.12 0.08
still 0.16 0.11
while 0.20 0.12
only 0.14 0.13
too 0.10 0.07
Table 6: Antithesis compared with Contrast
lexical marking choices than nuclearity and/or symmetry. This is also in line
with the two way distinction in the theoretical linguistics. Note also that
the reliable discourse markers differ from those suggested in the annotation
manual: although and despite are only reliable markers of Concession, not
Antithesis, and however doesn't characterize Contrast relations at all.
A second result is that by using ?
2
statistics to identify discourse markers
we have a reliable and fairly automatic alternative method to the intuitive
identification of markers made by much of the existing research. This method
can be applied to other discourse relations and may find some surprising
results, such as e.g. our finding that however is not a reliable unambiguous
marker of Contrast when compared with Cause-Effect relations. Of course,
it is entirely possible that however is a good indicator of Contrast when
distinguishing Contrast from e.g. Narration. Ideally, we should compare
all combinations to derive an exhaustive and data derived list of reliable
discourse markers for all relations, but we limit our discussion to a small
set of lexical items and only compare Contrast with Cause-Effect relations
because of time and space constraints, but this is an obvious next step in
our inquiry.
Our results have implications for data oriented approaches using intuition
to identify markers to extract examples of coherence relations. Marcu and
Echihabi [2002] for example relied solely on discourse markers to extract
training data, necessarily so because the method they used requires more
data than could feasibly be manually annotated. But our results show that
careful testing of the reliability of the discourse markers could improve the
quality of the extracted relations. Further, the number of Contrast relations
219
recognized has to be carefully considered. Treating all Contrast relations as
one supercategory, collapsing the RST distinctions as Marcu and Echihabi
[2002] and many others have done, may lead to worse results than retaining
the distinctions; we know from part of speech tagging for example, that while
too many distinctions may make tagging harder, too few can do the same.
The results also show that even a modest amount of annotated data can be
useful for improving extracted data.
Finally, one of the most obvious problems with all the studies (including
this one) on automatically identifying discourse relations is that they only
work with marked discourse relations. Our results won't help much in iden-
tifying unmarked Contrast relations, yet these relations are very frequent.
Carlson et al [2003] have shown that in the corpus of Rhetorical Struc-
ture trees only 61 out of 238 contrast relations were marked by a discourse
marker. This means that contrastive markers would help to identify only
25% of contrast relations in that corpus. Similarly, Taboada [2006] looked
at the RST corpus and a task-oriented dialogue corpus and concluded that
most of the relations (between 60-70%) were not signaled by any discourse
markers. Finding a solution to these problems will be a challenge for future
work.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Axel Brink for help with data extraction, and the
anonymous reviewers for useful comments. Jennifer Spenader's work was
supported by grant 016.064.062 from the Netherlands Organisation for Sci-
entific Research (NWO).
References
Nicholas Asher and Alex Lascarides. Logics of Conversation. Cambridge
University Press, 2003.
Lynn Carlson and Daniel Marcu. Discourse tagging manual. Technical re-
port, ISI Tech Report ISI-TR-545, July 2001.
L. Carlson, Daniel Marcu, and M.E Okurowski. Building a Discourse-Tagged
Corpus in the Framework of Rhetorical Structure Theory. 2003.
Ad Foolen. Polyfunctionality and the semantics of adversative conjunctions.
Multilingual, 10(1/2):7092, 1991.
220
Jerry Hobbs. On the coherence and structure of discourse. Technical report,
Report No. CSLI-85-37, Center for the Study of Language and Informa-
tion, 1985.
Andrew Kehler. Coherence and the resolution of ellipsis. Linguistics and
Philosophy, 23(6):533575, 2000.
Robyn Lakoff. If, ands and buts about conjunction, chapter Studies in Lin-
guistic Semantics. Holt, Reinhart and Winston, 1971.
William C. Mann and Sandra A. Thompson. Rhetorical Structure Theory:
A theory of text organization. Information Sciences Institute, Marina del
Rey, CA, 1987.
Daniel Marcu and A Echihabi. An unsupervised approach to recognizing
discourse relations. Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (ACL-). Philadelphia, PA, July
7-12, 2002.
Sarah Louise Oates. Multiple discourse marker occurrence: Creating hi-
erarchies for natural language generation. In Proceedings of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
4145, 2000.
Brian Reese, Julia Hunter, Nicholas Asher, Pascal Deni, and Jason
Baldridge. Reference manual for the analysis and annotation of rhetorical
structure (version 1.0), 2007.
Jennifer Spenader and Gert Stulp. Antonymy and contrast relations. In
Seventh International Workshop on Computational Semantics, Tilburg,
10-11 January 2007.
Caroline Sporleder and Alex Lascarides. Using automatically labelled ex-
amples to classify rhetorical relations: An assessment. Natural Language
Engineering, 14(3):369416, 2008.
Maite Taboada. Discourse markers as signals (or not) of rhetorical relations.
Journal of Pragmatics, 38(4):567592, 2006.
Y. Winter and M. Rimon. Contrast and implication in natural language.
Journal of Semantics, 1994.
Florian Wolf and Edward Gibson. Representing discourse coherence: A
corpus-based study. Computational Linguistics, 31(2):249288, 2005.
221
