Proceedings of the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and the 4th IJCNLP of the AFNLP, pages 423?431,
Suntec, Singapore, 2-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Who, What, When, Where, Why?  
Comparing Multiple Approaches to the Cross-Lingual 5W Task 
Kristen Parton*, Kathleen R. McKeown*, Bob Coyne*, Mona T. Diab*,  
Ralph Grishman?, Dilek Hakkani-T?r?, Mary Harper?, Heng Ji?, Wei Yun Ma*,  
Adam Meyers?, Sara Stolbach*, Ang Sun?, Gokhan Tur?, Wei Xu? and Sibel Yaman? 
 
*Columbia University 
New York, NY, USA 
{kristen, kathy, 
coyne, mdiab, ma, 
sara}@cs.columbia.edu 
 
?New York University 
New York, NY, USA 
{grishman, meyers, 
asun, xuwei} 
@cs.nyu.edu 
?International Computer 
Science Institute 
Berkeley, CA, USA 
{dilek, sibel} 
@icsi.berkeley.edu 
 
?Human Lang. Tech. Ctr. of 
Excellence, Johns Hopkins 
and U. of Maryland, 
College Park  
mharper@umd.edu 
?City University of  
New York 
New York, NY, USA 
hengji@cs.qc.cuny.edu 
 
 
?SRI International 
Palo Alto, CA, USA 
gokhan@speech.sri.com 
 
 
  
Abstract 
Cross-lingual tasks are especially difficult 
due to the compounding effect of errors in 
language processing and errors in machine 
translation (MT). In this paper, we present an 
error analysis of a new cross-lingual task: the 
5W task, a sentence-level understanding task 
which seeks to return the English 5W's (Who, 
What, When, Where and Why) corresponding 
to a Chinese sentence. We analyze systems 
that we developed, identifying specific prob-
lems in language processing and MT that 
cause errors. The best cross-lingual 5W sys-
tem was still 19% worse than the best mono-
lingual 5W system, which shows that MT 
significantly degrades sentence-level under-
standing. Neither source-language nor target-
language analysis was able to circumvent 
problems in MT, although each approach had 
advantages relative to the other. A detailed 
error analysis across multiple systems sug-
gests directions for future research on the 
problem. 
1 Introduction 
In our increasingly global world, it is ever more 
likely for a mono-lingual speaker to require in-
formation that is only available in a foreign lan-
guage document. Cross-lingual applications ad-
dress this need by presenting information in the 
speaker?s language even when it originally ap-
peared in some other language, using machine 
translation (MT) in the process. In this paper, we 
present an evaluation and error analysis of a 
cross-lingual application that we developed for a 
government-sponsored evaluation, the 5W task. 
The 5W task seeks to summarize the informa-
tion in a natural language sentence by distilling it 
into the answers to the 5W questions: Who, 
What, When, Where and Why. To solve this 
problem, a number of different problems in NLP 
must be addressed: predicate identification, ar-
gument extraction, attachment disambiguation, 
location and time expression recognition, and 
(partial) semantic role labeling. In this paper, we 
address the cross-lingual 5W task: given a 
source-language sentence, return the 5W?s trans-
lated (comprehensibly) into the target language. 
Success in this task requires a synergy of suc-
cessful MT and answer selection.  
The questions we address in this paper are: 
? How much does machine translation (MT) 
degrade the performance of cross-lingual 
5W systems, as compared to monolingual 
performance? 
? Is it better to do source-language analysis 
and then translate, or do target-language 
analysis on MT? 
? Which specific problems in language 
processing and/or MT cause errors in 5W 
answers?  
In this evaluation, we compare several differ-
ent approaches to the cross-lingual 5W task, two 
that work on the target language (English) and 
one that works in the source language (Chinese). 
423
A central question for many cross-lingual appli-
cations is whether to process in the source lan-
guage and then translate the result, or translate 
documents first and then process the translation. 
Depending on how errorful the translation is, 
results may be more accurate if models are de-
veloped for the source language. However, if 
there are more resources in the target language, 
then the translate-then-process approach may be 
more appropriate. We present a detailed analysis, 
both quantitative and qualitative, of how the ap-
proaches differ in performance.  
We also compare system performance on hu-
man translation (which we term reference trans-
lations) and MT of the same data in order to de-
termine how much MT degrades system per-
formance. Finally, we do an in-depth analysis of 
the errors in our 5W approaches, both on the 
NLP side and the MT side. Our results provide 
explanations for why different approaches suc-
ceed, along with indications of where future ef-
fort should be spent. 
2 Prior Work 
The cross-lingual 5W task is closely related to 
cross-lingual information retrieval and cross-
lingual question answering (Wang and Oard 
2006; Mitamura et al 2008). In these tasks, a 
system is presented a query or question in the 
target language and asked to return documents or 
answers from a corpus in the source language. 
Although MT may be used in solving this task, it 
is only used by the algorithms ? the final evalua-
tion is done in the source language. However, in 
many real-life situations, such as global business, 
international tourism, or intelligence work, users 
may not be able to read the source language. In 
these cases, users must rely on MT to understand 
the system response. (Parton et al 2008) exam-
ine the case of ?translingual? information re-
trieval, where evaluation is done on translated 
results in the target language. In cross-lingual 
information extraction (Sudo et al 2004) the 
evaluation is also done on MT, but the goal is to 
learn knowledge from a large corpus, rather than 
analyzing individual sentences.  
The 5W task is also closely related to Seman-
tic Role Labeling (SRL), which aims to effi-
ciently and effectively derive semantic informa-
tion from text. SRL identifies predicates and 
their arguments in a sentence, and assigns roles 
to each argument. For example, in the sentence 
?I baked a cake yesterday.?, the predicate 
?baked? has three arguments. ?I? is the subject of 
the predicate, ?a cake? is the object and ?yester-
day? is a temporal argument.  
Since the release of large data resources anno-
tated with relevant levels of semantic informa-
tion, such as the FrameNet (Baker et al, 1998) 
and PropBank corpora (Kingsbury and Palmer, 
2003), efficient approaches to SRL have been 
developed (Carreras and Marquez, 2005). Most 
approaches to the problem of SRL follow the 
Gildea and Jurafsky (2002) model. First, for a 
given predicate, the SRL system identifies its 
arguments' boundaries. Second, the Argument 
types are classified depending on an adopted 
lexical resource such as PropBank or FrameNet. 
Both steps are based on supervised learning over 
labeled gold standard data. A final step uses heu-
ristics to resolve inconsistencies when applying 
both steps simultaneously to the test data.  
Since many of the SRL resources are English, 
most of the SRL systems to date have been for 
English. There has been work in other languages 
such as German and Chinese (Erk 2006; Sun 
2004; Xue and Palmer 2005). The systems for 
the other languages follow the successful models 
devised for English, e.g. (Gildea and Palmer, 
2002; Chen and Rambow, 2003; Moschitti, 2004; 
Xue and Palmer, 2004; Haghighi et al, 2005). 
3 The Chinese-English 5W Task 
3.1 5W Task Description 
We participated in the 5W task as part of the 
DARPA GALE (Global Autonomous Language 
Exploitation) project. The goal is to identify the 
5W?s (Who, What, When, Where and Why) for a 
complete sentence. The motivation for the 5W 
task is that, as their origin in journalism suggests, 
the 5W?s cover the key information nuggets in a 
sentence. If a system can isolate these pieces of 
information successfully, then it can produce a 
pr?cis of the basic meaning of the sentence. Note 
that this task differs from QA tasks, where 
?Who? and ?What? usually refer to definition 
type questions. In this task, the 5W?s refer to se-
mantic roles within a sentence, as defined in Ta-
ble 1.  
In order to get al 5W?s for a sentence correct, 
a system must identify a top-level predicate, ex-
tract the correct arguments, and resolve attach-
ment ambiguity. In the case of multiple top-level 
predicates, any of the top-level predicates may be 
chosen. In the case of passive verbs, the Who is 
the agent (often expressed as a ?by clause?, or 
not stated), and the What should include the syn-
tactic subject.  
424
Answers are judged Correct1 if they identify a 
correct null argument or correctly extract an ar-
gument that is present in the sentence. Answers 
are not penalized for including extra text, such as 
prepositional phrases or subordinate clauses, 
unless the extra text includes text from another 
answer or text from another top-level predicate. 
In sentence 2a in Table 2, returning ?bought and 
cooked? for the What would be Incorrect. Simi-
larly, returning ?bought the fish at the market? 
for the What would also be Incorrect, since it 
contains the Where. Answers may also be judged 
Partial, meaning that only part of the answer was 
returned. For example, if the What contains the 
predicate but not the logical object, it is Partial.  
Since each sentence may have multiple correct 
sets of 5W?s, it is not straightforward to produce 
a gold-standard corpus for automatic evaluation. 
One would have to specify answers for each pos-
sible top-level predicate, as well as which parts 
of the sentence are optional and which are not 
allowed. This also makes creating training data 
for system development problematic. For exam-
ple, in Table 2, the sentence in 2a and 2b is the 
same, but there are two possible sets of correct 
answers. Since we could not rely on a gold-
standard corpus, we used manual annotation to 
judge our 5W system, described in section 5. 
3.2 The Cross-Lingual 5W Task 
In the cross-lingual 5W task, a system is given a 
sentence in the source language and asked to 
produce the 5W?s in the target language. In this 
task, both machine translation (MT) and 5W ex-
traction must succeed in order to produce correct 
answers. One motivation behind the cross-lingual 
5W task is MT evaluation. Unlike word- or 
phrase-overlap measures such as BLEU, the 5W 
evaluation takes into account ?concept? or ?nug-
get? translation. Of course, only the top-level 
predicate and arguments are evaluated, so it is 
not a complete evaluation. But it seeks to get at 
the understandability of the MT output, rather 
than just n-gram overlap. 
Translation exacerbates the problem of auto-
matically evaluating 5W systems. Since transla-
tion introduces paraphrase, rewording and sen-
tence restructuring, the 5W?s may change from 
one translation of a sentence to another transla-
tion of the same sentence. In some cases, roles 
may swap. For example, in Table 2, sentences 1a 
and 1b could be valid translations of the same 
                                                 
1
 The specific guidelines for determining correctness 
were formulated by BAE.  
Chinese sentence. They contain the same infor-
mation, but the 5W answers are different. Also, 
translations may produce answers that are textu-
ally similar to correct answers, but actually differ 
in meaning. These differences complicate proc-
essing in the source followed by translation. 
 
Example: On Tuesday, President Obama met with 
French President Sarkozy in Paris to discuss the 
economic crisis. 
W Definition Example  
answer 
WHO Logical subject of the 
top-level predicate in 
WHAT, or null. 
President 
Obama 
WHAT One of the top-level 
predicates in the sen-
tence, and the predi-
cate?s logical object. 
met with 
French Presi-
dent Sarkozy 
WHEN ARGM-TMP of the 
top-level predicate in 
WHAT, or null. 
On Tuesday 
WHERE ARGM-LOC of the 
top-level predicate in 
WHAT, or null. 
in Paris 
WHY ARGM-CAU of the 
top-level predicate in 
WHAT, or null. 
to discuss the 
economic crisis 
Table 1. Definition of the 5W task, and 5W answers 
from the example sentence above. 
4 5W System 
We developed a 5W combination system that 
was based on five other 5W systems. We se-
lected four of these different systems for evalua-
tion: the final combined system (which was our 
submission for the official evaluation), two sys-
tems that did analysis in the target-language 
(English), and one system that did analysis in the 
source language (Chinese). In this section, we 
describe the individual systems that we evalu-
ated, the combination strategy, the parsers that 
we tuned for the task, and the MT systems.  
 Sentence WHO WHAT 
1a Mary bought a cake 
from Peter. 
Mary bought a 
cake 
1b Peter sold Mary a 
cake. 
Peter sold Mary 
2a I bought the fish at 
the market yesterday 
and cooked it today. 
I bought the 
fish 
[WHEN: 
yesterday] 
2b I bought the fish at 
the market yesterday 
and cooked it today. 
I cooked it 
[WHEN: 
today] 
Table 2. Example 5W answers. 
425
4.1 Latent Annotation Parser 
For this work, we have re-implemented and en-
hanced the Berkeley parser (Petrov and Klein 
2007) in several ways: (1) developed a new 
method to handle rare words in English and Chi-
nese; (2) developed a new model of unknown 
Chinese words based on characters in the word; 
(3) increased robustness by adding adaptive 
modification of pruning thresholds and smooth-
ing of word emission probabilities. While the 
enhancements to the parser are important for ro-
bustness and accuracy, it is even more important 
to train grammars matched to the conditions of 
use. For example, parsing a Chinese sentence 
containing full-width punctuation with a parser 
trained on half-width punctuation reduces accu-
racy by over 9% absolute F. In English, parsing 
accuracy is seriously compromised by training a 
grammar with punctuation and case to process 
sentences without them.  
We developed grammars for English and Chi-
nese trained specifically for each genre by sub-
sampling from available treebanks (for English, 
WSJ, BN, Brown, Fisher, and Switchboard; for 
Chinese, CTB5) and transforming them for a 
particular genre (e.g., for informal speech, we 
replaced symbolic expressions with verbal forms 
and remove punctuation and case) and by utiliz-
ing a large amount of genre-matched self-labeled 
training parses. Given these genre-specific 
parses, we extracted chunks and POS tags by 
script. We also trained grammars with a subset of 
function tags annotated in the treebank that indi-
cate case role information (e.g., SBJ, OBJ, LOC, 
MNR) in order to produce function tags.   
4.2 Individual 5W Systems 
The English systems were developed for the 
monolingual 5W task and not modified to handle 
MT. They used hand-crafted rules on the output 
of the latent annotation parser to extract the 5Ws.  
English-function used the function tags from 
the parser to map parser constituents to the 5Ws. 
First the Who, When, Where and Why were ex-
tracted, and then the remaining pieces of the sen-
tence were returned as the What. The goal was to 
make sure to return a complete What answer and 
avoid missing the object. 
English-LF, on the other hand, used a system 
developed over a period of eight years (Meyers 
et al 2001) to map from the parser?s syntactic 
constituents into logical grammatical relations 
(GLARF), and then extracted the 5Ws from the 
logical form. As a back-up, it also extracted 
GLARF relations from another English-treebank 
trained parser, the Charniak parser (Charniak 
2001). After the parses were both converted to 
the 5Ws, they were then merged, favoring the 
system that: recognized the passive, filled more 
5W slots or produced shorter 5W slots (provid-
ing that the WHAT slot consisted of more than 
just the verb). A third back-up method extracted 
5Ws from part-of-speech tag patterns. Unlike 
English-function, English-LF explicitly tried to 
extract the shortest What possible, provided there 
was a verb and a possible object, in order to 
avoid multiple predicates or other 5W answers.  
Chinese-align uses the latent annotation 
parser (trained for Chinese) to parse the Chinese 
sentences. A dependency tree converter (Johans-
son and Nuges 2007) was applied to the constitu-
ent-based parse trees to obtain the dependency 
relations and determine top-level predicates. A 
set of hand-crafted dependency rules based on 
observation of Chinese OntoNotes were used to 
map from the Chinese function tags into Chinese 
5Ws.  Finally, Chinese-align used the alignments 
of three separate MT systems to translate the 
5Ws: a phrase-based system, a hierarchical 
phrase-based system, and a syntax augmented 
hierarchical phrase-based system. Chinese-align 
faced a number of problems in using the align-
ments, including the fact that the best MT did not 
always have the best alignment. Since the predi-
cate is essential, it tried to detect when verbs 
were deleted in MT, and back-off to a different 
MT system. It also used strategies for finding 
and correcting noisy alignments, and for filtering 
When/Where answers from Who and What.  
4.3 Hybrid System 
A merging algorithm was learned based on a de-
velopment test set. The algorithm selected all 
5W?s from a single system, rather than trying to 
merge W?s from different systems, since the 
predicates may vary across systems. For each 
document genre (described in section 5.4), we 
ranked the systems by performance on the devel-
opment data. We also experimented with a vari-
ety of features (for instance, does ?What? include 
a verb). The best-performing features were used 
in combination with the ranked list of priority 
systems to create a rule-based merger. 
4.4 MT Systems 
The MT Combination system used by both of the 
English 5W systems combined up to nine sepa-
rate MT systems. System weights for combina-
tion were optimized together with the language 
426
model score and word penalty for a combination 
of BLEU and TER (2*(1-BLEU) + TER). Res-
coring was applied after system combination us-
ing large language models and lexical trigger 
models. Of the nine systems, six were phrased-
based systems (one of these used chunk-level 
reordering of the Chinese, one used word sense 
disambiguation, and one used unsupervised Chi-
nese word segmentation), two were hierarchical 
phrase-based systems, one was a string-to-
dependency system, one was syntax-augmented, 
and one was a combination of two other systems. 
Bleu scores on the government supplied test set 
in December 2008 were 35.2 for formal text, 
29.2 for informal text, 33.2 for formal speech, 
and 27.6 for informal speech. More details may 
be found in (Matusov et al 2009). 
5 Methods 
5.1 5W Systems 
For the purposes of this evaluation2, we com-
pared the output of 4 systems: English-Function, 
English-LF, Chinese-align, and the combined 
system. Each English system was also run on 
reference translations of the Chinese sentence. 
So for each sentence in the evaluation corpus, 
there were 6 systems that each provided 5Ws. 
5.2 5W Answer Annotation 
For each 5W output, annotators were presented 
with the reference translation, the MT version, 
and the 5W answers. The 5W system names 
were hidden from the annotators. Annotators had 
to select ?Correct?, ?Partial? or ?Incorrect? for 
each W. For answers that were Partial or Incor-
rect, annotators had to further specify the source 
of the error based on several categories (de-
scribed in section 6). All three annotators were 
native English speakers who were not system 
developers for any of the 5W systems that were 
being evaluated (to avoid biased grading, or as-
signing more blame to the MT system). None of 
the annotators knew Chinese, so all of the judg-
ments were based on the reference translations. 
After one round of annotation, we measured 
inter-annotator agreement on the Correct, Partial, 
or Incorrect judgment only. The kappa value was 
0.42, which was lower than we expected. An-
other surprise was that the agreement was lower 
                                                 
2
 Note that an official evaluation was also performed by 
DARPA and BAE. This evaluation provides more fine-
grained detail on error types and gives results for the differ-
ent approaches. 
for When, Where and Why (?=0.31) than for 
Who or What (?=0.48). We found that, in cases 
where a system would get both Who and What 
wrong, it was often ambiguous how the remain-
ing W?s should be graded. Consider the sentence: 
?He went to the store yesterday and cooked lasa-
gna today.? A system might return erroneous 
Who and What answers, and return Where as ?to 
the store? and When as ?today.? Since Where 
and When apply to different predicates, they 
cannot both be correct. In order to be consistent, 
if a system returned erroneous Who and What 
answers, we decided to mark the When, Where 
and Why answers Incorrect by default. We added 
clarifications to the guidelines and discussed ar-
eas of confusion, and then the annotators re-
viewed and updated their judgments.  
After this round of annotating, ?=0.83 on the 
Correct, Partial, Incorrect judgments. The re-
maining disagreements were genuinely ambigu-
ous cases, where a sentence could be interpreted 
multiple ways, or the MT could be understood in 
various ways. There was higher agreement on 
5W?s answers from the reference text compared 
to MT text, since MT is inherently harder to 
judge and some annotators were more flexible 
than others in grading garbled MT. 
5.3 5W Error Annotation 
In addition to judging the system answers by the 
task guidelines, annotators were asked to provide 
reason(s) an answer was wrong by selecting from 
a list of predefined errors. Annotators were asked 
to use their best judgment to ?assign blame? to 
the 5W system, the MT, or both. There were six 
types of system errors and four types of MT er-
rors, and the annotator could select any number 
of errors. (Errors are described further in section 
6.) For instance, if the translation was correct, 
but the 5W system still failed, the blame would 
be assigned to the system. If the 5W system 
picked an incorrectly translated argument (e.g., 
?baked a moon? instead of ?baked a cake?), then 
the error would be assigned to the MT system. 
Annotators could also assign blame to both sys-
tems, to indicate that they both made mistakes.  
Since this annotation task was a 10-way selec-
tion, with multiple selections possible, there were 
some disagreements. However, if categorized 
broadly into 5W System errors only, MT errors 
only, and both 5W System and MT errors, then 
the annotators had a substantial level of agree-
ment (?=0.75 for error type, on sentences where 
both annotators indicated an error).  
427
5.4 5 W Corpus 
The full evaluation corpus is 350 documents, 
roughly evenly divided between four genres: 
formal text (newswire), informal text (blogs and 
newsgroups), formal speech (broadcast news) 
and informal speech (broadcast conversation). 
For this analysis, we randomly sampled docu-
ments to judge from each of the genres. There 
were 50 documents (249 sentences) that were 
judged by a single annotator. A subset of that set, 
with 22 documents and 103 sentences, was 
judged by two annotators. In comparing the re-
sults from one annotator to the results from both 
annotators, we found substantial agreement. 
Therefore, we present results from the single an-
notator so we can do a more in-depth analysis. 
Since each sentence had 5W?s, and there were 6 
systems that were compared, there were 7,500 
single-annotator judgments over 249 sentences. 
6 Results 
Figure 1 shows the cross-lingual performance 
(on MT) of all the systems for each 5W. The best 
monolingual performance (on human transla-
tions) is shown as a dashed line (% Correct 
only). If a system returned Incorrect answers for 
Who and What, then the other answers were 
marked Incorrect (as explained in section 5.2). 
For the last 3W?s, the majority of errors were due 
to this (details in Figure 1), so our error analysis 
focuses on the Who and What questions. 
6.1 Monolingual 5W Performance 
To establish a monolingual baseline, the Eng-
lish 5W system was run on reference (human) 
translations of the Chinese text. For each partial 
or incorrect answer, annotators could select one 
or more of these reasons: 
? Wrong predicate or multiple predicates. 
? Answer contained another 5W answer. 
? Passive handled wrong (WHO/WHAT). 
? Answer missed. 
? Argument attached to wrong predicate. 
Figure 1 shows the performance of the best 
monolingual system for each 5W as a dashed 
line. The What question was the hardest, since it 
requires two pieces of information (the predicate 
and object). The When, Where and Why ques-
tions were easier, since they were null most of 
the time. (In English OntoNotes 2.0, 38% of sen-
tences have a When, 15% of sentences have a 
Where, and only 2.6% of sentences have a Why.) 
The most common monolingual system error on 
these three questions was a missed answer, ac-
counting for all of the Where errors, all but one 
Why error and 71% of the When errors. The re-
maining When errors usually occurred when the 
system assumed the wrong sense for adverbs 
(such as ?then? or ?just?). 
 Missing Other 
5W 
Wrong/Multiple 
Predicates 
Wrong 
REF-func 37 29 22 7 
REF-LF 54 20 17 13 
MT-func 18 18 18 8 
MT-LF 26 19 10 11 
Chinese 23 17 14 8 
Hybrid 13 17 15 12 
Table 3. Percentages of Who/What errors attributed to 
each system error type. 
The top half of Table 3 shows the reasons at-
tributed to the Who/What errors for the reference 
corpus. Since English-LF preferred shorter an-
swers, it frequently missed answers or parts of 
Figure 1. System performance on each 5W. ?Partial? indicates that part of the answer was missing. Dashed lines 
show the performance of the best monolingual system (% Correct on human translations). For the last 3W?s, the 
percent of answers that were Incorrect ?by default? were: 30%, 24%, 27% and 22%, respectively, and 8% for the 
best monolingual system 
60 60 56 66
36 40 38 42
56 59 59 64 63
70 66 73 68 75 71 78
19201914
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
En
g-
fu
nc
En
g-
LF
Ch
in
es
e
Hy
br
id
En
g-
fu
nc
En
g-
LF
Ch
in
es
e
Hy
br
id
En
g-
fu
nc
En
g-
LF
Ch
in
es
e
Hy
br
id
En
g-
fu
nc
En
g-
LF
Ch
in
es
e
Hy
br
id
En
g-
fu
nc
En
g-
LF
Ch
in
es
e
Hy
br
id
WHO WHAT WHEN WHERE WHY
Partia l
Correct
90
75 81
83 90
Best 
mono-
lingual
428
answers. English-LF also had more Partial an-
swers on the What question: 66% Correct and 
12% Partial, versus 75% Correct and 1% Partial 
for English-function. On the other hand, English-
function was more likely to return answers that 
contained incorrect extra information, such as 
another 5W or a second predicate. 
6.2 Effect of MT on 5W Performance 
The cross-lingual 5W task requires that systems 
return intelligible responses that are semantically 
equivalent to the source sentence (or, in the case 
of this evaluation, equivalent to the reference).  
As can be seen in Figure 1, MT degrades the 
performance of the 5W systems significantly, for 
all question types, and for all systems. Averaged 
over all questions, the best monolingual system 
does 19% better than the best cross-lingual sys-
tem. Surprisingly, even though English-function 
outperformed English-LF on the reference data, 
English-LF does consistently better on MT. This 
is likely due to its use of multiple back-off meth-
ods when the parser failed.  
6.3 Source-Language vs. Target-Language 
The Chinese system did slightly worse than ei-
ther English system overall, but in the formal 
text genre, it outperformed both English systems.  
Although the accuracies for the Chinese and 
English systems are similar, the answers vary a 
lot. Nearly half (48%) of the answers can be an-
swered correctly by both the English system and 
the Chinese system. But 22% of the time, the 
English system returned the correct answer when 
the Chinese system did not. Conversely, 10% of 
the answers were returned correctly by the Chi-
nese system and not the English systems. The 
hybrid system described in section 4.2 attempts 
to exploit these complementary advantages. 
After running the hybrid system, 61% of the 
answers were from English-LF, 25% from Eng-
lish-function, 7% from Chinese-align, and the 
remaining 7% were from the other Chinese 
methods (not evaluated here). The hybrid did 
better than its parent systems on all 5Ws, and the 
numbers above indicate that further improvement 
is possible with a better combination strategy.  
6.4 Cross-Lingual 5W Error Analysis 
For each Partial or Incorrect answer, annotators 
were asked to select system errors, translation 
errors, or both. (Further analysis is necessary to 
distinguish between ASR errors and MT errors.) 
The translation errors considered were: 
? Word/phrase deleted. 
? Word/phrase mistranslated. 
? Word order mixed up. 
? MT unreadable. 
Table 4 shows the translation reasons attrib-
uted to the Who/What errors. For all systems, the 
errors were almost evenly divided between sys-
tem-only, MT-only and both, although the Chi-
nese system had a higher percentage of system-
only errors. The hybrid system was able to over-
come many system errors (for example, in Table 
2, only 13% of the errors are due to missing an-
swers), but still suffered from MT errors. 
Table 4. Percentages of Who/What errors by each 
system attributed to each translation error type. 
Mistranslation was the biggest translation 
problem for all the systems. Consider the first 
example in Figure 3. Both English systems cor-
rectly extracted the Who and the When, but for 
Mistrans-
lation 
Deletion Word 
Order 
Unreadable 
MT-func 34 18 24 18 
MT-LF 29 22 21 14 
Chinese 32 17 9 13 
Hybrid 35 19 27 18 
MT: After several rounds of reminded, I was a little bit 
Ref: After several hints, it began to come back to me. 
 ??????,?????????? 
MT: The Guizhou province, within a certain bank robber, under the watchful eyes of a weak woman, and, with a 
knife stabbed the woman. 
Ref: I saw that in a bank in Guizhou Province, robbers seized a vulnerable young woman in front of a group of 
onlookers and stabbed the woman with a knife. 
 ?????????,?????????,???????,??,???????? 
MT: Woke up after it was discovered that the property is not more than eleven people do not even said that the 
memory of the receipt of the country into the country. 
Ref: Well, after waking up, he found everything was completely changed. Apart from having additional eleven 
grandchildren, even the motherland as he recalled has changed from a socialist country to a capitalist country. 
 ?????????????,?????????,????????????????????????? 
Figure 3 Example sentences that presented problems for the 5W systems. 
 
429
What they returned ?was a little bit.? This is the 
correct predicate for the sentence, but it does not 
match the meaning of the reference. The Chinese 
5W system was able to select a better translation, 
and instead returned ?remember a little bit.? 
Garbled word order was chosen for 21-24% of 
the target-language system Who/What errors, but 
only 9% of the source-language system 
Who/What errors. The source-language word 
order problems tended to be local, within-phrase 
errors (e.g., ?the dispute over frozen funds? was 
translated as ?the freezing of disputes?). The tar-
get-language system word order problems were 
often long-distance problems. For example, the 
second sentence in Figure 3 has many phrases in 
common with the reference translation, but the 
overall sentence makes no sense. The watchful 
eyes actually belong to a ?group of onlookers? 
(deleted). Ideally, the robber would have 
?stabbed the woman? ?with a knife,? rather than 
vice versa. Long-distance phrase movement is a 
common problem in Chinese-English MT, and 
many MT systems try to handle it (e.g., Wang et 
al. 2007). By doing analysis in the source lan-
guage, the Chinese 5W system is often able to 
avoid this problem ? for example, it successfully 
returned ?robbers? ?grabbed a weak woman? for 
the Who/What of this sentence. 
Although we expected that the Chinese system 
would have fewer problems with MT deletion, 
since it could choose from three different MT 
versions, MT deletion was a problem for all sys-
tems. In looking more closely at the deletions, 
we noticed that over half of deletions were verbs 
that were completely missing from the translated 
sentence. Since MT systems are tuned for word-
based overlap measures (such as BLEU), verb 
deletion is penalized equally as, for example, 
determiner deletion. Intuitively, a verb deletion 
destroys the central meaning of a sentence, while 
a determiner is rarely necessary for comprehen-
sion. Other kinds of deletions included noun 
phrases, pronouns, named entities, negations and 
longer connecting phrases.  
Deletion also affected When and Where. De-
leting particles such as ?in? and ?when? that in-
dicate a location or temporal argument caused 
the English systems to miss the argument. Word 
order problems in MT also caused attachment 
ambiguity in When and Where. 
The ?unreadable? category was an option of 
last resort for very difficult MT sentences. The 
third sentence in Figure 3 is an example where 
ASR and MT errors compounded to create an 
unparseable sentence.  
7 Conclusions 
In our evaluation of various 5W systems, we dis-
covered several characteristics of the task. The 
What answer was the hardest for all systems, 
since it is difficult to include enough information 
to cover the top-level predicate and object, with-
out getting penalized for including too much. 
The challenge in the When, Where and Why 
questions is due to sparsity ? these responses 
occur in much fewer sentences than Who and 
What, so systems most often missed these an-
swers. Since this was a new task, this first 
evaluation showed clear issues on the language 
analysis side that can be improved in the future. 
The best cross-lingual 5W system was still 
19% worse than the best monolingual 5W sys-
tem, which shows that MT significantly degrades 
sentence-level understanding. A serious problem 
in MT for systems was deletion. Chinese con-
stituents that were never translated caused seri-
ous problems, even when individual systems had 
strategies to recover. When the verb was deleted, 
no top level predicate could be found and then all 
5Ws were wrong.  
One of our main research questions was 
whether to extract or translate first. We hypothe-
sized that doing source-language analysis would 
be more accurate, given the noise in Chinese 
MT, but the systems performed about the same. 
This is probably because the English tools (logi-
cal form extraction and parser) were more ma-
ture and accurate than the Chinese tools.  
Although neither source-language nor target-
language analysis was able to circumvent prob-
lems in MT, each approach had advantages rela-
tive to the other, since they did well on different 
sets of sentences. For example, Chinese-align 
had fewer problems with word order, and most 
of those were due to local word-order problems.  
Since the source-language and target-language 
systems made different kinds of mistakes, we 
were able to build a hybrid system that used the 
relative advantages of each system to outperform 
all systems. The different types of mistakes made 
by each system suggest features that can be used 
to improve the combination system in the future. 
Acknowledgments 
This work was supported in part by the Defense 
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) 
under contract number HR0011-06-C-0023. Any 
opinions, findings and conclusions or recom-
mendations expressed in this material are the 
authors' and do not necessarily reflect those of 
the sponsors. 
430
References  
Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B. 
Lowe. 1998. The Berkeley FrameNet project. In 
COLING-ACL '98: Proceedings of the Conference, 
held at the University of Montr?al, pages 86?90. 
Xavier Carreras and Llu?s M?rquez. 2005. Introduc-
tion to the CoNLL-2005 shared task: Semantic role 
labeling. In Proceedings of the Ninth Conference 
on Computational Natural Language Learning 
(CoNLL-2005), pages 152?164. 
Eugene Charniak. 2001. Immediate-head parsing for 
language models. In Proceedings of the 39th An-
nual Meeting on Association For Computational 
Linguistics (Toulouse, France, July 06 - 11, 2001).   
John Chen and Owen Rambow. 2003. Use of deep 
linguistic features for the recognition and labeling 
of semantic arguments. In Proceedings of the 2003 
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, Sapporo, Japan. 
Katrin Erk and Sebastian Pado. 2006. Shalmaneser ? 
a toolchain for shallow semantic parsing. Proceed-
ings of LREC. 
Daniel Gildea and Daniel Jurafsky. 2002. Automatic 
labeling of semantic roles. Computational Linguis-
tics, 28(3):245?288. 
Daniel Gildea and Martha Palmer. 2002. The neces-
sity of parsing for predicate argument recognition. 
In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Conference of 
the Association for Computational Linguistics 
(ACL-02), Philadelphia, PA, USA. 
Mary Harper and Zhongqiang Huang. 2009. Chinese 
Statistical Parsing, chapter to appear. 
Aria Haghighi, Kristina Toutanova, and Christopher 
Manning. 2005. A joint model for semantic role la-
beling. In Proceedings of the Ninth Conference on 
Computational Natural Language Learning 
(CoNLL-2005), pages 173?176.  
Paul Kingsbury and Martha Palmer. 2003. Propbank: 
the next level of treebank. In Proceedings of Tree-
banks and Lexical Theories. 
Evgeny Matusov, Gregor Leusch, & Hermann Ney: 
Learning to combine machine translation systems.  
In: Cyril Goutte, Nicola Cancedda, Marc Dymet-
man, & George Foster (eds.) Learning machine 
translation. (Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press, 
2009); pp.257-276. 
Adam Meyers, Ralph Grishman, Michiko Kosaka and 
Shubin Zhao.  2001. Covering Treebanks with 
GLARF. In Proceedings of the ACL 2001 Work-
shop on Sharing Tools and Resources. Annual 
Meeting of the ACL. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, Morristown, NJ, 51-58. 
Teruko Mitamura, Eric Nyberg, Hideki Shima, 
Tsuneaki Kato, Tatsunori Mori, Chin-Yew Lin, 
Ruihua Song, Chuan-Jie Lin, Tetsuya Sakai, 
Donghong Ji, and Noriko Kando. 2008. Overview 
of the NTCIR-7 ACLIA Tasks: Advanced Cross-
Lingual Information Access. In Proceedings of the 
Seventh NTCIR Workshop Meeting. 
Alessandro Moschitti, Silvia Quarteroni, Roberto 
Basili, and Suresh Manandhar. 2007. Exploiting 
syntactic and shallow semantic kernels for question 
answer classification. In Proceedings of the 45th 
Annual Meeting of the Association of Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 776?783.  
Kristen Parton, Kathleen R. McKeown, James Allan, 
and Enrique Henestroza. Simultaneous multilingual 
search for translingual information retrieval. In 
Proceedings of ACM 17th Conference on Informa-
tion and Knowledge Management (CIKM), Napa 
Valley, CA, 2008. 
Slav Petrov and Dan Klein. 2007. Improved Inference 
for Unlexicalized Parsing. North American Chapter 
of the Association for Computational Linguistics 
(HLT-NAACL 2007). 
Sudo, K., Sekine, S., and Grishman, R. 2004. Cross-
lingual information extraction system evaluation. 
In Proceedings of the 20th international Confer-
ence on Computational Linguistics. 
Honglin Sun and Daniel Jurafsky. 2004. Shallow Se-
mantic Parsing of Chinese. In Proceedings of 
NAACL-HLT. 
Cynthia A. Thompson, Roger Levy, and Christopher 
Manning. 2003. A generative model for semantic 
role labeling. In 14th European Conference on Ma-
chine Learning. 
Nianwen Xue and Martha Palmer. 2004. Calibrating 
features for semantic role labeling. In Dekang Lin 
and Dekai Wu, editors, Proceedings of EMNLP 
2004, pages 88?94, Barcelona, Spain, July. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics. 
Xue, Nianwen and Martha Palmer. 2005. Automatic 
semantic role labeling for Chinese verbs. InPro-
ceedings of the Nineteenth International Joint Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 1160-1165.  
Chao Wang, Michael Collins, and Philipp Koehn. 
2007. Chinese Syntactic Reordering for Statistical 
Machine Translation. Proceedings of the 2007 Joint 
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing and Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL), 737-745. 
Jianqiang Wang and Douglas W. Oard, 2006. "Com-
bining Bidirectional Translation and Synonymy for 
Cross-Language Information Retrieval," in 29th 
Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on 
Research and Development in Information Re-
trieval, pp. 202-209. 
431
