Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Computational Semantics, pages 222?234,
Tilburg, January 2009. c?2009 International Conference on Computational Semantics
Disambiguation of Polysemous Verbs
for Rule-based Inferencing
Fabienne Martin, Dennis Spohr, and Achim Stein
Institut fu?r Linguistik/Romanistik
Universita?t Stuttgart, Germany
firstname.lastname@ling.uni-stuttgart.de
Abstract
We present an approach to disambiguating verb senses which differ
w.r.t. the inferences they allow. It combines standard ontological tools
and formalisms with a formal semantic analysis and is hence more
formalised and more detailed than existing lexical semantic resources
like WordNet and FrameNet [Fellbaum, 1998, Baker et al, 1998]. The
resource presented here implements formal semantic descriptions of
verbs in the Web Ontology Language (OWL) and exploits its reasoning
potential based on Description Logics (DL) for the disambiguation of
verbs in context, since before the correct sense of a verb can be reliably
determined, its syntactic arguments have to be disambiguated first. We
present details on this process, which is based on a mapping from the
French EuroWordNet [Vossen, 1998] to SUMO [Niles and Pease, 2003].
Moreover, we focus on the selectional restrictions of verbs w.r.t. the
ontological type of their arguments, as well as their representation as
necessary and sufficient conditions in the TBox. After a DL reasoner
has identified the verb sense on the basis of these conditions, we make
use of the more expressive Semantic Web Rule Language to calculate
the inferences that are permitted on the selected interpretation.
1 Introduction
Verbs raise a number of challenges for computational linguistic applications,
two of which will be addressed in this paper. Firstly, a lot of them are
highly polysemous, which makes a careful disambiguation a prerequisite for
the application of semantic web technologies. As an example, the same
French verb encourager is normally translated by three different verbs in
German, as illustrated in (1)-(3):
222
(1) Un terroriste a encourage?
1
ma voisine a` poser une bombe dans la cave.
A terrorist has encouraged my neighbour to place a bomb in the basement.
Ein Terrorist hat meine Nachbarin ermutigt, eine Bombe im Keller zu legen.
(2) La lettre a encourage?
2
ma voisine a` poser une bombe dans la cave.
The letter has encouraged my neighbour to place a bomb in the basement.
Der Brief hat meine Nachbarin dazu bewegt, eine Bombe im Keller zu legen.
(3) Le gouvernement a encourage?
3
la recherche sur les armes biologiques.
The government has encouraged research on biological weapons.
Die Regierung hat die Erforschung biologischer Waffen angeregt.
Note that (1) differs from (2) only by the ontological category of the
subject, which is a human entity in (1) and a non-human
1
one in (2). On
the other hand, (3) differs from the previous two in that its object is a non-
human entity (while the object denotes a human in (1) and (2)), and in that
it does not take an infinitival complement. The second challenge concerns
the computation and the weighting of the inferences triggered by verbs. The
contrast between (1) and (2) offers a striking example: while the interpreter
of (2) can take for granted that a bomb was placed, it can only be guessed
that it was possible in (1). It is crucial to note that subtle differences like
these do exist in French, which is further exemplified by the fact that (1) can
be continued by the sentence ..., mais elle ne l?a pas fait. (?..., but she [the
neighbour] didn?t do it.?), whereas (2) cannot (cf. Mari and Martin [2007]).
Following Bhatt [1999], let us call ?actuality entailment? (ae) the entail-
ment triggered by (2) ? and to which the interpreter assigns the probability
1 ? that an event satisfying the infinitival complement took place, and ?weak
inference? the one triggered by (1) ? and to which the interpreter assigns a
probability p between 0 and 1. Furthermore, we will say that when the ae
is triggered, the verb instantiates its ?implicative reading?.
2
Note that the presence of the non-human subject in (2) is only a neces-
sary condition to trigger the ae (and consequently the implicative reading).
For the ae to arise, the tense of the sentence has to be of a certain kind as
well (i.e. a perfective tense, e.g. the passe? compose? in French). The inter-
action between lexical semantics and information pertaining to the textual
level like tense and aspect must then be modelled appropriately to capture
the facts.
1
The fact that letters are generally written by humans is of no relevance here.
2
The terminology is borrowed from [Karttunen, 1971]. Note however that verbs like
encourager differ from what Karttunen originally calls ?implicative verbs? (e.g. re?ussir a`,
?manage to?), because the latter trigger an ae with any kind of tenses.
223
A model which allows to identify and weigh appropriately the inferences
triggered by verbs like encourager is highly desirable, since, first of all, verbs
of the same class are pervasive in the lexicon and heavily present in official
texts.
3
Secondly, rating accurately the inference that an event described by a
constituent took place is central for text understanding and summarisation.
As it is more convenient to present the implementation through a specific
reading of a polysemous verb, we will firstly detail the lexical semantics of
a specific interpretation of the verb encourager, namely the one translated
by the German verb (zu etwas) bewegen and selected in (2).
In (1) and (2), encourager is a psychological verb in that it denotes an
action or a state likely to trigger a certain psychological change of state of
the entity denoted by the object y (henceforth labelled ?Experiencer?). This
cannot be the case in (3), since a non-animate object (as research) cannot
experience a psychological state or process. Rather, encourager denotes in
(3) an action of the subject which is likely ?to be good for the development
of? the object. The evaluative component of this reading is the reason why
we propose to call this reading the ?axiological reading? of encourager.
Under the reading instantiated in (2), encourager is analysed here as
meaning something like to be in a state with the goal that y wants to P,
or, if y already has this desire, that y wants to P more than previously.
Want(s, d, t, P ) describes the state of wanting P at a degree d at a time t.
P stands here for a three-place relation.
(4) encourager
2
? ?s?y?x?P [Theme(s, x) ? Target(s, y) ? Goal(s, P
2
) ? P
2
=
[?s
1
?d
1
?t?d
2
?s
2
Want(s
1
, d
1
, P, t) ?Want(s
2
, d
2
, P, t
r
) ? t > t
r
? d
2
> d
1
?
Experiencer(s
1
, y) ?Experiencer(s
2
, y)]]
Plan of the paper. Section 2 discusses the model, focussing on selectional
restrictions and formalisation of inference rules. Section 3 shows how these
are applied to (2) in order to disambiguate the verb and its arguments, and
to calculate the inferences based on this selection. We conclude in Section
4 with the advantages of our approach over existing lexical resources.
2 Implementation of the Model
In the following, we will describe how we model the inference triggers just
mentioned as well as semantic representations like the one in (4) using OWL
3
Examples of verbs displaying the alternation between (1) and (2) (thus triggering
inferences of different strength in the two places) are autoriser a` P ?to authorize to P ?,
aider a` P, ?to help to P ?, or exiger que P, ?to demand that P ?.
224
DL and the more expressive Semantic Web Rule Language (SWRL).
4
2.1 Encoding of selectional argument restrictions
As mentioned above, the primary triggers for selecting one sense over an-
other is the presence (or absence) of syntactic arguments as well as their
ontological type. For example in (2), the fact that (i) encourager subcate-
gorises an infinitive, (ii) the subject is inanimate, and (iii) the direct object
is animate, determine the sense of encourager in this sentence. To make this
information available and processable, we use a straightforward encoding of
these triggers as conditions on class definitions (see also Franconi [2003]),
based on concepts of the Suggested Upper Merged Ontology
5
(SUMO; Niles
and Pease [2003]).
In particular, the different senses of a verb are modelled as subclasses of a
general class that denotes an underspecified representation of the verb. How-
ever, the different verb senses do only subclass this generic representation in
the lexicon, not in the concept hierarchy, since verb senses very frequently
denote different concepts that are not subsumed by a common concept. In
our concrete example, we assume 3 different senses of encourager in our
lexicon, which differ w.r.t. to their axiomatic definition. (5) below shows
the definition of the sense of encourager corresponding to the one in (2)
above.
(5) encourager2 ? encourager
?obj(Agent ? SocialRole) ? ?obj(Agent ? SocialRole)
?subj(?Agent) ? ?subj(?Agent)
? 1 xcompPred owl:Thing
The first line of this definition states that encourager2 is a subclass of
the underspecified encourager. The subsequent line requires that there be
values of the obj property which are either of type Agent or SocialRole, and
further that all values of the obj property have to be within this set of Agents
or SocialRoles. For capturing the inanimacy of the subject of encourager,
the next line indicates that the values of the subj property may not be of
type Agent, and finally, the last line says that the xcompPred property (i.e.
the main predicate of the embedded infinitive) has to have at least one value.
The general motivation for this encoding, which views the contextual
triggers discussed above as necessary and sufficient conditions, is that a
4
See http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-ref/ and http://www.w3.org/Submission/SWRL/.
5
The reasons for using SUMO classes will become evident in Section 3.1 below.
225
reasoner can infer ? on the basis of a particular setting of contextual param-
eters (i.e. property values) ? the specific type of an instance of the generic
encourager. In the following, we will discuss the inference rules that are
attached to each sense class, and which are evoked once a specific sense has
been determined.
2.2 Inference rules
As was mentioned above, the different senses of encourager do not only
differ w.r.t. to the necessary and sufficient conditions that are used to classify
them, but also w.r.t. the inferences they allow. In our model, such inferences
are encoded in the form of SWRL rules (see e.g. O?Connor et al [2005]), as
they require inference capacities which go beyond the scope of the inventory
provided by OWL DL. The SWRL rule that corresponds to the semantic
description of encourager
2
given in (4) is shown in Table 1 below, with the
rule body in lines 1 to 8 and the rule head in lines 9 to 30.
The first line represents the configuration in which the rule applies, i.e.
an instance of encourager2 with grammatical subject and object. Lines 2
to 8 make use of the SWRL extensions built-ins
6
defined within the Prote?ge?
ontology editor [Knublauch et al, 2004] in order to create instances that
are to be inserted into the representation, based on the analysis in (4). In
lines 9 to 11, the grammatical subject is asserted as the theme of the state
denoted by encourager, the grammatical object as target, and, as goal, the
proposition that the degree of y wanting to ?place a bomb? is now greater
than it was at a previous point in time. The two ?wanting? states that are
part of this proposition (lines 12 and 13) are described in lines 14 to 17 and
18 to 21, where the ?wanted? object corresponds to the embedded infinitive
7
.
Lines 22 and 23 state that the previous degree of wanting is greater than
the current one (note that the reference time tr is not a variable), and that
the grammatical object y is the experiencer of both wanting states. Finally,
lines 26 to 30 classify the remaining instances created in the rule body.
Although the rule appears to be quite specifically tailored to the par-
ticular use of encourager2, large parts of it can be re-used for senses of
other verbs within this group of psychological verbs, while other parts can
be parametrised to cover verbs of other groups. For example, the syntactic
setting (cf. line 1) is applicable to any transitive verb, while the assignment
6
See http://protege.cim3.net/cgi-bin/wiki.pl?SWRLExtensionsBuiltIns; the
built-in function createOWLThing has been replaced with cOT in the table.
7
Note that the four-place predicate Want(s, d, P, t) in (4) has been decomposed into a
sequence of two-place predicates indicating the degree, time, and object of the ?wanting?.
226
1 syntactic configuration required for appli-
cation of rule
encourager2(?s) ?
subj(?s,?x) ? obj(?s,?y) ?
2 create previous state of wanting swrlx:cOT(?s1,?s) ?
3 create current state of wanting swrlx:cOT(?s2,?s) ?
4 create proposition corresponding to em-
bedded infinitive
swrlx:cOT(?p,?s1) ?
5 create the proposition that is the goal of
encourager
swrlx:cOT(?p2,?s) ?
6 create previous degree of wanting swrlx:cOT(?d1,?s1) ?
7 create current degree of wanting swrlx:cOT(?d2,?s2) ?
8 create previous time swrlx:cOT(?t,?s)
?
9 assert grammatical subject as theme of
encourager
theme(?s,?x) ?
10 assert grammatical object as target of
encourager
target(?s,?y) ?
11 assert proposition as goal of encourager goal(?s,?p2) ?
12 assert that previous state is part of the
proposition
hasPart(?p2,?s1) ?
13 assert that current state is part of the
proposition
hasPart(?p2,?s2) ?
14 assert previous state of wanting WANTING(?s1) ?
15 assert previous degree of wanting degree(?s1,?d1) ?
16 assert object of wanting object(?s1,?p) ?
17 assert time of previous wanting time(?s1,?t) ?
18 assert current state of wanting WANTING(?s2) ?
19 assert current degree of wanting degree(?s2,?d2) ?
20 assert object of wanting object(?s2,?p) ?
21 assert reference time as time current of
wanting
time(?s2,tr) ?
22 assert that time of previous wanting is be-
fore reference time
before(?t,tr) ?
23 assert that current degree of wanting is
greater than previous
greaterThan(?d2,?d1) ?
24 assert grammatical object as experiencer of
previous wanting
experiencer(?s1,?y) ?
25 assert grammatical object as experiencer of
current wanting
experiencer(?s2,?y) ?
26 assert proposition Proposition(?p) ?
27 assert proposition Proposition(?p2) ?
28 assert degree Degree(?d1) ?
29 assert degree Degree(?d2) ?
30 assert time Time(?t)
Table 1: SWRL rule implementing the description of encourager
2
in (4)
227
of semantic roles (lines 9 to 11), the specification of the involved states (or
events) in lines 14 to 21 and 24 to 25, as well as the more specific temporal
and degree assertions in lines 22 to 23 can be parametrised to suit other
verb senses. For instance, the semantics of verbs like inviter a` P (?to invite
to P ?), inciter a` P (?to incite to P ?), pousser a` P (?push to P ?) and others
also involve a comparison between different degrees of wanting P associated
to different states. One possibility to achieve parametrisation is to store
information on these individual segments as property values for the sense
classes. These are read out by an external application and re-inserted into
the model in the form of a SWRL rule. This way, it is not necessary to store
inference rules for every single word sense, but to have only a small set of
generally applicable static rules in the model, while specific ones applying
in a given discourse are created dynamically using externally completed rule
templates.
3 Disambiguation and Calculation of Inferences
In order to select the correct reading of a verbal predicate in a sentence
like (2) and, moreover, to generate the appropriate semantic representation
on the basis of this choice, our system passes a number of distinct analy-
sis steps. Basically, the system receives input from a syntactic parser and
tries to determine the correct senses of both the verbal predicate and its
syntactic arguments, before calculating the inferences permitted on this in-
terpretation. The process is summarised in Figure 1.
For the scope of this paper, we will ignore details on the syntactic analysis
that precedes the semantic processing steps, and instead assume a syntactic
parser which returns output like the one depicted in Figure 1, providing
information on the predicate (encourager), its syntactic arguments (lettre,
voisin and the infinitival complement), its modal context (e.g. embedding
under pouvoir, ?can, be able to?), and the tense in which the predicate is
used. These context features are crucial for determining the inferences that
may be drawn, and thus play an important role in the semantic processing
steps which build on the syntactic analysis (see below).
3.1 Disambiguation of the predicate and its arguments
Before the correct sense of the verbal predicate can be selected, its syntactic
arguments have to be disambiguated first. In order to achieve this, we apply
a methodology that has been presented in [Spohr, 2008], which is very much
in line with standard approaches to word-sense disambiguation (see e.g.
228
Agent
SocialRole
...
Group
...
0.3957
0.3610
...
0.2315
...
0.0369
0.0369
...
?0.0066
...
Governmt
Gov.Orga.
...
Text
...
encourager1
encourager
   obj (?Agent)
   obj (?Agent)
= 0 xcompPred owl:Thing
A
E
>
encourager
   obj (Agent    SocialRole)
   obj (Agent    SocialRole)
   subj (Agent    SocialRole)
   subj (Agent    SocialRole)
   1 xcompPred owl:Thing
A
A
E
E
>
encourager
   obj (Agent    SocialRole)
   obj (Agent    SocialRole)
   subj (?Agent)
   subj (?Agent)
   1 xcompPred owl:Thing
A
A
E
E
Subject
SUMO?EuroWordNet?MappingOutput of syntactic parser
...
tense = perfective
xcomp.pred = poser
obj = voisin
subj = lettre
pred = encourager
Object
Selectional preference lists
3
encourager
encourager2 encourager
Reasoner
Figure 1: Schema of the process of determining the intended sense of
encourager in (2) from syntactically parsed input
[Schulte im Walde, 2008] for a recent account of related work in this field).
The major difference is that it makes use of ontological categories based on
a mapping between the French EuroWordNet ? a lexical semantic resource
for French (EWN; see e.g. Vossen [1998]) ? and the Suggested Upper Merged
Ontology (SUMO; Niles and Pease [2003]). By applying this methodology
to a verb like encourager, we obtain lists of selectional preferences w.r.t. to
the ontological types of its subject and object (see top righthand corner of
Figure 1). For the actual disambiguation, the different senses of the subject
(lettre in the present case) are looked up in the SUMO-EWN mapping, and
the sense scoring highest in the corresponding selectional preference list is
selected. The words are then asserted as instances of the respective class (in
this example Text for lettre and SocialRole for voisin) in the model.
The disambiguation of the arguments is not a deterministic process.
However, when viewed from the abstract level of SUMO concepts, the senses
distinguished in EWN are often still closely related so that their distinctions
have no impact on the interpretation of the verb and thus the selection of
the appropriate sense. E.g., although the three senses of lettre in EWN
map onto two SUMO concepts (Text and Character), they are still sub-
sumed under the common class ContentBearingPhysical, which suffices to
select the correct sense of encourager irrespective of the particular sense
of lettre. Thus, even though arguments may be disambiguated towards
the wrong sense, the interpretation of the verb stays the same and the in-
ferences drawn on the basis of this selection remain unaffected. Once the
229
arguments have been disambiguated, they are linked to the instance repre-
senting encourager. The intermediate ABox obtained from the operations
so far looks as follows.
(6) encourager( s) ? subj( s, lettre) ? obj( s, voisin) ? Text(lettre) ?
SocialRole(voisin)
The next step consists in determining the correct sense of encourager.
As mentioned in Section 2 above, selectional restrictions have been imple-
mented as necessary and sufficient conditions on class definitions, which
allows a reasoner to infer the type of the instance on the basis of these
conditions. With the configuration in (6), the reasoner
8
correctly infers the
instance of encourager as being of the more specific type encourager2, as
this is the only class satisfying the condition of having a subject that is not
an Agent, while having an object either of type Agent or SocialRole (cf.
Figure 1).
3.2 Calculation of inferences
The assertion of encourager2( s) in combination with subj( s, lettre) ?
obj( s, voisin) causes the SWRL rule in Table 1 above to fire, so that the
inferences can be calculated and inserted into the ABox. For this task we
used version 7 of the Jess rule engine
9
. The result of the rule application is
illustrated in Figure 2 and represents all assertions made on the basis of the
input sentence (2).
10
The logical form of the graph is given below.
(7) encourager2( s)? theme( s, lettre) ? target( s, voisin) ? goal( s, p2)
?hasPart( p2, s1)?WANTING( s1)?degree( s1, d1)?object( s1, p)
?time( s1, t)?hasPart( p2, s2)?WANTING( s2)?degree( s2, d2)
?object( s2, p)? time( s2, tr)?before( t, tr)?greaterThan( d2, d1)
?experiencer( s1, voisin)?experiencer( s2, voisin)?Proposition( p)
? Proposition( p2) ?Degree( d1) ?Degree( d2) ? T ime( t)
After the application of this rule, we can execute the rule corresponding
to the representation of the embedded infinitive, which is triggered by the use
of the perfective tense in sentence (2). In order to avoid repetition, we will
restrict ourselves to presenting only those statements that are introduced
8
We have used the Pellet OWL DL reasoner (http://pellet.owldl.com/).
9
See http://www.jessrules.com/.
10
The visualisation of the graph has been done using the Prote?ge? Jambalaya plug-in
(see http://www.thechiselgroup.org/jambalaya).
230
Figure 2: Model after execution of the SWRL rule in Table 1
by the embedded infinitive. Again, a certain sense of poser is instantiated
in the lexicon, which then triggers the application of an inference rule
11
.
(8) poser2( e) ?MOV ING( e) ? agent( e, voisin) ? theme( e, bombe) ?
Weapon(bombe) ? inside( s3, cave) ? Artifact(cave) ? theme( s3, bombe) ?
outside( s4, cave)?theme( s4, bombe)?time( s4, t2)?time( e, t3)?before( t2, t3)?
cause( e, s3)
The interpretation of this logical form is that a ?moving? event e took
place that causes the bombe, which was outside of the basement at a previous
state s4, to be inside the basement at a state s3. Moreover, this event e
is linked to the representation given in (7) as being a part of the proposition
p. As a result, the model captures appropriately the fact that in sentence
(2), the verb encourager instantiates what we called its implicative reading.
11
Weapon and Artifact are SUMO concepts subsuming the senses of bombe and cave.
231
4 Conclusion
We have presented an approach to modelling polysemous verbs using stan-
dard formalisms such as OWL and SWRL. We have shown how the disam-
biguation of the verbs and their arguments can be performed in this setting,
and how inferences can be calculated and inserted into a representation that
can be interpreted by tools developed in the context of the Semantic Web.
One of the advantages of our approach is that fine-grained sense distinc-
tions based on contextual features enable accurate annotation of particular
senses, and with it the calculation of inferences allowed by the respective
sense. Moreover, the resource combines formal semantics with up-to-date
technology for semantic processing and is thus more formalised and detailed
than existing lexical semantic resources. WordNet [Fellbaum, 1998], for ex-
ample, distinguishes three senses of to encourage (1. ?support, back up?, 2.
?inspire, animate...?, 3. ?induce, stimulate...?), without accounting for the
difference between implicative and non-implicative readings: the examples
show clearly that both are subsumed by sense 3 (e.g. ?The ads induced me to
buy a VCR? vs. ?My children finally got me to buy a computer?). FrameNet
[Baker et al, 1998] contains only one sense of to encourage, which it asso-
ciates with the Attempt Suasion frame. This frame corresponds to the
non-implicative reading (definition: ?The Speaker expresses through lan-
guage his wish to get the Addressee to act. There is no implication that
the Addressee forms an intention to act, let alne acts.?), whereas e.g. Sua-
sion implies that the Addressee forms an intention or accepts some content.
However, encourage is neither associated with this latter frame, nor with
a frame implying an action. Moreover, it does not emphasise the contex-
tual parameters mentioned above (e.g. the presence of arguments and their
ontological type), which trigger certain interpretations and are crucial for
determining the sense of a verb as well as its inferences. More closely related
is VerbNet [Kipper Schuler, 2005], though the major difference lies in the
formal semantic description that is the output of our analysis.
Although the system is ? due to lack of coverage ? not in a state of being
applied to sophisticated reasoning tasks such as the RTE challenge [Dagan
et al, 2005], the inclusion of the contained knowledge into existing systems
designed for such tasks seems very promising. The RTE challenge consists in
determining, given two text fragments, whether one text fragment is entailed
by the other. In our examples, the hypothesis ?A bomb has been placed.?
can only be inferred from sentence (2), not from (1). This shows that great
detail in the semantic description is a definite asset and an important step
beyond the information contained in existing lexical semantic resources.
232
Acknowledgements
This work has been done within the project ?Polysemy in a Conceptual
System? (SFB 732, project B5), funded by the German Research Foundation.
References
Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B. Lowe. The Berkeley
FrameNet project. In Proceedings of COLING/ACL, Montreal, 1998.
Rajesh Bhatt. Covert Modality in Non-Finite Contexts. PhD thesis, Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania, 1999.
Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini. The PASCAL Recognis-
ing Textual Entailment Challenge. In Proceedings of the PASCAL Chal-
lenges Workshop on RTE, Southampton, UK, 2005.
Christiane Fellbaum, editor. WordNet ? An Electronic Lexical Database.
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 1998.
Enrico Franconi. Natural Language Processing. In The Description Logic
Handbook: Theory, Implementation and Applications. CUP, 2003.
Lauri Karttunen. Implicative verbs. Language, 47:340?358, 1971.
Karin Kipper Schuler. VerbNet: A Broad-Coverage, Comprehensive Verb
Lexicon. PhD thesis, University of Pennsylvania, 2005.
Holger Knublauch, Mark A. Musen, and Alan L. Rector. Editing description
logic ontologies with the Prote?ge? OWL plugin. In Proceedings of DL 2004,
Whistler, BC, 2004.
Alda Mari and Fabienne Martin. Tense, abilities and actuality entailment.
In Maria Aloni, Paul Dekker, and Floris Roelofsen, editors, Proceedings
of the Sixteenth Amsterdam Colloquium, pages 151?156, 2007.
Ian Niles and Adam Pease. Linking Lexicons and Ontologies: Mapping
WordNet to the Suggested Upper Merged Ontology. In Proceedings of
IKE ?03, Las Vegas, NV, 2003.
Martin O?Connor, Holger Knublauch, Samson Tu, Benjamin Grosof, Mike
Dean, William Grosso, and Mark Musen. Supporting Rule System Inter-
operability on the Semantic Web with SWRL. In Proceedings of the 4th
International Semantic Web Conference, Galway, Ireland, 2005.
233
Sabine Schulte im Walde. The Induction of Verb Frames and Verb Classes
from Corpora. In Corpus Linguistics. An International Handbook, volume
29.1 of Handbooks of Linguistics and Communication Science, pages 952?
971. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin, 2008.
Dennis Spohr. Extraction of Selectional Preferences for French using a
Mapping from EuroWordNet to the Suggested Upper Merged Ontology.
In Proceedings of the 4th Global WordNet Conference, Szeged, Hungary,
2008.
Piek Vossen, editor. EuroWordNet: A Multilingual Database with Lexical
Semantic Networks. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1998.
234
