Proceedings of the 12th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation, pages 42?49,
Athens, Greece, 30 ? 31 March 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Generating Approximate Geographic Descriptions
Ross Turner, Yaji Sripada and Ehud Reiter
Dept of Computing Science,
University of Aberdeen, UK
{r.turner,yaji.sripada,e.reiter}@abdn.ac.uk
Abstract
Georeferenced data sets are often large and
complex. Natural Language Generation
(NLG) systems are beginning to emerge that
generate texts from such data. One of the
challenges these systems face is the gener-
ation of geographic descriptions referring to
the location of events or patterns in the data.
Based on our studies in the domain of me-
teorology we present a two staged approach
to generating geographic descriptions. The
first stage involves using domain knowledge
based on the task context to select a frame
of reference, and the second involves using
constraints imposed by the end user to select
values within a frame of reference. Because
geographic concepts are inherently vague our
approach does not guarantee a distinguish-
ing description. Our evaluation studies show
that NLG systems, because they can analyse
input data exhaustively, can produce more
fine-grained geographic descriptions that are
more useful to end users than those generated
by human experts.
1 Introduction
Disciplines such as environmental studies, geography,
geology, planning and business marketing make exten-
sive use of Geographical Information Systems (GIS);
however, despite an explosion of available mapping
software, GIS remains a specialist tool with special-
ist skills required to analyse and understand the infor-
mation presented using map displays. Complement-
ing such displays with textual summaries therefore pro-
vides an immediate niche for NLG systems.
Recently, research into NLG systems that gener-
ate text from georeferenced data has begun to emerge
(Dale et al, 2005; Turner et al, 2006; Turner et al,
2008b; Thomas and Sripada, 2008). These systems are
required to textually describe the geographic distribu-
tion of domain variables such as road surface temper-
ature and unemployment rates. For example, descrip-
tions such as ?road surface temperatures will fall below
zero in some places in the southwest? and ?unemploy-
ment is highest in the rural areas? need to be generated
by these systems. One of the main challenges such sys-
tems face is the generation of geographic descriptions
such as ?in some places in the southwest? and ?in the
rural areas?. Such a task is challenging for a number of
reasons:
? many geographic concepts are inherently vague
(see for example (Varzi, 2001) for a discussion on
this topic);
? often the underlying data sets contain little explicit
geographic information for a generation system to
make use of (Turner et al, 2008b);
? as input to a generation system, georeferenced
data is often complex, constraints imposed on the
output text (such as length) may make the tradi-
tional approach to the Referring Expression Gen-
eration (REG) problem in NLG of finding a dis-
tinguishing description implausible (Turner et al,
2008b).
This paper looks at the problem in the context of
work the authors have carried out on summarising geo-
referenced data sets in the meteorology domain. The
main feature of our approach is that geographic de-
scriptions perform the dual function of referring to
a specific geographic locations unambiguously (tradi-
tional function of REG) and also communicate the re-
lationship between the domain information and the ge-
ography of the region (novel function of geographic de-
scriptions).
We present a two staged approach to generating ge-
ographic descriptions that involve regions. The first
stage involves using domain knowledge (meteorolog-
ical knowledge in our case) to select a frame of ref-
erence and the second involves using constraints im-
posed by the end user to select values within a frame
of reference. While generating geographic descriptions
it is not always possible to produce a distinguishing
description because of the inherent vagueness in ge-
ographic concepts. Therefore, in our case we aim to
produce a distinguishing description wherever possi-
ble, but more often allow non-distinguishing descrip-
tions in the output text, which approximate the location
of the event being described as accurately as possible.
After a short overview of the background in ?2,
some empirical observations on geographic descrip-
42
tions from knowledge acquisition (KA) studies we have
carried out are discussed in ?3. Taking these observa-
tions into account, in ?4 we describe how this problem
is approached using examples from RoadSafe (Turner
et al, 2008b), which generates spatial references to
events in georeferenced data in terms of regions that
approximate their location. It pays particular attention
to the use of different perspectives to describe the same
situation and how factors that affect what makes a good
reference in this domain are taken into account by the
system. In ?5 we present a qualitative discussion of as-
pects of geographic description from the evaluations of
RoadSafe that were carried out, and how this relates to
future possible work on this topic.
2 Background
Much work on generation of spatial descriptions has
concentrated on smaller scale spaces that are imme-
diately perceivable. For example, spatial descriptions
have been studied from the perspective of robot com-
munication (Kelleher and Kruijff, 2006), 3D anima-
tion (Towns et al, 1998) and basic visual scenes (Vi-
ethen and Dale, 2008; Ebert et al, 1996). In a more
geographical context route description generation sys-
tems such as (Dale et al, 2005) and (Moulin and Ket-
tani, 1999) have had wide appeal to NLG researchers.
(Varges, 2005) also generate landmark based spatial de-
scriptions using maps from the map task dialogue cor-
pus.
RoadSafe is an NLG system that has been opera-
tionally deployed at Aerospace and Marine Interna-
tional (AMI) to produce weather forecast texts for win-
ter road maintenance. It generates forecast texts de-
scribing various weather conditions on a road network
as shown in Figure 1.
The input to the system is a data set consisting of
numerical weather predictions (NWP) calculated over
a large set of point locations across a road network. An
example static snapshot of the input to RoadSafe for
one parameter is shown in Figure 2. The complete in-
put is a series of such snapshots for a number of param-
eters (see (Turner et al, 2008b) for details).
In applications such as RoadSafe, the same geo-
graphical situation can be expressed in a variety of dif-
ferent ways dependent upon the perspective employed,
henceforth termed as a frame of reference. Space (ge-
ographic or otherwise) is inherently tied to a frame of
reference that provides a framework for assigning dif-
ferent values to different locations in space. For ex-
ample, locations on Earth?s surface can be specified by
latitude and longitude which provide an absolute frame
of reference for geographic space. Cardinal directions
such as {North, East, West and South} provide an alter-
native frame of reference for geographic space. As was
noted in (Turner et al, 2008b), characterising the data
in terms of frames of reference is important because
often the only geographic information input data con-
tains are coordinates (latitude and longitude), while the
Overview: Road surface temperatures will fall
below zero on all routes during the late evening until
around midnight.
Wind (mph): NE 15-25 gusts 50-55 this afternoon
in most places, backing NNW and easing 10-20
tomorrow morning, gusts 30-35 during this evening
until tomorrow morning in areas above 200M.
Weather: Snow will affect all routes at first,
clearing at times then turning moderate during
tonight and the early morning in all areas, and
persisting until end of period. Ice will affect
all routes from the late evening until early morn-
ing. Hoar frost will affect some southwestern
and central routes by early morning. Road surface
temperatures will fall slowly during the evening
and tonight, reaching zero in some far southern
and southwestern places by 21:00. Fog will af-
fect some northeastern and southwestern routes dur-
ing tonight and the early morning, turning freezing
in some places above 400M.
Figure 1: RoadSafe forecast text showing geographic
descriptions underlined
output texts are required to employ a wider choice of
frames of reference such as altitude, direction, coastal
proximity and population. In RoadSafe the frames of
reference employed are always absolute according to
Levinson?s terminology (Levinson, 2003).
Because the geographic descriptions in RoadSafe do
not fit the traditional formulation of the REG problem
as finding the most distinguishing description, the most
pressing question to address is what makes an adequate
reference strategy in this case? This is of course a dif-
ficult question and is reliant to a large extent on the
communication goal of the system. This paper looks
into this problem in the context of the RoadSafe appli-
cation, that uses a simple spatial sublanguage to gener-
ate the types of descriptions required in this application
domain.
3 Observations on geographic
descriptions from the weather domain
In this section we summarise some empirical observa-
tions on how meteorologists use geographic descrip-
tions in weather forecasts. It describes work carried
out over the course of the RoadSafe project involving
knowledge acquisition (KA) studies with experts on
summarising georeferenced weather data, observations
from data-text corpora (one aimed at the general pub-
lic and one aimed at experts) and a small study with
people from the general public. During RoadSafe we
built two prototype georeferenced data-to-text systems
that summarised georeferenced weather data: one that
produces pollen forecasts based on very simple data
(Turner et al, 2006), and the RoadSafe system, which
43
Figure 2: Input data for ?reaching zero in some far southern and southwestern places? in Figure 1
generates road ice forecasts based on complex data.
Small corpora consisting of forecast texts and their un-
derlying NWP data were collected in both application
domains. Using techniques described in (Reiter et al,
2005) these corpora have been analysed to understand
the experts? strategies to describe georeferenced data.
The major finding from our studies is the fact that
experts tailor their geographic descriptions to the task
context. Not only does the geographic knowledge of
the end user have to be taken into account in their de-
scriptions, but also how the geography of the region
causes events and patterns in the data. The latter con-
sideration has a large affect on the frame of reference
experts employ to describe particular geographic situ-
ations. ?3.1 looks at these observations from the point
of view of end users of weather forecasts, while ?3.2
looks at the descriptive strategies of experts.
3.1 End users? geographic knowledge
It is a well known and accepted fact that geographic
knowledge varies greatly between individuals. To il-
lustrate this point 24 students of a further education
college in Scotland were asked a geography question,
without reference to a map. Which of four major place
names in Scotland (Ayr, Glasgow, Isle of Arran and
Stirling) did they consider to be in the south west of
the country? The responses showed a great variation
in the subjects? geographic knowledge. Half of all sub-
jects considered Glasgow and Ayr to be in the south
west, one third considered Stirling to be in the south
west and most surprisingly only four considered this to
be true of the Isle of Arran. The results of this study
are surprising because Stirling is the least south west-
erly place in the list while Isle of Arran is the most
south westerly. This study actually agrees well with
the studies in psychology on variation in individuals?
mental representation of their geographic environment
(Tversky, 1993).
Contrast this with the detailed knowledge of a road
engineer who the RoadSafe texts are intended for. Road
engineers rely upon a large amount of local geographic
knowledge and experience when treating roads. In-
deed, their spatial mental models are specified at a
much finer detail. For example, they get to know
where frost hollows tend to form and also come to learn
of particular unexpected black spots, such as where
garages allow hose water to cover part of a road during
winter. This is an important point to be taken into ac-
count when communicating georeferenced data as geo-
graphic descriptions should be sensitive to that knowl-
edge because it dictates how accurately they will be in-
terpreted by the end user.
Both task context and structural features of data (e.g.
number of observations, granularity of measurement),
as well as functional features of data (how the entities
being described function in space) influence how it is
44
described geographically. Analysis of a small pollen
forecast corpus (Turner et al, 2006) revealed that fore-
cast texts, contain a rich variety of spatial descrip-
tions for a location despite the data containing only six
data points for the whole of Scotland. In general, the
same region could be referred to by its proper name
e.g. Sutherland and Caithness, by its relation to a well
known geographical landmark e.g. North of the Great
Glen, or simply by its geographical location on the map
e.g. the far North and Northwest. In other words, ex-
perts characterise the limited geographic information
contained within the data according to the task context.
As the consumers of such forecasts are the general pub-
lic, there is a greater onus on the expert to make the
texts more interesting, unlike more restricted domains
such as marine (see (Reiter et al, 2005)) or road ice
forecasts that require consistent terminology.
3.2 Experts? descriptive strategy
Work in psychology has suggested that meteorologists
use a dynamic mental model to arrive at an inference to
predict and explain weather conditions (Trafton, 2007).
Vital to this process is also their ability to take into
account how the geography of a region influences the
general weather conditions. Understanding the weath-
ers interaction with the terrain enables them to make
reliable meteorological inferences particularly when a
certain pattern in the data may appear random. It is
often unfeasible for a human forecaster to spend large
amounts of time inspecting every data point in a de-
tailed visual display. Using experience and expertise a
forecaster can use her mental model to ?play out dif-
ferent hypothetical situations? (Trafton, 2007, p.2) and
thus arrive at a plausible explanation for an apparently
random weather pattern. Consider the following exam-
ple description of a weather event by an expert taken
from our road ice corpus:
? ?exposed locations may have gales at times.?
This is a good example of a forecaster using her me-
teorological expertise to make an inference about a ran-
dom weather pattern. Clearly there is no way from
inspection of a map one can ascertain with certainty
where the exposed locations are in a region. How-
ever, an expert?s knowledge of how the referent entity
(the wind parameter) is affected by geographical fea-
tures allow her to make such an inference. These prag-
matic factors play a large part in determining an experts
descriptive strategy, where certain frames of reference
may be considered more appropriate to describe certain
weather events (Turner et al, 2008a). This comes from
weather forecasters? explicit knowledge of spatial de-
pendence (the fact that observations points in georefer-
enced data at nearby locations are related, and the val-
ues of their non-spatial attributes will be influenced by
certain geographical features). This is one of the most
important and widely understood fact about spatial data
from an analysis point of view, and one of the main rea-
sons that it requires special treatment in comparison to
other types of non-spatial data. This fact is most clearly
outlined by an observation made in (Tobler, 1970, p.3)
that ?everything is related to everything else, but near
things are more related than distant things?. This is
commonly known as the first law of geography and still
resonates strongly today amongst geographers (Miller,
2004). The implication of Tobler?s first law (TFL) is
that samples in spatial data are not independent, and
observations located at nearby locations are more likely
to be similar. Recasting this into meteorological terms,
exposed locations are more likely to be windier and el-
evated areas colder for example.
In fact, an analogy can be drawn between how me-
teorologists consider perspectives in their descriptive
strategy and the preferred attribute list in the semi-
nal work on REG by (Dale and Reiter, 1995). In
their specification of an algorithm for generating refer-
ring expressions content selection is performed through
the iteration over a pre-determined and task specific
list of attributes. In our context, preferred attributes
are replaced by preferred frames of reference. This
means describing georeferenced data requires situa-
tional knowledge of when to apply a particular frame
of reference given a particular geographic distribution
to describe.
The most striking observation about the expert strat-
egy is that the geographic descriptions in the corpora
are approximations of the input (Turner et al, 2008a).
The input is highly overspecified with 1000s of points
for a small forecast region, sampled at sub hourly inter-
vals during a forecast period. Meteorologists use vague
descriptions in the texts to refer to weather events such
as:
? ?in some places in the south, temperatures will
drop to around zero or just above zero.?
There are a number of reasons they use this descrip-
tive strategy: the forecasts are highly compressed sum-
maries, as a few sentences describes megabytes of data;
very specific descriptions are avoided unless the pat-
tern in the data is very clear cut; experts try to avoid
misinterpretation, road engineers often have detailed
local geographic knowledge and experts may not be
aware the more provincial terminology they use to refer
to specific areas. The following section demonstrates
how the problem of generating such descriptions is ad-
dressed in RoadSafe.
4 Generating Approximate Geographic
Descriptions
In its current form, where summaries are meant to give
a brief synopsis of conditions to the user, RoadSafe
follows the approach taken by forecasters as discussed
previously. This is unconventional in comparison to
traditional REG approaches that aim to rule out all dis-
tractors in the domain (properties that are not true of
the referent). In a description such as ?reaching zero
45
in some places above 100M by 16:00? above, distrac-
tors can be defined as the set of points above 100M that
do not satisfy the premise that temperatures will drop
below zero. More succinctly, these can be defined as
false positives. In fact, the problem can be formulated
as a trade off between false positives and false nega-
tives, where false negatives constitute points that are
wrongly omitted from the description. For road grit-
ting purposes, costs can be assigned to each type of
error: road accidents in the case of false negatives and
wasted salt in the case of false positives. As the task
dictates, with the higher associated cost it is impera-
tive that a referring expression eliminates all false neg-
atives. Ideally a truly optimal description should then
seek to minimise false positives as far as possible, thus
reducing the overall cost for the reader. While reduc-
ing errors descriptions should also be meteorologically
correct, as discussed in the previous section. Using cer-
tain frames of reference in certain contexts may result
in a poor inference about a particular weather situation
(Turner et al, 2008b).
Given this domain knowledge, we can formulate
constraints for what makes a good approximate geo-
graphic description in this task context:
1. Meteorological correctness (inferencing about
causal relationships).
2. Minimise false positives.
3. Complete coverage of the event being described
(no false negatives).
These constraints have been realized in a two staged
approach to generating geographic descriptions. The
first stage involves using domain knowledge (meteo-
rological knowledge in our case) to select a frame of
reference, while the second accounts for end-user con-
straints to select values within that frame of reference.
Before we describe the individual stages, two necessary
pre-processing stages for generation are described.
4.1 Geographic characterisation
As noted in ?2, observations in georeferenced data of-
ten contain little explicit geographic information apart
from their coordinates. Geographic characterisation is
responsible for assigning a set of qualitative descrip-
tors to each observation based upon a set of reference
frames, such that observations can be collectively dis-
tinguished from each other. This provides both a cri-
terion for partitioning the data, and a set of properties
to generate geographic descriptions. A frame of ref-
erence in this context consists of a set of descriptions
based upon a common theme such as coastal proximity
e.g. {inland,coastal} or population e.g. {urban,rural}.
In RoadSafe four frames of reference have been imple-
mented: altitude, coastal proximity, population and di-
rection. Those that make use of human (population)
and physical geographical features (altitude, coastal
Proximity) can be represented by existing GIS data
sets; therefore, in these cases geographic characterisa-
tion is simply responsible for mapping observation co-
ordinates to areas of these data sets. In contrast, direc-
tions are abstract and require definition. In RoadSafe,
geographic characterisation maps each observation to a
set of directional areas with crisp boundaries, described
in the following section.
4.2 Pattern formation
To generate descriptions, the geographic distribution
of the event to be communicated has to be approxi-
mated using data analysis techniques such as cluster-
ing. While not new to data-to-text systems, the novel
aspect here is that the data is partitioned based upon
the frames of reference that make up the spatial sublan-
guage of the system. This process summarises the lo-
cation of the event by measuring its density within each
frame of reference?s set of descriptions. An example of
such a distribution is shown in Figure 3.
Reference Frame Description Proportion
Altitude
100M 0.033
200M: 0.017
300M 0.095
400M 0.042
Direction
SSE 0.037
SSW 0.014
WSW: 0.048
TSE 0.489
TSW 0.444
Population
Rural: 0.039
Figure 3: Density of zero temperatures in Figure 2
While the descriptions within each frame of refer-
ence with human and geographical features are dictated
by the granularity of available GIS data sets (altitude
resolution for example), the boundaries of directional
areas require definition. In RoadSafe, because some
flexibility in the generated geographic descriptions is
desirable, the system uses a four by four grid to split
the domain into sixteen equally sized directional areas
defined by their their latitude longitude extents. This
configuration is shown below where T stands for true
and C for central in this case:
TNW NNW NNE TNE
WNW CNW CNE ENE
WSW CSW CSE ESE
TSW SSW SSE TSE
Using a simple set of adjacency matrices based on
this grid, RoadSafe represents a set of descriptions de-
picting the traditional eight main points of the compass
plus a further five that we term gradable (central, far
south, far north, far east and far west). Alternative con-
46
figurations using a greater number of gradable descrip-
tions are possible. These matrices are used by the mi-
croplanner to choose attributes to refer to events using
the direction frame of reference. One example matrix
for each category of directional description are listed
below. In each matrix a value of 1 indicates that the
event has a non-zero density in that area.
Gradable
? Far South:
{TSW,SSW,SSE, TSE} =
?
??
0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0
1 1 1 1
?
??
Intercardinal
? South West:
{TSW,WSW,SSW,CSW} =
?
??
0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0
1 1 0 0
1 1 0 0
?
??
Cardinal
? South:
SouthEast ? SouthWest =
?
??
0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0
1 1 1 1
1 1 1 1
?
??
In what follows we describe how our two stage strat-
egy is implemented in our system.
4.3 Frame of reference selection
The main content selection decision made by the doc-
ument planner is the choice of which frame of refer-
ence to describe a specific weather event such as wind
gusts increasing or road surface temperature falling be-
low zero. This decision is based upon both the location
of the event as discussed previously, and situational
knowledge stored in the knowledge base of the system.
Frames of reference where all descriptions have non-
zero densities are not considered. Situational knowl-
edge consists of the probability of using each frame of
reference given the context (the weather parameter to
describe), and is based on corpus frequencies. Rather
than simply choosing the frame of reference with the
highest density, weighting each frame of reference in
this way ensures meteorological correctness as far as
possible.
4.4 Attribute selection
Once a frame of reference has been selected the mi-
croplanner maps the descriptions to abstract syntax
templates. As this is fairly trivial for most frames of
reference in RoadSafe, because they contain a limited
number of descriptions, we will provide an example
how this is accomplished for directional descriptions.
The input to the microplanner is a structure comprised
of the density of the event within the containing area
plus its associated adjacency matrix as shown in Figure
4.
Location {Pointratio : 0.21
Relation : in
Container :
?
???
0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0
1 0 0 0
1 1 1 1
?
???
}
Figure 4: REG input to describe Figure 2
The attribute selection algorithm is based upon four
constraints incorporating the first two principles of the
descriptive strategy outlined at the beginning of this
section. They are:
1. Minimise false positives - The description de-
scribing the distribution should introduce the least
number of distractors. For the above example distri-
bution the set {South} ensures coverage but introduces
three distractors: CSW, CSE and ESE. While the set
of directions {Far South, South West} only introduces
one: CSW. In general, a measure of how distinguishing
a description x is of a distribution y is given by:
distinguishing(x, y) = |x ? y||x|
Thus, for a distribution z and descriptions x and y,
x is a more distinguishing description of z than y iff
distinguishing(x,z) > distinguishing(y,z).
2. Coverage (no false negatives) - The descrip-
tion should completely describe the distribution. The
set of directions {Far South,South West} completely
describes the above example distribution while {Far
South} does not. For the set of directions x and dis-
tribution y, the predicate covers(x, y) is true iff
|x ? y|
|y| = 1
3. Brevity - The set of directions should yield the
shortest description of the distribution. For the above
example distribution there is only one set of direc-
tions that ensures complete coverage. But when faced
with a choice for example {South} and {South West,
South East} brevity constraint favours {South}. In gen-
eral,the set x should be chosen over y because it is a
shorter description. For the distribution z and sets of
directions x, y with equal coverage of z, x is a shorter
description of z than y iff |x| < |y|.
4. Ordering: If two descriptions have equal cov-
erage, cardinality and are equally distinguishing for a
47
given distribution, a description is chosen based upon
a predefined preference ordering. Each type of prop-
erty is assigned a score: Cardinal = 3, Intercardinal =
2 and Gradeable = 1. Therefore, the set of directions
{Far South, South West} would be assigned a value of
3.
In classification terms, the first constraint can be con-
sidered as precision and the second as recall. The algo-
rithm firstly ranks each individual description in the set
described in ?4.2 according to the constraints outlined
above. If a single directional term cannot be used to de-
scribe the distribution it then incrementally tries to find
the highest ranking combination of directions that sat-
isfy the coverage constraint and do not cover the whole
region; otherwise, the algorithm terminates by return-
ing the empty set. So, for the example input provided
at the beginning of this section it would return the ab-
stract syntax template shown in Figure 4. Quantifiers
are selected by applying a simple threshold to the point
ratio (which is recalculated should distractors be intro-
duced): some = > 0, many = > 0.5, most = > 0.7.
This would be realised as ?in some far southern and
southwestern places?.
?
??????????????????????
Type: LocationSyntax
Head: | in |
Object:
?
?????????????????
Head: | place |
Features:
[
definite:false
plural:true
]
Quantifier: | some |
Modifier:
?
??????
Head: | and |
Coord1
[
Head: | southern |
Modifier: | far |
]
Coord2
[
Head | southwestern |
]
?
??????
?
?????????????????
?
??????????????????????
Figure 5: Phrase syntax for input in Figure 4
5 Evaluation and Discussion
RoadSafe has been evaluated in post-edit evaluations
with meteorologists at AMI and by asking potential
users to compare the quality of the summaries to corpus
texts based on the same data. While evaluations have
been intended to test the overall quality of the texts
we have received much feedback on the geographic de-
scriptions the system generates. We have also carried
out some comparison of the direction descriptions to
those in the corpus, by annotating the corpus descrip-
tions with our adjacency matrices and running them
through the system. Descriptions were compared by
calculating the Jaccard coefficient between the two ma-
trices. Overall the mean score was 0.53, with a fairly
low perfect recall percentage of 30%. The low pre-
cision score is perhaps not surprising as the descrip-
tions generated by RoadSafe are crisp and the corpus
descriptions are not solely based on the input data we
have available. However, the majority (67%) of par-
tial alignments were the result of RoadSafe producing
a subset of the human desciprition, e.g. northwest ver-
sus north, which indicates the system descriptions are
more fine grained. In terms of the human descriptions,
what was most apparent from this evaluation is the fact
that they almost exclusively used the eight major points
of the compass.
In terms of feedback experts have commented that
generally the location descriptions generated by the
system are accurate but should be more general. Of
97 post edited texts generated by the system 20% of
the geographic descriptions were edited.
Most notable was feedback from twenty one road
maintenance personnel, who participated in an exper-
iment asking them to compare expert written texts to
RoadSafe generated texts based on the same five data
sets. The details of this experiment are to be published
elsewhere; however, one of the main reasons they gave
for liking the style of the generated texts was because
they contained more geographic descriptions than the
corresponding human ones. The fact that a data-to-text
system can analyse every data point is an advantage. In
contrast experts have a huge amount of knowledge and
experience to draw upon and this reflects in their more
general and conservative approach in their geographic
descriptions. Perhaps one of their biggest criticisms
of the system as a whole is that it doesn?t do a good
job of generating geographic descriptions that involve
motion, such as ?a band of rain works east across the
area?. Indeed, this was the most edited type of gener-
ated phrase during the post-edit evaluation. There has
been little work to our knowledge on describing motion
in the NLG literature.
There are many aspects of the generation of geo-
graphic that haven?t been addressed in this paper and
warrant further exploration. Particularly at the con-
tent level, there is a need to consider how to account
for semantic composition effects caused by overlaying
frames of reference. Another question that arises is
when is it best to use an intensional rather than exten-
sional description. There is also the question of when
to use descriptions that involve relations or gradable
properties. These are all choices that a data-to-text sys-
tem can make that will affect how the summary is in-
terpreted.
6 Conclusions
This paper has described an approach for generating
approximate geographic descriptions involving regions
in the RoadSafe system, which is based on empirical
work carried out in the weather domain. Our strat-
egy takes into account constraints on what constitutes a
good reference in the application domain described, by
taking into account pragmatic factors imposed by both
the task context and the end user. What is most appar-
ent from our empirical studies is that geographic de-
scriptions describing georeferenced data are influenced
48
by not only by location but also task context. An im-
portant observation based on our evaluation studies is
that NLG systems by virtue of their ability to analyse
input data exhaustively can generate descriptions that
are more useful to end users than those generated by
human experts.
References
R. Dale and E. Reiter. 1995. Computational interpreta-
tions of the gricean maxims in the generation of re-
ferring expressions. Cognitive Science, 19:233?263.
R Dale, S Geldof, and J-P Prost. 2005. Using natu-
ral language generation in automatic route descrip-
tion. Journal of Research and Practice in Informa-
tion Technology, 37(1):89?105.
C. Ebert, D. Glatz, M. Jansche, R. Meyer-Klabunde,
and R. Porzel. 1996. From conceptualization to
formulation in generating spatial descriptions. In
U. Schmid, J. Krems, and F. Wysotzki, editors, Pro-
ceedings of the First European Workshop on Cogni-
tive Modeling, pages 235?241.
John D. Kelleher and Geert-Jan M. Kruijff. 2006. In-
cremental generation of spatial referring expressions
in situated dialog. In Proceedings of ACL06, pages
1041?1048.
S. Levinson. 2003. Spatial language. In Nadel L.,
editor, Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science, volume 4,
pages 131?137. Nature Publishing Group.
Harvey J. Miller. 2004. Tobler?s first law and spatial
analysis. Annals of the Association of American Ge-
ographers, 93(3),:574?594.
B. Moulin and D. Kettani. 1999. Route generation
and description using the notions of objects influence
area and spatial conceptual map. Spatial Cognition
and Computation, 1:227?259.
E. Reiter, S. Sripada, J. Hunter, J. Yu, and I. Davy.
2005. Choosing words in computer-generated
weather forecasts. In Artificial Intelligence, vol-
ume 67, pages 137?169.
Kavita E Thomas and Somayajulu Sripada. 2008.
What?s in a message? interpreting geo-referenced
data for the visually-impaired. In Proceedings of
INLG08.
Waldo Tobler. 1970. A computer movie simulating
urban growth in the detroit region. Economic Geog-
raphy, 46(2):234?240.
Stuart Towns, Charles Callaway, and James Lester.
1998. Generating coordinated natural language and
3D animations for complex spatial explanations. In
Proceedings of the Fifteenth National Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, pages 112?119, Madison, WI.
J. Gregory Trafton. 2007. Dynamic mental models in
weather forecasting. In Proceedings of the Human
Factors and Ergonomics Society 51st Annual Meet-
ing, pages 311?314.
R. Turner, S. Sripada, E. Reiter, and I. Davy. 2006.
Generating spatio-temporal descriptions in pollen
forecasts. EACL06 Companion Volume, pages 163?
166.
R. Turner, S. Sripada, E. Reiter, and I. Davy. 2008a.
Building a parallel spatio-temporal data-text cor-
pus for summary generation. In Proceedings of
the LREC2008 Workshop on Methodologies and
Resources for Processing Spatial Language, Mar-
rakech, Morocco.
R. Turner, S. Sripada, E. Reiter, and I Davy. 2008b.
Using spatial reference frames to generate grounded
textual summaries of georeferenced data. In Pro-
ceedings of INLG08.
B. Tversky. 1993. Cognitive maps, cognitive col-
lages, and spatial mental models. In A.U. Frank
and I. Campari, editors, Spatial Information Theory,
pages 14?24. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Sebastian Varges. 2005. Spatial descriptions as refer-
ring expressions in the maptask domain. In ENLG-
05, Aberdeen, UK.
Achille C. Varzi. 2001. Vagueness in geography. Phi-
losophy & Geography, 4:1:4965.
Jette Viethen and Robert Dale. 2008. The use of spatial
relations in referring expressions. In Proceedings of
INLG08, Salt Fork, Ohio, USA.
49
What?s In a Message? Interpreting Geo-referenced Data for the
Visually-impaired
Kavita E. Thomas
Department of Computing Science
University of Aberdeen
Aberdeen, Scotland
tkavita@abdn.ac.uk
Somayajulu Sripada
Department of Computing Science
University of Aberdeen
Aberdeen, Scotland
yaji.sripada@abdn.ac.uk
Abstract
In this paper we describe content determina-
tion issues involved in the Atlas.txt project,
which aims to automatically describe geo-
referenced information such as census data as
text for the visually-impaired (VI). Texts com-
municating geo-referenced census informa-
tion contain census data abstractions and their
corresponding geographic references. Be-
cause visually impaired users find interpreting
geographic references hard, we hypothesized
that an introduction message about the under-
lying geography should help the users to in-
terpret the geographic references easily. We
performed user studies to design and evaluate
the introduction message. An initial evalua-
tion study with several sighted users and one
partially sighted user showed that an introduc-
tion message is certainly preferred by most
participants. Many of them used an introduc-
tion message themselves when they described
maps textually. But the study also showed
that the introduction message made no differ-
ence when the participants were asked to draw
maps using the information in the textual de-
scriptions.
1 Introduction
Atlas.txt is a data-to-text natural language gener-
ation (NLG) system which aims to communicate
geo-referenced information to VI people. Geo-
referenced data are data which has a geographic
component, and is distributed over a region on Earth.
Such data is often visualised as thematic maps, as
shown in Figure 1, where colour shading indicates
density of distribution, so that dark or intense re-
gions on such maps indicate where the variable, for
example unemployment, is most frequently located.
Geo-referenced data is frequently stored in long data
tables which hinder VI users, who must rely on
screenreaders to read out the values in the data ta-
ble, from quickly and easily forming an overview of
how the data is distributed. For example, although
the table corresponding to Figure 1 only has 31 rows
(corresponding to the 31 council areas of Scotland),
VI users still need to listen to each of these values
and remember them in order to form a mental pic-
ture of the overall trends in population distribution
which sighted users can infer from the map in under
a minute. Furthermore, tables do not communicate
where regions are located. This means that although
they might be able to pick out maxima and minima,
inferring trends is a much harder task, and mentally
visualising how the data is distributed is impossible
for unfamiliar areas given named locations in tables.
Atlas.txt aims to automatically interpret this tabu-
lar geo-referenced data and communicate its central
information as texts which can then be read out to
VI users via a screenreading application. We start
by describing some of the issues involved in com-
municating geo-referenced information in the cen-
sus domain. Then we address content determination
issues in the system and present some user needs
requirements for communicating geo-referenced in-
formation to VI users, principle among which is the
need for texts to enable mentally visualising the re-
gion and how the data is distributed. This motivates
our decision to include introduction messages which
describe the region before communicating how the
113
Figure 1: A typical map showing geo-referenced data
data is distributed, and present an experiment into
this choice, focusing on evaluating whether intro-
duction messages are beneficial.
2 Related Work
Systems which generate descriptions of numeri-
cal data are not uncommon, e.g., the FOG system
(Goldberg et al 1994), TREND (Boyd, 1997) and
MULTI-METEO (Coch, 1998) all generate textual
summaries of numerical weather data. (Ferres et
al, 2006) generates textual descriptions of informa-
tion in graphs and enables user querying. SumTime1
summarises time-series data and RoadSafe2 gener-
ates travel advisories and looks at spatial time-series
data. While there is no prior work on generating tex-
tual descriptions of geo-referenced data, there have
been studies on describing spatial data in the context
of route directions ((Geldof, 2003), (Marciniak and
Strube, 2004)), scene descriptions (Novak, 1986),
geometric descriptions (Mitkov, 1990) and spatial
descriptions (Ebert et al 1996).
Data-to-text generation projects like Atlas.txt dif-
fer from the traditional three-stage pipeline genera-
tion architecture of most NLG systems (Reiter and
Dale, 2000) because they need to analyse the data
in order to determine data abstractions before then
going on to the traditional three stages of document
planning, micro-planning and realisation, as was put
forward by (Sripada, Reiter et al 2001). Content
determination has been described as involving a col-
lective classification problem (Barzilay and Lapata,
1More information can be found at
http://www.csd.abdn.ac.uk/research/sumtime.
2See http://www.csd.abdn.ac.uk/research/roadsafe.
2005) and in the context of data-to-text systems.
Since our system involves data-to-text NLG, content
determination has more in common with the two-
stage process of (Sripada, Reiter et al 2001) than
the classification process of (Barzilay and Lapata,
2005). However a notable difference between our
domain and the meteorology domain described in
(Sripada, Reiter et al 2001), is that for us, arriv-
ing at an overview before communicating the data to
the end-user involves not just data analysis but also
scene description to aid in our visualisation goal.
3 Content Determination in Atlas.txt
System
The Atlas.txt system aims to be able to take geo-
referenced data in tabular form, perform data analy-
sis to determine significant features in the data, and
then communicate these significant features via text.
Data analysis for Atlas.txt involves clustering to find
regions in the geography with similar values of cen-
sus variable. Data analysis also involves trending to
find spatial trends in the data. Information obtained
from data analysis forms the input to the content de-
termination module.
In order to select which information to communi-
cate (i.e., content selection), we ran a corpus study
on online census texts to try and determine what
messages they communicate (Thomas and Sripada,
2008). Of course, these documents are not written
for the VI user group. On the other hand, without
evidence to the contrary, we cannot assume that VI
users require census information (i.e., census statis-
tics) that is different from what sighted users require.
But VI users do need additional content that helps
them to interpret any geographic references associ-
ated with census information. An experiment con-
ducted in Ottawa on a group of 5 blind and 5 sighted
participants indicated that both blind and sighted
participants (without access to a map) need addi-
tional information to ground proper name reference
to unfamiliar places. Because we did not find ex-
amples of these kind in our corpus texts, we hy-
pothesised that all texts produced by Atlas.txt sys-
tem should start with what we called an ?introduc-
tion? messages which help VI users to interpret geo-
graphic information better.
This means, we need knowledge of two kinds of
114
messages for building Atlas.txt, ones that communi-
cate census information and the others that help VI
users understand the geography better. Designing
the first type of census messages requires a good un-
derstanding of user goals. We have noticed a broad
range of goals census users have, and we consider a
number of use cases illustrating particular user goals
below:
1. You want to buy a house somewhere safe, i.e.,
with a low crime rate, and within commuting
distance of City X.
2. You want to start a business selling expensive
furniture and you want to pick a location near
potential clientele who are profiled as wealthy
based on income level data.
This illustrates the huge range of purposes people
might have when accessing census data, and many
of these examples were found via online documents
on census uses.3 We determined which content to
communicate from the data in this domain by con-
sidering both evidence from use cases like the ones
above and also online census documents. In many
online census documents there is no corresponding
data available in tabular form. This could be because
the information in different modalities is intended to
be complimentary rather than equivalent. The lack
of corresponding data in most cases makes it hard to
learn what sorts of results constitute interesting data
which should be reported. From a qualitative study
of corpus documents, we notice that most such texts
at the least describe where the variable they focus on
(e.g., unemployment) has its high values, low val-
ues, and spatial trends of the variable?s distribution
if there are any. Some scenarios require additional
information, e.g., the vicinity of a major road, the
coast, a city, etc. We aim for a scenario-generic so-
lution for now as a first step given that the system is
not interactive. However we hope that communicat-
ing the basic statistics in a meaningful way (i.e., via
useful spatial expressions) and also introducing the
region and its salient features will improve accessi-
bility to this information. The goal of such a system
3Business Uses of Census Data:
www.incontext.indiana.edu/2001/july01/spotlight.html, Uses
of Census Data: www.laria.gov.uk/content/articles/2003
conference pdf/boag.pdf
is of course to eventually become interactive so that
it can eventually address users? specific goals and
answer more specific questions about how the data
is distributed. As explained above Atlas.txt includes
the following census messages:
? Maxima message: location/s of high values
from Data Analysis
? Minima message: location/s of low values from
Data Analysis
? Trend message: location/s of trends from Data
Analysis
All these census messages make explicit references
to geographic locations which are hard to interpret
for VI users. We assume that the introduction mes-
sages introduced earlier enable hearers to visualise
the underlying geography which helps them to make
sense of spatial descriptions in census messages.
The introduction message also gives a general sum-
mary by communicating the overall average value-
range of the data (e.g., ?Overall, unemployment fre-
quencies are low?), inspired by Gestalt principles
of grouping in perception (Metzger, 2006) and the
visual information seeking mantra (Schneiderman,
1996) which argues that one should start with an
overview, zoom and filter, and only provide details
upon demand (the latter of which is only applicable
to interactive systems). The following components
of introduction messages are currently considered:
? Boundary geographic information, which indi-
cates geographic features which bound the re-
gion as a whole on any side
? Gestalt-driven overview of data (average value-
range)
? Location of where population is densest
In order to communicate the boundary geographic
information, we ran a survey eliciting spatial de-
scriptions of Aberdeenshire which indicated that
people?s spatial descriptions when presented with a
census map seem to fall into the following three cat-
egories of geographic information:
? Human geography: cities, roads, towns, ur-
ban/rural distinctions, census ward boundaries,
etc.
115
? Physical geography: lakes, mountains, sea,
desert, etc.
? Orientation geography: cardinal directions
In other words, we saw many descriptions which
used terms like ?urban?, ?rural?, which pointed
out major roads as indicators of where population
might be denser, and also many of the descriptions
which referred to areas as ?coastal?, ?inland?, ?[in
the] hills?, etc. Cardinal directions (e.g., ?North?,
?Southwest?, etc.) were also frequently used to
locate phenomena and are absolute coordinates in
the survey frame of reference involved in Atlas.txt,
which describes maps from a bird?s eye view, (Tay-
lor and Tversky, 1996).
Determining salient geographic information
which describes where maxima, minima and trends
are involves overlaying the clusters (and ends of
trends) with geographic layers in the human and
physical geographies discussed above. Then if we
find that any of the geographic elements contained
in any of the geographic overlays aligns spatially
with the cluster, we add this to a list of multiple
possible spatial expressions which can be used to
describe the location of the cluster. Appropriately
describing clusters via selecting informative spatial
expressions is a central aspect of communicating
the maximum, minimum and trend messages.
Overlaying different layers like this is a stan-
dard ?intersect overlay? operation in Geographic
Information Systems (GIS) and data containing
altitude information, urban/road information and
physical geography exist online which can be
used as the alignment layers in a GIS. We want to
select features which intersect our clusters even
minimally, as they help to describe where features
are located. If no intersecting regions exist, we
choose the nearest. Note that the layers considered
all fall within the different geographic types, i.e.,
human and physical geographies. Orientation
information does not require overlaying maps to
identify which parts are North, etc. Orientation
information can be calculated for the region in
question by overlaying it with a square 8 by 8 grid
for the various cardinal directions. The location
of the maxima and minima clusters can then be
described as lying in a particular cardinal direction
by simply checking which square/s of the grid they
fall in. Determining cardinal direction has been
implemented in the Roadsafe project.
In future we will consider how to handle situa-
tions in which multiple possible features intersect
(or are near to) our clusters, which will involve
us ranking some of these features higher than oth-
ers. We will also want to consider the effects of
other factors than proximity on selection of spa-
tial descriptions, e.g., discourse context and causal-
ity could affect the choice of spatial description.
The results from our survey eliciting spatial de-
scriptions of Aberdeen showed more spatial de-
scriptions from the human geography (58%) than
from the physical geography (42%). The survey in-
volved a between-subjects design where the 24 par-
ticipants were blocked into 3 groups, one group get-
ting coarse maps with only 3 or 4 large wards cover-
ing all of Aberdeenshire while the other two groups
had medium (around 28 wards) and fine grained
maps (around 50 wards) covering the shire. Coarse-
grained maps had higher percentages of scores for
physical geography descriptions than for human ge-
ography descriptions (62% vs. 37%) while both
medium and fine-grained maps had larger percent-
ages for human geography descriptions (62% and
57% respectively). There were also a higher num-
ber of human descriptions used per turn on average,
4.2 vs. 2.6 for physical descriptions.
Most census variables describe information which
pertains to human populations, (e.g., unemployment
statistics, or employment in hunting, agriculture and
forestry in our survey), indicating that human geo-
graphic features might be causally linked to most
census data. As was indicated in our initial sur-
vey, human geographic features like the locations of
cities and roads seem to be most related to these pop-
ulation variables and might form the most meaning-
ful description for the hearer, since they may help
the hearer to infer useful correlations between the
presence of (e.g.) a maxima and a geographic fea-
ture. However there might also be correlations be-
tween physical geographic features and these vari-
ables, for example, logging in forests, fishing indus-
try in coastal areas, etc.
Context will certainly also play a large role, e.g.,
if the prior message uses a description from the
physical geography (e.g., ?coastal?), this might re-
sult in ?inland? being preferred over ?urban?, par-
116
ticularly if the messages have opposite content (e.g.,
one reports maxima while the other reports minima).
We also saw that participants tended to mix ge-
ographies more often than not, involving both physi-
cal and human geography descriptions in their texts,
as 60% of the number of turns which had descrip-
tions from both geographies. Describing cluster lo-
cations with two geographies leads to sentences like
?Unemployment is highest in rural and coastal ar-
eas,? which leads to a range of inferences about how
coastal and rural areas might be similar where unem-
ployment is concerned. Mixed geography descrip-
tions are more informative, since they convey addi-
tional information, so our view is that extra descrip-
tors, particularly if they come from other geogra-
phies, will only clarify and help listeners to ground
the locations of clusters.
So the content determination module takes the
document plan containing the four messages to be
communicated and gets the locations of maxima,
minima and trends (which come from data analysis).
These are then overlaid with data of the area contain-
ing physical or human geographies for the region.
Proximity is our current selection factor, so align-
ing features are currently selected if they intersect
(though as discussed earlier, if no features intersect,
the nearest ones are chosen) and are saved as possi-
ble spatial expressions to be used in the message. In
future work we will also need to account for causal-
ity and context in this selection of appropriate spatial
descriptions.
4 Evaluation
Unlike many of the other data-to-text systems de-
scribed, the Atlas.txt system?s goal is much more
general. Rather than generating specific texts for
specific audiences with particular expertise and tasks
in mind, this project aims to communicate census
data to a VI audience of varying expertise who, un-
like for most other NLG systems, have a range of
tasks in mind. As we argued earlier, the messages
we choose to communicate enable the vast major-
ity of users to at least get an overview of the salient
features in the data and we leave more specific in-
formational requirements for an interactive version
of Atlas.txt.
One issue that arises for a broad-focus non-task-
specific domain like this is that evaluation methods
are not as well-specified as for other NLG systems
for content determination. (Dale and Mellish, 1998)
present four questions one can ask when evaluat-
ing content determination: (1) truth (is the output
true), (2) quantity?does the output say enough, (3)
quantity?does the output say too much, and (4) ap-
propriateness (is the output inappropriate to the con-
text). But what if we want to ask the more high level
question of utility? That is, do we really need the
introduction message (assuming it is not mislead-
ing)? The two quantity considerations?have we said
too much or too little?are probably the best ways to
guage whether the introduction message is informa-
tive enough (and not too verbose). But again, this
is a bit too fine-grained for us, as we want to first
ask whether the introduction message is necessary
or not in the first place before attempting to refine
its contents.
The general-purpose task aspect of this domain
also implies that we cannot compare our texts with
an expert?s texts based on the underlying data, as it is
difficult to find simple summarising expert-written
census texts online. The vast majority of census
texts are far longer than ours and tend to discuss the
implications of what the data presents which is be-
yond our scope. Furthermore, we cannot compare
Atlas.txt output against expert-written text because
there is no expert-produced parallel data where texts
summarise the information contained in tables or
maps. Also, experts (statisticians) are not used to
summarising tables as simple, general-purpose texts
like this and they vary in the sorts of texts they
produce. Our experiment in Ottawa indicated that
different statisticians employed at Statistics Canada
vary both in terms of the analyses they make of
both tabular and textual census data (under experi-
mental conditions) and in their post-edits of expert-
written census texts (Thomas and Sripada, 2008).
This means that we need to rethink how we should
evaluate Atlas.txt?s texts.
4.1 Study
Given that instructions rich in imagery help sub-
jects to form a spatial mental model (Gyselinck et
al, 2006), our end goal is to discover if introduc-
tion messages actually aid in visualisation. Given
the lack of conclusive evidence to the contrary, we
117
operate under the premise that VI people have spa-
tial comprehension abilities (Kitchin et al 1997) and
can benefit from texts which enable visualisation.
We run the study with sighted people because they
can draw maps which they visualise from our texts.
We ran a study which presented a group of 20 ran-
domly recruited sighted participants with a pair of
texts where one member of the pair included the in-
troduction message and the other member did not
include the introduction message. The introduc-
tion message contains the two geographic elements
we discussed earlier: locations of boundary infor-
mation, the location of where population is densest
and the trend for population density. The messages
were identical in content (though names and direc-
tions were changed so that participants would not
assume that the same country was being described),
and both texts have a maxima, minima and trend
message (each), as can be seen in Examples 1 and
2 below:
1. The land of Bosk is bounded to the East by
the Bale Ocean, and its largest city is Wrist-
wath, on the East coast. Population is densest
around Wristwath and gradually decreases as
one moves Westward, though there are clusters
of medium-high population in cities like Slan-
gin in Central Bosk. Crime rates are highest
in Wristwath and Southern suburbs of Wrist-
wath. Additionally, Slangin also has high crime
rates. Crime is lowest in Northwestern and
East-Central Bosk. Crime tends to decrease as
one goes East or West from Central Bosk with
the exception of the Wristwath area.
2. Poverty rates are highest in Galen and Western
suburbs of Galen. Additionally, Boroos also
has high poverty rates. Poverty rates are low-
est in Northwestern and East-Central Dagor.
Poverty rates tends to decrease as one goes East
or West from Central Dagor with the exception
of the Galen area.
For each text, participants were asked to draw a map
of the area they visualise based on the text, indicat-
ing where the maxima and minima are and where all
other information mentioned in the text is located.
Then they were asked two task-based questions per
text which aim to check whether they can use the
information appropriately. The first question asks
whether they can identify the minima/maxima, e.g.,
?You want to relocate to Bosk. Considering only
crime rates, where might you want to move?? The
second question gives them a piece of additional in-
formation which sighted people would be able to
pick off from the map, e.g., that there is a coastline,
harbours, roads, etc., e.g., ?You work in Wristwath
and need to commute in daily. Given this and the
above info, where might you want to live in Bosk??
After each of the two pairs of texts and questions,
participants are asked to indicate which text was eas-
ier to visualise and to state why. Participants were
also presented with two thematic maps and asked to
write descriptions of them so that someone who is
blind can visualise them.
We hypothesized that Ex.2 above will cause dif-
ficulties for map drawing. There is no introduc-
tion message helping readers to orient themselves to
the region, and one does not know a priori whether
Galen is the name of a city or the region itself, or
where it is in the region if it is indeed a city. This
might seem purposefully difficult, but this is what
one typically finds in census texts online. For exam-
ple, if you want to know where in Canada Saskatoon
is, you need to look it up in a map. This makes it
hard (even for sighted people) when you read many
unfamiliar place names and are trying to get an over-
all picture of where places are.
4.2 Results and Discussion
The maps drawn for the text stimuli are scored on
a number of features, but the primary goal is to as-
certain whether readers visualised the locations of
the maximum, minimum and trend correctly. Each
text is based on an underlying map which is used as
the gold standard against which participants? maps
are compared. This gold standard map includes a
range of variation in location of maximum, mini-
mum and trend based on the ambiguity present in the
text. For example, ?East-Central? in Ex. 2 is hard
to define. Participants were given a point each for
correctly identifying the maximum, minimum and
trend in each message, or a zero if they failed to do
so correctly or if their answer was uninterpretable.
These three scores were also totalled giving a total
score per text for the maps drawn. Here we did not
see a huge difference in scores for the different mes-
118
Table 1: Average & std. deviation scores for map drawing
Text Maximum Minimum Trend Total
Text 1 1; 0 0.80; 0.41 0.80; 0.41 0.87; 0.23
Text 2 0.85; 0.37 0.70; 0.47 0.65; 0.49 0.73; 0.32
sages, as can be seen in the table; Text 1 has an in-
troduction message (and is seen in Ex. 1) and Text
2 (Ex. 2) lacks the introduction message. The to-
tal column corresponds to the average score for the
three messages (maximum, minimum and trend). A
t-test on the total scores for Texts 1 and 2 gives a
non-significant result with a p-value of 0.110. On
the other hand, almost all the participants preferred
Text 1 to Text 2; a signed ranks test on the prefer-
ence judgements (participants ticked which text they
preferred, 1 or 2) was significant with a p-value <
0.001. When asked to state their reasons for pre-
ferring Text 1, participants identified the geographic
information from the introduction message as the
only reason. Also when participants wrote texts for
map stimuli they tended to include introduction mes-
sages in them; a binomial test on whether introduc-
tion messages were included in either of their two
texts was significant with a p-value < 0.041. Inter-
estingly enough, shape was a feature used in many
of these introduction messages when the map had
a particularly non-square shape. In the part of the
experiment where participants answered task-based
questions based on texts with and without introduc-
tion messages they performed well on all questions
following both types of texts.
It is encouraging that participants preferred texts
with introduction messages and also used them in
their own texts. But it is disappointing that the ab-
sence of introduction messages seems to make no
difference to mental visualisation of Text 2. In fact,
many of the maps for Text 2 were incomplete; par-
ticipants simply marked the required information
and their nearby geographic entities. The problem
with evaluating maps is that they partly measure the
geometrical relationships in the map which could
bias such evaluations against participants with poor
drawing skills. Poor drawing skills could also ob-
scure whether they have visualised the correct infor-
mation.
Many participants said that drawing the map and
accounting for all of the information contained in
the introduction message was very difficult, so there
might have additionally been some cognitive over-
load on drawing maps for Text 1 which biased the
results in favour of Text 2. Generally all the partic-
ipants complained that the whole experiment took
longer than they had expected. This indicates that
the texts were challenging enough and not triv-
ial. (Murray, 1979) claims that there are variations
among people?s ability to draw mentally visualised
geographic information, indicating that evaluating
elicited maps might have a large amount of indi-
vidual variation. Ideally we need to find alternative
ways (other than eliciting map drawing) of assessing
the effectiveness of introduction messages.
Other factors could also have affected these re-
sults. For example, we did not randomise the order
of stimuli. Furthermore, our task-based questions
proved too easy for participants because they can be
answered by simply searching for the named region
with the highest value etc. Another issue which we
will want to explore in future work is whether us-
ing spatial descriptions (e.g., ?a medium-sized city?
instead of ?Slangin? from Text 1, etc.) in both texts
would have helped people to make more sense of the
texts, particularly Text 2.
We also ran the text stimuli of the experiment with
a VI computing undergraduate who clearly indicated
that the texts without the introduction message were
much harder to visualise, as he did not know where
the cities (referred to by proper name alone) were
located. He also indicated that some information re-
quired to partially visualise the region could be in-
ferred indirectly from information presented in these
texts lacking introduction messages. For example, in
Ex. 2, he could deduce that poverty rates are high in
Central Dagor, since it decreases as one goes East
or West from Central Dagor. However there was not
enough information for him to place Boroos in Cen-
tral Dagor.
5 Conclusions and Future Directions
In this paper we describe how content determination
in Atlas.txt is achieved and report on evaluation of
one message in our content determination schema:
the introduction message. Our end goal is to en-
able VI users to mentally visualise the region being
described in order to locate where areas with high
119
and low values of the census variable described are
and also to visualise spatial trends for this variable
in the region. In order to evaluate whether intro-
duction messages in our texts help users to mentally
visualise the region, we elicited drawings of maps
visualised by sighted participants based on our texts
with and without the introduction message. This was
based on the assumption that VI people also have
spatial cognition abilities, and because sighted par-
ticipants can draw the maps they visualise. We did
not see a significant difference between texts with
and without introduction messages from the elicited
drawings of maps which were scored on the correct
locations of maximum, minimum and trend informa-
tion. However we saw that participants overwhelm-
ingly preferred texts with introduction messages to
those without, and also tended to include introduc-
tion messages in texts describing maps when asked
to describe the maps to blind readers.
The question then arises as to how one should ide-
ally evaluate message inclusion when communicat-
ing spatial data. Although drawing maps seemed a
natural way to evaluate visualisation, we saw that
it was fraught with difficulties. We leave the ques-
tion of finding an appropriate evaluation methodol-
ogy for message choice in spatial data-to-text sys-
tems such as ours for future work.
Evaluating the utility of the individual compo-
nents of the introduction message has also been left
as future work. Furthermore, we also plan on inves-
tigating the factors involved in selecting description
geographies, e.g., causality and context, in order to
produce informative spatial descriptions in our mes-
sages.
References
R. Barzilay and M. Lapata. 2005. Collective Content Selection
for Concept-to-text Generation. Human Language Technol-
ogy Conference.
S. Boyd. 1997. Detecting and Describing Patterns in Time-
varying Data Using Wavelets. Advances in Intelligent Data
Analysis: Reasoning About Data, Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science, 1280.
J. Coch. 1998. Multimeteo: Multilingual Production of
Weather Forecasts. ELRA Newsletter, 3(2).
R. Dale and C. Mellish. 1998. Towards the Evaluation of Nat-
ural Language Generation. Proceedings of the First Interna-
tional Conference on Evaluation of Natural Language Pro-
cessing Systems.
C. Ebert, D. Glatz, M. Jansche, R. Meyer-Klabunde and R.
Porzel. 1996. From Conceptualization to Formulation in
Generating Spatial Descriptions. Proceedings fo the 5th Eu-
ropean Conference on Cognitive Modelling.
L. Ferres, A. Parush, S. Roberts and G. Lindgaard. 2006. Help-
ing People with Visual Impairments Gain Access to Graph-
ical Information Through Natural Language: The iGraph
System. Proceedings of ICCHP 2006, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, 4061.
S. Geldof. 2003. Corpus Analysis for NLG. Proceedings of the
9th EWNLG.
E. Goldberg, N. Driedger and R.L. Kittredge. 1994. Using
Natural-Language Processing to Produce Weather Forecasts.
IEEE Expert, 9(2).
V. Gyselinck, R. De Beni, F. Pazzaglia, C. Meneghetti and A.
Mondoloni. 2006. Spatial Knowledge Acquisition from
Maps and from Navigation in Real and Virtual Environ-
ments. Memory and Cognition, 27.
R. Kitchin, M. Blades and R. Golledge. 1997. Understanding
Spatial Concepts at the Geographic Scale Without the Use of
Vision. Human Geography, 21(2).
T. Marciniak and M. Strube. 2004. Classification-based Gener-
ation Using TAG. Proceedings of Natural Language Gener-
ation: 3rd International Conference, Lecture Notes in Artifi-
cial Intelligence, 3123.
W. Metzger. 2006. Laws of Seeing. MIT Press.
R. Mitkov. 1990. A Text-Generation System for Explaining
Concepts in Geometry. Proceedings of the 13th Conference
on Computational Linguistics.
D. Murray and C. Spencer. 1979. Individual Differences in
the Drawing of Cognitive Maps: the Effects of Geographi-
cal Mobility, Strength of Mental Imagery and Basic Graphic
Ability. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers,
New Series, Vol.4, No.3.
H.J. Novak. 1986. Generating a Coherent Text Describing a
Traffic Scene. Proceedings of the 11th Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics.
E. Reiter and R. Dale. 2000. Building Natural Language Gen-
eration Systems. Cambridge University Press.
B. Schneiderman. 1996. The Eyes Have It: A Task by Data
Type Taxonomy for Information Visualisations. Proceed-
ings of Visual Language.
S. Sripada, E. Reiter, J. Hunter and J. Yu. 2001. A Two-Stage
Model for Content Determination. Proceedings of the 8th
ACL-EWNLG.
S. Sripada, E. Reiter, J. Hunter and J. Yu. 2003. Exploiting a
Parallel TEXT-DATA Corpus. Proceedings of Corpus Lin-
guistics.
H. Taylor and B. Tversky. 1996. Perspective in Spatial De-
scriptions. Journal of Memory and Language, vol. 35.
K. Thomas and S. Sripada. 2008. Atlas.txt: First Steps Towards
Bridging the Gap Between Geo-Referenced Data and Text.
Proceedings of the Cross-Disciplinary Conference on Web
Accessibility.
J. Yu, E. Reiter, J. Hunter and C. Mellish. 2005. Choosing
the Content of Textual Summaries of Large Time-series Data
Sets. Natural Language Engineering, vol. 11.
120
