Proceedings of the NAACL HLT Workshop on Computational Approaches to Linguistic Creativity, pages 63?70,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Planning Author and Character Goals for Story Generation   Candice Jean Solis, Joan Tiffany Siy, Emerald Tabirao, and Ethel Ong College of Computer Studies  De La Salle University Manila, Philippines candice_solis13@yahoo.com, emeraldtabirao_dlsu@yahoo.com.ph, joan.tiffany.siy@gmail.com, ethel.ong@delasalle.ph 
 
  Abstract The design and content of the planning library of a story generation system dictates the con-tent quality of the story it produces. This paper presents the story planner component of Pic-ture Books, a system that generates stories for children aged 4 to 6 years based on a set of picture elements selected by the user. The planning library separates the design for the story patterns from the design of the semantic ontology that supplies the story?s domain knowledge. An evaluation of the system shows that the coherency and completeness of the plot is attributed to the story pattern design structure while the appropriateness of the con-tent is attributed to the semantic ontology. 1 Introduction Several researchers have developed story genera-tors capable of generating stories that closely resemble human-made stories. Some of these include TALE-SPIN (Meehan, 1977) that gener-ates stories through problem solving, MIN-STREL (Turner, 1992) that uses an episodic memory scheme for storing past problem-solving cases, and MAKEBELIEVE (Liu and Singh, 2002) that constructs stories with the use of logi-cal reasoning. Callaway and Lester (2002) observed that most story generators (SG), such as TALE-SPIN and MAKEBELIEVE, concentrated on the gen-eration of plots and the characters, with less em-phasis on linguistic phenomena, resulting in sto-ries that have good narrative quality but lacking in linguistic structures. Their STORYBOOK sys-tem addresses this by applying full-scale linguis-tic approaches to the narrative prose generation architecture of AUTHOR (Callaway, 2000). Loenneker (2005) made a similar observation regarding SG whose implicit goal is to generate a coherent narrative in a given genre with less em-phasis on discourse structure, and skipping 
document structuring and microplanning (Reiter and Dale, 2000) stages. In this paper, we present our story generator, Picture Books, which generates stories for chil-dren aged four to six. Picture Books derives the story elements from a given input set of picture elements (backgrounds, characters, and objects). The genre (fables) and story goal (moral lessons) are applied as separate parts of the system?s planning library, which contains story planning goals to convert abstract story specifications to coherent stories suitable for the target age group. The rest of this paper is subdivided as fol-lows. Section 2 presents some background in-formation on the specifications of a children?s story as well as the semantic ontology used by the planners of Picture Books. Section 3 dis-cusses the design of the plan library and the planning process involved in story generation, followed by the evaluation results on the content and grammar of the stories generated by the sys-tem in Section 4. The paper ends with a summary of future work that can be done to improve the generated stories.  2 Storytelling and Picture Books The motivation behind Picture Books is two-fold. First is the realization that stories are com-binations of various genres to produce a differing effect.  The genres can be considered as tem-plates that dictate the plot of the story.  It is therefore possible to create a story by indicating the story elements (i.e., characters, events, and settings), the genres, and the goal of the story to automatically produce a narrative text. The sec-ond motivation is that stories serve as rich sources of information that help develop a child?s knowledge.  However, young children recognize images of objects easily compared to words (Fields et al 2003), accounting for the popularity of picture-based story books that al-low readers to relate stories by using not only words, but pictures depicting the story. 
63
2.1 Story Specifications Interviews with child educators revealed that most of the published storybooks for children focus on themes to teach them lessons about proper behavior. These themes revolve around everyday activities like eating on time and brush-ing your teeth with lessons on being careful, be-ing honest, and the value of sharing. Themes also dictate the objects that can be used in the story, for example, in the eating healthy foods theme, possible positive objects supporting good behav-ior are apples and bananas, while cakes and can-dies are considered negative objects in cases of misbehavior (i.e., unhealthy foods). Another common characteristic of children's stories is the use of the fable form, wherein the story characters are portrayed by animals that can capture the imagination and attention of the target readers. The animals have simple traits that children can relate with, such as loyalty for dogs, playfulness for cats, kindness for rabbits, and bravery for tigers. They are also given names, such as Ellen the elephant, Rizzy the rab-bit, and Leo the lion, to give the impression that the characters are friends that the children are getting to know better through reading the story. In the linguistic aspect, stories for four year olds have simple sentence structures and contain line redundancy. This is lessened as the child grows older. The words used in the stories are not only simple and easy to understand, but also vary depending on the child's age in order to in-troduce new words to his vocabulary. Lessons and rules are emphasized by positive praises while improper behaviors are emphasized by re-vealing their consequences. Another aspect to consider in storytelling is the story?s title. Story titles are short and often 
contain the story?s theme as a hint to what the story is about. The main character?s name should also be included in the title, such as ?Leo the Lion Learns to Eat on Time?. In general, Machado (2003) showed that sto-ries follow a common and classic story pattern depicted in Figure 0, which flows from negative to positive and has the following outline: i. The main character wants something. ii. The main character is informed of the rules and/or restrictions. iii. The main character disobeys the rule. iv. The main character is either caught or experiences natural consequences of dis-obedience (e.g. a tooth ache from eating too much candy). v. The main character learns a lesson. 2.2 Semantic Ontology The knowledge resource dictates the amount of information that an SG system can output, thus highlighting its importance. Picture Books uses an ontology to have a flexible knowledge re-source that provides relevant concepts familiar to the target age group as well as applicable to the story being planned. Its design was adapted from ConceptNet (Liu and Singh, 2004a), a semantic resource with structure closely resembling that of WordNet (2006). The nodes used by ConceptNet are of three general classes representing noun phrases, attrib-utes, and activity phrases. A semantic relation-ship connects two concepts while a semantic category classifies them. The semantic relation-ships are binary relation types defined by Open Mind Commonsense project (Liu and Singh, 2004b). Table 1 lists some of these relationships defined in Picture Books following the form <re-lationship>(<concept1>, <concept2>). 
Quick, satisfying conclusion 
Introduction of setting and characters 
Introduction of problem or dilemma 
Rising action and plot development 
Insightful answer or solution 
Climactic scene 
Beginning 
Ending 
Figure 0. Common and Classic Story Pattern Form (Machado, 2003)  
64
Semantic Category Semantic Relationships Things IsA(headache, pain) - corresponds loosely to hypernym in WordNet  PropertyOf(apple, healthy) PartOf(window, pane) ? corresponds loosely to holonym in WordNet MadeOf(toy car, clay) Events FirstSubeventOf(tell bedtime story, sleep) EventForGoalEvent(go to grocery store, buy food) EventForGoalState(clean up, be neat)  EventRequiresObject(play, toy) Actions EffectOf(become dirty, itchy) EffectOfIsState(make friends, friendship) CapableOf(toy car, play) Table 1. ConceptNet semantic relationships (Liu and Singh, 2004b) with sample concepts of Picture Books 3 Planning the Story Picture Books has three major components ? a picture editor, a story planner, and a sentence planner. The Picture Editor is provided for users to specify the background or setting of the story (kitchen), and to select and ?stick? into the back-ground the set of characters (little sheep and mama sheep) and objects (cake, bread). An ex-ample picture is shown in Figure 2. The first child character placed in the picture will be the protagonist of the story, while the first adult sticker placed in the picture will be the par-ent of the protagonist. If there is no adult charac-ter, the protagonist's biological parent will be chosen as the adult character needed in the story. The first object sticker placed in the picture will assume the %object% variable used in planning the story - especially in ontology accesses. The rest are discarded. All elements in the picture, namely the back-ground, the characters and the objects (including sequence of placement), and the name and age of the user, are stored in an input content represen-tation (ICR) and passed on to the story planner. The Story Planner takes in the abstract ICR then performs three planning steps ? i) theme planning to select an appropriate theme for the story, ii) plot planning to instantiate the story plots depicting the theme, and iii) presentation planning to handle the planning of the story?s title, introduction and appropriate ending. A Story Organizer arranges these resulting story events as it is supposed to be presented to the user in an abstract story tree. 
The Sentence Planner then converts the ab-stract story tree representation to sentence speci-fications by performing referring expression generation, lexicalization, and phrase specifica-tion mapping. The Surface Realizer uses the sim-plenlg realiser (Venour and Reiter, 2008) to con-vert the sentence specifications to actual sen-tences that comprise the story.  
 Figure 2. Sample Picture with Stickers 3.1 Plan Library The plan library contains the set of instruc-tions and information on creating the plot of a story, and has three parts: (1) the story elements containing information regarding the characters, objects and settings of a story; (2) a set of story patterns to direct the story goal towards attain-ment of the moral lesson; and (3) a semantic on-tology containing concepts applicable to the tar-get domain, in this case, fables. Picture Books uses a set of predefined characters, objects and backgrounds, as inputs. These story elements are used to determine the actors, the setting and the theme of a story. Information on characters, such as the parents, is useful for identifying other characters in the story. The background serves as the main setting of the story, and combined with the selected objects, is used to determine the theme. Given a bedroom background, the set of available themes include being brave, being neat, being careful, being honest, and sleeping early. Objects that are available for this background include an alarm clock, a lamp, a pillow, and toys. The story pattern is used to direct the goal of the story and is composed of the theme, story plot, author goal and character goal. Each com-ponent is designed to subsume the next (i.e., theme subsumes story plot, and story plot sub-sumes author goal) to support different granular-
65
ity of story details and to lessen the redundancy as common story details are subsumed by a higher-level component. A theme dictates the plot of a story and is composed of four story plots (see Figure 3) namely, the problem, rising action, solution and climax which, according to Machado (2003), are the four fundamental stages of the main plot of any story. In the theme take_bath, these four plots would contain the following:  Problem:          Defy by not doing the rule  Rising Action:  Experience consequence Solution:          Do the lesson Climax:            Learn the benefit 
 Figure 3. Theme Structure  The theme is executed through the story plot. A story plot represents the major events in the theme and contains at least two author goals (shown in Figure  4) that represent the scenes comprising the event. 
 Figure 4. Story Plot Structure  
 Figure 5. Author Goal Structure  An author goal (Figure 5) is composed of a goal of the scene and the corresponding conse-quence of the goal to ensure consistency in the scene. Each goal and consequence component of 
an author goal is in turn filled up by at least one character goal.A character goal (Figure 6) rep-resents the unit of action a character or two char-acters do in order to depict the goal/consequence of the scene. This design of the character goal is based from the action operators of Uijlings (2006) and can be directly converted to simple declarative sentences. A character goal has five fields ? the action, the agens or doer of the action, the patiens or receiver of the action, the target, and the instru-ment. One character goal generates one sentence in the story with the agens as the subject, the ac-tion as the verb, the patiens as the character or object that undergoes the action verb, the target as the location or object of the action verb, and the instrument as the object used to perform the verb. This design allows all fields to be empty except for action and agens.  
 Figure 6. Character Goal Data Structure  The character goal is generic so that it only contains default values for action, agens and pa-tiens. During instantiation of a character goal for a particular scene, attribute values are passed to the character goal at the author goal level. For example, given the generic character goal adult tells main character (CGL01) has the following default attributes: action: tell agens: adult patiens: main character When a scene requires the adult to inform the main character of the lesson, the target attribute would then be assigned with the lesson value to denote that the adult is talking to the main char-acter about the lesson. The invocation of the character goal in the author goal level would be: CGL01(target:lesson) This customizes the character goal to ?adult tells the lesson to the main character? to fit the scene. Parameters for character goal attributes in-clude not only the story variables (i.e. object, lesson, background), but invocations to inner character goals and ontology accesses as well. An inner character goal is a character goal as-signed as an attribute of an outer character goal. 
66
It represents a clause in a sentence and is usually assigned as a value of the target attribute in the outer character goal, for example: CGL03(target:CGL05(target:lesson)) Picture Books would interpret the inner char-acter goal ?main character is not doing the les-son (CGL05)? first before appending it to the outer character goal ?secondary character told the adult character (CGL03)?, resulting in the following sentence specification: secondary character tells an adult that the main character is not doing the lesson The instrument attribute in a character goal may have the following value which would trigger an ontology search for a concept: onto<semantic_category>(%object%) The <semantic category> constrains the search coverage to concepts that are directly connected to the given input concept (%ob-ject%). For example, ontoSpatial(play) triggers a search for all concepts connected to play within the spatial semantic category (e.g., ?locationOf? and ?oftenNear? semantic relationships).  Character goals can also be created dynami-cally during runtime and are used to increase the length and the variation of the generated story. Dynamic character goals necessitate the search for relationship paths in the ontology. Two input concepts, the source and destination concepts, and the semantic category that constrains the search coverage, are needed when searching for relationship paths. Consider the following attribute value of a character goal:  ontoEvent(break object, punishment) This denotes that a search for a series of seman-tic relationships within the Event semantic cate-gory must be performed to relate break object to punishment. The resulting path is shown in Figure  7.  
 Figure 7. Sample Ontology Path Search Result  Each relationship in the resulting path, ex-cluding isA (hypernym) and conceptuallyRelat-edTo relationships, is mapped to a dynamic char-
acter goal. For example, in the first lastSubeven-tOf relationship in Figure 7, the second concept (?get punished?) is assigned to the action attrib-ute of the dynamic character goal, resulting in the abstract output sentence specifications ?Main character gets punished? and ?Main character is not allowed to play today?. 3.2 Planning Process The Theme Planner selects a theme by matching the input objects against the applicable objects of the candidate themes for a specified background. When the theme with the highest score has been determined, the Plot Planner instantiates the story plots of the chosen theme, beginning with the problem, followed by the rising action, then the solution and finally the climax. Given the theme eat_on_time with the following corre-sponding story plots: eat_on_time(defy_break_rule, experience_ consequence, inform_lesson, realize _benefit) 1 the first (problem) story plot, defy_break_rule, suggests that the main character will disobey an adult character?s rule/instruction. Executing this plot entails executing the author goals within it. defy_break_rule(inform_character_rule,         ignore _rule) Then the first author goal, inform_character _rule, suggesting that the adult character informs the main character of the rule first, is executed: inform_character_rule(adult_talk_character, character_not_want) Finally, the character goals in the author goal, adult_talk_character and character_not_want, are executed. Notice that it is only in the character goal level that instantiation of characters and objects are made. adult_talk_character(?tell?, ?Mommy Audrey?, ?Simon?, ?eat on time?, null) 2 character_not_want(?not want?, ?Simon?, null, ?eat on time?, null) These phrase specifications of character goals will be forwarded later to the surface realizer for translation to simple sentences to generate the text ?Mommy Audrey told Simon to eat on time.? and ?Simon did not want to eat on time.?, respectively.                                                  1 Theme format:  Theme(problem, rising action, solution, climax) 2 Character Goal format:  CG(action, agens, patiens, target, instrument) 
67
The planning process continues by backtracking to the first story plot and iterating until it exhausts all the theme?s story plots. A depth-first tree traversal algorithm is employed to recursively traverse the theme tree. An excerpt from the theme eat_on_time, starting from the story plot defy_break_rule, and its tree traversal, is shown in Figure  8. 
 Figure 8. Tree Traversal for the Problem ?Defy Break Rule? of the ?Eat_On_Time? Theme 3.3 Planning for Linguistic Variation Sentences generated by Picture Books vary in length and word complexity according to the user?s age. The variation in length is handled by specificity character goals (SCG) that are ap-pended as supporting details to their respective character goals. SCGs are designed so that their existence will give more detail to the preceding character goal while ensuring consistency, and that their non-existence will still make the story complete. SCG is not executed when the user is four years old, one SCG is executed when the user is five years old, and all of SCGs are exe-cuted when the user is six years old.  Age Story Excerpt Four Ellen was scared. She was sad. Teacher Sara saw that Ellen was crying. Teacher Sara told Ellen to be brave. Five Ellen was scared. She was lonely. Teacher Sara saw that Ellen was crying. Teacher Sara asked Ellen if everything was okay. She told her to be brave. Six Ellen was scared. She was upset.  Teacher Sara saw that she was crying. Teacher Sara asked Ellen if everything was okay. Ellen told teacher Sara that she was scared.  Teacher Sara told Ellen to be brave. Table 2. Excerpts of Stories with Linguistic Variation   Word complexity is addressed by storing dif-ferent synonymous lexical items in the lexicon. The appropriateness of the lexical items to the 
target age group was verified by child educators. Table 2 contains excerpts from Picture Books? stories for various ages, with boldfaced italics showing lexical variation, while underlined sen-tences are the executed SCGs. Additional sen-tences and lexical items can be generated by en-coding more SCGs into the plan library and the ontology, respectively. 4 Results and Analysis The knowledge base of Picture Books currently contains 9 backgrounds, 11 themes, 40 charac-ters, 37 objects, 77 author goals, and 61 character goals. The lexicon has been populated with 419 words appropriate for the target age group, while the ontology has 240 concepts and 369 semantic relationships. 15 exemplary stories generated by the system, consisting of five themes that vary per age (4, 5, and 6), were selected. Two child educators and a linguist manually validated the appropriateness of the content and the linguistic correctness of the 15 stories, respectively. Each story was rated per criterion from 1 to 4, with 4 being the highest. A rate of 4 means that the criterion is completely present in the story, 3 means that the criterion is present but incom-plete, 2 means the criterion is partially present, and 1 means the criterion is not present. 4.1 Evaluating the Story Content The evaluation on the story patterns? role in en-suring that the story goal is met is shown in Ta-ble 3, while the evaluation of the semantic ontol-ogy?s role in supplying domain knowledge to the story is shown in Table 4. The evaluators gave the stories high ratings in terms of plot completeness, validating that the stories have all the essential story elements (problem, rising action, the solution and the climax to the problem) as well as the introduc-tion of the time and setting of the story. This was attributed to the plan library structure consisting of themes, plots, author goals, and character goals. Because of this coherency in the plot, the understandability criterion received a high average score of 3.47. Criteria Average Story is understandable 3.47 The settings of the story were de-scribed 3.86 The characters in the story were described 3.67 Objects are present in the story 4.00 General Average 3.75 Table 3. Evaluation on the Story Patterns 
68
Criteria Average Sentences are coherent 2.67 The story has transition 3.47 The actions of the characters make sense 3.93 Story is appropriate to target age 3.80 Objects in the story were described 2.80 General Average 3.33 Table 4. Evaluation of the Semantic Ontology  Evaluations on the effectiveness of the semantic ontology, on the other hand, produced varying scores. The coherency of the sentences received a low average score of 2.67, because as seen in the excerpt below, a sentence (such as the underlined text) depicting that Ellen the elephant did something to show she is trying to be brave was missing in the generated story. She wanted to be brave. Ellen was brave. She wanted to play with others. She bravely intro-duced herself. Ellen made friends. Since the ontology did not contain any other information of what to do in order to be brave, the story content planner did not place any detail describing the action of the main character depicting her attempt to be brave. This can be remedied by adding more semantic relationships (that can be converted to sentences) between concepts. The excerpt from the generated story ?Rizzy the Rabbit Learns to be Honest? below also affected the coherency criterion when the second character, Denise the dog, suddenly appeared in the middle of the story when she could have been introduced with the first character, Rizzy the rabbit, at the start of the story. The evening was warm. Rizzy the rabbit was in the dining room. She played near a lamp. Rizzy broke the lamp. She was scared. Mommy Francine saw that the lamp was broken. Rizzy told Mommy Francine that Denise broke the lamp. The criterion regarding story transition pertains to the ease of transition of events that can be attributed to the path of relationships retrieved from the semantic ontology, which more often than not, introduce event transitions including character actions.  The criterion on appropriateness of the story content to the target age received a high average score of 3.80 mainly because the semantic ontology has been populated with concepts specifically for the target age group. 
While the presence of objects in the stories received a high score of 4.00 (see Table 3), the description of objects received a low score of 2.80 (see Table 4), because although objects are present in the stories, as in ?She played near a lamp.?, they were not described, i.e., ?breakable lamp?. This was remedied by adding object descriptions in the ontology. However, the selection of which description to be used was currently not dictated by the story theme, nor was the description subsequently used to direct the sequences of events in the rest of the story. 4.2 Evaluating the Linguistic Aspect Table 5 summarizes the evaluation on the gram-matical aspect of the generated stories. Since mostly simple sentences are generated, they are grammatically correct and coherent.   CRITERIA AVG Sentences are grammatically correct 3.20 Sentences are coherent 3.60 Pronouns are used correctly 3.45 Articles are used correctly 3.20 The story has transition 3.00 General Average 3.29 Table 5. Evaluation on Grammar Correctness  Most of the generated stories contain correct usage of pronouns, except for sentences such as ?Teacher Sara told Ellen that Ellen should be brave?, where the second reference to ?Ellen? should be replaced with the pronoun ?she?. The evaluators, however, noted the lack of possessive pronouns in the text below (the underlined words are the identified missing pronouns). Porky wanted to play. He played with his toys. His toys were scattered. There are also occurrences of missing articles, as shown in the excerpt below (the underlined words are the missing articles). He played near a glass of water.  Simon broke the glass of water. He was scared. Daddy Gary saw that the glass of water was broken. The generated stories received an average score of 3.0 for the transition criterion due to missing transitional devices, as shown in the ex-cerpt below (the underlined words are the miss-ing transitional devices). He apologized to her. Mommy Patricia then helped Porky to clean up. Soon he found the lost toys. 
69
5 Conclusion and Recommendations  The design of Picture Books? plan library, com-bined with planning operators in the form of story plots and character goals, demonstrated that grammatically correct and coherent stories for children aged 4 to 6 can be generated from a given set of predefined pictures, provided that the appropriate domain knowledge is present. The semantic ontology whose design was adapted from ConceptNet provided the domain knowledge that supplies factual information to the story.  The theme structure and its compo-nents model the way humans perform storytel-ling and also ensured that the generated stories will contain the four basic elements of problem, rising action, solution, and climax. The separa-tion of the plan library which dictates the story patterns from the semantic ontology gives flexi-bility to Picture Books such that it could easily be adapted to generate other story domain. Currently, Picture Books generates stories with simple declarative sentences. A future im-provement of the system is to extend the design of the character goal to generate stories with dia-logues. Although common animals that young children can relate with have been used as the main characters of the story, their traits, such as loyalty, bravery, and kindness, have not been considered in determining the flow of the story. A similar claim can be made for describing the objects used in the story, such that a story pro-moting the value of ?being thrifty? can use the ?expensive lamp? as an object, while the value of ?being careful? can use the ?breakable lamp? instead. These are aspects of storytelling that can be investigated in a future work. From a linguistic perspective, the current im-plementation of Picture Books can generate pro-nouns and articles, as well as a transitional de-vice at the last sentence in the story. However, possessive pronouns, the consistent use of arti-cles, and the generation of appropriate transi-tional devices in several parts of the story should be further explored. The design of the character goals can be extended by adding an attribute in-dicating a connection or the passage of time be-tween sentences. Rhetorical Structure Theory (Mann and Thompson, 1988) can also be applied to author goals and character goals for an effec-tive discourse structure that would provide a smoother story flow.   
References  Charles B. Callaway, and James C. Lester. 2002. Nar-rative Prose Generation. Artificial Intelligence, 139(2): 213-252. Charles B. Callaway. 2000. Narrative Prose Genera-tion. PhD thesis, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC. Robert Dale, and Ehud Reiter. 2000. Building Natural Language Generation Systems. Cambridge: Cam-bridge University Press. Marjorie Fields, Lois Groth, and Katherine Spangler. 2003. Let's Begin Reading Right: A Developmental Approach to Emergent Literacy, 5/E. Prentice Hall. Hugo Liu, and Push Singh. 2004a. Commonsense Reasoning in and over Natural Language. In Pro-ceedings of the 8th International Conference on Knowledge-Based Intelligent Information and En-gineering Systems, 293-306, Wellington, New Zea-land. Springer Berlin. Hugo Liu, and Push Singh, 2004b. ConceptNet ? A Practical Commonsense Reasoning Tool-Kit. BT Technology Journal, 22(4): 211-226. Springer Netherlands. Hugo Liu, and Push Singh. 2002. Makebelieve: Using Commonsense Knowledge to Generate Stories. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 957-958, Edmonton, Al-berta, Canada. AAAI Press. Birte Loenneker. 2005. Narratological Knowledge for Natural Language Generation. In Proceedings of the Tenth European Workshop on Natural Lan-guage Generation, 91-100, Aberdeen, Scotland. Jeanne Machado. 2003. Storytelling. In Early Childhood Experiences in Language Arts: Emerging Literacy, 304-319. Clifton Park, N.Y. Thomson/Delmar Learning. William C. Mann, Sandra A. Thompson. 1988. Rhetorical Structure Theory: Toward a Functional Theory of Text Organization. Text, 8(3), 243-281. James Meehan. 1977. TALE-SPIN, An Interactive Program that Writes Stories. Proceedings of the 5th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 91-98. Cambridge, M.A. Scott R. Turner. 1992. Minstrel: A Computer Model of Creativity and Storytelling. Los Angeles, Cali-fornia: University of California. Jasper Uijlings. 2006. Designing a Virtual Environment for Story Generation. MSc Thesis, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam. Chris Venour, Ehud Reiter. 2008. A Tutorial for Simplenlg (version 3.7) http://www.csd.abdn.ac.uk/~ereiter/simplenlg/ WordNet: A Lexical Database for the English Lan-guage. Princeton University, New Jersey, 2006. 
70
