Proceedings of NAACL HLT 2009: Short Papers, pages 177?180,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
 
 
Towards Effective Sentence Simplification for  
Automatic Processing of Biomedical Text  
 
Siddhartha Jonnalagadda*, Luis Tari**, J?rg Hakenberg**, Chitta Baral**, Graciela Gonzalez* 
*Department of Biomedical Informatics, Arizona State University, Phoenix, AZ 85004, USA. 
**Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85281, USA. 
 Corresponding author: ggonzalez@asu.edu 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
The complexity of sentences characteristic to 
biomedical articles poses a challenge to natu-
ral language parsers, which are typically 
trained on large-scale corpora of non-technical 
text. We propose a text simplification process, 
bioSimplify, that seeks to reduce the complex-
ity of sentences in biomedical abstracts in or-
der to improve the performance of syntactic 
parsers on the processed sentences. Syntactic 
parsing is typically one of the first steps in a 
text mining pipeline. Thus, any improvement 
in performance would have a ripple effect 
over all processing steps. We evaluated our 
method using a corpus of biomedical sen-
tences annotated with syntactic links. Our em-
pirical results show an improvement of 2.90% 
for the Charniak-McClosky parser and of 
4.23% for the Link Grammar parser when 
processing simplified sentences rather than the 
original sentences in the corpus. 
1 Introduction 
It is typical that applications for biomedical text 
involve the use of natural language syntactic pars-
ers as one of the first steps in processing. Thus, the 
performance of the system as a whole is largely 
dependent on how well the natural language syn-
tactic parsers perform.  
One of the challenges in parsing biomedical text is 
that it is significantly more complex than articles in 
typical English text. Different analysis show other 
problematic characteristics, including inconsistent 
use of nouns and partial words (Tateisi & Tsujii, 
2004), higher perplexity measures (Elhadad, 2006), 
greater lexical density, plus increased number of 
relative clauses and prepositional phrases (Ge-
moets, 2004), all of which correlate with dimi-
nished comprehension and higher text difficulty.  
These characteristics also lead to performance 
problems in terms of computation time and accura-
cy for parsers that are trained on common English 
text corpus. 
  We identified three categories of sentences: 1) 
normal English sentences, like in Newswire text, 
2) normal biomedical English sentences ? those 
sentences which can be parsed without a problem 
by Link Grammar-, and 3) complex biomedical 
English sentences ? those sentences which can?t be 
parsed by Link Grammar. Aside from the known 
characteristics mentioned before, sentences in the 
third group tended to be longer (18% of them had 
more than 50 words, while only 8% of those in 
group 2 and 2% of those in group 1 did). It has 
been observed that parsers perform well with sen-
tences of reduced length (Chandrasekar & Srini-
vas, 1997; Siddharthan, 2006).  
  In this paper, we explore the use of text simplifi-
cation as a preprocessing step for general parsing 
to reduce length and complexity of biomedical sen-
tences in order to enhance the performance of the 
parsers.  
2 Methods  
There are currently many publicly available corpo-
ra of biomedical texts, the most popular among 
them being BioInfer, Genia, AImed, HPRD 50, 
IEPA, LLL and BioCreative1-PPI. Among these 
corpora, BioInfer includes the most comprehensive 
collection of sentences and careful annotation for 
links of natural parser, in both the Stanford and 
Link Grammar schemes. Therefore, we chose the 
BioInfer corpus, version 1.1.0 (Pyysalo et al, 
2007), containing 1100 sentences for evaluating 
the effectiveness of our simplification method on 
177
  
the performance of syntactic parsers. The method 
includes syntactic and non-syntactic transforma-
tions, detailed next. 
2.1 Non-syntactic transformation 
We group here three steps of our approach: 1. pre-
processing through removal of spurious phrases; 2. 
replacement of gene names; 3. replacement of 
noun phrases. 
  To improve the correctness of the parsing, each 
biomedical sentence is first preprocessed to re-
move phrases that are not essential to the sentence. 
This includes removal of section indicators, which 
are phrases that specify the name of the section at 
the beginning of the sentence, plus the removal of 
phrases in parentheses (such as citations and num-
bering in lists). Also, partially hyphenated words 
are transformed by combining with the nearest 
word that follows or precedes the partial hyphe-
nated word to make a meaningful word. For in-
stance, the phrase ?alpha- and beta-catenin? is 
transformed into ?alpha-catenin and beta-catenin?. 
  Occurrences of multi-word technical terms and 
entity names involved in biomedical processes are 
common in biomedical text. Such terms are not 
likely to appear in the dictionary of a parser (per-
plexity is high), and will force it to use morpho-
guessing and unknown word guessing. This is time 
consuming and prone to error. Thus, unlike typical 
text simplification that emphasizes syntactic trans-
formation of sentences, our approach utilizes a 
named entity recognition engine, BANNER  
(Leaman & Gonzalez, 2008), to replace multi-word 
gene names with single-word placeholders.  
 Replacement of gene names with single elements 
is not enough, however, and grammatical category 
(i.e. singular or plural) of the element has to be 
considered. Lingpipe (Alias-i, 2006), a shallow 
parser for biomedical text, identifies noun phrases 
and replaces them with single elements. A single 
element is considered singular when the following 
verb indicates a third-person singular verb or the 
determiner preceded by the element is either ?a? or 
?an?. Otherwise it is considered as plural and an 
?s? is attached to the end of the element. 
2.2 Syntactic transformation 
The problem of simplifying long sentences in 
common English text has been studied before, not-
ably by Chandrasekar & Srinivas (1997) and Sidd-
harthan (2006). However, the techniques used in 
these studies might not totally solve the issue of 
parsing biomedical sentences. For example, using 
Siddharthan?s approach, the biological finding 
?The Huntington's disease protein interacts with 
p53 and CREB-binding protein and represses tran-
scription?, and assuming multi-word nouns such as 
?CREB-binding protein? do not present a problem, 
would be simplified to: 
?The Huntington's disease protein interacts with 
p53. The Huntington's disease protein interacts 
with CREB-binding protein. The Huntington's 
disease protein represses transcription.?  
 Our method transforms it to ?GENE1 interacts 
with GENE2 and GENE3 and represses transcrip-
tion.? Both decrease the average sentence length, 
but the earlier distorts the biological meaning 
(since the Huntington?s disease protein might not 
repress transcription on its own), while the latter 
signifies it. 
  While replacement of gene names and noun 
phrases can reduce the sentence length, there are 
Figure 1 ? Linkages after simplification of the original sentence 
? GENE1: human CREB binding protein 
? GENE2: CBP 
? GENE3s: CBP 
? REPNP1s: RTS patients 
Original sentence ST: The gene for the human CREB binding protein, the transcriptional coactivator CBP,   
is included in the RT1 cosmid, and mutations in CBP have recently been identified in RTS patients. 
ST1: 
ST2: 
c1 
c3 c4 
c2 
178
  
cases when the sentences are still too complex to 
be parsed efficiently. We developed a simple algo-
rithm that utilizes linkages (specific grammatical 
relationships between pairs of words in a sentence) 
of the Link Grammar parser (Sleator, 1998) and 
punctuations for splitting sentences into clauses. 
An example in Figure 1 illustrates the main part of 
the algorithm. Each linkage has a primary link type 
in CAPITAL followed by secondary link type in 
short. The intuition behind the algorithm is to try to 
identify independent clauses from complex sen-
tences. The first step is to split the sentence ST into 
clauses c1, c2, c3 and c4 based on commas. c1 is 
parsed using the Link Grammar parser, but c1 can-
not be a sentence as there is no ?S? link in the lin-
kage of c1. c2 is then attached to c1 and the linkage 
of ?c1, c2? does not contain a ?S? link as well. ?c1, 
c2, c3.? is recognized as a sentence, since the lin-
kage contains an ?S? link, indicating that it is a 
sentence, as well as the linkage of c4. So the algo-
rithm returns two sentences ST1 and ST2 for ST. 
3 Results 
Our method has the greatest impact on the perfor-
mance of Link Grammar (LG), which lies at the 
core of BioLG (Pyysalo et al, 2006). However, it 
also has a significant impact on the self-training 
biomedical parser by McClosky & Charniak (CM), 
which is currently the best parser available for 
biomedical text.  
3.1 Rudimentary statistics of the results of sim-
plification: After the simplification algorithm was 
tested on the 1100 annotated sentences of the Bio-
Infer corpus, there were 1159 simplified sentences 
because of syntactic transformation (section 2.2). 
The number of words per sentence showed a sharp 
drop of 20.4% from 27.0 to 21.5. The Flesh-
Kincaid score for readability dropped from 17.4 to 
14.2. The Gunning Fog index also dropped by 
18.3% from 19.7 to 16.1. 
Pre-
processing 
Replacement 
of gene names 
Replacement of 
noun phrases 
Syntactic  
Simplification 
359  1082  915  91 
Table 1: Sentences processed in each stage 
 
3.2 Impact of simplification on the efficiency of 
parsing: We inputted the BioInfer corpus to LG 
and CM. If LG cannot find a complete linkage, it 
invokes its panic mode, where sentences are re-
turned with considerably low accuracy. Out of the 
1100 original sentences in the corpus, 219 went 
into panic mode. After processing, only 39 out of 
1159 simplified sentences triggered panic mode (a 
16.4% improvement in efficiency). The average 
time for parsing a sentence also dropped from 7.36 
secs to 1.70 secs after simplification.  
 
3.3 Impact of simplification on the accuracy of 
parsing: Let ?g, ?o and ?s, respectively be the 
sets containing the links of the gold standard, the 
output generated by the parser on original sen-
tences and the output generated by the parser on 
simplified sentences. We denote a link of type ? 
between the tokens ?1 and ?2 by (?,?1,?2). In the 
case of the original sentences, the tokens ?1and ?2 
are single-worded. So, (?,?1,?2) is a true positive 
iff (?,?1,?2) belongs to both ?g and ?o, false posi-
tive iff it only belongs to ?o and false negative iff 
it only belongs to ?g. In the case of simplified sen-
tences, the tokens ?1and ?2 can have multiple 
words. So, (?,?1,?2) which belongs to ?s is a true 
positive iff (?,??1,??2) belongs to ?g where ??1 
and ??2 are respectively one of the words in ?1 and 
?2. Additionally, (?,?1,?2) which belongs to ?g is 
not a false negative if ?1 and ?2 are parts of a sin-
gle token of a simplified sentence. For measuring 
the performance of a parser, the nature of linkage 
is most relevant in the context of the sentence in 
consideration. So, we calculate precision and recall 
for each sentence and average them over all sen-
tences to get the respective precision and recall for 
the collection.  
 
 Precision Recall f-measure 
CM 77.94% 74.08% 75.96% 
BioSimplify + 
CM 
82.51% 75.51% 78.86% 
Improvement   4.57% 1.43% 2.90% 
    
LG 72.36% 71.65% 72.00% 
BioSimplify + 
LG 
78.30% 74.27% 76.23% 
Improvement   5.94% 2.62% 4.23% 
Table 2: Accuracy of McClosky & Charniak (CM) and 
Link Grammar (LG) parsers based on Stanford depen-
dencies, with and without simplified sentences.  
 
  In order to compare the effect of BioSimplify on 
the two parsers, a converter from Link Grammar to 
Stanford scheme was used (Pyysalo et al 2007: 
precision and recall of 98% and 96%). Results of 
179
  
this comparision are shown in Table 2. On CM and 
LG, we were able to achieve a considerable im-
provement in the f-measures by 2.90% and 4.23% 
respectively. CM demonstrated an absolute error 
reduction of 4.1% over its previous best on a dif-
ferent test set. Overall, bioSimplify leverages pars-
ing of biomedical sentences, increasing both the 
efficiency and accuracy. 
4 Related work 
During the creation of BioInfer, noun phrase ma-
cro-dependencies were determined using a simple 
rule set without parsing. Some of the problems re-
lated to parsing noun phrases were removed by 
reducing the number of words by more than 20%. 
BioLG enhances LG by expansion of lexicons and 
the addition of morphological rules for biomedical 
domain. Our work differs from BioLG not only in 
utilizing a gene name recognizer, a specialized 
shallow parser and syntactic transformation, but 
also in creating a preprocessor that can improve the 
performance of any parser on biomedical text. 
  The idea of improving the performance of deep 
parsers through the integration of shallow and deep 
parsers has been reported in (Crysmann et al, 
2002; Daum et al, 2003; Frank et al, 2003) for 
non-biomedical text. In BioNLP, extraction sys-
tems (Jang et al, 2006; Yakushiji et al, 2001) used 
shallow parsers to enhance the performance of 
deep parsers. However, there is a lack of evalua-
tion of the correctness of the dependency parses, 
which is crucial to the correctness of the extracted 
systems. We not only evaluate the correctness of 
the links, but also go beyond the problem of rela-
tionship extraction and empower future researchers 
in leveraging their parsers (and other extraction 
systems) to get better results. 
5 Conclusion and Future work 
We achieved an f-measure of 78.86% using CM on 
BioInfer Corpus which is a 2.90% absolute reduc-
tion in error. We achieved a 4.23% absolute reduc-
tion in error using LG. According to the measures 
described in section 3.1, the simplified sentences 
of BioInfer outperform the original ones by more 
than 18%. Our method can also be used with other 
parsers. As future work, we will demonstrate the 
impact of our simplification method on other text 
mining tasks, such as relationship extraction. 
Acknowledgments 
We thank Science Foundation Arizona (award 
CAA 0277-08 Gonzalez) for partly supporting this 
research. SJ also thanks Bob Leaman and Anoop 
Grewal for their guidance. 
References  
Chandrasekar, R., & Srinivas, B. (1997). Automatic 
induction of rules for text simplification. Knowledge-
Based Systems, 10, 183-190.  
Crysmann, B., Frank, A., Kiefer, B., Muller, S., Neu-
mann, G., et al (2002). An integrated architecture for 
shallow and deep processing. ACL'02. 
Daum, M., Foth, K., & Menzel, W. (2003). Constraint 
based integration of deep and shallow parsing tech-
niques. EACL'03.  
Elhadad, No?mie (2006) User-Sensitive Text Summari-
zation: Application to the Medical Domain. 
Ph.D. Thesis, Columbia University. Available at 
www.dbmi.columbia.edu/noemie/papers/thesis.pdf 
Frank, A., Becker M, et al,. (2003). Integrated shallow 
and deep parsing: TopP meets HPSG. ACL'03. 
Gemoets, D., Rosemblat, G., Tse, T., Logan, R., Assess-
ing Readability of Consumer Health Information: An 
Exploratory Study. MEDINFO 2004. 
Jang, H., Lim, J., Lim, J.-H., Park, S.-J., Lee, K.-C. and 
Park, S.-H. (2006) Finding the evidence for protein-
protein interactions from PubMed abstracts, Bioin-
formatics, 22, e220-226. 
Leaman, R., & Gonzalez, G. (2008). BANNER: An 
executable survery of advances in biomedical named 
entity recognition. 652-663.  
Manning, C. D., & Sch?tze, H. (1999). Foundations of 
statistical natural language processing MIT Press. 
McClosky, D., & Charniak, E. (2008) Self-training for 
biomedical parsing. ACL?08. 
Pyysalo, S., Ginter, F., Haverinen, K., Heimonen, J., 
Salakoski, T., & Laippala, V. (2007) On the unifica-
tion of syntactic annotations under the stanford de-
pendency scheme.. ACL?07. 
Pyysalo, S., Salakoski, T., Aubin, S., & Nazarenko, A. 
(2006). Lexical adaptation of link grammar to the 
biomedical sublanguage: A comparative evaluation 
of three approaches. BMC Bioinformatics, 7, S2.  
Siddharthan, A. (2006). Syntactic simplification and 
text cohesion. Res  Lang  Comput, 4(1), 77-109.  
Sleator, D. (1998) Link Grammar Documentation 
Tateisi, Y., & Tsujii, J. (2004). Part-of-speech annota-
tion of biology research abstracts. LREC, 1267-1270.  
Yakushiji, A., Tateisi, Y., Miyao, Y., & Tsujii, J. 
(2001). Event extraction from biomedical papers using a 
full parser. PSB'01, 6, 408-419. 
180
Proceedings of the Workshop on BioNLP: Shared Task, pages 86?94,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Molecular event extraction from Link Grammar parse trees
Jo?rg Hakenberg1, Ille?s Solt2, Domonkos Tikk2,3, Luis Tari1,
Astrid Rheinla?nder3, Quang Long Ngyuen3, Graciela Gonzalez1, and Ulf Leser3
1Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85283, USA,
2Budapest University of Technology and Economics, 1117 Budapest, Hungary,
3Humboldt Universita?t zu Berlin, 10099 Berlin, Germany.
Abstract
We present an approach for extracting molec-
ular events from literature based on a deep
parser, using in a query language for parse
trees. Detected events range from gene ex-
pression to protein localization, and cover a
multitude of different entity types, including
genes/proteins, binding sites, and locations.
Furthermore, our approach is capable of rec-
ognizing negation and the speculative char-
acter of extracted statements. We first parse
documents using Link Grammar (BioLG) and
store the parse trees in a database. Events are
extracted using a newly developed query lan-
guage with traverses the BioLG linkages be-
tween trigger terms, arguments, and events.
The concrete queries are learnt from an an-
notated corpus. On BioNLP Shared Task data,
we achieve an overall F1-measure of 29.6%.
1 Introduction
Biomedical text mining aims at making the wealth
of information available in publications available for
systematic, automatic studies. An important area of
biomedical text mining is concerned with the ex-
traction of relationships between biological entities,
especially the extraction of protein?protein inter-
actions from PubMed abstracts (Krallinger et al,
2008). The BioNLP?09 Shared Task addresses the
problem of extracting nine different types of molec-
ular events (Kim et al, 2009) and thus targets a
problem that is considerable less-well studied than
protein-protein interactions. Such molecular events
include statements about the expression level of
genes, the binding sites of proteins, and the up/down
regulation of genes, among others. All events fo-
cus on genes/proteins and may include only a single
protein (e.g., protein catabolism), multiple proteins
(e.g., binding), and other arguments (e.g., phospho-
rylation site; protein location). The most complex
type of event considered in the task are regulations,
which may refer to other events (negative regulation
of gene expression) and may also include causes as
arguments. The task also addresses the problem that
experimental findings often are described in a defen-
sive manner (?Our results suggest ...?) or may appear
in negated context. This meta-information about an
extracted event should be taken into account when
text mining results are used in automated analysis
pipelines, but recognizing the degree of confidence
that can be put into an event adds further complex-
ity to the task. Overall, the three tasks in BioNLP?09
are: 1) event detection and characterization, 2) event
argument recognition, and 3) recognition of nega-
tions and speculations.
The approach we present in this paper addresses
all three tasks. Essentially, our system consists of
three components: A deep parser, a query language
for parse trees, and a set of queries that extract spe-
cific events from parse trees. First, we use the Bio-
LG parser (Pyysalo et al, 2006) for parsing sen-
tences into a graph-like structure. Essentially, Bio-
LG recognizes the syntactic structure of a sentence
and represents this information in a tree. It adds links
between semantically connected elements, such as
the links between a verb and its object and sub-
ject. Second, we store the result of BioLG in a re-
lational database. This information is accessed by a
special-purpose query language (Tu et al, 2008) that
86
 


	

 






	





