Proceedings of the Workshop on BioNLP, pages 55?62,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Selecting an Ontology for Biomedical Text Mining
He Tan, Patrick Lambrix
Department of Computer and Information Science
Linko?pings universitet, Sweden
Abstract
Text mining for biomedicine requires a sig-
nificant amount of domain knowledge. Much
of this information is contained in biomedical
ontologies. Developers of text mining appli-
cations often look for appropriate ontologies
that can be integrated into their systems, rather
than develop new ontologies from scratch.
However, there is often a lack of documen-
tation of the qualities of the ontologies. A
number of methodologies for evaluating on-
tologies have been developed, but it is diffi-
cult for users by using these methods to se-
lect an ontology. In this paper, we propose
a framework for selecting the most appropri-
ate ontology for a particular text mining appli-
cation. The framework comprises three com-
ponents, each of which considers different as-
pects of requirements of text mining applica-
tions on ontologies. We also present an ex-
periment based on the framework choosing an
ontology for a gene normalization system.
1 Introduction
With the explosive growth of the volume of pub-
lished biomedical research, it is challenging to keep
up to date with the underlying knowledge avail-
able in the form of free text. The necessity of un-
derstanding actions of individual biological compo-
nents in system context rather than in isolation, ex-
tends the coverage of literature far beyond the ca-
pabilities of individual scientists. Text mining is an
emerging field that attempts to deal with these chal-
lenges (Ananiadou and McHought, 2006; Cohen
and Hersh, 2005; Spasic et al, 2005). Text mining
requires a significant amount of domain knowledge.
A large number of biomedical ontologies already ex-
ist, and hold much of the information. Some of the
ontologies have been designed for modeling domain
knowledge, e.g. FMA (Rosse and Mejino, 2003) and
GO (Ashburner et al, 2000), others are developed
for potential applications, e.g. MeSH (Lowe and
Barnett, 1994) for indexing the medical literature.
Whatever purposes the ontologies were built for,
they are used to support text mining for tasks such as
access to text, natural language processing, and in-
formation integration. Developers of text mining ap-
plications often look for appropriate ontologies that
can be integrated into their systems, rather than de-
velop new ontologies from scratch. The choice of
ontology may, however, have a major impact on the
performance of the text mining system, including
the quality of the results.
Selecting an appropriate ontology relies on eval-
uation and comparison of the available ontologies.
Unfortunately, there is often a lack of documenta-
tion of the qualities of the ontologies. A number of
methodologies for evaluating ontologies have been
proposed, mainly for evaluating one ontology at a
time. However, it is difficult for users by using these
methods to make a decision on ontology selection.
The various evaluation methods can be classified
into three main categories: 1) Those that evaluate
ontologies against a set of criteria defined by hu-
man (e.g. (Lozano and Go?mez, 2004) suggests 160
criteria). Most of the evaluation criteria are from
the point of view of ontology building. They are
not applicable for the selection of ontologies for a
particular application. 2) Those that include meth-
ods to gather statistics about the nature of ontolo-
gies (e.g. (Gangemi et al, 2006) proposes 32 mea-
sures for depth, width, fan-out, etc). The problem
55
for this kind of methods is that it is not clear how to
use these statistics for ontology selection among al-
ternatives. 3) Those that are application-dependent
evaluations. For example, ontologies are evaluated
against a corpus in (Brewster et al, 2004) regarding
the domain of an IE system, and (Porzel and Malaka,
2004) evaluates the quality of an ontology regard-
ing a relation tagging task by using gold standard
data tagged by human. While evaluating ontologies
for the particular application is a relatively straight-
forward method, evaluations may be sensitive to the
test dataset, and it may also be expensive to perform
evaluations for many ontologies.
In this paper we propose a framework for select-
ing the most appropriate ontology for a particular
text mining application. The framework comprises
three components for selection, and uses and ex-
tends some of existing ontology evaluation and val-
idation methods regarding the requirements of text
mining in the area. After a brief overview of the re-
lated work, we introduce our framework in section
3. In section 4 we show how to use the framework
in the setting of selecting an ontology for the gene
normalization system described in (Tan, 2008).
2 Related Work
Not much work has been done yet for ontology se-
lection in the biomedical area. Bioportal (Biopor-
tal, 2.0) is an ontology library, currently mainly
for browsing and navigating biomedical ontologies.
The system also allows users of ontologies to submit
information about their applications and comments
on the content of ontologies, and stores mappings
between concepts of ontologies in the library. This
information may help users to select ontologies from
the repository.
Some work has been done for ontology selection
for the Semantic Web. In (Sabou et al, 2006), au-
thors indicate the challenges for ontology evalua-
tion posed by ontology selection for the Semantic
Web, such as the need for automation and good per-
formance. Two examples of ontology selection for
the Semantic Web are OntoSelect (Buitelaar et al,
2004) and AKTiveRank (Alani and Brewster, 2005).
Both are mainly based on the second category of on-
tology evaluation methods. OntoSelect is an ontol-
ogy library that gives a functionality for selecting
ontologies for a given knowledge markup task. The
selection relies on measuring the number of con-
cepts and properties, and popularity of ontologies.
The ontology selection algorithm in AKTiveRank
combines the measures of coverage of an ontology
given search terms, and locations of the terms and
semantic similarity between the terms in the struc-
ture of the ontology.
OntoMetric is a hierarchical framework proposed
in (Lozano and Go?mez, 2004) for general ontology
selection. The tool offers a default hierarchy of cri-
teria to evaluate ontologies from the point of view of
building ontologies, and also allows users to adapt it
for their needs. The selection is based on a weighted
addition of value of each criteria.
3 The Framework
In principle biomedical ontologies provide formal
representations of domain knowledge for text min-
ing in the area, but they are used for different pur-
poses such as providing a model for storing, search-
ing and querying a repository of text; providing do-
main knowledge for natural language processing;
providing a framework for information integration;
or several of the above purposes.
Based on a literature study and experience in
building systems, in this section we suggest crite-
ria for selecting an ontology for a given biomedical
text mining application. The criteria are organized
in three components of a framework.
Component 1
In the first component the criteria for ontology selec-
tion are given in two dimensions: content and sup-
porting technologies. The combined requirements
from the two dimensions lead to a list of candidate
ontologies.
Content What are the requirements on the content
of ontology given an application? We propose three
characteristics to be considered,
- Type What is the kind of the ontology required
in the scenario? Ontologies can be distin-
guished into three basic types (Stenzhorn et al,
2005): top ontologies, e.g. BFO (Smith, 2004),
contain only a restricted set of highly general
classes, such as Function and Object, which are
not tied to any particular domain of interest;
56
top-domain ontologies, e.g. BioTop (Stenzhorn
et al, 2005), contain all classes that are essen-
tially needed to describe a certain domain, such
as Organism, Cell and Tissue in the case of bi-
ology; and domain ontologies, e.g. GO (Ash-
burner et al, 2000), contain classes that com-
prehensively describe a certain domain of in-
terest. For example, for natural language pro-
cessing tasks such as entity recognition, a top-
domain ontology may be sufficient.
- Scope What are the main subjects that need to
be covered in a top-domain or domain ontology
required by the application? For example, gene
and disease are the domains that concern (Hris-
tovski et al, 2005).
- Representation What kind of information needs
to be present in the ontology? From a knowl-
edge representation point of view, ontologies
can have the following components: concepts,
which represent sets or classes of entities in a
domain; relations between concepts, instances,
which represent the actual entities; and axioms,
which represent facts that are always true in
the topic area of the ontology (Lambrix et al,
2007). Which components should be present
in the ontology, depends to some extent on the
purpose of the ontology in the application. For
example, if an ontology is used as resource for
NLP in the application, components concepts
and instances both may be necessary, but not
relations and axioms.
Supporting technologies Three questions are con-
sidered in this dimension:
1. What technologies are needed to support the
use of the ontology in the scenario? Support-
ing technologies may include ontology repre-
sentation languages, ontology browsers, tools
for ontology alignment, reasoning services, and
ontology-driven NLP tools.
2. Are tools available to provide the supporting
technologies for the ontology? For example,
ontology alignment systems, e.g. (Lambrix and
Tan, 2008) are available for biomedical ontolo-
gies in OWL and OBO format.
3. What is the cost to develop new tools to support
the use of an ontology if there is no existing
tools? Does the cost meet the expectations of
the application?
Component 2
In this level the criteria for selection focus on de-
tailed content of candidate ontologies which are con-
sidered in two aspects: verification and evaluation.
Verification Considering the maturity level of cur-
rent biomedical ontologies, verification of taxo-
nomic knowledge in candidate ontologies is valu-
able for selection. Reasoners, such as Racer, Pellet,
and FaCT++, can check consistency, incompleteness
and redundancy in ontologies.
Evaluation First, we list a set of characteristics of
ontologies that are of interest for text mining appli-
cations,
- Coverage Does an ontology cover the concepts
or/and relations concerned in the application?
Do their definitions meet the expected scope?
- Taxonomic Knowledge The two relations is-a
and part-of have a central role in almost all on-
tologies (Smith et al, 2005). Do the locations
of essential concepts in the is-a and part-of hi-
erarchies meet the expectation?
- Instance The instantiation of concepts and the
number of instances for each concept could ef-
fect greatly the performance of many text min-
ing tasks such as entity recognition. Do they
satisfy the requirements?
These characteristics may be evaluated,
- against domain experts or references if they ex-
ist. For example, if an ontology involves inte-
gration of literature with data from biological
databases, schemas of databases can be the ref-
erences.
- among candidate ontologies. There is no gold
standard in this situation and therefore the can-
didate ontologies are compared directly to each
other. For instance, aligning the ontologies can
provide information about their similarities and
differences regarding their coverage.
57
Component 3
The results from component 1 and 2 may not lead to
a direct and confident decision. Also, in many cases
there exist gold standards or benchmarks which we
can use to evaluate our application. Therefore, the
purpose of component 3 is to evaluate the use of on-
tologies in a real system. This component could pro-
vide a relatively straightforward method for evaluat-
ing the quality of ontologies for use in the applica-
tion.
The field of biomedical text mining has ex-
pended considerable effort in building evaluation re-
sources. A number of challenges, such as TREC Ge-
nomics track, BioCreative, BioNLP/JNLPBA 2004
and LLL05, have been organized in the community.
They contribute to the creation of shared gold stan-
dard datasets, prepared by domain experts and also
suggest evaluation measures. Comparison of the
system individually bundled with candidate ontolo-
gies can be performed by using these gold standard
datasets and measures.
4 Experiment
In this section we present an experiment in which we
use our framework to select a biomedical ontology
for the gene normalization task.
4.1 Scenario
The purpose of gene normalization (GN) is to link
genes and proteins mentioned in the literature to
their entries in structured databases of biological
data. It has a substantial impact on tasks such as re-
trieval of relevant documents, identification of inter-
esting genes and proteins, and relationships between
them. The task is challenging even for scientists,
since there is no community wide agreement on how
a particular gene and gene product should be named.
Heavy use of short forms (acronyms or abbrevia-
tions) in biomedical literature makes the problem
worse. In (Tan, 2008) we developed an ontology-
centred system for gene normalization. It relies on
information about gene candidates, contexts of the
symbol and external knowledge sources. Informa-
tion about gene candidates is extracted from gene
databases. Ontologies are used for semantic inter-
pretation of contexts of gene symbols and identifi-
cation of their relevance to gene candidate informa-
ontologies
mapper
matching
disambiguated gene symbols
m
apping
similarity
N
ER
annotated
gene DBs
+ candidatestext
gene symbols
candidate
gene
retrieval
disambiguation
ranking
gene
symbolstext
Figure 1: The components and data flows of the system
tion. Normalization is based on matching contexts
of the symbol to relevant information about gene
candidates.
Figure 1 illustrates the components and data flows
of the system. The system receives a raw text as the
input, and yields database entries of genes appear-
ing in the text: 1) Mapper receives the ontology and
schemas of gene databases, and outputs a list of con-
cepts from the ontology and their mappings to cat-
egories of information stored in gene databases. 2)
Named Entity Recognizer (NER) recognizes relevant
biomedical entities in text by linking them to the
concepts of the ontology which have been mapped
to categories of gene information in mapper. 3)
Gene candidate retrieval retrieves gene candidates
for each gene symbol. The categories of information
about each gene candidate are collected. 4) Match-
ing includes various algorithms that match contexts
of a gene symbol to information about its gene can-
didates according to the mappings obtained in map-
per, and returns similarity values between them. 5)
Normalization ranking ranks gene candidates based
on results of Matching for each gene symbol appear-
ing in a text.
4.2 Selecting the ontology
In this application the components NER and Map-
per count on the deployment of ontologies. The
ontology-driven NER component involves associat-
ing text with the correct concepts in the ontology by
means of associating mentions in the text with in-
stances in the ontology. The ontology provides the
formal representation of domain knowledge for the
NER. The component Mapper involves mapping the
58
ontology to database schemas. The ontology pro-
vides the model to link information extracted from
literature and data in biological databases.
Component 1
Following the criteria of the component 1, we define
the requirements on the ontology.
Type Based on studies of categories of information
stored in gene databases such as EntrezGene (Ma-
gloot et al, 2005), we decide that top-domain on-
tologies are suitable for our application.
Scope The ontology should represent domain knowl-
edge about genes and gene products. The ontol-
ogy must contain concepts covering the categories
of gene information, e.g. location, functions, and
biological process.
Representation In order to support the task of NER,
the ontology must at least have concepts and in-
stances.
Supporting Technologies In the system the support-
ing technologies include an ontology-driven NLP
tool that support the task of NER, and ontology
alignment algorithms, that can be used to map the
ontology to categories of information in databases.
We look for suitable ontologies by searching
OBO (OBO, 2009) and Bioportal, and reviewing lit-
erature on biomedical ontologies. There are a few
ontologies covering genes and gene products such as
GO, MeSH, the Unified Medical Language System
(UMLS) knowledge sources (Lingberg et al, 1993)
and ontologies from the GENIA project (Kim et al,
2003). Only two of these meet al the above require-
ments, the UMLS knowledge sources and the GE-
NIA ontologies. The UMLS Semantic Network and
GENIA entity and event ontologies can be seen as
top-domain ontologies, of which the concepts are on
the level of the requirement. The UMLS Metathe-
saurus is primarily concerned with names used in
the domain. It contains a huge number of biomedical
entities and events (called concepts in the Metathe-
saurus) and their various names from more than 100
biomedical vocabularies. All of the concepts are as-
signed to at least one semantic type in the Semantic
Network. The MetaMap program (Aronson, 2001)
is available to map text to the concepts and seman-
tic type. The GENIA project collects a set of MED-
LINE articles concerning transcription factors in hu-
man blood cells. Every biomedical entity and event
appearing in the articles are identified with a con-
cept in the GENIA ontology. Several NLP tools,
e.g. LingPipe (LingPipe, 3.7.0), support statistical
name entity recognition by using the GENIA corpus
as training data.
Component 2
Verification We checked the consistency and redun-
dancy in the UMLS Semantic Network and GE-
NIA ontologies, respectively, by translating them
into OWL format and then sending to the reasoner,
Racer. Both of them are consistent and have mini-
mal representations.
Evaluation We perform two evaluations. The first
evaluation is to investigate the coverage of concepts
of the two ontologies against categories of Entrez-
Gene. The coverage determines the extent of infor-
mation that can be used for gene normalization. In
the second one we compare biomedical entities and
events belonging to concepts of the two ontologies,
since they influence the performance of NER.
- Evaluation 1 Manually, we identify a list of cate-
gories of EntrezGene that are used for gene normal-
ization. Evaluation is performed by aligning con-
cepts of the two ontologies to the categories. A first
observation is that UMLS covers more topics than
GENIA and therefore may give better results for
NER. The topics of the GENIA corpus can be repre-
sented by a query using human, blood cell, transcrip-
tion factor. To be able to compare the coverage of
UMLS and GENIA on an overlapping piece of a do-
main we align the two ontologies based on the GE-
NIA topics. The evaluation is based on an instance-
based strategy proposed in (Tan et al, 2006). The al-
gorithm consists of the following steps: 1) Instance
collection: We retrieve a list of human genes from
the database using human, blood cell, and transcrip-
tion factor. All entities appearing in the categories of
information are collected as instances. 2) Classifica-
tion: For each ontology, each instance is classified
to concepts by a NLP tool. The MetaMap program
is used for the UMLS Semantic Network, and the
LingPipe entity recognition program is used for the
GENIA ontology. An instance can be classified to
more than one concept. 3) Calculation: The simi-
larity between a concept from an ontology (A) and
a category from the EntrezGene (Bj) is determined
by the extent to which the instances of the category
59
EntrezGene UMLS (value) GENIA (value)
Name/Syn. Gene or Genome (0,66) protein molecule (0,83)
Chromosome Cell Component (1.0) protein molecule (1.0)
Map Location Nucleotide Sequence (1.0) DNA domain or region (0,5)
protein molecule (0,4)
Protein Gene or Genome (0,42) protein molecule (0,60)
Amino Acid, Peptide,
or Protein (0,25)
Pathway Molecular Function (0,29) other name (0,76)
Cell Function (0,24)
GOA function Molecular Function (0,75) other name (0,85)
GOA component Cell Component (0,96) cell component (0,40)
other name ( 0,15)
GOA process Cell Function (0,49) other name (0,78)
Molecular Function (0,16)
Table 1: Comparison: EntrezGene, UMLS and GENIA
support the concept. The similarity value is calcu-
lated as: sim(A,Bj) =
Pn
i=1 S(ai,Bj)
Pm
k=1
Pn
i=1 S(ai,Bk)
, where ai
are the instances belonging to A, n is the number of
instances belonging to A, m is the number of cate-
gories, and S is a function calculating the degree to
which an instance of an ontology concept supports a
category from EntrezGene. S is defined as:
S(ai, Bj) =
8
<
:
0 if ai does not associate with Bj
1
p otherwise; p is the number of categories Bk
that ai associates with
Table 1 shows the alignment results. The left col-
umn gives the categories of gene information we use
for normalization. If the similarity value between a
category and the UMLS semantic type or GENIA
concept is higher than 0.6, they are considered as
corresponding to the category. If no similarity value
is higher than 0.6, we list the two semantic types
or concepts with the highest values. Three of eight
alignments fall into this situation for UMLS seman-
tic types, and two for GENIA concepts. We also
note that the GENIA concept other name appears 4
times, but the meaning of this concept is not well-
defined. Most other categories are aligned to pro-
tein molecule, although the categories are very dif-
ferent. In this evaluation, it is more likely that the
UMLS semantic network is more appropriate than
the GENIA ontology for our system.
- Evaluation 2 35,515 entities of interest in the bi-
ological domain are identified in the GENIA entity
corpus, 7,089 entities of which have been found in
the UMLS Metathesaurus. Since we could not ob-
tain all the UMLS Metathesaurus concepts for each
semantic type, we decided to compare the UMLS
semantic types and GENIA concepts that appear
in the first evaluation, based on these 7,089 shared
instances. The comparison is based on the same
instance-based alignment strategy used in the first
evaluation. Tables 2 and 3 show the alignment re-
sults. In table 2 the value illustrates the extent
to which instances of GENIA concepts support the
UMLS semantic types. We list the three concepts
with the highest values in the table, if they ex-
ist. The concepts in italics are event concepts, the
others are entities. All the UMLS semantic types
cover instances from more than one GENIA con-
cept belonging to a subtree. For example, Gene or
Genome could be aligned to the three GENIA con-
cepts DNA family or group, DNA domain or region
and RNA molecule, which are leaves of the subtree
Nucleotide acid compound. The granularity of the
part of the GENIA ontology concerning the appli-
cation is finer than the corresponding part of the
UMLS semantic network. Table 3 shows the dis-
tribution of the instances of GENIA concepts when
they support UMLS semantic types. Instances of
DNA domain or region and cell component mainly
support Gene or Genome and Cell Component, re-
spectively, which is consistent with our observation
in table 1. Another observation from this table is
that protein molecule covers both Gene or Genome
and Amino Acid, Peptide, or Protein. The result also
shows that other name is not well defined. However,
this evaluation does not give a conclusive answer to
which ontology supports the task of NER better.
Component 3
Since component 1 and 2 could not lead to a di-
rect and confident decision, we evaluate the use of
the two ontologies in our system We use a train-
ing dataset from the BioCreative II gene normal-
ization task (Morgan et al, 2008) in the evaluation.
The BioCreative datasets contain Medline abstracts
along with the EntrezGene identifiers corresponding
to the human genes and direct gene products ap-
pearing in the abstracts. The training dataset con-
tain 281 Medline abstracts and 640 human genes.
The MetaMap program is the NLP tool that uses the
UMLS Semantic Network, and the LingPipe entity
recognition program employs GENIA ontology.
Table 4 illustrates the quality of normalization in
the two systems. The quality is measured in terms of
precision, recall and f-measure. Recall (Re.) is de-
fined as the number of correctly disambiguated gene
symbols divided by the number of the gene sym-
bols to be disambiguated. Precision is measured in
60
GENIA UMLS value
DNA family or group Gene or Genome 0.63
DNA domain or region Gene or Genome 0.54
RNA molecule Gene or Genome 0.44
DNA N/A Nucleotide Sequence 0.23
DNA substructure Nucleotide Sequence 0.23
DNA domain or region Nucleotide Sequence 0.17
cell component Cell Component 0.76
RNA N/A Cell Component 0.50
DNA molecule Cell Component 0.46
protein family or group Amino Acid, Peptide, or Protein 0.37
protein subunit Amino Acid, Peptide, or Protein 0.33
amino acid monomer Amino Acid, Peptide, or Protein 0.33
protein domain or region Amino Acid Sequence 0.42
Cellular physiological process Cell Function 0.26
Cell communication Cell Function 0.24
Cell differentiation Cell Function 0.19
Protein amino acid deacetylation Molecular Function 1.0
Protein amino acid dephosphorylation Molecular Function 0.80
Protein ubiquitination Molecular Function 0.50
Table 2: Comparison: UMLS and GENIA (1)
GENIA UMLS value
protein molecule Gene or Genome 0.30
protein molecule Amino Acid, Peptide, or Protein 0.29
protein molecule Biologically Active Substance 0.10
DNA domain or region Gene or Genome 0.54
DNA domain or region Biologically Active Substance 0.07
DNA domain or region Nucleotide Sequence 0.06
cell component Cell Component 0.76
cell component Biomedical or Dental Material 0.03
cell component Amino Acid, Peptide, or Protein 0.02
other name Disease or Syndrome 0.15
other name Cell Function 0.09
other name Neoplastic Process 0.08
Table 3: Comparison: UMLS and GENIA (2)
two ways. Pre.-1 is defined as the number of gene
symbols correctly and uniquely identified to the real
gene, divided by the total number of genes proposed
in the result regarding the whole data set. Pre.-2 is
computed as the average of the precision of disam-
biguation for each gene symbol. F-measure is the
evenly weighted harmonic mean of precision and re-
call. Pre.-1 and Pre.-2 are used in the computation
of Fm.-1 and Fm.-2, respectively. For both datasets
the quality of normalization from the system bun-
dled with the UMLS is better than the one with the
GENIA ontology.
Result
Overall, the UMLS knowledge source can be con-
sidered as the ontology that is most appropriate for
our gene normalization system. The ontology cov-
ers the subject, genes and gene products, well. The
meaning of the concepts is defined well enough for
the use in the application. The granularity of the
part of the ontology meets the need of the task. The
system bundled with the UMLS and its supporting
technologies produced better results in a gold stan-
dard dataset than the other one.
KB Dataset Pre.-1 Pre.-2 Re. Fm.-1 Fm.-2
GENIA dataset 1 0.45 0.65 0.78 0.57 0.71
dataset 2 0.50 0.63 0.72 0.59 0.67
UMLS dataset 1 0.48 0.69 0.82 0.61 0.75
dataset 2 0.52 0.67 0.78 0.62 0.72
Table 4: Quality of normalization
Although we have not run additional expirements
to confirm that the we have indeed made the right se-
lection for our gene normalization system, the tests
do corrobarate our results. The chosen ontology
leads to a better result for both datasets that we used.
Therefore, each dataset can be seen as a confirma-
tion of the framework where we only used the other
dataset.
5 Conclusions
In this paper we proposed a framework for select-
ing an appropriate ontology for a particular biomed-
ical text mining application. The framework deals
with ontology selection in three components, each
of which considers different aspects of requirements
of text mining applications on ontologies. Then we
present an experiment in which we select a biomedi-
cal ontology for a gene normalization system, using
the framework. Within the framework, evaluation
results lead us to a relatively concrete choice of an
ontology for our system.
In the future we want to evaluate our framework
with more applications and ontologies. Further, cur-
rently there is no service to support ontology selec-
tion for biomedical text mining. Therefore, an im-
portant track for future work is to build or extend an
existing portal with information about the ontologies
and their use in text mining applications that is struc-
tured according to our framework. The information
in such a portal will constitute valuable data and ex-
periences regarding ontology selection that will be
useful for future applications.
Acknowledgments
We thank Bo Servenius for comments on the project,
Qiang Liu for generating part of the data and David
Byers for proof-reading the paper. We also acknowl-
edge the financial support of the Center for Indus-
trial Information Technology.
61
References
Alani H, Brewster C. (2005) Ontology Ranking based on
the Analysis of Concept Structures. Proceedings of the
3th International Conference on Knowledge Capture,
51-58.
Alias-i. 2008. LingPipe 3.7.0. http://alias-i.com/lingpipe
Ananiadou S, McNaught J. (editors) (2006) Text Mining
for Biology and Biomedicine. Artech House.
Aronson AR. (2001) Effective mapping of biomedical
text to the UMLS Metathesaurus: the MetaMap pro-
gram. Proceedings of the AMIA Symposium, 17-21.
Ashburner M, Ball CA, Blake JA, Botstein D, Butler H,
Cherry JM, Davis AP, Dolinski K, Dwight SS, Eppig
JT, Harris MA, Hill DP, Issel-Tarver L, Kasarskis A,
Lewis S, Matese JC, Richardson JE, Ringwald M, Ru-
bin GM, Sherlock G. (2000) Gene ontology: tool for
the unification of biology. The Gene Ontology Consor-
tium. Nature Genetics, 25(1):25-9.
Bioportal. http://bioportal.bioontology.org/
Brewster C, Alani H, Dasmahapatra S, Wilks Y. (2004)
Data Driven Ontology Evaluation. International Con-
ference on Language Resources and Evaluation.
Buitelaar P, Eigner T, Declerck T. (2004) OntoSelect: A
Dynamic Ontology Library with Support for Ontology
Selection. Proceedings of the Demo Session at the In-
ternational Semantic Web Conference.
Cohen AM, Hersh WR. (2005) A survey of current work
in biomedical text mining. Briefings in Bioinformatics,
6:57-71.
Gangemi A, Catenacci C, Ciaramita M, Lehmann J.
(2006) Modelling Ontology Evaluation and Valida-
tion. Proceedings of the 2006 European Semantic Web
Conference.
Hristovski D, Peterlin B, Mitchell JA, Humphrey SM.
(2005) Using literature-based discovery to identify dis-
ease candidate genes. International Journal of Medical
Informatics, 74(2-4):289-298.
Kim J-D, Tomoko O, Yuka T, Tsujii J. (2003). GE-
NIA corpus - a semantically annotated corpus for bio-
textmining. Bioinformatics, 19(suppl. 1):180-182.
Lambrix P, Tan H, Jakoniene V, Stro?mba?ck L. (2007) Bi-
ological Ontologies. Chapter 4 in Baker, Cheung (eds),
Semantic Web: Revolutionizing Knowledge Discovery
in the Life Sciences, 85-99, Springer.
Lambrix P, Tan H. (2008) Ontology alignment and merg-
ing. Chapter 6 in Burger, Davidson, Baldock, (eds),
Anatomy Ontologies for Bioinformatics: Principles
and Practice, 133-150, Springer.
Lindberg DA, Humphreys BL, McCray AT.(1993) The
Unified Medical Language System. Methods of Infor-
mation in Medicine, 32:281 -91.
Lowe HJ, Barnett GO. (1994) Understanding and using
the medical subject headings (MeSH) vocabulary to
perform literature searches. Journal of the American
Medical Association, 271(14):1103-1108.
Lozano-Tello A, Go?mez-Pe?rez A. (2004) ONTOMET-
RIC: A Method to Choose the Appropriate Ontology.
Journal of Database Management. Special Issue on
Ontological Analysis, Evaluation, and Engineering of
Business Systems Analysis Methods, 15(2):1-18.
Maglott D, Ostell J, Pruitt KD, Tatusova T. (2005) En-
trez Gene: gene-centered information at NCBI. Nu-
cleic Acids Research. 33:D54-8.
Morgan AA, Lu Z, Wang X, Cohen AM, Fluck J, Ruch
P, Divoli A, Fundel K, Leaman R, Hakenberg J, Sun
C, Liu HH, Torres R, Krauthammer M, Lau WW, Liu
H, Hsu CN, Schuemie M, Cohen KB, Hirschman L.
(2008) Overview of BioCreative II gene normaliza-
tion. Genome Biology, 9(Suppl 2):S3.
OBO. http://obofoundry.org/
Porzel R, Malaka R. (2004) A task-based approach for
ontology evaluation. ECAI 2004 Workshop Ontology
Learning and Population .
Rosse C, Mejino JL Jr. (2003) A reference ontol-
ogy for biomedical informatics: the foundational
model of anatomy. Journal of Biomedical Informatics,
36(6):478-500.
Sabou M, Lopez V, Motta E, Uren V. (2006) Ontology
Selection: Ontology Evaluation on the Real Semantic
Web. Proceedings of the 4th International EON Work-
shop, Evaluation of Ontologies for the Web.
Smith B. (2004) Beyond concepts: ontology as reality
representation. Proceedings of Formal Ontology and
Information Systems, 73-78.
Smith B, Ceusters W, Klagges B, Ko?hler J, Kumar A,
Lomax J, Mungall C, Neuhaus F, Rector AL, Rosse
C. (2005) Relations in biomedical ontologies. Genome
Biology, 6(5):R46.
Spasic I, Ananiadou S, McNaught J, Kumar A. (2005)
Text mining and ontologies in biomedicine: mak-
ing sense of raw text. Briefings in Bioinformatics,
6(3):239-251.
Stenzhorn H, Schulz S, Bei?wanger E. (2007) Towards
a Top-Domain Ontology for Linking Biomedical On-
tologies Proceedings of the 12th World Congress on
Health (Medical) Informatics.
Tan H. (2008) Knowledge-based Gene Symbol Disam-
biguation. CIKM: Proceedings of the 2nd interna-
tional workshop on Data and text mining in bioinfor-
matics, 73-76.
Tan H, Jakoniene V, Lambrix P, Aberg J, Shahmehri
N. (2006) Alignment of Biomedical Ontologies using
Life Science Literature. Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Workshop on Knowledge Discovery in Life Sci-
ence Literature, 1-17.
62
Proceedings of the 2011 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing, ACL-HLT 2011, pages 74?82,
Portland, Oregon, USA, June 23-24, 2011. c?2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
Building frame-based corpus on the basis of ontological domain knowledge
He Tan
Institutionen fo?r
datavetenskap
Linko?pings universitet
Sweden
he.tan@liu.se
Rajaram Kaliyaperumal
Institutionen fo?r
medicinsk teknik
Linko?pings universitet
Sweden
rajka625
Nirupama Benis
Institutionen fo?r
medicinsk teknik
Linko?pings universitet
Sweden
nirbe455@student.liu.se
Abstract
Semantic Role Labeling (SRL) plays a key
role in many NLP applications. The develop-
ment of SRL systems for the biomedical do-
main is frustrated by the lack of large domain-
specific corpora that are labeled with seman-
tic roles. Corpus development has been very
expensive and time-consuming. In this paper
we propose a method for building frame-based
corpus on the basis of domain knowledge pro-
vided by ontologies. We believe that ontolo-
gies, as a structured and semantic represen-
tation of domain knowledge, can instruct and
ease the tasks in building the corpora. In the
paper we present a corpus built by using the
method. We compared it to BioFrameNet, and
examined the gaps between the semantic clas-
sification of the target words in the domain-
specific corpus and in FrameNet and Prop-
Bank/VerbNet.
1 Introduction
The sentence-level semantic analysis of text is con-
cerned with the characterization of events, such as
determining ?who? did ?what? to ?whom?, ?where?,
?when? and ?how?. It is believed to play a key role
in NLP applications such as Information Extraction,
Question Answering and Summarization. Seman-
tic Role Labeling (SRL) is a process that, for each
predicate in a sentence, indicates what semantic re-
lations hold among the predicate and other sentence
constituents that express the participants in the event
(such as who and where). The relations are de-
scribed by using a list of pre-defined possible se-
mantic roles for that predicate (or class of predi-
cates). Recently, large corpora have been manually
annotated with semantic roles in FrameNet (Fill-
more et al, 2001) and PropBank (Palmer et al,
2005). With the advent of resources, SRL has be-
come a well-defined task with a substantial body of
work and comparative evaluation. Most of the work
has been trained and evaluated on newswire text (see
(Ma`rquez et al, 2008)).
Biomedical text considerably differs from the
newswire text, both in the style of the written text
and the predicates involved. Predicates in newswire
text are typically verbs, biomedical text often prefers
nominalizations, gerunds, and relational nouns (Kil-
icoglu et al, 2010). Predicates like endocytosis, exo-
cytosis and translocate, though common in biomed-
ical text, are absent from both the FrameNet and
PropBank data (Bethard et al, 2008). Predicates
like block, generate and transform, have been used
in biomedical documents with different semantic
senses and require different number of semantic
roles compared to FrameNet (Tan, 2010) and Prop-
Bank (Wattarujeekrit et al, 2004). The development
of SRL systems for the biomedical domain is frus-
trated by the lack of large domain-specific corpora
that are labeled with semantic roles.
The projects, PASBio (Wattarujeekrit et
al., 2004), BioProp (Tsai et al, 2006) and
BioFrameNet (Dolbey et al, 2006), have made
efforts on building PropBank-like and FrameNet-
like corpora for processing biomedical text. Up
until recently, these corpora are relatively small.
Further, no general methodology exists to sup-
port domain-specific corpus construction. The
difficulties include, how to discover and define
74
semantic frames together with associated semantic
roles within the domain? how to collect and group
domain-specific predicates to each semantic frame?
and how to select example sentences from publi-
cation databases, such as the PubMed/MEDLINE
database containing over 20 million articles? In
this paper, we propose that building frame-based
lexicon for the domain can be strongly instructed
by domain knowledge provided by ontologies. We
believe that ontologies, as a structured and semantic
representation of domain-specific knowledge, can
instruct and ease all the above tasks.
The paper proceeds as follows: first we explain
our method how ontological domain knowledge in-
structs the main tasks in building a frame-based lexi-
con. This is followed by the related work. In section
4, we present a ?study case? of the method. We built
a frame Protein Transport containing text annotated
with semantic roles. The construction is carried
out completely under the supervision of the domain
knowledge from the Gene Ontology (GO) (Ash-
burner et al, 2000). We evaluated it to the frame
Protein transport in the BioFrameNet and examined
the gaps between the semantic classification of the
target words in the domain-specific corpus and in
FrameNet and PropBank/VerbNet. Finally, we con-
clude our work.
2 The Method
The FrameNet project is the application of the the-
ory of Frames Semantics (Fillmore et al, 1985) in
computational lexicography. Frame semantics be-
gins with the assumption that in order to understand
the meanings of the words in a language, we must
first have knowledge of the background and moti-
vation for their existence in the language and for
their use in discourse. The knowledge is provided
by the conceptual structures, or semantic frames. In
FrameNet, a semantic frame describes an event, a
situation or a object, together with the participants
(called frame elements (FE)) involved in it. A word
evokes the frame, when its sense is based on the
frame. The relations between frames include is-a,
using and subframe.
Ontology is a formal representation of knowledge
of a domain of interest. It has concepts that represent
sets or classes of entities within a domain. It defines
different types of relations among concepts. Intu-
itively, ontological concepts and their relations can
be used as the frame-semantic descriptions imposed
on a lexicon.
A large number of ontologies have been devel-
oped in the domain of biomedicine. Many of them
contain concepts that comprehensively describe a
certain domain of interest, such as GO. GO bi-
ological process ontology, containing 20,368 con-
cepts, provides the structured knowledge of biolog-
ical processes that are recognized series of events
or molecular functions. For example, the con-
cept GO:0015031 protein transport defines the sce-
nario, ?the directed movement of proteins into,
out of or within a cell, or between cells, by
means of some agent such as a transporter or
pore?. It is a subclass of GO:0006810:transport and
GO:0045184:establishment of protein localization.
The class has 177 descendant classes in is-a hierar-
chies. A Protein Transport frame can be effectively
described by using these classes and relations be-
tween them.
In many cases ontological terms can be seen
as phrases that exhibit underlying compositional
structures (McCray et al, 2002; Ogren et al,
2005). Figure 1 presents the compositional
structures of 9 direct subclasses describing var-
ious types of protein transport. They pro-
vide that translocation, import, recycling,
secretion and transport are the possible pred-
icates, evoking the protein transport event. The
more complex expressions, e.g. translocation of
peptides or proteins into other organism involved
in symbiotic interaction (GO:0051808), express par-
ticipants involved in the event, i.e. the en-
tity (peptides or proteins), destination (into
other organism) and condition (involved in
symbiotic interaction) of the event.
So far, we, using these classes and relations be-
tween them, have partly defined the semantic frame
Protein Transport, decided the participants involved
in the event, and listed the domain-specific words
evoking the frame. The complete frame description
can be given after studying all the related classes
and their relations. Lastly, collecting example sen-
tences will be based on knowledge based search
engine for biomedical text, like GoPubMed (Doms
and Schroeder, 2005). As such, domain knowledge
75
Figure 1: A concise view of 9 GO terms describing Protein Transport. We use the modified finite state automaton
(FSA) representation given in (Ogren et al, 2005). Any path that begins at a start state, represented by double solid
borders, and ends in an end state, represented by a single solid border, corresponds to a term. The nodes with a dashed
border are neither start states nor end states.
provided by ontologies, such as GO biological pro-
cess ontology and molecular function ontology, and
pathway ontologies, can instruct us in building large
frame-based corpora for the domain.
We outline the aspects of how ontologies instruct
building a frame-based corpus:
1. The structure and semantics of domain knowl-
edge in ontologies constrain the frame seman-
tics analysis, i.e. decide the coverage of seman-
tic frames and the relations between them;
2. Ontological terms can comprehensively de-
scribe the characteristics of events/scenarios in
the domain, so domain-specific semantic roles
can be determined based on terms;
3. Ontological terms provide a list of domain-
specific predicates, so the semantic senses of
the predicates in the domain are determined;
4. The collection and selection of example sen-
tences can be based on knowledge-based search
engine for biomedical text.
3 Related Work
The PropBank project is to add a semantic layer on
the Penn Treebank (Marcus et al, 1994). For each
unique verb sense, a set of semantic roles is de-
fined at its accompanying syntactic realizations. The
VerbNet project (Kipper et al, 2000) systematically
creates English verb entries in a lexicon with syntac-
tic and semantic information, referring to Levin verb
classes. It made efforts to classify individual verbs
in PropBank into VerbNet classes, based on patterns
of usage (Kingsbury and Kipper, 2003).
The FrameNet project collects and analyzes the
corpus (the British National Corpus) attestations of
target words with semantic overlapping. The attes-
tations are divided into semantic groups, noting es-
pecially the semantic roles of each target words, and
then these small groups are combined into frames.
Ontologies have been put under the spotlight for
providing the framework for semantic representa-
tion of textual information, and thus a basis for text
mining systems (Spasic et al, 2005; Ashburner et
al., 2008). Up to recently, TM systems mainly use
ontologies as terminologies to recognize biomedical
terms, by mapping terms occurring in text to con-
cepts in ontologies, or use ontologies to guide and
constrain analysis of NLP results, by populating on-
tologies. In the latter case, ontologies are more ac-
tively used as a structured and semantic representa-
tion of domain knowledge.
The FrameNet project links Semantic Types (ST)
of FrameNet to the Suggested Upper Merged Ontol-
ogy (SUMO) classes (Scheffczyk et al, 2006). The
main function of ST is to indicate the basic typing
of fillers of semantic roles, e.g. ?Sentient? defined
for the semantic role ?Cognizer? in the frame ?Cog-
itation?. The goal of the work is to combine frame
semantics in FrameNet and the formal world knowl-
edge from SUMO, for improving FrameNet capabil-
ity for deductive reasoning.
BioFrameNet is a domain-specific FrameNet ex-
tension. Its intracellular protein transport frames
are mapped to the Hunter Lab 1 knowledge base
(HLKB) protein transport classes. The frame ele-
ments are taken from HLKB slots. BioFrameNet
1Website for Hunters Bioinformatics research lab: http:
//compbio.uchsc.edu/.
76
considered a collection of Gene References in Func-
tion (GRIF) texts that are annotated by the HLKB
protein transport classes in the knowledge base.
Predicates are extracted from this collection of GRIF
texts.
PASBio and BioProp are the projects that aim to
produce definitions of Predicate Argument Structure
(PAS) frames. They do not offer a direct linking
of the predicates or their arguments to domain or
general ontologies. PASBio used a model for a hy-
pothetical signal transduction pathway of an ideal-
ized cell, to motivate verb choices. BioProp anno-
tated the arguments of 30 frequent biomedical verbs
found in the GENIA corpus (Kim et al, 2003).
4 Case Study: Protein Transport Frame
In this section we present the frame Protein Trans-
port. The frame is built completely based on the do-
main knowledge provided by the piece of GO de-
scribing the event. The core structure of the frame is
the same as that of FrameNet. The description of the
scenario evoked by the frame is provided, along with
a list of the frame elements and their definitions. A
list of lexical units (LUs) that evoke the frame is pro-
vided. In addition, example sentences that contain
at least one of the LUs, are given annotations us-
ing definitions of the frame. The annotations follow
FrameNet?s guidelines for lexicographic annotation,
described in (Ruppenhofer et al, 2005).
4.1 The Frame
Resources. The description of the frame uses the
scenario defined in GO:0015031 protein transport
from the GO biological process ontology. It is a sub-
class of GO:0006810 transport and GO:0045184 es-
tablishment of protein localization. The class has 177
descendant classes. A total of 581 class names and
synonyms are collected for the study. In addition to
that from GO concepts, synonyms are also gathered
by querying the UMLS Metathesaurus (Schuyler et
al., 1992).
Frame. The definition (see Table 1) follows the
definition of GO:0015031 protein transport.
Frame Elements. By studying all the names and
synonyms (we call them ?term? in the paper), we
defined all possible FEs for the frame (see Table 2).
The first 4 FEs are considered as core FEs. Ta-
?This frame deals with the cellular process in
which a protein or protein-complex, the Trans-
port Entity, moves from the Transport Origin to
a different location, the Transport Destination.
Sometimes the Transport Origin and Trans-
port Destination are not specified or are the same
location. The Transport Entity undergoes di-
rected movement into, out of or within a cell or
between cells or within a multicellular organism.
This activity could be aided or impeded by other
substances, organelles or processes and could in-
fluence other cellular processes.?
Table 1: The frame definition.
ble 3 gives the number of the GO terms that indi-
cate the FEs. For instance, in the term GO:003295
B cell receptor transport within lipid bilayer, lipid
bilayer is the location within which protein
transport happens. The term GO:0072322 protein
transport across periplasmic space describes the
path along which protein transport occurs. The
term GO:0043953 protein transport by the Tat com-
plex specifies a molecule that carries protein dur-
ing the movement. GO:0030970 retrograde pro-
tein transport, ER to cytosol indicates the direc-
tion (retrograde) of the movement. An attribute
(SRP-independent) of the event is described in
the term GO:0006620 SRP-independent protein-
membrane targeting ER.
Predicates. All lexical units in the frame are
listed in Table 4. The first row gives the head of
the GO terms (noun phrases). The number in the
bracket indicates the number of GO terms with the
head. If the verb derived from a head, can be used
to describe the event that is expressed by the head,
it is also included as a LU. GO terms, such as re-
lated and broader synonyms, may be not consid-
ered for collecting predicates. For example, fat body
metabolism, a broad synonym of GO:0015032 stor-
age protein import into fat body, is not considered.
Example Sentences. The example sentences are
retrieved from the PubMed/MEDLINE database by
using the GoPubMed (Doms and Schroeder, 2005),
a knowledge-based search engine for biomedical
text. The sentences to be annotated, are always the
most relevant and from the latest publications. For
77
FEs definition
Transport
Entity (TE)
Protein or protein complex which is
undergoing the motion event into,
out of or within a cell, or between
cells, or within a multicellular or-
ganism.
Transport
Origin
(TO)
The organelle, cell, tissue or gland
from which the Transport Entity
moves to a different location.
Transport
Destination
(TDS)
The organelle, cell, tissue or gland
to which the Transport Entity moves
from a different location.
Transport
Condition
(TC)
The event, substance, organelle or
chemical environment which posi-
tively or negatively directly influ-
ences or is influenced by, the motion
event. The substance organelle does
not necessarily move with the Trans-
port Entity
Transport
Location
(TL)
The organelle, cell, tissue or gland
where the motion event takes place
when the origin and the destination
are the same or when origin or des-
tination is not specified.
Transport
Path (TP)
The substance or organelle which
helps the entity to move from
the Transport Origin to the Trans-
port Destination, sometimes by con-
necting the two locations, without it-
self undergoing translocation
Transport
Transporter
(TT)
The substance, organelle or cell cru-
cial to the motion event, that moves
along with the Transport Entity, tak-
ing it from the Transport Origin to
the Transport Destination.
Transport
Direction
(TDR)
The direction in which the mo-
tion event is taking place with re-
spect to the Transport Place, Trans-
port Origin, Transport Destination
or Transport Location.
Transport
Attribute
(TA)
This describes the motion event in
more detail by giving information
on how (particular movement, speed
etc.) the motion event occurs. It
could also give information on char-
acteristic or typical features of the
motion event.
Table 2: The frame elements
#T 578 50 159 95 41 27 6 2 1
FEs TE TO TDS TC TL TP TT TDR TA
Table 3: The number of the GO terms that describe the
frame elements
the
head
of GO
terms
delivery (1), egress (2), establishment
of ... localization (19), exit (2), export
(20), import (88), recycling (2), release
(1), secretion (226), sorting (4), target-
ing (68), trafficking (1), translocation
(76), transport (100), uptake (5)
LUs delivery.n, deliver.v, egress.n, estab-
lishment of ... localization.n, exit.n,
exit.v, export.n, export.v, import.n, im-
port.v, recycling.n recycle.v, release.n,
release.v, secretion.n, secrete.v, sort.v,
sorting.n, target.v, targeting.n, translo-
cation.n, translocate.v, transport.v,
transport.n, trafficking.n, uptake.n
Table 4: The lexical units
[L.pneumophilaTransport Origin|NP.Ext] [trans-
locatepredicate] [more than 100 effector
proteinsTransport Entity|NP.Obj] [into host
cytoplasmTransport Destination|PP[into].Dep] [us-
ing Dot/Icm T4BSSTransport Path|VPing.Dep],
[modulating host cellular functionsTransport
Condition|VPing.Dep] to establish a replicative
niche within host cells.
(PMID: 20949065)
Table 5: An example sentence: the three layers of anno-
tations are given as FE|PT.GF.
78
LUs derived from one head, we acquired sentences
by using the GO terms with the head. The query
starts from using the most general GO terms. In the
case that the number of query results is huge, more
specific terms are used instead. Minimally, 10 sen-
tences are gathered for each LU, if applicable. In
cases when only specific GO terms are available and
the number of query results is too small, we gener-
alize the query term. For example, the lexical units,
release.n and release.v, are derived and only
derived from GO:0002001 renin secretion into blood
stream?s synonym renin release into blood stream.
No query result returns for the GO term. The gen-
eral term ?protein release? is used as the query term
instead.
Table 5 shows an example sentence for the frame.
For each sentence annotated, we mark the target LU,
and collect and record syntactic and semantic infor-
mation about the relevant frame?s FEs. For each
FE, three types of annotation are gathered. The first
layer is the identity of the specific FE. In cases when
the FE is explicitly realized, phrase type (PT, for ex-
ample NP) and grammatical function (GF) of the re-
alization are annotated. The GFs describe the ways
in which the constituents satisfy abstract grammati-
cal requirements of the target word. In cases when
the FE is omitted, the type of its null instantiation is
recorded. These three layers for all of the annotated
sentences, along with complete frame and FE de-
scriptions are used in summarizing valence patterns
for each annotated LU.
4.2 Evaluation
4.2.1 Compared to BioFrameNet
We compared this frame to the frame Pro-
tein transport in BioFrameNet 2. The frame in-
volves the phenomenon of intracellular protein
transport. BioFrameNet considered a collection of
GRIF texts that describe various types of intracellu-
lar protein transport phenomena. The GRIFs texts
are annotated by HLKB protein transport classes.
All the 5 HLKB protein transport classes are ar-
ranged in is-a hierarchy. The description of the top
level class protein transport is taken from the defini-
tion of GO:0015031 protein transport which is a su-
2http://dolbey.us/BioFN/BioFN.zip (28-Mar-
2009)
perclass of GO:0006886 intracellular protein trans-
port in GO. For the frame, BioFrameNet provides
definitions for 4 FEs, including Transported entity,
Transport origin, Transport destination and Trans-
port locations. The proposed FEs are taken from
the slot definitions in the HLKB classes.
Table 6 illustrates the difference between the
LUs in the 2 frames. The LUs that are not
included in our corpus, can be classified into
two groups. The first group include the LUs
enter.v, redistribution.n, return.v, and
traffic.n. They or their nominals are absent from
GO biological process ontology terms. The second
group includes those appear in GO, but in the terms
that are not included in descendants of GO:0015031
protein transport.
The LUs, endocytosis.n, internaliza-
tion.n, recruitment.n, do not appear in the
descendants of GO:0015031 protein transport, but
appear in GO terms that indeed describe protein
transport event. endocytosis is the head of 9
GO terms, among which 2 concepts indeed describe
an endocytotic process of protein (e.g.GO:0070086
ubiquitin-dependent endocytosis). 3 GO terms have
internalization as the head. They all de-
scribe protein transport event (e.g. GO:0031623 re-
ceptor internalization). recruitment.n occurs in
GO:0046799 recruitment of helicase-primase com-
plex to DNA lesions and GO:0046799 recruitment
of 3?-end processing factors to RNA polymerase II
holoenzyme complex, which describe the movement
of protein complex to another macro molecule.
The LUs, efflux.n, entry.n, exo-
cytosis.n, migrate.n, mobilization.n,
move.v, movement.n, shuttle.n and
shuttling.v, appear in GO terms that are
descendants of GO:0006810 transport. They are
used to describe various kinds of transport events
that protein is not involved in.
shift.n only occurs in GO:0003049 regula-
tion of systemic arterial blood pressure by capillary
fluid shift. capillary fluid shift describes
a kind of transport event. relocation.n and
relocate.v only appear in GO:0009902 chloro-
plast relocation which is considered as a kind of or-
ganelle organization.
Example Sentences. The number of example
sentences for each lexical unit in BioFrameNet re-
79
LUs
only
in Bio-
Frame-
Net
efflux.n, endocytosis.n, enter.v, en-
try.n, exocytosis.n, internalization.n,
migrate.v, mobilization.n, move.v,
movement.n, recruitment.n, redistribu-
tion.n, relocate.v, relocation.n, return.v,
shift.n, shuttle.v, shuttling.n, traffic.n
LUs in
both
corpus
delivery.n, exit.v, export.n, import.n,
recycle.v, recycling.n, release.n, tar-
geting.n, trafficking.n, translocate.v,
translocation.n, transport.n, transport.v
LUs
only
in our
corpus
deliver.v, egress.n, establishment of ...
localization.n, exit.n, export.v, import.v,
release.v, secretion.n, secrete.v, sort.v,
sorting.n, target.v, uptake.n
Table 6: The comparison of LUs in the 2 frames
lies on the existing collection of GRIFs in HLKB.
The number of annotated sentences for each LU
ranges from 1 to over 200. 207 GRIFs use
the LU translocation.n, and 10 GRIFs use
transport.v.
In our corpus, minimally for each LU 10 an-
notated sentences are gathered, if applicable. Ta-
bles 7 and 8 show the realizations of the FEs for
the LUs translocation.n and translocate.v.
The second columns give the number of times that
the FE is realized in the 10 sentences. The PT and
GF layers and the number of times they occur are
given in the last columns, in the format of PT GF
(number of occurrences). There are differences be-
tween the valence patterns of two corpus. We no-
tice that example sentences in BioFrameNet mainly
describe about protein. Although protein transport
is described, different topics may be covered in the
sentences in our corpus.
4.2.2 Predicates in FrameNet and
PropBank/VerbNet
We examined the gaps between the semantic clas-
sification of the LUs (or only verbs) in the frame,
and in FrameNet and PropBank/VerbNet. Around
half of the LUs from the frame are absent from
FrameNet data. 5 LUs are used in describing protein
transport event, with the same semantic sense as in
FrameNet. We identified the FEs for Protein Trans-
port frame based on the domain knowledge. The
FEs # Realizations
TE 10 PP[of] Dep (6); NP Dep (3); Poss
Gen (1);
TO 1 PP[from] Dep (1);
TDS 7 A Dep (2); PP[into] Dep (2); PP[to]
Dep (3);
TC 6 NP Ext (5); NP dep (1);
TL 2 PP[in] Dep (1); A Dep (1);
TP 1 PP[across] Dep (1);
TT 0 -
TD 0 -
TA 1 AJP Dep (1);
Table 7: FE realizations for annotations with
translocation.n
FEs # Realizations
TE 10 PP[than].Dep (1); NP Ext (6); NP
Obj (3);
TO 4 PP[from] Dep (2); PP[of] Dep (1);
NP Ext (1);
TDS 9 PP[to] Dep (6); PP[into] Dep (3);
TC 6 NP Ext (1); PP[upon] Dep (2);
PP[prior to] Dep (1); PP[during]
Dep (1); VPing Dep (1); VPbrst Dep
(1); VPfin Dep (1);
TL 0 -
TP 4 NP Ext(3); VPing Dep (1)
TT 0 -
TD 0 -
TA 2 PP[with] Dep (1); AVP Dep (1)
Table 8: FE realizations for annotations with
translocate.v
80
LUs FrameNet SS
egress.n, establishment
of ... localization,
export.n, localiza-
tion.n, localize.v,
recycling.n, recycle.v,
targeting.n, transloca-
tion.n, translocate.v,
trafficking.n, uptake.n
- -
delivery.n, deliver.v Delivery
?
exit.v Departing
?
export.v Sending
?
Exporting
Import export
import.n Importance
import.v Importing
Import export
release.n, release.v Releasing
secrete.v Emitting
?
sort.n Type
sort.v Differentiation
target.v Aiming
transport.n, transport.v Bringing
?
Table 9: Predicates in FrameNet: If the predicate is used
with the same semantic sense as in the FrameNet?s frame,
?semantic sense (SS)? is checked.
number of FEs and their definitions are very differ-
ent from FrameNet data. Other LUs are used with
different semantic senses.
Except translocate, all verbs are included in
PropBank data. Half of the verb senses have been
classified into VerbNet classes. Only 3 verbs are
used with the same sense as in describing protein
transport event.
5 Conclusion
In this paper we propose a method for building
frame-based corpus for the domain of biomedicine.
The corpus construction relies on domain knowl-
edge provided by ontologies. We believe that onto-
logical domain knowledge can instruct us and ease
the tasks in building the corpora. We built a cor-
pus for transport event completely on basis of the
piece of domain knowledge provided by GO bio-
verbs VerbNet PropBank
translocate - -
deliver,
transport
send-11.1 with the same
semantic sense
secrete -
exit escape-51.1 with different
release free-80.1 semantic sense
sort classify-29.10
target confront-98
export,
import,
localize,
recycle
-
Table 10: Verbs in PropBank/VerbNet
logical process ontology 3. We compared the frame
Protein Transport to the frame Protein transport in
BioFrameNet, and examined the gaps between the
semantic classification of the target words in the
domain-specific corpus and in FrameNet and Prop-
Bank/VerbNet.
In the future, we aim to extend the corpus to cover
other biological events. GO ontologies will be the
main resource to provide domain knowledge, but
also other ontologies, such as pathway ontologies
will be considered as important domain knowledge
resources. The identification of frames and the rela-
tions between frames are needed to be investigated.
In addition, we will study the definition of STs in the
domain corpus and their mappings to classes in top
domain ontologies, such as BioTop (Bei?wanger et
al., 2008).
Acknowledgement
We acknowledge the financial support of the Center
for Industrial Information Technology (CENIIT)
and the foundation Stiftelsen Olle Engkvist
Byggma?stare.
References
Michael Ashburner, Catherine A. Ball, Judith A. Blake,
David Botstein, Heather Butler, J. Michael Cherry, Al-
lan P. Davis, Kara Dolinski, Selina S. Dwight, Janan
3The corpus is publicly available on http://www.ida.
liu.se/?hetan/bio-onto-frame-corpus
81
T. Eppig, Midori A. Harris, David P. Hill, Laurie Issel-
Tarver, Andrew Kasarskis, Suzanna Lewis, John C.
Matese, Joel E. Richardson, Martin Ringwald, Gerald
M. Rubin and Gavin Sherlock. 2000. Gene Ontology:
tool for the unification of biology. Nature Genetics,
25:25-29.
Michael Ashburner, Ulf Leser and Dietrich Rebholz-
Schuhmann (Eds.). 2008. Ontologies and Text Mining
for Life Sciences: Current Status and Future Perspec-
tives. 24.03-28.03, Dagstuhl Seminar Proceedings.
Steven Bethard, Zhiyong Lu, James H Martin and
Lawrence Hunter. 2008. Semantic Role Labeling for
Protein Transport Predicates. BMC Bioinformatics,
9:277.
Elena Bei?wanger, Stefan Schulz, Holger Stenzhorn and
Udo Hahn. 2008. BioTop: An upper domain ontol-
ogy for the life sciences: A description of its current
structure, contents and interfaces to OBO ontologies.
Applied Ontology, 3(4):205-212.
Adress Doms and Michael Schroeder. 2005. GoP-
ubMed: exploring PubMed with the Gene Ontology.
Nucleic Acids Research, 33:W783-786.
Andrew Dolbey, Michael Ellsworth and Jan Scheffczyk.
2006. BioFrameNet: A Domain-Specific FrameNet
Extension with Links to Biomedical Ontologies. The
proceedings of KR-MED, 87-94.
Charles J. Fillmore. 1985. Frames and the semantics of
understanding. Quaderni di Semantica, 6(2).
Charles J. Fillmore, Charles Wooters and Collin F. Baker.
2001. Building a Large Lexical Databank Which Pro-
vides Deep Semantics. The Pacific Asian Conference
on Language, Information and Computation.
Halil Kilicoglu, Marcelo Fiszman, Graciela Rosemblat,
Sean Marimpietri and Thomas C. Rindflesch. 2010.
Arguments of nominals in semantic interpretation of
biomedical text. Proceedings of the 2010 Work-
shop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing
(BioNLP?10).
Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, Yuka Teteisi and Jun?ichi
Tsujii. 2003. GENIA corpus - a semantically an-
notated corpus for bio-textmining. Bioinformatics.
19(suppl. 1):180-182.
Paul Kingsbury and Karin Kipper. Deriving Verb-
Meaning Clusters from Syntactic Structure. Work-
shop on Text Meaning, held in conjunction with
HLT/NAACL 2003.
Karin Kipper, Hoa Trang Dang and Martha Palmer. 2000.
Class-Based Construction of a Verb Lexicon. AAAI-
2000 Seventeenth National Conference on Artificial
Intelligence.
Mitchell Marcus, Grace Kim, Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz,
Robert MacIntyre, Ann Bies, Mark Ferguson, Karen
Katz and Britta Schasberger. 1994. The Penn Tree-
bank: annotating predicate argument structure. In Pro-
ceedings of the workshop on Human Language Tech-
nology (HLT ?94).
Alexa T. McCray, Allen C. Browne and Olivier Boden-
reider. 2002. The Lexical Properties of the Gene On-
tology (GO). Proceedings of AMIA Symposium , 504-
508.
Llu??s Ma`rquez, Xavier Carreras, Kenneth C. Litkowski
and Suzanne Stevenson. 2008. Semantic role label-
ing: an introduction to the special issue. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 34(2).
Philip V. Ogren, K. Bretonnel Cohen and Lawrence
Hunter. 2005. Implications of compositionality in the
gene ontology for its curation and usage. Pacific Sym-
posium on Biocomputing, 10:174-185.
Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea and Paul Kingsbury. 2005.
The Proposition Bank: an annotated corpus of seman-
tic roles. Computational Linguistics, 31:71-105.
Josef Ruppenhofer, Michael Ellsworth, Miriam R. L.
Petruck, Christopher R. Johnson and Jan Scheffczyk.
2005. ICSI. FrameNet II: Extended Theory and Prac-
tice.
Irena Spasic, Sophia Ananiadou, John McNaught and
Anand Kumar. 2005. Text mining and ontologies in
biomedicine: making sense of raw text. Briefings in
Bioinformatics, 6(3):239-251.
Jan Scheffczyk, Adam Pease and Michael Ellsworth.
2006. Linking FrameNet to the SUMO Ontology. In-
ternational Conference on Formal Ontology in Infor-
mation Systems (FOIS 2006).
Peri L. Schuyler, William T. Hole, Mark S. Tuttle and
David D. Sherertz. 1992. The UMLS Metathe-
saurus: representing different views of biomedical
concepts. Bulletin of the Medical Library Association,
81(2):217-22.
He Tan. 2010. A study on the relation between
linguistics-oriented and domain-specific semantics.
Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on Se-
mantic Web Applications and Tools for the Life Sci-
ences.
Richard Tzong-Han Tsai, Wen-Chi Chou, Ying-Shan Su,
Yu-Chun Lin, Cheng-Lung Sung, Hong-Jie Dai, Irene
Tzu-Hsuan Yeh, Wei Ku, Ting-Yi Sung and Wen-Lian
Hsu. 2006. BIOSMILE: adapting semantic role label-
ing for biomedical verbs: an exponential model cou-
pled with automatically generated template features.
Proceedings of the 2005 Workshop on Biomedical Nat-
ural Language Processing (BioNLP?06).
Tuangthong Wattarujeekrit, Parantu K Shah and Nigel
Collier. 2004. PASBio: predicate-argument structures
for event extraction in molecular biology. BMC Bioin-
formatics, 5:155.
82
Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Health Text Mining and Information Analysis (Louhi) @ EACL 2014, pages 46?53,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26-30 2014.
c
?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
A System for Building FrameNet-like Corpus for the Biomedical Domain
He Tan
School of Engineering
J?onk?oping University, Sweden
he.tan@jth.hj.se
Abstract
Semantic Role Labeling (SRL) plays an
important role in different text mining
tasks. The development of SRL systems
for the biomedical area is frustrated by the
lack of large-scale domain specific corpora
that are annotated with semantic roles. In
our previous work, we proposed a method
for building FramenNet-like corpus for the
area using domain knowledge provided by
ontologies. In this paper, we present a
framework for supporting the method and
the system which we developed based on
the framework. In the system we have de-
veloped the algorithms for selecting ap-
propriate concepts to be translated into se-
mantic frames, for capturing the informa-
tion that describes frames from ontology
terms, and for collecting example sentence
using ontological knowledge.
1 Introduction
Semantic Role Labeling (SRL) is a process that,
for each predicate in a sentence, indicates what se-
mantic relations hold among the predicate and its
associated sentence constituents. The associated
constituents are identified and their semantic role
labels are assigned, as in: [
Transporter
CBG] de-
livers [
Entity
cortisol] [
Destination
to target cells].
SRL could play an important role in text min-
ing tasks such as information extraction, question
answering and text summarization. With the ad-
vent of large resources like FrameNet (Fillmore
et al., 2001) and PropBank (Palmer et al., 2005),
SRL has become a well-defined task with a sub-
stantial body of work and comparative evaluation.
Much of this work has focused on the arguments
of verbs, and has been trained and evaluated on
newswire text.
Recently, work has turned to bring SRL to the
biomedical area (Wattarujeekrit et al., 2004; Tsai
et al., 2006; Dolbey et al., 2006; Bethard et al.,
2008). Biomedical text considerably differs from
the PropBank and FrameNet data, both in the style
of the written text and the predicates involved.
Predicates in the data are typically verbs, biomed-
ical text often prefers nominalizations, gerunds
and relational nouns (Cohen et al., 2008; Kil-
icoglu et al., 2010). Predicates like endocytosis
and translocate, though common in biomedical
text, are absent from both the FrameNet and Prop-
Bank data (Wattarujeekrit et al., 2004; Bethard et
al., 2008; Tan, 2010). Predicates like block, gen-
erate and transform, have been used in biomedical
documents with different semantic senses and re-
quire different number of semantic roles compared
to FrameNet (Tan, 2010) and PropBank data (Wat-
tarujeekrit et al., 2004).
The projects, such as PASBio (Wattarujeekrit
et al., 2004), BioProp (Tsai et al., 2006) and
BioFrameNet (Dolbey et al., 2006), have made ef-
forts on building resources for training SRL sys-
tems in the biomedical domain. PASBio annotated
the semantic roles for 31 predicates (distributed
29 verbs) in style of PropBank. It used a model
for a hypothetical signal transduction pathway of
an idealized cell, to motivate verb choices. Bio-
Prop, also a PropBank-like corpus, annotated the
semantic roles of 30 frequent biomedical verbs
found in the GENIA corpus. BioFrameNet built a
FrameNet-like corpus having 32 verbs and nouns
annotated with the semantic roles. It considers a
collection of GeneRIF (Gene References in Func-
tion) texts that are annotated by the protein trans-
port classes in the Hunter Lab knowledge base. Up
until recently, these corpora are relatively small.
One of obstacles to building FrameNet-like re-
sources is to manually construct large, coherent
and consistent frame sets for the domain. In (Tan
et al., 2012) we argue that we can build large-scale
FrameNet-like resources using domain knowledge
from ontologies. A large number of ontologies
46
have been developed in biomedical area, such as
OBO ontologies (Smith et al., 2007). Many of
them represent the knowledge of domain-specific
events (any activities, processes and states). Al-
though most of the ontologies are controlled vo-
cabularies and do not explicitly describe the at-
tributes of events, this information is implicitly
contained in ontology terms. Together with the
knowledge explicitly represented in the data mod-
els of ontologies the information can guide us in
constructing large, coherent and consistent frame
sets and also ease the task of collecting example
sentences. In next section we describe the back-
ground knowledge and then present how the on-
tological knowledge can be used to build frame-
semantic descriptions. Section 3 describes a gen-
eral framework that supports this ontology-driven
construction of frame-semantic descriptions and
the current system we have developed based on
the framework. Related work is given in section
4. Then we conclude the paper with a conclusion
and the discussion of future work.
2 Ontology and Frame Semantics
Ontology is a formal representation of knowledge
of a domain of interest. An ontology includes
concepts that represent classes of entities within
a domain, and defines different types of relations
among concepts, as well as the rules for combin-
ing these concepts and relations. Most currently
widely used ontologies in the biomedical domain
are controlled vocabularies. The data models es-
sentially contain lists of concepts, and organize
them in an is-a and part-of hierarchy.
In practice, a concept contains one or more
terms that are chosen for naming the concept. A
preferred term is assigned as the name of the con-
cept, and others could become synonyms. Terms
are carefully chosen to clearly and precisely cap-
ture the intended meaning of the entities the con-
cept refer to. The terms are noun or noun phrases.
As showed in the results of the survey of nam-
ing conventions in OBO ontologies (Schober et
al., 2009), multi-word terms are constructed in a
consistent manner. They are created by re-using
strings that appear in the terms already defined in
this or in other ontologies. Although attributes of
the entities belonging to concepts are not explic-
itly described in the data model, they remain im-
plicit in the terms (Stevens et al., 2000). The con-
stituents of the terms might contain the informa-
Table 1: Protein Transport Concepts
GO:0009306 protein secretion
GO:0017038 protein import
GO:0071693 protein transport within extracellular region
GO:0072322 protein transport across periplasmic space
GO:0072323 chaperone-mediated protein transport
across periplasmic space
GO:0042000 translocation of peptides or proteins into
host
GO:0051844 translocation of peptides or proteins into
symbiont
GO:0051808 translocation of peptides or proteins into
other organism involved in symbiotic interaction
tion.
The Gene Ontology (GO) (The Gene Ontology
Consortium, 2000) is the most widely used
controlled vocabulary in the area. It provides
the terms for declaring molecular functions,
biological processes and cellular components
of gene and gene products. Table 1 lists the
names of 8 subclasses of GO:0015031 protein
transport in the is-a hierarchy. The head of a
phrase determines the semantic category of object
or situation which the phrase refer to. Therefore,
the head words of the terms, translocation,
import, secretion and transport, refer to a
?protein transport? category, since the concepts
represent different kinds of ?protein trans-
port?. Other constituents of the terms express
the attributes or properties of the event. For
example, translocation of peptides or
proteins into other organism involved
in symbiotic interaction (GO:0051808),
express the entity (peptides or proteins), the
destination (into other organism) and the con-
dition (involved in symbiotic interaction)
of a protein transport event. These information
are not represented in the model of the ontology.
Frame Semantics (Fillmore, 1985) is the study
of how the words evoke or activate frame knowl-
edge, and how the frames thus activated can be
used to understand the text that contains the words.
Frame semantics assumes that in order to under-
stand the meanings of the words in a language,
we must first have knowledge of the background
and motivation for their existence in the language
and for their use in discourse. The knowledge is
defined in the conceptual structures (frames). In
the FrameNet, the lexicographic application of the
theory, a semantic frame describes an event, a sit-
uation or an object, together with the frame ele-
47
ments (FE) that represent the aspects and compo-
nents of the frame. Lexical units (LU) that be-
long to the frame, are the words that evoke the
frame. Each frame is associated with example
sentences within which LUs and FEs are marked.
The FrameNet builds frames by collecting and
analysing the attestations of words with semantic
overlap from the British National Corpus (BNC).
We propose that the domain knowledge con-
tained in ontologies can instruct us in building a
FrameNet-like corpus, without having an existing
large scale domain corpus like BNC. The con-
struction starts with creating large coherent and
consistent frame sets and then collecting associ-
ated example sentences. The information implic-
itly contained in ontology terms together with the
knowledge represented in the models of ontologies
provide the background knowledge that is required
to building the frame-semantic descriptions. After
the frames are created, associated example sen-
tences can be collected using knowledge based
search engines for biomedical text, and then be an-
notated.
For example, a frame Protein Transport can be
characterized based on the concept GO:0015031
protein transport. In the frame, by studying
the terms of the subclasses and descendants of the
concept (such as those in table 1), the aspects and
components of the frame (such as entity, destina-
tion and condition), and the domain-specific words
evoking the frame (like translocation, import, se-
cretion and transport) are captured. Furthermore,
we can identify a inheritance relation between this
frame and the frame Transport built based on the
concept GO:0006810 transport, since there is
the is-a relation between GO:0006810 transport
and GO:0015031 protein transport in the GO.
Now a complete frame-semantic description for
Protein Transport, including FEs, LUs, and relations
to other frames, is obtained after all the related
concepts and relations are studied.
3 The System
In this section we present a framework that
supports this ontology-driven construction of
FrameNet-like corpus and describe the current
system we have developed based on the frame-
work.
Figure 1: A Framework of Ontology-driven Build-
ing Corpus
3.1 Framework
In Fig 1 we propose the framework for support-
ing the ontology-driven construction of domain
corpus with frame-semantics annotations. Before
starting the building process, a sub-ontology of
biomedical events is extracted from an ontology
or an ontology database in which relations be-
tween ontology terms are identified. Firstly, con-
cepts representing biomedical events, are gath-
ered. A concept represents a biomedical event
if it is a concept that is classified to a type of
event in top-domain ontology (like the semantic
type T038 Biologic Function in UMLS seman-
tic network (Bodenreider, 2004)), or is a subclass
or descendant of a concept that has been identi-
fied as a representation of biomedical event, or can
be defined as a concept describing event based on
its definition. After the concepts are identified, an
event sub-ontology, including the concepts and the
relations between them in original ontologies, is
extracted. A root is assigned to the sub-ontology
if the concepts are from more than one sub-trees
in original ontologies.
The concept selection tool suggests the appro-
priate concepts that will be translated into frames.
The algorithm may consider the characteristics
that indicate the generalness of a concept as the
selection criteria, such as the location of the con-
cept in the hierarchy and the number of subclasses
and descendants the concept has. Further, the con-
cept could be manually identified by domain ex-
perts. After a concept is selected, the frame de-
48
scribing the event represented by the concept, is
created. Relations between frames are decided ac-
cording to the relations between the corresponding
concepts. The name and definition of a frame is
edited by domain experts based on the definition
of the concept.
The frame description is accomplished by
studying the sub-tree under the concept. After col-
lecting the terms in the sub-tree, the parsing term
tool analyses the compositional structure of the
term, which elucidate the meaning of a term. The
tool may derive the compositional structure of a
term based a syntax parse of the term. LUs and
FEs then are suggested based on the compositional
structures. A final frame-semantic description is
decided with interactions to domain experts.
The associated example sentences of a frame
could be collected using semantic search engines
for biomedical text, like GoPubMed (Doms and
Schroeder, 2005). Such search engines annotate
documents with concepts of domain ontologies
by mapping phrases in text of documents to con-
cepts. Based on this underlying domain knowl-
edge search engines are able to maximize preci-
sion and recall of the documents that the user is
interested to collect specific information. There-
fore, example sentences can be collected from the
documents annotated by the concepts in the sub-
tree used to characterize the associated frame. In
the end annotating example sentences with LUs
and FEs of the associated frame is completed by
domain experts under the assistance of annotation
tools.
3.2 The System
We have developed a system based on the frame-
work for building FrameNet-like corpus using do-
main ontologies.
An Event Sub-Ontology
In the current system we experimented with the
GO biological process ontology (data-version:
2012-10-27). In UMLS semantic network the
root node of the ontology biological process
(GO:0008150) is classified into the semantic type
T038 Biologic Function . The ontology con-
tains 24,181 concepts and 65,988 terms. The
terms include the names of the concepts and
their exact synonyms. Other synonyms (broad,
narrow and related synonyms) are not included,
since only terms intending to precisely capture the
meaning of a concept are considered. For ex-
ample, fat body metabolism, a broad synonym
of GO:0015032 storage protein import into
fat body, describes a much broader activity than
that belongs to the concept.
Method for Concept Selection
Different types of frames are used to describe dif-
ferent situations. Frames can range from highly
abstract to very specific. To assist the user in se-
lecting appropriate concepts to be translated into
frames, the system provides the structure informa-
tion of the ontology, and the definitions of the con-
cepts and their locations in the ontology.
The event ontology O can be represented as a
directed graph G. Graph elements are considered
to calculate the structure information of O and the
location of the concepts in G including,
- the root, the node having no outgoing is-a
arcs. The graph G has one root.
- a leaf node , a node having no ingoing is-a
arcs in the graph.
- sibling nodes, nodes connected to the same
node through is-a arcs.
- descendant nodes of a node n
i
, nodes in the
sub-tree rooted at n
i
.
- a path p
ij
, any sequence of directed edges
from the node n
i
to the node n
j
.
- a generation g
i
, the set of all sibling nodes
connected to the node n
i
.
- depth, the cardinality of a path
- breadth, the cardinality of a generation.
As the structure information of O we calculate
the number of nodes in G, the average and maxi-
mal shortest paths from the root to leaves, the av-
erage and maximal breadth of the generations hav-
ing different distances from the root. To show the
location of a concept in G, we calculate the short-
est path from the concept to the root, and the num-
ber of its descendants and siblings.
The user selects appropriate concepts based
on the above information, and may also using
their own domain knowledge. For example, a
frame could be constructed based on the concept
GO:0006810 transport. The structural informa-
tion as showed in table 2 suggests that the concept
is richly described in the ontology and it covers a
large set of related events. Further, the user (a do-
main expert) himself/herself could be aware that
transport events have been studied in the area over
49
#node depth of #sibling avg. depth max. depth avg. max. #leaf
shortest path of SPR of SPR breadth breadth.
to root (SPR) from leaves from leaves
biological process 24181 - - 6.5 14 3.7 413 12871
transport 1210 2 5 5.9 14 3.5 41 754
protein transport 182 3 41 5.7 9 4.2 40 132
Table 2: The structural information of GO biological process ontology (data-version: 2012-10-
27) and the sub-trees under the concept GO:0006810 transport and GO:0015031 protein
transport.
the last 30 years. Most cellular processes are ac-
companied by transport events. For understanding
biomedical texts, transport events are among the
most important things to know about.
Method for Parsing Terms
After a concept is selected, the terms in the sub-
tree rooted at the concept are collected to be anal-
ysed for building frame description. In the current
system the analysis is separated into three steps.
Terms are noun phrases (NP). The first step is to
tokenize phrase string into an ordered sequence of
an atomic (non-decomposable) token. The phrase
string is split on white-space characters and non-
alphanumeric characters. White-space character
are discarded, but non-alphanumeric characters
are preserved and treated as special word tokens.
For example, ?alpha-glucoside transport ?
(GO:0000017) is tokenized into {alpha, -, gluco-
side, transport}
The second step is to identify the head word of
NP. We assume that the head of a phrase is com-
posed of only one token. A naive Bayes classifier
classifies a token as the head of a phrase, if the
highest value for the posterior probability of being
the head word given the token is obtained among
all the tokens in the phrase. The posterior prob-
ability of being the head word w given token t is
estimated using Bayes rule (Mitchell, 1997):
P (w|t) =
P (w)P (t|w)
P (t)
As P (t) is independent of w being the head, it can
be ignored. This gives: P (w|t) = P (w)P (t|w).
A token is either the head word or not the head
work of a phrase, so P (w) is a constant. P (t|w)
is estimated by the feature probabilities of token t.
Assuming that the features x
i
are all conditionally
independent of one another, we have
P (t|w) =
n
?
i=1
P (x
i
= a
ik
|w)
P (x
i
= a
ik
|w) is estimated using the maximum
likelihood estimation method. Let n(x
i
= a
ik
, t)
be the number of occurrences of token t where at-
tribute x
i
is a
ik
and t is a head word, and n(w) be
the number of occurrences of the token t where t
is a head word. Then P (x
i
= a
ik
|w) is estimated
by
P (x
i
= a
ik
|w) =
n(x
i
= a
ik
, w) + ?
n(w) + ?|V |
where ? is the earlier defined Laplace smoothing
parameter, and |V | is the number of distinct values
of the attribute x
i
.
Attributes of a token t in a phrase p include,
? token string,
? the part-of-speech (POS) of t in p, (the POS
of t in p is assigned using MedPost POS Tag-
ger (Smith et al., 2004)),
? the POS of the tokens before and after t in p,
? the length of p (the number of tokens in p),
? the position of t in p.
We have evaluated the method on identifying
the heads of terms in GO biological process on-
tology. The length of terms in the ontology ranges
from 1 to 39. For each length, 10% of terms are
randomly selected as training data if it is applica-
ble. The result of 10-fold cross validation showed
that 93.9% of the heads are correctly identified on
average.
A term, a NP, has a noun as its head. The
system collects other forms (such as verb, objec-
tive, etc.) having the same meaning as the head
by looking up the SPECIALIST Lexicon (Boden-
reider, 2004), a general English lexicon including
many biomedical term. Words in different forms
are all suggested as predicates for frame.
The last step is to capture the information hid-
den in modifiers in phrases. Modifiers describe the
head word of a phrase and makes its meaning more
specific. They modify phrases by adding informa-
tion about ?where?, ?when?, or ?how? something
50
Table 3: Major Modifier Types in Ontology Terms
Pre-modifiers head Post-modifiers
attributive adjective noun prepositional phrase
ed-participial adjective ed-clause
ing-participial adjective ing-clause
noun to-clause
appositive noun phrase
is done. The information gives the suggestions
on what FEs to be defined for a frame. In a NP,
the head word is preceded by a determiner or one
or more pre-modifiers, and may also be followed
by one or more post-modifiers. The major struc-
tural types of pre-modifiers and post-modifiers are
given in table 3. We observed that determiners and
relative clauses rarely appear in ontology terms.
The number of FEs is limited in a frame. The
information about the major attributes of event ap-
pears frequently in the terms. For example, in the
sub-tree under GO:0006810 transport, 92.6%
terms contain the entity undergoing the ?transport?
event, and 19.3% terms describe the destination
(see Table 4). Therefore, although there maybe
a large number of terms in a sub-tree, a very small
number of the terms can be used to capture the
major attributes of the event.
To facilitate the user in identifying the FEs,
the system collects a smallest set of terms cover-
ing all the attributes of the event that have been
described in the sub-tree. The attributes of the
event reside in different modifier types appearing
in the terms. Further, prepositional phrase mod-
ifiers starting with different prepositions may de-
scribe different properties. The algorithm for col-
lecting the term set is given as follows,
T ={the set of terms in the sub-tree} ;
M={the set of modifier types m} ;
P,L = ? ;
repeat
l = the longest t ? T ;
foreach m in l do
if ( m is a prepositional phrase and m
starts with a preposition p /? P ) or m /? P
then
add l to L ;
foreach m,p in l do
if m, p /? P then
add m, p to P ;
end
break ;
end
remove l from T ;
until T = ? or length(l) = 1;
return L
Method for Collecting Example Sentences
The example sentences are retrieved from the
PubMed/MEDLINE database by using the GoP-
ubMed. The sentences to be annotated, are al-
ways the most relevant and from the latest publi-
cations. For a LU, we acquired sentences by using
the GO terms with the head from which the LU is
derived. The query starts from using the most gen-
eral GO terms. In cases when only specific GO
terms are available and the number of query re-
sults is too small, the query term is generalized by
removing modifiers from terms. For example, the
lexical units, release.n and release.v, are de-
rived and only derived from renin release into
blood stream (a synonym of GO:0002001 renin
secretion into blood stream). No query re-
sult returns for the GO term (AND operator is used
to combine the tokens in the term in the query).
The general term ?protein release? is used as the
query term instead.
Annotation Tool
The current system contains a tool that sup-
ports manual annotation following the FrameNet?s
guidelines described in (Ruppenhofer et al., 2005).
File Format
The corpus is stored in XML files using the same
format as the FrameNet. The correspondences be-
tween frames and ontology concepts are stored in
a RDF file. Such relations could benefit integra-
tions of different lexical resources and/or knowl-
edge bases in the future. A correspondence is en-
coded as follows:
<correspondence id="1">
<concept rdf:about=
"http://www.geneontology.org/go#GO:0006810"/>
<frame rdf:about=
"http://hj.se/ontobiofn/frames#0000001"/>
<comment/>
</correspondence>
It provides the features: concept (the URI of
some concept of an ontology); frame (the URI of
the frame translated from the concept); comment
(the comment on this correspondence given by the
user); and an id assigned to this correspondence.
3.3 Evaluation of the System
We have successfully built a FrameNet-like cor-
pus using the method of ontology-driven construc-
tion (Tan et al., 2012). The construction is done
manually by 2 master students with biology back-
ground. The corpus covers transport events in the
domain. The GO is used as the source ontology for
domain knowledge. The corpus contains 2 frames.
51
TE TO TDS TC TL TP TT TDR TA TPL
Protein Transport 99.5% 8.6% 37.4% 16.4% 7.1% 4.6% 1.0% 0.3% 0.2% 0%
(581 terms) (578) (50) (159) (95) (41) (27) (6) (2) (1) (0)
Transport 92.6% 12.2% 19.3% 9.9% 5.7% 7.3% 1.9% 1.5% 1.8% 0.36%
(2235 terms) (2070) (272) (432) (221) (127) (164) (43) (34) (40) (8)
Table 4: The percentage of the GO terms that indicate the FEs (the number of GO terms). FEs are Transport Entity (TE),
Transport Origin (TO), Transport Destination (TDS), Transport Condition (TC), Transport Location (TL), Transport Path
(TP), Transport Transporter (TT),Transport Direction (TDR), Transport Attribute (TA), Transport Place (TPL).
Table 5: Time for Building the Corpus
using system manual
construct frames 2 days 2 weeks
gather and annotate
example sentences 2.5 weeks 3 weeks
The Transport frame follows the definition of the
GO concept, GO:0006810 transport (Tan et al.,
2012). It has a sub-frame Protein Transport, which
characterizes transport events of proteins (Tan et
al., 2011). It follows the definition of GO:0015031
protein transport. To accomplish the descrip-
tion of the two frames, 2235 terms and 581 terms,
respectively, were collected and analysed from the
GO. Based on the background knowledge implic-
itly described in the terms, 10 FEs are identified
for the frame Transport (inherited by the frame Pro-
tein Transport), and 129 LUs are collected. Max-
imally for each LU 10 annotated sentences are
gathered. Totally, 955 example sentences were re-
trieved from PubMed and annotated.
We evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of
the system. 2 different master students are asked
to build a FrameNet-like corpus covering transport
and protein transport events using the method. The
GO is also provided as the source ontology. The
2 students have biology background and have the
knowledge of the FrameNet and ontology. Both
students correctly complete the task using the sys-
tem in the evaluation. They build the 2 frames
Transport and Protein Transport, and construct the
same frame descriptions using the domain knowl-
edge from the GO. They are also required to max-
imally collect and annotate 10 sentences for each
LU. The set of the example sentences are not ex-
actly the same set of sentences chosen in the pre-
vious corpus. Table 5 shows the time they use on
average and the time spent in the manual construc-
tion.
4 Related Work
Interfacing ontologies and lexical resources has
been initiated in several work (Guarino, 1998;
Gangemi et al., 2003; Niles and Pease, 2003).
The work in (Gangemi et al., 2003; Niles and
Pease, 2003) has attempted to reorganize Word-
Net?s top-level synset taxonomy using ontology
concepts. More recently, the FrameNet project
links FrameNet?s semantic types to ontology con-
cepts, to constrain the filler types of frame el-
ements for specific domains (Scheffczyk et al.,
2006). It is the first step of their work aiming at
improving FrameNet capability for deductive rea-
soning with natural language. The authors suggest
that the alignment between lexicons and ontolo-
gies could restructure the lexicon on the basis of
ontological-driven principles, and enables ontolo-
gies to be used automatically by natural language
processing (NLP) applications.
5 Conclusion
In this paper we present our method for building
FrameNet-like corpus for biomedical area start-
ing with use of ontological domain knowledge.
Ontological knowledge can lead to well-defined
semantics exposed on the corpus, which can be
very valuable in NLP and text mining applications.
We have developed a framework of supporting the
method and implemented a system based on the
framework. In the current system we developed
the algorithms for selecting appropriate concepts
to be translated into semantic frames, for capturing
the information that describes aspects and compo-
nents of frames from ontology terms, and for col-
lecting example sentence using ontology concepts.
In the future we will continue to extend the cor-
pus using ontological knowledge. The event ontol-
ogy to be used as domain knowledge will include
terms from different ontologies. We will evaluate
our system when it deals with different ontologies
and their terms. Another direction of the future
work is to investigate how the ontological knowl-
52
edge bundled with the corpus are used by NLP and
text mining applications.
References
Steven Bethard, Zhiyong Lu, James H Martin, and
Lawrence Hunter. 2008. Semantic role labeling for
protein transport predicates. BMC Bioinformatics,
9:277.
Olivier Bodenreider. 2004. The unified medical lan-
guage system (umls): integrating biomedical termi-
nology. Nucleic Acids Research, pages D267?D270.
K. Bretonnel Cohen, Martha Palmer, and Lawrence
Hunter. 2008. Nominalization and alternations in
biomedical language. PLoS ONE, 3(9).
Andrew Dolbey, Michael Ellsworth, and Jan Schef-
fczyk. 2006. Bioframenet: A domain-specific
framenet extension with links to biomedical ontolo-
gies. In Proceedings of KR-MED, pages 87?94.
Adress Doms and Michael Schroeder. 2005. Gop-
ubmed: exploring pubmed with the gene ontology.
Nucleic Acids Research, 33:W783?786.
Charles J. Fillmore, Charles Wooters, and Collin F.
Baker. 2001. Building a large lexical databank
which provides deep semantics. In Proceedings of
the PACLIC.
Charles J. Fillmore. 1985. Frames and the semantics of
understanding. Quaderni di Semantica, 6(2):222?
254.
Aldo Gangemi, Nicola Guarino, Claudio Masolo, and
Alessandro Oltramari. 2003. Sweetening wordnet
with dolce. AI Magazine, 3(24):13?24.
Nicola Guarino. 1998. Some ontological principles for
designing upper level lexical resources. In Proceed-
ings of First International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation, pages 527?534.
Halil Kilicoglu, Marcelo Fiszman, Graciela Rosemblat,
Sean Marimpietri, and Thomas C. Rindflesch. 2010.
Arguments of nominals in semantic interpretation of
biomedical text. In Proceedings of the 2010 Work-
shop on BioNLP.
Tom Mitchell. 1997. Machine Learning. McGraw-
Hill.
Ian Niles and Adam Pease. 2003. Linking lexicons and
ontologies: Mapping wordnet to the suggested upper
merged ontology. In Proceedings of the IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Information and Knowledge
Engineering.
Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
2005. The proposition bank: an annotated corpus of
semantic roles. Computational Linguistics, 31:71?
105.
Josef Ruppenhofer, Michael Ellsworth, Miriam R. L.
Petruck, Christopher R. Johnson, and Jan Schef-
fczyk. 2005. FrameNet II: Extended theory and
practice. Technical report, ICSI.
Jan Scheffczyk, Adam Pease, and Michael Ellsworth.
2006. Linking framenet to the sumo ontology. In
International Conference on Formal Ontology in In-
formation Systems.
Daniel Schober, Barry Smith, Suzanna Lewis, Waclaw
Kusnierczyk, Jane Lomax, Chris Mungall, Chris
Taylor, Philippe Rocca-Serra, and Susanna-Assunta
Sansone. 2009. Survey-based naming conventions
for use in obo foundry ontology development. BMC
Bioinformatics, 10(1):125.
L. Smith, T. Rindflesch, and W. J. Wilbur. 2004. Med-
Post: a part-of-speech tagger for bioMedical text.
Bioinformatics, 20(14):2320?2321.
Barry Smith, Michael Ashburner, and et al. 2007.
The obo foundry: coordinated evolution of ontolo-
gies to support biomedical data integration. Nature
Biotechnology, 25(11):1251?1255.
Robert Stevens, Carole A. Goble, and Sean Bechhofer.
2000. Ontology-based knowledge representation for
bioinformatics. Briefings in Bioinformatics, 1:398?
414.
He Tan, Rajaram Kaliyaperumal, and Nirupama Benis.
2011. Building frame-based corpus on the basis of
ontological domain knowledge. In Proceedings of
the 2011 Workshop on BioNLP, pages 74?82.
He Tan, Rajaram Kaliyaperumal, and Nirupama Benis.
2012. Ontology-driven construction of corpus with
frame semantics annotations. In CICLing 2012, Part
I, LNCS 7181, pages 54?65.
He Tan. 2010. A study on the relation between
linguistics-oriented and domain-specific semantics.
In Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on
SWAT4LS.
The Gene Ontology Consortium. 2000. Gene ontol-
ogy: tool for the unification of biology. Nature Ge-
netics, 25:25?29.
Richard Tzong-Han Tsai, Wen-Chi Chou, Ying-Shan
Su, Yu-Chun Lin, Cheng-Lung Sung, Hong-Jie Dai,
Irene Tzu-Hsuan Yeh, Wei Ku, Ting-Yi Sung, and
Wen-Lian Hsu. 2006. Biosmile: adapting semantic
role labeling for biomedical verbs: an exponential
model coupled with automatically generated tem-
plate features. In Proceedings of the 2005 Workshop
on BioNLP.
Tuangthong Wattarujeekrit, Parantu K Shah, and Nigel
Collier. 2004. Pasbio: predicate-argument struc-
tures for event extraction in molecular biology.
BMC Bioinformatics, 5:155.
53
