Proceedings of the NAACL HLT Workshop on Computational Approaches to Linguistic Creativity, pages 79?86,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Morphological Productivity Rankings of Complex Adjectives  
 
 
Stefano Vegnaduzzo 
Ask.com 
Oakland, CA 94607, USA 
svegnaduzzo@ask.com 
 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper investigates a little-studied class of 
adjectives that we refer to as ?complex adjec-
tives?, i.e., operationally, adjectives consti-
tuted of at least two word tokens separated by 
a hyphen. We study the properties of these ad-
jectives using two very large text collections: 
a portion of Wikipedia and a Web corpus. We 
consider three corpus-based measures of mor-
phological productivity, and we investigate 
how productivity rankings based on them cor-
relate with each other under different condi-
tions, thus providing different angles both on 
the morphological productivity of complex 
adjectives, and on the productivity measures 
themselves. 
1 Introduction 
Adjectives as a syntactic category have received 
relatively scarce attention in theoretical and com-
putational linguistics, at least when compared to 
noun and verbs. Within the class of adjectives 
there is a particular group that has not received 
much specific attention. These are the adjectives 
that can be operationally defined by the fact that in 
the orthography they are constituted by at least two 
tokens separated by a hyphen. Examples include: 
left-wing politician, best-selling book, part-time 
job, large-scale experiment. In this paper we will 
focus the analysis on 2-item adjectives; however 
the class includes several examples with more than 
two items: day-to-day, tongue-in-cheek, up-and-
coming, state-of-the-art, pay-as-you-go, all-you-
can-eat, etc.  
We refer to these adjectives as ?complex adjec-
tives?. They allow several mechanisms for the 
generation of new linguistic expressions which are 
spread along a continuum that goes from full 
productivity to lexicalized forms. Treating 
complex adjective formation as a morphological 
process allows us to characterize them in the light 
of the notion of morphological productivity. 
Morphological productivity falls within the 
domain of how the broad notion of creativity is 
realized in language, by providing mechanisms for 
generating new words that are unintentional, 
unlimited and regular (Evert and L?deling 2001). 
Previous work has typically considered complex 
adjectives only in the context of tokenization and 
generally low-level text processing, without 
specific focus on the class per se. Moilanen and 
Pulman (2008) identify polarity markers in certain 
complex adjectives for the purpose for assigning 
sentiment polarities to unknown words (well-built 
is positive, rat-infested is negative). 
Highly productive classes like complex 
adjectives are problematic for computational 
lexicons in that they bring about a large number of 
unknown words. A typology of complex adjectives 
is important to support computational lexicons and 
the NLP applications based on them, for example 
by listing out the patterns (as defined in section 3) 
that complex adjectives are based on.  
2 Data  
The analysis presented here is based on two large 
text collections. The first is a portion of Wikipedia, 
consisting of about 250 million tokens. The second 
collection is a Web corpus specifically built for 
NLP applications targeted at adjectives, consisting 
of about 290 million tokens (after some reasonable 
clean-up process). The list of all adjectives in 
WordNet1 was used as a seed list. Each seed adjec-
tive was sent as a query to the Yahoo search engine 
                                                          
1 http://wordnet.princeton.edu. 
79
BOSS API2. For all the 1000 (the maximum al-
lowed by the API) returned web results, each URL 
was used to fetch the corresponding web page, and 
the full text of the web page was processed for ad-
dition to the corpus. Both corpora were POS-
tagged using the Stanford POS tagger3 (reported 
accuracy is about 97%). Using such tagger that 
was trained on the Penn Treebank makes it easy to 
identify complex adjectives, since the Penn Tree-
bank tagging guidelines explicitly prescribe that 
hyphenated compounds used as modifiers should 
be tagged as adjectives (JJ). 
The two corpora give a slightly different view 
on the linguistic behavior of adjectives. The 
Wikipedia corpus is intended to provide a picture 
of adjective distribution in a large and relatively 
homogenous collection of current English text. The 
Web corpus is intended to bias the collection in the 
direction of making sure that at least for the 
WordNet seed adjectives a large number of in-
stances are present even for adjectives that would 
have otherwise a very low frequency in a properly 
balanced corpus. 
Throughout the paper we will use the Wikipedia 
corpus as the main data collection for the 
presentation of the analysis, and we will use the 
Web corpus as a validation set, to assess the 
stability and reliability of the results obtained on 
the Wikipedia corpus. 
3 Theoretical background 
We partition the orthographically defined class of 
complex adjectives in morphological categories 
defined by a variable part and a base generator. For 
example ?X-free? is a morphological category that 
specifies that the base generator -free can be com-
bined with other words to form complex adjectives 
such as risk-free, toll-free, gluten-free, etc. The 
two corpora are used to analyze and quantify how 
different degrees of linguistic creativity are exhib-
ited by different classes of complex adjectives. We 
will show that this yields a ranking of complex 
adjective types along a continuum going from high 
productivity to lexicalized forms. Specifically, we 
characterize the linguistic creativity of complex 
adjectives through three distinct and complemen-
tary measures of morphological productivity, fol-
lowing Baayen (1993, 2006) and his notation: 
                                                          
2 http://developer.yahoo.com/search/boss. 
3 http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/tagger.shtml. 
realized productivity, expanding productivity, and 
potential productivity. Now, Evert and L?deling 
(2001) show that, in the general case, automatic 
pre-processing of text corpora with current mor-
phological analyzers yields results that are too 
noisy for Baayen?s measure of productivity to be 
reliable. The fact that complex adjectives are 
orthographically defined by the presence of the 
hyphen and the components are easy to separate 
eliminates some of those text-processing problems. 
By choice, we take at face value the morphological 
parse provided by the hyphen, and therefore we do 
not run into situations where the phonotactics ob-
scures the morphological analysis (e.g., lady vs. 
ladies), affix ordering (undoable), accidental string 
identity (restaurant does not instantiate the prefix 
re-), and words generated by creative rather then 
morphological productive processes (youtube). 
Relying on the orthographical hyphen eases the 
problems of automatic morphological pre-
processing and makes this a particularly good do-
main for using Baayen?s measures.  
Realized productivity is defined as V=V(C,N), 
the number of word types (as opposed to word to-
kens) of morphological category C in a corpus of 
N tokens. The intuition behind this measure is that 
it expresses the sheer size of a morphological cate-
gory within a particular corpus. 
Expanding productivity is defined as P* = 
V(1,C,N)/V(1,N), where V(1,C,N) is the number 
of words of category C that occur only once in a 
corpus of N tokens, and V(1,N) is the number of 
words of any category that occur only once in a 
corpus of N tokens. This measure expresses the 
contribution of the morphological category C to 
the growth rate of the total vocabulary. The under-
lying intuition is that a morphologically productive 
category contributes to the growth rate of the vo-
cabulary of a language, and vocabulary growth rate 
can be estimated by the number of hapax legomena 
(words with frequency 1) in a sufficiently large 
corpus. Hapax legomena in turn are taken to be 
good estimators of novel linguistic forms. 
Potential productivity is defined as P = 
V(1,C,N)/N(C), where N(C) is the total number of 
tokens in the corpus for a given category C. This 
measure expresses the growth rate of the vocabu-
lary of the category C itself. In other words, it ex-
presses the ease with which a category can be 
applied to new words. 
80
These three measures are complementary, in that 
they capture different aspects of morphological 
productivity that can possibly be at odds with each 
other (Baayen 2006). 
4 Analysis 
At the highest level the two POS-tagged corpora 
allow us to compare the distribution of complex 
adjectives with respect to other major syntactic 
categories. In the context of morphological produc-
tivity, the vocabulary of a morphological process is 
the number of types that the process can potentially 
generate. If we understand complex adjective for-
mation as a morphological process, we can obtain 
their general vocabulary growth curve by plotting 
the number of types against the number of tokens 
in a corpus. Figure 1 shows vocabulary growth 
curves for nouns, verbs, adjectives and their hy-
phenated counterparts for the Wikipedia corpus. 
Vocabulary Growth
0
50000
100000
150000
200000
250000
300000
350000
400000
450000
500000
0 100 200 300
Tokens (millions)
Ty
pe
s
Nouns
Adjectives
Complex Adjectives
Verbs
Hyphenated Nouns
Hyphenated Verbs
Figure 1. Wikipedia vocabulary growth. 
 
Complex adjectives exhibit a surprisingly high 
growth rate, which at 250M tokens still doesn?t 
tend to converge. The number of types correspond-
ing to the final corpus size can be interpreted as an 
estimate of the realized productivity of complex 
adjectives as a whole class. 
We focus the analysis on two-item adjectives, 
i.e., those of the form ?A-B? such as cat-like. 
We describe first the data collection process. We 
process each POS-tagged corpus from beginning to 
end, and for each complex adjective (defined by 
the tag JJ and the presence of a hyphen), we gener-
ate all the possible categories by replacing in turn 
each item with a variable. So cat-like yields the 
two possible categories ?cat-X? and ?X-like?; day-
to-day yields ?X-to-day?, ?day-X-day?, ?day-to-X? 
and the special case ?X-to-X?, where the two side 
items are identical. Then for each category we 
count the number of types in that category and the 
number of tokens for each type, including hapax 
legomena. So the category ?X-like? includes the 
types dog-like, cat-like, mouse-like, etc., and each 
type is instantiated by a certain number of tokens 
(including types instantiated by exactly 1 token). In 
this way we obtain the basic counts that are needed 
to compute the three measures of productivity in-
troduced above. Once these measures are obtained, 
all morphological categories (such as ?X-like?) can 
be sorted into three productivity rankings corre-
sponding to the three measures. 
Of the three measures, realized and expanding 
productivity are by design directly dependent on 
corpus size, whereas potential productivity is de-
pendent on the relative ratio of morphological 
categories but not directly on corpus size. This en-
tails that, especially for the first two measures, 
productivity rankings obtained on a corpus of a 
particular size are not necessarily significant, in 
that productivity rankings obtained on corpora of 
different sizes could be different.  
Realized and expanding productivity are af-
fected in different ways by corpus size. Everything 
else being equal, realized productivity estimates 
will be more reliable with larger corpora. Expand-
ing productivity is based on the assumption that 
hapax legomena (i.e., rare words with the lowest 
frequency in a corpus) are good estimators of mor-
phological productivity. Rare words include vari-
ous subtypes: misspellings, proper names, foreign 
words, words from different registers or genres 
than those represented in the corpus, new words 
generated by non-regular creative processes, and 
new words generated by morphologically produc-
tive processes. In a ?small? corpus, hapax le-
gomena will include many words that do not fall in 
any of categories above, but just happen to be rela-
tively uncommon words. As corpus size increases, 
uncommon words have a chance to occur more 
often, and the proportion of true morphological 
neologisms among hapaxes increases.  
Given the dependency on corpus size, the ques-
tion arises of how reliable productivity rankings 
are that haven been obtained for a specific corpus. 
In order to assess rankings reliability, we divided 
both the Wikipedia and Web corpus into 20 chunks 
of the same size, and then we added them up one 
after the other, essentially obtaining 20 corpora of 
81
increasing size for each of the two original text 
collections. Finally for each intermediate corpus 
we recomputed the productivity measures and 
rankings based on them. At this point we can 
measure the stability of the final productivity rank-
ing for a given corpus by comparing it with each of 
the intermediate rankings using Spearman?s rank 
correlation coefficient.  
Expanding Productivity, Wikipedia
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
Tokens (millions)
S
pe
ar
m
an
's
 r
ho
Top 100
Top 50
Top 25
 
Figure 2. Expanding productivity stability, Wikipedia 
Realized Productivity, Wikipedia
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
Tokens (millions)
S
pe
ar
m
an
's
 r
ho
Top 100
Top 50
Top 25
 
Figure 3. Realized productivity stability, Wikipedia 
 
Plotting corpus size against Spearman?s ? coef-
ficient reveals that rankings for realized and ex-
panding productivity in both the Wikipedia corpus 
and the Web corpus are very stable. For example, 
for expanding productivity in the Wikipedia corpus 
the ranking of the top 20 complex adjectives does 
not change any more after the first 5M corpus 
chunk. Figures 2 and 3 show how Spearman?s co-
efficient between the full Wikipedia corpus and 
each of the 19 sub-corpora varies as a function of 
corpus size for the top 25, 50 and 100 adjectives. 
Curves for the Web corpus are similar. 
As corpus size continues to increase, a larger 
and larger portion of the rankings stabilizes, sug-
gesting that realized and expanding productivity 
capture substantial properties of the language of 
which the Wikipedia corpus and the Web corpus 
are respectively representative. 
The dependency of productivity rankings on a 
specific corpus is a reminder that another impor-
tant factor that has been observed to affect linguis-
tic creativity as expressed by morphological 
productivity is register and genre variation. In this 
context we are using two corpora that are represen-
tative of different types of language, and could 
therefore have substantially different rankings. 
However, it turns out that Spearman?s rank correla-
tion between the full size of the Wikipedia and 
Web corpus for both realized and expanding pro-
ductivity rankings is quite strong (see Table 1). 
 
Rankings Realized Expanding 
Top 5 1 0.9 
Top 10 0.91515 0.94545 
Top 20 0.85939 0.70601 
Top 25 0.80346 0.665 
Top 50 0.64998 0.58909 
Top 100 0.64309 0.62732 
Table 1: Spearman?s correlation between productivity 
rankings for Wikipedia and Web corpus 
 
The high Spearman?s correlation values confirm 
the stability of reliability of realized and expanding 
productivity rankings across different corpora.  
The next question is to what extent productivity 
rankings based on different measures correlate 
with each other. We consider first the relationship 
between realized and expanding productivity. The 
two notions focus by design on different aspects of 
morphological productivity: realized productivity 
is oriented towards the ?present?: a morphological 
process may be common to many existing word 
types, but might have no ability to be applied to 
generate new words. Baayen (1993) also refers to 
it as ?extent of use?. Expanding productivity is in-
tended to assess the rate at which a morphological 
process is expanding in the language. A morpho-
logical process may be able to spread quickly in 
terms of its ability to generate new words, and yet 
not be very common in the general language.  
In order to quantify the degree of agreement be-
tween realized and expanding productivity for 
complex adjectives we computed Spearman?s rank 
correlation coefficient between pairs of productiv-
ity rankings (for the top 100 adjectives) at each of 
the intermediate corpus sizes described above, for 
both the Wikipedia and Web corpus. 
Figure 4 shows that for complex adjectives in 
the Wikipedia corpus (the graph is similar for the 
82
Web corpus) the correlation between realized and 
expanding productivity is very strong, the value of 
? being constantly around 0.9 from the very begin-
ning, therefore independently of corpus size. We 
can interpret this fact as suggesting that the class of 
complex adjectives is overall a dynamic class, in 
the sense that its members, even the most estab-
lished (i.e., those with high realized productivity), 
continue to expand in the language and to allow 
speakers to easily create new words. Table 2 shows 
the top 20 complex adjectives for both realized and 
expanding productivity. 
Productivity Rankings Correlation, Wikipedia
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
0 100 200 300
Tokens (millions)
S
pe
ar
m
an
's
 r
ho Realized -
Expanding
Realized -
Potential
Expanding
- Potential
Figure 4: Productivity Rankings Correlation for the 
Wikipedia corpus, top 100 complex adjectives. 
 
Figure 4 also shows that Spearman?s correlation 
of both realized and expanding productivity with 
respect to potential productivity is significantly 
weaker. It is important to note that in the case of 
potential productivity we arbitrarily chose to re-
quire that the total number of tokens in the corpus 
for a given morphological category (the denomina-
tor of the potential productivity formula) be at least 
100. We will show later that choosing a high value, 
(such as 100) for this factor indeed increases the 
strength of the correlation between potential pro-
ductivity and the other two types. With low values 
the correlation coefficient is closer or equal to ?1. 
We are now going to discuss how rankings for 
potential productivity (and, consequently, their 
degree of correlation with realized and expanding 
productivity) vary with the choice of the minimum 
threshold for the denominator value of the formula 
P = V(1,C,N)/N(C). 
In general the situation for potential productivity 
is quite a different. On one hand it doesn?t depend 
directly on corpus size like the other two measures. 
On the other hand, its definition as the ratio of ha-
pax legomena of a morphological category with 
respect to all tokens of that category makes it sus-
ceptible to frequency effects. If a corpus is too 
small or a morphological category is fairly rare this 
measure will overestimate the productivity of low 
frequency items. In the extreme case, a morpho-
logical category instantiated by exactly one type 
that occurs exactly once in the corpus will get a 
potential productivity value of 1, the highest possi-
ble.    
Wikipedia productivity rankings 
Realized Expanding 
1.non-X 2.53E-05 1.non-X 0.014388 
2.X-based 1.63E-05 2.X-based 0.009694 
3.X-like 1.49E-05 3.X-like 0.00943 
4.anti-X 9.59E-06 4.anti-X 0.005875 
5.pre-X 8.00E-06 5.pre-X 0.005001 
6.X-style 6.58E-06 6.X-style 0.004809 
7.X-related 6.38E-06 7.X-related 0.004395 
8.X-type 5.36E-06 8.X-type 0.004386 
9.post-X 5.35E-06 9.post-X 0.003443 
10.self-X 4.23E-06 10.then-X 0.002381 
11.semi-X 3.78E-06 11.semi-X 0.00224 
12.multi-X 3.73E-06 12.self-X 0.002197 
13.re-X 3.64E-06 13.ex-X 0.002116 
14.then-X 3.42E-06 14.X-oriented 0.002082 
15.pro-X 3.41E-06 15.re-X 0.002078 
16.X-oriented 3.22E-06 16.pro-X 0.002022 
17.ex-X 2.97E-06 17.un-X 0.001937 
18.single-X 2.95E-06 18.multi-X 0.001852 
19.two-X 2.90E-06 19.X-only 0.001813 
20.high-X 2.78E-06 20.half-X 0.001604 
Table 2: Wikipedia rankings for  
realized and expanding productivity. 
 
The notion of potential productivity is often 
used, especially in Baayen?s work, in a deductive 
setting: typically a relatively small number of deri-
vational morphemes is selected, and an in-depth 
analysis is carried out, for example assessing intui-
tive productivity rankings against those obtained 
from corpus statistics. The goal is often to achieve 
high explanatory depth, integrating for example 
mental processing and socio-linguistic factors. In 
this context the target morphemes are typically 
fairly common in the language, and a sufficiently 
large corpus will provide a sufficiently large sam-
ple of each morphological category so that the fre-
quency effects mentioned above are negligible.  
On the other hand, the setting of the work pre-
sented in this paper is inductive in nature, in that, 
by capitalizing on the easy identification of com-
plex adjectives thanks to the orthography, we aim 
at an exploratory characterization of a large class 
of morphological categories. 
83
In practice, in the large-scale scale setting of the 
present work, frequency effects have a significant 
consequence on how potential productivity values 
are computed, and on the rankings that derive from 
them. For the Wikipedia corpus 49.36% (40223 
out of 81481) of the complex adjective morpho-
logical categories have only 1 type with 1 token. 
For example the category ?X-distracted? (based on 
a past participle like the much more common cate-
gory ?X-controlled?, which has types such as com-
puter-controlled, electronically-controlled, etc.) 
has only the type easily-distracted, which occurs 
only once in the corpus. By blindly applying the 
formula V(1,C,N)/N(C), we would conclude that 
complex adjectives that occur only once have the 
highest potential productivity (1/1=1), which runs 
counter to intuition.  
One option here would be to try to extrapolate 
the value of the potential productivity measure 
with respect to larger corpus sizes, using statistical 
models (LNRE models, for ?Large Number of Rare 
Events? models) that are appropriate for the Zip-
fian properties of word frequency distributions, as 
done in Baayen (2001). However, Evert and 
L?deling (2001) provide a detailed analysis of the 
specific problems encountered in automatic pre-
processing of large amounts of textual data, and 
conclude that in the general case automatic tools 
deliver results that are too noisy to yield reliable 
extrapolations of potential productivity measures.  
For this reason we choose instead to focus on 
the two existing corpora and explore how potential 
productivity measures vary when constraints are 
imposed on the minimum number of tokens that 
instantiate the morphological category whose po-
tential productivity we want to measure. 
We compute potential productivity measures for 
the full Wikipedia corpus by setting a minimum 
threshold for the number of tokens that instantiate 
morphological categories, starting from 0 (no con-
straint) and proceeding in increments of 5 up to 
100. For each threshold level we derive productiv-
ity rankings.  
We consider first a variant on the notion of sta-
bility of the productivity ranking by computing 
Spearman?s rank correlation between the ranking 
obtained when setting the minimum threshold 
value to 100 and each of the rankings obtained at 
the 5-increment interval, shown in Figure 5. 
Figure 5 visualizes how frequency effects im-
pact the stability of potential productivity rankings. 
When the minimum threshold is very low (0 or the 
first few increments above 0), productivity rank-
ings are extremely unstable, to the point that the 
correlation is negative with respect to the final 
ranking based on the highest threshold value (100). 
This is due to the fact that at low thresholds many 
categories have productivity 1, since all the types 
for those categories are instantiated by exactly 1 
token. Because no attempt is made to add a second 
sort order (which could be for example the number 
of types) to the productivity value, the top portion 
of the ranking is basically random, since there can 
be hundreds of categories with productivity 1. 
However, as the constraint on the minimum 
threshold becomes increasingly stronger, rankings 
tend to stabilize. For the last few thresholds values 
the rankings at the highest positions are very simi-
lar. For the threshold value 100 the ranking is 
shown in Table 3. 
Potential Productivity, Wikipedia
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
Minimum threshold level
S
pe
ar
m
an
's
 r
ho
Top 100
Top 50
Top 25
 
Figure 5: Potential productivity stability as a function of 
threshold level, on the Wikipedia corpus. 
 
A simple visual comparison between Table 3 
and Table 2 shows that complex adjectives with 
the highest potential productivity are very different 
from those with the highest realized and expanding 
productivity. 
The main qualitative impression is that adjec-
tives with high potential productivity seem to ex-
emplify patterns that are grammatically and 
compositionally very transparent. There are many 
categories based on adverbs (?partially-X?) and 
past participles (?X-obsessed?). These patterns 
could indeed be written out as two separate words 
(with a space instead of the hyphen) forming a syn-
tactic adjective phrase. On the other hand, adjec-
tives with high realized and expanding productivity 
seem to exemplify patterns that tend towards lexi-
calization. Patterns like ?anti-X?, ?pre-X?, ?post-X?, 
?re-X?, ?semi-X?, ?multi-X? could be indeed written 
84
out as a single word that is syntactically an adjec-
tive4. In other words, we could suggest that poten-
tial productivity might correlate with the early 
stages of a lexicalization process, and realized and 
expanding productivity might correlate with the 
more advanced ones. In this paper we will not 
elaborate this suggestion any further, and leave it 
for future work. 
 
Wikipedia potential productivity rankings 
1.X-ish 0.735849 11.X-wearing 0.47619 
2.almost-X 0.649123 12.X-penned 0.451327 
3.easily-X 0.613208 13.un-X 0.451001 
4.already-X 0.581522 14.X-centric 0.443662 
5.X-obsessed 0.529412 15.nearly-X 0.442308 
6.partially-X 0.526786 16.X-kilometer 0.441176 
7.X-focused 0.508197 17.X-associated 0.437229 
8.X-less 0.48913 18.X-capable 0.434066 
9.X-inspired 0.48537 19.previously-X 0.427907 
10.micro-X 0.481081 20.mini-X 0.42449 
Table 3: Potential productivity rankings for the Wikipe-
dia corpus, based the threshold value 100. 
 
We consider now another angle of the relation-
ship between potential productivity on one hand 
and realized and expanding productivity on the 
other. Using the same rankings obtained by vary-
ing minimum threshold for the number of tokens 
that instantiate morphological categories, we calcu-
late the Spearman?s rank correlation of each poten-
tial productivity ranking at every increment 
interval with respect to correspondent rankings for 
realized and expanding productivity on the full 
Wikipedia corpus. 
Figure 6 shows that no matter how we set the 
minimum threshold level, rankings for potential 
productivity appear to be significantly different 
with respect to the rankings for realized and ex-
panding productivity, and at least for the size of the 
Wikipedia corpus the correlation remains strongly 
negative.  
A slight upward trend is detectable though, and 
this corresponds to the fact that setting the mini-
mum threshold value to 100 increases somewhat 
the strength of the correlation between potential 
productivity and the other two types as corpus size 
increases (as we discussed in regard to Figure 4). 
                                                          
4 The occurrence of single orthographic word variant can be 
construed as a signal of lexicalization for complex adjectives, 
but not in the general case, as demonstrated by the the ortho-
graphic integrity of words within idioms. 
Indeed, the values of ? at the rightmost edge of the 
respective curves in Figures 4 and 6 are the same, 
since they corresponds to the rank correlation 
among productivity rankings for the full Wikipedia 
corpus with minimum threshold value set to 100. 
We can interpret this slight upward trend as a con-
sequence of the mitigation of frequency effects 
(which typically affect potential productivity rank-
ings, as discussed above) brought about by the 
raising of the minimum threshold level. 
  
Potential productivity rankings correlation
-1.02
-1
-0.98
-0.96
-0.94
-0.92
-0.9
-0.88
-0.86
0 50 100 150
Minimum threshold level
S
pe
ar
m
an
's
 r
ho
Realized - Potential
Expanding -
Potential
 
Figure 6. Potential productivity rankings correlation as a 
function of minimum threshold level in Wikipedia 
 
This behavior highlights the fact that, compared 
to the other two measures, potential productivity 
focuses by design on a significantly different facet 
of the notion of morphological productivity. Poten-
tial productivity attempts to capture in a simple 
formula the ability of a morphological category to 
continue to enable speakers to generate new words. 
It is intended to characterize a morphological cate-
gory in terms of the number of potential words that 
can still be created in that category. Thus it could 
be the case that a morphological category is well 
established in the language (realized productivity) 
and is expanding (expanding productivity), but 
does not have much potential for further expansion 
(potential productivity).  
In order to explore these scenarios, we compare 
the three measures for the specific morphological 
pattern ?non-X?, which has both the highest real-
ized and expanding productivity for all the 19 in-
termediate corpus slices, and for the full corpus 
size (both for the Wikipedia corpus and for the 
Web corpus). On the Wikipedia full corpus this 
category yields 6444 distinct types for a total of 
47489 tokens (including 4496 hapax legomena), 
ranging from very frequent types such as non-
profit (2268 tokens), non-existent (619 tokens), 
85
non-standard (501 tokens) to hapax legomena such 
as non-ratified (1 token), non-amphibious (1 to-
ken), etc. Specifically, the fact that ?non-X? has the 
highest expanding productivity means that it has 
more hapax legomena than any other morphologi-
cal pattern. This notwithstanding, the fact that its 
different types yield a very large number of tokens 
results in a very low potential productivity value of 
?non-X? (on the full corpus). Setting the minimum 
threshold value at 50, the average potential produc-
tivity rank for ?non-X? steadily gets worse as cor-
pus size increases from rank 24 for the first 
intermediate corpus to rank 2404 for the full size 
corpus, in stark contrast to the rank position 1 it 
has for realized and expanding productivity (we 
use ranks since absolute productivity values for 
different measures cannot be compared to each 
other). 
On the other hand, the pattern ?X-ish? which has 
the highest potential productivity when the mini-
mum threshold is set to 100 exhibits radically dif-
ferent behavior. On the Wikipedia corpus this 
category yields 99 distinct types for a total of only 
112 tokens, but including 87 hapax legomena. The 
most productive types are cartoon-ish and blue-ish 
(with 3 tokens each) and 40-ish, blues-ish, vanity-
ish, place-ish, bully-ish, punk-ish, tree-ish, white-
ish, noir-ish (with 2 tokens each). All other types 
have 1 token each. The high proportion of hapax 
legomena pushes ?X-ish? at the very top of the po-
tential productivity ranking. As is expected, the 
realized and expanding productivity ranks are 
much lower. However, they do increase steadily 
from rank 5204 and 3990 respectively for the first 
intermediate corpus to rank 403 and 242 for the 
full size corpus. We can interpret this trend as a 
consequence of the fact that for the category ?X-
ish? almost every new token is also both a new 
type and a new hapax legomena. The effect of this 
is that it slows down the rate of decrease of the 
realized and expanding productivity measures 
(which always decrease inversely to corpus size), 
thus lifting the rank of ?X-ish? above that of com-
petitors as corpus size increases.  
Note that from a linguistic point of view, the 
hyphen in potential productivity patterns seems to 
signal the awareness of the writer/speaker regard-
ing the ?novelty? of the complex adjective, along a 
continuum from compounding (?almost-X?, ?X-
capable?) to more established derivational mor-
phemes (?X-ish?, ?un-X?). 
5 Conclusions and future work. 
A general trend has consistently emerged 
throughout the analysis, as illustrated by the oppo-
site properties of the categories ?non-X? and ?X-
ish?. We have shown from a variety of angles how 
realized and expanding productivity measures tend 
to capture closely related aspects of morphological 
productivity, both in terms of the specific words 
and global correlation between productivity rank-
ings. On the other hand, potential productivity con-
sistently exhibits clearly different and indeed 
opposite properties compared to the other two, 
again both in terms of the specific words that score 
the highest values and in terms of productivity 
ranking correlation patterns.  
The most significant question to be addressed 
next is the extent to which the above-mentioned 
conclusions about the relationships among differ-
ent types of morphological productivity carry over 
to other segments of language. 
Regarding complex adjectives, future work will 
focus in more detail on their internal typology, 
specifically considering the extent to which they 
impose selectional restrictions (whether morpho-
syntactic or semantic in nature) on the component 
associated with the base generator of a category, 
and the correlation patterns between such con-
straints and the three types of morphological pro-
ductivity. 
References  
R. Harald Baayen. 1993. On Frequency, Transparency, 
and Productivity. In: Geert E. Booij and Jaap van 
Marle (eds). Yearbook of Morphology. Dordrecht: 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 181-208. 
R. Harald Baayen. 2001. Word Frequency Distributions. 
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
R. Harald Baayen. 2006. Corpus Linguistics in Mor-
phology: Morphological Productivity. In: L?deling, 
A. and M. Kyt? (eds). Corpus Linguistics. An Inter-
national Handbook. New York: Mouton De Gruyter.   
Stefan Evert and Anke L?deling. 2001. Measuring 
Morphological Productivity: Is Automatic Preproc-
essing Sufficient? In: Proceedings of the Corpus Lin-
guistics 2001 Conference, 167-175. 
Karo Moilanen and Stephen Pulman. 2008. The Good, 
the Bad, and the Unknown: Morphosyllabic Senti-
ment Tagging of Unseen Words. In: Proceedings of 
ACL 2008. 
86
