Proceedings of SIGDIAL 2009: the 10th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group in Discourse and Dialogue, pages 322?325,
Queen Mary University of London, September 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Dialogue behaviour under high cognitive load
Jessica Villing
Graduate School of Language Technology and
Department of Philosophy, Linguistics and Theory of Science
jessica@ling.gu.se
Abstract
For safety reasons, in-vehicle dialogue
systems should be able to take the cogni-
tive load of the driver into consideration.
However, it is important to distinguish be-
tween two types of cognitive load, namely
if the cognitive load is affecting the driv-
ing behaviour or not. We will present find-
ings from a data collection carried out in
the DICO project1, where the dialogue be-
haviour under high cognitive load is anal-
ysed, and present a novel theory of how
to distinguish between different types of
workload.
1 Introduction
In-vehicle dialogue systems demand dialogue
management that takes the cognitive workload of
the driver into consideration. The primary task is
the driving, and therefore it is necessary to develop
a dialogue system that interferes as little as pos-
sible with the driving task. However, the driver?s
cognitive workload might increase for various rea-
sons, and it is important to distinguish between
workload that is driving-induced (i.e. due to, for
example, a heavy traffic situation) and workload
that is dialogue-induced (i.e. due to a complicated
dialogue). If the workload is driving-induced it is
probably necessary to pause the dialogue to enable
for the driver to concentrate on the driving task,
whereas if the workload is dialogue-induced it is
instead necessary to facilitate the dialogue task,
for example by reformulating a question.
1www.dicoproject.org
2 Data collection
DICO is a project that aims to develop a proof-of-
concept demo system, showing how a spoken dia-
logue system can be an aid for drivers. To study
how an additional distraction or increase in the
cognitive load would affect a driver?s dialogue be-
haviour, a data collection has been made. The goal
was to elicit a natural dialogue (as opposed to giv-
ing the driver a constructed task such as for exam-
ple a math task) and make the participants engage
in the conversation.
The participants (two female and six male) be-
tween the ages of 25 and 36, drove a car in
pairs while interviewing each other. The inter-
view questions and the driving instructions were
given to the passenger, hence the driver knew nei-
ther what questions to discuss nor the route in ad-
vance. Therefore, the driver had to signal, implicit
or explicit, when she wanted driving instructions
and when she wanted a new question to discuss.
The passenger too had to have a strategy for when
to change topic. The reasons for this setup was to
elicit a natural and fairly intense dialogue and to
force the participants to change topic and/or do-
main (e.g. to get driving instructions).
The participants changed roles after 30 minutes,
which meant that each participant acted both as
driver and as passenger. The cognitive load of the
driver was measured in two ways. The driver per-
formed a Tactile Detection Task (TDT (van Win-
sum et al, 1999)) 2, and workload was also mea-
sured by using an IDIS system 3.
2When using a TDT, a summer is attached to the driver?s
wrist. The driver is told to push a button each time the sum-
mer is activated. Cognitive load is determined by measuring
hit-rate and reaction time.
3IDIS determines workload based on the
driver?s behaviour (for example steering wheel
322
The participants were audio- and videotaped,
and then transcribed with the transcription tool
ELAN4, using an orthographic transcription. The
annotation scheme was designed to enable analy-
sis of utterances with respect to topic change for
each domain.
Domain and topic was defined as:
? interview domain: discussions about the in-
terview questions where each interview ques-
tion was defined as a topic
? navigation domain: navigation-related dis-
cussions where each navigation instruction
belonging to the same row in the given route
was defined as a topic
? traffic domain: discussions about the traffic
situation and fellow road-users where each
comment not belonging to a previous event
was defined as a topic
? other domain: anything that does not fit
within the above domains where each com-
ment not belonging to a previous event was
defined as a topic
Topics change has been coded as follows:
? begin-topic: whatever? topic A (new)
? end-topic: topic A (finished)? whatever
? interrupt-topic: topic A (unfinished) ?
whatever
? resume-topic: whatever ? topic A (unfin-
ished)
? reraise-topic: whatever? topic A (finished)
Cognitive load has been annotated as:
? reliable workload: annotated when work-
load is reliably high according to the TDT
(reliability was low if response button was
pressed more than 2 times after the event).
? high: high workload according to IDIS
? low: low workload according to IDIS
movements or driver applying the brake). See
http://www.roadsafe.com/news/article.aspx?article=210
4http://www.lat-mpi.eu/tools/elan/
Silence, regardless of length, has been coded as
a pause.
The annotation schema has not been tested for
inter-coder reliability. While full reliability test-
ing would have further strengthened the results,
we believe that our results are still useful as a basis
for future implementation and experimental work.
2.1 High workload
0%?
5%?
10%?
15%?
20%?
TDT? IDIS? TDT+IDIS?
Workload?
Figure 1: Percentage of annotated workload time.
Figure 1 shows workload measured uniqely by
IDIS, uniqely by the TDT and annotations made
by IDIS and TDT jointly.
The difference in annotation time can be ex-
plained by the fact that IDIS analyses driving be-
haviour while the TDT measures the driver?s re-
action time. IDIS is developed to decide when
it is suitable to show alarms that are non-critical
(such as the indicator for low level of wind screen
washer fluid). Since showing the alarm is not
time critical, IDIS does not measure the individual
driver?s workload directly. Taking this into con-
sideration, IDIS measurements alone might be too
general and approximate when it comes to adapt-
ing a dialogue system to the driver?s cognitive
load. However, neither IDIS nor TDT in isolation
say anything about what is causing the high cog-
nitive load, only that something makes the driver
unable to pay full attention to the task at hand.
These differences can be used to decide what type
of workload the driver is experiencing, which will
be explained next.
3 Workload management
To determine type of workload, the dialoge man-
ager could be extended with a Cognitive Load
Manager (CLM) which has access to two work-
load detectors, a Speech Analyser (SA) and a Vehi-
cle State Analyser (VSA), see figure 2.
Since the driver is talking to a dialogue sys-
tem the most convenient method for determining
323
Speech?analyser?
Vehicle?state?analyser?
Cogni?e ?load?manager?
ASR?
Dialogue?manager?
Figure 2: Architecture of the cognitive load man-
ager.
workload level would be to analyse the speech.
Studies have for example shown that an increased
number of disfluencies such as deletions can in-
dicate increased workload (Shriberg, 2001; Lind-
strom et al, 2008). The driver might also make
sudden changes of domain, e.g. talk as if address-
ing fellow road-users, to indicate that she is busy
sorting out a difficult traffic situation (Villing et
al., 2008). There are no commercial SA systems
present today, however research has shown that
it is possible to detect workload by analysing the
speech signal (Yin et al, 2008).
The VSA analyses the driving behaviour to find
signs of increased workload. Variants of VSA-like
modules are a reality in the vehicle industry today.
For example, if the driver puts the brake on, makes
a left turn or manages the radio or the fan, it is
assumed that the workload is high.
The CLM collects data from the detectors and
determines type of workload based on the com-
bined signals from the SA and the VSA. Type of
workload can be set to driving-induced (workload
that is affecting the driving performance, detected
by the VSA) or dialogue-induced (workload that
is not affecting the driving performance, detected
by the SA) based on four assumptions, shown in
Table 1.
4 Results
4.1 High workload annotations
Figure 3 shows the number of instances of
high workload detected by IDIS alone (possi-
bly driving-induced), by TDT alone (dialogue-
induced) and by both IDIS and TDT jointly
(driving-induced) for each domain. The TDT
makes most annotations in the other and interview
domains and fewest in the traffic domain, while
the TDT and IDIS jointly makes most annotations
in the traffic and other domains and fewest in the
??
??
??
??
??
??
??
?????? ??? ???? ???
??????????????????????????????
Figure 3: High workload measured for each do-
main.
interview domain.
To make the SA more powerful, we wanted to
investigate if an analysis of dialogue behaviour
might improve the possibility to determine work-
load level. The most frequent topic changes are
shown in Figure 4. Most interview related top-
ics are discussed during dialogue-induced work-
load, while traffic related topics are discussed
during driving-induced workload. During possi-
bly driving-induced workload the topics are fairly
equally spread. These results are further discussed
in (Villing, 2009).
0%?
20%?
40%?
60%?
80%?
100%?
Dialogue?induced?Possibly?driving?induced?Driving?induced?
Figure 4: Topic shift during high workload.
Figure 5 shows the average duration of the
driver?s pauses.
Figure 6 shows that the majority of driver utter-
ances are produced during low workload.
5 Discussion
Figure 5 and 6 shows that an analysis of the speech
can give clues about workload level. The dura-
tion of the pauses is increasing during high work-
load, and especially during driving-induced work-
load. This supports our hypothesis that the dia-
logue system should pause when the driver needs
to concentrate on the driving task. This trend can
also be derived from Figure 6, since the number
324
SA + VSA SA VSA
driver speaking driving-induced dialogue-induced false alarm
driver not speaking - - possibly driving-induced
Table 1: CLM output based on information from the SA and the VSA.
0?0,2?
0,4?0,6?
0,8?1?
1,2?1,4?
1,6?1,8?
Low?workload? Dialogue?induced? Possibly?driving?induced? Driving?induced?
Figure 5: Average pause duration for the driver (in
seconds).
Low?workload?Dialogue?induced?Possibly?driving?induced?Driving?induced?
Figure 6: Distribution of driver utterances during
low and high workload.
of utterances are decreasing dramatically under
high workload when comparing with low work-
load. The driver seems to make fewest utterances
during driving-induced workload.
Looking at Figure 3, it seems like the VSA-
like systems present today would benefit from co-
operating with a system that is able to make a
deeper analyse of the cognitive load of the driver.
For example, the traffic domain holds almost no
dialogue-induced workload annotations but sec-
ond most driving-induced, supporting the theory
that people often make comments about the traf-
fic situation to signal that they have to concentrate
on the driving task. The results, although tenta-
tive, can be seen as an indication that it is possi-
ble to distinguish between different types of cogni-
tive load by analysing both driving behaviour and
speech, and that different types of workload de-
mand different dialogue strategies.
6 Future work
Next we will analyse the DICO material regarding
interruptions, to find a relevant interruption place
in the dialogue, i.e. a place where it is most suit-
able to pause in order to disturb the driver as little
as possible.
The resumption behaviour will also be analysed
to see who takes the initiative to resume the dia-
logue and how it is done. The findings will form a
basis for a theory of in-vehicle dialogue manage-
ment.
References
Anders Lindstrom, Jessica Villing, Staffan Lars-
son, Alexander Seward, Nina Aberg, and Cecilia
Holtelius. 2008. The effect of cognitive load on
disfluencies during in-vehicle spoken dialogue. In
Proceedings of Interspeech 2008.
Elisabeth Shriberg. 2001. To "errrr" is human: ecology
and acoustics of speech and disfluencies. Journal of
the International Phonetic Association, 31:153?169.
W van Winsum, M Martens, and L Herland. 1999. The
effect of speech versus tactile driver support mes-
sages on workload, driver behaviour and user ac-
ceptance. tno-report tm-99-c043. Technical report,
Soesterberg, Netherlands.
Jessica Villing, Cecilia Holtelius, Staffan Larsson, An-
der Lindstrom, Alexander Seward, and Nina Aberg.
2008. Interruption, resumption and domain switch-
ing in in-vehicle dialogue. In Bengt Nordstrom and
Aarne Ranta, editors, Proceedings of GoTAL, 6th In-
ternational Conference of Advances in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, volume 5221, pages 488?499,
August.
Jessica Villing. 2009. In-vehicle dialogue man-
agement - towards distinguishing between different
types of workload. In Proceedings of SiMPE, Fourth
Workshop on Speech in Mobile and Pervasive Envi-
ronments (to appear).
Bo Yin, N. Ruiz, Fang Chen, and E. Embikairajah.
2008. Investigating speech features and automatic
measurement of cognitive load. In Proceedings of
2008 IEEE 10th Workshop on Multimedia Signal
Processing, pages 988?993.
325
Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 798?805,
Uppsala, Sweden, 11-16 July 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Now, where was I?
Resumption strategies for an in-vehicle dialogue system
Jessica Villing
Graduate School of Language Technology and
Department of Philosophy, Linguistics and Theory of Science
University of Gothenburg
jessica@ling.gu.se
Abstract
In-vehicle dialogue systems often contain
more than one application, e.g. a navi-
gation and a telephone application. This
means that the user might, for example, in-
terrupt the interaction with the telephone
application to ask for directions from the
navigation application, and then resume
the dialogue with the telephone applica-
tion. In this paper we present an anal-
ysis of interruption and resumption be-
haviour in human-human in-vehicle dia-
logues and also propose some implications
for resumption strategies in an in-vehicle
dialogue system.
1 Introduction
Making it useful and enjoyable to use a dialogue
system is always important. The dialogue should
be easy and intuitive, otherwise the user will not
find it worth the effort and instead prefer to use
manual controls or to speak to a human.
However, when designing an in-vehicle dia-
logue system there is one more thing that needs
to be taken into consideration, namely the fact that
the user is performing an additional, safety crit-
ical, task - driving. The so-called 100-car study
(Neale et al, 2005) revealed that secondary task
distraction is the largest cause of driver inatten-
tion, and that the handling of wireless devices is
the most common secondary task. Even if spoken
dialogue systems enables manouvering of devices
without using hands or eyes, it is crucial to ad-
just the interaction to the in-vehicle environment
in order to minimize distraction from the interac-
tion itself. Therefore the dialogue system should
consider the cognitive load of the driver and ad-
just the dialogue accordingly. One way of doing
this is to continously measure the cognitive work-
load level of the driver and, if the workload is high,
determine type of workload and act accordingly.
If the workload is dialogue-induced (i.e. caused
by the dialogue itself), it might be necessary to
rephrase or offer the user help with the task. If
the workload is driving-induced (i.e. caused by
the driving task), the user might need information
that is crucial for the driving task (e.g. get nav-
igation instructions), or to pause the dialogue in
order to enable the user to concentrate on the driv-
ing task (Villing, 2009). Both the driver and the
system should be able to initiate interruptions.
When the interaction with a dialogue system has
been interrupted, e.g. because the user has not an-
swered a question, it is common that the system
returns to the top menu. This means that if the
user wants to finish the interrupted task she has
to restart from the beginning, which is both time-
consuming and annoying. Instead, the dialogue
system should be able to either pause until the
workload is low or change topic and/or domain,
and then resume where the interruption took place.
However, resumption of an interrupted topic needs
to be done in a way that minimizes the risk that
the cognitive workload increases again. Although
a lot of research has been done regarding dialogue
system output, very little work has been done re-
garding resumption of an interrupted topic. In this
paper we will analyse human-human in-vehicle di-
alogue to find out how resumptions are done in
human-human dialogue and propose some impli-
cations for resumption strategies in a dialogue sys-
tem.
2 Related work
To study resumption behaviour, Yang (2009), car-
ried out a data collection where the participants
were switching between an ongoing task (a card
game) and a real-time task (a picture game). The
participants randomly had to interrupt the ongo-
ing task to solve a problem in the real-time task.
When studying the resumption behaviour after an
798
interruption to the real-time task they found that
the resuming utterance contained various amounts
and types of redundant information depending on
whether the interruption occured in the middle of
a card discussion, at the end of a card or at the
end of a card game. If the interruption occured
in the middle of a card discussion it was possible
to make a distinction between utterance restate-
ment (repeat one?s own utterance, repeat the dia-
logue partners utterance or clarification of the dia-
logue partners utterance) and card review (review-
ing all the cards on hand although this information
had already been given). They found that the be-
haviour is similar to grounding behaviour, where
the speaker use repetition and requests for repeti-
tion to ensure that the utterance is understood.
3 Data collection
A data collection has been carried out within the
DICO project (see, for example, (Larsson and
Villing, 2007)) to study how an additional distrac-
tion or increase in the cognitive load would affect a
driver?s dialogue behaviour. The goal was to elicit
a natural dialogue (as opposed to giving the driver
a constructed task such as for example a math task)
and make the participants engage in the conversa-
tion.
The participants (two female and six male) be-
tween the ages of 25 and 36 drove a car in pairs
while interviewing each other. The interview
questions and the driving instructions were given
to the passenger, hence the driver knew neither
what questions to discuss nor the route in advance.
Therefore, the driver had to signal, implicitly or
explicitly, when she wanted driving instructions
and when she wanted a new question to discuss.
The passenger too had to have a strategy for when
to change topic. The reasons for this setup was
to elicit a natural and fairly intense dialogue and
to force the participants to frequently change topic
and/or domain (e.g. to get driving instructions).
The participants changed roles after 30 minutes,
which meant that each participant acted both as
driver and as passenger. The cognitive load of the
driver was measured in two ways. The driver per-
formed a Tactile Detection Task (TDT) (van Win-
sum et al, 1999). When using a TDT, a buzzer
is attached to the driver?s wrist. The driver is told
to push a button each time the summer is activated.
Cognitive load is determined by measuring hit-rate
and reaction time. Although the TDT task in itself
might cause an increased workload level, the task
is performed during the whole session and thereby
it is possible to distinguish high workload caused
by something else but the TDT task.
Workload was also measured by using an IDIS
system (Brostr?m et al, 2006). IDIS determines
workload based on the driver?s behaviour (for ex-
ample, steering wheel movements or applying the
brake). What differs between the two measure-
ments is that the TDT measures the actual work-
load of each driver, while IDIS makes its assump-
tions based on knowledge of what manouvres are
usually cognitively demanding.
The participants were audio- and videotaped,
the recordings are transcribed with the transcrip-
tion tool ELAN1, using an orthographic transcrip-
tion. All in all 3590 driver utterances and 4382
passenger utterances are transcribed. An annota-
tion scheme was designed to enable analysis of
utterances with respect to topic change for each
domain.
Domain and topic was defined as:
? interview domain: discussions about the in-
terview questions where each interview ques-
tion was defined as a topic
? navigation domain: navigation-related dis-
cussions where each navigation instruction
was defined as a topic
? traffic domain: discussions about the traffic
situation and fellow road-users where each
comment not belonging to a previous event
was defined as a topic
? other domain: anything that does not fit
within the above domains where each com-
ment not belonging to a previous event was
defined as a topic
Topic changes has been coded as follows:
? begin-topic: whatever? new topic
? I.e., the participants start discussing an
interview question, a navigation instruc-
tion, make a remark about the traffic
or anything else that has not been dis-
cussed before.
? end-topic: finished topic? whatever
1http://www.lat-mpi.eu/tools/elan/
799
? A topic is considered finished if a ques-
tion is answered or if an instruction or a
remark is confirmed.
? interrupt-topic: unfinished topic? whatever
? An utterance is considered to interrupt if
it belongs to another topic than the pre-
vious utterance and the previous topic
has not been ended with an end-topic.
? resume-topic: whatever? unfinished topic
? A topic is considered to be resumed if
it has been discussed earlier but was not
been finished by an end-topic but instead
interrupted with an interrupt-topic.
? reraise-topic: whatever? finished topic
? A topic is considered to be reraised if it
has been discussed before and then been
finished with an end-topic.
The utterances have been categorised according
to the following schema:
? DEC: declarative
? (?You are a Leo and I am a Gemini?,
?This is Ekelund Street?)
? INT: interrogative
? (?What do you eat for breakfast??,
?Should we go back after this??)
? IMP: imperative
? (?Go on!?)
? ANS: ?yes? or ?no? answer (and variations
such as ?sure, absolutely, nope, no way?)
? NP: bare noun phrase
? (?Wolfmother?, ?Otterhall Street?)
? ADVP: bare adverbial phrase
? (?Further into Karlavagn Street?)
? INC: incomplete phrase
? (?Well, did I answer the?, ?Should we?)
Cognitive load has been annotated as:
? reliable workload: annotated when work-
load is reliably high according to the TDT
(reliability was low if response button was
pressed more than 2 times after the event).
? high: high workload according to IDIS
? low: low workload according to IDIS
The annotation schema has not been tested for
inter-coder reliability. While full reliability test-
ing would have further strengthened the results,
we believe that our results are still useful as a basis
for future implementation and experimental work.
4 Results
The codings from the DICO data collection has
been analysed with respect to interruption and re-
sumption of topics (interrupt-topic and resume-
topic, respectively). Interruption can be done in
two ways, either to pause the dialogue or to change
topic and/or domain. In the DICO corpus there are
very few interruptions followed by a pause. The
reason is probably that both the driver and the pas-
senger were strongly engaged in the interview and
navigation tasks. The fact that the driver did not
know the route elicited frequent switches to the
navigation domain done by both the driver and the
passenger, as can be seen in Figure 1. Therefore,
we have only analysed interruption and resump-
tion from and to the interview and navigation do-
mains.
!"
#!"
$!"
%!"
&!"
'!!"
()*+,-(+." )/-(" *,/01" 2*3+,"
Figure 1: Distribution of utterances coded as
interrupt-topic for each domain, when interrupt-
ing from an interview topic.
4.1 Redundancy
The easiest way of resuming an interrupted topic
in a dialogue system is to repeat the last phrase that
was uttered before the interruption. One disda-
vantage of this method is that the dialogue system
might be seen as tedious, especially if there are
several interruptions during the interaction. We
wanted to see if the resuming utterances in human-
human dialogue are redundant and if redundancy
has anything to do with the length of the inter-
ruption. We therefore sorted all utterances coded
800
as resume-topic in two categories, those which
contained redundant information when comparing
with the last utterance before the interruption, and
those which did not contain and redundant infor-
mation. As a redundant utterance we counted all
utterances that repeated one or more words from
the last utterance before the interruption. We then
counted the number of turns between the interrup-
tion and resumption. The number of turns varied
between 1 and 42. The result can be seen in Figure
2.
!"
#"
$!"
$#"
%!"
%#"
&'()*""""""+,-"*.)/01"
2345.6"+#78"*.)/01"
9(/:"""""""""""""""""+;$!"*.)/01"
<(/=)34./4>/*"
?34./4>/*"
Figure 2: Number of redundant utterances depend-
ing on length of interruption.
As can be seen, there are twice as many non-
redundant as redundant utterances after a short
interruption (?4 turns), while there are almost
solely redundant utterances after a long interrup-
tion (?10 turns). The average number of turns
is 3,5 when no redundancy occur, and 11,5 when
there are redundancy. When the number of turns
exceeds 12, there are only redundant utterances.
4.2 Category
Figure 3 shows the distribution, sorted per cate-
gory, of driver utterances when resuming to an in-
terview and a navigation topic. Figure 4 shows the
corresponding figures for passenger utterances.
!"#
$!"#
%!"#
&!"#
'!"#
(!"#
)*+# ,-+# ,-.# -/# 0-1# 0)2/
#
345678369#
4:83#
Figure 3: Driver resuming to the interview and
navigation domains.
The driver?s behaviour is similar both when re-
suming to an interview and a navigation topic.
Declarative phrases are most common, followed
by incomplete, interrogative (for interview topics)
and noun phrases.
!"#
$!"#
%!"#
&!"#
'!"#
(!"#
)*+# ,-+# ,-.# -/# ,0/# 1)2/
#
345678369#
4:83#
Figure 4: Passenger resuming to the interview and
navigation domains.
When looking at the passenger utterances we
see a lot of variation between the domains. When
resuming to an interview topic the passenger
uses mostly declarative phrases, followed by noun
phrases and interrogative phrases. When resum-
ing to a navigation topic imperative phrases are
most common, followed by declarative phrases.
Only the passenger use imperative phrases, proba-
bly since the passenger is managing both the inter-
view questions and the navigation instructions and
therefore is the one that is forcing both the inter-
view and the navigation task through.
4.3 Workload level
The in-vehicle environment is forcing the driver to
carry out tasks during high cognitive workload. To
minimize the risk of increasing the workload fur-
ther, an in-vehicle dialogue system should be able
to decide when to interrupt and when to resume a
topic depending on the driver?s workload level.
The figures in this section shows workload level
and type of workload during interruption and re-
sumption to and from topics in the interview do-
main. When designing the interview and naviga-
tion tasks that were to be carried out during the
data collection, we focused on designing them so
that the participants were encouraged to discuss
as much as possible with each other. Therefore,
the navigation instructions sometimes were hard
to understand, which forced the participants to dis-
cuss the instructions and together try to interpret
them. Therefore we have not analysed the work-
load level while interrupting and resuming topics
in the navigation domain since the result might be
801
misleading.
Type of workload is determined by analysing
the TDT and IDIS signals described in 3. Work-
load is considered to be dialogue-induced when
only the TDT is indicating high workload (since
the TDT indicates that the driver is carrying out a
task that is cognitively demanding but IDIS is not
indicating that the driving task is demanding at the
moment), driving-induced when both the TDT and
IDIS is indicating high workload (since the TDT is
indicating that the workload level is high and IDIS
is indicating that the driving task is demanding)
and possibly driving-induced when only IDIS is
indicating high workload (since IDIS admittedly
is indicating that the driving task is demanding
but the TDT indicates that the driver?s workload is
low, it could then be that this particular driver does
not experience the driving task demanding even
though the average driver does) (Villing, 2009).
The data has been normalized for variation in
workload time. The diagrams shows the distri-
bution of interruption and resumption utterances
made by the driver and the passenger, respectively.
dialogue-induced
possibly dr iv ing-induced
driv ing-induced
low workload
Page 1
Figure 5: Workload while the driver is interrupting
an interview topic.
dialogue-induced
possibly dr iv ing-induced
driv ing-induced
low workload
Page 1
Figure 6: Workload while the passenger is inter-
rupting an interview topic.
Figures 5 and 6 show driver workload level
while the driver and the passenger (respectively)
are interrupting from the interview domain. The
driver most often interrupts during a possible
driving-induced or low workload, the same goes
for the passenger but in opposite order. It is
least common for the driver to interrupt dur-
ing dialogue- or driving-induced workload, while
the passenger rarely interrupts during dialogue-
induced and never during driving-induced work-
load.
dialogue-induced
possible dr iv ing-induced
driv ing-induced
low workload
Page 1
Figure 7: Workload while driver is resuming to the
interview domain.
dialogue-induced
possible dr iv ing-induced
driv ing-induced
low workload
Page 1
Figure 8: Workload while passenger is resuming
to the interview domain.
Figures 7 and 8 show workload level while the
driver and the passenger (respectively) are resum-
ing to the interview domain. The driver most of-
ten resumes while the workload is low or possi-
bly driving-induced, while the passenger is mostly
resuming during low workload and never during
driving-induced workload.
5 Discussion
For both driver and passenger, the most common
way to resume an interview topic is to use a declar-
ative utterance, which is illustrated in Figure 3.
When studying the utterances in detail we can see
that there is a difference when comparing infor-
mation redundancy similar to what Yang (2009)
describe in their paper. They compared grade of
802
redundancy based on where in the dialogue the in-
terruption occur, what we have looked at in the
DICO corpus is how many turns the interrupting
discussion contains.
As Figure 2 shows, if the number of turns is
about three (on average, 3,5), the participants tend
to continue the interrupted topic exactly where it
was interrupted, without considering that there had
been any interruption. The speaker however of-
ten makes some sort of sequencing move to an-
nounce that he or she is about to switch domain
and/or topic, either by using a standard phrase or
by making an extra-lingustic sound like, for exam-
ple, lipsmack or breathing (Villing et al, 2008).
Example (1) shows how the driver interrupts a dis-
cussion about what book he is currently reading to
get navigation instructions:
(1) Driver: What I read now is Sofie?s
world.
Driver (interrupting): Yes, where do
you want me to drive?
Passenger: Straight ahead,
straight ahead.
Driver: Straight ahead. Alright,
I?ll do that.
Passenger (resuming): Alright [sequencing
move]. Enemy of the enemy was
the last one I read. [DEC]
If the number of turns is higher than ten (on av-
erage, 11,5) the resuming speaker makes a redun-
dant utterance, repeating one or more words from
the last utterance before the interruption. See ex-
ample (2):
(2) Driver: Actually, I have always been
interested in computers and
technology.
Passenger (interrupting): Turn right
to Vasaplatsen. Is it here?
No, this is Gr?nsakstorget.
Driver: This is Gr?nsakstorget.
We have passed Vasaplatsen.
.
.
. (Discussion about how to
turn around and get back to
Vasaplatsen, all in all 21
turns.)
Driver (resuming): Well, as I said
[sequencing move]. I have
always been interested in
computer and computers and
technology and stuff like that.
[DEC]
The passenger often uses a bare noun phrase to
resume, the noun phrase can repeat a part of the
interview question. For example, after a discus-
sion about wonders of the world, which was inter-
rupted by a discussion about which way to go next,
the passenger resumed by uttering the single word
?wonders? which was immediatly understood by
the driver as a resumption to the interview topic.
The noun phrase can also be a key phrase in the
dialogue partner?s answer as in example (3) where
the participants discuss their favourite band:
(3) Driver: I like Wolfmother, do you know
about them?
Passenger: I?ve never heard about
them. [...] You have to bring
a cd so I can listen to them.
Driver (interrupting): Where was I
supposed to turn?
.
.
. (Navigation discussion, all
in all 13 turns.)
Passenger (resuming): [LAUGHS]Wolfmother.
[NP]
When resuming to the navigation domain, the
driver mostly uses a declarative phrase, typically
to clarify an instruction. It is also common to use
an interrogative phrase or an incomplete phrase
such as ?should I...? which the passenger answers
by clarifying which way to go. The passenger in-
stead uses mostly imperative phrases as a reminder
of the last instruction, such as ?keep straight on?.
When the speakers interrupts an interview topic
they mostly switch to the navigation domain, see
Figure 1. That means that the most common rea-
son for the speaker to interrupt is to ask for or give
information that is crucial for the driving task (as
opposed for the other and traffic domains, which
are mostly used to signal that the speaker?s cogni-
tive load level is high (Villing et al, 2008)). As
can be seen in Figures 5 and 6, the driver mostly
interrupts the interview domain during a possi-
ble driving-induced workload while the passen-
ger mostly interrupts during low workload. As
noted above (see also Figure 3), the utterances are
mostly declarative (?this is Ekelund Street?), in-
terrogative (?and now I turn left??) or incomplete
(?and then...?), while the passenger gives addi-
tional information that the driver has not asked for
explicitly but the passenger judges that the driver
might need (?just go straight ahead in the next
crossing?, ?here is where we should turn towards
J?rntorget?). Hence, it seems like the driver inter-
rupts to make clarification utterances that must be
answered immediately, for example, right before a
803
crossing when the driver has pressed the brakes or
turned on the turn signal (and therefore the IDIS
system signals high workload which is interpreted
as driving-induced workload) while the passenger
take the chance to give additional information in
advance, before it is needed, and the workload
therefore is low.
Figure 7 shows that the driver mostly resumes
to the interview domain during low or possible
driving-induced workload. Since the IDIS system
makes its assumption on driving behaviour, based
on what the average driver finds cognitively de-
manding, it might sometimes be so that the system
overgenerates and indicates high workload even
though the driver at hand does not find the driv-
ing task cognitively demanding. This might be an
explanation to these results, since the driver of-
ten resumes to an interview topic although he or
she is, for example, driving through a roundabout
or pushing the brakes. It is also rather common
that the driver is resuming to an interview ques-
tion during dialogue-induced workload, perhaps
because she has started thinking about an answer
to a question and therefore the TDT indicates high
workload and the IDIS does not. The passenger
mostly resumes to the interview domain during
low workload, which indicates that the passenger
analyses both the traffic situation and the state of
mind of the driver before he or she wants to draw
the drivers attention from the driving task.
6 Implications for in-vehicle dialogue
systems
In this paper we point at some of the dialogue
strategies that are used in human-human dialogue
during high cognitive load when resuming to an
interrupted topic. These strategies should be taken
under consideration when implementing an in-
vehicle dialogue system.
To make the dialogue natural and easy to under-
stand the dialogue manager should consider which
domain it will resume to and the number of turns
between the interruption and resumption before
deciding what phrase to use as output. For ex-
ample, the results indicate that it might be more
suitable to use a declarative phrase when resum-
ing to a domain where the system is asking the
user for information, for example when adding
songs to a play list at the mp3-player (cf. the in-
terview domain). If the number of turns are 4 or
less, it probably does not have to make a redun-
dant utterance at all, but may continue the discus-
sion where it was interrupted. If the number of
turns exceeds 4 it is probably smoother to let the
system just repeat one or more keywords from the
interrupted utterance to make the user understand
what topic should be discussed, instead of repeat-
ing the whole utterance or even start the task from
the beginning. This will make the system feel less
tedious which should have a positive effect on the
cognitive workload level. However, user tests are
probably needed to decide how much redundant
information is necessary when talking to a dia-
logue system, since it may well differ from talking
to a human being who is able to help the listener
understand by, for example, emphasizing certain
words in a way that is currently impossible for a
computer. When resuming to a domain where the
system has information to give to the user it is suit-
able to make a short, informative utterance (e.g.
?turn left here?, ?traffic jam ahead, turn left in-
stead?).
Finally, it is also important to consider the cog-
nitive workload level of the user to determine
when - and if - to resume, and also whether the
topic that is to be resumed belongs to a domain
where the system has information to give to the
user, or a domain where the user gives informa-
tion to the system. For example, if the user is us-
ing a navigation system and he or she is experi-
encing driving-induced workload when approach-
ing e.g. a crossing, it might be a good idea to give
additional navigation information even though the
user has not explicitly asked for it. If the user how-
ever is using a telephone application it is probably
better to let the user initiate the resumption. The
DICO corpus shows that it is the passenger that is
most careful not to interrupt or resume when the
driver?s workload is high, indicating that the sys-
tem should let the user decide whether it is suit-
able to resume during high workload, while it is
more accepted to let the system interrupt and re-
sume when the workload is low.
When resuming to the interview domain the
driver (i.e. the user) mostly uses declarative
phrases, either as an answer to a question or as a
redundant utterance to clarify what was last said
before the interruption. Therefore the dialogue
system should be able to store not only what has
been agreed upon regarding the interrupted task,
but also the last few utterances to make it possible
to interpret the user utterance as a resumption.
804
It is common that the driver utterances are in-
complete, perhaps due to the fact that the driver?s
primary task is the driving and therefore his or her
mind is not always set on the dialogue task. Lind-
str?m (2008) showed that deletions are the most
common disfluency during high cognitive load,
which is supported by the results in this paper. The
dialogue system should therefore be robust regard-
ing ungrammatical utterances.
7 Future work
Next we intend to implement strategies for inter-
ruption and resumption in the DICO dialogue sys-
tem. The strategies will then be evaluated through
user tests where the participants will compare an
application with these strategies with an applica-
tion without them. Cognitive workload will be
measured as well as driving ability (for example,
by using a Lane Change Task (Mattes, 2003)). The
participants will also be interviewed in order to
find out which version of the system is more pleas-
ant to use.
References
Robert Brostr?m, Johan Engstr?m, Anders Agnvall,
and Gustav Markkula. 2006. Towards the next gen-
eration intelligent driver information system (idis):
The volvo cars interaction manager concept. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2006 ITS World Congress.
Staffan Larsson and Jessica Villing. 2007. The dico
project: A multimodal menu-based in-vehicle dia-
logue system. In H C Bunt and E C G Thijsse, edi-
tors, Proceedings of the 7th International Workshop
on Computational Semantics (IWCS-7), page 4.
Anders Lindstr?m, Jessica Villing, Staffan Lars-
son, Alexander Seward, Nina ?berg, and Cecilia
Holtelius. 2008. The effect of cognitive load on
disfluencies during in-vehicle spoken dialogue. In
Proceedings of Interspeech 2008, page 4.
Stefan Mattes. 2003. The lane-change-task as a tool
for driver distraction evaluation. In Proceedings of
IGfA.
V L Neale, T A Dingus, S G Klauer, J Sudweeks, and
M Goodman. 2005. An overview of the 100-car
naturalistic study and findings. In Proceedings of
the 19th International Technical Conference on En-
hanced Safety of Vehicles (ESV).
W van Winsum, M Martens, and L Herland. 1999. The
effect of speech versus tactile driver support mes-
sages on workload, driver behaviour and user ac-
ceptance. tno-report tm-99-c043. Technical report,
Soesterberg, Netherlands.
Jessica Villing, Cecilia Holtelius, Staffan Larsson, An-
ders Lindstr?m, Alexander Seward, and Nina ?berg.
2008. Interruption, resumption and domain switch-
ing in in-vehicle dialogue. In Proceedings of Go-
TAL, 6th International Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing, page 12.
Jessica Villing. 2009. In-vehicle dialogue man-
agement - towards distinguishing between different
types of workload. In Proceedings of SiMPE, Fourth
Workshop on Speech in Mobile and Pervasive Envi-
ronments, pages 14?21.
Fan Yang and Peter A Heeman. 2009. Context restora-
tion in multi-tasking dialogue. In IUI ?09: Proceed-
ings of the 13th international conference on Intelli-
gent user interfaces, pages 373?378, New York, NY,
USA. ACM.
805
Proceedings of the ACL-HLT 2011 System Demonstrations, pages 92?96,
Portland, Oregon, USA, 21 June 2011. c?2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
Multimodal Menu-based Dialogue with Speech Cursor in DICO II+
Staffan Larsson
University of Gothenburg
Sweden
sl@ling.gu.se
Alexander Berman
Talkamatic AB
Sweden
alex@talkamatic.se
Jessica Villing
University of Gothenburg
Sweden
jessica@ling.gu.se
Abstract
This paper describes Dico II+, an in-vehicle
dialogue system demonstrating a novel com-
bination of flexible multimodal menu-based
dialogueand a ?speech cursor? which enables
menu navigation as well as browsing long list
using haptic input and spoken output.
1 Introduction
Dico is a multimodal in-car dialogue system appli-
cation, originally developed in the DICO (with cap-
ital letters) project by Volvo Technology AB and
the University of Gothenburg. Dico is built on top
of the GoDiS dialogue system platform (Larsson,
2002), which in turn is implemented using TrindiKit
(Traum and Larsson, 2003).
The main goal of the original Dico application
(Olsson and Villing, 2005), (Villing and Larsson,
2006) was to develop an interface that is less dis-
tracting for the driver, and thus both safer and easier
to use than existing interfaces. (Larsson and Villing,
2009) described the Dico II system resulting from
work in the DICO project. Since then, the Dico
demonstrator has been further developed.
In this paper, we describe the Dico II+ demon-
strator which introduces a novel combination of
flexible Multimodal Menu-Based Dialogue and a
Speech Cursor which together enable flexible multi-
modal interaction without the need for looking at the
screen. In the following, we will first argue for the
usefulness of in-vehicle dialogue systems. We will
then briefly present the GoDiS platform which Dico
II+ is based on, as well as some aspects of flexible
dialogue enabled by the GoDiS dialogue manager.
2 In-vehicle dialogue systems
Voice interaction is a very natural means of com-
munication for humans, and enabling spoken inter-
action with technologies may thus make it easier
and less cognitively demanding for people to in-
teract with machines. However, this requires that
the spoken interaction is similar to ordinary spoken
human-human dialogue. A problem with available
in-vehicle voice control technologies is that they are
not flexible enough in terms of the interaction strate-
gies and modalities offered to the user.
3 GoDiS features in Dico
GoDiS (Larsson, 2002) is an experimental di-
alogue system implementing a theory of Issue-
Based Dialogue Management based on Ginzburg?s
concept of Questions Under Discussion (QUD).
GoDiS is implemented using the TrindiKit, a toolkit
for implementing dialogue move engines and dia-
logue systems based on the Information State ap-
proach (Traum and Larsson, 2003). GoDiS has
been adapted to several different dialogue types, do-
mains, and languages, including menu-based mul-
timodal dialogue when acting as an interface to an
mp3 player (Hjelm et al, 2005).
The GoDiS dialogue manager allows the user
to interact more flexibly and naturally with menu-
based interfaces to devices. General dialogue man-
agement issues such as accommodation, task switch-
ing and grounding are handled by the application-
independent dialogue manager. Re-using these tech-
nologies in new applications enables rapid prototyp-
ing of advanced dialogue applications.
92
3.1 Accommodation
The applications in Dico II+ are based on exist-
ing menu interfaces, using a method for converting
menus into dialogue plans (see below). While it is
possible for the novice user to let the system take
initiative and guide the user through the menus step-
by-step, expert users might prefer to use accommo-
dation strategies enabling the user to skip through
the menus and getting right to the point. Two exam-
ples are shown below.
Ex. 1:
S: ?What do you want to do? Go to the
phonebook, manage settings, or...?
U: ?Call Lisa?s home number?
S: ?OK. Calling Lisa?s home number.?
Ex. 2:
U: ?Lisa?s home number?
S: ?OK. Do you want to change the num-
ber or make a call??
U: ?Make a call.?
S: ?OK. Calling Lisa?s home number.?
3.2 Multiple simultaneous tasks and task
switching
GoDiS enables arbitrarily nested subdialogues. It
is possible to start one dialogue to perform a task,
and then start a subdialogue before the first task is
completed. When the second task is completed the
system automatically returns to the first task, and ex-
plicitly signals this. This gives the user freedom to
switch task at any time:
Ex. 3:
U: ?Change Lisa?s home number.?
S: ?Okay. Let?s see. What phone number
do you want instead??
U: ?Check my messages.?
S: ?You have got this message. Hi!
I have got a new home number, it is
(031)234567. Best regards, Lisa.?
S: ?Returning to change an entry. What
phone number do you want instead??
U: ?oh three one twentythree fourtyfive
sixtyseven.?
U: ?Okay. Changing Lisa?s home num-
ber to oh three one two three four five six
seven.?
3.3 Feedback and grounding
The GoDiS dialogue manager provides general feed-
back strategies to make sure that the dialogue part-
ners have contact, that the system can can hear what
the user says, understands the words that are spoken
(semantic understanding), understands the meaning
of the utterance (pragmatic understanding) and ac-
cepts the dialogue moves performed in utterances.
As an example, the single user utterance ?Lisa?
may result in positive feedback on the semantic level
but negative on the pragmatic, resulting in a system
utterance consisting of two feedback moves and a
clarification question: ?Lisa. I don?t quite under-
stand. Do you want to make a call, change an entry
in the phonebook, or delete an entry from the phone-
book??
4 Multimodal menu-based dialogue
Dico II+ implemented a concept of Multimodal
Menu-based Dialogue (MMD). Technologies for
MMD in menu-based applications have already been
developed for other GoDiS applications (Hjelm et
al., 2005) and the ideas behind these solutions were
re-implemented and significantly improved in Dico.
A common argument for using spoken interaction
in a car context is that the driver should be able to
use a system without looking at a screen. However,
there are many situations where current technology
requires the user to look at a screen at some point
in the interaction. The idea behind MMD is that the
user should be able to switch between and combine
modalities freely across and within utterances. This
makes it possible to use the system using speech
only, using traditional GUI interaction only, or us-
ing a combination of the two.
MMD enables integrated multimodality for user
input, meaning that a single contribution can use
several input modalities, e.g. ?Call this contact
[click]? where the [click] symbolises haptic input
(e.g. a mouse click) which in this case selects a spe-
cific contact. For output, MMD uses parallel mul-
93
timodality, i.e., output is generally rendered both
as speech and as GUI output. To use speech only,
the user can merely ignore the graphical output and
not use the haptic input device. To enable interac-
tion using GUI only, speech input and output can be
turned on or off using a button which toggles be-
tween ?speech on? and ?speech off? mode.
The GUI used in Dico II+ is a generic graphi-
cal interface for the GoDiS system, developed by
Talkamatic AB with graphical adaptations for Dico.
It represents GoDiS dialogue moves graphically as
menus using a refined version of the conversion
schema presented in (Larsson et al, 2001) . For
example, alternative questions are represented as
multiple choice menus, and wh-questions are rep-
resented as scrollable lists. Conversely, haptic user
input from the GUI is interpreted as dialogue moves.
Selecting an action in a multiple-choice menu cor-
responds to making a request move, and selecting
an item in a scrollable list corresponds to an answer
move.
5 Speech Cursor
This section describes an important addition to the
GoDiS dialogue manager and Dico demonstrator,
which enables the user to use spoken interaction in
combination with haptic input to access all func-
tionality (including browsing long lists) without ever
having to look at the screen. In combination with
the flexible dialogue capabilities of the GoDiS dia-
logue manager, and the concept of MMD, we believe
that a Speech Cursor provides a powerful and user-
friendly way of interacting with menu-based inter-
faces in cognitively demanding environments such
as the in-vehicle environment.
5.1 The problem
A common argument for using spoken interaction
in a car context is that the driver should be able to
use a system without looking at a screen. However,
there are many situations where current technology
requires the user to look at a screen at some point
in the interaction. This was true also for Dico II
in the case of browsing lists; for example, to find
out which contacts were listed in the phonebook, the
user would at some point have to look at the screen.
Imagine that the user wants to select a song from
a song database, and that the user has made restric-
tions filtering out 30 songs from the database. The
dialogue system asks the user which of the songs she
wants to hear displaying them in a list on the screen.
The user must now either look at the screen and
use a scroll-wheel or similar to select a song, or look
at the screen to see which songs are available, and
then speak the proper song title. This means that
part of the point of using spoken interaction in the
car is lost. The example discusses car use, but is
applicable any time when the user cannot or does
not want to look at a screen, for instance when using
a cellphone walking in a city, or when using a web
application on a portable device.
An existing interaction strategy for addressing the
problems of browsing lists is to allow a kind of meta-
dialogue, where the system verbally presents a num-
ber of items (for instance 5) from the list, then asking
the user if she or he would like to hear the subse-
quent 5 items, until the list has been read in its en-
tirety or until the users responds negatively. While
this strategy in principle solves the problem, it is
rather time-consuming compared to browsing the
list using a screen and a haptic input device (such
as a scroll-wheel); this may decrease the perceived
usability of the voice interface in comparison with
traditional GUI-based interaction.
Some existing voice interaction systems use a
technology to establish understanding which con-
sists of displaying the top N best recognition hy-
potheses to the user, each one associated with a num-
ber, together with a verbal request to the user to
say the number corresponding to the desired result.
This situation, however, requires the user to look at
a screen, and is arguably quite unnatural.
5.2 The solution: Speech Cursor
Dico II+ requires a haptic menu navigation de-
vice, such as a mouse (trackball, touch pad,
TrackPointTM ) with buttons, pointers and drivers,
keyboard with arrow keys, or jog dial/shuttle wheel.
A typical in-vehicle menu navigation device consists
of three or four buttons (UP, DOWN, OK and possi-
ble BACK).
Every time a new item gets focus, the system
reads out a voice icon - a spoken representation of
the item. This representation can be textual, in-
tended to be realised using a TTS, or in the form
94
of audio data, to be played directly. Every time a
new element gets focus, all any ongoing voice out-
put is interrupted by the voice icon for the element
in focus.
6 Combining flexible dialogue and Speech
Cursor
Combining flexible dialogue processing with the
Speech Cursor concept1 enables interaction where
the user may freely choose between using domain-
level spoken utterances (requests, confirmations,
questions, answers etc.) and using the Speech Cur-
sor. This is an improvement over existing technol-
ogy in that it offers a greater variety of interaction
styles which can be freely chosen and combined by
the user, as well as offering flexible dialogue inter-
action. Specifically, it provides flexible spoken dia-
logue interaction in combination with user-friendly
browsing of long lists without the need for looking
at the screen.
Here is a walk-through of a sample interaction:
Ex. 4:
U: ?I want to listen to Madonna?(This ut-
terance uses accommodation to allow the
user to supply unrequested information)
S: ?There are 3 songs by Madonna. What
song do you want?? (Showing list of all
songs by Madonna: ?Like a Prayer?, ?La
Isla Bonita?, ?Music?, ...)
U: [DOWN]
S: ?Like a Prayer from the album Like a
Prayer? (?Like a Prayer? is highlighted)
U: [DOWN]
S: ?La Isla Bonita from the album True
Blue? (?La Isla Bonita? is highlighted)
U: [DOWN]
S: ?Music from the alb+? (?Music? is
highlighted)
U: [UP]
S: ?Like a Prayer?
1The combination of a (simple or flexible) spoken dialogue
system and the voice cursor technology is patent pending.
U: [OK]
S: ?OK, playing Like a Prayer.?
Here is a further example:
Ex. 5:
U: ?I want to add an ABBA song?
S: ?What album?? (Shows ?Waterloo?
and ?Arrival)
U: [DOWN]
S: ?Wat...?
U: [DOWN]
S: ?Arrival?
U: [OK]
S: ?what song?? (Shows ?Mamma Mia?
and ?Money Money Money?)
U: ?Mamma Mia?
A promotional demo film showing interactions
similar to the above is available2, courtesy of Talka-
matic AB.
Acknowledgments
The work reported here was funded DICO, Vinnova
project P28536-1. Additional funding was provided
by Talkamatic AB, and by CLT, the Centre of Lan-
guage Technology at the University of Gothenburg.
Dico II+ was implemented by the authors, Fredrik
Kronlid, Peter Ljunglo?f and Andreas Wiberg. The
authors gratefully acknowledge the assistance of
Volvo Technology AB and the DICO project group.
The GoDiS system is the property of Talkamatic
AB.
References
David Hjelm, Ann-Charlotte Forslund, Staffan Larsson,
and Andreas Wallentin. 2005. DJ GoDiS: Multimodal
menu-based dialogue in an asychronous isu system. In
Claire Gardent and Bertrand Gaiffe, editors, Proceed-
ings of the ninth workshop on the semantics and prag-
matics of dialogue.
2www.youtube.com/watch?v=yvLcQOeBAJE
95
Staffan Larsson and Jessica Villing. 2009. Multimodal
menu-based dialogue in dico ii. In Jens Edlund,
Joakim Gustafson, Anna Hjalmarsson, and Gabriel
Skantze, editors, Proceedings of DiaHolmia, 2009
Workshop on the Semantics and Pragmatics of Dia-
logue.
Staffan Larsson, Robin Cooper, and Stina Ericsson.
2001. menu2dialog. In Proceedings of the 2nd IJCAI
Workshop on Knowledge and Reasoning in Practical
Dialogue Systems, pages 41?45.
Staffan Larsson. 2002. Issue-based Dialogue Manage-
ment. Ph.D. thesis, Go?teborg University.
Anna Olsson and Jessica Villing. 2005. Dico - a dialogue
system for a cell phone. Master?s thesis, Department
of Linguistics, Goteborg University.
David Traum and Staffan Larsson. 2003. The informa-
tion state approach to dialogue management. In Ron-
nie Smith and Jan Kuppevelt, editors, Current and New
Directions in Discourse & Dialogue. Kluwer Aca-
demic Publishers.
Jessica Villing and Staffan Larsson. 2006. Dico - a mul-
timodal in-vehicle dialogue system. In D. Schlangen
and R. Fernandez, editors, Proceedings of the 10th
workshop on the semantics and pragmatics of dia-
logue.
96
