Proceedings of NAACL HLT 2009: Short Papers, pages 265?268,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Anchored Speech Recognition for Question Answering
Sibel Yaman1, Gokhan Tur2, Dimitra Vergyri2, Dilek Hakkani-Tur1,
Mary Harper3 and Wen Wang2
1 International Computer Science Institute
2 SRI International
3 Hopkins HLT Center of Excellence, University of Maryland
{sibel,dilek}@icsi.berkeley.edu,{gokhan,dverg,wwang}@speech.sri.com,mharper@casl.umd.edu
Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel question
answering system that searches for responses
from spoken documents such as broadcast
news stories and conversations. We propose a
novel two-step approach, which we refer to as
anchored speech recognition, to improve the
speech recognition of the sentence that sup-
ports the answer. In the first step, the sen-
tence that is highly likely to contain the an-
swer is retrieved among the spoken data that
has been transcribed using a generic automatic
speech recognition (ASR) system. This candi-
date sentence is then re-recognized in the sec-
ond step by constraining the ASR search space
using the lexical information in the question.
Our analysis showed that ASR errors caused
a 35% degradation in the performance of the
question answering system. Experiments with
the proposed anchored recognition approach
indicated a significant improvement in the per-
formance of the question answering module,
recovering 30% of the answers erroneous due
to ASR.
1 Introduction
In this paper, we focus on finding answers to user
questions from spoken documents, such as broad-
cast news stories and conversations. In a typical
question answering system, the user query is first
processed by an information retrieval (IR) system,
which finds out the most relevant documents among
massive document collections. Each sentence in
these relevant documents is processed to determine
whether or not it answers user questions. Once a
candidate sentence is determined, it is further pro-
cessed to extract the exact answer.
Answering factoid questions (i.e., questions like
?What is the capital of France??) using web makes
use of the redundancy of information (Whittaker et
al., 2006). However, when the document collection
is not large and when the queries are complex, as
in the task we focus on in this paper, more sophis-
ticated syntactic, semantic, and contextual process-
ing of documents and queries is performed to ex-
tract or construct the answer. Although much of the
work on question answering has been focused on
written texts, many emerging systems also enable
either spoken queries or spoken document collec-
tions (Lamel et al, 2008). The work we describe
in this paper also uses spoken data collections to
answer user questions but our focus is on improv-
ing speech recognition quality of the documents by
making use of the wording in the queries. Consider
the following example:
Manual transcription: We understand from Greek of-
ficials here that it was a Russian-made rocket which is
available in many countries but certainly not a weapon
used by the Greek military
ASR transcription: to stand firm greek officials here that
he was a a russian made rocket uh which is available in
many countries but certainly not a weapon used by he
great moments
Question: What is certainly not a weapon used by the
Greek military?
Answer: a Russian-made rocket
Answering such questions requires as good ASR
transcriptions as possible. In many cases, though,
there is one generic ASR system and a generic lan-
guage model to use. The approach proposed in this
paper attempts to improve the ASR performance by
re-recognizing the candidate sentence using lexical
information from the given question. The motiva-
265
tion is that the question and the candidate sentence
should share some common words, and therefore
the words of the answer sentence can be estimated
from the given question. For example, given a fac-
toid question such as: ?What is the tallest build-
ing in the world??, the sentence containing its an-
swer is highly likely to include word sequences such
as: ?The tallest building in the world is NAME?
or ?NAME, the highest building in the world, ...?,
where NAME is the exact answer.
Once the sentence supporting the answer is lo-
cated, it is re-recognized such that the candidate an-
swer is constrained to include parts of the question
word sequence. To achieve this, a word network is
formed to match the answer sentence to the given
question. Since the question words are taken as a ba-
sis to re-recognize the best-candidate sentence, the
question acts as an anchor, and therefore, we call
this approach anchored recognition.
In this work, we restrict out attention to questions
about the subject, the object and the locative, tempo-
ral, and causative arguments. For instance, the fol-
lowings are the questions of interest for the sentence
Obama invited Clinton to the White House to discuss
the recent developments:
Who invited Clinton to the White House?
Who did Obama invite to the White House?
Why did Obama invite Clinton to the White House?
2 Sentence Extraction
The goal in sentence extraction is determining the
sentence that is most likely to contain the answer
to the given question. Our sentence extractor relies
on non-stop word n-gram match between the ques-
tion and the candidate sentence, and returns the sen-
tence with the largest weighted average. Since not
all word n-grams have the same importance (e.g.
function vs. content words), we perform a weighted
sum as typically done in the IR literature, i.e., the
matching n-grams are weighted with respect to their
inverse document frequency (IDF) and length.
A major concern for accurate sentence extraction
is the robustness to speech recognition errors. An-
other concern is dealing with alternative word se-
quences for expressing the same meaning. To tackle
the second challenge, one can also include syn-
onyms, and compare paraphrases of the question and
the candidate answer. Since our main focus is on ro-
Predicate
Sentence ExtractionSemantic Roles
Answering Sentence
Answer Extraction Anchored Recognition
Document
Speech Recognition
Question
Searched Argument
Baseline
Proposed
Figure 1: Conceptual scheme of the baseline and pro-
posed information distillation system.
bustness to speech recognition errors, our data set
is limited to those questions that are worded very
similarly to the candidate answers. However, the
approach is more general, and can be extended to
tackle both challenges.
3 Answer Extraction
When the answer is to be extracted from ASR out-
put, the exact answers can be erroneous because (1)
the exact answer phrase might be misrecognized, (2)
other parts of the sentence might be misrecognized,
so the exact answer cannot be extracted either be-
cause parser fails or because the sentence cannot
match the query.
The question in the example in the Introduction
section is concerned with the object of the predicate
?is? rather than of the other predicates ?understand?
or ?was?. Therefore, a pre-processing step is needed
to correctly identify the object (in this example) that
is being asked, which is described next.
Once the best candidate sentence is estimated, a
syntactic parser (Harper and Huang, ) that also out-
puts function tags is used to parse both the ques-
tion and candidate answering sentence. The parser
is trained on Fisher, Switchboard, and speechified
Broadcast News, Brown, and Wall Street Journal
treebanks without punctuation and case to match in-
put the evaluation conditions.
An example of such a syntactic parse is given in
Figure 2. As shown there, the ?SBJ? marks the sur-
face subject of a given predicate, and the ?TMP? tag
marks the temporal argument. There are also the
?DIR? and ?LOC? tags indicating the locative ar-
gument and the ?PRP? tag indicating the causal ar-
gument. Such parses not only provide a mechanism
to extract information relating to the subject of the
predicate of interest, but also to extract the part of
266
Figure 2: The function tags assist in finding the subject,
object, and arguments of a given predicate.
the sentence that the question is about, in this ex-
ample ?a Russian-made rocket [which] is certainly
not a weapon used by the Greek military?. The ex-
traction of the relevant part is achieved by matching
the predicate of the question to the predicates of the
subsentences in the best candidate sentence. Once
such syntactic parses are obtained for the part of the
best-candidate sentence that matches the question, a
set of rules are used to extract the argument that can
answer the question.
4 Anchored Speech Recognition
In this study we employed a state-of-the-art broad-
cast news and conversations speech recognition
system (Stolcke et al, 2006). The recognizer
performs a total of seven decoding passes with
alternating acoustic front-ends: one based on
Mel frequency cepstral coefficients (MFCCs) aug-
mented with discriminatively estimated multilayer-
perceptron (MLP) features, and one based on per-
ceptual linear prediction (PLP) features. Acoustic
models are cross-adapted during recognition to out-
put from previous recognition stages, and the output
of the three final decoding steps are combined via
confusion networks.
Given a question whose answer we expect to find
in a given sentence, we construct a re-decoding net-
work to match that question. We call this process an-
chored speech recognition, where the anchor is the
question text. Note that this is different than forced
alignment, which enforces the recognition of an au-
dio stream to align with some given sentence. It is
used for detecting the start times of individual words
or for language learning applications to exploit the
acoustic model scores, since there is no need for a
language model.
Our approach is also different than the so-called
flexible alignment (Finke and Waibel, 1997), which
is basically forced alignment that allows skipping
any part of the given sentence, replacing it with a re-
ject token, or inserting hesitations in between words.
In our task, we require all the words in the ques-
tion to be in the best-candidate sentence without any
skips or insertions. If we allow flexible alignment,
then any part of the question could be deleted. In the
proposed anchored speech recognition scheme, we
allow only pauses and rejects between words, but do
not allow any deletions or skips.
The algorithm for extracting anchored recognition
hypotheses is as follows: (i) Construct new recogni-
tion and rescoring language models (LMs) by inter-
polating the baseline LMs with those trained from
only the question sentences and use the new LM
to generate lattices - this aims to bias the recogni-
tion towards word phrases that are included in the
questions. (ii) Construct for each question an ?an-
chored? word network that matches the word se-
quence of the question, allowing any other word se-
quence around it. For example if the question is
WHAT did Bruce Gordon say?, we construct a word
network to match Bruce Gordon said ANYTHING
where ?ANYTHING? is a filler that allows any word
(a word loop). (iii) Intersect the recognition lat-
tices from step (i) with the anchored network for
each question in (ii), thus extracting from the lattice
only the paths that match as answers to the ques-
tion. Then rescore that new lattice with higher order
LM and cross-word adapted acoustic models to get
the best path. (iv) If the intersection part in (iii) fails
then we use a more constrained recognition network:
Starting with the anchored network in (ii) we first
limit the vocabulary in the ANYTHING word-loop
sub-network to only the words that were included in
the recognition lattice from step (i). Then we com-
pose this network with the bigram LM (from step (i))
to add bigram probabilities to the network. Vocab-
ulary limitation is done for efficiency reasons. We
also allow optional filler words and pauses to this
network to allow for hesitations, non-speech events
and pauses within the utterance we are trying to
match. This may limit somewhat the potential im-
provement from this approach and we are working
267
Question Type ASR Output Manual Trans.
Subject 85% 98%
Object 75% 90%
Locative Arg. 81% 93%
Temporal Arg. 94% 98%
Reason 86% 100%
Total 83% 95%
Table 1: Performance figures for the sentence extraction
system using automatic and manual transcriptions.
Question ASR Manual Anchored
Type Output Trans. Output
Subject 51% 77% 61%
Object 41% 73% 51%
Locative Arg. 18% 22% 22%
Temporal Arg. 55% 73% 63%
Reason 26% 47% 26%
Total 44% 68% 52%
Table 2: Performance figures for the answer extraction
system using automatic and manual transcriptions com-
pared with anchored recognition outputs.
towards enhancing the vocabulary with more candi-
date words that could contain the spoken words in
the region. (v) Then we perform recognition with
the new anchored network and extract the best path
through it. Thus we enforce partial alignment of
the audio with the question given, while the regu-
lar recognition LM is still used for the parts outside
the question.
5 Experiments and Results
We performed experiments using a set of questions
and broadcast audio documents released by LDC for
the DARPA-funded GALE project Phase 3. In this
dataset we have 482 questions (177 subject, 160 ob-
ject, 73 temporal argument, 49 locative argument,
and 23 reason) from 90 documents. The ASR word
error rate (WER) for the sentences from which the
questions are constructed is 37% with respect to
noisy closed captions. To factor out IR noise we as-
sumed that the target document is given.
Table 1 presents the performance of the sentence
extraction system using manual and automatic tran-
scriptions. As seen, the system is almost perfect
when there is no noise, however performance de-
grades about 12% with the ASR output.
The next set of experiments demonstrate the per-
formance of the answer extraction system when the
correct sentence is given using both automatic and
manual transcriptions. As seen from Table 2, the
answer extraction performance degrades by about
35% relative using the ASR output. However, using
the anchored recognition approach, this improves to
23%, reducing the effect of the ASR noise signifi-
cantly1 by more than 30% relative. This is shown
in the last column of this table, demonstrating the
use of the proposed approach. We observe that the
WER of the sentences for which we now get cor-
rected answers is reduced from 45% to 28% with
this approach, a reduction of 37% relative.
6 Conclusions
We have presented a question answering system
for querying spoken documents with a novel an-
chored speech recognition approach, which aims to
re-decode an utterance given the question. The pro-
posed approach significantly lowers the error rate for
answer extraction. Our future work involves han-
dling audio in foreign languages, that is robust to
both ASR and machine translation noise.
Acknowledgments: This work was funded by DARPA un-
der contract No. HR0011-06-C-0023. Any conclusions or rec-
ommendations are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of DARPA.
References
M. Finke and A. Waibel. 1997. Flexible transcription
alignment. In Proceedings of the IEEE ASRU Work-
shop, Santa Barbara, CA.
M. Harper and Z. Huang. Chinese Statistical Parsing,
chapter To appear.
L. Lamel, S. Rosset, C. Ayache, D. Mostefa, J. Turmo,
and P. Comas. 2008. Question answering on speech
transcriptions: the qast evaluation in clef. In Proceed-
ings of the LREC, Marrakech, Morocco.
A. Stolcke, B. Chen, H. Franco, V. R. R. Gadde,
M. Graciarena, M.-Y. Hwang, K. Kirchhoff, N. Mor-
gan, X. Lin, T. Ng, M. Ostendorf, K. Sonmez,
A. Venkataraman, D. Vergyri, W. Wang, J. Zheng,
and Q. Zhu. 2006. Recent innovations in speech-
to-text transcription at SRI-ICSI-UW. IEEE Trans-
actions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing,
14(5):1729?1744, September.
E. W. D. Whittaker, J. Mrozinski, and S. Furui. 2006.
Factoid question answering with web, mobile and
speech interfaces. In Proceedings of the NAACL/HLT,
Morristown, NJ.
1according to the Z-test with 0.95 confidence interval
268
Proceedings of the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and the 4th IJCNLP of the AFNLP, pages 423?431,
Suntec, Singapore, 2-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Who, What, When, Where, Why?  
Comparing Multiple Approaches to the Cross-Lingual 5W Task 
Kristen Parton*, Kathleen R. McKeown*, Bob Coyne*, Mona T. Diab*,  
Ralph Grishman?, Dilek Hakkani-T?r?, Mary Harper?, Heng Ji?, Wei Yun Ma*,  
Adam Meyers?, Sara Stolbach*, Ang Sun?, Gokhan Tur?, Wei Xu? and Sibel Yaman? 
 
*Columbia University 
New York, NY, USA 
{kristen, kathy, 
coyne, mdiab, ma, 
sara}@cs.columbia.edu 
 
?New York University 
New York, NY, USA 
{grishman, meyers, 
asun, xuwei} 
@cs.nyu.edu 
?International Computer 
Science Institute 
Berkeley, CA, USA 
{dilek, sibel} 
@icsi.berkeley.edu 
 
?Human Lang. Tech. Ctr. of 
Excellence, Johns Hopkins 
and U. of Maryland, 
College Park  
mharper@umd.edu 
?City University of  
New York 
New York, NY, USA 
hengji@cs.qc.cuny.edu 
 
 
?SRI International 
Palo Alto, CA, USA 
gokhan@speech.sri.com 
 
 
  
Abstract 
Cross-lingual tasks are especially difficult 
due to the compounding effect of errors in 
language processing and errors in machine 
translation (MT). In this paper, we present an 
error analysis of a new cross-lingual task: the 
5W task, a sentence-level understanding task 
which seeks to return the English 5W's (Who, 
What, When, Where and Why) corresponding 
to a Chinese sentence. We analyze systems 
that we developed, identifying specific prob-
lems in language processing and MT that 
cause errors. The best cross-lingual 5W sys-
tem was still 19% worse than the best mono-
lingual 5W system, which shows that MT 
significantly degrades sentence-level under-
standing. Neither source-language nor target-
language analysis was able to circumvent 
problems in MT, although each approach had 
advantages relative to the other. A detailed 
error analysis across multiple systems sug-
gests directions for future research on the 
problem. 
1 Introduction 
In our increasingly global world, it is ever more 
likely for a mono-lingual speaker to require in-
formation that is only available in a foreign lan-
guage document. Cross-lingual applications ad-
dress this need by presenting information in the 
speaker?s language even when it originally ap-
peared in some other language, using machine 
translation (MT) in the process. In this paper, we 
present an evaluation and error analysis of a 
cross-lingual application that we developed for a 
government-sponsored evaluation, the 5W task. 
The 5W task seeks to summarize the informa-
tion in a natural language sentence by distilling it 
into the answers to the 5W questions: Who, 
What, When, Where and Why. To solve this 
problem, a number of different problems in NLP 
must be addressed: predicate identification, ar-
gument extraction, attachment disambiguation, 
location and time expression recognition, and 
(partial) semantic role labeling. In this paper, we 
address the cross-lingual 5W task: given a 
source-language sentence, return the 5W?s trans-
lated (comprehensibly) into the target language. 
Success in this task requires a synergy of suc-
cessful MT and answer selection.  
The questions we address in this paper are: 
? How much does machine translation (MT) 
degrade the performance of cross-lingual 
5W systems, as compared to monolingual 
performance? 
? Is it better to do source-language analysis 
and then translate, or do target-language 
analysis on MT? 
? Which specific problems in language 
processing and/or MT cause errors in 5W 
answers?  
In this evaluation, we compare several differ-
ent approaches to the cross-lingual 5W task, two 
that work on the target language (English) and 
one that works in the source language (Chinese). 
423
A central question for many cross-lingual appli-
cations is whether to process in the source lan-
guage and then translate the result, or translate 
documents first and then process the translation. 
Depending on how errorful the translation is, 
results may be more accurate if models are de-
veloped for the source language. However, if 
there are more resources in the target language, 
then the translate-then-process approach may be 
more appropriate. We present a detailed analysis, 
both quantitative and qualitative, of how the ap-
proaches differ in performance.  
We also compare system performance on hu-
man translation (which we term reference trans-
lations) and MT of the same data in order to de-
termine how much MT degrades system per-
formance. Finally, we do an in-depth analysis of 
the errors in our 5W approaches, both on the 
NLP side and the MT side. Our results provide 
explanations for why different approaches suc-
ceed, along with indications of where future ef-
fort should be spent. 
2 Prior Work 
The cross-lingual 5W task is closely related to 
cross-lingual information retrieval and cross-
lingual question answering (Wang and Oard 
2006; Mitamura et al 2008). In these tasks, a 
system is presented a query or question in the 
target language and asked to return documents or 
answers from a corpus in the source language. 
Although MT may be used in solving this task, it 
is only used by the algorithms ? the final evalua-
tion is done in the source language. However, in 
many real-life situations, such as global business, 
international tourism, or intelligence work, users 
may not be able to read the source language. In 
these cases, users must rely on MT to understand 
the system response. (Parton et al 2008) exam-
ine the case of ?translingual? information re-
trieval, where evaluation is done on translated 
results in the target language. In cross-lingual 
information extraction (Sudo et al 2004) the 
evaluation is also done on MT, but the goal is to 
learn knowledge from a large corpus, rather than 
analyzing individual sentences.  
The 5W task is also closely related to Seman-
tic Role Labeling (SRL), which aims to effi-
ciently and effectively derive semantic informa-
tion from text. SRL identifies predicates and 
their arguments in a sentence, and assigns roles 
to each argument. For example, in the sentence 
?I baked a cake yesterday.?, the predicate 
?baked? has three arguments. ?I? is the subject of 
the predicate, ?a cake? is the object and ?yester-
day? is a temporal argument.  
Since the release of large data resources anno-
tated with relevant levels of semantic informa-
tion, such as the FrameNet (Baker et al, 1998) 
and PropBank corpora (Kingsbury and Palmer, 
2003), efficient approaches to SRL have been 
developed (Carreras and Marquez, 2005). Most 
approaches to the problem of SRL follow the 
Gildea and Jurafsky (2002) model. First, for a 
given predicate, the SRL system identifies its 
arguments' boundaries. Second, the Argument 
types are classified depending on an adopted 
lexical resource such as PropBank or FrameNet. 
Both steps are based on supervised learning over 
labeled gold standard data. A final step uses heu-
ristics to resolve inconsistencies when applying 
both steps simultaneously to the test data.  
Since many of the SRL resources are English, 
most of the SRL systems to date have been for 
English. There has been work in other languages 
such as German and Chinese (Erk 2006; Sun 
2004; Xue and Palmer 2005). The systems for 
the other languages follow the successful models 
devised for English, e.g. (Gildea and Palmer, 
2002; Chen and Rambow, 2003; Moschitti, 2004; 
Xue and Palmer, 2004; Haghighi et al, 2005). 
3 The Chinese-English 5W Task 
3.1 5W Task Description 
We participated in the 5W task as part of the 
DARPA GALE (Global Autonomous Language 
Exploitation) project. The goal is to identify the 
5W?s (Who, What, When, Where and Why) for a 
complete sentence. The motivation for the 5W 
task is that, as their origin in journalism suggests, 
the 5W?s cover the key information nuggets in a 
sentence. If a system can isolate these pieces of 
information successfully, then it can produce a 
pr?cis of the basic meaning of the sentence. Note 
that this task differs from QA tasks, where 
?Who? and ?What? usually refer to definition 
type questions. In this task, the 5W?s refer to se-
mantic roles within a sentence, as defined in Ta-
ble 1.  
In order to get al 5W?s for a sentence correct, 
a system must identify a top-level predicate, ex-
tract the correct arguments, and resolve attach-
ment ambiguity. In the case of multiple top-level 
predicates, any of the top-level predicates may be 
chosen. In the case of passive verbs, the Who is 
the agent (often expressed as a ?by clause?, or 
not stated), and the What should include the syn-
tactic subject.  
424
Answers are judged Correct1 if they identify a 
correct null argument or correctly extract an ar-
gument that is present in the sentence. Answers 
are not penalized for including extra text, such as 
prepositional phrases or subordinate clauses, 
unless the extra text includes text from another 
answer or text from another top-level predicate. 
In sentence 2a in Table 2, returning ?bought and 
cooked? for the What would be Incorrect. Simi-
larly, returning ?bought the fish at the market? 
for the What would also be Incorrect, since it 
contains the Where. Answers may also be judged 
Partial, meaning that only part of the answer was 
returned. For example, if the What contains the 
predicate but not the logical object, it is Partial.  
Since each sentence may have multiple correct 
sets of 5W?s, it is not straightforward to produce 
a gold-standard corpus for automatic evaluation. 
One would have to specify answers for each pos-
sible top-level predicate, as well as which parts 
of the sentence are optional and which are not 
allowed. This also makes creating training data 
for system development problematic. For exam-
ple, in Table 2, the sentence in 2a and 2b is the 
same, but there are two possible sets of correct 
answers. Since we could not rely on a gold-
standard corpus, we used manual annotation to 
judge our 5W system, described in section 5. 
3.2 The Cross-Lingual 5W Task 
In the cross-lingual 5W task, a system is given a 
sentence in the source language and asked to 
produce the 5W?s in the target language. In this 
task, both machine translation (MT) and 5W ex-
traction must succeed in order to produce correct 
answers. One motivation behind the cross-lingual 
5W task is MT evaluation. Unlike word- or 
phrase-overlap measures such as BLEU, the 5W 
evaluation takes into account ?concept? or ?nug-
get? translation. Of course, only the top-level 
predicate and arguments are evaluated, so it is 
not a complete evaluation. But it seeks to get at 
the understandability of the MT output, rather 
than just n-gram overlap. 
Translation exacerbates the problem of auto-
matically evaluating 5W systems. Since transla-
tion introduces paraphrase, rewording and sen-
tence restructuring, the 5W?s may change from 
one translation of a sentence to another transla-
tion of the same sentence. In some cases, roles 
may swap. For example, in Table 2, sentences 1a 
and 1b could be valid translations of the same 
                                                 
1
 The specific guidelines for determining correctness 
were formulated by BAE.  
Chinese sentence. They contain the same infor-
mation, but the 5W answers are different. Also, 
translations may produce answers that are textu-
ally similar to correct answers, but actually differ 
in meaning. These differences complicate proc-
essing in the source followed by translation. 
 
Example: On Tuesday, President Obama met with 
French President Sarkozy in Paris to discuss the 
economic crisis. 
W Definition Example  
answer 
WHO Logical subject of the 
top-level predicate in 
WHAT, or null. 
President 
Obama 
WHAT One of the top-level 
predicates in the sen-
tence, and the predi-
cate?s logical object. 
met with 
French Presi-
dent Sarkozy 
WHEN ARGM-TMP of the 
top-level predicate in 
WHAT, or null. 
On Tuesday 
WHERE ARGM-LOC of the 
top-level predicate in 
WHAT, or null. 
in Paris 
WHY ARGM-CAU of the 
top-level predicate in 
WHAT, or null. 
to discuss the 
economic crisis 
Table 1. Definition of the 5W task, and 5W answers 
from the example sentence above. 
4 5W System 
We developed a 5W combination system that 
was based on five other 5W systems. We se-
lected four of these different systems for evalua-
tion: the final combined system (which was our 
submission for the official evaluation), two sys-
tems that did analysis in the target-language 
(English), and one system that did analysis in the 
source language (Chinese). In this section, we 
describe the individual systems that we evalu-
ated, the combination strategy, the parsers that 
we tuned for the task, and the MT systems.  
 Sentence WHO WHAT 
1a Mary bought a cake 
from Peter. 
Mary bought a 
cake 
1b Peter sold Mary a 
cake. 
Peter sold Mary 
2a I bought the fish at 
the market yesterday 
and cooked it today. 
I bought the 
fish 
[WHEN: 
yesterday] 
2b I bought the fish at 
the market yesterday 
and cooked it today. 
I cooked it 
[WHEN: 
today] 
Table 2. Example 5W answers. 
425
4.1 Latent Annotation Parser 
For this work, we have re-implemented and en-
hanced the Berkeley parser (Petrov and Klein 
2007) in several ways: (1) developed a new 
method to handle rare words in English and Chi-
nese; (2) developed a new model of unknown 
Chinese words based on characters in the word; 
(3) increased robustness by adding adaptive 
modification of pruning thresholds and smooth-
ing of word emission probabilities. While the 
enhancements to the parser are important for ro-
bustness and accuracy, it is even more important 
to train grammars matched to the conditions of 
use. For example, parsing a Chinese sentence 
containing full-width punctuation with a parser 
trained on half-width punctuation reduces accu-
racy by over 9% absolute F. In English, parsing 
accuracy is seriously compromised by training a 
grammar with punctuation and case to process 
sentences without them.  
We developed grammars for English and Chi-
nese trained specifically for each genre by sub-
sampling from available treebanks (for English, 
WSJ, BN, Brown, Fisher, and Switchboard; for 
Chinese, CTB5) and transforming them for a 
particular genre (e.g., for informal speech, we 
replaced symbolic expressions with verbal forms 
and remove punctuation and case) and by utiliz-
ing a large amount of genre-matched self-labeled 
training parses. Given these genre-specific 
parses, we extracted chunks and POS tags by 
script. We also trained grammars with a subset of 
function tags annotated in the treebank that indi-
cate case role information (e.g., SBJ, OBJ, LOC, 
MNR) in order to produce function tags.   
4.2 Individual 5W Systems 
The English systems were developed for the 
monolingual 5W task and not modified to handle 
MT. They used hand-crafted rules on the output 
of the latent annotation parser to extract the 5Ws.  
English-function used the function tags from 
the parser to map parser constituents to the 5Ws. 
First the Who, When, Where and Why were ex-
tracted, and then the remaining pieces of the sen-
tence were returned as the What. The goal was to 
make sure to return a complete What answer and 
avoid missing the object. 
English-LF, on the other hand, used a system 
developed over a period of eight years (Meyers 
et al 2001) to map from the parser?s syntactic 
constituents into logical grammatical relations 
(GLARF), and then extracted the 5Ws from the 
logical form. As a back-up, it also extracted 
GLARF relations from another English-treebank 
trained parser, the Charniak parser (Charniak 
2001). After the parses were both converted to 
the 5Ws, they were then merged, favoring the 
system that: recognized the passive, filled more 
5W slots or produced shorter 5W slots (provid-
ing that the WHAT slot consisted of more than 
just the verb). A third back-up method extracted 
5Ws from part-of-speech tag patterns. Unlike 
English-function, English-LF explicitly tried to 
extract the shortest What possible, provided there 
was a verb and a possible object, in order to 
avoid multiple predicates or other 5W answers.  
Chinese-align uses the latent annotation 
parser (trained for Chinese) to parse the Chinese 
sentences. A dependency tree converter (Johans-
son and Nuges 2007) was applied to the constitu-
ent-based parse trees to obtain the dependency 
relations and determine top-level predicates. A 
set of hand-crafted dependency rules based on 
observation of Chinese OntoNotes were used to 
map from the Chinese function tags into Chinese 
5Ws.  Finally, Chinese-align used the alignments 
of three separate MT systems to translate the 
5Ws: a phrase-based system, a hierarchical 
phrase-based system, and a syntax augmented 
hierarchical phrase-based system. Chinese-align 
faced a number of problems in using the align-
ments, including the fact that the best MT did not 
always have the best alignment. Since the predi-
cate is essential, it tried to detect when verbs 
were deleted in MT, and back-off to a different 
MT system. It also used strategies for finding 
and correcting noisy alignments, and for filtering 
When/Where answers from Who and What.  
4.3 Hybrid System 
A merging algorithm was learned based on a de-
velopment test set. The algorithm selected all 
5W?s from a single system, rather than trying to 
merge W?s from different systems, since the 
predicates may vary across systems. For each 
document genre (described in section 5.4), we 
ranked the systems by performance on the devel-
opment data. We also experimented with a vari-
ety of features (for instance, does ?What? include 
a verb). The best-performing features were used 
in combination with the ranked list of priority 
systems to create a rule-based merger. 
4.4 MT Systems 
The MT Combination system used by both of the 
English 5W systems combined up to nine sepa-
rate MT systems. System weights for combina-
tion were optimized together with the language 
426
model score and word penalty for a combination 
of BLEU and TER (2*(1-BLEU) + TER). Res-
coring was applied after system combination us-
ing large language models and lexical trigger 
models. Of the nine systems, six were phrased-
based systems (one of these used chunk-level 
reordering of the Chinese, one used word sense 
disambiguation, and one used unsupervised Chi-
nese word segmentation), two were hierarchical 
phrase-based systems, one was a string-to-
dependency system, one was syntax-augmented, 
and one was a combination of two other systems. 
Bleu scores on the government supplied test set 
in December 2008 were 35.2 for formal text, 
29.2 for informal text, 33.2 for formal speech, 
and 27.6 for informal speech. More details may 
be found in (Matusov et al 2009). 
5 Methods 
5.1 5W Systems 
For the purposes of this evaluation2, we com-
pared the output of 4 systems: English-Function, 
English-LF, Chinese-align, and the combined 
system. Each English system was also run on 
reference translations of the Chinese sentence. 
So for each sentence in the evaluation corpus, 
there were 6 systems that each provided 5Ws. 
5.2 5W Answer Annotation 
For each 5W output, annotators were presented 
with the reference translation, the MT version, 
and the 5W answers. The 5W system names 
were hidden from the annotators. Annotators had 
to select ?Correct?, ?Partial? or ?Incorrect? for 
each W. For answers that were Partial or Incor-
rect, annotators had to further specify the source 
of the error based on several categories (de-
scribed in section 6). All three annotators were 
native English speakers who were not system 
developers for any of the 5W systems that were 
being evaluated (to avoid biased grading, or as-
signing more blame to the MT system). None of 
the annotators knew Chinese, so all of the judg-
ments were based on the reference translations. 
After one round of annotation, we measured 
inter-annotator agreement on the Correct, Partial, 
or Incorrect judgment only. The kappa value was 
0.42, which was lower than we expected. An-
other surprise was that the agreement was lower 
                                                 
2
 Note that an official evaluation was also performed by 
DARPA and BAE. This evaluation provides more fine-
grained detail on error types and gives results for the differ-
ent approaches. 
for When, Where and Why (?=0.31) than for 
Who or What (?=0.48). We found that, in cases 
where a system would get both Who and What 
wrong, it was often ambiguous how the remain-
ing W?s should be graded. Consider the sentence: 
?He went to the store yesterday and cooked lasa-
gna today.? A system might return erroneous 
Who and What answers, and return Where as ?to 
the store? and When as ?today.? Since Where 
and When apply to different predicates, they 
cannot both be correct. In order to be consistent, 
if a system returned erroneous Who and What 
answers, we decided to mark the When, Where 
and Why answers Incorrect by default. We added 
clarifications to the guidelines and discussed ar-
eas of confusion, and then the annotators re-
viewed and updated their judgments.  
After this round of annotating, ?=0.83 on the 
Correct, Partial, Incorrect judgments. The re-
maining disagreements were genuinely ambigu-
ous cases, where a sentence could be interpreted 
multiple ways, or the MT could be understood in 
various ways. There was higher agreement on 
5W?s answers from the reference text compared 
to MT text, since MT is inherently harder to 
judge and some annotators were more flexible 
than others in grading garbled MT. 
5.3 5W Error Annotation 
In addition to judging the system answers by the 
task guidelines, annotators were asked to provide 
reason(s) an answer was wrong by selecting from 
a list of predefined errors. Annotators were asked 
to use their best judgment to ?assign blame? to 
the 5W system, the MT, or both. There were six 
types of system errors and four types of MT er-
rors, and the annotator could select any number 
of errors. (Errors are described further in section 
6.) For instance, if the translation was correct, 
but the 5W system still failed, the blame would 
be assigned to the system. If the 5W system 
picked an incorrectly translated argument (e.g., 
?baked a moon? instead of ?baked a cake?), then 
the error would be assigned to the MT system. 
Annotators could also assign blame to both sys-
tems, to indicate that they both made mistakes.  
Since this annotation task was a 10-way selec-
tion, with multiple selections possible, there were 
some disagreements. However, if categorized 
broadly into 5W System errors only, MT errors 
only, and both 5W System and MT errors, then 
the annotators had a substantial level of agree-
ment (?=0.75 for error type, on sentences where 
both annotators indicated an error).  
427
5.4 5 W Corpus 
The full evaluation corpus is 350 documents, 
roughly evenly divided between four genres: 
formal text (newswire), informal text (blogs and 
newsgroups), formal speech (broadcast news) 
and informal speech (broadcast conversation). 
For this analysis, we randomly sampled docu-
ments to judge from each of the genres. There 
were 50 documents (249 sentences) that were 
judged by a single annotator. A subset of that set, 
with 22 documents and 103 sentences, was 
judged by two annotators. In comparing the re-
sults from one annotator to the results from both 
annotators, we found substantial agreement. 
Therefore, we present results from the single an-
notator so we can do a more in-depth analysis. 
Since each sentence had 5W?s, and there were 6 
systems that were compared, there were 7,500 
single-annotator judgments over 249 sentences. 
6 Results 
Figure 1 shows the cross-lingual performance 
(on MT) of all the systems for each 5W. The best 
monolingual performance (on human transla-
tions) is shown as a dashed line (% Correct 
only). If a system returned Incorrect answers for 
Who and What, then the other answers were 
marked Incorrect (as explained in section 5.2). 
For the last 3W?s, the majority of errors were due 
to this (details in Figure 1), so our error analysis 
focuses on the Who and What questions. 
6.1 Monolingual 5W Performance 
To establish a monolingual baseline, the Eng-
lish 5W system was run on reference (human) 
translations of the Chinese text. For each partial 
or incorrect answer, annotators could select one 
or more of these reasons: 
? Wrong predicate or multiple predicates. 
? Answer contained another 5W answer. 
? Passive handled wrong (WHO/WHAT). 
? Answer missed. 
? Argument attached to wrong predicate. 
Figure 1 shows the performance of the best 
monolingual system for each 5W as a dashed 
line. The What question was the hardest, since it 
requires two pieces of information (the predicate 
and object). The When, Where and Why ques-
tions were easier, since they were null most of 
the time. (In English OntoNotes 2.0, 38% of sen-
tences have a When, 15% of sentences have a 
Where, and only 2.6% of sentences have a Why.) 
The most common monolingual system error on 
these three questions was a missed answer, ac-
counting for all of the Where errors, all but one 
Why error and 71% of the When errors. The re-
maining When errors usually occurred when the 
system assumed the wrong sense for adverbs 
(such as ?then? or ?just?). 
 Missing Other 
5W 
Wrong/Multiple 
Predicates 
Wrong 
REF-func 37 29 22 7 
REF-LF 54 20 17 13 
MT-func 18 18 18 8 
MT-LF 26 19 10 11 
Chinese 23 17 14 8 
Hybrid 13 17 15 12 
Table 3. Percentages of Who/What errors attributed to 
each system error type. 
The top half of Table 3 shows the reasons at-
tributed to the Who/What errors for the reference 
corpus. Since English-LF preferred shorter an-
swers, it frequently missed answers or parts of 
Figure 1. System performance on each 5W. ?Partial? indicates that part of the answer was missing. Dashed lines 
show the performance of the best monolingual system (% Correct on human translations). For the last 3W?s, the 
percent of answers that were Incorrect ?by default? were: 30%, 24%, 27% and 22%, respectively, and 8% for the 
best monolingual system 
60 60 56 66
36 40 38 42
56 59 59 64 63
70 66 73 68 75 71 78
19201914
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
En
g-
fu
nc
En
g-
LF
Ch
in
es
e
Hy
br
id
En
g-
fu
nc
En
g-
LF
Ch
in
es
e
Hy
br
id
En
g-
fu
nc
En
g-
LF
Ch
in
es
e
Hy
br
id
En
g-
fu
nc
En
g-
LF
Ch
in
es
e
Hy
br
id
En
g-
fu
nc
En
g-
LF
Ch
in
es
e
Hy
br
id
WHO WHAT WHEN WHERE WHY
Partia l
Correct
90
75 81
83 90
Best 
mono-
lingual
428
answers. English-LF also had more Partial an-
swers on the What question: 66% Correct and 
12% Partial, versus 75% Correct and 1% Partial 
for English-function. On the other hand, English-
function was more likely to return answers that 
contained incorrect extra information, such as 
another 5W or a second predicate. 
6.2 Effect of MT on 5W Performance 
The cross-lingual 5W task requires that systems 
return intelligible responses that are semantically 
equivalent to the source sentence (or, in the case 
of this evaluation, equivalent to the reference).  
As can be seen in Figure 1, MT degrades the 
performance of the 5W systems significantly, for 
all question types, and for all systems. Averaged 
over all questions, the best monolingual system 
does 19% better than the best cross-lingual sys-
tem. Surprisingly, even though English-function 
outperformed English-LF on the reference data, 
English-LF does consistently better on MT. This 
is likely due to its use of multiple back-off meth-
ods when the parser failed.  
6.3 Source-Language vs. Target-Language 
The Chinese system did slightly worse than ei-
ther English system overall, but in the formal 
text genre, it outperformed both English systems.  
Although the accuracies for the Chinese and 
English systems are similar, the answers vary a 
lot. Nearly half (48%) of the answers can be an-
swered correctly by both the English system and 
the Chinese system. But 22% of the time, the 
English system returned the correct answer when 
the Chinese system did not. Conversely, 10% of 
the answers were returned correctly by the Chi-
nese system and not the English systems. The 
hybrid system described in section 4.2 attempts 
to exploit these complementary advantages. 
After running the hybrid system, 61% of the 
answers were from English-LF, 25% from Eng-
lish-function, 7% from Chinese-align, and the 
remaining 7% were from the other Chinese 
methods (not evaluated here). The hybrid did 
better than its parent systems on all 5Ws, and the 
numbers above indicate that further improvement 
is possible with a better combination strategy.  
6.4 Cross-Lingual 5W Error Analysis 
For each Partial or Incorrect answer, annotators 
were asked to select system errors, translation 
errors, or both. (Further analysis is necessary to 
distinguish between ASR errors and MT errors.) 
The translation errors considered were: 
? Word/phrase deleted. 
? Word/phrase mistranslated. 
? Word order mixed up. 
? MT unreadable. 
Table 4 shows the translation reasons attrib-
uted to the Who/What errors. For all systems, the 
errors were almost evenly divided between sys-
tem-only, MT-only and both, although the Chi-
nese system had a higher percentage of system-
only errors. The hybrid system was able to over-
come many system errors (for example, in Table 
2, only 13% of the errors are due to missing an-
swers), but still suffered from MT errors. 
Table 4. Percentages of Who/What errors by each 
system attributed to each translation error type. 
Mistranslation was the biggest translation 
problem for all the systems. Consider the first 
example in Figure 3. Both English systems cor-
rectly extracted the Who and the When, but for 
Mistrans-
lation 
Deletion Word 
Order 
Unreadable 
MT-func 34 18 24 18 
MT-LF 29 22 21 14 
Chinese 32 17 9 13 
Hybrid 35 19 27 18 
MT: After several rounds of reminded, I was a little bit 
Ref: After several hints, it began to come back to me. 
 ??????,?????????? 
MT: The Guizhou province, within a certain bank robber, under the watchful eyes of a weak woman, and, with a 
knife stabbed the woman. 
Ref: I saw that in a bank in Guizhou Province, robbers seized a vulnerable young woman in front of a group of 
onlookers and stabbed the woman with a knife. 
 ?????????,?????????,???????,??,???????? 
MT: Woke up after it was discovered that the property is not more than eleven people do not even said that the 
memory of the receipt of the country into the country. 
Ref: Well, after waking up, he found everything was completely changed. Apart from having additional eleven 
grandchildren, even the motherland as he recalled has changed from a socialist country to a capitalist country. 
 ?????????????,?????????,????????????????????????? 
Figure 3 Example sentences that presented problems for the 5W systems. 
 
429
What they returned ?was a little bit.? This is the 
correct predicate for the sentence, but it does not 
match the meaning of the reference. The Chinese 
5W system was able to select a better translation, 
and instead returned ?remember a little bit.? 
Garbled word order was chosen for 21-24% of 
the target-language system Who/What errors, but 
only 9% of the source-language system 
Who/What errors. The source-language word 
order problems tended to be local, within-phrase 
errors (e.g., ?the dispute over frozen funds? was 
translated as ?the freezing of disputes?). The tar-
get-language system word order problems were 
often long-distance problems. For example, the 
second sentence in Figure 3 has many phrases in 
common with the reference translation, but the 
overall sentence makes no sense. The watchful 
eyes actually belong to a ?group of onlookers? 
(deleted). Ideally, the robber would have 
?stabbed the woman? ?with a knife,? rather than 
vice versa. Long-distance phrase movement is a 
common problem in Chinese-English MT, and 
many MT systems try to handle it (e.g., Wang et 
al. 2007). By doing analysis in the source lan-
guage, the Chinese 5W system is often able to 
avoid this problem ? for example, it successfully 
returned ?robbers? ?grabbed a weak woman? for 
the Who/What of this sentence. 
Although we expected that the Chinese system 
would have fewer problems with MT deletion, 
since it could choose from three different MT 
versions, MT deletion was a problem for all sys-
tems. In looking more closely at the deletions, 
we noticed that over half of deletions were verbs 
that were completely missing from the translated 
sentence. Since MT systems are tuned for word-
based overlap measures (such as BLEU), verb 
deletion is penalized equally as, for example, 
determiner deletion. Intuitively, a verb deletion 
destroys the central meaning of a sentence, while 
a determiner is rarely necessary for comprehen-
sion. Other kinds of deletions included noun 
phrases, pronouns, named entities, negations and 
longer connecting phrases.  
Deletion also affected When and Where. De-
leting particles such as ?in? and ?when? that in-
dicate a location or temporal argument caused 
the English systems to miss the argument. Word 
order problems in MT also caused attachment 
ambiguity in When and Where. 
The ?unreadable? category was an option of 
last resort for very difficult MT sentences. The 
third sentence in Figure 3 is an example where 
ASR and MT errors compounded to create an 
unparseable sentence.  
7 Conclusions 
In our evaluation of various 5W systems, we dis-
covered several characteristics of the task. The 
What answer was the hardest for all systems, 
since it is difficult to include enough information 
to cover the top-level predicate and object, with-
out getting penalized for including too much. 
The challenge in the When, Where and Why 
questions is due to sparsity ? these responses 
occur in much fewer sentences than Who and 
What, so systems most often missed these an-
swers. Since this was a new task, this first 
evaluation showed clear issues on the language 
analysis side that can be improved in the future. 
The best cross-lingual 5W system was still 
19% worse than the best monolingual 5W sys-
tem, which shows that MT significantly degrades 
sentence-level understanding. A serious problem 
in MT for systems was deletion. Chinese con-
stituents that were never translated caused seri-
ous problems, even when individual systems had 
strategies to recover. When the verb was deleted, 
no top level predicate could be found and then all 
5Ws were wrong.  
One of our main research questions was 
whether to extract or translate first. We hypothe-
sized that doing source-language analysis would 
be more accurate, given the noise in Chinese 
MT, but the systems performed about the same. 
This is probably because the English tools (logi-
cal form extraction and parser) were more ma-
ture and accurate than the Chinese tools.  
Although neither source-language nor target-
language analysis was able to circumvent prob-
lems in MT, each approach had advantages rela-
tive to the other, since they did well on different 
sets of sentences. For example, Chinese-align 
had fewer problems with word order, and most 
of those were due to local word-order problems.  
Since the source-language and target-language 
systems made different kinds of mistakes, we 
were able to build a hybrid system that used the 
relative advantages of each system to outperform 
all systems. The different types of mistakes made 
by each system suggest features that can be used 
to improve the combination system in the future. 
Acknowledgments 
This work was supported in part by the Defense 
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) 
under contract number HR0011-06-C-0023. Any 
opinions, findings and conclusions or recom-
mendations expressed in this material are the 
authors' and do not necessarily reflect those of 
the sponsors. 
430
References  
Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B. 
Lowe. 1998. The Berkeley FrameNet project. In 
COLING-ACL '98: Proceedings of the Conference, 
held at the University of Montr?al, pages 86?90. 
Xavier Carreras and Llu?s M?rquez. 2005. Introduc-
tion to the CoNLL-2005 shared task: Semantic role 
labeling. In Proceedings of the Ninth Conference 
on Computational Natural Language Learning 
(CoNLL-2005), pages 152?164. 
Eugene Charniak. 2001. Immediate-head parsing for 
language models. In Proceedings of the 39th An-
nual Meeting on Association For Computational 
Linguistics (Toulouse, France, July 06 - 11, 2001).   
John Chen and Owen Rambow. 2003. Use of deep 
linguistic features for the recognition and labeling 
of semantic arguments. In Proceedings of the 2003 
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, Sapporo, Japan. 
Katrin Erk and Sebastian Pado. 2006. Shalmaneser ? 
a toolchain for shallow semantic parsing. Proceed-
ings of LREC. 
Daniel Gildea and Daniel Jurafsky. 2002. Automatic 
labeling of semantic roles. Computational Linguis-
tics, 28(3):245?288. 
Daniel Gildea and Martha Palmer. 2002. The neces-
sity of parsing for predicate argument recognition. 
In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Conference of 
the Association for Computational Linguistics 
(ACL-02), Philadelphia, PA, USA. 
Mary Harper and Zhongqiang Huang. 2009. Chinese 
Statistical Parsing, chapter to appear. 
Aria Haghighi, Kristina Toutanova, and Christopher 
Manning. 2005. A joint model for semantic role la-
beling. In Proceedings of the Ninth Conference on 
Computational Natural Language Learning 
(CoNLL-2005), pages 173?176.  
Paul Kingsbury and Martha Palmer. 2003. Propbank: 
the next level of treebank. In Proceedings of Tree-
banks and Lexical Theories. 
Evgeny Matusov, Gregor Leusch, & Hermann Ney: 
Learning to combine machine translation systems.  
In: Cyril Goutte, Nicola Cancedda, Marc Dymet-
man, & George Foster (eds.) Learning machine 
translation. (Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press, 
2009); pp.257-276. 
Adam Meyers, Ralph Grishman, Michiko Kosaka and 
Shubin Zhao.  2001. Covering Treebanks with 
GLARF. In Proceedings of the ACL 2001 Work-
shop on Sharing Tools and Resources. Annual 
Meeting of the ACL. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, Morristown, NJ, 51-58. 
Teruko Mitamura, Eric Nyberg, Hideki Shima, 
Tsuneaki Kato, Tatsunori Mori, Chin-Yew Lin, 
Ruihua Song, Chuan-Jie Lin, Tetsuya Sakai, 
Donghong Ji, and Noriko Kando. 2008. Overview 
of the NTCIR-7 ACLIA Tasks: Advanced Cross-
Lingual Information Access. In Proceedings of the 
Seventh NTCIR Workshop Meeting. 
Alessandro Moschitti, Silvia Quarteroni, Roberto 
Basili, and Suresh Manandhar. 2007. Exploiting 
syntactic and shallow semantic kernels for question 
answer classification. In Proceedings of the 45th 
Annual Meeting of the Association of Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 776?783.  
Kristen Parton, Kathleen R. McKeown, James Allan, 
and Enrique Henestroza. Simultaneous multilingual 
search for translingual information retrieval. In 
Proceedings of ACM 17th Conference on Informa-
tion and Knowledge Management (CIKM), Napa 
Valley, CA, 2008. 
Slav Petrov and Dan Klein. 2007. Improved Inference 
for Unlexicalized Parsing. North American Chapter 
of the Association for Computational Linguistics 
(HLT-NAACL 2007). 
Sudo, K., Sekine, S., and Grishman, R. 2004. Cross-
lingual information extraction system evaluation. 
In Proceedings of the 20th international Confer-
ence on Computational Linguistics. 
Honglin Sun and Daniel Jurafsky. 2004. Shallow Se-
mantic Parsing of Chinese. In Proceedings of 
NAACL-HLT. 
Cynthia A. Thompson, Roger Levy, and Christopher 
Manning. 2003. A generative model for semantic 
role labeling. In 14th European Conference on Ma-
chine Learning. 
Nianwen Xue and Martha Palmer. 2004. Calibrating 
features for semantic role labeling. In Dekang Lin 
and Dekai Wu, editors, Proceedings of EMNLP 
2004, pages 88?94, Barcelona, Spain, July. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics. 
Xue, Nianwen and Martha Palmer. 2005. Automatic 
semantic role labeling for Chinese verbs. InPro-
ceedings of the Nineteenth International Joint Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 1160-1165.  
Chao Wang, Michael Collins, and Philipp Koehn. 
2007. Chinese Syntactic Reordering for Statistical 
Machine Translation. Proceedings of the 2007 Joint 
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing and Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL), 737-745. 
Jianqiang Wang and Douglas W. Oard, 2006. "Com-
bining Bidirectional Translation and Synonymy for 
Cross-Language Information Retrieval," in 29th 
Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on 
Research and Development in Information Re-
trieval, pp. 202-209. 
431
Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics:shortpapers, pages 374?378,
Portland, Oregon, June 19-24, 2011. c?2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
Detection of Agreement and Disagreement in Broadcast Conversations
Wen Wang1 Sibel Yaman2y Kristin Precoda1 Colleen Richey1 Geoffrey Raymond3
1SRI International, 333 Ravenswood Avenue, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA
2IBM T. J. Watson Research Center P.O.Box 218, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA
3University of California, Santa Barbara, CA, USA
fwwang,precoda,colleeng@speech.sri.com, syaman@us.ibm.com, graymond@soc.ucsb.edu
Abstract
We present Conditional Random Fields
based approaches for detecting agree-
ment/disagreement between speakers in
English broadcast conversation shows. We
develop annotation approaches for a variety
of linguistic phenomena. Various lexical,
structural, durational, and prosodic features
are explored. We compare the performance
when using features extracted from au-
tomatically generated annotations against
that when using human annotations. We
investigate the efficacy of adding prosodic
features on top of lexical, structural, and
durational features. Since the training data
is highly imbalanced, we explore two sam-
pling approaches, random downsampling
and ensemble downsampling. Overall, our
approach achieves 79.2% (precision), 50.5%
(recall), 61.7% (F1) for agreement detection
and 69.2% (precision), 46.9% (recall), and
55.9% (F1) for disagreement detection, on the
English broadcast conversation data.
1 Introduction
In this work, we present models for detecting
agreement/disagreement (denoted (dis)agreement)
between speakers in English broadcast conversation
shows. The Broadcast Conversation (BC) genre dif-
fers from the Broadcast News (BN) genre in that
it is more interactive and spontaneous, referring to
free speech in news-style TV and radio programs
and consisting of talk shows, interviews, call-in
programs, live reports, and round-tables. Previous
yThis work was performed while the author was at ICSI.
work on detecting (dis)agreements has been focused
on meeting data. (Hillard et al, 2003), (Galley
et al, 2004), (Hahn et al, 2006) used spurt-level
agreement annotations from the ICSI meeting cor-
pus (Janin et al, 2003). (Hillard et al, 2003) ex-
plored unsupervised machine learning approaches
and on manual transcripts, they achieved an over-
all 3-way agreement/disagreement classification ac-
curacy as 82% with keyword features. (Galley et
al., 2004) explored Bayesian Networks for the de-
tection of (dis)agreements. They used adjacency
pair information to determine the structure of their
conditional Markov model and outperformed the re-
sults of (Hillard et al, 2003) by improving the 3-
way classification accuracy into 86.9%. (Hahn et al,
2006) explored semi-supervised learning algorithms
and reached a competitive performance of 86.7%
3-way classification accuracy on manual transcrip-
tions with only lexical features. (Germesin and Wil-
son, 2009) investigated supervised machine learn-
ing techniques and yields competitive results on the
annotated data from the AMI meeting corpus (Mc-
Cowan et al, 2005).
Our work differs from these previous studies in
two major categories. One is that a different def-
inition of (dis)agreement was used. In the cur-
rent work, a (dis)agreement occurs when a respond-
ing speaker agrees with, accepts, or disagrees with
or rejects, a statement or proposition by a first
speaker. Second, we explored (dis)agreement de-
tection in broadcast conversation. Due to the dif-
ference in publicity and intimacy/collegiality be-
tween speakers in broadcast conversations vs. meet-
ings, (dis)agreement may have different character-
374
istics. Different from the unsupervised approaches
in (Hillard et al, 2003) and semi-supervised ap-
proaches in (Hahn et al, 2006), we conducted su-
pervised training. Also, different from (Hillard et
al., 2003) and (Galley et al, 2004), our classifica-
tion was carried out on the utterance level, instead
of on the spurt-level. Galley et al extended Hillard
et al?s work by adding features from previous spurts
and features from the general dialog context to in-
fer the class of the current spurt, on top of fea-
tures from the current spurt (local features) used by
Hillard et al Galley et al used adjacency pairs to
describe the interaction between speakers and the re-
lations between consecutive spurts. In this prelim-
inary study on broadcast conversation, we directly
modeled (dis)agreement detection without using ad-
jacency pairs. Still, within the conditional random
fields (CRF) framework, we explored features from
preceding and following utterances to consider con-
text in the discourse structure. We explored a wide
variety of features, including lexical, structural, du-
rational, and prosodic features. To our knowledge,
this is the first work to systematically investigate
detection of agreement/disagreement for broadcast
conversation data. The remainder of the paper is or-
ganized as follows. Section 2 presents our data and
automatic annotation modules. Section 3 describes
various features and the CRF model we explored.
Experimental results and discussion appear in Sec-
tion 4, as well as conclusions and future directions.
2 Data and Automatic Annotation
In this work, we selected English broadcast con-
versation data from the DARPA GALE pro-
gram collected data (GALE Phase 1 Release
4, LDC2006E91; GALE Phase 4 Release 2,
LDC2009E15). Human transcriptions and manual
speaker turn labels are used in this study. Also,
since the (dis)agreement detection output will be
used to analyze social roles and relations of an inter-
acting group, we first manually marked soundbites
and then excluded soundbites during annotation and
modeling. We recruited annotators to provide man-
ual annotations of speaker roles and (dis)agreement
to use for the supervised training of models. We de-
fined a set of speaker roles as follows. Host/chair
is a person associated with running the discussions
or calling the meeting. Reporting participant is a
person reporting from the field, from a subcommit-
tee, etc. Commentator participant/Topic participant
is a person providing commentary on some subject,
or person who is the subject of the conversation and
plays a role, e.g., as a newsmaker. Audience par-
ticipant is an ordinary person who may call in, ask
questions at a microphone at e.g. a large presenta-
tion, or be interviewed because of their presence at a
news event. Other is any speaker who does not fit in
one of the above categories, such as a voice talent,
an announcer doing show openings or commercial
breaks, or a translator.
Agreements and disagreements are com-
posed of different combinations of initiating
utterances and responses. We reformulated the
(dis)agreement detection task as the sequence
tagging of 11 (dis)agreement-related labels for
identifying whether a given utterance is initiating
a (dis)agreement opportunity, is a (dis)agreement
response to such an opportunity, or is neither of
these, in the show. For example, a Negative tag
question followed by a negation response forms an
agreement, that is, A: [Negative tag] This is not
black and white, is it? B: [Agreeing Response]
No, it isn?t. The data sparsity problem is serious.
Among all 27,071 utterances, only 2,589 utterances
are involved in (dis)agreement as initiating or
response utterances, about 10% only among all
data, while 24,482 utterances are not involved.
These annotators also labeled shows with a va-
riety of linguistic phenomena (denoted language
use constituents, LUC), including discourse mark-
ers, disfluencies, person addresses and person men-
tions, prefaces, extreme case formulations, and dia-
log act tags (DAT). We categorized dialog acts into
statement, question, backchannel, and incomplete.
We classified disfluencies (DF) into filled pauses
(e.g., uh, um), repetitions, corrections, and false
starts. Person address (PA) terms are terms that a
speaker uses to address another person. Person men-
tions (PM) are references to non-participants in the
conversation. Discourse markers (DM) are words
or phrases that are related to the structure of the
discourse and express a relation between two utter-
ances, for example, I mean, you know. Prefaces
(PR) are sentence-initial lexical tokens serving func-
tions close to discourse markers (e.g., Well, I think
375
that...). Extreme case formulations (ECF) are lexi-
cal patterns emphasizing extremeness (e.g., This is
the best book I have ever read). In the end, we man-
ually annotated 49 English shows. We preprocessed
English manual transcripts by removing transcriber
annotation markers and noise, removing punctuation
and case information, and conducting text normal-
ization. We also built automatic rule-based and sta-
tistical annotation tools for these LUCs.
3 Features and Model
We explored lexical, structural, durational, and
prosodic features for (dis)agreement detection. We
included a set of ?lexical? features, including n-
grams extracted from all of that speaker?s utter-
ances, denoted ngram features. Other lexical fea-
tures include the presence of negation and acquies-
cence, yes/no equivalents, positive and negative tag
questions, and other features distinguishing differ-
ent types of initiating utterances and responses. We
also included various lexical features extracted from
LUC annotations, denoted LUC features. These ad-
ditional features include features related to the pres-
ence of prefaces, the counts of types and tokens
of discourse markers, extreme case formulations,
disfluencies, person addressing events, and person
mentions, and the normalized values of these counts
by sentence length. We also include a set of features
related to the DAT of the current utterance and pre-
ceding and following utterances.
We developed a set of ?structural? and ?dura-
tional? features, inspired by conversation analysis,
to quantitatively represent the different participation
and interaction patterns of speakers in a show. We
extracted features related to pausing and overlaps
between consecutive turns, the absolute and relative
duration of consecutive turns, and so on.
We used a set of prosodic features including
pause, duration, and the speech rate of a speaker. We
also used pitch and energy of the voice. Prosodic
features were computed on words and phonetic
alignment of manual transcripts. Features are com-
puted for the beginning and ending words of an ut-
terance. For the duration features, we used the aver-
age and maximum vowel duration from forced align-
ment, both unnormalized and normalized for vowel
identity and phone context. For pitch and energy, we
calculated the minimum, maximum, range, mean,
standard deviation, skewness and kurtosis values. A
decision tree model was used to compute posteriors
from prosodic features and we used cumulative bin-
ning of posteriors as final features , similar to (Liu et
al., 2006).
As illustrated in Section 2, we reformulated the
(dis)agreement detection task as a sequence tagging
problem. We used the Mallet package (McCallum,
2002) to implement the linear chain CRF model for
sequence tagging. A CRF is an undirected graph-
ical model that defines a global log-linear distribu-
tion of the state (or label) sequence E conditioned
on an observation sequence, in our case including
the sequence of sentences S and the corresponding
sequence of features for this sequence of sentences
F . The model is optimized globally over the en-
tire sequence. The CRF model is trained to maxi-
mize the conditional log-likelihood of a given train-
ing set P (EjS; F ). During testing, the most likely
sequence E is found using the Viterbi algorithm.
One of the motivations of choosing conditional ran-
dom fields was to avoid the label-bias problem found
in hidden Markov models. Compared to Maxi-
mum Entropy modeling, the CRF model is opti-
mized globally over the entire sequence, whereas the
ME model makes a decision at each point individu-
ally without considering the context event informa-
tion.
4 Experiments
All (dis)agreement detection results are based on n-
fold cross-validation. In this procedure, we held
out one show as the test set, randomly held out an-
other show as the dev set, trained models on the
rest of the data, and tested the model on the held-
out show. We iterated through all shows and com-
puted the overall accuracy. Table 1 shows the re-
sults of (dis)agreement detection using all features
except prosodic features. We compared two condi-
tions: (1) features extracted completely from the au-
tomatic LUC annotations and automatically detected
speaker roles, and (2) features from manual speaker
role labels and manual LUC annotations when man-
ual annotations are available. Table 1 showed that
running a fully automatic system to generate auto-
matic annotations and automatic speaker roles pro-
376
duced comparable performance to the system using
features from manual annotations whenever avail-
able.
Table 1: Precision (%), recall (%), and F1 (%) of
(dis)agreement detection using features extracted from
manual speaker role labels and manual LUC annota-
tions when available, denoted Manual Annotation, and
automatic LUC annotations and automatically detected
speaker roles, denoted Automatic Annotation.
Agreement
P R F1
Manual Annotation 81.5 43.2 56.5
Automatic Annotation 79.5 44.6 57.1
Disagreement
P R F1
Manual Annotation 70.1 38.5 49.7
Automatic Annotation 64.3 36.6 46.6
We then focused on the condition of using fea-
tures from manual annotations when available and
added prosodic features as described in Section 3.
The results are shown in Table 2. Adding prosodic
features produced a 0.7% absolute gain on F1 on
agreement detection, and 1.5% absolute gain on F1
on disagreement detection.
Table 2: Precision (%), recall (%), and F1 (%) of
(dis)agreement detection using manual annotations with-
out and with prosodic features.
Agreement
P R F1
w/o prosodic 81.5 43.2 56.5
with prosodic 81.8 44.0 57.2
Disagreement
P R F1
w/o prosodic 70.1 38.5 49.7
with prosodic 70.8 40.1 51.2
Note that only about 10% utterances among all
data are involved in (dis)agreement. This indicates
a highly imbalanced data set as one class is more
heavily represented than the other/others. We sus-
pected that this high imbalance has played a ma-
jor role in the high precision and low recall results
we obtained so far. Various approaches have been
studied to handle imbalanced data for classifications,
trying to balance the class distribution in the train-
ing set by either oversampling the minority class or
downsampling the majority class. In this prelimi-
nary study of sampling approaches for handling im-
balanced data for CRF training, we investigated two
approaches, random downsampling and ensemble
downsampling. Random downsampling randomly
downsamples the majority class to equate the num-
ber of minority and majority class samples. Ensem-
ble downsampling is a refinement of random down-
sampling which doesn?t discard any majority class
samples. Instead, we partitioned the majority class
samples into N subspaces with each subspace con-
taining the same number of samples as the minority
class. Then we train N CRF models, each based
on the minority class samples and one disjoint parti-
tion from the N subspaces. During testing, the pos-
terior probability for one utterance is averaged over
the N CRF models. The results from these two sam-
pling approaches as well as the baseline are shown
in Table 3. Both sampling approaches achieved sig-
nificant improvement over the baseline, i.e., train-
ing on the original data set, and ensemble downsam-
pling produced better performance than downsam-
pling. We noticed that both sampling approaches
degraded slightly in precision but improved signif-
icantly in recall, resulting in 4.5% absolute gain on
F1 for agreement detection and 4.7% absolute gain
on F1 for disagreement detection.
Table 3: Precision (%), recall (%), and F1 (%) of
(dis)agreement detection without sampling, with random
downsampling and ensemble downsampling. Manual an-
notations and prosodic features are used.
Agreement
P R F1
Baseline 81.8 44.0 57.2
Random downsampling 78.5 48.7 60.1
Ensemble downsampling 79.2 50.5 61.7
Disagreement
P R F1
Baseline 70.8 40.1 51.2
Random downsampling 67.3 44.8 53.8
Ensemble downsampling 69.2 46.9 55.9
In conclusion, this paper presents our work on
detection of agreements and disagreements in En-
377
glish broadcast conversation data. We explored a
variety of features, including lexical, structural, du-
rational, and prosodic features. We experimented
these features using a linear-chain conditional ran-
dom fields model and conducted supervised train-
ing. We observed significant improvement from
adding prosodic features and employing two sam-
pling approaches, random downsampling and en-
semble downsampling. Overall, we achieved 79.2%
(precision), 50.5% (recall), 61.7% (F1) for agree-
ment detection and 69.2% (precision), 46.9% (re-
call), and 55.9% (F1) for disagreement detection, on
English broadcast conversation data. In future work,
we plan to continue adding and refining features, ex-
plore dependencies between features and contextual
cues with respect to agreements and disagreements,
and investigate the efficacy of other machine learn-
ing approaches such as Bayesian networks and Sup-
port Vector Machines.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Gokhan Tur and Dilek Hakkani-
Tu?r for valuable insights and suggestions. This
work has been supported by the Intelligence Ad-
vanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA) via
Army Research Laboratory (ARL) contract num-
ber W911NF-09-C-0089. The U.S. Government is
authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for
Governmental purposes notwithstanding any copy-
right annotation thereon. The views and conclusions
contained herein are those of the authors and should
not be interpreted as necessarily representing the of-
ficial policies or endorsements, either expressed or
implied, of IARPA, ARL, or the U.S. Government.
References
M. Galley, K. McKeown, J. Hirschberg, and E. Shriberg.
2004. Identifying agreement and disagreement in con-
versational speech: Use of bayesian networks to model
pragmatic dependencies. In Proceedings of ACL.
S. Germesin and T. Wilson. 2009. Agreement detection
in multiparty conversation. In Proceedings of Interna-
tional Conference on Multimodal Interfaces.
S. Hahn, R. Ladner, and M. Ostendorf. 2006. Agree-
ment/disagreement classification: Exploiting unla-
beled data using constraint classifiers. In Proceedings
of HLT/NAACL.
D. Hillard, M. Ostendorf, and E. Shriberg. 2003. De-
tection of agreement vs. disagreement in meetings:
Training with unlabeled data. In Proceedings of
HLT/NAACL.
A. Janin, D. Baron, J. Edwards, D. Ellis, D. Gelbart,
N. Morgan, B. Peskin, T. Pfau, E. Shriberg, A. Stolcke,
and C. Wooters. 2003. The ICSI Meeting Corpus. In
Proc. ICASSP, Hong Kong, April.
Yang Liu, Elizabeth Shriberg, Andreas Stolcke, Dustin
Hillard, Mari Ostendorf, and Mary Harper. 2006.
Enriching speech recognition with automatic detec-
tion of sentence boundaries and disfluencies. IEEE
Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Pro-
cessing, 14(5):1526?1540, September. Special Issue
on Progress in Rich Transcription.
Andrew McCallum. 2002. Mallet: A machine learning
for language toolkit. http://mallet.cs.umass.edu.
I. McCowan, J. Carletta, W. Kraaij, S. Ashby, S. Bour-
ban, M. Flynn, M. Guillemot, T. Hain, J. Kadlec,
V. Karaiskos, M. Kronenthal, G. Lathoud, M. Lincoln,
A. Lisowska, W. Post, D. Reidsma, and P. Wellner.
2005. The AMI meeting corpus. In Proceedings of
Measuring Behavior 2005, the 5th International Con-
ference on Methods and Techniques in Behavioral Re-
search.
378
