Proceedings of the EACL 2009 Workshop on Computational Approaches to Semitic Languages, pages 27?35,
Athens, Greece, 31 March, 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Hybrid Approach for Building Arabic Diacritizer  
 
 
Khaled Shaalan Hitham M. Abo Bakr Ibrahim Ziedan 
The Faculty of Informatics  Computer & System Dept Computer & System Dept. 
The British University in Dubai Zagazig University Zagazig University 
khaled.shaalan@buid.ac.ae hithamab@yahoo.com i.ziedan@yahoo.com 
 
  
 
Abstract 
 
Modern standard Arabic is usually written 
without diacritics. This makes it difficult for 
performing Arabic text processing. Diacritiza-
tion helps clarify the meaning of words and 
disambiguate any vague spellings or pronun-
ciations, as some Arabic words are spelled the 
same but differ in meaning. In this paper, we 
address the issue of adding diacritics to undia-
critized Arabic text using a hybrid approach. 
The approach requires an Arabic lexicon and 
large corpus of fully diacritized text for train-
ing purposes in order to detect diacritics. Case-
Ending is treated as a separate post processing 
task using syntactic information. The hybrid 
approach relies on lexicon retrieval, bigram, 
and SVM-statistical prioritized techniques.  
We present results of an evaluation of the pro-
posed diacritization approach and discuss var-
ious modifications for improving the perfor-
mance of this approach. 
1 Introduction 
Modern Arabic written texts usually include 
Arabic scripts without short vowels and other 
diacritic marks. This often leads to considerable 
ambiguity since several words that have differ-
ent diacritic patterns may appear identical in a 
diacritic-less setting. Educated modern Arabic 
speakers are able to accurately derive/restore 
diacritics in a document. This is based on the 
context and their linguistic knowledge of Arabic. 
However, a text without diacritics brings diffi-
culties for Arabic readers. It is also problematic 
for Arabic processing applications, such as text-
to-speech, speech-to-text, and text analysis, 
where the lack of diacritics adds another layer of 
ambiguity when processing the input data. As an 
example, full vocalization of Arabic text is re-
quired for text-to-speech applications, where the 
mapping from graphemes to phonemes is com-
plicated compared to languages such as English 
and French; where there is, in most cases, simple 
one-to-one relationship. Nevertheless, using 
Arabic text with diacritics has proven an im-
provement in the accuracy of speech-recognition 
applications (Zitouni et al, 2006).  
The problem of automatic restoration (i.e., deri-
vation) of the diacritic signs of Arabic text can 
be solved by two approaches. The first is a rule-
based approach that involves a complex integra-
tion of the Arabic morphological, syntactic, and 
semantic tools with significant efforts to acquire 
respective linguistic rules. A morphological ana-
lyzer gets the breakdowns of the undiacritized 
word according to known patterns or templates 
and recognizes its prefixes and suffixes. A syn-
tax analyzer applies specific syntactic rules to 
determine the case-ending diacritics, usually, by 
techniques such as finite-state automata. Seman-
tics handling helps to resolve ambiguous cases 
and to filter out hypothesis. Hence, rule-based 
diacritization approach is a complicated process 
and takes longer time to process an Arabic sen-
tence which is naturally long. The second ap-
proach is the statistical approach that requires 
linguistic resources such as a large tagged cor-
pus (in particular a TreeBank) to extract lan-
guage statistics for estimating the missing dia-
critical marks. The approach is fully automated 
and does not require efforts to acquire respective 
linguistic knowledge. Results are usually im-
proved by increasing the size of the corpus. 
It is worth noting that identifying some of the 
diacritic marks can be seen as a morphological 
problem and the relevant letters are called inter-
nal characters in this paper. Moreover, diacritic 
mark of the last character of the Arabic is called 
case ending (????? ???????). The identification of 
case-ending diacritics is determined at the syn-
27
tactic processing level (case ending depends on 
the position of the word within the sentence) 
whereas detecting the internal diacritics is de-
termined at the morphological processing level. 
In widespread cases, the case-ending come in-
ternally rather than with the last character such 
as "?????????" (by-her-pen). 
In this paper, an Arabic diacritizer is proposed. 
Internal diacritization was restored by a model 
based on the synergy of three different tech-
niques:  retrieval of unambiguous lexicon en-
tries, retrieval of two-word expression from a 
preprocessed diacritized bigram database, and a 
prediction using statistical approach based on 
SVM-learning technique, (Cristianini and Tay-
lor, 2000) and (Hearst, 1998). The later tech-
nique tokenizes a text and provides a Reduced 
Tag Set (RTS) of Part of Speech (POS)1 for each 
token. The tags are used to restore the diacritics. 
From the obtained diacritization results of these 
techniques, the most consistent one is selected. 
The Case-Ending diacritization is treated as a 
post-process of the internal diacritization task 
using the same machine learning approach that 
was trained on Base phrase (BP)-Chunk as well 
as POS features of individual tokens with correct 
case-ending tags. A utility has been designed to 
extract correct case-ending tags from the LDC?s 
Arabic Tree Bank (ATB).  
This paper presents a new simple but efficient 
approach that gets results comparable with the 
best performing systems, to our knowledge, 
(Habash and Rambow, 2007). The achieved re-
sults are: 11.795% Word Error Rate (WER) and 
about 3.245% Diacritics Error Rate (DER). The 
paper is structured as follows. Section 2 reviews 
closely related work. Section 3 introduces the 
proposed diacritization approach. Section 4 de-
scribes the training process. Section 5 presents 
the evaluation experiment. Section 6 concludes 
the article and gives direction for future re-
search. 
2 Related Work 
Diacritic restoration has been receiving increas-
ing attention and has been the focus of several 
studies. In El-Sadany and Hashish (1988), a rule-
                                                 
1 List of POS and RTS that are used here can be found at: 
http://www.ircs.upenn.edu/arabic/Jan03release/arabic-
POStags-collapse-to-PennPOStags.txt 
 
based approach that uses morphological analyzer 
for vowelization was proposed. Another, rule-
based grapheme to sound conversion approach 
appeared in 2003 by Y. El-Imam (2003). 
There are many related works dealing with the 
problem of Arabic diacritization in general (Zi-
touni et al, 2006), (Habash and Rambow, 2007), 
(Ananthakrishnan, 2005), (Kirchhoff, 2005).  and 
(Elshafei et al 2006); all trying to handle this 
problem using statistical approaches but they 
tend to handle the case ending diacritic mark in 
the same way they used to handle the internal 
(any letter but the last) diacritics. In our proposed 
approach we differentiate between them as the 
detection of case-ending diacritics is a syntactic-
based problem whereas detecting the internal 
diacritics is a morphological-based problem. Ha-
bash et al (2007) introduced a system called 
MADA-D that uses Buckwalter?s Arabic mor-
phological analyzer where they used 14 taggers 
and a lexeme-based language model. MADA is 
so far the best performing system to date. It has 
been reported that it achieved a WER of 14.9% 
and a DER of 4.8%. 
3 The Proposed Diacritization Ap-
proach  
The Arabic internal diacritization problem will 
be addressed from three different proposed tech-
niques, each of which has its own strengths and 
weaknesses. Such techniques are integrated to 
optimize the performance of the Arabic diacritiz-
er and to a large extent remove ambiguities. 
These proposed techniques are: 1) Lexicon Re-
trieval, 2) diacritized bigram, and 3) SVM-
statistical-based diacritizer. Then, the case end-
ing diacritization will be determined after the 
internal discrimination is performed. Figure 1 
shows the architecture of Arabic Diacritization 
System. 
 
28
Receive 
undiacritized 
statement
Tokenize 
statement
Get POS tagging
Get BP-Chunk
Get Case Ending
Search in Arabic 
Lexicon for Diac 
word by using 
the POS
Return Case 
Ending for 
each Token
Return 
Diac Word 
Word if 
exist
Split Eeach word 
with its POS
Search for single 
result in the 
Lexicon
Search In 
Diacritized 
Bigram Database
Return 
Diac Word 
if exist
Return 
Diac 
Words if 
exist
Receive 
selected internal 
Diacritized 
Words
Search for token 
in Internal 
diacritized word 
to decide the 
position of Case-
Ending
Fully 
Diacritized 
Statement
Add Case Ending 
in correct 
position
Get Correct Internal 
Diacritics using Decision 
Maker module 
Split Statement 
to words
Split Statement 
to Bigrams
Results From SVM 
Statistical Module
 
Figure 1: Arabic Diacritization System 
 
Lexicon Retrieval Technique (LR) 
Lexicon retrieval approach tries to find the result 
(diacritized word) returned from an Arabic lex-
icon for a specific input undiacritized word. If 
only one diacritization is returned, then there is 
no ambiguity. This solution is final and we do 
not need to look at the results form the other two 
techniques. However, this situation is usually 
rare but when it occurs the result is confirmed. 
 
Diacritized Bigram Technique (DB) 
When more than one solution is retrieved for an 
unvowelized input word, i.e., ambiguous diacrti-
cazation, the bigram technique comes into play. 
The idea behind this technique is to make use of 
the multiword expressions in Arabic texts.  When 
such expressions are analyzed as separate words, 
the possibility for ambiguity is increased.  In this 
work, we considered a two-word expression (bi-
gram) that usually occurs with high frequency in 
Arabic texts such that one word can determine 
the diacritization of the other. Once the expres-
sion is identified and diacritized correctly, it adds 
a sense of certitude to the diacritization which 
significantly reduces the ambiguity. Table 1 
shows an extraction of the diacritized bigram 
database. 
   
1st 
Word 
2nd 
Word 
Cat Diac. 1st 
Word 
Diac. 2nd 
Word 
??????? ??????? 3 ????? ???? 
???????????? ????????? 1 ??????? ???????? 
????????? ?????? 1 ??????? ???? 
???? ?????? 1 ??? ????? 
???????????? ???????? 1 ??????? ????? 
Table 1: Diacritized Bigram Database 
 
SVM-Statistical Technique (SVM) 
The previous two diacritization techniques can 
be viewed as a lookup process; either for a word 
in the lexicon or for a two-word expression in a 
large bigram database. However, statistical me-
thods can be viewed as general approaches be-
cause they are heavily dependent on the Arabic 
syntactic analysis that was manually performed 
by Arabic specialists. 
The main idea of this approach is to tokenize 
and automatically annotate tokens with the cor-
rect POS tags. Then, by searching the Arabic 
lexicon using a token and the corresponding 
POS, the correct diacritization result can reached, 
even though multiple ambiguous words are re-
trieved from the lexicon. 
 Buckwalter's morphological analyzer (Buck-
walter, 2002) takes an inflected Arabic word and 
returns fully diacritized ambiguous words. We 
claim in our approach that only internal diacritics 
should be handled morphologically whereas case 
ending should be handled syntactically. Hence, 
we have used the Buckwalter's morphological 
analyzer after removing all case ending diacritics 
from the suffixes table in order to prevent the 
generation of the case ending output. One advan-
tage of this modification is to considerably re-
duce the number of alternatives (i.e., overgenera-
tions) returned from the morphological analyzer. 
Another advantage is that some NLP tasks, such 
as Information Retrieval, require only diacritic 
restoration of internal (lexical) vowels which can 
benefit from such modification. For example, 
given the word ? ???? ? to this morphological 
analyzer, it returns 7 results that have the same 
internal diacritics with one having no case-
ending and 6 having different case-ending dia-
critics. Consequently, splitting the diacrization 
into two stages (internal and case ending) will 
avoid such morphological ambiguity and at the 
second stage the syntactic case ending is treated 
29
separately as a post processing which ultimately 
leads to a fully efficient diacritized Arabic word. 
A Hybrid of All Internal Techniques 
When we apply each of the three proposed 
techniques on an input undiacritized Arabic sen-
tence we may get different diacritization results 
for each word within this sentence. The selection 
criteria depend on the agreement among these 
techniques. Two or more matched results can 
determine the discrimination of a word. In case 
of disagreement, a priority is applied in the fol-
lowing, highest to lowest, order: lexicon retriev-
al, bigram and SVM-Statistical technique respec-
tively. If no solution is reached from all tech-
niques, the undiacritized input word is returned.  
 
Case Ending Model 
The main idea is to relate the case-ending for 
each token with its POS and chunk position as 
well as its position within the sentence (Abo 
Bakr et al, 2008). We made a training using 
Support Vector Machines (SVM) technique with 
undiacritized tokens. This technique involves an 
Arabic Treebank. 
An Arabic Treebank usually created on top of 
a corpus that has already been annotated with 
POS tags. We have used the Penn Arabic Tree-
bank (ATB) (Maamouri et al 2004). ATB has 
begun in the fall of 2001 and has now completed 
four full releases of morphologically and syntac-
tically annotated data: Version 1 of the ATB has 
three parts with different releases; some versions 
like Part 1 V3.0 and Part 2 V 2.0 are fully diacri-
tized trees. For example, consider the following 
undiacritized statement: 
 
 
 
 
 
The following tree representation is partially 
extracted from the tree fileU-
MAAH_UM.ARB_20020120-a.0007.tree that is part 
of  the ATB Part 2 V.2.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 shows a graphical representation of this 
tree2. Case-ending is indicated, ovals in Figure 2, 
by one of the following tags: NCE, 
CASE_DEF_GEN, CASE_INDEF_GEN, 
CASE_DEF_NOM, CASE_DEF_ACC, 
CASE_INDEF_NOM, CASE_DEF_ACCGEN, 
CASE_INDEF ACC, and 
CASE_INDEF_ACCGEN. 
Table 2 gives the complete description of these 
tags. 
 
Figure 2: A graphical representation of an Arabic sen-
tence extracted from the Penn Arabic Treebank 
 
Case Ending Tags Description 
NCE No Case Ending 
CASE_DEF_GEN  Kasra  ?? 
CASE_INDEF_GEN  kasratan ?? 
CASE_DEF_NOM Damma ?? 
CASE_DEF_ACC Fat-ha ?? 
CASE_DEF_ACCGEN  Maftouh bi Kasra ?? 
CASE_INDEF_NOM  Damatan  ?? 
CASE_INDEF_ACCGEN  Fathatan ?? or  ?? 
CASE_INDEF_ACC Fathatan ?? 
Table 2: Description of Case-Ending tags found in 
ATB 
 
A sequence of tokens with its POS, BP-chunk 
and Case-Ending is extracted from Treebank us-
ing YamCha File Creator (YFC utility3). The 
                                                 
2 This graphical representation of the Treebank files is ex-
tracted from our Treebank Viewer tool that is freely availa-
ble at: http://www.staff.zu.edu.eg/hmabobakr/ 
 
3 We developed YFC utility to extract information from 
Penn Arabic Treebank ATB and produce the Yamcha stan-
dard input format to be able to use this information in the 
training process. 
http://www.staff.zu.edu.eg/hmabobakr/page.asp?id=53 
"????? ?????? ??? ??????? ????? ???? ?????? ??? 
?????".... 
"llywm AlvAny ElY AltwAly tZAhr TlAb 
(S (S (S (PP-TMP (PREP li-) (NP (NP 
(DET+NOUN+CASE_DEF_GEN -Al+yawom+i) 
(DET+ADJ Al+vAniy)) (PP (PREP EalaY) (NP 
(DET+NOUN Al+tawAliy))))) (VP 
(VERB_PERFECT+PVSUFF_SUBJ:3MS N 
Al+musolim+iyona) ?.. 
30
basic approach used in YFC is inspired by the 
work of Sabine for Treebank-to-chuck conver-
sion script (Sang and Buchholz, 2000), which we 
have extended to be used with Arabic. This has 
required adding some features like Case-Ending. 
The output produced from YFC utility for case 
ending training process is shown in Table 3. 
 
Token POS Chunk Case Ending
L IN B-PP NCE 
Al DT B-NP NCE 
ywm NN I-NP CASE_DEF_GEN 
Al DT I-NP NCE 
vAny JJ I-NP NCE 
ElY IN B-PP NCE 
Al DT B-NP NCE 
twAly NN I-NP NCE 
tZAhr VBD B-VP NCE 
TlAb NN B-NP CASE_INDEF_NOM 
Yntmwn VBP B-VP NCE 
<lY IN B-PP NCE 
jmAEp NN B-NP CASE_DEF_GEN 
Table 3: Training file format for detecting Case-
Ending 
4 Training of the Arabic Diacritizer 
The diacritization system we present here is 
trained and evaluated on the LDC?s Arabic Tree-
bank of diacritized news articles ? Part 2 v2.0: 
catalog number LDC2004T02 and 1-58563-282-
1. The corpus includes complete vocalization 
(including case endings). We introduce here a 
clearly defined and replicable split of the corpus, 
so that the reproduction of the results or future 
investigations can accurately and correctly be 
established. This corpus includes 501 stories 
from the Ummah Arabic News Text. There are a 
total of 144,199 words (counting non-Arabic to-
kens such as numbers and punctuation) in the 
501 files - one story per file.   We split the cor-
pus into two sets: training data and development 
test (devtest) data. The devtest data are the files 
ended by character ?7? like 
?UMAAH_UM.ARB_20020120-a.0007.tree? 
and its count was 38 files. The remaining files 
are used for training. 
5 Evaluation 
For Arabic tokenizer, POS tagger, BP-chunk, 
and statistical Case-Ending, we used a standard 
SVM with a polynomial kernel of degree 2 and 
C=1.0. Evaluation of the system was done by 
calculating the performance using the standard 
evaluation measures: accuracy, precision, recall, 
and the f-measure4.We used YamCha (Kudo and 
Matsumoto, 2003) implementation of SVMs. 
Diacritization evaluation of our experiments is 
reported in terms of word error rate (WER), and 
diacritization error rate (DER)5. 
We conducted experiments to: 
1. Evaluate the impact of tokenization, part-of-
speech, chunking, and case-ending parame-
ters on the training models, see Section 5.1. 
2. Evaluate the impact of including and ex-
cluding the case-ending on the performance 
of the Arabic diacritizer, see Section 5.2. 
3. Compare our approach of Tokenization and 
POS tagger with the ArabicSVMTools tag-
ger using different parameters and fea-
ture(s), see Section 5.2. 
 
5.1 Results of Tokenization, Part-of-Speech, 
BP-chunking, and case-ending  
The results obtained for tokenization (TOK), 
part-of-speech (POS), and Chunking (BP-chunk) 
tasks are comparable with the results presented 
in the most notable literature (Diab et al 2007; 
Diab et al 2004). We did some modifications of 
the feature list to compromise between the speed 
and accuracy. The case ending task is novel, and 
did not get enough handling in other research. It 
achieved acceptable results. 
 
Evaluation of the impact of the tokenization 
parameter on the training process 
Two tokenization tasks was performed on 
window sizes of -2 /+2 and -4/+4, for illustration 
see TOK1 and TOK2 tasks in Figure 3. For each 
window size there are two columns. The first one 
contains a sequence of Buckwalter's translite-
rated Arabic letters shown from top to bottom 
that resembles the left-to-right Arabic writing 
system (e.g., ?.wyblg Eddhm ?.. are the trans-
literation of the Arabic words ...????? ?????... , re-
spectively). The second column contains the cor-
responding tokenization tags presented by In-
side-Outside-Beginning (I-O-B) of a chunk, i.e., 
                                                 
4 These results were computed using our developed evlua-
tion tool that was developed and tested against Evaluation 
Tools for CONLL 2000 
http://www.cnts.ua.ac.be/conll2000/chunking/conlleval.txt. 
 
5 These results were computed using our developed evalua-
tion tool that was developed based on information presented 
in (Habash and Rambow, 2007). 
 
31
prefix (PRE), word (WRD), and suffix (SUFF), 
respectively, (Kudo and Matsumoto, 2003). The 
tokenization tags are: B-PRE1, I-PRE1, B-PRE2, 
I-PRE2, B-PRE3, I-PRE3, B-WORD-1, I-
WORD-1, B-SUFF1, I-SUFF1 and O for outside 
word boundary. We made segmentation for the 
determiner "Al" ? "??". This segmentation is im-
portant for the case-ending detection for: the ad-
jective and the noun it modifies ?????? ?????????, 
1st and 2nd Particle of the construction Annexed 
and Annexed noun ??????? ? ?????? ?????, and Nu-
nation  ???????" ". The result of the evaluation of the 
two tokenization tasks is shown in Table 4. 
 
 
Figure 3: Tokenization evaluation with window sizes 
of -2/+2 and -4/+4 
 
Measurement TOK1 TOK2
Accuracy 98.59% 99.56% 
Precision 97.17% 98.95% 
Recall 97.29% 99.06% 
F-Measure 97.23% 99.00% 
Table 4: Tokenization results with window sizes of     
-2/+2 and -4/+4 
 
Evaluation of the impact of the part-of-speech 
parameter on the training process 
A POS tagging (POS1) task was performed on a 
sequence of tokens produced from the tokeniza-
tion task. A window size of +2/ -2 tokens centered 
at the focus token. We made another POS tag-
ging (POS2) task by adding the last two charac-
ters as an extra feature for enhancing the accura-
cy of some tags such as plural or dual noun 
(NNS) and singular noun (NN). For illustration 
see POS1 and POS2 tasks in Figure 4. The result 
of the evaluation of the two POS tagging tasks is 
shown in Table 5. 
 
 
Figure 4: POS evaluations with window size of -2/+2; 
with and without using the last two characters as an 
added feature 
Measurement POS1 POS2 
Accuracy 94.34% 95.97% 
Table 5: POS results for different window sizes 
 
Evaluation of the impact of chunking parame-
ters on the training process 
The chunking task was performed on tokens pro-
duced from the tokenization and POS tasks. The 
evaluation included 16 tag-set (features) of a 
window size of -2/+2 for both tokens and POS, 
and only the previous two chunk tags. For illu-
stration see Figure 5. The result of the evaluation 
of is shown in Table 6. 
 
Figure 5: Chunk evaluation with window size of -2/+2 
 
Measurement Results 
Accuracy 95.52% 
Precision 93.19% 
Recall 95.90% 
F-Measure 94.52% 
Table 6: Results for BP-chunk 
32
 
Evaluation of the impact case-ending parame-
ters on the training process 
Two case-ending tasks were performed. The 
first case-ending (CE1) task was discussed in a 
previous work (Abo Bakr et al, 2008). It was 
performed on window size of -3/+3 and 8 tag 
sets. For illustration see Figure 6. 
 
Figure 6: Case-ending evaluation with window size of 
-3/+3 
 
The evaluation has achieved 95.35% in accu-
racy. We noticed that in some cases the system 
can produce unacceptable case ending (e.g., 
Tanween on the sound plural masculine ? ???
?????? ???????) that we could improved by: 
1- Enhancing the POS tagging (POS2) task 
by adding last two characters (L2Ch) as 
a feature.  
2- Enhancing the case ending (CE2) task by 
adding the last character (LCh) and the 
last two characters (L2Ch) as features. 
 
 
Figure 7: Case-Ending evaluation with widow size of 
-3/3 and using the last two characters (L2Ch) and the 
last character (LCh) as added features 
 
The following modifications were done to 
conduct the second case-ending (CE2) task, for 
illustration see Figure 7:  
? Adding the last two characters (L2Ch) and 
the last character (LCh) as features.  
? Enhancing the case ending representation by 
adding an extra tagset for ?indeclension of 
the fatha? - ????? ??? ?????? that is presented in 
Treebank as ?PVSUFF_SUNJ:3MS?. 
 
Table 7 presents the results obtained for the two 
case ending (CE1 and CE2) tasks. As shown, the 
performance is improved.  
 
 Measurement CE1 CE2 
Accuracy 95.35% 96.57% 
Table 7: Results of Case Ending evaluation 
5.2 Diacritization Results 
In this section, we compare our approach of To-
kenization and POS tagger with Ara-
bicSVMTools tagger. We evaluate the impact of 
including and excluding different techniques of 
internal diacritization and case-ending on the 
overall performance of our Arabic diacritizer. In 
particular, we show the results from the follow-
ing techniques:  lexicon retrieval (LR), diacri-
tized bigram (DB), SVM, and case-ending (CE), 
techniques. Results for different combinations 
were reported and compared. All results were 
performed using TOK1, POS1, and CE1 tasks 
and shown in Table 8 through Table 10. 
 
Including CE Excluding CE6
Technique WER DER WER DER
LR 90.35% 40.85%? 31.38%? 36.67%
SVM 69.94% 23.36%? 16.28%? 11.36%
Table 8: WER and DER for Lexicon Retrieval and 
Statistical SVM techniques for including and exclud-
ing case ending 
 
Table 8 shows that excluding case ending (letter) 
from the evaluation gives better results in terms 
of WER and DER.  
As shown in Table 9, it is noted that including 
the case ending technique has enhanced dramati-
cally the results of diacritic restoration. Further 
enhancement was obtained by adopting a new 
method to restore internal diacritics, when all of 
the hybrid techniques fail to return any solution; 
the new method, we call it ?accepts any? (AA), 
                                                 
6 Results for ?Excluding CE? are calculated manually for a 
limited number of test files because Case-Ending diacritic is 
not always at the last character.  
33
is used for arbitrary accepting results from lex-
icon. 
 
Technique WER DER
LR+DB? 35.81%? 9.77%
LR+DB+SVM? 33.51%? 7.99%
LR+DB+SVM+CE 17.31% 4.41%
LR+DB+SVM+CE+AA 16.66%? 3.84%
Table 9: WER and DER for different combination of 
diacritization techniques 
 
To investigate the effect of enhancing POS tag-
ging on the internal SVM statistical technique, 
we adapted our modules to interact with Ara-
bicSVMTools, the up-to-date most famous free 
tagger7.  Some modification were made to our 
module to accept the article ?Al? as it may occur 
as radical letters inside the Noun (we handle ?Al? 
separately in our tokenizer). We evaluated our 
statistical diacritization approach using Ara-
bicSVMTools and our proposed tagger. The use 
of ArabicSVMTools has improved the perfor-
mance of our diacrtizer as shown in Table 10. 
ArabicSVMTools gave better results than our 
proposed tagger. However, our proposed tagger 
is about 4 times faster than ArabicSVMTools 
because we use less features. 
 
Tagger WER DER
ArabicSVMTools  12.79% 9.94% 
Proposed SVM  16.28% 11.36% 
Table 10: WER and DER for statistical approach us-
ing different taggers without considering case-ending 
diacritics. 
 
Table 11, shows the results after modifying both 
the statistical and the case ending approaches for 
TOK2, POS2, and CE2 tasks. The last row 
represent results after adding some simple heu-
ristic rules (SHR) to correctly add Tanween Ka-
sra instead of Tanween el Fatha in case of sound 
plural  feminine "??? ?????? ??????" . 
 
Technique WER DER
LR+DB+SVM 31.86% 7.92% 
LS+DB+SVM+CE 12.16% 3.78% 
LS+DB+SVM+CE+SHR 11.795% 3.245%
Table 11: WER and DER for different techniques 
                                                 
7 ArabicSVMTools: 
http://www.cs.columbia.edu/~mdiab/downloads/ArabicSV
MTools.tar.gz 
 
6 Conclusions and Future work 
In this paper, we proposed a diacritization model 
that distinguishes between internal and case end-
ing diacritization. The overall performance is 
comparable with the best diacritization model 
that was reported in the literature so far. 
Statistically based methods show great promise 
in addressing the ambiguity resolution problem 
in Arabic language diacritization.  
The proposed system yields good results in the 
DER and WER compared with MADA-D sys-
tem, the modifications for case ending algorithm 
have enhanced the performance. 
The proposed system has an advantage that we 
can use all internal diacritics approaches in paral-
lel because there is no such dependency between 
algorithms. Nevertheless, the case ending algo-
rithm can also be processed in parallel with the 
statistical approach. Such parallel processing ad-
vantage can improve the response time that could 
be critical for some diacritization-based real time 
systems. 
Maintaining the bigram database up-to-date will 
significantly enhance the performance of the sys-
tem. 
Our future work will include adding some heu-
ristic rules for the proposed model as a post 
processing. This  will enhance the performance 
for the system especially to restore correct dia-
critics of the possessive personal pronounce suf-
fixes ? ?????? ?. Moreover, adding extra POS tag 
sets to distinguish between dual noun and plural 
nouns will enhance the diacritization results. We 
plan also to enrich the system by increasing the 
training set by using latest fully diacritized Tree-
bank like Part1 V3.0 (Maamouri et al 2008) 
which is not available due to limitation of our 
budget. This has the effect of enhancing the sys-
tem performance and allow us to make a compar-
ison with other systems, such as (Habash and 
Rambow, 2007) and (Zitouni et al , 2006) . 
 
References 
Abo Bakr H. M. , Shaalan K., Ziedan I., 2008, "A 
Statistical Method for Adding Case Ending Diacrit-
ics for Arabic Text", The Eighth Conference on 
Language Engineering, ESOLEC?2008, Page 225-
234, Cairo, Egypt,Deceber 17-18 2008. 
Ananthakrishnan, Narayanan S., and Bangalore S., 
(2005), ?Automatic diacritization of arabic tran-
scripts for asr?. In Proceedings of ICON-05, Kan-
pur, India. 
Buckwalter T., (2002). Buckwalter Arabic morpho-
logical analyzer version 1.0. Technical report, Lin-
34
guistic Data Consortium, LDC2002L49 and ISBN 
1-58563- 257-0.  
Cristianini N. and Taylor J.S., (2000), ?An Introduc-
tion to Support Vector Machines and Other Kernel-
based Learning Methods?, The Press Syndicate of 
the University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom. 
Diab M., Hacioglu K., and Jurafsky D., (2004), "Au-
tomatic Tagging of Arabic Text: From Raw Text to 
Base Phrase Chunks," In Proc. of HLT/NAACL 
2004, Boston. 
Diab M., Hacioglu K., and Jurafsky D.,(2007), ?Arab-
ic Computational Morphology Knowledge-based 
and Empirical Methods? - Chapter 7 ?Automatic 
Processing of Modern Standard Arabic 
Text?,ISBN: 978-1-4020-6046-5, SpringerLink. 
El-Imam Y., (2003). Phonetization of Arabic: rules 
and algorithms. Computer Speech and Language, 
18:339? 373. 
El-Sadany T. and Hashish M., (1988). Semi-
automatic vowelization of Arabic verbs.  In 10th 
NC Conference, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. 
Elshafei M., Al-Muhtaseb H., and Alghamdi M., 
(2006), ?Statistical Methods for Automatic Diacri-
tization of Arabic Text?. The Saudi 18th National 
Computer Conference. Riyadh. 18: 301-306. 
Emam O. and Fisher V. (2004)., A hierarchical ap-
proach for the statistical vowelization of Arabic 
text. Technical report, IBM patent filed, DE9-2004-
0006, US patent application US2005/0192809 A1. 
Gal Y., (2002). An HMM approach to vowel restora-
tion in Arabic and Hebrew. In ACL-02 Workshop 
on Computational Approaches to Semitic Languag-
es. 
Habash N. and Rambow O., (2007), ?Arabic Diacriti-
zation through Full Morphological Tagging?, In 
Proceedings of the North American chapter of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics 
(NAACL), Rochester, New York. 
Hearst M. A., (1998), "Support Vector Machines," 
IEEE Intelligent Systems, vol. 13,  no. 4,  pp. 18-
28,  Jul/Aug,  1998. 
Kirchhoff K. and Vergyri D., (2005). Cross-dialectal 
data sharing for acoustic modeling in Arabic speech 
recognition. Speech Communication, 46(1):37?51, 
May.  
Kudo T. and Matsumoto Y., (2003), " Fast methods 
for kernel-based text analysis," In Proceedings of 
the 41st Annual Meeting on Association For Com-
putational Linguistics - Volume 1 (Sapporo, Japan, 
July 07 - 12, 2003). Annual Meeting of the ACL. 
Association for Computational Linguistics, Morris-
town. 
Maamouri, M., Bies, A. & Buckwalter, T. (2004). The 
Penn Arabic treebank: Building a largescale anno-
tated Arabic corpus. In NEMLAR Conference on 
Arabic Language Resources and Tools, Cairo, 
Egypt. 
Maamouri M., Bies A., Kulick S., (2008), "Enhanced 
Annotation and Parsing of the Arabic Treebank"; 
INFOS 2008, Cairo, Egypt, March 27-29, 2008. 
Sang E. and Buchholz S., (2000), ? Introduction to the 
CoNLL-2000 Shared Task: Chunking?, Proceeding 
of CoNLL-2000 and LLL-2000,Page 127-132, Lis-
bon,Portugal. 
Zitouni I., Sorensen J. S., and Sarikaya R., (2006), 
?Maximum entropy based restoration of Arabic di-
acritics?. In Proceedings of ACL?06. 
35
