Proceedings of CLIAWS3, Third International Cross Lingual Information Access Workshop, pages 38?45,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Investigation in Statistical Language-Independent Approaches for 
Opinion Detection in English, Chinese and Japanese
Olena Zubaryeva Jacques Savoy
Institute of Informatics Institute of Informatics
University of Neuch?tel University of Neuch?tel
Emile-Argand, 11, 2009 Switzerland Emile-Argand, 11, 2009 Switzerland
olena.zubaryeva@unine.ch jacques.savoy@unine.ch
Abstract
In this paper we present a new statistical ap-
proach to opinion detection and its? evalua-
tion on the English,  Chinese and Japanese 
corpora.  Besides,  the  proposed  method  is 
compared  with  three  baselines,  namely 
Na?ve  Bayes  classifier,  a  language  model 
and an approach based on significant collo-
cations. These models being language inde-
pendent are improved with the use of lan-
guage-dependent technique on the example 
of  the  English  corpus.  We show that  our 
method almost  always  gives  better  perfor-
mance  compared  to  the  considered  base-
lines.
1 Introduction
The task of opinion mining has received atten-
tion  from  the  research  community  and  industry 
lately. The main reasons for extensive research in 
the area are the growth of user needs and compa-
nies? desire to analyze and exploit the user-gener-
ated content on the Web in the form of blogs and 
discussions. Thus, users want to search for opin-
ions on various topics from products that they want 
to buy to  opinions  about  events and well-known 
persons. A lot of businesses are interested in how 
their  services  are  perceived  by  their  customers. 
Therefore,  the  detection  of  subjectivity  in  the 
searched information may add the additional value 
to the interpretation of the results and their relevan-
cy to the searched topic. The growth of user activi-
ty on the Web gives substantial amounts of data for 
these purposes. 
In the context of globalization the possibility to 
provide search of opinionated information in dif-
ferent natural languages might be of great interest 
to  organizations  and  communities  around  the 
world. Our goal is to design a fully automatic sys-
tem capable of working in a language-independent 
manner. In order to compare our approach on dif-
ferent languages we chose English, traditional Chi-
nese and Japanese corpora. As a further possibility 
to improve the effectiveness of the language inde-
pendent  methods  we also consider the  additional 
application of language dependent techniques spe-
cific to the particular natural language. 
The related work in opinion detection is present-
ed in Section 2. We describe our approach in detail 
with  the  three  other  baselines  in  Section  3.  The 
fourth  section  describes  language  specific  ap-
proach used for the English corpus. In Section 5 
we present the evaluation of the three models using 
the NTCIR-6 and NTCIR-7 MOAT English, Chi-
nese  and  Japanese  test  collections  (Seki  et  al., 
2008). The main findings of our study and future 
research possibilities are discussed in the last sec-
tions.
2 Related Work 
The focus of our work is to propose a general 
approach that can be easily deployed for different 
natural languages. This task of opinion detection is 
important  in  many  areas  of  NLP  such  as 
question/answering,  information  retrieval,  docu-
38
ment classification and summarization, and infor-
mation  filtering.  There  are  numerous  challenges 
when trying to solve the task of opinion detection. 
Some of them include the fact that the distinction 
between opinionated and factual could be denoted 
by a single word in the underlying text (e.g., ?The 
iPhone  price  is  $600.?  vs.  ?The  iPhone  price  is 
high.?).  Most  importantly  evaluating  whether  or 
not a given sentence conveys an opinion could be 
questionable when judged by different people. Fur-
ther, the opinion classification can be done on dif-
ferent levels, from documents to clauses in the sen-
tence. 
We consider the opinion detection task on a sen-
tence level.  After retrieving the relevant sentences 
using any IR system we automatically classify a 
sentence according to two classes: opinionated and 
not opinionated (factual).  When viewing an opin-
ion-finding task as a classification task, it is usual-
ly  considered  as  a  supervised  learning  problem 
where a statistical model performs a learning task 
by  analyzing  a  pool  of  labeled  sentences.  Two 
questions must therefore be solved, namely defin-
ing an effective classification algorithm and deter-
mining  pertinent  features  that  might  effectively 
discriminate between opinionated and factual sen-
tences.   From  this  perspective,  during  the  last 
TREC  opinion-finding  task  (Macdonald et  al., 
2008) and the last NTCIR-7 workshop (Seki et al, 
2008), a series of suggestions surfaced. 
As  the  language-dependent  approach  various 
teams  proposed  using  Levin  defined  verb  cate-
gories  (namely,  characterize,  declare,  conjecture, 
admire,  judge, assess,  say,  complain, advise)  and 
their features (a verb corresponding to a given cat-
egory occurring in the analyzed information item) 
that  may  be  pertinent  as  a  classification  feature 
(Bloom  et  al.,  2007).  However,  words  such  as 
these  cannot  always  work correctly as  clues,  for 
example with the word ?said? in the two sentences 
?There were crowds and crowds of people at the 
concert,  said  Ann?  and  ?There  were  more  than 
10,000 people at the concert, said Ann.?  Both sen-
tences contain the clue word ?said? but  only the 
first one contains an opinion on the target product. 
Turney (2002) suggested comparing the frequency 
of  phrase  co-occurrences  with  words  predeter-
mined  by  the  sentiment  lexicon.  Specific  to  the 
opinion  detection  in  Chinese  language  Ku et  al. 
(2006) propose a dictionary-based approach for ex-
traction and summarization. For the Japanese lan-
guage  in  the  last  NTCIR-6  and  NTCIR-7  work-
shops the opinion finding methods included the use 
of  supervised  machine  learning  approaches  with 
specific selection of certain parts-of-speech (POS) 
and sentence parts in the form of  n-gram features 
to improve performance. 
There  has  been  a  trend  in  applying  language 
models  for  opinion  detection  task  (Lavrenko, 
Croft, 2001). Pang & Lee (2004) propose the use 
of language models for sentiment analysis task and 
subjectivity extraction.  Usually,  language  models 
are  trained on the  labeled data  and as  an output 
they give probabilities of classified tokens belong-
ing to the class.  Eguchi & Lavrenko (2006) pro-
pose the use of probabilistic language models for 
ranking the results not only by sentiment but also 
by the topic relevancy. 
As  an  alternative  other  teams  during  the  last 
TREC and NTCIR evaluation campaigns have sug-
gested  variations  of  Na?ve  Bayes  classifier,  lan-
guage models and SVM, along with the use of such 
heuristics  as  word  order,  punctuation,  sentence 
length, etc. 
We might also mention OpinionFinder (Wilson 
et al, 2005), a more complex system that performs 
subjectivity analyses to identify opinions as well as 
sentiments  and other  private  states  (speculations, 
dreams, etc.). This system is based on various clas-
sical  computational  linguistics  components  (tok-
enization, part-of-speech (POS) tagging (Toutano-
va  &  Manning,  2000)  as  well  as  classification 
tools. For example, a Na?ve Bayes classifier (Wit-
ten & Frank, 2005) is used to distinguish between 
subjective  and  objective  sentences.  A  rule-based 
system is included to identify both speech events 
(?said,? ?according to?) and direct  subjective ex-
pressions (?is happy,? ?fears?) within a given sen-
tence.  Of  course  such  learning  system  requires 
both a training set  and a deeper knowledge of a 
given  natural  language  (morphological  compo-
nents, syntactic analyses, semantic thesaurus).  
The lack of enough training data for the learn-
ing-based  systems  is  clearly  a  drawback.  More-
over, it is difficult to objectively establish when a 
complex learning system has enough training data 
(and to objectively measure the amount of training 
data needed in a complex ML model).
39
3 Language Independent Approaches 
In  this  section  we  propose  our  statistical  ap-
proach for opinion detection as well as the descrip-
tion of the Na?ve Bayes and language model (LM) 
baselines. 
3.1  Logistic Model
Our system is based on two components: the ex-
traction and weighting of useful features (limited 
to isolated words in this study) to allow an effec-
tive  classification,  and  a  classification  scheme. 
First, we present the feature extraction approach in 
the Section 3.1.1. Next, we discuss our classifica-
tion model. Sections 3.2 and 3.3 describe the cho-
sen baselines.
3.1.1 Features Extraction
 In order to determine the features that can help 
distinguishing  between  factual  and  opinionated 
documents, we have selected the tokens. As shown 
by Kilgarriff (2001), the selection of words (or in 
general features) in an effort to characterize a par-
ticular  category  is  a  difficult  task.  The  goal  is 
therefore to design a method capable of selecting 
terms that clearly belong to one of the classes. The 
approaches that use words and their frequencies or 
distributions are usually based on a contingency ta-
ble (see Table 1).   
S C-
? a b a+b
not ? c d c+d
a+c b+d n=a+b+c
+d
Table 1. Example of a contingency table.
In this table, the letter a represents the number of 
occurrences (tokens) of  the word  ? in the docu-
ment set S (corresponding to a subset of the larger 
corpus C in the current study). The letter b denotes 
the number of tokens of the same word ? ?in the 
rest of the corpus (denoted C-) while a+b is the to-
tal number of occurrences in the entire corpus (de-
noted C with C=C-?S).  Similarly,  a+c indicates 
the total number of tokens in S.  The entire corpus 
C corresponds to the union of the subset S and C- 
that contains n tokens (n = a+b+c+d).   
Based on the MLE (Maximum Likelihood Esti-
mation) principle the values shown in a contingen-
cy table could be used to estimate various probabil-
ities. For example we might calculate the probabil-
ity of the occurrence of the word  ? in the entire 
corpus C as Pr(?) = (a+b)/n or the probability of 
finding in C a word belonging to the set S as Pr(S) 
= (a+c)/n.  
Now to define the discrimination power a term 
?, we suggest defining a weight attached to it ac-
cording to Muller's method (Muller, 1992). We as-
sume that the distribution of the number of tokens 
of the word ? follows a binomial distribution with 
the parameters p and n'. The parameter p represent-
ed the probability of drawing a word ? also denot-
ed in the corpus C (or Pr(?)) and could be estimat-
ed as (a+b)/n.  If we repeat this drawing n' =  a+c 
times, we will have an estimate of the number of 
word  ? included in the subset S by Pr(?).n'.  On 
the other hand, Table 1 gives also the number of 
observations of the word ? in S, and this value is 
denoted by a. A large difference between a and the 
product  Pr(?).n' is  clearly  an  indication  that  the 
presence of a occurrences of the term ? is not due 
by chance but corresponds to an intrinsic charac-
teristic of the subset S compared to the subset C-.  
In order to obtain a clear rule, we suggest com-
puting the Z score attached to each word ?.  If the 
mean of a binomial distribution is Pr(?).n', its vari-
ance is n'.Pr(?).(1-Pr(?)). These two elements are 
needed to compute the standard score as described 
in Equation 1.   
           ))Pr(1()Pr(`
)Pr(`)(
??
?
?
???
??
= n
naZscore         (1)
As a decision rule we consider the words having 
a Z score between -2 and 2 as terms belonging to a 
common vocabulary, as compared to the reference 
corpus  (as  for  example  ?will,?  ?with,?  ?many,? 
?friend,? or ?forced? in our example). This thresh-
old was chosen arbitrary. A word having a Z score 
> 2 would be considered as overused (e.g., ?that,? 
?should,?  ?must,?  ?not,?  or  ?government?  in 
MOAT NTCIR-6 English corpus), while a Z score 
<  -2 would be interpreted  as  an underused  term 
(e.g.,  ?police,? ?cell,? ?year,? ?died,? or ?accord-
ing?).  The  arbitrary  threshold  limit  of  2  corre-
sponds to the limit of the standard normal distribu-
tion, allowing us to find around 5% of the observa-
40
tions (around 2.5% less than -2 and 2.5% greater 
than 2). As shown in Figure 1, the difference be-
tween our arbitrary limit of 2 (drawn in solid line) 
and the limits delimiting the 2.5% of the observa-
tions (dotted line) are rather close.  
Figure 1.  Distribution of the Z score
(MOAT NTCIR-6 English corpus, opinionated).
Based  on  a  training  sample,  we  were  able  to 
compute the Z score for different words and retain 
only those having a large or small Z score value. 
Such a procedure is repeated for all classification 
categories  (opinionated and factual).   It  is  worth 
mentioning that such a general scheme may work 
with  isolated  words  (as  applied  here)  or  n-gram 
(that  could be a sequence of either characters or 
words), as well as with punctuations or other sym-
bols  (numbers,  dollar  signs),  syntactic  patterns 
(e.g., verb-adjective in comparative or superlative 
forms) or other features (presence of proper names, 
hyperlinks, etc.)  
3.1.2 Classification Model
When our system needs to determine the opin-
ionatedness of  a  sentence,  we first  represent  this 
sentence as a set of words. For each word, we can 
then retrieve the Z scores for each category. If all 
Z scores for all words are judged as belonging to 
the  general  vocabulary,  our  classification  proce-
dure selects the default category.  If not, we may 
increase the weight associated with the correspond-
ing category (e.g., for the opinionated class if the 
underlying term is overused in this category).  
 Such a simple additive process could be viewed 
as a first classification scheme, selecting the class 
having  the  highest  score  after  enumerating  all 
words occurring in a sentence. This approach as-
sumes that the word order does not have any im-
pact. We also assume that each sentence has a sim-
ilar length. 
For  this  model,  we  can  define  two  variables, 
namely  SumOP  indicating the sum of the Z score 
of terms overused in opinionated class (i.e. Z score 
> 2) and appearing in the input sentence. Similarly, 
we can define SumNOOP for the other class. How-
ever, a large  SumOP value can be obtained by a 
single word or by a set of two (or more) words. 
Thus, it could be useful to consider also the num-
ber of words (features) that are overused (or under-
used)  in  a  sentence.  Therefore,  we  can  define 
#OpOver  indicated  the  number  of  terms  in  the 
evaluated  sentence  that  tends  to  be  overused  in 
opinionated  documents  (i.e.  Z  score  >  2)  while 
#OpUnder indicated  the  number  of  terms  that 
tends to be underused in the class of  opinionated 
documents (i.e. Z score < -2).  Similarly, we can 
define the variables #NoopOver, #NoopUnder, but 
for the non-opinionated category. 
 With these additional explanatory variables, we 
can compute the corresponding subjectivity score 
for each sentence as follows:
NoopUnderNoopOver
NoopOverscoreNoop
OpUnderOpOver
OpOverscoreOp
##
 #_
##
 #_
+
=
+
=
    (2)
As a better way to combine different judgments 
we  suggest  following Le Calv?  & Savoy (2000) 
and normalize the scores using the logistic regres-
sion. The  logistic  transformation  ?(x)  given  by 
each logistic regression model is defined as:
?+
?
=
=
=
+
+
k
i ii
k
i ii
x
x
e
ex
10
10
1
)(
??
??
pi                   (3)
where ?i are the coefficients obtained from the fit-
ting, xi are the variables, and k is the number of ex-
planatory variables.  These coefficients reflect  the 
relative  importance  of  each  variable  in  the  final 
score. 
For each sentence, we can compute the ?(x) cor-
responding to the two possible categories and the 
final decision is simply to classify the sentence ac-
cording to the max ?(x) value.  This approach takes 
account of the fact that some explanatory variables 
may have more importance than other in assigning 
the correct category.  
41
3.2 Na?ve Bayes 
For  comparison  with  our  logistic  model  we 
chose three baselines: Na?ve Bayes  and language 
model and finding significant collocations. Despite 
its simplicity Na?ve Bayes classifier tends to per-
form relatively well for various text categorization 
problems  (Witten,  Frank,  2005).  In  accordance 
with our approach, we used word tokens as classi-
fication features for  the English corpora.  For the 
Chinese  and  Japanese  languages  overlapping  bi-
gram approach was used (Savoy, 2005). The train-
ing method estimates the relative frequency of the 
probability  that  the  chosen  feature  belongs  to  a 
specific  category  using  add-one  smoothing  tech-
nique.  
3.3 Language Model (LM)
As a second baseline we use the classification 
based on the language model using overlapping n-
gram sequences (n was set to 8) as suggested by 
Pang & Lee (2004, 2005) for the English language. 
Using  the  overlapping  4-gram  sequence  for  the 
word  ?company?,  we  obtain:  ?comp?,  ?ompa?, 
?mpan?, etc. For the Chinese and Japanese corpora 
bigram approach was applied. As in Na?ve Bayes, 
the  language  model  gives  the  probability  of  the 
sentence belonging to a specific class.   Working 
with relatively large n allows a lot of word tokens 
to be processed as is, at least for the English lan-
guage.
3.4 Significant Collocations (SC)
Another promising approach among the super-
vised learning schemes is the use of collocations of 
two  or  more  words  or  features  (Manning  & 
Sch?tze, 2000). This method allows classification 
of  instances  based  on  significant  collocations 
learned from the labeled data. Some examples of 
the frequent collocations in the corpora would be 
?in the?, ?of the?. The idea of the method is to find 
significant collocations (SC) that occur more in the 
opinionated  corpus  than  in  the  non-opinionated 
one. In order to do so the model returns the collo-
cations  of  two  words  for  the  English  language 
based on the degree to which their counts in the 
opinionated corpus exceed their expected counts in 
the not opinionated one. As an example for the En-
glish opinionated corpus the following collocations 
were found: ?are worried?, ?pleaded guilty?, ?ea-
ger to?, ?expressed hope?. Clearly, overlooking the 
list  of  new  found  collocations  it  is  possible  to 
judge their relevancy. However, it is not clear how 
to use this method with the Chinese and Japanese 
texts,  since  these  languages  do  not  have  white 
space or other usual delimiters as in English. In or-
der to  solve the  problem of  feature selection we 
chose  bigram  indexing  on  the  Chinese  and 
Japanese corpora and searched for significant new 
collocations of bigrams.
4 Language Dependent Approach
As the language dependent technique to improve 
the obtained classification results  we suggest  the 
use  of  SentiWordNet  for  the  English  language 
(Esuli & Sebastiani, 2006). Since the vocabulary of 
words in SentiWordNet is quite limited it is not al-
ways clear how to combine the objectivity scores. 
The SentiWordNet  score  was computed  in  the 
following way: to define the opinionated score of 
the sentence the sum of scores representing that the 
word  belongs  to  opinionated  category  for  each 
word in the sentence is calculated. The not opin-
ionated score of  the sentence is  computed in the 
same way with the difference that it is divided by 
the number of words in the sentence. Thus, if opin-
ionated  score  is  more  than  not  opinionated  one, 
there is an opinion, otherwise not. This is a heuris-
tic approach that intuitively takes account of the ra-
tionalization  that  there  are  more  not  opinionated 
words  than  opinionated  in  the  sentence.  At  the 
same  time  the  presence  of  opinionated  word 
weighs more than the presence of the not opinion-
ated ones. Especially, this approach seems to give 
good result.
5 Experiments
The experiment was carried out on the NTCIR-6 
and NTCIR-7 English news corpora using 10-fold 
cross-validation  model  on  a  lenient  evaluation 
standard  as  described  in  Seki  et  al.  We  do  not 
question the construction and structure of opinions 
in  this  data  set,  since  those  questions  were  ad-
dressed  at the NTCIR workshops. Using the Chi-
nese and Japanese corpora we can verify the quali-
ty  of  the  suggested  language-independent  ap-
proaches. 
42
5.1 Feature Selection & Evaluation in English
For the evaluation of sentences in English, the 
assumption of isolated words (bag-of-words) pre-
viously stemmed was used by our system. The cor-
pora are comprised of more than 13,400 sentences, 
4,859 (36.3%)  of  which  are  opinionated.  As  the 
evaluation metrics precision, recall and F1-measure 
were used based on gold standard evaluation pro-
vided  by NTCIR workshops  (Seki  et  al.,  2008). 
The precision and recall  are  weighted equally in 
our  experiment  but  it  should  be  recognized  that 
based on the system's needs and focus there could 
be more accent on precision or recall. 
Model Precision Recall F1-measure
Logistic model 0.583 0.508 0.543
Na?ve Bayes 0.415 0.364 0.388
LM 0.350 0.339 0.343
SC 0.979 0.360 0.527
Table 2. Evaluation results of 10-fold cross-valida-
tion on NTCIR-6 and NTCIR-7 English  corpora.
Comparing the results in Table 2 to the baselines 
of the Na?ve Bayes classifier and LM evaluated on 
the same training and testing sets, we see that lo-
gistic  model  outperforms  the  baselines.   In  our 
opinion, this is due to the use of more explanatory 
variables that better discriminate between opinion-
ated and factual sentences. 
The use  of  language  dependent  techniques  on 
the other hand might  further improve the results. 
Especially, this seems promising observing the re-
sults when using the SentiWordNet on the English 
corpus. In Table 3 one can see that the first three 
models show improvement. Specifically, the preci-
sion of the logistic model increased from 0.583 to 
0.766 (by 31.4%).
Model Precision Recall F1-measure
Logistic model 0.766 0.488 0.597
Na?ve Bayes 0.667 0.486 0.562
LM 0.611 0.474 0.534
SC 0.979 0.420 0.588
Table 3. Evaluation results of 10-fold cross-valida-
tion on NTCIR-6 and NTCIR-7 English corpora 
with SentiWordNet.
When considering the F1-measure, the impact of 
the language-dependent approach shows 9% of im-
provement, from 0.543 to 0.597. 
The way that we incorporated the scores provid-
ed by SentiWordNet was done with the help of lin-
ear  combination  and  normalization  of  scores  for 
each of the models.
5.2 Feature Selection & Evaluation in Chinese
We have assumed until now that words can be 
extracted  from a  sentence in  order  to  define  the 
needed features used to determine if the underlying 
information item conveys an opinion or not. Work-
ing  with  the  Chinese  language  this  assumption 
does no longer hold. Therefore, we need to deter-
mine indexing units by either applying an automat-
ing segmentation approach (based on either a mor-
phological  (e.g.,  CSeg&Tag)  or  a  statistical 
method (Murata & Isahara, 2003)) or considering 
n-gram indexing approach (unigram or bigram, for 
example).  Finally we may also consider a combi-
nation  of  both  n-gram and  word-based  indexing 
strategies.  
Based on the work of Savoy,  2005 we experi-
mented  with overlapping  bigram and trigram in-
dexing schemes for Chinese. The experimental re-
sults  show that  bigram indexing outperforms  tri-
gram on all  three  considered  statistical  methods. 
Therefore, as features for Chinese we used over-
lapping bigrams.
The  NTCIR-6  and  NTCIR-7  Chinese  corpora 
consisted  of  more  than  14,507  sentences,  9960 
(68.7%) of which are opinionated. The results of 
all three statistical models performed on the Chi-
nese corpora are presented in Table 4.
Model Precision Recall F1-measure
Logistic model 0.943 0.730 0.823
Na?ve Bayes 0.729 0.538 0.619
LM 0.581 0.634 0.606
SC 0.313 0.898 0.464
Table 4. Evaluation results of 10-fold cross-valida-
tion on NTCIR-6 and NTCIR-7 Chinese 
corpora.
From the results in Table 4 we clearly see that 
our  approach  gives  better  performance  and  con-
firms the results presented in Tables 2 and 3.  The 
significant improvement in scores could be due to 
the fact that Chinese corpus contains more opin-
ionated sentences in relevance to not opinionated 
once. Thus, the training set for opinionated classi-
43
fication was much larger compared to the English 
language. This proves the relevance of more train-
ing data for the learning-based systems. But the di-
rect  comparison  with  the  results  on  the  English 
corpus is not possible.
5.3 Feature Selection & Evaluation in Japanese
As with the Chinese language we face the same 
challenges  in  feature  definition  for  the  Japanese 
language. After experimenting with bigram and tri-
gram we chose bigram strategy for indexing and 
feature selection.
The NTCIR-6  and  NTCIR-7 Japanese corpora 
consisted  of  more  than  11,100  sentences  with 
4,622  opinionated  sentences  (representing  41.6% 
of the corpus). The results of the statistical models 
are shown in Table 5.
Model Precision Recall F-measure
Logistic model 0.527 0.761 0.623
Na?ve Bayes 0.565 0.570 0.567
LM 0.657 0.667 0.662
SC 0.663 0.856 0.747
Table 5. Evaluation results of 10-fold cross-valida-
tion on NTCIR-6 and NTCIR-7 Japanese 
corpora.
From the results we can see that the significant 
collocations  model  outperforms  the  others.  This 
could be due to the fewer number of opinionated 
sentences compared to the Chinese or English cor-
pora. This tends to indicate the necessity of an ex-
tensive training data for the logistic model in order 
to provide reliable opinion estimates.
6 Future Work and Conclusion
In  this  paper  we  presented our  language-inde-
pendent approach based on using Z scores and the 
logistic  model  to  identify  those  terms  that  ade-
quately characterize subsets of the corpus belong-
ing to opinionated or non-opinionated classes.  In 
this selection, we focused only on the statistical as-
pect (distribution difference) of words or bigrams. 
Our approach was compared to the three baselines, 
namely  Na?ve  Bayes  classifier,  language  model 
and an approach based on finding significant collo-
cations. We have also demonstrated on the English 
corpora how we can use the language dependent 
techniques to identify the possibility of opinion ex-
pressed in the sentences that otherwise were classi-
fied as not opinionated by the system. The use of 
SentiWordNet (Esuli & Sebastiani, 2006) in com-
bination with our methods yields better results for 
the English language. 
This study was limited to isolated words in En-
glish corpus but in further research we could easily 
consider  longer  word  sequences  to  include  both 
noun  and  verb  phrases.  The  most  useful  terms 
would also then be added to the query to improve 
the rank of opinionated documents. As another ap-
proach, we could use the evaluation of co-occur-
rence terms of pronouns ?I? and ?you? mainly with 
verbs (e.g., ?believe,? ?feel,? ?think,? ?hate?) using 
part of speech tagging techniques in order to boost 
the rank of retrieved items.  
Using  freely  available  POS  taggers,  we  could 
take POS information into account (Toutanova & 
Mannning,  2004)  and hopefully develop  a  better 
classifier.   For  example,  the  presence  of  proper 
names  and  their  frequency or  distribution  might 
help us classify a document as being opinionated 
or not.  The presence of adjectives and adverbs, to-
gether  with their  superlative  (e.g.,  best,  most)  or 
comparative (e.g., greater, more) forms could also 
be useful hints regarding the presence of opinionat-
ed versus factual information.  
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the MOAT task organiz-
ers at NTCIR-7 for their valuable work.
References 
Bloom, K., Stein, S., & Argamon, S.  2007.  Appraisal  
extraction  for  news  opinion  analysis  at  NTCIR-6. 
Proceedings NTCIR-6, NII, Tokyo, pp. 279-289. 
Eguchi, K., Lavrenko, V. 2006. Sentiment retrieval us-
ing generative models. Proceedings of EMNLP, Syd-
ney, pp. 345-354. 
Esuli, A., Sebastiani, F. 2006. SentiWordNet: A publicly  
available lexical  resource for  opinion mining.  Pro-
ceedings LREC?06, Genoa. 
Kilgarriff, A.  2001.  Comparing corpora. International 
Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 6(1):97-133. 
Ku, L.-W., Liang, Y.-T., Chen, H.-H. 2006. Opinion ex-
traction,  summarization  and  tracking  in  news  and 
blog  corpora. Proceedings  of  AAAI-2006  Spring 
Symposium on Computational  Approaches  to  Ana-
lyzing Weblogs, pp. 100-107. 
Lavrenko, V., Croft, W.B. 2001. Relevance-based lanu-
age models. SIGIR, New Orleans, LA, pp. 120-127. 
44
Le Calv?, A., Savoy, J.  2000.  Database merging strat-
egy based on logistic regression.  Information Pro-
cessing & Management, 36(3):341-359. 
Macdonald,  C.,  Ounis,  I.,  &  Soboroff,  I.   2008. 
Overview of the TREC-2007 blog track.  In Proceed-
ings  TREC-2007,  NIST  Publication  #500-274,  pp. 
1-13. 
Manning, C. D., Sch?tze, H. 2000. Foundations of Sta-
tistical Natural Language Processing. MIT Press. 
Muller,  C. 1992.  Principes  et  m?thodes de statistique  
lexicale. Champion, Paris. 
Murata, M., Ma, Q., & Isahara, H. 2003. Applying mul-
tiple  characteristics  and  techniques  to  obtain  high  
levels of performance in information retrieval. Pro-
ceedings of NTCIR-3, NII, Tokyo. 
Pang, B., Lee, L. 2004. A sentimental education: Senti-
ment  analysis  using  subjectivity  summarization  
based  on  minimum  cuts. Proceedings  of  ACL, 
Barcelona, pp. 271-278. 
Pang, B., Lee,  L. 2005.  Seeing stars: Exploiting class 
relationships  for  sentiment  categorization  with  re-
spect to rating scales. In Proceedings of the Associa-
tion  for  Computational  Linguistics  (ACL),  pp. 
115-124. 
Savoy,  J.  2005.  Comparative  study  of  monolingual 
search models for use with asian languages. ACM 
Transactions  on  Asian  Language  Information  Pro-
cessing, 4(2):163-189. 
Seki, Y., Evans, D. K., Ku, L.-W., Sun, L., Chen, H.-H., 
& Kando, N.  2008.  Overview of multilingual opin-
ion analysis task at NTCIR-7. Proceedings NTCIR-7, 
NII, Tokyo, pp. 185-203. 
Toutanova,  K.,  &  Manning,  C.  2000.  Enriching  the 
Knowledge  Sources  Used  in  a  Maximum  Entropy 
Part-of-Speech  Tagging. Proceedings  EMNLP / 
VLC-2000, Hong Kong, pp. 63-70. 
Turney, P. 2002. Thumbs up or thumbs down? Semantic  
orientation applied to unsupervised classification of  
reviews. Proceedings of the ACL, Philadelphia (PA), 
pp. 417-424. 
Wilson, T., Hoffmann,  P.,  Somasundaran, S.,  Kessler, 
J., Wiebe, J., Choi, Y., Cardie, C., Riloff, E., & Pat-
wardhan,  S.,  2005.   OpinionFinder:   A system for  
subjectivity  analysis. Proceedings  HLT/EMNLP, 
Vancouver (BC), pp. 34-35.  
Witten, I.A., & Frank, E.  2005.  Data Mining: Practi-
cal Machine Learning Tools and Techniques.  Mor-
gan Kaufmann, San Francisco (CA).  
45
