Coling 2008: Proceedings of the workshop on Cognitive Aspects of the Lexicon (COGALEX 2008), pages 94?101
Manchester, August 2008
Cognitively Salient Relations
for Multilingual Lexicography
Gerhard Kremer
CIMeC
University of Trento
gerhard.kremer@unitn.it
Andrea Abel
EURAC
Bolzano
aabel@eurac.edu
Marco Baroni
CIMeC
University of Trento
marco.baroni@unitn.it
Abstract
Providing sets of semantically related
words in the lexical entries of an electronic
dictionary should help language learners
quickly understand the meaning of the tar-
get words. Relational information might
also improve memorisation, by allowing
the generation of structured vocabulary
study lists. However, an open issue is
which semantic relations are cognitively
most salient, and should therefore be used
for dictionary construction. In this paper,
we present a concept description elicita-
tion experiment conducted with German
and Italian speakers. The analysis of the
experimental data suggests that there is a
small set of concept-class?dependent rela-
tion types that are stable across languages
and robust enough to allow discrimination
across broad concept domains. Our further
research will focus on harvesting instantia-
tions of these classes from corpora.
1 Introduction
In electronic dictionaries, lexical entries can be
enriched with hyperlinks to semantically related
words. In particular, we focus here on those re-
lated words that can be seen as systematic prop-
erties of the target entry, i. e., the basic concepts
that would be used to define the entry in relation to
its superordinate category and coordinate concepts.
So, for example, for animals the most salient rela-
tions would be notions such as ?parts? and ?typical
c
? 2008. Licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/). Some
rights reserved.
behaviour?. For a horse, salient properties will in-
clude the mane and hooves as parts, and neighing
as behaviour.
Sets of relevant and salient properties allow the
user to collocate a word within its so-called ?word
field? and to distinguish it more clearly from neigh-
bour concepts, since the meaning of a word is
not defined in isolation, but in contrast to related
words in its word field (Geckeler, 2002). More-
over, knowing the typical relations of concepts in
different domains might help pedagogical lexicog-
raphy to produce structured networks where, from
each word, the learner can naturally access entries
for other words that represent properties which are
salient and distinctive for the target concept class
(parts of animals, functions of tools, etc.). We
envisage a natural application of this in the au-
tomated creation of structured vocabulary study
lists. Finally, this knowledge might be used as
a basis to populate lexical networks by building
models of concepts in terms of ?relation sketches?
based on salient typed properties (when an animal
is added to our lexicon, we know that we will have
to search a corpus to extract its parts, behaviour,
etc., whereas for a tool the function would be the
most important property to mine).
This paper provides a first step in the direction of
dictionaries enriched with cognitively salient prop-
erty descriptions by eliciting concept descriptions
from subjects speaking different languages, and
analysing the general patterns emerging from these
data.
It is worth distinguishing our approach to enrich-
ing connections in a lexical resource from the one
based on free association, such as has been recently
pursued, e. g., within the WordNet project (Boyd-
Graber et al, 2006). While we do not dispute the
usefulness of free associates, they are irrelevant to
94
our purposes, since we want to generate system-
atic, structured descriptions of concepts, in terms
of the relation types that are most salient for their
semantic fields. Knowing that the word Holland
is ?evoked? by the word tulip might be useful for
other reasons, but it does not allow us to harvest
systematic properties of flowers in order to popu-
late their relation sketch: we rather want to find
out that tulips, being flowers, will have colour as
a salient property type. As a location property of
tulips, we would prefer something like garden in-
stead of the name of a country or individual asso-
ciations. To minimise free association, we asked
participants in our experiments to produce concept
descriptions in terms of characteristic properties
of the target concepts (although we are not aware
of systematic studies comparing free associates to
concept description tasks, the latter methodology
is fairly standard in cognitive science: see sec-
tion 2.2 below).
To our knowledge, this sort of approach has
not been proposed in lexicography, yet. Cognitive
scientists focus on ?concepts?, glossing over the
fact that what subjects will produce are (strings
of) words, and as such they will be, at least to
a certain extent, language-dependent. For lexico-
graphic applications, this aspect cannot, of course,
be ignored, in particular if the goal is to produce
lexical entries for language learners (so that both
their first and their second languages should be
taken into account).
We face this issue directly in the elicitation ex-
periment we present here, in which salient rela-
tions for a set of 50 concepts from 10 different
categories are collected from comparable groups
of German and Italian speakers. In particular, we
collected data from high school students in South
Tyrol, a region situated in Northern Italy, inhabited
by both German and Italian speakers. Both Ger-
man and Italian schools exist, where the respective
non-native language is taught. It is important to
stress that the two communities are relatively sep-
arated, and most speakers are not from bilingual
families or bilingual social environments: They
study the other language as an intensively taught
L2 in school. Thus, we move in an ideal sce-
nario to test possible language-driven differences
in property descriptions, among speakers that have
a very similar cultural background.
South Tyrol also provides the concrete applica-
tive goal of our project. In public administration
and service, employees need to master both lan-
guages up to a certain standardised level (they have
to pass a ?bilingual? proficiency exam). Therefore,
there is a big need for language learning materi-
als. The practical outcome of our research will be
an extension of ELDIT1, an electronic learner?s dic-
tionary for German and Italian (Abel and Weber,
2000).
2 Related Work
Lexicographic projects providing semantic rela-
tions and experimental research on property gen-
eration are the basis for our research.
2.1 Dictionaries
In most paper-based general and learners? dictio-
naries only some information about synonyms and
sometimes antonyms is presented. Newer dictio-
naries, such as the ?Longman Language Activa-
tor? (Summers, 1999), are providing lists of related
words. While these will be useful to learners, infor-
mation about the kind of semantic relation is usu-
ally missing.
Semantic relations are often available in elec-
tronic resources, most famously in WordNet (Fell-
baum, 1998) and related projects like Kirrkirr
(Jansz et al, 1999), ALEXIA (Chanier and Selva,
1998), or as described in Fontenelle (1997). How-
ever, these resources tend to include few relation
types (hypernymy, meronymy, antonymy, etc.).
The salience of the relations chosen is not veri-
fied experimentally, and the same set of relation
types is used for all words that share the same part-
of-speech. Our results below, as well as work by
Vinson et al (2008), indicate that different concept
classes should, instead, be characterised by differ-
ent relation types (e. g., function is very salient for
tools, but not at all for animals).
2.2 Work in Cognitive Sciences
Several projects addressed the collection of prop-
erty generation data to provide the community
with feature norms to be used in different psy-
cholinguistic experiments and other analyses: Gar-
rard et al (2001) instructed subjects to complete
phrases (?concept is/has/can. . . ?), thus restricting
the set of producible feature types. McRae et
al. (2005) instructed their subjects to list concept
properties without such restrictions, but providing
them with some examples. Vinson et al (2008)
1URL http://www.eurac.edu/eldit
95
gave similar instructions, but explicitly asked sub-
jects not to freely associate.
However, these norms have been collected for
the English language. It remains to be explored
if concept representations in general and seman-
tic relations for our specific investigations have the
same properties across languages.
3 Data Collection
After choosing the concept classes and appropri-
ate concepts for the production experiment, con-
cept descriptions were collected from participants.
These were transcribed, normalised, and annotated
with semantic relation types.
3.1 Stimuli
The stimuli for the experiment consisted of 50 con-
crete concepts from 10 different classes (i. e., 5
concepts for each of the classes): mammal (dog,
horse, rabbit, bear, monkey), bird (seagull, spar-
row, woodpecker, owl, goose), fruit (apple, orange,
pear, pineapple, cherry), vegetable (corn, onion,
spinach, peas, potato), body part (eye, finger, head,
leg, hand), clothing (chemise, jacket, sweater,
shoes, socks), manipulable tool (comb, broom,
sword, paintbrush, tongs), vehicle (bus, ship, air-
plane, train, truck), furniture (table, bed, chair,
closet, armchair), and building (garage, bridge,
skyscraper, church, tower). They were mainly
taken from Garrard et al (2001) and McRae et
al. (2005). The concepts were chosen so that they
had unambiguous, reasonably monosemic lexical
realizations in both target languages.
The words representing these concepts were
translated into the two target languages, German
and Italian. A statistical analysis (using Tukey?s
honestly significant difference test as implemented
in the R toolkit2) of word length distributions
(within and across categories) showed no signif-
icant differences in either language. There were
instead significant differences in the frequency of
target words, as collected from the German, Italian
and English WaCky corpora3. In particular, words
of the class body part had significantly larger fre-
quencies across languages than the words of the
other classes (not surprisingly, the words eye, head
and hand appear much more often in corpora than
the other words in the stimuli list).
2URL http://www.r-project.org/
3URL http://wacky.sslmit.unibo.it/
3.2 Experimental Procedure
The participants in the concept description exper-
iment were students attending the last 3 years of
a German or Italian high school and reported to
be native speakers of the respective languages. 73
German and 69 Italian students participated in the
experiment, with ages ranging between 15 and 19.
The average age was 16.7 (standard deviation 0.92)
for Germans and 16.8 (s.d. 0.70) for Italians.
The experiment was conducted group-wise in
schools. Each participant was provided with a ran-
dom set of 25 concepts, each presented on a sep-
arate sheet of paper. To have an equal number of
participants describing each concept, for each ran-
domly matched subject pair the whole set of con-
cepts was randomised and divided into 2 subsets.
Each subject saw the target stimuli in his/her sub-
set in a different random order (due to technical
problems, the split was not always different across
subject pairs).
Short instructions were provided orally before
the experiment, and repeated in written format on
the front cover of the questionnaire booklet dis-
tributed to each subject. To make the concept de-
scription task more natural, we suggested that par-
ticipants should imagine a group of alien visitors,
to each of which a particular word for a concrete
object was unknown and thus had to be described.
Participants should assume that each alien visitor
knew all other words of the language apart from
the unknown (target) word.
Participants were asked to enter a descriptive
phrase per line (not necessarily a whole sentence)
and to try and write at least 4 phrases per word.
They were given a maximum of one minute per
concept, and they were not allowed to go back to
the previous pages.
Before the real experiment, subjects were pre-
sented an example concept (not in the target list)
and were encouraged to describe it while asking
clarifications about the task.
All subjects returned the questionnaire so that
for a concept we obtained, on average, descriptions
by 36.48 German subjects (s.d. 1.24) and 34.34
Italian subjects (s.d. 1.72).
3.3 Transcription and Normalisation
The collected data were digitally transcribed and
responses were manually checked to make sure
that phrases denoting different properties had been
properly split. We tried to systematically apply the
96
criterion that, if at least one participant produced
2 properties on separate lines, then the properties
would always be split in the rest of the data set.
However, this approach was not always equally
applicable in both languages. For example, Trans-
portmittel (German) and mezzo di trasporto (Ital-
ian) both are compounds used as hypernyms for
what English speakers would probably rather clas-
sify as vehicles. In contrast to Transportmittel,
mezzo di trasporto is splittable as mezzo, that can
also be used on its own to refer to a kind of vehi-
cle (and is defined more specifically by adding the
fact that it is used for transportation). The German
compound word also refers to the function of trans-
portation, but -mittel has a rather general meaning,
and would not be used alone to refer to a vehicle.
Hence, Transportmittel was kept as a whole and
the Italian quasi-equivalent was split, possibly cre-
ating a bias between the two data sets (if the Italian
string is split into mezzo and trasporto, these will
be later classified as hypernym and functional fea-
tures, respectively; if the German word is not split,
it will only receive one of these type labels). More
in general, note that in German compounds are
written as single orthographic words, whereas in
Italian the equivalent concepts are often expressed
by several words. This could also create further
bias in the data annotation and hence in the analy-
sis.
Data were then normalised and transcribed into
English, before annotating the type of semantic re-
lation. Normalisation was done in accordance with
McRae et al (2005), using their feature norms as
guidelines, and it included leaving habitual words
like ?normally,?, ?often?, ?most? etc. out, as they
just express the typicality of the concept descrip-
tion, which is the implicit task.
3.4 Mapping to Relation Types
Normalised and translated phrases were sub-
sequently labelled for relation types following
McRae et al?s criteria and using a subset of the se-
mantic relation types described in Wu and Barsa-
lou (2004): see section 4.1 below for the list of
relations used in the current analysis.
Trying to adapt the annotation style to that of
McRae et al, we encountered some dubious cases.
For example, in the McRae et al?s norms, carni-
vore is classified as a hypernym, but eats meat as
a behaviour, whereas they seem to us to convey es-
sentially the same information. In this case, we
decided to map both to eats meat (behaviour).
Among other surprising choices, the normalised
phrase used for cargo is seen by McRae et al as
a function, but used by passengers is classified as
denoting the participants in a situation. In this case,
we followed their policy.
While we tried to be consistent in relation la-
belling within and across languages, it is likely
that our own normalisation and type mapping also
include a number of inconsistencies, and our re-
sults must be interpreted by keeping this important
caveat in mind.
The average number of normalised phrases ob-
tained for a concept presented is 5.24 (s.d. 1.82) for
the German participants and 4.96 (s.d. 1.86) for the
Italian participants; in total, for a concept in our set,
the following number of phrases was obtained on
average: 191.28 (German, s.d. 25.96) and 170.42
(Italian, s.d. 25.49).
4 Results
The distribution of property types is analysed both
class-independently and within each class (sepa-
rately for German and Italian), and an unsuper-
vised clustering analysis based on property types
is conducted.
4.1 Distributional Analysis
We first look at the issue of how comparable the
German and Italian data are, starting with a check
of the overlap at the level of specific properties.
There are 226 concept?property pairs that were
produced by at least 10 German subjects; 260 pairs
were produced by at least 10 Italians. Among these
common pairs, 156 (i. e., 69% of the total Ger-
man pairs, and 60% of the Italian pairs) are shared
across the 2 languages. This suggests that the two
sets are quite similar, since the overlap of specific
pairs is strongly affected by small differences in
normalisation (e. g., has a fur, has fur and is hairy
count as completely different properties).
Of greater interest to us is to check to what
extent property types vary across languages and
across concept classes. In order to focus on the
main patterns emerging from the data, we limit our
analysis to the 6 most common property types in
the whole data set (that are also the top 6 types in
the two languages separately), accounting for 69%
of the overall responses. These types are:
? category (Wu/Barsalou code: ch;
?pear is a fruit?)
97
? (external) part (WB code: ece;
?dog has 4 legs?)
? (external) quality (WB code: ese;
?apple is green?)
? behaviour (WB code: eb;
?dog barks?)
? function (WB code: sf ;
?broom is for sweeping?)
? location (WB code: sl;
?skyscraper is found in cities?)
Figure 1 compares the distribution of property
types in the two languages via a mosaic plot
(Meyer et al, 2006), where rectangles have areas
proportional to observed frequencies in the corre-
sponding cells. The overall distribution is very
similar. The only significant differences pertain to
category and location types: Both differences are
significant at the level p < 0.0001, according to a
Pearson residual test (Zeileis et al, 2005).
For the difference in location, no clear pattern
emerges from a qualitative analysis of German and
Italian location properties. Regarding the differ-
ence in (superordinate) categories, we find, inter-
estingly, a small set of more or less abstract hy-
pernyms that are frequently produced by Italians,
but never by Germans: construction (72), object
(36), structure (16). In the these cases, the Ital-
ian translations have subtle shades of meaning that
make them more likely to be used than their Ger-
man counterparts. For example, the Italian word
oggetto (?object?) is used somewhat more con-
cretely than the extremely abstract German word
Objekt (or English ?object?, for that matter) ? in
Italian, the word might carry more of an ?arti-
fact, man-made item? meaning. At the same time,
oggetto is less colloquial than German Sache, and
thus more amenable to be entered in a written def-
inition. In addition, among others, the category ve-
hicle was more frequent in the Italian than in the
German data set (for which one reason could be the
difference between the German and Italian equiva-
lents, which was discussed in section 3.3). Differ-
ences of this sort remind us that property elicita-
tion is first and foremost a verbal task, and as such
it is constrained by language-specific usages. It is
left to future research to test to what extent linguis-
tic constraints also affect deeper conceptual repre-
sentations (would Italians be faster than Germans
type
lang
uag
e
Italian
German
cate
gory part quali
ty
beha
viour funct
ion
locat
ion
Figure 1: Cross-language distribution of property
types
at recognising superordinate properties of concepts
when they are expressed non-verbally?).
Despite the differences we just discussed, the
main trend emerging from figure 1 is one of es-
sential agreement between the two languages, and
indicates that, with some caveats, salient property
types may be cross-linguistically robust. We, thus,
turn to the issue of how such types are distributed
across concepts of different classes. This question
is visually answered by the association plots in fig-
ure 2 on the following page.
Each plot illustrates, through rectangle heights,
how much each cell deviates from the value ex-
pected given the overall contingency tables (in
our case, the reference contingency tables are the
language-specific distributions of figure 1). The
sign of the deviation is coded by direction with re-
spect to the baseline. For example, the first row
of the left plot tells us, among other things, that
in German behaviour properties are strongly over-
represented in mammals, whereas function proper-
ties are under-represented within this class. Like in
figure 1, shades of grey cue degrees of significance
of the deviation (Meyer et al, 2003).
The first observation we can make about figure 2
is how, for both languages, a large proportion of
cells show a significant departure from the overall
distribution. This confirms what has already been
observed and reported in the literature on English
norms ? see, in particular, Vinson et. al. (2008):
98
German
type
clas
s
building
furniture
vehicle
tool
clothing
body
vegetable
fruit
bird
mammal
category part qualitybehaviourfunction location
Italian
type
clas
s
building
furniture
vehicle
tool
clothing
body
vegetable
fruit
bird
mammal
category part qualitybehaviourfunction location
Figure 2: Distribution of property types across classes
property types are highly distinctive characteristics
of concept classes.
The class-specific distributions are extremely
similar in German and Italian. There is no sin-
gle case in which the same cell is deviating sig-
nificantly but in opposite directions in the two lan-
guages; and the most common pattern by far is the
one in which the two languages show the same de-
viation profile across cells, often with very simi-
lar effect sizes (compare, e. g., the behaviour and
function columns). These results suggest that prop-
erty types are not much affected by linguistic fac-
tors, an intrinsically interesting finding that also
supports our idea of structuring relation-based nav-
igation in a multi-lingual dictionary using concept-
class?specific property types.
The type patterns associated with specific con-
cept classes are not particularly surprising, and
they have been already observed in previous stud-
ies (Vinson and Vigliocco, 2008; Baroni and Lenci,
2008). In particular, living things (animals and
plants) are characterised by paucity of functional
features, that instead characterise all man-made
concepts. Within the living things, animals are
characterised by typical behaviours (they bark, fly,
etc.) and, to a lesser extent, parts (they have legs,
wings, etc.), whereas plants are characterised by
a wealth of qualities (they are sweet, yellow, etc.)
Differences are less pronounced within man-made
objects, but we can observe parts as typical of
tool and furniture descriptions. Finally, location is
a more typical definitional characteristic of build-
ings (for clothing, nothing stands out, if not, per-
haps, the pronounced lack of association with typ-
ical locations). Body parts, interestingly, have a
type profile that is very similar to the one of (ma-
nipulable) tools ? manipulable objects are, after all,
extensions of our bodies.
4.2 Clustering by Property Types
The distributional analysis presented in the previ-
ous section confirmed our main hypotheses ? that
property types are salient properties of concepts
that differ from a concept class to the other, but are
robust across languages. However, we did not take
skewing effects associated to specific concepts into
account (e. g., it could be that, say, the property
profile we observe for body parts in figure 2 is
really a deceiving average of completely oppo-
site patterns associated to, say, heads and hands).
Moreover, our analysis already assumed a division
into classes ? but the type patterns, e. g., of mam-
mals and birds are very similar, suggesting that a
higher-level ?animal? class would be more appro-
priate when structuring concepts in terms of type
profiles. We tackled both issues in an unsupervised
clustering analysis of our 50 target concepts based
on their property types. If the postulated classes
are not internally coherent, they will not form co-
herent clusters. If some classes should be merged,
they will cluster together.
Concepts were represented as 6-dimensional
vectors, with each dimension corresponding to one
99
of the 6 common types discussed above, and the
value on a dimension given by the number of times
that concept triggered a response of the relevant
type. We used the CLUTO toolkit4, selecting the
rbr method and setting all other clustering param-
eters to their default values. We explored partitions
into 2 to 10 clusters, manually evaluating the out-
put of each solution.
Both in Italian and in German, the best results
were obtained with a 3-way partition, neatly cor-
responding to the division into animals (mammals
and birds), plants (vegetables and fruits) and ob-
jects plus body parts (that, as we observed above,
have a distribution of types very similar to the one
of tools). The 2-way solution resulted in merging
two of the classes animals and plants both in Ger-
man and in Italian. The 4-way solution led to an
arbitrary partition among objects and body parts
(and not, as one could have expected, in separat-
ing objects from body parts). Similarly, the 5-
to 10-way solutions involve increasingly granular
but still arbitrary partitions within the objects/body
parts class. However, one notable aspect is that in
most cases almost all concepts of mammals and
birds, and vegetables and fruits are clustered to-
gether (both in German and Italian), expressing
their strong similarity in terms of property types
as compared to the other classes as defined here.
Looking at the 3-way solution in more detail,
in Italian, the concept horse is in the same clus-
ter with objects and body parts (as opposed to Ger-
man, where the solution is perfect). The misclassi-
fication results mainly from the fact that for horse
a lot of functional properties were obtained (which
is a feature of objects), but none of them for the
other animals in the Italian data. In German, some
functional properties were assigned to both horse
and dog, which might explain why it was not mis-
classified there.
To conclude, the type profiles associated with
animals, vegetables and objects/body parts have
enough internal coherence that they robustly iden-
tify these macro-classes in both languages. Inter-
estingly, a 3-way distinction of this sort ? exclud-
ing body parts ? is seen as fundamental on the ba-
sis of neuro-cognitive data by Caramazza and Shel-
ton (1998). On the other hand, we did not find
evidence that more granular distinctions could be
made based on the few (6) and very general types
4URL http://glaros.dtc.umn.edu/gkhome/
cluto/cluto/overview
we used. We plan to explore the distribution across
the remaining types in the future (preliminary clus-
tering experiments show that much more nuanced
discriminations, even among all 10 categories, can
be made if we use all types). However, for our ap-
plied purposes, it is sensible to focus on relatively
coarse but well-defined classes, and on just a few
common relation types (alternatively, we plan to
combine types into superordinate ones, e. g. exter-
nal and internal quality). This should simplify both
the automatic harvesting of corpus-based proper-
ties of the target types and the structuring of the
dictionary relational interface.
Finally, the peculiar object-like behaviour of
body parts on the one hand, and the special na-
ture of horse, on the other, should remind us of
how concept classification is not a trivial task, once
we try to go beyond the most obvious categories
typically studied by cognitive scientists ? animals,
plants, manipulable tools. In a lexicographic per-
spective, this problem cannot be avoided, and, in-
deed, the proposed approach should scale in diffi-
cultiese to even trickier domains, such as those of
actions or emotions.
5 Conclusion
This research is part of a project that aims to inves-
tigate the cognitive salience of semantic relations
for (pedagogical) lexicographic purposes. The re-
sulting most salient relations are to be used for re-
vising and adding to the word field entries of a mul-
tilingual electronic dictionary in a language learn-
ing environment.
We presented a multi-lingual concept descrip-
tion experiment. Participants produced differ-
ent semantic relation type patterns across concept
classes. Moreover, these patterns were robust
across the two native languages studied in the ex-
periment ? even though a closer look at the data
suggested that linguistic constraints might affect
(verbalisations of) conceptual representations (and
thus, to a certain extent, which properties are pro-
duced). This is a promising result to be used for au-
tomatically harvesting semantically related words
for a given lexical entry of a concept class.
However, the granularity of concept classes has
to be defined. In addition, to yield a larger number
of usable data for the analysis, a re-mapping of the
rare semantic relation types occurring in the actual
data set should be conducted. Moreover, the stim-
uli set will have to be expanded to include, e. g., ab-
100
stract concepts ? although we hope to mine some
abstract concept classes on the basis of the proper-
ties of our concept set (colours, for example, could
be characterised by the concrete objects of which
they are typical).
To complement the production experiment re-
sults, we aim to conduct an experiment which in-
vestigates the perceptual salience of the produced
semantic relations (and possibly additional ones),
in order to detect inconsistencies between genera-
tion and retrieval of salient properties. If, as we
hope, we will find that essentially the same proper-
ties are salient for each class across languages and
both in production and perception, we will then
have a pretty strong argument to suggest that these
are the relations one should focus on when popu-
lating multi-lingual dictionaries.
Of course, the ultimate test of our approach will
come from empirical evidence of the usefulness of
our relation links to the language learner. This is,
however, beyond the scope of the current project.
References
[Abel and Weber2000] Abel, Andrea and Vanessa We-
ber. 2000. ELDIT?A Prototype of an Innovative
Dictionary. In Heid, Ulrich, Stefan Evert, Egbert
Lehmann, and Christian Rohrer, editors, EURALEX
Proceedings, volume 2, pages 807?818, Stuttgart.
[Baroni and Lenci2008] Baroni, Marco and Alessandro
Lenci. 2008. Concepts and Properties in Word
Spaces. Italian Journal of Linguistics. To appear.
[Boyd-Graber et al2006] Boyd-Graber, Jordan, Chris-
taine Fellbaum, Daniel Osherson, and Robert
Schapire. 2006. Adding Dense, Weighted Connec-
tions to WordNet. In Proceedings of the Thirds Inter-
national WordNet Conference. Masaryk University
Brno.
[Caramazza and Shelton1998] Caramazza, Alfonso and
Jennifer R. Shelton. 1998. Domain?Specific Knowl-
edge Systems in the Brain: The Animate?Inanimate
Distinction. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
10:1?34.
[Chanier and Selva1998] Chanier, Thierry and Thierry
Selva. 1998. The ALEXIA system: The Use of Vi-
sual Representations to Enhance Vocabulary Learn-
ing. In Computer Assisted Language Learning, vol-
ume 11, pages 489?522.
[Fellbaum1998] Fellbaum, Christiane, editor. 1998.
WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database. Lan-
guage, Speech, and Communication. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
[Fontenelle1997] Fontenelle, Thierry. 1997. Using a
Bilingual Dictionary to Create Semantic Networks.
International Journal of Lexicography, 10(4):275?
303.
[Garrard et al2001] Garrard, Peter, Matthew A. Lam-
bon Ralph, John R. Hodges, and Karalyn Patterson.
2001. Prototypicality, Distinctiveness, and Intercor-
relation: Analyses of the Semantic Attributes of Liv-
ing and Nonliving Concepts. Cognitive Neuropsy-
chology, 18(2):125?174.
[Geckeler2002] Geckeler, Horst. 2002. Anfa?nge und
Ausbau des Wortfeldgedankens. In Cruse, D. Alan,
Franz Hundsnurscher, Michael Job, and Peter Rolf
Lutzeier, editors, Lexikologie. Ein internationales
Handbuch zur Natur und Struktur von Wo?rtern und
Wortscha?tzen, volume 21 of Handbu?cher zur Sprach-
und Kommunikationswissenschaft, pages 713?728.
de Gruyter, Berlin ? New York.
[Jansz et al1999] Jansz, Kevin, Christopher Manning,
and Nitin Indurkha. 1999. Kirrkirr: Interactive Visu-
alisation and Multimedia From a Structured Warlpiri
Dictionary. In Proceedings of the 5th Australian
World Wide Web Conference (AusWeb?99), pages
302?316.
[McRae et al2005] McRae, Ken, George S. Cree,
Mark S. Seidenberg, and Chris McNorgan. 2005.
Semantic Feature Production Norms for a Large
Set of Living and Nonliving Things. Be-
haviour Research Methods, Instruments & Comput-
ers, 37(4):547?559.
[Meyer et al2003] Meyer, David, Achim Zeileis, and
Kurt Hornik. 2003. Visualizing Independence Using
Extended Association Plots. In Proceedings of DSC
2003. Online at URL http://www.ci.tuwien.
ac.at/Conferences/DSC-2003/.
[Meyer et al2006] Meyer, David, Achim Zeileis, and
Kurt Hornik. 2006. The Strucplot Framework: Vi-
sualizing Multi?Way Contingency Tables With vcd.
Journal of Statistical Software, 17(3):1?48.
[Summers1999] Summers, Della, editor. 1999. Long-
man Language Activator. The World?s First Produc-
tion Dictionary. Longman, Harlow.
[Vinson and Vigliocco2008] Vinson, David P. and
Gabriella Vigliocco. 2008. Semantic Feature Pro-
duction Norms for a Large Set of Objects and Events.
Behaviour Research Methods, 40(1):183?190.
[Wu and Barsalou2004] Wu, Ling?ling and
Lawrence W. Barsalou. 2004. Grounding Con-
cepts in Perceptual Simulation: I. Evidence From
Property Generation. Unpublished manuscript.
[Zeileis et al2005] Zeileis, Achim, David Meyer, and
Kurt Hornik. 2005. Residual?Based Shadings for
Visualizing (Conditional) Independence. Technical
Report 20, Department of Statistics and Mathemat-
ics, Wirtschaftsuniversita?t, Vienna.
101
