Deep Semantic Analysis of Text
James F. Allen1,2
Mary Swift1
Will de Beaumont2
1University of Rochester (USA)
2Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, Pensacola (USA)
email: james@cs.rochester.edu
Abstract
We describe a graphical logical form as a semantic representation for text
understanding. This representation was designed to bridge the gap be-
tween highly expressive "deep" representations of logical forms and more
shallow semantic encodings such as word senses and semantic relations.
It preserves rich semantic content while allowing for compact ambigu-
ity encoding and viable partial representations. We describe our system
for semantic text processing, which has the TRIPS parser at the core,
augmented with statistical preprocessing techniques and online lexical
lookup. We also present an evaluation metric for the representation and
use it to evaluate the performance of the TRIPS parser on the common
task paragraphs.
343
344 Allen, Swift, and de Beaumont
1 Introduction
As building rich semantic representations of text becomes more feasible, it is impor-
tant to develop standard representations of logical form that can be used to share data
and compare approaches. In this paper, we describe some general characteristics that
such a logical form language should have, then present a graphical representation de-
rived from the LF used in the TRIPS system (Allen et al, 2007).
The Logical Form is a representation that serves as the interface between structural
analysis of text (i.e., parsing) and the subsequent use of the information to produce
knowledge, whether it be for learning by reading, question answering, or dialogue-
based interactive systems.
It?s important to distinguish two separable problems, namely the ontology used and
the structure of the logical form language (LFL). The ontology determines the set of
word senses and semantic relations that can be used. The LFL determines how these
elements can be structured to capture the meaning of sentences. We are addressing the
latter in the paper. Consider some principles for designing useful LFs.
Preserve Rich Semantic Content in Phrasing
The LFL should allow one to express the dependencies and subtleties that are ex-
pressed in the sentence. On the simple end, this means the LFL should allow us to
represent the differences between the NP The pigeon house, which is a type of house,
and the house pigeon, which is a type of pigeon. On the more complicated end, the
LFL should be able to capture complex quantifier structures such as those in the NPs
Nearly all peaches, or Every dog but one, and phenomena such as modal operators,
predicate modifiers, and explicit sets.
One might argue that capturing such complex phenomena in the LFL is premature
at this time, as existing techniques are unlikely to be able to produce them reliably.
On the other hand, if we don?t allow such subtleties in the gold-standard LFL, we will
tend to stifle long-term work on the difficult problems since it is not reflected in the
score in evaluations.
Encoding ambiguity compactly when possible
This issue has a long history in the literature, with the most classic case being quan-
tifier scoping. Underspecified representations of quantifier scoping are a prime fo-
cus in the development of modern logical form languages such as MRS (Copestake
et al, 2006), and work goes all the way back to early natural language systems (e.g.
Woods, 1978). Other techniques for compactly encoding ambiguity include preposi-
tional phrase attachment, and most critically, the use of vague predicates and relations.
For example, for many cases of noun-noun modification, the exact semantic relation
between the nouns cannot be determined, and actually need not be determined pre-
cisely to be understood.
Enable Viable Partial Interpretations
In many cases, because of limitations in current processing, or because of the fragmen-
tary nature of the language input itself, a system will only be able to construct partial
interpretations. The LFL should be constructed in a way such that partial representa-
tions are easily compared with full representations. In particular, the interpretation of
Deep Semantic Analysis of Text 345
a fragment should be a subset of the full logical form of the entire sentence. It is a
fortunate circumstance that representations that tend to compactly encode ambiguity
tend also to have this subset property.
(SPEECHACT SA_TELL)
(F FOLLOW chase))
:CONTENT
(THE ANIMAL cat)
:THEME
(QUANTIFIER ANIMAL dog)
:AGENT
(OP FREQUENCY usually))
:MOD
PRES
:TENSE
EVERY
:QUAN
(F LIVING-PROPERTY-VAL hungry)
:MOD
:OF
:OF
(PRO PERSON my)
:ASSOC-WITH
Figure 1: An LF Graph for ?Every hungry dog usually chases my cat?
2 Overview of LF Graphs
An example LF-graph is shown in Figure 1. This graph introducesmuch of the formal-
ism. Each node represents either a speechact, a proposition, a generalized quantifier,
an operator or a kind. Nodes are labelled in three parts, the specifier, indicating the
semantic function of node, the type, indicating conceptual class drawn from the on-
tology, and the word from the input. The latter allows us to relate the nodes in the
LF graph back to the input. The edges are labelled with semantic roles that indicate
argument structure and other critical properties such as modification relationships.
Consider each of the core node types. The first term type captures the meanings
of fragments that define eventualities (i.e., events and properties). For instance, the
node (F FOLLOW chase) in Figure 1 refers to an eventuality of the type FOLLOW
(which would be defined in the ontology). Additional information about the even-
tuality is captured by the outgoing edges, which identify two arguments, the :Agent
and the :Theme, and one other that provides the tense information for later contextual
interpretation (PRES is the present tense).
The second node type captures generalized quantifier constructions. The node
(THE ANIMAL cat) indicates a definite description referring to an object of type
ANIMAL in the ontology. Generalized quantifiers that have universal import are in-
dicated as shown in the node (QUANTIFIER ANIMAL dog), where an edge labelled
:QUAN gives the specific quantifier involved. Note also the presence of a modification
to the type (the :MOD) arc, which points to another eventuality, namely (F LIVING-
PROPERTY-VAL hungry), which in turn has an argument (:OF) pointing back to the
modified node. The :MOD link is critical for capturing dependencies that allow us to
reconstruct the full logical form from the graph. For instance, it allows us to retain the
distinction between head noun and the modifiers (e.g., the pigeon house vs the house
pigeon).
Table 1 shows the core set of generalized quantifiers used in TRIPS (and subse-
quently interpreted in discourse processing, especially reference resolution. A large
set of quantifiers that indicate the size (e.g., many, some, five, at most three, a few, ...)
346 Allen, Swift, and de Beaumont
are treated as an indefinite construction with a (often vague) size modifier.
Table 1: Core Generalized Quantifiers
Type Description
THE a definite form
(we expect to be able to resolve it from context)
A an indefinite form
(we expect it to introduce new objects)
PRO a pronoun form
(we expect it to be resolved from local context)
IMPRO an implicit anaphoric form
BARE forms with no specifier and ambiguous between
generic, kind, and indefinite
QUANTIFIER ?universally? quantified constructions (e.g., EVERY)
QUANTITY-TERM a quantity expressed in units (e.g., three pounds)
WH-TERM ?wh? terms as in questions (e.g., which trucks)
KIND the definition of a kind (aka lambda abstraction)
The next term type specifies modal operators, and seen in Figure 1 as the node (OP
FREQUENCY usually). The operator nodes must be distinguished from the terms for
predications (F) to support algorithms for quantifier and operator scoping.
The final class of node in Figure 1 is the speech act performed by an utterance:
(SPEECHACT TELL). This has no third argument as it does not arise from any single
word in the utterance. The semantic role :content indicates the propositional content of
the speech act, and additional roles indicating the speaker and hearer are suppressed.
Speech acts havemodifiers in order to handle phenomena such as discourse adverbials.
(SPEECHACT SA_WH-QUESTION)
(WH-TERM PERSON who)
:FOCUS (F ACTIVE-PERCEPTION see)
:CONTENT
(THE SET)
:THEME
:EXPERIENCER
PAST
:TENSE
(QUANTITY-TERM NUMBER)
:SIZE
(KIND ENGINE engine)):OF
3
:VALUE
(F SIZE-VAL small))
:MOD :OF
Figure 2: The LF graph for ?Who saw the three small engines?
Figure 2 shows another LF graph which captures some additional key construc-
tions. It shows another speech act, for Wh-questions, and shows the handling of plu-
rals. LF graphs distinguish explicitly between singular and plurals by modeling sets,
in which an :of argument that points to the type of objects in the set.
The KIND operator is used to define these types (aka lambda abstraction). Thus
the three small engines is a SET of size three with elements of KIND ENGINE and
which are small.
LF-graphs are interesting as they offer the possibility of comparing the semantic
content of different approaches, ranging from shallow approaches that identify word
Deep Semantic Analysis of Text 347
senses and semantic roles, to complex representations produced by state-of-the-art
deep parsers. On the shallow side, a word sense disambiguation system would produce
a set of nodes with the word senses labeled from an ontology, but not indicating a
specifier, and not capturing any semantic roles. A system that identifies semantic
roles can capture its results using the edges of the graph.
On the other hand, we can show that the LF-graph formalism is equivalent to the
TRIPS logical form language (LFL), which is a ?flat? scope-underspecified represen-
tation of a reference modal logic with generalized quantifiers and lambda abstraction.
We have developed an efficient quantifier scoping algorithm on this LFL that con-
structs possible fully-scoped forms in the reference logic, and we can prove that we
derive the same sets of possible interpretations as the representations constructed by
MRS (Manshadi et al, 2008). Figure 3 shows the TRIPS logical form that produced
Figure 1, and Figure 4 shows one of the interpretations produced by the scoping algo-
rithm.
(SPEECHACT a1 TELL :content f1)
(F f1 (:* FOLLOW Chase) :agent x :theme y)
(EVERY x (:* ANIMAL Dog) :mod f2)
(F f2 (:* LIVING-PROPERTY-VAL Hungry) :of x)
(A y (:* ANIMAL Cat))
(OP p1 (:* FREQUENCY usually) :of f1)
Figure 3: TRIPS Logical Form of ?Every hungry dog usually chases a cat?
Every(x, Dog(x) ^ Hungry(f2) ^ theme(f2,x),
Frequent(
A(y, Cat(y),
Chase(f1) ^ agent(f1,x) ^ theme(f1,y))))
Figure 4: One possible scoped interpretation shown in reference representation
Coreference
The final information encoded in the LF graphs is coreference information. Referen-
tial expressions are connected to their antecedents using a :coref arc. Note this can
only encode referential relations to antecedents that actually appear previously in the
text. Simple forms of bridging reference can also be encoded using the insertion of
IMPRO nodes that stand in for implicit arguments, and may then co-refer with terms
in the graph.
3 The LF Ontology and Word Senses
The LF ontology is the source of the semantic types and semantic roles that are used in
the LF graphs. In this paper, we use the LF ontology of the TRIPS system. The TRIPS
ontology also defines a rich set of semantic features that are crucial for constraining
348 Allen, Swift, and de Beaumont
ambiguity at multiple levels of language processing. For example, the grammar uses
selectional restrictions to guide word sense disambiguation and prepositional phrase
attachment during parsing, and reference resolution uses the semantic features to iden-
tify valid referents and discard invalid ones.
The TRIPS LF ontology is designed to be linguistically motivated and domain
independent. The semantic types and selectional restrictions are driven by linguis-
tic considerations rather than requirements from reasoning components in the system
(Dzikovska et al, 2003). Word senses are defined based on subcategorization patterns
and domain independent selectional restrictions. As much as possible the semantic
types in the LF ontology are compatible with types found in FrameNet (Johnson and
Fillmore, 2000). FrameNet generally provides a good level of abstraction for appli-
cations since the frames are derived from corpus examples and can be reliably distin-
guished by human annotators. However we use a smaller, more general set of semantic
roles for linking the syntactic and semantic arguments rather than FrameNet?s exten-
sive set of specialized frame elements. The LF ontology defines approximately 650
semantic types and 30 semantic roles. See Dzikovska et al (2004) for more discus-
sion of the relationship between FrameNet and the LF ontology. We also expanded
our verb coverage by integrating VerbNet entries (Swift, 2005; Crabbe et al, 2006).
The LF ontology also differs from FrameNet in its use of a rich semantic feature
set. Our semantic features are an extended version of EuroWordNet (Vossen, 1997).
There are five top-level distinctions: physical object, abstract object, situation, time
and proposition. Subtypes are defined to capture distinctions in lexical aspect, spatial
abstractions (point, region...), origins (natural, artifact...) and so on.
We are not attempting to capture all possible word senses in our ontology. Rather,
we are looking for the level of abstraction that affects linguistic processing, and leave
finer distinctions for subsequent discourse processing and inference. In order not
to lose information in the LF, our word senses are a tuple of form (:* <LF-type>
<word-type>), where the LF-type comes from the Ontology, and the <word-type>
is a canonicalized version of the word. For example, the property of a switch/device
being on or off is associated with an LF type ARTIFACT-PROPERTY-VAL. Another
sense of on is its spatial reading, of type SPATIAL-LOC, which also includes words
such as behind and in front of. These two senses of on are:
(:* ARTIFACT-PROPERTY-VAL ON)
(:* SPATIAL-LOC ON).
Though we don?t have the space to describe it here, TRIPS provides an ontology
mapping capability that allows developers to easily map the TRIPS LF forms to a
domain-specific ontology (Dzikovska et al, 2008).
4 System Overview
Much recent text processing work has focused on developing ?shallow?, statistically
driven, techniques. We have taken a different approach. We use statistical methods as
a preprocessing step to provide guidance to a deep parsing system that uses a detailed,
hand-built, grammar of English with a rich set of semantic restrictions. This way, we
hope to obtain deeper, more accurate interpretations. Because the parser was devel-
Deep Semantic Analysis of Text 349
oped to identify likely fragments when an entire interpretation cannot be constructed,
we believe it can match statistical methods in its precision and recall measures.
The TRIPS grammar is a lexicalized context-free grammar, augmented with feature
structures and feature unification. The grammar is motivated from X-bar theory, and
draws on principles fromGPSG (e.g., head and foot features) and HPSG. The search in
the parser is controlled by a set of hand-build rule preferences encoded as weights on
the rules, together with a heavy use of selectional restrictions (encoded in the lexicon
and ontology) to eliminate semantically anomalous sense combinations.
The TRIPS parser uses a packed-forest chart representation and builds constituents
bottom-up using a best-first search strategy similar to A*, based on rule and lexi-
cal weights and the influences of the techniques addressed below. The search termi-
nates when a pre-specified number of spanning constituents have been found or a pre-
specified maximum chart size is reached. The chart is then searched using a dynamic
programming algorithm to find the least cost sequence of constituents according to a
cost table that can be varied by genre. For instance, when processing text as in the ex-
periments reported here, we mostly expect UTT constituents encoding the speech act
TELL, then less likely the speech acts WH-QUESTION and YN-QUESTION and we
don?t expect dialog-based speech acts such as CONFIRM or GREET. In addition, we
also assign costs to non-sentential constituents (e.g., NPs, ADVPs, etc). The resulting
least cost sequence produces a set of logical forms that are the results reported here.
Here we describe the different ways that shallow methods contribute to deep pro-
cessing.
Using Preprocessors
First, statistical processing is used as a preprocessor. The TRIPS parser accepts a word
lattice as input, which we have used when working with speech recognition where we
want to consider multiple word hypotheses simultaneously. We have used this capa-
bility to allow for preprocessors as well. For instance, we use multiple named entity
recognizers (NER) to identify names of people, companies, geographical locations,
and so on. The output of the NERs are treated as additional constituent hypotheses in
the input to the parser. As an example, consider the sentence The New York Times is a
newspaper. Assuming an NER identifies The New York Times as a name with semantic
type PUBLICATION, the input to the parser will be:
(word "the" 1 2)
(word "new" 2 3)
(word "york" 3 4)
(word "times" 4 5)
(constit "the new york times" 1 5
:syn (NAME :class PUBLICATION))
(word "is" 5 6)
(word "a" 6 7)
(word "newspaper" 7 8)
As the parser runs, it chooses between interpreting the words individually or using
the name, depending on what produces the best overall interpretation. In addition, we
use a specialized recognizer that identifies possible street addresses (e.g., 15 N 25th
350 Allen, Swift, and de Beaumont
St NE). Note we don?t need specialized NERs for dates and times as they are handled
in the main grammar.
Part of Speech Tagging
We also use a part-of-speech tagger to preprocess the input and provide a likely POS
tag (or set of tags) for consideration by the parser. Rather than eliminating the inter-
pretations that do not match, the parser simply assigns more weight to interpretations
consistent with the tags. This allows the parser to override bad POS assignments in
some cases.
Using on-line resources
We have built a system called WordFinder that draws on WordNet (Miller, 1995) and
COMLEX (Grishman et al, 1994) to construct (underspecified) lexical representa-
tions using mapping rules from high-level WordNet classes into our LF ontology. We
deliberately stay at a fairly abstract level as we would rather have a few semantically
abstract lexical entries rather than the many highly-specific senses found in WordNet,
which we have not found useful for parsing.
Using Preferences during Parsing
Preferences (either syntactic or semantic) can be given to the parser based on statis-
tical or other analyses. We have used the Collins parser as a preprocessor to extract
hypotheses for the three constituents (NP, VP, and ADVP) which in pretests had a
precision greater than 60% (Swift et al, 2004). For instance, for the sentence The
New York Times is a newspaper, the Collins preprocessor would produce the follow-
ing preferences:
(NP 1 5) (NP 6 8) (VP 5 8) (S 1 8)
With simple sentences, this information has little effect. But on longer complex
sentences, we found that the preferences allow us to produce more accurate interpre-
tations in faster time. Note again that the parser is not required to follow this advice
? all this information does is add a preference for such interpretations.
Another mechanismwe use is logical form preference patterns. Local form patterns
of predicate types and arguments can be specified with preference scores. Consider
the sentence ?He put the box in the corner near the house?. Although the location
adverbial ?near the house? could possibly describe the putting event, it is much more
likely that it modifies the corner. Thus the pattern (PUT :agent :theme :destination) is
preferred over the pattern (PUT :agent :theme :destination :location). We have only
tested this capability so far with hand-specified patterns, though we plan to start exper-
iments using learned patterns derived from propositions extracted from corpora (e.g.
van Durme et al, 2008). The overall system, using all these techniques, is shown
graphically in Figure 5.
5 An Evaluation Metric for LF Graphs
In this section we define an evaluation metric for LF-graphs that allows us to quantify
our system performance against gold standard representations.
Deep Semantic Analysis of Text 351
named entity 
recognizers
address 
recognizer
statistical
parser
Input
Chart
name
 hypotheses
address
 hypotheses
Bracketing
Preferences
semantic 
preferences
LF form
preferences
Wordnet Wordfinder
new lexical entries
Core Lexicon & LF Ontology
Grammar
Parser
Content
Extractor
Final
Logical 
Form
Input
Output
Chart
word
 hypotheses
Comlex
POS
tagging
POS
hyps
Figure 5: Using Shallow Methods to Inform Deep Parsing (the subsystems in dotted
ovals were not used in the reported evaluations)
The evaluation metric between a gold LF graph G and a test LF graph T is defined
as the maximum score produced by any node/edge alignment from the gold to the test
LF. More formally, an alignment A is a 1-1 mapping from the nodes of the gold graph
to nodes of the test graph (or to a pseudo empty node if there is no corresponding
node in the test graph). Once we have defined a scoring metric between aligned nodes
and edges, we define the match between a gold and test graph as the maximum score
produced by an alignment. While complex scoring functions can be used, our results
reported here use a simple measure:
NscoreA(n) = 2 if both the indicator and word in the label of n matches
the label of A(n), 1 if one of them matches, and 0 otherwise.
EscoreA(e) = 1 if e connect nodes n1 and n2, and there is an edge between
A(n1) and A(n2) with same label, 0 otherwise.
Gscore(G,T) = maxA(Sumn,ein(NscoreA(n)+EscoreA(e))
Once we know Gscore(G,T), we can compute semantic precision and recall measures
by comparing this to the G and T graphs aligned with themselves, which gives us the
maximum possible gold and test scores.
Precision(G,T) = Gscore(G,T)/Gscore(T,T)
Recall(G,T) = Gscore(G,T)/Gscore(G,G)
A more general function of node matching would be more informative. For in-
stance, with words not in our core lexicon, we usually derive an abstract sense that is
not the most specific sense in our ontology, however is an abstraction of the correct
sense. A scoring function that would give such cases partial credit would have raised
our scores (cf. Resnik and Yarowsky, 1997).
Evaluation Procedure and Results
To evaluate our system on the shared texts, we built gold representations for each. We
did this by first generating an LF-graph by running the system, and then correcting this
352 Allen, Swift, and de Beaumont
(SPEECHACT SA_TELL)
(F (:* DISPERSE SPREAD))
:CONTENT
(BARE (:* ACTION DISTRIBUTION))
:THEME
(F (:* TO-LOC TO))
:MOD
(F (:* EVENT-TIME-REL ONCE))
:MOD
W::PAST
:TENSE
:OF
(KIND (:* SUBSTANCE ELECTRICITY))
:ASSOC-WITH
(KIND (:* NON-MEASURE-ORDERED-DOMAIN SCALE))
:ASSOC-WITH
(F (:* SIZE-VAL BROAD))
:MOD:OF
:OF
(THE SET)
:VAL
(A SET)
:MEMBER
(A SET)
:MEMBER
(KIND ROOT)
:OF
(KIND (:* LOCATION FARM))
:OF(KIND (:* DISTRICT TOWN))
:OF
(KIND (:* LOCATION COUNTRY))
:ASSOC-WITH
(F (:* START START))
(F (:* TRANSFORMATION SUBSIDE))
:EFFECT
(BARE (:* USE USE))
:THEME
W::PAST
:TENSE
(BARE (:* SUBSTANCE ENERGY))
:THEME
(KIND (:* AIR-CURRENT WIND))
:ASSOC-WITH
(F (:* SPATIAL-LOC IN))
:MOD
:OF
:VAL
(THE (:* COUNTRY USA))
(THE UNITED STATES)
:NAME-OF
(F (:* ADJUST PICK-UP))
(F (:* CONJUNCT BUT))
(PRO (:* REFERENTIAL-SEM IT))
:THEME
(F (:* FREQUENCY AGAIN))
:MOD
(F (:* EVENT-TIME-REL AFTER))
:MOD
W::PAST
:TENSE
:COREF
:OF :OF
:SIT-VAL
(THE (:* LACK SHORTAGE))
(KIND (:* FATS-OILS OIL))
:OF
(THE (:* COUNTRY USA))
:ASSOC-WITH
(F (:* TIME-SPAN-REL IN))
:MOD
(THE U PUNC-PERIOD S PUNC-PERIOD)
:NAME-OF
:OF
(THE TIME-RANGE)
:VAL
1970
:DECADE
(F (:* SCHEDULED-TIME-MODIFIER EARLY))
:MOD :OF
:SIT-VAL
:OF
:VAL
:MOD
Figure 6: Hand built gold standard for ?Once broad-scale electricity distribution
spread to farms and country towns, use of wind energy in the United States started
to subside, but it picked up again after the U.S. oil shortage in the early 1970s.?
by hand using a graphical editor. Figure 6 illustrates the gold standard for a sample
paragraph.
Table 2 reports the results on our baseline system, which was the first run we made
on the shared texts once they became available. In addition, we report results on the
latest version of the system after making some lexicon and grammar additions based
on problems found in parsing the paragraphs.
Table 2: Evaluation Results
Base System Final System
Text Prec Recall Prec Recall
1 ?physics? 70.1% 70.1% 73.4% 80.0%
2 ?cancer? 62.1% 71.9% 71.9% 79.3%
3 ?dining? 86.7% 90.4% 90.8% 94.6%
4 ?dogs? 63.0% 68.6% 63.8% 69.1%
5 ?guns? 55.0% 64.0% 63.8% 73.4%
6 ?gardens? 47.4% 53.6% 59.7% 62.0%
7 ?wind? n/a n/a 65.8% 76.3%
Average 64.1% 69.7% 69.9% 76.4%
Specifically, we added 16 new lexical items (1 verb, 12 nouns, 2 adjectives and 1
adverb); 17 new or modified senses for existing lexical items; 3 new ontology concepts
and one grammar rule, to handle the formulation of meters per second as ?m/s?.
6 Conclusion
We have described a graphical logical form language for expressing a significant
amount of the semantic content in natural text. The representation allows for the
specification of partial information extracted from sentences, yet is expressive enough
to capture many of the subtleties and complications present in linguistically motivated
Deep Semantic Analysis of Text 353
approaches, including supporting complex processes such as quantifier scoping, ref-
erence resolution, and reasoning.
We also briefly described a hybrid system architecture centered around a domain-
general, broad coverage parsing framework capable of producing deep analyses of
texts. Statistical and corpora-based approaches serve to inform the parsing in order to
achieve a balance between depth of analysis and broad coverage.
We find the results very encouraging, given this is our first evaluation of the sys-
tem on text rather than dialog. While it is hard to quantify exactly without further
detailed analysis, the remaining errors probably break down roughly evenly between
gaps in grammatical coverage, word sense disambiguation errors and inadequacies in
our search. Looking at grammatical coverage, the single biggest problem appears to
be conjoined sentences with subject ellipsis. Regarding our search problems, because
we are building semantic structures rather than syntactic, the search space is much big-
ger than a traditional CFG. We believe that integrating a statistical parser preprocessor
and the LF-preference mechanism will start to address this problem.
Acknowledgments This work was supported by grants from the National Science
Foundation (#0748942), the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (FA8750-
07-D-0185), and the Of[fb01]ce of Naval Research (N000140510314).
References
Allen, J., M. Dzikovska, M. Manshadi, and M. Swift (2007, June). Deep linguistic
processing for spoken dialogue systems. In ACL 2007 Workshop on Deep Linguis-
tic Processing, pp. 49?56. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Copestake, A., D. Flickinger, C. Pollard, and I. Sag (2006). Minimal recursion se-
mantics: An introduction. Research on Language and Computation 3(4), 281?332.
Crabbe, B., M. Dzikovska, W. de Beaumont, and M. Swift (2006, June). Extending
the coverage of a domain independent dialog lexicon with VerbNet. In Proceedings
of the Third International Workshop on Scalable Natural Language Understanding
(ScaNLU06) at HLT-NAACL 2006, pp. 25?32.
Dzikovska, M., J. Allen, and M. Swift (2008). Linking semantic and knowledge
representations in a multi-domain dialogue system. J. Log. and Comput. 18(3),
405?430.
Dzikovska, M., M. Swift, and J. Allen (2003, August). Integrating linguistic and do-
main knowledge for spoken dialogue systems in multiple domains. In Proceedings
of Workshop on Knowledge and Reasoning in Practical Dialogue Systems at the
18th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-2003), Aca-
pulco, Mexico, pp. 383?389.
Dzikovska, M., M. Swift, and J. Allen (2004, May). Building a computational lexicon
and ontology with FrameNet. In Proceedings of Workshop on Building Lexical Re-
sources with Semantically Annotated Corpora at The 4th International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC?04), pp. 53?60.
354 Allen, Swift, and de Beaumont
Grishman, R., C. Macleod, and A. Meyers (1994). Comlex syntax: Building a com-
putational lexicon. In COLING, pp. 268?272.
Johnson, C. and C. J. Fillmore (2000). The FrameNet tagset for frame-semantic and
syntactic coding of predicate-argument structure. In Proceedings of the first confer-
ence on North American chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
San Francisco, CA, USA, pp. 56?62. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.
Manshadi, M., J. Allen, and M. Swift (2008, August). Toward a universal under-
specifed semantic representation. In 13th Conference on Formal Grammar (FG
2008).
Miller, G. A. (1995). Wordnet: a lexical database for english. Commun. ACM 38(11),
39?41.
Resnik, P. and D. Yarowsky (1997, June). A perspective on word sense disambigua-
tion methods and their evaluation. In Proceedings of SIGLEX ?97, pp. 79?86.
Swift, M. (2005, February). Towards automatic verb acquisition from VerbNet for
spoken dialog processing. In K. Erk, A. Melinger, and S. S. im Walde (Eds.),
Proceedings of InterdisciplinaryWorkshop on the Identification and Representation
of Verb Features and Verb Classes, pp. 115?120.
Swift, M., J. Allen, and D. Gildea (2004, Aug 23?Aug 27). Skeletons in the parser:
Using a shallow parser to improve deep parsing. In COLING ?04: Proceedings of
the 20th international conference on Computational Linguistics, Morristown, NJ,
USA, pp. 383?389. Association for Computational Linguistics.
van Durme, B., T. Qian, and L. K. Schubert (2008, Aug 18?Aug 22). Class-driven
attribute extraction. In COLING ?08: Proceedings of the 24th international confer-
ence on Computational Linguistics. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Vossen, P. (1997, March 5-7). EuroWordNet: a multilingual database for information
retrieval. In Proceedings of the DELOS workshop on Cross-language Information
Retrieval, Zurich.
Woods, W. A. (1978). Semantics and quantification in natural language question an-
swering. Advances in Computers 17, 1?87.
