Proceedings of the 2007 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and Computational
Natural Language Learning, pp. 181?189, Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Improving Query Spelling Correction  
Using Web Search Results 
Qing Chen 
Natural Language Processing Lab 
Northeastern University 
Shenyang, Liaoning, China, 110004 
chenqing@ics.neu.edu.cn 
Mu Li 
Microsoft Research Asia 
5F Sigma Center 
Zhichun Road, Haidian  District 
Beijing, China, 100080 
muli@microsoft.com 
Ming Zhou 
Microsoft Research Asia 
5F Sigma Center 
Zhichun Road, Haidian  District 
Beijing, China, 100080 
mingzhou@microsoft.com 
 
 
Abstract 
Traditional research on spelling correction 
in natural language processing and infor-
mation retrieval literature mostly relies on 
pre-defined lexicons to detect spelling er-
rors. But this method does not work well 
for web query spelling correction, because 
there is no lexicon that can cover the vast 
amount of terms occurring across the web. 
Recent work showed that using search 
query logs helps to solve this problem to 
some extent. However, such approaches 
cannot deal with rarely-used query terms 
well due to the data sparseness problem. In 
this paper, a novel method is proposed for 
use of web search results to improve the 
existing query spelling correction models 
solely based on query logs by leveraging 
the rich information on the web related to 
the query and its top-ranked candidate. Ex-
periments are performed based on real-
world queries randomly sampled from 
search engine?s daily logs, and the results 
show that our new method can achieve 
16.9% relative F-measure improvement 
and 35.4% overall error rate reduction in 
comparison with the baseline method. 
1 Introduction 
Nowadays more and more people are using Inter-
net search engine to locate information on the web. 
Search engines take text queries that users type as 
input, and present users with information of ranked 
web pages related to users? queries. During this 
process, one of the important factors that lead to 
poor search results is misspelled query terms. Ac-
tually misspelled queries are rather commonly ob-
served in query logs, as shown in previous investi-
gations into the search engine?s log data that 
around 10%~15% queries were misspelled (Cucer-
zan and Brill, 2004).  
Sometimes misspellings are due to simple typo-
graphic errors such as teh for the. In many cases 
the spelling errors are more complicated cognitive 
errors such as camoflauge for camouflage. As a 
matter of fact, correct spelling is not always an 
easy task ? even many Americans cannot exactly 
spell out California governor?s last name: Schwar-
zenegger. A spelling correction tool can help im-
prove users? efficiency in the first case, but it is 
more useful in the latter since the users cannot fig-
ure out the correct spelling by themselves. 
There has been a long history of general-purpose 
spelling correction research in natural language 
processing and information retrieval literature 
(Kukich, 1992), but its application to web search 
181
query is still a new challenge. Although there are 
some similarities in correction candidate genera-
tion and selection, these two settings are quite dif-
ferent in one fundamental problem: How to deter-
mine the validity of a search term. Traditionally, 
the measure is mostly based on a pre-defined spel-
ling lexicon ? all character strings that cannot be 
found in the lexicon are judged to be invalid. How-
ever, in the web search context, there is little hope 
that we can construct such a lexicon with ideal 
coverage of web search terms. For example, even 
manually collecting a full list of car names and 
company names will be a formidable task. 
To obtain more accurate understanding of this 
problem, we performed a detailed investigation 
over one week?s MSN daily query logs, among 
which found that 16.5% of search terms are out of 
the scope of our spelling lexicon containing around 
200,000 entries. In order to get more specific num-
bers, we also manually labeled a query data set that 
contains 2,323 randomly sampled queries and 
6,318 terms. In this data set, the ratio of out-of-
vocabulary (OOV) terms is 17.4%, which is very 
similar to the overall distribution. However, only 
25.3% of these OOV terms are identified to be 
misspelled, which occupy 85% of the overall spel-
ling errors. All these statistics indicate that accu-
rate OOV term classification is of crucial impor-
tance to good query spelling correction perfor-
mance. 
Cucerzan and Brill (2004) first investigated this 
issue and proposed to use query logs to infer cor-
rect spellings of misspelled terms. Their principle 
can be summarized as follows: given an input 
query string q, finding a more probable query c 
than q within a confusion set of q, in which the edit 
distance between each element and q is less than a 
given threshold. They reported good recall for 
misspelled terms, but without detailed discussions 
on accurate classification of valid out-of-
vocabulary terms and misspellings. In Li?s work, 
distributional similarity metrics estimated from 
query logs were proposed to be used to discrimi-
nate high-frequent spelling errors such as massen-
ger from valid out-of-vocabulary terms such as 
biocycle. But this method suffers from the data 
sparseness problem: sufficient amounts of occur-
rences of every possible misspelling and valid 
terms are required to make good estimation of dis-
tributional similarity metrics; thus this method 
does not work well for rarely-used out-of-
vocabulary search terms and uncommon misspel-
lings. 
In this paper we propose to use web search re-
sults to further improve the performance of query 
spelling correction models. The key contribution of 
our work is to identify that the dynamic online 
search results can serve as additional evidence to 
determine users? intended spelling of a given term. 
The information in web search results we used in-
cludes the number of pages matched for the query, 
the term distribution in the web page snippets and 
URLs. We studied two schemes to make use of the 
returning results of a web search engine. The first 
one only exploits indicators of the input query?s 
returning results, while the other also looks at other 
potential correction candidate?s search results. We 
performed extensive evaluations on a query set 
randomly sampled from search engines? daily 
query logs, and experimental results show that we 
can achieve 35.4% overall error rate reduction and 
18.2% relative F-measure improvement on OOV 
misspelled terms. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. 
Section 2 details other related work of spelling cor-
rection research. In section 3, we show the intuitive 
motivations to use web search results for the query 
spelling correction. After presenting the formal 
statement of the query spelling correction problem 
in Section 4, we describe our approaches that use 
machine learning methods to integrate statistical 
features from web search results in Section 5. We 
present our evaluation methods for the proposed 
methods and analyze their performance in Section 
6. Section 7 concludes the paper. 
2 Related Work 
Spelling correction models in most previous work 
were constructed based on conventional task set-
tings. Based on the focus of these task settings, two 
lines of research have been applied to deal with 
non-word errors and real-word errors respectively.  
Non-word error spelling correction is focused on 
the task of generating and ranking a list of possible 
spelling corrections for each word not existing in a 
spelling lexicon. Traditionally candidate ranking is 
based on manually tuned scores such as assigning 
alternative weights to different edit operations or 
leveraging candidate frequencies (Damerau, 1964; 
Levenshtein, 1966). In recent years, statistical 
models have been widely used for the tasks of nat-
182
ural language processing, including spelling cor-
rection task. (Brill and Moore, 2000) presented an 
improved error model over the one proposed by 
(Kernighan et al, 1990) by allowing generic 
string-to-string edit operations, which helps with 
modeling major cognitive errors such as the confu-
sion between le and al. Via explicit modeling of 
phonetic information of English words, (Toutanova 
and Moore, 2002) further investigated this issue. 
Both of them require misspelled/correct word pairs 
for training, and the latter also needs a pronuncia-
tion lexicon, but recently (Ahmad and Kondrak, 
2005) demonstrated that it is also possible to learn 
such models automatically from query logs with 
the EM algorithm, which is similar to work of 
(Martin, 2004), learning from a very large corpus 
of raw text for removing non-word spelling errors 
in large corpus. All the work for non-word spelling 
correction focused on the current word itself with-
out taking into account contextual information.  
Real-word spelling correction is also referred to 
be context sensitive spelling correction (CSSC), 
which tries to detect incorrect usage of valid words 
in certain contexts. Using a pre-defined confusion 
set is a common strategy for this task, such as in 
the work of (Golding and Roth, 1996) and (Mangu 
and Brill, 1997). Opposite to non-word spelling 
correction, in this direction only contextual evi-
dences were taken into account for modeling by 
assuming all spelling similarities are equal. 
The complexity of query spelling correction task 
requires the combination of these types of evidence, 
as done in (Cucerzan and Brill, 2004; Li et al, 
2006). One important contribution of our work is 
that we use web search results as extended contex-
tual information beyond query strings by taking 
advantage of application specific knowledge.  Al-
though the information used in our methods can all 
be accessed in a search engine?s web archive, such 
a strategy involves web-scale data processing 
which is a big engineering challenge, while our 
method is a light-weight solution to this issue. 
3 Motivation 
When a spelling correction model tries to make a 
decision whether to make a suggestion c to a query 
q, it generally needs to leverage two types of evi-
dence: the similarity between c and q, and the va-
lidity plausibility of c and q. All the previous work 
estimated plausibility of a query based on the 
query string itself ? typically it is represented as 
the string probability, which is further decomposed 
into production of consecutive n-gram probabilities. 
For example, both the work of (Cucerzan and Brill, 
2004; Li et al, 2006) used n-gram statistical lan-
guage models trained from search engine?s query 
logs to estimate the query string probability.  
In the following, we will show that the search 
results for a query can serve as a feedback mechan-
ism to provide additional evidences to make better 
spelling correction decisions. The usefulness of 
web search results can be two-fold: 
First, search results can be used to validate 
query terms, especially those not popular enough 
in query logs. One case is the validation for navi-
gational queries (Broder, 2004). Navigational que-
ries usually contain terms that are key parts of des-
tination URLs, which may be out-of-vocabulary 
terms since there are millions of sites on the web. 
Because some of these navigational terms are very 
relatively rare in query logs, without knowledge of 
the special navigational property of a term, a query 
spelling correction model might confuse them with 
other low-frequency misspellings. But such infor-
mation can be effectively obtained from the URLs 
of retrieved web pages. Inferring navigational que-
ries through term-URL matching thus can help re-
duce the chance that the spelling correction model 
changes an uncommon web site name into popular 
search term, such as from innovet to innovate. 
Another example is that search results can be used 
in identifying acronyms or other abbreviations. We 
can observe some clear text patterns that relate ab-
breviations to their full spellings in the search re-
sults as shown in Figure 1. But such mappings 
cannot easily be obtained from query logs. 
 
Figure 1. Sample search results for SARS 
Second, search results can help verify correction 
candidates. The terms appearing in search results, 
both in the web page titles and snippets, provide 
additional evidences for users intention. For exam-
ple, if a user searches for a misspelled query vac-
cum cleaner on a search engine, it is very likely 
that he will obtain some search results containing 
the correct term vacuum as shown in Figure 2. This 
183
can be attributed to the collective link text distribu-
tion on the web ? many links with misspelled text 
point to sites with correct spellings. Such evi-
dences can boost the confidence of a spelling cor-
rection model to suggest vacuum as a correction.  
 
Figure 2. Sample search results  
for vaccum cleaner 
The number of matched pages can be used to 
measure the popularity of a query on the web, 
which is similar to term frequencies occurring in 
query logs, but with broader coverage. Poor cor-
rection candidates can usually be verified by a 
smaller number of matched web pages. 
 Another observation is that the documents re-
trieved with correctly-spelled query and misspelled 
ones are similar to some extent in the view of term 
distribution. Both the web retrieval results of va-
cuum and vaccum contain terms such as cleaner, 
pump, bag or systems. We can take this similarity 
as an evidence to verify the spelling correction re-
sults. 
4 Problem Statement 
Given a query q, a spelling correction model is to 
find a query string c that maximizes the posterior 
probability of c given q within the confusion set of 
q. Formally we can write this as follows: 
?? = ?????? 
???
??(?|?) (1)  
where C is the confusion set of q. Each query 
string c in the confusion set is a correction candi-
date for q, which satisfies the constraint that the 
spelling similarity between c and q is within given 
threshold ?. 
In this formulation, the error detection and cor-
rection are performed in a unified way. The query 
q itself always belongs to its confusion set C, and 
when the spelling correction model identifies a 
more probable query string c in C which is differ-
ent from q, it claims a spelling error detected and 
makes a correction suggestion c. 
There are two tasks in this framework. One is 
how to learn a statistical model to estimate the 
conditional probability ?? ? ? , and the other is 
how to generate confusion set C of a given query q  
4.1 Maximum Entropy Model for Query 
Spelling Correction 
We take a feature-based approach to model the 
posterior probability ?? ? ? . Specifically we use 
the maximum entropy model (Berger et al, 1996) 
for this task: 
?? ? ? =
exp  ???? ?, ? 
?
?=1  
 exp( ????(?, ?)
?
?=1 )?
 (2)  
where exp( ????(?, ?)
?
?=1 )?  is the normalization 
factor; ?? ?, ?  is a feature function defined over 
query q and correction candidate c , while ??  is the 
corresponding feature weight. ?? can be optimized 
using the numerical optimization algorithms such 
as the Generalized Iterative Scaling (GIS) algo-
rithm (Darroch and Ratcliff, 1972) by maximizing 
the posterior probability of the training set which 
contains a manually labeled set of query-truth pairs: 
?? = argmax ? ,? log???(?|?) (3)  
The advantage of maximum entropy model is 
that it provides a natural way and unified frame-
work to integrate all available information sources. 
This property is well fit for our task in which we 
are using a wide variety of evidences based on lex-
icon, query log and web search results. 
4.2 Correction Candidate Generation 
Correction candidate generation for a query q can 
be decomposed into two phases. In the first phase, 
correction candidates are generated for each term 
in the query from a term-base extracted from query 
logs. This task can leverage conventional spelling 
correction methods such as generating candidates 
based on edit distance (Cucerzan and Brill, 2004) 
or phonetic similarity (Philips, 1990). Then the 
correction candidates of the entire query are gener-
ated by composing the correction candidates of 
each individual term. Let  ? = ?1??? , and the 
confusion set of ??  is  ?? ? , then the confusion set 
of q is ??1???2??????
1. For example, for a 
query  ? = ?1?2 , ?1  has candidates ?11  and ?12 , 
while ?2 has candidates ?21and ?22, then the con-
fusion set C is {?11?21 , ?11?22 , ?12?21 , ?12?22}. 
                                                 
1 For denotation simplicity, we do not cover compound and 
composition errors here. 
184
The problem of this method is the size of confu-
sion set C may be huge for multi-term queries. In 
practice, one term may have hundreds of possible 
candidates, then a query containing several terms 
may have millions. This might lead to impractical 
search and training using the maximum entropy 
modeling method. Our solution to this problem is 
to use candidate pruning. We first roughly rank the 
candidates based on the statistical n-gram language 
model estimated from query logs. Then we only 
choose a subset of C that contains a specified 
number of top-ranked (most probable) candidates 
to present to the maximum entropy model for of-
fline training and online re-ranking, and the num-
ber of candidates is used as a parameter to balance 
top-line performance and run-time efficiency. This 
subset can be efficiently generated as shown in (Li 
et al, 2006). 
5 Web Search Results based Query Spel-
ling Correction 
In this section we will describe in detail the me-
thods for use of web search results in the query 
spelling correction task. In our work we studied 
two schemes. The first one only employs indicators 
of the input query?s search results, while the other 
also looks at the most probable correction candi-
dates? search results. For each scheme, we extract 
additional scheme-specific features from the avail-
able search results, combine them with baseline 
features and construct a new maximal model to 
perform candidate ranking. 
5.1 Baseline model 
We denote the maximum entropy model based on 
baseline model feature set as M0 and the feature 
set S0 derived from the latest state of the art works 
of (Li et al, 2006), where S0 includes the features 
mostly concerning the statistics of the query terms 
and the similarities between query terms and their 
correction candidates. 
5.2 Scheme 1: Using search results for input 
query only 
In this scheme we build more features for each cor-
rection candidate (including input query q itself) 
by distilling more evidence from the search results 
of the query. S1 denotes the augmented feature set, 
and M1 denotes the maximum entropy model 
based on S1. The features are listed as follows: 
1. Number of pages returned: the number of 
web search pages retrieved by a web search 
engine, which is used to estimate the popu-
larity of query. This feature is only for q. 
2. URL string: Binary features indicating 
whether the combination of terms of each 
candidate is in the URLs of top retrieved 
documents. This feature is for all candidates. 
3. Frequency of correction candidate term: 
the number of occurrences of modified 
terms in the correction candidate found in 
the title and snippet of top retrieved docu-
ments based on the observation that correc-
tion terms possibly co-occur with their 
misspelled ones. This feature is invalid for q. 
4. Frequency of query term: the number of 
occurrences of each term of q found in the 
title or snippet of the top retrieved docu-
ments, based on the observation that the cor-
rect terms always appear frequently in their 
search results.  
5. Abbreviation pattern: Binary features indi-
cating whether inputted query terms might 
be abbreviations according to text patterns in 
search results. 
5.3 Scheme 2: Using both search results of 
input query and top-ranked candidate 
In this scheme we extend the use of search results 
both for query q and for top-ranked candidate c 
other than q determined by M1. First we submit a 
query to a search engine for the initial retrieval to 
obtain one set of search results ?? , then use M1 to 
find the best correction candidate c other than q. 
Next we perform a second retrieval with c to ob-
tain another set of search results ?? . Finally addi-
tional features are generated for each candidate 
based on ?? , then a new maximum entropy model 
M2 is built to re-rank the candidates for a second 
time. The entire process can be schematically 
shown in Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3.  Relations of models and features 
Lexicon / query  
Logs Spelling  
Similarity 
? ? ??  
? ? ??  
S0 features 
S1 specific 
features 
 S2 specific 
features 
 
Model M1 
 
Model M2 
 
Model M0 
 
185
where ??  is the web search results of query q; ??  is 
the web search results of c which is the top-ranked 
correction of q suggested by model M1. 
   The new feature set denoted with S2 is a set of 
document similarities between ??  and ?? , which 
includes different similarity estimations between 
the query and its correction at the document level 
using merely cosine measure based on term fre-
quency vectors of ??  and ?? . 
6 Experiments 
6.1 Evaluation Metrics 
In our work, we consider the following four types 
of evaluation metrics: 
? Accuracy: The number of correct outputs 
proposed by the spelling correction model di-
vided by the total number of queries in the test 
set 
? Recall: The number of correct suggestions for 
misspelled queries by the spelling correction 
model divided by the total number of miss-
pelled queries in the test set 
? Precision: The number of correct suggestions 
for misspelled queries proposed by the spel-
ling correction model divided by the total 
number of suggestions made by the system 
? F-measure: Formula ? = 2??/(? + ?) used 
for calculating the f-measure, which is essen-
tially the harmonic mean of recall and preci-
sion 
Any individual metric above might not be suffi-
cient to indicate the overall performance of a query 
spelling correction model. For example, as in most 
retrieval tasks, we can trade recall for precision or 
vice versa. Although intuitively F might be in ac-
cordance with accuracy, there is no strict theoreti-
cal relation between these two numbers ? there are 
conditions under which accuracy improves while 
F-measure may drop or be unchanged. 
6.2 Experimental Setup 
We used a manually constructed data set as gold 
standard for evaluation. First we randomly sam-
pled 7,000 queries from search engine?s daily 
query logs of different time periods, and had them 
manually labeled by two annotators independently. 
Each query is attached to a truth, which is either 
the query itself for valid queries, or a spelling cor-
rection for misspelled ones. From the annotation 
results that both annotators agreed with each other, 
we extracted 2,323 query-truth pairs as training set 
and 991 as test set. Table 1 shows the statistics of 
the data sets, in which Eq denotes the error rate of 
query and Et denotes the error rate of term. 
 
 # queries # terms 
qE
 
tE
 
Training set 2,323 6,318 15.0% 5.6% 
Test set 991 2,589 12.8% 5.2% 
Table 1. Statistics of training set and test set 
In the following experiments, at most 50 correc-
tion candidates were used in the maximum entropy 
model for each query if there is no special explana-
tion. The web search results were fetched from 
MSN?s search engine. By default, top 100 re-
trieved items from the web retrieval results were 
used to perform feature extraction. A set of query 
log data spanning 9 months are used for collecting 
statistics required by the baseline. 
6.3 Overall Results 
Following the method as described in previous sec-
tions, we first ran a group of experiments to eva-
luate the performance of each model we discussed 
with default settings. The detailed results are 
shown in Table 2. 
 
Model Accuracy Recall Precision F 
M0 91.8% 60.6% 62.6% 0.616 
M1 93.9% 64.6% 77.4% 0.704 
M2 94.7% 66.9% 78.0% 0.720 
Table 2. Overall Results 
From the table we can observe significant per-
formance boosts on all evaluation metrics of M1 
and M2 over M0.  
We can achieve 25.6% error rate reduction and 
23.6% improvement in precision, as well as 6.6% 
relative improvement in recall, when adding S1 to 
M1. Paired t-test gives p-value of 0.002, which is 
significant to 0.01 level. 
M2 can bring additional 13.1% error rate reduc-
tion and moderate improvement in precision, as 
well as 3.6% improvement in recall over M1, with 
paired t-test showing that the improvement is sig-
nificant to 0.01 level.  
186
6.4 Impact of Candidate number 
Theoretically the number of correction candidates 
in the confusion set determines the accuracy and 
recall upper bounds for all models concerned in 
this paper. Performance might be hurt if we use a 
too small candidate number, which is because the 
corrections are separated from the confusion sets. 
These curves shown in Figure 4 and 5, include 
both theoretical bound (oracle) and actual perfor-
mance of our described models. From the chart we 
can see that our models perform best when ??  is 
around 50, and when ?? > 15 the oracle recall and 
accuracy almost stay unchanged, thus the actual 
models? performance only benefits a little from 
larger ??  values. The missing part of recall is 
largely due to the fact that we are not able to gen-
erate truth candidates for some weird query terms 
rather than insufficient size of confusion set. 
 
 
Figure 4. Recall versus candidate number 
 
Figure 5. Accuracy versus candidate number 
6.5 Discussions 
We also studied the performance difference be-
tween in-vocabulary (IV) and out-of-vocabulary 
(OOV) terms when using different spelling correc-
tion models. The detailed results are shown in Ta-
ble 3 and Table 4. 
 
 Accuracy Precision  Recall F 
M0 88.2% 77.1% 67.3% 0.718 
M1 92.4% 88.5% 77.3% 0.825 
M2 93.2% 91.6% 79.1% 0.849 
Table 3. OOV Term Results 
 Accuracy Precision  Recall F 
M0 98.8% 44.0% 45.8% 0.449 
M1 99.0% 62.5% 20.8% 0.313 
M2 99.1% 75.0% 37.5% 0.500 
Table 4. IV Term Results 
The results show that M1 is very powerful to 
identify and correct OOV spelling errors compared 
with M0. Actually M1 is able to correct spelling 
errors such as guiness, whose frequency in query 
log is even higher than its truth spelling guinness. 
Since most spelling errors are OOV terms, this ex-
plains why the model M1 can significantly outper-
form the baseline. But for IV terms things are dif-
ferent. Although the overall accuracy is better, the 
F-measure of M1 is far lower than M0. M2 per-
forms best for the IV task in terms of both accura-
cy and F-measure. However, IV spelling errors is 
so small a portion of the total misspelling (only 
17.4% of total spelling errors in our test set) that 
the room for improvement is very small. This helps 
to explain why the performance gap between M1 
and M0 is much larger than the one between M2 
and M1, and shows the tendency that M1 prefer to 
identify and correct OOV misspellings in compari-
son to IV ones, which causes F-measure drop from 
M0 to M1; while by introducing more useful evi-
dence, M2 outperforms better for both OOV and 
IV terms over M0 and M1. 
Another set of statistics we collected from the 
experiments is the performance data of low-
frequency terms when using the models proposed 
in this paper, since we believe that our approach 
would help make better classification of low-
frequency search terms. As a case study, we identi-
fied in the test set al terms whose frequencies in 
our query logs are less than 800, and for these 
terms we calculated the error reduction rate of 
model M1 over the baseline model M0 at each in-
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
R
e
ca
ll
Candidate number
M0 M1
M2 Oracle
86%
88%
90%
92%
94%
96%
98%
100%
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
A
cc
u
ra
cy
Candidate number
M0 M1
M2 Oracle
187
terval of 50. The detailed results are shown in Fig-
ure 6. The clear trend can be observed that M1 can 
achieve larger error rate reduction over baseline for 
terms with lower frequencies. This is because the 
performance of baseline model drops for these 
terms when there are no reliable distributional si-
milarity estimations available due to data sparse-
ness in query logs, while M1 can use web data to 
alleviate this problem.  
 
Figure 6. Error rate reduction of M1 over baseline 
for terms in different frequency ranges 
7 Conclusions and Future Work 
The task of query spelling correction is very differ-
ent from conventional spelling checkers, and poses 
special research challenges. In this paper, we pre-
sented a novel method for use of web search re-
sults to improve existing query spelling correction 
models.  
We explored two schemes for taking advantage 
of the information extracted from web search re-
sults. Experimental results show that our proposed 
methods can achieve statistically significant im-
provements over the baseline model which only 
relies on evidences of lexicon, spelling similarity 
and statistics estimated from query logs. 
There is still further potential useful information 
that should be studied in this direction. For exam-
ple, we can work on page ranking information of 
returning pages, because trusted or well-known 
sites with high page rank generally contain few 
wrong spellings. In addition, the term co-
occurrence statistics on the returned snippet text 
are also worth deep investigation. 
References 
Ahmad F. and Grzegorz Kondrak G. Learning a spelling 
error model from search query logs. Proceedings of 
EMNLP 2005, pages 955-962, 2005 
Berger A. L., Della Pietra S. A., and Della Pietra V. J.  
A maximum entropy approach to natural language 
processing. Computation Linguistics, 22(1):39-72, 
1996 
Brill E. and Moore R. C. An improved error model for 
noisy channel spelling correction. Proceedings of 
38th annual meeting of the ACL, pages 286-293, 
2000. 
Broder, A. A taxonomy of web search. SIGIR Forum 
Fall 2002, Volume 36 Number 2, 2002. 
Church K. W. and Gale W. A. Probability scoring for 
spelling correction. In Statistics and Computing, vo-
lume 1, pages 93-103, 1991. 
Cucerzan S. and Brill E. Spelling correction as an itera-
tive process that exploits the collective knowledge of 
web users. Proceedings of EMNLP?04, pages 293-
300, 2004. 
Damerau F. A technique for computer detection and 
correction of spelling errors. Communication of the 
ACM 7(3):659-664, 1964. 
Darroch J. N. and Ratcliff D. Generalized iterative scal-
ing for long-linear models. Annals of Mathematical 
Statistics, 43:1470-1480, 1972. 
Efthimiadis, N.E., Query Expansion, In Annual Review 
of Information Systems and Technology, Vol. 31, pp. 
121-187 , 1996. 
Golding A. R. and Roth D. Applying winnow to con-
text-sensitive spelling correction. Proceedings of 
ICML 1996, pages 182-190, 1996. 
J. Lafferty and C. Zhai. Document language models, 
query models, and risk minimization for information 
retrieval. In Proceedings of SIGIR?2001, pages 111-
119, Sept 2001. 
J. Xu and W. Croft. Query expansion using local and 
global document analysis. In Proceedings of the SI-
GIR 1996, pages 4-11, 1996 
Kernighan M. D., Church K. W. and Gale W. A. A spel-
ling correction program based on a noisy channel 
model. Proceedings of COLING 1990, pages 205-
210, 1990. 
Kukich K. Techniques for automatically correcting 
words in text. ACM Computing Surveys. 24(4): 377-
439, 1992. 
Levenshtein V. Binary codes capable of correcting dele-
tions, insertions and reversals. Soviet Physice ? Dok-
lady 10: 707-710, 1966. 
Li M., Zhu M. H., Zhang Y. and Zhou M. Exploring 
distributional similarity based models for query spel-
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
50 150 250 350 450 550 650 750
e
rr
o
r 
ra
te
 r
e
d
u
c
ti
o
n
term frequency
188
ling correction. Proceedings of COLING-ACL 2006, 
pages 1025-1032, 2006 
Mangu L. and Eric Brill E. Automatic rule acquisition 
for spelling correction. Proceedings of ICML 1997, 
pages 734-741, 1997. 
Martin Reynaert. Text induced spelling correction. Pro-
ceedings of COLING 2004,pages 834-840, 2004. 
Mayes E., Damerau F. and Mercer R. Context based 
spelling correction. Information processing and 
management, 27(5): 517-522, 1991. 
Philips L. Hanging on the metaphone. Computer Lan-
guage Magazine, 7(12): 39, 1990. 
Toutanova K. and Moore R. Pronunciation modeling for 
improved spelling correction. Proceedings of the 
40th annual meeting of ACL, pages 144-151, 2002. 
189
