Coling 2008: Proceedings of the workshop on Knowledge and Reasoning for Answering Questions, pages 41?48
Manchester, August 2008
Creating and Querying a Domain dependent Know-How Knowledge Base
of Advices and Warnings
Lionel Fontan
IRIT - UPS,
118 route de Narbonne,
31062 Toulouse Cedex, France.
antonin follet@hotmail.fr
Patrick Saint-Dizier
IRIT - CNRS,
118 route de Narbonne,
31062 Toulouse Cedex, France.
stdizier@irit.fr
Abstract
In this paper, we present the explanation struc-
ture of procedural texts, that supports and moti-
vates the goal-instruction structure. We focus in
particular on arguments, and show how arguments
of type warnings and advices can be extracted. Fi-
nally, we show how a domain dependent know-
how textual knowledge base can be constructed
and queried.
1 Introduction
Procedural texts consist of a sequence of instruc-
tions, designed with some accuracy in order to
reach a goal (e.g. assemble a computer). Procedu-
ral texts may also include subgoals. These are most
of the time realized by means of titles and subti-
tles. The user must carefully follow step by step
the given instructions in order to reach the goal.
The main goal of our project is to analyse the
structure of procedural texts in order to efficiently
and accurately respond to How-to ? questions.
This means identifying titles (which convey the
main goals of the text), sequences of instructions
serving these goals, and a number of additional
structures such as prerequisites, warnings, advices,
illustrations, etc.
In our perspective, procedural texts range
from apparently simple cooking recipes to large
maintenance manuals. They also include docu-
ments as diverse as teaching texts, medical no-
tices, social behavior recommendations, directions
for use, assembly notices, do-it-yourself notices,
itinerary guides, advice texts, savoir-faire guides
c
? 2008. Licensed under the Creative Commons
= Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/).
Some rights reserved.
etc. (Aouladomar et al, 2005). Procedural texts
follow a number of structural criteria, whose real-
ization may depend on the author?s writing abili-
ties, on the target user, and on traditions associated
with a given domain. Procedural texts can be regu-
latory, procedural, programmatory, prescriptive or
injunctive. The work we report here was carried
out on a development corpus of French texts taken
from the Web from most of the various domains
cited above.
Argument extraction is not yet a very active
area, althought it has obvious uses in question an-
swering, in decision theory, etc. For example, ex-
tracting arguments from legal texts (ICAIL 2005)
or for answering opinion questions is a major chal-
lenge of primary use.
We have developed a quite detailed analysis of
procedural texts, identifying their main basic com-
ponents as well as their global structure. For that
purpose, we have defined two levels: a segmenta-
tion level that basically tags structures considered
as terminal structures (titles, instructions, advices,
prerequisites, etc.) and a grammar level that binds
these terminal structures to give a global structure
to procedural texts (Delpech et al 2008). This
structure is textual and dedicated only to elements
relevant to procedurality.
Procedural texts are complex structures, they
often exhibit a quite complex rational (the instruc-
tions) and ?irrational? structure which is mainly
composed of advices, conditions, preferences,
evaluations, user stimulations, etc. They form
what is called the explanation structure, which mo-
tivates and justifies the goal-instructions structure,
which is the backbone of procedural texts. A num-
ber of these elements are forms of argumentation,
they provide a strong and essential internal cohe-
sion and coherence to procedural texts.
41
An important aspect of this project is the ac-
curate identification of the explanation structure
as found in procedural texts in order (1) to bet-
ter understand explanation strategies deployed by
humans in precise, concrete and operational situ-
ations and (2) to build a knowledge base of ad-
vices and warnings related to an application do-
main, that reflects several forms of know-how on
this domain. Such repositories exist, but they have
been build completely manually, by various users,
often in a wiki fashion. Our goal is then to allow
users not only to query procedural texts via How
to questions, but also to create and to access to a
repository of advices and warnings (basically Why
questions and some How-to questions to a lesser
extent) about a certain task.
We have already studied the instructional as-
pects of procedural texts and implemented a quite
efficient prototype within the TextCoop project
(Delpech et al 2008) that tags text with dedicated
XML tags. In this paper, after a brief categoriza-
tion of explanation structure as found in our corpus
of procedural texts, we focus on the argumentation
structure via the recognition of warnings and ad-
vices. Then, we show how a textual knowledge
base of advices and warnings can be produced and
how it can be queried.
2 The explanation structure in
procedural texts
We first present, in this section, the general orga-
nization of the explanation structure as it emerged
from corpus analysis. Then we develop the major
component of procedural texts: the instructional
compound.
2.1 A global view of the explanation struc-
ture
From our development corpus, we established a
classification of the different forms explanations
may take. Basically, the explanation structure is
meant to guide the user by making sure that he
will effectively realize actions as they are speci-
fied, via e.g. threats, rewards, evaluations, advices
and warnings. The main structures are facilita-
tion and argumentation structures; they are either
global (they are adjoined to goals, and have scope
over the whole procedure) or local, included into
instructional compounds, with a scope local to the
instructional compound. This latter case is by far
the most frequently encountered. These structures
are summarized as follows (the terms we use are
either borrowed from works on rhetorical relations
or are just ours if none exist):
? facilitation structures, which are rhetorical
in essence (Kosseim et al2000) (Van der
Linden 1993), correspond to How to do X ?
questions, these include two subcategories:
(1) user help, with: hints, evaluations and
encouragements and
(2) controls on instruction realization, with
two cases: (2.1) controls on actions: guid-
ance, focusing, expected result and elabo-
ration and (2.2) controls on user interpre-
tations: definitions, reformulations, illustra-
tions and also elaborations.
? argumentation structures, corresponding
to why do X ? questions.
These have either:
(1) a positive orientation with the author in-
volvement (promises) or not (advices and
justifications) or
(2) a negative orientation with the author in-
volvement (threats) or not (warnings).
In what follows, we will mainly concentrate on this
second point, and in particular on warnings and ad-
vices which are the most frequently encountered
(since there are rarely involvements from the au-
thor). These will be used to construct the know-
how knowledge base. Argumentation structures
are relatively general to an applications domain,
while facilitation structures are much more spe-
cific to the text and the targeted audiences. There
are several ways of defining and approaching ar-
gumentation. Without entering any debate, we
consider here the approach where an argument is
composed of one or more supports associated with
a certain statement, as in the following warning:
carefully plug in your mother card vertically, oth-
erwise you will most likely damage its connec-
tors. where if the intruction (carefully plug in...)
is not correctly realized, the user know the conse-
quences.
2.2 From instructions to instructional
compounds
In most types of texts, we do not find just se-
quences of simple instructions but much more
42
complex compounds composed of clusters of in-
structions, that exhibit a number of semantic de-
pendencies between each other, that we call in-
structional compounds. These are organized
around a few main instructions, to which a number
of subordinate instructions, warnings, arguments,
and explanations of various sorts may possibly be
adjoined. All these elements are, in fact, essen-
tial in a compound for a good understanding of the
procedure at stake.
An instructional compound has a relatively
well organized discourse structure, composed of
several layers, which are:
? The goal and justification level, which has
wider scope over the remainder of the com-
pound, indicates motivations for doing ac-
tions that follow in the compound (e.g. in
your bedroom, you must clean regularly the
curtains..., which here motivates actions to
undertake). It gives the fundamental moti-
vation of the compound.
? The instruction kernel structure, which
contains the main instructions. These can be
organized temporally or be just sets of ac-
tions. Actions are identified most frequently
via the presence of action verbs (in relation
to the domain) in the imperative form, or in
the infinitive form introduced by a modal.
We observed also a number of subordinated
instructions forms adjoined to the main in-
structions. These are in general organized
within the compound by means of rhetorical
relations, introduced below.
? The deontic and illocutionary force struc-
tures: consist of marks that operate over
instructions, outlining different parameters.
These linguistic structures play a major role
in argumentation:
? deontic: obligatory, optional, forbid-
den or impossible, alternates (or),
? illocutionary and related aspects:
stresses on actions: necessary, ad-
vised, recommended, to be avoided,
etc. These marks are crucial to identify
the weight of an argument.
? a temporal structure that organizes se-
quences of instructions (and, at a higher
level, instructional compounds). In general,
the temporal structure is very simple, with
sequences of actions to carry out. In some
cases, parallel actions are specified, which
partially overlap.
? The conditional structure: introduces con-
ditions over instructions within the com-
pound or even over the whole instruc-
tional compound. We encounter quite a lot
of structures organizing mutually exclusive
cases.
? the causal structure that indicates the goal
of an action. We identify four types of causal
relations, following (Talmy 2001): intend-to
(direct objective of an action: push the but-
ton to start the engine), Instrumented (use a
2 inch key to dismount the door), Facilitation
(enlarge the hole to better empty the tank)
and Continue (keep the liquid warm till its
colour changes).
? The rhetorical structure whose goal is to
enrich the kernel structure by means of a
number of subordinated aspects (realized as
propositions, possibly instructions) among
which, most notably: enablement, motiva-
tion, circumstance, elaboration, instrument,
precaution, manner. A group of relations
of particular interest in this paper are argu-
ments, developed hereafter.
Explanations and arguments help the user un-
derstand why an instruction must be realized and
what are the risks or the drawbacks if he does not
do it properly. An example of an instructional
compound is:
[
instructional compound
[
Goal
To clean leather armchairs,]
[
argument:advice
[
instruction
choose specialized products dedicated
to furniture,
[
instruction
and prefer them colourless ]],
[
support
they will play a protection role, add
beauty, and repair some small damages.]]]
We have here an argument of type advice
which is composed of 2 instructions (later called
a conclusion) and a conjunction of three supports
which motivate the 2 instructions.
43
3 Identifying arguments in proce-
dures
In this section let us first give a quite informal def-
inition of what an argument is, and how it interacts
with the goal-instructions structure. Let us then
focus on warnings and advices which are, by far,
the most frequently encountered structures. Most
warnings and advices are included into instruc-
tional compounds.
3.1 Argumentation and Action theories
Roughly, argumentation is a process that allows
speakers to construct statements for or against an-
other statement called the conclusion. These for-
mer statements are called supports. The general
form of an argument is : Conclusion ?because?
Support (noted as C because S). In natural lan-
guage, conclusions often appear before the sup-
port, but they may also appear after. A conclusion
may receive several supports, possibly of different
natures (advices and warnings). Arguments may
be more or less strong, they bear in general a cer-
tain weight, induced from the words they contain
(Anscombre et al 1981), (Moeschler 1985), (Am-
goud et al. 2001). In natural contexts, this weight
is somewhat vague, and only general classes can
be produced, e.g. from light to strong.
In the case of procedural texts, the represen-
tation and the role of arguments in a text can be
modelled roughly as follows. Let G be a goal
which can be reached by the sequence of instruc-
tions A
i
, i ? [1, n], whatever their exact tem-
poral structure is. A subset of those instructions
is interpreted as arguments where each instruction
(A
j
, viewed as a conclusion) is paired with a sup-
port S
j
that stresses the importance of A
j
(Care-
fully plug in your mother card vertically, otherwise
you will damage the connectors). Their general
form is: A
j
because S
j
(we use here the term ?be-
cause? which is more vague than the implication
symbol used in formal argumentation, because nat-
ural language is not so radical). Supports S
k
which
are negatively oriented are warnings whereas those
which are positively oriented are advices. Neutral
supports simply introduce basic explanations.
Similarly to the principles of argument theory,
but within the framework of action theory (e.g.
Davidson 2003), if A
j
is associated with a support
of type warning S
j
then if A
j
is not realized cor-
rectly, the warning S
j
is ?active? and attacks the
goal G, i.e. it makes its realization more difficult,
if not impossible. Conversely, if S
j
is an advice,
it supports the goal G, making its full realization
easier, or providing better results if A
j
is executed.
Note however that there is an implicit gradabil-
ity in the realization of an action, which may be
more or less accurately and completely realized.
In that case, negative or positive consequences on
the main goal evolve accordingly.
Supports can themselves receive supports :
don?t add natural fertilizer, this may attract in-
sects, which will damage your young plants. In the
same range of ideas, instructions A
j
which are ad-
vices or warnings have a different status than ?nor-
mal?, unsupported instructions (although one can
say that most of them could be associated with an
implicit support such as otherwise you will fail).
Advices are often optional instructions: they are
a kind of invitation to do the associated action for
better results, whereas warnings are an incitation to
be more careful. Therefore, instructions in a proce-
dure do not have all the same operational strength
and status.
As can be noted, our definition includes terms
which are gradual: ?more difficult?, ?easier?, be-
cause in practice, failing to realize an instruction
properly does not necessarily means that the goal
cannot be reached, but the user will just be less
successful, for various reasons. In the natural lan-
guage expressions of conclusions (the A
j
) as well
as of supports, there are many modals or classes
of verbs (like risk verbs) that modulate the conse-
quences on G, contrast for example:
use professional products to clean your leathers,
they will give them a brighter aspect. with:
carefully plug in your mother card vertically, oth-
erwise you will most likely damage its connectors.
In the latter case, the goal ?mounting your own PC?
is likely to fail, whereas in the former, the goal
?cleaning your leathers? will just be less success-
ful.
3.2 Processing arguments
From the above observations, we have defined a
set of patterns that recognize instructions which
are conclusions and their related supports. We de-
fined those patterns from a development corpus
of about 1700 texts from various domains (cook-
ing, do it yourself, gardening, video games, so-
cial advices, etc.). The study is made on French,
English glosses are given here for ease of read-
44
ing. The recognition problem is twofold: identi-
fying propositions as conclusions or supports by
means of specific linguistic marks (sometimes we
also found a few typographic marks), and then de-
limiting these elements. In general, boundaries are
either sentences or, by default, instructional com-
pound boundaries. In procedural texts, roughly,
the proportion of advices and warnings is almost
equivalent.
3.2.1 Processing warnings
Warnings are basically organized around a unique
structure composed of an ?avoid expression? com-
bined with a proposition. The variations around
the ?avoid expressions? capture the illocutionary
force of the argument via several devices, ordered
here by increasing force :
(1) ?prevention verbs like avoid? NP / to VP (avoid
hot water)
(2) do not / never / ... VP(infinitive) ... (never put
this cloth in the sun)
(3) it is essential, vital, ... to never VP(infinitive).
In cases where the conclusion is relatively weak in
terms of consequences, it may not have any spe-
cific mark, its recognition is then based on the ob-
servation that it is the instruction that immediately
precedes an already identified support.
Supports are propositions which are identified
from various marks:
(1) via connectors such as: sinon, car, sous peine
de, au risque de (otherwise, under the risk of), etc.
or via verbs expressing consequence,
(2) via negative expressions of the form: in order
not to, in order to avoid, etc.
(3) via specific verbs such as risk verbs introducing
an event (you risk to break). In general the embed-
ded verb has a negative polarity.
(4) via the presence of very negative terms, such
as: nouns: death, disease, etc., adjectives, and
some verbs and adverbs. We have a lexicon of
about 200 negative terms found in our corpora.
Some supports have a more neutral formula-
tion: they may be a portion of a sentence where
a conclusion has been identified. For example,
a proposition in the future tense or conditional
following a conclusion is identified as a support.
However, as will be seen below, some supports
may be empty, because they can easily be inferred
by the reader. In that case, the argument is said to
be truncated.
Patterns are implemented in Perl and are in-
cluded into the TextCoop software. From the
above observations, with some generalizations and
the construction of lexicons of marks, we have
summarized the extraction process in only 8 pat-
terns for supports and 3 patterns for conclusions.
Pattrens are basically morpho-lexical, with the
need to recognize a few local structures, treated by
means of local automata. A pattern in Perl has the
following form:
(PRO:PER--Modalite +)?--
evit(ez|er)--(\w+ )*--##
with modalite = devoir, veiller a, etre essentiel, etc.
Some local automata are associated with most pat-
terns in order to make them as generic as possible.
In our programme, Perl scripts are treated one af-
ter the other, in sequence. We do not have any effi-
cieny requirement since these treatments are real-
ized in batch mode. However, for the whole pro-
cessing, we tag abouit 200 Mo of text per hour on
a standard 3GhZ Pentium machine.
3.2.2 Evaluation
In procedural texts, arguments are tagged by XML
tags. We carried out an indicative evaluation (e.g.
to get improvement directions) on a corpus of 66
texts over various domains, containing 302 argu-
ments, including 140 advices and 162 warnings.
This test corpus was collected from a large collec-
tion of texts from our study corpus. Domains are
in 2 categories: cooking, gardening and do it your-
self, which are very prototypical, and 2 other do-
mains, far less stable: social recommendations and
video games solutions. Arguments were manually
tagged in these texts, and a comparison was made
with the output of the system. Therefore, we report
below the recall, the precision being almost 100%
(very little noise).
We get the following results for warnings:
conclusion support (3) (4)
recognition recognition
88% 91% 95% 95%
(3) conclusions well delimited (4) supports
well delimited, with respect to warnings correctly
identified.
As far as warnings are concerned, results are
really good. Errors are very diverse, some of them
involve uses of the verb pouvoir (to be able to) and
the auxiliary e?tre (to be).
45
3.2.3 Processing Advices
Conclusions of type advice are identified essen-
tially by means of two types of patterns (in
French):
(1) advice or preference expressions followed by
an instruction. The expressions may be a verb or a
more complex expression: is advised to, prefer, it
is better, preferable to, etc.,
(2) expression of optionality or of preference fol-
lowed by an instruction: our suggestions: ..., or ex-
pression of optionality within the instruction (use
preferably a sharp knife).
In addition, as for warnings, any instruction pre-
ceding a support of type advice is a conclusion.
The first pattern above is recogned by the fol-
lowing script:
ceci|cela|NOM|PRO:
PER+--tre?--ADV?--Verb/
advice exporession--(\w+ )*--##
Supports of type advice are identified on the
basis of 3 distinct types of patterns:
(1) Goal exp + (adverb) + positively oriented term.
Goal expressions are e.g.: in order to, for, whereas
adverb includes: better (in French: mieux, plus,
davantage), and positively oriented term includes:
nouns (savings, perfection, gain, etc.), adjectives
(efficient, easy, useful, etc.), or adverbs (well, sim-
ply, etc.). For this latter class of positively oriented
terms we constructed a lexicon that contains about
50 terms. terms.
(2) goal expression with a positive consequence
verb (favour, encourage, save, etc.), or a facilita-
tion verb (improve, optimize, facilitate, embellish,
help, contribute, etc.),
(3) the goal expression in (1) and (2) above can be
replaced by the verb ?to be? in the future: it will be
easier to locate your keys.
Similarly as above, we carried out an indica-
tive evaluation on the same corpus as above, with
the same experimental conditions. We get the fol-
lowing results for advices:
conclusion support (3) (4) (5)
recognition recognition
79% 84% 92% 91% 91%
(3) conclusions well delimited, (4) supports
well delimited, both with respect to advices cor-
rectly identified. (5) support and conclusion cor-
rectly related.
A short example of an annotated text is given
in Fig. 1 below.
4 Constructing and Querying a
know-how textual database
Besides studying the textual structure of proce-
dural texts and responding to How-to questions
(Delpech et al 2007) from the analysis of these
texts, a major application of this work is the con-
struction of domain know-how knowledge base,
which is probably quite basic, but which could be
subject to interesting generalizations. Obviously,
to make this knowledge optimal, it would be useful
to associate with every statement a formal repre-
sentation that supports inference, data fusion, etc.
This domain know-how knowledge base of ad-
vices, hints and warnings is of much importance
for different types of users who have a procedure
to realize a task but who want to know more before
starting. Some psychological experiments have in
fact shown that, besides instructions given in pro-
cedural texts, users are very much interested in
what remains implicit in those texts: what you are
supposed to know or care about (but have no means
to ask). This know-how textual database is aimed
to fill in this kind of gap.
The work presented hereafter is still ex-
ploratory, since the task is quite complex. The
domain know-how textual database is planned to
be either directly consulted by users, or queried
by means of requests in natural language or key-
words.
4.1 Constructing a text database of do-
main know-how
There are repositories of advices organized by
sector of activity available on the Web (e.g.
http://www.conseils-gratuit.com). These are real-
ized manually: most of these advices come from
hints sent by readers of these pages. These repos-
itories contain in general simple advices and also
small procedures which are hints to better realize a
certain task.
In our approach, the text units that we have ac-
cess to are either (1) procedural texts decomposed
into subgoals when they are large (e.g. the differ-
ent phases of assembling a computer), or (2) in-
structional compounds. Compounds roughly cor-
respond to the various advice forms found in man-
46
[procedure
[
title
How to embellish your balcony
[
Prerequisites
1 lattice, window boxes, etc.]
....
[
instructional?compound
In order to train a plant to grow up a wall, select first a sunny area, clean the floor and
make sure it is flat......
[
Argument
[
Conclusion:Advice
You should better let a 10 cm interval between the wall and the lattice.]
[
Support:Advice
This space will allow the air to move around, which is beneficial for the health of your
plant. ]
...... ]]]]
Figure 1: An annotated procedure
ually realized repositories of advices. Advices and
warnings mainly appear within these instructional
compounds. However, compounds being inserted
into a larger procedure may be somewhat elliptical
in some cases. Therefore, the textual database we
are constructing will contain titles (to settle con-
text) and compounds.
Let us now present the construction of the do-
main know-how textual database of advices and
warnings. At this stage, this is an experimental ten-
tative that needs further improvements and evalu-
ation. We first process texts by domain, according
to our corpus (about 8000 texts). The main func-
tions of this processing are:
(1) cleaning web pages from irrelevant data (adds,
forums, summaries, links, etc.),
(2) XML tagging the instructional aspects, with
dedicated tags: tagging titles (and reconstructing
the numerous titles which are incomplete, with
missing verb or object, and tagging instructional
compounds and prerequisites, and
(3) tagging within instructional compounds ad-
vices and warnings based on the patterns given
above.
In the textual database, the first
level of structure is domains: house,
coocking, administration, health,
garden, computer, do it yourself,
animals, beauty, society.
Next, below each of these domain top nodes,
we have a list of items that correspond to proce-
dures main titles (e.g. boucher un trou avec du
platre (fill up a hole with plaster). Since, for most
domains we have several hundreds of documents,
we need to organize those titles and abstract over
them. This is being organized around two axis:
(1) task oriented: where action verbs are grouped
on the basis of closely related terms to form a sin-
gle title (for that purpose we use our verb lexical
base (Volem)). A second level of generalization
is carried out by skipping adjuncts, therefore we
have items like: ?repairing walls? independently of
the material or the technique used, e.g. with plas-
ter. mastic, cement.
(2) object oriented: where we only keep track of
the objects, viewed as a theme: wall, wood, plas-
ter, etc. so that the user can access the different
operations these objects may undergo.
These revised titles form a second level in the
structure of the know-how textual knowledge base.
Below these links, we have the list of relevant
web pages. Each of these pages is associated with
an index composed of the set of titles it contains
and the list of supports identified (reconstructed
supports are not yet included). Titles are used to
make the procedure context more precise so that
the scope of supports is more clear, since some
supports are vague. A short example is given in
Fig. 2 below. Supports which are too vague to be
of any use are filtered out. At the moment we are
studying various forms of filters based on the type
of words they contain and their relevance.
4.2 Querying the know-how textual
database
In general, attempting to match queries directly
with supports in order to get the advice, i.e. the
associated conclusion does not lead to the best re-
sults because supports are often incomplete or they
contain a lot of pronominal references. Our match-
ing procedure therefore includes the taking into ac-
count of the page title, or subtitles together with
support contents. It seems that this leads to better
results in terms of accuracy and relevance.
Related to Fig. 2, a query could be: how to
get smooth plaster surfaces on a wall ?. There is
no procedural text that corresponds to this query,
47
domain: do-it-yourself
topic: repairing walls
repairing your walls with plaster -[INDEX: Title, list of supports]-[TEXT]
filling up holes in your walls ]-[INDEX: Title, list of supports]-[TEXT
.....
topic: painting walls
.....
Figure 2: A text database index
which is rather an advice request. Answering this
question is realized by the following steps:
(1) based on keywords which appear as objects in
the query, select a domain and a topic in the knowl-
edge base.
(2) then, over the topics selected, match the query
with one or more supports. Matching is obviously
not direct and requires, as in most systems, some
flexibility. Of interest here are adjectives, which
abound in this type of question, for which we need
to develop scales that capture the different lan-
guage expressions of the properties they character-
ize. This type of scale, in (Cruse 1986), is called
non branching proportional series. For example
?smooth? will appear on a scale of type ?surface
granularity? that includes other adjectives such as
rough, grainy, etc.
5 Perspectives
The work presented here complements the tagging
of titles and instructional compounds in procedural
texts of various domains, as reported in (Delpech
et al 2008). We analyzed the forms arguments of
type advice and warning may take, and have imple-
mented and tested a system that tags those struc-
tures and attempts at reconstructing empty sup-
ports. At this level, there is still linguistic and for-
mal work to be carried out, for example to evaluate
the illocutionary force of arguments and to better
settle this work within action theory. We believe
we have a very useful corpus of examples of argu-
ments, of much interest for research in argumenta-
tion theory.
In a second stage, we have now established a
first version of criteria to construct from these ar-
guments a domain know-how textual database, that
users can query to get additional information when
realizing a task, often information which remains
implicit in a procedure, but that users do need to
operate safely and efficiently. The construction of
such a repository is a complex task that we will
pursue, together with an analysis of how it can be
queried accurately.
Credits We thank the French ANR-RNTL re-
search programme for supporting this project. We
also thank very warmly Leila Amgoud for discus-
sions on argumentation, Daniel Kayser for com-
ments on this paper, and 3 anonymous reviewers.
References
Amgoud, L., Parsons, S., Maudet, N., 2001,
Arguments, Dialogue, and Negotiation, in: 14th
European Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
Berlin.
Anscombre, J.-Cl. Ducrot, O., 1981, Interro-
gation et Argumentation, in Langue francaise, no
52, L?interrogation, 5 - 22.
Aouladomar, F., Saint-dizier, P., 2005, To-
wards Answering Procedural Questions, Work-
shop KRAQ05, IJCAI05, Edinburgh.
Cruse, A., 1986, Lexical Semantics, Cam-
bridge Univ. Press.
Davidson, D., 1963, Actions, Reasons, and
Causes, Journal of Philosophy, 60.
Delpech, E., Saint-Dizier, P., 2008, Investigat-
ing the Structure of Procedural Texts for Answer-
ing How-to Questions, LREC 2008, Marrakech.
Kosseim, L., Lapalme, G., 2000, Choosing
Rhetorical Structures to Plan Instructional Texts,
Computational Intelligence, Blackwell, Boston.
Moschler, J., 1985, Argumentation et Conver-
sation, Ele?ments pour une Analyse Pragmatique
du Discours, Hatier - Cre?dif.
ICAIL, 2005, Automatic semantics extraction
in law documents, proceedings, C. Biagili et al.
(ed), ACM ICAIL publications, Stanford.
Vander Linden, K., 1993, Speaking of Ac-
tions Choosing Rhetorical Status and Grammati-
cal Form in Instructional Text Generation Thesis,
University of Colorado.
48
Analyzing the Explanation
Structure of Procedural Texts:
Dealing with Advice and
Warnings
Lionel Fontan
Patrick Saint-Dizier
IRIT, Toulouse (France)
email: stdizier@irit.fr
Abstract
We present the explanation structure of procedural texts, focusing on the
analysis of argumentation, in particular advice and warnings. Their role is
to support and motivate the goal-instruction structure, which is the skele-
ton of procedural texts. Procedural texts consist of a sequence of instruc-
tions, designed with some accuracy in order to reach a goal (e.g. assemble
a computer). Procedural texts may also include subgoals. Goals and sub-
goals are most of the time realized by means of titles and subtitles. The
user must carefully follow step by step the given instructions in order to
reach the goal. We introduce the notion of instructional compound, which
is a complex structure that articulates instructions with various discourse
elements. We then show how arguments can be extracted with the help of
patterns. We finally investigate their contribution to the structure and the
understanding of procedural texts.
115
116 Fontan and Saint-Dizier
1 Introduction
The main goal of our project is to analyze the structure of procedural texts in order to
efficiently and accurately respond to How-to-do-X? questions. This means identifying
titles (which convey the main goals of the procedure), sequences of instructions serv-
ing these goals, and a number of additional structures such as prerequisites, warnings,
advice, illustrations, etc. (Takechi et al 2003, Adam, 2001). A response to an How-to
question is then the well-formed text portion within the scope of the title that matches
the question.
In our perspective, procedural texts range from apparently simple cooking recipes
to large maintenance manuals. They also include documents as diverse as teaching
texts, medical notices, social behavior recommendations, directions for use, assembly
notices, do-it-yourself notices, itinerary guides, advice texts, savoir-faire guides etc.
(Aouladomar et al, 2005). Procedural texts follow a number of structural criteria,
whose realization may depend on the author?s writing abilities, on the target user,
and on traditions associated with a given domain. Procedural texts can be regulatory,
procedural, programmatory, prescriptive or injunctive. The work we report here was
carried out on a development corpus of 1,700 French texts taken from the Web from
most of the areas cited above, and extracted randomly from our more global corpus of
8,000 texts.
We have developed a detailed analysis of procedural texts from a manual corpus
analysis, identifying their main basic components as well as their global structure.
For that purpose, we have defined two levels: a segmentation level that basically iden-
tifies structures considered as terminal structures (titles, instructions, prerequisites,
connectors, etc.) and a grammar level that binds these terminal structures to give a
global structure to procedural texts (Delpech et al 2008). This structure is textual and
dedicated only to elements relevant to procedurality. To design the grammar, we have
borrowed a few considerations from Minimalist syntax, in particular recent develop-
ments of X-bar syntax and notions like merge. This point will not be developed here
(but see Delpech et al 2007). Note that text grammars are generally in a relatively
early development stage (Webber 2004, Gardent 1997).
Procedural texts are complex structures, they often exhibit a quite complex rational
(the instructions) and ?irrational? structure which is mainly composed out of pieces of
advice, conditions, preferences, evaluations, user stimulations, etc. They form what
we call the explanation structure, which motivates and justifies the goal-instructions
structure, viewed as the backbone of procedural texts. A number of these elements
are forms of argumentation, they appear to be very useful, sometimes as important as
instructions, they provide a strong and essential internal cohesion and coherence to
procedural texts.
An important aspect of this project is the accurate identification of the explana-
tion structure as found in procedural texts in order to better understand explanation
strategies deployed by humans in precise, concrete and operational situations and to
transpose it to the generation of explanations in general and in cooperative question-
answering systems in particular. We have already studied the instructional aspects
of procedural texts and implemented a quite efficient prototype within the TextCoop
project (Delpech et al 2008) that tags titles and instructions with dedicated XML
tags. In this paper, after a categorization of explanation structure as found in our cor-
Analyzing the Explanation Structure of Procedural Texts 117
pus of procedural texts, and the presentation of instructional compounds, we focus on
the recognition of warnings and advice. The work is realized for French, examples in
English are just glosses.
2 The explanation structure in procedural texts
We will introduce two independent structures: the general organization of the expla-
nation structure, and the notion of instructional compound.
2.1 A global view of the explanation structure
Procedural texts have a very rich semantic structure, with a large number of facets.
From our development corpus (1,700 web texts of 1?3 pages), we established a clas-
sification of the different forms explanations may take. The explanation structure is
meant to guide the user in two ways: (1) by making sure that he will effectively real-
ize actions as they are specified, via arguments (Amgoud et al 2001, 2005) such as
threats, rewards, advice and warnings which are ?coercitive? in a certain sense, and (2)
help considerations such as evaluation of work realized so far and encouragements of
different kinds.
The main structures we have identified in this type of text are facilitation and argu-
mentation structures. They are either global (adjoined to goals, and having scope over
the whole procedure) or local, included into instructional compounds, with a scope
local to the instructional compound (see next section). The latter is by far the most
frequently encountered case.
Explanation structures can be organized as follows (the terminology is borrowed
from existing work on rhetorical relations or introduced by ourselves):
? facilitation structures, which are rhetorical in essence (Kosseim et al 2000,
Vander Linden 1993), correspond to How to do X? questions, these include two
subcategories:
1. user help, with: hints, evaluations and encouragements;
2. controls on instruction realization, with two cases:
(a) controls on actions: guidance, focusing, expected result and elabora-
tion;
(b) controls on user interpretations: definitions, reformulations, illustra-
tions and also elaborations.
? argumentation structures, corresponding to Why do X? questions. These have
either:
1. positive orientation with the author involvement (promises) or not (advice
and justifications), or
2. negative orientation with the author involvement (threats) or not (warn-
ings).
In what follows, we will mainly concentrate on this second point, and in partic-
ular on warnings and advice which are the most frequently encountered arguments
(since there are rarely involvements from the author). Roughly, we have about 25%
118 Fontan and Saint-Dizier
of instructions which have arguments in do-it-yourself texts, and up to 60% in social
procedural texts. Argumentation structures are relatively general to an application do-
main, while facilitation structures are much more specific to the text and the targeted
audiences.
2.2 From instructions to instructional compounds
In most types of texts, we do not just find sequences of simple instructions but more
complex compounds composed of clusters of instructions, that exhibit a number of se-
mantic contextual dependencies between each other, that we call instructional com-
pounds. These compounds are organized around a few main instructions, to which
a number of subordinate instructions, warnings, arguments, and explanations of var-
ious sorts may possibly be adjoined. All these elements are, in fact, essential in a
compound for a good understanding of the procedure at stake.
An instructional compound has a very rich, but relatively well organized, discourse
structure, composed of several layers, which correspond to the different aspects in-
structions may have. The structure is the following:
? The goal and justification level, which has in general wider scope over the re-
mainder of the compound. It indicates motivations for doing actions that follow
in the compound (e.g. You must regularly clean the curtains of your bedroom:
to do this ...; To change your mother card, you must..., which here motivates
actions to undertake). It gives the fundamental motivation of the compound.
Compared to titles, these introduce very local goals. These are not considered
in the goal hierarchy introduced by titles, and they will not be considered for
question answering.
? The instruction core (or kernel) structure, which contains the main instruc-
tions. These are more or less explicitly temporally organized (see below). In
general simple sequentiality prevails, the goal being to limit the intellectual load
imposed to the user. Actions are identified most frequently via the presence of
action verbs (in relation to the domain) in the imperative form, or in the infinitive
form introduced by a modal (Delpech et al 2008). We observed also a number
of subordinated instructions forms adjoined to the main instructions. These are
in general organized within the compound by means of rhetorical relations, as
the examples below will illustrate.
? The deontic and illocutionary force structures: consist of marks that oper-
ate over instructions, outlining different parameters. These linguistic structures
play a major role in argumentation:
? deontic: obligatory, optional, forbidden or impossible, alternates (or),
? illocutionary and related aspects: stresses the importance of actions: nec-
essary, advised, recommended, to be avoided, etc. These marks are crucial
to identify the weight of an argument.
? a temporal structure that organizes sequences of instructions (and, at a higher
level, instructional compounds). In general, the temporal structure is simple,
Analyzing the Explanation Structure of Procedural Texts 119
sequentiality prevails. In some cases, parallel actions are specified, which par-
tially overlap. Action verbs may indicate some form of parallelism of actions
(incorporate and stir). In other cases it is the user?s experience that determines
the exact temporal interpretation.
? The conditional structure: introduces conditions over instructions within the
compound or even over the whole instructional compound. We encounter quite
a lot of structures organizing mutually exclusive cases If you are pregant, take
medicine X ..., if you are not pregnant and between 19 and 65, it is advised that
you take medecine Y, ...
? The rhetorical structure whose goal is to enrich the core instructions by means
of a number of subordinated aspects (realized as propositions, possibly instruc-
tions) among which, most notably: enablement, basic forms of motivation, cir-
cumstance, elaboration, instrument, precaution, manner. A group of relations
of particular interest in this paper are arguments, developed hereafter.
? The causal structure indicating the goal of an action. We identified in pro-
cedural texts four types of causal relations, following (Talmy 2001): intend-to
(direct objective of an action: push the button to start the engine), Instrumented
(use a 2 inch key to dismount the door), Facilitation (enlarge the hole to bet-
ter empty the tank) and Continue (keep the liquid warm till its color changes).
These are local to a single instruction, with no a priori interaction with the goal
or justification level advocated above.
Explanations and arguments help the reader understand why an instruction must be
followed and what are the risks or the drawbacks if he does not do it properly. We
will illustrate this with two instructional compound examples. In the first example, we
have three main instructions, and an elaboration is adjoined to the second one. The
temporal relations are simple (realized by then, and) and are not represented:
[instructional?compound
[instruction The first step consists in opening the computer box,]
[instruction then to place it on a large, clean surface,
[elaboration or precaution where you make sure there is no risk to
damage electronic components,]]
[instruction and then to withdraw all the caches at the PC front.]]
In the second example, an argument of type advice is introduced; it is composed of
two instructions (later called conclusions) and a conjunction of three supports which
motivate the two instructions.
[instructional?compound
[goal To clean leather armchairs,]
[argument:advice
[instruction choose specialized products dedicated to furniture],
[instruction and prefer them colorless,]
[support they will play a protection role, add beauty, and repair
some small damages.]]]
120 Fontan and Saint-Dizier
Identifying rhetorical relations in this type of text is not straightforward. Some rela-
tions have a fewmarks associated whereas others are largely pragmatic and need some
knowledge of the domain to be identified by a reader. We observed a few, partial, hi-
erarchical relations between the items that build up an instructional compound. Scope
priorities come in three groups. The first group is composed of goals and conditions,
then, at a second level come causal, deontic and illucotionary elements operating over
instructions. At the lower level, we have subordinated instructions, attached to the
core instructions.
2.3 Implementation of instructional compounds
The actual schema for recognizing instructional compounds is quite simple at the mo-
ment, but results are quite satisfactory. Basically, such a compound contains at least
one instruction. It is then delimited as follows:
? any element in an enumeration (typographically marked) is an instructional
compound,
? in a paragraph which is not an enumeration, an instructional compound is de-
limited by expressions which induce an idea of strong break (even though this
term is quite fuzzy). Such marks are for example: goal or conditional expres-
sion, end of paragraph, strong temporal mark (after two hours, when this is over,
at the end of, and so on).
We have manually annotated 160 procedural texts. This is not an easy task due
to the complexity of the structures at stake. Then these were compared with results
obtained automatically. These will be used fully or in part to test the system. We
selected texts we understand so that the risk of errors is limited as much as possible.
This is presented in detail in (Delpech et al 2008) where Kappa tests are realized to
evaluate the homogeneity of human judgements.
For instructional compounds, for the three domains with best title and instruction
recognition rate (do it yourself, cooking, and social life), we obtained the following
results, based on a small corpus of data (60 texts):
Domain Recall Precision
cooking receipes 0.95 1.00
do it Yourself 0.89 0.98
social life 0.88 0.98
We have not yet attempted to implement an efficient system, but we are able to fully
tag about 500 million web pages per hour, on a Pentium 4 3GhZ dual core machine
with 4 Gigabyte RAM. This process includes cleaning web pages, running TreeTagger,
and tagging titles, instructions and instructional compounds.
3 Identifying arguments in procedures
In this section let us first give a quite informal definition of what an argument is, and
how it interacts with the goal-instructions structure. Let us then focus on warnings and
advice which are, by far, the most frequently encountered structures. Most warnings
and advice are included into instructional compounds.
Analyzing the Explanation Structure of Procedural Texts 121
3.1 Argumentation and Action theories
Roughly, argumentation is a process that allows speakers to construct statements for
or against another statement called the conclusion. These former statements are called
supports. The general form of an argument is: Conclusion ?because? Support (noted
as C because S). In natural language, conclusions usually appear before the support,
but they may also appear after, to stress the support. A conclusion may receive sev-
eral supports, possibly of different natures (advice and warnings): don?t add natural
fertilizer, this may attract insects, which will damage your young plants. Arguments
may be more or less strong, they bear in general a certain weight, mostly induced from
the words they contain or from their syntactic construction (Anscombre et al 1981,
Moeschler 1985, Amgoud et al 2001). In natural contexts, this weight is somewhat
vague.
In the case of procedural texts, the representation and the role of arguments in a
text can be modeled roughly as follows. Let G be a goal which can be reached by the
sequence of instructions Ai, i ? [1,n], whatever their exact temporal structure is. Any
instruction Ai is associated with a pair (gi, pi) where gi is the gain associated with Ai
(there is a gain only in case where Ai is a piece of advice, improving G) and pi is the
penalty in case where the user (partly of fully) fails to realize Ai.
A subset of Ai are interpreted as explicit arguments (Ai, is a conclusion) when they
are explicitly paired with a support Si that stresses the importance of Ai (Carefully
plug in your mother card vertically, otherwise you will damage the connectors) or
when advice is given. Their general form is: A j because S j (we use here the term
?because? which is more vague than the implication symbol used in formal argumen-
tation, because natural language is not so radical). Supports Sk which are negatively
oriented are warnings whereas those which are positively oriented are pieces of ad-
vice. Neutral supports simply introduce explanations which are not arguments. For
the other instructions, the support is just implicit (do the action otherwise you will run
into problems).
Similarly to the principles of argumentation theory, but within the framework of
action theory (e.g. Davidson 1963), it is a priori possible to evaluate for a given
realization of the instructions, the gains w.r.t. the goal G (when advice is followed,
improving G) and the penalties (when actions are not well performed, with or without
warnings). In an abstract model, we can assign each instruction a gain and a penalty,
however in practice this is a little bit difficult. At the moment, let?s say that gains are
a priori null, except when we have an instruction of type advice which is realized,
in that case the gain is greater or equal to 1. Penalties are numbers greater than 0,
high penalties corresponding to very crucial instructions. If an instruction is correctly
realized, penalty is 0, if there is a complete failure, penalty is the assigned number,
which may be infinite if the instruction is absolutely crucial.
Given a certain realization by a user, the success of a goal G is the sum of the gains
on the one hand, and the sum of the penalties on the other. Gains and penalties do not
compensate each other but operate at different levels. Since any Ai is in fact realized
successfully to a certain degree by the user, gains and penalties (which are values
given a priori) need to be weighted, i.e. paired with a success measure, respectively
? and ?, each of these weights being included in [0,1]. Then, for a given execution of
the goal G, we have:
122 Fontan and Saint-Dizier
gain(G) = ?ni=1 gi ? ?i penalty(G) = ?ni=1 pi ? ?i
As can be noted, our definitions include terms which are gradual: ?more difficult?,
?easier?, because in practice, failing to realize an instruction properly does not neces-
sarily means that the goal cannot be reached, but the user will just be less successful,
for various reasons. In the natural language expressions of conclusions (the A j) as
well as of supports, there are many modals or classes of verbs (like risk verbs) that
modulate the consequences on G, contrast for example:
use professional products to clean your leathers, they will give them a
brighter aspect.
with:
carefully plug in your mother card vertically, otherwise you will most
likely damage its connectors.
In the latter case, the goal ?mounting your own PC? is likely to fail (the instruction
at stake will be assigned a high penalty), whereas in the former, the goal ?cleaning
your leathers? will just be less successful, but there is a gain gi associated.
3.2 Processing arguments
From the above observations, we have investigated the different forms arguments may
take and how they are realized in French. We noted that, in a very large number
of cases, arguments in procedural texts can be identified by means of specific terms,
i.e. there is no need to make complex parses or inferences. For most of them, they
are embedded into instructional compounds, it is therefore quite easy to delimit them.
Their scope is in general the compound, and their delimitation is quite simple. Most of
the time, arguments are introduced by a goal or a cause connector. They are quite often
either a complete, independent sentence following an instruction, or a subordinated
clause ending a sentence. As a result, their recognition is relatively well portable from
one procedural domain to another, with only mainly generic vocabulary involved.
We have defined a set of patterns that recognize instructions which are conclusions
and their related supports. We defined those patterns from a development corpus of
about 1,700 texts from various domains (cooking, do it yourself, gardening, video
games, social advice, etc.). The study is made on French, English glosses are given
here for ease of reading. The recognition problem is twofold: identifying propositions
as conclusions or supports bymeans of specific linguistic marks and a few typographic
marks, and then delimiting these elements. In general, boundaries are either sentences
or, by default, instructional compound boundaries. In procedural texts, roughly, the
proportion of advice and warnings is almost equivalent.
Processing warnings
Warnings are basically organized around a unique structure composed of an ?avoid
expression? combined with a proposition. The variations in the ?avoid expressions?
capture the illocutionary force of the argument via several devices, ordered here by
increasing force:
1. ?prevention verbs like avoid? NP / to VP (avoid hot water)
Analyzing the Explanation Structure of Procedural Texts 123
2. do not / never / ... VP(infinitive) ... (never put this cloth in the sun)
3. it is essential, vital, ... to never VP(infinitive).
In cases where the conclusion is relatively weak in terms of consequences, it may not
have any specific mark, its recognition is then based on the observation that it is the
instruction that immediately precedes an already identified support.
Supports are propositions which are identified from various marks: (a) via connec-
tors such as: otherwise, under the risk of, etc., in French: sinon, car, sous peine de, au
risque de or via verbs expressing consequence; (b) via negative expressions: in order
not to, in order to avoid, etc.; (c) via specific verbs such as risk verbs introducing
events (you risk to break) ? in general the embedded verb has a negative polarity; (d)
via the presence of very negative terms, such as: nouns: death, disease, etc., adjec-
tives, and some verbs and adverbs. We have a lexicon of ca. 200 negative terms found
in our corpora.
Some supports have a more neutral formulation: they may be a portion of a sen-
tence where a conclusion has been identified. For example, a proposition in the future
tense or conditional following a conclusion is identified as a support. However, some
supports may be empty, because they can easily be inferred by the reader. In that case,
the argument is said to be truncated.
Patterns are implemented in Perl and are included into the global system (the
TextCoop software). From the above observations, with some generalizations and
the construction of lexicons of marks, we have summarized the extraction process
in only eight patterns for supports and three patterns for conclusions. Arguments are
tagged by XML tags. We carried out an indicative evaluation (e.g. to get improvement
directions) on a corpus of 66 texts over various domains, containing 262 arguments.
We get the following results for warnings: (supports well delimited are with respect
to warnings correctly identified):
Conclusion Support Conclusions Supports
recognition recognition well delimited well delimited
88% 91% 95% 95%
Processing advice
Conclusions of type advice are identified essentially by means of two types of pattern
(in French):
1. advice or preference expression followed by an instruction. The preference
expression may be a verb or a more complex expression: is advised to, prefer, it
is better, preferable to, etc.;
2. expression of optionality or of preference followed by an instruction: our sug-
gestions: ..., or expression of optionality within the instruction (use preferably
a sharp knife).
In addition, as for warnings, any instruction preceding a support of type advice is
a conclusion. Supports of type advice are identified on the basis of 3 distinct types of
pattern:
124 Fontan and Saint-Dizier
1. Goal exp + (adverb) + positively oriented term. Goal expressions are e.g.: in
order to, for, whereas adverb includes: better, more (in French: mieux, plus,
davantage), and positively oriented term includes: nouns (savings, perfection,
gain, etc.), adjectives (efficient, easy, useful, etc.), or adverbs (well, simply, etc.).
For this latter class of positively oriented terms we constructed a lexicon that
contains about 50 terms.
2. Goal expressions with a positive consequence verb (favor, encourage, save,
etc.), or a facilitation verb (improve, optimize, facilitate, embellish, help, con-
tribute, etc.),
3. The goal expression in (1) and (2) above can be replaced by the verb ?to be? in
the future: it will be easier to locate your keys.
A short example of an annotated text is given in Figure 1 below. Similarly as above,
we carried out an indicative evaluation on the same corpus with 68 texts containing
240 manually identified pieces of advice (again, delimitation results are calculated
with respect to advice correctly identified):
Conclusion Support Conclusions Supports Support/Conclusion
recognition recognition well delimited well delimited correctly related
79% 84% 92% 91% 91%
As the reader may note, results are less satisfactory than for warnings. This is
mainly due to the fact that advice is expressed in a much ?softer? way than warnings,
with less emphasis and strength, therefore, terms typical of advice are not necessarily
strongly marked, when present.
[procedure
[title How to embellish your balcony
[Prerequisites 1 lattice, window boxes, etc.] ...
[instructional?compound In order to train a plant to grow up a wall, select first a sunny area,
clean the floor and make sure it is flat...
[Argument [Conclusion:Advice You should better let a 10 cm interval between the wall and the
lattice.]
[Support:Advice This space will allow the air to move around, which is beneficial for the
health of your plant.] ... ]]]]
Figure 1: An annotated procedure
The terms involved in advice as well as warning patterns are mostly domain inde-
pendent, they are also quite limited in number. Their variations are mainly due to the
author?s style and the target audience. Finally, it seems that our extraction mechanism
can be used to extract arguments in a large number of non-procedural texts such as
news. This is very tentative but a few tests on French news indicates an accuracy of
about 75%, but these also contain a few rewards and threats. We get really good results
with teaching texts, which may be felt to be at the boarder line of procedural texts, but
which contain quite a lot of reward expressions since interactions are more prominent
(with the teacher). In terms of multilinguality, we are at the moment developing the
same approach for Thai (at Kasetsart univ., Bangkok) applied to the treatment of rice.
Analyzing the Explanation Structure of Procedural Texts 125
[instructional?compound En decembre-janvier, effectuer la taille d??quilibrage et de net-
toyage de vos arbres.
[Argument [Conclusion:warning La premi?re ann?e de fructification, ?liminer tous les
fruits au moment o? ils se d?veloppent,]
[Support:warning Cela ?vite d??puiser l?arbre.] ... ]]
Figure 2: Annotated warning (gloss: In December-January, make the first pruning
and cleaning of your trees. The first year with fruits, eliminate all fruits, this avoids
the tree to run out.)
[instructional?compound [goal Les ?tag?res de votre meuble doivent ?tre lisses.
[Argument [Conclusion:advice Utilisez si possible une ponceuse ?lectrique,]
[Support:advice Ce sera beaucoup plus rapide et vraiment moins fatigant.] ...]]
Figure 3: Anotated advice (gloss: The shelves of your furniture must be very smooth.
Use if possible an electric sander, this will be faster and less tiring.)
3.3 Dealing with empty supports
Considering do-it-yourself and gardening texts, we noted that about 2/3 of the argu-
ments are not supported. This very large number of unsupported arguments, in such
typically procedural texts, can be explained by several factors: (1) procedural texts are
more oriented towards action than control, (2) some supports, possibly complex, could
in fact introduce doubts or confusions, (3) some explanations (supports) may be too
complex to be understood by a casual user, and (4) supports are sometimes sufficiently
explicit in the conclusions (do not scatter seeds by high winds! = they won?t go where
you want them to go). In socially-oriented procedural texts, supports are often much
more explicit, but this may differ depending on the author?s style.
We noted that realized supports correspond to two main trends: (1) supports that
express general requirements such as: efficiency of actions, security, ease of execution,
adequate execution, speed, aesthetics, lower cost, etc. and (2) supports that cover more
precise, domain dependent situations (avoid pruning trees when temperature drops
below zero).
Reconstructing empty support is still under research, let us note here the still very
tentative directions we are investigating, which require different forms of inference.
For empty supports corresponding to general requirements, we infer a generic support
based on those requirements, e.g.: mounting your computer: use a flat and clean sur-
face. induced support: ?for a better ease of execution?. From our observations (which
need further confirmation), generic supports are in general triggered by adjectives or
by general purpose verbs used in the conclusion.
The second situation (empty support in a domain dependent situation) is more del-
icate and requires domain or lexical knowledge. We are investigating the use of prin-
ciples of the Generative Lexicon (Pustejovsky 1991) for that purpose. Very briefly,
wind has in its telic role several predicates like push, take away, scatter, disperse,
break, damage, .... When applied e.g. to gardening, such as planting new flowers,
since these are not so mobile when planted, a predicate like break or damage can be
126 Fontan and Saint-Dizier
selected (selection principles in the Generative lexicon remain however an open and
very delicate problem). Then, from a statement such as: avoid planting flowers by
high winds the support: because wind will damage or break flowers can be inferred.
4 Perspectives
The work presented here complements the tagging of titles and instructional com-
pounds in procedural texts of various domains, as reported in (Delpech et al 2007,
2008). It allows us to have a quite comprehensive analysis of procedural texts, which
turn out to have a very rich structure. Annotated corpus is available on request. We
plan to include in our system the treatment of conditional expressions realized in
(Bouffier et al 2007), since we have not studied this phenomenon (and the associ-
ated scoping problems). We will then examine how illocutionary force is expressed.
Finally, we plan to investigate the main lines of the facilitation structure.
We analyzed the forms arguments of type advice and warning may take, and have
implemented and tested a system that tags those structures and attempts at reconstruct-
ing empty supports. At this level, there is still linguistic and formal work to be carried
out, for example to evaluate the illocutionary force of arguments and to better settle
this work within action theory. We believe we have a very useful corpus of examples
of arguments, of much interest for research in argumentation theory. An important
result is that arguments can be recognized on the basis of relatively simple parameter-
ized patterns. The terms involved in those patterns are mostly domain independent.
They may just vary depending on the author?s style and the target audience. Finally,
it seems that our extraction mechanism can be used to extract arguments in a large
number of non-procedural texts such as news.
Besides studying the textual structure of procedural texts and responding to How-
to questions from the analysis of these texts, a major application of this work is the
construction of domain know-how knowledge base, quite basic but which could be
subject to interesting generalizations. Obviously, to make this knowledge optimal, it
would be useful to associate with every statement a formal representation that supports
inference, data fusion, etc. This domain know-how knowledge base of advice, hints
and warnings is of much importance for different types of users who have a procedure
to realize a task but who want to know more before starting. Some psychological
experiments have shown that, besides instructions given in procedural texts, users are
very much interested in what remains implicit in those texts: what you are supposed to
know or care about (but have no means to ask). Although there are already available,
but manually constructed, such bases of advice, it is of much interest to construct it
automatically, using the instructional compound as an advice unit.
Acknowledgements This paper relates work realized within the French ANR project
TextCoop. We thank its partners for stimulating discussions. We also thank Leila
Amgoud and Daniel Kayser for very useful discussions on this work. Finally, we are
very grateful to three reviewers for their detailed comments which helped improve and
clarify this paper.
Analyzing the Explanation Structure of Procedural Texts 127
References
Adam, J.M., Types de Textes ou genres de Discours? Comment Classer les Textes qui
Disent De et Comment Faire, Langages, 141, pp. 10?27, 2001.
Amgoud, L., Bonnefon, J.F., Prade, H., An Argumentation-based Approach to Mul-
tiple Criteria Decision, in 8th European Conference on Symbolic and Quantitative
Approaches to Reasoning with Uncertainty, ECSQARU?2005, Barcelona, 2005.
Amgoud, L., Parsons, S., Maudet, N., Arguments, Dialogue, and Negotiation, in: 14th
European Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Berlin, 2001.
Anscombre, J.-Cl. Ducrot, O., Interrogation et Argumentation, in Langue francaise,
no 52, L?interrogation, 5 - 22, 1981.
Aouladomar, F., Saint-Dizier, P., An Exploration of the Diversity of Natural Argumen-
tation in Instructional Texts, 5th International Workshop on Computational Models of
Natural Argument, IJCAI, Edinburgh, 2005.
Bouffier, A., Poibeau, T., Re-engineering free texts to obtain XML documents: a dis-
course based approach, RANLP 2007.
Delin, J., Hartley, A., Paris, C., Scott, D., Vander Linden, K., Expressing Procedural
Relationships in Multilingual Instructions, Proceedings of the Seventh International
Workshop on Natural Language Generation, pp. 61-70, Maine, USA, 1994.
Davidson, D., Actions, Reasons, and Causes, Journal of Philosophy, 60, 1963
Delpech, E., Murguia, E., Saint-Dizier, P., A Two-Level Strategy for Parsing Procedu-
ral Texts, VSST07, Marrakech, October 2007.
Delpech, E., Saint-Dizier, P., Anonymous, Investigating the Structure of Procedural
Texts for Answering How-to Questions, LREC 2008, Marrakech.
Gardent, C., Discourse tree adjoining grammars, report nb. 89, Univ. Saarlandes,
Saarbrucken, 1997.
Kosseim, L., Lapalme, G., Choosing Rhetorical Structures to Plan Instructional Texts,
Computational Intelligence, Blackwell, Boston, 2000.
Moeschler, J., Argumentation et Conversation, El?ments pour une Analyse Pragma-
tique du Discours, Hatier - Cr?dif, 1985.
Pustejovsky, J., The Generative Lexicon, Computational Linguistics, 17(4), 1991.
Takechi, M., Tokunaga, T., Matsumoto, Y., Tanaka, H., Feature Selection in Cate-
gorizing Procedural Expressions, The Sixth International Workshop on Information
Retrieval with Asian Languages (IRAL2003), pp. 49?56, 2003.
Talmy, L., Towards a Cognitive Semantics, vol. 1 and 2, MIT Press, 2001.
Vander Linden, K., Speaking of Actions Choosing Rhetorical Status and Grammatical
Form in Instructional Text Generation Thesis, University of Colorado, 1993.
Webber, B., D-LTAG: extending lexicalized TAGs to Discourse, Cognitive Science
28, pp. 751?779, Elsevier, 2004.
