Prominence and Phrasing in Spoken Discourse Processing 
 
 
Shari R. Speer Kiwako Ito 
Department of Linguistics Department of Linguistics 
Ohio State University Ohio State University 
Columbus, Ohio, USA Columbus, Ohio, USA 
speer@ling.osu.edu ito@ling.osu.edu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
We review psycholinguistic research on the 
use of intonation in dialogue, focusing on our 
own recent work. In experiments using com-
plex real-world tasks and na?ve speakers and 
listeners, we show that speakers reliably spe-
cific prosodic cues to signal their intensions, 
and that listeners use these cues to recognize 
syntactic and pragmatic aspects of discourse 
meaning. 
1 Introduction 
The intonation of an utterance conveys a great deal 
of information about a speaker?s intended message. 
Recent research has addressed whether, when, and 
how speakers use intonation to transmit linguistic 
and paralinguistic meaning. Speakers use intona-
tion for a broad range of functions in communica-
tion, such as: to mark the difference between 
immediately relevant vs. background information; 
to express contrast, contradiction, and correction; 
and to indicate the intended syntax of ambiguous 
utterances.  
In this paper, we will review recent experimental 
studies of na?ve speakers? and listeners? use of in-
tonation during production and comprehension. 
We focus primarily on our own work, where we 
have used naturalistic, relatively complex real-
world tasks to elicit speakers? intonation in dia-
logue, and to examine listeners? ability to use into-
nation during comprehension.   
 
1.1 Structure of the Review 
The review includes a very brief overview of the 
ToBI (Tone and Break Indices: Beckman, Hir-
shberg & Shattuck Hufnagel, 2005; Brugos, Shat-
tuck Hufnagel, & Veilleux, 2006), a system widely 
used to annotate the locations and types of intona-
tional entities present in speech. We then turn to 
the correspondence between intonational phrasing 
and syntactic constituency, examining whether and 
how speakers use the location and size of prosodic 
breaks as they produce syntactic structure, and test-
ing listeners? ability to use this correspondence. 
Next, we will discuss the role of intonational 
prominence in discourse structuring. In particular, 
we will examine the production and comprehen-
sion of accentual prominence to express referential 
contrast. Our experimental findings suggest that 
both phrasing and prominence cues are robust for 
understanding spoken messages, and infelicitous 
use of those prosodic cues may mislead the lis-
tener?s comprehension processes.  The closing dis-
cussion emphasizes the contribution of intonation 
to spoken language processing, and its essential 
role in discourse modeling.  
2 Prosodic phrasing and syntactic structure 
Production experiments investigating the corre-
spondence of prosodic and syntactic phrasing in 
language production were conducted using a par-
tially-scripted two-player board game task (Speer, 
Warren, & Schafer, 2003, Schafer, Speer, & War-
ren, 2005). The game was constructed to elicit par-
ticular syntactic contrasts as the players spoke to 
1
each other to exchange information and move 
game pieces from start to goal, avoiding hazards 
and collecting bonuses. Speakers were required to 
use a fixed set of sentence frames and game piece 
names to construct instructions, requests and ac-
knowledgements. Board layouts were carefully 
constructed to create situational contexts for the 
resulting dialogues produced by the speakers, so 
that potentially syntactically ambiguous utterances 
sometimes remained ambiguous given the game 
context, but sometimes were contextually disam-
biguated. The task allowed recording of multiple 
renditions of a sentence from the same speaker, as 
well as across speakers.  
Phonetic analyses and phonological transcription 
of speech from the game task experiments demon-
strates that speakers reliably used prosodic cues to 
signal syntactic structure, and to convey the in-
tended meaning of syntactically ambiguous sen-
tences.  Although speakers produced a wide variety 
of prosodic patterns for the same sentence, they 
consistently placed the strongest prosodic break in 
the syntactic location that indicated their intended 
meaning.  This effect held for different syntactic 
types, and was robust across various types of po-
tentially disambiguating situational contexts. 
Companion comprehension experiments used the 
na?ve speakers? productions from the game task as 
stimuli in forced-choice experiments. Results show 
that listeners make reliable use of prosodic regu-
larities to accurately recover the speakers? intended 
meanings. 
3 Intonational prominence and contrast 
To investigate na?ve speakers? use of intonational 
prominence to mark contrast, Ito, Speer & Beck-
man (2004; Ito & Speer, 2006) elicited unscripted 
speech using a holiday tree decoration task. Na?ve 
speakers were asked to be ?directors,? giving in-
structions about how to hang ornaments on a tree 
to a confederate ?decorator.? Photos of ornaments 
and the tree were used to give ?directors? the se-
quence of ornaments and their intended locations 
on the tree. By using a set of common color terms 
and object names for the ornaments, we collected 
multiple spontaneous productions of target adjec-
tive-noun pairs (e.g. ?green bell?) in a natural con-
versational setting. The sequence of decoration 
was constructed to create contrastive discourse 
contexts (green bell -> blue bell). Prosodic annota-
tion of the spontaneous speech and supporting 
phonetic measurements indicated that speakers 
used prominent pitch accent more frequently when 
the decoration sequence was contrastive than when 
it was not (e.g. ?green bell?. ? Now, find a 
BLUE bell?: where the adjective ?blue? is accented 
and the repeated noun ?bell? is deaccented).  
To test how prominent accent guides referential 
resolution during comprehension, a set of experi-
ments was conducted using eye movement moni-
toring technique (Ito & Speer, 2008). Spoken 
stimuli modeled on the productions from the pre-
vious production study were recorded by a trained 
phonetician.  This time, na?ve listeners followed 
instructions to locate ornaments and hang them as 
specified on a small tree. 
Results showed the immediate use of intona-
tional cues by the listeners.  For example, when a 
prominent accent felicitously marked contrast on a 
color adjective (?First hang the red ball. ? Next, 
hang the BLUE ball?), fixation proportions to tar-
get cells increased more quickly than when intona-
tion did not cue the contrast (?Hang the red ball. ? 
Next, hang the blue ball.?). The timing of fixations 
indicates that listeners moved their eyes to the cor-
rect ornament before processing the segmental in-
formation of the noun. In addition, prominent 
accent misled listeners when the decoration se-
quence did not prompt contrast (blue ball ? 
GREEN drum: here, participants looked at balls 
before they redirected fixations to the drum). These 
incorrect fixations increased toward the end of the 
adjective and continued to rise halfway into the 
noun with conflicting segmental information. 
Thus, listeners were executing their initial visual 
search based on the intonational information of the 
adjective, demonstrating the use of prosody for 
making predictions during comprehension of run-
ning speech.   
 
Acknowledgments 
To our colleagues and co-investigators, especially 
Ping Bai, Mary Beckman and Laurie Maynell, and 
to NSF BCS-0617609 & REU-0617609 and NIH 
DC007090. 
 
2
References  
Beckman, M.E., Hirschberg, J., & Shattuck-Huffnagel, 
S. (2005). The original ToBI system and the evolu-
tion of the ToBI framework.  In Sun-Ah Jun (ed.), 
Prosodic models and transcription: Towards pro-
sodic typology.  Oxford University Press.  
Brugos, A., Shattuck-Hufnagel, S., & Vielleux, N. 
(2006). Transcribing Prosodic Structure of Spoken 
Utterances with ToBI., MIT Open Courseware, 
http://ocw.mit.edu/OcwWeb/Electrical-
Engineering-and-Computer-Science/6-
911January--IAP--2006.  
Ito & Speer, S.R. (2006). Using interactive tasks to 
elicit natural dialogue. In P. Augurzky & D. Lener-
tova (Eds.), Methods in Empirical Prosody Research, 
Mouton de Gruyter. 
Ito, K., & Speer, S.R. (2008). Anticipatory effects of 
intonation: Eye movements during instructed visual 
search. Journal of Memory and Language, Special is-
sue on Language-Vision interaction.  
Ito, K., Speer, S.R., & Beckman, M. (2004). Informa-
tional status and pitch accent distribution in sponta-
neous dialogues in English. Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Speech Prosody. Nara, 
Japan.  
Schafer, A.J., Speer, S.R., & Warren, P. (2005). Pro-
sodic influences on the production and comprehen-
sion of syntactic ambiguity in a game-based 
conversation task. In M. Tanenhaus & J. Trueswell 
(Eds.) Approaches to Studying World Situated Lan-
guage Use: Psycholinguistic, Linguistic and Compu-
tational Perspectives on Bridging the Product and 
Action Tradition, Cambridge: MIT Press.  
Speer, S.R., Warren, P., & Schafer, A.J. (2003). Into-
nation and sentence processing. Proceedings of the 
Fifteenth International Congress of Phonetic Sci-
ences, Barcelona, Spain.  
 
 
3
