Coling 2008: Proceedings of the workshop on Cross-Framework and Cross-Domain Parser Evaluation, pages 36?43
Manchester, August 2008
Large Scale Production of Syntactic Annotations to Move Forward
Patrick Paroubek, Anne Vilnat, Sylvain Loiseau
LIMSI-CNRS
BP 133 91403 Orsay Cedex
France
prenom.nom@limsi.fr
Gil Francopoulo
Tagmatica
126 rue de Picpus 75012 Paris
France
gil.francopoulo@tagmatica.com
Olivier Hamon
ELDA and LIPN-P13
55-57 rue Brillat-Savarin 75013 Paris,
France
hamon@elda.org
Eric Villemonte de la Clergerie
Alpage-INRIA
Dom. de Voluceau Rocquencourt,
B.P. 105, 78153 Le Chesnay, France
Eric.De La Clergerie@inria.fr
Abstract
This article presents the methodology of
the PASSAGE project, aiming at syntacti-
cally annotating large corpora by compos-
ing annotations. It introduces the anno-
tation format and the syntactic annotation
specifications. It describes an important
component of the methodolgy, namely an
WEB-based evaluation service, deployed
in the context of the first PASSAGE parser
evaluation campaign.
1 Introduction
The last decade has seen, at the international level,
the emergence of a very strong trend of researches
on statistical methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing. In our opinion, one of its origins, in
particular for English, is the availability of large
annotated corpora, such as the Penn Treebank
(1M words extracted from the Wall Street journal,
with syntactic annotations; 2
nd
release in 1995
1
,
the British National Corpus (100M words cover-
ing various styles annotated with parts of speech
2
),
or the Brown Corpus (1M words with morpho-
syntactic annotations). Such annotated corpora
were very valuable to extract stochastic grammars
or to parametrize disambiguation algorithms. For
instance (Miyao et al, 2004) report an experiment
where an HPSG grammar is semi-automatically
aquired from the Penn Treebank, by first annotat-
ing the treebank with partially specified derivation
c
? 2008. Licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported li-
cense (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/).
Some rights reserved.
1
http://www.cis.upenn.edu/
?
treebank/
2
http://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk/
trees using heuristic rules , then by extracting lex-
ical entries with the application of inverse gram-
mar rules. (Cahill et al, 2004) managed to ex-
tract LFG subcategorisation frames and paths link-
ing long distance dependencies reentrancies from
f-structures generated automatically for the Penn-
II treebank trees and used them in an long distance
dependency resolution algorithm to parse new text.
They achieved around 80% f-score for fstructures
parsing on the WSJ part of the Penn-II treebank,
a score comparable to the ones of the state-of-
the-art hand-crafted grammars. With similar re-
sults, (Hockenmaier and Steedman, 2007) trans-
lated the Penn Treebank into a corpus of Combina-
tory Categorial Grammar (CCG) derivations aug-
mented with local and long-range word to word
dependencies and used it to train wide-coverage
statistical parsers. The development of the Penn
Treebank have led to many similar proposals of
corpus annotations
3
. However, the development of
such treebanks is very costly from an human point
of view and represents a long standing effort, in
particular for getting of rid of the annotation errors
or inconsistencies, unavoidable for any kind of hu-
man annotation. Despite the growing number of
annotated corpora, the volume of data that can be
manually annotated remains limited thus restrict-
ing the experiments that can be tried on automatic
grammar acquisition. Furthermore, designing an
annotated corpus involves choices that may block
future experiments from acquiring new kinds of
linguistic knowledge because they necessitate an-
notation incompatible or difficult to produce from
the existing ones.
With PASSAGE (de la Clergerie et al, 2008b),
we believe that a new option becomes possible.
3
http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de/
projekte/TIGER/related/links.shtml
36
Funded by the French ANR program on Data
Warehouses and Knowledge, PASSAGE is a 3-
year project (2007?2009), coordinated by INRIA
project-team Alpage. It builds up on the re-
sults of the EASy French parsing evaluation cam-
paign, funded by the French Technolangue pro-
gram, which has shown that French parsing sys-
tems are now available, ranging from shallow to
deep parsing. Some of these systems were nei-
ther based on statistics, nor extracted from a tree-
bank. While needing to be improved in robustness,
coverage, and accuracy, these systems has nev-
ertheless proved the feasibility to parse medium
amount of data (1M words). Preliminary experi-
ments made by some of the participants with deep
parsers (Sagot and Boullier, 2006) indicate that
processing more than 10 M words is not a prob-
lem, especially by relying on clusters of machines.
These figures can even be increased for shallow
parsers. In other words, there now exists sev-
eral French parsing systems that could parse (and
re-parse if needed) large corpora between 10 to
100 M words.
Passage aims at pursuing and extending the
line of research initiated by the EASy campaign
by using jointly 10 of the parsing systems that
have participated to EASy. They will be used to
parse and re-parse a French corpus of more than
100 M words along the following feedback loop
between parsing and resource creation as follows
(de la Clergerie et al, 2008a):
1. Parsing creates syntactic annotations;
2. Syntactic annotations create or enrich linguis-
tic resources such as lexicons, grammars or
annotated corpora;
3. Linguistic resources created or enriched on
the basis of the syntactic annotations are then
integrated into the existing parsers;
4. The enriched parsers are used to create richer
(e.g., syntactico-semantic) annotations;
5. etc. going back to step 1
In order to improve the set of parameters of
the parse combination algorithm (inspired from
the Recognizer Output Voting Error Reduction,
i.e. ROVER, experiments), two parsing evalu-
ation campaigns are planned during PASSAGE,
the first of these already took place at the end of
2007 (de la Clergerie et al, 2008b). In the follow-
ing, we present the annotation format specification
and the syntactic annotation specifications of PAS-
SAGE, then give an account of how the syntactic
annotations were compared in the first evaluation
campaign, by first describing the evaluation met-
rics and the web server infrastructure that was de-
ployed to process them. We conclude by showing
how the results so far achieved in PASSAGE will
contribute to the second part of the project, extract-
ing and refining enriched linguistic annotations.
2 PASSAGE Annotation Format
The aim is to allow an explicit representation of
syntactic annotations for French, whether such an-
notations come from human annotators or parsers.
The representation format is intended to be used
both in the evaluation of different parsers, so the
parses? representations should be easily compara-
ble, and in the construction of a large scale anno-
tation treebank which requires that all French con-
structions can be represented with enough details.
The format is based on three distinct specifica-
tions and requirements:
1. MAF (ISO 24611)
4
and SynAF (ISO 24615)
5
which are the ISO TC37 specifications for
morpho-syntactic and syntactic annotation
(Ide and Romary, 2002) (Declerck, 2006)
(Francopoulo, 2008). Let us note that these
specifications cannot be called ?standards?
because they are work in progress and these
documents do not yet have the status Pub-
lished Standard. Currently, their official sta-
tus is only Committee Draft.
2. The format used during the previous TECH-
NOLANGUE/EASY evaluation campaign
in order to minimize porting effort for the ex-
isting tools and corpora.
3. The degree of legibility of the XML tagging.
From a technical point of view, the format is a
compromise between ?standoff? and ?embedded?
notation. The fine grain level of tokens and words
is standoff (wrt the primary document) but higher
levels use embedded annotations. A standoff nota-
tion is usually considered more powerful but less
4
http://lirics.loria.fr/doc pub/maf.pdf
5
http://lirics.loria.fr/doc pub/
N421 SynAF CD ISO 24615.pdf
37
Figure 1: UML diagram of the structure of an an-
notated document
readable and not needed when the annotations fol-
low a (unambiguous) tree-like structure. Let us
add that, at all levels, great care has been taken to
ensure that the format is mappable onto MAF and
SynAF, which are basically standoff notations.
The structure of a PASSAGE annotated docu-
ment may be summarized with the UML diagram
in Figure1. The document begins by the declara-
tion of all the morpho-syntactic tagsets (MSTAG)
that will be used within the document. These dec-
larations respect the ISO Standard Feature Struc-
ture Representation (ISO 24610-1). Then, tokens
are declared. They are the smallest unit address-
able by other annotations. A token is unsplittable
and holds an identifier, a character range, and a
content made of the original character string. A
word form is an element referencing one or sev-
eral tokens. It has has two mandatory attributes:
an identifier and a list of tokens. Some optional at-
tributes are allowed like a part of speech, a lemma,
an inflected form (possibly after spelling correc-
tion or case normalization) and morpho-syntactic
tags. The following XML fragment shows how
the original fragment ?Les chaises? can be repre-
sented with all the optional attributes offered by
the PASSAGE annotation format :
<T id="t0" start="0" end="3">
Les
</T>
<W id="w0" tokens="t0"
pos="definiteArticle"
lemma="le"
form="les"
mstag="nP"/>
<T id="t1" start="4" end="11">
chaises
</T>
<W id="w1" tokens="t1"
pos="commonNoun"
lemma="chaise"
form="chaises"
mstag="nP gF"/>
Note that all parts of speech are taken from the
ISO registry
6
(Francopoulo et al, 2008). As in
MAF, a word may refer to several tokens in or-
der to represent multi-word units like ?pomme de
terre?. Conversely, a unique token may be refered
by two different words in order to represent results
of split based spelling correction like when ?un-
etable? is smartly separated into the words ?une?
and ?table?. The same configuration is required to
represent correctly agglutination in fused preposi-
tions like the token ?au? that may be rewritten into
the sequence of two words ?`a? ?le?. On the con-
trary of MAF, cross-reference in token-word links
for discontiguous spans is not allowed for the sake
of simplicity. Let us add that one of our require-
ment is to have PASSAGE annotations mappable
onto the MAF model and not to map all MAF an-
notations onto PASSAGE model. A G element de-
notes a syntactic group or a constituent (see details
in section 3). It may be recursive or non-recursive
and has an identifier, a type, and a content made of
word forms or groups, if recursive. All group type
values are taken from the ISO registry. Here is an
example :
<T id="t0" start="0" end="3">
Les
</T>
<T id="t1" start="4" end="11">
chaises
</T>
<G id="g0" type="GN">
<W id="w0" tokens="t0"/>
<W id="w1" tokens="t1"/>
</G>
A group may also hold optional attributes like syn-
tactic tagsets of MSTAG type. The syntactic re-
lations are represented with a standoff annotations
which refer to groups and word forms. A relation
is defined by an identifier, a type, a source, and a
target (see details in section 3. All relation types,
like ?subject? or ?direct object? are mappable onto
the ISO registry. An unrestricted number of com-
ments may be added to any element by means of
the mark element (i.e. M). Finally, a ?Sentence?
6
Data Category Registry, see http://syntax.
inist.fr
38
element gathers tokens, word forms, groups, rela-
tions and marks and all sentences are included in-
side a ?Document? element.
3 PASSAGE Syntactic Annotation
Specification
3.1 Introduction
The annotation formalism used in PASSAGE
7
is
based on the EASY one(Vilnat et al, 2004) which
whose first version was crafted in an experimental
project PEAS (Gendner et al, 2003), with inspira-
tion taken from the propositions of (Carroll et al,
2002). The definition has been completed with the
input of all the actors involved in the EASY evalu-
ation campaign (both parsers? developers and cor-
pus providers) and refined with the input of PAS-
SAGE participants. This formalism aims at mak-
ing possible the comparison of all kinds of syn-
tactic annotation (shallow or deep parsing, com-
plete or partial analysis), without giving any ad-
vantage to any particular approach. It has six
kinds of syntactic ?chunks?, we call constituents
and 14 kinds of relations The annotation formal-
ism allows the annotation of minimal, continuous
and non recursive constituents, as well as the en-
coding of relations wich represent syntactic func-
tions. These relations (all of them being binary, ex-
cept for the ternary coordination) have sources and
targets which may be either forms or constituents
(grouping several forms). Note that the PASSAGE
annotation formalism does not postulate any ex-
plicit lexical head.
3.2 Constituent annotations
For the PASSAGE campaigns, 6 kinds of con-
stituents (syntactic ?chunks?) have been consid-
ered and are illustrated in Table 3.2:
? the Noun Phrase (GN for Groupe Nominal)
may be made of a noun preceded by a de-
terminer and/or by an adjective with its own
modifiers, a proper noun or a pronoun;
? the prepositional phrase (GP, for groupe
pr?epositionnel ) may be made of a preposi-
tion and the GN it introduces, a contracted
determiner and preposition, followed by the
introduced GN, a preposition followed by an
adverb or a relative pronoun replacing a GP;
7
Annotation guide: http://www.limsi.fr/
Recherche/CORVAL/PASSAGE/eval 1/2007 10
05PEAS reference annotations v11.12.html
? the verb kernel (NV for noyau verbal ) in-
cludes a verb, the clitic pronouns and possible
particles attached to it. Verb kernels may have
different forms: conjugated tense, present or
past participle, or infinitive. When the con-
jugation produces compound forms, distinct
NVs are identified;
? the adjective phrase (GA for groupe adjec-
tival) contains an adjective when it is not
placed before the noun, or past or present par-
ticiples when they are used as adjectives;
? the adverb phrase (GR for groupe adverbial )
contains an adverb;
? the verb phrase introduced by a preposition
(PV) is a verb kernel with a verb not inflected
(infinitive, present participle,...), introduced
by a preposition. Some modifiers or adverbs
may also be included in PVs.
GN - la tr`es grande porte
8
(the very big door);
- Rouletabille
- eux (they), qui (who)
GP - de la chambre (from the bedroom),
- du pavillon (from the lodge)
- de l`a (from there), dont (whose)
NV - j?entendais (I heared)
- [on ne l?entendait]
9
plus
(we could no more hear her)
- Jean [viendra] (Jean will come)
- [d?esob?eissant] `a leurs parents
(disobeying their parents),
- [ferm?ee] `a clef (key closed)
- Il [ne veut] pas [venir]
(He doesn?t want to come),
- [ils n??etaient] pas [ferm?es]
(they were not closed),
GA - les barreaux [intacts] (the intact bars)
- la solution [retenue] fut...
(the chosen solution has been...),
- les enfants [d?esob?eissants]
(the disobeying children)
GR - aussi (also)
- vous n?auriez [pas] (you would not)
PV - [pour aller] `a Paris (for going to Paris),
- de vraiment bouger (to really move)
Table 1: Constituent examples
39
3.2.1 Syntactic Relation annotations
The dependencies establish all the links between
the minimal constituents described above. All par-
ticipants, corpus providers and campaign organiz-
ers agreed on a list of 14 kinds of dependencies
listed below:
1. subject-verb (SUJ V): may be inside the
same NV as between elle and ?etait in elle
?etait (she was), or between a GN and a NV as
between mademoiselle and appelait in Made-
moiselle appelait (Miss was calling);
2. auxiliary-verb (AUX V), between two NVs
as between a and construit in: on a construit
une maison (we have built a house);
3. direct object-verb (COD V): the relation is
annotated between a main verb (NV) and a
noun phrase (GN), as between construit and
la premi`ere automobile in: on a construit la
premi`ere automobile (we have built the first
car);
4. complement-verb (CPL V): to link to the
verb the complements expressed as GP or PV
which may be adjuncts or indirect objects, as
between en quelle ann?ee and construit in en
quelle ann?ee a-t on construit la premi`ere au-
tomobile (In which year did we build the first
car);
5. modifier-verb (MOD V): concerns the con-
stituants which certainly modify the verb,
and are not mandatory, as adverbs or adjunct
clauses, as between profond?ement or quand
la nuit tombe and dort in Jean dort pro-
fond?ement quand la nuit tombe (Jean deeply
sleeps when the night falls);
6. complementor (COMP): to link the intro-
ducer and the verb kernel of a subordinate
clause, as between qu? and viendra in Je
pense qu?il viendra (I think that he will
come); it is also used to link a preposition and
a noun phrase when they are not contiguous,
preventing us to annotate them as GP;
7. attribute-subject/object (ATB SO): between
the attribute and the verb kernel, and precis-
ing that the attribute is relative to (a) the sub-
ject as between grand and est in il est grand
), or (b) the object as between ?etrange and
trouve in il trouve cette explication ?etrange;
8. modifier-noun (MOD N): to link to the noun
all the constituents which modify it, as the ad-
jective, the genitive, the relative clause... This
dependency is annotated between unique and
fen?etre in l?unique fen?etre (the unique win-
dow) or between de la chambre and la porte
in la porte de la chambre (the bedroom door);
9. modifier-adjective (MOD A): to relate to the
adjective the constituents which modify it, as
between tr`es et belle in ?la tr`es belle collec-
tion (the very impressive collection) or be-
tween de son fils and fi`ere in elle est fi`ere de
son fils (she is proud of her son);
10. modifier-adverb (MOD R): the same kind of
dependency than MOD A for the adverbs, as
between tr`es and gentiment in elle vient tr`es
gentiment (she comes very kindly);
11. modifier-preposition (MOD P): to relate to
a preposition what modifies it, as between
peu and avant in elle vient peu avant lui (she
comes just before him);
12. coordination (COORD): to relate the coor-
dinate and the coordinated elements, as be-
tween Pierre, Paul and et in Pierre et Paul
arrivent (Paul and Pierre are arriving);
13. apposition (APP): to link the elements which
are placed side by side, when they refer to the
same object, as between le d?eput?e and Yves
Tavernier in Le d?eput?e Yves Tavernier ... (the
Deputy Yves Tavernier...);
14. juxtaposition (JUXT): to link constituents
which are neither coordinate nor in an appo-
sition relation, as in enumeration. It also links
clauses as on ne l?entendait et elle ?etait in
on ne l? entendait plus ... elle ?etait peut-?etre
morte (we did not hear her any more... per-
haps she was dead).
Some dependencies are illustrated in the two an-
notated sentences illutrated in figure . These anno-
tations have been made using EasyRef, a specific
Web annotation tool developed by INRIA.
4 PASSAGE First Evaluation Campaign
4.1 Evalution Service
The first PASSAGE evaluation campaign was
carried out in two steps. During the ini-
tial one-month development phase, a develop-
ment corpus was used to improve the quality of
40
Figure 2: Example of two sentences annotations
parsers. This development corpus from the TECH-
NOLANGUE/EASY is composed of 40,000 sen-
tences, out of which 4,000 sentences have been
manually annotated for the gold standard. Based
on these annotated sentences, an automatic WEB-
based evaluation server provides fast performance
feedback to the parsers? developers. At the end
of this first phase, each participant indicated what
he thought was his best parser run and got evalu-
ated on a new set of 400 sentences selected from
another part of the developement corpus which
meanwhile had been manually annotated for the
purpose and kept undisclosed.
The two phases represent a strong effort for the
evaluators. To avoid adding the cost of managing
the distribution and installation of the evaluation
package at each developer?s site, the solution of the
WEB evaluation service was chosen. A few infras-
tructures have been already experimented in NLP,
like GATE (Cunningham et al, 2002) infrastruc-
tures, but to our knowledge none has been used to
provide an WEB-based evaluation service as PAS-
SAGE did. The server was designed to manage
two categories of users: parser developers and or-
ganizers. To the developers, it provides, almost in
real time, confidential and secure access to the au-
tomatic evaluation of their submitted parses. To
the organizers, it give access to statistics enabling
them to follow the progress made by the develop-
ers, and easy management of the test phase. The
evaluation server provides, through a simple WEB
browser, access to both coarse and fine grain statis-
tics to a developer?s performance evaluation, glob-
ally for the whole corpus, at the level of a partic-
ular syntactic annotation or of a particular genre
specific subcorpus, and also at the level of a single
annotation for a particular word form.
Figure 3: Overall functional relations results
4.2 Performance Results
Ten systems participated to the constituents anno-
tation task. For most of the systems, F-measure is
up to 90% and only three systems are between 80%
and 90%. The trend is quite the same for Recall
and Precision. Around 96.5% of the constituents
returned by the best system are correct and it found
95.5% of the constituents present in gold standard.
Figure 3 shows the results of the seven systems that
participated to the functional relations annotation
task. Performance is lower than for constituents
and differences between systems are larger, an evi-
dence that the task remains more difficult. No sys-
tems gets a performance above 70% in F-measure,
three are above 60% and two above 50%. The last
two systems are above 40%.
4.3 Systems Improvements
The higher system gets increasing results from the
beginning of the development phase to the test
phase for both constituents and relations. How-
ever, although the increase for relations is rather
continuous, constituents results grow during the
first few development evaluations, then reach a
threshold from which results do not vary. This
can be explained by the fact that the constituent
scores are rather high, while for relations, scores
are lower and starting from low scores.
Using the evaluation server, system improves
its performance by 50% for the constituents and
600% for the relations, although performance vary
according to the type of relation or constituent.
Moreover, in repeating development evaluations,
another consequence was the convergence of pre-
cision and recall.
41
5 Parser?s outputs combination
The idea to combine the output of systems partic-
ipating to an evalauation campaign in order to ob-
tain a combination with better performance than
the best one was invented to our knowledge by J.
Fiscus (Fiscus, 1997) in a DARPA/NIST speech
recognition evaluation (ROVER/Reduced Output
Voting Error Reduction). By aligning the out-
put of the participating speech transcription sys-
tems and by selecting the hypothesis which was
proposed by the majority of the systems, he ob-
tained better performances than these of the best
system. The idea gained support in the speech pro-
cessing community(L?o?of et al, 2007) and in gen-
eral better results are obtained with keeping only
the output of the two or three best performing sys-
tems, in which case the relative improvement can
go up to 20% with respect to the best performance
(Schwenk and Gauvain, 2000). For text process-
ing, the ROVER procedure was applied to POS
tagging (Paroubek, 2000) and machine translation
(Matusov et al, 2006).
In our case, we will use the text itself to realign
the annotations provided by the various parser be-
fore computing their combination, as we did for
our first experiments with the EASY evaluation
campaign data (Paroubek et al, 2008). Since it
is very likely taht the different parsers do not use
the same word and sentence segmentation, we will
realign all the data along a common word and sen-
tence segmentation obtained by majority vote from
the different outputs.
But our motivation for using such procedure
is not only concerned with performance improve-
ment but also with the obtention of a confidence
measure for the annotation since if all systems
agree on a particular annotation, then it is very
likely to be true.
At this stage many options are open for the way
we want to apply the ROVER algorithm, since we
have both constituents and relations in our anno-
tations. We could vary the selection order (be-
tween constituents and relations), or use differ-
ent comparison functions for the sources/targets of
constituents/relations(Patrick Paroubek, 2006), or
perform incremental/global merging of the annoa-
tions, or explore different weightings/thresholding
strategies etc. In passage, ROVER experiments
are only beginning and we have yet to determine
which is the best strategy before applying it to
word and sentence free segmentation data. In the
early experiment we did with the ?EASy classic?
PASSAGE track which uses a fixed word and sen-
tence segmentation, we measured an improvement
in precision for some specific subcorpora and an-
notations but improvement in recall was harder to
get.
6 Conclusion
The definition of a common interchange syntactic
annotation format is an essential element of any
methodology aiming at the creation of large an-
notated corpora from the cooperation of parsing
systems to acquire new linguistic knowledge. But
the formalism aquires all of its value when backed-
up by the deployment of a WEB-based evaluation
service as the PASSAGE examples shows. 167
experiments were carried out during the develop-
ment phase (around 17 experiments per participant
in one month). The results of the test phase were
available less than one hour after the end of the de-
velopment phase. The service proved so success-
ful that the participants asked after the evaluation,
that the evaluation service be extended to support
evaluation as a perennial service
References
Cahill, Aoife, Michael Burke, Ruth O?Donovan, Josef
Van Genabith, and Andy Way. 2004. Long-distance
dependency resolution in automatically acquired
wide-coverage pcfg-based lfg approximations. In
Proceedings of the 42nd Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (ACL?04), Main Vol-
ume, pages 319?326, Barcelona, Spain, July.
Carroll, J., D. Lin, D. Prescher, and H. Uszkoreit.
2002. Proceedings of the workshop beyond parse-
val - toward improved evaluation measures for pars-
ing systems. In Proceedings of the 3rd International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC), Las Palmas, Spain.
Cunningham, Hamish, Diana Maynard, Kalina
Bontcheva, and Valentin Tablan. 2002. Gate:
an architecture for development of robust hlt ap-
plications. In ACL ?02: Proceedings of the 40th
Annual Meeting on Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 168?175, Morristown, NJ, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Declerck, T. 2006. Synaf: towards a standard for syn-
tactic annotation. In In proceedings of the fifth in-
ternational conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2006), Genoa, Italy, May. ELRA.
Fiscus, Jonathan G. 1997. A post-processing system
to yield reduced word error rates: recognizer output
voting error reduction (rover). In In proceedings of
42
the IEEE Workshop on Automatic Speech Recogni-
tion and Understanding, pages 347?357, Santa Bar-
bara, CA.
Francopoulo, G., T. Declerck, V. Sornlertlamvanich,
E. de la Clergerie, and M. Monachini. 2008. Data
category registry: Morpho-syntactic and syntactic
profiles. Marrakech. LREC.
Francopoulo, Gil. 2008. Tagparser: Well on the way
to iso-tc37 conformance. In In proceedings of the
International Conference on Global Interoperability
for Language Resources (ICGL), pages 82?88, Hong
Kong, January.
Gendner, V?eronique, Gabriel Illouz, Mich`ele Jardino,
Laura Monceaux, Patrick Paroubek, Isabelle Robba,
and Anne Vilnat. 2003. Peas the first instanciation
of a comparative framework for evaluating parsers of
french. In Proceedings of the 10
th
Conference of the
European Chapter fo the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 95?98, Budapest, Hungary,
April. ACL. Companion Volume.
Hockenmaier, Julia and Mark Steedman. 2007. Ccg-
bank: A corpus of ccg derivations and dependency
structures extracted from the penn treebank. Com-
putational Linguistics, 33(3):355?396.
Ide, N. and L. Romary. 2002. Standards for language
ressources. Las Palmas. LREC.
L?o?of, J., C. Gollan, S. Hahn, G. Heigold, B. Hoffmeis-
ter, C. Plahl, D. Rybach, R. Schl?uter, , and H. Ney.
2007. The rwth 2007 tc-star evaluation system for
european english and spanish. In In proceedings of
the Interspeech Conference, pages 2145?2148.
Matusov, Evgeny, N. Ueffing, and Herman Ney. 2006.
Automatic sentence segmentation and punctuation
prediction for spoken language translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Workshop on Spo-
ken Language Translation (IWSLT), pages 158?165,
Trento, Italy.
de la Clergerie, Eric, Christelle Ayache, Ga?el de Chal-
endar, Gil Francopoulo, Claire Gardent, and Patrick
Paroubek. 2008a. Large scale production of syntac-
tic annotations for french. In In proceedings of the
First Workshop on Automated Syntactic Annotations
for Interoperable Language Resources at IGCL?08,
pages 45?52, Hong Kong, January.
de la Clergerie, Eric, Olivier Hamon, Djamel Mostefa,
Christelle Ayache, Patrick Paroubek, and Anne Vil-
nat. 2008b. Passage: from french parser evalua-
tion to large sized treebank. In ELRA, editor, In
proceedings of the sixth international conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC), Mar-
rakech, Morroco, May. ELRA.
Miyao, Yusuke, Takashi Ninomiya, and Jun?ichi Tsu-
jii. 2004. Corpus-oriented grammar development
for acquiring a head-driven phrase structure gram-
mar from the penn treebank. In In Proceedings of
the First International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing (IJCNLP-04).
Paroubek, Patrick, Isabelle Robba, Anne Vilnat, and
Christelle Ayache. 2008. Easy, evaluation of parsers
of french: what are the results? In Proceedings of
the 6
th
International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC), Marrakech, Mor-
roco.
Paroubek, Patrick. 2000. Language resources as by-
product of evaluation: the multitag example. In
In proceedings of the Second International Con-
ference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC2000), volume 1, pages 151?154.
Patrick Paroubek, Isabelle Robba, Anne Vilnat Chris-
telle Ayache. 2006. Data, annotations and mea-
sures in easy - the evaluation campaign for parsers
of french. In ELRA, editor, In proceedings of
the fifth international conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC 2006), pages 315?
320, Genoa, Italy, May. ELRA.
Sagot, Beno??t and Pierre Boullier. 2006. Efficient
parsing of large corpora with a deep lfg parser. In
In proceedings of the sixth international conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC),
Genoa, Italy, May. ELDA.
Schwenk, Holger and Jean-Luc Gauvain. 2000. Im-
proved rover using language model information. In
In proceedings of the ISCA ITRW Workshop on Au-
tomatic Speech Recognition: Challenges for the new
Millenium, pages 47?52, Paris, September.
Vilnat, A., P. Paroubek, L. Monceaux, I. Robba,
V. Gendner, G. Illouz, and M. Jardino. 2004. The
ongoing evaluation campaign of syntactic parsing of
french: Easy. In Proceedings of the 4
th
International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC), pages 2023?2026, Lisbonne, Portugal.
43
