Proceedings of the EACL 2009 Demonstrations Session, pages 45?48,
Athens, Greece, 3 April 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Tool for Multi-Word Expression Extraction in Modern Greek
Using Syntactic Parsing
Athina Michou
University of Geneva
Geneva, Switzerland
Athina.Michou@unige.ch
Violeta Seretan
University of Geneva
Geneva, Switzerland
Violeta.Seretan@unige.ch
Abstract
This paper presents a tool for extrac-
ting multi-word expressions from cor-
pora in Modern Greek, which is used to-
gether with a parallel concordancer to aug-
ment the lexicon of a rule-based machine-
translation system. The tool is part of a
larger extraction system that relies, in turn,
on a multilingual parser developed over
the past decade in our laboratory. The
paper reviews the various NLP modules
and resources which enable the retrieval
of Greek multi-word expressions and their
translations: the Greek parser, its lexical
database, the extraction and concordanc-
ing system.
1 Introduction
In today?s multilingual society, there is a pressing
need for building translation resources, such as
large-coverage multilingual lexicons, translation
systems or translation aid tools, especially due to
the increasing interest in computer-assisted trans-
lation.
This paper presents a tool intended to as-
sist translators/lexicographers dealing with Greek1
as a source or a target language. The tool
deals specifically with multi-lexeme lexical items,
also called multi-word expressions (henceforth
MWEs). Its main functionalities are: 1) the robust
parsing of Greek text corpora and the syntax-based
detection of word combinations that are likely to
constitute MWEs, and 2) concordance and align-
ment functions supporting the manual creation of
monolingual and bilingual MWE lexicons.
The tool relies on a symbolic parsing technol-
ogy, and is part of FipsCo, a larger extraction sys-
tem (Seretan, 2008) which has previously been
1For the sake of simplicity, we will henceforth use the
term Greek to refer to Modern Greek.
used to build MWE resources for other languages,
including English, French, Spanish, and Italian.
Its extension to Greek will ultimately enable the
inclusion of this language in the list of languages
supported by an in-house translation system.
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 in-
troduces the Greek parser and its lexical database.
Section 3 provides a description of Greek MWEs,
including a syntactic classification for these. Sec-
tion 4 presents the extraction tool, and Section 5
concludes the paper.
2 The Greek parser
The Greek parser is part of Fips, a multilin-
gual symbolic parser that deals, among other lan-
guages, with English, French, Spanish, Italian,
and German (Wehrli, 2007). The Greek version,
FipsGreek (Michou, 2007), has recently reached
an acceptable level of lexical and grammatical
coverage.
Fips relies on generative grammar concepts, and
is basically made up of a generic parsing module
which can be refined in order to suit the specific
needs of a particular language. Currently, there
are approximately 60 grammar rules defined for
Greek, allowing for the complete parse of about
50% of the sentences in a corpus like Europarl
(Koehn, 2005), which contains proceedings of
the European Parliament. For the remaining sen-
tences, partial analyses are instead proposed for
the chunks identified.
One of the key components of the parser is its
(manually-built) lexicon. It contains detailed mor-
phosyntactic and semantic information, namely,
selectional properties, subcategorization informa-
tion, and syntactico-semantic features that are
likely to influence the syntactic analysis.
The Greek monolingual lexicon presently con-
tains about 110000 words corresponding to 16000
45
lexemes,2 and a limited number of MWEs (about
500). The bilingual lexicon used by our trans-
lation system contains slightly more than 8000
Greek-French/French-Greek equivalents.
3 MWEs in Modern Greek
Greek is a language which exhibits a high MWE
productivity, with new compound words being
created especially in the science and technology
domains. Sometimes, existing words are trans-
formed in order to denote new concepts; also, nu-
merous neologisms are created or borrowed from
other languages.
A frequent type of multi-word constructions
in Greek are special noun phrases, called lexical
phrases (Anastasiadi-Symeonidi, 1986) or loose
multi-word compounds (Ralli, 2005):
- Adjective+Noun: anoiqt? ??lassa
(anichti thalassa, ?open sea?),
paidik? qar? (pediki chara, ?kinder-
garten?);
- Noun+NounGEN : z?nh asfale?ac (zo-
ni asfalias, ?safety belt?), f?roc
eisod?matoc (foros isodimatos,
?income tax?);
- Noun+NounNOM (head-complement re-
lation): paid?-?a?ma (pedi-thavma,
?child prodigy?), suz?thsh-mara??nioc
(syzitisi-marathonios, ?marathon
talks?) ;
- NounNOM+NounNOM (coordina-
tion relation): kanap?c-kreb?ti
(kanapes-krevati, ?sofa bed?), gia-
tr?c-nosok?moc (yiatros-nosokomos,
?doctor-nurse?).
A large body of Greek MWEs constitute collo-
cations (typical word associations whose meaning
is easy to decode, but whose component items are
difficult to predict), such as katarr?ptw ?na rek?r
(kataripto ena rekor, ?to break a record?),
in which the verbal collocate katarr?ptw (?shake
down?) is unpredictable. Collocations may occur
in a wide range of syntactic types. Some of the
configurations taken into account in our work are:
- Noun(Subject)+Verb: h suz?thsh l?gei (i
sizitisi liyi, ?discussion ends?);
2Most of the inflected forms were automatically obtained
through morphological generation; that is, the base word was
combined with the appropriate suffixes, according to a given
inflectional paradigm. A number of 25 inflection classes have
been defined for Greek nouns, 11 for verbs, and 10 for adjec-
tives.
- Adjective+Noun: janatik? poin?
(thanatiki pini, ?death penalty?);
- Verb+Noun(Object): diatr?qw k?nduno
(diatrecho kindino, ?run a risk?);
- Verb+Preposition+Noun(Argument):
katadik?zw se ??nato (katadikazo
se thanato, ?to sentence to death?);
- Verb+Preposition: prosanatol?zomai proc
(prosanatolizome pros, ?to orient
to?);
- Noun+Preposition+Noun: protrop? gia
an?ptuxh (protropi yia anaptiksi,
?incitement to development?);
- Preposition+Noun: up? suz?thsh (ipo
sizitisi, ?under discussion?);
- Verb+Adverb: qeirokrot? jerm?
(xirokroto therma, ?applause
warmly?);
- Adverb+Adjective: genetik? tropopoih-
m?noc (yenetika tropopiimenos,
?genetically modified?);
- Adjective+Preposition: exarthm?noc ap?
(eksartimenos apo, ?dependent on?).
In addition, Greek MWEs cover other types of
constructions, such as:
- one-word compounds: erujr?dermoc
(erithrodermos, ?red skin?), luk?skulo
(likoskylo, ?wolfhound?);
- adverbial phrases: ek twn prot?rwn (ek
ton proteron, ?a priori, in principle?);
- idiomatic expressions (whose meaning
is difficult to decode): g?nomai qal? na
me pat?seic (yinome xali na me
patisis, literally, become a carpet to walk
all over; ?be ready to satisfy any wish?).
4 The MWE Extraction Tool
MWEs constitute a high proportion of the lexicon
of a language, and are crucial for many NLP tasks
(Sag et al, 2002). This section introduces the tool
we developed for augmenting the coverage of our
monolingual/bilingual MWE lexicons.
4.1 Extraction
As we already mentioned, the Greek MWE extrac-
tor is part of FipsCo, a larger extraction system
based on a symbolic parsing technology (Seretan,
2008) which we previously applied on text corpora
in other languages. The recent development of the
Greek parser enabled us to extend it and apply it
to Greek.
46
Figure 1: Screen capture of the parallel concordancer, showing an instance of the collocation epitugq?nw
isorrop?a (?strike balance?) and the aligned context in the target language, English.
The extractor is designed as a module which is
plugged into the parser. After a sentence from the
source corpus is parsed, the extractor traverses the
output structure and identifies as a potential MWE
the words found in one of the syntactic configura-
tions listed in Section 3.
Once all MWE candidates are collected from
the corpus, they are divided into subsets according
to their syntactic configuration. Then, each subset
undergo a statistical analysis process whose aim
is to detect those candidates that are highly cohe-
sive. A strong association between the items of
a candidate indicates that this is likely to consti-
tute a collocation. The strength of association can
be measured with one of the numerous associa-
tion measures implemented in our extractor. By
default, the log-likelihood ratio measure (LLR) is
proposed, since it was shown to be particularly
suited to language data (Dunning, 1993).
In our extractor, the items of each candidate ex-
pression represent base word forms (lemmas) and
they are considered in the canonical order implied
by the given syntactic configuration (e.g., for a
verb-object candidate, the object is postverbal in
SVO languages like Greek). Even if the candidate
occurs in corpus in a different morphosyntactic re-
alizations, its various occurrences are successfully
identified as instances of the same type thanks to
the syntactic analysis performed with the parser.
4.2 Visualization
The extraction tool also provides visualization
functions which facilitate the consultation and
interpretation of results by users?e.g., lexi-
cographers, terminologists, translators, language
learners?by displaying them in the original con-
text. The following functions are provided:
Filtering and sorting The results which will
be displayed can be selected according to seve-
47
ral criteria: the syntactic configuration (i.e., users
can select only one or several configurations they
are interested in), the LLR score, the corpus fre-
quency (users can specify the limits of the de-
sired interval),3 the words involved (users can look
up MWEs containing specific words). Also, the
selected results can be ordered by score or fre-
quency, and users can filter them according to the
rank obtained.
Concordance The (filtered) results are dis-
played on a concordancing interface, similar to the
one shown in Figure 1. The list on the left shows
the MWE candidates that were extracted. When
an item of the list is selected, the text panel on
the right displays the context of its first instance
in the source document. The arrow buttons be-
neath allow users to navigate through all the in-
stances of that candidate. The whole content of
the source document is accessible, and it is auto-
matically scrolled to the current instance; the com-
ponent words and the sentence in which they occur
are highlighted in different colors.
Alignment If parallel corpora are available, the
results can be displayed in a sentence-aligned con-
text. That is, the equivalent of the source sen-
tence in the target document containing the trans-
lation of the source document is also automatically
found, highlighted and displayed next to the origi-
nal context (see Figure 1). Thus, users can see how
a MWE has previously been translated in a given
context.
Validation The tool also provides functiona-
lities allowing users to create a database of manu-
ally validated MWEs from among the candidates
displayed on the (parallel) concordancing inter-
faces. The database can store either monolin-
gual or bilingual entries; most of the informa-
tion associated to an entry?such as lexeme in-
dexes, syntactic type, source sentence?is auto-
matically filled-in by the system. For bilingual en-
tries, a translation must be provided by the user,
and this can be easily retrieved manually from
the target sentence showed in the parallel concor-
dancer (thus, for the collocation shown in Figure
1, the user can find the English equivalent strike
balance).
3Thus, users can specify themselves a threshold (in other
systems it is arbitrarily predefined).
5 Conclusion
We presented a MWE extractor with advanced
concordancing functions, which can be used
to semi-automatically build Greek monolin-
gual/bilingual MWE lexicons. It relies on a
deep syntactic approach, whose benefits are mani-
fold: retrieval of grammatical results, interpre-
tation of syntactic constituents in terms of ar-
guments, disambiguation of lexemes with multi-
ple readings, and grouping of all morphosyntactic
variants of MWEs.
Our system is most similar to Termight (Dagan
and Church, 1994) and TransSearch (Macklovitch
et al, 2000). To our knowledge, it is the first of
this type for Greek.
Acknowledgements
This work has been supported by the Swiss Na-
tional Science Foundation (grant 100012-117944).
The authors would like to thank Eric Wehrli for his
support and useful comments.
References
Anna Anastasiadi-Symeonidi. 1986. The neology in the
Common Modern Greek. Triandafyllidi?s foundation,
Thessaloniki. In Greek.
Ido Dagan and Kenneth Church. 1994. Termight: Identifying
and translating technical terminology. In Proceedings of
ANLP, pages 34?40, Stuttgart, Germany.
Ted Dunning. 1993. Accurate methods for the statistics
of surprise and coincidence. Computational Linguistics,
19(1):61?74.
Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A parallel corpus for statis-
tical machine translation. In Proceedings of MT Summit
X, pages 79?86, Phuket, Thailand.
Elliott Macklovitch, Michel Simard, and Philippe Langlais.
2000. TransSearch: A free translation memory on the
World Wide Web. In Proceedings of LREC 2000, pages
1201?1208, Athens, Greece.
Athina Michou. 2007. Analyse syntaxique et traitement au-
tomatique du syntagme nominal grec moderne. In Pro-
ceedings of TALN 2007, pages 203?212, Toulouse, France.
Angela Ralli. 2005. Morphology. Patakis, Athens. In Greek.
Ivan A. Sag, Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann Copes-
take, and Dan Flickinger. 2002. Multiword expressions:
A pain in the neck for NLP. In Proceedings of CICLING
2002, pages 1?15, Mexico City.
Violeta Seretan. 2008. Collocation extraction based on syn-
tactic parsing. Ph.D. thesis, University of Geneva.
Eric Wehrli. 2007. Fips, a ?deep? linguistic multilingual
parser. In Proceedings of ACL 2007 Workshop on Deep
Linguistic Processing, pages 120?127, Prague, Czech Re-
public.
48
