Coling 2008: Proceedings of the workshop on Cognitive Aspects of the Lexicon (COGALEX 2008), pages 18?24
Manchester, August 2008
Accessing the ANW dictionary 
Fons Moerdijk, Carole Tiberius, Jan Niestadt 
Institute for Dutch Lexicology (INL) 
Leiden 
{moerdijk,tiberius,niestadt}@inl.nl 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper describes the functional de-
sign of an interface for an online schol-
arly dictionary of contemporary standard 
Dutch, the ANW. One of the main inno-
vations of the ANW is a twofold meaning 
description: definitions are accompanied 
by ?semagrams?. In this paper we focus 
on the strategies that are available for ac-
cessing information in the dictionary and 
the role semagrams play in the dictionary 
practice. 
1 Introduction 
In this paper we discuss the functional design of 
an interface for a scholarly dictionary of contem-
porary standard Dutch which is currently being 
compiled at the institute for Dutch Lexicology in 
Leiden. The ?Algemeen Nederlands Woorden-
boek? (General Dutch Dictionary), further abbre-
viated as ANW, has been set up as an online dic-
tionary from the start. Thus, the ANW is not a 
clone of an existing printed dictionary, but it 
truly represents a new generation of electronic 
dictionaries in the sector of academic and scien-
tific lexicography. A similar dictionary project is 
undertaken for German at the Institut f?r 
Deutsche Sprache in Mannheim, i.e. elexiko1.  
The project runs from 2001 till 2019. We have 
currently finished the functional design of the 
interface and the first results will be published on 
the web in 2009. 
                                                 
 ? 2008. Licensed under the Creative Commons Attri-
bution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported 
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-
sa/3.0/). Some rights reserved. 
 
1 http://hypermedia.ids-
mannheim.de/pls/elexiko/p4_start.portal 
The structure of this paper is as follows. First 
we will provide some background information on 
the ANW dictionary and we will explain what a 
semagram is. Then we will discuss the range of 
search routes that are offered to the user to ex-
ploit the information in the dictionary and we 
will describe the role of the semagram. The 
ANW dictionary is aimed at the adult Dutch lan-
guage user ranging from laymen to linguists and 
other language professionals. 
2 The ANW dictionary 
The ANW Dictionary is a comprehensive online 
scholarly dictionary of contemporary standard 
Dutch in the Netherlands and in Flanders, the 
Dutch speaking part of Belgium. Object of de-
scription is the general language. Thus words 
that are specific to a particular region, to a par-
ticular group of people or a particular subject 
field are not included. The dictionary focuses on 
written Dutch and covers the period from 1970 
till 2018. The ANW dictionary is a corpus-based 
dictionary based on the ANW corpus, a balanced 
corpus of just over 100 million words, which was 
compiled specifically for the project at the Insti-
tute for Dutch Lexicology. The corpus was com-
pleted in 20052. It consists of several subcorpora: 
a corpus of present-day literary texts, a corpus of 
neologisms, a corpus of domain dependent texts 
and a corpus of newspaper texts. The dictionary 
will contain approximately 80.000 headwords 
with a complete description and about 250.000 
smaller entries. 
The ANW is a very informative dictionary. Its 
abstract entry structure is composed of hundreds 
of elements and subelements. The reason for this 
is that special attention is paid to words in  con-
text (combinations, collocations, idioms, prov-
                                                 
2 For neologisms new corpus material continues to be 
gathered.  
18
erbs) and to relations with other words (lexical 
relations like synonymy, antonymy, hypero-
nymy, hyponymy), to semantic relations (meta-
phor, metonymy, generalisation, specialisation) 
and to morphological patterns, the word structure 
of derivations and compounds. One of its main 
innovations is a twofold meaning description: 
definitions are accompanied by ?semagrams?. As 
semagrams play a central role in the dictionary 
(for understanding and production), we provide a 
short introduction below. 
3 The semagram 
A semagram is the representation of knowledge 
associated with a word in a frame of ?slots? and 
?fillers?. ?Slots? are conceptual structure elements 
which characterise the properties and relations of 
the semantic class of a word meaning. On the 
basis of these slots specific data is stored (?fill-
ers?) for the word in question. In ANW jargon 
the abstract structure schema is called a ?type 
template?, whereas semagram refers to such a 
?type template? populated with concrete word 
data. Each semantic class has its own predefined 
type template with its own slots. For instance, the 
type template for the class of animals contains 
the slots PARTS, BEHAVIOUR, COLOUR, SOUND, 
BUILD, SIZE, PLACE, APPEARANCE, FUNCTION and 
SEX, whereas the type template for beverages has 
slots for INGREDIENT, PREPARATION, TASTE, 
COLOUR, TRANSPARANCY, USE, SMELL, SOURCE, 
FUNCTION, TEMPERATURE and COMPOSITION. So 
far we have concentrated on semagrams for 
nouns, those for verbs and adjectives will be dif-
ferent. Below we give an example of a semagram 
for a member of the animal class, i.e. koe (cow) 
(translated into English for illustration) in its 
meaning as a ?bovine?: 
 
COW 
 
UPPER CATEGORY: is an animal # animal; mammal; ruminant 
CATEGORY:  is a bovine (animal) # bovine; ruminant 
SOUND:   moows/lows, makes a sound that we imitate with a low, long-drawn ?boo? #  
   moo; low; boo 
COLOUR:  is often black and white spotted, but also brown and white spotted, black,  
   brown or white # black and white; brown and white; red and white; spotted;  
   black; blackspotted; white; brown; rusty brown  
SIZE:   is big # big 
BUILD:   is big-boned, bony, large-limbed in build # big-boned, bony, large-limbed  
PARTS:    has an udder, horns and four stomachs: paunch, reticulum, third stomach, proper 
   stomach # udder; horns: paunch; rumen; honeycomb bag; reticulum; third stomach; 
   omasum; proper stomach; abomasum  
FUNCTION:  produces milk and (being slaughtered) meat # milk; flesh; meat; beef; milk  
   production; meat production 
PLACE:   is kept on a farm; is in the field and in the winter in the byre # farm;   
   farmhouse; field; pasture; meadow; byre; cow-house; shippon; stable  
AGE:   is adult, has calved # adult; calved 
PROPERTY:  is useful and tame; is considered as a friendly, lazy, slow, dumb, curious, social  
   animal # tame; domesticated; friendly; lazy; slow; dumb; curious; social  
SEX:   is female # female  
BEHAVIOUR:  grazes and ruminates # graze; ruminate; chew the cud 
TREATMENT:  is milked every day; is slaughtered # milk; slaughter 
PRODUCT:  produces milk and meat # milk; meat 
VALUE:   is useful # useful  
 
Example 1. Semagram for koe (cow) 
 
 
At present the data in the slots is completed 
manually by the lexicographers based on in-
formation in the ANW corpus, reference 
works (such as dictionaries and encyclopaedia) 
and their language and world knowledge. Not 
all slots in the type template have to be com-
pleted in all cases. Only those for which there 
is a value are shown in the above example. As 
can be seen from the semagram above, the 
lexicographers give the characterisation of the 
slots in terms of short statements about the 
headword. Such sentences are particularly well 
suited to get an impression of the meaning 
starting from the word form, i.e. for ?semasi-
19
ological? queries. To facilitate the retrieval for 
queries from content or parts of the content to 
the matching words, the ?onomasiological que-
ries?, those sentences are complemented, after 
a ?#? character (a hash), with one or more 
keywords and possibly some synonyms or 
other relevant words. The data after the hash 
will not be visible to the dictionary user on the 
screen though and will only be used in 
searches by the computer to enhance retrieval. 
A detailed description of the semagram, in-
cluding its origin, motivation and the devel-
opment of the type templates and their slots, 
can be found in Moerdijk (2008). In this paper 
we focus on the strategies that are available for 
accessing information in the dictionary and we 
discuss the role of the semagrams in this. 
4 Accessing the dictionary 
As was hinted at in the previous section, 
semagrams provide an increase and improve-
ment in search and query facilities. This is par-
ticularly the case for queries guiding the user 
from content to form. For instance, a user who 
cannot think of e.g. the word apiarist can find 
this word through separate content elements 
(e.g. ?bees?, ?keep?) that he does know and can 
use for a search. However, with semagrams it 
is not only possible to go from content to the 
appropriate word. It is also possible to retrieve 
a set of words on the basis of one or more con-
tent features. Thus a user can retrieve all 
names for female animals in Dutch on the ba-
sis of a query combining the field CATEGORY 
with the value ?animal?, and a field SEX with 
the value ?female?. In our online dictionary we 
wish to make all these possibilities available to 
the user. 
Five search options are distinguished: 
a) word ? meaning, i.e. search for in-
formation about a word; 
b) meaning ? word, i.e. search for a 
word starting from its meaning; 
c) features ? words, i.e. search for 
words with one or more common fea-
tures; 
d) search for example sentences; 
e) search for other dictionary informa-
tion. 
We believe that by presenting the search op-
tion this way (rather than using the traditional 
dichotomy between simple search (a) and ad-
vanced search (b, c, d, e)), users have a better 
overview of what they can actually search for 
and will be more enticed to explore the various 
options. Semagrams play a role in the first 
three search options. 
4.1 Word ? Meaning 
This is the traditional search which allows 
the user to search for information about a word 
or phrase in the dictionary. As this is the basic 
search option, it is offered to the user in a cen-
tral place on every page of the interface. Some 
form of fuzzy matching will be incorporated to 
take care of typing errors and incomplete input. 
The ANW contains a wealth of information. 
To represent this to the user, we use a variation 
of the two-panel selector model (Tidwell 
2005), where two panes are shown next to 
each other on the screen. (Figure 1) 
The left pane contains a tree structure show-
ing all the elements available for the lemma in 
question in the ANW. These tree structures 
look like (and work as) Windows Explorer tree 
structures.  Advantage is that users know im-
mediately how to deal with them. Thus the 
elements are hierarchically structured and can 
be opened and closed like in Windows Ex-
plorer. The meaning structure (the numbered 
elements in Figure 1) of the lemma remains 
visible at all times. This way the user keeps an 
overview and can select the information he 
likes to see on the right-hand-side of the screen. 
This is shown for the semagram of the first 
meaning of koe (cow) in Figure 1. The ele-
ments are presented in the same order as in the 
translated semagram in Example 1.3  
On the article screen, the semagram is pre-
sented together with the definition. Its function 
is to provide, in a systemized, explicit and 
consistent way, more semantic and encyclope-
dic information than can be given in the defini-
tion. For the lemma koe (cow), for instance, it 
gives the user information on sound, colour 
and parts, which is not present in the definition. 
At the bottom left of the screen, the user is 
given a direct link to all idioms, proverbs, ex-
ample sentences and combinations for the 
lemma koe (cow). 
 
                                                 
3 Note that the layout is still subject to change during the 
graphical design of the interface. 
20
 
Figure 1 Article screen 
4.2 Meaning ? Word 
By this we mean the onomasiological search 
where the user is looking for a word that he 
has forgotten or where he wants to know 
whether there is a word for a certain concept 
or not. For instance, a user may want to know 
whether there is a Dutch equivalent for the 
English cradle snatcher (i.e. one who weds, or 
is enamoured of, a much younger person 
(OED)). 
Onomasiological searches in electronic dic-
tionaries derived from printed dictionaries 
have not been very successful so far, mostly 
because such searches are primarily based on 
definitions. Going from a definition to a word 
can only succeed if the words of the user coin-
cide (more or less) with the words in the defi-
nition, which is seldom the case (Moerdijk 
2002). 
As also pointed out by Sierra (2000) the 
ideal onomasiological search must allow writ-
ers to input the concept to be searched for 
through the ideas they may have, using words 
in any order. The system must be so con-
structed that it accepts a wide range of words 
which it then analyses in order to point the 
user to the word that most closely approaches 
the concept he had in mind when he started the 
search. 
Recent work in computational linguistics 
has therefore looked at the possibility of using 
associative networks (Zock & Bilac 2004) or a 
combination of definitions and a resource such 
as WordNet (El-Kahlout & Oflazer 2004). 
It is obvious that the information in the se-
magrams plays an essential role in the success 
of onomasiological queries in the ANW. How-
ever, rather than just accepting a wide range of 
words as input, we believe that the format in 
which the input query is obtained can also help 
to increase the success rate. 
Therefore, we offer the user two alternatives 
for onomasiological queries. First, the user can 
search by giving a definition, a description, a 
paraphrase or by summing up synonyms or 
other words that he can associate with the 
word he is looking for. This input will be sub-
ject to some linguistic analysis including 
stemming and removal of stop words. Second, 
there is a guided search based on the sema-
gram. The user is asked to choose a category 
(the semantic class or subclass) from a menu 
(is it a thing, a person, an animal, a vehicle, 
etc.?). This is a subset of the total number of 
semantic classes that are distinguished in the 
ANW. Once the user has selected a category, 
21
the feature slots of the type template for that 
category appear on the screen and the user is 
asked to fill in the value(s) that spring to mind. 
Again we do not present the full list of feature 
slots of the type template of that particular se-
mantic class, but rather a dozen or so (which 
have been automatically deduced on the basis 
of completed semagrams), as we do not want 
to put off the user with excessively long lists 
which he needs to complete before he gets an 
answer. We illustrate this with an example for 
animals. 
Assume the user is looking for the name of 
a particular breed of dogs, e.g. borzoi (barzoi 
in Dutch), but cannot remember the word. In 
order to find the answer, he selects the cate-
gory ?animal? from the menu. He is then pre-
sented with a list of features that are character-
istic for animals (Figure 2). He completes the 
most prominent ones for the animal he is 
thinking of e.g. BEHAVIOUR: quiet, intelligent 
and independent; SOUND: barks; CLASS: grey-
hound; PLACE: Russia; SIZE: large; BUILD: 
strong and graceful; APPEARANCE: long-haired; 
MOVEMENT: sprinter. 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Screenshot Meaning ? Word 
 
The input from the user is then compared to 
the data in the dictionary database (semagrams, 
definitions, lexical relations and ?contex-
tants?4). Now the words behind the hashes are 
also involved in the retrieval process and the 
matching cases (in the best scenario just one!) 
are shown. It is not necessary that the feature-
                                                 
                                                
4 We define ?contextants? as words which do not 
occur in direct combination with the headword, but 
do occur in a wider context and are semantically 
relevant for the headword. This is a separate infor-
mation category in the microstructure of the ANW. 
value combinations match exactly one-to-one. 
For instance, in our example, one of the values 
given for BEHAVIOUR, i.e. intelligent, matches 
the value for PROPERTY in the semagram for 
barzoi (borzoi). 
The results are then presented in a list, or-
dered by relevance. Each result is accompa-
nied by a ?mini definition?5 such that the user 
can immediately see which word (sense) he is 
looking for. 
 
5 A shortened version of the definition. 
22
4.3 Features ? words 
This option is particularly relevant for linguists 
and other language professionals. It enables 
them to gather words that share one or more 
identical features within the main dimensions 
of the ANW, i.e. orthography, pronunciation, 
morphology, pragmatics, meaning, combina-
torics, idioms, etymology. The semagram is of 
course active in searches in the semantic do-
main. Its role is to some extent comparable to 
its role in the search for a word, going from 
content to form, but users can now search for 
all the words that belong to a certain semantic 
class, for all the words that share one or more 
particular features, or for all the words sharing 
both class and certain features, instead of 
searching for a particular word to express a 
concept. Here the user is presented the full list 
of feature slots that occur in one or more of the 
predefined type templates. This means a total 
of nearly 200 features can be searched for. 
To assist the user in finding his way through 
this forest of criteria, they are presented in a 
structured way much like the tree structure 
which is used for navigation on the article 
screen. We illustrate this with an example 
query in Figure 3. The user starts from an 
empty query screen. He is asked to select crite-
ria from the tree structure on the left. By de-
fault, the user searches for words, but he can 
also search for proverbs or idioms which will 
result in a different feature tree as only a sub-
set of the criteria that can occur in a query for 
words apply to idioms and proverbs. In our 
example the user wants to find all words for 
long-haired animals (semagram) which consist 
of two syllables and have alternating stress 
(orthography and pronunciation). Again barzoi 
(borzoi) will be among the results. 
 
 
 
Figure 3 Screenshot Features ? Words 
 
This search option can also be used to resolve 
the so-called tip-of-the-tongue problems where a 
user is looking for a word which he cannot ac-
cess in his memory, but where he does know, for 
instance, what the word looks like (e.g. its begin-
ning, number of syllables) and its part of speech. 
For example, a user who is unsure whether the 
particular breed of dogs he is looking for should 
be called barzoi or borzoi in Dutch, can find the 
answer by specifying that the form ends in ?zoi, 
the word consist of two syllables, that it is a noun 
23
and that it refers to a breed of dogs (animal cate-
gory) with long hairs (appearance). 
Obviously users will be offered the possibility 
to save their queries in a kind of ?search tem-
plates? to avoid having to reconstruct the same 
query over and over again. 
4.4 Search for examples 
This option allows the user to search for example 
sentences based on a set of 5 criteria, i.e. 
word(s), author, source, domain and date. For 
instance, a user could search for all example sen-
tences with the words koe (cow) and schaap 
(sheep) in the period from 2000 ? 2002 (date). 
No combo boxes are used for author and source. 
Although we do not reckon that the user knows 
which authors and sources are cited in the dic-
tionary, the lists would be excessively long and 
we assume that the user will only use these crite-
ria in a search to see which other examples are 
available from a particular author or source he 
has retrieved in a previous query. Users will also 
be offered the possibility to link through to more 
examples of the same source or author by click-
ing on a particular source or author on the results 
page. 
4.5 Search for information about the ANW 
The final search option groups primarily diction-
ary specific queries and queries of an administra-
tive nature, much like a Frequently Asked Ques-
tions page. Here the user will find queries about 
frequency such as how many lemmas are dedi-
cated to lexicalised phrases? How many names 
are there in the dictionary? How many nouns? 
How many semagrams? How many Flemish 
words? It also comprises questions such as what 
kind of dictionary is the ANW? How big is the  
ANW corpus? Which images are included? 
5 Conclusion 
In this paper we have discussed the functional 
design of an interface for an electronic dictionary 
of Dutch, the ANW. We have focused on the 
access strategies that are offered and the role se-
magrams play in this. We have shown that sema-
grams provide an increase in search and query 
facilities. One the one hand, they lead to a much 
richer and more consistent semantic description 
in ?semasiological? queries. On the other hand, 
they are particularly well-suited to support 
?onomasiological? queries by offering a struc-
tured way to find words through separate content 
elements. 
References 
El-Kahlout, ?lknur Durgar & Kemal Oflazer. 2004. 
Use of Wordnet for Retrieving Words from their 
Meanings. In Proceedings of the Global Wordnet 
Conference (GWC2004). 118-123. 
Moerdijk, Fons. 2002. Het woord als doelwit. Am-
sterdam, Amsterdam University Press. 
Moerdijk, Fons. 2008. Frames and semagrams; Mean-
ing description in the General Dutch Dictionary. In 
Proceedings of the Thirteenth Euralex Interna-
tional Congress, EURALEX 2008. Barcelona. 
Sierra, Gerardo. 2000. The onomasiological diction-
ary: a gap in lexicography. In Proceedings of the 
Ninth Euralex International Congress, EURALEX 
2000  I, 223-235. Institut f?r Maschinelle Sprach-
verarbeitung, Universit?t Stuttgart. 
Tidwell Jenifer. 2005. Designing Interfaces. O?Reilly. 
Zock, Michael & Slaven Bilac. 2004. Word lookup on 
the basis of association: from an idea to a roadmap. 
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Enhancing and 
using electronic dictionaries, COLING 2004. 29-
35. 
24
