Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Important Unresolved Matters, pages 1?8,
Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
Multi-Component Tree Adjoining Grammars,  
Dependency Graph Models, and Linguistic Analyses 
Joan Chen-Main* and Aravind K. Joshi*+ 
*Institute for Research in Cognitive Science, and 
+Dept of Computer and Information Science 
University of Pennsylvania 
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6228 
{chenmain,joshi}@seas.upenn.edu 
 
 
Abstract 
Recent work identifies two properties that 
appear particularly relevant to the charac-
terization of graph-based dependency mod-
els of syntactic structure1: the absence of 
interleaving substructures (well-nestedness) 
and a bound on a type of discontinuity 
(gap-degree ? 1) successfully describe 
more than 99% of the structures in two de-
pendency treebanks (Kuhlmann and Nivre 
2006).2 Bodirsky et al (2005) establish that 
every dependency structure with these two 
properties can be recast as a lexicalized 
Tree Adjoining Grammar (LTAG) deriva-
tion and vice versa. However, multi-
component extensions of TAG (MC-TAG), 
argued to be necessary on linguistic 
grounds, induce dependency structures that 
do not conform to these two properties 
(Kuhlmann and M?hl 2006). In this paper, 
we observe that several types of MC-TAG 
as used for linguistic analysis are more re-
strictive than the formal system is in prin-
ciple. In particular, tree-local MC-TAG, 
tree-local MC-TAG with flexible composi-
                                                 
1 Whereas weak equivalence of grammar classes is only con-
cerned with string sets and fails to shed light on equivalence at 
the structural level, our work involves the equivalence of deri-
vations and graph based models of dependencies.  Thus, our 
work is relevant to certain aspects of grammar engineering 
that weak equivalence does not speak to. 
2 These properties hold for many of the so-called non-
projective dependency structures and the corresponding non-
context free structures associated with TAG, further allowing 
CKY type dynamic programming approaches to parsing to 
these dependency graphs. 
tion (Kallmeyer and Joshi 2003), and spe-
cial cases of set-local TAG as used to de-
scribe certain linguistic phenomena satisfy 
the well-nested and gap degree ? 1 criteria. 
We also observe that gap degree can dis-
tinguish between prohibited and allowed 
wh-extractions in English, and report some 
preliminary work comparing the predic-
tions of the graph approach and the MC-
TAG approach to scrambling. 
1 Introduction 
Bodirsky et al (2005) introduce a class of graphi-
cal dependency models, called graph drawings 
(which differ from standard dependency struc-
tures), that are equivalent to lexicalized Tree Ad-
joining Grammar (LTAG) derivations (Joshi and 
Schabes 1997).  Whereas TAG is a generative 
framework in which each well-formed expression 
corresponds with a legitimate derivation in that 
system, the graph drawing approach provides a set 
of structures and a set of constraints on well-
formedness.  Bodirsky et al offer the class of 
graph drawings that satisfy these constraints as a 
model-based perspective on TAG.  Section 2 
summarizes this relationship between TAG deriva-
tions and these graph drawings. 
In related work, Kuhlmann and Nivre (2006) 
evaluate a number of constraints that have been 
proposed to restrict the class of dependency struc-
tures characterizing natural language with respect 
to two dependency treebanks: the Prague Depend-
ency Treebank (PDT) (Haji? et al, 2001) and the 
Danish Dependency Treebank (DDT) (Kromann, 
2003).  The results indicate that two properties 
provide good coverage of the structures in both 
1
treebanks.3  The first is a binary well-nestedness 
constraint.4  The other is a bound on gap degree, a 
graded measure of discontinuity.  These results are 
given in Table 1.  What is noteworthy is that the 
graph drawings which correspond to LTAG deriva-
tions share these two properties: LTAG induced 
graph drawings are both well-nested and have gap 
degree ? 1, and for every graph drawing that is 
both well-nested and gap degree ? 1, there exists a 
corresponding LTAG derivation (M?hl 2006). In 
section 3, these two properties are defined. 
 
property Danish Dep. 
Treebank 
Prague Dep. 
Tree-bank 
all structures n = 4393 n = 73088 
well-nested 99.89% 99.89% 
gap degree 0 84.95% 76.85% 
gap degree 1 14.89% 22.72% 
gap degree ? 1 99.84% 99.57% 
Table 1. Relevant results from Kuhlmann and 
Nivre (2006). 
 
In section 4, we show that gap degree can be 
used to distinguish between strong island viola-
tions and weak island violations in English.  This 
supports the notion that gap-degree is a linguisti-
cally relevant measure. 
Although TAG is a linguistically expressive 
formalism, a closer look at the linguistic data has 
motivated extensions of TAG.5  One of the most 
widely used extensions for handling cases that are 
difficult for classic TAG is Multi-Component TAG 
(Weir 1988). Like basic TAG, MC-TAG is a for-
malism for rewriting nodes of a tree as other trees.  
The set of underived trees are called elementary 
trees. The rewriting is accomplished via two opera-
tions: substitution, which rewrites a leaf node la-
beled X with a tree rooted in a node labeled X, and 
adjoining, which rewrites a node X with a tree that 
labels both its root and a distinguished leaf node, 
the foot, with X.  The observation that linguistic 
dependencies typically occur within some sort of 
local domain is expressed in the TAG hypothesis 
that all such dependencies occur within the basic 
                                                 
3 A third property based on edge degree also characterizes the 
structures, but has no clear relationship to TAG-derivations.  
Thus, reference to it is omitted in the remaining text. See 
Kuhlmann and Nivre (2006) for the definition of edge degree. 
4 Well-nestedness differs from projectivity.  (See section 3.) 
5 For a readable introduction, see Chapter 1 of Frank (2002). 
building blocks of the grammar.  Recursive struc-
ture is ?factored out,? which allows apparent non-
local dependencies to be recast as local ones. 
Whereas basic TAG takes the basic unit to be a 
single elementary tree, MC-TAG extends the do-
main of locality to encompass a set of elementary 
trees.  That is, these sets are the objects over which 
the combinatory operations apply. The MC-
extension allows for linguistically satisfying ac-
counts for a number of attested phenomena, such 
as: English extraposition (Kroch and Joshi 1986), 
subj-aux inversion in combination with raising 
verbs (Frank 1992), anaphoric binding (Ryant and 
Scheffler 2006), quantifier scope ambiguity (Joshi 
et al 2003), clitic climbing in Romance (Bleam 
1994), and Japanese causatives (Heycock 1986). 
The primary concern of this paper is the recon-
ciliation of the observation noted above, that MC-
TAG appears to be on the right track for a good 
generative characterization of natural language, 
with a second observation: The graph drawings 
that correspond to MC-TAG derivations, are not 
guaranteed to retain the properties of basic-TAG 
induced graph drawings.  Kuhlmann and M?hl 
(2006) report that if an entire MC set is anchored 
by a single lexical element (the natural extension 
of ?lexicalization? of TAGs to MC-TAGs), then 
the class of dependency structures is expanded 
with respect to both conditions that characterized 
the TAG-induced graph drawings: MC-TAG in-
duced graph drawings include structures that are 
not well-nested, have gap degree > 1, or both.  As 
Kuhlmann and M?hl point out, the gap degree in-
creases with the number of components, which we 
will elaborate in section 6.  This is true even if we 
require that all components of a set combine with a 
single elementary tree (i.e. tree-local MC-TAG, 
which is known to allow more derivation structures 
(i.e. derivation trees) than TAG, although they gen-
erate the same set of derived trees). If we suppose 
that the characterization of dependency structures 
as reported by Kuhlmann and Nivre (2006) for 
Czech and Danish extends cross-linguistically, i.e. 
the dependency structures for natural language 
falls within the class of well-nested and gap degree 
? 1 dependency structures, then MC-TAG appears 
to correspond to the wrong class of model-
theoretic dependency structures.  It is desirable to 
account for the apparent mismatch. 
One possibility is that the linguistic analyses that 
depend on a multi-component approach are ex-
2
tremely infrequent, and that this is reflected in the 
small proportion (< 1%) of data in the PDT and 
DDT that are not both well-nested and gap degree 
? 1.  A second possibility is that the structures in 
the PDT and DDT are actually not good represen-
tatives of the structures needed to characterize 
natural languages in general.  However, a look at 
the cases in which MC-TAG is employed reveals 
that these particular analyses yield derivations that 
correspond to graph drawings that do satisfy well-
nestedness and have gap degree ? 1.  In practice, 
MC-TAG seems to be used more restrictively than 
what the formal system allows in principle. This 
keeps the corresponding graph drawings within the 
class of structures identified by Bodirsky et al 
(2005) as a model of TAG derivations, and by 
Kuhlmann and Nivre (2006) as empirically rele-
vant.  Lastly, we compare the scrambling patterns 
that are possible in an MC-TAG extension with 
those that conform to the well-nestedness and gap 
degree ? 1 properties of the graph approach. 
2 TAG-induced Graph Dependencies 
The next two sections are intended to provide an 
intuition for the terms defined more formally in 
Bodirsky et al (2005) and Kuhlmann and Nivre 
(2006). In the former, the authors define their de-
pendency structures of interest, called graph draw-
ings, as a three-tuple: a set of nodes, a dominance 
relation, and a (total) precedence relation.  These 
dependency structures are based on information 
from both a TAG-derivation and that derivation?s 
final phrase structure.  The anchor of each elemen-
tary tree of a strictly lexicalized TAG (LTAG) is 
used as a node label in the induced dependency 
structure.  E.g. suppose tree A is anchored by lexi-
cal item a in the LTAG grammar.  Then a will be a 
node label in any dependency structure induced by 
an LTAG derivation involving tree A. 
To see how the dominance relation and prece-
dence relation mirror the derivation and the final 
derived phrase structure, let us further suppose that 
LTAG tree B is anchored by lexical item b.  Node 
a dominates node b in the dependency structure iff 
Tree A dominates tree B in the derivation struc-
ture. (I.e. tree B must substitute or adjoin into tree 
A during the TAG-derivation.6)  Node a precedes 
                                                 
6 Whereas in standard dependency graphs, adjunction of t2 to 
t1 generally corresponds to a dependency directed from t2 to 
node b in the dependency structure iff a linearly 
precedes b in the derived phrase structure tree. 
An example based on the cross-serial dependen-
cies seen in Dutch subordinate clauses is given in 
Figure 1.  In the graph drawing in (4), the four 
nodes names, {Jan, de kinderen, zag, zwemmen}, 
are the same set as the anchors of the elementary 
trees in (1), which is the same as the set of termi-
nals in (3), the derived phrase structure.  The or-
dering of these nodes is exactly the ordering of the 
terminals in (3). The directed edges between the 
nodes mirrors the immediate dominance relation 
represented in (2), the derivation structure showing 
how the trees in (1) combine.  E.g. Just as the 
zwemmen node has the zag and de kinderen nodes 
as its two children in (2), so does the zwemmen 
node dominate zag and de kinderen in (4). 
M?hl (2006) provides the formal details show-
ing that such LTAG-induced dependency struc-
tures have the properties of being 1) well-nested 
and 2) gap degree ? 1, and, conversely, that any 
structures with these properties have a correspond-
ing LTAG derivation.7  These properties are de-
fined in the next section. 
  (1) (2) 
 
 
 
    
  (2) (4) 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Derivation for Jan de kinderen zag 
zwemmen and corresponding graph drawing 
3 Properties of Dependency Graphs 
3.1 Gap-Degree 
It will be useful to first define the term projection. 
Definition: The projection of a node x is the set of 
nodes dominated by x (including x). (E.g. in (4), 
the projection of zag = {Jan, zag}.)  
                                                                             
t1, in a TAG-induced dependency graph, adjoining t2 to t1 
corresponds to the reverse dependency. 
7 This result refers to single graph drawings and particular 
LTAG derivation.  See Kuhlmann and M?hl (2007) on the 
relationship between sets of graph drawings and LTAGs. 
 
Y
NP X*
zag 
(saw) 
X 
NP
zwemmen
(swim) 
S 
Jan
de kinderen 
(the children) 
 
zag 
Jan 
de kinderen
zwemmen
Jan  de kinderen  zag  zwemmen 
 
Jan 
NP  
de kinderen
(the children) 
NP
 
Y
NP X*
zag
(saw)
X  
X
NP
zwemmen 
(swim) 
S 
3
Recall that the nodes of a graph drawing are in a 
precedence relation, and that this precedence rela-
tion is total. 
Definition: A gap is a discontinuity with respect to 
precedence in the projection of a node in the draw-
ing.  (E.g. in (4), de kinderen is the gap preventing 
Jan and zag from forming a contiguous interval.) 
Definition: The gap degree of a node is the num-
ber of gaps in its projection. (E.g. the gap degree of 
node zag = 1.)  
Definition: The gap degree of a drawing is the 
maximum among the gap degrees of its nodes.  
(E.g. in (4), only the projection of zag is inter-
rupted by a gap.  Thus, the gap degree of the graph 
drawing in (4) = 1.) 
In TAG drawings, a gap arises from an interrup-
tion of the dependencies in an auxiliary tree.  If B 
is adjoined into A, the gap is the material in A that 
is below the foot node of B.  E.g. in figure 1, De 
kinderen is substituted into the zwemmen tree be-
low the node into which the zag tree adjoins into 
the zwemmen tree.  Thus, de kinderen interrupts the 
pronounced material on the left of the zag tree?s 
foot node, Jan, from the pronounced material on 
the right of the foot node, zag. 
3.2 Well-Nestedness 
Definition: If the roots of two subtrees in the 
drawing are not in a dominance relation, then the 
trees are disjoint. (E.g. in (5), the subtrees rooted in 
b and c are disjoint, while the subtrees rooted in a 
and b are not.) 
Definition: If nodes x1, x2 belong to tree X, nodes 
y1, y2 belong to tree Y, precedence orders these 
nodes: x1 > y1 > x2 > y2, and X and Y are disjoint, 
then trees X and Y interleave. (E.g. in (5), b and d 
belong to the subtree rooted in b, while c and e be-
long to the subtree rooted in c.  These two subtrees 
are disjoint. Since the nodes are ordered b > c > d 
> e, the two trees interleave.) 
Definition: If there is no interleaving between dis-
joint subtrees, then a graph drawing is well-nested.  
(e.g. (4) is well-nested, but (5) is not) 
 
(5) 
 
 
Non-well nested graph drawing 
 
4 Island Effects and Gap-Degree 
When standard TAG analyses of island effects are 
adopted (see Frank 2002), we observe that differ-
ences in gap degree align with the division be-
tween wh-extractions that are attested in natural 
language (grammatical wh-movement and weak 
island effects) and those claimed to be prohibited 
(strong island effects). Specifically, four strong 
island violations, extraction from an adverbial 
modifier, relative clause, complex NP, or subject, 
correspond to structures of gap degree 1, while 
cyclic wh-movement and a weak island violation 
(extraction from a wh-island) are gap degree 0 in 
English. Interestingly, while it is clear that weak 
islands vary in their island status from language to 
language, strong islands have been claimed to 
block extraction cross-linguistically.  We tenta-
tively postulate that gap degree is useful for char-
acterizing strong islands cross-linguistically. 
An example is given in (6), a standard TAG 
derivation for adverbial modification: the after-tree 
adjoins into the buy-tree (the matrix clause), the 
got-tree substitutes into the after-tree, and the two 
arguments who and a-raise substitute into the got-
tree. In (7), the corresponding dependency struc-
ture, the projection of got includes who, which is 
separated from got by the string comprising the 
matrix clause and adverbial. Clearly, we do not 
want to claim that any gap degree of 1 is a sure 
source of ungrammaticality.  However, it is possi-
ble that a gap degree of 1 in conjunction with a wh-
element yields ungrammaticality.  For the particu-
lar set of islands we examined, we postulate that 
the projection of the node immediately dominating 
the wh-element is prohibited from containing gaps. 
 
  (6) 
 
 
 
  (7)* 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. LTAG derivation and graph drawing 
for *Who did Jane buy a house after got a raise? 
 
a b c d e
Who     did      Jane     buy    a-house    after     got    a-raise 
Jane
got 
a-house 
buy 
did after 
Who a-raise 
4
    (8a) (8w) ? ? (11a) (11d) (11e) 
 
 
 (8b) (8c) (8d) (8e) (8x) (8y) (8z) (11b) ? ? (11c) ?  ?   
 
  (9)  (10) 
    (12) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 MC-TAG-induced Dependency Graphs 
5.1 Gap-Degree Beyond 1 
As reviewed in section 3, the source of every gap 
in a TAG drawing comes from an interruption of 
the dependencies in an auxiliary tree.  Since the 
auxiliary tree only has one foot, it only has a slot 
for a single gap.  A MC-set, however, could be 
comprised of two auxiliary trees.  This means there 
are slots for two gaps, one associated with each 
foot.  Furthermore, a gap may arise as a result of 
any pronounced material between the two compo-
nents.  Thus, when we already have at least one 
foot, adding an additional foot increases the maxi-
mum gap degree by 2.  The maximum gap degree 
= 1 + 2(n ? 1) = 2n ? 1, where n is the max # of 
foot nodes in any elementary tree set. 
As an example, consider the composition of the 
trees in (8), Figure 3 (Kuhlmann, p.c.) The tree set 
in (8w) is comprised of two auxiliary trees.  One 
tree, (8w?), adjoins into (8a), and a gap is created 
by the material in (8a) that falls below the foot 
node of (8w?), namely b.  When (8w?) is adjoined 
into (8?) at node V, a second gap is created below 
(8w?) by d.  A third gap is created by the material 
between the two components.  (9) shows the de-
rived phrase structure, and (10), the corresponding 
graph drawing.  The projection of node w, {w, x, y, 
z} has three discontinuities, nodes b, c, and d. 
5.2 Non-Well-Nestedness 
Kuhlmann and M?hl (2006) show that even a tree-
local MC-TAG that allows only substitution can 
induce a non-well-nested graph drawing.  Figure 4 
replicates their example.  This derivation involves 
two MC-sets, (11b) and (11c).  The tree anchored 
by d, (11d), substitutes into the second component 
of the set anchored by b, (11b).  Similarly, the tree 
anchored by e, (11e), substitutes into the second 
component of the set anchored by c, (11c).  Both 
MC-sets compose into the tree anchored by a, 
yielding the derived phrase structure in (12). The 
corresponding graph drawing is exactly our earlier 
example of non-well-nestedness in (5). 
6 MC-TAG in Practice 
We now turn to cases in which linguists have used 
MC-TAGs to account for cases argued to have no 
satisfying solution in basic TAG.   Unlike the ex-
amples in 5.1 and 5.2, these particular MC-deriva-
tions correspond to dependency structures that are 
well-nested and have gap degree ? 1. Table 2 
summarizes these cases.  The last column indicates 
the type of MC-extension assumed by the analysis: 
tree-local MC-TAGs, tree-local MC-TAGs with 
flexible composition, the mirror operation to ad-
joining; if tree ? adjoins into tree ?, the combina-
tion can be alternatively viewed as tree ? ?flexibly? 
composing with tree ? (Joshi et al 2003, Kall-
meyer and Joshi 2003)8, and set-local MC-TAGs.  
Set-local MC-TAGs are generally more powerful 
than TAGs, but since these particular cases induce 
well-nested graph drawings of gap degree ? 1, we 
can conclude that set-local MC-TAG as used in 
                                                 
8 I.e. When composing A and B, we can take A as the function 
and B as the argument or vice versa. For CFGs, such flexibil-
ity has no added benefit. For categorical type grammars, this 
kind of flexibility is accomplished via type raising, which 
allows for some new types of constituents but does not give 
rise to any new word orders. For tree local MC-TAGs, such 
flexibility does allow more word orders (permutations) to be 
generated than are possible without flexible composition. 
 
W 
B 
V 
A 
C a 
D 
E 
E 
e 
C 
c 
D 
d 
B 
b 
X 
x 
Y 
y 
Z 
z 
X Y
V 
V w Z
W 
W 
 A 
a 
X Y 
V 
V w Z 
W 
W 
E 
e 
C 
c 
D 
d 
B 
b 
x y z 
a     w    b    z      c     x    d     y     e 
 
B W 
A
C a Y 
 W
X 
B 
b 
 Y 
Z 
C 
c 
X 
d 
Z 
e 
 A 
a Y 
Z 
W 
X 
C 
c 
B 
b 
d e 
Figure 4. Non-well-nested MC-
TAG induced graph drawing Figure 3. MC-TAG induced graph drawing of gap degree 3
5
Table 2. Canonical tree sets used in MC-TAG analyses of several phenomena 
 
these cases is weakly equivalent to TAG.  
From Table 2, we can draw two generalizations.  
First, in an MC-TAG analysis, a two-component 
set is typically used.  One of the trees is often a 
very small piece of structure that corresponds to 
the ?base position,? surface position, or scope posi-
tion of a single element.  Second, the auxiliary tree 
components typically have elements with phono-
logical content only on one side of the foot. 
At this point, we make explicit an assumption 
that we believe aligns with Bodirsky et al (2005).  
Since silent elements, such as traces, do not anchor 
an elementary tree, they do not correspond to a 
node in the dependency structure. 
 
6.1 Why the Gap-Degree Remains ? 1 
Recall that in example (8), each of the two compo-
nents in the example MC-TAG has a foot with 
phonological material on both sides, giving rise to 
two gaps, and a third gap is created via the material 
between the two components.  In contrast, in the 
MC-TAG sets shown in Table 2, the auxiliary trees 
have pronounced material only on one side of the 
foot node.  This eliminates the gap that would have 
arisen due to the interruption of material on the left 
side of the foot from the right side of the foot as a 
result of the pronounced material beneath the foot.  
The only way to obtain pronounced material on 
both sides of the foot node is to adjoin a compo-
nent into one of these auxiliary trees.  Interestingly, 
the set-local analyses (in which all components of 
a set must combine with components of a single set 
vs. tree-local MC-TAG) for clitic climbing and 
Japanese causatives do posit recursive components 
adjoining into other recursive components, but 
only while maintaining all pronounced material on 
one side of the foot. In the absence of a deriva-
tional step resulting in pronounced material on 
analysis 
source 
phenomenon first  
component 
second  
component 
MC-type 
Kroch 
and Joshi  
1986 
English extraposition 
A man arrived who knew Mary. 
Auxiliary Auxiliary Tree-
local 
 
Frank 
1992 
subj-aux inversion with raising verb constructions 
Does Gabriel seem to like gnocchi? 
Non-auxiliary Auxiliary Tree-
local 
 
Ryant 
and 
Scheffler 
2006 
anaphoric binding 
Johni likes himselfi. 
Auxiliary Non-auxiliary Tree-
local + 
flexible 
compo-
sition 
Joshi, 
Kall-
meyer, & 
Romero 
2003 
quantifier scope ambiguity 
An FBI agent is spying on every professor. 
(?y [prof(y) ??x [agent(x) ? spy (x, y)] ]) OR 
(?x [agent(x) ??y [prof(y)? spy (x, y)] ]) 
Auxiliary Non-auxiliary Tree-
local + 
flexible 
compo-
sition 
Bleam 
1994 
clitic climbing in Romance 
Mari telo    quiere permitir ver. 
Mari you-it wants to permit to see 
?Mari wants to permit you to see it.? 
Auxiliary Non-auxiliary Set-
local 
Heycock 
1986 
Japanese causatives 
Watasi-wa Mitiko-ni Taroo-o ik ?ase (?sase) ?ta. 
I           TOP        DAT        ACC go  ?CS   ?CS   ?PST 
?I made Mitiko make Taroo go.? 
Auxiliary Auxiliary Set-
local 
NP*
ei 
S'
NP
 
ei 
I 
seem 
V I'* 
VP 
I' 
 
doesi 
C
 NP*  
himself 
NP 
 
S* 
NP[+wh]   knew NP  
S'i 
S 
 
NP
e 
S* Vi
VP
S  
V * 
-ase 
Vi 
V 
I 
tei
I *
I  
V 
permitir 
VP 
VP 
ei 
 S* 
 
every 
DET N 
NP 
6
both sides of a foot, the only remaining possible 
gap is that which arises from pronounced material 
that appears between the two components. 
Note that the observation about the position of 
pronounced material applies only to auxiliary trees 
in sets with multiple components.  That is, auxil-
iary trees that comprise a singleton set may still 
have pronounced material on both sides of the foot. 
6.2 Why the Structures Remain Well-Nested 
Since Kuhlmann and M?hl (2006) show that even 
a MC-TAG that allows only non-auxiliary trees in 
MC-sets will expand the drawings to include non-
well-nested drawings, there is no way to pare back 
the MC-TAG via restrictions on the types of trees 
allowed in MC-sets so as to avoid interleaving. 
Recall that to satisfy the definition of interleav-
ing, it is necessary that the two MC-sets are not in 
any dominance relation in the derivation structure.  
In Kuhlmann and M?hl?s example, this is satisfied 
because the two MC-sets are sisters in the deriva-
tion; they combine into the same tree.  In the lin-
guistic analyses considered here, no more than one 
MC-set combines into the same tree.  For tree-local 
MC-TAG, it appears to be sufficient to bar more 
than one MC-set from combining into a single tree.   
7 MC-TAG and Scrambling 
In subordinate clauses in Standard German, the 
canonical order of verbs and their subject argu-
ments is a nested dependency order. However, 
other orderings are also possible.  For example, in 
the case of a clause-final cluster of three verbs, the 
canonical order is as given in (13), NP1NP2NP3 
V3V2V1, but all the other permutations of the NP 
arguments are also possible orderings. All six per-
mutations of the NPs can be derived via tree-local 
MC-TAG.  From the graph-model perspective 
adopted here, this is unsurprising: All the se-
quences are well-nested and have gap degree ? 1. 
 
(13)   NP1   NP2   NP3   V3                 V2       V1 
 . . . Hans Peter Marie schwimmen lassen sah 
. . . Hans Peter Marie swim            make  saw 
 ? . . . Hans saw Peter make Marie swim.? 
 
However, with an additional level of embed-
ding, i.e. four NPs and four verbs, the situation is 
different, both linguistically and formally.  Our 
focus is on making the formal predictions of a lin-
guistically informed system precise. We start with 
a tree-local MC-TAG that is restricted to linguisti-
cally motivated tree-sets and to semantically co-
herent derivations.  The former linguistic restric-
tion is illustrated in (14), the possible tree-sets an-
chored by a verb that takes a VP argument.  The 
latter linguistic restriction is that there is no seman-
tic feature clash at any stages of the derivation: the 
VP argument of Vi must be associated with Vi+1. 
 
(14) ? 
 
 ? 
 
Single and two-component sets for Vi 
 
As MC-TAG is enriched in various ways (by al-
lowing flexible composition, multiple adjoining at 
the same node, and/or components from the same 
MC-set to target the same node), all 24 orderings 
where the nouns permute while the verbs remain 
fixed can be derived. (We are aware that German 
also allows verbs to scramble.) Taking the depend-
ency structures of these sequences to consist of an 
edge from each verb Vi to its subject NP and to the 
head of its argument VP, Vi+1, we can compare the 
predictions of the graph drawing approach and the 
MC-TAG approach. It turns out that the permuta-
tions of gap degree ? 1 and those of gap-degree 2 
do not align in an obvious way with particular en-
richments. For example, NP4NP2NP3NP1V4V3V2V1 
(gap degree 2) is derivable via basic tree-local MC-
TAG, but NP3NP1NP4NP2V4V3V2V1 and 
NP3NP2NP4NP1V4V3V2V1 (also gap degree 2) ap-
pear to require both flexible composition and al-
lowing components from the same MC-set to tar-
get the same node. 
8 Conclusion and Future Work 
This paper reviews the connection established in 
previous work between TAG derivations and 
model-theoretic graph drawings, i.e. well-nested 
dependency structures of gap degree ? 1, and re-
ports several observations that build on this work.  
First, additional evidence of the linguistic rele-
vance of the gap degree measure is given. The gap 
degree measure can distinguish wh-movement that 
is assumed to be generally disallowed from wh-
movement that is permitted in natural language. 
Second, we observe that the graph drawings in-
 
NPi
NP VP(i+1)*
VP
VP
VP 
(e)i Vi
 
NPi 
NP VP(i+1)* 
VP* 
VP 
VP 
VP 
(e)i Vi
7
duced by MC-TAGs used in linguistic analyses 
continue to fall within the class of well-nested, gap 
degree ? 1 dependency structures. While 
Kuhlmann and M?hl (2006) show that MC-TAGs 
in which each set has a single lexical anchor in-
duce graph drawings that are outside this class, this 
extra complexity in the dependency structures does 
not appear to be utilized. Even for the crucial cases 
used to argue for MC-extensions, MC-TAG is used 
in a manner requiring less complexity than the 
formal system allows.  Examining these particular 
grammars lays the groundwork for identifying a 
natural class of MC-TAG grammars whose deriva-
tions correspond to well-nested graph drawings of 
gap degree ? 1. Specifically, the observations sug-
gest the class to be MC-TAGs in which 1) compo-
nent sets have up to two members, 2) auxiliary 
trees that are members of non-singleton MC-sets 
have pronounced material on only one side of the 
foot, whether the auxiliary member is derived or 
not, and 3) up to one MC-set may combine into 
each tree. Though these constraints appears stipu-
lative from a formal perspective, a preliminary 
look suggests that natural language will not require 
their violation. That is, we may find linguistic jus-
tification for these constraints.  Lastly, in ongoing 
work, we explore how allowing flexible composi-
tion and multiple adjoining enables MC-TAGs to 
derive a range of scrambling patterns. 
References 
Tonia Bleam. 2000. Clitic climbing and the power of 
Tree Adjoining Grammar. In A. Abeill? and O. Ram-
bow (eds.), Tree Adjoining Grammars: formalisms, 
linguistic analysis and processing. Stanford: CSLI 
Publications, 193-220. (written in 1994). 
Manuel Bodirsky, Marco Kuhlmann, and Mathias M?hl. 
2005. Well-nested drawings as models of syntactic 
structure.  In 10th Conference of Formal Grammar 
and 9th Meeting on Mathematics of Language (FG-
MoL), Edinburgh, UK. 
Robert Frank. 1992. Syntactic Locality and Tree Adjoin-
ing Grammar: grammatical, acquisition, and proc-
essing perspectives. PhD dissertation, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA. 
Robert Frank. 2002. Phrase Structure Composition and 
Syntactic Dependencies. MIT Press. 
Jan Haji?, Barbora Vidova Hladka, Jarmila Panevov?, 
Eva Haji?ov?, Petr Sgall, and Petr Pajas. 2001. Pra-
gue Dependency Treebank 1.0. LDC, 2001T10. 
Caroline Heycock. 1986. The structure of the Japanese 
causative. Technical Report MS-CIS-87-55, Univer-
sity of Pennsylvania. 
Aravind K. Joshi, Laura Kallmeyer, and Maribel Ro-
mero. 2003. Flexible composition in LTAG: quanti-
fier scope and inverse linking. In H. Bunt and R. 
Muskens (eds.), Computing Meaning 3. Dordrecht: 
Kluwer. 
Aravind K. Joshi and Y. Schabes. 1997. Tree-Adjoining 
Grammars. In G. Rozenberg and A. Salomaa (eds.): 
Handbook of Formal Languages. Berlin: Springer, 
69?123. 
Laura Kallmeyer and Aravind K. Joshi. 2003. Factoring 
predicate argument and scope semantics: underspeci-
fied semantics with LTAG. Research on Language 
and Computation 1(1-2), 3-58. 
Anthony Kroch and Aravind K. Joshi. 1990. Extraposi-
tion in a Tree Adjoining Grammar. In G. Huck and 
A. Ojeda, eds., Syntax and Semantics: Discontinuous 
Constituents, 107-149. 
Matthias Trautner Kromann. 2003. The Danish Depend-
ency Treebank and the DTAG treebank tool. In 2nd 
Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories 
(TLT), 217-220. 
Marco Kuhlmann and Mathias M?hl. 2006. Extended 
cross-serial dependencies in Tree Adjoining Gram-
mars. In Proceedings of the 8th International Work-
shop on Tree Adjoining Grammar and Related For-
malisms, Sydney, Australia, 121-126. 
Marco Kuhlmann and Mathias M?hl. 2007. Mildly con-
text-sensitive dependency languages. In 45th Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (ACL), Prague, Czech Republic. 
Marco Kuhlmann and Joakim Nivre. 2006. Mildly non-
projective dependency structures. In 21st Interna-
tional Conference on Computational Linguistics and 
44th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (COLING-ACL), Companion Vol-
ume, Sydney, Australia. 
Mathias M?hl. 2006. Drawings as Models of Syntactic 
Structure: Theory and Algorithms, Masters thesis, 
Saarland University, Saarbr?cken, Germany. 
Neville Ryant and Tatjana Scheffler. 2006. Binding of 
anaphors in LTAG. In Proceedings of the 8th Interna-
tional Workshop on Tree Adjoining Grammar and 
Related Formalisms, Sydney, Australia, 65-72. 
David Weir. 1988. Characterizing mildly context-
sensitive grammar formalisms. PhD dissertation, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA.
8
