From TUNA Attribute Sets to Portuguese Text: a First Report 
 
 
Daniel Bastos Pereira Ivandr? Paraboni 
Escola de Artes, Ci?ncias e Humanidades Escola de Artes, Ci?ncias e Humanidades 
University of S?o Paulo ? USP University of S?o Paulo - USP 
Av. Arlindo Bettio, 1000 - S?o Paulo, Brazil Av. Arlindo Bettio, 1000 - S?o Paulo, Brazil 
daniel.bastos@usp.br ivandre@usp.br 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
This document describes the development of a 
surface realisation component for the Portu-
guese language that takes advantage of the 
data and evaluation tools provided by the 
REG-2008 team. At this initial stage, our 
work uses simple n-gram statistics to produce 
descriptions in the Furniture domain, with lit-
tle or no linguistic variation. Preliminary re-
sults suggest that, unlike the generation of 
English descriptions, contextual information 
may be required to account for Portuguese 
word order. 
1 Introduction 
In this work we describe a surface realisation com-
ponent for Portuguese definite descriptions using 
the data and evaluation tool provided as part of the 
REG-2008 Challenge. However, given the differ-
ences between language and a number of project 
decisions discussed below, the present results are 
not suitable for comparison with the work done by 
the actual task participants, and it should be re-
garded simply as an ongoing effort to generate and 
evaluate Portuguese descriptions using similar 
standards. 
2 System Description 
Our work is a simple application of n-gram statis-
tics to surface realisation. Two independent anno-
tators started by producing individual lists of the 
most likely phrases that could possibly be associ-
ated with every attribute?value pair in the corpus. 
Since at this initial stage we are only considering 
1-to-n relations (i.e., each phrase is the realisation 
of exactly one attribute-value pair) the mapping 
annotation was straightforward. More complex (m-
to-n) cases ? those in which two or more properties 
may combine to form a single text unit (e.g., the 
properties of being human, young and male may be 
realised simply as ?a young man? or even as ?a 
boy?) ? will be discussed elsewhere. 
Given a TUNA attribute set as an input, we 
compute all (unordered) sets of phrases that corre-
spond to a possible description, including gender 
variations. Next, we compute all possible permuta-
tions of each phrase set that matched a pre-defined 
description template suitable to Portuguese phrase 
order, once again with gender variation. As a re-
sult, even a simple attribute set as in ?the large red 
table? would have at least eight possible realisa-
tions in Portuguese, although only a few can be 
considered well-formed and likely to be uttered for 
the purpose of identification. The final task of se-
lecting the most likely output string is left to a 
simple bigram language model built from a 40-
million words corpus of Brazilian Portuguese 
newspaper articles. 
3 Preliminary Evaluation  
We produced a surface realisation form for each of 
the 80 instances of Portuguese descriptions in the 
REG-2008 development data. Overall, 32 instances 
(40%) of descriptions were incorrectly generated. 
The major source of errors was the lack of com-
plete gender agreement, since our simple bigram-
based model cannot handle long-distance depend-
232
encies appropriately, as in ?o sof? grande ver-
melha?, in which the gender agreement between 
?sof?? (masculine) and ?vermelha? (feminine) 
could not be established. We believe that this could 
be easily fixed had we used a more expressive lan-
guage model instead. 
Two independent annotators built a Portuguese 
reference set by manually translating each of the 
80 descriptions in the development data set and 
taking into account the possible phrase realisations 
defined earlier. More specifically, we produced a 
?normalized? reference set, removing much of the 
noise that naturally occurs in the raw data. This 
included a number of likely errors (e.g., ?red chair 
in center red?), meta-attributes (e.g., ?first picture 
on third row?), illegal attributes (e.g.., ?the grey 
desk with drawers?), differences in specificity 
(e.g., ?shown from the side? as a less specific al-
ternative to both ?facing left? and ?facing right? 
values) and synonymy (e.g., ?facing the viewer? as 
an alternative to ?facing forward?). Moreover, 
given that definiteness cannot be worked out from 
the attribute set alne, all indefinite descriptions 
were changed to definite. 
Regarding the usefulness of this modified refer-
ence set, there are a number of due observations: 
firstly, given the differences between languages, 
our reference data set is not to be regarded as a 
resource for investigating language use as the 
original TUNA data set is intended to be, but rather 
as a standard of acceptable performance for a prac-
tical Portuguese NLG system. Moreover, since the 
translated descriptions were not produced in real 
situations of reference, we are aware that our re-
sults are  not directly comparable to, e.g., the work 
carried out in the REG-2008 challenge for evaluat-
ing English descriptions, and that would remain the 
case even without normalization.  
On the other hand, although the result of both 
translation and normalization tasks is a somewhat 
simplified set of Portuguese descriptions, this is 
not to say that these descriptions are tailored to 
match those that we intend to generate. In fact, one 
of the goals in the normalization task was to retain 
the most appropriate instances of reference, which 
included a large number of cases that we are not 
presently able to produce, e.g., those combining 
the x-dimension and y-dimension attributes in sin-
gle references to corners, as in ?in the upper right 
corner?. Figure 1 summarizes our findings for the 
80 instances of descriptions in the Furniture do-
main. 
 
 Furniture 
String Accuracy 0.26 
String-edit dist. 3.26 
Figure 1. Portuguese descriptions (Furniture domain) 
4 Final Remarks 
One striking difference between system descrip-
tions and the reference set was the word order of 
Portuguese adjectives. To our surprise, it is not 
clear in which order attributes such as colour and 
size should be combined in Portuguese definite 
descriptions. For example, ?a large red table? 
could be realised either as type + colour + size 
(e.g., ?a mesa vermelha, grande? ) or as type + size 
+ colour (e.g., ?a mesa grande, vermelha?). As 
both alternatives seem equally acceptable, the 
choice may depend on which property contrasts 
each of the distractors in the situation of reference. 
Whilst the present ambiguity reveals a weakness in 
our artificially-built reference set, it may also sug-
gest that a much more sophisticated approach to 
Portuguese realisation is called-for, especially if 
compared to the generation of English descriptions 
whose word order seems fairly standard. We be-
lieve that further investigation on this issue is still 
required 
Acknowledgments 
This work has been partially supported by CNPq-
Brazil (484015/2007-9), FAPESP (2006/03941-7) 
and Ensinar com Pesquisa / USP. 
References  
Gatt, A.; I. van der Sluis, and K. van Deemter (2007) 
Evaluating algorithms for the generation of referring 
expressions using a balanced corpus. 11th European 
Workshop on Natural Language Generation 49?56. 
van Deemter, K.; I. van der Sluis and A. Gatt (2006) 
Building a semantically transparent corpus for the 
generation of referring expressions. 4th International 
Conference on Natural Language Generation. 
233
