Global Health Monitor - A Web-based System for Detecting and 
Mapping Infectious Diseases
Son Doan*, QuocHung-Ngo?, Ai Kawazoe*, Nigel Collier*
* National Institute of Informatics,
2-1-2 Hitotsubashi, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, 
Japan
{doan,zoeai,collier}@nii.ac.jp
? University of Information Technology, 
Vietnam National University (HCM), 
Vietnam
hungnq@uit.edu.vn
Abstract
We present the Global Health Monitor, an 
online Web-based system for 
detecting and mapping infectious disease 
outbreaks that appear in news 
stories. The system analyzes English news 
stories from news feed providers, 
classifies them for topical relevance and 
plots them onto a Google map using 
geo-coding information, helping public 
health workers to monitor the spread 
of diseases in a geo-temporal context. The 
background knowledge for the 
system is contained in the BioCaster ontol-
ogy (BCO) (Collier et al, 2007a) 
which includes both information on infec-
tious diseases as well as 
geographical locations with their lati-
tudes/longitudes. The system consists 
of four main stages: topic classification, 
named entity recognition (NER), 
disease/location detection and visualiza-
tion. Evaluation of the system shows 
that it achieved high accuracy on a gold 
standard corpus. The system is now 
in practical use. Running on a cluster-
computer, it monitors more than 1500 
news feeds 24/7, updating the map every 
hour.
1 Introduction
Information concerning disease outbreak events is 
published in various news outlets on the World 
Wide Web, in many different languages.  Identify-
ing early news stories about disease outbreaks
automatically is important for a bio-surveillance 
system that is designed to inform health profes-
sionals. Currently, there are several systems avail-
able for the disease detection and tracking task. For 
example, ProMED-mail (2001) or MedISys (2007)
(Medical Intelligence System). ProMED-mail is an 
Internet-based system that provides reports by pub-
lic health experts concerning outbreak diseases 
(that is, the system is not automatic but rather hu-
man curated). In contrast to ProMED-mail, MedI-
Sys is an automatic system working on multilin-
gual languages, but it mainly focuses on analyzing 
news stories based on the country level. Another 
system which is close to the one we present is 
HealthMap (Brownstein and Freifeld, 
2007). HealthMap automatically collects news 
from the Internet about human and animal health 
and plots the data on a Google Maps mashup. Data 
is aggregated by disease and location. Unlike 
HealthMap, our system takes an ontology-centred 
approach to knowledge understanding and linkage 
to external resources. For annotation of topics and 
entities we also exploit a range of linguistic re-
sources within a machine learning framework.
There are several challenges in geo-coding when 
dealing with news stories. The two main chal-
lenges are disease/location extraction and geo-
disambiguation. The former is concerned with how 
to determine disease and location names for dis-
ease-related news stories. The latter is concerned 
with how to solve geo-disambiguation. For exam-
ple, if there is a news story about equine influenza 
in Camden, the system should detect that the dis-
ease name is ?equine influenza? and the location 
name is ?Camden?. However, there are two loca-
tions named Camden: One in Australia and one in 
951
London, UK. The problem is that only one location 
should be chosen for plotting into a map. In our 
opinion, current systems lack the advanced natural 
language processing and text mining techniques 
that would enable the automatic extraction of such 
disease/location event information.
BioCaster is a project working towards the detec-
tion and tracking of infectious diseases using text 
mining techniques. One of the main components is 
the BioCaster Ontology (BCO), which includes 50
infectious diseases with links to external vocabu-
lary resources, and a geographical ontology of a 
total of 243 countries and 4025 sub-countries 
(province and cities) with their lati-
tudes/longitudes. We also now automatically link 
news on outbreaks to academic sources such as
Stanford university?s Highwire and NCBI?s Pub-
Med using search terms Disease name + Location
name (Country) + ?case?. This is to ensure a focus 
on recent case report relevant to the news items.
The system includes four main stages: topic classi-
fication, named entity recognition (NER), dis-
ease/location detection, and visualization. The cur-
rent version of the system (English only) can be 
found at http://biocaster.nii.ac.jp.
The remainder of this paper is organized as fol-
lows. Section 2 outlines the BioCaster Ontology 
(BCO). Section 3 describes some features of the 
system (modules, functionality and algorithms).  
Section 4 is concerned with system evaluation. 
Finally, Section 5 outlines conclusions and pre-
sents possible future work.
2 Overview of BCO
BCO is one of the main components in the Bio-
Caster project. It includes an ontology of 50 infec-
tious diseases and a geographical ontology (243 
countries and 4,025 sub-countries). The infectious 
disease ontology was built by a team consisting of
a linguist, an epidemiologist, a geneticist, and a 
medical anthropologist. A disease in BCO has a 
root name which is unique identifier and also other 
properties relating to synonyms, symptoms, asso-
ciated syndromes, hosts, etc. The ontology is mul-
tilingual, supporting six languages (English, Japa-
nese, Vietnamese, Thai, Korean, and Chinese); and 
has links to external ontologies (such as MeSH,
SNOMED and ICD9/10) and resources (like 
Wikipedia). The geographical part is built from 
Wikipedia1. The BCO is available on the Web at 
http://biocaster.nii.ac.jp. For a fuller description of 
the BCO, see Collier et al (2007a) and Kawazoe et 
al. (2007).
3 The System
3.1 Overview of the system
The Global Health Monitor system runs on a clus-
ter machine with 16 nodes under the Linux operat-
ing system. The code was written in PHP, Perl, C, 
and Java and the number of input news feeds is 
about 1,500. The system has a crawler that collects 
news every hour. These collected news stories are 
then processed and analyzed step-by-step in four
main phases: topic classification, named entity 
recognition (NER), disease/location detection, and 
visualization. Each of the four phases is managed 
by a distinct module. These components are de-
picted in Figure 1. The first three modules are run 
inside the system and the visualization module ?
the Google Map ? can be seen at the BioCaster 
portal. Figure 2 shows a screenshot of the system. 
                                                
1 http://www.wikipedia.org.
Figure 1. Stages of the system.
952
We will now describe each of the four modules in 
turn: 
* Topic classification.  This module identifies 
news stories with disease-related topics and retains 
relevant ones for later processing. The module uses
ontology-supported text classification with na?ve 
Bayes as the classification algorithm and the Bio-
Caster gold standard corpus as the training data set
(Doan et al, 2007). In this module, we used the 
Rainbow toolkit.2
* NER. Disease-related news stories are automati-
cally analyzed and tagged with NEs like PERSON, 
ORGANIZATION, DISEASE, LOCATION. This 
module is implemented by SVM classification al
                                                
2 Rainbow toolkit, available at 
http://www.cs.umass.edu/~mccallum/bow/rainbow
gorithm3. For a more detailed description of the 
schema and NER module, see Kawazoe et al 
(2006).
* Disease/location detection. This module extracts 
disease and location information. Details are given
in Section 3.2.
* Visualization. The detected locations are plotted 
onto a Google map with ontology links to associ-
ated diseases and news stories.
3.2 Disease/location detection algorithm
The disease/location detection algorithm is based 
on a statistical model of the LOCATION and DIS
EASE Named Entities (NEs). The algorithm can be 
described as follows:
                                                
3 TinySVM, available at 
http://chasen.org/~taku/software/TinySVM.
Figure 2.  The Global Health Monitor system, showing disease events from the last 30 days. The main 
screen is a Google Map. Selected headline reports run along the bottom of the screen and link to biomedi-
cal reference on PubMed, HighWire and Google Scholar.  Symbol    links to disease names in the BCO 
and symbol  stands for disease name not in the BCO. The right of the screen shows various user options 
to filter the news.
953
Input: A set of news stories tagged with NEs.
Output: A set of disease/location pairs.
Step 1: Detect LOCATION-DISEASE pairs in 
each news story by corresponding NEs, and calcu-
late their frequency in a news story.
Step 2: Calculate the frequency of LOCATION-
DISEASE pairs in a corpus.
Step 3: Rank LOCATION ? DISEASE pairs by 
the frequencies calculated in Step 2. Use a thresh-
old to choose top LOCATION - DISEASE names4. 
Step 4: Map disease and location names: If DIS-
EASE matches to a synonym in BCO then DIS-
EASE was assigned to that disease name. This 
process of matching (grounding the terms) allows
us to provide extra information from the ontology
and to remove variant forms of terms from the map
                                                
4 In the current system, we set the threshold value to 40.
? thereby aiding readability. Similarly, if LOCA-
TION matches to a location in BCO then LOCA-
TION was assigned to that location name. 
Step 5: Re-map into news stories: Match detected 
diseases and locations within the first half of each 
news story. If both disease and location are
matched then they are stored; otherwise, skip.
This five step process is repeated every hour, for 
each news article that is less than 1 day (24 hours) 
old.
3.3 Capabilities of the system
The following lists some capabilities of the current 
Global Health Monitor system.
* Date range: The system shows the dis-
ease/location and news stories within a specific
date range. Current implemented date ranges are:
30 days ago, 3 weeks ago, 2 weeks ago, 1 week 
ago, this week and today.
Figure 3.  The Global Health Monitor with the Respiratory Syndrome  selected. The time span selected is 
the current week.
954
* Genre filter: The system can show news stories 
by publication type. There are four genres of news: 
Press news (like Google News, Yahoo News), Of-
ficial news (like ProMED, WHO reports), Business 
news, and Mixed news (like Topix.com).
* Similar stories: The system currently uses a sim-
ple method to remove duplicate news stories. Users 
can use the ?Initial headline only? option to acti-
vate this function.
* Syndrome filter: There are six syndromes in 
BCO: Dermatological, Gastrointestinal, Hemor-
harrgic fever, Musculoskeletal, Neurological, and 
Respiratory. A syndrome can be associated with
several diseases included in BCO. The system can 
show news stories related to these syndromes.
* Agent option: This option allows users to view 
lists of infectious diseases which come from BCO. 
Some diseases though are not in the BCO. Users 
can choose some, all, or no diseases using a check-
box style interface.
Figure 3 shows the interface when users choose 
Syndromes as Respiratory for this week at the cur-
rent view. 
4 Evaluation
To evaluate any bio-surveillance system is very 
challenging (Morse, 2007). Our system is an inte-
gration of several modules, e.g., classification, 
NER and other algorithms. The evaluation proc-
esses for these modules are briefly described be-
low:
4.1 Topic classification
Evaluation of topic classification is presented in 
Doan et al (2007). The system used the BioCaster 
gold standard corpus which includes 1,000 anno-
tated news stories as training data. The classifica-
tion model is na?ve Bayes with features as raw text, 
NEs, and Roles (Doan et al, 2007). The system 
achieved an accuracy score of 88.10%.
4.2 NER evaluation
The evaluation of the NER system module is re-
ported in Kawazoe et al (2006). We used an anno-
tated corpus of 200 corpus news articles as training 
data. The NER system achieved an F-score of 
76.97% for all NE classes. 
4.3 Disease/location detection
For the preliminary evaluation of disease/location 
detection, we used data from a one-month period
(from October 12 to November 11, 2007). 
In our observations, the system detects about 25-30 
locations a day, an average of 40 infectious dis-
eases and 950 detected pairs of diseases/locations 
per month (A news story can contain multiple loca-
tions and diseases). The main news resources
mostly come from Google News (251 pairs, about 
26.4%), Yahoo News (288 pairs, about 30.3%), 
ProMED-mail (180 pairs, about 18.9%), and the 
remaining 24.3% for others. The running time for 
updating disease/location takes about 5 minutes.
In order to evaluate the performance of dis-
ease/location detection, we define the Precision 
and Recall as follows:
pairsRetrieved#
pairsRetrieved#pairsRelevant #
Precision
??
,
pairsRelevant #
pairsRetrieved#pairsRelevant #
Recall
??
Where #Relevant pairs is the number of dis-
ease/location pairs that human found, and #Re-
trieved pairs is the number of disease/location pairs 
that the system detected.
The Precision can be calculated based on our re-
trieved pairs detected by the system, however the 
Recall is under estimated as it does not measure 
pairs missed by  the system in the topic classifica-
tion stage. 
We evaluate the Precision of disease/location de-
tection on 950 pairs of location/disease. The sys-
tem correctly detected 887 pairs, taking 
887/950=93.4% Precision. 
4.4 Limitations of the system
There are some limitations of the system. The first 
limitation is there are several cases of ambiguity. 
For example, news stories about ?A team at Peking 
University in Beijing studied tissue taken from 2 
955
people killed by H5N1 in China? or ?A meeting on 
foot and mouth disease (FMD) was held in Brus-
sels on 17th October, 2007?. The system incorrectly
detects the location as Beijing in the first story, and 
Brussels in the second one. Another hard case is 
location disambiguation, e.g., news about ?Rabies 
in Isle of Wight? in which in the main body does 
not mention anything about country and sub-
country. There are two locations named ?Isle of 
Wight? in our geo-ontology: one in Virginia, USA 
and one in the UK. In the future, we will look at 
the country-level information of new providers (by 
checking domain names) to solve this problem. For 
example, if a news story mentions the Isle of 
Wight, and the news story originates from the UK,
then it will be taken to refer to the Isle of Wight in 
the UK.
The second limitation is the ability to detect new 
diseases or locations that are not in the ontology. In 
the future work, we will augment newly detected 
diseases as well as improve the geographical on-
tology.
5 Conclusion
We presented the Global Health Monitor - a Web-
based system for detecting and mapping infectious 
diseases from Web. The system collects news from 
news feed providers, analyzes news and plots dis-
ease relevant data onto a Google map. Preliminary
evaluations show that our system works efficiently
with real data.
In the future, we will develop more efficient algo-
rithms for detecting diseases/locations based on 
relation identification. Named relation will be de-
scribed in the BCO event taxonomy (Kawazoe et 
al., 2007). Extra capabilities will be added to the 
system like classifying outbreak of disease by 
countries, detecting new diseases that are not in out 
ontology, and showing timeline of news stories.
Evaluation of the timelineness system against hu-
man curated sources like ProMED-mail will be 
implemented. Working versions for other lan-
guages like Vietnamese, Japanese, and Thai are 
also being considered, using the existing BioCaster 
disease ontology.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank Mike Conway at the 
National Institute of Informatics for revising the 
manuscript, and both Mika Shigematsu and Kiyosu 
Taniguchi at the National Institute of Infectious 
Diseases for useful discussions. This work was 
supported by Grants-in-Aid from the Japan Society 
for the Promotion of Science (grant no. 18049071).
References
J. Brownstein and C. Freifeld. 2007. HealthMap ?
Global Disease Alert Mapping System.
http://www.healthmap.org. 
N. Collier, A. Kawazoe, L. Jin, M. Shigematsu, D.
Dien, R. Barrero, K. Takeuchi, A. Kawtrakul. 2007a. 
A multilingual ontology for infectious disease out-
break surveillance: rationale, design and challenges.
Journal of Language Resources and Evaluation. DOI: 
10.1007/s10579-007-9019-7.
N. Collier, A.Kawazoe, S. Doan, M. Shigematsu, K. 
Taniguchi, L. Jin, J. McCrae, H. Chanlekha, D. Dien, 
Q. Hung, V.C. Nam, K. Takeuchi, A. Kawtrakul. 
2007b. Detecting Web Rumors with a Multilingual 
Ontology - Supported Text Classification System.
Advances in Disease Surveillance, pp.242, vol.4, 
2007.
S. Doan, A. Kawazoe, and N.Collier. 2007. The Roles of 
Roles in Classifying Annotated Biomedical Text. 
Proc. of BioNLP - Biological, translational, and clini-
cal language processing 2007, pp.17-24, 2007.
A. Kawazoe, L. Jin, M. Shigematsu, R. Barrero, K. Ta-
niguchi and N. Collier. 2006. The development of a 
schema for the annotation of terms in the BioCaster 
disease detection/tracking system. Proc. of the Int?l 
Workshop on Biomedical Ontology in Action (KR-
MED 2006), Baltimore, Maryland, USA, November 
8, pp. 77-85, 2006.
A. Kawazoe, H. Chanlekha, M. Shigematsu and N. Col-
lier. 2007. Structuring an event ontology for disease 
outbreak detection. The 2nd International Sympo-
sium on Languages in Biology and Medicine (LBM) 
(accepted to appear).
MedISys. 2007. Medical Intelligence System.
http://medusa.jrc.it/medisys. 
S. Morse S. 2007. Global Infectious Disease Surveil-
lance And Health
 Intelligence. Health Affairs, 26(4):1069-1077, 2007.
ProMED-mail. 2001. The Program for Monitoring 
Emerging Diseases. http://www.promedmail.org.
956
