Coling 2008: Proceedings of the workshop on Cognitive Aspects of the Lexicon (COGALEX 2008), pages 64?72
Manchester, August 2008
Lexical-Functional Correspondences  
and Their Use in the System of Machine Translation ETAP-3 
 
A.S. Andreyeva  
Moscow State University, Philological Faculty,      
Department of Theoretical and Applied Linguistics 
Moscow, Vorobjevi Gori, 1st Building of the Humanities 
andreyevs@mtu-net.ru 
 
 
Abstract 
ETAP-3 is a system of machine 
translation consisting of various types of 
rules and dictionaries. Those dictionaries, 
being created especially for NLP system, 
provide for every lexeme not only data 
about its characteristics as a separate 
item, but also different types of 
information about its syntactic and 
semantic links to other lexemes.  
The paper shows how the information 
about certain types of semantic links 
between lexemes represented in the 
dictionaries can be used in a machine 
translation system. The paper deals with 
correspondences between lexical-
functional constructions of different types 
in the Russian and the English languages.  
Lexical-functional construction is a 
word-combination consisting of an 
argument of a lexical function and a value 
of this lexical function for this argument.  
The paper describes the cases when a 
lexical functional construction in one of 
these languages corresponds to a lexical-
functional construction in the other 
language, but lexical functions 
represented by these two constructions 
are different. The paper lists different 
types of correspondences and gives the 
reasons for their existence. It also shows 
how the information about these 
correspondences can be used to improve 
the work of the linguistic component of 
the machine translation system ETAP-3. 
                                                          
? 2008. Licensed under the Creative Commons 
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported 
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-
sa/3.0/). Some rights reserved. 
1 Introduction 
The concept of lexical function (LF) was 
proposed in Igor Mel?uk's ?Meaning ? Text 
Theory? (Mel?uk, 1974; Mel?uk & 
Zholkovsky, 1984; Mel?uk et al, 1984, 1988, 
1992) as the means of description of certain types 
of lexeme meaning correlations. ?Lexical 
function f describes the dependence that 
determines for the certain word or word-
combination such a multitude of words or word-
combinations {Yi}=f(X), that for every 1, 2 the 
following statement is true: if f(1) and f(2) 
exist, then there is always the same semantic 
correlation between f(1) and 1, on the one 
hand, and between f(2) and 2, on the other 
hand?. (Mel?uk, 1974) 
Soon lexical-functional description turned out 
to be of great value for the systems of natural 
language processing. Different ways the LF 
description can be used in NLP system are 
described in (Apresjan et al, 2003). As far as 
machine translation is concerned, lexical 
functions play an important role in it, being used, 
in particular, for providing translation 
equivalents. 
The mechanism of their usage is the following: 
if in one language (L1) X1 is an argument of the 
lexical function lf1, and lf1(X1)=Y1, and X1 has 
a translation equivalent X2 in another language 
(L2), and X2 is an argument of the same lexical 
function lf1, and lf1(X2)=Y2, then if in the 
process of translation from L1 to L2 a word-
combination ?X1+Y1? turns out to be a lexical-
functional construction2 representing lf1, X1 is 
replaced with X2, and Y1 is replaced with Y2 
                                                          
2
 Lexical-functional construction, or lexical-functional 
word-combination, is a word-combination consisting of 
an argument of a lexical function and a value of given 
lexical function for the same argument. 
64
irrespective of the fact what trivial translation 
equivalent3 it has. 
 
(1)  IncepReal1 (bus) = take 
IncepReal1 (avtobus) = sadit?sja na 
(avtobus ? bus) 
(sadit?sja na ? sit on, brat? - take) 
 
To take a bus is translated as sadit?sja na 
avtobus, not brat? avtobus. 
 
In the system of machine translation ETAP-3 
information about LF links between the words is 
stored in the dictionaries4. If a lexeme is an 
argument of one or several lexical functions, the 
list of these LFs is written in the dictionary entry 
of this lexeme along with the values of these LFs 
for this argument. Thus, dictionary entry of the 
word bus includes the following fragment: 
IncepReal1: take 
Such a way of storage allows the information 
about LF links between words to be easily used 
in the process of translation. 
The described above mechanism of usage of 
lexical functions in the process of translation is 
very useful, but it can be implemented only if X1 
and X2 are arguments of the same lexical 
function, and Russian and English do not provide 
such a correspondence in 100% of cases.  
If such a direct correspondence between two 
languages does not exist, information about 
lexical functions can still be used for providing 
proper translation equivalents. In many cases 
?X1+Y1? and its translation equivalent are both 
LF constructions but representing different 
lexical functions. 
The goal of this paper is to describe different 
types of such correspondences, to explain the 
reasons of their existence, and to show the ways 
they can be used in a  machine translation 
system. 
2 Translation and false homonymy 
The first type of lexical-functional 
correspondences I would like to mention is 
described in an earlier paper (Andreyeva, 2007).  
That paper is devoted to homonymous word-
combinations which are lexical-functional at least 
in one of its meanings. It describes different 
                                                          
3
 Trivial translation equivalent of a word from L1 is its 
default translations equivalent in L2, or translation 
equivalent this word from L1 has as a separate word. 
4
 The system has a separate dictionary for every language. 
types of homonymy, and one of them is so-called 
false homonymy.  
This type of homonymy characterizes LF 
constructions which are not actually 
homonymous having only one meaning each, but 
every such construction can be described with the 
help of at least two lexical functions.  
 
(2) to conclude an agreement 
 
As I note in (Andreyeva, 2007), the word-
combination from (2) can be described with the 
help of two LFs (IncepOper1 and CausFunc0), 
but the way of description does not change the 
meaning: ?to begin to have an agreement? 
(IncepOper1) or ?to cause an agreement to take 
place? (CausFunc0) are two descriptions of the 
same situation, not descriptions of two different 
situations. 
In (Andreyeva, 2007) I show that (2) is not 
unique, there exist quite big groups of non-
homonymous word-combinations which can also 
be described with the help of the same pair of 
lexical functions. These are, for example, 
arguments of LF IncepOper1 with the value 
begin (to begin an argument, a battle, a struggle 
and so on).  
There exists also a much larger group of words 
denoting different objects that can be created this 
or that way (to grow plants, to write music etc). 
In this case the word-combinations can be 
described with the help of both CausFunc0 and 
Oper1. 
The work also shows one more pair of lexical 
functions describing the same constructions - 
FinOper1 and LiquFunc0 (to stop the battle, for 
example). 
In (Andreyeva, 2007) it is claimed that there 
are several reasons of the existence of false 
homonymy.  
First, the descriptions of lexical functions are 
quite general and approximate. The creators of 
the system of LF did not have an aim to divide all 
the possible situations into non-crossing classes, 
the aim was to describe the main prototypical 
semantic correspondences.  
Second, lexical functions were initially created 
for the description of situations. Their usage for 
the description of objects produced additional 
cases of false homonymy. 
To sum it up, it is possible to list three pairs of 
lexical functions, and each pair can be used for 
the description of a non-homonymous word-
combination: 
 
65
         English         English 
1. IncepOper1 (X)     CausFunc0 (X) 
2. Oper1 (X)              CausFunc0 (X) 
3. FinOper1 (X)         LiquFunc0 (X) 
 
Table 1. False homonymy correspondences in the 
English language 
 
All the examples in this section were given for 
the English language. The fact is that for the 
majority of their translation equivalents in 
Russian the situation is the same ? being non-
homonymous they can be described with the help 
of two lexical functions (the same ones as their 
English equivalents).  
So, table 1 can be transformed into the 
following one: 
 
               L1            L2 
4. IncepOper1 (X)     CausFunc0 (X) 
5. Oper1 (X)              CausFunc0 (X) 
6. FinOper1 (X)         LiquFunc0 (X) 
 
Table 2. False homonymy correspondences5 
 
So, there are a lot of word-combinations in 
both languages that have only one meaning but 
can be described with the help of two different 
lexical functions. This fact is interesting from the 
point of view of theoretical semantics, but it 
causes difficulties for a machine translation 
system. 
For simplification of the situation in 
(Andreyeva, 2007) I propose to use only one of 
these lexical-functional descriptions in every 
case. It is a good decision for every word-
combination in particular, but being implemented 
for the system in general it still causes 
difficulties.  
The fact is that the number of these word-
combinations is quite big. The ETAP-3 system is 
developed by many linguists and it is changed all 
the time. In the cases described in this section 
there is no or nearly no difference between the 
meanings of lexical functions in the pairs, so 
each of these LFs can be chosen for the 
description of a word-combination. It is 
impossible to guarantee that the same functions 
will be chosen to describe translation equivalents. 
Besides, there can be a slight difference between 
the meanings of equivalents in two languages, 
and different functions can seem preferable for 
                                                          
5
 L1 and L2 can be both the Russian and the English 
languages. 
their description. If different lexical functions are 
used to describe translation equivalents, the 
information about their equivalency will be lost. 
To avoid such a situation and to be free to 
choose the best corresponding lexical function 
for the description of an LF construction without 
taking into consideration the material of the other 
language it seems reasonable to add special rules 
to the ETAP-3 system. These rules allow to 
replace the value of a lexical function from the 
pair not only with the value of the same function 
but also with the value of the other LF from the 
same pair. The technique of this replacement is 
described in section 4. 
3 Real lexical-functional 
correspondences 
In the introduction there was given the general 
definition of lexical function given by Mel?uk. 
According to it, to be regarded as an argument of 
the LF and a value of given LF for the same 
argument, two words must have a certain 
correlation between their meanings. But the 
majority of definitions of concrete lexical 
functions include not only semantic, but also 
syntactic conditions: to have a right to be called 
an argument of the LF and a value of given LF 
for the same argument, two words must also be 
connected by a certain syntactic link. 
All the pairs of corresponding lexical functions 
in section 2 have differences in the semantic parts 
of their definitions, but the syntactic parts are 
absolutely identical. If they were not, it would be 
impossible to use these pairs for the description 
of the same constructions.  
But it has already been mentioned that the 
reasons of adding these correspondences to the 
system of machine translation are mainly 
technical. What is really important for the system 
is the possibility to establish correspondences 
between different word-combinations, among 
which one can be described only with the help of 
lexical function lf1, and the other one represents 
only lexical function lf2. 
Actually, such correspondences have already 
been described and implemented in the system of 
machine translation ETAP-3. See, for example, 
(Apresjan, Tsinman, 2002), where several dozens 
of such correspondences are listed, including 
quite rare ones. But the majority of these 
correspondences were used only in the 
paraphrasing block of the system, i.e. a block 
responsible for paraphrasing of sentences of one 
language only. As far as translation is concerned, 
66
only a few LF correspondences were 
implemented in the translation process. 
This section shows which real LF 
correspondences can be found between the 
Russian and the English languages and how they 
can be used to improve translation process. 
3.1 LF correspondences types 
It happens quite often that in one of the described 
languages X1+Y1 form an LF construction (with 
X1 as an argument and Y1 as a value of the LF 
lf1), and the translation equivalent of X1+Y1 in 
the other language represents some other lexical 
function. Sometimes it is X2+Y2 (with X2 as a 
translation equivalent of X1 and Y2 as a value of 
LF lf2 for X2), but it also happens that it is Y2 
only. 
In some cases such correspondences represent 
system differences in strategies two languages 
use. In these cases the same correspondence 
describes large groups of word-combinations. In 
other cases the correspondences are not caused 
by system differences, but nevertheless can be 
used for the processing of big groups of 
constructions. There are also situations when LF 
correspondences are specific for small groups of 
constructions. 
3.2 System differences 
Func - Oper 
This subsection describes not a pair, but a whole 
class of lexical functions dealing with the idea of 
possession (in its widest meaning, of course).  
It is common knowledge that Russian belongs 
to so-called ?be-languages?, and English is a 
?have-language?. These characteristics of the 
languages could not help influencing the sphere 
of lexical functions describing possession.  
Of course, both Russian and English have 
Func and Oper LF constructions of different 
types. But in the Russian language the number of 
LF constructions of Func type is approximately 
two times bigger than in the English language. In 
the majority of cases, if a Russian LF 
construction of the Func type cannot be 
translated into English with the help of the same 
LF, an Oper correspondence can be found. 
This principle can be illustrated by the 
following list of corresponding pairs of lexical 
functions:  
 
 
 
 
        Russian          English 
1. Func1 (X)              Oper1 (X) 
2. IncepFunc1 (X)     IncepOper1 (X) 
3. FinFunc1 (X)         FinOper1 (X) 
4. Func2 (X)              Oper2 (X) 
 
Table 3. Some correspondences of Func type and 
Oper type lexical functions 
 
Here are some illustrations for LF 
correspondences from table 3. 
 
(3) Oper1 (boredom) = feel 
 Func1 (toska) = glodat? 
 (toska ? boredom, glodat? ? gnaw) 
 
(4) IncepOper1 (impression) = gain 
 IncepFunc1 (vpechtlenije) = skladivat?sja u 
 (vpechtlenije ? impression,  
 (skladivat?sja u ? form itself at) 
(5) FinOper1 (cold6) = shake off 
 FinFunc1 (nasmork) = prohodit? u 
 (nasmork ? cold, prohodit? u ? be over at) 
 
(6) Oper2 (threat) = bear 
 Func2 (ugroza) = navisat? nad 
 (ugroza ? treat, navisat? nad ? hang over) 
 
Examples (3)-(6) show pairs of translation 
equivalents among which the Russian one is an 
argument of the Func type lexical function from 
the corresponding pair of LFs and is not an 
argument of the LF of Oper type; on the other 
hand, the English word is an argument of the 
Oper type LF and is not an argument of the Func 
type one.  
In the process of translation word-
combinations formed by these arguments of LFs 
and values of these LFs for these arguments are 
replaced with each other. Translation equivalents 
for the material from examples (3)-(6) are the 
following: 
 
(3a) Ego glojet toska.  He is feeling boredom. 
(4a) U nego skladivajetsja vpechatlenije, chto... 
 He is gaining an impression that? 
(5a) Nasmork u nego proshel.  He shook off 
the cold. 
(6a) Nad nim navisla ugroza iskluchenija.  
He bore the threat of exclusion.  
 
                                                          
6
 cold3 ? a disease 
67
Technical aspects of implementation of LF 
correspondences described in this section are 
given in section 4. 
 
Nouns and gerunds 
 
Another system difference between the English 
and the Russian languages that turns out to be 
important for the use of lexical functions in the 
translation process is the difference between 
forms Russian and English verbs have. In the 
English language there exists a verb form called 
gerund which has no analogues in Russian. 
The way this difference influences the domain 
of LF constructions is the following. Among 
lexical functions a lot (more than a nundred) have 
nouns as their arguments and verbs (sometimes 
accompanied by prepositions or adverbs) as their 
values. For example, all LFs mentioned above 
belong to this group.  
Many of these verbs form verbal nouns which 
in the majority of cases inherit the meaning of the 
verbs. Therefore, if a verb V is a value of lexical 
function lf1 for the argument X (lf1(X) = V), and 
V forms a verbal noun NV, in the majority of 
cases there will be the same semantic correlation 
between X and V, on one hand, and X and NV, on 
the other hand.  
But syntactic links between a verb and a noun 
(X+V) and a noun and a noun (X+NV) are of 
course different, so word-combinations formed 
by two nouns cannot be described as representing 
the same lexical functions as word-combinations 
formed by a noun and a verb. 
This problem was solved by making a special 
group of lexical functions for the description of 
word-combinations formed by a verbal noun and 
another noun. If lf1(X) = V, and semantic 
correlation between the meanings of V and X and 
of NV and X is the same, then NV = S0_lf1 (X). 
For example, see (7). 
 
(7) IncepOper1 (compromise) = arrive at 
 S0_IncepOper1 (compromise) = arrival at 
 
Lexical-functional constructions of S0_lf type 
exist both in the Russian and the English 
languages, but their number is bigger in Russian. 
The reason for this seems to be the fact that the 
English language has gerund which can be used 
in a function of a noun. Russian has no verb form 
of this kind. So, it has to form verbal nouns 
which are actually formed quite freely. English, 
being able to use gerunds in many constructions, 
does not need such a big number of verbal nouns. 
The result of this difference is that in many 
cases Russian LF word-combination representing 
a lexical function of S0_lf type corresponds to 
the English construction with gerund. In order 
not to lose the information about lexical-
functional correspondences it is possible to 
establish the following correlation: 
S0_lf (in Russian) ? lf (in English) (gerund) 
Such a correspondence can be established for 
all (or nearly all) the lexical functions of S0_lf 
type. The article is too small to list them all7, so 
only several examples are given: 
 
 
          Russian          ? English  
1. S0_Oper1 (X)           ? Oper1 (X) 
(gerund) 
2. S0_IncepOper1 (X)  ? IncepOper1 (X) 
(gerund) 
3. S0_FinOper1 (X)      ? FinOper1 (X) 
(gerund) 
 
Table 4. Some correspondences of S0_lf type and 
nonS0_lf type lexical functions 
 
Here are some illustrations for LF 
correspondences from table 4: 
 
(8) S0_Oper1 (sport) = zanatija 
 Oper1 (sport) = go in for 
 (sport ? sport, zanatija ? work) 
 
(9) S0_IncepOper1 (soglashenije) = dostizenije 
 IncepOper1 (agreement) = arrive at 
 (soglashenije ? agreement) 
 (dostizenije - reaching) 
 
(10) S0_FinOper1 (biznes) = uhod iz 
 FincOper1 (business) = go out of 
 (biznes ? business) 
 (uhod iz = going away from) 
 
Translation equivalents for examples (8)-(10) 
are: 
 
(8a) zanatija sportom ? going in for sports 
(9a) dostijenije soglashenija ? arriving at an 
agreement 
(10a) uhod iz biznesa ? going out of business  
 
                                                          
7
 There are more then 100 LF of S0_lf type in the ETAP-3 
system. 
68
3.3 Other differences 
Lexical-functional correspondences described in 
the previous section are the result of system 
differences between the Russian and the English 
languages. This section is devoted to LF 
correspondences which are not caused by 
difference in strategies these languages use, but 
which are still applicable to large amount of 
word-combinations.  
These LF correspondences consist of functions 
from Func group.  
Lexical functions of Func type include, among 
others, Func0 and Func1. Func0 describes 
situations when X takes place, Func1 describes 
situations when X takes place for 
something/somebody or characterizes 
something/somebody (X is an argument of LF 
and a grammatical subject, something/somebody 
is a principal complement)8. 
There are a lot of cases when a word in one of 
the languages (X1) is an argument of Func1, and 
its translation equivalent in the other language 
(X2) is an argument of Func0 and is not an 
argument of Func1.  
In such cases the result of the translation 
would be much better if we replace the value of 
Func1 for X1 with the value of Func0 for X2 
than if we replace it with the trivial translation 
equivalent of X1. So, there can be established the 
following lexical-functional correspondence: 
Func1?Func0. 
It is important to note that, unlike all the other 
?real? LF correspondences described above, this 
correspondence works in both Russian-English 
and English-Russian translation. 
Here is the example for the described LF 
correspondence: 
 
(11) Func0 (anger) = reign 
 Func1 (gnev) = vladet? 
 (gnev ? anger, vladet? ? possess) 
 Im vladeet gnev. ? Anger reigns.  
 
There is one more reason for the establishment 
of Func1?Func0 LF correspondence. A lot of 
words are arguments of both Func0 and Func1. 
But in many cases information about one of these 
links is not yet included in the system by mistake, 
or by chance, or because of the lack of time. In 
this case Func1?Func0 correspondence works as 
a technical one, not being able to provide the best 
                                                          
8
 These definitions of lexical functions were created by 
Ju.D. Apresjan (Apresjan, Tsinman, 2002). 
translation result, but making it as good as 
possible. 
Func1?Func0 is not the only lexical-
functional correspondence of Func type. Other 
LF correspondences for lexical functions of Func 
group can be established. This is the list of them: 
 
 
               L1          ? L2 
1. IncepFunc1 (X)    ? IncepFunc0 (X) 
2. FinFunc1 (X)      ? FinFunc0 (X) 
3. CausFunc1 (X)     ? CausFunc0 (X) 
4. LiquFunc1 (X)     ? LiquFunc0 (X) 
 
Table 5. Correspondences of Func type lexical 
functions 
 
Here are some illustrations for LF 
correspondences from table 5: 
 
(12) IncepFunc0 (doubt) = arise 
 IncepFunc1 (somnenije) = voznikat? u 
 (somnenije ? doubt, voznikat? u ? appear at) 
 
(13) FinFunc0 (doubt) = disappear 
 FinFunc1 (somnenije) = pokidat? 
 (pokidat? ? leave) 
 
(14) CausFunc0 (indignation) = arouse 
 CausFunc1 (vozmuschenije) = vyzyvat? u 
 (vozmuschenije ? indignation) 
 (vyzyvat? u ? cause at) 
(15) LiquFunc0 (confidence) = shatter 
 LiquFunc1 (doverije) = podryvat? 
 (doverije ? confidence) 
 (podryvat? ? undermine) 
 
Translation equivalents for examples (12)-(15) 
are: 
 
(12a) U nego voznikajet somnenije. ?  
 Doubt arises. 
(13a) Somnenija pokidajut ego. ?  
 Doubts leave him. 
(14a) Eto vyzyvajet vozmuschenije u vseh. ? 
This arouses everybody?s indignation. 
(15a) Eto podryvajet doverije ludej. ?  
 It shatters people?s confidence. 
 
3.4 Rare correspondences 
Despite the differences, all lexical-functional 
correspondences described above have one 
common feature: they take a word-combination 
69
X1+lf1(X1) and transform it into a word-
combination X2+lf2(X2).  
But the situation is not always that simple. Let 
us look at the following examples: 
 
(16)  carry convinction 
(17)  privodit? v izumlenije9 
(18)  prihodit? v izumlenije  
 
All the examples (16)-(18) represent different 
lexical functions.  
 
(16a) CausFunc0 (conviction) = carry 
(17a) CausOper1 (izumlenije) = privodit? 
(18a) IncepOper1 (izumlenije) = prihodit? 
 (izumlenije ? astonishment) 
 (prihodit? ? come, privodit? ? lead) 
 
The fact is that none of the examples (16)-(18) 
can be translated with the help of any of LF 
correspondences described above in this article. 
These word-combinations are transformed in the 
process of translation into one verb. Fortunately 
this verb is a value of CausV0 for the translation 
equivalent of X1, so it is possible to establish the 
following LF correspondences: 
 
 
                   L1            ? L2 
1. CausFunc0 (X) + X    ? CausV0 (X) 
2. CausOper1 (X) + X    ? CausV0 (X) 
3. IncepOper1 (X) + X   ? CausV0 (X) 
(passive voice) 
 
Table 6. Some rare LF correspondences 
 
Here are translation equivalents for table 6. 
 
(16b) to carry conviction ? ubejdat?  
 (ubejdat? ? convince) 
(17b) privodit? v izumlenije ? to astonish 
(18b) prihodit? v izumlenije ? to be astonished 
4 Mechanism of translation 
In sections 2 and 3 different types of lexical-
functional correspondences were described. This 
chapter shows how the use of these LF 
correspondences is realised in the system of 
machine translation ETAP-3. 
?Linguistically, ETAP-3 consists of various 
sets of rules and dictionaries? All the rules ? 
are subdivided into three main types: (i) general 
rules that apply to all the sentences in the course 
                                                          
9
 Russian examples (17) and (18) will be translated below. 
of their processing; (ii) class-specific rules that 
hold for compact groups of words and are 
referred to by their names in the dictionary 
entries of the respective items; (iii) word-specific 
rules that are characteristic of individual lexical 
items and are stored directly in their dictionary 
entries. The second and third types of rules are 
activated only on condition that the processed 
sentence contains the relevant lexical items.? 
(Apresjan et al 2003). As for general rules, it is 
important to note that they work one after 
another, in the fixed order, so the order they are 
listed in the system is very important. 
To implement the above-described lexical-
functional correlations we have to include them 
into the system in a form of translation rules. It 
means two main problems to be solved:  
1) what type these rules must belong to, 
2) if they are general, what their order must be. 
As for the type, the decision seems to be the 
following: all the correspondences except ones 
from section 3.4 (rare correspondences) must 
become general rules, and those from 3.4 must 
become class-specific ones. The latter are very 
rare and can be implemented, perhaps, only for 
several words each. There is no use in making 
them general, and they must not be word-
specific, too, because they describe groups of 
constructions, not singular cases. So, class-
specific type is ideal for them.  
All the other types of LF correspondences 
described above are worth being implemented 
with the help of general rules. First, they describe 
big groups of constructions. Second and the most 
important is the reason for they usage: we need 
them to work automatically in case the main rule 
of translation with the help of a lexical function 
(described in the introduction) does not work, 
and the only way to provide this is to make them 
general. 
As these correspondences are implemented 
with the help of general rules, it is very important 
to put them into the proper order. I would like to 
propose the following one. 
 
1) The first rule in the list of rules responsible 
for the translation with the help of LFs is of 
course the main rule described in 
introduction. All the other rules can work 
only in case the first one did not work. So, 
the first rule is: 
 
lf1 (X) ? lf1 (X) 
 
70
2) The second block of rules is the block 
responsible for Func-Oper correspondences. 
In case the general rule does not work this 
block provides the most correct translation 
equivalents. So, the second block is: 
 
        Russian          English 
1. Func1 (X)              Oper1 (X) 
2. IncepFunc1 (X)     IncepOper1 (X) 
3. FinFunc1 (X)         FinOper1 (X) 
4. Func2 (X)              Oper2 (X) 
 
The order of rules inside this block (as well as 
inside all the other blocks) is not of great 
importance. It can be the same as in the table. 
 
3) The third block is the one responsible for 
correspondences of Func type. 
 
 
               L1          ? L2 
1. Func1 (X)             ? Func0 (X) 
2. IncepFunc1 (X)    ? IncepFunc0 (X) 
3. FinFunc1 (X)      ? FinFunc0 (X) 
4. CausFunc1 (X)     ? CausFunc0 (X) 
5. LiquFunc1 (X)     ? LiquFunc0 (X) 
 
It is very important for the third block to be 
implemented only after the second one, because 
there are lexical functions both blocks work with 
(Func1, IncepFunc1, and FincFunc1). If it is 
impossible to replace the value of one of these 
functions with the value of the same one, we 
must first try to replace it with its Oper 
equivalent and only in case it is impossible pass 
to Func0 correspondence. Oper equivalent is 
better than Func0 one because the former allows 
to preserve the information about all the actants 
of the verb ? value of an LF, while the latter loses 
the information about one of the actants. 
 
4) The fourth block is the one transforming 
nouns into gerunds. 
 
 
          Russian          ? English  
1. S0_Oper1 (X)           ? Oper1 (X) 
(gerund) 
2. S0_IncepOper1 (X)  ? IncepOper1 (X) 
(gerund) 
3. S0_FinOper1 (X)      ? FinOper1 (X) 
(gerund) 
 
As for the order of the third and the fourth 
blocks, they do not interfere with each other so it 
is of no importance which one is the first. The 
only problem is that in reality the fourth block is 
very big (it includes the majority of LFs of S0_lf 
type), so it is just more convenient to have it after 
the third block. 
 
5) And the last one is the block responsible for 
false homonymy correspondences.  
 
This block was created ?just in case?, so it is 
worth being placed at the end of the list. Besides, 
it works with Oper functions of different types, 
so in any case it must be placed after the second 
block. 
This block causes one additional problem. If 
we list all its correspondences in one column, we 
will see that CausFunc0 can become both Oper1 
and IncepOper1. Establishment of both of these 
rules in the system will not improve the 
translation but will produce plenty of wrong 
translation variants. As the rules of this block are 
not of great importance, it seems better not to use 
these two problem rules at all. So, this block will 
be the following: 
 
 
              L1           ? L2 
1. IncepOper1 (X)    ? CausFunc0 (X) 
2. Oper1 (X)             ? CausFunc0 (X) 
3. FinOper1 (X)        ? LiquFunc0 (X) 
4. LiquFunc0 (X)     ? FinOper1 (X)  
 
In the majority of cases the transformation of 
one LF construction into the other one entails 
changes in syntactic roles of actants. Information 
about these changes is also included into the 
rules. 
5 Conclusion 
The paper described different types of lexical-
functional correspondences between the Russian 
and the English languages. It showed how the 
information about LF links included in the 
dictionaries and translation rules of machine 
translation system ETAP-3 allowed to consider 
these correspondences in the process of 
translation and thus to improve its results. 
 
References 
Andreyeva, A.S. 2007. Lexical Functions and 
Homonymy. MTT-2007, Proceedings of the 3rd 
International Conference on Meaning-Text 
Theory. Wiener Slawistischer Almanach, 
Sonderband 69. M?nchen ? Wien 
71
Apresjan, Jury D., Igor M. Boguslavsky, Leonid L. 
Iomdin, Alexander V. Lazursky, Vladimir Z. 
Sannikov, Victor G. Sizov, and Leonid L. Tsinman. 
2003. ETAP-3 Linguistic Processor: a Full-Fledged 
NLP Implementation of the MTT. MTT 2003, First 
International Conference on Meaning ? Text 
Theory. Paris, Ecole Normale Superieure, Paris, 
279-288 
Apresjan, Jury D., and Leonid L. Tsinman. 2002. 
Formal?naja model? perifrazirovanija predlozhenij 
dlja sistem pererabotki tekstov na estestvennyx 
jazykax [A Formal Model of Sentence 
Paraphrasing for NLP Systems]. Russkij jazyk v 
nauchnom osveshchenii, No. 4, pp. 102-146 
Mel?uk, Igor 1974. Opyt teorii lingvisticheskix 
modelej "Smysl ? Tekst" [A Theory of Meaning 
? Text Linguistic Models"]. Moscow, Nauka. 
Mel?uk, Igor, Nadia Arbatchewsky-Jumarie, Lidija 
Iordanskaja, and Ad?le Lessard. 1984. Dictionnaire 
explicatif et combinatoire du fran?ais 
contemporain, Recherches lexico-s?mantiques I. 
Les Presses de l'Universit? de Montr?al. 
Mel?uk, Igor, Nadia Arbatchewsky-Jumarie, Louise 
Dagenais, L?o Elnitsky, Lidija Iordanskaja, Marie-
No?lle Lefebvre, and Suzanne Mantha. 1988. 
Dictionnaire explicatif et combinatoire du fran?ais 
contemporain. Recherches lexico-s?mantiques II. 
Les Presses de l'Universit? de Montr?al. 
Mel?uk, Igor, Nadia Arbatchewsky-Jumarie, Lidija 
Iordanskaja, and Suzanne Mantha. 1992. 
Dictionnaire explicatif et combinatoire du fran?ais 
contemporain. Recherches lexico-s?mantiques III. 
Les Presses de l'Universit? de Montr?al. 
Mel?uk, Igor, and Alexander Zholkovskij. 1984. 
Tolkovo-kombinatornyj slovar' sovremennogo 
russkogo jazyka. [An Explanatory Combinatorial 
Dictionary of the Contemporary Russian Language] 
Wiener Slawistischer Almanach, Sonderband 14. 
72
