Representing and Visualizing
Calendar Expressions in Texts
Delphine Battistelli
Univ. Paris-Sorbonne (France)
email: Delphine.Battistelli@paris-sorbonne.fr
Javier Couto
INCO, FING, UdelaR (Uruguay)
email: jcouto@fing.edu.uy
Jean-Luc Minel
MoDyCo, CNRS-Univ. ParisX (France)
email: Jean-Luc.Minel@u-paris10.fr
Sylviane R. Schwer
LIPN, CNRS-Univ. ParisXIII (France)
email: Sylviane.Schwer@lipn.univ-paris13.fr
Abstract
Temporal expressions that refer to a part of a calendar area in terms of
common calendar divisions are studied. Our claim is that such a ?cal-
endar expression" (CE) can be described by a succession of operators
operating on a calendar base (CB). These operators are categorized: a
pointing operator that transform a CB into a CE; a focalizing/shifting op-
erator that reduces or shifts the CE into another CE, and finally a zoning
operator that provides the wanted CE from this last CE. Relying on these
operators, a set of annotations is presented which are used to automat-
ically annotate biographic texts. A software application, plugged in the
platformNavitext, is described that builds a calendar view of a biographic
text.
365
366 Battistelli, Couto, Minel, and Schwer
1 Introduction
Taking into account temporality expressed in texts appears as fundamental, not only
in a perspective of global processing of documents, but also in the analysis of the
structure of a document.1 The analysis of temporality within texts has been studied
principally by considering verbal times (e.g. Song and Cohen (1991); Hitzeman et al
(1995) and temporal adverbials (see below).
Our approach is focused on temporal adverbials ? in French ? that refer directly
to text units concerning common calendar divisions, that we name ?calendar expres-
sions? (CEs for short). Several analyses of this kind of expressions has generated
a lot of interest, ranging from their automatic recognition and annotation in texts to
their analysis in terms of discursive frames (Charolles, 1997; Tannen, 1997), following
work of Halliday (1994) which put the emphasis on the importance of the temporal
adverbial expressions as modes of discursive organization.
Nowadays, in the field of temporality processing, automatic identification and an-
notation tasks of CEs are the most developed, mainly because identifying and anno-
tating expressions which contain calendar units are considered? a priori ? as trivial
tasks. Those tasks have been particularly explored in three contexts:
1. Systems which aim to set events on a time scale depending on their duration
and according to a hierarchy of unities called granularities (Schilder and Habel,
2001);
2. Systems for summarizing multi-documents (Barzilay et al, 2001); and
3. QA systems (Pustejovsky et al, 1993; Harabagiu and Bejan, 2005).
Please note that the proposition of the well-known standard temporalmeta-language
named TimeML (Pustejovsky et al, 2003) initially took place in the context of a QA
systems worshop (Pustejovsky, 2002), and mainly integrates two schemes of annota-
tions ? namely TIDES TIMEX2 (Ferro et al, 2004) and Sheffield STAG (Setzer and
Gaizauskas, 2000) ? which were essentially put forward from the analysis of CEs.
In this paper, we propose a formal description of CEs in written French texts, by ex-
plicitly distinguishing several classes of linguistic markers which must be interpreted
as successive operators. This work is driven in order to propose a set of fine and
well-defined annotations which will be used to navigate temporally in an annotated
document. Our approach differs from the preceding ones in two crucial ways:
? Our goal is not to link a CE to an event, neither to fix it on a ?temporal line",
using a set of values relying on ISO 8601 standard format (Mani and Wilson,
2000; Setzer and Gaizauskas, 2000; Filatova and Hovy, 2001); instead our goal
is to link CEs between themselves, that is to say to establish their qualitative
relative positions (the set of those relations is named ?proper text calendar?);
? We design CE semantics as algebraic expressions.
1This research is funded with an ANR grant (Projet Blanc Conique).
Representing and Visualizing Calendar Expressions in Texts 367
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we in-
troduce an algebra of CEs. In Section 3 we describe a software application, which
exploits functional representation, built with previous way exhibited operators and
plugged in the NaviTexte platform, aiming to support text reading. Finally, conclu-
sions and future research directions are presented in Section 4.
2 An Algebra for Calendar Expressions
We postulate that a CE, say E , used to refer to a calendar area can be described by a
succession of operators applied on an argument, named calendar base (CB), say B,
that bears a granulariry and a value for anchoring allowing fixing it in the calendar
system used and that gives access at the calendar area described by the CE.
Each operator gives a piece of the processing following a specific order: on B is
applied a pointing operation, usually expressed by a determinant, whose result is an
CE, E1 part of E . On E1 is applied a second kind of operator expressing the useful
part of this base (all, the beginning, the middle, the end, a fuzzy area around) given as
result a new CE E2 which is part of E and is associated with a piece of the calendar
that cuts the time line in three areas (illustrated by Figure 1):
? the former half-line (A),
? the Useful portion (U),
? posterior half-line (P)2.
The useful part can also be obtained either by shifting, like in ?trois semaines plus
tard" (three weeks later), or by zooming, as in ?l?automne de cette ann?e l?" (the au-
tumn of this present year).3 A third kind of operator gives access at the area described
by the complete CE E: selecting one of the three portioned areas, like in ?jusqu?en
avril 2006" (until April 2006).
Figure 1: Partition of the time line for a unary CE
The order of operators is the following: a pointing operator OpPointing, followed
by one or more focalising or shifting operatorsOpFocalising/Shi f ting+ and finally at
least one zoning operator OpZoning?.4 Some operators can be omitted, usually when
2This Time line is pragmatically limited bounded. For instance, (P) can be naturally limited by the
present moment, as we do in Figure 1.
3For such deictic CEs, the CB has the granularity year, and the value current.
4Usually one, but we also can find two zoning operators, for instance in ?jusqu?? avant No?l (until before
Christmas"). In this case, the order of the operators is more constraint than the order of Focalising/Shifting
operators. Therefore we use the ? symbol instead of +
368 Battistelli, Couto, Minel, and Schwer
they do not provide any new information. In sum, the representation of CEs has the
following generic form: OpZoning?(OpFocalising/Shi f ting+(OpPoin-ting(CB)).
For instance, let us analyse the CE E=?Avant le d?but de la fin de l?ann?e 2008"
(before the beginning of the end of the year 2008). B=?ann?e 2008". Firstly, the
operator of pointing, triggered by the identification of ?l?" (the contraction of ?le")
is applied, given E1=L?ann?e 2008".5 Secondly, two operators of focalising/shifting
are applied successively: the first one triggered by ?la fin de" , provides E ?2 and the
second one, triggered by ?le d?but de", provides E2. Finally an operator of zoning is
associated with ?avant", provided E . Consequently, the CE ?avant le d?but de la fin
de l?ann?e 2008" is produced as avant (le d?but de (la fin de(l?(ann?e 2008)))). The
sequence of this CE is depicted and visualized in Figure 2.
Figure 2: Computation of ?avant le d?but de la fin de l?ann?e 2008"
Each operator is characterized by its arity (the number of its arguments) and type.
With regard to arity, in this paper we focus on unary operators.
2.1 Unary operators
Three types of operators have been defined: pointing, focalising/shifting and zoning.
The pointing operator is trivial (it transforms B into a CE of type E1) but the two
others need some refinements.
Focalising/Shifting operators
Focalising/Shifting operators transform a CE of type E1 into a CE of type E2. Several
kinds of focalising/shifting time may be expressed. For instance, in the expression ?au
d?but de mai 2005" (at the beginning of may 2005) the focalising/shifting is localised
inside the BC (mai 2005), whereas in the expression ?trois semaines avant mai 2005"
(three weeks before may 2005) it is outside the BC. Consequently, six sub-operators
have been identified and are shown Table 1. It should be noted that ShiftingBeginning
and ShiftingAfter operators refers to a family of operators, because for these ones it is
necessary to precise two parameters, the granularity and the value of the shifting.
For some reasons of implementation, except for the operator IdShifting, which
refers at the identity, all others operators are treated as idempotent. In other words, we
consider as equivalent these two expressions ?au d?but du d?but des ann?es 1980" (at
the beginning of the early eighties) and ?au d?but des ann?es 1980? (in the early of
eighties). The next version will improve at this point.
Zoning operators
A Zoning operator transforms a CE of type E2, associated to the useful portion U of
Figure 1, into the CE E analysed. A Zoning operator refers to one of the six possible
5This pointing operator, as mentioned previously, is not an operator of the CE algebra, but all the other
operators are part of the CE algebra.
Representing and Visualizing Calendar Expressions in Texts 369
Table 1: Focalising/Shifting operators
Operators Examples
IdShifting ? en 1945
? au mois d?ao?t
ZoomBeginning ? ? l?aube des ann?es 1980
? au d?but de mai 1945
ZoomMiddle ? au milieu des ann?es 1980
ZoomEnding ? ? la fin des ann?es 1980
ShiftingBefore (granularity, -n) ? 10 jours avant le 14 juillet 2005
ShiftingAfter (granularity, +n) ? 10 jours apr?s le 14 juillet 2005
zones6 built from A, P and U: that is A, A+U, U, U+P, P, A+P. These six kinds of
zoning are associated with a set of prepositions, whose prototypes are shown Table 2.
Fuzzy expressions like ?peu avant? (short before) can double this number. Table 2
also illustrates the the ZoningAbout operator <U>. Further, note that ZoningId is not
expressed, but has to be taken into account.
Table 2: Zoning operators
Operators Expression
ZoningBefore [A] avant fin avril 2008
ZoningUntil [A+U] jusqu?? fin avril 2008
ZoningId [U] [ /0] fin avril 2008
ZoningAbout <U> vers la fin avril 2008
ZoningSince [U+P] depuis la fin avril 2008
ZoningAfter [P] apr?s fin avril 2008
ZoningApart [A+P] except? fin avril 2008
2.2 N-ary or sequence operators
As mentioned before, it is necessary to use several N-ary operators to represent some
CE. For instance, a binary operator is used for representing an expression like ?entre
fin mai 2005 et avril 2006" (between the end of may 2005 and april 2006). This oper-
ator, Between, applies to two CEs, so for the preceding expression the representation
is Between ((ZoomEnding(Pointing(may 2005), Pointing(april 2006)). Moreover, a
sequence operator is needed to represent a CE like ?le mardi 21, le mercredi 22 et le
vendredi 24 mai 1980" (on Tuesday 21, Wednesday 22 and Friday 24 of May). The
study of these operators, associated with even more complex CEs with quantifications,
is currently under investigation.
6The empty zone, expressed by ?jamais? (never) and the full zone, that is A+U+P, expressed by ?tou-
jours? (always) are CE, but not associated with unary operators associated to a BC, as defined here, hence
excluded of our precedent study.
370 Battistelli, Couto, Minel, and Schwer
3 Application
Many applications which exploit temporal expressions in texts, in particular in the area
of information extraction, have been implemented (Pazienza, 1999). Our application
is plugged into the textual navigation workstation NaviTexte (Couto, 2006; Couto and
Minel, 2007), in order to combine a traditional linear reading with a chronological
one. With this intention, we have undertaken the construction of a computerized aided
reading of biographies. Consequently, we have addressed two issues. First, identifying
temporal expressions and ordering chronologically text segments in which they are
included. Second, building calendar views of the text and navigating through these
views.
3.1 Identifying and ordering calendar expressions
From the linguistic study presented above, we have defined a set of annotations which
are used to automatically annotate biographic texts. This process is carried out by
transducers which put XML7 annotations through the processed text. These annota-
tions describe on the one hand, the granularity of CEs, and on the other hand, the
kind of identified operator. For instance, the following XML code illustrates how the
temporal expression ?avant le d?but de la fin de l?ann?e 2008" (Before the beginning
of the end of the year 2008) will be annotated:
<UT Type="Expression Calendaire" Nro="7">
<Annotation Nom="Grain">Annee</Annotation>
<Annotation Nom="Annee">2008</Annotation>
<Annotation Nom="RelationCalendrier">Absolue</Annotation>
<Annotation Nom="OpTempR?O?gion1">Avant</Annotation>
<Annotation Nom="OpTempD?O?placement1">FocalFin</Annotation>
<Annotation Nom="OpTempD?O?placement2">FocalDebut</Annotation>
<Chaine>
avant le debut de la fin de l?annee 2008
</Chaine>
</UT>
From these annotations, an automatic ordering relying on values of CEs can be
carried out. A first implementation took only into account disjoined CEs, because they
are linearly ordered. Intersecting CEs, like ?En juin 2007 (. . . ) en ?t? 2007" (in June
2007 (. . . ) in summer 2007) requires a more powerful formalism. A formalism relying
both on S-Languages (Schwer, 2002b) and granules (Schwer, 2002a) is required to
provide a full automatic ordering.
3.2 Building a text calendar view
A new kind of view, a calendar one, has been built in the NaviTexte platform. This
view is built from texts which contain CEs annotated as described above. An example
is shown in Figure 3. Conceptually, a calendar view is a graph coordinated with a two-
dimensional grid. In the left part of the view, lexical chains of various occurrences
of CEs in the text are displayed. By default, those are ordered according to their
order of appearance in the text, but it is possible to display a chronological order,
7A DTD is defined in Couto (2006)
Representing and Visualizing Calendar Expressions in Texts 371
by using options offered in the panel located in bottom of the view. Nodes in the
graph represent these lexical chains. The visual representation of a CE depends of the
functional representation computed as described before Figure 2.
A simple CE, with only a pointing operator like in ?l?ann?e 2008" (the year 2008)
is always visualised like a white ellipse. An operator of focalising/Shifting like ?la fin
de" (the end of) selects an area of the ellipse and blackens it. Finally, a zoning operator
like ?avant" (before) is visualised by a bold line displaying the area that is referred to.
The plug-in is implemented with the JGaph package and we largely use some of
its functionalities, like zooming or the partial layout cache. We also use html tooltip
text in Swing to contextualise a CE in the original text. For example, in Figure 3,
the whole paragraph which contains the CE ?en 1953? (in 1953) is displayed and the
occurrence of a CE is highlighted.
3.3 Evaluation
Two kinds of evaluation could be performed on this work: (i) evaluation of automatic
recognition and semantic annotation of CEs in text, (ii) evaluation of the calendar
view. The former calls for a classical protocol in NLP, whereas the latter is more
complex to carry out.
So far, only recognition has been carried out by Teissedre (2007) who computed
recall and precision on three kinds of corpora. Due to the fact that an annotation is
made up of several fields the recall has been computed like this: a score zero when
a CE is not identified, a score 1 when the identification is total, and 0.5 when the
identification is partial. Applying these rules, recall is 0.8 and precision is 0.9.
We would like to make two remarks on this result. First, quantified CEs like ?tous
les mardis? (every Tuesday) or ?un mardi sur deux? (one Tuesday out of two) and
n-aries (n? 3) CEs like "entre 2008 et 2009 et en juin 2010" (between 2008 and 2009
and in june 2010) are identified but are not yet taken into account in the semantic
annotation process. Second, syntactic ambiguities like in ?il a dormi deux jours avant
No?l? (he slept two days before Christmas) are not taken into account either. However
in this example, there are two possible syntactic structures. In the first case, "avant
No?l" is the CE and the operator is the Regionalisation one; in the second case, "deux
jours avant No?l" is the CE and the operator is the Shifting one. Presently, our analysis
provides only the second one like in Aunargue et al (2001) but we intend to upgrade
it in order to provide both analyses.
Evaluation of the calendar view should be studied from a cognitive point of view
and is highly dependent on the application. We plan to work with cognitive scien-
tists to build a relevant protocol to study this aspect of evaluation which calls for the
specification of a set of navigation operations based on the algebra of operators.
4 Conclusion
We proposed an algebra of CEs with three kinds of operators to analyse calendar
expressions and build a functional representation of these expressions. We described
an implementation of this approach in the platformNaviTexte and we have shown how
the functional representation is used to visualise a calendar view of a text. In future
work, we will rely on a methodology presented in Battistelli and Chagnoux (2007) in
372 Battistelli, Couto, Minel, and Schwer
Figure 3: Example of calendar view in NaviTexte
order to take into account several temporal axis, and thus several calendar structures,
which are expressed in texts by different levels of enunciations, like citations.
References
Aunargue, M., M. Bras, L. Vieu, and N. Asher (2001). The syntax and semantics of
locating adverbials. Cahiers de Grammaire 26, 11?35.
Barzilay, R., N. Elhadad, and K. McKeown (2001). Sentence ordering in multidocu-
ment summarization. In First International Conference on Human Language Tech-
nology Research (HLT-01), pp. 149?156.
Battistelli, D. and M. Chagnoux (2007). Repr?senter la dynamique ?nonciative et
modale de textes. In actes TALN?07 (Traitement automatique du langage naturel,
pp. 13?23.
Charolles, M. (1997). L?encadrement du discours ? univers, champs, domaines et
espaces. In Cahiers de recherche linguistique, Volume 6 of LANDISCO, pp. 1?73.
Universit? Nancy 2.
Couto, J. (2006). Mod?lisation des connaissances pour une navigation textuelle
assist?e. La plate-forme logicielle NaviTexte. Ph. D. thesis, Universit? Paris-
Sorbonne.
Couto, J. and J.-L. Minel (2007). Navitexte, a text navigation tool. In , Lecture Notes
in Artificial Intelligence 4733, pp. 251?259. Springer-Verlag.
Representing and Visualizing Calendar Expressions in Texts 373
Ferro, L., L. Gerber, I. Mani, B. Sundheim, and G. Wilson (2004). Standard for the
annotation of temporal expressions. Technical report, timex2.mitre.org, MITRE
Corporation.
Filatova, E. and E. Hovy (2001). Assigning time-stamps to event-clauses. In Work-
shop on Temporal and Spatial Information Processing, ACL?2001, pp. 88?95.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1994). An introduction to functional grammar. London: Edward
Arnold.
Harabagiu, S. and C. A. Bejan (2005). Question answering based on temporal infer-
ence. In AAAI-2005 Workshop on Inference for Textual Question Answering.
Hitzeman, J., M.Moens, and C. Grover (1995). Algorithms for analyzing the temporal
structure of discourse. In EACL?95, pp. 253?260.
Mani, I. and G. Wilson (2000). Robust temporal processing of news. In Proceedings
38th ACL, pp. 69?76.
Pazienza, M. T. (1999). Information Extraction, toward scalable, adaptable systems.
New York: Springer-Verlag.
Pustejovsky, J. (Ed.) (2002). TERQAS 2002: An ARDA Workshop on Advanced Ques-
tion Answering Technology.
Pustejovsky, J., J. Castano, R. Ingria, R. Sauri, R. Gaizauskas, A. Setzer, and G. Katz
(2003). Timeml: Robust specification of event and temporal expressions in text. In
IWCS-5 Fifth International Workshop on Computational Semantics.
Pustejovsky, J., R. Knippen, J. Lintman, and R. Sauri (1993). Temporal and event
information in natural language text. Lexique 11, 123?164.
Schilder, F. and C. Habel (2001). From temporal expressions to temporal informa-
tion: Semantic tagging of news messages. In Proceedings of ACL?01 workshop on
temporal and spatial information processing, pp. 65?72.
Schwer, S. R. (2002a). Reasoning with intervals on granules. Journal of Universal
Computer Science 8 (8), 793?808.
Schwer, S. R. (2002b). S-arrangements avec r?p?titions. Comptes Rendus de
l?Acad?mie des Sciences de Paris S?rie I 334, 261?266.
Setzer, A. and R. Gaizauskas (2000). Annotating events and temporal information in
newswire texts. In Proceeedings 2rd LRC, pp. 64?66.
Song, F. and R. Cohen (1991). Tense interpretation in the context of narrative. In 9th
AAAI, pp. 131?136.
Tannen, D. (1997). Framing in Discourse. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Teissedre, C. (2007). La temporalit? dans les textes : de l?annotation s?mantique ? la
navigation textuelle. Master?s thesis, Universit? Paris-Sorbonne.
