Generating Baseball Summaries from Multiple Perspectives by Reordering
Content
Alice Oh
MIT CSAIL
32 Vassar St.
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
aoh@mit.edu
Howard Shrobe
MIT CSAIL
32 Vassar St.
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
hes@csail.mit.edu
Abstract
This paper presents a reordering algorithm for
generating multiple stories from different per-
spectives based on a single baseball game. We
take a description of a game and a neutral sum-
mary, reorder the content of the neutral sum-
mary based on event features, and produce two
summaries that the users rated as showing per-
spectives of each of the two teams. We de-
scribe the results from an initial user survey
that revealed the power of reordering on the
users? perception of perspective. Then we de-
scribe our reordering algorithm which was de-
rived from analyzing the corpus of local news-
paper articles of teams involved in the games
as well as a neutral corpus for the respective
games. The resulting reordering algorithm is
successful at turning a neutral article into two
different summary articles that express the two
teams? perspectives.
1 Introduction
Stories about events are written in many different
perspectives, or points-of-view. For example, fol-
lowing a baseball game, multiple articles are writ-
ten that summarize the game from different perspec-
tives. Although they are describing the same game,
readers feel differently about the articles and may
prefer to read a certain perspective over all the oth-
ers. We have explored what factors contribute to the
differences in perspective in these event summary
stories and how we can automatically plan content
to generate multiple summaries of a baseball game
written from different perspectives. The end goal of
this work is to build a system that takes as input a
factual description of a baseball game and a neutral
article about the game, then produces two other ar-
ticles, each from a particular team?s point of view.
There is previous work such as (Robin and McK-
eown, 1996) on automatic summary generation of
sports games, but our work goes further to generate
multiple summaries.
It is first necessary to define what is meant by per-
spective and multiple perspectives. The definition of
perspective in this work is somewhat different from
a more traditional meaning of perspective in litera-
ture, such as the third-person perspective discussed
in (Wiebe and Rapaport, 1988). Our definition is
much closer to that used in (Lin and Hauptmann,
2006), where they look at ideological perspectives
of online articles on political, social, and cultural is-
sues. They look at the political domain of the is-
sues between Israel and Palestine, and they try to
infer, for each online article, whether it is written
from the Israeli perspective or the Palestinian per-
spective. For our work, we are looking at the do-
main of baseball games, so we focus on the arti-
cle?s perspective in terms of the home team versus
the visiting team. We first assume that the two op-
posing perspectives are expressed in the local news-
paper articles of the two teams, and we assume that
the neutral perspective is expressed in the Associ-
ated Press articles published on an ESPN website
(www.espn.com). We confirmed these assumptions
via a user study, then we identified some key factors
contributing to an article having a certain perspec-
tive. The next section explains our corpus and user
studies.
173
2 Corpus
The Major League Baseball (MLB) has 30 teams
within the United States and Canada, and each team
plays approximately 160 games per season. We have
collected data for hundreds of games from the 2005
and 2006 MLB seasons. The corpus is divided into
two sets. The first is factual descriptions of the
games in quantitative form and simple natural lan-
guage text, and the second is journalistic writings
from online news sources.
2.1 Game Data
For every MLB game, the website of MLB
(www.mlb.com) publishes game data consisting of
two documents. The first is a game log (see figure
1) , which is a complete list of at-bats in the game,
where each at-bat is a set of pitches thrown from a
pitcher to a batter such that the batter either gets out
or advances to a base at the completion of the at-bat.
There are at least 3 at-bats per half of an inning (top
or bottom), and there are at least 9 innings per game
(except in extreme weather conditions), so there are
at least 54 at-bats, but usually more. In our corpus,
the average number of at-bats is 76.2 per game. The
second is a boxscore, which is a list of each bat-
ter and pitcher?s performance statistics for the game.
Currently we do not use the boxscore documents.
The game log is parsed using simple regular ex-
pression type patterns to turn each at-bat into a
feature vector. We have defined 22 features: in-
ningNumber, atBatNumber, pitchCount, homeScore,
visitScore, team, pitcher, batter, onFirst, onSec-
ond, onThird, outsAdded, baseHit, rbi, doubleplay,
runnersStranded, homerun, strikeOut, extraBase-
Hit, walk, error, typeOfPlay. Some of these features,
such as batter and typeOfPlay are extracted directly
from each line in the log that is being transformed
into a feature vector. Some of the features, such as
inningNumber, team, and pitcher are span multiple
contiguous at-bats and are extracted from the cur-
rent line or in one of the lines going back a few at-
bats. The remaining features, such as onFirst, out-
sAdded, and runnersStranded are derived from look-
ing at the feature vector of the previous at-bat and
following simple rules of the baseball game. For ex-
ample, onSecond is derived from looking at the pre-
vious feature vector?s onFirst value, and if the cur-
rent play is one that advances the runner one base,
the previous feature vector?s onFirst gets copied to
the current onSecond. While we tried to identify
features that are important for analyzing and gener-
ating multiple perspectives, later sections will show
that some of them were not used, as they were not
significant variables for our content ordering algo-
rithm.
2.2 Online Articles
In addition to game logs and boxscores, we collected
articles published on several online news sources.
The MLB website (www.mlb.com) publishes two
articles for every game, written for each of the
two teams in the game. Each team has a unique
sportswriter covering that team for the entire season,
so we use the MLB articles as one of our sources
with the home/visit team perspective. The ESPN
website (www.espn.com) also has articles for ev-
ery MLB game including the main summary arti-
cles from the Associated Press (AP). We use the AP
articles as our neutral source. We also collected
online local newspaper articles for MLB teams
in the American League East Division: Boston
Red Sox (The Boston Globe at www.boston.com),
New York Yankees (The New York Times at
www.nytimes.com), Baltimore Orioles (The Wash-
ington Post at www.washingtonpost.com), Toronto
Blue Jays (The Toronto Star at torontostar.com), and
Tampa Bay Devil Rays (The Tampa Tribune at tam-
patrib.com).
3 From Neutral to One-Sided Perspective
We are building a system that takes a neutral article
and turns it into an article with a one-sided perspec-
tive, so we looked at whether we can use the same
content of the neutral article and still produce a non-
neutral perspective. Surprisingly, looking at the ar-
ticles in terms of the game events, there were many
games where the three articles overlap quite a bit in
the (at-bats) that are mentioned in the articles. That
is, the neutral and the home/visit team articles all
describe the same set of game events, but they still
manage to present them such that the readers notice
the differences in perspective.
To compute the overlap of content, the articles
were first tagged with player names and part-of-
174
Figure 1: Pitch by Pitch Log of a Baseball Game
Games All Home Visit
41 215 23 21
Ave 5.24 0.56 0.51
Table 1: Number of at-bats described in all three articles,
at-bats only in the home team articles, and at-bats only in
the visit team articles for 41 games.
speech tags, and simple pattern matching heuristics
were used to automatically align the sentences in the
articles with game events. The player names were
downloaded from the MLB team sites accessible
from www.mlb.com, and the POS tagging was done
with the Stanford POS tagger (Toutanova and Man-
ninig, 2000). Pattern matching heuristics looked for
co-occurrences of tags and words within a certain
window (e.g., {player} AND ?homerun? within 3
words), and the results from applying those heuris-
tics were aligned with the at-bat feature vectors
computed from the game log. Testing on 45 arti-
cles hand-annotated by the first author, we achieved
a precision of 79.0% and recall of 79.2% for align-
ment. The average number of at-bats in those hand-
annotated articles was 8. The percentage of overlap-
ping content varies widely, mostly due to the way the
games unfolded. For example, many games are one-
sided where one team simply dominates, and there
are just not enough events that are positive for one of
the teams. For those games, the losing team?s news-
paper merely reports the result of the game without
describing the events of the game in detail. How-
ever, games that are close in score and number of
hits, we found a high overlap of content among all
three articles. Table 1 lists the number of at-bats re-
ported in common in all three articles.
Based on the corpus analyses we surveyed users
to see whether we can identify the important factors
that contribute to differences in perspective.
First, to confirm that the home team and the visit
team perspectives of the local team articles are cor-
rectly perceived, we simply presented the AP and
local newspaper articles to users and asked them to
guess which team the articles were written for. As
expected, users identified the local team perspec-
tive with ease and confidence. Then, we took out
all sentences except ones that describe the the game
events (at-bats). Player quotes, commentary about
the team or players? historical performances, and fi-
nancial and personal news were some of the con-
tent that were removed from the articles. Users were
asked to guess which team the articles were written
for, and again, they were able to identify the local
team perspectives. We then removed sentences de-
scribing game events that did not overlap with the
content in the neutral article, and again, users iden-
tified the local perspectives. Finally, we replaced all
the sentences with canned surface forms, such that
all the articles shared the same surface form of sen-
tences and preserved only the ordering of the con-
tent. This last experiment, albeit with less confi-
dence than the previous ones, still produced users?
perception of local perspective for the non-neutral
articles. 8 users participated in the study using 12
games, and table 2 summarizes the results of these
user surveys. All 8 users rated all 36 articles, 3 ar-
ticles for each game, but the ordering of the articles
was randomized. For all four conditions, users were
asked to rate each article on a scale of 1 to 5, where 1
is strongly home team perspective, 3 is neutral, and
5 is strongly visit team perspective.
4 Feature-based Ordering Strategies
Following the results from the user study, we used
a corpus-driven approach to identify the ordering
strategies that contribute to the different perspec-
tives. We looked at the games for which the three
175
Condition Home AP Visit
Original 1.75 2.75 4.06
Events Only 1.75 2.90 3.85
Overlapping 2.02 2.75 3.85
Ordering 2.18 2.83 3.83
Table 2: Users? ratings on how they perceived perspec-
tive. They rated using a 1 to 5 scale, where 1 is the home
team perspective, 3 is neutral, and 5 is the visiting team
perspective. For all lines, t-test for the users? ratings of
home team articles and visit tema articles show a statisti-
cally significant difference at the level p < 0.05.
articles have highly overlapping content and studied
how the content is organized differently. We seg-
mented the articles into topic segments (e.g, para-
graphs) and noticed that the three articles differ quite
a bit in the topics that hold the content together.
These topics can be expressed simply by the fea-
ture values that are shared among the at-bats that
appear together in the same segment. Below is an
example of two different orderings of at-bats based
on feature values. The first segment (lines 1a, 2a) of
the first ordering shares the same values for the fea-
tures pitcher, team, inning, andR (score added by
that play). The second segment (lines 3a, 4a) shares
pitcher, batter, and team.
Pitcher Batter Team inn type R
1a Johns Damon Bos 1 hr 1
2a Johns Ramir Bos 1 dbl 1
3a Schil Jeter Nyy 4 dbl 0
4a Schil Jeter Nyy 6 hr 2
The second ordering shows the same content ar-
ranged in different segments, where both segments
are organized based on the value of type of play.
This is a frequent pattern in our corpus that seems to
be responsible for the different perspectives of the
articles.
Pitcher Batter Team inn type R
1b Johns Damon Bos 1 hr 1
2b Schil Jeter Nyy 6 hr 2
3b Johns Ramir Bos 1 dbl 1
4b Schil Jeter Nyy 4 dbl 0
Since there are many features, we need to identify
the features to use for assigning the at-bats to appear
in the same segment. We used a simple counting of
most frequent feature values of the corpus to derive
these features. This comes from the intuition that
the players whose names appear most frequently in
the articles for a local newspaper tend to be impor-
tant topics for those stories. So we aggregate all
the local team articles and rank the feature values
including pitcher and batter names and play types
(e.g., homerun, single, strikeout). To turn a neutral
article into a local perspective article, we take the
at-bats that should appear in the article, look at the
feature values that are shared among them, and find
the highest-ranked feature value for that team. Any
remaining at-bats are arranged in chronological or-
der.
5 Conclusion
We presented a content ordering algorithm that takes
a neutral article of baseball and produces two other
articles from the two teams? perspectives. We
showed that just by reordering, we can induce dif-
ferent perspectives, and we used a corpus for dis-
covering the different ordering strategies. In the fu-
ture, we will refine our reordering algorithm, carry
out a full evaluation, and also look at other factors
that contribute to perspective such as content selec-
tion and surface realization. We will also look at an-
other domain, such as the socio-political conflict in
the Middle East discussed in (Lin and Hauptmann,
2006), to see whether similar reordering patterns ap-
pear in those articles.
References
Wei-Hao Lin and Alexander Hauptmann. 2006. Are
these documents written from different perspectives?
A test of different perspectives based on statistical dis-
tribution divergence. Proceedings of the 42th annual
meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jacques Robin and Kathleen McKeown. 1996. Empir-
ically designing and evaluating a new revision-based
model for summary generation. Artificial Intelligence.
Kristina Toutanova and Christopher D. Manning. 2000.
Enriching the knowledge sources used in a maximum
entropy part-of-speech tagger. Proceedings of the
Joint SIGDAT Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing and Very Large Corpora
(EMNLP/VLC-2000).
Janyce M. Wiebe and William J. Rapaport. 1988. A
computational theory of perspective and reference in
narrative. Proceedings of the 26th annual meeting on
Association for Computational Linguistics, 131?138.
176
