Coling 2008: Proceedings of the 2nd workshop on Information Retrieval for Question Answering (IR4QA), pages 58?65
Manchester, UK. August 2008
Evaluation of Automatically Reformulated Questions in Question Series
Richard Shaw, Ben Solway, Robert Gaizauskas and Mark A. Greenwood
Department of Computer Science
University of Sheffield
Regent Court, 211 Portobello
Sheffield S1 4DP UK
{aca04rcs, aca04bs}@shef.ac.uk
{r.gaizauskas, m.greenwood}@dcs.shef.ac.uk
Abstract
Having gold standards allows us to evalu-
ate new methods and approaches against a
common benchmark. In this paper we de-
scribe a set of gold standard question re-
formulations and associated reformulation
guidelines that we have created to support
research into automatic interpretation of
questions in TREC question series, where
questions may refer anaphorically to the
target of the series or to answers to pre-
vious questions. We also assess various
string comparison metrics for their utility
as evaluation measures of the proximity of
an automated system?s reformulations to
the gold standard. Finally we show how
we have used this approach to assess the
question processing capability of our own
QA system and to pinpoint areas for im-
provement.
1 Introduction
The development of computational systems which
can answer natural language questions using large
text collections as knowledge sources is widely
seen as both intellectually challenging and prac-
tically useful. To stimulate research and devel-
opment in this area the US National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST) has organized a
shared task evaluation as one track at the annual
TExt Retrieval Conference (TREC) since 19991.
These evaluations began by considering factoid-
type questions only (e.g. How many calories are
c
? 2008. Licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported li-
cense (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/).
Some rights reserved.
1http://trec.nist.gov/
there in a Big Mac?) each of which was asked in
isolation to any of the others. However, in an effort
to move the challenge towards a long term vision
of interactive, dialogue-based question answer-
ing to support information analysts (Burger et al,
2002), the track introduced the notion of question
targets and related question series in TREC2004
(Voorhees, 2005), and this approach to question
presentation has remained central in each of the
subsequent TRECs. In this simulated task, ques-
tions are grouped into series where each series has
a target of a definition associated with it (see Fig-
ure 1). Each question in the series asks for some
information about the target and there is a final
?other? question which is to be interpreted as ?Pro-
vide any other interesting details about the target
that has not already been asked for explicitly?. In
this way ?each series is a (limited) abstraction of
an information dialogue in which the user is trying
to define the target. The target and earlier ques-
tions in a series provide the context for the current
question.? (Voorhees, 2005).
One consequence of putting questions into se-
ries in this way is that questions may not make
much sense when removed from the context their
series provides. For example, the question When
was he born? cannot be sensibly interpreted with-
out knowledge of the antecedent of he provided
by the context (target or prior questions). Inter-
preting questions in question series, therefore, be-
comes a critical component within a QA systems.
Many QA systems have an initial document re-
trieval stage that takes the question and derives a
query from it which is then passed to a search en-
gine whose task is to retrieve candidate answering
bearing documents for processing by the rest of
the system. Clearly a question such as When was
he born? is unlikely to retrieve documents rele-
58
Target 136: Shiite
Q136.1 Who was the first Imam of the Shiite
sect of Islam?
Q136.2 Where is his tomb?
Q136.3 What was this persons relationship to
the Prophet Mohammad?
Q136.4 Who was the third Imam of Shiite
Muslims?
Q136.5 When did he die?
Figure 1: An Example Question Series
vant to answering a question about Kafka?s date
of birth if passed directly to a search engine. This
problem can be addressed in a naive way by sim-
ply appending the target to every question. How-
ever, this has several disadvantages: (1) in some
cases co-reference in a question series is to the
answer of a previous question and not to the tar-
get, so blindly substituting the target is not ap-
propriate; (2) some approaches to query formula-
tion and to answer extraction from retrieved docu-
ments may require syntactically well-formed ques-
tions and may be able to take advantage of the extra
information, such as syntactic dependencies, pro-
vided in a fully de-referenced, syntactically correct
question.
Thus, it is helpful in general if systems can auto-
matically interpret a question in context so as to re-
solve co-references appropriately, and indeed most
TREC QA systems do this to at least a limited ex-
tent as part of their question pre-processing. Ide-
ally one would like a system to be able to reformu-
late a question as a human would if they were to re-
express the question so as to make it independent
of the context of the preceding portion of the ques-
tion series. To support the development of such
systems it would useful if there were a collection
of ?gold standard? reformulated questions against
which systems? outputs could be compared. How-
ever, to the best of our knowledge no such resource
exists.
In this paper we describe the creation of such a
corpus of manually reformulated questions, mea-
sures we have investigated for comparing system
generated reformulations against the gold stan-
dard, and experiments we have carried out com-
paring our TREC system?s automatic question re-
formulator against the gold standard and insights
we have obtained therefrom.
2 The Gold Standard Corpus
Our aim was to take the questions in a TREC
question series and re-express them as questions
that would naturally be asked by a human ask-
ing them as a single, stand-alone question outside
the context of the question series. Our intuition
was that most adult native speakers would agree
on a small number of variant forms these refor-
mulated questions would take. We explored this
intuition by having two persons iteratively refor-
mulate some questions independently, compare re-
sults and evolve a small set of guidelines for the
process.
2.1 Creating the Gold Standard
Ten question sets were randomly selected from
sets available at http://trec.nist.gov/
data/qa/t2007_qadata.html. These were
reformulated separately by two people and results
compared. From this an initial set of guidelines
was drawn up. Using these guidelines another 10
question sets from the TREC 2007 QA set were in-
dependently reformulated and then the guidelines
refined.
At this point the reformulators? outputs were
sufficiently close to each other and the guidelines
sufficiently stable that, given limited resources, it
was decided reformulation could proceed singly.
Using the guidelines, therefore, a further 48 ques-
tion sets from 2007 were reformulated, where
this time each question set was only reformulated
by a single person. Each question set contained
between 5 and 7 individual questions therefore
around 406 questions were reformulated, creating
one or more gold standard forms for each question.
In total there are approximately 448 individual re-
formulations, with a maximum number of 3 refor-
mulations for any single question and a mean of
1.103 reformulations per question.
2.2 Guidelines
Using the above method we derived a set of simple
guidelines which anyone should be able to follow
to create a set of reformulated questions.
Context independence and readability: The
reformulation of questions should be understand-
able outside of the question series context. The re-
formulation should be written as a native speaker
would naturally express it; this means, for exam-
ple, that stop words are included.
Example: ?How many people were killed 1991
59
eruption of Mount Pinatubo?? vs ?How many
people were killed in the 1991 eruption of Mount
Pinatubo?. The latter is preferred as it more read-
able due to the inclusion of stop words ?in the?.
Reformulate questions so as to maximise
search results:
Example: ?Who was William Shakespeare??
vs ?Who was Shakespeare??. William should be
added to the phrase as it adds extra information
which could allow more results to be found.
Target matches a sub-string of the question:
If the target string matches a sub-string of the ques-
tion the target string should substitute the entirety
of the substring. Stop-words should not be used
when determining if strings and target match but
should usually be substituted along with the rest of
the target.
Example: Target: ?Sony Pictures Entertainment
(SPE)?; Question: ?What U.S. company did Sony
purchase to form SPE??; Gold Standard: ?What
U.S. company did Sony purchase to form Sony Pic-
tures Entertainment (SPE)??
Rephrasing: A Question should not be unnec-
essarily rephrased.
Example: Target: ?Nissan Corp?; Question:
?What was Nissan formerly known as??; ?What
was Nissan Corp. formerly known as?? is pre-
ferred over the other possible reformulation ?Nis-
san Corp. was formerly known as what??.
Previous Questions and Answers: Questions
which include a reference to a previous ques-
tion should be reformulated to include a PREVI-
OUS ANSWER variable. Another reformulation
should also be provided should a system know it
needs the answer to the previous question but has
not found one. This should be a reformulation of
the previous question within the current question.
Example: Target: ?Harriet Miers withdraws
nomination to Supreme Court?; Question: ?What
criterion did this person cite in nominating
Miers??; Gold Standard 1: ?What criterion did
PREVIOUS ANSWER cite in nominating Harriet
Miers??; Gold Standard 2: ?What criterion did
this person who nominated Harriet Miers for the
post cite in nominating Harriet Miers??
Targets that contain brackets: Brackets in tar-
get should be dealt with in the following way. The
full target should be substituted into the question
in the correct place as one of the Gold Standards.
The target without the bracketed word and with it
should also be included in the Gold Standard.
Example: Target: ?Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints (Mormons)?; Question:?Who
founded the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints??; Gold Standard 1: ?Who founded the
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Mor-
mons)??; Gold Standard 2: ?Who founded the
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints??;
Gold Standard 3 ?Who founded the Mormons??
Stemming and Synonyms: Words should not
be stemmed and synonyms should not be used un-
less they are found in the target or the current ques-
tion series. If they are found then both should be
used in the Gold Standard.
Example: Target: ?Chunnel?; Question:?How
long is the Chunnel??; Gold Standard: ?How long
is the Chunnel??; Incorrect reformulation: ?How
long is the Channel Tunnel??
As the term ?Channel Tunnel? is not referenced
in this section or hard-coded into the QA engine it
cannot be substituted for ?Chunnel?, even though
doing so may increase the probability of finding
the correct answer.
It: The word it should be interpreted as referring
to either the answer of the previous question of that
set or if no answer available to the target itself.
Example:Target: ?1980 Mount St. Helens erup-
tion?; Question: ?How many people died when
it erupted??; Gold Standard: ?How many people
died when Mt. St. Helens? erupted in 1980??
Pronouns (1): If the pronouns he or she are
used within a question and the TARGET is of type
?Person? then substitute the TARGET string for the
pronoun. If however the PREVIOUS ANSWER
is of type ?Person? then it should be substituted in-
stead as in this case the natural interpretation of the
pronoun is to the answer of the previous question.
Example: Target: ?Jay-Z?; Question: ?When
was he born??; Gold Standard: ?When was Jay-Z
born??
Pronouns (2): If the pronouns his/hers/their
are used within a question and the TARGET is of
type ?Person? then substitute the TARGET string
for the pronoun appending the string ??s? to the
end of the substitution. If however the PREVI-
OUS ANSWER is of type ?Person? then it should
be substituted as the natural interpretation of the
pronoun is to the answer of the previous question.
Example: Target: ?Jasper Fforde?; Question:
?What year was his first book written??; Gold
Standard: ?What year was Jasper Fforde?s first
book written??
60
3 Evaluation against the Gold Standard
To assess how close a system?s reformulation of a
question in a questions series is to the gold stan-
dard requires a measure of proximity. Whatever
metric we adopt should have the property that re-
formulations that are closer to our gold standard re-
formulations get a higher score. The closest possi-
ble score is achieved by getting an identical string
to that of the gold standard. Following conven-
tional practice we will adopt a metric that gives us
a value between 0 and 1, where 1 is highest (i.e. a
score of 1 is achieved when the pre-processed re-
formulation and the gold standard are identical).
Another requirement for the metric is that the
ordering of the words in the reformulation is not
as important as the content of the reformulation.
We assume this because one key use for reformu-
lated questions in the retrieval of candidate answer
bearing documents and the presence of key content
terms in a reformulation can help to find answers
when it is used as a query, regardless of their order
Ordering does still need to be taken into account
by the metric but it should alter the score less than
the content words in the reformulation.
Related to this point, is that we would like refor-
mulations that simply append the target onto the
end of the original question to score more highly
on average than the original questions on their
own, since this is a default strategy followed by
many systems that clearly helps in many cases.
These requirement can help to guide metric selec-
tion.
3.1 Choosing a metric
There are many different systems which attempt
to measure string similarity. We considered a va-
riety of tools like ROUGE (Lin, 2004) and ME-
TEOR (Lavie and Agarwal, 2007) but decided they
were unsuitable for this task. ROUGE and ME-
TEOR were developed to compare larger stretches
of text ? they are usually used to compare para-
graphs rather than sentences. We decided develop-
ing our own metric would be simpler than trying to
adapt one of these existing tools.
To explore candidate similarity measures we
created a program which would take as input a list
of reformulations to be assessed and a list of gold
standard reformulations and compare them to each
other using a selection of different string compar-
ison metrics. To find out which of these metrics
best scored reformulations in the way which we
expected, we created a set of test reformulations to
compare against the gold standard reformulations.
Three test data sets were created: one where
the reformulation was simply the original ques-
tion, one where the reformulation included the tar-
get appended to the end, and one where the refor-
mualation was identical to the gold standard. The
idea here was that the without target question set
should score less than the with target question set
and the identical target question set should have a
score of 1 (the highest possible score).
We then had to choose a set of metrics to test and
chose to use metrics from the SimMetrics library
as it is an open source extensible library of string
similarity and distance metrics 2.
3.2 Assessing Metrics
After running the three input files against the met-
rics we could see that certain metrics gave a score
which matched our requirements more closely than
others.
Table 1 shows the metrics used and the mean
scores across the data set for the different question
sets. A description of each of these metrics can be
found in the SimMetrics library.
From these results we can see that certain met-
rics are not appropriate. SmithWaterman, Jaro and
JaroWinkler all do the opposite to what we require
them to do in that they score a reformulation with-
out the target higher than one with the target. This
could be due to over-emphasis on word ordering.
These metrics can therefore be discounted.
Levenshtein, NeedlemanWunch and QGrams-
Distance can also be discounted as the difference
between With target and Without target is not large
enough. It would be difficult to measure improve-
ments in the system if the difference is this small.
MongeElkan can also be discounted as overall its
scores are too large and for this reason it would be
difficult to measure improvements using it.
Of the five remaining metrics ? DiceSimilar-
ity, JaccardSimilarity, BlockDistance, Euclidean-
Distance and CosineSimilarity ? we decided that
we should discount EuclideanDistance as it had the
smallest gap between with target and without tar-
get. We now look at the other four metrics in more
detail3:
2http://www.dcs.shef.ac.uk/
?
sam/
simmetrics.html
3Refer to Manning and Schu?tze (2001) for more details on
these algorithms.
61
Metric Without Target With Target Identical
JaccardSim. 0.798 0.911 1.0
DiceSim. 0.872 0.948 1.0
CosineSim. 0.878 0.949 1.0
BlockDistance 0.869 0.941 1.0
EuclideanDistance 0.902 0.950 1.0
MongeElkan 0.922 0.993 1.0
Levenshtein 0.811 0.795 1.0
NeedlemanWunch 0.830 0.839 1.0
SmithWaterman 0.915 0.859 1.0
QGramsDistance 0.856 0.908 1.0
JaroWinkler 0.855 0.831 0.993
Jaro 0.644 0.589 0.984
Table 1: Mean scores across the data set for each of the different question sets.
3.2.1 Block Distance
Block Distance metric is variously named block
distance, L1 distance or city block distance. It is a
vector-based approach, where q and r are defined
in n-dimensional vector space. The L
1
or block
distance is calculated from summing the edge dis-
tances.
L
1
(q, r) =
?
y
| q(y) ? r(y)|
This can be described in two dimensions with
discrete-valued vectors. When we can picture the
set of points within a grid, the distance value is
simply the number of edges between points that
must be traversed to get from q to r within the grid.
This is the same problem as getting from corner
a to b in a rectilinear street map, hence the name
?city-block metric?.
3.2.2 Dice Similarity
This is based on Dice coefficient which is a term
based similarity measure (0-1) whereby the simi-
larity measure is defined as twice the number of
terms common to compared entities divided by the
total number of terms in both. A coefficient result
of 1 indicates identical vectors while a 0 indicates
orthogonal vectors.
Dice Coefficient =
2 ? |S
1
? S
2
|
|S
1
| + |S
2
|
3.2.3 Jaccard Similarity
This is a token based vector space similarity
measure like the cosine distance. Jaccard Sim-
ilarity uses word sets from the comparison in-
stances to evaluate similarity. The Jaccard mea-
sure penalizes a small number of shared entries
(as a portion of all non-zero entries) more than
the Dice coefficient. Each instance is represented
as a Jaccard vector similarity function. The Jac-
card similarity between two vectors X and Y is
(X ? Y )/(|X||Y | ? (X ? Y )) where (X ? Y ) is the
inner product of X and Y , and |X| = (X ? X)1/2,
i.e. the Euclidean norm of X. This can more easily
be described as (|X ? Y |)/(|X ? Y |)
3.2.4 Cosine similarity
This is a common vector based similarity mea-
sure similar to the Dice Coefficient. The input
string is transformed into vector space so that the
Euclidean cosine rule can be used to determine
similarity. The cosine similarity is often paired
with other approaches to limit the dimensionality
of the problem. For instance with simple strings a
list of stopwords is used to reduce the dimension-
ality of the comparison. In theory this problem has
as many dimensions as terms exist.
cos(q, r) =
?
y
q(y)r(y)
?
?
y
q(y)
2
?
y
r(y)
2
3.3 Using bigrams and trigrams
All four of these measures appear to value the con-
tent of the strings higher than ordering which is
what we want our metric to do. However the scores
are quite large, and as a result we considered refin-
ing the metrics to give scores that are not as close
to 1. To do this we decided to try and increase the
importance of ordering by also taking into account
shared bigrams and trigrams. As we do not want
ordering to be too important in our metric we intro-
duced a weighting mechanism into the program to
62
Metric Without Target With Target ?Gap
Dice 0.872 0.948 +0.076
Cosine 0.878 0.949 +0.071
Jaccard 0.798 0.911 +0.113
Block 0.869 0.941 +0.072
Table 2: Results for Unigram weighting
Metric Without Target With Target ?Gap
Dice 0.783 0.814 -3.6
Cosine 0.789 0.816 -3.5
Jaccard 0.698 0.748 -5.5
Block 0.782 0.811 -3.5
Table 3: U:1, B:1, T:0
allow us to used a weighted combination of shared
unigrams, bigrams and trigrams.
The results for just unigram weighting is shown
in Table 2.
We began by testing the metrics by introduc-
ing just bigrams to give us an idea of what effect
they would have. A weight ratio of U:1, B:1, T:0
was used (where U:unigram, B:bigram, T:trigram).
The results are shown in Table 3.
The ? Gap column is the increase in the differ-
ence between Without Target and With Target from
the first test run which used only unigrams.
The introduction of bigrams decreases the gap
between Without Target and With Target. It also
lowers the scores which is good as it is then eas-
ier to distinguish between perfect reformulations
and reformulations which are close but not perfect.
This means that the introduction of bigrams is al-
ways going to decrease a system?s ability to dis-
tinguish between Without Target and With Target.
We had to now find the lowest decrease in this gap
whilst still lowering the score of the with target re-
sult.
From the results of the bigrams we expected that
the introduction of trigrams would further decrease
the gap (U : 1, B : 1, T : 1). The results proved
Metric Without Target With Target ?Gap
Dice 0.725 0.735 -6.4
Cosine 0.730 0.735 -6.3
Jaccard 0.639 0.663 -9.0
Block 0.724 0.733 -6.1
Table 4: U:1, B:1, T:1
Metric Without Target With Target ?Gap
Dice 0.754 0.770 -4.8
Cosine 0.759 0.771 -4.9
Jaccard 0.664 0.694 -7.4
Block 0.753 0.767 -4.6
Table 5: U:1, B:2
Metric Without Target With Target ?Gap
Dice 0.813 0.859 -2.4
Cosine 0.819 0.860 -2.4
Jaccard 0.731 0.802 -3.7
Block 0.811 0.854 -2.2
Table 6: U:2, B:1
this and are shown in Table 4.
The introduction of trigrams has caused the gaps
to significantly drop. It has also lowered the scores
too much. From this evidence we decided trigrams
are not appropriate to use to refine these metrics.
We now had to try and find the best weighting
of unigram to bigram that would lower the With
Target score from 1.0 whilst still keeping the gap
between Without Target and With Target high.
We would expect that further increasing the bi-
gram weighting would further decrease the gap
and the With Target score. The results in Table 5
show this to be the case. However this has de-
creased the gap too much. The next step was to
look at decreasing the weighting of the bigrams.
Table 6 shows that the gap has decreased slightly
but the With Target score has decreased by around
10% on average. The Jaccard score for this run is
particularly good as it has a good gap and is not
too close to 1.0. The Without Target is also quite
low which is what we want.
U : 2, B : 1 is currently the best weighting
found with the best metric being Jaccard. Fur-
ther work in this area could be directed at further
modifying these weightings using machine learn-
ing techniques to refine the weightings using linear
regression.
4 Our system against the Metric
Our current pre-processing system takes a question
and its target and looks to replace pronouns like
?he?, ?she? and certain definite nominals with the
target and also to replace parts of the target with
the full target (Gaizauskas et al, 2005). Given
our choice of metric we would hope that this strat-
63
Figure 2: Graph of Jaccard score distribution
egy gets a better score than just adding the target
on the end, as the ordering of the words is also
taken into account by our pre-processing as it tries
to achieve natural reformulations like those of our
gold standard. We would therefore expect that it
achieves at least the same score as adding the target
on the end, which is its default strategy when no
co-reference can be determined, though of course
incorrect coreference resolutions will have a neg-
ative effect. One of the aims of creating the gold
standard and a comparison metric was to quickly
identify whether strategies such as ours are work-
ing and if not where not.
A subset of the gold standard was preprocessed
by our system then compared against the results
of doing no reformulation and of reformulating by
simply appending the target.
Tables 7 and 8 shows how our system did in
comparison. Diff shows the difference between
WithTarget and Our System. Table 7 is results for
weighting U : 1, B : 0, T : 0, Table 8 is results for
U : 2, B : 1, T : 0.
Our system does do better than just adding the
target on the end, and this difference is exaggerated
(Table 8) when bigrams are taken into account, as
expected since this weighting increases the met-
ric?s sensitivity to recognising our system?s ability
to put the target in the correct place.
Mean scores across a data set tell part of the
story, but to gain more insight we need to exam-
ine the distribution of scores and then, in order to
improve the system, we need to look at questions
which have a low score and work out what has
gone wrong. Figure 2 shows the distribution of
Jaccard scores across the test data set. Looking at
the scores from the data set using the U:2,B:1,T:0
weighting we find that the minimum Jaccard score
was 0.44 and was for the following example:
Metric Score
Dice 0.574
Cosine 0.578
Jaccard 0.441
Block 0.574
Table 9: Finding Bad Reformulations
Target: ?Hindenburg disaster?; Question:
?How many of them were killed?; Our System:
?How many of Hindenburg disaster were killed?;
Gold Standard: ?How many people were killed
during the Hindenburg disaster?.
The results of comparing our system with the
gold standard for this question for all four metrics
are shown in Table 9.
The problem here is that our system has wrongly
replaced the term ?them? with the target when in
fact its antecedent was in the previous question
in the series How many people were on board?.
Once again the low score has helped us to quickly
identify a problem: the system is only interpret-
ing pronouns as references to the target, which is
clearly insufficient. Furthermore should the pre-
processing system be altered to address a problem
like this the gold system and scoring software can
be used for regression testing to ensure no previ-
ously correct reformulations have been lost.
Another example of a poor scoring reformula-
tion is:
Target: ?Hindenburg disaster?; Question:
?What type of craft was the Hindenburg?; Our
System: ?What type of craft was the Hindenburg
disaster?; Gold Standard: ?What type of craft was
the Hindenburg?.
For this example Jaccard gave our system refor-
mulation a score of 0.61. The problem here is our
system blindly expanded a substring of the target
appearing in the question to the full target without
recognizing that in this case the substring is not an
abbreviated reference to the target (an event) but to
an entity that figured in the event.
5 Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper we have presented a Gold Standard
for question reformulation and an associated set of
guidelines which can be used to reformulate other
questions in a similar fashion. We then evaluated
metrics which can be used to assess the effective-
ness of the reformulations and validated the whole
approach by showing how it could be used to help
64
Metric Without Target With Target Our System Diff
Dice 0.776 0.901 0.931 +3.1
Cosine 0.786 0.904 0.936 +3.1
Jaccard 0.657 0.834 0.890 +5.5
Block 0.772 0.888 0.920 +4.2
Table 7: How our system compared, U:1,B:0,T:0
Metric Without Target With Target Our System Diff
Dice 0.702 0.819 0.889 +8.7
Cosine 0.742 0.822 0.893 +9.2
Jaccard 0.616 0.738 0.839 +12.3
Block 0.732 0.812 0.884 +9.1
Table 8: How our system compared, U:2,B:1,T:0
improve the question pre-processing component of
a QA system.
Further work will aim to expand the Gold Stan-
dard to at least 1000 questions, refining the guide-
lines as required. The eventual goal is to incor-
porate the approach into an evaluation tool such
that a developer would have a convenient way
of evaluating any question reformulation strategy
against a large gold standard. Of course one also
needs to develop methods for observing and mea-
suring the effect of question reformulation within
question pre-processing upon the performance of
downstream components in the QA system, such
as document retrieval.
References
Burger, J., C. Cardie, V. Chaudhri, R. Gaizauskas,
S. Harabagiu, D. Israel, C. Jacquemin, C-Y.
Lin, S. Maiorano, G. Miller, D. Moldovan,
B. Ogden, J. Prager, E. Riloff, A. Singhal,
R. Shrihari, T. Strzalkowski, E. Voorhees, and
R. Weischedel. 2002. Issues, tasks and pro-
gram structures to roadmap research in question
& answering (q&a). Technical report. www-
nlpir.nist.gov/projects/duc/papers/qa.Roadmap-
paper v2.doc.
Gaizauskas, Robert, Mark A. Greenwood, Mark Hep-
ple, Henk Harkemaa, Horacio Saggion, and Atheesh
Sanka. 2005. The University of Sheffield?s TREC
2005 Q&A Experiments. In Proceedings of the 14th
Text REtrieval Conference.
Lavie, Alon and Abhaya Agarwal. 2007. METEOR:
An automatic metric for MT evaluation with high
levels of correlation with human judgments. In Pro-
ceedings of the Second Workshop on Statistical Ma-
chine Translation, pages 228?231, Prague, Czech
Republic, June. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Lin, Chin-Yew. 2004. Rouge: A package for
automatic evaluation of summaries. In Marie-
Francine Moens, Stan Szpakowicz, editor, Text Sum-
marization Branches Out: Proceedings of the ACL-
04 Workshop, pages 74?81, Barcelona, Spain, July.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Manning, Christopher D. and Hinrich Schu?tze. 2001.
Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Pro-
cessing. MIT Press.
Voorhees, E. 2005. Overview of the TREC 2004
question answering track. In Proceedings of the
Thirteenth Text Retrieval Conference (TREC 2004).
NIST Special Publication 500-261.
65
