Coling 2008: Proceedings of the workshop on Knowledge and Reasoning for Answering Questions, pages 17?24
Manchester, August 2008
Know-Why Extraction from Textual Data for Supporting What 
Question      
Chaveevan Pechsiri 
Dept. of Information   
Technology,      
DhurakijPundit University,   
Bangkok, Thailand 
itdpu@hotmail.com 
Phunthara Sroison 
Dept. of Information   
Technology,      
DhurakijPundit University,   
Bangkok, Thailand 
phunthara@it.dpu.ac.th 
U. Janviriyasopak 
Eastern Industry Co.ltd. 
Bangkok, Thailand 
uraiwanjan@hotmail.com 
 
 
1Abstract
This research aims to automatically ex-
tract Know-Why from documents on the 
website to contribute knowledge sources 
to support the question-answering sys-
tem, especially What-Question, for dis-
ease treatment.  This paper is concerned 
about extracting Know-Why based on 
multiple EDUs (Elementary Discourse 
Units). There are two problems in ex-
tracting Know-Why: an identification 
problem and an effect boundary determi-
nation problem.  We propose using Na?ve 
Bayes with three verb features, a causa-
tive-verb-phrase concept set, a supporting 
causative verb set, and the effect-verb-
phrase concept set.  The Know-Why ex-
traction results show the success rate of 
85.5% precision and 79.8% recall. 
1 Introduction 
Automatically Know -Why extraction is essential 
for providing the rational knowledge source, to 
the society through question answering system, 
especially in herbal medicines when assisting the 
locals to understand more about herbs. 
According to Jana Trnkova and Wolfgang 
Theilmann (2004) Know-Why is the knowing of 
the reason of why something is the way it is.   
Therefore, Know-Why has to involve the causal 
relation which is ?an irreflexive, transitive and 
asymmetrical? relation that contains the 
properties of ?productivity (effect is ?produced? 
by the cause) and locality (it obeys the markov 
                                                 
? 2008. Licensed under the Creative Commons Attri-
bution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported 
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-
sa/3.0/). Some rights reserved. 
condition, for model A B  C, if there is no 
B, then A does not cause C)?( Lemeire J. et al 
(2004)).  Wolff P. (2007) stated that the causal 
relation can be decomposed into 2 major 
approaches, the dependency model and the 
physicalist models. The dependency model can 
be represented by using statistical dependency 
model whereas in recent physicalist models are 
based on the concepts of force dynamic models 
consisting of 2 force entities in certain events; 
the agonist and the antagonist (Talmy, 2000).  
Later, the agonist form (Wolff P., 2007) can be 
viewed as the ?effect? and the antagonist as the 
?cause?. According to Talmy (2000), if there is a 
situation where the antagonist is stronger, which 
can be expressed as ?event X happens because of 
event Y?(Y contains the antagonist.), it is a form 
of causation.  Moreover, the causal relation can 
pivot on the distinction between causality and 
causation (Lehmann J. et al 2004) whereas 
causality is ?a law-like relation between cause 
events and effect events? and causation is ?the 
actual causal relation that holds between 
individual events?.  For example: 
?Because a bird sings a song at a window, The 
rock is thrown at the window.? 
Causality: ?An object vibrates. An object 
moves.? 
Causation: ?A bird sings.  The rock is thrown? 
This research focuses only on ?causal relation? to 
provide both ?causality? for extracting Know-
Why from the herbal medicine domain and 
?causation? for answering What-question, since 
what questions contain ambiguities (Girju R. and 
Moldovan D., 2002) for example:  
Know-Why: ?	
 

 
