Combining Optimal Clustering and Hidden Markov Models for
Extractive Summarization
Pascale Fung

Human Language Technology Center,
Dept. of Electrical & Electronic
Engineering,
University of Science & Technology
(HKUST)
Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong
pascale@ee.ust.hk
Grace Ngai

Dept. of Computing,
Hong Kong Polytechnic
University,
Kowloon, Hong Kong
csgngai@polyu.edu.hk
CHEUNG, Chi-Shun

Human Language Technology Center,
Dept. of Electrical & Electronic
Engineering,
University of Science & Technology
(HKUST)
Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong
eepercy@ee.ust.hk
Abstract
We propose Hidden Markov models with
unsupervised training for extractive sum-
marization. Extractive summarization se-
lects salient sentences from documents to
be included in a summary. Unsupervised
clustering combined with heuristics is a
popular approach because no annotated
data is required. However, conventional
clustering methods such as K-means do
not take text cohesion into consideration.
Probabilistic methods are more rigorous
and robust, but they usually require su-
pervised training with annotated data. Our
method incorporates unsupervised train-
ing with clustering, into a probabilistic
framework. Clustering is done by modi-
fied K-means (MKM)--a method that
yields more optimal clusters than the con-
ventional K-means method. Text cohesion
is modeled by the transition probabilities
of an HMM, and term distribution is
modeled by the emission probabilities.
The final decoding process tags sentences
in a text with theme class labels. Parame-
ter training is carried out by the segmental
K-means (SKM) algorithm. The output of
our system can be used to extract salient
sentences for summaries, or used for topic
detection. Content-based evaluation
shows that our method outperforms an ex-
isting extractive summarizer by 22.8% in
terms of relative similarity, and outper-
forms a baseline summarizer that selects
the top N sentences as salient sentences
by 46.3%.
1 Introduction
Multi-document summarization (MDS) is the
summarization of a collection of related documents
(Mani (1999)). Its application includes the summa-
rization of a news story from different sources
where document sources are related by the theme
or topic of the story. Another application is the
tracking of news stories from the single source
over different time frame. In this case, documents
are related by topic over time.

Multi-document summarization is also an exten-
sion of single document summarization. One of the
most robust and domain-independent summariza-
tion approaches is extraction-based or shallow
summarization (Mani (1999)). In extraction-based
summarization, salient sentences are automatically
extracted to form a summary directly  (Kupiec et.
al, (1995), Myaeng & Jang (1999), Jing et. al,
(2000), Nomoto & Matsumoto (2001,2002), Zha
(2002), Osborne (2002)), or followed by a synthe-
sis stage to generate a more natural summary
(McKeown & Radev (1999), Hovy & Lin (1999)).
Summarization therefore involves some theme or
topic identification and then extraction of salient
segments in a document. 

Story segmentation, document and sentence and
classification can often be accomplished by unsu-
pervised, clustering methods, with little or no re-
quirement of human labeled data (Deerwester
(1991), White & Cardie (2002), Jing et. al (2000)).
Unsupervised methods or hybrids of supervised
and unsupervised methods for extractive summari-
zation have been found to yield promising results
that are either comparable or superior to supervised
methods (Nomoto & Matsumoto (2001,2002)). In
these works, vector space models are used and
document or sentence vectors are clustered to-
gether according to some similarity measure
(Deerwester (1991), Dagan et al (1997)).

The disadvantage of clustering methods lies in
their ad hoc nature. Since sentence vectors are con-
sidered to be independent sample points, the sen-
tence order information is lost. Various heuristics
and revision strategies have been applied to the
general sentence selection schema to take into con-
sideration text cohesion (White & Cardie (2002),
Mani and Bloedorn (1999), Aone et. al (1999), Zha
(2002), Barzilay et al, (2001)). We would like to
preserve the natural linear cohesion of sentences in
a text as a baseline prior to the application of any
revision strategies.

To compensate for the ad hoc nature of vector
space models, probabilistic approaches have re-
gained some interests in information retrieval in
recent years (Knight & Marcu (2000), Berger &
Lafferty (1999), Miller et al, (1999)).  These re-
cent probabilistic methods in information retrieval
are largely inspired by the success of probabilistic
models in machine translation in the early 90s
(Brown et. al), and regard information retrieval as
a noisy channel problem. Hidden Markov Models
proposed by Miller et al (1999), and have shown
to outperform tf, idf in TREC information retrieval
tasks. The advantage of probabilistic models is that
they provide a more rigorous and robust frame-
work to model query-document relations than ad
hoc information retrieval. Nevertheless, such prob-
abilistic IR models still require annotated training
data.

In this paper, we propose an iterative unsupervised
training method for multi-document extractive
summarization, combining vectors space model
with a probabilistic model. We iteratively classify
news articles, then paragraphs within articles, and
finally sentences within paragraphs into common
story themes, by using modified K-means (MKM)
clustering and segmental K-means (SKM) decod-
ing. We obtain an initial clustering of article
classes by MKM, which determines the inherent
number of theme classes of all news articles. Next,
we use SKM to classify paragraphs and then sen-
tences. SKM iterates between a k-means clustering
step, and a Viterbi decoding step, to obtain a final
classification of sentences into theme classes. Our
MKM-SKM paradigm combines vector space clus-
tering model with a probabilistic framework, pre-
serving some of the natural sentence cohesion,
without the requirement of annotated data. Our
method also avoids any arbitrary or ad hoc setting
of parameters.

In section 2, we introduce the modified K-means
algorithm as a better alternative than conventional
K-means for document clustering. In section 3 we
present the stochastic framework of theme classifi-
cation and sentence extraction. We describe the
training algorithm in section 4, where details of the
model parameters and Viterbi scoring are pre-
sented. Our sentence selection algorithm is de-
scribed in Section 5. Section 6 describes our
evaluation experiments. We discuss the results and
conclude in section 7.
2 Story Segmentation using Modified K-
means (MKM) Clustering
The first step in multi-document summarization is
to segment and classify documents that have a
common theme or story. Vector space models can
be used to compare documents (Ando et al (2000),
Deerwester et al (1991)). K-means clustering is
commonly used to cluster related document or sen-
tence vectors together. A typical k-means cluster-
ing algorithm for summarization is as follows:

1. Arbitrarily choose K vectors as initial centroids;
2. Assign vectors closest to each centroid to its cluster;
3. Update centroid using all vectors assigned to each
cluster;
4. Iterate until average intra-cluster distance falls be-
low a threshold;

We have found three problems with the standard k-
means algorithm for sentence clustering. First, the
initial number of clusters k, has to be set arbitrarily
by humans. Second, the initial partition of a cluster
is arbitrarily set by thresholding. Hence, the initial
set of centroids is arbitrary. Finally, during cluster-
ing, the centroids are selected as the sentence
among a group of sentences that has the least aver-
age distance to other sentences in the cluster. All
these characteristics of K-means can be the cause
of a non-optimal cluster configuration at the final
stage.

To avoid the above problems, we propose using
modified K-means (MKM) clustering algorithm
(Wilpon & Rabiner(1985)), coupled with virtual
document centroids. MKM starts from a global
centroid and splits the clusters top down until the
clusters stabilize:

1. Compute the centroid of the entire training set;
2. Assign vectors closest to each centroid to its cluster;
3. Update centroid using all vectors assigned to each
cluster;
4. Iterate 2-4 until vectors stop moving between clus-
ters;
5. Stop if clusters stabilizes, and output final clusters,
else goto step 6;
6. Split the cluster with largest intra-cluster distance
into two by finding the pair of vectors with largest
distance in the cluster. Use these two vectors as new
centroids, and repeat steps 2-5.

In addition, we do not use any existing document
in the collection as the selected centroid. Rather,
we introduce virtual centroids that contain the ex-
pected value of all documents in a cluster. An ele-
ment of the centroid is the average weight of the
same index term in all documents within that clus-
ter:

M
w
M
m
m
i
i

=
=
1?

The vectors are document vectors in this step. The
number of clusters is determined after the clusters
are stabilized. The resultant cluster configuration is
more optimal and balanced than that from using
conventional k-means clustering.   Using the MKM
algorithm with virtual centroids, we segment the
collection of news articles into clusters of related
articles. Articles covering the same story from dif-
ferent sources now carry the same theme label.
Articles from the same source over different time
period also carry the same theme label. In the next
stage, we iteratively re-classify each paragraph,
and then re-classify each sentence in each para-
graph into final theme classes.

3 A Stochastic Process of Theme Classifi-
cation
After we have obtained story labels of each article,
we need to classify the paragraphs and then the
sentences according to these labels. Each para-
graph in the article is assigned the cluster number
of that article, as we assume all paragraphs in the
same article share the same story theme.

We suggest that the entire text generation process
can be considered as a stochastic process that starts
in some theme class, generates sentences one after
another for that theme class, then goes to the next
theme and generates the sentences, so on and so
forth, until it reaches the final theme class in a
document, and finishes generating sentences in that
class. This is an approximation of the authoring
process where a writer thinks of a certain structure
for his/her article, starts from the first section,
writes sentences in that section, proceeds to the
next section, etc., until s/he finishes the last sen-
tence in the last section.

Given a document of sentences, the task of sum-
mary extraction involves discovering the underly-
ing theme class transitions at the sentence
boundaries, classify each sentence according to
these theme concepts, and then extract the salient
sentences in each theme class cluster.

We want to find )|(maxarg DCP
C

  where D

 is a
document consisting of linearly ordered sentence
sequences ))(,),(,),2(),1(( TstsssD 

= , and C

is
a theme class sequence which consists of the class
labels of all the sentences in D

 ,
)))((,)),((,)),2(()),1((( TsctscscscC 

= .

Following Bayes Rule gives us
)(/)()|()|( DPCPCDPDCP  = . We assume )(DP  is
equally likely for all documents, so that finding the
best class sequence becomes:

)))(()),((,)),2(()),1(((
)))((),()),((),(,)),2((),2()),1((),1((maxarg
)()|(maxarg)|(maxarg
TsctscscscP
TscTstsctsscsscsP
CPCDPDCP
C
CC





?=
?

Note that the total number of theme classes is far
fewer than the total number of sentences in a
document and the mapping is not one-to-one. Our
task is similar to the concept of discourse parsing
(Marcu (1997)), where discourse structures are
extracted from the text. In our case, we are carry-
ing out discourse tagging, whereby we assign the
class labels or tags to each sentence in the docu-
ment.

We use Hidden Markov Model for this stochastic
process, where the classes are assumed to be hid-
den states.

We make the following assumptions:

? The probability of the sentence given its past only
depends on its theme class (emission probabilities);
? The probability of the theme class only depends on
the theme classes of the previous N sentences (tran-
sition probabilities).


The above assumptions lead to a Hidden Markov
Model with M states representing M different
theme classes. Each state can generate different
sentences according to some probability distribu-
tion?the emission probabilities. These states are
hidden as we only observe the generated sentences
in the text.  Every theme/state can transit to any
other theme/state, or to itself, according to some
probabilities?the transition probabilities.

2C
1C 3C
jC
?
=
L
i
jt CiSP
0
)|)(( 



Figure 1: An ergodic HMM for theme tagging

Our theme tagging task then becomes a search
problem for HMM: Given the observation se-
quence ))(,),(,),2(),1(( TstsssD 

= , and the
model ? , how do we choose a corresponding state
sequence )))((,)),((,)),2(()),1((( TsctscscscC 

=  ,
that best explains the sentence sequence?


To train the model parameter ? , we need to solve
another problem in HMM: How do we adjust the
model parameters ),,( pi? BA= , the transition,
emission and initial probabilities, to maximize the
likelihood of the observation sentence sequences
given our model?

In a supervised training paradigm, we can obtain
human labeled class-sentence pairs and carry out a
relative frequency count for training the emission
and transition probabilities. However, hand label-
ing some large collection of texts with theme
classes is very tedious. One main reason is that
there is a considerable amount of disagreement
between humans on manual annotation of themes
and topics. How many themes should there be?
Where should each theme start and end? 

It is therefore desirable to decode the hidden theme
or topic states using an unsupervised training
method without manually annotated data. Conse-
quently, we only need to cluster and label the ini-
tial document according to cluster number. In the
HMM framework, we then improve upon this ini-
tial clustering by iteratively estimate ),,( pi? BA= ,
and maximize )|( DCP   using a Viterbi decoder.

3.1 Sentence Feature Vector and Similarity
Measure
Prior to the training process, we need to define sen-
tence feature vector and the similarity measure for
comparing two sentence vectors.

As we consider a document D

 to be a sequence of
sentences, the sentences themselves are repre-
sented as feature vectors )(ts  of length L, where t
is the position of the sentence in the document and
L is the size of the vocabulary. Each element of the
vector )(ts  is an index term in the sentence,
weighted by its text frequency (tf) and inverse
document frequency (idf) where tf is defined as the
frequency of the word in that particular sentence,
and idf  is the inverse frequency of the word in the
larger document collection
N
dflog? where df is
the number of sentences this particular word ap-
pears in and N is the total number of sentences in
the training corpus.  We select the sentences as
documents in computing the tf and idf because we
are comparing sentence against sentence.

In the initial clustering and subsequent Viterbi
training process, sentence feature vectors need to
be compared to the centroid of each cluster. Vari-
ous similarity measures and metrics include the
cosine measure, Dice coefficient, Jaccard coeffi-
cient, inclusion coefficient, Euclidean distance, KL
convergence, information radius, etc (Manning &
Sch   tze (1999), Dagan et al (1997), Salton and
McGill (1983)).  We chose the cosine similarity
measure for its ease in computation:

 

= =
=
?
?
=
L
i
L
i
ii
L
i
ii
vsts
vsts
vsts
1 1
22
1
))(())((
)()(
))(),(cos(
4 Segmental K-means Clustering for Pa-
rameter Training
In this section, we describe an iterative training
process for estimation of our HMM parameters.
We consider the output of the MKM clustering
process in Section 2 as an initial  segmentation of
text into class sequences. To improve upon this
initial segmentation, we use an iterative Viterbi
training method that is similar to the segmental k-
means clustering for speech processing (Rabiner &
Juang(1993)). All articles in the same story cluster
are processed as follows: 

1. Initialization: All paragraphs in the same story class
are clustered again. Then all sentences in the same
paragraph shares the same class label as that para-
graph. This is the initial class-sentence segmentation.
Initial class transitions are counted.
2. (Re-)clustering: Sentence vectors with their class
labels are repartitioned into K clusters (K is obtained
from the MKM step previously) using the K-means
algorithm. This step is iterated until the clusters sta-
bilize.
3. (Re-)estimation of probabilities: The centroids of
each cluster are estimated. Update emission prob-
abilities from the new clusters.
4. (Re-)classification by decoding: the updated set of
model parameters from step 2 are used to rescore the
(unlabeled) training documents into sequences of
class given sentences, using Viterbi decoding. Up-
date class transitions from this output.
5. Iteration: Stop if convergence conditions are met,
else repeat steps 2-4.

The segmental clustering algorithm is iterated until
the decoding likelihood converges. The final
trained Viterbi decoder is then used to tag un-
annotated data sets into class-sentence pairs. 

In the following Sections 4.1 and 4.2, we discuss in
more detail steps 3 and 4.
4.1 Estimation of Probabilities
We need to train the parameters of our HMM such
that the model can best describe the training data.
During the iterative process, the probabilities are
estimated from class-sentence pair sequences ei-
ther from the initialization stage or the re-
classification stage.
4.1.1 Transition Probabilities: Text Cohesion
and Text Segmentation
Text cohesion (Halliday and Hasan (1996)) is an
important concept in summarization as it under-
lines the theme of a text segment based on connec-
tivity patterns between sentences (Mani (2002)).
When an author writes from theme to theme in a
linear text, s/he generates sentences that are tightly
linked together within a theme. When s/he pro-
ceeds to the next theme, the sentences that are gen-
erated next are quite separate from the previous
theme of sentences but are they themselves tightly
linked again.

As mentioned in the introduction, most extraction-
based summarization approaches give certain con-
sideration to the linearity between sentences in a
text. For example, Mani (1999) uses spread activa-
tion weight between sentence links,  (Barzilay et al
2001) uses a cohesion constraint that led to im-
provement in summary quality. Anone et al (1999)
uses linguistic knowledge such as aliases, syno-
nyms, and morphological variations to link lexical
items together across sentences.

Term distribution has been studied by many NLP
researchers. Manning & Sch?tze (1999) gives a
good overview of various probability distributions
used to describe how a term appears in a text. The
distributions are in general non-Gaussian in nature.

Our Hidden Markov Model provides a unified
framework to incorporate text cohesion and term
distribution information in the transition probabili-
ties of theme classes. The class of a sentence de-
pends on the class labels of the previous N
sentences. The linearity of the text is hence pre-
served in our model.  In the preliminary experi-
ment, we set N to be one, that is, we are using a bi-
gram class model.

4.1.2 Emission Probabilities: Poisson distribu-
tion of terms
For the emission probabilities, there are a number
of possible formulations. We cannot use relative
frequency counts of number of sentences in clus-
ters divided by the total sentences in the cluster
since most sentences occur only once in the entire
corpus. Looking at the sentence feature vector, we
take the view that the probability of a sentence
vector being generated by a particular cluster is the
product of the probabilities of the index terms in
the sentence occurring in that cluster according to
some distribution, and that these term distribution
probabilities are independent of each other.

For a sentence vector of length L, where L is the
total size of the vocabulary, its elements?the in-
dex terms?have certain probability density func-
tion (pdf). In speech processing, spectral features
are assumed to follow independent Gaussian dis-
tributions. In language processing, several models
have been proposed for term distribution, including
the Poisson distribution, the two-Poisson model for
content and non-content words (Bookstein and
Swanson (1975)), the negative binomial (Mosteller
and Wallace (1984), Church and Gale (1995)) and
Katz?s k-mixture (Katz (1996)). We adopt two
schemes for comparison (1) the unigram distribu-
tion of each index term in the clusters; (2) the Pois-
son distribution as pdf. for modeling the term
emission probabilities:
!
);(
k
ekp
k
i
i
i
?? ??=

At each estimation step of the training process, the
? for the Poisson distribution is estimated from the
centroid of each theme cluster. 1
                                                         
1

Strictly speaking, we ought to re-estimate the IDF in the k-mixture
during each iteration by using the re-estimated clusters from the k-
means step as the documents. However, we simplify the process by
using the pre-computed IDF from all training documents.
4.2 Viterbi Decoding: Re-classification with
sentence cohesion

After each re-estimation, we use a Viterbi decoder
to find the best class sequence given a document
containing sentence sequences.  The ?time se-
quence? corresponds to the sequence of sentences
in a document whereas the states are the theme
classes.

At each node of the trellis, the probability of a sen-
tence given any class state is computed from the
transition probabilities and the emission probabili-
ties. After Viterbi backtracking, the best class se-
quence of a document is found and the sentences
are relabeled by the class tags.

5 Salient Sentence Extraction
The SKM algorithm is iterated until the decoding
likelihood converges. The final trained Viterbi de-
coder is then used to tag un-annotated data sets
into class-sentence pairs. We can then extract sali-
ent sentences from each class to be included in a
summary, or for question-answering.

To evaluate the effectiveness of our method as a
foundation for extractive summarization, we ex-
tract sentences from each theme class in each
document using four features, namely:
(1) the position of the sentence
n
p 1= -- the further it is
from the title, the less important it is supposed to be;
(2) the cosine similarity of the sentence with the centroid of
its class ?1;
(3) its similarity with the first sentence in the article ?2; and
(4) the so-called Z model (Zechner (1996), Nomoto & Ma-
tsumoto (2000)), where the mass of a sentence is com-
puted as the sum of tf, idf values of index terms in that
sentence and the center of mass  is chosen as the salient
sentence to be included in a summary.

))(())))((log(1(maxarg
1
tsidftstfz i
L
i
i
s

=
?+= 

The above features are linearly combined to yield a
final saliency score for every sentence:

zwwwpwsw ?+?+?+?= 423121)( ??
                                                                                         

Our features are similar to those in an existing sys-
tem (Radev 2002), with the difference in the cen-
troid computation (and cluster definition), resulting
from our stochastic system.

6 Experiments
Many researchers have proposed various evalua-
tion methods for summarization. We find that ex-
trinsic, task-oriented evaluation method to be most
easily automated, and quantifiable (Radev 2000).
We choose to evaluate our stochastic theme classi-
fication system (STCS) on a multi-document
summarization task, among other possible tasks
We choose a content-based method to evaluate the
summaries extracted by our system, compared to
those by another extraction-based system MEAD
(Radev 2002), and against a baseline system that
chooses the top N sentence in each document as
salient sentences.  All three systems are considered
unsupervised.

The evaluation corpus we use is a segment of the
English part of HKSAR news from the LDC, con-
sisting of 215 articles. We first use MEAD to ex-
tract summaries from 1%-20% compression ratio.
We then use our system to extract the same num-
ber of salient sentences as MEAD, according to the
sentence weights. The baseline system also ex-
tracts the same amount of data as the other two
systems. We plot the cosine similarities of the
original 215 documents with each individual ex-
tracted summaries from these three systems. The
following figure shows a plot of cosine similarity
scores against compression ratio of each extracted
summary. In terms of relative similarity score, our
system is 22.8% higher on average than MEAD,
and 46.3% higher on average than the base-
line.
0
0. 1
0. 2
0. 3
0. 4
0. 5
0. 6
0. 7
0. 8
0. 9
0% 10% 20% 30%
Our  syst em
MEAD
TOP-N Sent

Figure 2: Our system outperforms an existing multi-document
summarizer (MEAD) by 22.8% on average, and outperforms
the baseline top-N sentence selection system by 46.3% on
average.

We would like to note that in our comparative
evaluation, it is necessary to normalize all variable
factors that might affect the system performance,
other than the intrinsic algorithm in each system.
For example, we ensure that the sentence segmen-
tation function is identical in all three systems. In
addition, index term weights need to be properly
trained within their own document clusters. Since
MEAD discards all sentences below the length 9,
the other two systems also discard such sentences.
The feature weights in both our system and MEAD
are all set to the default value one. Since all other
features are the same between our system and
MEAD, the difference in performance is attributed
to the core clustering and centroid computation
algorithms in both systems.
7 Conclusion and Discussion
We have presented a stochastic HMM framework
with modified K-means and segmental K-means
algorithms for extractive summarization. Our
method uses an unsupervised, probabilistic ap-
proach to find class centroids, class sequences and
class boundaries in linear, unrestricted texts in or-
der to yield salient sentences and topic segments
for summarization and question and answer tasks.
We define a class to be a group of connected sen-
tences that corresponds to one or multiple topics in
the text. Such topics can be answers to a user
query, or simply one concept to be included in the
summary. We define a Markov model where the
states correspond to the different classes, and the
observations are continuous sequences of sen-
tences in a document. Transition probabilities are
the class transitions obtained from a training cor-
pus. Emission probabilities are the probabilities of
an observed sentence given a specific class, fol-
lowing a Poisson distribution.  Unlike conventional
methods where texts are treated as independent
sentences to be clustered together, our method in-
corporates text cohesion information in the class
transition probabilities. Unlike other HMM and
noisy channel, probabilistic approaches for infor-
mation retrieval, our method does not require an-
notated data as it is unsupervised.

We also suggest using modified K-means cluster-
ing algorithm to avoid ad hoc choices of initial
cluster set as in the conventional K-means algo-
rithm. For unsupervised training, we use a segmen-
tal K-means training method to iteratively improve
the clusters. Experimental results show that the
content-based performance of our system is 22.8%
above that of an existing extractive summarization
system, and 46.3% above that of simple top-N sen-
tence selection system.  Even though the evalua-
tion on the training set is not a close evaluation
since the training is unsupervised, we will also
evaluate on testing data not included in the training
set as our trained decoder can be used to classify
sentences in unseen texts. Our framework serves as
a foundation for future incorporation of other sta-
tistical and linguistic information as vector features,
such as part-of-speech tags, name aliases, syno-
nyms, and morphological variations.
References
Chinatsu Aone, James Gorlinsky, Bjornar Larsen, and Mary Ellen Oku-
rowski, 1999. A trainable summarizer with knowledge acquired from
robust NLP techniques. In Advances in automatic text summarization,
ed. Inderjeet Mani and Mark T. Maybury. pp 71-80.
Michele Banko, Vibhu O. Mittal & Michael J. Witbrock. 2000. Headline
Generation Based on Statistical Translation. In Proc. Of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics. 
Regina Barzilay,  Noemie Elhadad & Kathleen R. McKeown. 2001. Sen-
tence Ordering in Multi-document Summarization. In  Proceedings of
the 1st Human Language Technology Conference. pp 149-156. San
Diego, CA, US.
Adam Berger & John Lafferty. 1999. Information Retrieval as Statistical
Translation. .  . In Proc. Of the 22nd  ACM SIGIR Conference (SIGIR-
99). pp 222-229. Berkeley, CA, USA.
Branimir Boguraev & Christopher Kennedy. 1999. Salience-Based Content
Characterisation of Text Documents.  In Advances in automatic text
summarization / edited. Inderjeet Mani and Mark T. Maybury. pp 99-
110.
Kenneth Ward Church. 1988. A Stochastic Parts Program and Noun Phrase
Parser for Unrestricted Text.  In  Proceedings of the Second Conference
on Applied Natural Language Processing. pp 136--143.  Austin, TX.
Ido Dagan, Lillian Lee, & Fernando Pereira. 1997. Similarity-based meth-
ods for word sense disambiguation. In Proc. Of the 32nd  Conference of
the Association of Computational Linguistics, pp 56-63.
Halliday & Hasan, 1976. Cohesion in English. London: Longman.
Marti A. Hearst. 1994. Multi-Paragraph Segmentation of       Expository
Text.  In  Proc. Of the Association for Computational Linguistics. pp 9-
16.  Las Cruces, NM.
Eduard Hovy & Chin-Yew Lin. 1999. Automated Text Summarization in
SUMMARIST In Advances in automatic text summarization / edited.
Inderjeet Mani and Mark T. Maybury.  pp 81-97.
H. Jing. Dragomir R. Radev and M. Budzikowska. Centroid-based summa-
rization of multiple documents: sentence extaction, utility-based
evaluation and user studies. In Proceedings of ANLP/NAACL-2000.
Slava M. Katz. 1996. Distribution of content words and phrases in text and
language modeling. In Natural Language Engineering, Vol.2 Part.1,
pp15-60.
Kevin Knight & Daniel Marcu. 2000. Statistics-Based Summarization ?
Step One: Sentence Compression. In Proc. Of the 17th Annual Confer-
ence of the American Association for Artificial Intelligence. pp  703-
710. Austin, Texas, US.
Julian Kupiec, Jan Pedersen & Francine Chen. 1995. A Trainable Docu-
ment Summarizer. In Proc. Of the 18th ACM-SIRGIR Conference. pp
68-73.
Inderjeet Mani & Eric Bloedorn. 1999. Summarizing Similarities and
Differences Among Related Documents.  In Information Retrieval, 1.
pp 35-67.
Christopher D. Manning & Hinrich Sch   tze 1999. Foundations of statisti-
cal natural language processing. The MIT Press  Cambridge, Massachu-
setts. London, England.
Daniel Marcu. 1997. The Rhetorical Parsing of Natural Language Texts.
In Proc. of the 35th Annual Meeting of Association for Computational
Linguistics and 8th Conference of European Chapter of Association for
Computational Linguistics. pp 96-103.  Madrid, Spain.
Bernard Merialdo. 1994. Tagging English Text with a Probabilistic Model.
In Computational Linguistics, 20.2. pp 155-172.
David R.H. Miller, Tim Leek & Richard M. Schwartz. 1999. A Hidden
Markov Model Information Retrieval System. In Proc. Of the
SIGIR?99   pp 214?221.  Berkley, CA, US.
Sung Hyon Myaeng & Dong-Hyun Jang. 1999. Development and Evalua-
tion of a Statistically-Based Document Summarization System. In Ad-
vances in automatic text summarization / edited. Inderjeet Mani and
Mark T. Maybury. MIT Press. pp 61-70.
Tadashi Nomoto & Yuji Matsumoto. 2002. Supervised ranking in open
domain summarization. In Proc. Of the 40th  Conference of the Associa-
tion of Computational Linguistics, pp.. Pennsylvania, US.
Tadashi Nomoto & Yuji Matsumoto.  2001.  A New Approach to Unsu-
pervised Text Summarization. In  Proc. Of the SIGIR?01, pp 26-34  New
Orleans, Louisiana, USA.
Jahna C. Otterbacher, Dragomir R. Radev & Airong Luo. 2002. Revision
that Improve Cohesion in Multi-document Summaries. In  Proc. Of the
Workshop on Automatic Summarization (including DUC 2002), pp 27-
36. Association for Computational Linguistics. Philadelphia, US.
Miles Osborne. 2002. Using Maximum Entropy for Sentence Extraction.
In  Proc. Of the Workshop on Automatic Summarization (including
DUC 2002), pp 1-8. Association for Computational Linguistics. Phila-
delphia, US.
Dragomir Radev, Adam Winkel & Michael Topper . 2002. Multi-
Document Centroid-based Text Summarization.. In Proc. Of the ACL-
02 Demonstration Session, pp112-113. Pennsylvania, US.
Michael White & Claire Cardie. 2002. Selecting Sentences for Multidocu-
ment Summaries using Randomized Local Search.  In Proc. Of the
Workshop on Automatic Summarization (including DUC 2002), pp 9-
18. Association for Computational Linguistics. Philadelphia, US.
J.G. Wilpon & L.R. Rabiner 1985. A modified K-means clustering algo-
rithm for use in isolated word recognition. In IEEE Trans. Acoustics,
Speech, Signal Proc. ASSP-33(3), pp 587-594.
K. Zechner. 1996. Fast generation of abstracts from general domain text
corpora by extracting relevant sentences. In Proc. Of the 16th  Interna-
tional Conference on Computational Linguistics, pp 986-989. Copen-
hagen, Denmark.
Hongyuan Zha. 2002. Generic Summarization and Keyphrase Extraction
Using Mutual Reinforcement Principle and Sentence Clustering.  In
Proc. Of the SIGIR?02. pp 113-120.  Tampere, Finland Endre Boros,
Paul B. Kantor & David J. Neu. 2001. A Clustering Based Approach to
Creating Multi-Document Summaries.
