Coling 2008: Proceedings of the workshop on Speech Processing for Safety Critical Translation and Pervasive Applications, pages 48?53
Manchester, August 2008
Speech Translation for Triage of Emergency Phonecalls in Minority 
Languages 
Udhyakumar Nallasamy, Alan W Black, Tanja 
Schultz, Robert Frederking 
Language Technologies Institute 
Carnegie Mellon University 
5000 Forbes Avenue 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213  USA 
udhay@cmu.edu, 
{awb,ref,tanja}@cs.cmu.edu 
Jerry Weltman 
Louisiana State University 
Baton Rouge,  
Louisiana 70802  USA 
jweltm2@lsu.edu 
 
Abstract 
We describe Ayudame, a system de-
signed to recognize and translate Spanish 
emergency calls for better dispatching. 
We analyze the research challenges in 
adapting speech translation technology to 
9-1-1 domain. We report our initial re-
search in 9-1-1 translation system design, 
ASR experiments, and utterance classifi-
cation for translation.  
1 Introduction 
In the development of real-world-applicable lan-
guage technologies, it is good to find an applica-
tion with a significant need, and with a complex-
ity that appears to be within the capabilities of 
current existing technology.  Based on our ex-
perience in building speech-to-speech translation, 
we believe that some important potential uses of 
the technology do not require a full, complete 
speech-to-speech translation system; something 
much more lightweight can be sufficient to aid 
the end users (Gao et al 2006). 
A particular task of this kind is dealing with 
emergency call dispatch for police, ambulance, 
fire and other emergency services (in the US the 
emergency number is 9-1-1).  A dispatcher must 
answer a large variety of calls and, due to the 
multilingual nature of American society, they 
may receive non-English calls and be unable to 
service them due to lack of knowledge of the 
caller language. 
                                               
 
 ? 2008. Licensed under the Creative Commons At-
tribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported 
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-
sa/3.0/). Some rights reserved. 
 
    Figure 1. Ayudame system architecture 
 
As a part of a pilot study into the feasibility of 
dealing with non-English calls by a mono-lingual 
English-speaking dispatcher, we have designed a 
translation system that will aid the dispatcher in 
communicating without understanding the 
caller?s language. 
48
The fundamental idea is to use utterance clas-
sification of the non-English input.  The non-
English is first recognized by a speech recogni-
tion system; then the output is classified into a 
small number of domain-specific classes called 
Domain Acts (DAs) that can indicate directly to 
the dispatcher the general intended meaning of 
the spoken phrase.  Each DA may have a few 
important parameters to be translated, such as 
street addresses (Levin et al 2003; Langley 
2003). The dispatcher can then select from a lim-
ited number of canned responses to this through 
a simple menu system.  We believe the reduction 
in complexity of such a system compared to a 
full speech-to-speech translation will be advanta-
geous because it should be much cheaper to con-
struct, easier to port to new languages, and, im-
portantly, sufficient to do the job of processing 
emergency calls.  
In the ?NineOneOne? project, we have de-
signed an initial prototype system, which we call 
?Ayudame? (Spanish word for ?Help me?).  Fig-
ure 1 gives an overview of the system architec-
ture. 
2 The NineOneOne Domain 
Our initial interest in this domain was due to con-
tact from the Cape Coral Police Department 
(CCPD) in Florida.  They were interested in in-
vestigating how speech-to-speech translations 
could be used in emergency 9-1-1 dispatch sys-
tems.  Most current emergency dispatching cen-
ters use some proprietary human translation ser-
vice, such as Language Line (Language Line 
Services).  Although this service provides human 
translation services for some 180 languages, it is 
far from ideal.  Once the dispatcher notes that the 
caller cannot speak/understand English, they 
must initiate the call to Language Line, including 
identifying themselves to the Language Line op-
erator, before the call can actually continue.  This 
delay can be up to a minute, which is not ideal in 
an emergency situation.    
After consulting with CCPD, and collecting a 
number of example calls, it was clear that full 
speech-to-speech translation was not necessary 
and that a limited form of translation through 
utterance classification (Lavie et al 2001) might 
be sufficient to provide a rapid response to non-
English calls.  The language for our study is 
Spanish.  Cape Coral is on the Gulf Coast of  
Florida and has fewer Spanish speakers than e.g. 
the Miami area, but still sufficient that a number 
of calls are made to their emergency service in 
Spanish, yet many of their operators are not 
sufficiently fluent in Spanish to deal with the 
calls. 
There are a number of key pieces of 
information that a dispatcher tries to collect 
before passing on the information to the 
appropriate emergency service.  This includes 
things like location, type of emergency, urgency, 
if anyone is hurt, if the situation is dangerous, 
etc.  In fact many dispaching organizations have 
existing, well-defined  policies on what 
information they should collect for different 
types of emergencies.  
3 Initial system design 
Based on the domain's characteristics, in addition 
to avoiding full-blown translation, we are follow-
ing a highly asymmetrical design for the system 
(Frederking et al 2000).  The dispatcher is al-
ready seated at a workstation, and we intend to 
keep them ?in the loop?, for both technical and 
social reasons.  So in the dispatcher-to-caller di-
rection, we can work with text and menus, sim-
plifying the technology and avoiding some cog-
nitive complexity for the operator.  So in the dis-
patcher-to-caller direction we require  
 no English ASR, 
 no true English-to-Spanish MT, and 
 simple, domain-limited, Spanish speech 
synthesis. 
The caller-to-dispatcher direction is much more 
interesting. In this direction we require 
 Spanish ASR that can handle emotional 
spontaneous telephone speech in mixed 
dialects, 
 Spanish-to-English MT, but 
 no English Speech Synthesis. 
We have begun to consider the user interfaces 
for Ayudame as well.  For ease of integration 
with pre-existing dispatcher workstations, we 
have chosen to use a web-based graphical inter-
face.  For initial testing of the prototype, we plan 
to run in ?shadow? mode, in parallel with live 
dispatching using the traditional approach.  Thus 
Ayudame will have a listen-only connection to 
the telephone line, and will run a web server to 
interact with the dispatcher.  Figure 2 shows an 
initial design of the web-based interface.  There 
are sections for a transcript, the current caller 
utterance, the current dispatcher response 
choices, and a button to transfer the interaction to 
a human translator as a fall-back option.  For 
each utterance, the DA classification is displayed 
in addition to the actual utterance (in case the 
dispatcher knows some Spanish). 
49
 Figure 2. Example of initial GUI design 
 
4 Automatic Speech Recognition 
An important requirement for such a system is 
the ability to be able to recognize the incoming 
non-English speech with a word error rate suffi-
ciently low for utterance classification and pa-
rameter translation to be possible.  The issues in 
speech recognition for this particular domain in-
clude: telephone speech (which is through a lim-
ited bandwidth channel); background noise (the 
calls are often from outside or in noisy places); 
various dialects of Spanish, and potential stressed 
speech.  Although initially we expected a sub-
stantial issue with recognizing stressed speakers, 
as one might expect in emergency situations, in 
the calls we have collected so far, although it is 
not a negligible issue, it is far less important that 
we first expected. 
The Spanish ASR system is built using the 
Janus Recognition Toolkit (JRTk) (Finke et al 
1997) featuring the HMM-based IBIS decoder 
(Soltau et al 2001). Our speech corpus consists 
of 75 transcribed 9-1-1 calls, with average call 
duration of 6.73 minutes (min: 2.31 minutes, 
max: 13.47 minutes). The average duration of 
Spanish speech (between interpreter and caller) 
amounts to 4.8 minutes per call. Each call has 
anywhere from 46 to 182 speaker turns with an 
average of 113 speaker turns per call. The turns 
that have significant overlap between speakers 
are omitted from the training and test set. The 
acoustic models are trained on 50 Spanish 9-1-1 
calls, which amount to 4 hours of speech data.  
 
 
The system uses three-state, left-to-right, sub-
phonetically tied acoustic models with 400 con-
text-dependent distributions with the same num-
ber of codebooks. Each codebook has 32 gaus-
sians per state. The front-end feature extraction 
uses standard 39 dimensional Mel-scale cepstral 
coefficients and applies Linear Discriminant 
Analysis (LDA) calculated from the training 
data. The acoustic models are seeded with initial 
alignments from GlobalPhone Spanish acoustic 
models trained on 20 hours of speech recorded 
from native Spanish speakers (Schultz et al 
1997). The vocabulary size is 65K words. The 
language model consists of a trigram model 
trained on the manual transcriptions of 40 calls 
and interpolated with a background model 
trained on GlobalPhone Spanish text data con-
sisting of 1.5 million words (Schultz et al 1997). 
The interpolation weights are determined using 
the transcriptions of 10 calls (development set). 
The test data consists of 15 telephone calls from 
different speakers, which amounts to a total of 1 
hour. Both development and test set calls con-
sisted of manually segmented and transcribed 
speaker turns that do not have a significant over-
lap with other speakers. The perplexity of the test 
set according to the language model is 96.7. 
The accuracy of the Spanish ASR on the test 
set is 76.5%.  This is a good result for spontane-
ous telephone-quality speech by multiple un-
known speakers, and compares favourably to the 
ASR accuracy of other spoken dialog systems.  
We had initially planned to investigate novel 
ASR techniques designed for stressed speech and 
multiple dialects, but to our surprise these do not 
50
seem to be required for this application.  Note 
that critical information such as addresses will be 
synthesized back to the caller for confirmation in 
the full system. So, for the time-being we will 
concentrate on the accuracy of the DA classifica-
tion until we can show that improving ASR accu-
racy would significantly help. 
5 Utterance Classification 
As mentioned above, the translation approach we 
are using is based on utterance classification. The 
Spanish to English translation in the Ayudame 
system is a two-step process. The ASR 
hypothesis is first classified into domain-specific 
Domain Acts (DA). Each DA has a 
predetermined set of parameters. These 
parameters are identified and translated using a 
rule-based framework.  For this approach to be 
accomplished with reasonable effort levels, the 
total number of types of parameters and their 
complexity must be fairly limited in the domain, 
such as addresses and injury types. This section 
explains our DA tagset and classification 
experiments. 
5.1 Initial classification and results 
The initial evaluation (Nallasamy et al 2008) 
included a total of 845 manually labeled turns in 
our 9-1-1 corpus. We used a set of 10 tags to an-
notate the dialog turns. The distribution of the 
tags are listed below 
 
Tag (Representation) Frequency 
Giving Name 80 
Giving Address 118 
Giving Phone number 29 
Requesting Ambulance 8 
Requesting Fire Service 11 
Requesting Police 24 
Reporting Injury/Urgency 61 
Yes 119 
No 24 
Others 371 
Table 1. Distribution of first-pass tags in the 
corpus. 
 
We extracted bag-of-word features and trained a 
Support Vector Machine (SVM) classifier (Bur-
ges, 1998) using the above dataset. A 10-fold 
stratified cross-validation has produced an aver-
age accuracy of 60.12%. The accuracies of indi-
vidual tags are listed below. 
 
Tag Accuracy  
  (%) 
Giving Name 57.50 
Giving Address 38.98 
Giving Phone number 48.28 
Req. Ambulance 62.50 
Req. Fire Service 54.55 
Req. Police 41.67 
Reporting Injury/Urgency 39.34 
Yes 52.94 
No 54.17 
Others 75.74 
Table 2. Classification accuracies of first-pass 
tags. 
5.2 Tag-set improvements 
We improved both the DA tagset and the 
classification framework in our second-pass 
classification, compared to our initial  
experiment. We had identified several issues in 
our first-pass classification:  
 We had forced each dialog turn to have a 
single tag. However, the tags and the 
dialog turns don?t conform to this 
assumption. For example, the dialog 
?Yes, my husband has breathing prob-
lem. We are at two sixty-one Oak 
Street?1 should get 3 tags: ?Yes?, ?Giv-
ing-Address?, ?Requesting-Ambulance?.  
 Our analysis of the dataset alo showed 
that the initial set of tags are not 
exhaustive enough to cover the whole 
range of dialogs required to be translated 
and conveyed to the dispatcher.  
We made several iterations over the tagset to 
ensure that it is both compact and achieves  
requisite coverage. The final tag set consists of 
67 entries. We manually annotated 59 calls with 
our new tagset using a web interface. The 
distribution of the top 20 tags is listed below. 
The whole list of tags can be found in the 
NineOneOne project webpage: 
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~911/ 
 
                                               
1
 The dialog is English Translation of  ?s?, mi esposo le falta 
el aire. es ac? en el dos sesenta y uno Oak Street?. It is 
extracted from the transcription of a CCPD 9-1-1 
emergency call, with address modified to protect privacy 
51
Tag (Representation) Frequency 
Yes 227 
Giving-Address 133 
Giving-Location 113 
Giving-Name 107 
No 106 
Other 94 
OK 81 
Thank-You 51 
Reporting-Conflict 43 
Describing-Vehicle 42 
Giving-Telephone-Number 40 
Hello 36 
Reporting-Urgency-Or-Injury 34 
Describing-Residence 28 
Dont-Know 19 
Dont-Understand 16 
Giving-Age 15 
Goodbye 15 
Giving-Medical-Symptoms 14 
Requesting-Police 12 
Table 3. Distribution of top 20 second-pass 
tags 
 
The new tagset is hierarchical, which allows 
us to evaluate the classifier at different levels of 
the hierarchy, and eventually select the best 
trade-off between the number of tags and 
classification accuracy. For example, the first 
level of tags for reporting incidents includes the 
five most common incidents, viz, Reporting-
Conflict, Reporting-Robbery, Reporting-Traffic-
accident, Reporting-Urgency-or-Injury and 
Reporting-Fire. The second level of tags are used 
to convey more detailed information about the 
above incidents (eg. Reporting-Weapons in the 
case of conflict) or rare incidents (eg. Reporting-
Animal-Problem). 
5.3 Second-pass classification and Results 
We also improved our classification 
framework to allow multiple tags for a single 
turn and to easily accomodate any new tags in 
the future. Our earlier DA classification used a 
multi-class classifier, as each turn was restricted 
to have a single tag. To accomodate multiple tags 
for a single turn, we trained binary classifiers for 
each tag. All the utterances of the corresponding 
tag are marked positive examples and the rest are 
marked as negative examples. Our new data set 
has 1140 dialog turns and 1331 annotations. Note 
that the number of annotations is more than the 
number of labelled turns as each turn may have 
multiple tags. We report classification accuracies 
in the following table for each tag based on 10-
fold cross-validation: 
 
Tag (Representation) Accuracy   
   (%) 
Yes 87.32 
Giving-Address 42.71 
Giving-Location 87.32 
Giving-Name 42.71 
No 37.63 
Other 54.98 
OK 72.5 
Thank-You 41.14 
Reporting-Conflict 79.33 
Describing-Vehicle 96.82 
Giving-Telephone-Number 39.37 
Hello 38.79 
Reporting-Urgency-Or-Injury 49.8 
Describing-Residence 92.75 
Dont-Know 41.67 
Dont-Understand 36.03 
Giving-Age 64.95 
Goodbye 87.27 
Giving-Medical-Symptoms 47.44 
Requesting-Police 79.94 
Table 4. Classification accuracies of 
individual second-pass tags 
 
The average accuracy of the 20 tags is 
58.42%. Although multiple classifiers increase 
the computational complexity during run-time, 
they are independent of each other, so we can run 
them in parallel. To ensure the consistency and 
clarity of the new tag set, we had a second 
annotator label 39 calls. The inter-coder 
agreement (Kappa coefficient) between the two 
annotators is 0.67. This is considered substantial 
agreement between the annotators, and confirms 
the consistency of the tag set. 
6 Conclusion 
The work reported here demonstrates that we can 
produce Spanish ASR for Spanish emergency 
calls with reasonable accuracy (76.5%), and clas-
sify manual transcriptions of these calls with rea-
sonable accuracy (60.12% on the original tagset, 
52
58.42% on the new, improved tagset).  We be-
lieve these results are good enough to justify the 
next phase of research, in which we will develop, 
user-test, and evaluate a full pilot system. We are 
also investigating a number of additional tech-
niques to improve the DA classification accura-
cies.  Further we believe that we can design the 
overall dialog system to ameliorate the inevitable 
remaining misclassifications, based in part on the 
confusion matrix of actual errors (Nallasamy et 
al, 2008).  But only actual user tests of a pilot 
system will allow us to know whether an even-
tual deployable system is really feasible. 
Acknowledgements 
This project is funded by NSF Grant No: IIS-
0627957 ?NineOneOne: Exploratory Research 
on Recognizing Non-English Speech for Emer-
gency Triage in Disaster Response?. Any opin-
ions, findings, and conclusions or recommenda-
tions expressed in this material are those of the 
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views 
of sponsors. 
References 
Burges C J C, A tutorial on support vector machines 
for pattern recognition, In Proc. Data Mining and 
Knowledge Discovery, pp 2(2):955-974, USA, 
1998 
Finke M, Geutner P, Hild H, Kemp T, Ries K and 
Westphal M, The Karlsruhe-Verbmobil Speech 
Recognition Engine, In Proc. IEEE International 
Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal 
Processing (ICASSP), pp. 83-86, Germany, 1997 
Frederking R, Rudnicky A, Hogan C and Lenzo K, 
Interactive Speech Translation in the Diplomat 
Project, Machine Translation Journal 15(1-2), 
Special issue on Spoken Language Translation, pp. 
61-66, USA, 2000 
Gao Y, Zhou B, Sarikaya R, Afify M, Kuo H, Zhu W, 
Deng Y, Prosser C, Zhang W and Besacier L, IBM 
MASTOR SYSTEM: Multilingual Automatic 
Speech-to-Speech Translator, In Proc. First Inter-
national Workshop on Medical Speech Translation, 
pp. 53-56, USA, 2006 
Langley C, Domain Action Classification and Argu-
ment Parsing for Interlingua-based Spoken Lan-
guage Translation. PhD thesis, Carnegie Mellon 
University, Pittsburgh, PA, 2003 
Language Line Services http://www.languageline.com 
Lavie A, Balducci F, Coletti P, Langley C, Lazzari G, 
Pianesi F, Taddei L and Waibel A, Architecture 
and Design Considerations in NESPOLE!: a 
Speech Translation System for E-Commerce Ap-
plications,. In Proc. Human Language Technolo-
gies (HLT), pp 31-34, USA, 2001 
Levin L, Langley C, Lavie A, Gates D, Wallace D and 
Peterson K, Domain Specific Speech Acts for Spo-
ken Language Translation, In Proc. 4th SIGdial 
Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue, pp. 208-
217, Japan, 2003 
Nallasamy U, Black A, Schultz T and Frederking R, 
NineOneOne: Recognizing and Classifying Speech 
for Handling Minority Language Emergency Calls, 
In Proc. 6th International conference on Language 
Resources and Evaluation (LREC), Morocco, 2008 
NineOneOne project webpage 
[www.cs.cmu.edu/~911] 
Schultz T, Westphal M and Waibel A, The 
GlobalPhone Project: Multilingual LVCSR with 
JANUS-3, In Proc. Multilingual Information Re-
trieval Dialogs: 2nd SQEL Workshop, pp. 20-27, 
Czech Republic, 1997 
Soltau H, Metze F, F?ugen C and Waibel A, A One 
Pass-Decoder Based on Polymorphic Linguistic 
Context Assignment, In Proc. IEEE workshop on 
Automatic Speech Recognition and Understanding 
(ASRU), Italy, 2001 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
53
