The Importance of Narrative and Other Lessons from an Evaluation of an
NLG System that Summarises Clinical Data
Ehud Reiter, Albert Gatt, Franc?ois Portet
Dept of Computing Science
University of Aberdeen, UK
{e.reiter,a.gatt,fportet}@
abdn.ac.uk
Marian van der Meulen?
Dept of Psychology
University of Edinburgh, UK
m.a.van-der-meulen@
sms.ed.ac.uk
Abstract
The BABYTALK BT-45 system generates tex-
tual summaries of clinical data about babies in
a neonatal intensive care unit. A recent task-
based evaluation of the system suggested that
these summaries are useful, but not as effec-
tive as they could be. In this paper we present
a qualitative analysis of problems that the
evaluation highlighted in BT-45 texts. Many
of these problems are due to the fact that BT-
45 does not generate good narrative texts; this
is a topic which has not previously received
much attention from the NLG research com-
munity, but seems to be quite important for
creating good data-to-text systems.
1 Introduction
Data-to-text NLG systems produce textual output
based on the analysis and interpretation of non-
linguistic data (Reiter, 2007). Systems which pro-
duce short summaries of small amounts of data, such
as weather-forecast generators (Reiter et al, 2005),
have been one of the most successful applications of
NLG, and there is growing interest in creating sys-
tems which produce longer summaries of larger data
sets.
We have recently carried out an evaluation of one
such system, BT-45 (Portet et al, 2007), which gen-
erates multi-paragraph summaries of clinical data
from a Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU). The
summaries cover a period of roughly 45 minutes,
and describe both sensor data (heart rate, blood oxy-
gen saturation, etc, sampled at 1 sec intervals) as
well as discrete events such as drug administration;
?Now at the Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Univer-
sity Hospital, Geneva, Switzerland
they are intended to help medical staff make treat-
ment decisions. This evaluation showed that from a
decision-support perspective, the BT-45 texts were
as effective as visualisations of the data, but less ef-
fective than human-written textual summaries.
In addition to quantitative performance data,
which is presented elsewhere (van der Meulen et
al., submitted), the evaluation also gave us valuable
clues about what aspects of data-to-text technology
need to be improved in order to make texts gener-
ated by such systems more effective as decision sup-
port aids; this is the subject of this paper. Somewhat
to our surprise, many of the problems identified in
the evaluation relate to the fact that BT-45 could not
produce a good narrative describing the data. Gen-
eration of non-fictional narratives is not something
which has been the focus of much NLG research in
the past, but our results suggest it is important, at
least in the context of producing texts which are ef-
fective decision-support aids.
1.1 Background: Data-to-Text
Data-to-text systems are motivated by the belief that
(brief) linguistic summaries of datasets may in some
cases be more effective than more traditional pre-
sentations of numeric data, such as tables, statistical
analyses, and graphical visualisations (even simple
visual/graphical displays require relatively complex
cognitive processing (Carpenter and Shah, 1998)).
Also linguistic summaries can be delivered in some
contexts where visualisations are not possible, such
as text messages on a mobile phone, or when the
user is visually impaired (Ferres et al, 2006). In the
NICU domain, Law et al (2005) conducted an ex-
periment which showed that medical professionals
were more likely to make the correct treatment deci-
147
sion when shown a human-written textual summary
of the data than when they were shown a graphical
visualisation of the data.
A number of data-to-text systems have been de-
veloped and indeed fielded, especially in the domain
of weather forecasts (Goldberg et al, 1994; Reiter
et al, 2005). Most of these systems have gener-
ated short (paragraph-length or smaller) summaries
of relatively small data sets (less than 1KB). Some
research has been on systems that summarise larger
data sets (Yu et al, 2007; Turner et al, 2008), but
these systems have also generated paragraph-length
summaries; we are not aware of any previous re-
search on generating multi-paragraph summaries in
a data-to-text system.
Data-to-texts systems have been evaluated in a
number of ways, including human ratings (the most
common technique) (Reiter et al, 2005), BLEU-like
scores against human texts (Belz and Reiter, 2006),
post-edit analyses (Sripada et al, 2005), and per-
suasive effectiveness (Carenini and Moore, 2006).
However, again to the best of our knowledge no pre-
vious data-to-text system has been evaluated by ask-
ing users to make decisions based on the generated
texts, and measuring the quality of these decisions.
2 BabyTalk and BT-45
Law et al (2005) showed that human-written textual
summaries were effective decision-support aids in
NICU, but of course it is not practical to expect medi-
cal professionals to routinely write such summaries,
especially considering that the summaries used by
Law et al in some cases took several hours to write.
The goal of the BABYTALK research project is to
use NLG and data-to-text technology to automati-
cally generate textual summaries of NICU data, for a
variety of audiences and purposes. The first system
developed in BABYTALK, and the subject of this pa-
per, is BT-45 (Portet et al, 2007), which generates
summaries of 30-60 minute chunks of clinical data,
for the purpose of helping nurses and doctors make
appropriate treatment decisions.
An example of BABYTALK input data is shown in
Figures 1 (sensor data) and 2 (selected event data).
Figure 3 shows the human-written corpus text for
this scenario, and Figure 4 shows the BT-45 text gen-
erated for this scenario. Note that for the purposes of
Figure 1: Example Babytalk Input Data: Sensors
HR = Heart Rate; TcPO2 = blood O2 level; TCPCO2 =
blood CO2 level; SaO2 = oxygen saturation; T1 = chest
temperature; T2 = toe temperature; mean BP = blood
pressure. The bars and triangles at the bottom show the
time of discrete events (Figure 2).
event time
Blood transfusion 13.35
Intermittent crying 13.38
FiO2 (oxygen level) changed to 50% 13.51
Incubator temperature changed to 36.4 13.52
Attempt to insert line 13.53
Line removed 13.57
Attempt to insert line 13.58
Line removed 14.00
FiO2 (oxygen level) changed to 45% 14.03
Attempt to insert line 14.08
Line removed 14.09
Figure 2: Example Babytalk Input Data: Selected Dis-
crete Events
148
You saw the baby between 13:30 and 14:10.
Over the course of the monitoring period the HR in-
creases steadily from 140 to 165; the BP varies between
41 and 49.
At the start of the period T1 is 37 and T2 is 35.8C.
During the first 15 minutes the pO2 is 7.8-9.2 and the
pCO2 is 5.9-7.3.
At 13:35 a blood transfusion is commenced.
At 13:38 the baby is crying and there are a few up-
ward spikes in the pO2 trace corresponding to downward
spikes in the pCO2 trace. At 13.45 the humidity on the
incubator walls is wiped away and T1 and T2 fall to 36.3
and 35.4 respectively
At 13:50 the baby is examined. There is a desaturation to
72% and the FiO2 is changed to 50%. Between now and
14.10 there are several attempts to site a peripheral can-
nula. The pO2 and pCO2 both have spikes in the traces,
pO2 reaching 19.2 and pCO2 reaching 0.4. There are sev-
eral episodes of artefact in the oxygen saturation trace.
T1 and T2 fall to 36.2 and 35.7 and the oxygen saturation
falls to 65%. The FiO2 is adjusted to 50%. Also at this
time the incubator temperature is adjusted to 36.4C.
At 14:03 with the pO2 at 13.9 and oxygen saturation at
100%, the FiO2 is reduced to 45
At 14:04 T1 rises sharply to 40, then drops fairly steeply
to 28.5C. Between 14.06 and 14.10 there are several
spikes in the pO2 and pCO2 traces but by 14.10 the pO2
is 8, pCO2 is 3.7, the oxygen saturation is 71%, the HR
is 163, the BP 39, T1 29C and T2 35.4C.
Figure 3: Corpus Text for Fig 1, 2 data
this paper, we have deliberately selected a relatively
poor quality BT-45 output text.
The processing performed by BT-45 is described
by Portet et al (2007). Very briefly, BT-45 generates
texts in four stages:
? signal analysis: for example, detecting spikes
in the sensor channels; this is done using adap-
tations of standard pattern detection and recog-
nition algorithms.
? data abstraction: for example, identifying
three line-insertion-attempt and line-removal
events within a short span of time and
grouping these into the higher-level con-
cept LINE-INSERTION-PROCESS-FAILED (BT-
You saw the baby between 13:30 and 14:10. Heart Rate
(HR) = 149. Core Temperature (T1) = 37.0. Periph-
eral Temperature (T2) = 35.8. Transcutaneous Oxygen
(TcPO2 ) = 9.5. Transcutaneous CO2 (TcPCO2) = 6.7.
Mean Blood Pressure (mean BP) = 41. Oxygen Satura-
tion (SaO2) = 94.
Over the next 39 minutes SaO2 decreased to 81, T2 de-
creased to 34.5, HR stayed at around 151, T1 decreased
to 36.2 and mean BP stayed at around 40.
A blood transfusion was given to the baby at 13:35.
At 13:50 there was a desaturation down to 65. As a result,
Fraction of Inspired Oxygen (FIO2) was set to 50
There were 3 failed attempts to insert a peripheral venous
line at 13:53. TcPO2 suddenly decreased to 8.1. SaO2
suddenly increased to 92. TcPO2 suddenly decreased to
9.3. There was a spike in TcPO2 up to 14.8. There had
been another spike in T1 up to 40.5. FIO2 had been low-
ered to 45%. Previously the baby had been examined.
Figure 4: BT-45 Text for Fig 1, 2 data
45 includes a domain ontology of such con-
cepts); this is done using knowledge-based
techniques.
? document planning: for example, deciding not
to mention most of the spikes in O2 and CO2;
this is primarily done in a bottom-up fashion,
using information (computed by the data ab-
straction module) on the medical importance of
events, and also on causal and other relation-
ships between events.
? microplanning and realisation: producing the
actual text shown in Figure 4; this is mostly
done using relatively standard NLG techniques,
although we have developed new techniques
for communicating temporal information and
relationships.
3 Evaluation of BT-45
BT-45 was evaluated by asking medical staff to
make decisions about what actions they should take
with regard to a baby, after viewing either a BT-45
text, a human-written textual summary, or a visual-
isation of the baby?s data; this was similar in gen-
eral terms to the experiment described by Law et al
(2005). van der Meulen et al (submitted) gives de-
149
tails about the evaluation design and quantitative re-
sults of the evaluation; in this paper we just briefly
summarise these aspects of the evaluation
Material: Our medical collaborators selected 24
scenarios (data sets), and defined 18 types of ac-
tions. For each of the data sets, they specified which
of the 18 actions were appropriate, inappropriate, or
neutral (neither appropriate nor inappropriate); one
appropriate action was identified as the main target
action. For the data set shown in Figures 1 and 2, for
example:
? Main target action: Adjust monitoring equip-
ment
? Other appropriate actions: calm/comfort baby,
manage temperature, analyse blood sample
? Neutral actions: adjust CPAP (ventilation) set-
tings, baby care (e.g., nappy change)
? Inappropriate actions: all other actions (e.g.
blood transfusion, order X-Ray) (12 in all)
For each scenario, we created three presentations: a
visualisation (similar to Figure 1), a human-written
text summary written by our collaborators, and the
summary produced by BT-45. Our collaborators
were asked not to include any explicit medical in-
terpretation of the data in their human-written sum-
maries. For each scenario, our collaborators also
prepared a text which gave background information
about the baby.
When developing BT-45, we had access to the
data collection that the scenario data sets were taken
from (which includes several months of data), but
did not know ahead of time which specific scenarios
would be used in the experiment.
Subjects: 35 medical professionals, including ju-
nior nurses, senior nurses, junior doctors, and senior
doctors.
Procedure: Each subject was shown 8 scenarios
in each condition (visualisation, human text, BT-45
text) in a Latin Square design; all subjects were also
shown the background texts. Subjects were asked to
specify which actions should be taken for this baby,
selecting actions from a fixed set of check-boxes;
they were given three minutes to make this deci-
sion. Subjects were not explicitly asked for free-text
comments, but any comments spontaneously made
by subjects were recorded. Subject responses were
scored by computing the percentage of appropriate
actions they selected, and subtracting from this the
percentage of inappropriate actions.
Results: The highest score was achieved by the
human texts (mean score of 0.39); there was no sig-
nificant difference between the BT-45 texts (mean
score of 0.34) and the visualisations (mean score of
0.33). The largest differences occurred in the ju-
nior nurses group. van der Meulen et al (submitted)
present a detailed statistical analysis of the results.
Discussion: This shows that BT-45 texts were as
effective as visualisation, but less effective than the
human texts. This suggests that data-to-text technol-
ogy as it stands could be useful as a supplement to
visualisations (since some individuals do better with
texts and some with graphics; also some data sets are
visualised effectively and some are not), and in con-
texts where visualisation is not possible. But it also
suggests that if we can improve the technology so
that computer-generated texts are as effective as hu-
man texts, we should have a very effective decision-
support technology.
4 Quantitative Comparison of BT-45 and
Corpus Texts
In addition to the task-based evaluation described
above, we also quantitatively compared the BT-45
and human texts, and qualitatively analysed prob-
lems in the BT-45 texts. Quantitative comparison
was done by annotating the BT-45 and human texts
to identify which events they mentioned. For each
scenario, we computed the MASI coefficient (Pas-
sonneau, 2006) between the set of events mentioned
in the BT-45 and human texts. The average MASI
score was 0.21 (SD = 0.13), which is low; this
suggests that BT-45 and the human writers choose
different content. We also checked whether similar
human and BT-45 texts (as judged by MASI score)
obtained similar evaluation scores; in fact there was
no significant correlation between MASI similarity
of human and BT-45 texts and the difference be-
tween their evaluation scores.
We performed a second analysis based on com-
paring the structure (e.g., number and size of para-
graphs) of the BT-45 and human texts, using a
tree-edit-distance metric to compare text structures.
150
Again this showed that there were large differences
between the structure of the BT-45 and human texts,
and that these differences did correlate with differ-
ences in evaluation scores.
In other words, simple metrics of content and
structural differences do not seem to be good pre-
dictors of text effectiveness; this is perhaps not sur-
prising given the complexity of the texts and the in-
formation they are communicating.
5 Qualitative Analysis of Problems in
BT-45 texts
The final step in our evaluation was to qualitatively
analyse the BT-45 texts and the results of the task-
based evaluation, in order to highlight problems in
the BT-45 texts. Of course we were aware of numer-
ous ways in which the software could be improved,
but the evaluation gave us information about which
of these mattered most in terms of overall effective-
ness. We report this analysis below, including issues
identified from subjects? comments, issues identi-
fied from scenarios where BT-45 texts did poorly,
and problems identified via manual inspection of the
texts. We do not distinguish between ?linguistic? and
?reasoning? problems, in part because it is usually
difficult (and indeed somewhat artificial) to separate
these aspects of BT-45.
5.1 Problems Identified by Subjects
Subjects made a number of comments during the ex-
periment. Two aspects of BT-45 were repeatedly
criticised in these comments.
5.1.1 Layout and bullet lists
Subjects wanted better layout and formatting, in
the human texts as well as the BT-45 texts (BT-45
texts do not currently include any visual formatting).
In particular, they wanted bullet lists to be used, es-
pecially for lab results. Such issues have been exten-
sively discussed by other researchers (e.g., (Power et
al., 2003)), we will not further discuss them here.
5.1.2 Continuity
BT-45 sometimes described changes in signals (or
other events) which didn?t make sense because they
omitted intermediate events. For example, consider
the last paragraph in the BT-45 text shown in Fig-
ure 4 (with italics added):
There were 3 failed attempts to insert a pe-
ripheral venous line at 13:53. TcPO2 sud-
denly decreased to 8.1. SaO2 suddenly in-
creased to 92. TcPO2 suddenly decreased
to 9.3. There was a spike in TcPO2 up
to 14.8. There had been another spike in
T1 up to 40.5. FIO2 had been lowered to
45%. Previously the baby had been exam-
ined.
Subjects complained that it made no sense for
TcPO2 to decrease to 9.3 when the last value men-
tioned for this parameter was 8.1
In this case (and in many others like it), BT-45
had identified the decrease events as being medically
important, but had not assigned as much importance,
and hence not mentioned, the increase event (TcPO2
went up to 19) between these decrease events. This
is partially because BT-45 believed that a TcPO2 of
19 is a sensor artefact (not a real reading of blood
oxygen), since 19kPa is a very high value for this
channel. In fact this is a correct inference on BT-
45?s part, but the text is still confusing for readers.
We call this problem continuity, making an anal-
ogy to the problems that film-makers have in ensur-
ing that scenes in a film (which maybe shot in very
different times and locations) fit together in the eyes
of the viewer. It is interesting to note that some of
the human texts also seem to have continuity prob-
lems (for example, the text in Figure 3 says T2 falls
to 35.4, and then says T2 falls to 35.7), but none of
the subjects complained about continuity problems
in the human texts. So some kinds of continuity vio-
lations seem more problematical to readers than oth-
ers. Perhaps this depends on the proximity of the
events both in the document structure and in time;
we hope to empirically explore this hypothesis.
Continuity is just one aspect of the broader prob-
lem of deciding which events need to be explicitly
mentioned in the text, and which can be omitted.
Making such decisions is perhaps one of the hard-
est aspects of data-to-text.
5.2 Scenarios Where BT-45 did Badly
When analysing the results of the experiment, we
noticed that BT-45 texts did as well as the human
texts for scenarios based on five of the eight target
actions; however they did significantly worse than
151
main target action human BT-45 diff
Adjust CPAP 0.37 0.37 0
Adjust monitoring equip 0.59 0.22 0.37
Adjust ventilation 0.22 0.23 -0.01
Extubate 0.14 0.12 0.02
Manage temperature 0.55 0.33 0.22
No action 0.61 0.43 0.18
Suction 0.34 0.42 -0.08
Support blood pressure 0.45 0.55 -0.10
Table 1: Average evaluation score by main target action
the human texts on the scenarios based on the other
three actions (Adjust Monitoring Equipment, Man-
age Temperature, and No Action). Details are shown
in Table 1; an ANOVA confirms that there is a sig-
nificant effect of main target action on scores (p <
.001). We have identified a number of reasons why
we believe this is the case, which we discuss below.
5.2.1 Too much focus on medically important
events
Content-selection in BT-45 is largely driven by
rules that assess the medical importance of events
and patterns. In particular, BT-45 tends to give low
importance to events which it believes are due to
sensor artefacts. While this strategy makes sense
in many cases, it leads to poor performance in sce-
narios where the target action is Adjust Monitor-
ing Equipment, when sensor problems need to be
pointed out to the reader.
This can be seen in the example scenario used in
this paper. The TcPO2 and TcPCO2 traces shown in
Figure 1 are full of sensor artefacts (such as the im-
plausibly high values of TcPO2 mentioned above).
The human text shown in Figure 3 explicitly men-
tions these, for example (italics added)
At 13:50 the baby is examined. There
is a desaturation to 72% and the FiO2 is
changed to 50%. Between now and 14.10
there are several attempts to site a periph-
eral cannula. The pO2 and pCO2 both
have spikes in the traces, pO2 reaching
19.2 and pCO2 reaching 0.4. There are
several episodes of artefact in the oxygen
saturation trace.
The BT-45 text shown in Figure 4, in contrast, only
mentions one spike in TcPO2, and does not mention
any artefacts.
This is a difficult problem to solve, because in
a context where medical intervention was needed,
BT-45 would be correct to ignore the sensor prob-
lems. One solution would be for BT-45 to perform
a top-level diagnosis itself, and adjust its texts based
on whether it believed staff should focus on medi-
cal intervention or adjusting sensors. Whether this
is desirable or even feasible is unclear; it relates to
the more general issue of how a data-summarisation
system such as BT-45 should be integrated with
the kind of diagnosis systems developed by the
AI/Medicine community.
5.2.2 Poor description of related channels
BT-45 essentially describes each channel inde-
pendently. For temperature, however, it is often bet-
ter to describe the two temperature channels together
and even contrast them, which is what the human
texts do; this contributes to BT-45?s poor perfor-
mance in Manage Temperature scenarios.
For example, in one of the Manage Temperature
scenarios, the BT-45 text says
Core Temperature (T1) = 36.4. Peripheral
Temperature (T2) = 34.0. . . .
(new paragraph)Over the next 44 minutes
T2 decreased to 33.4.
The human text says
He is warm centrally but T2 drifts down
over the 45 minutes from 34 to 33.3C.
The information content of the two texts is quite
similar, but the human text describes temperature
in an integrated fashion. Similar problems occur in
other scenarios. In fact, over the 24 scenarios as
a whole, the human texts include only three para-
graphs which mention just one of the temperatures
(T1 or T2, but not both), while the BT-45 texts in-
clude 18 such paragraphs.
BT-45?s document planner is mostly driven by
medical importance and causal relationships; al-
though it does try to group together information
about related channels, this is done as a secondary
optimisation, not as a primary organising principle.
The human texts place a much higher priority on
152
grouping ?physiological systems? (to use NICU ter-
minology) of related channels and events together,
including the respiratory and cardiac systems as well
as the temperature system. We suspect that BT-45
should place more emphasis on systems in its docu-
ment planning.
5.2.3 Poor long-term overview
BT-45 does not do a good job of summarising a
channel?s behaviour over the entire scenario. This
isn?t a problem in eventful scenarios, where the key
is to describe the events; but it does reduce the effec-
tiveness of texts in uneventful scenarios where the
main target action is No Action (i.e., do nothing).
This problem can be seen in the text extracts
shown in the previous section. Even at the level of
individual channels, He is warm centrally is a better
overview than Core Temperature (T1) = 36.4; and
T2 drifts down over the 45 minutes from 34 to 33.3C
is better than Peripheral Temperature (T2) = 34.0.
. . . Over the next 44 minutes T2 decreased to 33.4.
At a signal analysis level, BT-45 also does not
do a good job of detecting patterns (such as spikes)
with a duration of minutes instead of seconds. This
contributes to the system?s poor performance in
Manage Temperature scenarios, because tempera-
ture changes relatively slowly.
We believe these problems can be solved, by
putting more emphasis on analysis and reporting of
long time-scale events in the BT-45 modules.
5.3 Other Problems
We manually examined the texts, looking for cases
where the BT-45 texts did not seem clear. This high-
lighted a number of additional issues.
5.3.1 Describing events at different temporal
time-scales
BT-45 does not always do a good job of correctly
identifying long-term trends in a context where there
are also short-term patterns such as spikes. In fact
accurately detecting simultaneous events at different
time-scales is one of the major signal analysis chal-
lenges in BT-45. There are linguistic issues as well
as signal analysis ones; for example, should long-
duration and short-duration events be described in
separate paragraphs?
5.3.2 Poor communication of time
BT-45 texts often did not communicate time well.
This is for a number of reasons, of which the
most fundamental is problems describing the time
of long-duration events. For instance, in our ex-
ample scenario, the sequence of insert/remove line
events in Figure 2 is analysed by the data-abstraction
module as the abstract event LINE-INSERTION-
PROCESS-FAILED, with a start time of 13.53 (first
insertion event) and an end time of 14.09 (last re-
moval event). BT-45 expresses this as There were 3
failed attempts to insert a peripheral venous line at
13:53; the time given is the time the abstract event
started, which is reasonable in this case. Now, if the
final insertion attempt at 14.08 had been successful,
the BT-45 data abstraction module would have in-
stead produced the abstract event LINE-INSERTION-
PROCESS-SUCCEEDED, with similar times, and BT-
45 would have produced the text
After three attempts, at 13.53 a peripheral
venous line was inserted successfully.
In other words, the time given would still be the time
that the abstract event started; but this is mislead-
ing, because readers of the above text expect that
the stated time is the time of the successful inser-
tion (14.08), not the time at which the sequence of
insert/remove events started.
We need a much better model of how to communi-
cate time, and how this communication depends on
the semantics and linguistic expression of the events
being described. An obvious first step, which we are
currently working on, is to include a linguistically-
motivated temporal ontology (Moens and Steedman,
1988), which will be separate from the existing do-
main ontology. We also need better techniques for
communicating the temporal relationships between
events in cases where they are not listed in chrono-
logical order (Oberlander and Lascarides, 1992).
6 Discussion
Two discourse analysts from Edinburgh University,
Dr. Andy McKinlay and Dr Chris McVittie, kindly
examined and compared some of the human and BT-
45 texts. Their top-level comment was that the hu-
man texts had much better narrative structures than
the BT-45 texts. They use the term ?narrative? in
153
the sense of Labov (1972, Chapter 9); that is story-
like structures which describe real experiences, and
which go beyond just describing the events and in-
clude information that helps listeners make sense of
what happened, such as abstracts, evaluatives, cor-
relatives, and explicatives.
Dr McKinlay and Dr. McVittie pointed out many
of the problems mentioned above, but they also
pointed out a number of other narrative deficiencies
in the BT-45 texts. The most fundamental was that
the human texts did a much better job of linking re-
lated events into a coherent whole. Other deficien-
cies include the lack of any kind of conclusion in the
BT-45 texts.
We agree with this analysis; it is striking that
many of the specific problems identified are related
to the problem of generating narratives. Continu-
ity, description of related channels, overview of be-
haviour over time, and communication of time are
all aspects of narrative in the broad sense; they are
things we need to get right in order to turn a text
into a story. This point is especially significant in
light of the fact that many of our medical collabora-
tors at Edinburgh have informally told us that they
believe stories are valuable when presenting infor-
mation about the babies, and indeed that a major
problem with data visualisation systems compared
to written notes (which they used many years ago) is
that the visualisation systems do not tell stories.
Unfortunately, we are not aware of any previ-
ous research in the NLG community about these is-
sues. Researchers in the creativity community have
looked at issues such as plot and character develop-
ment in systems that generate fictional stories (Perez
y Perez and Sharples, 2004); but this is not relevant
to our problem, which is presenting non-fictional
events as a narrative. Callaway and Lester (2002)
looked at microplanning issues in narrative genera-
tion, including reference, lexical variation, and ag-
gregation; but none of these were identified in our
evaluation as major problems in text quality.
7 Future Work
The BABYTALK project continues until August
2010, and during this period we hope to investigate
most of the issues identified above, especially the
ones related to narrative. We are currently conduct-
ing experiments to improve the way we communi-
cate time, and we have started redoing the docu-
ment planner to do a better job of describing sys-
tems of related channels in a unified manner. We
are also investigating top-down data abstraction and
document planning approaches which we hope will
address continuity problems, and which may assist
in better overviews and narrative structures. We are
also working on many issues not directly related to
narrative, such as reasoning about and communicat-
ing uncertainty, use of vague language, generation
of texts for non-specialists (e.g., parents), and HCI
issues.
We would welcome interest by other researchers
in these topics (there is more that needs investigat-
ing than we can do on our own!), and we would be
happy to assist such people, for example by sharing
some of our code and data resources.
8 Conclusion
We believe that there is enormous potential in sys-
tems such as BABYTALK which generate textual
summaries of data; the world desperately needs bet-
ter techniques to help people understand data sets,
and our experiments suggest that good textual sum-
maries really can help communicate data sets, at
least in some contexts. However, building good
data summarisation systems requires the NLG re-
search community to address a number of problems
which it has not traditionally focused on, many of
which have to do with generating good narratives.
We intend to focus much of our energy on these
issues, and would welcome research contributions
from other members of the community.
Acknowledgements
Many thanks to our colleagues in the BabyTalk
project, and to the doctors and nurses who partic-
ipated in the evaluation; this work would not have
been possible without them. Special thanks to Dr
McKinlay and Dr McVittie for agreeing to anal-
yse the texts for us. We are also grateful to our
colleagues in the Aberdeen NLG group, and to the
anonymous reviewers, for their helpful comments.
This research was funded by the UK Engineer-
ing and Physical Sciences Research Council, under
grant EP/D049520/1.
154
References
A Belz and E Reiter. 2006. Comparing automatic and
human evaluation of NLG systems. In Proceedings of
EACL-2006, pages 313?320.
C Callaway and J Lester. 2002. Narrative prose genera-
tion. Artificial Intelligence, 139:213?252.
G Carenini and J Moore. 2006. Generating and eval-
uating evaluative arguments. Artificial Intelligence,
170:925?952.
P Carpenter and P Shah. 1998. A model of the percep-
tual and conceptual processes in graph comprehension.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 4:74?
100.
L Ferres, A Parush, S Roberts, and G Lindgaard. 2006.
Helping people with visual impairments gain access to
graphical information through natural language: The
iGraph system. In Proceedings of ICCHP-2008.
E Goldberg, N Driedger, and R Kittredge. 1994. Using
natural-language processing to produce weather fore-
casts. IEEE Expert, 9(2):45?53.
W Labov. 1972. Language in the Inner City. University
of Pennsylvania Press.
A Law, Y Freer, J Hunter, R Logie, N McIntosh, and
J Quinn. 2005. A comparison of graphical and textual
presentations of time series data to support medical de-
cision making in the neonatal intensive care unit. Jour-
nal of Clinical Monitoring and Computing, 19:183?
194.
M Moens and M Steedman. 1988. Temporal ontology
and temporal reference. Computational Linguistics,
14(2):15?28.
J Oberlander and A Lascarides. 1992. Preventing false
temporal implicatures: Interactive defaults for text
generation. In Proceedings of COLING-1992, pages
721?727.
R Passonneau. 2006. Measuring agreement on set-
valued items (MASI) for semantic and pragmatic an-
notation. In Proceedings of LREC-2006.
R Perez y Perez and M Sharples. 2004. Three computer-
based models of storytelling: Brutus, Minstrel, and
Mexica. Knowledge-Based Systems, 17:15?29.
F Portet, E Reiter, J Hunter, and S Sripada. 2007. Auto-
matic generation of textual summaries from neonatal
intensive care data. In Proceedings of AIME 2007.
R Power, D Scott, and N Bouayad-Agha. 2003. Doc-
ument structure. Computational Linguistics, 29:211?
260.
E Reiter, S Sripada, J Hunter, J Yu, and I Davy. 2005.
Choosing words in computer-generated weather fore-
casts. Artificial Intelligence, 167:137?169.
E Reiter. 2007. An architecture for Data-to-Text sys-
tems. In Proceedings of ENLG-07, pages 97?104.
S Sripada, E Reiter, and L Hawizy. 2005. Evaluation of
an NLG system using post-edit data: Lessons learned.
In Proceedings of ENLG-2005, pages 133?139.
R Turner, S Sripada, E Reiter, and I Davy. 2008. Using
spatial reference frames to generate grounded textual
summaries of georeferenced data. In Proceedings of
INLG-2008.
M van der Meulen, R Logie, Y Freer, C Sykes, N McIn-
tosh, and J Hunter. submitted. When a graph is poorer
than 100 words: A comparison of computerised natu-
ral language generation, human generated descriptions
and graphical displays in neonatal intensive care.
J Yu, E Reiter, J Hunter, and C Mellish. 2007. Choosing
the content of textual summaries of large time-series
data sets. Natural Language Engineering, 13:25?49.
155
