Proceedings of the Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL 2010, pages 152?156,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Proposal for Multi-Word Expression Annotation in Running Text
Iris Hendrickx, Ama?lia Mendes and Sandra Antunes
Centro de Lingu??stica da Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal
{iris, amalia.mendes, sandra.antunes}@clul.ul.pt
Abstract
We present a proposal for the annotation
of multi-word expressions in a 1M corpus
of contemporary portuguese. Our aim is
to create a resource that allows us to study
multi-word expressions (MWEs) in their
context. The corpus will be a valuable ad-
ditional resource next to the already ex-
isting MWE lexicon that was based on a
much larger corpus of 50M words. In this
paper we discuss the problematic cases for
annotation and proposed solutions, focus-
ing on the variational properties of MWEs.
1 Introduction
Given the widespread studies of co-occurring
words phenomenon, the term ?multi-word expres-
sion? (MWE) usually refers to a sequence of words
that act as a single unit, embracing all different
types of word combinations. Their study is of
extreme importance for computational linguistics,
where applications find notorious difficulties when
dealing with them (Sag et al, 2002).
Having a well-balanced corpus annotated with
multi-word expressions offers the possibility to
analyze the behavior of MWEs as they appear in
running text. Such corpus will contain a rich and
diversified set of MWE and also be an excellent
resource to evaluate automatic MWE identifica-
tion systems. Here we propose our approach to
the manual annotation of the CINTIL corpus (Bar-
reto et al, 2006) with MWE information. This
Portuguese corpus of 1M tokens is a balanced cor-
pus of both spoken and written data from different
sources and has been previously annotated with
linguistic information such as part-of-speech and
lemma and inflection.
As the starting point for our annotation project,
we want to use a Portuguese MWE lexicon con-
taining approximately 14,000 entries. The lexi-
con contains besides idiomatic expressions, also
many collocations: expressions of frequently co-
occurring words that do not show syntactic or se-
mantic fixedness. We are mostly interested in the
idiomatic expressions and will only mark up these
in the corpus.
2 Related Work
There is already quite some work about the cre-
ation and representation of MWE lexicons (Bald-
win and Kim, 2010). Most of the currently avail-
able corpora annotated with MWE information
consist of a collection of extracted sentences con-
taining a MWE (for example the data sets in the
MWE 2008 shared task1). Fellbaum et al (2006)
report on a larger German example corpus consist-
ing of MWEs with their surrounding sentences.
There are also data sets specifically designed for
automatic MWE identification, in which part of
the sentences contains an idiomatic expression and
the other part expresses a literal meaning (e.g.
(Sporleder and Li, 2009)). An example of a bal-
anced corpus fully annotated with MWEs is the
Prague Treebank which is enriched with a diverse
set of MWE annotations (Bo?hmova? et al, 2005).
3 MWE Lexicon
Our annotation proposal uses information from
a lexicon of MWE for Portuguese (available on-
line2). This lexicon is implemented on a MySQL
relational database. The MWEs were extracted
from a 50M words balanced corpus of Portuguese.
The MWE are organized under canonical forms.
Also inflectional variations of the canonical forms
are recorded, in total the lexicon contains 14,153
canonical forms and 48,154 MWEs variations. For
each of those several examples are collected from
the corpus. Each MWE entry is also assigned
1More infomation at: http://multiword.sourceforge.net/
2MWE lexicon: http://www.clul.ul.pt/sectores/linguistica
de corpus/manual combinatorias online.php
152
to one or multiple word lemmas, of a total num-
ber of 1180 single word lemmas. The MWE
were selected from a sorted list of n-grams based
on the mutual information measure (Church and
Hanks, 1990) and validated manually (Mendes et
al., 2006; Antunes et al, 2006; Bacelar do Nasci-
mento et al, 2006).
4 Proposed annotation
In this section we discuss our approach to the an-
notation of MWEs in the corpus.
4.1 Typology
We want to classify each idiomatic MWE occur-
ring in the CINTIL corpus according to a typol-
ogy that expresses the typical properties of the
MWE. Although the lexicon of MWEs covers a
wide range of units, from idiomatic expressions
to collocations, we decided to restrict our anno-
tation of the corpus to cases of idiomatic MWEs
because those are the problematic ones for any
task of semantic annotation and disambiguation.
The MWE lexicon does not provide labels for id-
iomatic vs. compositional expressions, so this in-
formation will have to be added during the anno-
tation task. Identifying idiomatic MWEs is not a
simple task. For clear cases of idiomatic units, the
global meaning can not be recovered by the sum of
the individual meanings of the elements that com-
pose the expression.
In other cases, only part of the MWE has an id-
iomatic meaning, while one or more of the ele-
ments are used in their literal meaning (e.g sau?de
de ferro ?iron health?). Deciding if one of the ele-
ments of the MWE is literal or not depends in fact
of our definition of literal: if we consider it to be
the first prototypical meaning of a word, this very
restrictive definition will trigger us to label a large
number of MWEs as idiomatic. Other MWEs are
compositional but receive an additional meaning,
like carta?o vermelho in football, which is literally
a red card but has an additional meaning of pun-
ishment.
We want to cover these different cases in our an-
notation, and to establish a typology that takes into
account morpho-syntactic and semantic aspects of
the MWE: its functional part-of-speech (PoS) cat-
egory, the PoS categories of its internal elements,
its fixed or semi-fixed nature, its global or partial
idiomatic property and motivation, and possible
additional meanings.
4.2 Division by syntactic category
When studying the MWE lexicon, we noticed dif-
ferent properties of MWEs according to their syn-
tactic patterns. Consequently, we propose to di-
vide our annotation guidelines according to each
syntactic pattern and to establish different proper-
ties that enables us to distinguish literal from id-
iomatic usage. At the sentence level, MWEs such
as proverbs or aphorisms (e.g. a?gua mole em pe-
dra dura tanto bate ate? que fura lit. ?water in hard
rock beats so long that it finally breaks?) have spe-
cific properties: they do not accept any possible
syntactic changes like passivization or relativiza-
tion, they do not accept any inflectional variation,
the only possible change is lexical (when speakers
substitute one or more elements, like we will dis-
cuss in section 4.4). However fixed, the meaning
of this example is clearly motivated and composi-
tional in the sense that it is recovered by the mean-
ing of the individual elements. On the contrary,
MWEs which are verb phrases will admit much
more morpho-syntactic variation. Moreover, noun
phrases raise specific issues: the most syntacti-
cally fixed units will be very close or identical to
compound nouns. For example, the meaning of
the prepositional modifier of the noun can be lit-
eral but the overall expression will still be used as
a compound and will denote a very specific entity,
frequently from domain-specific languages (pro-
jecto de lei ?project of legislation?, contrato de
compra e venda ?sell contract?). Moreover, the
prepositional and adjectival modifiers of the noun
will express many different semantic relationships
(part of, made of, used for) which interact with the
meaning (literal or idiomatic) of the noun (Calzo-
lari et al, 2002). Establishing specific guidelines
for these different types of MWEs will enable a
more accurate annotation. To decide upon the dif-
ficult cases of idiomatic and non-idiomatic usage,
we plan to use the intuitions of different annota-
tors.
4.3 Linking to MWE lexicon
We will annotate each encountered MWE in the
corpus with a link to the MWE-entry in the lexi-
con, instead of labelling each MWE with its typol-
ogy. This way we link each MWE to its canonical
form and other additional information. Moreover,
we can easily gather all occurrences of one par-
ticular canonical MWE and check its variation in
the corpus. It will also allow us to work with a
153
more detailed typology and will give us the possi-
bility to revise it during the annotation process. It
might be difficult to establish beforehand very pre-
cise guidelines that will apply to all the MWEs and
even to all the MWEs of a specific subtype. Of-
ten, guidelines are constantly in need of revision as
we encounter slightly different contexts who chal-
lenges decisions previously taken.
The corpus annotation will enable us to extend
the information in the MWE lexicon with typol-
ogy labels regarding the whole expression (func-
tion, idiomatic meaning) but also regarding indi-
vidual words of the expression as to whether they
are obligatory or not.
We plan to add a meaning to idiomatic expres-
sions using a dictionary. We expect that MWEs
will be unambiguous: they have the same meaning
each time they are used. In some cases, the syn-
onym or paraphrase proposed for the MWE might
not be able to replace the MWE in the corpus
context. For example, the MWE a`s ma?os cheias
means em grande quantidade ?in large quantity?,
but this meaning can not always replace the MWE
in context.
The annotation process of fully fixed expres-
sions could be retrieved automatically. For the
variable expressions we will combine automatic
retrieval with manual validation, Here the auto-
matic retrieval step will aim for a high recall and
select all sentences that contain the lemmas of
the MWE. Without doubt our corpus will contain
many MWEs that are not yet listed in the MWE
lexicon. Therefore each sentence will need to be
checked manually for MWEs. We can create the
links between the lexicon and MWEs in the cor-
pus automatically, but again, as not all MWEs will
occur in the lexicon, we will need to do a manual
validation of the automatic labelling and also add
newly discovered MWEs to the lexicon.
4.4 MWE Variation
Corpus analysis clearly shows that MWEs have
different types of internal variation. Following
Moon (1998), we will also assume that, in most of
the cases, these expressions ?have fixed or canon-
ical forms and that variations are to some extent
derivative or deviant?. The canonical forms of
(variable) expressions are listed in the MWE lex-
icon. Mapping MWE occurrences in the corpus
to their canonical form can be a hard task depend-
ing on the flexibility of the MWE. In the next part
we discuss our proposal how to handle the anno-
tation of several types of variation in MWEs: lex-
ical, syntactic and structural variation, lexical in-
sertions and truncation of MWEs.
4.4.1 Lexical diversity
MWEs have a wide range of lexical variation and
it can apply to any type of grammatical category,
although we do notice that verb variation is the
commonest type. Studying the lexicon showed
us that there is a group of cases in which a word
in a MWE can only be replaced by another word
from a very limited set (usually not larger than 10
words) of synonyms or antonyms. For these cases
this set is already recorded in the MWE lexicon.
We mark these variable words as: ?obligatory parts
of the MWE and member of a specified list?. In 1
we show an example: the canonical form followed
by a sentence containing this MWE and the En-
glish translations.
Many MWEs also contain parts that are almost
lexically free or only restricted to a semantic class
such as person or named entity. These elements
are represented in the MWE lexicon with a pro-
noun (e.g. algue?m, algum (?someone?, ?some-
thing?)) or the tag NOUN (with possible gen-
der/number restrictions) when a pronoun cannot
substitute the free part. When marking up these
elements in the corpus, we will label them with
a reference to the pronoun used in the canonical
form (example 2).
(1) dizer/ sair da boca para fora
(to say / to get out from the mouth outside)
Arrependeu-se com o que lhe saiu da boca
para fora
?She regretted her slip of the tongue?
(2) estar nas ma?os de ALGUE?M
A nossa vida esta? nas ma?os de Deus
?Our life is in the hands of God?
MWEs are not always contiguous: it is frequent
to encounter insertion of lexical elements which
do not belong to the canonical form of the MWE.
Often, the function of the inserted elements is ad-
verbial, quantificational or emphatic. Or the MWE
occurs in a negative context, by the insertion of the
adverb na?o. Such inserted elements that are not
part of the MWE are not labelled. This is the case
of the quantifier muitas in (3), which is not part
of the canonical form of the MWE dar voltas a`
cabec?a ?to think?.
154
(3) Dei muitas voltas a` cabec?a para encontrar
uma soluc?a?o.
?I?ve been thinking a lot to find a solution.?
Another type of MWE variation is truncation:
only a part of the full expression is lexically re-
alized. This phenomenon usually occurs with
proverbs and sayings. For example in 4 the brack-
eted part was not realized in the sentence, but it
is part of the canonical form in the MWE lexicon.
When marking up such truncated expressions we
do not label explicitly this phenomenon, we just
mark up the occurring part with a reference link to
MWEs in the lexicon.
(4) mais vale um pa?ssaro na ma?o (do que dois a
voar)
?bird in the hand is worth (two in the bush)?
4.4.2 Syntactic variation
An obvious form of syntactic variation is inflec-
tion of verbs and nouns. Since Portuguese is
a highly inflectional language, practically all the
verbs that occur in MWEs inflect, except for some
fixed sayings. Also shifting from active to passive
voice leads to syntactic variation. We do not label
auxiliary verbs as part of the MWE.
Several MWEs that have a free part such as ex-
ample 2 do not only exhibit lexical variation but
also syntactic variation: pronominalization (estar
nas ma?os dele) or with a possessive form (estar
nas suas ma?os). In such cases we will mark up
possessives as part of the MWE but give them an
additional label to signal that they are optional el-
ements. However, possessives are not always op-
tional, sometimes it is an obligatory part of the
canonical form and we will annotate it normally
(e.g. o lea?o mostra a sua rac?a. ?the lion shows
what he?s made off?).
Also permutations of the MWE can occur
(ex.5). We do not signal this phenomenon in our
annotation as this can easily be detected when
comparing to the canonical form.
(5) estar de ma?os e pe?s atados / estar de pe?s e
ma?os atados
?to be tied hand and foot/ foot and hand?
4.4.3 Structural variation
True idioms are both semantically and syntacti-
cally fixed. However, language use is creative and
can lead to MWEs that only partly match the ?real?
MWE as listed in the MWE lexicon. For these
cases we mark up the different part with an extra
label to clarify which part exactly varies. For ex-
ample 6.
(6) no poupar e? que esta? o ganho
in the saving is the profit
no esperar / provar / comparar e? que esta?
o ganho
in waiting / proving / comparing is the profit
(7) ja? dei voltas e voltas a` cabec?a
?thoughs went on and on in my mind?
(8) ALGO e? a ma?e de todas NOUN-PL
?something is the mother of all x?
a educac?a?o e? a ma?e de todas as civilizac?o?es
a liberdade e? a ma?e de todas as virtudes
?education is the mother of all civilizations?
?freedom is the mother of all virtues?
Another interesting case is shown in example 7 in
wich a part of the MWE is duplicated for empha-
sis. This should be treated differently than the ex-
ample in 3. In these cases we will label the du-
plicated part as ?part of the MWE but optional?
(similar to possessives).
There are cases in which part of the MWE may
vary without any apparent limits, while the other
part remains fixed. An example can be found in 8.
These are actually just an extension of ones we al-
ready discussed (see example 2) and we treat them
in the same matter.
5 Conclusion
In sum, we propose to split the annotation of
MWEs to develop separate annotation guidelines
for the grammatical categories, as we have ob-
served that e.g. nominal MWEs behave differ-
ently than verbal MWEs. Each MWE in the run-
ning text will be linked to its canonical form in the
lexicon. The lexicon itself will be enhanced with
additional information such as typology informa-
tion and MWE meaning. Special elements of the
MWE such as optional or variable parts will be ex-
plicitly marked as such both in the lexicon and in
the annotation of the MWE in the corpus. We are
convinced that the implementation of our proposal
will lead to a rich new resource that can help us
study the behavior of MWE in more depth. We
also plan to use this resource for the development
and evaluation of automatic MWE identification
systems.
155
References
S. Antunes, M. F. Bacelar do Nascimento, J. M. Caster-
leiro, A. Mendes, L. Pereira, and T. Sa?. 2006. A lex-
ical database of portuguese multiword expressions.
In LNAI, volume 3960, pages 238?243. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, (PROPOR 2006).
M. F. Bacelar do Nascimento, A. Mendes, and S. An-
tunes, 2006. Spoken Language Corpus and Linguis-
tic Informatics, chapter Typologies of MultiWord
Expressions Revisited: A Corpus-driven Approach,
pages 227?244. Coll. Usage-Based Linguistic Infor-
matics, vol.V. John Benjamins.
T. Baldwin and S. Nam Kim. 2010. Multiword ex-
pressions. In Nitin Indurkhya and Fred J. Damerau,
editors, Handbook of Natural Language Process-
ing, Second Edition. CRC Press, Taylor and Francis
Group, Boca Raton, FL. ISBN 978-1420085921.
F. Barreto, A. Branco, E. Ferreira, A. Mendes, M. F. P.
Bacelar do Nascimento, F. Nunes, and J. Silva.
2006. Open resources and tools for the shallow pro-
cessing of portuguese. In Proceedings of the 5th In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC2006), Genoa, Italy.
A. Bo?hmova?, S. Cinkova?, and E. Hajic?ova?. 2005. A
Manual for Tectogrammatical Layer Annotation of
the Prague Dependency Treebank (English transla-
tion). Technical report, U?FAL MFF UK, Prague,
Czech Republic.
N. Calzolari, C. Fillmore, R. Grishman, N. Ide,
A. Lenci, C. MacLeod, and A. Zampolli. 2002.
Towards best practice for multiword expressions in
computational lexicon. In Proceedings of the Third
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC?2002), pages 1934?1940,
Las Palmas, Spain.
K.W. Church and P. Hanks. 1990. Word association
norms, mutual information, and lexicography. Com-
putational Linguistics, 16(1):22?29.
C. Fellbaum, A. Geyken, A. Herold, F. Koerner, and
G. Neumann. 2006. Corpus-based studies of ger-
man idioms and light verbs. International Journal
of Lexicography, 19(4):349?360.
A. Mendes, M. F. Bacelar do Nascimento, S. Antunes,
and L. Pereira. 2006. COMBINA-PT: a large
corpus-extracted and hand-checked lexical database
of portuguese multiword expressions. In Proceed-
ings of LREC 2006, pages 1900?1905, Genoa, Italy.
R. Moon. 1998. Fixed expressions and idioms in en-
glish: A corpus-based approach. In Oxford Studies
in Lexicography and Lexicology. Clarendon Press,
Oxford.
I. Sag, T. Baldwin, F. Bond, A. Copestake, and
D. Flickinger. 2002. Multiword Expressions: A
Pain in the Neck for NLP. In Proceedings of
CICLING-2002.
C. Sporleder and L. Li. 2009. Unsupervised recog-
nition of literal and non-literal use of idiomatic ex-
pressions. In Proceedings of the 12th Conference
of the European Chapter of the ACL (EACL 2009),
pages 754?762, Athens, Greece, March. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
156
Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2013), pages 87?92,
Atlanta, Georgia, 13-14 June 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
MWE in Portuguese: Proposal for a Typology  
for Annotation in Running Text 
 
 
Sandra Antunes and Am?lia Mendes 
Centro de Lingu?stica da Universidade de Lisboa 
Av. Prof. Gama Pinto, 2 
1649-003 Lisboa, Portugal 
{sandra.antunes, amalia.mendes}@clul.ul.pt 
  
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
Based on a lexicon of Portuguese MWE, this 
presentation focuses on an ongoing work that 
aims at the creation of a typology that de-
scribes these expressions taking into account 
their semantic, syntactic and pragmatic prop-
erties. We also plan to annotate each MWE-
entry in the mentioned lexicon according to 
the information obtained from that typology. 
Our objective is to create a valuable resource, 
which will allow for the automatic identifica-
tion MWE in running text and for a deeper 
understanding of these expressions in their 
context. 
1 Introduction 
As it is widely known, the lexicon does not consist 
mainly of simple lexical items but appears to be 
populated with numerous chunks, more or less 
predictable, though not fixed (Firth, 1955). In fact, 
the development of computer technologies and 
corpus-based approaches has enabled the identifi-
cation of complex patterns of word associations, 
proving that the speakers use a large number of 
preconstructed phrases that constitute single choic-
es (Sinclair, 1991:110). Several studies have also 
shown that great part of a speaker?s lexicon is 
composed by these word associations (Jackendoff, 
1997; Fellbaum, 1998). These multiword expres-
sions (MWE)1 appear in every kind of spoken and 
                                                          
1
 The term multiword expression will be used to refer to any 
sequence of words that act as a single unit, embracing all dif-
ferent types of word combinations (collocations, compound 
nouns, light verbs, institutionalized phrases, idioms, etc.). 
written discourse and, despite the fact that they 
don?t pose any problems from the speaker?s point 
of view (we easily recognize that they function as a 
single unit that may have a specific meaning), nat-
ural language processing (NLP) applications, on 
the other hand, find notorious difficulties when 
dealing with them (Sag et al, 2000). 
Bearing in mind the extreme importance of the 
study of this linguistic phenomenon for the im-
provement of NLP systems, this paper will address 
an ongoing analysis that aims to create a typology 
for MWE in Portuguese (based on a MWE lexicon 
previously extracted from a 50 million word writ-
ten corpus) that will be used to enrich that lexicon 
with extensive information regarding these expres-
sions. This annotated lexicon will be a resource 
that will allow for the annotation of these expres-
sions in running text (Hendrickx et al, 2010a). 
This presentation will briefly discuss compila-
tion of the lexicon and the methodology adopted 
for MWE selection and organization (section 2), 
the typology based on syntactic, semantic and sta-
tistic criteria (section 3), the annotation proposal of 
the lexicon (section 4) and applications of the work 
(section 5). 
2 MWE: Corpus and Lexicon 
The work we are going to present used the lexicon 
of word combinations2 that was created within the 
scope of the project COMBINA-PT ? Word Com-
binations in Portuguese Language3. The corpus 
used for their extraction was 50 million word writ-
                                                          
2
 The lexicon is available at Meta-Share repository: 
http://www.meta-net.eu/meta-share. 
3
 https://www.clul.ul.pt/en/research-teams/187-combina-pt-
word-combinations-in-portuguese-language 
87
ten corpus extracted from the Reference Corpus of 
Contemporary Portuguese4, and has the constitu-
tion presented in Table 1 (Mendes et al, 2006): 
 
CORPUS CONSTITUTION 
Newspapers   30.000.000 
Books   10.917.889 
Magazines   
  7.500.000 
Miscellaneous   1.851.828 
Leaflets   104.889 
Supreme court verdicts   313.962 
Parliament sessions   277.586 
TOTAL   50.966.154 
Table 1. Constitution of the corpus 
 
 The MWE in the lexicon are organized in order 
to identify a main lemma (from which the MWE 
was selected) and a group lemma, which corre-
sponds to the canonical form of the MWE and 
covers all the variants that occurred in the corpus. 
Concordances lines for each MWE are also avail-
able in KIWIC format. Table 2 illustrates some 
MWE that were identified when analyzing the 
lemma fogo ?fire?. 
 
Main Lemma 
fogo ?fire? 
Group Lemma 
arma de fogo ?firearm? 
Concordances 
uma arma de fogo relativamente leve 
?a relatively light firearm? 
800 mil portugueses possuem armas de fogo 
?800 thousand Portuguese have firearms? 
Group Lemma 
baptismo de fogo ?baptism of fire? 
Concordances 
teve o seu baptismo de fogo no assalto 
?he had his baptism of fire in a robbery? 
Group Lemma 
fogo cruzado ?crossfire? 
Concordances 
civis apanhados no fogo cruzado entre o ex?rcito 
?civilians were caught in a crossfire between the army? 
Group Lemma 
fogo de artif?cio ?firework? 
Concordances 
espect?culos de fogo de artif?cio 
?firework shows? 
? 1 hora haver? fogos de artif?cio 
?there will be fireworks at 1:00 a.m.? 
Table 2. Example of MWE for the lemma fogo ?fire? 
 
                                                          
4
 CRPC is a monitor corpus of 311 million words, constituted 
by sampling from several types of written and spoken text and 
comprising all the national and regional varieties of Portu-
guese (https://www.clul.ul.pt/en/research-teams/183-
reference-corpus-of-contemporary-portuguese-crpc). 
In all, the lexicon comprises 1.180 main lemmas, 
14.153 group lemmas and 48.154 word combina-
tions. 
 Mendes et al (2006) describe the criteria used 
for MWE selection: following the results of previ-
ous studies (Evert and Krenn, 2001; Pereira and 
Mendes, 2002), the authors first selected groups 
with MI5 values between 8 and 10, and, throughout 
manual validation, applied several criteria upon 
which usually relies the definition of a MWE: 
a) lexical and syntactic fixedness that can be ob-
served through the possibility of replacing ele-
ments, inserting modifiers, changing the 
syntagmatic structure or gender/number features; 
b) total or partial loss of compositional meaning, 
which means that the meaning of the expressions 
can not be predicted by the meaning of the parts; 
c) frequency of occurrence, which means that the 
expressions may be semantically compositional but 
occur with high frequency, revealing sets of fa-
voured co-occurring forms, which could tell that 
they may be in their way to a possible fixedness. 
3 Data Analysis: Towards a Typology 
In contrast to languages for which there is a wide 
range of studies regarding MWE both from a lin-
guistic and a computational point of view, for Por-
tuguese little work has been done so far. Great part 
of the existing studies had paid more attention to 
idiomatic expressions and compound nouns in 
general, relegating the analysis of other types of 
expressions to the morphossyntactic properties of 
its elements (Mac?rio Lopes, 1992; Chacoto, 1994; 
Baptista, 1994; Vilela, 2002; Ranchhod, 2003)6. 
Considering the existence of different types of 
MWE with different degrees of syntactic and se-
mantic cohesion, our analysis tries to categorize 
these expressions taking into account their lexical, 
syntactic, semantic and pragmatic properties. Thus, 
from a semantic standpoint, three major classes 
were considered: (i) expressions with composition-
al meaning (p?o de centeio ?rye bread?); (ii) ex-
pressions with partial idiomatic meaning, i.e., at 
least one of the elements keeps its literal meaning 
                                                          
5
 Statistical association measure (Church and Hanks, 1990). 
6
 Some research has been carried out regarding the identifica-
tion and annotation of Complex Predicates, usually called in 
the literature Light Verb Constructions or Support Verb Con-
structions (Hendrickx et al, 2010b; Duran et al, 2011; Zeller 
and Pad?, 2012). 
88
(vontade de ferro ?iron will?); (iii) expressions with 
total idiomatic meaning (p?s de galinha ?crow?s 
feet?). 
 Note, however, that one may find notorious dif-
ficulties regarding the evaluation of the meaning of 
certain expressions that seems to be linked to two 
major factors: (i) the polysemous nature of the 
words (it is necessary to establish a boundary be-
tween compositional and figurative meanings. If 
we consider the literal meaning to be the first pro-
totypical meaning of a word, this restrictive defini-
tion will trigger us to consider a large number of 
MWE as idiomatic); (ii) the awareness of the se-
mantic motivation that had led to the idiomatic 
meanings, which depends on cultural and social 
factors. 
 This semantic criterion implies that the same 
type of MWE may occur in different classes. It is 
the case with compound nouns. Although we tried 
to accentuate the different degrees of lexicalization 
of this type of expressions, we are acutely aware 
that drawing this dividing line neither is easy nor 
allows for accurate definitions and divisions. 
 Within each of these three semantic categories, 
the expressions are also analyzed according to their 
grammatical category and lexical and syntactic 
fixedness. Regarding the latest aspect, the expres-
sions may be: (i) fixed (no variation); (ii) semi-
fixed (nominal/verbal inflection)7; (iii) with varia-
tion: lexical (permutation, replacement of ele-
ments, insertion of modifiers) and/or syntactic 
(constructions with passives, relatives, pronouns, 
extraction, adjectival vs. prepositional modifiers). 
 Our typology relies, then, on several categories, 
some of which we will briefly present. 
 
Expressions with Compositional Meaning 
 Favoured co-occurring forms ? expressions that 
occurred with high frequency in the corpus, reveal-
ing a tendency to co-occur in certain contexts (p?o 
seco ?dry bread?, desvendar o mist?rio ?unravel the 
mystery?). Expressions with full lexical and syn-
tactic variation8. 
 Compound nouns ? expressions that represent a 
single concept (noite de n?pcias ?wedding night?, 
cama de casal ?double bed?, cavalo alaz?o9 ?chest-
nut horse?, Idade do Ferro ?Iron Age?). Usually, 
                                                          
7
 Since Portuguese is a highly inflectional language, practical-
ly all the verbs and nouns that occur in MWE inflect. 
8
 More examples of variation will be included in Section 4. 
9
 ?Lexikalische Solidarit?ten? (Coseriu, 1967). 
these expressions are semi-fixed. However, we 
also observed that some combinations may occur 
in a small distributional paradigm (cama de 
solteiro ?single bed?) that allows for predicative 
constructions (a cama ? de solteiro lit. ?the bed is 
single?). Entities are fixed. 
 Institutionalized expressions ? expressions ob-
served with higher frequency than any alternative 
lexicalization of the same concept (lufada de ar 
fresco ?breath of fresh air?, condenar ao fracasso 
?doomed to failure?, abrir um precedente ?set a 
precedent?). Apart from inflection, since there are 
alternative expressions, we also observed lexical 
variation, such as substitution (rajada de ar fresco 
?rush of fresh air?), insertion of modifiers 
(condenar este projecto ao fracasso lit. ?to doom 
this project to failure?) and change in the syntag-
matic structure (o precedente foi aberto ?a prece-
dent has been set?, abertura de um precedente lit. 
?the opening of a precedent?). 
 Ligh verb constructions ? expressions where 
the noun is used in a normal sense and the verb 
meaning appears to be bleached (dar um passeio 
?take a walk?). Expressions with lexical and syn-
tactic variation (substitution, insertion of modifi-
ers, change in the syntagmatic structure). 
 proverbs (no poupar ? que est? o ganho ?profit 
is in saving?). Despite our conception of proverbs 
as frozen expressions, the fact is that speakers? lex-
ical creativity may result in the production of ex-
pressions such as no 
anunciar/atacar/descontar/esperar/comparar ? 
que est? o ganho ?profit is in announc-
ing/attacking/discounting/waiting/comparing?. 
 
Expressions with Partial Idiomatic Meaning 
 Expressions with an additional meaning that 
can not be derived from the meaning of its parts10, 
(cintur?o negro ?black belt? + martial arts expert, 
abrir a boca ?open the mouth? + to speak/to yawn, 
deitar as m?os ? cabe?a lit. ?throw the hands in the 
head? (throw one?s hands up) + despair). Nominal 
expressions are semi-fixed while verbal expres-
sions may undergo inflection and lexical variation, 
such as substitution (levar/lan?ar as m?os ? 
cabe?a lit. ?put/lay the hands in the head?) and in-
sertion of modifiers (deitou logo as m?os ? cabe?a 
lit. ?put immediately his hands in his head?). 
                                                          
10
 Quasi-phrasemes or quasi-idioms (Mel?cuk, 1998). 
89
 Compound nouns: (i) the meaning does not oc-
cur in any other combination (sorriso amarelo lit. 
?yellow smile? ? yellow = wry); (ii) the meaning 
may occur in different combinations (caf? fresco 
?fresh coffe?, p?o fresco ?fresh bread? ? fresh = 
recent); (iii) periphrastic nouns11 (continente negro 
?black continent? = Africa); (iv) entities (dama de 
ferro ?iron lady?). Apart from inflection, some ex-
pressions are subject to lexical and syntactic varia-
tion, namely insertion of modifiers (sorriso muito 
amarelo lit. ?smile very yellow?), alternation be-
tween simple elements and elements with suffixes 
(sorrisinho amarelo lit. ?little yellow smile?) and 
alternation between adjectival and prepositional 
modifiers (sil?ncio mortal ?deadly silence?, 
sil?ncio de morte ?silence of death?). Entities are 
fixed. 
 
Expressions with Total Idiomatic Meaning 
 Expressions transposed to another semantic 
field by metaphoric process (balde de ?gua fria 
?cold shower?, faca de dois gumes ?double-edge 
knife?, esticar o pernil ?kick the bucket?, deitar 
?gua na fervura ?pour oil on troubled waters?, a 
sangue frio ?in cold blood?). Adverbial expressions 
are fixed. Some of the nominal and verbal struc-
tures may undergo lexical and syntactic variation, 
such as substitution (arma/espada/pau de dois 
gumes ?double-edge weapon/sword/stick?), inser-
tion of modifiers (deitar mais ?gua na fervura 
?pour more oil on troubled waters?), permutation 
(estar de m?os e p?s atados ?bound hand and foot?, 
estar de p?s e m?os atados ?bound foot and hand? 
(helpless)) and occurrence both in negative and 
affirmative sentences (ter olhos na cara lit. ?have 
eyes in the face? (put things in perspective), n?o ter 
olhos na cara lit. ?do not have eyes in the face?). 
 Compound nouns (flor de estufa ?greenhouse 
plant? (delicate person); m?o de ferro ?iron fist?). 
Apart from inflection, we observed alternation be-
tween simple elements and elements with suffixes. 
 Proverbs (gr?o a gr?o enche a galinha o papo 
lit. ?grain by grain the hen fills its belly? (little 
strokes fell great oaks)). As in compositional prov-
erbs, we also observed lexical variation (gr?o a 
gr?o enche muita gente o papo lit. ?grain by grain 
lots of people fill their bellies?). 
 
                                                          
11
 Cf. Sanrom?n, 2000. 
 In what idiomatic expressions are concerned, it 
is important to note the fact that the transposition 
of an expression to another semantic field is a syn-
chronic process that usually implies that at some 
point in time (including the present day) the ex-
pressions may simultaneously present composi-
tional and idiomatic meanings (porto de abrigo 
?harbor?; ?safe haven?). Curiously, from a statisti-
cal point of view, our study showed that the idio-
matic meaning is the one that usually presents high 
frequency of occurrence. This information, togeth-
er with the interpretation of the context, may help 
the automatic systems to decide whether they face 
a compositional or idiomatic expression. 
 In a sweeping look at the data, we observed that 
MWE show particular properties according to their 
syntactic pattern. Thus, at the sentence level (prov-
erbs and aphorisms), MWE usually do not accept 
syntactic changes (the possible change seems to be 
lexical, when speakers substitute one or more ele-
ments), while verb phrases admit much more 
morphossyntactic variation. Noun phrases, on the 
other hand, raise specific issues. Compositional 
groups can behave as idiomatic ones and it is not 
always easy to distinguish them. The modifiers of 
the noun can express different semantic relations 
(part of, made of, used for) that may interact with 
the meaning (literal or idiomatic) of the noun. 
4 Annotation of the Lexicon 
The information presented on our typology will 
allow us to enrich the lexicon mentioned in Section 
2. Our purpose is to have each MWE entry in the 
lexicon labeled regarding: (i) canonical form of the 
expression; (ii) definition of idiomatic expressions 
through synonyms or literal paraphrases; (iii) 
grammatical category of both the expression and 
its elements; (iv) idiomatic property and additional 
meanings; (v) possible variation; (vi) function of 
MWE parts (e.g., obligatory, optional, free). 
 As we have seen before, MWE have different 
types of variation for which we have to account 
for. We will briefly discuss our proposal for han-
dling the annotation of some cases of lexical and 
syntactic variation in the lexicon. 
 
Lexical Variation 
 Insertion of modifiers ? lexical elements (usual-
ly with an emphatic function) that do not belong to 
the canonical form are not part of the MWE and 
90
are not labeled (sorriso muito amarelo lit. ?smile 
very yellow?). 
 Lexical substitution ? This variation is restrict-
ed to limited set of alternatives. This set is record-
ed in the MWE lexicon as ?obligatory parts of the 
MWE and member of a set list? (com-
er/vender/comprar/impingir/levar gato por lebre 
lit. ?eat/sell/buy/impose/take a cat instead of a 
hare? (buy a pig in a poke)). 
 Free lexical elements ? These elements are 
marked in the lexicon with, e. g., a pronoun 
(ALGU?M ?someone?, ALGUM ?something?) or a 
particular phrase (NP, PP) (estar nas m?os de 
ALGU?M  ?to be in the hands of someone?). 
There are also cases where parts of the MWE may 
freely vary, while other parts remain fixed (a 
educa??o ? a m?e de todas as civiliza??es ?educa-
tion is the mother of all civilizations?, a liberdade ? 
a m?e de todas as virtudes ?liberty is the mother of 
all virtues?). These cases are treated likewise 
(ALGO ? a m?e de todas as NOUN-PL ?something 
is the mother of all NOUN-PL?) 
Also, since creative use of language can lead to 
MWEs that only partly match the canonical MWE 
(cf. proverbs), we label these parts as 'different 
from canonical form'. 
 
Syntactic Variation 
 Pronouns/Possessives ? These elements will be 
marked up as part of the MWE, but will have an 
additional label to signal that they are optional 
(estar nas m?os dele/estar nas suas m?os ?to be in 
the hands of him?/?to be in his hands?). 
 From active to passive voice ? Auxiliary verbs 
are not labeled as part of the MWE (passar ALGO 
a pente fino/ALGO foi passado a pente fino lit. 
?pass something with a fine tooth-
comb?/?something was passed with a fine tooth-
comb? (to scrutinize)). 
 
 According to Hendrickx et al (2010a), this an-
notated lexicon could be the basis for the annota-
tion of idiomatic MWE in running text12. Each 
MWE encountered in the corpus would be annotat-
ed with a link to the corresponding entry in the 
lexicon. Linking each MWE to its canonical form 
                                                          
12
 The authors? approach is to annotate CINTIL corpus, a 1M 
word corpus of both spoken and written data from different 
sources that has been previously annotated with linguistic 
information such as part-of-speech, lemma, inflection, proper 
names, etc. (http://cintil.ul.pt/pt/). 
would allow for an easier detection of all occur-
rences of one particular MWE and check its varia-
tion in the corpus. The annotation process would 
combine automatic retrieval with manual valida-
tion in order to better account for variable expres-
sions. Without doubt, the corpus would contain 
many MWE that were not yet listed in the lexicon. 
Therefore, each sentence would need to be checked 
manually for new MWE and the newly discovered 
expression would be manually added to the lexi-
con. 
5 Conclusion 
This paper has shown the ongoing research that 
aims to describe, as detailed as possible, the syn-
tactic and semantic properties of different types of 
Portuguese MWE. During our analysis, we en-
countered two major problems: (i) the evaluation 
of the meaning of certain expressions (composi-
tional or idiomatic); (ii) the attempt to account for 
all possible lexical and syntactic variation. The 
information obtained from the typology will be 
used to annotate a MWE lexicon. Having a re-
source with such information (that includes addi-
tional meanings, possible variation that accounts 
for obligatory and optional elements, etc.) will be 
of extreme value for the development and evalua-
tion of automatic MWE identification systems. 
References 
Baptista Jorge. 1994. Estabelecimento e Formaliza??o 
de Classes de Nomes Compostos. MA Thesis, Facul-
dade de Letras da Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon. 
Chacoto Lu?sa. 1994. Estudo e Formaliza??o das Pro-
priedades L?xico-Sint?cticas das Express?es Fixas 
Proverbiais. MA Thesis, Faculdade de Letras da 
Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa. 
Church Kenneth and Patrick Hanks. 1990. Word Asso-
ciation Norms, Mutual Information and Lexico-
graphy. Proceedings of the 27th Annual Meeting of 
the Association for Computational Linguistics. Van-
couver, Canada, pp. 76-83. 
Coseriu Eugenio. 1967. Lexikalische Solidarit?ten. Poe-
tica 1. pp. 293-303. 
Duran Magali Sanches, Carlos Ramish, Sandra Maria 
Alu?sio and Aline Villavicencio. 2011. Identifying 
and Analyzing Brazilian Portuguese Complex Predi-
cates. Proceedings of the Workshop on Multiword 
Expressions. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics. Portland, Oregon, USA, pp. 74-82. 
91
Evert Stephan and Brigitte Krenn. 2001. Methods for 
the Qualitative Evaluation of Lexical Association 
Measures. Proceedings of the 39th Annual Meeting 
of the Association for Computational Linguistics. 
Toulouse, France, pp. 188-195. 
Fellbaum Christiane. 1998. An WordNet Electronic Lex-
ical Database. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Firth R. John. 1955. Modes of meaning. Papers in Lin-
guistics 1934-1951. London, Oxford University 
Press, pp. 190-215. 
Hendricks Iris, Am?lia Mendes and Sandra Antunes. 
2010a. Proposal for Multi-word Expression Annota-
tion in Running Text. Proceedings of the fourth Lin-
guistic Annotation Workshop. Association for 
Computational Linguistics. Uppsala, Sweden, pp. 
152-156. 
Hendricks Iris, Am?lia Mendes, S?lvia Pereira, Anabela 
Gon?alves and In?s Duarte. 2010b. Complex Predi-
cates annotation in a corpus of Portuguese. Proceed-
ings of the fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop. 
Association for Computational Linguistics. Uppsala, 
Sweden, pp 100-108. 
Jackendoff Ray. 1997. The Architecture of the Lan-
guage Faculty. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Mac?rio Lopes Ana Cristina. 1992. Texto Proverbial 
Portugu?s: elementos para uma an?lise sem?ntica e 
pragm?tica. PhD Dissertation, Universidade de 
Coimbra, Coimbra. 
Mel??uk Igor. 1998. Collocations and Lexical Func-
tions. Cowie, A. P. (ed.), Phraseology. Theory, 
Analysis, and Applications. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, pp. 23-53. 
Mendes Am?lia, Sandra Antunes, Maria Fernanda Bace-
lar do Nascimento, Jo?o M. Casteleiro, Lu?sa Pereira 
and Tiago S?. 2006. COMBINA-PT: A Large Cor-
pus-extracted and Hand-checked Lexical Database of 
Portuguese Multiword Expressions. Proceedings of 
the Fifth International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation. Genoa, Italy, pp. 1900-1905. 
Pereira Lu?sa and Am?lia Mendes. 2002. An Electronic 
Dictionary of Collocations for European Portuguese: 
Methodology, Results and Applications. Braasch, A. 
and C. Povlsen (eds.), Proceedings of the 10th Inter-
national Congress of the European Association for 
Lexicography. Copenhagen, Denmark, vol. II, pp. 
841-849. 
Ranchhod Elisabete. 2003. O Lugar das Express?es 
?Fixas? na Gram?tica do Portugu?s. Castro, I. and I. 
Duarte (eds.), Raz?es e Emo??o. Miscel?nea de 
Estudos oferecida a Maria Helena Mira Mateus. 
Imprensa Nacional Casa da Moeda, Lisboa, pp. 239-
254. 
Sag Ivan, Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann Copes-
take and Dan Flickinger. 2002. Multiword Expres-
sions: A Pain in the Neck for NLP. Gelbukh A. (ed.), 
Proceedings of the Third International Conference 
on Intelligent Text Processing and Computational 
Linguistics. Mexico City, Mexico, pp. 1-15. 
Sanrom?n A. Iriarte. 2000. A Unidade Lexicogr?fica. 
Palavras, Coloca??es, Frasemas, Pragmatemas. 
PhD Dissertation, Universidade do Minho, Braga. 
Sinclair John. 1991. Corpus, Concordance and Colloca-
tion. Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
Vilela M?rio. 2002. Met?foras do Nosso Tempo. Alme-
dina, Coimbra. 
Zeller Britta and Sebastian Pad?. 2012. Corpus-Based 
Acquisition of Support Verb Constructions for Por-
tuguese. Proceedings of the 10th International Con-
ference on Computational Processing of the 
Portuguese Language. Coimbra, Portugal, pp. 73-84. 
 
92
