Annotation of Multiword Expressions in the Prague Dependency Treebank
Eduard Bejc?ek, Pavel Stran??k and Pavel Schlesinger
Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics
Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic
{bejcek,stranak,schlesinger}@ufal.mff.cuni.cz
Abstract
In this article we want to demonstrate that
annotation of multiword expressions in the
Prague Dependency Treebank is a well de-
fined task, that it is useful as well as feasible,
and that we can achieve good consistency of
such annotations in terms of inter-annotator
agreement. We show a way to measure agree-
ment for this type of annotation. We also ar-
gue that some automatic pre-annotation is
possible and it does not damage the results.
1 Motivation
Various projects involving lexico-semantic annota-
tion have been ongoing for many years. Among those
there are the projects of word sense annotation, usu-
ally for creating training data for word sense disam-
biguation. However majority of these projects have
only annotated very limited number of word senses
(cf. Kilgarriff (1998)). Even among those that aim
towards ?all words? word-sense annotation, multi-
word expressions (MWE) are not annotated adequa-
tely (see (Mihalcea, 1998) or (Hajic? et al, 2004)),
because for their successful annotation a method-
ology allowing identification of new MWEs during
annotation is required. Existing dictionaries that in-
clude MWEs concentrate only on the most frequent
ones, but we argue that there are many more MWEs
that can only be identified (and added to the dictio-
nary) by annotation.
There are various projects for identification of na-
med entities (for an overview see (?evc??kov? et al,
2007)). We explain below (mainly in Section 2) why
we consider named entities to be concerned with lex-
ical meaning. At this place we just wish to recall that
these projects only select some specific parts of text
and provide information only for these. They do not
aim for full lexico-semantic annotation of texts.
There is also another group of projects that have to
tackle the problem of lexical meaning, namely tree-
banking projects that aim to develop a deeper layer
of annotation in adition to a surface syntactic layer.
This deeper layer is generally agreed to concern lex-
ical meaning. Therefore the units of this layer cannot
be words anymore, they should be lexias.
Lexia is defined by Filipec and C?erm?k (1986)
as equivalent to a ?monosemic lexeme? of (Filipec,
1994) or a ?lexical unit? of (Cruse, 1986): ?a pair
of a single sense and a basic form (plus its derived
forms) with relatively stable semantic properties?.
We work with the Prague Dependency Treebank
(PDT, see Hajic? (2005)), which has in addition to
the morphemic and the surface syntactic layers also
the tectogrammatical layer. The latter has been con-
strued as the layer of the (literal) meaning of the sen-
tence and thus should be composed of lexias (lexical
units) and the relations between their occurrences.1
On the tectogrammatical layer only the autose-
mantic words form nodes in a tree (t-nodes). Synse-
mantic (function) words are represented by various
attributes of t-nodes. Each t-node has a lemma: an at-
tribute whose value is the node?s basic lexical form.
Currently t-nodes, and consequently their t-lemmas,
are still visibly derived from the morphological di-
vision of text into tokens. This preliminary handling
1With a few exceptions, such as personal pronouns (that co-
refer to other lexias) or coordination heads.
793
has always been considered unsatisfactory in FGD.2
There is a clear goal to distinguish t-lemmas through
their senses, but this process has not been completed
so far.
Our project aims at improving the current state
of t-lemmas. Our goal is to assign each t-node a
t-lemma that would correspond to a lexia, i.e. that
would really distinguish the t-node?s lexical mean-
ings. To achieve this goal, in the first phase of the
project, which we report on in this paper, we iden-
tify multiword expressions and create a lexicon of
the corresponding lexias.
2 Introduction
We annotate all occurrences of MWEs (including
named entities, see below) in PDT 2.0. When we
speak of multiword expressions we mean ?idiosyn-
cratic interpretations that cross word boundaries?
(Sag et al, 2002). We understand multiword expres-
sions as a type of lexias. We distinguish also a spe-
cial type of MWEs, for which we are mainly inter-
ested in its type, rather than individual lexias, during
the annotation: named entities (NE).3 Treatment of
NEs together with other MWEs is important, be-
cause syntactic functions are more or less arbitrary
inside a NE (consider an address with phone num-
bers, etc.) and so is the assignment of semantic roles.
That is why we need each NE to be combined into a
single node, just like we do it with MWEs in general.
For the purpose of annotation we have built a repos-
itory of lexias corresponding to MWEs, which we
call SemLex. We have built it using entries from
some existing dictionaries and it is being enriched
during the annotation in order to contain every lexia
that was annotated. We explain this in detail in Sec-
tion 4.1.
3 Current state of MWEs in PDT 2.0
During the annotation of valency that is a part of
the tectogrammatical layer of PDT 2.0 the t-lemmas
2Functional Generative Description (FGD, (Sgall et al,
1986; Hajic?ov? et al, 1998)) is a framework for system-
atic description of a language, that the PDT project is based
upon. In FGD units of the t-layer are construed equivalently to
monosemic lexemes (lexias) and are combined into dependency
trees, based on syntactic valency of the lexias.
3NEs can in general be also single-word, but in this phase of
our project we are only interested in multiword expressions, so
when we say NE in this paper, we always mean multiword.
that correspond to lexias have been basically iden-
tified for all the verbs and some nouns and adjec-
tives. The resulting valency lexicon is called PDT-
VALLEX (Hajic? et al, 2003) and we can see it as
a repository of lexias based on verbs, adjectives and
nouns in PDT that have valency. 4
This is a starting point for having t-nodes corre-
sponding to lexias. However in the current state it is
not fully sufficient even for verbs, mainly because
parts of MWEs are not joined into one node. Parts
of frames marked as idiomatic are still represented
by separate t-nodes in a tectogrammatical tree. Ver-
bal phrasemes are also split into 2 nodes, where the
nominal part is governed by the verb. Non-verbal id-
ioms have not been annotated at all.
Below we give an example of the current state:
an idiom meaning ?in a blink (of an eye)? ? literally
?*what not-see? (Figure 1).
Figure 1: ?Co nevide?t? (in a blink)
4 Methodology
4.1 Building SemLex
Each entry we add into SemLex is considered to be
a lexia. We have also added 9 special entries to iden-
tify NE types, so we do not need to add the expres-
sions themselves. These types are derived from NE
classification by (?evc??kov? et al, 2007). Some fre-
quent names of persons, institutions or other objects
(e.g. film titles) are being added into SemLex dur-
ing annotation (while keeping the information about
a NE type), because this allows for their following
occurrences to be pre-annotated automatically (see
Section 5). For others, like addresses or bibliographic
4It is so because in PDT-VALLEX valency is not the only
criterion for distinguishing frames (=meanings). Two words
with the same morphological lemma and valency frame are as-
signed two different frames if their meaning differs. Thus the
PDT-VALLEX frames correspond to lexias.
794
entries, it makes but little sense, because they most
probably will not reappear during the annotation.
Currently (for the first stage of lexico-semantic
annotation of PDT) SemLex contains only lexias cor-
responding to MWEs. Its base has been composed of
MWEs extracted from Czech WordNet (Smr?, 2003),
Eurovoc (Eurovoc, 2007) and SC?FI (C?erm?k et al,
1994).5 Currently there are over 30,000 multi-word
lexias in SemLex and more are being added during
annotations.
The entries added by annotators must be lexias as
defined above. Annotators define their ?sense? infor-
mally (as much as possible) and we extract an exam-
ple of usage and the basic form from the annotation
automatically. The ?sense? information shall be re-
vised by a lexicographer, based on annotated occur-
rences.
4.2 Annotation
PDT 2.0 uses PML (Pajas and ?te?p?nek, 2005),
which is an application of XML that utilises a stand-
off annotation scheme. We have extended the PDT-
PML with a new schema for so-called s-files. We
use these files to store all of our annotation without
altering the PDT itself. These s-files are very sim-
ple: basically each of them consists of a list of s-
nodes. Each s-node corresponds to an occurrence of
a MWE and it is composed of a link to the entry in
SemLex and a list of identifiers of t-nodes that cor-
respond to this s-node.
Our annotation program reads in a tectogrammati-
cal representation (t-file) and calls TrEd (Pajas, 2007)
to generate plain text. This plain text (still linked to
the tectogrammatical representation) is presented to
the annotator. While the annotator marks MWEs al-
ready present in SemLex or adds new MWEs into
SemLex, tree representations of these MWEs extrac-
ted from underlying t-trees are added into their Sem-
Lex entries via TrEd scripts.
5 Pre-annotation
Because MWEs tend to occur repeatedly in a text,
we have decided to test pre-annotation both for the
speed improvement and for improving the consis-
tency of annotations. On the assumption that all oc-
5Slovn?k c?esk? frazeologie a idiomatiky (Dictionary of
Czech Phraseology and Idiomatics)
currences of a MWE share the same tree structure,
while there are no restrictions on the surface word
order other than those imposed by the tree structure
itself we have decided to employ four types of pre-
annotation:
A) External pre-annotation provided by our col-
league (see Hn?tkov? (2002)). With each MWE a
set of rules is associated that limits possible forms
and surface word order of parts of a MWE. This ap-
proach was devised for corpora that are not syntac-
tically annotated.
B) Our one-time pre-annotation with those lexias
from SemLex that were already used in annotation,
and thus have a tree structure as a part of their entry.
C) Dynamic pre-annotation as in B, only with the
SemLex entries that have been recently added by the
annotator.
D) When an annotator tags an occurrence of a
MWE in the text, other occurrences of this MWE
in the article are identified automatically.6
(A) was executed once for all of the PDT. (B) is
performed each time we merge lexias added by an-
notators into the main SemLex. We carry out this
annotation in one batch for all PDT files remaining
to annotate. (C) should be done for each file while
it is being opened in LexemAnn GUI. (D) happens
each time the annotator adds a new lexia into Sem-
Lex and uses it to annotate an occurrence in the text.
In subsequent files instances of this lexia are already
annotated in step (C), and later even in (B).
After the pilot annotation without pre-annotation
(D) we have compared instances of the same tags
and found that 10.5% of repeated lexias happened
to have two different trees. After closer examination
this 10.5% group is negligible because these cases
are caused by ellipses, variations in lexical form such
as diminutives etc., or wrong lemmatisation, rather
than inconsistencies in the tree structure. These cases
show us some issues of PDT 2.0, for instance:
? ji?n? ? Ji?n? Korea [southern ? South Korea] ?
wrong lemmatisation
6This is exactly what happens: 1) Tree structure of the se-
lected MWE is identified via TrEd 2) The tree structure is added
to the lexeme?s entry in SemLex 3) All the sentences in the
given file are searched for the same MWE using its tree structure
(via TrEd) 4) Other occurrences returned by TrEd are tagged
with this MWE?s ID, but these occurrences receive an attribute
?auto?, which identifies them (both in the s-files and visually in
the annotation tool) as annotated automatically.
795
? obchodn? r?editel ? r?editelka [managing direc-
tor ? man ? woman] ? in future these should
have one t-lemma and gender should be speci-
fied by an attribute of a t-node.
We have not found any case that would show that
there is such a MWE that its structure cannot be rep-
resented by a single tectogrammatical tree. 1.1% of
all occurences were not connected graphs, but this
happened due to errors in data and to coordination.
This corroborates our assumption that (disregarding
errors) all occurrences of a MWE share the same
tree structure. As a result, we started storing the tree
structures in the SemLex entries and employ them in
pre-annotation (D). This also allows us to use pre-
annotations (B) and (C), but we have decided not
to use them at the moment, in order to be able to
evaluate each pre-annotation step separately. Thus
the following section reports on the experiments that
employ pre-annotation (A) and (D).
6 Analysis of Annotations
Two annotators already started to use (and test) the
tool we have developed. They both have got the same
texts. The text is generated from the t-trees and pre-
sented as a plain text with pre-annotated words mark-
ed by colour labels. Annotators add their tags in the
form of different colour labels and they can delete
the pre-annotated tags. In this experiment data con-
sists of approx. 120,000 tokens that correspond to
100,000 t-nodes. Both annotators have marked about
15,200 t-nodes (~15%) as parts of MWEs. annotator
A has grouped them into 7,263 MWEs and annota-
tor B into 6,888. So the average length of a MWE is
2.2 t-nodes.
The ratio of general named entities versus Sem-
Lex lexias was 52:48 for annotator A and 49:51 in
case of annotator B. Annotator B used 10% more
lexias than annotatorA (3,279 and 3,677), while they
both used almost the same number of NEs. Some
comparison is in the Table 1.
type of MWE A B
SemLex lexias 3,677 3,279
Named Entities 3,553 3,587
- person/animal 1130 1137
- institution 842 772
Table 1: Annotated instances of significant types of
MWEs
Both annotators also needed to add missing en-
tries to the originally compiled SemLex or to edit
existing entries. annotatorA added 722 entries while
the annotator B added 861. They modified 796 and
809 existing entries, respectively.
6.1 Inter-anntator Agreement
In this section our primary goal is to assess whether
with our current methodology we produce reliable
annotation of MWEs. To that end we measure the
amount of inter-annotator agreement that is above
chance. There are, however, a few sources of com-
plications in measuring this agreement:
? Each tag of a MWE identifies a subtree of a tec-
togrammatical tree (represented on the surface by a
set of marked words). This allows for partial agree-
ment of tags at the beginning, at the end, but also in
the middle of a surface interval (in a sentence).
? A disagreement of the annotators on the tag is
still an agreement on the fact that this t-node is a part
of a MWE and thus should be tagged. This means we
have to allow for partial agreement on a tag.
? There is not any clear upper bound as to how
many (and how long) MWEs are there in texts.
? There is not a clear and simple way to esti-
mate the amount of the agreement by chance, be-
cause it must include the partial agreements men-
tioned above.
Since we want to keep our agreement calculation
as simple as possible but we also need to take into
account the problems above, we have decided to start
from pi as defined in (Artstein and Poesio, 2007) and
to make a few adjustments to allow for types of par-
tial agreement and estimated maximal agreement.
Because we do not know how many MWEs there
are in our texts, we need to calculate the agreement
over all t-nodes, rather than the t-nodes that ?should
be annotated?. This also means, that the theoretical
maximal agreement (upper bound) U , cannot be 1.
If it was 1, it would be saying that all nodes are part
of a MWE.
Since we know that U < 1 but we do not know
it?s exact value, we use the estimated upper bound
U? (see Equation 1). Because we calculate U? over all
t-nodes, we need to account not only for agreement
on tagging a t-node, but also for agreement, that the
t-node is not a part of a MWE, therefore it is not
796
tagged.7
If N is the number of all t-nodes in our data and
nA?B is the number of t-nodes annotated by at least
one annotator, then we estimate U? as follows:
U? =
nA?B
N
+ 0.052 ?
N ? nA?B
N
= 0.215 (1)
The weight 0.052 used for scoring the t-nodes that
were not annotated is explained below. Because U?
includes all the disagreements of the annotators, we
believe that the real upper bound U lies somewhat
below it and the agreement value 0.215 is not some-
thing that should (or could) be achieved. This is how-
ever based on the assumption that the data we have
not yet seen have similar ratio of MWEs as the data
we have used.
To account for partial agreement we divide the t-
nodes into 5 classes c and assign each class a weight
w as follows:
c1 If the annotators agree on the exact tag from Sem-
Lex, we get maximum information: w = 1
c2 If they agree, that the t-node is a part of a NE or
they agree it is a part of some lexia from Sem-
Lex, but they do not agree which NE or which
lexia, we estimate we get about a half of the in-
formation compared to c1: w = 0.5
c3 If they agree that the t-node is a part of a MWE,
but disagree whether a NE or a lexia from Sem-
Lex, it is again half the information compared to
c2, so w = 0.25
c4 If they agree that the t-node is not a part of a
MWE, w = 0.052. This low value of w accounts
for frequency of t-nodes that are not a part of a
MWE, as estimated from data: Agreement on not
annotating provides the same amount of infor-
mation as agreement on annotating, but we have
to take into account higher frequency of t-nodes
that are not annotated:
c4 = c3 ?
P
annotated
P
not annotated
= 0.25 ?
12797
61433
? 0.052
c5 If the annotators do not agree whether to anno-
tate a t-node or not, w = 0.
The number of t-nodes (n) and weights w per class
c are given in Table 2.
7If we did not do this, there would be no difference between
t-nodes, that were not tagged (annotators agreed they are not a
part of a MWE) and the t-nodes that one annotator tagged and
the other did not (i.e. they disagreed).
Agreement Disagreement
Agreement on annotation Not annotation
Agreement on NE / lexia
Full agreement
class c 1 2 3 4 5
t-nodes n 10,527 2,365 389 83,287 3,988
weight w 1 0.5 0.25 0.052 0
Table 2: The agreement per class and the associated
weights
Now that we have estimated the upper bound of
agreement U? and the weights w for all t-nodes we
can calculate our weighted version of pi:
piw =
Ao ?Ae
U? ?Ae
Ao is the observed agreement of annotators and
Ae is the agreement expected by chance (which is
similar to a baseline). piw is thus a simple ratio of our
observed agreement above chance and maximum a-
greement above chance.
Weights w come into account in calculation ofAo
and Ae.
We calculate Ao by multiplying the number of t-
nodes in each category c by that category?s weight
w, summing these 5 weighted sums and dividing this
sum of all the observed agreement in the data by
the total number of t-nodes: Ao = 1N
?5
c=1 ncwc =
0.160.
Ae is the probability of agreement expected by
chance over all t-nodes. This means it is the sum of
the weighted probabilities of all the combinations of
all the tags that can be obtained by a pair of annota-
tors. Every possible combination of tags (including
not tagging a t-node) falls into one of the categories
c and thus gets the appropriate weight w. Calculat-
ing the value of Ae depends not only on values of
w (see Table 2), but also on the fact that SemLex is
composed of 9 entries for NE types and over 30,000
entries for individual lexias. Based on this we have
obtained Ae = 0.047.
The resulting piw is then
piw =
Ao ?Ae
U? ?Ae
=
0.160? 0.047
0.215? 0.047
= 0.6760
When we analyse the cases of disagreement and
partial agreement we find that most of it has to do
with SemLex lexias rather than NEs. This is mostly
due to imperfectness of the dictionary and its size
(annotators could not explore each of almost 30,000
797
of SemLex entries). Our current methodology, which
relies too much on searching the SemLex, is also to
blame. This should, however, improve by employing
pre-annotation (B) and (C).
One more reason for disagreement consists in the
fact that there are cases, for which non-trivial knowl-
edge of the world is needed: ?Jang Di Pertuan Agong
Sultan Azlan ??h, the sultan of the state of Perak,
[ . . . ] flew back to Perak.? Is ?Sultan Azlan ??h? still
a part of the name or is it (or a part of it) a title?
The last important reason of disagreement is sim-
ple: both annotators identify the same part of text
as MWE instances, but while searching the SemLex
they choose different lexias as the tags. This can be
rectified by:
? Removing duplicate entries from SemLex (cur-
rently there are many close identical entries orig-
inating from Eurovoc and Czech WordNet).
? Imploring improved pre-annotation B and C, as
mentioned above.
7 Conclusion
We have annotated multi-word lexias and named en-
tities in a part of PDT 2.0. We use tectogrammati-
cal tree structures of MWEs for the automatic pre-
annotation. In the analysis of inter-annotator agree-
ment we show that a weighted measure that accounts
for partial agreement as well as the estimation of
maximal agreement is needed.
The resulting piw = 0.6760 is statistically sig-
nificant and should gradually improve as we clean
up the annotation lexicon, more entries can be pre-
annotated automatically, and further types of pre-
annotation are employed.
8 Acknowledgement
This work has been supported by grants 1ET2011205-
05 of Grant Agency of the Academy of Science of
the Czech Republic, projects MSM0021620838 and
LC536 of the Ministry of Education and 201/05/H014
of the Czech Science Foundation.
References
Ron Artstein and Massimo Poesio. 2007. Inter-coder agree-
ment for computational linguistics. Submitted to Computa-
tional Linguistics.
F. C?erm?k, V. C?erven?, M. Churav?, and J. Machac?. 1994.
Slovn?k c?esk? frazeologie a idiomatiky. Academia.
D.A. Cruse. 1986. Lexical Semantics. Cambridge University
Press.
Eurovoc. 2007. http://europa.eu/eurovoc/.
Josef Filipec and Franti?ek C?erm?k. 1986. C?esk? lexikologie.
Academia.
Josef Filipec. 1994. Lexicology and lexicography: Develop-
ment and state of the research. In P. A. Luelsdorff, editor,
The Prague School of Structural and Functional Linguistics,
pages 163?183, Amsterdam/Philadelphia. J. Benjamins.
Jan Hajic?, Jarmila Panevov?, Zden?ka Ure?ov?, Alevtina B?-
mov?, Veronika Kol?r?ov?, and Petr Pajas. 2003. PDT-
VALLEX. In Joakim Nivre and Erhard Hinrichs, editors,
Proceedings of The Second Workshop on Treebanks and Lin-
guistic Theories, volume 9 of Mathematical Modeling in
Physics, Engineering and Cognitive Sciences, pages 57?68,
Vaxjo, Sweden. Vaxjo University Press.
Jan Hajic?, Martin Holub, Marie Huc??nov?, Martin Pavl?k, Pavel
Pecina, Pavel Stran??k, and Pavel Martin ?id?k. 2004.
Validating and improving the Czech WordNet via lexico-
semantic annotation of the Prague Dependency Treebank. In
LREC 2004, Lisbon.
Jan Hajic?, 2005. Insight into Slovak and Czech Corpus Lin-
guistics, chapter Complex Corpus Annotation: The Prague
Dependency Treebank, pages 54?73. Veda Bratislava, Slo-
vakia.
Eva Hajic?ov?, Barbara H. Partee, and Petr Sgall. 1998. Topic-
focus articulation, tripartite structures, and semantic con-
tent, volume 71 of Studies in Linguistics and Philosophy.
Kluwer, Dordrecht.
Milena Hn?tkov?. 2002. Znac?kov?n? fraz?mu? a idiomu? v
C?esk?m n?rodn?m korpusu s pomoc? Slovn?ku c?esk? fraze-
ologie a idiomatiky. Slovo a slovesnost.
A. Kilgarriff. 1998. Senseval: An exercise in evaluating word
sense disambiguation programs. In Proc. LREC, pages 581?
588, Granada.
Rada Mihalcea. 1998. Semcor semantically tagged corpus.
Petr Pajas and Jan ?te?p?nek. 2005. A Generic XML-Based For-
mat for Structured Linguistic Annotation and Its Application
to Prague DependencyTreebank 2.0. Technical Report TR-
2005-29, ?FAL MFF UK, Prague, Czech Rep.
Petr Pajas. 2007. TrEd. http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/?pajas/
tred/index.html.
Ivan A. Sag, Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann Copestake,
and Dan Flickinger. 2002. Multiword expressions: A pain
in the neck for nlp. In Third International Conference, CI-
CLing.
Magda ?evc??kov?, Zdene?k ?abokrtsk?, and Oldr?ich Kru?za.
2007. Zpracov?n? pojmenovan?ch entit v c?esk?ch textech
(treatment of named entities in czech texts). Technical Re-
port TR-2007-36, ?FAL MFF UK, Prague, Czech Republic.
Petr Sgall, Eva Hajic?ov?, and Jarmila Panevov?. 1986. The
Meaning of the Sentence in Its Semantic and Pragmatic As-
pects. Academia/Reidel Publ. Comp., Praha/Dordrecht.
Pavel Smr?. 2003. Quality control for wordnet development.
In Petr Sojka, Karel Pala, Pavel Smr?, Christiane Fellbaum,
and Piek Vossen, editors, Proceedings of the Second Inter-
national WordNet Conference?GWC 2004, pages 206?212.
Masaryk University Brno, Czech Republic.
798
Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2013), pages 106?115,
Atlanta, Georgia, 13-14 June 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Syntactic Identification of Occurrences of Multiword Expressions in Text
using a Lexicon with Dependency Structures
Eduard Bejc?ek, Pavel Stran?a?k, Pavel Pecina
Charles University in Prague, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics,
Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics
Malostranske? na?me?st?? 25, 118 00 Praha 1, Czechia
{bejcek,stranak,pecina}@ufal.mff.cuni.cz
Abstract
We deal with syntactic identification of oc-
currences of multiword expression (MWE)
from an existing dictionary in a text corpus.
The MWEs we identify can be of arbitrary
length and can be interrupted in the surface
sentence. We analyse and compare three ap-
proaches based on linguistic analysis at a vary-
ing level, ranging from surface word order to
deep syntax. The evaluation is conducted us-
ing two corpora: the Prague Dependency Tree-
bank and Czech National Corpus. We use the
dictionary of multiword expressions SemLex,
that was compiled by annotating the Prague
Dependency Treebank and includes deep syn-
tactic dependency trees of all MWEs.
1 Introduction
Multiword expressions (MWEs) exist on the inter-
face of syntax, semantics, and lexicon, yet they are
almost completely absent from major syntactic the-
ories and semantic formalisms. They also have inter-
esting morphological properties and for all these rea-
sons, they are important, but challenging for Natural
Language Processing (NLP). Recent advances show
that taking MWEs into account can improve NLP
tasks such as dependency parsing (Nivre and Nils-
son, 2004; Eryig?it et al, 2011), constituency parsing
(Arun and Keller, 2005), text generation (Hogan et
al., 2007), or machine translation (Carpuat and Diab,
2010).
The Prague Dependency Treebank (PDT) of
Czech and the associated lexicon of MWEs Sem-
Lex1 offer a unique opportunity for experimentation
1http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/lexemann/mwe/semlex.zip
with MWEs. In this paper, we focus on identifica-
tion of their syntactic structures in the treebank us-
ing various levels of linguistic analysis and match-
ing algorithms.2 We compare approaches operating
on manually and automatically annotated data with
various depth of annotation from two sources: the
Prague Dependency Treebank and Czech National
Corpus (CNC).
The remainder of the paper is organised as fol-
lows. Section 2 describes the state of the art of in
acquisition and identification of MWEs. Section 3
explains what we consider a MWE. In Section 4
we describe the data used for our experiments. Sec-
tion 5 gives the details of our experiments, and in
Section 6 we analyse and discuss the results. Con-
clusions from the analysis are drawn in Section 7.
2 Processing of Multiword Expressions
and Related Work
Automatic processing of multiword expressions in-
cludes two distinct (but interlinked) tasks. Most of
the effort has been put into acquisition of MWEs
appearing in a particular text corpus into a lexi-
con of MWEs (types) not necessarily linked with
their occurrences (instances) in the text. The best-
performing methods are usually based on lexical as-
sociation measures that exploit statistical evidence
of word occurrences and co-occurrences acquired
from a corpus to determine degree of lexical asso-
ciation between words (Pecina, 2005). Expressions
that consist of words with high association are then
2We do not aim at disambiguating the occurrences as figura-
tive or literal. We have not observed enough literal uses to sub-
stantiate working on this step. There are bigger improvements
to be gained from better identification of syntactic occurrences.
106
denoted as MWEs. Most of the current approaches
are limited to bigrams despite the fact that higher-
order MWEs are quite common.
The task of identification of MWE occurrences
expects a list of MWEs as the input and identifies
their occurrences (instances) in a corpus. This may
seem to be a trivial problem. However, the complex
nature of this phenomenon gives rise to problems on
all linguistic levels of analysis: morphology, syntax,
and semantics.
In morphologically complex languages, a single
MWE can appear in a number of morphological
variants, which differ in forms of their individual
components; and at the same time, a sequence of
words whose base forms match with base forms
of components of a given MWE do not neces-
sarily represent an instance of this MWE (Praco-
val dnem i noc?? / He?s been working day and night
vs. Ti dva byli jako den a noc / Those two were as
day and night).
MWEs differ in the level of syntactic fixedness.
On the one hand, certain MWEs can be modified
by inserting words in between their components
or by changing word order. Such expressions can
only be identified by matching their syntactic struc-
tures, but only if a reliable syntactic information is
available in both the lexion and text (Po pr?evratu
padaly hlavy / After the coup, heads were rolling
vs. Hlavy zkorumpovany?ch na?me?stku? budou padat
jedna za druhou / One head of a corrupt deputy
will be rolling after the other). On the other hand,
some MWEs can appear only as fixed expressions
with no modifications allowed. In that case, the syn-
tactic matching approach can miss-indicate their in-
stances because of an inserted word or altered word
order (Vys?s??? spolec?nost / High society vs. *Vys?s??? bo-
hats??? spolec?nost / High rich society).
From the semantic point of view, MWEs are of-
ten characterized by more or less non-compositional
(figurative) meaning. Their components, however,
can also occur with the same syntax but composi-
tional (literal) semantics, and therefore not acting
as MWEs (Jedinou branku dal az? v posledn?? minute?
za?pasu / He scored his only goal in the last minute of
the match. vs. Rozhodc??? dal branku zpe?t na sve? m??sto
/ The referee put a goal back to its place).
Automatic discrimination between figurative and
literal meaning is a challenging task similar to
word sense disambiguation which has been stud-
ied extensively: Katz and Giesbrecht (2006), Cook
et al (2007), Hashimoto and Kawahara (2008), Li
and Sporleder (2009), and Fothergill and Baldwin
(2011). Seretan (2010) includes MWE identification
(based on a lexicon) in a syntactic parser and reports
an improvement of parsing quality. As a by-product,
the parser identified occurrences of MWEs from a
lexicon. Similarly, Green et al (2013) embed identi-
fication of some MWEs in a Tree Substitution Gram-
mar and achieve improvement both in parsing qual-
ity and MWE identification effectiveness. None of
these works, however, attempt to identify all MWEs,
regardless their length or complexity, which is the
main goal of this paper.
3 Definition of Multiword Expressions
We can use the rough definition of MWEs put for-
ward by Sag et al (2002): ?idiosyncratic interpreta-
tions that cross word boundaries (or spaces)?. We
can also start from their ? or Bauer?s (1983) ? ba-
sic classification of MWEs as lexicalised or insti-
tutionalised phrases, where lexicalised phrases in-
clude some syntactic, semantic or lexical (i.e. word
form) element, that is idiosyncratic. Institutionalised
phrases are syntactically and semantically compo-
sitional, but still require a particular lexical choice,
e.g. disallowing synonyms (mobile phone, but not
*movable phone).
We need to make just one small adjustment to the
above: ?phrase? above must be understood as a sub-
tree, i.e. it can have holes in the surface sentence, but
not in terms of a dependency tree.
In reality there is no clear boundary, in particu-
lar between the institutional phrases and other collo-
cations. Like many other traditional linguistic cate-
gories, cf. Manning (2003), this phenomenon seems
to be more continuous than categorial.
For the purpose of this paper, however, it is not
important at all. We simply try to find all instances
of the expressions (subtrees) from a lexicon in a text,
whatever form the expression may take in a sen-
tence.
4 Data
In this work we use two datasets: Czech National
Corpus (CNC), version SYN2006-PUB, and the
107
Prague Dependency Treebank (PDT), version 2.5.
We run and compare results of our experiments on
both manual annotation of PDT, and automatic anal-
ysis of both PDT and CNC (see Section 5.3). We
also make use of SemLex, a lexicon of MWEs in
the PDT featuring their dependency structures that
is described in Section 4.3.
4.1 Corpora ? Czech National Corpus and
Prague Dependency Treebank
CNC is a large3 corpus of Czech. Its released ver-
sions are automatically segmented and they contain
automatic morphological tagging (Hajic?, 2004).
PDT (Bejc?ek et al, 2011) is a smaller news-
domain corpus based on a subset of the news section
of CNC. It contains approx. 0.8 million words that
have three layers of annotation: morphological, ana-
lytical (surface syntax), and tectogrammatical (deep
syntax).
Annotation of a sentence on the morphological
layer consists of attaching morphological lemma
and tag to the tokens. A sentence at the analytical
layer is represented as a rooted ordered tree with la-
belled nodes. The dependency relation between two
nodes is captured by an edge with a functional label.
On the tectogrammatical layer only content words
form nodes in a tree (t-nodes).4 Auxiliary words are
represented by various attributes of t-nodes, as they
do not have their own lexical meaning, but rather
modify the meaning of the content words. Each t-
node has a t-lemma: an attribute whose value is the
node?s basic lexical form, and a dependency func-
tion that relates it to its parent. Figure 1 shows the
relations between the neighbouring layers of PDT.
4.2 MWE in Prague Dependency Treebank 2.5
In the Functional Generative Description (Sgall et
al., 1986, FGD)5 the tectogrammatical layer is con-
strued as a layer of the linguistic meaning of text.
This meaning is composed by means of ?deep?
(tecto-grammatical) syntax from single-meaning-
carrying units: monosemic lexemes.
3It contains 200 mil. words in SYN2000, 600 mil. in
SYN2006-PUB; http://www.korpus.cz.
4with a few exceptions (personal pronouns or coord. heads)
5FGD is a framework for systematic description of a lan-
guage, that the PDT project is based upon.
Byl         by        ?el       do     lesa       .
Byl          by                   do                 lesa
?el
AuxV          AuxV                     AuxP                   
  b?t             b?t            j?t            do        les             .  VpYS---XR-AA---      Vc-------------       VpYS---XR-AA---    RR?2----------    NNIS2-----A----        Z:------------- 
Adv
Pred
AuxS
j?tPRED
#PersPronACT  lesDIR3a
tree.r
f
a/aux.
rf
a/aux
.rf
a/lex.
rf
a/aux
.rf
a/lex.
rf
t - lay
er
a - lay
e r
m - la
yer
   .AuxK
Figure 1: A visualisation of the annotation schema of
PDT. Lit.: ?[He] would have gone into forest.?
In order to better facilitate this concept of t-layer,
all multiword expressions in the release of PDT 2.5
(Bejc?ek et al, 2011) have been annotated and they
are by default displayed as single units, although
their inner structure is still retained.
A lexicon of the MWEs has been compiled. A
simple view of the result of this annotation is given
in the Figure 2. A detailed description can be found
in Bejc?ek and Stran?a?k (2010), and Stran?a?k (2010).
The MWEs in PDT 2.5 include both multiword lex-
emes (phrasemes, idioms) and named entities (NEs).
In the present work we ignore the named entities,
concentrating on the lexemes. Some NEs (names of
persons, geographical entities) share characteristics
of multiword lexemes, other NEs do not (addresses,
bibliographic information).
We build on the PDT 2.5 data and MWE lexicon
SemLex (Section 4.3) to evaluate the approach with
various automatic methods for detection of MWEs.
4.3 Lexicon of MWEs ? SemLex
SemLex is the lexicon of all the MWEs annotators
identified during the preparation of PDT 2.5 t-layer.
In the PDT 2.5 these instances of MWEs can then be
displayed as single nodes and all the MWEs them-
selves are compiled in the SemLex lexicon. The lex-
icon itself is freely available. See http://ufal.
mff.cuni.cz/lexemann/mwe/. Length (size)
108
Can word sense disambiguation help statistical machine translation?
help
disambiguation
sense
word
translation
machine
statistical
#root
help
WSD MT
#root
statistical
Word sense disambiguation
Machine translation ?
BASIC_FORM: Word sense disambiguation
TREE_STRUCT: disambiguation?sense?word
LEMMATIZED: ?
?
SemLex
Figure 2: An illustration of changes in t-trees in PDT 2.5;
every MWE forms a single node and has its lexicon entry
distribution of MWEs in PDT 2.5 is given in Table 1.
There are three attributes of SemLex entries cru-
cial for our task:
BASIC FORM ? The basic form of a MWE. In
many languages including Czech it often contains
word forms in other than the basic form for the given
word on its own. E.g. ?vysoke? uc?en??? contains a
neuter suffix of the adjective ?vysoky?? (high) be-
cause of the required agreement in gender with the
noun, whereas the traditional lemma of adjectives in
Czech is in the masculine form.
LEMMATIZED ? ?Lemmatised BASIC FORM?,
i.e. take the basic form of an entry and substitute
each form with its morphological lemma. This at-
tribute is used for the identification of MWEs on the
morphological layer. For more details see Section 5.
TREE STRUCT (TS) ? A simplified tectogram-
matical dependency tree structure of an entry. Each
node in this tree structure has only two attributes: its
tectogrammatical lemma, and a reference to its ef-
fective parent.
4.4 Enhancing SemLex for the Experiments
SemLex contains all the information we use for the
identification of MWEs on t-layer.6 It also contains
basic information we use for MWE identification on
m-layer: the basic form and the lemmatized form of
each entry. For the experiments with MWE iden-
tification on analytical (surface syntactic) layer we
6Automatic identification of MWES was, after all, one of
the reasons for its construction.
a) len types instances
2 7063 18914
3 1260 2449
4 305 448
5 100 141
6 42 42
7 16 15
8 4 5
9 4 3
11 1 0
12 2 2
b) len types instances
18 148 534
2 7444 19490
3 843 1407
4 162 244
5 34 32
6 13 8
7 3 1
8 4 1
9 1 1
10 0 0
Table 1: Distribution of MWE length in terms of words (a)
and t-nodes (b) in SemLex (types) and PDT (instances).
need to add some information about the surface syn-
tactic structures of MWEs. Given the annotated oc-
currences of MWEs in the t-layer and links from
t-layer to a-layer, the extraction is straightforward.
Since one tectogrammatical TS can correspond to
several analytical TSs that contain auxiliaries and
use morphological lemmas, we add a list of a-layer
TSs with their frequency in data to each SemLex en-
try (MWE). In reality the difference between t-layer
and a-layer is unfortunately not as big as one could
expect. Lemmas of t-nodes still often include even
minute morphological variants, which goes against
the vision of tectogrammatics, as described in Sgall
et al (1986).7 Our methods would benefit from more
unified t-lemmas, see also Section 6.2.
5 Methodology of Experiments
SemLex ? with its almost 8,000 types of MWEs and
their 22,000 instances identified in PDT ? allows us
to measure accuracy of MWE identification on vari-
ous layers, since it is linked with the different layers
of PDT 2.5. In this section, we present the method
for identification of MWEs on t-layer in compari-
son with identification on a-layer and m-layer. The
7These variants are unified in FGD theory, but time consum-
ing to annotate in practice. Therefore, this aspect was left out
from the current version of PDT.
8Indeed, there are expressions that are multiword, but
?single-node?. E.g.: the preposition in bez va?ha?n?? (without hes-
itation) does not have its own node on t-layer; the phrase na
spra?vnou m??ru (lit.: into correct scale) is already annotated as
one phrasal node in PDT with the lemma ?na spra?vnou m??ru?;
the verbal expression ume?t si pr?edstavit (can imagine) has again
only one node for reflexive verb ?pr?edstavit si? plus an attribute
for the ability (representing ?ume?t? as explained in Section 4.1).
109
idea of using tectogrammatical TS for identification
is that with a proper tectogrammatical layer (as it
is proposed in FGD, i.e. with correct lemmatisation,
added nodes in place of ellipses, etc.), this approach
should have the highest Precision.
Our approach to identification of MWEs in this
work is purely syntactic. We simply try to find
MWEs from a lexicon in any form they may take
(including partial ellipses in coordination, etc.). We
do not try to exploit semantics, instead we want to
put a solid baseline for future work which may do
so, as mentioned in Section 2.
5.1 MWE Identification on t-layer
We assume that each occurrence of a given MWE
has the same t-lemmas and the same t-layer struc-
ture anywhere in the text. During the manual con-
struction of SemLex, these tectogrammatical ?tree
structures? (TSs) were extracted from PDT 2.5 and
inserted into the lexicon. In general this approach
works fine and for majority of MWEs only one TS
was obtained. For the MWEs with more than one TS
in data we used the most frequent one. These cases
are due to some problems of t-layer, not deficiencies
of the theoretical approach. See section 6.2 for the
discussion of the problems.
These TSs are taken one by one and we try to find
them in the tectogrammatical structures of the input
sentences. Input files are processed in parallel. The
criteria for matching are so far only t-lemmas and
topology of the subtree.9 Comparison of tree struc-
tures is done from the deepest node and we consider
only perfect matches of structure and t-lemmata.
5.2 MWE Identification on a-layer and m-layer
We use identification of MWE occurrences on a-
layer and m-layer mainly for comparison with our
approach based on the t-layer.
9It is not sufficient, though. Auxiliary words that are ig-
nored on t-layer are occasionally necessary for distinguishing
MWE from similar group of nodes. (E.g. ?v tomto sme?ru? (?in
this regard?) is an MWE whereas ?o tomto sme?ru? (?about
this direction?) is not.) There are also attributes in t-layer that
are?although rarely?important for distinguishing the mean-
ing. (E.g. words typeset in bold in ?Leonardo dal svy?m go?lem
signa?l.? (?Leonardo signalled by his goal.?) compose exactly
the same structure as in ?Leonardo dal go?l.? (?Leonardo scored
a goal.?). I.e., the dependency relation is ?dal governs go?l? in
both cases. The difference is in the dependency function of go?l:
it is either MEANS or DIRECT OBJECT (CPHR).)
We enhance SemLex with a-tree structures as ex-
plained in Section 4.4, and then a-layer is processed
in the same manner as t-layer: analytical TS is taken
from the SemLex and the algorithm tries to match it
to all a-trees. Again, if more than one TS is offered
in lexicon, only the most frequent one is used for
searching.
MWE identification on the m-layer is based on
matching lemmas (which is the only morphological
information we use). The process is parametrised
by a width of a window which restricts the maxi-
mum distance (in a sentence) of MWE components
to span (irrespective of their order) measured in the
surface word order. However, in the setting which
does not miss any MWE in a sentence (100% Re-
call), this parameter is set to the whole sentence and
the maximum distance is not restricted at all.
The algorithm processes each sentence at a time,
and tries to find all lemmas the MWE consists of,
running in a cycle over all MWEs in SemLex. This
method naturally over-generates ? it correctly finds
all MWEs that have all their words present in the sur-
face sentence with correct lemmatisation (high Re-
call), but it also marks words as parts of some MWE
even if they appear at the opposite ends of the sen-
tence by complete coincidence (false positives, low
Precision).
In other experiments, the window width varies
from two to ten and MWE is searched for within a
limited context.
5.3 Automatic Analysis of Data Sets
The three MWE identification methods are applied
on three corpora:
? manually annotated PDT: This is the same
data, from which the lexicon was created. Results
evaluated on the same data can be seen only as num-
bers representing the maximum that can be obtained.
? automatically annotated PDT: These are the
same texts (PDT), but their analysis (morphological,
analytical as well as tectogrammatical) started from
scratch. Results can be still biased ? first, there are
no new lexemes that did not appear during annota-
tion (that is as if we had a complete lexicon); second,
it should be evaluated only on eval part of the data ?
see discussion in Section 6.1.
? automatically annotated CNC: Automatic
analysis from scratch on different sentences. The
110
layer/span PDT/man PDT/auto CNC/auto
tecto 61.99 / 95.95 / 75.32 63.40 / 86.32 / 73.11 44.44 / 58.00 / 50.33
analytical 66.11 / 88.67 / 75.75 66.09 / 81.96 / 73.18 45.22 / 60.00 / 51.58
morpho / 2 67.76 / 79.96 / 73.36 67.77 / 79.26 / 73.07 51.85 / 56.00 / 53.85
3 62.65 / 90.50 / 74.05 62.73 / 89.80 / 73.86 46.99 / 60.00 / 52.70
4 58.84 / 92.03 / 71.78 58.97 / 91.29 / 71.65 42.83 / 61.33 / 50.48
5 56.46 / 92.94 / 70.25 56.59 / 92.16 / 70.12 40.09 / 61.33 / 48.49
6 54.40 / 93.29 / 68.81 54.64 / 92.51 / 68.70 38.27 / 61.33 / 47.13
7 52.85 / 93.42 / 67.51 53.01 / 92.64 / 67.43 36.99 / 61.33 / 46.15
8 51.39 / 93.46 / 66.32 51.57 / 92.68 / 66.27 35.59 / 61.33 / 45.04
9 50.00 / 93.46 / 65.15 50.18 / 92.68 / 65.11 34.67 / 61.33 / 44.30
10 48.57 / 93.46 / 63.92 48.71 / 92.68 / 63.86 33.84 / 61.33 / 43.64
? 35.12 / 93.51 / 51.06 35.16 / 92.72 / 50.99 22.70 / 62.00 / 33.24
P / R / F P / R / F P / R / F
Table 2: Evaluation of all our experiments in terms of Precision (P), Recall (R) and F1 score (F) in percent. Experiments
on the m-layer are shown for different widths of window (see Section 5.2).
disadvantage here is the absence of gold data. Man-
ual evaluation of results has to be accomplished.
For the automatic analysis we use the modular
NLP workflow system Treex (Popel and Z?abokrtsky?,
2010). Both datasets were analysed by the standard
Treex scenario ?Analysis of Czech? that includes the
following major blocks:
1) standard rule-based Treex segmentation and to-
kenisation
2) morphology (Hajic?, 2004) and Featurama tag-
ger (Spousta, 2011) trained on the train part of
the PDT
3) MST Parser with an improved set of features by
Nova?k and Z?abokrtsky? (2007)
4) and t-trees structure provided by standard rule-
based Treex block.
6 Results
Effectiveness of our methods of identification of
MWE occurrences is presented in Table 2. Numbers
are given as percentages of Precision and Recall The
first two columns show the results of the evaluation
against gold data in PDT 2.5, the third column re-
flects the manual evaluation on 546 sentences. The
results obtained for PDT (the first two columns) are
also visualised in Figure 3.
The important issue to be decided when evaluat-
ing MWE identification is whether partial match be-
tween automatic identification and gold data MWE
is to be counted. Because of cases containing el-
lipses (see Section 6.2), it can happen that longer
MWE is used for annotation of its subset in text.10
We do not want to penalise automatic identification
(either performing this behaviour or confronted with
it in the gold data), so we treated subset as a match.
Another decision is that although the MWEs can-
not be nested in gold data, we accept it for automatic
identification. Since one word can belong to several
MWEs, the Recall rises, while Precision declines.11
6.1 Discussion of Results
The automatically parsed part of the CNC consists
of 546 sentences. Thus the third column in Table 2
represents evaluation on a much smaller data set.
During manual annotation of this data carried out
by one annotator (different from those who anno-
tated PDT data, but using the same methodology and
a tool), 163 occurences of MWEs were found. Out
10Let us say, only elliptic term Ministry of Industry is seen
in the data (instead of the full name Ministry of Industry and
Trade) annotated by the full-term lexicon entry. Whenever Min-
istry of Industry and Trade is spotted in the test data, its first
part is identified. Should that be qualified as a mistake when
confronted with the gold annotation of the whole term? The as-
signed lexicon entry is the same ? only the extent is different.
11For example, annotator had to choose only one MWE to an-
notate in vla?dn?? na?vrh za?kona o dani z pr???jmu (lit.: government
proposal of the Law on Income Tax), while it is allowed to auto-
matically identify vla?dn?? na?vrh za?kona, za?kon o dani and dan? z
pr???jmu together with the whole phrase. Recall for this example
is 1, whereas Precision is 0.25.
111
 Str?nka 1
78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
m-layer a-layer t-layer
Recall
Pre
cis
ion
 
Str?nka 1
78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
m-layer a-layer t-layer
Recall
Pre
cis
ion
Figure 3: Precision?Recall scores of identification of MWE structures on manually/automatically annotated PDT.
of them, 46 MWEs were out-of-vocabulary expres-
sions: they could not be found by automatic prece-
dure using the original SemLex lexicon.
Note that results obtained using automatically
parsed PDT are very close to those for manual data
on all layers (see Table 2). The reasons need to be
analysed in more detail. Our hypotheses are:
? M-layer identification reaches the same results
on both data. It is caused by the fact that the ac-
curacy of morphological tagging is comparable to
manual morphological annotation: 95.68% (Spous-
tova?, 2008).
? Both a- and t-parsers have problems mostly in
complex constructions such as coordinations, that
very rarely appear inside MWEs.
There are generally two issues that hurt our accu-
racy and that we want to improve to get better re-
sults. First, better data can help. Second, the method
can always be improved. In our case, all data are
annotated?we do nothing on plain text?and it can
be expected that with a better parser, but also possi-
bly a better manual annotation we can do better, too.
The room for improvement is bigger as we go deeper
into the syntax: data are not perfect on the a-layer
(both automatically parsed and gold data) and on
the significantly more complex t-layer it gets even
worse. By contrast, the complexity of methods and
therefore possible improvements go in the opposite
direction. The complexity of tectogrammatic anno-
tation results in a tree with rich, complex attributes
of t-nodes, but simple topology and generalised lem-
mas. Since we only use tree topology and lemmas,
the t-layer method can be really simple. It is slightly
more complex on the a-layer (with auxiliary nodes,
for example); and finally on the m-layer there is vir-
tually unlimited space for experiments and a lot of
literature on that problem. As we can see, these two
issues (improving data and improving the method)
complement each other with changing ratio on indi-
vidual layers.
It is not quite clear from Table 2 that MWE iden-
tification should be done on the t-layer, because it is
currently far from our ideal. It is also not clear that it
should be done on the m-layer, because it seems that
the syntax is necessary for this task.
6.2 Error Analysis and Possible Improvements
There are several reasons, why the t-layer results are
not clearly better:
1. our representation of tree structures proved a
bit too simple,
2. there are some deficiencies in the current t-
layer parser, and
3. t-layer in PDT has some limitations relative to
the ideal tectogrammatical layer.
Ad 1. We thought the current SemLex implemen-
tation of simple tree structures would be sufficient
for our purpose, but it is clear now that it is too
simple and results in ambiguities. At least auxiliary
words and some further syntactico-semantic infor-
mation (such as tectogrammatical functions) should
be added to all nodes in these TSs.
Ad 2. Current tectogrammatical parser does not
do several things we would like to use. E.g. it cannot
112
properly generate t-nodes for elided parts of coordi-
nated MWEs that we need in order to have the same
TS of all MWE occurrences (see below).
Ad 3. The total of 771 out of 8,816 SemLex en-
tries, i.e. 8.75%, have been used with more than one
tectogrammatical tree structure in the PDT 2.5. That
argues against our hypothesis (stated in Section 5.1)
and cause false negatives in the output, since we cur-
rently search for only one TS. In this part we analyze
two of the most important sources of these inconsis-
tent t-trees and possible improvements:
? Gender opposites, diminutives and lemma vari-
ations. These are currently represented by variations
of t-lemma. We believe that they should rather be
represented by attributes of t-nodes that could be
roughly equivalent to some of the lexical functions
in the Meaning-text theory (see Mel?c?uk (1996)).
This should be tackled in some future version of
PDT. Once resolved it would allow us to identify
following (and many similar) cases automatically.
? obchodn?? r?editel vs. obchodn?? r?editelka
(lit.: managing director-man vs. managing
director-woman)
? rodinny? du?m vs. rodinny? domek
(lit.: family house vs. family little-house; but
the diminutive domek does not indicate that the
house is small)
? obc?ansky? za?kon vs. obc?ansky? za?kon??k
(lit.: citizen law vs. citizen law-codex, meaning
the same thing in modern Czech)
These cases were annotated as instances of the same
MWE, with a vision of future t-lemmas disregard-
ing this variation. Until that happens, however, we
cannot identify the MWEs with these variations au-
tomatically using the most frequent TS only.
? Elided parts of MWEs in coordinations. Al-
though t-layer contains many newly established t-
nodes in place of elided words, not all t-nodes
needed for easy MWE annotation were there. This
decision resulted in the situation, when some MWEs
in coordinations cannot be correctly annotated, esp.
in case of coordination of several multiword lexemes
like inz?eny?rska?, monta?z?n?? a stavebn?? spolec?nost (en-
gineering, assembling and building company), there
is only one t-node for company. Thus the MWE
inz?eny?rska? spolec?nost / engineering company is not
in PDT 2.5 data and cannot be found by the t-layer
identification method. It can, however, be found by
the m-layer surface method, provided the window is
large enough and MWEs can overlap.
7 Conclusions
Identification of occurrences of multiword expres-
sions in text has not been extensively studied yet
although it is very important for a lot of NLP ap-
plications. Our lexicon SemLex is a unique resource
with almost 9 thousand MWEs, each of them with
a tree-structure extracted from data. We use this re-
source to evaluate methods for automatic identifica-
tion of MWE occurrences in text based on matching
syntactic tree structures (tectogrammatical ? deep-
syntactic, and analytical ? surface-syntactic trees)
and sequences of lemmas in the surface sentence.
The theoretically ideal approach based on tec-
togrammatical layer turned out not to perform bet-
ter, mainly due to the imperfectness of the t-layer
implemented in PDT and also due to the low ac-
curacy of automatic tectogrammatical parser. It still
shows very high Recall, as expected ? due to sim-
ple topology of the trees ? however Precision is not
ideal. Morphology-based MWE identification guar-
antees high Recall (especially when no limits are put
on the MWE component distance) but Precision of
this approach is rather low. On the other hand, if the
maximum distance is set to 4?5 words we get a very
interesting trade-off between Precision and Recall.
Using analytical layer (and thus introducing surface
syntax to the solution) might be a good approach for
many applications, too. It provides high Precision as
well as reasonable Recall.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Czech Sci-
ence Foundation (grant n. P103/12/G084 and
P406/2010/0875). This work has been using lan-
guage resources developed and/or stored and/or dis-
tributed by the LINDAT-Clarin project of the Min-
istry of Education of the Czech Republic (project
LM2010013). We want to thank to our colleagues
Michal Nova?k, Martin Popel and Ondr?ej Dus?ek for
providing the automatic annotation of the PDT and
CNC data.
113
References
Abhishek Arun and Frank Keller. 2005. Lexicaliza-
tion in crosslinguistic probabilistic parsing: The case
of French. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL?05), pages 306?313, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
Laurie Bauer. 1983. English Word-formation. Cam-
bridge Textbooks in Linguistics. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Eduard Bejc?ek and Pavel Stran?a?k. 2010. Annotation of
multiword expressions in the Prague dependency tree-
bank. Language Resources and Evaluation, (44):7?
21.
Eduard Bejc?ek, Jarmila Panevova?, Jan Popelka, Lenka
Smejkalova?, Pavel Stran?a?k, Magda S?evc???kova?, Jan
S?te?pa?nek, Josef Toman, Zdene?k Z?abokrtsky?, and
Jan Hajic?. 2011. Prague dependency tree-
bank 2.5. http://hdl.handle.net/11858/
00-097C-0000-0006-DB11-8. Data.
Marine Carpuat and Mona Diab. 2010. Task-based eval-
uation of multiword expressions: a pilot study in statis-
tical machine translation. In Human Language Tech-
nologies: The 2010 Annual Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, HLT ?10, pages 242?245, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA.
Paul Cook, Afsaneh Fazly, and Suzanne Stevenson.
2007. Pulling their weight: exploiting syntactic forms
for the automatic identification of idiomatic expres-
sions in context. In Proceedings of the Workshop on a
Broader Perspective on Multiword Expressions, MWE
?07, pages 41?48.
Gu?ls?en Eryig?it, Tugay I?lbay, and Ozan Arkan Can. 2011.
Multiword expressions in statistical dependency pars-
ing. In Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Sta-
tistical Parsing of Morphologically Rich Languages,
SPMRL ?11, pages 45?55, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Richard Fothergill and Timothy Baldwin. 2011. Flesh-
ing it out: A supervised approach to MWE-token and
MWE-type classification. In Proceedings of 5th Inter-
national Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 911?919, Chiang Mai, Thailand.
Spence Green, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2013. Parsing models for
identifying multiword expressions. Computational
Linguistics, 39(1):195?227.
Jan Hajic?. 2004. Disambiguation of Rich Inflection
(Computational Morphology of Czech). Nakladatel-
stv?? Karolinum.
Chikara Hashimoto and Daisuke Kawahara. 2008. Con-
struction of an idiom corpus and its application to id-
iom identification based on WSD incorporating idiom-
specific features. In Proceedings of the Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
EMNLP ?08, pages 992?1001.
Deirdre Hogan, Conor Cafferkey, Aoife Cahill, and Josef
van Genabith. 2007. Exploiting multi-word units in
history-based probabilistic generation. In EMNLP-
CoNLL, pages 267?276. ACL.
Graham Katz and Eugenie Giesbrecht. 2006. Automatic
identification of non-compositional multi-word ex-
pressions using latent semantic analysis. In Proceed-
ings of the Workshop on Multiword Expressions: Iden-
tifying and Exploiting Underlying Properties, MWE
?06, pages 12?19.
Linlin Li and Caroline Sporleder. 2009. Classifier com-
bination for contextual idiom detection without la-
belled data. In Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing:
Volume 1 - Volume 1, EMNLP ?09, pages 315?323.
Christopher D. Manning, 2003. Probabilistic Linguistics,
chapter Probabilistic Syntax, pages 289?341. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.
Igor Mel?c?uk. 1996. Lexical functions: A tool for the
description of lexical relations in a lexicon. In Leo
Wanner, editor, Lexical Functions in Lexicography and
Natural Language Processing, volume 31 of Studies
in Language Companion Series, pages 37?102. John
Benjamins.
Joachim Nivre and Jens Nilsson. 2004. Multiword units
in syntactic parsing. In Dias, G., Lopes, J. G. P. and
Vintar, S. (eds.) MEMURA 2004 - Methodologies and
Evaluation of Multiword Units in Real-World Applica-
tions, Workshop at LREC 2004, pages 39?46, Lisbon,
Portugal.
Va?clav Nova?k and Zdene?k Z?abokrtsky?. 2007. Fea-
ture engineering in maximum spanning tree depen-
dency parser. In Va?clav Matous?ek and Pavel Mautner,
editors, Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, Pro-
ceedings of the 10th International Conference on Text,
Speech and Dialogue, volume 4629 of Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, pages 92?98, Berlin / Heidel-
berg. Springer.
Pavel Pecina. 2005. An extensive empirical study of
collocation extraction methods. In Proceedings of the
ACL Student Research Workshop, pages 13?18, Ann
Arbor, Michigan.
Martin Popel and Zdene?k Z?abokrtsky?. 2010. TectoMT:
Modular NLP framework. In Hrafn Loftsson, Eirikur
Ro?gnvaldsson, and Sigrun Helgadottir, editors, Lec-
ture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, Proceedings of the
7th International Conference on Advances in Natural
Language Processing (IceTAL 2010), volume 6233 of
LNCS, pages 293?304, Berlin / Heidelberg. Iceland
Centre for Language Technology (ICLT), Springer.
Ivan A. Sag, Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann
Copestake, and Dan Flickinger. 2002. Multiword
114
expressions: A pain in the neck for NLP. In Com-
putational Linguistics and Intelligent Text Process-
ing: Third International Conference, CICLing, vol-
ume 2276/2002 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
Springer Berlin / Heidelberg.
Violeta Seretan. 2010. Syntax-Based Collocation Ex-
traction, volume 44 of Text, Speech and Language
Technology. Springer.
Petr Sgall, Eva Hajic?ova?, and Jarmila Panevova?. 1986.
The Meaning of the Sentence in Its Semantic and
Pragmatic Aspects. Academia/Reidel Publ. Comp.,
Praha/Dordrecht.
Miroslav Spousta. 2011. Featurama. http://
sourceforge.net/projects/featurama/.
Software.
Drahom??ra ?johanka? Spoustova?. 2008. Combining sta-
tistical and rule-based approaches to morphological
tagging of Czech texts. The Prague Bulletin of Math-
ematical Linguistics, 89:23?40.
Pavel Stran?a?k. 2010. Annotation of Multiword Expres-
sions in The Prague Dependency Treebank. Ph.D. the-
sis, Charles University in Prague.
115
