Proceedings of the ACL-ISMB Workshop on Linking Biological Literature, Ontologies and Databases: Mining
Biological Semantics, pages 54?61, Detroit, June 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
IntEx: A Syntactic Role Driven Protein-Protein Interaction Extractor 
for Bio-Medical Text 
 Syed Toufeeq Ahmed, Deepthi Chidambaram, Hasan Davulcu*, Chitta Baral. 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, 
 Arizona State University,  
Tempe, AZ 85287.  
{toufeeq, deepthi, hdavulcu, chitta}@asu.edu 
  
 
 
Abstract 
In this paper, we present a fully auto-
mated extraction system, named IntEx, to 
identify gene and protein interactions in 
biomedical text. Our approach is based on 
first splitting complex sentences into sim-
ple clausal structures made up of syntactic 
roles. Then, tagging biological entities 
with the help of biomedical and linguistic 
ontologies. Finally, extracting complete 
interactions by analyzing the matching 
contents of syntactic roles and their lin-
guistically significant combinations. Our 
extraction system handles complex sen-
tences and extracts multiple and nested in-
teractions specified in a sentence. 
Experimental evaluations with two other 
state of the art extraction systems indicate 
that the IntEx system achieves better per-
formance without the labor intensive pat-
tern engineering requirement. ?  
1 Introduction 
Genomic research in the last decade has resulted in 
the production of a large amount of data in the 
form of micro-array experiments, sequence infor-
mation and publications discussing the discoveries. 
The data generated by these experiments is highly 
                                                          
? To whom correspondence should be addressed 
connected; the results from sequence analysis and 
micro-arrays depend on functional information and 
signal transduction pathways cited in peer-
reviewed publications for evidence. Though scien-
tists in the field are aided by many online data-
bases of biochemical interactions, currently a 
majority of these are curated labor intensively by 
domain experts. Information extraction from text 
has therefore been pursued actively as an attempt 
to extract knowledge from published material and 
to speed up the curation process significantly.  
In the biomedical context, the first step towards 
information extraction is to recognize the names of 
proteins (Fukuda, Tsunoda et al 1998), genes, 
drugs and other molecules. The next step is to rec-
ognize interaction events between such entities  
(Blaschke, Andrade et al 1999; Blaschke, Andrade 
et al 1999; Hunter 2000; Thomas, Milward et al 
2000; Thomas, Rajah et al 2000; Ono, Hishigaki 
et al 2001; Hahn and Romacker 2002) and then to 
finally recognize the relationship between interac-
tion events. However, several issues make extract-
ing such interactions and relationships difficult 
since (Seymore, McCallum et al1999) (i) the task 
involves free text ? hence there are many ways of 
stating the same fact (ii) the genre of text is not 
grammatically simple (iii) the text includes a lot of 
technical terminology unfamiliar to existing natu-
ral language processing systems (iv) information 
may need to be combined across several sentences, 
and (v) there are many sentences from which noth-
ing should be extracted. 
In this paper, we present a fully automated extrac-
tion approach to identify gene and protein interact- 
54
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tions in natural language text with the help of bio-
medical and linguistic ontologies. Our approach 
works in three main stages: 
1. Complex Sentence Processor (CSP): First, is 
splitting complex sentences into simple clausal 
structures made of up syntactic roles. 
2. Tagging: Then, tagging biological entities 
with the help of biomedical and linguistic on-
tologies.  
3. Interaction Extractor: Finally, extracting 
complete interactions by analyzing the match-
ing contents of syntactic roles and their lin-
guistically significant combinations.  
The novel aspects of our system are its ability to 
handle complex sentence structures using the 
Complex Sentence Processor (CSP) and to extract 
multiple and nested interactions specified in a sen-
tence using the Interaction Extractor without the 
labor intensive pattern engineering requirement. 
Our approach is based on identification of syntac-
tic roles, such as subject, objects, verb and modifi-
ers, by using the word dependencies. We have used 
a dependency based English grammar parser, the 
Link Grammar (Sleator and Temperley 1993), to 
identify the roles. Syntactic roles are utilized to 
transform complex sentences into their multiple 
clauses each containing a single event. This clausal 
structure enables us to engineer an automated algo-
rithm for the extraction of events thus overcoming 
the burden of labor intensive pattern engineering 
for complex and compound sentences. Pronoun 
resolution module assists Interaction Extractor in 
identifying interactions spread across multiple sen-
tences using pronominal references. We performed 
comparative experimental evaluations with two 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: System Architecture 
state of the art systems.  Our experimental results 
show that the IntEx system presented here achieves 
better performance without the labor intensive rule 
engineering step which is required for these state 
of the art systems.  
 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In 
Section 2 we survey the related work. In Section 3 
we present an architectural overview of the IntEx 
system. Sections 4 and 5 explain and illustrate the 
individual modules of the IntEx system. A detailed 
evaluation of our system with the BioRAT 
(Corney, Buxton et al 2004) and GeneWays 
(Rzhetsky, Iossifov et al 2004) is presented in Sec-
tion 6. Section 7 concludes the paper.  
  
2 Related Work 
Information extraction is the extraction of salient 
facts about pre-specified types of events, entities 
(Bunescu, Ge et al 2003) or relationships from 
free text. Information extraction from free-text util-
izes shallow-parsing techniques (Daelemans, 
Buchholz et al 1999), Parts-of-Speech tag-
ging(Brill 1992), noun and verb phrase chunking 
(Mikheev and Finch 1997), verb subject and object 
relationships (Daelemans, Buchholz et al 1999), 
and learned (Califf and Mooney 1998; Craven and 
Kumlein 1999; Seymore, McCallum et al 1999) or 
hand-build patterns to automate the creation of 
specialized databases. 
Manual pattern engineering approaches employ 
shallow parsing with patterns to extract the interac-
tions. In the (Ono, Hishigaki et al 2001) system, 
55
sentences are first tagged using a dictionary based 
protein name identifier and then processed by a 
module which extracts interactions directly from 
complex and compound sentences using regular 
expressions based on part of speech tags. 
 
The SUISEKI system of Blaschke (Blaschke, 
Andrade et al 1999) also uses regular expressions, 
with probabilities that reflect the experimental ac-
curacy of each pattern to extract interactions into 
predefined frame structures.  
 
GENIES (Friedman, Kra et al 2001) utilizes a 
grammar based NLP engine for information extrac-
tion. Recently, it has been extended as GeneWays 
(Rzhetsky, Iossifov et al 2004), which also pro-
vides a Web interface that allows  users to search 
and submit papers of interest for analysis. The 
BioRAT system (Corney, Buxton et al 2004) uses 
manually engineered  templates that combine lexi-
cal and semantic information to identify protein 
interactions. The GeneScene system(Leroy, Chen 
et al 2003) extracts interactions using frequent 
preposition-based templates.  
 
Grammar engineering approaches, on the other 
hand use manually generated specialized grammar 
rules (Rinaldi, Schneider et al 2004) that perform 
a deep parse of the sentences. Temkin (Temkin and 
Gilder 2003) addresses the problem of extracting 
protein interactions by using an extendable but 
manually built Context Free Grammar (CFG) that 
is designed specifically for parsing  biological text. 
The PathwayAssist system uses an NLP system, 
MedScan (Novichkova, Egorov et al 2003), for the 
biomedical domain that tags the entities in text and 
produces a semantic tree. Slot filler type rules are 
engineered based on the semantic tree representa-
tion to extract relationships from text. Recently, 
extraction systems have also used link grammar 
(Grinberg, Lafferty et al 1995) to identify interac-
tions between proteins (Ding, Berleant et al 2003). 
Their approach relies on various linkage paths be-
tween named entities such as gene and protein 
names. Such manual pattern engineering ap-
proaches for information extraction are very hard 
to scale up to large document collections since they 
require labor-intensive and skill-dependent pattern 
engineering. 
Machine learning approaches have also been used 
to learn extraction rules from user tagged training 
data. These approaches represent the rules learnt in 
various formats such as decision trees (Chiang, Yu 
et al 2004) or grammar rules (Phuong, Lee et al 
2003). Craven et al(Craven and Kumlien 1999) 
explored an automatic rule-learning approach that 
uses a combination of FOIL (Quinlan 1990) and 
Na?ve Bayes Classifier to learn extraction rules.  
  
3 System Architecture 
The sentences in English are classified as either 
simple, complex, compound or complex-
compound based on the number and types of 
clauses present in them. Our extraction system re-
solves the complex, compound and complex-
compound sentence structures (collectively re-
ferred to as complex sentence structures in this 
document) into simple sentence clauses which con-
tain a subject and a predicate. These simple sen-
tence clauses are then processed to obtain the 
interactions between proteins. The architecture of 
the IntEx system is shown in Figure 1, and the fol-
lowing Sections 4 and 5 explain the workings of its 
modules. 
4 Complex Sentence Processing  
4.1 Pronoun Resolution 
Interactions are often specified through pronominal 
references to entities in the discourse, or through 
co references where, a number of phrases are used 
to refer to the same entity. Hence, a complete ap-
proach to extracting information from text should 
also take into account the resolution of these refer-
ences. References to entities are generally catego-
rized as co-references or anaphora and has been 
investigated using various approaches (Casta?o, 
Zhang et al 2002). IntEx anaphora resolution sub-
system currently focuses on third person pronouns 
and reflexives since the first and second person 
pronouns are frequently used to refer to the authors 
of the papers.  
Our pronoun resolution module uses a heuristic 
approach to identify the noun phrases referred by 
the pronouns in a sentence. The heuristic is based 
on the number of the pronoun (singular or plural) 
and the proximity of the noun phrase. The first 
noun phrase that matches the number of the pro-
noun is considered as the referred phrase.   
56
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.2 Entity Tagger 
The entity tagging module marks the names of 
genes, and proteins in text. The process of tagging 
is a combination of dictionary look up and heuris-
tics. Regular expressions are also used to mark the 
names that do not have a match in the dictionaries. 
The protein name dictionaries for the entity tagger  
are derived from various biological sources such as 
UMLS1, Gene Ontology2 and Locuslink3 database  
 
 
 
                                                          
1 http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/ 
2 http://www.geneontology.org/ 
3 http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
.  
 
 Fig. 3 Example - a) A Sentence from an abstract (PMID: 1956405). b) Pronoun ?it?s? is resolved 
with ?The SAC6 gene?. c) Each row represents a simple sentence, d) for each constituent, role type is 
resolved and interaction words are tagged, e) Protein-Protein interaction is extracted. 
4.3 Preprocessor 
The tagged sentences need to be pre-processed to 
replace syntactic constructs, such as parenthesized 
nouns and domain specific terminology that cause 
the Link Grammar Parser to produce an incorrect 
output. This problem is overcome by replacing 
such elements with alternative formats that is rec-
ognizable by the parser.  
 
4.4 Link Grammar and the Link grammar 
parser 
Link grammar (LG)  introduced by  Sleator and 
Temperley (Sleator and Temperley 1991) is a de-
pendency based grammatical system. The basic 
idea of link grammar is to connect pairs of words 
57
in a sentence with various syntactically significant 
links.  The LG consists of set of words, each of 
which has various alternative linking requirements.   
 
A linking requirement can be seen as a block with 
connectors above each word. A connector is satis-
fied by matching it with compatible connector. 
Fig.2 below shows how linking requirements can 
be satisfied to produce a parse for the example sen-
tence "The dog chased a cat". 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Even though LG has no explicit notion of constitu-
ents or categories (Sleator and Temperley 1993), 
they emerge as contiguous connected sequence of 
words attached to the rest of sentence by a particu-
lar types of links, as in the above example where 
?the dog?  and ?a cat? are connected to the main 
verb via ?S? and ?O? links respectively. Our algo-
rithms utilize this property of LG where certain 
link types allow us to extract the constituents of 
sentences irrespective of the tense. The LG 
parser?s ability to detect multiple verbs and their 
constituent linkage in complex sentences makes it 
particularly well suited for our approach during 
resolving of complex sentences into their multiple 
clauses. The LG parsers? dictionary can also be 
easily enhanced to produce better parses for bio-
medical text (Szolovits 2003). 
4.5  Complex Sentence Processor Algorithm 
The complex sentence processor (CSP) component 
splitsthe complex sentences into a collection of 
simple sentence clauses which contain a subject 
and a predicate. The CSP follows a verb-based ap-
proach to extract the simple clauses. A sentence is 
identified to be complex it contains more than one 
verb. A simple sentence is identified to be one with 
a subject, a verb, objects and their modifying 
phrases. The example in Figure 3 illustrates the 
major steps involved during complex sentence 
processing. The following schema is used as the 
format to represent simple clauses: 
    Subject | Verb | Object | Modifying phrase to the 
verb 
5 Interaction Extraction 
Interaction Extractor (IE) extracts interactions 
from simple sentence clauses produced by the 
complex sentence processor. The highly technical 
terminology and the complex grammatical con-
structs that are present in the biomedical abstracts 
make the extraction task difficult, Even a simple 
sentence with a single verb can contain multiple 
and/or nested interactions. That?s why our IE sys-
tem is based on a deep parse tree structure pre-
sented by the LG and it considers a thorough case 
based analysis of contents of various syntactic 
roles of the sentences like their subjects (S), verbs 
(V), objects (O) and modifying phrases (M) as well 
as their linguistically significant and meaningful 
combinations like S-V-O, S-O, S-V-M or S-M, il-
lustrated in Figure 4, for finding and extracting 
protein-protein interactions.  
Figure 2: Link grammar representation of a sentence 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.1 Role Type Matcher  
For each syntactic constituent of the sentence, the 
role type matcher identifies the type of each role as 
either ?Elementary?, ?Partial? or ?Complete? based 
on its matching content, as presented  in Table 1.  
Table 1: Role Type Matcher 
Role  Type Description 
Elementary If the role contains a Protein name or an 
interaction word. 
Partial  If the role has a Protein name and an interac-
tion word.  
Complete If the role has at least two Protein names and 
an interaction word. 
Figure 4: Interaction Extraction: Composition and analysis 
of various syntactic roles.  
S O M
S-O S-M 
Subject (S) Modifying Phrase (M)Object (O) 
S-V-O S-V-M 
58
5.2 Interaction Word Tagger 
 The words that match a biologically significant 
action between two gene/protein names are labeled 
as ?interaction words?. Our gazetteer for interaction 
words is derived from UMLS and WordNet4. Por-
ter Stemmer (Porter 1997) was also used for stem-
ming such words before matching.  
 
5.3 Interaction Extractor (IE) 
IntEx interaction extractor works as follows. The 
input to IE is the preprocessed and typed simple 
clause structures. The IE algorithm progresses bot-
tom up, starting from each syntactic role S, V or 
M, and expanding them using the lattice provided 
in Figure 4 until all ?Complete? singleton or com-
posite role types are obtained.  
 
Consider the example shown in Figure 3, for the 
third sentence, the boundaries of the subject and 
the modifying phrase are identified and both are 
role typed as ?Elementary? using Table 1. Since the 
main verb is tagged as an interaction word, IE uses 
the S-V-M composite role from Figure 4 to find 
and extract the following complete interaction:    
          
{?The SAC 6 gene Protein?, ?colocalizes?, ?actin?}.  
 
?Complete? roles also need to be analyzed in order 
to determine their voice as ?active? or ?passive?. 
Since there are only a small number of preposition 
combinations, such as of-by, from-to etc., that oc-
cur frequently within the clauses, they can be used 
to distinguish the agent and the theme of the inter-
actions.  
 
For example, in the sentence ?The kinase phos-
phorylation of pRb by c-Abl in the gland could 
inhibit ku70?, the subject role is ?The kinase phos-
phorylation of pRb by c-Abl in the gland?. Since 
the subject has at least two protein names and an 
interaction word it is ?complete?. By using the ?of-
by? pattern (?<Interaction-Word (action)>... of  
...<theme>?by  ...<agent>?) the IE is able to 
extract the correct interaction {c-Abl, phosphoryla-
tion, pRb} from the subject role alone. 
                                                          
                                                          
4 http://www.cogsci.princeton.edu/~wn/ 
6 Evaluation & discussion  
We have evaluated the performance of our system 
with two state of the art systems - BioRAT 
(Corney, Buxton et al 2004) and GeneWays 
(Rzhetsky, Iossifov et al 2004).  
 
Blaschke and Valencia (Valencia 2001) recom-
mend DIP (Xenarios, Rice et al 2000) dataset  as a 
benchmark for evaluating biomedical Information 
Extraction systems. The first evaluation for IntEx 
system was performed on the same dataset 5 that 
was used for the BioRAT evaluation. For BioRAT 
evaluation, authors identified 389 interactions from 
the DIP database such that both proteins participat-
ing in the interaction had SwissProt entries. These 
interactions correspond to 229 abstracts from the 
PubMed. The BioRAT system was evaluated using 
these 229 abstracts. The interactions extracted by 
the system were then manually examined by a do-
main expert for precision and recall. Precision is a 
measure of correctness of the system, and is calcu-
lated as the ratio of true positives to the sum of true 
positives and false positives. The sensitivity of the 
system is given by the recall measure, calculated as 
the ratio of true positives to the sum of true posi-
tives and false negatives.  
 
Table 2: Recall comparison of IntEx and BioRAT from  229 ab-
stracts when compared with DIP database. 
IntEx BioRAT Recall 
Results Cases Percent (%) Cases Percent(%) 
Match 142 26.94 79 20.31 
No 
Match 385 73.06 310 79.67 
Totals 527 100.00 389 100.00 
 
We have also limited our protein name dictionary 
to the SwissProt entries. Tables 2 and 3 present the 
evaluation results as compared with the BioRAT 
system. A detailed analysis of the sources of all 
types of errors is shown in Figure 6.  
5 Dataset was obtained from Dr. David Corney by personal 
communication. 
59
Table 3: Precision comparison of IntEx and BioRAT  from  229 
abstracts.  
 
DIP contains protein interactions from both ab-
stracts and full text. Since our extraction system 
was tested only on the abstracts, the system missed 
out on some interactions that were only present in 
the full text of the abstract.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Second evaluation for the IntEx system was done 
to test its recall performance using an article6 that 
was also used by the GeneWays (Rzhetsky, Iossi-
fov et al 2004) system. Both systems performance 
was tested using the full text of the article 
(Friedman, Kra et al 2001). GeneWays system 
achieves a recall of 65% where as IntEx extracted 
a total of 44 interactions corresponding to a recall 
measure of 66 %.  
Conclusion 
In this paper, we present a fully automated extrac-
tion system for identifying gene and protein inter-
                                                          
6 Dataset was obtained from Dr. Andrew Rzhetsky by personal 
communication. 
actions from biomedical text. The source code and 
documentation of the IntEx system, as well as all 
experimental documents and extracted interactions 
are available online at our Web site at 
http://cips.eas.asu.edu/textmining.htm. Our extrac-
tion system handles complex sentences and ex-
tracts multiple nested interactions specified in a 
sentence. Experimental evaluations of the IntEx 
system with the state of the art semi-automated 
systems -- the BioRAT and GeneWays datasets 
indicates that our system performs better without 
the labor intensive rule engineering requirement. 
We have shown that a syntactic role-based ap-
proach compounded with linguistically sound in-
terpretation rules applied on the full sentence?s 
parse can achieve better performance than existing 
systems which are based on manually engineered 
patterns which are both costly to develop and are 
not as scalable as the automated mechanisms pre-
sented in this paper.  
IntEx BioRAT Precision  
Results Cases Percent (%) Cases 
Percent 
(%) 
Correct 262 65.66 239 55.07 
Incorrect 137 34.33 195 44.93 
Totals 399 100.00 434 100.00 
Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank to both Dr. David Corney 
and Dr. Andrew Rzhetsky for sharing their evalua-
tion datasets and results. 
References 
Blaschke, C., M. A. Andrade, et al (1999). "Automatic extrac-
tion of biological information from scientific text: Protein-
protein interactions." Proceedings of International Sympo-
sium on Molecular Biology: 60-67. 
 
Brill, E. (1992). "A simple rule-based part-of-speech tagger." 
Proceedings of ANLP 92, 3rd Conference on Applied 
Natural Language Processing: 152-155. Figure 6: Analysis of types of errors encountered
 
Bunescu, R., R. Ge, et al (2003). Comparative Experiments 
on Learning Information Extractors for Proteins and   their 
Interactions. Artificial Intelligence in Medicine. 
 
Califf, M. E. and R. J. Mooney (1998). "Relational learning of 
pattern-match rules for information extraction." Working 
Notes of AAAI Spring Symposium on Applying Machine 
Learning to Discourse Processing: 6-11. 
 
Casta?o, J., J. Zhang, et al (2002). Anaphora Resolution in 
Biomedical Literature. International Symposium on Refer-
ence Resolution. Alicante, Spain. 
 
Chiang, J.-H., H.-C. Yu, et al (2004). "GIS: a biomedical text-
mining system for gene information discovery." Bioinfor-
matics 20(1): 120-121. 
 
60
Corney, D. P. A., B. F. Buxton, et al (2004). "BioRAT: ex-
tracting biological information from full-length papers." 
Bioinformatics 20(17): 3206-3213. 
 
Craven, M. and J. Kumlien (1999). Constructing Biological 
Knowledge Bases by Extracting Information from Text   
Sources. Proceedings of the Seventh International Confer-
ence on Intelligent Systems   for Molecular Biology: 77--
86. 
 
Daelemans, W., S. Buchholz, et al (1999). "Memory-based 
shallow parsing." Proceedings of CoNLL. 
 
Ding, J., D. Berleant, et al (2003). Extracting Biochemical 
Interactions from MEDLINE Using a Link Grammar 
Parser. Proceedings of the 15th IEEE International Confer-
ence on Tools with   Artificial Intelligence (ICTAI'03): 
467. 
 
Friedman, C., P. Kra, et al (2001). GENIES: a natural-
language processing system for the extraction of molecular   
pathways from journal articles. Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Confernce on Intelligent Systems for   Molecular Bi-
ology: 574-82. 
 
Fukuda, K., T. Tsunoda, et al (1998). "Toward information 
extraction: Identifying protein names from biological pa-
pers." PSB 1998,: 705-716. 
 
Grinberg, D., J. Lafferty, et al (1995). "A Robust Parsing 
Algorithm For LINK Grammars." (CMU-CS-TR-95-125). 
 
Hahn, U. and M. Romacker (2002). "Creating knowledge 
repositories from biomedical reports: The medsyndikate 
text mining system." Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing 
2002: 338-349. 
 
Hunter, R. T. a. C. R. a. J. (2000). "Extracting Molecular 
Binding Relationships from Biomedical Text." In Proceed-
ings of  the ANLP-NAACL 000,Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: pages 188-195. 
 
Leroy, G., H. Chen, et al (2003). Genescene: biomedical text 
and data mining. Proceedings of the third ACM/IEEE-CS 
joint conference on Digital libraries: 116--118. 
 
Mikheev, A. and S. Finch (1997). "A workbench for finding 
structure in texts." Proceedings of Applied Natural Lan-
guage Processing (ANLP-97). 
 
Novichkova, S., S. Egorov, et al (2003). "MedScan, a natural 
language processing engine for MEDLINE abstracts." Bio-
informatics 19(13): 1699-1706. 
 
Ono, T., H. Hishigaki, et al (2001). "Automatic Extraction of 
Information on protein-protein interactions from the bio-
logical literature." Bioinformatics 17(2): 155-161. 
 
Phuong, T. M., D. Lee, et al (2003). "Learning Rules to Ex-
tract Protein Interactions from Biomedical Text." PAKDD 
2003: 148-158. 
 
Porter, M. F. (1997). "An algorithm for suffix stripping." Pro-
gam, vol. 14, no. 3, July 1980: 313--316. 
 
Quinlan, J. R. (1990). "Learning Logical Definitions from 
Relations." Mach. Learn. 5(3): 239--266. 
 
Rinaldi, F., G. Schneider, et al (2004). Mining relations in the 
GENIA corpus. Proceedings of the Second European 
Workshop on Data Mining and Text Mining   for Bioin-
formatics: 61 - 68. 
 
Rzhetsky, A., I. Iossifov, et al (2004). "GeneWays: a system 
for extracting, analyzing, visualizing, and integrating   mo-
lecular pathway data." J. of Biomedical Informatics 37(1): 
43--53. 
 
Seymore, K., A. McCallum, et al (1999). Learning hidden 
markov model structure for information extraction. AAAI 
99 Workshop on Machine Learning for Information Extrac-
tion. 
 
Sleator, D. and D. Temperley (1991). Parsing English with a 
Link Grammar.Carnegie Mellon University Computer Sci-
ence technical report CMU-CS-91-196, Carnegie Mellon 
University. 
 
Sleator, D. and D. Temperley (1993). Parsing English with a 
Link Grammar. Third International Workshop on Parsing 
Technologies. 
 
Szolovits, P. (2003). "Adding a Medical Lexicon to an English 
Parser." Proc. AMIA 2003 Annual Symposium.: 639-643. 
 
Temkin, J. M. and M. R. Gilder (2003). "Extraction of protein 
interaction information from unstructured text using   a 
context-free grammar." Bioinformatics 19(16): 2046-2053. 
 
Thomas, J., D. Milward, et al (2000). "Automatic extraction 
of protein interactions from scientific abstracts." Proceed-
ings of the Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing 5: 502-
513. 
 
Thomas, R., C. Rajah, et al (2000). "Extracting molecular 
binding relationships from biomedical text." Proceedings of 
the ANLP-NAACL 2000: 188-195. 
 
Valencia, B. a. (2001). "Can bibliographic pointers for known 
biological data be found automatically? Protein interactions 
as a case study." Comp. Funct. Genom. 2: 196-206. 
 
Xenarios, I., D. W. Rice, et al (2000). "DIP: the Database of 
Interacting Proteins." Nucl. Acids Res. 28(1): 289-291. 
 
 
61
