Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Young Investigators Workshop on Computational Approaches to Languages of the Americas,
pages 76?83, Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Combining CBIR and NLP for Multilingual Terminology Alignment
and Cross-Language Image Indexing
Diego A. Burgos Herrera
Translation and New Technologies Group
University of Antioquia
Calle 67 No. 53-108 ? Bloque 11
burgos.diego@gmail.com
Abstract
In this paper, an overview of an approach for
cross-language image indexing and multilin-
gual terminology alignment is presented. Con-
tent-Based Image Retrieval (CBIR) is
proposed as a means to find similar images in
target language documents in the web and
natural language processing is used to reduce
the search space and find the image index. As
the experiments are carried out in specialized
domains, a systematic and recursive use of the
approach is used to align multilingual termi-
nology by creating repositories of images with
their respective cross-language indices.
1 Introduction
Images, as representation of real world entities,
constitute a sine qua non prerequisite for a number
of language tasks. For instance, children as well as
foreign language learners often resort to images in
order to concretize lexical learning through asso-
ciative processes (cf. Bloom, 2000: 57).
Likewise, human translators particularly benefit
a lot from images when dealing with specialized
texts. For example, a word-based image search is a
very useful technique to enhance understanding of
the source text and achieve precision in the target
text. In the context of online resources, a site with
the image of a device provides the translator not
only with an illustration of the object, but also with
hyperlinks to websites containing relevant infor-
mation.
However, for an integral usage of images as a
supportive resource for automated language
processes, comprehensive indexed image databases
as well as wide-coverage lists of suitable index
terms are required. The availability of such lists
and the material to index images are language de-
pendent. For instance, for English, considerably
more resources are available than for Spanish. A
study carried out by Burgos (2006) with bilingual
Spanish-English terminological dictionaries re-
vealed that the average of retrieved Spanish docu-
ments per term from the web was dramatically
lower (7,860) than the average of retrieved English
documents (246,575). One explanation to this is
the huge size of the web search space for English
and the little search space for Spanish. However,
another reason is that Spanish terms found in tradi-
tional terminological dictionaries could not be of
conventional usage among experts and do not
represent what is actually contained in the search
space. Therefore, more suitable index terms must
be looked for.
In the present work, content-based image re-
trieval (CBIR) is proposed as a means for multilin-
gual terminology retrieval from the web with the
purpose of aligning a multilingual glossary and
building up an image index. The main goal of this
research is to exploit the co-occurrence of images
and terms in specialized texts which has been
called the bimodal co-occurrence (BC). Experi-
ments have been done so far for English and Span-
76
ish with a few observations in other languages,
e.g., Portuguese. Figure 1 shows a forecast of the
whole system.
The following section provides references on
previous work and suggests that the use of termi-
nology for indexing specialized domain images in
a bilingual or multilingual setting has not been
discussed in previous literature. Section 3 de-
scribes the bimodal co-occurrence (BC) hypothesis
with more detail. Section 4 provides an overview
of how CBIR supports image indexing and term
alignment and includes an outline of the procedure
to select candidate indices through concrete / ab-
stract discrimination. Section 5 presents the current
appeals and needs of this research and section 6
sketches the future work.
Figure 1. Forecast of the system. A spider is launch to
the Internet. Websites fulfilling predefined criteria are
temporarily saved and their images analyzed by DORIS.
If an image in the website presents feature values within
a threshold determined by the example image features,
nouns are extracted and classified from the surrounding
text to make up a list of candidate target terms which
could designate the object in the website?s image. Final-
ly, index-image alignment is carried out.
2 Related Research
The particular nature of this research where lin-
guistic and visual representations converge to
make up a bimodal co-occurrence which is in-
tended to be exploited for multilingual term re-
trieval from the web requires the support of diverse
specialized knowledge to be applied along the
image-based multilingual term retrieval proposed
here. As a consequence, the required processes will
be framed within or related to the fields and sub-
fields of cross-language information retrieval,
cross-language retrieval from image collections,
image-term alignment, image annotation and con-
tent-based image retrieval.
Many of the latest contributions on the above
mentioned fields have been presented in widely
known events such as the Text Retrieval Confe-
rence (TREC), the Cross-Language Evaluation
Forum (CLEF), the Language Resource Evaluation
Conference (LREC), the Special Interest Group in
Information Retrieval (SIGIR) Conference or the
Symposium on String Processing and Information
Retrieval (SPIRE), among others.
For work related to cross-language image re-
trieval which deals with the problem of retrieving
images from multilingual collections, see Clough
et al (2006), Clough et al (2005), Clough (2005),
Bansal et al (2005), Daumke et al (2006), Iz-
quierdo-Bevi? et al (2005) or Peinado et al
(2005).
Likewise, for standard and alternatives propos-
als for Content-Based Image Retrieval systems, the
reader can check DORIS (Jaramillo and Branch,
2009b), CIRES1 (Iqbal and Aggarwal, 2003),
QBIC2 (Flickner et al, 1995), PHOTOBOOK3
(Pentland et al, 1996), IMATCH4 and Visual-
SEEk5 (Smith and Chang, 1996), Nakazato et al
(2003) or Iqbal and Aggarwal (2003). On the other
hand, for a detailed description of the CBIR stan-
dard technology, see Urcid Pliego (2003), Geradts
(2003) or Rui et al (1999) who present concrete
information on the main features for CBIR as well
as on some related systems and research. For web-
based CBIR related work, see Carson et al (2002),
Yi et al, (2000), Chang et al (1997), Tollmar et al
(2004) or  Drelie et al (2007). An updated review,
compilation of CBIR techniques, real world appli-
cations, evaluation techniques and interesting ref-
erences can be found in Datta et al (2008).
Content and Text-Based Cross-Language Image
Retrieval works can be found in Alvarez et al
(2005), Besan?on et al (2005), Besan?on and Mil-
1 http://amazon.ece.utexas.edu/~qasim/research.htm
2
http://domino.research.ibm.com/comm/pr.nsf/pages/rsc.qbic.ht
ml
3 http://vismod.media.mit.edu/vismod/demos/photobook/
4 http://www.photools.com/
5
http://www.ctr.columbia.edu/~jrsmith/html/pubs/acmmm96/ac
mfin.html
77
Index2Index1
L1 L2
Referent
let (2006), Chang and Chen (2006)  or Deselaers et
al. (2006).
Image Annotation contributions can be reviewed
in Barnard et al (2003), Cheng et al (2005), Liu et
al. (2006), Qiu et al (2006), Rahman et al (2005),
Florea et al (2006), G?ld et al (2006), Petkova
and Ballesteros (2005), M?ller et al (2006) or Li
and Wang (2003).
Finally, some image-term alignment work has
been presented in Burgos and Wanner (2006), Dec-
lerck and Alcantara (2006); Li and Wang (2003);
Barnard and Forsyth (2001); Pastra (2006) and
Wang et al (2004).
3 BC Hypothesis
The starting point of this proposal is the BC hypo-
thesis which can be defined as follows.
We assume language independent bimodal co-
occurrence of images and their index terms in the
corpus. This implies that if an image occurs in a
document of the corpus, the corresponding index
term will also occur in the same document (see
Figure 2).
Figure 2. Representation of the BC-hypothesis
Figure 2 also suggests the BC in a bilingual set-
ting. That is, when there is an image of an object in
the source language corpus along with its index
term there should also be an image of the same
object along with its index term in the target lan-
guage corpus. This means that matching both im-
ages would get the two equivalent terms closer.
Table 1 shows an example of the bilingual setting
of the BC. Both bimodal pairs (image and term)
were extracted from manually tracked websites. It
is an example of two manually matched images
taken from two different language websites which
also serve to illustrate how cross-language equiva-
lences between index terms can be established.
Table 1. BC-hypothesis for indexing in a bilingual set-
ting.
In order to prove this BC assumption with some
more representative data, a preliminary empirical
study (carried out initially for English) was carried
out. A sub-corpus of 20 noun phrases6 designating
concrete entities from the automotive industry was
extracted from an issue of the Automotive Engi-
neering International Online7 journal?s Tech Briefs
section and used to retrieve documents from the
web. The first 10 results (i.e., web pages) for each
term were stored. Each of the web pages was ma-
nually analyzed to check the BC. The result was
that the 20 terms confirmed the BC-hypothesis in
145 sites (out of 200) which means a 72.5% of
positive cases.
4 CBIR-Based Image indexing
In order to make the most of the BC, it is necessary
to automate the process of image matching and
image indexing. The fact of matching two images
coming from different language documents gene-
rates comparable corpora (i.e., topic related) and
increases the probability of aligning two equivalent
terms by reducing the search space. To do so, we
use DORIS, a Domain-ORiented Image Searcher
(Jaramillo and Branch, 2009a). DORIS is a JAVA
application to retrieve visual information which
uses both geometric and Zernike moments based
on texture and shape information contained in im-
ages. DORIS performance reaches a 90% of preci-
sion (Jaramillo and Branch, 2009b).
For the image indexing, we first start from a
source language indexed image. An internet seg-
ment in the target language is delimited as the
search space whose images are compared with the
source language image using DORIS. When a
6 See (Quirk et al, 1985: 247) or (Bosque, 1999: 8-28, 45-51)
with respect to the interpretation of the concept ?concrete
noun?.
7 Cf.  http://www.sae.org/automag/, state January, 2006.
78
positive image matching occurs, the target lan-
guage document containing the matched image is
marked as a potential location of the target lan-
guage index term.
Given that more noise results from a large
search space, the size of the image database is
usually one of the major concerns in CBIR applica-
tions. In our work, we observed that the first prob-
lem to tackle is the appropriate definition of the
web segment that will constitute the search space.
Therefore, scalability and quality issues will be
initially addressed by systematically predefining
the websites which could contain the image and
therefore the target term. In this regard, and as a
starting point, the Open Directory Project8 is used
to define our search space. This way, not only cat-
egories but also languages can be filtered. For ex-
ample, the url
http://www.dmoz.org/Business/Automotive/ leads
to the automotive category which contains subca-
tegories and sites in English. On the other hand,
following the url
http://www.dmoz.org/World/Espa?ol/Negocios/Ind
ustrias/Automotriz/ which specifies the language,
the user finds subcategories and sites of the catego-
ry automotriz for Spanish.
The image database size and quality will depend
on this definition. Uniformity is more likely, for
example, within the photographs of the same site
than between the images of two or more sites.
Likewise, there will be greater variance of image
characteristics between the images of two different
domains than within the images of the same do-
main, and so on.
Current results were achieved using DORIS.
The observations made so far with respect to
matching of images on the web suggest that some
positive matches in rather homogeneous search
spaces provided enough target index term locations
to pursue index candidate selection.
4.1 Index Candidate Selection
As it has been suggested, BC can be used for mo-
nolingual or bilingual indexing. Once this setting
has been decided and the target image has been
located as described in the previous section, the
index candidate selection can be carried out but,
before, it is possible to reduce even more the
8 http://dmoz.org/
search space for the index term location by parsing
the text surrounding the target image and extract-
ing the noun phrases (NP).
We distinguish NPs from other sort of phrases
by means of a chunker. Once all NPs have been
extracted, some normalization is done in order to
optimize the coming noun classification stage. The
cleaning consists of removing determiners at the
beginning of the phrase; lemmatization (if appro-
priate); discarding NPs whose head noun is an
acronym9; splitting Saxon possessives, and delet-
ing proper nouns and numbers:
three development objectives --> development objective
FSE?s single direct injector --> single direct injector
Given the nature of the association, we are fo-
cusing, that is image-term alignment, the list of
remaining NPs can be additionally pruned by clas-
sifying nouns intro concrete and abstract10.
Classifying nouns as denoting an abstractum or
a concretum is not a trivial task and cannot be
widely covered in this paper because of the limited
space. It can be said, however, that for noun classi-
fication, some approaches have been considered
here. For example, remarkable contributions were
made particularly by Bullinaria (2008), Katrenko
and Adriaans (2008), Peirsman et al (2008),
Shaoul and Westbury (2008), Van de Cruys (2008)
and Versley (2008). They use word space and syn-
tactic models which, in some cases, behave very
well.
As for the present study experimentation con-
cerning noun classification, three approaches were
tested. The number one used non-linguistic va-
riables, the number two was based on syntactic
patterns and the number three used lexical seman-
tics information taken from WordNet (Fellbaum,
1998). The automatic semantic annotation was
done by the SuperSenseTagger (Ciaramita, 2006).
In fact, it is the latter approach the one that yielded
the best results with a precision of 88.6% (for de-
tailed information, see Burgos, 2009).
9 NPs with acronyms as HN are not included at this stage of
the work since often do not reveal whether they designate
concrete or abstract entities ? which could hinder further
validation.
10 The experiments in this stage so far have been done for
English.
79
Concrete Abstract No
annota-
tion
No
ana-
lysis
Concrete 81 14 1 4
Abstract 8 90 0 2
Table 2. Results of noun classification for 100 concrete
nouns and 100 abstract nouns. The first two col-
umns/rows show the confusion matrix
These figures suggest that out of 95 concrete
nouns, 81 were correctly annotated, and that out of
98 abstract nouns, 90 were annotated with the right
sense.
4.2 Index-Image Alignment
With a 90% of precision in image matching and an
88.6% of precision in the noun classification task,
we assume a high probability of having the right
image with a reduced list of index candidates.
Now, the indexing process can be simplified if
the image file name matches any of the candidates.
For cases where such matching does not occur, the
following procedure is proposed.
For indexing the target image, each candidate is
used to query the image database (e.g., Google) for
images. For each candidate, the 20 first retrieved
images are compared with the target image using
DORIS. When a positive image match occurs, the
original image is indexed with the candidate that
was used to retrieve from the web the image that
yielded the positive image match. Table 4 illu-
strates this procedure by an example. In the exam-
ple, the images retrieved by steering wheel and air
filter did not match with the original image, but
one of the images retrieved by cylinder head did.
Therefore, the original image is indexed as cylind-
er head.
NP Google
Images
Original
image
Matching
(+/-)
New
index
steering
wheel
?      ?
?      ? ?
?
? ?
cylinder
head
?       ?
? ?
?      ?
?
?
+
?
?
cylinder
head
air filter ? ?
? ? ?
?
? ?
Table 3. Illustration of the monolingual image-index
alignment procedure.
5 Discussion
The approach shows that image indices can be
assigned taking into account usage, specificity and
geographical variants. The fact of indexing the
image with a term retrieved from its context as-
sures that the index term is being used. Moreover,
this technique tries to retrieve the appropriate de-
gree of specificity that the index of a specific do-
main image is expected to present ? which is often
determined by the number of modifiers of multi-
word expressions. Likewise, even for specialized
discourse, indices should respond to geographical
variants. This aspect can be controlled by specify-
ing country domains.
6 Appeals and needs
This work could be incorporated with projects
dealing with the access to existing information
bases by providing multilingual and multimodal
extensions to them. For instance, assistive technol-
ogy databases (e.g. EASTIN) or patent retrieval
engines (cf. Codina et al, 2008) which contain a
great deal of visual content.
Content-Based Image Retrieval (CBIR) is an
important contribution to multimodal information
retrieval. In addition, pairing images with equiva-
lent multilingual terminology has become a matter
of interest, particularly in specialized domains.
This work could integrate CBIR and natural lan-
guage processing (NLP) techniques so that images
can be used as language independent representa-
tions to help in finding documents of textual or
ontology descriptions.
Our approach can be especially useful for web
users who do not know the structure of the classifi-
cation system to successfully search or when they
do not know the language and special terminology
of the information base.
Thus, this work can be integrated to other sys-
tems in order to provide cross-lingual retrieval and
machine translation for both queries and docu-
ments and to enable visualization support for query
formulation and document content presentation.
Given the nature of this research?s products,
they can be included into the scope of multilingual-
ity by combining CBIR and cross-language infor-
mation retrieval technology. A link to
terminological databases can also be established so
80
they can be automatically fed with entries and vis-
ual content.
As for this research needs, an adaptation of the
SST to Spanish would be really valuable. The SST
has already been ported to Italian which represents
an interesting experience to take into account.
On the other hand, optimization and integration
of the research modules such as a web crawler and
an interface for CBIR and noun classification are
still pending.
7 Future work
Given that not all process stages of the proposal
presented in this paper have been completely inte-
grated and automated, an overall evaluation has not
been possible so far. Future work aims at integrat-
ing DORIS in modules for index candidate selec-
tion and index-image alignment. The goal is to be
able to compile multilingual specialized glossaries
after systematic and recursive exploration of well
delimited web segments and storage of images
with their respective cross-language indices. Like-
wise, some other methods to improve discrimina-
tion between concrete and abstract nouns will be
researched. The above cited related works in this
line have not been tested yet for our proposal, but,
for future work, they will be taken into account
provided that these models rely on local informa-
tion and it certainly represents an advantage for
this specific task11. Even if linguistic specific fea-
tures are hard to find in both classes of nouns, they
are not completely discarded. Finally, further expe-
riments will be carried out with other domains than
automotive engineering.
Acknowledgments
This study is part of a wider research work being
carried out by the author within the framework of
his PhD thesis at the IULA, Universitat Pompeu
Fabra, Barcelona, Spain. It was partially supported
by a grant from the Government of Catalonia ac-
cording to resolution UNI/772/2003 of the Depar-
tament d?Universitats, Recerca i Societat de la
Informaci? dated March 10th, 2003.
11 From a theoretical and experimental point of view, Altarriba
et al (1999) provide concreteness, context availability, and
imageability ratings and word associations for abstract, con-
crete, and emotion words. These ratings may be used to fur-
ther research in areas such as retrieval of abstract and concrete
nouns.
The author is very grateful with the anonymous
reviewers of this paper as well as with Leo Wanner
and Stefanos Vrochidis for their valuable com-
ments.
References
Altarriba, J.; Bauer, L. M. & Benvenuto, C. (1999),
'Concreteness, context availability, and imageability
ratings and word associations for abstract, concrete,
and emotion words', Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers 31(4), 578-602.
Alvarez, C.; Oumohmed, A. I.; Mignotte, M. & Nie,
J.Y. (2005), Multilingual Information Access for
Text, Speech and Images, Springer Berlin / Heidel-
berg, Berlin, chapter Toward Cross-Language and
Cross-Media Image Retrieval, pp. 676-687.
Bansal, V.; Zhang, C.; Chai, J. Y. & Jin, R. (2005),
Multilingual Information Access for Text, Speech
and Images, Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, Berlin,
chapter MSU at ImageCLEF: Cross Language and
Interactive Image Retrieval, pp. 805-815.
Barnard, K. & Forsyth, D. (2001), Learning the seman-
tics of words and pictures, in 'Proceedings of the In-
ternational Conference on Computer Vision', pp.
408--415.
Barnard, K.; Duygulu, P.; Forsyth, D.; de Freitas, N.;
Blei, D. M. & Jordan, M. I. (2003), 'Matching
Words and Pictures', Journal of Machine Learning
Research 3, 1107?1135.
Besan?on, R. & Millet, C. (2006), Using Text and Im-
age Retrieval Systems: Lic2m Experiments at Im-
ageCLEF 2006, in 'Working notes of the CLEF 2006
Workshop'.
Besan?on, R.; Hede, P.; Moellic, P.A. & Fluhr, C.
(2005), Multilingual Information Access for Text,
Speech and Images, Springer Berlin / Heidelberg,
Berlin, chapter Cross-Media Feedback Strategies:
Merging Text and Image Information to Improve
Image Retrieval, pp. 709-717.
Bloom, P. (2000), How Children Learn the Meanings of
Words, MIT Press.
Bosque, I. (1999). El nombre com?n. In Bosque, I.,
Demonte, V. (eds) Gram?tica descriptiva de la len-
gua castellana. Madrid: Espasa Calpe, pp. 3-75.
Bullinaria, J. A. (2008), Semantic Categorization Using
Simple Word Co-occurrence Statistics, in Baroni
Marco; Evert Stefan & Lenci Alessandro,
ed.,'ESSLLIWorkshop on Distributional Lexical
Semantics'.
Burgos, D. & Wanner, L. (2006), Using CBIR for Mul-
tilingual Terminology Glossary Compilation and
Cross-Language Image Indexing, in 'Proceedings of
the Workshop on Language Resources for Content-
based Image Retrieval', pp. 5-8.
Burgos, D. (2006). Concept and Usage-Based Approach
81
for Highly Specialized Technical Term Translation.
In Gotti, M., Sarcevic, S. (eds) 2006. Insights into
Specialized Translation. Bern: Peter Lang.
Burgos, D. (2009) ?Clasificaci?n de nombres concretos
y abstractos para extracci?n terminol?gica?. In La
terminolog?a y los usuarios de la informaci?n: pun-
tos de encuentro y relaciones necesarias para la
transferencia de la informaci?n. 4, 5 and 6 of May,
2009. Medellin, Colombia. ISBN: 978-958-714-251-
8 .
Carson, C., Belongie, S., Greenspan, H., Malik, J.
(2002). Blobworld: Image Segmentation Using Ex-
pectation-Maximisation and its Application to Image
Querying. IEEE Trans. Pattern Analysis and Ma-
chine Intelligence 24(8), pp. 1026-1038.
Chang, S., Smith, J. R., Beigi, M., Benitez, A. (1997).
Visual Information Retrieval from Large Distributed
Online Repositories. Communications of the ACM
40(12). 63-71.
Chang, Y.C. & Chen, H.H. (2006), Approaches of Us-
ing a Word-Image Ontology and an Annotated Im-
age Corpus as Intermedia for Cross-Language Image
Retrieval, in 'Working notes of the CLEF 2006
Workshop'.
Chen, F., Gargi, U., Niles, L., Schutze, H. (1999). Mul-
ti-Modal Browsing of Images in Web Documents.
Document Recognition and Retrieval VI, Proceed-
ings of SPIE 3651, pp. 122-133.
Chen, Y., Wang, J. Krovetz, R. (2003). CLUE: Cluster-
Based Retrieval of Images by Unsupervised Learn-
ing. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, Vol.
14 (8) pp. 1187-1201.
Cheng, P.C.; Chien, B.C.; Ke, H.R. & Yang, W.P.
(2005), NCTU_DBLAB@ImageCLEF 2005: Auto-
matic annotation task, in 'Working Notes of the
CLEF Workshop 2005'.
Ciaramita, M. & Altun, Y. (2006), Broad-Coverage
Sense Disambiguation and Information Extraction
with a Supersense Sequence Tagger, in 'Proceedings
of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing'.
Clough, P. (2005), Multilingual Information Access for
Text, Speech and Images, Springer Berlin / Heidel-
berg, Berlin, chapter Caption and Query Translation
for Cross-Language Image Retrieval, pp. 614-625.
Clough, P.; Grubinger, M.; Deselaers, T.; Hanbury, A.
& M?ller, H. (2006), Overview of the ImageCLEF
2006 photographic retrieval and object annotation
tasks, in 'Working notes of the CLEF 2006 Work-
shop'.
Clough, P.; M?ller, H. & Sanderson, M. (2005), Multi-
lingual Information Access for Text, Speech and Im-
ages, Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, Berlin, chapter
The CLEF 2004 Cross-Language Image Retrieval
Track, pp. 597-613.
Codina, J.; Pianta, E.; Vrochidis, S.; Papadopoulos, S.
(2008) ?Integration of Semantic, Metadata and Im-
age search engines with a text search engine for pa-
tent retrieval?, Semantic Search 2008 Workshop,
Tenerife, Spain, 2 June.
Datta, R.; Joshi, D.; Li, J. & Wang, J. Z. (2008), 'Image
retrieval: Ideas, influences, and trends of the new
age', ACM Comput. Surv. 40(2), 1--60.
Daumke, P.; Paetzold, J. & Mark?, K. (2006), Morpho-
saurus in ImageCLEF 2006: The effect of subwords
on biomedical IR, in 'Working notes of the CLEF
2006 Workshop'.
Declerck, T. & Alcantara, M. (2006), Semantic Analysis
of Text Regions Surrounding Images in Web Docu-
ments, in 'Proceedings of the Workshop on Lan-
guage Resources for Content-based Image
Retrieval', pp. 9-12.
Deselaers, T.; Weyand, T. & Ney, H. (2006), Image
Retrieval and Annotation Using Maximum Entropy,
in 'Working notes of the CLEF 2006 Workshop'.
Fellbaum, C. (1998), WordNet: An Electronic Lexical
Database, MIT Press, Cambridge.
Gelasca, E. D.; Ghosh, P.; Moxley, E.; Guzman, J. D.;
Xu, J.; Bi, Z.; Gauglitz, S.; Rahimi, A. M. & Manju-
nath, B. S. (2007), 'CORTINA: Searching a 10 Mil-
lion + Images Database'.
G?ld, M. O.; Thies, C.; Fischer, B. & Lehmann, T. M.
(2006), Combining global features for content-based
retrieval of medical images, in 'Working notes of the
CLEF 2006 Workshop'.
Iqbal, I. & Aggarwal, J. K. (2003), Feature Integration,
Multi-image Queries and Relevance Feedback in
Image Retrieval, in '6th International Conference on
Visual Information Systems (VISUAL 2003)', pp.
467-474.
Izquierdo-Bevi?, R.; Tom?s, D.; Saiz-Noeda, M. &
Vicedo, J. L. (2005), University of Alicante in Im-
ageCLEF2005, in 'Working Notes of the CLEF
Workshop 2005'.
Jaramillo, G. & Branch, J. (2009), 'Recuperaci?n de
Im?genes por Contenido Utilizando Momentos', Re-
vista Iteckne 5(2).
Jaramillo, G. E. & Branch, J. W. (2009), Recuperaci?n
Eficiente de Informaci?n Visual Utilizando Momen-
tos, in 'XXXV Conferencia Latinoamericana de In-
form?tica - CLEI 2009'.
Katrenko, S. & Adriaans, P. (2008), Qualia Structures
and their Impact on the Concrete Noun Categoriza-
tion Task, in Baroni Marco; Evert Stefan & Lenci
Alessandro, ed.,'ESSLLIWorkshop on Distributional
Lexical Semantics'.
Li, J. & Wang, J. Z. (2003), 'Automatic Linguistic In-
dexing of Pictures by a Statistical Modeling Ap-
proach', IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN
ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE 25(9),
1075-1088.
Liu, J.; Hu, Y.; Li, M. & Ying Ma, W. (2006), Medical
Image Annotation and Retrieval Using Visual Fea-
82
tures, in 'Working notes of the CLEF 2006 Work-
shop'.
M?ller, H.; Gass, T. & Geissbuhler, A. (2006), Perform-
ing image classification with a frequency?based in-
formation retrieval schema for ImageCLEF 2006, in
'Working notes of the CLEF 2006 Workshop'.
Pastra, K. (2006), Image-Language Association: are we
looking at the right features?, in 'Proceedings of the
Workshop on Language Resources for Content-
based Image Retrieval', pp. 40-43.
Peinado, V.; L?pez-Ostenero, F. & Gonzalo, J. (2005),
UNED at ImageCLEF 2005: Automatically Struc-
tured Queries with Named Entities over Metadata, in
'Working Notes of the CLEF Workshop 2005'.
Peirsman, Y.; Heylen, K. & Geeraerts, D. (2008), Size
Matters: Tight and Loose Context Definitions in
English Word Space Models, in Baroni Marco;
Evert Stefan & Lenci Alessandro,
ed.,'ESSLLIWorkshop on Distributional Lexical
Semantics'.
Petkova, D. & Ballesteros, L. (2005), Categorizing and
Annotating Medical Images by Retrieving Terms
Relevant to Visual Features, in 'Working Notes of
the CLEF Workshop 2005'.
Qiu, B.; Xu, C. & Tian, Q. (2006), Two-stage SVM for
Medical Image Annotation, in 'Working notes of the
CLEF 2006 Workshop'.
Quirk, R., Greenbaum, S., Leech, G. Svartvik, J. (1985).
A Comprehensive Grammar of the English Lan-
guage. London: Longman.
Rahman, M. M.; Desai, B. C. & Bhattacharya, P.
(2005), Supervised Machine Learning based Medi-
cal Image Annotation and Retrieval, in 'Working
Notes of the CLEF Workshop 2005'.
Routledge English Technical Dictionary. Copenhaguen:
Routledge. 1998.
Shaoul, C. & Westbury, C. (2008), Performance of
HAL-like word space models on semantic cluster-
ing, in Baroni Marco; Evert Stefan & Lenci Ales-
sandro, ed.,'ESSLLIWorkshop on Distributional
Lexical Semantics'.
Shen H.T., Ooi B.C., Tan K.L. (2000). Giving Mean-
ings to WWW Images. In: Proceedings of the 8th
ACM international conference on multimedia, 30
October - 3 November 2000, Los Angeles, pp 39-48
Tsai, C. (2003). Stacked Generalisation: a Novel Solu-
tion to Bridge the Semantic Gap for Content-Based
Image Retrieval. Online Information Review, Vol.
27 (6), pp. 442-445.
Van de Cruys, T. (2008), A Comparison of Bag of-
Words and Syntax-based Approaches for Word Ca-
tegorization, in Baroni Marco; Evert Stefan & Lenci
Alessandro, ed.,'ESSLLIWorkshop on Distributional
Lexical Semantics'.
Versley, Y. (2008), Decorrelation and Shallow Seman-
tic Patterns for Distributional Clustering of Nouns
and Verbs, in Baroni Marco; Evert Stefan & Lenci
Alessandro, ed.,'ESSLLIWorkshop on Distributional
Lexical Semantics'.
Wang, X. J.; Ma, W.Y. & Li, X. (2004), Data-driven
approach for bridging the cognitive gap in image re-
trieval, in 'Proceedings of the 2004 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Multimedia and Expo (ICME
2004)', pp. 2231-2234.
Yeh, T., Tollmar, K., Darrell, T. (2004). Searching the
Web with Mobile Images for Location Recognition.
IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR'04), Vol. 2,
pp. 76-81.
83
Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2013), pages 82?86,
Atlanta, Georgia, 13-14 June 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Exploring MWEs for Knowledge Acquisition  
from Corporate Technical Documents 
 
 
Bell Manrique Losada Carlos M. Zapata Jaramillo Diego A. Burgos 
Universidad de Medell?n Universidad Nacional de Colombia Wake Forest University 
Cra. 87 30-65 Bel?n Cra. 80 65-223 Robledo Greene Hall, P.O. Box 7566 
Medell?n, AQ, Colombia Medell?n, AQ, Colombia Winston Salem, NC 27109, USA 
bmanrique@udem.edu.co cmzapata@unal.edu.co burgosda@wfu.edu 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
High frequency can convert a word sequence 
into a multiword expression (MWE), i.e., a 
collocation. In this paper, we use collocations 
as well as syntactically-flexible, lexicalized 
phrases to analyze ?job specification docu-
ments? (a kind of corporate technical docu-
ment) for subsequent acquisition of automated 
knowledge elicitation. We propose the defini-
tion of structural and functional patterns of 
specific corporate documents by analyzing the 
contexts and sections in which the expression 
occurs. Such patterns and its automated pro-
cessing are the basis for identifying organiza-
tional domain knowledge and business 
information which is used later for the first in-
stances of requirement elicitation processes in 
software engineering. 
 
1 Introduction 
 
In software engineering, business knowledge and 
the needs of a system?s users are analyzed and 
specified by a process called requirement elicita-
tion (RE). Traditionally, RE has been carried out 
by human analysts through techniques such as 
interviews, observations, questionnaires, etc. The 
information obtained by the analyst is then con-
verted to a controlled language used further stages 
of software implementation. These techniques, 
however, necessarily increase costs and imply a 
certain degree of subjectivity. Sometimes, as an 
alternative approach for RE, human analysts elicit 
requirement from documents instead of from cli-
ents or users. The present work, proposes the use 
multiword expressions (MWEs) such as colloca-
tions and syntactically-flexible, lexicalized phrases 
to detect relevant patterns in ?job specification 
documents? (a kind of corporate technical docu-
ment). The approach contributes to the task of 
generating controlled language used in subsequent 
automated knowledge representation.  
MWEs are lexical items which can be decom-
posed into multiple lexemes with lexical, syntactic, 
semantic, pragmatic, and/or statistical idiomaticity 
(Baldwin et al, 2010). According to Bauer (1983), 
MWEs can be broadly classified into lexicalized 
phrases and institutionalized phrases. Institutional-
ized phrases, or collocations, basically require a 
high frequency of co-occurrence of their compo-
nents. Lexicalized phrases (LP), on the other hand, 
may present other kind of idiomaticity, but not 
only statistical. Along with collocations, out of the 
set of lexicalized phrase types, we find syntactical-
ly-flexible, lexicalized phrases and semi-fixed 
phrases of special interest for the present work. 
Based on an experimental corpus, we identify 
when and how a MWE is used in order to identify 
patterns, infer organizational relationships, and 
generate corporate information and/or conceptual 
models for further requirement elicitation.  
We propose context analysis?in which MWEs 
occur?would contribute by adding essential in-
formation to the pattern definition. Such patterns 
are conceived from the structural and functional 
components inherent to corporate documents. This 
means that we classify MWEs according to the 
section in the document where they prevail. We 
expect the automated processing of such patterns 
helps in the identification and understanding of 
domain knowledge and business information from 
an organization. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as fol-
lows: in Section 2 we describe the conceptual 
82
framework and background. Section 3 presents 
examples and analysis of the MWEs used for this 
study. Last, Section 4 draws conclusions and out-
lines future work. 
 
2 Conceptual Framework and Back-
ground 
 
Two main lines converge on this study, namely 
requirements elicitation belonging to software 
engineering and linguistic description and parsing 
related to natural language processing. 
Requirements elicitation (RE) is the initial pro-
cess from requirement engineering in the software 
development process lifecycle. RE involves seek-
ing, uncovering, capturing, and elaborating re-
quirements, based on activities of the business 
analysis initially performed. This process compris-
es functional, behavioral, and quality properties of 
the software to be developed (Castro-Herrera et al, 
2008). In order to accomplish RE, an analyst 
should increasingly and iteratively develop several 
actions involving natural language analysis and 
modeling (Li et al, 2003). 
On the other hand, a user of a language has 
available a large number of pre-constructed 
phrases conforming single choices, even though 
they might appear to be analyzable into segments 
(Sinclair, 1991). Such phrases are known as lexical 
phrases (LPs) and may have a pragmatic function. 
According to P?rez (1999), the importance of LPs 
lies in their usage and domain, which constitute an 
integral part of the communicative competence. In 
the same line of thought, L?pez-Mezquita (2007) 
categorizes LPs into polywords, institutionalized 
expressions, phrasal constraints, and sentence 
builders.  
For this study, we use the classification of 
MWEs proposed by Baldwin et al (2010). This 
and other classifications have been used in natural 
language processing techniques for text-mining 
and information extraction. They also have been 
applied to the analysis of many kinds of docu-
ments, e.g., technical documents, patents, and 
software requirement documents. 
Cascini et al (2004) present a functional analy-
sis of patents and their implementation in the PAT-
Analyzer tool. They use techniques based on the 
extraction of the interactions between the entities 
described in the document and expressed as sub-
ject-action-object triples, by using a suitable syn-
tactic parser. 
R?sner et al (1997) use techniques to automat-
ically generate multilingual documents from 
knowledge bases. The resulting documents can be 
represented in an interchangeable, reusable way. 
The authors describe several techniques for 
knowledge acquisition from documents by using 
particular knowledge structures from particular 
contexts. Breaux et al (2006) describe the extrac-
tion of rights and obligations from regulation texts 
restated into restricted natural language statements. 
In this approach, the authors identify normative 
phrases that define what stakeholders are permitted 
or required to do, and then extract rights and obli-
gations by using normative phrases. 
For knowledge acquisition, several authors 
have applied NLP techniques for handling MWEs. 
Jackendoff (1997) and Aussenac-Gilles et al 
(2000) extract knowledge from existing documents 
and demonstrate its usage on the ontological engi-
neering research domain.  
Some other contributions are related to the ex-
traction of multiword expressions from corpora, 
empirical work on lexical semantics in compara-
tive fields, word sense disambiguation, and ontolo-
gy learning (Bannard, 2005). In the intersection of 
NLP and requirement elicitation, Lee and Bryant 
(2002) use contextual techniques to overcome the 
ambiguity and express domain knowledge in the 
DARPA agent markup language (DAML). The 
resulting expression from the linguistic processing 
is a formal representation of the informal natural 
language requirements. 
For processing technical and organizational 
documentation, Dinesh et al (2007) propose the 
description of organizational procedures and the 
validation of their conformance to regulations, 
based on logical analysis. L?vy et al (2010) pre-
sent an environment that enables semantic annota-
tions of document textual units (e.g., words, 
phrases, paragraphs, etc.) with ontological infor-
mation (concepts, instances, roles, etc.). This ap-
proach provides an ontology-driven interpretation 
of the document contents. 
Some work has been also developed to perform 
corpus-based analysis from several technical doc-
uments, as follows: for the use of frequency and 
concordance data from a corpus, Flowerdew 
(1993) work on English biology lectures; Lam 
(2007) propose the processing of English tourism 
83
documents looking for pedagogical implications of 
its usage; and Henry and Roseberry (2001) observe 
English application letters. 
In other lines of thought, we found language 
models accounting for documents oriented to audit 
linguistic expertise and analyze communicative 
and health texts (Fern?ndez & Garc?a, 2009).  
 
3 Exploration of MWEs in Corporate 
Documents  
 
3.1 Corpus and Analysis Tools 
 
We collected and analyzed a set of documents 
from the corporate domain in different subject 
fields such as medicine, forestry, and laboratory. 
The corpus used as the basis for this preliminary 
study consists of 25 English-written documents 
with independence of its variety.  
The documents selected are a small sample be-
longing to the ?Job Specification Document? (JSD) 
category and were collected following representa-
tiveness and ecological criteria, i.e., looking for the 
collection of documents produced, created, or 
promoted in the corporate or business environ-
ment. All the documents were taken from different 
corporations and sum 31627 tokens and 3839 
types. 
The initial exploration of this experimental cor-
pus was supported by AntConc 3.3.5w? (Anthony, 
2009) and TermoStatWeb? (Drouin, 2003). 
AntConc was used to manually and systematically 
find frequent expressions and select their contexts, 
and TermoStatWeb? was used to list most fre-
quent verbs, nouns, and adjectives which could 
become part of MWEs. 
 
3.2 Identification of Relevant MWEs 
Relevant MWEs are identified in the experimental 
corpus according to the flow chart shown in Figure 
1. From each technical document belonging to the 
corpus, we carried out the task of LP extraction 
(institutionalized expressions or lexicalized expres-
sions) and classification (analysis by categories).  
We classify the extracted expressions based on 
the document section where they prevail (see Table 
1). Each section corresponds to a structural com-
ponent of the JSD which also reflects the commu-
nicative intention of the writer. 
 
 
Figure 1. Flow chart for identifying MWEs 
 
No.  Description section 
i Job purpose / objective 
ii Main responsibilites / functions 
iii Knowledge and skills 
iv Requirements 
Table 1. Sections of JSD 
Table 2 shows the relevant MWEs identified, as 
follows: i) the selected expressions with the corre-
sponding MWE category (C) according to the clas-
sification proposed by Baldwin et al (2010); ii) the 
frequency (F) of occurrence for each expression; 
and, iii) the section number (S) where the expres-
sion prevails in the JSD (from the Table 1).  
 
C MWEs F S 
1. 
Statisti
cally-
idio-
matic 
phrases 
be Able to 13 iii 
be required to 13 ii 
are required to 7 iv 
be responsible for 5 ii 
- knowledge of 49 iii 
- experience in 15 iv 
- ability to 61 iii 
related duties as 11 Ii 
the duties of 6 ii 
skills and abilities 11 iii 
level experience - 12 iv 
job code - 4 i 
job description - 9 i 
job specification - 7 i 
office equipment - 5 ii,iii 
working relationships with 12 ii,iii 
at all times 10 ii 
as well as 11 ii 
2. 
Syntact
ically-
flexible  
phrases 
be [adquired] on 5 iv 
to [support] the 29 ii 
the [priority] and 
[schedule] 
of 
24 
ii,iii 
the [work] of [others] 12 iii,iv 
by [giv]ing [time] 11 iii,iv 
in [contacts] 
with the  
[public] 
13 
ii 
3. 
Semi-
fixed 
phrases 
- work in 7 ii,iii 
- work of 6 ii 
- work with 5 iii 
- may be 30 ii 
- may have 5 iv 
- follow up 4 i,ii 
- carry out 9 i, 
Table 2. Extracted MWEs 
 
LP extraction Classification 
Institut. 
phrases 
Lexicalized 
phrases 
Doc_1 
Doc_2 
Doc_n 
Analysis 
by 
categories  
Technical 
documents 
84
We use brackets for indicating semi-fixed 
phrases or variable uses of the expression (they can 
take values with the same conjugation). In this way, 
we identify and prioritize the most frequents 
MWEs and patterns in each category, as follows:  
1. ability to, knowledge of, experience in, be able to, 
be required to 
2. to-V-the, the-N-and-N-of, in-N-with-the-N 
3. may be, carry out, work in, work of 
 
Likewise, we also found useful identifying the 
most frequent lexical items that could become part 
of MWEs and alternate with the expressions and 
patterns presented above. For that purpose, Ter-
moStatWeb was used to generate a map with the 
most frequent verbs, nouns, and adjectives. Some 
examples are shown in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2. Some frequent verbs, nouns, and adjectives. 
 
The high frequency of these items in the corpus 
suggests that they could probably be part of MWEs 
conveying corporate information. Also, when 
placed in the slots of the patterns observed in Table 
2, they increase their chance to become relevant 
MWEs useful to detect specific corporate 
knowledge. 
The following paragraph is an example of how 
this can happen. The source text belongs to a JSD 
from our corpus and shows how two frequent items 
(evaluate and work) co-occur in a collocation. 
Then, identified corporate information is expected 
to be generated by other means into specific organ-
izational information in a controlled language: 
 
Source paragraph 
?A City Manager plans, organizes, evaluates, and controls 
the work of all City departments to ensure that operations 
and services comply with the policies? 
Generated organizational information:  
[City_manager plans work. City_manager organizes work. 
City_manager evaluates work City_manager controls work] 
[City_department has work] [City_manager ensures opera-
tions] [City_department has operations] [City_department 
has services] [operations comply policies] 
 
In terms of organizational knowledge, an analyst 
can find information from JSDs about roles, re-
sponsibilities, actions, and constraints, as an ap-
proach for understanding an organizational 
domain. Such entities are expressed in a JSD as 
subject, actions, and object triples, as suggested by 
some instances in Table 2. This information can be 
represented either into models or controlled lan-
guage discourses, among other specifications.  
 
4 Conclusions  
 
This study aims at characterizing JSDs by reveal-
ing key MWEs used in an English corpus. We 
proposed a set of MWEs of a JSD, as a corporate 
technical document, which can be processed as 
input for further knowledge engineering processes. 
The appropriateness of JSDs in requirements elici-
tation was verified with this study. 
The analysis shows frequencies and patterns of 
relevant MWEs as well as their contexts and in-
flectional forms extracted via a concordance tool. 
The performed analysis is a preliminary study for 
knowledge acquisition and understanding of organ-
izational domains. Such knowledge is expected to 
be readily available to future applications in specif-
ic domains in order to validate the findings and 
then to automate the process. 
As future work, we expect to increase the num-
ber of documents in the corpus and refine the study 
of lexical and textual features. Statistical associa-
tion measures can be also considered as a way to 
reinforce MWEs and term identification and ex-
traction in the frame of knowledge acquisition 
from corporate documents. Likewise, given the 
importance of the syntactic structure given by the 
triple subject-verb-object, dependency parsing 
seems to be a promising approach for the identifi-
cation of roles and responsibilities in JSDs. 
 
Acknowledgments 
This work is funded by the Vicerrector?a de Investiga-
ci?n from both the Universidad de Medell?n and the 
Universidad Nacional de Colombia, under the project: 
?M?todo de transformaci?n de lenguaje natural a len-
guaje controlado para la obtenci?n de requisitos, a 
partir de documentaci?n t?cnica?. 
 
V
er
b
s 
?Record 
?Report 
?Maintain 
?Verify 
? perform 
? provide 
? involve 
? direct 
? develop 
? ensure 
?work 
? evaluate 
? require 
?prepare 
N
o
u
n
s 
? Order 
? Accounting 
? skill 
? Knowledge 
? Business 
? Invoice 
? Department 
? Operation 
? Employee 
? Information 
? ability 
? work 
? regulation 
? code 
? development 
? task 
A
d
je
ct
iv
es
 
? applicable 
? effective 
? essential 
? administrative 
? accurate 
 
85
References  
Anthony, L. 2009. Issues in the design and development 
of software tools for corpus studies: The case for col-
laboration. Contemporary corpus linguistics, Lon-
don: P. Baker Ed.: 87-104. 
Aussenac-Gilles, N. Bi?bow, B. and Szulman, S. 2000. 
Revisiting Ontology Design: A Method Based on 
Corpus Analysis. Knowledge Engineering and 
Knowledge Management. Methods, Models, and 
Tools, 1937:27?66. 
Baldwin, Timothy and Su Nam Kim (2010) Multiword 
Expressions, in Nitin Indurkhya and Fred J. Damerau 
(eds.) Handbook of Natural Language Processing, 
Second Ed., CRC Press, USA, pp. 267-292. 
Bannard, C. 2005. Learning about the meaning of verb?
particle constructions from corpora. Computer 
Speech & Language, 19(4): 467-478. 
Bauer, L. 1983. English Word-Formation. London: 
Cambridge University Press, 311. 
Breaux, T.D., Vail, M.W. and Ant?n, A.I. 2006. To-
wards Regulatory Compliance: Extracting Rights and 
Obligations to Align Requirements with Regulations. 
North Carolina State University TR-2006-6. 
Cascini, G. Fantechi, A. and Spinicci, E. 2004. Natural 
Language Processing of Patents and Technical Doc-
umentation. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 
3163:508-520. 
Castro-Herrera, C., Duan, C., Cleland-Huang, J. and 
Mobasher, B. Using data mining and recommender 
systems to facilitate large-scale, open, and inclusive 
requirements elicitation processes. Proceedings of 
16th IEEE Inter. Requirements Eng. Conference, 
pp.165?168, 2008. 
Dinesh, N. Joshi, A. Lee, I. and Sokolski, O. 2007. 
Logic-based regulatory conformance checking. In 
14th Monterey Workshop, ScholarlyCommons Penn. 
Drouin, P. 2003. TermoStat Web 3.0. D?sormais utilisa-
ble qu'apr?s enregistremen. Available in: 
http://olst.ling.umontreal.ca/~drouinp/termostat_web/ 
Fern?ndez, L. and Garc?a, F.J. 2009. Texto y empresa. 
Applied Linguistics Now: Understanding Language 
and Mind, pp.655-665. Universidad de Almer?a, Es-
pa?a.  
Flowerdew, J. 1993. Concordancing as a Tool in Course 
Design. System, 21(2): 231-244.  
Henry, A. and Roseberry, R.L. 2001. Using a Small 
Corpus to Obtain Data for Teaching a Genre. In 
Ghadessy/Henry/Roseberry: 93-133. 
Jackendoff, R. 1997. The architecture of the language 
faculty. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA. 
Lam, P. Y.  2007. A Corpus-driven L?xico-grammatical 
Analysis of English Tourism Industry Texts and the 
Study of its Pedagogic Implications in ESP. In Hidal-
go/Quereda/Santana: 71-90. 
Lee, B. and Bryant, B. R. 2002. Contextual Natural 
Language Processing and DAML for Understanding 
Software Requirements Specifications. In 19th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics, 
Taipei, Taiwan.  
Levy, F. Guisse, A. Nazarenko, A. Omrane, N. and 
Szulman, S. 2010. An Environment for the Joint 
Management of Written Policies and Business Rules. 
22nd IEEE International Conference on Tools with 
Artificial Intelligence. IEEE Computer Society, 
2:142-149. 
Li, K., Dewar, R.G. and Pooley, R.J. Requirements 
capture in natural language problem statements. Her-
iot-Watt University, 2003. Available in 
http://www.macs.hw.ac.uk:8080/techreps/docs/files/
HW-MACS-TR-0023.pdf 
L?pez-Mezquita, M.T. 2007. La evaluaci?n de la com-
petencia l?xica: tests de vocabulario. Su fiabilidad y 
validez. Centro de Investigaci?n y Documentaci?n 
Educativa, 177(1): 488.  
L?pez  Rodr?guez,  C.  I., Faber,  P., Le?n- Ara?z,  P., 
Prieto,  J. A. and  Tercedor, M. 2010. La  Terminolo-
g?a  basada  en marcos y su aplicaci?n a las ciencias 
medioambientales: los proyectos MarcoCosta y Eco-
sistema. Arena Romanistica, 7 (10): 52-74. 
Peleg, M. Gutnik, L.A. Snow, V. and Patel, V.L. 2005. 
Interpreting procedures from descriptive guidelines. 
Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 39(1):184?195. 
Perez, C. 1999. La ense?anza del vocabulario desde 
una perspectiva lingufstica y pedagogica. In S. Sala-
berri (Ed.), Lingutstica Aplicada a las Lenguas Ex-
tranjeras, Almer?a: Univ. de Almer?a: 262-307. 
R?sner, D., Grote, B., Hartmann, K. and H?fling. B. 
1997. From Natural Language Documents to Shara-
ble Product Knowledge: A Knowledge Engineering 
Approach. Journal of Universal Computer Science. 
3(8): 955-987. 
Sinclair, J. 1991. Corpus, concordance, colloca-
tion. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Soler, C. and Gil, I. 2010. Posibilidades y l?mites de los 
tesauros frente a otros sistemas de organizaci?n del 
conocimiento: folksonom?as, taxonom?as y ontolo-
g?as. Revista Interamericana de Bibliotecolog?a, 
33(2): 361-377. 
 
86
