A THAI SPEECH TRANSLATION SYSTEM  FOR MEDICAL DIALOGS
Tanja Schultz, Dorcas Alexander, Alan W Black, Kay Peterson, Sinaporn Suebvisai, Alex Waibel
Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
E-mail: tanja@cs.cmu.edu
1. Introduction
In this paper we present our activities towards a Thai
Speech-to-Speech translation system. We investigated in
the design and implementation of a prototype system. For
this purpose we carried out research on bootstrapping a
Thai speech recognition system, developing a translation
component, and building an initial Thai synthesis system
using our existing tools.
2. Speech Recognition
The language adaptation techniques developed in our lab
[5] enables us to rapidly bootstrap a speech recognition
system in a new target language given very limited amount
of training data. The Thailand?s National Electronics and
Technology Center gave us the permission to use their
Thai speech data collected in the hotel reservation domain.
They provided us with a 6 hours text and speech database
recorded from native Thai speakers. We divided the data
into three speaker disjoint sets, 34 speakers were used for
training, 4 speakers for development, and another 4
speakers for evaluation. The provided transcriptions were
manually pre-segmented and given in Thai script. We
transformed the Thai script into a Roman script
representation by concatenating the phoneme
representation of the Thai word given in the pronunciation
dictionary. The motivation for this romanization step was
threefold: (1) it makes it easier for non-Thai researchers to
work with the Roman representation like in the grammar
development, (2) the romanized output basically provides
the pronunciation which makes things easier for the speech
synthesis component, and (3) our speech engine currently
does not handle Thai characters.
In our first Thai speech engine we decided to disregard the
tone information. Since tone is a distinctive feature in the
Thai language, disregarding the tone increases the number
of homographs. In order to limit this number, we
distinguished those word candidates by adding a tag that
represents the tone. The resulting dictionary consists of
734 words which cover the given 6-hours database.
Building on our earlier studies which showed that
multilingual seed models outperform monolingual ones
[5], we applied phonemes taken from seven languages,
namely Chinese, Croatian, French, German, Japanese,
Spanish, and Turkish as seed models for the Thai phone
set. Table 1 describes the performance of the Thai speech
recognition component for different acoustic model sizes
(context-independent vs. 500 and 1000 tri-phone models).
The results indicate that a Thai speech recognition engine
can be built by using the bootstrapping approach with a
reasonable amount of speech data. Even the very initial
system bootstrapped from multilingual seed models gives
a performance above 80% word accuracy. The good
performance might be an artifact from the very limited
domain with a compact and closed vocabulary.
System Dev Test Eval Test
Context-Independent 85.62% 83.63%
Context-Dependent (500) 86.99% 84.44%
Context-Dependent (1000) 84.63% 82.71%
Table1: Word accuracy [%] in Thai language
3. Machine Translation
The Machine Translation (MT) component of our current
Thai system is based on an interlingua called the
Interchange Format (IF). The IF developed by CMU has
been expanded and now encompasses concepts in both the
travel and medical domains, as well as many general-use
or cross-domain concepts in many different languages [4].
Interlingua-based MT has several advantages, namely: (1)
it abstracts away from variations in syntax across
languages, providing potentially deep analysis of meaning
without relying on information pertinent only to one
particular language pair, (2) modules for analysis and
generation can be developed monolingually, with
additional reference only to the second "language" of the
interlingua, (3) the speaker can be given a paraphrase in
his or her own language, which can help verify the
accuracy of the analysis and be used to alert the listener to
inaccurate translations, and (4) translation systems can be
extended to new languages simply by hooking up new
monolingual modules for analysis and/or generation,
eliminating the need to develop a completely new system
for each new language pair.
Thai has some particular characteristics which we
addressed in IF and appear in the grammars as follows:
1) The use of a term to indicate the gender of the person:
Thai: zookhee kha1
Eng: okay (ending)
s[acknowledge] (zookhee *[speaker=])
2) An affirmation that means more than simply "yes."
Thai: saap khrap
Eng: know (ending)
s[affirm+knowledge](saap *[speaker=])
3) The separation from the main verb of terms for
feasibility and other modalities.
Thai: rvv khun ca paj dooj thxksii
kyydaaj
Eng: or you will go by taxi [can too]
s[give-information+feasibility+trip]
(*DISC-RHET [who=] ca paj
[locomotion=] [feasibility=])
4. Language Generation
For natural language generation from interlingua for Thai
and English, we are currently investigating two options: a
knowledge-based generation with the pseudo-unification
based GenKit generator developed at CMU, which
employs manually written semantic/syntactic grammars
and lexicons, and a statistical generation operating on a
training corpus of aligned interlingua and natural language
correspondences. Performance tests as well as the amount
and quality of training data will decide which approach
will be pursued in the future.
5. Speech Synthesis
First, we built a limited domain Thai voice in the Festival
Speech Synthesis System [1]. Limited Domain voices can
achieve very high quality voice output [2], and can be easy
to construct if the domain is constrained. Our initial voice
targeted the Hotel Reservation domain and we constructed
235 sentence that covered the aspects of our immediate
interest. Using the tools provided in FestVox [1], we
recorded, auto-labeled, and built a synthetic voice.
In supporting any new language in synthesis, a number of
language specific issues first had to be addressed. As with
our other speech-to-speech translation projects we share
the phoneme set between the recognizer and the
synthesizer. The second important component is the
lexicon. The pronunciation of Thai words from Thai script
is not straightforward, but there is a stronger relationship
between the orthography and pronunciation than in
English. For this small set of initial words we constructed
an explicit lexicon by hand with the output vocabulary of
522 words. The complete Thai limited domain voice uses
unit selection concatenative synthesis. Unlike our other
limited domain synthesizers, where they have a limited
vocabulary, we tag each phone with syllable and tone
information in selection making the result more fluent, and
a little more general.
Building on our previous Thai work in pronunciation of
Thai words [3], we have used the lexicon and statistically
trained letter to sound rules to bootstrap the required word
coverage. With a pronunciation model we can select
suitable phonetically balanced text (both general and in-
domain) from which we are able to record and build a
more general voice.
6. Demonstration Prototype System
Our current version is a two-way speech-to-speech
translation system between Thai and English for dialogs in
the medical domain where the English speaker is a doctor
and the Thai speaker is a patient. The translated speech
input will be spoken using the built voice. At the moment,
the coverage is very limited due to the simplicity of the
used grammars. The figure shows the interface of our
prototype system.
Acknowledgements
This work was partly funded by LASER-ACTD. The
authors thank Thailand?s National Electronics and
Computer Technology Center for giving the permission to
use their database and dictionary for this task.
References
[1] Black, A. and Lenzo, K. (2000) "Building Voices in the
Festival Speech Synthesis System", http://festvox.org
[2] Black, A. and Lenzo, K. (2000) "Limited Domain Synthesis",
ICSLP2000, Beijing, China.
[3] Chotmongkol, A. and Black, A. (2000) "Statistically trained
orthographic to sound models for Thai", ICSLP2000,
Beijing, China.
[4] Lavie A. and Levin L. and Schultz T. and Langley C. and
Han B., Tribble, A., Gates D., Wallace D. and Peterson K.
(2001) ?Domain Portability in Speech-to-speech
Translation?,  HLT, San Diego, March 2001.
[5] Schultz, T. and Waibel, A. (2001) ?Language Independent
and Language Adaptive Acoustic Modeling for Speech
Recognition?, Speech Communication, Volume 35, Issue 1-
2, pp. 31-51, August 2001.
