Proceedings of the Multiword Expressions: From Theory to Applications (MWE 2010), pages 37?45,
Beijing, August 2010
Automatic Extraction of Complex Predicates in Bengali  
Dipankar Das     Santanu Pal      Tapabrata Mondal       Tanmoy Chakraborty   
 
  Sivaji Bandyopadhyay 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
Jadavpur University 
dipankar.dipnil2005@gmail.com, 
santanupersonal1@gmail.com, 
tapabratamondal@gmail.com, its_tanmoy@yahoo.co.in, 
sivaji_cse_ju@yahho.com 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper presents the automatic ex-
traction of Complex Predicates (CPs) 
in Bengali with a special focus on 
compound verbs (Verb + Verb) and 
conjunct verbs (Noun /Adjective + 
Verb). The lexical patterns of com-
pound and conjunct verbs are extracted 
based on the information of shallow 
morphology and available seed lists of 
verbs. Lexical scopes of compound and 
conjunct verbs in consecutive sequence 
of Complex Predicates (CPs) have 
been identified. The fine-grained error 
analysis through confusion matrix 
highlights some insufficiencies of lexi-
cal patterns and the impacts of different 
constraints that are used to identify the 
Complex Predicates (CPs). System 
achieves F-Scores of 75.73%, and 
77.92% for compound verbs and 
89.90% and 89.66% for conjunct verbs 
respectively on two types of Bengali 
corpus.      
1 Introduction 
Complex Predicates (CPs) contain [verb] + 
verb (compound verbs) or [noun/ 
adjective/adverb] +verb (conjunct verbs) 
combinations in South Asian languages (Hook, 
1974). To the best of our knowledge, Bengali  
 
 
is not only a language of South Asia but also 
the sixth popular language in the World 1 , 
second in India and the national language of 
Bangladesh. The identification of Complex 
Predicates (CPs) adds values for building 
lexical resources (e.g. WordNet (Miller et al, 
1990; VerbNet (Kipper-Schuler, 2005)), 
parsing strategies and machine translation 
systems.  
Bengali is less computerized compared to 
English due to its morphological enrichment. 
As the identification of Complex Predicates 
(CPs) requires the knowledge of morphology, 
the task of automatically extracting the Com-
plex Predicates (CPs) is a challenge. Complex 
Predicates (CPs) in Bengali consists of two 
types, compound verbs (CompVs) and conjunct 
verbs (ConjVs). 
The compound verbs (CompVs) (e.g. ? ?? 
? ?? mere phela ?kill?, ???? ???? bolte laglo 
?started saying?) consist of two verbs. The first 
verb is termed as Full Verb (FV) that is present 
at surface level either as conjunctive participial 
form -e ?e or the infinitive form -?  ?te. The 
second verb bears the inflection based on 
Tense, Aspect and Person. The second verbs 
that are termed as Light Verbs (LV) are 
polysemous, semantically bleached and 
confined into some definite candidate seeds 
(Paul, 2010).  
On the other hand, each of the Bengali con-
junct verbs (ConjVs) (e.g. ???? ??? bharsha 
                                                 
1http://www.ethnologue.com/ethno_docs/distributio
n.asp?by=size 
37
kara ?to depend?, ???? ??? jhakjhak kara ?to 
glow?) consists of noun or adjective followed 
by a Light Verb (LV). The Light Verbs (LVs) 
bear the appropriate inflections based on 
Tense, Aspect and Person.   
According to the definition of multi-word 
expressions (MWEs)(Baldwin and Kim, 2010), 
the absence of conventional meaning of the 
Light Verbs in Complex Predicates (CPs) 
entails us to consider the Complex Predicates 
(CPs) as MWEs (Sinha, 2009). But, there are 
some typical examples of Complex Predicates 
(CPs), e.g. ? ?? ??? dekha kara ?see-do? that 
bear the similar lexical pattern as Full Verb 
(FV)+ Light Verb (LV) but both of the Full 
Verb (FV) and Light Verb (LV) loose their 
conventional meanings and generate a 
completely different meaning (?to meet? in this 
case).  
In addition to that, other types of predicates 
such as ???? ? ? niye gelo ?take-go? (took and 
went), ???? ? ? diye gelo ?give-go? (gave and 
went) follows the similar lexical patterns 
FV+LV as of Complex Predicates (CPs) but 
they are not mono-clausal. Both the Full Verb 
(FV) and Light Verb (LV) behave like 
independent syntactic entities and they belong 
to non-Complex Predicates (non-CPs). The 
verbs are also termed as Serial Verb (SV) 
(Mukherjee et al, 2006). 
Butt (1993) and Paul (2004) have also 
mentioned the following criteria that are used 
to check the validity of complex predicates 
(CPs) in Bengali. The following cases are the 
invalid criteria of complex predicates (CPs). 
1. Control Construction (CC): ????? ??? 
likhte bollo ?asked to write?, ????? ???? 
??? likhte badhyo korlo ?forced to 
write? 
2. Modal Control Construction (MCC): 
? ?? ??? jete hobe ?have to go? ? ?? ??? 
khete hobe ?have to eat? 
3. Passives (Pass) : ??? ??? dhora porlo 
?was caught?, ???? ?? mara holo ?was 
beaten? 
4. Auxiliary Construction (AC): ??? ??? 
bose ache ?is sitting?, ???? ??? niye chilo 
?had taken?. 
Sometimes, the successive sequence of the 
Complex Predicates (CPs) shows a problem of 
deciding the scopes of individual Complex 
Predicates (CPs) present in that sequence. For 
example the sequence, u?? ??? ? ???? uthe pore 
dekhlam ?rise-wear-see? (rose and saw) seems 
to contain two Complex Predicates (CPs) (u?? 
??? uthe pore ?rose? and ??? ? ???? pore 
dekhlam ?wore and see?). But there is actually 
one Complex Predicate (CP). The first one u?? 
??? uthe pore ?rose? is a compound verb 
(CompV) as well as a Complex Predicate (CP). 
Another one is ? ???? dekhlam ?saw? that is a 
simple verb. As the sequence is not mono-
clausal, the Complex Predicate (CP) u?? ??? 
uthe pore ?rose? associated with ? ???? dekhlam 
?saw? is to be separated by a lexical boundary. 
Thus the determination of lexical scopes of 
Complex Predicates (CPs) from a long con-
secutive sequence is indeed a crucial task.      
 The present task therefore not only aims to 
extract the Complex Predicates (CPs) 
containing compound and conjunct verbs but 
also to resolve the problem of deciding the 
lexical scopes automatically. The compound 
verbs (CompVs) and conjunct verbs (ConjVs) 
are extracted from two separate Bengali 
corpora based on the morphological 
information (e.g. participle forms, infinitive 
forms and inflections) and list of Light Verbs 
(LVs). As the Light Verbs (LVs) in the 
compound verbs (CompVs) are limited in 
number, fifteen predefined verbs (Paul, 2010) 
are chosen as Light Verbs (LVs) for framing 
the compound verbs (CompVs).  A manually 
prepared seed list that is used to frame the 
lexical patterns for conjunct verbs (ConjVs) 
contains frequently used Light Verbs (LVs).  
An automatic method is designed to identify 
the lexical scopes of compound and conjunct 
verbs in the long sequences of Complex 
Predicates (CPs). The identification of lexical 
scope of the Complex Predicates (CPs) 
improves the performance of the system as the 
number of identified Complex Predicates 
(CPs) increases.  
Manual evaluation is carried out on two 
types of Bengali corpus. The experiments are 
carried out on 800 development sentences 
from two corpora but the final evaluation is 
carried out on 1000 sentences. Overall, the 
system achieves F-Scores of 75.73%, and 
77.92% for compound verbs and 89.90% and 
89.66% for conjunct verbs respectively.  
38
The error analysis shows that not only the 
lexical patterns but also the augmentation of 
argument structure agreement (Das, 2009), the 
analysis of Non-MonoClausal Verb (NMCV) or 
Serial Verb, Control Construction (CC), 
Modal Control Construction (MCC), Passives 
(Pass) and Auxiliary Construction (AC) (Butt, 
1993; Paul, 2004) are also necessary to 
identify the Complex Predicates (CPs). The 
error analysis shows that the system suffers in 
distinguishing the Complex Predicates (CPs) 
from the above constraint constructions.  
The rest of the paper is organized as fol-
lows. Section 2 describes the related work 
done in this area. The automatic extraction of 
compound and conjunct verbs is described in 
Section 3. In Section 4, the identification of 
lexical scopes of the Complex Predicates 
(CPs) is mentioned. Section 5 discusses the 
results of evaluation along with error analysis. 
Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper. 
2 Related Work 
The general theory of complex predicate is 
discussed in Alsina (1996). Several attempts 
have been organized to identify complex 
predicates in South Asian languages (Abbi, 
1991; Bashir, 1993; Verma, 1993) with a spe-
cial focus to Hindi (Burton-Page, 1957; Hook, 
1974), Urdu (Butt, 1995), Bengali (Sarkar, 
1975; Paul, 2004), Kashmiri (Kaul, 1985) and 
Oriya (Mohanty, 1992). But the automatic ex-
traction of Complex Predicates (CPs) has been 
carried out for few languages, especially 
Hindi. 
The task described in (Mukherjee et al, 
2006) highlights the development of a database 
based on the hypothesis that an English verb is 
projected onto a multi-word sequence in Hindi. 
The simple idea of projecting POS tags across 
an English-Hindi parallel corpus considers the 
Complex Predicate types, adjective-verb (AV), 
noun-verb (NV), adverb-verb (Adv-V), and 
verb-verb (VV) composites. A similar task 
(Sinha, 2009) presents a simple method for 
detecting Complex Predicates of all kinds us-
ing a Hindi-English parallel corpus. His simple 
strategy exploits the fact that Complex Predi-
cate is a multi-word expression with a meaning 
that is distinct from the meaning of the Light 
Verb. In contrast, the present task carries the 
identification of Complex Predicates (CPs) 
from monolingual Bengali corpus based on 
morphological information and lexical pat-
terns. 
The analysis of V+V complex predicates 
termed as lexical compound verbs (LCpdVs) 
and the linguistic tests for their detection in 
Hindi are described in (Chakrabarti et al, 
2008). In addition to compound verbs, the pre-
sent system also identifies the conjunct verbs 
in Bengali. But, it was observed that the identi-
fication of Hindi conjunct verbs that contain 
noun in the first slot is puzzling and therefore a 
sophisticated solution was proposed in (Das, 
2009) based on the control agreement strategy 
with other overtly case marked noun phrases. 
The present task also agrees with the above 
problem in identifying conjunct verbs in Ben-
gali although the system satisfactorily identi-
fies the conjunct verbs (ConjVs). 
Paul (2003) develops a constraint-based 
mechanism within HPSG framework for com-
posing Indo-Aryan compound verb construc-
tions with special focus on Bangla (Bengali) 
compound verb sequences. Postulating seman-
tic relation of compound verbs, another work 
(Paul, 2009) proposed a solution of providing 
lexical link between the Full verb and Light 
Verb to store the Compound Verbs in Indo 
WordNet without any loss of generalization. 
To the best of our knowledge, ours is the first 
attempt at automatic extraction of Complex 
Predicates (CPs) in Bengali.  
3 Identification of Complex Predi-
cates (CPs) 
The compound verbs (CompVs) and conjunct 
verbs (ConjVs) are identified from the shallow 
parsed result using a lexical pattern matching 
technique. 
3.1 Preparation of Corpora 
Two types of Bengali corpus have been con-
sidered to carry out the present task. One cor-
pus is collected from a travel and tourism do-
main and another from an online web archive 
of Rabindranath Rachanabali 2 . Rabindra 
Rachanabali corpus is a large collection of 
short stories of Rabindranath Tagore. The for-
                                                 
2 www.rabindra-rachanabali.nltr.org 
39
mer EILMT travel and tourism corpus is ob-
tained from the consortium mode project ?De-
velopment of English to Indian Languages 
Machine Translation (EILMT 3) System?. The 
second type of corpus is retrieved from the 
web archive and pre-processed accordingly. 
Each of the Bengali corpora contains 400 and 
500 development and test sentences respec-
tively.   
The sentences are passed through an open 
source Bengali shallow parser 4. The shallow 
parser gives different morphological informa-
tion (root, lexical category of the root, gender, 
number, person, case, vibhakti, tam, suffixes 
etc.) that help in identifying the lexical patterns 
of Complex Predicates (CPs).  
3.2 Extracting Complex Predicates (CPs) 
Manual observation shows that the Complex 
Predicates (CPs) contain the lexical pattern 
{[XXX] (n/adj) [YYY] (v)} in the shallow 
parsed sentences where XXX and YYY repre-
sent any word. But, the lexical category of the 
root word of XXX is either noun (n) or adjec-
tive (adj) and the lexical category of the root 
word of YYY is verb (v). The shallow parsed 
sentences are pre-processed to generate the 
simplified patterns. An example of similar 
lexical pattern of the shallow parsed result and 
its simplified output is shown in Figure 1.  
 
((NP  a????  NN  <fs 
?f='a???? ,n,,sg,,d,?? ? ,?? ? '>  ))              
   
((VGF  ???????      VM       <fs 
?f='?r,v,,,5,,? ,? '>     )) 
a???? |no?n|a???? /NN/NP/ 
(a???? ^n^*^sg^*^d^?? ^?? ? )_ 
???????|v??b|???????/VM/VGF/              
(?r^v^*^*^1^*^? ^? ) 
         
 Figure 1. Example of a pre-processed shallow 
parsed result. 
 
                                                 
3 The EILMT project is funded by the Department of 
Information Technology (DIT), Ministry of Communica-
tions and Information Technology (MCIT), Government 
of India. 
4http://ltrc.iiit.ac.in/showfile.php?filename=downloads/sh
allow_parser.php 
The corresponding lexical categories of the 
root words a???? adhyan ?study? (e.g. noun 
for ?n?) and '?r  kar, ?do? (e.g. verb for ?v?) are 
shown in bold face in Figure 1. The f ollowing 
example is of conjunct verb (ConjV).  
The extraction of Bengali compound verbs 
(CompVs) is straightforward rather than con-
junct verbs (ConjVs). The lexical pattern of 
compound verb is {[XXX](v) [YYY] (v)} where 
the lexical or basic POS categories of the root 
words of  ?XXX? and ?YYY? are only verb. If 
the basic POS tags of the root forms of ?XXX? 
and ?YYY? are verbs (v) in shallow parsed sen-
tences, then only the corresponding lexical 
patterns are considered as the probable candi-
dates of compound verbs (CompVs).  
Example 1: 
??i??|v??b|??i??/VM/VGNF/? ? ^v^*^*^?ny^*^i??^i??)
#??????|v??b|??????/VM/VGF/(??^v^*^*^1^*^?^?) 
Example 1 is a compound verb (CompV) but 
Example 2 is not. In Example 2, the lexical 
category or the basic POS of the Full Verb 
(FV) is noun (n) and hence the pattern is dis-
carded as non-compound verb (non-CompV). 
Example 2: 
?k? |noun|?k? /NN/NP/(?k? ^n^*^*^*^*^*^pos
lcat="NM") #  
?????|verb|?????/VM/VGNF/(?r^v^*^*^any^*^i??
^i??) 
Bengali, like any other Indian languages, is 
morphologically very rich. Different suffixes 
may be attached to a Light Verb (LVs) (in this 
case [YYY]) depending on the various features 
such as Tense, Aspect, and Person.  
In case of extracting compound verbs 
(CompVs), the Light Verbs are identified from 
a seed list (Paul, 2004). The list of Light Verbs 
is specified in Table 1. The dictionary forms of 
the Light Verbs are stored in this list. As the 
Light Verbs contain different suffixes, the pri-
mary task is to identify the root forms of the 
Light Verbs (LVs) from shallow parsed result. 
Another table that stores the root forms and the 
corresponding dictionary forms of the Light 
Verbs is used in the present task. The table 
contains a total number of 378 verb entries 
including Full Verbs (FVs) and Light Verbs 
(LVs). The dictionary forms of the Light Verbs 
(LVs) are retrieved from the Table. 
On the other hand, the conjunctive particip-
ial form -e/i?? -e/iya or the infinitive form -
? /i?? ?te/ite are attached with the Full Verbs 
40
(FVs) (in this case [XXX]) in compound verbs 
(CompVs). i?? / iya and i??/ ite are also used 
for conjunctive participial form -e ?e or the 
infinitive form -?  ?te respectively in litera-
ture. The participial and infinitive forms are 
checked based on the morphological informa-
tion (e.g. suffixes of the verb) given in the 
shallow parsed results. In Example 1, the Full 
Verb (FV) contains -i?? -iya suffix. If the dic-
tionary forms of the Light Verbs (LVs) are pre-
sent in the list of Light Verbs and the Full 
Verbs (FVs) contain the suffixes of -e/i?? -
e/iya or ? /i?? ?te/ite, both verbs are combined 
to frame the patterns of compound verbs 
(CompVs). 
 
aSa ?come?          d?Ra ?stand? 
rakha ?keep?       ana ?bring?  
deoya ?give?        pOra ?fall?  
paTha ?send?       bERano ?roam? 
neoya ?take?        tola ?lift? 
bOSa ?sit?           oTha ?rise? 
jaoya ?go?           chaRa ?leave? 
phEla ?drop?       mOra ?die? 
 
Table 1. List of Light Verbs for compound 
verbs. 
The identification of conjunct verbs 
(ConjVs) requires the lexical pattern (Noun / 
Adjective + Light Verb) where a noun or an 
adjective is followed by a Light Verb (LV). The 
dictionary forms of the Light Verbs (LVs) that 
are frequently used as conjunct verbs (ConjVs) 
are prepared manually. The list of Light Verbs 
(LVs) is given in Table 2. The detection of 
Light Verbs (LVs) for conjunct verbs (ConjVs) 
is similar to the detection of the Light Verbs 
(LVs) for compound verbs (CompVs) as de-
scribed earlier in this section.  If the basic POS 
of the root of the first words ([XXX]) is either 
?noun? or ?adj? (n/adj) and the basic POS of 
the following word ([YYY]) is ?verb? (v), the 
patterns are considered as conjunct verbs 
(ConjVs). The Example 2 is an example of 
conjunct verb (ConjV). 
For example, ???? ??? (jhakjhak kara ?to 
glow?), ???? ??? (taktak ?to glow?), ?? ??? ??? 
(chupchap kara ?to silent?) etc are identified as 
conjunct verbs (ConjVs) where the basic POS 
of the former word is an adjective (adj) fol-
lowed by ??? kara ?to do?, a common Light 
Verb.  
deoya ?give?        kara  ?do?    
neoya ?take?        laga  ?start?            
paoya ?pay?         kata  ?cut?   
  
Table 2. List of Light Verbs for conjunct verbs. 
 
Example 3:  
  ????|?dj|???? /JJ/JJP/(???? ^?dj) # 
????|v??b|????/VM/VGF/(?r^v^*^*^5^*^?^?) 
But, the extraction of conjunct verbs 
(ConjVs) that have a ?noun+verb? construction 
is descriptively and theoretically puzzling 
(Das, 2009). The identification of lexical pat-
terns is not sufficient to recognize the com-
pound verbs (CompVs). For example, ?i ? ??? 
boi deoya ?give book? and ???? ? ??? bharsa 
deyoa ?to assure? both contain similar lexical 
pattern (noun+verb) and same Light Verb ? ??? 
deyoa. But, ???? ? ??? bharsa deyoa ?to assure? 
is a conjunct verb (ConjV) whereas ?i ? ??? boi 
deoya ?give book? is not a conjunct verb 
(ConjV). Linguistic observation shows that the 
inclusion of this typical category into conjunct 
verbs (ConjVs) requires the additional knowl-
edge of syntax and semantics.  
In connection to conjunct verbs (ConjVs), 
(Mohanty, 2010) defines two types of conjunct 
verbs (ConjVs), synthetic and analytic. A syn-
thetic conjunct verb is one in which both the 
constituents form an inseparable whole from 
the semantic point of view or semantically 
non-compositional in nature. On the other 
hand, an analytic conjunct verb is semantically 
compositional. Hence, the identification of 
conjunct verbs requires knowledge of seman-
tics rather than only the lexical patterns. 
It is to be mentioned that sometimes, the 
negative markers (?? no, ??i nai) are attached 
with the Light Verbs u?????  uthona ?do not get 
up? ? ?????  phelona ?do not throw?. Negative 
attachments are also considered in the present 
task while checking the suffixes of Light Verbs 
(LVs). 
4 Identification of Lexical Scope for 
Complex Predicates (CPs) 
The identification of lexical scopes of the 
Complex Predicates (CPs) from their succes-
sive sequences shows that multiple Complex 
41
Predicates (CPs) can occur in a long sequence. 
An automatic method is employed to identify 
the Complex Predicates (CPs) along with their 
lexical scopes. The lexical category or basic 
POS tags are obtained from the parsed sen-
tences. 
If the compound and conjunct verbs occur 
successively in a sequence, the left most two 
successive tokens are chosen to construct the 
Complex Predicate (CP). If successive verbs 
are present in a sequence and the dictionary 
form of the second verb reveals that the verb is 
present in the lists of compound Light Verbs 
(LV), then that Light Verb (LV) may be a part 
of a compound verb (CompV). For that reason, 
the immediate previous word token is chosen 
and tested for its basic POS in the parsed result. 
If the basic POS of the previous word is ?verb 
(v)? and any suffixes of either conjunctive par-
ticipial form -e/i?? -e/iya or the infinitive form 
-? /i?? ?te/ite is attached to the previous verb, 
the two successive verbs are grouped together 
to form a compound verb (CompV) and the 
lexical scope is fixed for the Complex Predi-
cate (CP).  
If the previous verb does not contain -e/i?? 
-e/iya or -? /i?? ?te/ite inflections, no com-
pound verb (CompV) is framed with these two 
verbs. But, the second Light Verb (LV) may be 
a part of another Complex Predicate (CP). This 
Light Verb (LV) is now considered as the Full 
Verb (FV) and its immediate next verb is 
searched in the list of compound Light Verbs 
(LVs) and the formation of compound verbs 
(CompVs) progresses similarly.  If the verb is 
not in the list of compound Light Verbs, the 
search begins by considering the present verb 
as Full Verb (FV) and the search goes in a 
similar way. 
The following examples are given to illus-
trate the formation of compound verbs 
(CompVs) and find the lexical scopes of the 
compound verbs (CompVs). 
 
???      ????       ????     ???      ? ??? 
(ami)       (chalte)      (giye)    (pore)    (gelam). 
I <fell down while walking>. 
 
Here, ?chalte giye pore gelam? is a verb 
group. The two left most verbs ???? ???? chalte 
giye are picked and the dictionary form of the 
second verb is searched in the list of com-
pound Light Verbs. As the dictionary form 
(jaoya ?go?) of the verb ???? giye is present in 
the list of compound Light Verbs (as shown in 
Table 1), the immediate previous verb ???? 
chalte is checked for inflections -e/i?? -e/iya 
or -? /i?? ?te/ite.  As the verb ???? chalte con-
tains the inflection -?  -te , the verb group ???? 
???? chalte giye is a compound verb (CompV) 
where ???? giye is a Light Verb and ???? chalte 
is the Full Verb with inflection (-?  -te).  Next 
verb group, ???   ? ??? pore gelam is identified 
as compound verb (CompV) in a similar way 
(??+ (-e) por+ (-e) + ? ??? gelam (jaoya ?go?)).  
Another example is given as follows.  
 
???    u??      ???       ? ????       ?   
(ami)   (uthe)      (pore)      (dekhlam)    (je)  
?? ??      e????        ? i 
(tumi)     (ekhane)       (nei) 
I <get up and saw> that you are not here 
 
Here, u?? ??? ? ???? uthe pore dekhlam is 
another verb group. The immediate next verb 
of u?? uthe is ??? pore that is chosen and its 
dictionary form is searched in the list of com-
pound Light Verbs (LV) similarly. As the dic-
tionary form (???  pOra) of the verb ??? pore 
is present in the list of Light Verbs and the 
verb u??   uthe contains the inflection -e ?e, 
the consecutive verbs frame a compound verb 
(CompV) u?? ??? where u?? uthe is a Full Verb 
with inflection -e ?e and ??? pore is a Light 
Verb. The final verb ? ????      dekhlam is 
chosen and as there is no other verb present, 
the verb ? ???? dekhlam is excluded from any 
formation of compound verb (CompV) by con-
sidering it as a simple verb.  
Similar technique is adopted for identifying 
the lexical scopes of conjunct verbs (ConjVs). 
The method seems to be a simple pattern 
matching technique in a left-to-right fashion 
but it helps in case of conjunct verbs (ConjVs). 
As the noun or adjective occur in the first slot 
of conjunct verbs (ConjVs) construction, the 
search starts from the point of noun or adjec-
tive. If the basic POS of a current token is ei-
ther ?noun? or ?adjective? and the dictionary 
form of the next token with the basic POS 
?verb (v)? is in the list of conjunct Light Verbs 
(LVs), then the two consecutive tokens are 
42
combined to frame the pattern of a conjunct 
verb (ConjV). 
For example, the identification of lexical 
scope of a conjunct verb (ConjV) from a se-
quence such as u????  ???? ? ??? uparjon korte 
gelam ?earn-do-go? (went to earn) identifies 
the conjunct verb (ConjV) u????  ???? uparjon 
korte. There is another verb group ???? ? ??? 
korte gelam that seems to be a compound verb 
(CompV) but is excluded by considering ?? ??? 
gelam as a simple verb. 
5 Evaluation 
The system is tested on 800 development sen-
tences and finally applied on a collection of 
500 sentences from each of the two Bengali 
corpora. As there is no annotated corpus avail-
able for evaluating Complex Predicates (CPs), 
the manual evaluation of total 1000 sentences 
from the two corpora is carried out in the pre-
sent task.  
The recall, precision and F-Score are con-
sidered as the standard metrics for the present 
evaluation. The extracted Complex Predicates 
(CPs) contain compound verb (CompV) and 
conjunct verbs (ConjVs). Hence, the metrics 
are measured for both types of verbs individu-
ally. The separate results for two separate cor-
pora are shown in Table 3 and Table 4 respec-
tively. The results show that the system identi-
fies the Complex Predicates (CPs) satisfacto-
rily from both of the corpus. In case of Com-
pound Verbs (CompVs), the precision value is 
higher than the recall. The lower recall value 
of Compound Verbs (CompVs) signifies that 
the system fails to capture the other instances 
from overlapping sequences as well as non-
Complex predicates (non-CPs).  
But, it is observed that the identification of 
lexical scopes of compound verbs (CompVs) 
and conjunct verbs (ConjVs) from long se-
quence of successive Complex Predicates 
(CPs) increases the number of Complex Predi-
cates (CPs) entries along with compound verbs 
(CompVs) and conjunct verbs (ConjVs). The 
figures shown in bold face in Table 3 and Ta-
ble 4 for the Travel and Tourism corpus and 
Short Story corpus of Rabindranath Tagore 
indicates the improvement of identifying lexi-
cal scopes of the Complex Predicates (CPs).  
In comparison to other similar language 
such as Hindi (Mukerjee et al, 2006) (the re-
ported precision and recall are 83% and 46% 
respectively), our results (84.66% precision 
and 83.67% recall) are higher in case of ex-
tracting Complex Predicates (CPs). The reason 
may be of resolving the lexical scope and han-
dling the morphosyntactic features using shal-
low parser.  
In addition to Non-MonoClausal Verb 
(NMCV) or Serial Verb, the other criteria 
(Butt, 1993; Paul, 2004) are used in our pre-
sent diagnostic tests to identify the complex 
predicates (CPs). The frequencies of 
Compound Verb (CompV), Conjunct Verb 
(ConjV) and the instances of other constraints 
of non Complex Predicates (non-CPs) are 
shown in Figure 2. It is observed that the num-
bers of instances of Conjunct Verb (ConjV), 
Passives (Pass), Auxiliary Construction (AC) 
and Non-MonoClausal Verb (NMCV) or Serial 
Verb are comparatively high than other in-
stances in both of the corpus. 
 
EILMT  Recall Precision F-
Score 
Compound  
Verb 
(CompV) 
65.92% 
70.31% 
 
80.11% 
82.06% 
72.32% 
75.73%
Conjunct 
Verb 
(ConjV) 
94.65% 
96.96% 
80.44% 
83.82% 
86.96% 
89.90%
 
Table 3. Recall, Precision and F-Score of the 
system for acquiring the CompVs and ConjVs 
from EILMT Travel and Tourism Corpus. 
 
Rabindra 
Rachana-
bali 
Recall Precision F-
Score 
Compound  
Verb 
(CompV) 
68.75% 
72.22% 
 
81.81% 
84.61% 
74.71% 
77.92%
Conjunct 
Verb 
(ConjV) 
94.11% 
95.23% 
83.92% 
84.71% 
88.72% 
89.66%
 
Table 4. Recall, Precision and F-Score of the 
system for acquiring the CompVs and ConjVs 
from Rabindra Rachanabali corpus. 
 
43
 
 CompV ConjV NMCV CC MCC Pass AC 
CompV 0.76 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.02 
ConjV 0.04 0.72 0.03 0.01 0.02 0.02 0.02 
NMCV 0.17 0.18 0.65 0.00 0.02 0.02 0.02 
CC 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.56 0.01 0.02 0.02 
MCC 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.07 0.65 0.00 0.02 
Pass 0.12 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.78 0.00 
AC 0.06 0.07 0.04 0.00 0.00 0.08 0.54 
Table 5. Confusion Matrix for CPs and constraints of non-CPs (in %).  
 
0
50
100
150
200
CompV
ConjV
CC MCC
Pass
AC NMCV
EILMTRabindra
  
Figure 2. The frequencies of Complex Predi-
cates (CPs) and different constrains of non-
Complex Predicates (non-CPs). 
 
The error analysis is conducted on both of 
the corpus. Considering both corpora as a 
whole single corpus, the confusion matrix is 
developed and shown in Table 5. The bold face 
figures in Table 5 indicate that the percentages 
of non-Complex Predicates (non-CPs) such as 
Non-MonoClausal Verbs (NMCV), Passives 
(Pass) and Auxiliary Construction (AC) that 
are identified as compound verbs (CompVs). 
The reason is the frequencies of the non-
Complex Predicates (non-CPs) that are rea-
sonably higher in the corpus.  In case of con-
junct verbs (ConjVs), the Non-MonoClausal 
Verbs (NMCV) and Auxiliary Construction 
(AC) occur as conjunct verbs (ConjVs).  The 
system also suffers from clausal detection that 
is not attempted in the present task. The Pas-
sives (Pass) and Auxiliary Construction (AC) 
requires the knowledge of semantics with ar-
gument structure knowledge. 
6 Conclusion 
In this paper, we have presented a study of 
Bengali Complex Predicates (CPs) with a spe-
cial focus on compound verbs, proposed auto-
matic methods for their extraction from a cor-
pus and diagnostic tests for their evaluation. 
The problem arises in case of distinguishing 
Complex Predicates (CPs) from Non-Mono-
Clausal verbs, as only the lexical patterns are 
insufficient to identify the verbs. In future task, 
the subcategorization frames or argument 
structures of the sentences are to be identified 
for solving the issues related to the errors of 
the present system.  
References 
Abbi, Anvita. 1991. Semantics of Explicator Com-
pound Verbs. In South Asian Languages, Lan-
guage Sciences, 13(2): 161-180. 
Alsina, Alex. 1996. Complex Predicates: Structure 
and Theory. Center for the Study of Language 
and Information Publications, Stanford, CA. 
Bashir, Elena. 1993. Causal chains and compound 
verbs. In M. K. Verma ed. (1993) Complex 
Predicates in South Asian Languages, Manohar 
Publishers and Distributors, New Delhi. 
Burton-Page, John. 1957. Compound and conjunct 
verbs in Hindi. Bulletin of the School of Oriental 
and African Studies, 19: 469-78. 
Butt, Miriam. 1995. The Structure of Complex 
Predicates in Urdu. Doctoral Dissertation, Stan-
ford University. 
Chakrabarti, Debasri, Mandalia Hemang, Priya 
Ritwik, Sarma Vaijayanthi, Bhattacharyya Push-
pak. 2008. Hindi Compound Verbs and their 
Automatic Extraction. International Conference 
on Computational Linguistics ?2008, pp. 27-30. 
44
Das, Pradeep Kumar. 2009. The form and function 
of Conjunct verb construction in Hindi. Global 
Association of Indo-ASEAN Studies, Daejeon, 
South Korea. 
Hook, Peter. 1974. The Compound Verbs in Hindi. 
The Michigan Series in South and South-east 
Asian Language and Linguistics. The University 
of Michigan. 
Kaul, Vijay Kumar. 1985. The Compound Verb in 
Kashmiri. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation. Ku-
rukshetra University. 
Kipper-Schuler, Karin. 2005. VerbNet: A broad-
coverage,  comprehensive verb lexicon. Ph.D. 
thesis, Computer and Information Science Dept., 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,PA  
Miller, George, Richard Beckwith, Christiane Fell-
baum, Derek Gross and Katherine Miller. 1990. 
Five Papers on WordNet. CSL Report 43, Cogni-
tive Science Laboratory, Princeton University, 
Princeton. 
Mohanty, Gopabandhu. 1992. The Compound 
Verbs in Oriya. Ph. D. dissertation, Deccan Col-
lege Post-Graduate and Research Institute, Pune. 
Mohanty, Panchanan. 2010. WordNets for Indian 
Languages: Some Issues. Global WordNet Con-
ference-2010, pp. 57-64. 
Mukherjee, Amitabha, Soni Ankit and Raina Achla 
M. 2006. Detecting Complex Predicates in Hindi 
using POS Projection across Parallel Corpora. 
Multiword Expressions: Identifying and Exploit-
ing Underlying Properties Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pp. 28?35, Sydney.  
Paul, Soma. 2010. Representing Compound Verbs 
in Indo WordNet. Golbal Wordnet Conference-
2010, pp. 84-91. 
Paul, Soma. 2004. An HPSG Account of Bangla 
Compound Verbs with LKB Implementation. 
Ph.D dissertation, University of Hyderabad, Hy-
derabad. 
Paul, Soma. 2003. Composition of Compound 
Verbs in Bangla. Multi-Verb constructions. 
Trondheim  Summer School. 
Sarkar, Pabitra. 1975. Aspects of Compound Verbs 
in Bengali. Unpublished M.A. dissertation, Chi-
cago University. 
Sinha, R. Mahesh, K. 2009. Mining Complex 
Predicates In Hindi Using A Parallel Hindi-
English Corpus. Multiword Expression Work-
shop, Association of Computational Linguistics-
International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing-2009, pp. 40-46, Singapore. 
Timothy, Baldwin, Su Nam Kim. 2010. Multiword 
Expressions. In Nitin Indurkhya and Fred J. 
Damerau (eds.) Handbook of Natural Language 
Processing, Second Edition, Chapman & 
Hall/CRC, London, UK, pp. 267-292. 
Verma, Manindra K.1993. Complex Predicates in 
South Asian Languages. Manohar Publishers and 
Distributors, New Delhi. 
 
45
Proceedings of the Multiword Expressions: From Theory to Applications (MWE 2010), pages 73?76,
Beijing, August 2010
Identification  of  Reduplication  in  Bengali  Corpus and their 
Semantic Analysis: A Rule-Based Approach 
Tanmoy Chakraborty 
Department of Computer Science and  
Engineering 
Jadavpur University 
its_tanmoy@yahoo.co.in 
Sivaji Bandyopadhyay 
Department of Computer Science and 
Engineering 
Jadavpur University 
sivaji_cse_ju@yahoo.co.in 
 
Abstract 
In linguistic studies, reduplication gener-
ally means the repetition of any linguis-
tic unit such as a phoneme, morpheme, 
word, phrase, clause or the utterance as a 
whole. The identification of reduplica-
tion is a part of general task of identifica-
tion of multiword expressions (MWE). 
In the present work, reduplications have 
been identified from the Bengali corpus 
of the articles of Rabindranath Tagore. 
The present rule-based approach is di-
vided into two phases. In the first phase, 
identification of reduplications has been 
done mainly at general expression level 
and in the second phase, their structural 
and semantics classifications are ana-
lyzed. The system has been evaluated 
with average Precision, Recall and F-
Score values of 92.82%, 91.50% and 
92.15% respectively. 
1 Introduction 
In all languages, the repetition of noun, pronoun, 
adjective and verb are broadly classified under 
two coarse-grained categories: repetition at the 
(a) expression level, and at the (b) contents or 
semantic level. The repetition at both the levels 
is mainly used for emphasis, generality, intensity 
or to show continuation of an act.  The paper 
deals with the identification of reduplications at 
both levels in Bengali. Reduplication phenome-
non is not an exotic feature of Indian Languages. 
For instance, Yiddish English has duplication of 
the form X schm-X, as in "duplication schmu-
plication". Semantic duplication is also rich in 
English and Onomatopoeic repetition is not un-
common either (e.g., ha-ha, blah-blah etc).  
Reduplication carries various semantic mean-
ings and sometime helps to identify the mental 
state of the speaker as well. Some correlative 
words are used in Bengali to express the posses-
siveness, relative or descriptiveness. They are 
called ?secondary descriptive compounds?.  
The related studies on MWEs are discussed in 
Section 2. Various types of reduplications in 
Bengali and their semantic interpretations are 
discussed in Section 3. The proposed system 
architecture and the procedures are discussed in 
Section 4. The evaluation metrics used for eva-
luating the system are discussed in Section 5.  
Experimental results are presented in Section 6 
and conclusions are drawn in Section 7.  
2 Related Work 
The works on MWE identification and extrac-
tion have been continuing in English (Fillmore, 
2003; Sag et. al, 2002). After tokenization, mul-
tiword expressions are important in understand-
ing the meaning in applications like Machine 
Translation, Information Retrieval system etc. 
Some of the MWE extraction tasks in English 
can be seen in (Diab and Bhutada, 2009; Enivre 
and Nilson, 2004). Among Indian languages, 
Hindi compound noun MWE extraction has been 
studied in (Kunchukuttan and Damani, 2008). 
Manipuri reduplicated MWE identification is 
discussed in (Nongmeikapam and Bandyop-
adhyay, 2010). There are no published works on 
reduplicated MWE identification in Bengali.  
3 Reduplication of Words in Bengali 
Identification of MWEs is done during the to-
kenization phase and is absolutely necessary 
73
during POS tagging as is outlined in (Thoudam 
and Bandyopadhyay, 2008). POS tagger identi-
fies MWE as unknown word at token level. 
Bengali Shallow Parser 1  can only identify hy-
phened reduplication and gives them separate 
tags like RDP (reduplication) or ECH (echo).  
Another objective for identifying reduplicated 
MWEs is to extract correct sense of reduplicated 
MWEs as discussed in Section 3.2. Sometime, 
reduplication is used for sentiment marking to 
identify whether the speaker uses it in positive or 
negative sense. For example,  
(i) Eto Bara Bara Asha Kisher?(Why are you 
thinking so high?)  (Positive Sense) 
(ii) Ki Bara Bara Bari Ekhane! (Here, the 
buildings are very large.) (Negative Sense)  
3.1 Expression Level Classification of Redu-
plication 
Four classes of reduplications commonly occur 
in the Indian language (Bengali, Hindi, Tamil2, 
Manipuri etc.). In Bengali, another type called 
correlated word is also classified as reduplica-
tion.  
Onomatopoeic expressions: Such words rep-
resent an imitation of a particular sound or imita-
tion of an action along with the sound, etc. For 
example, khat khat, (knock knock). 
Complete Reduplication: The individual 
words carry certain meaning, and they are re-
peated. e.g. bara-bara (big big), dheere dheere, 
slowly). In some cases, both the speaker and the 
listener repeat certain clauses or phrases in long 
utterances or narrations. The repetition of such 
utterances breaks the monotony of the narration, 
allows a pause for the listener to comprehend the 
situation, and also provides an opportunity to the 
speaker to change the style of narration. 
Partial Reduplication: Only one of the 
words is meaningful, while the second word is 
constructed by partially reduplicating the first 
word. Most common type in Bengali is one 
where the first letter or the associated matra or 
both is changed, e.g. thakur-thukur (God), 
boka-soka ( Foolish) etc.  
Semantic Reduplication: The most common 
forms of semantic relations between paired 
words are synonym (matha-mundu, head), an-
                                                 
1 http://ltrc.iiit.ac.in/analyzer/bengali 
2 http://users.ox.ac.uk/~sjoh0535/thesis.html 
tonym (din-rat, day and night), class representa-
tive (cha-paani, snacks)). 
Correlative Reduplication: To express a 
sense of exchange or barter or interchange, the 
style of corresponding correlative words is used 
just preceding the main root verb. For example, 
maramari( fighting).  
3.2 Reduplication at the Sense Level 
Different types of reduplication at the sense 
level are described below: 
i. Sense of repetition:  
       Bachar Bachar Ek Kaj Kara . 
       ( Do the same job every year.)  
ii. Sense of plurality: 
 Ki Bara Bara Bari Ekhane. 
 (Here, the houses are very large.) 
iii. Sense of Emphatic or Modifying Meaning:   
         Lala-Lala phul. (Deep red rose) 
iv. Sense of completion:  
        Kheye Deye Ami Shute Jaba. 
         After eating, I shall go to sleep. 
v. Sense of hesitation or softness:  
       Eta Hasi Hasi Mukh Kena? 
 Why does your face smiling? 
vi. Sense of incompleteness of the verbs: 
  Katha Bolte Bolte Hatat Se Chup Kore Gelo. 
    Talking about something, suddenly he      
stopped. 
vii. Sense of corresponding correlative words: 
     Nijera  Maramari Kara  Na.  
 Don?t fight among yourselves. 
viii.  Sense of Onomatopoeia:  
     Shyamal Darja Khata khata Karchhe .  
 Shyamal is knocking at the door. 
4 System Design 
The system is designed in two phases. The first 
phase identifies mainly five cases of reduplica-
tion discussed in Section 3.1 and the second 
phase attempts to extract the associated sense or 
semantics discussed in Section 3.2.     
4.1 Identifying Reduplications 
 Reduplication is considered as two consecutive 
words W1 and W2. For complete reduplica-
tion, after removing matra, comparison for com-
plete equality of two words is checked. 
74
  In partial reduplication, three cases are pos-
sible- (i) change of the first vowel or the matra 
attached with first consonant, (ii) change of con-
sonant itself in first position or (iii) change of 
both matra and consonant. Exception is reported 
where vowel in first position is changed to con-
sonant and its corresponding matra is added. For 
example, ???-???? (abal-tabal, incoherent or 
irrelevant). Linguistic study (Chattopadhyay, 
1992) reveals that the consonants that can be 
produced after changing are ???, ???, ???, ???. 
For onomatopoeic expression, mainly words 
are repeated twice and may be with some matra 
(mainly ?e?-matra is added with the first word to 
make second word). In this case, after removing 
inflection, words are divided equally and then 
the comparison is done.  
For correlative reduplication, the formative 
affixes ???? and ?-i? are added with the root to 
form w1 and w2 respectively and agglutinated 
together to make a single word. 
For semantic reduplication, a dictionary 
based approach has been taken. List of inflec-
tions identified for the semantic reduplication is 
shown in Table 1.  
 
Set of identified inflections and matra 
0(?? ? ), e(-? , -?), -? (-e??), -? , ? (-e??), -
?, -e?(? ?), e??, -? ?,  -??, -?, -?? ?? , -o, -i, 
 
Table 1. Inflections identified for semantic redu-
plication. 
This system has identified those consecutive 
words having same part-of-speech. Then, mor-
phological analysis has been done to identify the 
roots of both components. In synonymous redu-
plication, w2 is the synonym of w1. So, at first 
in Bengali monolingual dictionary, the entry of 
w1 is searched to have any existence of w2. For 
antonym words, they are mainly gradable oppo-
site (pap-purna, Vice and Virtue) where the 
word and its antonyms are entirely different 
word forms. The productive opposites (garraji, 
disagree is the opposite of raji, agree) are easy 
to identify because the opposite word is gener-
ated by adding some fixed number of prefixes or 
suffixes with the original. In dictionary based 
approach, English meaning of both w1 and w2 
are extracted and opposite of w1 is searched in 
English WordNet3 for any entry of w2. The first 
model for identifying the five types of reduplica-
tions is shown in Figure 1.  
 
   
Figure 1. System Architecture of first phase. 
4.2 Semantics (Sense) Analysis 
Mainly eight types of semantic classifications 
are identified in Section 3.2. If the reduplication 
is an onomatopoeic expression, its sense is easily 
identified as the sense of onomatopoeia. When 
infinite verb with complete reduplication is iden-
tified in a sentence, it obviously expresses the 
sense of incompleteness. The semantic or partial 
reduplicated words belong to the sense of com-
pletion. The correlative word is classified as the 
sense of corresponding correlative word because 
it is generally associated with the full verb in the 
sentence. The problem arises when grouping the 
complete reduplication. Sometime they are used 
as sense of repetition, plurality and sometime 
they express some kind of hesitation, incom-
pleteness or softness. Sense disambiguation for 
this case has been identified as a future work.  
5 Evaluation Metrics 
The corpus is collected from some selected arti-
cles of Rabindranath Tagore4. Standard IR met-
rics like Precision, Recall and F-score are used 
to evaluate the system. Total number of relevant 
                                                 
3 http://wordnetweb.princeton.edu/perl/webwn 
4 http://www.rabindra-rachanabali.nltr.org 
75
reduplication is identified manually. For each 
type of expression level classification, Precision, 
Recall and F-score are calculated separately. The 
overall system score is the average of these 
scores. Statistical co-occurrence measures like 
frequency, hyphen and closed form count are 
calculated on each of the types as an evidence of 
their MWEhood.  
6 Experimental Results 
The collected corpus includes 14,810 tokens for 
3675 distinct word forms at the root level.  Pre-
cision, Recall, F-score are calculated for each 
class as well as for the reduplication identifica-
tion system and are shown in Table 2. 
Reduplications Precision Recall F-
Score 
Onomatopoeic 99.85 99.77 99.79 
Complete 99.98 99.92 99.95 
Partial 79.15 75.80 77.44 
Semantic 85.20 82.26 83.71 
Correlative 99.91 99.73 99.82 
System 92.82 91.50 92.15 
 
Table 2. Evaluation results for various reduplica-
tions (in %). 
The scores of partial and semantic evaluation 
are not satisfactory because of some wrong tag-
ging by the shallow parser (adjective, adverb and 
noun are mainly interchanged). Some synony-
mous reduplication (????-?? ??, dhire-susthe, 
slowly and steadily, leisurely) implies some 
sense of the previous word but not its exact 
synonym. These words are not identified prop-
erly.  Figure 2 shows that the use of complete 
reduplication is more in this corpus. In this cor-
pus, only 8.52% reduplications are hyphened. It 
shows that the trend of writing reduplications is 
to use the space as separator. Also the percent-
age of closed reduplications is 33.09% where 
maximum of them are onomatopoeic, correlative 
and semantic reduplications. 100% of correlative 
reduplications are closed. 
7 Conclusion 
The reduplication phenomenon has been studied 
for Bengali at the expression as well as at the 
semantic levels. The semantics of the redupli-
cated words indicate some sort of sense disam-
biguation that cannot be handled by only rule-
based approach. More works need to be done for 
identifying semantic reduplication using statisti-
cal and morphological approaches. 
 
8.51
51.06
26.6
12.7
18.08 Onomatopoeic
Complete
Partial 
Semantic
Correlative   
  Figure 2. Frequencies (in %) of different redu-
plications. 
References 
Bhaskararao, Peri. 1977. Reduplication and Ono-
matopoeia in Telugu. Deccan College Post-
Graduate and research Institute, Pune, India. 
Chattopadhyay Suniti Kumar. 1992. Bhasa-Prakash 
Bangala Vyakaran, Third Edition.  
Diab, Mona and Pravin Bhutada. 2009. Verb Noun 
Construction MWE Token Supervised Classifica-
tion, In Proceedings of the Joint conference of As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics and  In-
ternational Joint Conference on Natural Language 
Processing, Workshop on Multiword Expression., 
Singapore,   pp.17-22. 
Enivre, Joakim and Jens Nilson. 2004. Multiword 
Units in Syntactic Parsing. In Proceedings of Me-
thodologies and Evaluation of Multiword Units in 
Real-World Applications, 2004 Workshop, Lisbon, 
pp. 39-46. 
Kunchukuttan, Anoop and Om Prakash Damani, 
2008. A System for Compound Noun Multiword 
Expression Extraction for Hindi. 6th International. 
Conference on Natural Language Processing, 
Pune, pp. 20-29. 
Nongmeikapam, Kishorjit and Sivaji Bandyopadhyay. 
2010.  Identification of Reduplication MWEs in 
Manipuri, a rule-based approach, In Proceedings 
of the 23rd International Conference on the Com-
puter Processing of Oriental Languages, Califor-
nia, USA, pp. 49-54. 
Thoudam, Doren Singh and Sivaji Bandyopadhyay. 
2008. Morphology Driven Manipuri POS Tagger. 
In workshop on NLP for Less Privileged Lan-
guages, International Joint conference of Natural 
Language Processing, Hyderabad, pp. 91-98 
76
Proceedings of the Workshop on Multiword Expressions: from Parsing and Generation to the Real World (MWE 2011), pages 8?13,
Portland, Oregon, USA, 23 June 2011. c?2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
Semantic Clustering: an Attempt to Identify Multiword Expressions in 
Bengali 
Tanmoy Chakraborty        Dipankar Das        Sivaji Bandyopadhyay 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
Jadavpur University, Kolkata 700 032, India 
its_tanmoy@yahoo.co.in, dipankar.dipnil2005@gmail.com  
sivaji_cse_ju@yahoo.com 
 
Abstract 
One of the key issues in both natural lan-
guage understanding and generation is the 
appropriate processing of Multiword Ex-
pressions (MWEs). MWE can be defined 
as a semantic issue of a phrase where the 
meaning of the phrase may not be obtained 
from its constituents in a straightforward 
manner. This paper presents an approach of 
identifying bigram noun-noun MWEs from 
a medium-size Bengali corpus by cluster-
ing the semantically related nouns and in-
corporating a vector space model for 
similarity measurement. Additional inclu-
sion of the English WordNet::Similarity 
module also improves the results consider-
ably. The present approach also contributes 
to locate clusters of the synonymous noun 
words present in a document. Experimental 
results draw a satisfactory conclusion after 
analyzing the Precision, Recall and F-score 
values.  
1 Introduction 
Over the past two decades or so, Multi-Word Ex-
pressions (MWEs) have been identified with an 
increasing amount of interest in the field of Com-
putational linguistics and Natural Language 
Processing (NLP). The term MWE is used to refer 
the various types of linguistic units and expres-
sions including idioms (kick the bucket, ?to die?), 
noun compounds (village community), phrasal 
verbs (find out, ?search?) and other habitual collo-
cations like conjunction (as well as), institutiona-
lized phrases (many thanks) etc. They can also be 
grossly defined as ?idiosyncratic interpretations 
that cross the word boundaries? (Sag et al, 2002).  
MWE is considered as a special issue of seman-
tics where the individual components of an expres-
sion often fail to keep their meanings intact within 
the actual meaning of the expression. This opaque-
ness in meaning may be partial or total depending 
on the degree of compositionality of the whole ex-
pression. In Bengali, an analogous scenario can be 
observed when dealing with the expressions like 
compound nouns (taser ghar, ?house of cards?, 
?fragile?), complex predicates such as conjunct 
verbs (anuvab kara, ?to feel?) and compound verbs 
(uthe para, ?to arise?), idioms (matir manus, ?down 
to the earth?), Named Entities (NEs) (Rabindra-
nath Thakur, ?Rabindranath Tagore?) etc.  
In this paper, we analyze MWEs from the pers-
pective of semantic interpretation. We have fo-
cused mainly on the fact that the individual 
meanings of the components are totally or partially 
diminished in order to form the actual semantics of 
the expression. A constellation technique has been 
employed to group all nouns that are somehow 
related to the meaning of the component of any 
expression in the corpus and hence to build cluster 
for that component. Two types of vector space 
based similarity techniques are applied to make a 
binary classification of the candidate nouns. The 
intuition was that more the similarity of the com-
ponents of an expression, less the probability of the 
candidate to become a MWE. We have also shown 
the results using WordNet::Similarity module.  
The remainder of the paper is organized as fol-
lows. In the next section, we review the related 
work on MWE and graph-clustering approach for 
detecting compositionality. Section 3 proposes a 
brief description of the semantic clustering ap-
proach. The system framework is elaborated in 
Section 4. Experimental results and the various 
observations derived from our research are dis-
cussed in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 concludes 
the paper. 
8
2 Related Work 
A number of research activities regarding MWE 
identification have been carried out in various lan-
guages like English, German and many other Eu-
ropean languages. The statistical co-occurrence 
measurements such as Mutual Information (MI) 
(Church and Hans, 1990), Log-Likelihood (Dun-
ning, 1993) and Salience (Kilgarriff and Rosenz-
weig, 2000) have been suggested for identification 
of MWEs. An unsupervised graph-based algorithm 
to detect the compositionality of MWEs has been 
proposed in (Korkontzelos and Manandhar 2009). 
In case of Indian languages, an approach in 
compound noun MWE extraction (Kunchukuttan 
and Damani, 2008) and a classification based ap-
proach for Noun-Verb collocations (Venkatapathy 
and Joshi, 2009) have been reported. In Bengali, 
the works on automated extraction of MWEs are 
limited in number. One method of automatic ex-
traction of Noun-Verb MWE in Bengali (Agarwal 
et al, 2004) has been carried out using significance 
function. In contrast, we have proposed a cluster-
ing technique to identify Bengali MWEs using se-
mantic similarity measurement. It is worth noting 
that the conducted experiments are useful for iden-
tifying MWEs for the electronically resource con-
strained languages.   
3 Semantic Clustering Approach 
Semantic clustering aims to cluster semantically 
related tokens present in a document. Identifying 
semantically related words for a particular token is 
carried out by looking the surrounding tokens and 
finding the synonymous words within a fixed con-
text window. Statistical idiomaticity demands fre-
quent occurrence of a particular expression as one 
or few occurrences of a particular word cannot in-
fer all its meaning. However, the semantics of a 
word may be obtained by analyzing its similarity 
sets called synset.  Higher value of the similarity 
coefficient between two synonymous sets of the 
multi-word components indicates more affinity of 
the components to each other.  
For individual component of a bigram expres-
sion, semantically related words of the documents 
are extracted by using a monolingual dictionary (as 
discussed in Section 4.4). Count of elements in an 
intersection of two synsets indicates the commo-
nality of the two sets and its absolute value stands 
for their commonality measure. Considering the 
common elements as the dimensions of the vector 
space, similarity based techniques are applied to 
measure the semantic affection of the two compo-
nents present in a bigram. 
4 System Framework 
4.1 Corpus Preparation and Candidate Selec-
tion 
The system uses a large number of Bengali articles 
written by the noted Indian Nobel laureate Rabin-
dranath Tagore 1 . We are primarily interested in 
single document term affinity rather than document 
information and document length normalization. 
Merging all of the articles, a medium size raw cor-
pus consisting of 393,985 tokens and 283,533 
types has been prepared. Basic pre-processing of 
the crawled corpus is followed by parsing with the 
help of an open source shallow parser2 developed 
for Bengali. Parts-of-Speech (POS), chunk, root, 
inflection and other morphological information for 
each token have been retrieved. Bigram noun se-
quence within a noun chunk is extracted and 
treated as candidates based on their POS, chunk 
categories and the heuristics described as follows.   
1. POS:   POS of each token is either ?NN? or         
?NNP? 
2. Chunk: w1 and w2 must be in the same ?NP?   
chunk 
3. Inflection: Inflection 3  of w1 must be                
?-    ????(null), ?-??(-r), ?-???(-er), ?-
??(-e), ?-??(-y) or ?-????(-yr) and for 
w2, any inflection is considered. 
4.2 Dictionary Restructuring 
To the best of our knowledge, no full-fledged 
WordNet resource is available for Bengali. Hence, 
the building of Bengali synsets from a monolingual 
Bengali dictionary not only aims to identify the 
meaning of a token, but also sets up the framework 
towards the development of Bengali WordNet. 
Each word present in the monolingual dictionary 
(Samsada Bengali Abhidhana)4 contains its POS, 
                                                        
1 http://www.rabindra-rachanabali.nltr.org 
2  http://ltrc.iiit.ac.in/analyzer/bengali 
3  Linguistic study (Chattopadhyay, 1992) reveals that for 
compound noun MWE, considerable inflections of first noun 
are only those which are mentioned above. 
4  http://dsal.uchicago.edu/dictionaries/biswas-bangala/ 
9
phonetics and synonymous sets. An automatic 
technique has been devised to identify the synsets 
of a particular word based on the clues (?,? comma 
and ?;? semi-colon) provided in the dictionary to 
distinguish words of similar and different sense 
from the synonymous sets. The symbol tilde (~) 
indicates that the suffix string followed by the tilde 
(~) notation makes another new word concatenat-
ing with the original entry word. A partial snapshot 
of the synsets for the Bengali word ????? (Ang-
shu) is shown in Figure 1. In Table 1, the frequen-
cies of different synsets according to their POS are 
shown. 
Dictionary Entry: 
??? [a??u] ??. 1 ????, ???, ???; ~ ? 
??. ?? , ??? ?? ; ???? ??? ???????? ??? 
???  ~ ??? ??. ????????, ?????????  
Synsets: 
??? ????/???/???_??.#25_1_1  
???? ??/???_??_??.#26_1_1  
???? ????_???_????????_???_??_??.#26_2_2 
?????? ????????/????????_??.#27_1_1 
Figure 1: A partial snapshot of the Bengali mono-
lingual dictionary entry (word and synsets) 
 
Total 
#Word  
Total 
#Synset 
Noun Adj- 
ective 
Pro- 
noun 
Verb 
33619 63403 28485 11023 235 1709 
Table 1: Total number of words, synsets and Fre-
quencies of different POS based synsets 
4.3 Generating Semantic Clusters of Nouns 
In the first phase, we have generated the synonym-
ous sets for all nouns present in the corpus using 
the synset based dictionary whereas in the second 
phase, the task is to identify the semantic distance 
between two nouns. The format of the dictionary 
can be thought of as follows:  
W1=n1
1, n2
1, n3
1,  ?????? = {ni
1} 
     . 
 . 
Wm=n1
m, n2
m, n3
m,  ?????. = {np
m} 
where, W1, W2, ?.,W
m are the dictionary word en-
tries and nj
m (for all j) are the elements of the syn-
sets of Wm. Now, each noun entry identified by the 
shallow parser in the document is searched in the 
dictionary. For example, if a noun N present the 
corpus becomes an entry of the synsets, W1, W
3
 and 
W5, the synset of N is as follows,  
            SynSet (N) = {Wl, W3, W5}??? (1) 
To identify the semantic similarity between two 
nouns, we have applied simple intersection rule. 
The number of common elements between the syn-
sets of the two noun words denotes the similarity 
between them. If Ni and Nj are the two noun words 
in the document and Wi and Wj are their corres-
ponding synsets, the similarity of the two words 
can be defined as, 
               Similarity (Ni,Nj) = |W
i ? Wj|???.(2) 
We have clustered all the nouns present in the 
document for a particular noun and have identified 
the similarity score for every pair of nouns ob-
tained using equation 2. 
4.4 Checking of Candidate Bigram as MWE  
The identification of candidates as MWE is done 
using the results obtained from the previous phase. 
The algorithm to identify the noun-noun bigram 
<M1 M2> as MWE is discussed below with an 
example shown in Figure 2. 
 
ALOGRITHM:  MWE-CHECKING 
    INPUT: Noun-noun bigram <M1 M2> 
    OUTPUT: Return true if MWE, or return false. 
1. Extract semantic clusters of M1 and M2 
2. Intersection of the clusters of both M1 and M2 
(Figure 2.1 shows the common synset entries of 
M1 and M2 using rectangle). 
3. For measuring the semantic similarity between 
M1 and M2: 
3.1. In an n-dimensional vector space (here 
n=2), the common entries act as the axes. Put 
M1 and M2 as two vectors and associated 
weights as their co-ordinates. 
3.2. Calculate cosine-similarity measurement 
and Euclidean distance (Figure 2.2). 
4. Final decision taken individually for two differ-
ent measurements- 
4.1 If cosine-similarity > m, return false;            
Else return true; 
  4.2 If Euclidean-distance >  p, return false; 
                Else return true; 
(Where m and p are the pre-defined cut-off values) 
 
 
    We have also employed English WordNet 5  to 
measure   the   semantic   similarity   between   two  
                                                        
5 http://www.d.umn.edu/tpederse/similarity.html 
10
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.1: Intersection of the clusters of the con-
stituents (left side); Figure 2.2: Similarity between 
two constituents Evaluation (right side) 
Bengali words translated into English. Word-
Net::Similarity is an open-source package for cal-
culating the lexical similarity between word (or 
sense) pairs based on various similarity measures. 
Basically, WordNet measures the relative distance 
between two nodes denoted by two words in the 
WordNet tree which can vary from -1 to 1 where    
-1 indicates total dissimilarity between two nodes. 
The equation used to calculate this distance is men-
tioned below- 
    Normalized_Distance= minDistToCommonPa-
rent / (DistFromCommonParentToRoot + min-
DistToCommonParent)                    ????..(3) 
We have translated the root of the two compo-
nents of a Bengali candidate into their English 
equivalents using a Bengali to English bilingual 
dictionary. They are passed into the WordNet 
based similarity module for measuring similarity 
between the components.  
If we take an example of a Bengali idiom hater 
panch (remaining resource) to describe our intui-
tion, we have seen that the WordNet defines two 
components of the idiom hat (hand) as ?a part of a 
limb that is farthest from the torso? and panch 
(five) as ?a number which is one more than four?. 
So from these two glosses it is quite clear that they 
are not at all semantically related in any sense.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
The synonymous sets for these two components 
extracted from the formatted dictionary are shown 
below ? 
Synset (??? ?hat?) = { ??, ??, ????, ???, ???, 
?????, ?????, ????, ????, ?????, ?????, 
?????, ???? } 
Synset (???? ?panch?) = {??, ?????, ???, ???, 
???, ????, ??, ????, ??, ????, ???, ??????, 
???????, ???? } 
It is clearly seen from the above synonymous 
sets that there is no common element and hence its 
similarity score is obviously zero. In this case, the 
vector space model cannot be drawn using zero 
dimensions. For them, a marginal weight is as-
signed to show them as completely non-
compositional phrase. To identify their non-
compositionality, we have to show that their occur-
rence is not certain only in one case; rather they 
can occur side by side in several occasions. But 
this statistical proof can be determined better using 
a large corpus. Here, for those candidate phrases, 
which show zero similarity, we have seen their 
existence more than one time in the corpus. Taking 
any decision using single occurrence may give in-
correct result because they can be unconsciously 
used by the authors in their writings. That is why, 
the more the similarity between two components in 
a bigram, the less the probability to be a MWE. 
4.5 Annotation Agreement 
Three annotators identified as A1, A2 and A3 were 
engaged to carry out the annotation. The annota-
tion agreement of 628 candidate phrases is meas-
ured using standard Cohen's kappa coefficient (?) 
(Cohen, 1960). It is a statistical measure of inter-
rater agreement for qualitative (categorical) items. 
In addition to this, we also choose the measure of 
agreements on set-valued items (MASI) (Passon-
neau, 2006) that was used for measuring agreement 
in the semantic and pragmatic annotation.  Annota-
tion results as shown in Table 2 are satisfactory.  
 
Cut-off 
Cosine-Similarity Euclidean Distance WordNet Similarity 
P R FS P R FS P R FS 
0.6 70.75 64.87 67.68 70.57 62.23 66.14 74.60 61.78 67.58 
0.5 78.56 59.45 67.74 72.97 58.79 65.12 80.90 58.75 68.06 
0.4 73.23 56.97 64.08 79.78 53.03 63.71 75.09 52.27 61.63 
 
Table 3: Precision (P), Recall (R) and F-score (FS) (in %) for various measurements 
11
The list of noun-noun collocations are extracted 
from the output of the parser for manual checking. 
It is observed that 39.39% error occurs due to 
wrong POS tagging or extracting invalid colloca-
tions by considering the bigrams in a n-gram chunk 
where n > 2. We have separated these phrases from 
the final list. 
Table 2: Inter-Annotator Agreement (in %) 
4.6 Experimental  Results 
We have used the standard IR matrices like Preci-
sion (P), Recall (R) and F-score (F) for evaluating 
the final results obtained from three modules. Hu-
man annotated list is used as the gold standard for 
the evaluation. The present system results are 
shown in Table 3.  These results are compared with 
the statistical baseline system described in (Cha-
kraborty, 2010). Our baseline system is reported 
with the precision of 39.64%. The predefined thre-
shold has been varied to catch individual results in 
each case. Increasing Recall in accordance with the 
increment of cut-off infers that the maximum 
numbers of MWEs are identified in a wide range 
of threshold. But the Precision does not increase 
considerably. It shows that the higher cut-off de-
grades the performance. The reasonable results for 
Precision and Recall have been achieved in case of 
cosine-similarity at the cut-off value of 0.5 where 
Euclidean distance and WordNet Similarity give 
maximum precision at cut-off values of 0.4 and 0.5 
respectively. In all cases, our system outperforms 
the baseline system.   
It is interesting to observe that English WordNet 
becomes a very helpful tool to identify Bengali 
MWEs. WordNet detects maximum MWEs cor-
rectly at the cut-off of 0.5. Baldwin et al, (2003) 
suggested that WordNet::Similarity measure is ef-
fective to identify empirical model of Multiword 
Expression Decomposability. This is also proved 
in this experiment as well and even for Bengali 
language. There are also candidates with very low 
value of similarity between their constituents (for 
example, ganer gajat (earth of song, affectionate 
of song), yet they are discarded from this experi-
ment because of their low frequency of occurrence 
in the corpus which could not give any judgment 
regarding collocation. Whether such an unexpec-
tedly low frequent high decomposable elements 
warrant an entry in the lexicon depends on the type 
of the lexicon being built. 
5 Conclusions 
We hypothesized that sense induction by analyzing 
synonymous sets can assist the identification of 
Multiword Expression. We have introduced an 
unsupervised approach to explore the hypothesis 
and have shown that clustering technique along 
with similarity measures can be successfully em-
ployed to perform the task. This experiment addi-
tionally contributes to the following scenarios - (i) 
Clustering of words having similar sense, (ii) Iden-
tification of MWEs for resource constraint lan-
guages and (iii) Reconstruction of Bengali 
monolingual dictionary towards the development 
of Bengali WordNet. However, in our future work, 
we will apply the present techniques for other type 
of MWEs (e.g., adjective-noun collocation, verbal 
MWEs) as well as for other languages.    
Acknowledgement 
The work reported in this paper is supported by a 
grant from the ?Indian Language to Indian Lan-
guage Machine Translation (IL-ILMT) System 
Phrase II?, funded by Department of Information 
and Technology (DIT), Govt. of India. 
References 
Agarwal, Aswini, Biswajit Ray, Monojit Choudhury, 
Sudeshna Sarkar and Anupam Basu. 2004. Automat-
ic Extraction of Multiword Expressions in Bengali: 
An Approach for Miserly Resource Scenario. In Pro-
ceedings of International Conference on Natural 
Language Processing (ICON), pp. 165-174. 
Baldwin, Timothy, Colin Bannard, Takaaki Tanaka and 
Dominic Widdows. 2003. An Empirical Model of 
Multiword Expression Decomposability. Proceed-
ings of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics-2003, Workshop on Multiword Expressions: 
Analysis, Acquisition and Treatment, Sapporo, Japan, 
pp. 89?96. 
Ckakraborty, Tanmoy, 2010, Identification of Noun-
Noun (N-N) Collocations as Multi-Word Expressions 
in Bengali Corpus. Student Session, International 
Conference of Natural Language Processing (ICON), 
IIT Kharagpur, India 
MWEs 
[# 628] 
Agreement  between pair of annotators  
A1-A2      A2-A3    A1-A3        Avg 
KAPPA 87.23 86.14 88.78 87.38 
MASI 87.17 87.02 89.02 87.73 
12
Chakraborty, Tanmoy and Sivaji Bandyopadhyay. 2010. 
Identification of Reduplication in Bengali Corpus 
and their Semantic Analysis: A Rule Based Ap-
proach.  In proceedings of the Workshop on Multi-
word Expressions: from Theory to Applications 
(MWE 2010), 23rd International Conference on 
Computational Linguistics (COLING 2010), pp.73-
76, Beijing, China. 
Chattopadhyay Suniti K. 1992. Bhasa-Prakash Bangala 
Vyakaran, Third Edition.  
Church, Kenneth Wrad and Patrick Hans. 1990. Word 
Association Norms, Mutual Information and Lexico-
graphy.  Proceedings of 27th Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (ACL), 16(1). pp. 22-29. 
Cohen, J. 1960. A coefficient of agreement for nominal 
scales. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 
vol. 20, pp. 37?46. 
Dunning, T. 1993. Accurate Method for the Statistic of 
Surprise and Coincidence. In Computational Linguis-
tics, pp. 61-74. 
Kilgarriff, Adam and Joseph Rosenzweig. 2000. 
Framework and results for English SENSEVAL. 
Computers and the Humanities. Senseval Special Is-
sue, 34(1-2). pp. 15-48. 
Korkontzelos,Ioannis and Suresh Manandhar. 2009. 
Detecting Compositionality in Multi-Word Expres-
sions. Proceedings of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics-IJCNLP, Singapore, pp. 65-68. 
Kunchukuttan F. A. and Om P. Damani. 2008. A Sys-
tem for Compound Noun Multiword Expression Ex-
traction for Hindi. Proceeding of 6th International 
Conference on Natural Language Processing 
(ICON). pp. 20-29. 
Passonneau, R.J. 2006. Measuring agreement on set-
valued items (MASI) for semantic and pragmatic an-
notation. Language Resources and Evaluation. 
Sag, Ivan A., Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann 
Copestake and Dan Flickinger. 2002. Multiword Ex-
pressions: A Pain in the Neck for NLP. In Proceed-
ings of Conference on Intelligent Text Processing 
and Computational Linguistics (CICLING), pp. 1-15. 
Venkatapathy, Sriram and Aravind Joshi. 2005. Measur-
ing the relative compositionality of verb-noun (V-N) 
collocations by integrating features. Proceedings of 
Human Language Technology Conference and Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language 
Processing (HLT/EMNLP), Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics. pp. 899 - 906.  
13
Proceedings of the Workshop on Distributional Semantics and Compositionality (DiSCo?2011), pages 38?42,
Portland, Oregon, 24 June 2011. c?2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
Shared task system description: Measuring the Compositionality of 
Bigrams using Statistical Methodologies 
Tanmoy Chakraborty, Santanu Pal, Tapabrata Mondal, Tanik Saikh, 
 Sivaji Bandyopadhyay 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
Jadavpur University 
its_tanmoy@yahoo.co.in, santanu.pal.ju@gmail.com, 
tapabratamondal@gmail.com, tanik4u@gmail.com, 
sivaji_cse_ju@yahoo.com 
 
Abstract 
The measurement of relative 
compositionality of bigrams is crucial to 
identify Multi-word Expressions 
(MWEs) in Natural Language 
Processing (NLP) tasks. The article 
presents the experiments carried out as 
part of the participation in the shared 
task ?Distributional Semantics and 
Compositionality (DiSCo)? organized as 
part of the DiSCo workshop in ACL-
HLT 2011. The experiments deal with 
various collocation based statistical 
approaches to compute the relative 
compositionality of three types of 
bigram phrases (Adjective-Noun, Verb-
subject and Verb-object combinations). 
The experimental results in terms of both 
fine-grained and coarse-grained 
compositionality scores have been 
evaluated with the human annotated gold 
standard data. Reasonable results have 
been obtained in terms of average point 
difference and coarse precision.  
1 Introduction 
The present work examines the relative 
compositionality of Adjective-Noun (ADJ-NN; 
e.g., blue chip), Verb-subject (V-SUBJ; where 
noun acting as a subject of a verb, e.g., name 
imply) and Verb-object (V-OBJ; where noun 
acting as an object of a verb, e.g., beg question) 
combinations using collocation based statistical 
approaches. Measuring the relative 
compositionality is useful in applications such as 
machine translation where the highly non-
compositional collocations can be handled in a 
special way (Hwang and Sasaki, 2005). 
Multi-word expressions (MWEs) are 
sequences of words that tend to co-occur more 
frequently than chance and are either 
idiosyncratic or decomposable into multiple 
simple words (Baldwin, 2006). Deciding 
idiomaticity of MWEs is highly important for 
machine translation, information retrieval, 
question answering, lexical acquisition, parsing 
and language generation. Compositionality 
refers to the degree to which the meaning of a 
MWE can be predicted by combining the 
meanings of its components. Unlike syntactic 
compositionality (e.g. by and large), semantic 
compositionality is continuous (Baldwin, 2006).   
Several studies have been carried out for 
detecting compositionality of noun-noun MWEs 
using WordNet hypothesis (Baldwin et al, 
2003), verb-particle constructions using 
statistical similarities (Bannard et al, 2003; 
McCarthy et al, 2003) and verb-noun pairs 
using Latent Semantic Analysis (Katz and 
Giesbrecht, 2006).  
Our contributions are two-fold: firstly, we 
experimentally show that collocation based 
statistical compositionality measurement can 
assist in identifying the continuum of 
compositionality of MWEs. Secondly, we show 
that supervised weighted parameter tuning 
results in accuracy that is comparable to the best 
manually selected combination of parameters.  
38
2 Proposed Methodologies 
The present task was to identify the numerical 
judgment of compositionality of individual 
phrase. The statistical co-occurrence features 
used in this experiment are described.     
Frequency:  If two words occur together 
quite frequently, the lexical meaning of the 
composition may be different from the 
combination of their individual meanings. The 
frequency of an individual phrase is directly 
used in the following methods. 
Point-wise Information (PMI): An 
information-theoretic motivated measure for 
discovering interesting collocations is point-wise 
mutual information (Church and Hanks, 1990). 
It is originally defined as the mutual information 
between particular events X and Y and in our 
case the occurrence of particular words, as 
follows: 
   = log ,. ? log ,.   1  
PMI represents the amount of information 
provided by the occurrence of the event 
represented by X about the occurrence of the 
event represented by Y. 
T-test:  T-test has been widely used for 
collocation discovery. This statistical test tells us 
the probability of a certain constellation 
(Nugues, 2006). It looks at the mean and 
variance of a sample of measurements. The null 
hypothesis is that the sample is drawn from a 
distribution with mean. T-score is computed 
using the equation (2): 
,  = 