 Combine Person Name and Person Identity Recognition and Docu-
ment Clustering for Chinese Person Name Disambiguation 
Ruifeng Xu1,2,Jun Xu1,Xiangying Dai1
Harbin Institute of Technology,  
Shenzhen Postgraduate School, China 
{xuruifeng.hitsz;hit.xujun; 
mi-chealdai}@gmail.com 
     Chunyu Kit2 
         2City University of Hong Kong,    
        Hong Kong, China 
    ctckit@cityu.edu.hk 
 
Abstract 
This paper presents the HITSZ_CITYU 
system in the CIPS-SIGHAN bakeoff 
2010 Task 3, Chinese person name dis-
ambiguation. This system incorporates 
person name string recognition, person 
identity string recognition and an agglo-
merative hierarchical clustering for 
grouping the documents to each identical 
person. Firstly, for the given name index 
string, three segmentors are applied to 
segment the sentences having the index 
string into Chinese words, respectively. 
Their outputs are compared and analyzed. 
An unsupervised clustering is applied 
here to help the personal name recogni-
tion. The document set is then divided 
into subsets according to each recog-
nized person name string. Next, the sys-
tem identifies/extracts the person identity 
string from the sentences based on lex-
icon and heuristic rules. By incorporat-
ing the recognized person identity string, 
person name, organization name and 
contextual content words as features, an 
agglomerative hierarchical clustering is 
applied to group the similar documents 
in the document subsets to obtain the fi-
nal person name disambiguation results. 
Evaluations show that the proposed sys-
tem, which incorporates extraction and 
clustering technique, achieves encourag-
ing recall and good overall performance. 
1 Introduction 
Many people may have the same name which 
leads to lots of ambiguities in text, especially for 
some common person names. This problem puz-
zles many information retrieval and natural lan-
guage processing tasks. The person name ambi-
guity problem becomes more serious in Chinese 
text. Firstly, Chinese names normally consist of 
two to four characters. It means that for a two-
character person name, it has only one character 
as surname to distinguish from other person 
names with the same family name. It leads to 
thousands of people have the same common 
name, such ??  and ?? . Secondly, some 
three-character or four-character person name 
may have one two-character person name as its 
substring such as ?? and ???, which leads 
to more ambiguities. Thirdly, some Chinese per-
son name string has the sense beyond the person 
name. For example, a common Chinese name, 
?? has a sense of ?Peak?. Thus, the role of a 
string as person name or normal word must be 
determined. Finally, Chinese text is written in 
continuous character strings without word gap. It 
leads to the problem that some person names 
may be segmented into wrong forms.  
In the recent years, there have been many re-
searches on person name disambiguation 
(Fleischman and Hovy 2004; Li et al 2004; Niu 
et al 2004; Bekkerman and McCallum 2005; 
Chen and Martin 2007; Song et al 2009). To 
promote the research in this area, Web People 
Search (WePS and WePS2) provides a standard 
evaluation, which focuses on information extrac-
tion of personal named-entities in Web data (Ar-
tiles et al, 2007; Artiles et al, 2009; Sekine and 
Artiles, 2009). Generally speaking, both cluster-
based techniques which cluster documents cor-
responding to one person with similar contexts, 
global features and document features (Han et al 
2004; Pedersen et al 2005; Elmacioglu et al 
2007; Pedersen and Anagha 2007; Rao et al 
2007) and information extraction based tech-
niques which recognizes/extracts the description 
features of one person name (Heyl and Neumann 
2007; Chen et al 2009) are adopted. Consider-
ing that these evaluations are only applied to 
English text, CIPS-SIGHAN 2010 bakeoff pro-
posed the first evaluation campaign on Chinese 
person name disambiguation. In this evaluation, 
corresponding to given index person name string, 
the systems are required to recognize each iden-
tical person having the index string as substring 
and classify the document corresponding to each 
identical person into a group. 
This paper presents the design and implemen-
tation of HITSZ_CITYU system in this bakeoff. 
This system incorporates both recogni-
tion/extract technique and clustering technique 
for person name disambiguation. It consists of 
two major components. Firstly, by incorporating 
word segmentation, named entity recognition, 
and unsupervised clustering, the system recog-
nize the person name string in the document and 
then classify the documents into subsets corres-
ponding to the person name. Secondly, for the 
documents having the same person name string, 
the system identifies the person identify string, 
other person name, organization name and con-
textual context words as features. An agglomera-
tive hierarchical clustering algorithm is applied 
to cluster the documents to each identical person. 
In this way, the documents corresponding to 
each identical person are grouped, i.e. the person 
name ambiguities are removed. The evaluation 
results show that the HITSZ_CITYU system 
achieved 0.8399(B-Cubed)/0.8853(P-IP) preci-
sions and 0.9329(B-Cubed)/0.9578(P-IP) recall, 
respectively. The overall F1 performance 
0.8742(B-Cubed)/0.915(P-IP) is ranked 2nd in 
ten participate teams. These results indicate that 
the proposed system incorporating both extrac-
tion and clustering techniques achieves satisfac-
tory recall and overall performance. 
The rest of this report is organized as follows. 
Section 2 describes and analyzes the task. Sec-
tion 3 presents the word segmentation and per-
son name recognition and Section 4 presents the 
person description extraction and document 
clustering. Section 5 gives and discusses the 
evaluation results. Finally, Section 6 concludes.  
2 Task Description 
CIPS-SIGHAN bakeoff on person name disam-
biguation is a clustering task. Corresponding to 
26 person name query string, the systems are 
required to cluster the documents having the in-
dex string into multiple groups, which each 
group representing a separate entity.   
HITSZ_CITYU system divided the whole 
task into two subtasks: 
1. Person name recognition. It includes:  
1.1  Distinguish person name/ non person 
name in the document. For a given index 
string ??, in Example 1, ?? is a person 
name while in Example 2, ?? is a noun 
meaning ?peak? rather than a person name. 
Example 1. ????????????
???????(Gaofeng, the Negotiator 
and professor of Beijing People's Police 
College, said). 
Example 2. ??????? 11.83%??
?? (This value raise to the peak value of 
11.83%). 
1.2  Recognize the exact person name, espe-
cially for three-character to four-character 
names. For a given index string, ??, a 
person name ?? should be identified in 
Example 3 while??? should be identi-
fied from Example 4. 
Example 3. ????????????
??????? (Li Yan from Chinese 
team one is the highest one in the female 
athletes participating this game). 
Example 4. ?????????  (The 
soldier Li YanQing is an orphan) 
2. Cluster the documents for each identical 
person. That is for each person recognized 
person name, cluster documents into groups 
while each group representing an individual 
person.  For the non person names instances 
(such as Example 2), they are clustered into 
a discarded group. Meanwhile, the different 
person with the same name should be sepa-
rated. For example, ?? in the Example 3 
and Example 5 is a athlete and a painter, re-
spectively. These two sentences should be 
cluster into different groups. 
Example 5. ????????????
????(The famous painter Li Yan , who 
involved in hosting this exhibition, said that) 
3 Person Name Recognition 
As discussed in Section 2, HITSZ_CITYU sys-
tem firstly recognizes the person names from the 
text including distinguish the person name/ non-
person name word and recognize the different 
person name having the name index string. In 
our study, we adopted three developed word 
segmentation and named entity recognition tools 
to generate the person name candidates. The 
three tools are: 
1. Language Processing Toolkit from Intel-
ligent Technology & Natural Language 
Processing Lab (ITNLP) of Harbin Insti-
tute of Technology (HIT).  
http://www.insun.hit.edu.cn/ 
2. ICTCLAS from Chinese Academy of 
Sciences. http://ictclas.org/ 
3. The Language Technology Platform from 
Information Retrieval Lab of Harbin Insti-
tute of Technology. http://ir.hit.edu.cn 
We apply the three tools to segment and tag 
the documents into Chinese words. The recog-
nized person name having the name index string 
will be labeled as /nr while the index string is 
labeled as discard if it is no recognized as a per-
son name even not a word.  For the sentences 
having no name index string, we simply vote the 
word segmentation results by as the output. As 
for the sentences having name index string, we 
conduct further analysis on the word segmenta-
tion results.  
1. For the cases that the matched string is 
recognized as person name and non-
person name by different systems, respec-
tively, we selected the recognized person 
name as the output. For example, in  
Example 6. ???????????
????????????? (Secre-
tary for Health, Welfare and Food, Yang 
Yongqiang commended the excellent work 
of Tse Wanwen). 
the segmentation results by three segmen-
tors are ???/nr |discarded|???/nr, 
respectively. We select ???/nr as the 
output. 
2. For the cases that three systems generate 
different person names, we further incor-
porating unsupervised clustering results 
for determination. Here, an agglomerative 
hierarchical clustering with high threshold 
is applied (the details of clustering will be 
presented in Section 4).  
Example 7. ?????? (Zhufang 
overcome three barriers) 
In this example, the word segmentation 
results are ??/nr, ???/nr, ???
/nr, respectively. It is shown that there is 
a segmentation ambiguity here because 
both ?? and ??? are legal Chinese 
person names. Such kinds of ambiguity 
cannot be solved by segmentors indivi-
dually. We further consider the clustering 
results. Since the Example 7 is clustered 
with the documents having the segmenta-
tion results of ??, two votes (emphasize 
the clustering confidence) for ?? are as-
signed. Thus, ?? and ??? obtained 3 
votes and 2 votes in this case, respectively, 
and thus ?? is selected as the output. 
3. For cases that the different person name 
forms having the same votes, the longer 
person name is selected. In the following 
example, 
Example 8. ???????????
??????????? (Prof. Zhang 
Mingxuan, the deputy director of Shang-
hai Municipal Education Commission, 
said at the forum) 
The segmentation form of ?? and ??
?  received the same votes, thus, the 
longer one??? is selected as the out-
put. 
In this component, we applied three segmen-
tors (normally using the local features only) with 
the help of clustering to (using both the local and 
global features) recognize person name in the 
text with high accuracy. It is important to ensure 
the recall performance of the final output. Noted, 
in order to ensure the high precision of cluster-
ing, we set a high similarity threshold here.  
4 Person Name Disambiguation 
4.1 Person Identity Recognition/Extraction 
A person is distinguished by its associated 
attributes in which its identity description is es-
sential. For example, a person name has the 
identity of ?? president and ?? farmer, re-
spectively, tends to be two different persons. 
Therefore, in HITSZ_CITYU system, the person 
identity is extracted based on lexicon and heuris-
tic rules before person name disambiguation. 
We have an entity lexicon consisting of 85 
suffixes and 248 prefix descriptor for persons as 
the initial lexicon. We further expand this lex-
icon through extracting frequently used entity 
words from Gigaword. Here, we segmented 
documents in Gigaword into word sequences. 
For each identified person name, we collect its 
neighboring nouns. The associations between the 
nouns and person name can be estimated by their 
?2 test value. For a candidate entity wa and per-
son name wb, (here, wb is corresponding to per-
son name class with the label /nr), the following 
2-by-2 table shown the dependence of their oc-
currence.  
Table 1 The co-occurrence of two words 
 
awx = awx ?  
bwy =  C11 C12 
bwy ?  C21 C22 
For wa and wb, ?2 test (chi-square test) esti-
mates the differences between observed and ex-
pected values as follows: 
)()()()(
)(
2221221221112211
2
211222112
CCCCCCCC
CCCCN
+++++++
??=?       (1) 
where, N is the total number of words in the 
corpus. The nouns having the ?2 value greater 
than a threshold are extracted as entity descrip-
tors. 
In person entity extraction subtask, for each 
sentence has the recognized person name, the 
system matches its neighboring nouns (-2 to +2 
words surrounding the person name) with the 
entries in entity descriptor lexicon. The matched 
entity descriptors are extracted.  
In this part, several heuristic rules are applied 
to handle some non-neighboring cases. Two ex-
ample rules with cases are given below. 
Example Rule 1. The prefix entity descriptor 
will be assigned to parallel person names with 
the split mark of ?/? , ???and ???,???(and). 
??????? /??  (Chinese players 
Gong Yuechun/Wang Hui)?>  
?? player-??? Gong Yuechun 
?? player-?? Wang Hui 
Example Rule 2. The entity descriptor will be 
assigned to each person in the structure of paral-
lel person name following ??(etc.)? and then a 
entity word. 
???????????????????
??? (The painter, Liu Bingsen, Chen Daz-
hang, Li Yan, Jin Hongjun, etc., paint a.. ) -> 
??? Liu Bingsen - ??? painter 
??? Chen Dazhang - ??? painter 
?? Li Yan - ??? painter 
??? Jin Hongjun - ??? painter 
Furthermore, the HITSZ_CITYU system ap-
plies several rules to identify a special kind of 
person entity, i.e. the reporter or author using 
structure information. For example, in the be-
ginning or the end of a document, there is a per-
son name in a bracket means this person and this 
name appear in the document for only once; 
such person name is regarded as the reporter or 
author. (????????) ?>??? Jin Lin-
peng - ?? reporter 
(??? ??) ?>??? Jin Linpeng - ?? 
reporter 
4.2 Clustering-based Person Name Disam-
biguation 
For the document set corresponding to each giv-
en index person name, we firstly split the docu-
ment set into: (1) Discarded subset, (2) Subset 
with different recognized person name. The sub-
sets are further split into (2-1) the person is the 
author/reporter and (2-2) the person is not the 
author/reporter. The clustering techniques are 
then applied to group documents in each (2-2) 
subset into several clusters which each cluster is 
corresponding to each identical person.  
In the Chinese Person Name Disambiguation 
task, the number of clusters contained in a subset 
is not pre-available. Thus, the clustering method 
which fixes the number of clusters, such as k-
nearest neighbor (k-NN) is not applicable. Con-
sidering that Agglomerative Hierarchical Clus-
tering (AHC) algorithm doesn?t require the fixed 
number of cluster and it performs well in docu-
ment categorization (Jain and Dubes 1988), it is 
adopted in HITSZ_CITYU system. 
Preprocessing and Document Representation 
Before representing documents, a series of pro-
cedures are adopted to preprocess these docu-
ments including stop word removal. Next, we 
select feature words for document clustering. 
Generally, paragraphs containing the target per-
son name usually contain more person-related 
information, such as descriptor, occupation, af-
filiation, and partners. Therefore, larger weights 
should be assigned to these words. Furthermore, 
we further consider the appearance position of 
the features. Intuitively, local feature words with 
small distance are more important than the glob-
al features words with longer distance. 
We implemented some experiments on the 
training data to verify our point. Table 2 and Ta-
ble 3 show the clustering performance achieved 
using different combination of global features 
and local features as well as different similarity 
thresholds.  
Table 2. Performance achieved on training set 
with different weights (similarity threshold 0.1) 
Feature words Precision Recall F-1 
Paragraph 0.820 0.889 0.849 
All 0.791 0.880 0.826 
All+ Paragraph?1 0.791 0.904 0.839 
All+ Paragraph?2 0.802 0.908 0.848 
All+ Paragraph?3 0.824 0.909 0.860 
All+ Paragraph?4 0.831 0.911 0.865 
All+ Paragraph?5 0.839 0.910 0.869 
All+ Paragraph?6 0.833 0.905 0.864 
All+ Paragraph?7 0.838 0.904 0.867 
 
Table 3. Performance achieved on training set 
with different weights (similarity threshold 0.15) 
Feature words Precision Recall F-1 
Paragraph 0. 901       0.873        0.883 
All 0.859        0.867 0.859 
All+ Paragraph?1 0.875 0.887 0.877 
All+ Paragraph?2 0.885 0.890 0.884 
All+ Paragraph?3 0.889 0.887 0.885 
All+ Paragraph?4 0.896 0.887 0.880 
All+ Paragraph?5 0.906 0.882 0.891 
All+ Paragraph?6 0.905 0.884 0.891 
All+ Paragraph?7 0.910 0.882 0.893 
In this two tables, ?Paragraph? means that we 
only select words containing in paragraph which 
contains the person index name as feature words 
(which are the local features), and ?All? means 
that we select all words but stop words in a doc-
ument as feature words. ?All+ Paragraph?k? 
means feature words consist of two parts, one 
part is obtained from ?All?, the other is gained 
from ?Paragraph?, at the same time, we assign 
the feature weights to the two parts, respectively. 
The feature weight coefficient of ?All? is 
)1(1 +k , while the feature weight coefficient of 
?All+ Paragraph?k? is )1( +kk . 
It is shown that, the system perform best using 
appropriate feature weight coefficient distribu-
tion. Therefore, we select all words in the docu-
ment (besides stop words) as global feature 
words and the words in paragraph having the 
index person name as local feature words. We 
then assign the corresponding empirical feature 
weight coefficient to the global/local features, 
respectively. A document is now represented as 
a vector of feature words as follows: 
)))(,());(,());(,(()( 2211 dwtdwtdwtdV nnL?   (2) 
where, d is a document, it  is a feature word, 
)(dwi  is the feature weight of it  in the document 
d . In this paper, we adopt a widely used weight-
ing scheme, named Term Frequency with In-
verse Document Frequency (TF-IDF). In addi-
tion, for each document, we need to normalize 
weights of features because documents have dif-
ferent lengths. The weight of word it in docu-
ment d  is shown as: 
 
? +
+?
=
=
n
i i
i
i
i
i
df
N
dtf
df
N
dtf
dw
1
2))05.0log(*)((
)05.0log()(
)(
        (3)
 
where )(dtf i means how many times word it oc-
curs in the document d , idf  means how many 
documents contains word it , and N  is the num-
ber of documents in the corpus. 
Similarity Estimation 
We use the cosine distance as similarity calcula-
tion function. After the normalization of weights 
of each document, the similarity between docu-
ment 1d  and document 2d  is computed as: 
? ?=
?? 21
2121 )()(),(
ddit
ii dwdwddsim   (4) 
where it  is the term which appears in document 
1d  and document 2d  simultaneously, )( 1dwi  and 
)( 1dwi  are the weights of it  in document 1d  and  
document 2d  respectively. If it  does not appear 
in a document, the corresponding weight in the 
document is zero. 
Agglomerative Hierarchical Clustering (AHC) 
AHC is a bottom-up hierarchical clustering 
method. The framework of AHC is described as 
follows: 
Assign each document to a single cluster. 
Calculate all pair-wise similarities between 
clusters. 
Construct a distance matrix using the similari-
ty values.  
Look for the pair of clusters with the largest 
similarity.  
Remove the pair from the matrix and merge 
them. 
Evaluate all similarities from this new cluster 
to all other clusters, and update the matrix. 
Repeat until the largest similarity in the matrix 
is smaller than some similarity criteria. 
There are three methods to estimate the simi-
larity between two different clusters during the 
cluster mergence: single link method, average 
link method and complete link method (Nallapati 
et al 2004). The three methods define the similar-
ity between two clusters 1c  and 2c  as follows: 
Single link method: The similarity is the 
largest of all similarities of all pairs of docu-
ments between clusters 1c  and 2c  and defined as: 
),(max),(
2,1
21 ji
cjdcid
ddsimccsim
??
=      (5) 
Average link method: The similarity is the 
average of the similarities of all pairs of docu-
ments between clusters 1c  and 2c  and defined as: 
21
1 2
21
),(
),(
cc
ddsim
ccsim
cid cjd
ji
?
? ?
= ? ?         (6) 
Complete link method: The similarity is the 
smallest of all similarities of all pairs of docu-
ments between clusters 1c  and 2c  and defined as: 
),(min),(
2,1
21 ji
cjdcid
ddsimccsim
??
=       (7) 
where, id   and jd   are the documents belongs 
to clusters 1c  and 2c , respectively.  
We evaluated the AHC algorithm with the 
above three link methods. The achieved perfor-
mance are given in Table 4. It is shown that the 
system performs best with the complete link me-
thod. Therefore, the complete link method is 
selected for the bakeoff testing. 
Table 4. Performance achieved on training set 
with different link method 
Similarity 
threshold 
Link method Precision Recall F1 
0.1 Single link 0.048 1.000 0.089 
0.1 Average link 0.839 0.910 0.869 
0.1 Complete link 0.867 0.888 0.874 
0.15 Single link 0.048 1.000 0.089 
0.15 Average link 0.906 0.882 0.891 
0.15 Complete link 0.923 0.868 0.891 
5 Evaluations 
The task organizer provides two set of evalua-
tion criteria. They are purity-based score (usual-
ly used in IR), B-cubed score (used in WePS-2), 
respectively. The details of the evaluation crite-
ria are given in the task overview.  
The performance achieved by the top-3 sys-
tems are shown in Table 5. 
Table 5. Performance of Top-3 Systems 
 B-Cubed P-IP 
System Precision Recall F1 Precision Recall F1 
NEU 0.957 0.883 0.914 0.969 0.925 0.945
HITSZ 0.839 0.932 0.874 0.885 0.958 0.915
DLUT 0.826 0.913 0.863 0.879 0.942 0.907
 
The evaluation results show that the 
HITSZ_CITYU system achieved overall F1 per-
formance of 0.8742(B-Cubed)/ 0.915(P-IP), re-
spectively.   
It is also shown that HITSZ_CITYU achieves 
the highest the recall performance. It shows that 
the proposed system is good at split the docu-
ment to different identical persons. Meanwhile, 
this system should improve the capacity on 
merge small clusters to enhance the precision 
and overall performance. 
6 Conclusions 
The presented HITSZ_CITYU system applies 
multi-segmentor and unsupervised clustering to 
achieve good accuracy on person name string 
recognition. The system then incorporates entity 
descriptor extraction, feature word extraction 
and agglomerative hierarchical clustering me-
thod for person name disambiguation. The 
achieved encouraging performance shown the 
high performance word segmentation/name rec-
ognition and extraction-based technique are 
helpful to improve the cluster-based person 
name disambiguation. 
References 
Andrea Heyl and G?nter Neumann. DFKI2: An In-
formation Extraction based Approach to People 
Disambiguation. Proceedings of ACL SEMEVAL 
2007, 137-140, 2007. 
Artiles, Javier, Julio Gonzalo and Satoshi Sekine, The 
SemEval-2007 WePS Evaluation: Establishing a 
benchmark for the Web People Search Task, Pro-
ceedings of Semeval 2007, Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, 2007. 
Artiles, Javier, Julio Gonzalo and Satoshi Sekine. 
?WePS 2 Evaluation Campaign: Overview of the 
Web People Search Clustering Task, In 2nd Web 
People Search Evaluation Workshop (WePS 2009), 
18th WWW Conference, 2009 
Bekkerman, Ron and McCallum, Andrew, Disambi-
guating Web Appearances of People in a Social 
Network, Proceedings of WWW2005, pp.463-470, 
2005 
Ergin Elmacioglu, Yee Fan Tan, Su Yan, Min-Yen 
Kan, and Dongwon Lee. PSNUS: Web People 
Name Disambiguation by Simple Clustering with 
Rich Features. Proceedings of ACL SEMEVAL 
2007, 268-271, 2007. 
Fei Song, Robin Cohen, Song Lin, Web People 
Search Based on Locality and Relative Similarity 
Measures, Proceedings of WWW 2009 
Fleischman M. B. and Hovy E., Multi-document Per-
son Name Resolution, Proceedings of ACL-42, 
Reference Resolution Workshop, 2004 
Hui Han , Lee Giles , Hongyuan Zha , Cheng Li , 
Kostas Tsioutsiouliklis, Two Supervised Learning 
Approaches for Name Disambiguation in Author 
Citations, Proceedings of the 4th ACM/IEEE-CS 
joint conference on Digital libraries, 2004 
Jain, A. K. and Dubes, R.C. Algorithms for Cluster-
ing Data, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, N.J., 
1988  
Nallapati, R., Feng, A., Peng, F., Allan, J., Event 
Threading within News Topics, Proceedings of-
CIKM 2004, pp. 446?453, 2004 
Niu, Cheng, Wei Li, and Rohini K. Srihari,Weakly 
Supervised Learning for Cross-document Person 
Name Disambiguation Supported by Information 
Extraction, Proceedings of ACL 2004 
Pedersen, Ted, Amruta Purandare, and Anagha Kul-
karni, Name Discrimination by Clustering Similar 
Contexts, Proceedings of the Sixth International 
Conference on Intelligent Text Processing and 
Computational Linguistics, Mexico City, Mexico, 
2005 
Pedersen, Ted and Anagha Kulkarni, Unsupervised 
Discrimination of Person Names in Web Contexts, 
Proceedings of the Eighth International Confe-
rence on Intelligent Text Processing and Computa-
tional Linguistics, Mexico City, 2007. 
Rao, Delip, Nikesh Garera and David Yarowsky, 
JHU1: An Unsupervised Approach to Person 
Name Disambiguation using Web Snippets, In 
Proceedings of ACL Semeval 2007 
Sekine, Satoshi and Javier Artiles. WePS 2 Evalua-
tion Campaign: overview of the Web People 
Search Attribute Extraction Task, Proceedings of 
2nd Web People Search Evaluation Workshop 
(WePS 2009), 18th WWW Conference, 2009  
Xin Li, Paul Morie, and Dan Roth, Robust Reading: 
Identification and Tracing of Ambiguous Names, 
Proceedings of NAACL,pp. 17-24, 2004. 
Ying Chen, Sophia Yat Mei Lee, Chu-Ren Huang, 
PolyUHK: A Robust Information Extraction Sys-
tem for Web Personal Names, Proceedings of 
WWW 2009 
Ying Chen and Martin J.H. CU-COMSEM: Explor-
ing Rich Features for Unsupervised Web Personal 
Name Disambiguation, Proceedings of ACL Se-
meval 2007 
 
