Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 108?115,
MIT, Massachusetts, USA, 9-11 October 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Positional Language Models for Clinical Information Retrieval
Florian Boudin
DIRO, Universite? de Montre?al
CP. 6128, succ. Centre-ville
H3C 3J7 Montre?al, Canada
boudinfl@iro.umontreal.ca
Jian-Yun Nie
DIRO, Universite? de Montre?al
CP. 6128, succ. Centre-ville
H3C 3J7 Montre?al, Canada
nie@iro.umontreal.ca
Martin Dawes
Department of Family Medicine
McGill University, 515 Pine Ave
H2W 1S4 Montre?al, Canada
martin.dawes@mcgill.ca
Abstract
The PECO framework is a knowledge repre-
sentation for formulating clinical questions.
Queries are decomposed into four aspects,
which are Patient-Problem (P), Exposure (E),
Comparison (C) and Outcome (O). However,
no test collection is available to evaluate such
framework in information retrieval. In this
work, we first present the construction of a
large test collection extracted from system-
atic literature reviews. We then describe an
analysis of the distribution of PECO elements
throughout the relevant documents and pro-
pose a language modeling approach that uses
these distributions as a weighting strategy. In
our experiments carried out on a collection of
1.5 million documents and 423 queries, our
method was found to lead to an improvement
of 28% in MAP and 50% in P@5, as com-
pared to the state-of-the-art method.
1 Introduction
In recent years, the volume of health and biomedi-
cal literature available in electronic form has grown
exponentially. MEDLINE, the authoritative reposi-
tory of citations from the medical and bio-medical
domain, contains more than 18 million citations.
Searching for clinically relevant information within
this large amount of data is a difficult task that med-
ical professionals are often unable to complete in a
timely manner. A better access to clinical evidence
represents a high impact application for physicians.
Evidence-Based Medicine (EBM) is a widely ac-
cepted paradigm for medical practice (Sackett et al,
1996). EBM is defined as the conscientious, explicit
and judicious use of current best evidence in making
decisions about patient care. Practice EBM means
integrating individual clinical expertise with the best
available external clinical evidence from systematic
research. It involves tracking down the best evi-
dence from randomized trials or meta-analyses with
which to answer clinical questions. Richardson et
al. (1995) identified the following four aspects as the
key elements of a well-built clinical question:
? Patient-problem: what are the patient charac-
teristics (e.g. age range, gender, etc.)? What is
the primary condition or disease?
? Exposure-intervention: what is the main in-
tervention (e.g. drug, treatment, duration, etc.)?
? Comparison: what is the exposure compared
to (e.g. placebo, another drug, etc.)?
? Outcome: what are the clinical outcomes (e.g.
healing, morbidity, side effects, etc.)?
These elements are known as the PECO elements.
Physicians are educated to formulate their clinical
questions in respect to this structure. For example, in
the following question: ?In patients of all ages with
Parkinson?s disease, does a Treadmill training com-
pared to no training allows to increase the walking
distance?? one can identify the following elements:
? P: Patients of all ages with Parkinson?s disease
? E: Treadmill training
? C: No treadmill training
? O: Walking distance
In spite of this well-defined question structure,
physicians still use keyword-based queries when
they search for clinical evidence. An explanation of
108
that is the almost total absence of PECO search in-
terfaces. PubMed1, the most used search interface,
does not allow users to formulate PECO queries
yet. For the previously mentioned clinical question,
a physician would use the query ?Treadmill AND
Parkinson?s disease?. There is intuitively much to
gain by using a PECO structured query in the re-
trieval process. This structure specifies the role of
each concept in the desired documents, which is
a clear advantage over a keyword-based approach.
One can for example differentiate two queries in
which a disease would be a patient condition or a
clinical outcome. This conceptual decomposition of
queries is also particularly useful in a sense that it
can be used to balance the importance of each ele-
ment in the search process.
Another important factor that prevented re-
searchers from testing approaches to clinical infor-
mation retrieval (IR) based on PECO elements is
the lack of a test collection, which contains a set of
documents, a set of queries and the relevance judg-
ments. The construction of such a test collection is
costly in manpower. In this paper, we take advan-
tage of the systematic reviews about clinical ques-
tions from Cochrane. Each Cochrane review ex-
amines in depth a clinical question and survey all
the available relevant publications. The reviews are
written for medical professionals. We transformed
them into a TREC-like test collection, which con-
tains 423 queries and 8926 relevant documents ex-
tracted from MEDLINE. In a second part of this pa-
per, we present a model integrating the PECO frame-
work in a language modeling approach to IR. An in-
tuitive method would try to annotate the concepts
in documents into PECO categories. One can then
match the PECO elements in the query to the ele-
ments detected in documents. However, as previous
studies have shown, it is very difficult to automat-
ically annotate accurately PECO elements in docu-
ments. To by-pass this issue, we propose an alter-
native that relies on the observed positional distri-
bution of these elements in documents. We will see
that different types of element have different distri-
butions. By weighting words according to their posi-
tions, we can indirectly weigh the importance of dif-
ferent types of element in search. As we will show
1www.pubmed.gov
in this paper, this approach turns out to be highly
effective.
This paper is organized as follows. We first briefly
review the previous work, followed by a description
of the test collection we have constructed. Next,
we give the details of the method we propose and
present our experiments and results. Lastly, we con-
clude with a discussion and directions for further
work.
2 Related work
The need to answer clinical questions related to a
patient care using IR systems has been well stud-
ied and documented (Hersh et al, 2000; Niu et al,
2003; Pluye et al, 2005). There are a limited but
growing number of studies trying to use the PECO
elements in the retrieval process. (Demner-Fushman
and Lin, 2007) is one of the few such studies, in
which a series of knowledge extractors is used to
detect PECO elements in documents. These ele-
ments are later used to re-rank a list of retrieved ci-
tations from PubMed. Results reported indicate that
their method can bring relevant citations into higher-
ranking positions, and from these abstracts gener-
ate responses that answer clinicians? questions. This
study demonstrates the value of the PECO frame-
work as a method for structuring clinical questions.
However, as the focus has been put on the post-
retrieval step (for question-answering), it is not clear
whether PECO elements are useful at the retrieval
step. Intuitively, the integration of PECO elements
in the retrieval process can also lead to higher re-
trieval effectiveness.
The most obvious scenario for testing this would
be to recognize PECO elements in documents prior
to indexing. When a PECO-structured query is for-
mulated, it is matched against the PECO elements
in the documents (Dawes et al, 2007). Neverthe-
less, the task of automatically identifying PECO el-
ements is a very difficult one. There are two major
reasons for that. First, previous studies have indi-
cated that there is a low to moderate agreement rate
among humans for annotating PECO elements. This
is due to the lack of standard definition for the el-
ement? boundaries (e.g. can be words, phrases or
sentences) but also to the existence of several lev-
els of annotation. Indeed, there are a high number
109
of possible candidates for each element and one has
to choose if it is a main element (i.e. playing a ma-
jor role in the clinical study) or secondary elements.
Second is the lack of sufficient annotated data that
can be used to train automatic tagging tools.
Despite all these difficulties, several efficient
detection methods have been proposed (Demner-
Fushman and Lin, 2007; Chung, 2009). Nearly all
of them are however restricted to a coarse-grain an-
notation level (i.e. tagging entire sentences as de-
scribing one element). This kind of coarser-grain
identification is more robust and more feasible than
the one at concept level, and it could be sufficient in
the context of IR. In fact, for IR purposes, what is
the most important is to correctly weight the words
in documents and queries. From this perspective,
an annotation at the sentence level may be suffi-
cient. Notwithstanding, experiments conducted us-
ing a collection of documents that were annotated at
a sentence-level only showed a small increase in re-
trieval accuracy (Boudin et al, 2010b) compared to
a traditional bag-of-words approach.
More recently, Boudin et al (2010a) proposed an
alternative to the PECO detection issue that relies
on assigning different weights to words according to
their positions in the document. A location-based
weighting strategy is used to emphasize the most
informative parts of documents. They show that
a large improvement in retrieval effectiveness can
be obtained this way and indicate that the weights
learned automatically are correlated to the observed
distribution of PECO elements in documents. In this
work, we propose to go one step further in this direc-
tion by analyzing the distribution of PECO elements
in a large number of documents and define the posi-
tional probabilities of PECO elements accordingly.
These probabilities will be integrated in the docu-
ment language model.
3 Construction of the test collection
Despite the increasing use of search engines by med-
ical professionals, there is no standard test collection
for evaluating clinical IR. Constructing such a re-
source from scratch would require considerable time
and money. One way to overcome this obstacle is
to use already available systematic reviews. Sys-
tematic reviews try to identify, appraise, select and
synthesize all high quality research evidence rele-
vant to a clinical question. The best-known source
of systematic reviews in the healthcare domain is the
Cochrane collaboration2. It consists of a group of
over 15,000 specialists who systematically identify
and review randomized trials of the effects of treat-
ments. In particular, a review contains a reference
section, listing all the relevant studies to the clinical
question. These references can be considered as rel-
evant documents. In our work, we propose to use
these reviews as a way to semi-automatically build a
test collection. As the reviews are made by special-
ists in the area independently from our study, we can
avoid bias in our test collection.
We gathered a subset of Cochrane systematic re-
views and asked a group of annotators, one professor
and four Master students in family medicine, to cre-
ate PECO-structured queries corresponding to the
clinical questions. As clinical questions answered
in these reviews cover various aspects of one topic,
multiple variants of precise PECO queries were gen-
erated for each review. Moreover, in order to be able
to compare a PECO-based search strategy to a real
world scenario, this group have also provided the
keyword-based queries that they would have used
to search with PubMed. Below is an example of
queries generated from the systematic review about
?Aspirin with or without an antiemetic for acute mi-
graine headaches in adults?:
Keyword-based query
[aspirin and migraine]
PECO-structured queries
1. [adults 18 years or more with migraine]P
[aspirin alone]E
[placebo]C
[pain free]O
2. [adults 18 years or more with migraine]P
[aspirin plus an antiemetic]E
[placebo]C
[pain free]O
3. [adults 18 years or more with migraine]P
[aspirin plus metoclopramide]E
[active comparator]C
[use of rescue medication]O
2www.cochrane.org
110
All the citations included in the ?References? sec-
tion of the systematic review were extracted and
selected as relevant documents. These citations
were manually mapped to PubMed unique identi-
fiers (PMID). This is a long process that was under-
taken by two different workers to minimize the num-
ber of errors. At this step, only articles published in
journals referenced in PubMed are considered (e.g.
conference proceedings are not included).
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
Number of references in each review
0
5
10
15
20
25
Nu
mb
er
 of
 sy
ste
ma
tic
 re
vie
ws
Figure 1: Histogram of the number of queries versus the
number of relevant documents.
We selected in sequential order from the set
of new systematic reviews3 and processed 156
Cochrane reviews. There was no restriction about
the topics covered or the number of included refer-
ences. The resulting test collection is composed of
423 queries and 8926 relevant citations (2596 differ-
ent citations). This number reduces to 8138 citations
once we remove the citations without any text in the
abstract (i.e. certain citations, especially old ones,
only contain a title). Figure 1 shows the statistics
derived from the number of relevant documents by
query. In this test collection, the average number of
documents per query is approximately 19 while the
average length of a document is 246 words.
4 Distribution of PECO elements
The observation that PECO elements are not evenly
distributed throughout the documents is not new. In
fact, most existing tagging methods used location-
based features. This information turns out to be very
useful because of the standard structure of medical
citations. Actually, many scientific journals explic-
itly recommend authors to write their abstracts in
3http://mrw.interscience.wiley.com/
cochrane/cochrane clsysrev new fs.html
compliance to the ordered rhetorical structure: In-
troduction, Methods, Results and Discussion. These
rhetorical categories are highly correlated to the dis-
tributions of PECO elements, as some elements are
more likely to occur in certain categories (e.g. clin-
ical outcomes are more likely to appear in the con-
clusion). The position is thus a strong indicator of
whether a text segment contains a PECO element or
not.
To the best of our knowledge, the first analysis
of the distribution of PECO elements in documents
was described in(Boudin et al, 2010a). A small col-
lection of manually annotated abstracts was used to
compute the probability that a PECO element oc-
curs in a specific part of the documents. This study
is however limited by the small number of anno-
tated documents (approximately 50 citations) and
the moderate agreement rate among human annota-
tors. Here we propose to use our test collection to
compute more reliable statistics.
The idea is to use the pairs of PECO-structured
query and relevant document, assuming that if a doc-
ument is relevant then it should contain the same
elements as the query. Of course, this is obvi-
ously not always the case. Errors can be introduced
by synonyms or homonyms and relevant documents
may not contain all of the elements described in the
query. But, with more than 8100 documents, it is
quite safe to say that this method produce fairly reli-
able results. Moreover, a filtering process is applied
to queries removing all non-informative words (e.g.
stopwords, numbers, etc.) from being counted.
There are several ways to look at the distribution
of PECO elements in documents. One can use the
rhetorical structure of abstracts to do that. However,
the high granularity level of such analysis would
make it less precise for IR purposes. Furthermore,
most of the citations available in PubMed are de-
void of explicitly marked sections. It is possible to
automatically detect these sections but only with a
non-negligible error rate (McKnight and Srinivasan,
2003). In our study, we chose to use a fixed num-
ber of partitions by dividing documents into parts of
equal length. This choice is motivated by its repeata-
bility and ease to implement, but also for compari-
son with previous studies.
We divided each relevant document into 10 parts
of equal length on a word level (from P1 to P10). We
111
computed statistics on the number of query words
that occur in each of these parts. For each PECO el-
ement, the distribution of query words among the
parts of the documents is not uniform (Figure 2).
We observe distinctive distributions, especially for
Patient-Problem and Exposure elements, indicating
that first and last parts of the documents have higher
chance to contain these elements. This gives us a
clear and robust indication on which specific parts
should be enhanced when searching for a given el-
ement. Our proposed model will exploit the typical
distributions of PECO elements in documents.
P1 P2 P3 P4 P5 P6 P7 P8 P9 P100.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25 P elements
P1 P2 P3 P4 P5 P6 P7 P8 P9 P10
E elements
P1 P2 P3 P4 P5 P6 P7 P8 P9 P10                                           Parts of the documents0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
      
      
      
      
      
      
 Pro
por
tion
 of P
ECO
 ele
men
ts in
 par
t
C elements
P1 P2 P3 P4 P5 P6 P7 P8 P9 P10
O elements
Figure 2: Distribution of each PECO element throughout
the different parts of the documents.
5 Retrieval Method
In this work, we use the language modeling ap-
proach to information retrieval. This approach as-
sumes that queries and documents are generated
from some probability distribution of text (Ponte and
Croft, 1998). Under this assumption, ranking a doc-
ument D as relevant to a query Q is seen as estimat-
ing P(Q|D), the probability thatQwas generated by
the same distribution as D. A typical way to score
a document D as relevant to a query Q is to com-
pute the Kullback-Leibler divergence between their
respective language models:
score(Q,D) =
?
w?Q
P(w|Q) ? logP(w|D) (1)
Under the traditional bag-of-words assumption,
i.e. assuming that there is no need to model term de-
pendence, a simple estimate for P(w|Q) can be ob-
tained by computing Maximum Likelihood Estima-
tion (MLE). It is calculated as the number of times
the word w appears in the query Q, divided by its
length:
P(w|Q) =
count(w,Q)
|Q|
A similar method is employed for estimating
P(w|D). Bayesian smoothing using Dirichlet pri-
ors is however applied to the maximum likelihood
estimator to compensate for data sparseness (i.e.
smoothing probabilities to remove zero estimates).
Given ? the prior parameter and C the collection of
documents, P(w|D) is computed as:
P(w|D) =
count(w,D) + ? ? P(w|C)
|D| + ?
5.1 Model definition
In our model, we propose to use the distribution of
PECO elements observed in documents to empha-
size the most informative parts of the documents.
The idea is to get rid of the problem of precisely
detecting PECO elements by using a positional lan-
guage model. To integrate position, we estimate
a series of probabilities that constraints the word
counts to a specific part of the documents instead of
the entire document. Each document D is ranked by
a weighted linear interpolation. Given a document
D divided in 10 parts p ? [P1, P2 ? ? ?P10], P(w|D)
in equation 1 is redefined as:
P ?(w|D) = ? ? P(w|D) + ? ? Ptitle(w|D)
+? ?
?
pi?D
?e ? Ppi(w|D) (2)
where the ?e weights for each type of element e
are empirically fixed to the values of the distribution
of PECO elements observed in documents. We then
redefine the scoring function to integrate the PECO
query formulation. The idea is to use the PECO
structure as a way to balance the importance of each
element in the retrieval step. The final scoring func-
tion is defined as:
scorefinal(Q,D) =
?
e?PECO
?e ? score(Qe, D)
112
In our model, there are a total of 7 weighting pa-
rameters, 4 corresponding to the PECO elements in
queries (?P, ?E, ?C and ?O) and 3 for the document
language models (?, ? and ?). These parameters
will be determined by cross-validation.
6 Results
In this section, we first describe the details of our
experimental protocol. Then, we present the results
obtained by our model on the constructed test col-
lection.
6.1 Experimental settings
As a collection of documents, we gathered 1.5 mil-
lions of citations from PubMed. We used the fol-
lowing constraints: citations with an abstract, hu-
man subjects, and belonging to one of the follow-
ing publication types: randomized control trials, re-
views, clinical trials, letters, editorials and meta-
analyses. The set of queries and relevance judg-
ments described in Section 3 is used to evaluate
our model. Relevant documents were, if not al-
ready included, added to the collection. Because
each query is generated from a systematic literature
review completed at a time t, we placed an addi-
tional restriction on the publication date of the re-
trieved documents: only documents published be-
fore time t are considered. Before indexing, each
citation is pre-processed to extract its title and ab-
stract text and then converted into a TREC-like doc-
ument format. Abstracts are divided into 10 parts of
equal length (the ones containing less than 10 words
are discarded). The following fields are marked in
each document: title, P1, P2 ? ? ? P10. The following
evaluation measures are used:
? Precision at rank n (P@n): precision computed
on the n topmost retrieved documents.
? Mean Average Precision (MAP): average of
precision measures computed at the point of
each relevant document in the ranked list.
? Number of relevant documents retrieved
All retrieval tasks are performed using an ?out-
of-the-shelf? version of the Lemur toolkit4. We use
the embedded tokenization algorithm along with the
4www.lemurproject.org
standard Porter stemmer. The number of retrieved
documents is set to 1000 and the Dirichlet prior
smoothing parameter to ? = 2000. In all our exper-
iments, we use the KL divergence scoring function
(equation 1) as baseline. Statistical significance is
computed using the well-known Student?s t-test. To
determine reasonable weights and avoid overtuning
the parameters, we use a 10-fold cross-validation op-
timizing the MAP values.
6.2 Experiments
We first investigated the impact of using PECO-
structured queries on the retrieval performance. As
far as we know, no quantitative evaluation of the
increase or decrease of performance in comparison
with a keyword-based search strategy has been re-
ported. Schardt et al (2007) presented a compari-
son between PubMed and a PECO search interface
but failed to demonstrate any significant difference
between the two search protocols. The larger num-
ber of words in PECO-structured queries, on aver-
age 18.8 words per query compared to 4.3 words for
keyword queries, should capture more aspects of the
information need. But, it may also be a disadvan-
tage due to the fact that more noise can be brought
in, causing query-drift issues.
We propose two baselines using the keyword-
based queries. The first baseline (named Baseline-
1) uses keyword queries with the traditional lan-
guage modeling approach. This is one of the state-
of-the-art approaches in current IR research. This
retrieval model considers each word in a query as
an equal, independent source of information. In the
second baseline (named Baseline-2), we consider
multiword phrases. In our test collection, queries
are often composed of multiword phrases such as
?low back pain? or ?early pregnancy?. It is clear
that finding the exact phrase ?heart failure? is a
much stronger indicator of relevance than just find-
ing ?heart? and ?failure? scattered within a docu-
ment. The Indri operator #1 is used to perform
phrase-based retrieval. Phrases are already indicated
in queries by the conjunction and (e.g. vaccine and
hepatitis B). A simple regular expression is used to
recognize the phrases.
Results are presented in Table 1. As expected,
phrase-based retrieval leads to some increase in re-
trieval precision (P@5). However, the number of
113
relevant documents retrieved is decreased. This is
due to the fact that we use exact phrase matching
that can reduce query coverage. One solution would
be to use unordered window features (Indri operator
#uwn) that would require words to be close together
but not necessarily in an exact sequence order (Met-
zler and Croft, 2005).
The PECO queries use PECO-structured queries
as a bag of words. We observe that PECO queries
do not enhance the average precision but increase
the P@5 significantly. The number of relevant doc-
uments retrieved is also larger. These results indi-
cate that formulating clinical queries according to
the PECO framework enhance the retrieval effec-
tiveness.
Model MAP P@5 #rel. ret.
Baseline-1 0.129 0.151 5369
Baseline-2 0.128 0.161? 4645
PECO-queries 0.126 0.172? 5433
Table 1: Comparing the performance measures of
keyword-based and PECO-structured queries in terms of
MAP, precision at 5 and number of relevant documents
retrieved (#rel. ret.). (?: t.test < 0.05)
In a second series of experiments, we evaluated
the model we proposed in Section 5 . We compared
two variants of our model. The first variant (named
Model-1) uses a global ?e distribution fixed accord-
ing to the average distribution of all PECO elements
(i.e. the observed probability that a PECO element
occurs in a document? part, no matter which element
it is). The second variant (named Model-2) uses a
differentiated ?e distribution for each type of PECO
element. The idea is to see if, given the fact that
PECO elements have different distributions in docu-
ments, using an adapted weight distribution for each
element can improve the retrieval effectiveness.
Previous studies have shown that assigning a dif-
ferent weight to each PECO element in the query
leads to better results (Demner-Fushman and Lin,
2007; Boudin et al, 2010a). In order to compare
our model with a similar method, we defined another
baseline (named Baseline-3) by fixing the parame-
ters ? = 0 and ? = 0 in equation 2. We performed
a grid search (from 0 to 1 by step of 0.1) to find
the optimal ? weights. Regarding the last three pa-
rameters in our full models, namely ?, ? and ?, we
conducted a second grid search to find their optimal
values. Performance measures obtained in 10-fold
cross-validation (optimizing the MAP measure) by
these models are presented in Table 2.
A significant improvement is obtained by
the Baseline-3 over the keyword-based approach
(Baseline-2). The PECO decomposition of queries
is particularly useful to balance the importance of
each element in the scoring function. We observe a
large improvement in retrieval effectiveness for both
models over the two baselines. This strongly indi-
cates that a weighting scheme based on the word po-
sition in documents is effective. These results sup-
port our assumption that the distribution of PECO
elements in documents can be used to weight words
in the document language model.
However, we do not observe meaningful differ-
ences between Model-1 and Model-2. This tend to
suggest that a global distribution is likely more ro-
bust for IR purposes than separate distributions for
each type of element. Another possible reason is that
our direct mapping from positional distribution to
probabilities may not be the most appropriate. One
may think about using a different transformation, or
performing some smoothing. We will leave this for
our future work.
7 Conclusion
This paper first presented the construction of a test
collection for evaluating clinical information re-
trieval. From a set of systematic reviews, a group
of annotators were asked to generate structured clin-
ical queries and collect relevance judgments. The
resulting test collection is composed of 423 queries
and 8926 relevant documents. This test collection
provides a basis for researchers to experiment with
PECO-structured queries in clinical IR. The test col-
lection introduced in this paper, along with the man-
ual given to the group of annotators, will be available
for download5.
In a second step, this paper addressed the prob-
lem of using the PECO framework in clinical IR. A
straightforward idea is to identify PECO elements in
documents and use the elements in the retrieval pro-
cess. However, this approach does not work well be-
5http://www-etud.iro.umontreal.ca/?boudinfl/pecodr/
114
Model MAP % rel. P@5 % rel. #rel. ret.
Baseline-2 0.128 - 0.161 - 4645
Baseline-3 0.144 +12.5%? 0.196 +21.7%? 5780
Model-1 0.164 +28.1%? 0.241 +49.7%? 5768
Model-2 0.163 +27.3%? 0.240 +49.1%? 5770
Table 2: 10-fold cross validation scores for the Baseline-2, Baseline-3 and the two variants of our proposed model
(Model-1 and Model-2). Relative increase over the Baseline-2 is given, #rel. ret. is the number of relevant documents
retrieved. (?: t.test < 0.01, ?: t.test < 0.05)
cause of the difficulty to automatically detect these
elements. Instead, we proposed a less demanding
approach that uses the distribution of PECO ele-
ments in documents to re-weight terms in the doc-
ument model. The observation of variable distribu-
tions in our test collection led us to believe that the
position information can be used as a robust indica-
tor of the presence of a PECO element. This strategy
turns out to be promising. On a data set composed
of 1.5 million citations extracted with PubMed, our
best model obtains an increase of 28% for MAP
and nearly 50% for P@5 over the classical language
modeling approach.
In future work, we intend to expand our analy-
sis of the distribution of PECO elements to a larger
number of citations. One way to do that would
be to automatically extract PubMed citations that
contain structural markers associated to PECO cate-
gories (Chung, 2009).
References
Florian Boudin, Jian-Yun Nie, and Martin Dawes. 2010a.
Clinical Information Retrieval using Document and
PICO Structure. In Proceedings of the HLT-NAACL
2010 conference, pages 822?830.
Florian Boudin, Lixin Shi, and Jian-Yun Nie. 2010b. Im-
proving Medical Information Retrieval with PICO El-
ement Detection. In Proceedings of the ECIR 2010
conference, pages 50?61.
Grace Y. Chung. 2009. Sentence retrieval for abstracts
of randomized controlled trials. BMC Medical Infor-
matics and Decision Making, 9(1).
Thomas Owens Sheri Keitz Connie Schardt, Martha
B Adams and Paul Fontelo. 2007. Utilization of the
PICO framework to improve searching PubMed for
clinical questions. BMC Medical Informatics and De-
cision Making, 7(1).
Martin Dawes, Pierre Pluye, Laura Shea, Roland Grad,
Arlene Greenberg, and Jian-Yun Nie. 2007. The iden-
tification of clinically important elements within med-
ical journal abstracts: PatientPopulationProblem, Ex-
posureIntervention, Comparison, Outcome, Duration
and Results (PECODR). Informatics in Primary care,
15(1):9?16.
D. Demner-Fushman and J. Lin. 2007. Answering
clinical questions with knowledge-based and statistical
techniques. Computational Linguistics, 33(1):63?103.
William R. Hersh, Katherine Crabtree, David H. Hickam,
Lynetta Sacherek, Linda Rose, and Charles P. Fried-
man. 2000. Factors associated with successful an-
swering of clinical questions using an information re-
trieval system. Bulletin of the Medical Library Asso-
ciation, 88(4):323?331.
Larry McKnight and Padmini Srinivasan. 2003. Catego-
rization of sentence types in medical abstracts. Pro-
ceedings of the AMIA annual symposium.
Donald Metzler and W. Bruce Croft. 2005. A Markov
random field model for term dependencies. In Pro-
ceedings of the SIGIR conference, pages 472?479.
Yun Niu, Graeme Hirst, Gregory McArthur, and Patricia
Rodriguez-Gianolli. 2003. Answering clinical ques-
tions with role identification. In Proceedings of the
ACL 2003 Workshop on Natural Language Processing
in Biomedicine, pages 73?80.
Pierre Pluye, Roland M. Grad, Lynn G. Dunikowski,
and Randolph Stephenson. 2005. Impact of clinical
information-retrieval technology on physicians: a lit-
erature review of quantitative, qualitative and mixed
methods studies. International Journal of Medical In-
formatics, 74(9):745?768.
Jay M. Ponte and W. Bruce Croft. 1998. A language
modeling approach to information retrieval. In Pro-
ceedings of the SIGIR conference, pages 275?281.
Scott W. Richardson, Mark C. Wilson, Jim Nishikawa,
and Robert S. Hayward. 1995. The well-built clini-
cal question: a key to evidence-based decisions. ACP
Journal Club, 123(3):A12?13.
David L. Sackett, William Rosenberg, J. A. Muir Gray,
Brian Haynes, and W. Scott Richardson. 1996. Ev-
idence based medicine: what it is and what it isn?t.
British medical journal, 312:71?72.
115
Human Language Technologies: The 2010 Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 822?830,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Clinical Information Retrieval using Document and PICO Structure
Florian Boudin and Jian-Yun Nie
DIRO, Universite? de Montre?al
CP. 6128, succursale Centre-ville
Montre?al, H3C 3J7 Que?bec, Canada
{boudinfl,nie}@iro.umontreal.ca
Martin Dawes
Department of Family Medicine
McGill University, 515 Pine Ave W
Montre?al, H2W 1S4 Que?bec, Canada
martin.dawes@mcgill.ca
Abstract
In evidence-based medicine, clinical questions
involve four aspects: Patient/Problem (P), In-
tervention (I), Comparison (C) and Outcome
(O), known as PICO elements. In this pa-
per we present a method that extends the lan-
guage modeling approach to incorporate both
document structure and PICO query formu-
lation. We present an analysis of the distri-
bution of PICO elements in medical abstracts
that motivates the use of a location-based
weighting strategy. In experiments carried out
on a collection of 1.5 million abstracts, the
method was found to lead to an improvement
of roughly 60% in MAP and 70% in P@10 as
compared to state-of-the-art methods.
1 Introduction
As the volume of published medical literature con-
tinues to grow exponentially, there is more and more
research for physicians to assess and evaluate and
less time to do so. Evidence-based medicine (EBM)
(Sackett et al, 1996) is a widely accepted paradigm
in medical practice that relies on evidence from
patient-centered clinical research to make decisions.
Taking an evidence-based approach to searching
means doing a systematic search of all the available
literature, individually critically appraising each re-
search study and then applying the findings in clini-
cal practice. However, this is a time consuming ac-
tivity. One way to facilitate searching for a precise
answer is to formulate a well-focused and structured
question (Schardt et al, 2007).
Physicians are educated to formulate their clinical
questions according to several well defined aspects
in EBM: Patient/Problem (P), Intervention (I),
Comparison (C) and Outcome (O), which are called
PICO elements. In many documents in medical lit-
erature (e.g. MEDLINE), one can find the elements
of the PICO structure, but rarely explicitly anno-
tated (Dawes et al, 2007). To identify documents
corresponding to a patient?s state, physicians also
construct their queries according to the PICO struc-
ture. For example, in the question ?In children with
pain and fever how does paracetamol compared
with ibuprofen affect levels of pain and fever?? one
can identify the following PICO elements:
Patient/Problem: children/pain and fever
Intervention: paracetamol
Comparison: ibuprofen
Outcome: levels of pain and fever
Very little work, if any, has been carried out on the
use of these elements in the Information Retrieval
(IR) process. There are several reasons for that. It
is not easy to identify PICO elements in documents,
as well as in the question if these are not explicitly
separated in it. Several studies have been performed
on identifying PICO elements in abstracts (Demner-
Fushman and Lin, 2007; Hansen et al, 2008; Chung,
2009). However, all of them are reporting coarse-
grain (sentence-level) tagging methods that have not
yet been shown to be sufficient for the purpose of
IR. Moreover, there is currently no standard test col-
lection of questions in PICO structure available for
evaluation. On the other hand, the most critical as-
pect in IR is term weighting. One of the purpose
of tagging PICO elements is to assign appropriate
weights to these elements during the retrieval pro-
cess. From this perspective, a semantic tagging of
PICO elements may be a task that goes well beyond
822
that is required for IR. It may be sufficient to have
a method that assigns appropriate weights to ele-
ments rather than recognizing their semantic roles.
In this paper, we will propose an approach to deter-
mine term weights according to document structure.
This method will be compared to that using tagging
of PICO elements.
In this paper, we first report an attempt to manu-
ally annotate the PICO elements in documents by
physicians and use them as training data to build
an automatic tagging tool. It turns out that there
is a high disagreement rate between human anno-
tators. The utilization of the automatic tagging tool
in an IR experiment shows only a small gain in re-
trieval effectiveness. We therefore propose an alter-
native to PICO element detection that uses the struc-
tural information of documents. This solution turns
out to be robust and effective. The alternative ap-
proach is motivated by a strong trend that we ob-
serve in the distribution of PICO elements in docu-
ments. We then make use of both PICO query and
document structure to extend the classical language
modeling approach to IR. Specifically, we investi-
gate how each element of a PICO query should be
weighted and how a location-based weighting strat-
egy can be used to emphasize the most informative
parts (i.e. containing the most PICO elements) of
documents.
The paper is organized as follows. We first briefly
review the previous work, followed by a description
of the method we propose. Next, we present our
experiments and results. Lastly, we conclude with a
discussion and directions for future work.
2 Related work
There have been only a few studies trying to use
PICO elements in the retrieval process. (Demner-
Fushman and Lin, 2007) is one of the few such stud-
ies. The method they describe consists in re-ranking
an initial list of retrieved citations. To this end, the
relevance of a document is scored by the use of de-
tected PICO elements, among other things. Several
other studies aimed to build a Question-Answering
system for clinical questions (Demner-Fushman and
Lin, 2006; Andrenucci, 2008). But again, the focus
has been set on the post-retrieval step, while the doc-
ument retrieval step only uses a standard approach.
In this paper, we argue that IR has much to gain by
using PICO elements.
The task of identifying PICO elements has how-
ever gain more attention. In their paper, (Demner-
Fushman and Lin, 2007) presented a method that
uses either manually crafted pattern-matching rules
or a combination of basic classifiers to detect PICO
elements in medical abstracts. Prior to that, biomed-
ical concepts are labelled by Metamap (Aronson,
2001) while relations between these concepts are
extracted with SemRep (Rindflesch and Fiszman,
2003). Recently, supervised classification using
Support Vector Machines (SVM) was proposed by
(Hansen et al, 2008) to extract the number of trial
participants. In a later study, (Chung, 2009) ex-
tended this work to other elements using Conditional
Random Fields. Although these studies are report-
ing interesting results, they are limited in several as-
pects. First, many are restricted to some segments
of the medical documents (e.g. Method section)
(Chung, 2009), and in most cases, the test collection
is very small (a few hundreds abstracts). Second, the
precision and granularity of these methods have not
yet been shown to be sufficient for the purpose of IR.
The structural information provided by markup
languages (e.g. XML) has been successfully used
to improve the IR effectiveness (INEX, 2002 2009).
For such documents, the structure information can
be used to emphasize some particular parts of the
document. Thereby, a given word should not have
the same importance depending on its position in the
document structure.
Taking into account the structure can be done ei-
ther at the step of querying or at the step of index-
ing. One way to integrate the structure at querying
is to adapt query languages (Fuhr and Gro?johann,
2001). These approaches follow the assumption that
the user knows where the most relevant information
is located. However, (Kamps et al, 2005) showed
that it is preferable to use structure as a search hint,
and not as a strict search requirement
The second approach consists in integrating the
document structure at the indexing step by introduc-
ing a structure weighting scheme (Wilkinson, 1994).
In such a scheme, the weight assigned to a word is
not only based on its frequency but also on its posi-
tion in the document. The structure of a document
can be defined in terms of tags (e.g. title, section),
823
each of those having a weight chosen either empiri-
cally or automatically by the use of optimizing tech-
niques such as genetic algorithms (Trotman, 2005).
3 Using PICO elements in retrieval
In this section, we present an experiment on the
manual annotation of PICO elements. We then de-
scribe an approach to detect these elements in doc-
uments and give some results on the use of these
tagged elements in the retrieval process.
3.1 Manual annotation of PICO elements
We asked medical professionals to manually anno-
tate the PICO elements in a small collection of ab-
stracts from PubMed1. The instructions given to
the annotators were fairly simple. They were asked
to precisely annotate all PICO elements in abstracts
with no restriction about the size of the elements (i.e.
they could be words, phrases or sentences). More
than 50 abstracts were manually annotated this way
by at least two different annotators. Two annotations
by two annotators are considered to agree if they
share some words (i.e. they overlap). We computed
the well known Cohen?s kappa measure as well as an
ad-hoc measure called loose. The latter uses PICO
elements as units and estimates the proportion of el-
ements that have been annotated by both raters.
Measure P-element I/C-element O-element
kappa 0.687 0.539 0.523
loose 0.363 0.136 0.140
Table 1: Agreement measures computed for each ele-
ment. Cohen?s kappa and loose agreement are presented.
We can observe that there is a very low agree-
ment rate between human annotators. The loose
measure indicates that less than 15% of the I, C and
O elements have been marked by both annotators.
This fact shows that such human annotations can be
hardly used to develop an automatic tagging tool for
PICO elements, which requires consistent training
data. We therefore try to develop a coarser-grained
tagging method.
1www.pubmed.gov, PubMed is a service of the US Na-
tional Library of Medicine that includes over 19 million cita-
tions from MEDLINE and other life science journals.
3.2 Automatic detection of PICO elements
Similarly to previous work, we propose a sentence-
level detection method. The identification of PICO
elements can be seen as a classification task. Even
for a coarser-grain classification task, we are still
lack of annotated data. One solution is to use the
structural information embedded in some medical
abstracts for which the authors have clearly stated
distinctive sentence headings. Some recent ab-
stracts in PubMed do contain explicit headings such
as ?PATIENTS?, ?SAMPLE? or ?OUTCOMES?,
that can be used to locate sentences correspond-
ing to PICO elements. Using that information, we
extracted three sets of abstracts: Patient/Problem
(14 279 abstracts), Intervention/Comparison (9 095)
and Outcome (2 394).
Tagging each document goes through a three steps
process. First, the document is segmented into plain
sentences. Then each sentence is converted into a
feature vector using statistical (e.g. position, length)
and knowledge-based features (e.g. MeSH semantic
type). Knowledge-based features were derived ei-
ther from manually crafted cue-words/verbs lists or
semantic types within the MeSH ontology2. Finally,
each vector is submitted to multiple classifiers, one
for each element, allowing to label the correspond-
ing sentence. We use several algorithms imple-
mented in the Weka toolkit3: decision trees, SVM,
multi-layer perceptron and Naive Bayes. Combin-
ing multiple classifiers using a weighted linear com-
bination of their prediction scores achieves the best
results with a f-measure score of 86.3% for P, 67%
for I/C and 56.6% for O in 10-fold cross-validation.
3.3 Use of detected elements in IR
We use language modeling approach to IR in this
work. The idea is that a document is a good match to
a query if its language model is likely to generate the
query (Ponte and Croft, 1998). It is one of the state-
of-the-art approaches in current IR research. Most
language modeling work in IR use unigram lan-
guage models ?also called bags-of-words models?
assuming that there is no structure in queries or doc-
uments. A typical way to score a document d as
relevant to a query q is to use the Kullback-Leibler
2www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/
3www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/index.html
824
divergence between their respective LMs:
score(q, d) =
?
w?q
P(w | Mq) ? log P(w | Md) (1)
? ?KL(Mq || Md)
whereMq is the LM of the query andMd the LM of
the document. P(w | M?) estimates the probability
of the word w given the language model M?. The
most direct way to estimate these models is to use
Maximum Likelihood estimation over the words:
P(w | M?) =
count(w, ?)
| ? |
where ? is the observed document, count(w, ?) the
number of times the wordw occurs in ? and | ? | the
length of the document. Bayesian smoothing using
Dirichlet priors is then applied to the maximum like-
lihood estimator to compensate for data sparseness.
We propose an approach that extend the basic
LM approach to take into consideration the PICO
element annotation. We assume that each ele-
ment in the document has a different importance
weight. Four more LMs are created, one for each
elements. Given?e the weight of the PICO element
e, P(w | Md) in equation 1 is re-defined as:
P1(w | Md) ? P(w | Md) +
?
e?[P,I,C,O]
?e ? P(w | Me)
The right hand of the above equation is not a prob-
ability function. We could use a normalization to
transform it. However, for the purpose of document
ranking, this will not make any difference. There-
fore, we will keep the un-normalized value.
We performed an extensive series of experiments
using this model on the test collection described in
Section 5. The results are shown in Table 2. It turns
out that the best improvement we were able to obtain
is very small (0.5% of MAP increase). There may
be several reasons for that. First, the accuracy of
the automatic document tagging may be insufficient.
Second, even if elements are correctly identified in
documents, if queries are treated as bags-of-words
then any PICO element can match with any identi-
cal word in the query, whether it describe the same
element or not. However, we also tested a na??ve ap-
proach that matches the PICO elements in queries
with the corresponding elements in documents. But
this approach quickly turns out to be too restrictive
and leads to bad results.
Measure
Weighted elements
P I / C O Best?
MAP increase 0.0% ?0.2% ?0.1% +0.5%
Table 2: Results using the PICO elements automatically
detected in documents (?: wP = 0.5, wI = 0.2).
As we can see, this approach only brings limited
improvement in retrieval effectiveness. This rises
the question of the usability of such tagging method
in its current performance state. We will see in the
next section an alternative solution to this problem
that relies on the distribution of PICO elements in
documents.
4 Method
4.1 Distribution of PICO elements
PICO elements are not evenly distributed in medical
documents, which often follow some implicit writ-
ing convention. An intuitive method is to weight
higher a segment that is more probable to con-
tain PICO elements. The distribution of PICO el-
ements is likely to correlate to the position within
the document. This intuition has been used in most
of the supervised PICO detection methods which
use location-based features. There has been sev-
eral studies that cover the PICO extraction problem.
However, as far as we know, none of them analyses
and uses the positional ditribution of these elements
within the documents for the purpose of IR. Biomed-
ical abstracts can be typically represented by four or-
dered rhetorical categories which are Introduction,
Methods, Results and Discussion (IMRAD) (Sollaci
and Pereira, 2004). The reason is found in the need
for speed when reviewing literature, as this format
allows readers to pick those parts of particular in-
terest. Besides, many scientific journals explicitly
recommended this ordered structure.
The PICO dispersion is highly correlated to these
rhetorical categories as some elements are more
likely to occur in certain categories. For example,
outcomes are more likely to appear in Results and/or
Discussion parts. One could also expect to infer the
825
role played by PICO elements in a clinical study. For
example, the drug pioglitazone has not the same role
in a clinical study if it appears as the main interven-
tion (likely to occur in all parts) or as a comparative
treatment (Methods and/or Results parts).
Instead of analysing the dispersion of PICO ele-
ments into the four IMRAD categories, we choose to
the use automatically splitted parts. There are sev-
eral reasons for that. First, the IMRAD categories
are not explicitely marked in abstracts. An auto-
matic tagging of these would surely result in some
errors. Second, using a low granularity approach
would provide more precise statistics. Furthermore,
if one would use the dispersion of elements as a cri-
terion to estimate how important each part is, an au-
tomatic partition would be a good choice because of
its repeatability and ease to implement.
We divided each manually annotated abstract into
10 parts of equal length (P1 being the begining and
P10 the ending) and computed statistics on the num-
ber of elements than occur in each of these parts.
The Figure 1 shows the proportion of elements for
each part. We can observe that PICO elements are
not evenly distributed throughout the abstracts. Uni-
versally accepted rules that govern medical writing
styles would be the first reason for that. It is clear
that the beginning and ending parts of abstracts do
contain most of the PICO elements. This gives us a
clear indication on which parts should be enhanced
when searching for these elements.
8 9 10 11 12 13% of PICO elements
P10
P9
P8
P7
P6
P5
P4
P3
P2
P1
Par
ts o
f th
e ab
stra
cts
Figure 1: Proportion of PICO elements computed for
each different part of abstracts.
Therefore, there may be several levels of granu-
larity when using the PICO framework in IR. One
can identify each PICO element in the document,
whether it is described by a word, a phrase or a com-
plete sentence. One can also use a coarser-grain
approach, estimating from the distribution across
documents the probability that each part contains a
PICO element. As attempts to precisely locate PICO
elements have shown that this task is particularly
difficult, we propose to get rid this issue by using
the second method.
4.2 Model definitions
We propose three different models that extend the
classical language modeling approach. The first uses
the structural information of documents, the second
takes advantage of the PICO query structure while
the third simply combine the first two models.
Model-1
Attempts to precisely locate PICO elements in doc-
uments have shown that this task is particularly dif-
ficult. We propose to get around this issue by intro-
ducing structural markers to convey document struc-
ture and use them as a means of providing location
information. Accordingly, each document is repre-
sented as a series of successive parts. To integrate
document structure into the ranking function, we es-
timate a series of probabilities that constraints the
word counts to a specific part instead of the entire
document. Each document d is then ranked by a
weighted linear interpolation. Intuitively, the weight
of a part should depend on how much information is
conveyed by its words. Given ?p the weight of the
part p ? [TITLE, P1 ? ? ? P10], P(w | Md) in equation
1 is re-defined as:
P2(w |Md) ? P(w |Md)+
?
p?d
?p ?P(w ? p |Md)
Model-2
The PICO formulation of queries provides informa-
tion about the role of each query word. One idea
is to use this structural decomposition to thoroughly
balance elements in the ranking function. For exam-
ple, the weight given to the drug fluoxetine should be
different depending on whether it refers to the inter-
vention or comparison concept. The same goes for
obesity which can be a problem or an outcome. To
826
integrate this in the ranking function, we define a pa-
rameter ?e that represents the weight given to query
words belonging to the element e ? [P, I, C, O].
f(w, e) = 1 if w ? e, 0 otherwise. We re-defined
P(w | Md) in equation 1 as:
P3(w |Mq) ? P(w |Mq)+
?
e?[P,I,C,O]
?e ?f(w, e)?P(w |Mq)
Model-1+2
This is the combination of the two previously de-
scribed models. We re-defined the scoring function
as:
score(q, d) =
?
w?q
P3(w | Mq) ? log P2(w | Md)
5 Experiments
In this section, we describe the details of our exper-
imental protocol. We then present the results ob-
tained with the three proposed models.
Experimental settings
We gathered a collection of nearly 1.5 million ab-
stracts from PubMed with the following require-
ments: with abstract, humans subjects, in english
and selecting the following publication types: RCT,
reviews, clinical trials, letters, practice guidelines,
editorials and meta-analysis. Prior to the index con-
struction, each abstract is automatically divided into
10 parts of equal length, abstracts containing less
than 10 words are discarded. The following fields
are then marked: TITLE, P1, P2, ... P10 with P1 be-
ing the begining of the document and P10 the end-
ing.
Unfortunately, there is no standard test collection
appropriate for testing the use of PICO in IR and
we had to manually create one. For queries, we use
the Cochrane systematic reviews4 on 10 clinical
questions about different aspects of ?diabetes?.
These reviews contain the best available infor-
mation about an healthcare intervention and are
designed to facilitate the choices that doctors face
in health care. All the documents in the ?Included
studies? section are judged to be relevant for the
4www.cochrane.org/reviews/
question. These included studies are selected by
the reviewers (authors of the review article) and
judged to be highly related to the clinical question.
In our experiments, we consider these documents
as relevant ones. From the 10 selected questions,
professors in family medicine have formulated a set
of 52 queries, each of which was manually anno-
tated according to the PICO structure. The resulting
testing corpus is composed of 52 queries (average
length of 14.7 words) and 378 relevant documents.
Below are some of the alternative formulations of
queries for the question ?Pioglitazone for type 2
diabetes mellitus?:
In patients with type 2 diabetes (P) | does pioglita-
zone (I) | compared to placebo (C) | reduce stroke
and myocardial infarction (O)
In patients with type 2 diabetes who have a high risk
of macrovascular events (P) | does pioglitazone (I) |
compared to placebo (C) | reduce mortality (O)
We use cross-validation to determine reasonable
weights and avoid over-fitting. We have divided the
queries into two groups of 26 queries: Qa and Qb.
The best parameters found for Qa are used to test
on Qb, and vice versa. In our experiments, we use
the KL divergence ranking (equation 1) as baseline.
The following evaluation measures are considered
relevant:
Precision at n (P@n). Precision computed on only
the n topmost retrieved documents.
Mean Average Precision (MAP). Average of preci-
sions computed at the point of each relevant docu-
ment in the ranked list of retrieved documents.
MAP is a popular measure that gives a global
quality score of the entire ranked list of retrieved
documents. In the case of clinical searches, one
could also imagine this scenario: a search performed
by a physician who does not have the time to look
into large sets of results, but for whom it is impor-
tant to have relevant results in the top 10. In such
case, P@10 is also an appropriate measure.
Student?s t-test is performed to determine statis-
tical significance. The Lemur Toolkit5 was used for
5www.lemurproject.org
827
all retrieval tasks. Experiments were performed with
an ?out-of-the-box? version of Lemur, using its tok-
enization algorithm and porter stemmer. The Dirich-
let prior smoothing parameter was set to its default
value ? = 2500.
Experiments with model-1
We first investigated whether assigning a weight to
each part of the document can improve the retrieval
accuracy. It is however difficult to determine a set
of reasonable values for all the parts together, as the
value of one part will affect those of the others. In
this study, we perform a two pass tuning. First, we
consider the ?p weights to be independent. By doing
so, searching for the optimal weight distribution can
be seen as tuning the weight of each part separately.
When searching the optimal weight of a part, the
weight for other parts is assigned 0. Second, these
approximations of the optimum values are used as
initial weights prior to the second pass. The final
weight distribution is obtained by searching for the
best weight combination around the initial values.
The Figure 2 shows the optimal weight distri-
butions along with the best relative MAP increase
for each part. A noticeable improvement is ob-
tained by increasing the weights associated to the ti-
tle/introduction and conclusion of documents. This
is consistent with the results observed on the dis-
tribution of PICO elements in abstracts. Boosting
middle parts of documents seems to have no impact
at all. We can see that the two ?p weight distribu-
tions (1-pass and 2-pass) are very close.
Performance measures obtained by model-1 are
presented in Table 3. With 1-pass tuning, we ob-
serve a MAP score increase of 37.5% and a P@10
increase of 64.1%. After the second pass, scores are
lower with 35% and 60.5% for MAP and P@10 re-
spectively. This result indicates that there is possibly
overfitting when we perform the two pass parameter
tuning. It could also be caused by the limited num-
ber of query in our test collection. However, we can
determine reasonable weights by tuning each part
weight separately.
Experiments with model-2
We have seen that a large improvement could come
from weighting each part accordingly. In a second
series of experiments, we try to assign a different
10
20
30
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
                            Weight parameter ?p
Q26A1-pass2-pass
Title P1 P2 P3 P4 P5 P6 P7 P8 P9 P100
10
20
30
      
      
      
      
      
     M
AP 
incr
eas
e (%
)
Different part of the documents
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Q26B1-pass2-pass
Figure 2: Best MAP increase for each part p (bar charts),
corresponding 1 and 2-pass ?p weights are also given.
weight to each PICO element in queries. A grid
search was used to find the optimal ?e weights com-
bination. The results are shown in Table 3.
We observe a MAP score increase of 22.5% and
an increase of 11% in P@10. Though the use of
a PICO weighting scheme increases the retrieval
accuracy, there is clearly much to gain by using
the document structure. The optimal [?p, ?i, ?c, ?o]
weights distribution is [0.3, 1.2, 0, 0.1] for Qa and
[0.2, 1, 0, 0.2] for Qb. That means that the most im-
portant words in queries belong to the Intervention
element. This supports the manual search strategy
proposed by (Weinfeld and Finkelstein, 2005), in
which they suggested that I and P elements should
be used first to construct queries, and only if too
many results are obtained that other elements should
be considered.
It is interesting to see that query words belonging
to the Comparison element have to be considered
as the least important part of a query. Even more
so because they are in the same semantic group as
the Intervention words. A reason for that could be
the use of vague words such as ?no-intervention? or
?placebo?. The methodology employed to construct
the queries is also responsible. Indeed, physicians
have focused on producing alternative formulations
of 10 general clinical questions by predominantly
modifying the one of the PICO elements. As a re-
sult, some of them do share the same vague Com-
parison words.
828
Experiments
MAP P@10
Qb?Qa Qa?Qb % Avg. Qb?Qa Qa?Qb % Avg.
Baseline 0.118 0.131 0.219 0.239
Model-1 / 1pass 0.165 0.176 +37.5%? 0.377 0.373 +64.1%?
Model-1 / 2pass 0.165 0.170 +35.0%? 0.354 0.381 +60.5%?
Model-2 0.149 0.168 +22.5%? 0.250 0.258 +11.0%
Model-1+2 0.198 0.202 +61.5%? 0.385 0.392 +70.0%?
Table 3: Cross-validation (train?test) scores for the baseline (Kullback-Leibler divergence), model-1 with 1 and 2-
pass tuning, model-2 and their combination (model-1+2). Relative increase over the baseline is also given (averaged
between Qa and Qb). (?: t.test < 0.01)
Experiments with model-1+2
We have seen that both the use of a location-based
weighting and a PICO-structure weighting scheme
increase the retrieval accuracy. In this last series of
experiments, we analyse the results of their com-
bination. We can observe that fusing model-1 and
model-2 allows us to obtain the best retrieval ac-
curacy with a MAP score increase of 61.5% and a
P@10 increase of 70.0%. It is a large improvement
over the baseline as it means that instead of about
two relevant documents in the top 10, our system
can retrieve nearly four. These results confirm that
both PICO framework and document structure can
be very helpful for the IR process.
6 Conclusion
We presented a language modeling approach that in-
tegrates document and PICO structure for the pur-
pose of clinical IR. A straightforward idea is to de-
tect PICO elements in documents and use the ele-
ments in the retrieval process. However, this ap-
proach does not work well because of the diffi-
culty to arrive at a consistent tagging of these ele-
ments. Instead, we propose a less demanding ap-
proach which assigns different weights to different
parts of a document.
We first analysed the distribution of PICO el-
ements in a manually annotated abstracts collec-
tion. The observed results led us to believe that a
location-based weighting scheme can be used in-
stead of a PICO detection approach. We then ex-
plored whether this strategy can be used as an in-
dicator to refine document relevance. We also pro-
posed a model to integrate the PICO information
provided in queries and investigated how each el-
ement should be balanced in the ranking function.
On a data set composed of 1.5 million abstracts ex-
tracted from PubMed, our method obtains an in-
crease of 61.5% for MAP and 70% for P@10 over
the classical language modeling approach.
This work can be much improved in the future.
For example, the location-based weighting method
can be improved in order to model a different weight
distribution for each PICO element. As the distri-
bution in abstracts is not the same among PICO el-
ements, it is expected that differentiated weighting
schemes could result in better retrieval effectiveness.
In a similar perspective, we are continuing our ef-
forts to construct a larger manually annotated col-
lection of abstracts. It will be thereafter conceiv-
able to use this data to infer the structural weighting
schemes or to train a more precise PICO detection
method. The focused evaluation described in this
paper is a first step. Although the queries are limited
to diabetes, this does not affect the general PICO
structure in queries. We plan to extend the coverage
of queries to other topics in the future.
Acknowledgements
The work described in this paper was funded by
the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Coun-
cil (SSHRC). The authors would like to thank Dr.
Ann McKibbon, Dr. Dina Demner-Fushman, Lorie
Kloda, Laura Shea, Lucas Baire and Lixin Shi for
their contribution in the project.
829
References
A. Andrenucci. 2008. Automated Question-Answering
Techniques and the Medical Domain. In International
Conference on Health Informatics, volume 2, pages
207?212.
A.R. Aronson. 2001. Effective Mapping of Biomedical
Text to the UMLS Metathesaurus: The MetaMap Pro-
gram. In AMIA Symposium.
G. Chung. 2009. Sentence retrieval for abstracts of ran-
domized controlled trials. BMC Medical Informatics
and Decision Making, 9(1):10.
M. Dawes, P. Pluye, L. Shea, R. Grad, A. Green-
berg, and J.Y. Nie. 2007. The identification of
clinically important elements within medical jour-
nal abstracts: Patient-Population-Problem, Exposure-
Intervention, Comparison, Outcome, Duration and
Results (PECODR). Informatics in Primary care,
15(1):9?16.
D. Demner-Fushman and J. Lin. 2006. Answer extrac-
tion, semantic clustering, and extractive summariza-
tion for clinical question answering. In ACL.
D. Demner-Fushman and J. Lin. 2007. Answering
clinical questions with knowledge-based and statistical
techniques. Computational Linguistics, 33(1):63?103.
N. Fuhr and K. Gro?johann. 2001. XIRQL: A query
language for information retrieval in XML documents.
In SIGIR, pages 172?180.
M.J. Hansen, N.O. Rasmussen, and G. Chung. 2008. A
method of extracting the number of trial participants
from abstracts describing randomized controlled trials.
Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, 14(7):354?358.
INEX. 2002-2009. Proceedings of the INitiative for the
Evaluation of XML Retrieval (INEX) workshop.
J. Kamps, M. Marx, M. de Rijke, and B. Sigurbjo?rnsson.
2005. Structured queries in XML retrieval. In CIKM,
pages 4?11.
J.M. Ponte and W.B. Croft. 1998. A language model-
ing approach to information retrieval. In SIGIR, pages
275?281.
T.C. Rindflesch and M. Fiszman. 2003. The interac-
tion of domain knowledge and linguistic structure in
natural language processing: interpreting hypernymic
propositions in biomedical text. Journal of Biomedical
Informatics, 36(6):462?477.
D.L. Sackett, W. Rosenberg, J.A. Gray, R.B. Haynes, and
W.S. Richardson. 1996. Evidence based medicine:
what it is and what it isn?t. British medical journal,
312(7023):71.
C. Schardt, M. Adams, T. Owens, S. Keitz, and
P. Fontelo. 2007. Utilization of the PICO frame-
work to improve searching PubMed for clinical ques-
tions. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Mak-
ing, 7(1):16.
L.B. Sollaci and M.G. Pereira. 2004. The introduction,
methods, results, and discussion (IMRAD) structure:
a fifty-year survey. Journal of the Medical Library
Association, 92(3):364.
A. Trotman. 2005. Choosing document structure
weights. Information Processing and Management,
41(2):243?264.
J.M. Weinfeld and K. Finkelstein. 2005. How to answer
your clinical questions more efficiently. Family prac-
tice management, 12(7):37.
R. Wilkinson. 1994. Effective retrieval of structured doc-
uments. In SIGIR, pages 311?317.
830
