  
A Unicode based Adaptive Segmentor 
Q. Lu, S. T. Chan, R. F. Xu, T. S. Chiu 
Dept. Of Computing, 
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 
Hung Hom, Hong Kong 
{csluqin,csrfxu}@comp.polyu.edu.hk 
B. L. Li, S. W. Yu 
The Institute of Computational Linguistics, 
Peking University, 
Beijing, China 
{libi,yusw}@pku.edu.cn 
 
Abstract 
This paper presents a Unicode based 
Chinese word segmentor. It can handle 
Chinese text in Simplified, Traditional, or 
mixed mode. The system uses the strategy 
of divide-and-conquer to handle the 
recognition of personal names, numbers, 
time and numerical values, etc in the pre-
processing stage. The segmentor further 
uses tagging information to work on 
disambiguation. Adopting a modular 
design approach, different functional parts 
are separately implemented using 
different modules and each module 
tackles one problem at a time providing 
more flexibility and extensibility. Results 
show that with added pre-processing 
modules and accessorial modules, the 
accuracy of the segmentor is increased 
and the system is easily adaptive to 
different applications. 
1 Introduction 
The most difficult problem in Chinese word 
segmentation is due to overlapping ambiguities [1-
2]. The recognition of names, foreign names, and 
organizations are quite unique for Chinese. Some 
systems can already achieve very high accuracy [3], 
but they heavily rely on manual work in getting the 
system to be trained to work certain language 
environment. However, for many applications, we 
need to look at the cost to achieve high accuracy. 
In a competitive environment, we also need to 
have systems that are quickly adaptive to new 
requirements with limited resources available. 
In this paper, we report a Unicode based Chinese 
word segmentor. The segmentor can handle 
Chinese text in Simplified, Traditional, or mixed 
mode where internally only one dictionary is 
needed. The system uses the strategy of divide-
and-conquer to handle the recognition of personal 
names, numbers, time and numerical values. The 
system has a built-in new word extractor that can 
extract new words from running text, thus save 
time on training and getting the system quickly 
adaptive to new language environment. The 
Bakeoff results in the open text for our system in 
all categories have shown that it works reasonably 
good for all different corpora. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 presents our system design objectives 
and components. Section 3 discusses more 
implementation details. Section 4 gives some 
performance evaluations. Section 5 is the 
conclusion. 
2 Design Objectives and Components 
With the wide use of Unicode based operating 
systems such as Window 2000 and Window XP, 
we now see more and more text data written in 
both the Simplified form and the Traditional form 
to co-exist on the same system. It is also likely that 
text written in mixed mode. Because of this reality, 
the first design objective of this system is its ability 
to handle the segmentation of Chinese text written 
in either Simplified Chinese, Traditional Chinese, 
or mixed mode.  As an example, we should be able 
to segment the same sentence in different forms 
such as the example given below:   
 
The second design objective is to adopt the 
modular design approach where different 
functional parts are separately implemented using 
independent modules and each module tackles one 
problem at a time. Using this modular approach, 
we can isolate problems and fine tune each module 
with minimal effect on other modules in the system. 
  
Special features like adding new rules or new 
dictionary can be easily done without affecting 
other modules. Consequently, the system is more 
flexible and can be easily extended.  
The third design objective of the system is to make 
the segmentor adaptive to different application 
domains. We consider it having more practical 
value if the segmentor can be easily trained using 
some semi-automatic process to work in different 
domains and work well for text with different 
regional variations. We consider it essential that 
the segmentor has tools to help it to obtain regional 
related information quickly even if annotated 
corpora are not available. For instance, when it 
runs text from Hong Kong, it must be able to 
recognize the personal names such as  if 
such a name(quadra-gram) appears in the text often. 
 
Figure 1. System components 
Figure 1 shows the two major components, the 
segmentor and data manager. The segmentor is the 
core component of the system. It has a pre-
processor, the kernel, and a post-processor. As the 
system has to maintain a number of tables such as 
the dictionaries, family name list, etc., a separate 
component called data manager is responsible in 
handling the maintenance of these data.  The pre-
processor has separate modules to handle 
paragraphs, ASCII code, numbers, time, and 
proper names including personal names, place and 
organizational names, and foreign names. The 
kernel supports different segmentation algorithms. 
It is the application or user?s choice to invoke the 
preferred segmentation algorithms that at current 
time include the basic maximum matching and 
minimum matching in both forward and backward 
mode. These can also be used to build more 
complicated algorithms later on. In addition, the 
system provides segmentation using part-of-speech 
tagging information to help resolve ambiguity. The 
post-processor applies morphological rules which 
cannot be easily applied using a dictionary.   
The data manager helps to maintain the knowledge 
base in the system. It also has an accessory 
software called the new word extractor which can 
collect statistical information based on character 
bi-grams, tri-grams and quadra-grams to semi-
automatically extract words and names so that they 
can be used by the segmentor to improve 
performance especially when switching to a new 
domain. Another characteristic of this segmentor is 
that it provides tagging information for segmented 
text. The tagging information can be optionally 
omitted if not needed by an application. 
3 Implementation Details 
The basic dictionary of this system was provided 
by Peking University [4] and we also used the 
tagging data from [4]. The data structure for our 
dictionaries are very similar to that discussed in [5]. 
As our program needs to handle both Simplified 
and Traditional Chinese characters, Unicode is the 
only solution for dealing with more than one script 
at the same time. 
Even though it is our design objective to support 
both Simplified and Traditional Chinese, we do not 
want to keep two different sets of dictionaries for 
Simplified and Traditional Chinese. Even if two 
versions are kept, it would not serve well for text 
in mixed mode. For example, Traditional Chinese 
word of ?the day after tomorrow? should be , 
and for Simplified Chinese, it should be . 
However sometimes we can see the word  
appears in a Traditional Chinese text. We cannot 
say that it is wrong because the sentence is still 
semantically correct especially in Unicode 
environment. Therefore the segmentor should be 
able to segment those words correctly such as in 
the examples: ? ?, and in ?  
?. We must also deal with dictionary 
maintenance related to Chinese variants. For 
example, characters  are variants, so are 
. 
Data manager Segmentor 
Pre-
Processor 
Kernel 
Post 
Processor 
New Word
Extractor
Knowledge-
base 
  
In order to keep the dictionary maintenance simple, 
our system uses a single dictionary which only 
keeps the so called canonical form of a word. In 
our system, the canonical form of a word is its 
?simplified form?.  We quoted the word 
?simplified? because only certain characters have 
simplified forms such as  to , but for  
, there is no simplified form. In the case of 
variants, we simply choose one of them as the 
canonical character.  The canonical characters are 
maintained in the traditional-simplified character 
conversion table as well as in a variant table.  
Whenever a new word, item, is added into the 
dictionary, it must be added using a function 
CanonicalConversion(), which takes item as an 
input. During segmentation, the corresponding 
dictionary look up function will first convert the 
token to its canonical form before looking up in the 
dictionary.  
The personal name recognizers (separate for 
Chinese names and foreign names) use the 
maximum-likelihood algorithm with consideration 
of commonly used Chinese family names, given 
names, and foreign name characters. It works for 
Chinese names of length up to 5 characters. In the 
following examples you can see that our system 
successfully recognized the name . This 
is done using our algorithm, not by putting her 
name in our dictionary: 
 
Organization names and place names are 
recognized mainly using special purpose 
dictionaries. The segmentor uses tagging 
information to help resolve ambiguity. The 
disambiguation is mostly based on rules such as  
p + (n + f) -> p + n + f 
which would word to correct 
  
For efficiency reasons, our system uses only about 
20 rules. The system is flexible enough for new 
rules to be added to improve performance.  
The new word extractor is an accessory program to 
extract new words from running text based on 
statistical data which can either be grabbed from 
the internet or collected from other sources. The 
basic statistical data include bi-gram frequency, tri-
gram frequency, and quadra-gram frequencies. In 
order to further example whether a bi-gram, say  
, is indeed a word, we further collect forward 
conditional frequency of  , and 
the back-ward conditional frequency of , 
. For an i-gram token, we also 
use the (i+1)-gram statistics to eliminate those i-
grams that are only a part of (i+1) ? gram word.  
For instance, if the frequency of bi-gram  is 
very close to the frequency of tri-gram , it 
is less likely that  is a word. Of course, 
whether  is a word depends on quadra-gram 
results.  Using the statistical result, a set of rules 
was applied to these i-grams to eliminate entries 
that are not considered new words. Minimal 
manual work is required to identify whether the 
remaining candidates are new words. Before words 
are added into the dictionary, part-of-speech 
information are added manually (although not 
necessary) before using the canonical function. 
The following table shows examples of bi-grams 
which are found by the new word extractor using 
one year Hong Kong Commercial Daily News data. 
 
 
 
4 Performance Evaluation 
The valuation metrics used in [6] were adopted 
here. 
1
3
N
N
recall =     (1) 
 
2
3
N
Npresicion =     (2) 
  
precisionrecall
precisionrecallrecallprecisionF +
??= 2),(1   (3) 
where N  1  denotes the number of words in the 
annotated corpus, N 2 denotes the number of words 
identified by the segmentation algorithm , and N 3 is 
the number of words correctly identified. 
We participated in the open tests for all four 
corpora. The results are shown in the following 
table. 
The worst performance in the 4 tests were for the 
CTB(UPenn) data. From the observation from the 
testing data, we found that the main problem with 
have with CTB data is the difference in word 
granularity. To confirm our observation, we have 
done an analysis of combining errors and 
overlapping errors. The results show that the ratios 
of combining errors in all the error types are 
0.8425(AS), 0.87684(CTB), 0.82085(HK), and 
0.77102(PK). The biggest problem we have with 
AS data, on the other hand is due to out of 
vocabulary mistakes. Even though our new word 
extractor can help us to reduce this problem, but 
we have not trained our system using data from 
Taiwan.  Our best performance was on PK data 
because we used a very similar dictionary. The 
additional training of data for HK was done using 
one year Commercial Daily( ). 
The following table summarizes the execution 
speed of our program for the 4 different 
sources: 
Data No. of 
chars 
Processi
ng Time 
(sec.) 
Processin
g Rate 
(char/sec) 
Segmentat
ion Rate 
(char/sec) 
AS 18,743 4.703 3,985 7,641 
CTB 62,332 10.110 6,165 7,930 
HK 57,432 10.329 5,560 7,109 
PK 28,458 4.829 5,893 10,970 
 
The program initialization needs around 2.25 
seconds mainly to load the dictionaries and other 
data into the memory before the segmentation can 
start. If we only count the segmentation time, the 
rate of segmentation on the average is around 
7,500 characters for the first three corpora. It 
seems that the processing speed for Peking U. data 
is faster. This may be because the dictionaries we 
used are closer to the PK system, thus it would 
take less time to work on disambiguation.  
5 Conclusion 
In this paper, design and algorithms of a general-
purposed Unicode based segmentor is proposed. It 
is able to process Simplified and Traditional 
Chinese appear in the same text. Sophisticated pre-
processing and other auxiliary modules help 
segmenting text more accurately. User interactions 
and modules can be easily added with the help of 
its modular design. A built-in new word extractor 
is also implemented for extracting new words from 
running text. It saves much time on training and 
thus it can be quickly adapted to new environments. 
Acknowledgement 
We thank the PI of ITF Grant by ITC of 
HKSARG (ITS/024/01) entitled: Towards Cost-
Effective E-business in the News Media & 
Publishing Industry for the use of HK Commercial 
Daily. 
References 
[1] Automatic Segmentation and Tagging for Chinese 
Text ( ) , K.Y. Liu, 
Commercial Press, 2000 
[2] Segmentation Issues in Chinese Information 
Processing,  (C.N. Huang Issue No. 
1, 1997) 
[3] The design and Implementation of a Modern General 
Purpose Segmentation System (B. Lou,  R. Song, W.L. 
Li, and Z.Y. Luo, Journal of Chinese Information 
Processing, Issue No. 5, 2001) 
[4] (Institute of 
Computational Linguistics, Peking Univ., 2002) 
[5] 
  Journal of Chinese information 
processing vol. 14, no. 1, 2001) 
[6] Chinese Word Segmentation and Information 
Retrieval, Palmer D., and Burger J., In AAAI 
Symposium Cross-Language Text and Speech 
Retrieval 1997 
