Proceedings of the Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL 2010, pages 192?196,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Combining Parallel Treebanks and Geo-Tagging
Martin Volk, Anne Go?hring, Torsten Marek
University of Zurich, Institute of Computational Linguistics
volk@cl.uzh.ch
Abstract
This paper describes a new kind of seman-
tic annotation in parallel treebanks. We
build French-German parallel treebanks of
mountaineering reports, a text genre that
abounds with geographical names which
we classify and ground with reference to
a large gazetteer of Swiss toponyms. We
discuss the challenges in obtaining a high
recall and precision in automatic ground-
ing, and sketch how we represent the
grounding information in our treebank.
1 Introduction
Treebanks have become valuable resources in nat-
ural language processing as training corpora for
natural language parsers, as repositories for lin-
guistic research, or as evaluation corpora for dif-
ferent NLP systems. We define a treebank as
a collection of syntactically annotated sentences.
The annotation can vary from constituent to de-
pendency or tecto-grammatical structures. The
term treebank is mostly used to denote manually
checked collections, but recently it has been ex-
tended to also refer to automatically parsed cor-
pora.
We have built manually checked treebanks for
various text genres (see section 3): economy texts,
a popular science philosophy novel, and technical
user manuals. We are now entering a new genre,
mountaineering reports, with the goal to link tex-
tual to spatial information. We build French and
German treebanks of translated texts from the
Swiss Alpine Club. This genre contains a multi-
tude of geographical names (e.g. mountains and
valleys, glaciers and rivers). Therefore we need to
include the identification and grounding of these
toponyms as part of the annotation process.
In this paper we first describe our corpus of
alpine texts, then our work on creating paral-
lel treebanks which includes aligning the parallel
trees on word and phrase level. We sketch the dif-
ficulties in disambiguating the toponyms and de-
scribe our integration of the toponym identifiers as
a special kind of semantic annotation in the tree-
bank.
2 Our Text+Berg Corpus
In our project Text+Berg1 we digitize alpine her-
itage literature from various European countries.
Currently our group digitizes all yearbooks of the
Swiss Alpine Club (SAC) from 1864 until today.
Each yearbook consists of 300 to 600 pages and
contains reports on mountain expeditions, culture
of mountain peoples, as well as the flora, fauna
and geology of the mountains.
The corpus preparation presented interesting
challenges in automatic OCR correction, language
identification, and text structure recognition which
we have described in (Volk et al, 2010).
As of March 2010 we have scanned and OCR-
converted 142 books from 1864 to 1982, corre-
sponding to nearly 70,000 pages. This resulted in
a multilingual corpus of 6101 articles in German,
2659 in French, 155 in Italian, 13 in Romansch,
and 3 in Swiss-German. The parallel part of our
corpus currently contains 701 translated articles
amounting to 2.6 million tokens in French and 2.3
million tokens in German.
3 Parallel Treebanks
In recent years the combined research on tree-
banks and parallel corpora has led to parallel tree-
banks. We have built a parallel treebank (En-
glish, German, Swedish) which contains 1500 sen-
tences in three languages: 500 sentences each
from Jostein Gaarder?s novel ?Sophie?s World?,
from economy texts (e.g. business reports from
mechanical engineering company ABB and from
the bank SEB), and from a technical manual with
1See www.textberg.ch.
192
usage instructions for a DVD player (Go?hring,
2009).
We have annotated the English sentences
according to the well-established Penn Tree-
bank guidelines. For German we followed the
TIGER annotation guidelines, and we adapted
these guidelines also for Swedish (see (Volk
and Samuelsson, 2004)). For French treebank-
ing we are looking for inspiration from the Le
Monde treebank (Abeille? et al, 2003) and from
L?Arboratoire (Bick, 2010). The Le Monde tree-
bank is a constituent structure treebank partially
annotated with functional labels. L?Arboratoire is
based on constraint grammar analysis but can also
output constituent trees.
3.1 Our Tree Alignment Tool
After finishing the monolingual trees we aligned
them on the word level and phrase level. For
this purpose we have developed the TreeAligner
(Lundborg et al, 2007). This program comes with
a graphical user interface to insert or modify align-
ments between pairs of syntax trees.2
The TreeAligner displays tree pairs with the
trees in mirror orientation (one top-up and one top-
down). This has the advantage that the alignment
lines cross fewer parts of the lower tree. Figure 1
shows an example of a tree pair with alignment
lines. The lines denote translation equivalence.
Both trees are constituent structure trees, but the
edge labels contain function labels (like subject,
object, attribute) which can be used to easily con-
vert the trees to dependency structures (cf. (Marek
et al, 2009)).
Recently we have extended the TreeAligner?s
functionality from being solely an alignment tool
to also being a powerful search tool over parallel
treebanks (Volk et al, 2007; Marek et al, 2008).
This enables our annotators to improve the align-
ment quality by cross-checking previous align-
ments. This functionality makes the TreeAligner
also attractive to a wider user base (e.g. linguists,
translation scientists) who are interested in search-
ing rather than building parallel treebanks.
3.2 Similar Treebanking Projects
Parallel treebanks have evolved into an active re-
search field in the last decade. Cmejrek et al
2The TreeAligner has been implemented in Python by
Joakim Lundborg and Torsten Marek and is freely available
at http://kitt.cl.uzh.ch/kitt/treealigner.
(2003) have built a parallel treebank for the spe-
cific purpose of machine translation, the Czech-
English Penn Treebank with tecto-grammatical
dependency trees. Other parallel treebank projects
include Croco (Hansen-Schirra et al, 2006) which
is aimed at building a English-German tree-
bank for translation studies, LinES an English-
Swedish parallel treebank (Ahrenberg, 2007), and
the English-French HomeCentre treebank (Hearne
and Way, 2006), a hand-crafted parallel treebank
consisting of 810 sentence pairs from a Xerox
printer manual.
Some researchers have tried to exploit parallel
treebanks for example-based or statistical machine
translation (Tinsley et al, 2009). Since manually
created treebanks are too small for this purpose,
various researchers have worked on automatically
parsing and aligning parallel treebanks. Zhechev
(2009) and Tiedemann and Kotze? (2009) have
presented methods for automatic cross-language
phrase alignment.
There have been various attempts to enrich
treebanks with semantic information. For exam-
ple, the Propbank project has assigned semantic
roles to Penn treebank sentences (Kingsbury et al,
2002). Likewise the SALSA project has added
frame-semantic annotations on top of syntax trees
from the German TIGER treebank (Burchardt et
al., 2006). Frame-semantics was extended to par-
allel treebanks by (Pado?, 2007) and (Volk and
Samuelsson, 2007). To our knowledge a treebank
with grounded toponym information has not been
created yet.
4 Geo-Tagging
Named entity recognition is an important aspect of
information extraction. But it has also been recog-
nized as important for the access to heritage data.
In a previous project we have investigated meth-
ods for named entity recognition in newspaper
texts (Volk and Clematide, 2001). In that work
we had only distinguished two types of geograph-
ical names: city names and country names. This
was sufficient for texts that dealt mostly with facts
like a company being located in a certain coun-
try or having started business in a certain city.
In contrast to that, our alpine text corpus deals
with much more fine-grained location informa-
tion: mountains and valleys, glaciers and climb-
ing routes, cabins and hotels, rivers and lakes. In
fact the description of movements (e.g. in moun-
193
MonteNE RosaNEderART RundtourNN umAPPR denARTDasART klassischeADJA Endst?ckNN desART Schwarzberg-WeisstorsNEderART GletscherpassNNausAPZR istVAFINvonAPPR ZermattNN .$.
.PCT_SestV leD_def colN_C glaciaireA_qual deP Schwarzberg-WeisstorN_PLaD_def derni?reA_qual ?tapeN_C ?P partirV deP ZermattN_PduP tourN_C duP MontN_P RoseN_P
HDNPPNC PNCPN NK HDNP
NK HD AGNPHD HDNKPPNK HDNP
HD NKPP
NK HD MNRMNRNP
NK NK HD AGNP
HD SPSP S
HD
HD
HD
HDNP
PPMONP
SP
HD
PHD
HDNP
PP
MO
HD
HD
HD
PNC PNCNP
PPMONP
PPMO NPSP S
Figure 1: German-French tree pair with alignments in the TreeAligner.
tains) requires all kinds of intricate references to
positions and directions in three dimensions.
In order to recognize the geographical names in
our corpus we have acquired a large list of Swiss
toponyms.
4.1 The SwissTopo Name List
The Swiss Federal Office of Topography (www.
swisstopo.ch) maintains a database of all
names that appear on its topographical maps. We
have obtained a copy of this database which con-
tains 156,755 names in 61 categories. Categories
include settlements (10 categories ranging from
large cities to single houses), bodies of water (13
categories from major rivers to ponds and wells),
mountains (7 categories from mountain ranges to
small hills), valleys, mountain passes, streets and
man-made facilities (e.g. bridges and tunnels), and
single objects like hotels, mountain cabins, monu-
ments etc. Some objects are subclassified accord-
ing to size. For example, cities are subdivided into
main, large, middle and small cities according to
their number of inhabitants.
Every name is listed in the SwissTopo database
with its coordinates, its altitude (if applicable and
available), the administrative unit to which it be-
longs (usually the name of a nearby town), and the
canton.
4.2 A First Experiment: Finding Mountain
Names
We selected an article from the SAC yearbook
of 1900 to check the precision and recall of au-
tomatically identifying mountain names based on
the SwissTopo name list. The article is titled
?Bergfahrten im Clubgebiet (von Dr. A. Walker)?.
It is an article in German with a wealth of French
mountain names since the author reports about his
hikes in the French speaking part of Switzerland.
We took the article after OCR without any further
manual correction. After our tokenization (incl.
the splitting of punctuation symbols) it consisted
of 9380 tokens.
We used the SwissTopo mountain names classi-
fied as ?Massiv, HGipfel, GGipfel, and KGipfel?
i.e. the 4 highest mountain classes. They consist of
5588 mountain names. This leads to a recall of 54
mountain names (20 different mountain names) at
194
the expense of erroneously marking 6 nouns Gen-
darm, Haupt, Kamm, Stand, Stein, Turm as moun-
tain names.
How many mountain names have we missed
to identify? A manual inspection showed that
there are another 92 mountain names (35 differ-
ent mountain names) missing. So recall of the
naive exact matching is below 40% despite the
large gazetteer. We have reported on a number of
reasons for missed names in (Volk et al, 2010).
We found that spelling variations and partial co-
references account for the majority of recall prob-
lems. In addition we need to disambiguate be-
tween name-noun and name-name homographs.
This leaves the issue on how to represent the geo-
tagging information in our treebank.
5 Geonames in Treebanks
Named entity classification can be divided into
name recognition, disambiguation and grounding.
The first two steps are applicable to all kinds of
names. The final step of grounding the names is
different depending on the name types. A per-
son name may be grounded by refering to the per-
son?s Wikipedia page. The same could be done
for a geographical name. The obvious disadvan-
tage are changing URLs and missing Wikipedia
pages. The goal of grounding must be to link
the name to the most stable and most reliable
?ground?. Therefore toponyms are often linked to
their geographical coordinates. We have chosen to
link the toponyms from our alpine texts to unique
identifiers in the SwissTopo database. This works
well for Swiss names and particularly well for par-
allel French-German sentence pairs. The cross-
language alignment assures that the names are rec-
ognized in either language and the classification
information can then automatically be transfered
to the other language.
In our example in figure 1, the mountain name
?Monte Rosa? is listed in SwissTopo with its al-
titude (4633 m) and its location close to Zermatt.
Since ?Zermatt? itself occurs in the sentence, this
is strong evidence that we have identified the cor-
rect mountain, and we will attach its SwissTopo
identification number in our treebank. Technically
this means we add a reference to the gazetteer and
to the identifier within the gazetteer into the XML
representation of the linguistic object.
In our German example sentence ?Monte Rosa?
is annotated as a proper name (PN). This occur-
rence is phrase 502 in sentence 311 of our tree-
bank. The grounding id (g id) is taken from Swis-
sTopo which then allows us to access the geo-
graphical coordinates, the altitude and neighbor-
hood information.
<nt id="s311_502"
cat="PN"
g_source="SwissTopo"
g_id="7355873" >
Instead of integrating the grounding pointers di-
rectly in the XML file of the treebank, it is possible
to use stand-off annotation by connecting the iden-
tifier of the geo-name with the identifier from the
gazetteer in a separate file.
The alignments in our parallel treebank lead
to the advantage that the grounding information
needs to be saved only once. In our example, the
corresponding mountain name ?Mont Rose? in the
French translation is listed in SwissTopo only as a
building in the municipality of Genthod in the can-
ton Geneva. Since we have strong evidence from
the German sentence, we can rule out this option.
Zermatt itself occurs in both the French and
German sentences in our example. It is listed in
SwissTopo with its altitude (1616 m) and classi-
fied as mid-sized municipality (2000 to 10,000 in-
habitants). Zermatt is a unique name in SwissTopo
and therefore is grounded via its SwissTopo identi-
fier. Likewise we ground ?Schwarzberg Weisstor?
(spelled without hyphen in SwissTopo) which is
listed as foot pass in the municipality of Saas-
Almagell. In case of doubt we could verify
that Saas-Almagell and Zermatt are neighboring
towns, which indeed they are.
6 Conclusions
Grounding toponyms in parallel treebanks repre-
sents a new kind of semantic annotation. We have
sketched the issues in automatic toponym classi-
fication and disambiguation. We are working on
a French-German parallel treebank of alpine texts
which contain a multitude of toponyms that de-
scribe way-points on climbing or hiking routes but
also panorama views. We are interested in iden-
tifying all toponyms in order to enable treebank
access via geographical maps. In the future we
want to automatically compute and display climb-
ing routes from the textual descriptions. The an-
notated treebank will then serve as a gold standard
for the evaluation of the automatic geo-tagging.
195
References
Anne Abeille?, Lionel Cle?ment, and Francois Toussenel.
2003. Building a Treebank for French. In Anne
Abeille?, editor, Building and Using Parsed Corpora,
volume 20 of Text, Speech and Language Technol-
ogy, chapter 10, pages 165?187. Kluwer, Dordrecht.
Lars Ahrenberg. 2007. LinES: An English-Swedish
parallel treebank. In Proc. of Nodalida, Tartu.
Eckhard Bick. 2010. FrAG, a hybrid constraint gram-
mar parser for French. In Proceedings of LREC,
Malta.
A. Burchardt, K. Erk, A. Frank, A. Kowalski, S. Pado?,
and M. Pinkal. 2006. The SALSA corpus: A Ger-
man corpus resource for lexical semantics. In Pro-
ceedings of LREC 2006, pages 969?974, Genoa.
Martin Cmejrek, Jan Curin, and Jiri Havelka. 2003.
Treebanks in machine translation. In Proc. Of the
2nd Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theo-
ries, pages 209?212, Va?xjo?.
Anne Go?hring. 2009. Spanish expansion of a parallel
treebank. Lizentiatsarbeit, University of Zurich.
Silvia Hansen-Schirra, Stella Neumann, and Mihaela
Vela. 2006. Multi-dimensional annotation and
alignment in an English-German translation corpus.
In Proceedings of the EACL Workshop on Multidi-
mensional Markup in Natural Language Processing
(NLPXML-2006), pages 35? 42, Trento.
Mary Hearne and Andy Way. 2006. Disambiguation
strategies for data-oriented translation. In Proceed-
ings of the 11th Conference of the European Asso-
ciation for Machine Translation (EAMT), pages 59?
68, Oslo.
P. Kingsbury, M. Palmer, and M. Marcus. 2002.
Adding semantic annotation to the Penn TreeBank.
In Proceedings of the Human Language Technology
Conference (HLT?02), San Diego.
Joakim Lundborg, Torsten Marek, Mae?l Mettler, and
Martin Volk. 2007. Using the Stockholm
TreeAligner. In Proc. of The 6th Workshop on Tree-
banks and Linguistic Theories, Bergen, December.
Torsten Marek, Joakim Lundborg, and Martin Volk.
2008. Extending the TIGER query language with
universal quantification. In Proceeding of KON-
VENS, pages 3?14, Berlin.
Torsten Marek, Gerold Schneider, and Martin Volk.
2009. A framework for constituent-dependency
conversion. In Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on
Treebanks and Linguistic Theories, Milano, Decem-
ber.
Sebastian Pado?. 2007. Cross-Lingual Annotation
Projection Models for Role-Semantic Information.
Ph.D. thesis, Saarland University, Saarbru?cken.
Jo?rg Tiedemann and Gideon Kotze?. 2009. Building
a large machine-aligned parallel treebank. In Pro-
ceedings of the 8th International Workshop on Tree-
banks and Linguistic Theories, pages 197?208, Mi-
lano.
John Tinsley, Mary Hearne, and Andy Way. 2009.
Exploiting parallel treebanks to improve phrase-
based statistical machine translation. In Computa-
tional Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing.
Springer.
Martin Volk and Simon Clematide. 2001. Learn-
filter-apply-forget. Mixed approaches to named en-
tity recognition. In Ana M. Moreno and Reind P.
van de Riet, editors, Applications of Natural Lan-
guage for Information Systems. Proc. of 6th Inter-
national Workshop NLDB?01, volume P-3 of Lec-
ture Notes in Informatics (LNI) - Proceedings, pages
153?163, Madrid.
Martin Volk and Yvonne Samuelsson. 2004. Boot-
strapping parallel treebanks. In Proc. of Work-
shop on Linguistically Interpreted Corpora (LINC)
at COLING, Geneva.
Martin Volk and Yvonne Samuelsson. 2007. Frame-
semantic annotation on a parallel treebank. In Proc.
of Nodalida Workshop on Building Frame Semantics
Resources for Scandinavian and Baltic Languages,
Tartu.
Martin Volk, Joakim Lundborg, and Mae?l Mettler.
2007. A search tool for parallel treebanks. In Proc.
of Workshop on Linguistic Annotation at ACL, pages
85?92, Prague.
Martin Volk, Noah Bubenhofer, Adrian Althaus, Maya
Bangerter, Lenz Furrer, and Beni Ruef. 2010. Chal-
lenges in building a multilingual alpine heritage cor-
pus. In Proceedings of LREC, Malta.
Ventsislav Zhechev. 2009. Automatic Generation of
Parallel Treebanks. An Efficient Unsupervised Sys-
tem. Ph.D. thesis, School of Computing at Dublin
City University.
196
Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Hybrid Approaches to Translation, pages 13?18,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8, 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Machine Learning Disambiguation of Quechua Verb Morphology
Annette Rios
Institute of Computational Linguistics
University of Zurich
arios@ifi.uzh.ch
Anne Go?hring
Institute of Computational Linguistics
University of Zurich
goehring@cl.uzh.ch
Abstract
We have implemented a rule-based proto-
type of a Spanish-to-Cuzco Quechua MT
system enhanced through the addition of
statistical components. The greatest dif-
ficulty during the translation process is to
generate the correct Quechua verb form in
subordinated clauses. The prototype has
several rules that decide which verb form
should be used in a given context. How-
ever, matching the context in order to ap-
ply the correct rule depends crucially on
the parsing quality of the Spanish input.
As the form of the subordinated verb de-
pends heavily on the conjunction in the
subordinated Spanish clause and the se-
mantics of the main verb, we extracted
this information from two treebanks and
trained different classifiers on this data.
We tested the best classifier on a set of 4
texts, increasing the correct subordinated
verb forms from 80% to 89%.
1 Introduction
As part of our research project SQUOIA,1 we have
developed several tools and resources for Cuzco
Quechua. These include a treebank, currently con-
sisting of around 500 sentences2, and a rule-based
MT system Spanish-Cuzco Quechua. The tree-
bank is currently being enhanced with more anno-
tated text and should reach about 4000 sentences
upon project completion.
As for the translation system, we want to en-
hance the rule-based approach with statistical
methods to overcome certain limitations of the
prototype. The main reason to build the core
1http://tiny.uzh.ch/2Q
2available through the PML query interface (S?te?pa?nek and
Petr, 2010) at:
http://kitt.ifi.uzh.ch:8075/app/form
system with a rule-based architecture is the lack
of parallel texts in Spanish and Quechua; there
is not enough parallel material to train a statisti-
cal MT system of acceptable quality, as Mohler
and Mihalcea (2008) showed in their experiments.
They trained an SMT system Spanish-Quechua on
translations of the Bible, resulting in 2.89 BLEU
points. By increasing the size of their train-
ing corpus with web-crawled parallel texts and
additional Bible translations, they achieved 4.55
BLEU points.3 Although better, the overall qual-
ity of the SMT system is still very low.
There are at least two other projects that started
the implementation of MT systems for the same
language pair, but in the opposite direction; the
AVENUE project4 used elicited corpora to build
an MT system Quechua-Spanish. Furthermore,
the language pair Quechua-Spanish has recently
been added to the open-source MT platform Aper-
tium.5 The translation system is still at a very early
stage in its development; at present, the grammar
contains 30 transfer rules and a morphological an-
alyzer.
2 Hybrid MT Spanish-Cuzco Quechua
The core of our own Spanish-Quechua MT sys-
tem is a classical rule-based transfer engine, based
on a reimplementation of the Matxin6 framework
that was originally developed for the translation of
Spanish to Basque (Mayor et al, 2012). As not
all of the necessary disambiguation can be done
satisfactorily with rules alone, we plan to add sta-
tistical modules at different stages of the transfer
to resolve the remaining ambiguities. The mod-
ule for the disambiguation of subordinated verb
3both baseline and improved SMT systems evaluated on
parts of the Bible
4http://www.cs.cmu.edu/?avenue/
5http://wiki.apertium.org/wiki/
Quechua_cuzqueno_y_castellano
6http://matxin.sourceforge.net/
13
forms described in this paper is the first statistical
enhancement to the rule-based prototype.
3 Quechua verb forms
Subordinated clauses in Quechua are often non-
finite, nominal forms. There are several nomi-
nalizing suffixes that are used for different clause
types that will be illustrated in more detail in this
section.
3.1 Switch-Reference
A common type of subordination in Quechua
is the so-called switch-reference: the subordi-
nated, non-finite verb bears a suffix that indicates
whether its subject is the same as in the main
clause or not. If the subject in the subordinated
clause is different, the non-finite verb bears a pos-
sessive suffix that indicates the subject person.
Consider the following examples7
Same subject: Mikhuspa hamuni.
(1) Mikhu
eat
-spa
-SS
hamu
come
-ni.
-1.Sg
?When I finished eating, I?ll come.?
(lit. ?My eating, I come.?)
Different subject: Mikhuchkaptiy pasakura.
(2) Mikhu
eat
-chka
-Prog
-pti
-DS
-y
-1.Sg.Poss
pasa
leave
-ku
-Rflx
-ra
-Pst
-?.
-3.Sg
?While I was eating, he left.?
(lit. ?[During] my eating, he left.?)
(Dedenbach-Salazar Sa?enz et al, 2002, 168)
In the Spanish source language, subordinated
verbs are usually finite. An overt subject is not
necessary, as personal pronouns are used only for
emphasis (?pro-drop?). In order to generate the
correct verb form, we need to find the subject
of the subordinated verb and compare it to the
main verb. For this reason, we included a mod-
ule that performs co-reference resolution on sub-
jects. So far, the procedure is based on the sim-
ple assumption that an elided subject is coreferent
7Abbreviations used:
Acc: accusative Add: additive (?too,also?)
Ben: benefactive (?for?) Dir: directional
DirE: direct evidentiality DS: different subject
Gen: genitive Imp: imperative
Inch: inchoative Loc: locative
Neg: negation Obl: obligative
Perf: perfect Poss: possessive
Prog: progressive Pst: past
Rflx: reflexive Sg: singular
SS: same subject Top: topic
with the previous explicit subject, if this subject
agrees in number and person with the current verb.
Of course, there are some exceptions that have to
be considered, e.g. the subject of a verb in direct
speech is not a good antecedent.
3.2 Other Types of Subordination
Generally, the relation of the subordinated clause
to the main clause is expressed through different
conjunctions in Spanish. In Quechua, on the other
hand, a specific verb form in combination with a
case suffix indicates the type of subordination. For
example, Spanish para que - ?in order to? has to
be translated with a nominal verb form with the
suffix -na and the case suffix -paq (usually called
benefactive, ?for?):
(3) Ventanata kichay wayraq haykurimunanpaq.
Ventana
window
-ta
-Acc
kicha
open
-y
-2.Sg.Imp
wayra
wind
-q
-Gen
hayku
enter
-ri
-Inch
-mu
-Dir
-na
-Obl
-n
-3.Sg.Poss
-paq.
-Ben
?Open the window, so the air comes in.?
(lit. ?Open the window for his entering of the wind?)
(Cusihuama?n, 1976, 210)
Finite verb forms are also possible in subordi-
nated clauses; in this case, the relation of the sub-
ordinated and the main clause is indicated through
a ?linker?. A linker often consists of a demon-
strative pronoun combined with case suffixes or
so-called independent suffixes; these are special
suffixes that can be attached to any word class
and their position is usually at the end of the suf-
fix sequence. The functions of the independent
suffixes include data source, polar question mark-
ing and topic or contrast, amongst others (Adelaar
and Muysken, 2004, 209). In combination with
demonstrative pronouns, the independent suffixes
are used for linking clauses, similar to Spanish or
English conjunctions. For example, the combina-
tion of demonstrative chay - ?this? with the topic
marker -qa, chayqa, is used in the sense of ?if, in
case that?:
(4) Munanki chayqa, Arekipatapis rinki makinapi.
Muna
want
-nki
-2.Sg
chay
this
-qa,
-Top
Arekipa
Arequipa
-ta
-Acc
-pis
-Add
ri
go
-nki
-2.Sg
makina
machine
-pi.
-Loc
?If you like, you can also go to Arequipa by train
(machine).?
(Cusihuama?n, 1976, 264)
A special case is indirect speech in the Spanish
source text; the Quechua equivalence of indirect
14
speech is direct speech. The conversion from in-
direct to direct speech is not trivial, because coref-
erence resolution for the subject is required: if the
subject of the main verb is the same as in the indi-
rect speech clause, the verb has to be generated as
first person form in direct speech.8
Furthermore, the form of the subordinated verb
may also depend on the semantics of the main
verb, e.g. complement clauses of control verbs
usually require -na, whereas with other verbs, the
nominalizer -sqa is used:
(5) Ri
go
-na
-Obl
-yki
-2.Sg.Poss
-ta
-Acc
muna
want
-ni.
-1.Sg
?I want you to leave.?
(lit. ?I want your going.?)
(6) Ama
don?t
-n
-DirE
chay
this
yacha
know
-sqa
-Perf
-yki
-2.Sg.Poss
-ta
-Acc
qunqa
forget
-nki
-2.Sg
-chu.
-Neg
?Don?t forget what you learned.?
(lit. ?Don?t forget those your learnings.?)
(Cusihuama?n, 1976, 125)
For all of these cases, the rule-based prototype
has a set of rules to match the given context, so
that the correct form can be assigned to each verb.
3.3 Relative Clauses
A special case of subordination are relative
clauses; the verb in the relative clause is a nom-
inal form that is either agentive or non-agentive.
The form depends on the semantics of the nomi-
nal head and its semantic role within the relative
clause. The MT system includes a specific rule-
based module that uses semantic resources for the
disambiguation of relative clauses. As their form
does not depend on the main verb, relative clauses
will not be discussed further in this paper.
4 Rule-based Disambiguation of Verb
Forms
The disambiguation of subordinated verb forms
depends on the previously described steps: the dis-
ambiguation of Spanish relative clauses, corefer-
ence resolution of subjects, the recognition of the
given type of subordination through the Spanish
conjunction and the semantics of the main verb.
Such a rule-based approach is prone to error, since
8consider this English example:
?John said he wanted to go fishing.?
if John = he : ?I want to go fishing?, John said.
if John 6= he: ?He wants to go fishing?, John said.
correct incorrect
verb chunks to disambiguate: 219
disambiguated chunks: 186 175 11
85% 94% 6%
left ambiguous for ML: 33
Table 1: Evaluation of rule-based verb disambiguation
it depends crucially on correct parse trees and cor-
rectly tagged verbs and conjunctions. As a pre-
caution, we only use rule-based disambiguation in
cases that can be safely disambiguated, i.e. if we
find the main verb and the Spanish conjunction
in the parse tree where they are to be expected.
An evaluation on four texts from different gen-
res9 shows that the rule-based module can disam-
biguate 85% of the verb forms; of these, 94% are
correct (see Table 1 for details).
For subordinated clauses that cannot be disam-
biguated with rules (15% in the 4 texts used for
evaluation), we use the machine learning approach
described in the following section.
5 Disambiguation with Machine
Learning
5.1 Training Corpus
As the form of the subordinated verb depends
mainly on the semantics of the main verb and the
Spanish conjunction in the source text, we trained
and evaluated different classifiers based on these
features.
We extracted all verb pairs from our Quechua
treebank with their corresponding forms and, if
present, the linker. The Quechua roots in the tree-
bank contain one or more Spanish translations.
We used the Spanish lemmas to create the in-
stances for training, as we might not have access
to the Quechua translation of the Spanish verb dur-
ing the transfer. Furthermore, we use the stan-
dardized Southern Quechua orthography (Cerro?n-
Palomino, 1994) in our translation system; how-
ever, the text in the treebank is written in a slightly
9Texts:
? La catarata de la sirena - ?the waterfall of the siren?
(Andean story)
? first two chapters of ?The Little Prince?
? article from the Peruvian newspaper ?El Diario?
? Spanish Wikipedia article about Peru
15
different spelling. By using the Spanish version of
the verbs, we avoid mapping the Quechua verbs
obtained from the transfer to the orthography used
in the treebank. Since most Quechua roots in the
treebank contain more than one Spanish transla-
tion, we can create an instance for every combi-
nation of the Spanish translations. With this ap-
proach we extracted 444 instances from our tree-
bank.
Since this initial training set was too small to
yield satisfactory results,10 we added synthetic
training data created from the translation of the
Spanish AnCora treebank (Taule? et al, 2008) with
the prototype. As the dependencies in AnCora are
correctly annotated, the rules of the MT system
will assign the correct Quechua verb forms with
high precision. We used these verb forms as ad-
ditional instances for training the classifiers. The
total number of instances obtained from AnCora
amounts to 7366.
5.2 Setup
We used WEKA (Hall et al, 2009) and
SVMmulticlass (Joachims, 1999) to compute the
machine learning models for our disambiguation
task. We trained different classifiers on 7810 in-
stances extracted from a Quechua and a translated
Spanish treebank. The class variable form repre-
sents the form of the subordinated verb; there are
5 different classes:11
? perfect: nominal form with -sqa
? obligative: nominal form with -na
? agentive: nominal form with -q
? switch: nominal forms with -pti/spa
? finite
5.3 Evaluation
We tested the classifiers on the ambiguous forms
from the 4 texts that we used for the evaluation
of the rule-based approach (see Table 1). Addi-
tionally, we extracted verb pairs from Quechua
texts (with their Spanish translations) and as-
signed them the corresponding class number. With
this procedure, we collected 100 instances for
testing. We trained and tested different classi-
fiers: Na??ve Bayes, Nearest Neighbour (Martin,
1995) and a multiclass support vector machine
1036% accuracy achieved with Naive Bayes, on the same
test set used in the final evaluation (see Table 2).
11Every instance contains the lemma of the main verb, the
lemma of the subordinated verb, the linker and a number rep-
resenting one of the 5 classes.
(Joachims, 1999). Table 2 contains the best results
for each classifier. The three WEKA classifiers
were trained with default settings, whereas for
SVMmulticlass we obtained the best results with
=0.1 and c=0.02 (linear kernel).
In an ideal case of disambiguation during trans-
lation, we would have information about the
lemma of the main verb (?head?) and the Span-
ish conjunction (?linker?).12 In these ideal cases,
we use the rule-based module to assign the sub-
ordinated verb form. In real translation scenar-
ios, however, either the head or linker might be
missing; a common source for errors are polyse-
mous conjunctions, such as que - ?that? or como -
?as? , that the tagger erroneously labeled as rela-
tive pronoun or preposition, respectively. In this
case, the linker cannot be retrieved from the parse
tree and we have to guess the verb form based
only on the lemmas of the main and the subordi-
nated verb (?subV?). Furthermore, we might have
a clearly subordinated verb form with a linker that
the parser attached to the wrong head. Finding
the correct head automatically is not always possi-
ble, especially within coordinations. In this case,
we need to guess the verb form based only on the
lemma of the subordinated verb and the linker.
Na??ve Bayes achieves the highest scores, both
on cross validation and on the test set (see Table 2
for details). From the 33 ambiguous verb forms in
Table 1, only 22 were disambiguated with the clas-
sifiers, as the rest were either nouns erroneously
tagged as verbs or had the wrong lemma, and
therefore can be counted as false without further
processing. From the 22 correctly tagged ambigu-
ous verbs, Na??ve Bayes classified 20 instances cor-
rectly. The rules of the MT system disambiguated
80% of the verb forms in the 4 evaluation texts
correctly. Feeding the remaining ambiguous verbs
to the classifier; we achieve an overall accuracy of
89% (see the results in Table 3).
The complete translation pipeline including the
Naive Bayes classifier is illustrated in Fig. 1.
6 Concluding remarks
We enhanced a purely rule-based machine trans-
lation system for the language pair Spanish-
Quechua with a classifier that predicts the form
of subordinated verbs in the target language
Quechua, based on information collected from the
12The Spanish lemma of the subordinated verb is always
known, since this is the verb we want to disambiguate.
16
SVM LibSVM NBayes NNge
=0.1,c=0.02 default: radial
cross-validation, 10x
head,subV - 43% 58% 48%
subV,linker - 59% 67% 60%
head,subV,linker - 47% 81% 75%
test set, 100 instances
head,subV 31% 38% 57% 47%
subV,linker 41% 61% 75% 68%
head,subV,linker 46% 45% 84% 72%
Table 2: Evaluation of Classifiers
Analysis of Source Text:
PoS Tagging
Dependency Parsing
Disambiguation of
Relative Clauses
(rule-based)
Coreference Resolution
on Subjects
(rule-based)
Verb Disambiguation
(rule-based)
[main verb and linker found]
Verb Disambiguation
(Naive Bayes classifier)
[main verb or linker not found]
Lexical Transfer
Syntactic Transfer
Syntactic Generation
Morphological Generation
(finite state)
Figure 1: Translation Pipeline
17
correct incorrect
rule based: 186 175 11
80% 5%
not disambiguated*: 11 11
ML : 22 20 2
total ?verb? chunks: 219 195 24
89% 11%
Table 3: Evaluation of Hybrid Verb Disambiguation
*11 of the ambiguous ?verbs? are nouns that were erroneously tagged as verbs,
had the wrong lemma or were relative clauses. We did not run those through
disambiguation with ML.
Spanish input text. The MT system has rules to
match the context of the subordinated verb and
assign a verb form for generation. Due to pars-
ing and tagging errors, the information needed for
rule-based disambiguation cannot always be re-
trieved. In order to disambiguate these forms, we
use a classifier that predicts the verb form even if
all of the context information is not accessible. We
tested three different machine learning algorithms,
out of which Na??ve Bayes achieved the best re-
sults. In an evaluation on 4 texts from different
genres, verb disambiguation was improved from
80% (purely rule-based) to 89%, with a combina-
tion of the rule-based module and the Na??ve Bayes
classifier.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Rico Sennrich for
his helpful advise and David Harfield for proof-
reading the first version of this paper. This re-
search is funded by the Swiss National Science
Foundation under grant 100015 132219/1.
References
Willem F. H. Adelaar and Pieter Muysken. 2004. The
Languages of the Andes. Cambridge Language Sur-
veys. Cambridge University Press.
Rodolfo Cerro?n-Palomino. 1994. Quechua
suren?o, diccionario unificado quechua-castellano,
castellano-quechua. Biblioteca Nacional del Peru?,
Lima.
Antonio G. Cusihuama?n. 1976. Grama?tica Quechua:
Cuzco-Collao. Grama?ticas referenciales de la
lengua quechua. Ministerio de Educacio?n, Lima.
Sabine Dedenbach-Salazar Sa?enz, Utta von Gleich,
Roswith Hartmann, Peter Masson, and Clodoaldo
Soto Ruiz. 2002. Rimaykullayki - Unterrichtsmate-
rialien zum Quechua Ayacuchano. Dietrich Reimer
Verlag GmbH, Berlin, 4. edition.
Mark Hall, Eibe Frank, Geoffrey Holmes, Bernhard
Pfahringer, Peter Reutemann, and Ian H. Witten.
2009. The WEKA data mining software: an update.
SIGKDD Explorations, 11(1):10?18.
Thorsten Joachims. 1999. Making Large-Scale SVM
Learning Practical. In Bernhard Scho?lkopf, Christo-
pher John C. Burges, and Alexander J. Smola, edi-
tors, Advances in Kernel Methods - Support Vector
Learning, pages 169?184, Cambridge, MA, USA.
MIT Press.
Brent Martin. 1995. Instance-Based learning: Near-
est Neighbor With Generalization. Master?s thesis,
University of Waikato, Hamilton, New Zealand.
Aingeru Mayor, In?aki Alegria, Arantza D??az de Ilar-
raza, Gorka Labaka, Mikel Lersundi, and Kepa Sara-
sola. 2012. Matxin, an open-source rule-based
machine translation system for Basque. Machine
Translation, (25):53?82.
Michael Mohler and Rada Mihalcea. 2008. Baby-
lon Parallel Text Builder: Gathering Parallel Texts
for Low-Density Languages. In Nicoletta Cal-
zolari, Khalid Choukri, Bente Maegaard, Joseph
Mariani, Jan Odijk, Stelios Piperidis, and Daniel
Tapias, editors, Proceedings of the Sixth Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC?08), Marrakech, Marroco.
Mariona Taule?, M. Anto`nia Mart??, and Marta Re-
casens. 2008. AnCora: Multilevel Annotated Cor-
pora for Catalan and Spanish. In Nicoletta Calzo-
lari, Khalid Choukri, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mar-
iani, Jan Odijk, Stelios Piperidis, and Daniel Tapias,
editors, Proceedings of the Sixth International Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC?08), Mar-
rakech, Marroco.
Jan S?te?pa?nek and Pajas Petr. 2010. Querying Diverse
Treebanks in a Uniform Way. In Nicoletta Calzo-
lari, Khalid Choukri, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mari-
ani, Jan Odijk, Stelios Piperidis, Mike Rosner, and
Daniel Tapias, editors, Proceedings of the 7th In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2010), Valletta, Malta.
18
