Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Computational Linguistics (Coling 2008), pages 289?296
Manchester, August 2008
An Algorithm for Adverbial Aspect Shift
Sabine Gr?under
Department of Computer Science, University of Leipzig
Johannisgasse 26, 04103 Leipzig, Germany
gruender@uni-leipzig.de
Abstract
The paper offers a new type of approach
to the semantic phenomenon of adverbial
aspect shift within the framework of finite-
state temporal semantics. The heart of the
proposal is a supervaluational concept of
underspecification, and the idea of treat-
ing the meanings of temporal prepositions
as dynamic presuppositions. The simple
shifting algorithm used in the present ap-
proach derives the correct set of possible
readings on the basis of lexical semantic
input only, and, furthermore, may claim
cognitive plausibility.
1 Introduction
The referents of temporally determined sentences
are usually talked of as situations. The traditional
ontological classification schema (Vendler, 1957)
divides up the respective situational types into at
least four abstract subclasses: states, activities, ac-
complishments and achievements. This aspectual
taxonomy takes into account the internal temporal
structure of the situations, and is based on a small
number of features, such as: telic, dynamic, dura-
tive.
Situations are referred to by verbal phrases. Dif-
ferences in truth conditions, presuppositions and
entailments of the respective sentences, as well as
effects on temporal sequencing in discourse are
plausibly built on the aforementioned structural
differences. That the assumed ontological aspec-
tual classification is reflected on linguistic level is
(at least partly) borne out by a number of language
c
? 2008. Licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported li-
cense (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/).
Some rights reserved.
internal testing procedures, such as grammaticality
effects in connection with imperative, progressive,
pseudo cleft and adverbial constructions.
The aspectual character of a verbal phrase is not
solely fixed on the basis of verbal lexical informa-
tion but can change during the process of semantic
composition under the influence of nominal argu-
ments and prepositional phrases, tense and aspec-
tual markers, aspectual auxiliaries, or temporal ad-
verbials. Accordingly, the aim of a theory of as-
pect is to determine the aspectual characteristics
of complex verbal phrases on the basis of semantic
information associated with certain of its parts.
In the last thirty years, considerable progress
has been made in formally describing the aspec-
tual contribution of nominal and prepositional ar-
guments. However as far as the aspectual behav-
ior of temporal adverbials is concerned, some puz-
zling sets of data still await proper explanation and
appropriate formalization. The observation that
problems arise right at that point gets particularly
worrying given that the very same types of ex-
amples are standardly used as linguistic test cases
to differentiate telic from atelic verbal phrases.
Therefore, if we could find significant problems
with the theory just here, the whole idea of a lan-
guage internal criterion for the division of verbal
expressions according to the aspectual situational
schema would suddenly become vague and un-
grounded.
The troublesome examples under discussion test
for compatibility of a verbal phrase with ?for? and
?in?-adverbials. According to observational facts
- so the traditional story goes - atelic states and
activities admit modification by a ?for?-adverbial,
but give rise to ungrammaticality when combined
with an ?in?-adverbial. For telic achievements
and accomplishments things are precisely the other
289
way around. The data under (1) and (2) shortly re-
peat this well-known pattern.
(1) be quiet for an hour / *in an hour
swim for an hour / *in an hour
(2) arrive *for an hour / in an hour
build a tower *for an hour / in an hour
However, after closer inspection, these claimed
test cases do not seem to be as simple and clear cut
as one would like, given their fundamental theoret-
ical status. The marked phrases, far from being un-
grammatical, quite naturally display several kinds
of meanings. The focus of the ?in?-temporal ad-
verbial under (1) can be read as being shifted from
the situation itself towards its pre-phase, which is
to lead up to the swimming process or to the state
of being quiet only an hour later than the present.
In cases where an implicit boundary for the activ-
ity is given by context (e. g., a triathlon competi-
tion) the process itself can be also modified by the
adverbial. For the telic examples in (2), an itera-
tive interpretation appears to be available, with the
?for?-adverbial giving the duration of the whole
complex situation rather than just of one of the in-
cluded basic events. Another interpretational pos-
sibility here is to let the adverbial fix the duration
of the preparatory phase, i. e., when the change is
under development, which precedes the culmina-
tion of the situation. Finally, the ?for?-adverbial is
also able to modify the result state following the
culmination of the event.
These phenomena in connection with the appli-
cation of temporal adverbials to situations that are
- under the perspective of traditional aspectual the-
ory - not suitable for them have proven to be noto-
riously difficult to treat in every kind of available
framework. At the same time, the observed cases
do not have the status of real exceptions, but ap-
pear cross-linguistical and spread over the whole
verbal lexicon. Therefore, no theory of aspect can
be seen as fully adequate as long as it is not able to
account for this flexibility in adverbial semantics.
The aim of this paper is to work out a semantic
analysis of the cases in question which allows to
derive the correct set of possible readings in a sim-
ple and fully compositional manner. Additionally,
the proposal will aim at explaining the underlying
semantic mechanism in terms of a more general
cognitive principle.
2 The State of the Art
Before turning to my own proposal for an analy-
sis of aspectual meaning shifts in connection with
the interpretation of temporal adverbial modifiers,
let me briefly discuss the idea figuring prominently
in virtually all recent approaches, e. g., (Pulman,
1997), (deSwart, 1998). I am going to argue
that by following this general line of thought too
strictly, linguistic research so far failed to answer
the question about the source of the semantic flex-
ibility of temporal adverbials (compare (Gruender,
2008)). The claim to be made in this section is
that the problems one can point out come about in-
evitably and for principle reasons. And that they
should be seen as the result of an attempt to take a
good metaphor too literally.
Moens and Steedman (1988) conceived tempo-
ral adverbials as ?functions which ?coerce? their
inputs to the appropriate type, by a loose [sic!]
analogy with type-coercion in programming lan-
guages?. Under this perspective, aspectual shift is
triggered by a conflict between the aspectual type
of the situation to be modified and the aspectual
constraint set by the temporal preposition head-
ing the modifier.
1
Coercion operators, then, are
thought to adapt the verbal input on the level of
model-theoretical interpretation by mapping one
sort of situation onto another. The underlying
model is commonly supposed to include situations
as first-order objects of the four basic types pre-
viously mentioned, i. e., states, activities, accom-
plishments and achievements.
A first problem is immediately evident with this
approach. Since the temporal prepositions con-
strain the aspectual type of the situation only as far
as telicity is concerned, the relation established by
coercion cannot be functional. With there being
no types telic and atelic but just two more spec-
ified primitive types for each case, which are ful-
filling the respective aspectual requirement equally
well, application of coercion inevitably leaves one
with several possible outputs. Since, on the other
hand, in examples of real type-coercion, as applied
in programming languages, the introduced relation
is always functional, a first clear, formal difference
1
Accordingly, the approach is not going to treat examples
(i. e. ?hiccup all day?) where aspectual shifts appear to fol-
low solely from conceptual background knowledge concern-
ing default durations of certain sorts of events, rather than be-
ing triggered by a formal semantic conflict in aspectual type
requirements. Likewise, I will disregard the possibility of
generic interpretations.
290
between the operations in the two domains has to
be noted. A simple mapping between two primi-
tive situations cannot be what is formally going on
in cases of meaning shifts triggered by temporal
adverbials, as the relevant formal criterion is too
general as to effectively constrain the output type.
This problem becomes even more serious when
we take into account the variety of aspectual shifts
that actually occur according to the previously
given examples. There it becomes clear that even if
confined to one of the assumed primitive ontolog-
ical sorts, the output value of the operation would
still remain underspecified. So, for instance, after
applying a ?for?-adverbial to an accomplishment,
the iterative and the result state interpretation count
as stative alike. According to the type-coercion
paradigm, however, in order to remedy ungram-
maticality just one such type-adapted output value
would have been sufficient. The fact of there being
this exact number and kinds of readings therefore
becomes a miracle, which the theory is unable to
explain and formally account for.
On the one hand, when the telicity/atelicity con-
straint is associated with the temporal adverbial
in the known way, it generally seems to be too
loose with respect to the observed transitions, at
the same time it appears to be too restrictive. In
the boundary reading, the adverbial is successfully
applied to a situational concept carrying the wrong
telicity feature without any visible aspectual shifts
occuring. At this point the type-coercion paradigm
obviously is as close as it could be to being led into
contradiction.
How do these very general problems present
themselves within the known theoretical ap-
proaches? In the course of semantic composition
coercion operations get introduced as some kind
of metavariables. These variables are instantiated
by a variety of concrete operations which relate
the input situation to an output situation in all the
ways possible. The answer to the decisive question
of which functions actually are the ones possible
here, however, is just read off the data. From the-
ory alone nothing beyond the telicity/atelicity re-
quirement for the output value would follow, and
even this prediction is not strictly borne out, as was
argued in the previous paragraph. Therefore, the
solution has just been given by empirical obser-
vation rather than derived through any theoretical
systematization. Here, semantic formalization has
become a mere record of the data without further
explanatory power.
Furthermore, by having set theoretical focus on
the ontological level when implementing aspectual
shifts, linguistic research has taken up a perspec-
tive entirely extrinsic to language and the adaptive
powers of meanings themselves. In result of fol-
lowing the type-coercion metaphor, language com-
prehension is seen as proceeding via an implicit se-
ries of program clashes, only to be repaired by sim-
ply not obeying to compositional rules for combin-
ing lexical semantic information any longer. How-
ever, according to a linguistically inspired, repre-
sentational view, the manipulations at work in case
of aspectual shifting would take place within the
realm of Fregean sense, rather than that of refer-
ence. The denotation of a situational expression
so would constantly get re-computed, as semantic
composition proceeds, via the systematic modifi-
cation of its meaning. By not only involving on-
tological type information but also semantic infor-
mation proper, such transition process should ef-
fectively determine the denotation of the respective
output situational concept in the end, and therefore
deliver the theoretical derivation of the aspectual
shifting operations that we are after.
Summarizing the result of this section, I claim
that the analogy between aspect shift as trig-
gered by temporal adverbials and type-coercion as
known in the programming language domain is not
as close as generally assumed, and surely does not
recommend itself for direct implementation. Ap-
plying the formal mechanism used in the latter case
too strictly to the former, inevitably leads to the in-
terrelated problems mentioned, and seems by now
to obstruct a deeper understanding of what is ac-
tually going on when senses change and adapt of
their own accord.
3 The Framework
In this section, I will shortly introduce a decom-
positional approach to event semantics within the
framework of finite-state temporal semantics de-
veloped by Fernando (2003), (2004). The deci-
sion to apply this kind of formalism in the present
context was motivated by the intuition that what
was needed to appropriately handle aspectual se-
mantic phenomena was the concept of a situation
as a complex but logically coherent, dynamic unit.
That means, if aspectual features are defined with
respect to some internal, temporal structure of a
situation, and if aspectual transitions proceed via
291
shifting focus of an adverbial along the time line
from one part of that structure to another, this very
structure must be represented by the formalism,
and has to be made easily accessible by the for-
mal operations. Obviously, the traditional David-
sonean event semantics, where events are seen as
indivisible atoms, and modifiers as just indiffer-
ently predicating over such atoms, is not a conve-
nient formal tool in this respect.
In Fernando?s approach a situational concept, is
characterized as a regular language, accepted by a
finite-state automata, that may amount to a finite
Kripke model with partial valuations. Each string
of such language is viewed as a temporal sequence
of observations or a comic stripe. The symbols in
the alphabet of the language are the still-pictures
or snapshots to be strung together in chronologi-
cal order. Given a finite set ? of formulas, or flu-
ents, a symbol consists of a consistent subset of
?, which non-exhaustively enumerates what holds
true at some single point in time. Therefore, a sit-
uation is represented not just as an atom, but all its
internal states are taken into account as well.
A suitable compositional device for stepwise
construction of complex situational concepts is
available in form of a regular operation superposi-
tion (&) over two languages (L and L
?
). Superposi-
tion performs componentwise alignment of strings
of equal length and is realized model-theoretically
as conjunction.
L & L
?
=
?
k?1
{(?
1
? ?
?
1
) ... (?
k
? ?
?
k
)
| ?
1
...?
k
? L, ?
?
1
... ?
?
k
? L
?
}
A simple example (by Fernando), deriving the
representation for the phrase ?rain from dawn
to dusk?, should make clear the general idea (
stands for ?-as-a-symbol, boxes replacing braces).
rain
+
& dawn
+
&
+
dusk =
rain,
dawn
rain
?
rain,
dusk
Negation of symbols is defined in De Morgan
style by:
? = ?; ? ?
1
,...,?
n
= ??
1
+ ... + ??
n
(writing + for non-deterministic choice).
Fernando?s central idea for a definition of aspec-
tual features is to formally base it on the symbols ?
and ? that start and finish a given language, respec-
tively. This serves to enable a nice formal encoding
of the idea of a situational type being initially or fi-
nally bounded or unbounded. If the condition ? is
immediately switched after the first stage an initial
boundary is marked; if ? is preserved the concept
is initially unbounded. In the same way ? can be
used to mark a final boundary. Aspectual features
then just enumerate all the possibilities for a corre-
sponding concept to be bounded or unbounded in
that sense.
telic (L) = ??(L)
+
iter (L) = ?(L)
+
prog (L) = ??(L)
+
reten (L) = ?(L)
+
Notably, on this perspective, the four classical
aspectual classes are derivable as the set of
logically possible cross-combinations of the four
aspectual features as defined above. The corre-
sponding properties of being initially or finally
bounded, are marked by using a short binary code,
with the first digit referring to the beginning, the
second to the ending, and 1 and 0 indicating the
presence or absence of a boundary, respectively. If
we let a and o refer to the two boundary marking
propositions inside the symbols ? and ? we get
the abstract characterizations on the very right.
state: reten, iter (0 0) a, o
+
activity: prog, iter (1 0) a, ?o ?a, o
+
achievem.: reten, telic (0 1) a, ?o
+
?a, o
accompl.: prog, telic (1 1) a, ?o ?a, ?o
+
?a, o
The following translations, which give formal-
izations within the framework of two of the initial
examples, ?swim? and ?build a tower?, may serve
as a concrete illustration.
2
(3) ??x 6= ? (swim(x)) ?x 6= ? (swim(x))
+
(4) ??x ? t (build(x)) ?x ? t (build(x)), ?build(t)
+
build(t)
4 The Proposal
Within the formalism introduced so far, the com-
monly assumed constraint on the interpretability
of temporal adverbials reads as follows (where V
represents a verbal phrase, and I an expression
denoting a temporal interval):
?(V in I) = {?(V) & ?(I) if ?(V) is telic; ? otherwise}
?(V for I) = {?(V) & ?(I) if ?(V) is iter; else ? otherwise}.
2
For the sake of abbreviation, here and in all that follows
obvious entailment relations are taken into account. So, for
instance, ?a is suppressed in presence of o here.
292
The aim of this section is to improve on that by giv-
ing room, within the semantic framework itself, for
those kinds of adapted interpretations that actually
occur, as shown by the initial examples. The ap-
proach will set the representational view (section
2) at work here, as it makes use of the possibility
to introduce the concept of underspecification.
The logical heart of the proposal to be made
is Supervaluation Theory, developed by van
Fraassen (1969) as a formal tool for handling pre-
supposition failure. The more general theoretical
aim of van Fraassen was to account for the ?third
possibility? beside the classical valuations Truth
and False in a way that preserves as much as pos-
sible from the classical framework. So, notably,
while the supervaluationist denies the metalogical
Principle of Bivalence, he still accepts the logical
Law of Excluded Middle together with all other
classical tautologies. This decisive difference to
the several three-valued logical systems known is
due to the idea of using truth-value gaps rather
than a proper third value. Ordinary partial valua-
tions are extended to supervaluations by consider-
ing the possible completions of a given model, that
is the set of classical valuations such that all miss-
ing values get filled up in one way or the other.
Take metavariable M to stand for partial models,
M
?
to range over all possible completions of M,
and M* to be the supermodel of M, comprising M
together with all its M
?
.
A supervaluation based on M is a func-
tion that assigns Truth with respect to
M* to a proposition ? just in case ? is
classically true in all M
?
, False just in
case it is false in all M
?
, and # (gap) oth-
erwise.
That means, if a proposition ? has received super-
value # there are underlying, more precise models
such that ? is true in some of them and false in
others.
With this additional technical equipment avail-
able, let me now turn back to the problem of giv-
ing an appropriately flexible, but non-ambiguous
formal characterization of the semantic contribu-
tion of temporal adverbials. The main task obvi-
ously consists in offering a proper semantics for
the prepositions ?in? and ?for? that accords with
the overall aspectual semantic formalism rather
than just stipulating ungrammaticality. In order to
keep the idea of a language internal criterion for
the aspectual characteristics of a situation intact
while allowing for the observed interpretational
flexibility, those semantic characterizations should
effectively constrain the basic applications of the
adverbials in the way commonly assumed, but at
the same time allowing and triggering composi-
tional adaptions of sense via meaning shifts. The
algorithm I am going to introduce is proceeding in
three steps, illustrated here firstly by means of a
telic example, and afterwards an atelic one. The
general lead-in will be the idea of formally treat-
ing aspectually sensitive temporal prepositions as
some kind of dynamic, structural presuppositions.
As the starting point, I assume the representa-
tions of the meanings of the two temporal prepo-
sitions ?in? and ?for? under (5) and (6). These
formalizations take into account the known pref-
erences with respect to the aspectual type of the
situational concept to be modified by encoding the
properties telic and iter according to the formal
definitions given in the previous section.
(5) ?(in) = ?o
+
(6) ?(for) = o
+
In the first, preparatory step of composition, the
prepositions get combined via superposition with
the nominal phrase ?an hour?, as done below.
(7) ?(for an hour) = o
+
& time(m)
+
time(n), hour(m,n)
= time(m) o
+
o, time(n), hour(m,n)
(8) ?(in an hour) = ?o
+
& time(m)
+
time(n), hour(m,n)
= ?o, time(m) ?o
+
time(n), hour(m,n)
Now, the adverbials are ready for modifying
the situational concepts, whose abstract aspectual
characterizations are given once more in (9) and
(10).
3
The explanation will proceed with respect
to the telic example first.
(9) ?(V
iter
) = a, ?o ?a, o
+
(10) ?(V
tel
) = a, ?o ?a, ?o
+
?a, o
In its first, obligatory phase, the algorithm com-
bines the representation of the temporal adverbial
with the abstract characterization of the situational
concept by means of superposition. If the aspec-
tual type of the situational concept agrees with
the structural condition set by the preposition, the
3
Here, an activity is chosen as the atelic example, an ac-
complishment as the telic one. For states and achievements,
though, the respective procedures would work out in exact
parallel.
293
incorporation of prepositional meaning does not
have any visible effect. The semantic material just
combines normally via superposition, as can be
seen in (11), and the algorithm finishes here.
(11) ?(V
tel
in an hour) =
a, ?o, time(m) ?a, ?o
+
?a, o, time(n), hour(m,n)
However, in case of an aspectual clash between
preposition and event description, combining the
concepts leads to a contradiction at some predeter-
mined position inside the complex situational type,
as happens in (12). This formal accident can be
traced back to the preposition and the situational
type contributing different claims with respect to
the truth-value of the proposition o, encoding the
telicity feature.
(12) ?(V
tel
*for an hour) =
a, ?o, time(m) ?a, ?o, o
+
?a, o, time(n), hour(m,n)
As these are the cases where interesting aspec-
tual shifts turn up, the real action starts here. In
its second phase, the algorithm applies a repairing
mechanism by assigning a truth-value gap (#) to the
proposition that previously had received contradic-
tory valuations. The rationale behind this may be
thought of as not passing judgement in the face of
equally probable but opposing evidences.
(13) ?(V
tel #
for an hour) =
a, ?o, time(m) ?a, #o
+
?a, o, time(n), hour(m,n)
The general formal rule applied here is right the
one standardly assumed for other cases of presup-
position failure. That means, the meaning of a tem-
poral preposition is thought of as some kind of dy-
namic, structural presupposition with respect to the
development of the truth value of a certain proposi-
tion. Its semantic contribution is empty in case the
verbal concept it combines with shows the right in-
ternal structure, but it causes the introduction of a
truth-value gap at a particular position inside the
situational string whenever its structural constraint
is not satisfied. In the latter case, the result of this
semantic operation is a situational concept which
is underspecified with respect to the aspectual fea-
ture telic (#telic).
As stated above, lacking a truth-value in the
sense of supervaluationism, consists in the capac-
ity in principle to make precise in more than one
way. That means, for the proposition o having
been marked # in a supermodel M*, there are un-
derlying models in M
?
such that o is true in one
of them but false in the other. This determina-
tion of previously underspecified information in all
possible directions, by grounding the freshly in-
troduced supervalue # in the underlying classical
models, is just what the algorithm is supposed to
do in its third, last step. Intuitively, instead of loos-
ing any information previously received, the ideal
language user is developing different hypothetical
interpretations separately. This might be taken as a
strategy to save monotonicity of the interpretation
process by allowing reciprocal adaptions between
preposition and situation. The two obvious out-
puts with respect to the telic example are spelled
out below.
(14) ?
1
(V
tel
for an hour) =
a, ?o, time(m) ?a, o
+
?a, o, time(n), hour(m,n)
(15) ?
2
(V
tel
for an hour) =
a, ?o, time(m) ?a, ?o
+
?a, o, time(n), hour(m,n)
This reintroduction of truth-values after a
forced gap gives rise to a specific set of new
regular languages. What situational concepts do
those rebuilt structures encode? In (14) the result
state description appears to have spread over the
entire internal part of the expression. Under this
perspective the preparatory phase got abstracted
away, and the event culminates immediately after
start. In consequence, the adverbial now gets
interpreted as indicating the duration of the result
state of the situation. Obviously, this is one of
the readings we had found in connection with
the modification of telic situational concepts by
?for?-adverbials at the very beginning. Under (16)
this point gets further illustrated with the help of
the familiar example (?build a tower for an hour?).
(16)
??x ? t (build(x)),
time(m)
?x ? t (build(x)),
build(t)
+
build(t),
time(n), hour(m,n)
In contrast, the second way to make precise
the aspectually underspecified concept in (13)
leads up to the description under (15). Here, the
preparatory phase is making up the whole inner
part of the regular expression. Consequently, ap-
plying the temporal adverbial gives the description
of an event that takes an hour to culminate. What
we have here clearly amounts to the preparatory
phase reading of the ?for ?-adverbial. Again, (17)
offers concrete illustration.
(17)
??x ? t (build(x)),
time(m)
?x ? t (build(x)),
?build(t)
+
build(t),
time(n), hour(m,n)
294
Notice that the formal mechanism does in prin-
cipal not serve to get rid of the factivity entailment
for the result state here. While this seems plausi-
ble for examples like ?grow old for many years?, it
is certainly not so for ?read a book for a few min-
utes?. I take this ambivalence as indicating that
this question is not a matter of aspectual logical
form, causing ?hard? semantic inferences, but that
it depends on background knowledge concerning
default durations of certain kinds of events. With
respect to the above example, this would mean that
in order to eventually strip off the result state, a
second, pragmatic principle would have to get ap-
plied to the intermediate, semantic output gained
here.
So far so good. But what about the iterative
reading we found as the third possibility when
looking at this kind of example at the very begin-
ning? To get this interpretation derived, let us take
one out of the several different-sized strings en-
coded by the regular expression in (13), which, for
instance, may look like this.
(18) ?
?
(V
tel #
for an hour) =
a, ?o,
time(m)
?a, #o ?a, #o ?a, #o ?a, #o
?a, o,
time(n), hour(m,n)
Now, obviously, different classical valuations
can be chosen for different states, leading, for in-
stance, to the pattern under (19).
(19) ?
3
(V
tel #
for an hour) =
a, ?o,
time(m)
?a, o ?a, ?o ?a, o ?a, ?o
?a, o,
time(n), hour(m,n)
That means, preparatory phases freely alternate
with result states, thereby forming a situational de-
scription which can only be interpreted as referring
to a situation comprising several iterations of the
original event. This complex situation as a whole
becomes the attaching point of the temporal infor-
mation carried by the adverbial. Under (20) this
move is spelled out with respect to the concrete
example.
(20)
??x? t (build(x)),
time(m)
build(t)
?x ? t (build(x)),
?build(t)
build(t) ...
?x ? t (build(x)),
?build(t)
build(t),
time(n), hour(m,n)
After having derived all possible interpretations
of a ?for?-adverbial when applied to a telic con-
cept, the task of accounting for adapted readings
of an ?in?-adverbial modifying an atelic situational
description is still at stake. A preparatory phase
and a boundary reading is what we would wish
the semantic mechanism to deliver here. The fol-
lowing formulas are the result of trying out the
three steps of the shifting algorithm - superposi-
tion, reparation, determination - for the atelic case.
(21) ?(V
iter
*in an hour) =
a, ?o, time(m) ?a, o, ?o
+
?a, o, time(n), hour(m,n)
As before, in order to escape contradiction the
algorithm proceeds by underspecifying the critical
telicity structural information. The side effect of
the truth-value gap spreading over from o to a in
the atelic example in (22) is due to the fact of the
both proposition generally being negation variants
of each other here (compare (3)).
(22) ?(V
iter #
in an hour) =
a, ?o, time(m) #a, #o
+
?a, o, time(n), hour(m,n)
Then, fulfilling the third, determination step
with respect to the above underspecified concept,
leads to the following two regular languages.
(23) ?
1
(V
iter
in an hour) =
a, ?o, time(m) a, ?o
+
?a, o, time(n), hour(m,n)
(24) ?
2
(V
iter
in an hour) =
a, ?o, time(m) ?a, o
+
?a, o, time(n), hour(m,n)
In (23) the start of the phase of activity is post-
poned to the very last symbol. On that basis, the
temporal adverbial gets interpreted as specifying
the duration of the respective pre-phase. In (24),
on the other hand, the activity phase of the situ-
ation got spread over the entire real suffix of the
regular expression. Therefore, the adverbial adds
information concerning the temporal boundaries
of the whole situation. So, both known interpre-
tational possibilities can be accounted for by the
proposed formalism.
4
Again, the concrete exam-
ple (?swim in an hour?) may ease understanding.
(25)
??x 6= ? (swim(x)),
time(m)
??x 6= ? (swim(x))
+
?x 6= ? (swim(x)),
time(n), hour(m,n)
(26)
??x 6= ? (swim(x)),
time(m)
?x 6= ? (swim(x))
+
?x 6= ? (swim(x)),
time(n), hour(m,n)
The aim of the semantic interpretation process
has been achieved at this point. It was to make
provision for the set of possible readings found in
the cases under consideration in a fully composi-
4
The formally possible third variant, parallel to the iter-
ative interpretation gained for the telic example, is not very
prominent here and usually not discussed in the literature. But
there are certainly special contexts in which this description
may nevertheless apply (imagine some sort of interval train-
ing session, for instance). So, there is no over-generation here.
295
tional manner, i. e., only using lexical semantic en-
tries and general rules for combining them. Fur-
ther methods will have to apply in order to filter
out the best actual candidate with the help of more
contextual information and world knowledge.
5 Conclusion
The aim of this paper was to show how the mean-
ing potential of temporal adverbials can be for-
mally accounted for, and to give room, within the
compositional semantic framework itself, for an
efficient derivation and systematic explanation of
the exact number and kinds of possible readings.
According to the proposal made here, aspectual
shifts consist in restructuring a situational concept
from inside rather than in simple mappings from
one atomic event onto another. Aspectual transi-
tions thus happen with respect to linguistic repre-
sentations rather than ontological entities and are
made on a finer, subatomic semantic level.
The heart of the proposal is the concept of as-
pectual underspecification and the idea of formally
treating the meaning of temporal prepositions as
some kind of dynamic, structural presuppositions.
Thus, the whole process is triggered by some kind
of type conflict, as traditionally assumed, but gets
now controlled by the introduction and consequent
filling in of a truth-value gap. Literally, the mean-
ing of a verbal phrase including an aspectual clash
between temporal adverbial modifier and situa-
tional concept to be modified is an aspectually un-
derspecified situational concept. The possible as-
pectually shifted readings then appear as the dif-
ferent ways of specifying it.
As opposed to what is the case in traditional the-
ories of aspect shift, those possible ways of spec-
ifying are compositionally determined, i. e. by
exclusive recurrence of semantic material already
present in the enriched representation, and via ap-
plication of the standardly assumed rule for cases
of presupposition failure. Therefore, the seman-
tic process in question is analysed here as entirely
language internal.
Another interesting feature of the proposed al-
gorithm when compared to the traditional ap-
proach seems to be that it is not the one-sided
compliance of letting the verbal phrase possibly
be type-changed by the adverbial, but rather the
idea of allowing reciprocal adaptations that finally
leaves us with the right set of predictions. Hereby,
monotonicity of the overall interpretation process
is preserved.
Last but not least, the procedure of systemati-
cally introducing underspecification as some kind
of claimed ignorance in the presence of conflicting
evidence, and of subsequently trying out all possi-
ble specifications separately, seems to be a plausi-
ble hypothesis about the rational strategies we re-
ally may use when adapting sense.
References
de Swart, Henriette. 1998. Aspectual Shift and Co-
ercion. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory,
16:347?385.
Fernando, Tim. 2003. Finite-state descriptions for tem-
poral semantics. Computing Meaning, volume 3.
Kluwer, Tilburg.
Fernando, Tim. 2004. A finite-state Approach to
Events in Natural Language Semantics. Journal of
Logic and Computation, 14(1):79?92.
Gr?under, Sabine. 2008. Aspectual Shift as
Supervaluation. (to appear), Available un-
der: http : //www.asv.informatik.uni ?
leipzig.de/opencms/opencms/asv/de/
Mitarbeiter/Sabine Gruender.html
Moens, Marc and Steedman, Mark. 1988. Temporal
Ontology and Temporal Reference. Computational
Linguistics, 14(2):15?28.
Pulman, Stephen, G. 1997. Aspectual Shift as Type
Coercion. Transactions of the Philological Society,
95(2):279?317.
Vendler, Zeno. 1957. Verbs and Times. Philosophical
Review, 66:143?160.
van Fraassen, Bas. 1969. Presuppositions, supervalua-
tions and free logic. in K. Lambert (ed) The Logical
Way of Doing Things, 67?91. Yale University Press,
New Haven.
296
