Proceedings of the Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL 2010, pages 177?181,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
An Annotation Schema for Preposition Senses in German  
 
 
Antje 
M?ller 
Olaf 
H?lscher 
Claudia 
Roch 
Katja Ke-
?elmeier 
Tobias 
Stadtfeld 
Jan  
Strunk 
Tibor 
Kiss 
Sprachwissenschaftliches Institut, Ruhr-Universit?t Bochum 
D-44801 Bochum, Germany 
{mueller, roch, kesselmeier, stadtfeld, strunk, tibor} 
@linguistics.rub.de, olaf.huelscher@rub.de 
 
 
Abstract 
Prepositions are highly polysemous. Yet, little 
effort has been spent to develop language-
specific annotation schemata for preposition 
senses to systematically represent and analyze 
the polysemy of prepositions in large corpora. 
In this paper, we present an annotation schema 
for preposition senses in German. The annota-
tion schema includes a hierarchical taxonomy 
and also allows multiple annotations for indi-
vidual tokens. It is based on an analysis of 
usage-based dictionaries and grammars and 
has been evaluated in an inter-annotator-
agreement study.  
1 Annotation Schemata for Preposition 
Senses: A Problem to be Tackled 
It is common linguistic wisdom that preposi-
tions are highly polysemous. It is thus somewhat 
surprising that little attention has been paid to the 
development of specialized annotation schemata 
for preposition senses.1 In the present paper, we 
present a tagset for the annotation of German 
prepositions. The need for an annotation schema 
emerged in an analysis of so-called Preposition-
Noun Combinations (PNCs), sometimes called 
determinerless PPs or bare PPs. PNCs minimally 
consist of a preposition and a count noun in the 
singular that appear without a determiner. In (1), 
examples are given from German. 
(1) auf parlamentarische Anfrage (after being 
asked in parliament), bei absolut klarer Ziel-
setzung (given a clearly present aim), unter 
sanfter Androhung (under gentle threat)  
The preposition-sense annotation forms part of a 
larger annotation task of the corpus, where all 
                                                           
1  The Preposition Project is a notable exception (cf. 
www.clres.com/prepositions.html). 
relevant properties of PPs and PNCs receive either 
automated or manual annotations. In developing 
an annotation schema for preposition senses, we 
pursue two general goals:   
I. An annotation schema for preposition senses 
should provide a basis for manual annotation 
of a corpus to determine whether the interpre-
tation of prepositions is a grammatical factor. 
II. The preposition sense annotations together 
with the other annotations of the corpus 
should serve as a reference for the automatic 
classification of preposition senses.  
With regard to the goals formulated, the present 
paper is an intermediate report. The annotation 
schema has been developed and the manual anno-
tation of the corpus is well under way. The next 
logical steps will be to apply the annotations to a 
wider range of prepositions and eventually to use 
the annotated corpus for an automated classifica-
tion system for preposition senses.   
As PNCs form the basic rationale for the current 
investigation, we are only considering prepositions 
that occur in PPs and PNCs in German. We thus 
systematically exclude prepositions that do not 
take an NP complement, postpositions, and com-
plex prepositions. Thus, the sense annotation for 
prepositions currently comprises the following 22 
simple prepositions in German: 
(2) an, auf, bei, dank, durch, f?r, gegen, gem??, 
hinter, in, mit, mittels, nach, neben, ohne, seit, 
?ber, um, unter, vor, w?hrend, wegen  
As empirical base of the analysis, we use a Swiss 
German newspaper corpus, which contains about 
230 million tokens (Neue Z?rcher Zeitung 1993-
1999).  
The remaining paper is structured as follows:  
Section 2 is devoted to the characteristics of the 
annotation schema. In section 3, we present an 
analysis of the schema in terms of inter-annotator 
177
agreement. It takes into account that the annotation 
schema is hierarchically ordered and allows for 
multiple annotations. Section 4 illustrates the ap-
plication of the schema to the preposition ohne 
(?without?) in German.  
2 Properties of the Annotation Schema 
There are no standardized features for an anno-
tation of preposition senses in German. Our work 
is thus based on several reference works, which we 
analyzed and combined to develop the schema, 
namely Duden Deutsch als Fremdsprache (Duden, 
2002) (a dictionary of German for foreign learn-
ers), Deutsche Grammatik from Helbig and 
Buscha (2001) (a grammar of German for foreign 
learners) (both usage-based), the Lexikon 
Deutscher Pr?positionen (Schr?der, 1986) (a dic-
tionary of German prepositions) and an analysis of 
prepositions with a temporal meaning (Durell and 
Br?e, 1993). Prima facie, the dictionary of German 
prepositions appears to be the most promising 
starting point because it includes a fine-grained 
feature-based analysis of preposition senses. How-
ever, it turns out that it is too complex for manual 
annotation, making use of more than 200 binary 
features to classify preposition meanings. 
The annotation schema shows a hierarchically 
organized, tree-like structure. Beginning with a 
root node, types of preposition meanings branch to 
subtrees for different classes (e.g. local, temporal 
or causal) with differing depths or to individual, 
non-splitting branches (see Figure 1). For temporal 
and spatial interpretations, we use decision trees 
that help to guide the annotator through the anno-
tation process.  
Altogether the annotation schema includes the 
following list of top-level categories: SPATIAL, 
TEMPORAL, MODAL, CAUSAL, STATE, COMMUNAL-
ITY/COMMUTATIVE, TRANSGRESSION, AGENT, 
REDUCTION/EXTENSION, PARTICIPATION, SUBOR-
DINATION, RECIPIENT, AFFILIATION, CORRELA-
TION/INTERACTION, ORDER, THEME, SUBSTITUTE, 
EXCHANGE, COMPARISON, RESTRICTIVE, COPULA-
TIVE, ADVERSATIVE, DISTRIBUTIVE, STATE-
MENT/OPINION, EXISTENCE/PRESENCE, CENTRE OF 
REFERENCE, and REALIZATION. 
 
The schema allows cross-classification at every 
level. This is of particular importance for the clas-
sification of directional meanings. Directionality is 
introduced through cross-classification and not 
through copying the hierarchical structure of the 
local subtree.2  
Another important property of the annotation 
schema is the possibility of multiple annotations 
for one preposition in context. For instance, a final 
distinction between a temporal and a causal inter-
pretation cannot be drawn in example (3). 
                                                           
2 During annotation, local and directional interpretations can 
be distinguished by case assignment in the majority of cases. 
 (3) Feuer nach [temporal/causal] Blitzschlag 
 ?Fire after/because of lightning stroke? 
In addition to the semantic categories, we use a 
feature ?governed? to label a preposition as gov-
erned by a lexical head whenever appropriate. 
Governed prepositions usually are assumed to be 
semantically empty but in some cases there is a 
discernible meaning for the preposition despite its 
being governed.  
The preposition sense annotation is only one 
part of a bigger annotation project. Annotations on 
lexical (POS, morphology, countability, preposi-
tion meaning, noun meaning), syntactic (chunks), 
relational (internal and external dependencies), and 
Figure 1: Hierarchical Annotation Schema 
178
??
global (e.g. marking as a headline or part of a TV 
program in a newspaper, idiomaticity, telegraphic 
style) levels will serve as a basis for annotation 
mining to detect licensing conditions of PNCs. 
3 An Analysis of Inter-Annotator 
Agreement  in a Hierarchical Annota-
tion Schema 
A weighted kappa statistic (?) forms a standard 
for assessing the feasibility of annotation sche-
mata. Based on Cohen?s seminal work (Cohen, 
1968), Artstein and Poesio (2008) suggest the 
measure in (4), where ? is calculated as the 
weighted difference between observed and ex-
pected disagreement. 
(4)      = 1 ?  
Two aspects of the present annotation schema 
prohibit a direct application of this statistic. First, 
the annotation schema makes use of a hierarchy 
with subtypes, which leads to overlapping annota-
tion categories. As an illustration, assume that one 
annotator has annotated a given preposition with 
the sense PRESENCE, while a second annotator 
makes use of the annotation ANALYTIC, the latter 
being a subtype of the first. Secondly, the annota-
tion schema allows more than one annotation for 
the same token, to cover cases where an ambigu-
ous interpretation cannot be maximally reduced, as 
in (4). 
To deal with the first problem, the hierarchical 
structure of the annotation schema is included in 
the calculation of the weight coefficients for ?. 
Basically, two annotations are more closely related 
if either both annotations are dominated by the 
same set of nodes in the hierarchy, or one annota-
tion is a direct subtype of the other one (as usual, 
we assume domination to be reflexive). Accord-
ingly, the weight coefficient for a given disagree-
ment is reduced in relation to the depth of embed-
ding of the subcategories, based on the cardinality 
of the set of nodes that dominate both categories. 
As an illustration consider two senses A and B 
in the following configurations: a) A and B are 
directly dominated by C, a subtype of ROOT; b) A 
dominates B, A being a subtype of ROOT, and c) 
ROOT directly dominates A and C, and B is a sub-
type of C. Intuitively, c) is a case of clear dis-
agreement, while in b) we find that one annotation 
is more specific than the other one, and in a), the 
annotators have at least agreed in a common super-
type of the categories. 
Consequently, the weight coefficient for dis-
agreement should be highest in case c), but should 
be similar in cases a) and b).  
(5)  
a) b) c) 
   
The weight coefficient is determined by the fol-
lowing formula, where 	

 designates the depth 
of the lowest common dominating node of the two 
senses (and hence the cardinality of the set of 
dominating nodes minus 1). 
(6)     

 = 

 ,    ?  0,   =  