Mining Large-scale Parallel Corpora from Multilingual Patents: 
An English-Chinese example and its application to SMT 
Bin Lu?, Benjamin K. Tsou??, Tao Jiang?, Oi Yee Kwong?, and Jingbo Zhu? 
?Department of Chinese, Translation & Linguistics, City University of Hong Kong 
?Research Centre on Linguistics and Language Information Sciences,  
Hong Kong Institute of Education 
?ChiLin Star Corp., Southern Software Park, Zhuhai, China 
?Natural Language Processing Lab, Northeastern University, Shenyang, China 
{lubin2010, rlbtsou, jiangtaoster}@gmail.com, 
rlolivia@cityu.edu.hk, zhujingbo@mail.neu.edu.cn 
 
Abstract 
In this paper, we demonstrate how to 
mine large-scale parallel corpora with 
multilingual patents, which have not 
been thoroughly explored before. We 
show how a large-scale English-Chinese 
parallel corpus containing over 14 
million sentence pairs with only 1-5% 
wrong can be mined from a large amount 
of English-Chinese bilingual patents. To 
our knowledge, this is the largest single 
parallel corpus in terms of sentence pairs. 
Moreover, we estimate the potential for 
mining multilingual parallel corpora 
involving English, Chinese, Japanese, 
Korean, German, etc., which would to 
some extent reduce the parallel data 
acquisition bottleneck in multilingual 
information processing. 
1 Introduction 
Multilingual data are critical resources for 
building many applications, such as machine 
translation (MT) and cross-lingual information 
retrieval. Many parallel corpora have been built, 
such as the Canadian Hansards (Gale and 
Church, 1991), the Europarl corpus (Koehn, 
2005), the Arabic-English and English-Chinese 
parallel corpora used in the NIST Open MT 
Evaluation.  
However, few parallel corpora exist for many 
language pairs, such as Chinese-Japanese, 
Japanese-Korean, Chinese- French or 
Japanese-German. Even for language pairs with 
several parallel corpora, such as Chinese-English 
and Arabic-English, the size of parallel corpora 
is still a major limitation for SMT systems to 
achieve higher performance. 
In this paper, we present a way which could, to 
some extent, reduce the parallel data acquisition 
bottleneck in multilingual language processing.  
Based on multilingual patents, we show how an 
enlarged English-Chinese parallel corpus 
containing over 14 million high-quality sentence 
pairs can be mined from a large number of 
comparable patents harvested from the Web. To 
our knowledge, this is the largest single parallel 
corpus in terms of parallel sentences. Some SMT 
experiments are also reported. Moreover, we 
investigate the potential to get large-scale 
parallel corpora for languages beyond the 
Canadian Hansards, Europarl and UN news used 
in NIST MT Evaluation by estimating the 
quantity of multilingual patents involving 
English, Chinese, Japanese, Korean, German, 
etc.  
Related work is introduced in Section 2. 
Patents, PCT patents, multilingual patents are 
described in Section 3. Then an English-Chinese 
parallel corpus, its mining process and 
application to SMT are introduced in Section 4, 
followed by the quantity estimation of 
multilingual patents involving other language 
pairs in Section 5. We discuss the results in 
Section 6, and conclude in Section 7. 
2 Related Work 
Parallel sentences could be extracted from 
parallel documents or comparable corpora. 
Different approaches have been proposed to 
align sentences in parallel documents consisting 
of the same content in different languages based 
on the following information: a) the sentence 
length in bilingual sentences (Brown et al 1991; 
Gale and Church, 1991); b) lexical information 
in bilingual dictionaries (Ma, 2006); c) statistical 
translation model (Chen, 1993), or the composite 
of more than one approach (Simard and 
Plamondon, 1998; Moore, 2002).  
To overcome the lack of parallel documents, 
comparable corpora are also used to mine 
parallel sentences, which raises further 
challenges since the bilingual contents are not 
strictly parallel. For instance, Zhao and Vogel 
(2002) investigated the mining of parallel 
sentences for Web bilingual news. Munteanu and 
Marcu (2005) presented a method for 
discovering parallel sentences in large Chinese, 
Arabic, and English comparable, non-parallel 
corpora based on a maximum entropy classifier. 
Cao et al, (2007) and Lin et al, (2008) proposed 
two different methods utilizing the parenthesis 
pattern to extract term translations from bilingual 
web pages. Jiang et al (2009) presented an 
adaptive pattern-based method which produced 
Chinese-English bilingual sentences and terms  
with over 80% accuracy. 
Only a few papers were found on the related 
work in the patent domain. Higuchi et al (2001) 
used the titles and abstracts of 32,000 
Japanese-English bilingual patents to extract 
bilingual terms. Utiyama and Isahara (2007) 
mined about 2 million parallel sentences by 
using two parts in the description section of 
Japanese-English comparable patents. Lu et al 
(2009) derived about 160K parallel sentences 
from Chinese-English comparable patents by 
aligning sentences and filtering alignments with 
the combination of different quality measures. 
Another closely related work is the 
English-Chinese parallel corpus (Lu et al, 
2010), which is largely extended by this work, in 
which both the number of patents and that of 
parallel sentences are augmented by about 
100%, and more SMT experiments are given. 
Moreover, we show the potential for mining 
parallel corpora from multilingual patents 
involving other languages. 
For statistical machine translation (SMT), 
tremendous strides have been made in two 
decades, including Brown et al (1993), Och and 
Ney (2004) and Chiang (2007). For the MT 
evaluation, NIST (Fujii et al, 2008; 2010) has 
been organizing open evaluations for years, and 
the performance of the participants has been 
improved rapidly.  
3 Patents and Multilingual Patents 
A patent is a legal document representing ?an 
official document granting the exclusive right to 
make, use, and sell an invention for a limited 
period? (Collins English Dictionary1). A patent 
application consists of different sections, and we 
focus on the text, i.e. only title, abstract, claims 
and description.  
3.1 PCT Patents 
Since the invention in a patent is only protected 
in the filing countries, a patent applicant who 
wishes to protect his invention outside the 
original country should file patents in other 
countries, which may involve other languages. 
The Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) system 
offers inventors and industry an advantageous 
route for obtaining patent protection 
internationally. By filing one ?international? 
patent application under the PCT via the World 
Intellectually Property Organization (WIPO), 
protection of an invention can be sought 
simultaneously (i.e. the priority date) in each of a 
large number of countries. 
The number of PCT international applications 
                                                          
1 Retrieved March 2010, from 
http://www.collinslanguage.com/ 
filed is more than 1.7 million 2 . A PCT 
international application may be filed in any 
language accepted by the relevant receiving 
office, but must be published in one of the 
official publication languages (Arabic, Chinese, 
English, French, German, Japanese, Korean, 
Russian and Spanish). Other highly used 
languages for filing include Italian, Dutch, 
Finnish, Swedish, etc. Table 1 3  shows the 
number of PCT applications for the most used 
languages of filing and publication.  
 Lang. of Filing 
Share 
(%) 
Lang. of 
Publication 
Share 
(%) 
English 895K 52.1 943K 54.9 
Japanese 198K 11.5 196K 11.4 
German 185K 10.8 184K 10.7 
French 55K 3.2 55K 3.2 
Korean 24K 1.4 3K4 0.2 
Chinese 24K 1.4 24K 1.4 
Other 336K 19.6 313K 18.2 
Total 1.72M 100 1.72M 100 
Table 1. PCT Application Numbers for Languages of 
Publication and Filing 
From Table 1, we can observe that English, 
Japanese and German are the top 3 languages in 
terms of PCT applications, and English accounts 
for over 50% of applications in terms of 
language of both publication and filing.  
3.2 Multilingual Patents 
A PCT application does not necessarily mean a 
multilingual patent. An applicant who has 
decided to proceed further with his PCT 
international application must fulfill the 
requirements for entry into the PCT national 
phase at the patent offices of countries where he 
seeks protection. For example, a Chinese 
company may first file a Chinese patent in China 
                                                          
2 Retrieved Apr., 2010 from 
http://www.wipo.int/pctdb/en/. The data below involving 
PCT patents comes from the website of WIPO. 
3 The data in this and other tables in the following sections 
involving PCT patents comes from the website of WIPO. 
4  Korean just became one of the official publication 
languages for the PCT system since 2009, and thus the 
number of PCT patents with Korean as language of 
publication is small. 
patent office and then file its international 
application also in Chinese under the PCT. Later 
on, it may have the patent translated into English 
and file it in USA patent office, which means the 
patent becomes bilingual. If the applicant 
continues to file it in Japan with Japanese, it 
would be trilingual. Even more, it would be 
quadrilingual or involve more languages when it 
is filed in other countries with more languages. 
Such multilingual patents are considered 
comparable (or noisy parallel) because they are 
not parallel in the strict sense but still closely 
related in terms of information conveyed 
(Higuchi et al, 2001; Lu et al, 2009). 
4 A Large English-Chinese Parallel 
Corpus Mined from Bilingual Patents 
In this section, we introduce the English-Chinese 
bilingual patents harvested from the Web and the 
method to mine parallel sentences from them. 
SMT experiments on the final parallel corpus are 
also described. 
4.1 Harvesting English-Chinese Bilingual 
Patents 
The official patent office in China is the State 
Intellectual Property Office (SIPO). In early 
2009,  by searching on its website, we found 
about 200K Chinese patents previously filed as 
PCT applications in English and crawled their 
bibliographical data, titles, abstracts and the 
major claim from the Web, and then other claims 
and descriptions were also added. Since some 
contents are in the image format, the images 
were OCRed and the texts recognized were 
manually verified. 
All PCT patent applications are filed through 
WIPO. With the Chinese patents mentioned 
above, the corresponding English patents were 
searched from the website of WIPO by the PCT 
publication numbers to obtain relevant sections 
of the English PCT applications, including 
bibliographical data, title, abstract, claims and 
description. About 80% (160K) out of the 
Chinese patents found their corresponding 
English ones. Some contents of the English 
patents were OCRed by WIPO. 
We automatically split the patents into 
individual sections according to the respective 
tags inside the patents, and segmented each 
section sentences according to punctuations. The 
statistics of each section for Chinese and 
English patents are shown in Table 2. 
Chinese English 
Sections 
#Char #Sent #Word #Sent 
Title 2.7M 157K 1.6M 157K 
Abstract 33M 596K 20M 784K 
Claim 367M 6.8M 217M 7.4M 
Desc. 2,467M 48.8M 1,353M 54.0M 
Total 2,870M 56.2M 1,591M 62.3M 
Table 2. Statistics of Comparable Patents 
4.2 Mining Parallel Sentences from 
Bilingual Patents 
The sentences in each section of Chinese patents 
were aligned with those in the corresponding 
section of the corresponding English patents to 
find parallel sentences after the Chinese 
sentences were segmented into words. 
Since the comparable patents are not strictly 
parallel, the individual alignment methods 
mentioned in Section 2 would be not effective: 1) 
the length-based method is not accurate since it 
does not consider content similarity; 2) the 
bilingual dictionary-based method cannot deal 
with new technical terms in the patents; 3) the 
translation model-based method would need 
training data to get a translation model. Thus, in 
this study we combine these three methods to 
mine high-quality parallel sentences from 
comparable patents. 
We first use a bilingual dictionary to 
preliminarily align the sentences in each section 
of the comparable patents. The dictionary-based 
similarity score dP  of a sentence pair is 
computed based on a bilingual dictionary as 
follows (Utiyama and Isahara, 2003):  
2/??
)deg()deg(
),(
),(
ce
Sw Sw ec
ec
ecd ll
ww
ww
SSp cc ee
+
=
? ?
? ?
?
 
where cw  and ew  are respectively the 
word types in Chinese sentence cS  and 
English sentence eS ; cl  and el  respectively 
denote the lengths of cS  and eS  in terms of 
the number of words; and ),( ec ww?  = 1 if 
cw  and ew  is a translation pair in the 
bilingual dictionary or are the same string, 
otherwise 0; and 
?
?
=
ee Sw
ecc www ),()deg( ?
?
?
=
ce Sw
ece www ),()deg( ? . 
For the bilingual dictionary, we combine three 
ones: namely, LDC_CE_DIC2.0 5  constructed 
by LDC, bilingual terms in HowNet and the 
bilingual lexicon in Champollion (Ma, 2006). 
We then remove sentence pairs using length 
filtering and ratio filtering: 1) for length filtering, 
if a sentence pair has more than 100 words in the 
English sentence or more than 333 characters in 
the Chinese one, it is removed; 2) for length ratio 
filtering, we discard the sentence pairs with 
Chinese-English length ratio outside the range of 
0.8 to 1.8. The parameters here are set 
empirically. 
We further filter the parallel sentence 
candidates by learning an IBM Model-1 on the 
remaining aligned sentences and compute the 
translation similarity score tP  of sentence 
pairs by combining the translation probability 
value of both directions (i.e. Chinese->English 
and English->Chinese) based on the trained 
IBM-1 model (Moore, 2002; Chen, 2003; Lu et 
al, 2009). It is computed as follows: 
ec
ecce
ect ll
)S(SPlog)S(SPlog
SSp
+
+
=
)|()|(
),(
 
where )SS(P ce | denotes the probability 
that a translator will produce eS  in English 
when presented with cS  in Chinese, and vice 
versa for )|(S ec SP . Sentence pairs with 
                                                          
5 http://projects.ldc.upenn.edu/Chinese/LDC_ch.htm 
similarity score tP  lower than a predefined 
threshold are filtered out as wrong aligned 
sentences. 
Table 3 shows the sentence numbers and the 
percentages of sentences kept in each step above 
with respect to all sentence pairs. In the first row 
of Table 3, 1.DICT denotes the first step of using 
the bilingual dictionary to align sentences; 2. FL 
denotes the length and ratio filtering; 3. TM 
refers to the third and final step of using 
translation models to filter sentence pairs. 
 1. DICT 2.FL 3. TM (final) 
Abstr. 503K 352K  (70%) 
166K  
(33%) 
Claims 6.0M 4.3M (72.1%) 
2.0M 
(33.4%) 
Desc. 38.6M 26.8M (69.4%) 
12.1M 
(31.3%) 
Total6 45.1M 31.5M (69.8%) 
14.3M 
(31.7%) 
Table 3. Numbers of Sentence Pairs 
Both the 31.5M parallel sentences after the 
second step FL and the final 14.3M after the third 
step TM are manually evaluated by randomly 
sampling 100 sentence pairs for each section. 
The evaluation metric follows the one in Lu et al 
(2009), which classifies each sentence pair into 
Correct, Partially Correct or Wrong. The results 
of manual evaluation are shown in Table 4. 
 Section Correct Partially Correct Wrong 
Abstr. 85% 7% 8% 
Claims 83% 10% 7% 2. FL 
Desc. 69% 15% 15% 
Abstr. 97% 2% 1% 
Claims 92% 3% 5% 3. TM  (final) 
Desc. 89% 8% 3% 
Table 4. Manual Evaluation of the Corpus 
From Table 4, we can see that: 1) In the final 
corpus, the percentages of correct parallel 
sentences are quite high, and the wrong 
percentages are no higher than 5%; 2) Without 
                                                          
6 Here the total number does not include the number of 
titles, which are directly treated as parallel. 
the final step of TM, the accuracies of 31.5M 
sentence pairs are between 69%-85%, and the 
percentages of wrong pairs are between 
7%-15%; 3) The abstract section shows the 
highest correct percentage, while the description 
section shows the lowest. 
Thus, we could conclude that the mined 14M 
parallel sentences are of high quality with only 
1%-5% wrong pairs, and our combination of 
bilingual dictionaries and translation models for 
mining parallel sentences are quite effective. 
4.3 Chinese-English Statistical Machine 
Translation 
A Chinese-English SMT system is setup using 
Moses (Koehn, 2007). We train models  based 
on different numbers of parallel sentences mined 
above. The test set contains 548 sentence pairs 
which are randomly selected and different from 
the training data. The sizes of the training data 
and BLEU scores for the models are shown in 
Table 5. 
System BLEU (%) #Sentence Pairs for training 
Model-A 17.94 300K 
Model-B 19.96 750K 
Model-C 20.09 1.5M 
Model-D 20.98 3M 
Model-E 22.60 6M 
Table 5. SMT Experimental Results 
From Table 5, we can see that the BLEU 
scores are improving steadily when the training 
data increases. When the training data is 
enlarged by 20 times from 300K to 6M, the 
BLEU score increases to 22.60 from 17.94, 
which is quite a significant improvement. We 
show the translations of one Chinese sample 
sentence in Table 6 below. 
CN  
Sent. 
?? ?? ?? ??? ?? ? ? ?? ? 
? ? 
Ref. 
the main shaft of the electric motor 
extends into the working cavity of the 
compressor shell , 
Model-A the motor main shaft into the compressor the chamber 
Model-B motor shaft into the compressor housing . the working chamber 
Model-C motor shaft into the compressor housing . the working chamber 
Model-D 
motor spindle extends into the 
compressor housing . the working 
chamber 
Model-E motor spindle extends into the working chamber of the compressor housing , 
Table 6. Translations of One Chinese Sentence 
From Table 6, we can see the translations 
given by Model-A to Model-C are lack of the 
main verb, the one given by Model-D has an 
ordering problem for the head noun and the 
modifier, and the one given by Model-E seems 
better than the others and its content is already 
quite similar to the reference despite the lexical 
difference. 
5 Multilingual Corpora for More 
Languages 
In this section, we describe the potential of 
building large-scale parallel corpora for more 
languages, especially Asian languages by using 
the 1.7 million PCT patent applications and their 
national correspondents. By using PCT 
applications as the pivot, we can build 
multilingual parallel corpora from multilingual 
patents, which would greatly enlarge parallel 
data we could obtain. 
The patent applications filed in one country 
should be in the official language(s) of the 
country, e.g. the applications filed in China 
should be in Chinese, those in Japan be in 
Japanese, and so on. In Table 7, the second 
column shows the total numbers of patent 
applications in different countries which were 
previously filed as PCT ones; and the third 
column shows the total numbers of applications 
in different countries, which were previously 
filed as PCT ones with English as language of 
publication. 
National Phase 
Country7 ALL 
English as Lang. 
of Publication 
                                                          
7 For the national phase of the PCT System, the statistics 
are based on data supplied to WIPO by national and 
Japan 424K 269K 
China 307K 188K 
Germany 32K 10K 
R. Korea 236K 134K 
China & Japan 189K 130K 
China & R. Korea 154K 91K 
Japan & R. Korea 158K 103K 
China & Japan  
& R. Korea 106K 73K 
Table 7. Estimated Numbers of Multilingual 
Patents 
The number of the Chinese-English bilingual 
patents (CE) in Table 7 is about 188K, which is 
consistent with the number of 160K found in 
Section 4.1 since the latter contains only the 
applications up to early 2009. Based on Table 7, 
we estimate below the rough sizes of bilingual 
corpora, trilingual corpora, and even 
quadrilingual corpora for different languages. 
1) Bilingual Corpora with English as one 
language 
Compared to CE (188K), the 
Japanese-English bilingual corpus (269K) could 
be 50% larger in terms of bilingual patents, the 
Korean-English one (134K) could be about 30% 
smaller, and the German-English one (10K) 
would be much smaller. 
2) Bilingual Corpora for Asian Languages  
The Japanese-Chinese bilingual corpus 
(189K) could be comparable to CE (188K) in 
terms of bilingual applications, the Chinese- 
Korean one (154K) could be about 20% smaller, 
and the Japanese-Korean one (158K) is quite 
similar to the Chinese-Korean one. 
3)  Trilingual Corpora 
In addition to bilingual corpora, we can also 
build trilingual corpora from trilingual patents. It 
is quite interesting to note that the trilingual 
corpora  could be quite large even compared to 
the bilingual corpora.  
The trilingual corpora for Chinese, Japanese 
and English (130K) could be only 30% smaller 
than CE in terms of patents. The trilingual corpus 
                                                                                      
regional patent Offices, received at WIPO often 6 months or 
more after the end of the year concerned, i.e. the numbers 
are not up-to-date . 
for Chinese, Korean and English (91K) and that 
for Japanese, Korean and English (103K) are 
also quite large. The number of the trilingual 
patents for the Asian languages of Chinese, 
Japanese and Korean (106K) is about 54% of 
that of CE. 
4) Quadrilingual Corpora 
The number of the quadrilingual patents for 
Chinese, Japanese, Korean and English (73K) is 
about 38% of that of CE. From these figures, we 
could say that a large proportion of the PCT 
applications published in English later have been 
filed in all the three Asian countries: China, 
Japan, and R. Korea. 
6 Discussion 
The websites from which the Chinese and 
English patents were downloaded were quite 
slow to access, and were occasionally down 
during access. To avoid too much workload for 
the websites, the downloading speed had been 
limited. Some large patents would cost much 
time for the websites to respond and had be 
specifically handled. It took considerable efforts 
to obtain these comparable patents.  
In addition our English-Chinese corpus mined 
in this study is at least one order of magnitude 
larger, we give some other differences between 
ours and those introduced in Section 2 (Higuchi 
et al, 2001; Utiyama and Isahara, 2007; Lu et al 
2009)  
1) Their bilingual patents were identified by 
the priority information in the US patents, and 
could not be easily extended to language pairs 
without English; while our method using PCT 
applications as the pivot could be easily 
extended to other language pairs as illustrated in 
Section 5. 
2) The translation process is different: their 
patents were filed in USA Patent Office in 
English by translating from Japanese or Chinese, 
while our patents were first filed in English as a 
PCT application, and later translated into 
Chinese. The different translation processes may 
have different characteristics. 
Since the PCT and multilingual patent 
applications increase rapidly in recent years as 
discussed in Section 3, we could expect more 
multilingual patents to enlarge the large-scale 
parallel corpora with the new applications and 
keep them up-to-date with new technical terms. 
On the other hand, patents are usually translated 
by patent agents or professionals, we could 
expect high quality translations from 
multilingual patents. We have been planning to 
build trilingual and quadrilingual corpora from 
multilingual patents. 
One possible limitation of patent corpora is 
that the sentences are all from technical domains 
and written in formal style, and thus it is 
interesting to know if the parallel sentences 
could improve the performance of SMT systems  
on NIST MT evaluation corpus containing news 
sentences and web sentences.  
7 Conclusion 
In this paper, we show how a large high-quality 
English-Chinese parallel corpus can be mined 
from a large amount of comparable patents 
harvested from the Web, which is the largest 
single parallel corpus in terms of the  number of 
parallel sentences. Some sampled parallel 
sentences are available at 
http://www.livac.org/smt/parpat.html, and more 
parallel sentences would be publicly available to 
the research community. 
With 1.7 million PCT patent applications and 
their corresponding national ones, there are 
considerable potentials of constructing 
large-scale high-quality parallel corpora for 
languages. We give an estimation on the sizes of 
multilingual parallel corpora which could be 
obtained from multilingual patents involving 
English, Chinese, Japanese, Korean, German, 
etc., which would to some extent reduce the 
parallel data acquisition bottleneck in 
multilingual information processing. 
Acknowledgements 
We wish to thank Mr. Long Jiang from 
Microsoft Research Asia and anonymous 
reviewers for their valuable comments. 
References 
Brown, Peter F., Jennifer C. Lai, and Robert L. 
Mercer. 1991. Aligning sentences in parallel 
corpora. In Proceedings of ACL. pp.169-176. 
Brown, Peter F., Stephen A. Della Pietra, Vincent J. 
Della Pietra, and Robert L. Mercer. 1993. 
Mathematics of statistical machine translation: 
Parameter estimation. Computational Linguistics, 
19(2), 263-311. 
Cao, Guihong, Jianfeng Gao and Jianyun Nie. 2007. 
A System to Mine Large-scale Bilingual 
Dictionaries from  Monolingual Web Pages. In 
Proceedings of MT Summit. pp. 57-64. 
Chen, Stanley F. 1993. Aligning sentences in 
bilingual corpora using lexical information. In 
Proceedings of ACL. pp. 9-16. 
Chiang, David. 2007. Hierarchical phrase-based 
translation. Computational Linguistics, 33(2), 
201?228. 
Fujii, Atsushi, Masao Utiyama, Mikio Yamamoto, 
and Takehito Utsuro. 2008. Overview of the patent 
translation task at the NTCIR-7 workshop. In 
Proceedings of the NTCIR-7 Workshop. pp. 
389-400. Tokyo, Japan. 
Fujii, Atsushi, Masao Utiyama, Mikio Yamamoto, 
Takehito Utsuro, Terumasa Ehara, Hiroshi 
Echizen-ya and Sayori Shimohata. 2010. 
Overview of the patent translation task at the 
NTCIR-8 workshop. In Proceedings of the 
NTCIR-8 Workshop. Tokyo, Japan. 
Gale, William A., and Kenneth W. Church. 1991. A 
program for aligning sentences in bilingual 
corpora. In Proceedings of ACL. pp.79-85. 
Higuchi, Shigeto, Masatoshi Fukui, Atsushi Fujii, and 
Tetsuya Ishikawa. PRIME: A System for 
Multi-lingual Patent Retrieval. In Proceedings of 
MT Summit VIII, pp.163-167, 2001. 
Koehn, Philipp. 2005. Europarl: A parallel corpus for 
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of 
MT Summit X. 
Koehn, Philipp, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris 
Callison-Burch, et al 2007. Moses: Open source 
toolkit for statistical machine translation. In 
Proceedings of ACL Demo Session. pp. 177-180. 
Lin, Dekang, Shaojun Zhao, Benjamin V. Durme and 
Marius Pasca. 2008. Mining Parenthetical 
Translations from the Web by Word Alignment. In 
Proceedings of ACL-08. pp. 994-1002. 
Jiang, Long, Shiquan Yang, Ming Zhou, Xiaohua Liu, 
and Qingsheng Zhu. 2009. Mining Bilingual Data 
from the Web with Adaptively Learnt Patterns. In 
Proceedings of ACL-IJCNLP. pp. 870-878. 
Lu, Bin, Benjamin K. Tsou, Jingbo Zhu, Tao Jiang, 
and Olivia Y. Kwong. 2009. The Construction of 
an English-Chinese Patent Parallel Corpus. MT 
Summit XII 3rd Workshop on Patent Translation. 
Lu, Bin, Tao Jiang, Kapo Chow and Benjamin K. 
Tsou. 2010. Building a Large English-Chinese 
Parallel Corpus from Comparable Patents and its 
Experimental Application to SMT. LREC 
Workshop on Building and Using Comparable 
Corpora. Malta. May, 2010. 
Ma, Xiaoyi. 2006. Champollion: A Robust Parallel 
Text Sentence Aligner. In Proceedings of the 5th 
International Conference on Language Resources 
and Evaluation (LREC). Genova, Italy. 
Moore, Robert C. 2002. Fast and Accurate Sentence 
Alignment of Bilingual Corpora. In Proceedings of 
AMTA. pp.135-144. 
Munteanu, Dragos S., and Daniel Marcu. 2005. 
Improving Machine Translation Performance by 
Exploiting Non-parallel Corpora. Computational 
Linguistics, 31(4), 477?504. 
Och, Franz J., and Hermann Ney. 2004. The 
Alignment Template Approach to Machine 
Translation. Computational Linguistics, 30(4), 
417-449. 
Simard, Michel, and Pierre Plamondon. 1998. 
Bilingual Sentence Alignment: Balancing 
Robustness and Accuracy. Machine Translation, 
13(1), 59-80. 
Utiyama, Masao, and Hitoshi Isahara. 2007. A 
Japanese-English patent parallel corpus. In 
Proceeding of MT Summit XI. pp. 475?482. 
Zhao, Bing, and Stephen Vogel. 2002. Adaptive 
Parallel Sentences Mining from Web Bilingual 
News Collection. In Proceedings of Second IEEE 
International Conference on Data Mining 
(ICDM?02). 
