BioNLP 2007: Biological, translational, and clinical language processing, pages 81?88,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
ConText: An Algorithm for Identifying Contextual Features 
from Clinical Text 
Wendy W. Chapman, David Chu, John N. Dowling 
Department of Biomedical Informatics 
University of Pittsburgh 
Pittsburgh, PA 
chapman@cbmi.pitt.edu 
 
Abstract 
Applications using automatically indexed 
clinical conditions must account for con-
textual features such as whether a condition 
is negated, historical or hypothetical, or 
experienced by someone other than the pa-
tient. We developed and evaluated an algo-
rithm called ConText, an extension of the 
NegEx negation algorithm, which relies on 
trigger terms, pseudo-trigger terms, and 
termination terms for identifying the values 
of three contextual features. In spite of its 
simplicity, ConText performed well at 
identifying negation and hypothetical status. 
ConText performed moderately at identify-
ing whether a condition was experienced 
by someone other than the patient and 
whether the condition occurred historically.  
1 Introduction 
Natural language processing (NLP) techniques can 
extract variables from free-text clinical records 
important for medical informatics applications per-
forming decision support, quality assurance, and 
biosurveillance [1-6]. Many applications have fo-
cused on identifying individual clinical conditions 
in textual records, which is the first step in making 
the conditions available to computerized applica-
tions. However, identifying individual instances of 
clinical conditions is not sufficient for many medi-
cal informatics tasks?the context surrounding the 
condition is crucial for integrating the information 
within the text to determine the clinical state of a 
patient.  
For instance, it is important to understand 
whether a condition is affirmed or negated, acute 
or chronic, or mentioned hypothetically. We refer 
to these as contextual features, because the infor-
mation is not usually contained in the lexical repre-
sentation of the clinical condition itself but in the 
context surrounding the clinical condition. We de-
veloped an algorithm called ConText for identify-
ing three contextual features relevant for biosur-
veillance from emergency department (ED) reports 
and evaluated its performance compared to physi-
cian annotation of the features. 
2 Background 
2.1 Encoding Contextual Information from-
Clinical Texts 
NLP systems designed to encode detailed informa-
tion from clinical reports, such as MedLEE [1], 
MPLUS [7], and MedSyndikate [4], encode con-
textual features such as negation, uncertainty, 
change over time, and severity. Over the last ten 
years, several negation algorithms have been de-
scribed in the literature [8-12]. Recently, research-
ers at Columbia University have categorized tem-
poral expressions in clinical narrative text and 
evaluated a temporal constraint structure designed 
to model the temporal information for discharge 
summaries [13, 14]. 
ConText differs from most other work in this 
area by providing a stand-alone algorithm that can 
be integrated with any application that indexes 
clinical conditions from text.  
2.2 Biosurveillance from ED Data 
Biosurveillance and situational awareness are im-
perative research issues in today?s world. State-of-
the-art surveillance systems rely on chief com-
plaints and ICD-9 codes, which provide limited 
clinical information and have been shown to per-
form with only fair to moderate sensitivity [15-18]. 
ED reports are a timely source of clinical informa-
81
tion that may be useful for syndromic surveillance. 
We are developing NLP-based methods for identi-
fying clinical conditions from ED reports. 
2.3 SySTR 
We are developing an NLP application called 
SySTR (Syndromic Surveillance from Textual Re-
cords). It currently uses free-text descriptions of 
clinical conditions in ED reports to determine 
whether the patient has an acute lower respiratory 
syndrome.  We previously identified 55 clinical 
conditions (e.g. cough, pneumonia, oxygen desatu-
ration, wheezing) relevant for determining whether 
a patient has an acute lower respiratory condition 
[19]. SySTR identifies instances of these 55 clini-
cal conditions in ED reports to determine if a pa-
tient has an acute lower respiratory syndrome. 
SySTR has four modules: 
(1) Index each instance of the 55 clinical condi-
tions in an ED report; 
(2) For each indexed instance of a clinical condi-
tion, assign values to three contextual features; 
(3) Integrate the information from indexed in-
stances to determine whether each of the 55 
conditions are acute, chronic, or absent; 
(4) Use the values of the 55 conditions to deter-
mine whether a patient has an acute lower res-
piratory syndrome. 
We built SySTR on top of an application 
called caTIES [20], which comprises a GATE 
pipeline of processing resources (http://gate.ac.uk/). 
Module 1 uses MetaMap [5] to index UMLS con-
cepts in the text and then maps the UMLS concepts 
to the 55 clinical conditions. For instance, Module 
1 would identify the clinical condition Dyspnea in 
the sentence ?Patient presents with a 3 day history 
of shortness of breath.? For each instance of the 55 
conditions identified by Module 1, Module 2 as-
signs values to three contextual features: Negation 
(negated, affirmed); Temporality (historical, re-
cent, hypothetical); and Experiencer (patient, 
other). For the sentence above, Module 2 would 
assign Dyspnea the following contextual features 
and their values: Negation?affirmed; Temporal-
ity?recent; Experiencer?patient. Module 3, as 
described in Chu and colleagues [21], resolves 
contradictions among multiple instances of clinical 
conditions, removes conditions not experienced by 
the patient, and assigns a final value of acute, 
chronic, or absent to each of the 55 conditions. 
Module 4 uses machine learning models to deter-
mine whether a patient has acute lower respiratory 
syndrome based on values of the conditions.  
The objective of this study was to evaluate an 
algorithm for identifying the contextual informa-
tion generated by Module 2. 
3 Methods 
We developed an algorithm called ConText for 
determining the values for three contextual features 
of a clinical condition: Negation, Temporality, and 
Experiencer. The same algorithm is applied to all 
three contextual features and is largely based on a 
regular expression algorithm for determining 
whether a condition is negated or not (NegEx [9]). 
ConText relies on trigger terms, pseudo-trigger 
terms, and scope termination terms that are specific 
to the type of contextual feature being identified. 
Below we describe the three contextual features 
addressed by the algorithm, details of how Con-
Text works, and our evaluation of ConText. 
3.1 Three Contextual Features 
Determining whether a patient had an acute epi-
sode of a clinical condition, such as cough, poten-
tially involves information described in the context 
of the clinical condition in the text. We performed 
a pilot study to learn which contextual features af-
fected classification of 55 clinical conditions as 
acute, chronic, or absent [21]. The pilot study 
identified which contextual features were critical 
for our task and reduced the number of values we 
initially used.  
The contextual features for each indexed clinical 
condition are assigned default values. ConText 
changes the values if the condition falls within the 
scope of a relevant trigger term. Below, we de-
scribe the contextual features (default values are in 
parentheses). 
(1) Negation (affirmed): ConText determines 
whether a condition is negated, as in ?No fe-
ver.? 
(2) Temporality (recent): ConText can change 
Temporality to historical or hypothetical. In its 
current implementation, historical is defined as 
beginning at least 14 days before the visit to 
the ED, but the algorithm can easily be modi-
fied to change the length of time. ConText 
would mark Fever in ?Patient should return if 
she develops fever? as hypothetical.   
82
(3) Experiencer (patient): ConText assigns condi-
tions ascribed to someone other than the pa-
tient an Experiencer of other, as in ?The pa-
tient?s father has a history of CHF.?  
3.2 Contextual Feature Algorithm 
As we examined how the contextual features were 
manifested in ED reports, we discovered similar 
patterns for all features and hypothesized that an 
existing negation algorithm, NegEx [9], may be 
applicable for all three features.  
NegEx uses two regular expressions (RE) to de-
termine whether an indexed condition is negated: 
RE1: <trigger term> <5w> <indexed term> 
RE2: <indexed term> <5w> <trigger term> 
<5w> represents five words (a word can be a sin-
gle word or a UMLS concept), and the text 
matched by this pattern is called the scope. NegEx 
relies on three types of terms to determine whether 
a condition is negated: trigger terms, pseudo-
trigger terms, and termination terms. Trigger terms 
such as ?no? and ?denies? indicate that the clinical 
conditions that fall within the scope of the trigger 
term should be negated. Pseudo-trigger terms, such 
as ?no increase,? contain a negation trigger term 
but do not indicate negation of a clinical concept.  
A termination term such as ?but? can terminate the 
scope of the negation before the end of the win-
dow, as in ?She denies headache but complains of 
dizziness.?  
ConText is an expansion of NegEx. It relies on 
the same basic algorithm but applies different term 
lists and different windows of scope depending on 
the contextual feature being annotated.  
3.3 ConText Term Lists  
Each contextual feature has a unique set of trigger 
terms and pseudo-trigger terms, as shown in Table 
1. The complete list of terms can be found at 
http://web.cbmi.pitt.edu/chapman/ConText.html. 
Most of the triggers apply to RE1, but a few 
(marked in table) apply to RE2. ConText assigns a 
default value to each feature, then changes that 
value if a clinical condition falls within the scope 
of a relevant trigger term.  
Although trigger terms are unique to the contex-
tual feature being identified, termination terms 
Table 1. Examples of trigger and pseudo-trigger terms for the three contextual features. If all terms are not 
represented in the table, we indicate the number of terms used by ConText in parentheses. 
Temporality (default = recent) 
Trigger terms for 
hypothetical 
Pseudo-trigger 
terms Trigger terms for historical Pseudo-trigger terms (10) 
if 
return 
should [he|she] 
should there 
should the patient 
as needed 
come back [for|to] 
if negative 
 
General triggers 
history 
previous^ 
History Section title^^ 
Temporal Measurement triggers^^^ 
  <time> of 
  [for|over] the [last|past] <time> 
  since (last) [day-of-week|week|month| 
    season|year] 
history, physical 
history taking 
poor history 
history and examination 
history of present illness 
social history 
family history 
sudden onset of 
Experiencer (default = patient)  Negation (default = affirmed) 
Trigger terms 
for other (12) 
Pseudo-trigger 
terms 
 Trigger terms for negated (125) Pseudo-trigger terms (16) 
father(?s) 
mother(?s) 
aunt(?s) 
  no 
not 
denies 
without 
no increase 
not extend 
gram negative 
^  the scope for ?previous? only extends one term forward (e.g., ?for previous headache?) 
^^Currently the only history section title we use is PAST MEDICAL HISTORY. 
^^^ <time> includes the following regular expression indicating a temporal quantification: x[-|space]   
[day(s)|hour(s)|week(s)|month(s)|year(s)]. x = any digit; words in brackets are disjunctions; items in parentheses are 
optional. The first two temporal measurement triggers are used with RE1; the third is used with RE2. For our 
current application, a condition lasting 14 days or more is considered historical.  
 
83
may be common to multiple contextual features. 
For instance, a termination term indicating that the 
physician is speaking about the patient can indicate 
termination of scope for the features Temporality 
and Experiencer. In the sentence ?History of 
COPD, presenting with shortness of breath,? the 
trigger term ?history? indicates that COPD is his-
torical, but the term ?presenting? terminates the 
scope of the temporality trigger term, because the 
physician is now describing the current patient 
visit. Therefore, the condition Dyspnea (?shortness 
of breath?) should be classified as recent. Simi-
larly, in the sentence ?Mother has CHF and patient 
presents with chest pain,? Experiencer for CHF 
should be other, but Experiencer for Chest Pain 
should be patient.  
We compiled termination terms into conceptual 
groups, as shown in Table 2.  
Table 2. ConText?s termination terms. Column 1 lists 
the type of termination term, the number of terms used 
by Context, and the contextual feature values using that 
type of termination term. Column 2 gives examples of 
the terms. 
Type of Term Examples 
Patient (5) 
Temporal (hypothetical) 
Experiencer (other) 
Patient, who, his, her, pa-
tient?s 
Presentation (12) 
Temporal (historical) 
Experiencer (other) 
Presents, presenting, com-
plains, was found, states, 
reports, currently, today 
Because (2) 
Temporal (hypothetical) Since, because 
Which (1) 
Experiencer (other) Which 
ED (2) 
Temporal (historical) Emergency department, ED 
But (8) 
Negation (negated) 
But, however, yet, though, 
although, aside from 
3.4 ConText Algorithm 
The input to ConText is an ED report with in-
stances of the 55 clinical concepts already indexed. 
For each clinical condition, ConText assigns val-
ues to the three contextual features. ConText?s al-
gorithm is as follows1: 
                                                 
1 This algorithm applies to RE1. The algorithm for RE2 
is the same, except that it works backwards from the 
trigger term and does not look for pseudo-trigger terms. 
Go to first trigger term in sentence 
If term is a pseudo-trigger term, 
   Skip to next trigger term  
Determine scope of trigger term 
If termination term within scope, 
   Terminate scope before termination term 
Assign appropriate contextual feature value to 
all indexed clinical concepts within scope.  
The scope of a trigger term depends on the con-
textual feature being classified. The default scope 
includes all text following the indexed condition 
until the end of the sentence. Thus, in the sentence 
?He should return for fever? the scope of the Tem-
porality (hypothetical) trigger term ?return? in-
cludes the segment ?for fever,? which includes an 
indexed condition Fever. The default scope is over-
ridden in a few circumstances. First, as described 
above, the scope can be terminated by a relevant 
termination term. Second, if the trigger term is a 
<section title>, the scope extends throughout the 
entire section, which is defined previous to Con-
Text?s processing. Third, a trigger term itself can 
require a different scope. The Temporality (histori-
cal) term ?previous? only extends one term for-
ward in the sentence. 
3.5 Evaluation 
We evaluated ConText?s ability to assign correct 
values to the three contextual features by compar-
ing ConText?s annotations with annotations made 
by a physician. 
Setting and Subjects. The study was conducted on 
reports for patients presenting to the University of 
Pittsburgh Medical Center Presbyterian Hospital 
ED during 2002. The study was approved by the 
University of Pittsburgh?s Institutional Review 
Board. We randomly selected 120 reports for pa-
tients with respiratory-related ICD-9 discharge di-
agnoses for manual annotation. For this study, we 
used 30 reports as a development set and 90 re-
ports as a test set. In addition to the annotated de-
velopment set, we used a separate set of 100 unan-
notated ED reports to informally validate our term 
lists. 
Reference Standard. A physician board-certified 
in internal medicine and infectious diseases with 
30 years of experience generated manual annota-
tions for the development and test reports. He used 
GATE (http://gate.ac.uk/) to highlight every indi-
84
vidual annotation in the text referring to any of the 
55 clinical conditions. For every annotation, he 
assigned values to the three contextual features, as 
shown in Figure 1.  
Previous experience in annotating the 55 condi-
tions showed that a single physician was inade-
quate for generating a reliable reference standard 
[19]. The main mistake made by a single physician 
was not marking a concept that existed in the text. 
We used NLP-assisted review to improve physi-
cian annotations by comparing the single physi-
cian?s annotations to those made by SySTR. The 
physician reviewed disagreements and made 
changes to his original annotations if he felt his 
original annotation was incorrect. A study by Mey-
stre and Haug [22] used a similar NLP-assisted 
review methodology and showed that compared to 
a reference standard not using NLP-assisted re-
view, their system had higher  recall and the same 
precision. 
Outcome Measures. For each contextual feature 
assigned to an annotation, we compared ConText?s 
value to the value assigned by the reference stan-
dard. We classified the feature as a true positive 
(TP) if ConText correctly changed the condition?s 
default value and a true negative (TN) if ConText 
correctly left the default value. We then calculated 
recall and precision using the following formulas: 
)(
:Recall
FNofnumberTPofnumber
TPofnumber
+
 
)(
:Precision
FPofnumberTPofnumber
TPofnumber
+
 
For the Temporality feature, we calculated recall 
and precision separately for the values historical 
and hypothetical. We calculated the 95% confi-
dence intervals (CI) for all outcome measures. 
4 Results 
Using NLP-assisted review, the reference standard 
physician made several changes to his initial anno-
tations. He indexed an additional 82 clinical condi-
tions and changed the title of the clinical condition 
for 48 conditions, resulting in a total of 1,620 in-
dexed clinical conditions in the 90 test reports. The 
reference standard physician also made 35 changes 
to Temporality values and 4 changes to Negation. 
The majority of Temporality changes were from 
historical to recent (17) and from hypothetical to 
recent (12).   
Table 3 shows ConText?s recall and precision 
values compared to the reference standard annota-
tions. About half of the conditions were negated 
(773/1620). Fewer conditions were historical 
(95/1620), hypothetical (40/1620), or experienced 
by someone other than the patient (8/1620). In 
spite of low frequency for these contextual feature 
values, identifying them is critical to understanding 
a patient?s current state. ConText performed best 
on Negation, with recall and precision above 97%. 
ConText performed well at assigning the Tempo-
rality value hypothetical, but less well on the Tem-
porality value historical. Experiencer had a small 
sample size, making results difficult to interpret. 
 
Table 3. Outcome measures for ConText on test set of 90 ED reports. 
Feature TP TN FP FN Recall 95% CI 
Precision 
95% CI 
Negation 750 824 23 23 97.0 96-98 
97.0 
96-98 
Temporality 
(historical) 66 1499 23 32 
67.4 
58-76 
74.2 
64-82 
Temporality 
(hypothetical) 33 1578 2 7 
82.5 
68-91 
94.3 
81-98 
Experiencer 4 1612 0 4 50.00 22-78 
100 
51-100 
5 Discussion 
We evaluated an extension of the NegEx algorithm 
for determining the values of two additional con-
textual features?Temporality and Experiencer. 
ConText performed with very high recall and pre-
cision when determining whether a condition was 
negated, and demonstrated moderate to high per-
formance on the other features. 
Figure 1. When the physician highlights text, 
GATE provides a drop-down menu to select the 
Clinical Condition and the values of the Contex-
tual Features. 
85
We performed an informal error analysis, which 
not only isolates ConText?s errors but also points 
out future research directions in contextual feature 
identification.  
5.1 Negation 
ConText?s negation identification performed sub-
stantially better than NegEx?s published results [9], 
even though ConText is very similar to NegEx and 
uses the same trigger terms.  Several possible ex-
planations exist for this boost in performance. First, 
our study evaluated negation identification in ED 
reports, whereas the referenced study on NegEx 
applied to discharge summaries. Second, ConText 
only applied to 55 clinical conditions, rather than 
the large set of UMLS concepts in the NegEx 
study. Third, the conditions indexed by SySTR that 
act as input to ConText are sometimes negated or 
affirmed before ConText sees them. For some con-
ditions, SySTR addresses internal negation in a 
word (e.g., ?afebrile? is classified as Fever with the 
Negation value negated). Also, SySTR assigns 
Negation values to some conditions with numeric 
values, such as negating Tachycardia from ?pulse 
rate 75.? Fourth, ConText does not use NegEx?s 
original scope of five words, but extends the scope 
to the end of the sentence. It would be useful to 
compare ConText?s scope difference directly 
against NegEx to determine which scope assign-
ment works better, but our results suggest the in-
creased scope may work well for ED reports. 
ConText?s errors in assigning the Negation 
value were equally distributed between FN?s and 
FP?s (23 errors each). Some false negatives re-
sulted from missing trigger terms (e.g., ?denying?). 
Several false negatives resulted from the interac-
tion between ConText and SySTR?s mapping rules. 
For example, in the sentence ?chest wall is without 
tenderness,? SySTR maps the UMLS concepts for 
?chest wall? and ?tenderness? to the condition 
Chest Wall Tenderness. In such a case, the nega-
tion trigger term ?without? is caught between the 
two UMLS concepts. Therefore, RE1 does not 
match, and ConText does not change the default 
from affirmed. False positive negations resulted 
from our not integrating the rule described in 
NegEx that a concept preceded by a definite article 
should not be negated [23] (e.g., ?has not been on 
steroids for his asthma?) and from descriptions in 
the text whose Negation status is even difficult for 
humans to determine, such as ?no vomiting with-
out having the cough? and ?patient does not know 
if she has a fever.? 
5.2 Temporality 
Historical. ConText identified historical condi-
tions with 67% sensitivity and 74% precision. 
Identifying historical conditions appears simple on 
the surface, but is a complex problem. The single 
trigger term ?history? is used for many of the his-
torical conditions, but the word ?history? is a rela-
tive term that can indicate a history of years (as in 
?history of COPD?) or of only a few days (as in 
?ENT: No history of nasal congestion?). The error 
analysis showed that ConText is missing trigger 
terms that act equivalently to the word ?history? 
such as ?in the past? (?has not been on steroids in 
the past for his asthma?) and ?pre-existing? (?pre-
existing shortness of breath?).  
Some conditions that the reference standard 
classified as historical had no explicit trigger in the 
text, as in the sentence ?When he sits up in bed, he 
develops pain in the chest.? It may be useful to 
implement rules involving verb tense for these 
cases. 
The most difficult cases for ConText were those 
with temporal measurement triggers. The few tem-
poral quantifier patterns we used were fairly suc-
cessful, but the test set contained multiple varia-
tions on those quantifiers, and a new dataset would 
probably introduce even more variations. For in-
stance, ConText falsely classified Non-pleuritic 
Chest Pain as historical in ?awoken at approxi-
mately 2:45 with chest pressure,? because Con-
Text?s temporal quantifiers do not account for time 
of the day. Also, even though ConText?s temporal 
quantifiers include the pattern ?last x weeks,? x 
represents a digit and thus didn?t match the phrase 
?intermittent cough the last couple of weeks.?  
We were hoping that identifying historical con-
ditions would not require detailed modeling of 
temporal information, but our results suggest oth-
erwise. We will explore the temporal categories 
derived by Hripcsak and Zhou [13] for discharge 
summaries to expand ConText?s ability to identify 
temporal measurement triggers.  
Hypothetical. ConText demonstrated 83% recall 
and 94% precision when classifying a condition as 
hypothetical rather than recent. Again, missing 
trigger terms (e.g., ?returning? and ?look out for?) 
and termination terms (e.g., ?diagnosis?) caused 
errors. The chief cause of false negatives was ter-
86
minating the scope of a trigger term too early. For 
instance, in the sentence ?She knows to return to 
the ED if she has anginal type chest discomfort 
which was discussed with her, shortness of breath, 
and peripheral edema? the scope of the trigger ?re-
turn? was terminated by ?her.? The major limita-
tion of regular expressions is evident in this exam-
ple in which ?her? is part of a relative clause modi-
fying ?chest discomfort,? not ?shortness of breath.?  
5.3 Experiencer 
ConText?s ability to identify an experiencer other 
than the patient suffered from low prevalence. In 
the test set of 90 reports, only 8 of the 1620 condi-
tions were experienced by someone other than the 
patient, and ConText missed half of them. Two of 
the false negatives came from not including the 
trigger term ?family history.? A more difficult er-
ror to address is recognizing that bronchitis is ex-
perienced by someone other than the patient in 
??due to the type of bronchitis that is currently 
being seen in the community.? ConText made no 
false positive classifications for Experiencer. 
5.4 Limitations and Future Work 
Some of ConText?s errors can be resolved by refin-
ing the trigger and termination terms. However, 
many of the erroneous classifications are due to 
complex syntax and semantics that cannot be han-
dled by simple regular expressions. Determining 
the scope of trigger terms in sentences with relative 
clauses and coordinated conjunctions is especially 
difficult. We believe ConText?s approach involv-
ing trigger terms, scope, and termination terms is 
still a reasonable model for this problem and hope 
to improve ConText?s ability to identify scope with 
syntactic information.  
A main limitation of our evaluation was the ref-
erence standard, which was comprised of a single 
physician. We used NLP-assisted review to in-
crease the identification of clinical conditions and 
decrease noise in his classifications. It is possible 
that the NLP-assisted review biased the reference 
standard toward ConText?s classifications, but the 
majority of changes made after NLP-assisted re-
view involved indexing the clinical conditions, 
rather than changing the values of the contextual 
features. Moreover, most of the changes to contex-
tual feature values involved a change in our anno-
tation schema after the physician had completed 
his first round of annotations. Specifically, we al-
lowed the physician to use the entire report to de-
termine whether a condition was historical, which 
caused him to mark recent exacerbations of his-
torical conditions as historical. A second physician 
is in the process of annotating the test set. The two 
physicians will come to consensus on their classi-
fications in generating a new reference standard.  
How good contextual feature identification has 
to be depends largely on the intended application. 
We tested SySTR?s ability to determine whether 
the 55 clinical conditions were acute, chronic, or 
absent on a subset of 30 test reports [24]. SySTR 
made 51 classification errors, 22 of which were 
due to ConText?s mistakes. In spite of the errors, 
SySTR demonstrated a kappa of 0.85 when com-
pared to physician classifications, suggesting that 
because of redundancy in clinical reports, Con-
Text?s mistakes may not have a substantial adverse 
effect on SySTR?s final output.  
5.5 Conclusion 
We evaluated a regular-expression-based algorithm 
for determining the status of three contextual fea-
tures in ED reports and found that ConText per-
formed very well at identifying negated conditions, 
fairly well at determining whether conditions were 
hypothetical or historical, and moderately well at 
determining whether a condition was experienced 
by someone other than the patient. ConText?s algo-
rithm is based on the negation algorithm NegEx, 
which is a frequently applied negation algorithm in 
biomedical informatics applications due to its sim-
plicity, availability, and generalizability to various 
NLP applications. Simple algorithms for identify-
ing contextual features of indexed conditions is 
important in medical language processing for im-
proving the accuracy of information retrieval and 
extraction applications and for providing a baseline 
comparison for more sophisticated algorithms. 
ConText accepts any indexed clinical conditions as 
input and thus may be applicable to other NLP ap-
plications. We do not know how well ConText will 
perform on other report types, but see similar con-
textual features in discharge summaries, progress 
notes, and history and physical exams. Currently, 
ConText only identifies three contextual features, 
but we hope to extend the algorithm to other fea-
tures in the future, such as whether a condition is 
mentioned as a radiology finding or as a diagnosis 
(e.g., Pneumonia).  
87
Over and above negation identification, which 
can be addressed by NegEx or other algorithms, 
ConText could be useful for a variety of NLP tasks, 
including flagging historical findings and eliminat-
ing indexed conditions that are hypothetical or 
were not experienced by the patient. Ability to 
modify indexed conditions based on their contex-
tual features can potentially improve precision in 
biosurveillance, real-time decision support, and 
information retrieval. 
Acknowledgments. This work was supported by 
NLM grant K22 LM008301, ?Natural language 
processing for respiratory surveillance.? 
References 
1. Friedman C. A broad-coverage natural language 
processing system. Proc AMIA Symp 2000:270-4. 
2. Fiszman M, Chapman WW, Aronsky D, Evans RS, 
Haug PJ. Automatic detection of acute bacterial pneu-
monia from chest X-ray reports. J Am Med Inform 
Assoc 2000;7(6):593-604. 
3. Taira R, Bashyam V, Kangarloo H. A field theory 
approach to medical natural language processing. IEEE 
Transactions in Inform Techn in Biomedicine 
2007;11(2). 
4. Hahn U, Romacker M, Schulz S. MEDSYNDI-
KATE-a natural language system for the extraction of 
medical information from findings reports. Int J Med Inf 
2002;67(1-3):63-74. 
5. Aronson AR. Effective mapping of biomedical text to 
the UMLS Metathesaurus: the MetaMap program. Proc 
AMIA Symp 2001:17-21. 
6. Hazlehurst B, Frost HR, Sittig DF, Stevens VJ. 
MediClass: A system for detecting and classifying en-
counter-based clinical events in any electronic medical 
record. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2005;12(5):517-29. 
7. Christensen L, Haug PJ, Fiszman M. MPLUS: a 
probabilistic medical language understanding system. 
Proc Workshop on Natural Language Processing in the 
Biomedical Domain 2002:29-36. 
8. Mutalik PG, Deshpande A, Nadkarni PM. Use of 
general-purpose negation detection to augment concept 
indexing of medical documents: a quantitative study 
using the UMLS. J Am Med Inform Assoc 
2001;8(6):598-609. 
9. Chapman WW, Bridewell W, Hanbury P, Cooper GF, 
Buchanan BG. A simple algorithm for identifying ne-
gated findings and diseases in discharge summaries. J 
Biomed Inform 2001;34(5):301-10. 
10. Elkin PL, Brown SH, Bauer BA, Husser CS, Carruth 
W, Bergstrom LR, et al A controlled trial of automated 
classification of negation from clinical notes. BMC Med 
Inform Decis Mak 2005;5(1):13. 
11. Herman T, Matters M, Walop W, Law B, Tong W, 
Liu F, et al Concept negation in free text components of 
vaccine safety reports. AMIA Annu Symp Proc 
2006:1122. 
12. Huang Y, Lowe HJ. A Novel Hybrid Approach to 
Automated Negation Detection in Clinical Radiology 
Reports. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2007. 
13. Hripcsak G, Zhou L, Parsons S, Das AK, Johnson 
SB. Modeling electronic discharge summaries as a sim-
ple temporal constraint satisfaction problem. J Am Med 
Inform Assoc 2005;12(1):55-63. 
14. Zhou L, Melton GB, Parsons S, Hripcsak G. A tem-
poral constraint structure for extracting temporal infor-
mation from clinical narrative. J Biomed Inform 2005. 
15. Chapman WW, Dowling JN, Wagner MM. Classifi-
cation of emergency department chief complaints into 
seven syndromes:  a retrospective analysis of 527,228 
patients. Ann Emerg Med 2005;46(5):445-455. 
16. Ivanov O, Wagner MM, Chapman WW, Olszewski 
RT. Accuracy of three classifiers of acute gastrointesti-
nal syndrome for syndromic surveillance. Proc AMIA 
Symp 2002:345-9. 
17. Chang HG, Cochrane DG, Tserenpuntsag B, Allegra 
JR, Smith PF. ICD9 as a surrogate for chart review in 
the validation of a chief complaint syndromic surveil-
lance system. In: Syndromic Surveillance Conference 
Seattle, Washington; 2005. 
18. Beitel AJ, Olson KL, Reis BY, Mandl KD. Use of 
emergency department chief complaint and diagnostic 
codes for identifying respiratory illness in a pediatric 
population. Pediatr Emerg Care 2004;20(6):355-60. 
19. Chapman WW, Fiszman M, Dowling JN, Chapman 
BE, Rindflesch TC. Identifying respiratory findings in 
emergency department reports for biosurveillance using 
MetaMap. Medinfo 2004;2004:487-91. 
20. Mitchell KJ, Becich MJ, Berman JJ, Chapman WW, 
Gilbertson J, Gupta D, et al Implementation and 
evaluation of a negation tagger in a pipeline-based sys-
tem for information extraction from pathology reports. 
Medinfo 2004;2004:663-7. 
21. Chu D, Dowling JN, Chapman WW. Evaluating the 
effectiveness of four contextual features in classifying 
annotated clinical conditions in emergency department 
reports. AMIA Annu Symp Proc 2006:141-5. 
22. Meystre S, Haug PJ. Natural language processing to 
extract medical problems from electronic clinical docu-
ments: performance evaluation. J Biomed Inform 
2006;39(6):589-99. 
23. Goldin I, Chapman WW. Learning to detect nega-
tion with 'not' in medical texts. In: Proc Workshop on 
Text Analysis and Search for Bioinformatics at the 26th 
Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference (SIGIR-
2003); 2003. 
24. Chu D. Clinical feature extraction from emergency 
department reports for biosurveillance [Master's Thesis]. 
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh; 2007. 
88
