TotalRecall: A Bilingual Concordance for Computer Assisted Translation and 
Language Learning
 
Jian-Cheng Wu , Kevin C. Yeh 
Department of Computer Science 
National Tsing Hua University 
101, Kuangfu Road, Hsinchu, 
300, Taiwan, ROC 
g904307@cs.nthu.edu.tw 
Thomas C. Chuang 
Department of Computer Science 
Van Nung Institute of Technology 
No. 1 Van-Nung Road 
Chung-Li Tao-Yuan, Taiwan, ROC 
tomchuang@cc.vit.edu.tw 
Wen-Chi Shei , Jason S. Chang 
Department of Computer Science 
National Tsing Hua University 
101, Kuangfu Road, Hsinchu, 300, 
Taiwan, ROC 
jschang@cs.nthu.edu.tw 
Abstract 
This paper describes a Web-based Eng-
lish-Chinese concordance system, Total-
Recall, developed to promote translation 
reuse and encourage authentic and idio-
matic use in second language writing. We 
exploited and structured existing high-
quality translations from the bilingual Si-
norama Magazine to build the concor-
dance of authentic text and translation. 
Novel approaches were taken to provide 
high-precision bilingual alignment on the 
sentence, phrase and word levels. A 
browser-based user interface (UI) is also 
developed for ease of access over the 
Internet. Users can search for word, 
phrase or expression in English or Chi-
nese. The Web-based user interface facili-
tates the recording of the user actions to 
provide data for further research. 
1 Introduction 
A concordance tool is particularly useful for study-
ing a piece of literature when thinking in terms of a 
particular word, phrase or theme. It will show ex-
actly how often and where a word occurs, so can 
be helpful in building up some idea of how differ-
ent themes recur within an article or a collection of 
articles. Concordances have been indispensable for 
lexicographers and increasingly considered useful 
for language instructor and learners. A bilingual 
concordance tool is like a monolingual concor-
dance, except that each sentence is followed by its 
translation counterpart in a second language. It 
could be extremely useful for bilingual lexicogra-
phers, human translators and second language 
learners. Pierre Isabelle, in 1993, pointed out: ?ex-
isting translations contain more solutions to more 
translation problems than any other existing re-
source.? It is particularly useful and convenient 
when the resource of existing translations is made 
available on the Internet. A web based bilingual 
system has proved to be very useful and popular. 
For example, the English-French concordance sys-
tem, TransSearch (Macklovitch et al 2000). Pro-
vides a familiar interface for the users who only 
need to type in the expression in question, a list of 
citations will come up and it is easy to scroll down 
until one finds one that is useful. TotalRecall 
comes with an additional feature making the solu-
tion more easily recognized. The user not only get 
all the citations related to the expression in ques-
tion, but also gets to see the translation counterpart 
highlighted. 
 
TotalRecall extends the translation memory 
technology and provide an interactive tool intended 
for translators and non-native speakers trying to 
find ideas to properly express themselves. Total-
Recall empower the user by allow her to take the 
initiative in submitting queries for searching au-
thentic, contemporary use of English. These que-
ries may be single words, phrases, expressions or 
even full sentence, the system will search a sub-
stantial and relevant corpus and return bilingual 
citations that are helpful to human translators and 
second language learners. 
2 Aligning the corpus 
Central to TotalRecall is a bilingual corpus and a 
set of programs that provide the bilingual analyses 
to yield a translation memory database out of the 
bilingual corpus. Currently, we are working with a 
collection of Chinese-English articles from the Si-
norama magazine. A large bilingual collection of 
Studio Classroom English lessons will be provided 
in the near future.  That would allow us to offer 
bilingual texts in both translation directions and 
with different levels of difficulty. Currently, the 
articles from Sinaroma seems to be quite usefully 
by its own, covering a wide range of topics, re-
flecting the personalities, places, and events in 
Taiwan for the past three decade.  
 
The concordance database is composed of bi-
lingual sentence pairs, which are mutual transla-
tion. In addition, there are also tables to record 
additional information, including the source of 
each sentence pairs, metadata, and the information 
on phrase and word level alignment. With that ad-
ditional information, TotalRecall provides various 
functions, including 1. viewing of the full text of 
the source with a simple click. 2. highlighted 
translation counterpart of the query word or phrase. 
3. ranking that is pedagogically useful for transla-
tion and language learning. 
 
We are currently running an experimental pro-
totype with Sinorama articles, dated mainly from 
1995 to 2002. There are approximately 50,000 bi-
lingual sentences and over 2 million words in total. 
We also plan to continuously updating the database 
with newer information from Sinorama magazine 
so that the concordance is kept current and relevant 
to the . To make these up to date and relevant.  
 
The bilingual texts that go into TotalRecall 
must be rearranged and structured. We describe the 
main steps below: 
2.1 Sentence Alignment 
After parsing each article from files and put them 
into the database, we need to segment articles into 
sentences and align them into pairs of mutual 
translation. While the length-based approach 
(Church and Gale 1991) to sentence alignment 
produces surprisingly good results for the close 
language pair of French and English at success 
rates well over 96%, it does not fair as well for 
distant language pairs such as English and Chinese. 
Work on sentence alignment of English and Chi-
nese texts (Wu 1994), indicates that the lengths of 
English and Chinese texts are not as highly corre-
lated as in French-English task, leading to lower 
success rate (85-94%) for length-based aligners.  
 
Table 1  The result of Chinese collocation candi-
dates extracted. The shaded collocation pairs are 
selected based on competition of whole phrase log 
likelihood ratio and word-based translation prob-
ability. Un-shaded items 7 and 8 are not selected 
because of conflict with previously chosen bilin-
gual collocations, items 2 and 3. 
 
Simard, Foster, and Isabelle (1992) pointed out 
cognates in two close languages such as English 
and French can be used to measure the likelihood 
of mutual translation. However, for the English-
Chinese pair, there  are no  orthographic,  phonetic 
or semantic cognates readily recognizable by the 
computer. Therefore, the cognate-based approach 
is not applicable to the Chinese-English tasks.  
 
At first, we used the length-based method for 
sentence alignment. The average precision of 
aligned sentence pairs is about 95%. We are now 
switching to a new alignment method based on 
punctuation statistics. Although the average ratio 
of the punctuation counts in a text is low (less than 
15%), punctuations provide valid additional evi-
dence, helping to achieve high degree of alignment 
precision. It turns out that punctuations are telling 
evidences for sentence alignment, if we do more 
than hard matching of punctuations and take into 
consideration of intrinsic sequencing of punctua-
tion in ordered comparison. Experiment results 
show that the punctuation-based approach outper-
forms the length-based approach with precision 
rates approaching 98%.  
2.2 Phrase and Word Alignment 
After sentences and their translation counterparts 
are identified, we proceeded to carry out finer-
grained alignment on the phrase and word levels. 
We employ  part of speech patterns  and  statistical  
Figure 1. The results of searching for ?hard+? with default ranking. 
 
analyses to extract bilingual phrases/collocations 
from a parallel corpus. The preferred syntactic pat-
terns are obtained from idioms and collocations in 
the machine readable English-Chinese version of 
Longman Dictionary of Contemporary of English. 
 
Phrases matching the patterns are extract from 
aligned sentences in a parallel corpus. Those 
phrases are subsequently matched up via cross lin-
guistic statistical association. Statistical association 
between the whole phrase as well as words in 
phrases are used jointly to link a collocation and its 
counterpart collocation in the other language. See 
Table 1 for an example of extracting bilingual col-
locations. The word and phrase level information is 
kept in relational database for use in processing 
queries, hightlighting translation counterparts, and 
ranking citations. Sections 3 and 4 will give more 
details about that. 
3 The Queries 
The goal of the TotalRecall System is to allow a 
user to look for instances of specific words or ex-
pressions. For this purpose, the system opens up 
two text boxes for the user to enter queries in any 
one of the languages involved or both. We offer 
some special expressions for users to specify the 
following queries: 
 
? Exact single word query - W. For instance, 
enter ?work? to find citations that contain 
?work,? but not ?worked?, ?working?, 
?works.? 
? Exact single lemma query ? W+. For in-
stance, enter ?work+? to find citations that 
contain ?work?, ?worked?, ?working?, 
?works.? 
? Exact string query. For instance, enter ?in 
the work? to find citations that contain the 
three words, ?in,? ?the,? ?work? in a row, 
but not citations that contain the three words 
in any other way. 
? Conjunctive and disjunctive query. For in-
stance, enter ?give+ advice+? to find cita-
tions that contain ?give? and ?advice.? It is 
also possible to specify the distance between 
?give? and ?advice,? so they are from a VO 
construction. Similarly, enter ?hard | diffi-
cult | tough? to find citations that involve 
difficulty to do, understand or bear some-
thing, using any of the three words. 
Once a query is submitted, TotalRecall dis-
plays the results on Web pages. Each result ap-
pears as a pair of segments, usually one sentence 
each in English and Chinese, in side-by-side for-
mat. The words matching the query are high-
lighted, and a ?context? hypertext link is included 
in each row. If this link is selected, a new page ap-
pears displaying the original document of the pair. 
If the user so wishes, she can scroll through the 
following or preceding pages of context in the 
original document. 
4 Ranking 
It is well known that the typical user usual has no 
patient to go beyond the first or second pages re-
turned by a search engine. Therefore, ranking and 
putting the most useful information in the first one 
or two is of paramount importance for search en-
gines. This is also true for a concordance.  
 
Experiments with a focus group indicate that 
the following ranking strategies are important: 
 
? Citations with a translation counterpart 
should be ranked first. 
? Citations with a frequent translation coun-
terpart appear before ones with less frequent 
translation 
? Citations with same translation counterpart 
should be shown in clusters by default. The 
cluster can be called out entirely on demand. 
? Ranking by nonlinguistic features should 
also be provided, including date, sentence 
length, query position in citations, etc. 
 
With various ranking options available, the users 
can choose one that is most convenient and 
productive for the work at hand. 
5 Conclusion 
In this paper, we describe a bilingual concordance 
designed as a computer assisted translation and 
language learning tool. Currently, TotalRecall 
uses Sinorama Magazine corpus as the translation 
memory and will be continuously updated as new 
issues of the magazine becomes available. We 
have already put a beta version on line and ex-
perimented with a focus group of second language 
learners. Novel features of TotalRecall include 
highlighting of query and corresponding transla-
tions, clustering and ranking of search results ac-
cording translation and frequency. 
 
TotalRecall enable the non-native speaker who 
is looking for a way to express an idea in English 
or Chinese. We are also adding on the basic func-
tions to include a log of user activities, which will 
record the users? query behavior and their back-
ground. We could then analyze the data and find 
useful information for future research. 
Acknowledgement  
We acknowledge the support for this study through 
grants from National Science Council and Ministry 
of Education, Taiwan (NSC 90-2411-H-007-033-
MC and MOE EX-91-E-FA06-4-4) and a special 
grant for preparing the Sinorama Corpus for distri-
bution by the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics and Chinese Language Processing. 
References 
Chuang, T.C. and J.S. Chang (2002), Adaptive Sentence 
Alignment Based on Length and Lexical Information, ACL 
2002, Companion Vol. P. 91-2. 
Gale, W. & K. W. Church, "A Program for Aligning Sen-
tences in Bilingual Corpora" Proceedings of the 29th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, Berkeley, CA, 1991. 
Macklovitch, E., Simard, M., Langlais, P.: TransSearch: A 
Free Translation Memory on the World Wide Web. Proc. 
LREC 2000 III, 1201--1208 (2000). 
Nie, J.-Y., Simard, M., Isabelle, P. and Durand, R.(1999) 
Cross-Language Information Retrieval based on Parallel 
Texts and Automatic Mining of Parallel Texts in the Web. 
Proceedings of SIGIR ?99, Berkeley, CA. 
Simard, M., G. Foster & P. Isabelle (1992), Using cognates to 
align sentences in bilingual corpora. In Proceedings of 
TMI92, Montreal, Canada, pp. 67-81. 
Wu, Dekai (1994), Aligning a parallel English-Chinese corpus 
statistically with lexical criteria. In The Proceedings of the 
32nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, New Mexico, USA, pp. 80-87. 
Wu, J.C. and J.S. Chang (2003), Bilingual Collocation Extrac-
tion Based on Syntactic and Statistical Analyses, ms. 
Yeh, K.C., T.C. Chuang, J.S. Chang (2003), Using Punctua-
tions for Bilingual Sentence Alignment- Preparing Parallel 
Corpus for Distribution by the ACLCLP, ms. 
Subsentential Translation Memory for  
Computer Assisted Writing and Translation 
Jian-Cheng Wu 
Department of Computer Science 
National Tsing Hua University 
101, Kuangfu Road, Hsinchu, 300, 
Taiwan, ROC 
D928322@oz.nthu.edu.tw 
Thomas C. Chuang 
Department of Computer Science 
Van Nung Institute of Technology
No. 1 Van-Nung Road 
Chung-Li Tao-Yuan, Taiwan, ROC
tomchuang@cc.vit.edu.tw 
Wen-Chi Shei , Jason S. Chang 
Department of Computer Science 
National Tsing Hua University 
101, Kuangfu Road, Hsinchu, 300, 
Taiwan, ROC 
jschang@cs.nthu.edu.tw 
 
Abstract 
This paper describes a database of translation 
memory, TotalRecall, developed to encourage 
authentic and idiomatic use in second 
language writing. TotalRecall is a bilingual 
concordancer that support search query in 
English or Chinese for relevant sentences and 
translations. Although initially intended for 
learners of English as Foreign Language (EFL) 
in Taiwan, it is a gold mine of texts in English 
or Mandarin Chinese. TotalRecall is 
particularly useful for those who write in or 
translate into a foreign language. We exploited 
and structured existing high-quality 
translations from bilingual corpora from a 
Taiwan-based Sinorama Magazine and 
Official Records of Hong Kong Legislative 
Council to build a bilingual concordance. 
Novel approaches were taken to provide high-
precision bilingual alignment on the 
subsentential and lexical levels. A browser-
based user interface was developed for ease of 
access over the Internet. Users can search for 
word, phrase or expression in English or 
Mandarin. The Web-based user interface 
facilitates the recording of the user actions to 
provide data for further research. 
1 Introduction 
Translation memory has been found to be more 
effective alternative to machine translation for 
translators, especially when working with batches 
of similar texts. That is particularly true with so-
called delta translation of the next versions for 
publications that need continuous revision such as 
an encyclopaedia or user?s manual. On another 
area of language study, researchers on English 
Language Teaching (ELT) have increasingly 
looked to concordancer of very large corpora as a 
new re-source for translation and language learning. 
Concordancers have been indispensable for 
lexicographers. But now language teachers and 
students also embrace the concordancer to foster 
data-driven, student-centered learning.  
A bilingual concordance, in a way, meets the 
needs of both communities, the computer assisted 
translation (CAT) and computer assisted language 
learning (CALL). A bilingual concordancer is like 
a monolingual concordance, except that each 
sentence is followed by its translation counterpart 
in a second language. ?Existing translations 
contain more solutions to more translation 
problems than any other existing resource.? 
(Isabelle 1993). The same can be argued for 
language learning; existing texts offer more 
answers for the learner than any teacher or 
reference work do.   
However, it is important to provide easy access 
for translators and learning writers alike to find the 
relevant and informative citations quickly. For in-
stance, the English-French concordance system, 
TransSearch provides a familiar interface for the 
users (Macklovitch et al 2000). The user type in 
the expression in question, a list of citations will 
come up and it is easy to scroll down until one 
finds translation that is useful much like using a 
search engine. TransSearch exploits sentence 
alignment techniques (Brown et al1990; Gale and 
Church 1990) to facilitate bilingual search at the 
granularity level of sentences.     
In this paper, we describe a bilingual 
concordancer which facilitate search and 
visualization with fine granularity. TotalRecall 
exploits subsentential and word alignment to 
provide a new kind of bilingual concordancer. 
Through the interactive interface and clustering of 
short subsentential bi-lingual citations, it helps 
translators and non-native speakers find ways to 
translate or express them-selves in a foreign 
language. 
2 Aligning the corpus 
Central to TotalRecall is a bilingual corpus and a 
set of programs that provide the bilingual analyses 
to yield a translation memory database out of the 
bilingual corpus. Currently, we are working with 
  
A: Database selection B: English query C: Chinese query D: Number of items per page 
E: Normal view F: Clustered summary according to translation G: Order by counts or lengths 
H: Submit bottom I: Help file J: Page index K: English citation L: Chinese citation M: Date and title 
N: All citations in the cluster O: Full text context P: Side-by-side sentence alignment 
Figure 2. The results of searching for ?hard? 
 
bilingual corpora from a Taiwan-based Sinorama 
Magazine and Official Records of Hong Kong 
Legislative Council. A large bilingual collection of 
Studio Classroom English lessons will be provided 
in the near future.  That would allow us to offer 
bilingual texts in both translation directions and 
with different levels of difficulty. Currently, the 
articles from Sinorama seems to be quite usefully 
by its own, covering a wide range of topics, 
reflecting the personalities, places, and events in 
Taiwan for the past three decades.  
The concordance database is composed of bi-
lingual sentence pairs, which are mutual translation. 
In addition, there are also tables to record 
additional information, including the source of 
each sentence pairs, metadata, and the information 
on phrase and word level alignment. With that 
additional information, TotalRecall provides 
various functions, including 1. viewing of the full 
text of the source with a simple click. 2. 
highlighted translation counterpart of the query 
word or phrase. 3. ranking that is pedagogically 
useful for translation and language learning. 
We are currently running an operational system 
with Sinorama Magazine articles and HK LEGCO 
records. These bilingual texts that go into 
TotalRecall must be rearranged and structured. We 
describe the main steps below: 
2.1 Subsentential alignment 
While the length-based approach (Church and 
Gale 1991) to sentence alignment produces very 
good results for close language pairs such as 
French and English at success rates well over 96%, 
it does not fair as well for disparate language pairs 
such as English and Mandarin Chinese. Also 
sentence alignment tends to produce pairs of a long 
Chinese sentence and several English sentences. 
Such pairs of mutual translation make it difficult 
for the user to read and grasp the answers 
embedded in the retrieved citations.  
We develop a new approach to aligning English 
and Mandarin texts at sub-sentential level in 
parallel corpora based on length and punctuation 
marks. 
The subsentential alignment starts with parsing 
each article from corpora and putting them into the 
database. Subsequently articles are segmented into 
subsentential segments. Finally, segments in the 
two languages which are mutual translation are 
aligned. 
Sentences and subsentenial phrases and clauses 
are broken up by various types of punctuation in 
the two languages. For fragments much shorter 
than sentences, the variances of length ratio are 
larger leading to unacceptably low precision rate 
for alignment. We combine length-based and 
punctuation-based approach to cope with the 
difficulties in subsentential alignment. 
Punctuations in one language translate more or less 
consistently into punctuations in the other language. 
Therefore the information is useful in 
compensating for the weakness of length-based 
approach. In addition, we seek to further improve 
the accuracy rates by employing cognates and 
lexical information. We experimented with an 
implementation of the pro-posed method on a very 
large Mandarin-English parallel corpus of records 
of Hong Kong Legislative Council with 
satisfactory results. Experiment results show that 
the punctuation-based approach outperforms the 
length-based approach with precision rates 
approaching 98%. 
 
 
Figure 1  The result of subsentential alignment 
and collocation alignment. 
 
2.2 Word and Collocation Alignment 
After sentences and their translation counterparts 
are identified, we proceeded to carry out finer-
grained alignment on the word level. We employed 
the Competitive Linking Algorithm (Melamed 
2000) produce high precision word alignment. We 
also extract English collocations and their transla-
tion equivalent based on the result of word align-
ment. These alignment results were subsequently 
used to cluster citations and highlight translation 
equivalents of the query. 
 
3 Aligning the corpus 
TotalRecall allows a user to look for instances of 
specific words or expressions and its translation 
counterpart. For this purpose, the system opens up 
two text boxes for the user to enter queries in any 
or both of the two languages involved. We offer 
some special expressions for users to specify the 
following queries: 
 
? Single or multi-word query ? spaces be-
tween words in a query are considered as ?and.?  
For disjunctive query, use ?||? to de-note ?or.? 
? Every word in the query will be expanded 
to all surface forms for search. That includes 
singular and plural forms, and various tense of the 
verbs.  
? TotalRecall automatically ignore high fre-
quency words in a stoplist such as ?the,? ?to,? and 
?of.? 
? It is also possible to ask for exact match by 
submitting query in quotes. Any word within the 
quotes will not be ignored. It is useful for 
searching named entities. 
Once a query is submitted, TotalRecall displays 
the results on Web pages. Each result appears as a 
pair of segments in English and Chinese, in side-
by-side format. A ?context? hypertext link is in-
cluded for each citation. If this link is selected, a 
new page appears displaying the original document 
of the pair. If the user so wishes, she can scroll 
through the following or preceding pages of con-
text in the original document. TotalRecall present 
the results in a way that makes it easy for the user 
to grasp the information returned to her: 
? When operating in the monolingual mode, 
TotalRecall presents the citation according to 
lengths. 
? When operating in the bilingual mode, To-
talRecall clusters the citations according to the 
translation counterparts and presents the user with 
a summary page of one example each for different 
translations. The query words and translation 
counterparts are high-lighted. 
4 Conclusion 
In this paper, we describe a bilingual 
concordance designed as a computer assisted 
translation and language learning tool. Currently, 
TotalRecll uses Sinorama Magazine and 
HKLEGCO corpora as the databases of translation 
memory. We have already put a beta version on 
line and experimented with a focus group of 
second language learners. Novel features of 
TotalRecall include highlighting of query and 
corresponding translations, clustering and ranking 
of search results according translation and 
frequency. 
TotalRecall enable the non-native speaker who is 
looking for a way to express an idea in English or 
Mandarin. We are also adding on the basic func-
tions to include a log of user activities, which will 
record the users? query behavior and their back-
ground. We could then analyze the data and find 
useful information for future research. 
Subsentential alignment results 
 
From 1983 to 1991, the average rate of wage growth for all trades 
and industries was only 1.6%.  
???????????????????? 1.6%? 
This was far lower than the growth in labour productivity, which 
averaged 5.3%. 
????????????? 5.3%??? 
But, it must also be noted that the average inflation rate was as 
high as 7.7% during the same period.  
???????????? 7.7%? 
As I have said before, even when the economy is booming, the 
workers are unable to share the fruit of economic success. 
??????????????????????????
??? 
Acknowledgement  
We acknowledge the support for this study 
through grants from National Science Council and 
Ministry of Education, Taiwan (NSC 91-2213-E-
007-061 and MOE EX-92-E-FA06-4-4) and a 
special grant for preparing the Sinorama Corpus 
for distri-bution by the Association for 
Computational Lin-guistics and Chinese Language 
Processing. 
References  
Brown P., Cocke J., Della Pietra S., Jelinek F., 
Lafferty J., Mercer R., & Roossin P. (1990). A 
statistical approach to machine translation. 
Computational Linguistics, vol. 16. 
Gale, W. & K. W. Church, "A Program for 
Aligning Sen-tences in Bilingual Corpora" 
Proceedings of the 29th An-nual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics, 
Berkeley, CA, 1991. 
Isabelle, Pierre, M. Dymetman, G. Foster, J-M. 
Jutras, E. Macklovitch, F. Perrault, X. Ren and 
M. Simard. 1993. Translation Analysis and 
Translation Automation. In Pro-ceedings of the 
Fifth International Conference on Theoreti-cal 
and Methodological Issues in Machine 
Translation, Kyoto, Japan, pp. 12-20. 
I. Dan Melamed. 2000. Models of translational 
equivalence among words. Computational 
Linguistics, 26(2):221?249, June. 
