Proceedings of the Workshop on Computational Approaches to Figurative Language, pages 5?12,
Rochester, NY, April 26, 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Corpus-driven Metaphor Harvesting
Astrid Reining
Institute of Romance Languages
University of Hamburg
20146 Hamburg, Germany
astrid.reining@uni-hamburg.de
Birte Lo?nneker-Rodman
International Computer Science Institute
1947 Center Street, Suite 600
Berkeley, CA 94704, USA
loenneke@icsi.berkeley.edu
Abstract
The paper presents a corpus-based method
for finding metaphorically used lex-
emes and prevailing semantico-conceptu-
al source domains, given a target domain
corpus. It is exemplified by a case study
on the target domain of European politics,
based on a French 800,000 token corpus.
1 Introduction
This investigation is situated within the frame-
work of the Hamburg Metaphor Database1 (HMD)
(Lo?nneker and Eilts, 2004), which collects manual
annotations of metaphors in context. HMD anno-
tation terminology refers to cognitive linguistic ac-
counts of metaphor. These suggest that abstract
?target? concepts are often thought and talked of in
terms of less abstract ?source? concepts (Section 2).
On these accounts, the paper presents a method for
finding metaphorically used lexical items and char-
acterizing the conceptual source domains they be-
long to, given a target domain corpus.
After mentioning related work on metaphor an-
notation (Section 3), we exemplify our method by a
case study on the target domain of European pol-
itics, for which a French 800,000 token corpus is
prepared and imported into a corpus manager (Sec-
tion 4). Using corpus manager functions, a small
set of highly salient collocates of Europe are classi-
fied as candidates of metaphorical usages; after as-
sessing their metaphoricity in context, these lexemes
1http://www1.uni-hamburg.de/metaphern
are grouped into semantico-conceptual domains for
which, in a final step, additional lexical instanti-
ations are searched (Section 5). Two important
source domains (BUILDING and MOTION) are de-
tected, which are supported by over 1,000 manual
corpus annotations. The domains can be charac-
terized as small networks of EuroWordNet synsets
(nodes) and lexical as well as conceptual relations
(Section 6). Section 7 concludes the paper.
2 Theoretical Aspects
The Conceptual Theory of Metaphor (CTM) worked
out originally by (Lakoff and Johnson, 1980) claims
that conceptual metaphors such as GOOD IS UP
and TIME IS MONEY structure the way we think
and influence the way we use language. Concep-
tual metaphors are mappings between conceptual
domains, for example between the target domain
GOOD and the less abstract source domain UP, or
between TIME (target) and MONEY (source).
Conceptual metaphors are rarely directly referred
to in speech or writing: Whereas time is money is a
standing expression in English, this is much less so
for many other conceptual mappings (cf. ?good is
up). Consequently, corpus analysis cannot have as a
goal finding conceptual mappings as such. Rather, it
can find their manifestations through non-literal us-
ages of lexical items ? i.e., contexts in which source
domain words are used to refer to elements in the
target domain.
For example, high (a word from the UP source do-
main) means ?good? in the expression high marks;
and spend or save, used in the source domain to re-
fer to actions involving money, refer to actions in the
5
target domain of TIME when used in contexts such as
spend time or save time.
Adopting a broad notion of metaphor based on
CTM, we refer to such non-literal usages (though
often conventionalized) as lexical metaphors in this
paper. Prominent conceptual metaphors are illus-
trated by a larger number of lexical metaphors,
which support the systematicity of their mapping.
3 Related Work
Earlier projects annotating metaphor in corpora in-
clude (Martin, 1994) and (Barnden et al, 2002). In
what follows, we give two examples of recent work.
Gedigian et al (2006) annotated a subset of the
Wall Street Journal for the senses of verbs from
Motion-related, Placing, and Cure frames which
were extracted from FrameNet (Fillmore et al,
2003). The annotation shows that more than 90%
of the 4,186 occurrences of these verbs in the corpus
data are lexical metaphors in the above sense. Gedi-
gian et al (2006) conclude that in the domain of eco-
nomics, Motion-related metaphors are used conven-
tionally to describe market fluctuations and policy
decisions. A classifier trained on the annotated cor-
pus can discriminate between literal and metaphori-
cal usages of the verbs.
Lee (2006) compiled a 42,000 word corpus of
transcribed doctor-patient dialogues, exhaustively
hand-annotated for stretches of metaphorical lan-
guage. These are provided with conceptual labels
enabling the author to identify prevalent and inter-
related metaphorical mappings used as part of com-
municative strategies in this domain.
4 The European Constitution Corpus
Exploration and annotation of a corpus to find infor-
mation regarding its predominant conceptual source
domains is most productive when applied to an ab-
stract and novel target domain. Abstractness calls
for ways to make the topic cognitively accessible,
and novelty entails a certain openness about the par-
ticular source domains that might be activated for
this purpose.
Abstractness and novelty are criteria fulfilled by
the target domain selected for our study: European
Constitutional politics. The domain is represented
by the public discourse on the possible introduction
of a European Constitution and on the corresponding
French referendum (29 May 2005). The referendum
allowed voters to accept or refuse the proposed Con-
stitution text (the result being refusal). The remain-
der of this section describes the sources of the corpus
(4.1), its acquisition (4.2), and pre-processing (4.3).
4.1 Sources
The corpus consists of two sub-corpora, collected
from online versions of two French dailies, Le
Monde and Le Figaro. The site lemonde.fr con-
tains each article published in the printed version of
the socialist-liberal newspaper Le Monde, whereas
lefigaro.fr contains articles from the conser-
vative newspaper Le Figaro.
4.2 Collection
From 27 April to 5 June, 2005, the above men-
tioned web sites were screened for articles on Eu-
rope and the European Constitution on a daily basis.
For the case study presented in this paper, only arti-
cles dealing with the Constitution and discussing the
referendum are retained. Each of these articles is a
document of the European Constitution corpus and
contains information on its publication date, author,
and newspaper section (e.g. editorial). The selection
of relevant articles is performed manually. This is
labor-intensive but keeps noise to a minimum. As a
guideline for distinguishing between ?general? Eu-
ropean topics and the referendum on the European
Constitution, key words including (European) Con-
stitution and referendum are used.
4.3 Preprocessing
The collected documents are converted into text for-
mat and annotated with a simple SGML tagset rep-
resenting document meta data (in the header), para-
graph boundaries, and sentence boundaries. Sen-
tence detection is performed reusing TreeTagger
scripts2 because we POS-tag and lemmatize the
texts using the TreeTagger (Schmid, 1994) and its
French parameter file (Stein and Schmid, 1995). Fi-
nally, the corpus is verticalized for use with the
Manatee/Bonito corpus manager (Rychly? and Smrz?,
2Tokenizer perl script for modern French, available on
Achim Stein?s web page, http://www.uni-stuttgart.
de/lingrom/stein/forschung/resource.html
[accessed 4 September 2006].
6
2004), run in single platform mode on a Linux com-
puter.
Table 1 gives an overview of the two sub-corpora.
When collecting the corpus, relevance to the topic
had been our only criterion. Interestingly, the two
newspaper corpora are very similar in size. This
means that the selected topic was assigned equal im-
portance by the different newspaper teams. Tables 2
and 3 show absolute frequencies of the top ten lem-
mas, filtered by a list of 725 French stop words3 but
still including oui - ?yes? and non - ?no?, buzz-words
during the political debate on the European Consti-
tution. The frequent words also give an impression
of the domain centeredness of the corpus.
Le Monde Le Figaro
Size (tokens) 411,066 396,791
Distinct word forms 23,112 23,516
Distinct lemmas 13,093 13,618
Documents 410 489
Paragraphs 7,055 6,175
Subdocuments 59 n.a.
Sentences 17,421 17,210
Table 1: Size of the European Constitution corpus.
5 Lexical Metaphors and Source Domains
Our aim is to determine empirically salient
metaphorical source domains used in the target do-
main of European politics, combined with the prac-
tical interest in speeding up the detection and anno-
tation of lexical metaphors. In Subsection 3 above,
two approaches to corpus annotation for metaphor
were mentioned. Due to the size of the corpus
and limited annotator resources, we cannot follow
the full-text annotation approach adopted by Lee
(2006). Neither do we proceed as Gedigian et al
(2006), because that approach pre-selects source do-
mains and lemmas. In our approach, we search for
metaphorically used lexical items from initially un-
known source domains, so interesting lemmas can-
not be listed a priori.
Therefore, we developed a new method which
makes efficient use of existing corpus manager func-
tions. The only constant is the representation of the
target domain, predefined at a high level by the se-
lection of our corpus. We fixed the lemma Europe
3Developed by Jean Ve?ronis: http://www.up.
univ-mrs.fr/veronis/data/antidico.txt [ac-
cessed 4 September 2006].
Lemma Occurrences
1. europe?en - ?European? 2,033
2. non - ?no? 2,306
3. Europe - ?Europe? 1,568
4. politique - ?political; politics? 1,159
5. oui - ?yes? 1,124
6. France - ?France? 1,110
7. constitution - ?Constitution? 1,099
8. traite? - ?treaty? 906
9. monsieur - ?mister? 872
10. mai - ?May? 781
Table 2: Frequent words in the Monde sub-corpus.
Lemma Occurrences
1. europe?en - ?European? 2,148
2. non - ?no? 1,690
3. Europe - ?Europe? 1,646
4. France - ?France? 1,150
5. politique - ?political; politics? 969
6. constitution - ?Constitution? 921
7. oui - ?yes? 917
8. ministre - ?minister? 885
9. traite? - ?treaty? 856
10. devoir - ?have to; obligation? 817
Table 3: Frequent words in the Figaro sub-corpus.
as a low-level anchor of the target domain.4 The in-
vestigation proceeds in three steps:
1. Statistically weighted lists of collocates of the
target domain lemma Europe are calculated and
screened for candidates of metaphorical lan-
guage use (5.1).
2. For the obtained candidate collocates, the cor-
pus is concordanced in order to discriminate us-
ages and assign a source domain to each collo-
cate (5.2).
3. The source domains are extended lexically,
making use of EuroWordNet synsets and rela-
tions (5.3).
Corpus data drives the discovery of relevant lemmas
in step 1. In steps 2 and 3, the corpus is used to
increasingly refine and evaluate findings regarding
relevant lemmas and source domains.
5.1 Collocate analysis
At this stage, it is necessary to set a range (span)
within which candidate lemmas are to appear, mea-
4We could have started with a larger set of target domain
lemmas, e.g. europe?en - ?European?, Bruxelles - ?Brussels?, UE
- ?EU? etc. However, the results for Europe quickly proved to
be sufficient in number and variety to illustrate the method.
7
sured in lemma counts starting with the anchor word
Europe. Sample concordances show that Europe is
often preceded by an article and sometimes by an
additional preposition. Based on this insight, we
heuristically restrict the context range for collocates
to four (i.e. three words are allowed to occur be-
tween it and Europe). For example, me`re ?mother?
in Example (1) is retained as a collocate:
(1) Parce qu?elle a e?te? la me`re4 fondatrice3 de2
l1?Europe unie. (?Because she [i.e. France]
has been the founding mother of the unified
Europe.?)
The minimum absolute frequency of the collocate
within the specified context range is set to 3, which
ensures results of at least three example sentences
per co-occurring lemma. Intentionally, no restriction
is applied to the part of speech of the collocate.
For both sub-corpora, lists of the top 100 collo-
cate lemmas for Europe are calculated in the Man-
atee/Bonito corpus manager. We use the MI-score
for ranking; it is based on the relative frequency of
the co-occurring lemmas. Choosing MI-score over
T-score is driven by an interest in salient collocates
of Europe, whether or not they are common in the
entire corpus. (T-score would tend to prefer collo-
cates that occur frequently throughout the corpus.)
The top collocates and their MI-scores are given in
Tables 4 and 5.
MI-scores of the 100 top-ranked collocates are be-
tween 7.297 and 4.575 in the Monde corpus and be-
tween 7.591 and 4.591 in the Figaro corpus. Em-
pirically, a threshold of MI >= 6 retains the most
salient collocates of Europe in both corpora. These
Lemma MI Abs. f
1. panne - ?breakdown? 7.297 6
2. uni - ?unified? 7.275 13
3. re?veil - ?awakening; alarm clock? 7.034 3
4. unification - ?unification? 6.864 4
5. paradoxe - ?paradox? 6.812 3
6. construire - ?construct? 6.799 31
7. re?solument - ?decidedly? 6.619 3
8. otage - ?hostage? 6.619 3
9. utopie - ?utopia? 6.619 3
10. de?fier - ?defy, challenge? 6.619 3
. . . . . . . . . . . .
26. re?volte - ?revolt? 6.034 3
. . . . . . . . . . . .
100. maintenant - ?now? 4.575 6
Table 4: Collocates of Europe in Le Monde.
Lemma MI Abs. f
1. oriental - ?oriental, east? 7.591 8
2. unifier - ?unify? 7.498 6
3. Forum - ?Forum? 7.176 3
4. occidental - ?occidental, west? 7.065 5
5. panne - ?breakdown? 6.913 8
6. ouest - ?west? 6.691 3
7. prospe`re - ?prosperous? 6.591 4
8. bouc - ?goat? 6.498 3
9. patrie - ?fatherland, home coun-
try?
6.498 3
10. ruine - ?ruin? 6.498 3
. . . . . . . . . . . .
20. doter - ?endow? 6.006 8
. . . . . . . . . . . .
100. attacher - ?attach? 4.591 3
Table 5: Collocates of Europe in Le Figaro.
are 26 collocate lemmas from Le Monde and 20 from
Le Figaro.
These highly salient collocates are evaluated for
the potential of being used metaphorically in the tar-
get domain. The guideline underlying this evalua-
tion is as follows: Those lexemes which, in at least
one of their usages, designate entities belonging to
domains more concrete than POLITICS (for exam-
ple, BUILDING or FAMILY) are likely to be used
metaphorically in the corpus. Specifically, among
those collocates with MI >= 6, we identify the
following metaphor candidates:
Le Monde panne - ?breakdown?, re?veil - ?awak-
ening; alarm clock?, construire - ?construct?,
otage - ?hostage?, ba?tir - ?build?, me`re -
?mother?, re?volte - ?revolt?;
Le Figaro panne, bouc - ?goat?, ruine - ?ruin?, tra-
verser - ?traverse?, racine - ?root?, visage -
?face?, reconstruire - ?reconstruct?.
Merging the lists yields 13 distinct candidate words,
which are now evaluated based on contexts from
within the corpus. There are a total of 112 occur-
rences of these lemmas co-occurring with Europe in
a range of 4, the setting used to calculate collocate
lists. Each of them is inspected in a context of at
least one sentence. An annotator decides whether
the usage is metaphorical, and confirms this in al-
most all of the cases (cf. Table 6).
5.2 Source domain identification
While disambiguating the 13 candidate lemmas in
context, the annotator also assigns a source domain
8
Monde Figaro Total Metaphor
construire 31 13 44 44
reconstruire 0 3 3 3
ba?tir 5 1 6 6
ruine 0 3 3 0 or 3
panne 5 7 12 12
traverser 2 7 9 9
me`re 3 1 4 4
racine 2 5 7 7
visage 2 5 7 7
re?veil 3 0 3 3
re?volte 3 0 3 3
otage 3 2 5 5
bouc 3 3 6 6
Total 62 50 112 109 or 112
Table 6: Co-occurrences of candidate lemmas.
label to each occurrence. Actually, to hold the sta-
tus of source domain in a conceptual mapping, a
conceptual domain should be instantiated systemat-
ically by a number of lexical metaphors. Therefore,
as long as this systematicity has not been verified,
the assigned source domains are tentative.
Four tentative source domains are postulated,
two of which might need to be split into subdo-
mains. The general domains are BUILDING, MO-
TION, FIGHT, and LIVING BEING. Verbs (.V) and
nouns (.N) instantiating them are listed in Table 7.
The table also contains further (though still ambigu-
ous) lemmas from the Top-100 collocate list sup-
porting the source domains. Observations regarding
the source domains, based on the 112 annotated lex-
ical metaphors, are summarized in what follows.
The BUILDING source domain has the highest
Domain Disambiguated Futher collocates
Lemmas (Top 100)
1. BUILDING construire.V, maison.N - ?house?,
reconstruire.V, fonder.V - ?found?
ba?tir.V, ruine.N ?
2. MOTION
? FORWARD panne.N, progresser.V - ?pro-
MOTION traverser.V gress?, avancer.V
- ?advance?
? MOTOR panne.N moteur.N - ?motor?
VEHICLE
3. FIGHT otage.N, re?volte.N lutter.V - ?fight?
4. LIVING BEING
? PROCRE- me`re.N, racine.N pe`re.N - ?father?,
ATION na??tre.V - ?be born?
? BODY visage.N dos.N - ?back?,
coeur.N - ?heart?
? REST re?veil.N ?
Table 7: Tentative source domains.
number of lexical metaphor instantiations. The am-
biguity of ruine - ?ruin?, however, is unresolvable:
The texts talk about ?ruins of Europe? after World
War II; if understood as ?ruins of cities/buildings in
Europe,? all of these occurrences are literal, but if
interpreted as ?ruins of the European political sys-
tem,? all of them are metaphorical. The ambiguity
might be deliberate.
Also the MOTION domain has been assigned to
a large number of disambiguated occurrences. The
noun panne - ?breakdown? might instantiate a sub-
domain, such as (MOTION IN A) MOTORIZED VEHI-
CLE; in some cases, it has been assigned MACHINE
as source domain, purposely underspecified as to its
motion-relatedness.
The LIVING BEING source domain is multi-
faceted, comprising PROCREATION, BODY, and
REST, obviously personifying Europe. However, the
frequency of lexical metaphors in these domains is
in large part due to recurring quotations: For ex-
ample, me`re - ?mother? is used exclusively within
the expression la me`re fondatrice de l?Europe - ?the
founding mother of Europe,? attributed to J. L. Ro-
driguez Zapatero; and re?veil - ?awakening; alarm
clock? (pointing to an action of a living being) oc-
curs only as part of the expression sonner le re?veil
de l?Europe - ?ring the awakening/alarm of Europe,?
coined by Ph. de Villiers. Finally, bouc - ?goat? is
always part of the idiom le bouc e?missaire - ?scape-
goat?. Although it could be grouped under LIVING
BEING, this expression is based on particular cul-
tural knowledge rather than on systematic exploita-
tion of general world knowledge about the source
domain.
The FIGHT domain has the lowest count of lexical
metaphors in the annotated co-occurrences of Eu-
rope. Also, the noun otage - ?hostage? occurs three
times out of five within the expression (ne pas) pren-
dre l?Europe en otage - ?(not) take Europe hostage,?
coined by N. Sarkozy and quoted as such.
To summarize, we observe that the most salient
lexical metaphors co-occurring with Europe in the
European Constitution corpus either refer to the
source domains of BUILDING or MOTION, well-
known source domains of conventional metaphors,
or the lexical metaphors are sparse, referring to
much less clearly delimited source domains such as
LIVING BEING or FIGHT. Within the second group,
9
there are a number of newly coined expressions,
?one shot rich image metaphors,? (Lakoff, 1987)
which evoke entire scenes but do not necessarily
contribute to a wide-spread systematic exploitation
of the source domain.
5.3 Lexical extension
Corpus annotation is now extended to a larger list
of lemmas from the source domains of BUILDING
and MOTION. The challenge here is finding addi-
tional lemmas that might exploit the postulated map-
pings, given a small set of disambiguated lemmas
and ambiguous collocates (cf. Table 7). A lexical
resource for French containing information on con-
ceptual domains would be helpful here. EuroWord-
Net (EWN) could go in this direction. It defines
many relation types, including the synonym relation
inside synsets, as well as hyponym, near-antonym
and meronym relations between synsets. Apart from
these lexical relations, EWN also recognizes a fam-
ily of semantico-conceptual INVOLVED relations,
which relate a verb synset Y to a noun synset X if
?X is the one/that who/which is typically involved
in Ying? (Vossen, 1999) (our emphasis). Unfortu-
nately, there are almost no actual instantiations of
INVOLVED relations in the French part of EWN.
Taking our previously identified collocates of Eu-
rope as seeds, we extend our lemma list resorting to
EuroWordNet synsets, as follows:
? lemmas in synsets lexically related by EWN re-
lations to synsets containing our seed lemmas
(hypo-, hyper-, anto-, mero- and synonyms);
? lemmas in synsets lexically related across
part of speech to synsets containing our seed
lemmas, by adding missing XPOS NEAR-
SYNONYM and XPOS NEAR ANTONYM
relations ourselves;
? lemmas in synsets that are conceptually related
to the seed synsets, by adding INVOLVED re-
lations ourselves.
A reiteration of these steps (using encountered
lemmas as new seeds) could lead very soon to gen-
eral or peripheral lemmas. Ideally, one would set
up a limit of reiteration per operation and consider
all encountered lemmas as possible keywords of the
domain. However, annotator resources being lim-
ited, we reduced the list of key lemmas to about 20
per domain (22 for BUILDING and 19 for MOTION),
using human judgment.
At this stage, the restriction on the keyword of
being a collocate of Europe is lifted. This results
in search, disambiguation, and annotation being per-
formed on the entire corpus. The annotator finds 663
lexical metaphors among the 1,237 occurrences of
22 BUILDING keywords, and 409 lexical metaphors
among the 1,307 occurrences of 19 MOTION key-
words. Each key lemma contributes positively to the
count of lexical metaphors. Two consequences fol-
low from these figures:
1. Both postulated source domains are systemati-
cally exploited by lexical metaphors.
2. Every second or third investigated occurrence
is a lexical metaphor.5 Collection and annota-
tion of metaphors can thus proceed consider-
ably faster on the key lemmas than it would on
full text or randomly selected sentences.
For each lexical metaphor, the annotator provides
EuroWordNet synset information. For the actual
meaning in context, the synset belonging to the tar-
get domain is encoded. Additionally, the synset con-
taining the metaphorically used lexeme in its source
domain sense is indicated (?source synset?).
6 Source domain structure
The information on source synsets underlies con-
ceptual maps of the two source domains. This is
exemplified here by Figure 1, which represents the
MOTION domain. Lexical metaphors are prefixed
by M ; those word senses not encoded in EWN are
marked with an asterisk at the end. Synsets shaded
gray in Figure 1 contain at least one lemma that is
exploited as a lexical metaphor, and as such attested
in the European Constitution corpus. Ovals rep-
resent verb synsets, boxes show noun synsets, and
hexagons depict events.
Relations between synsets illustrate the internal
structure of the domain. Solid lines represent rela-
tions encoded in EuroWordNet. For legibility rea-
sons, labels of hyponym relations have been omitted.
5In the vicinity of Europe, the ratio continues to be higher,
with at least three quarters of the contexts being metaphorical.
10
M_progresser:2
M_avancer:4
?advance?
d?placer:5 bouger:2 ?move?
changer de place:1 se d?placer:2
?get around?
se d?placer:1 se mouvoir:1 M_aller:3
?move, go?
HAS_HYPONYM
moyen de transport:1
v?hicule:1
?means of
transportation?
INVLVD_INSTR
route:4
M_voie:2
?route?
INVLVD_DIRECTION
passer:16
?pass?
M_traverser:5
M_parcourir:3
?pass through?
M_traverser:4
?traverse?
M_continuer:2 M_poursuivre:5
M_avancer:12
?continue, pursue?
M_avancer:8
traverser:3
?advance?
M_passage:9
M_chemin:3
M_parcours:1*
?passage?
INVLVD_LOCATION
v?hicule:2
?vehicle?
vaisseau:2 M_bateau:2
avion:2
?vessel?
v?hicule ? moteur:1
?motor vehicle?
transports
en commun:1
?public transportation?
M_train:2
?train?
M_chemin:1
M_direction:1
?path?
M_direction:6
M_cours:2
?direction?
passer ? travers:1
M_franchir:2
M_traverser:2
?trespass?
M_poursuite:5 pers?cution:2
?pursuit?
XPOS_NEAR_SYN
faire une pause:1 s?arreter:4
?pause?
NEAR_ANT
M_route:2 M_chemin:4
?way?
M_bateau:1
?boat?
M_boussole:1*
?compass?
HAS_MEROPART
moteur ? combustion interne:1 M_moteur:2*
?internal combustion engine?
HAS_MEROPART
M_ancrer:2 mouiller l?ancre:1
mouiller:2
?moor; anchor?
RELATION?CAUSES
moteur thermique:1
?combustion engine?
M_moteur:1
?motor?
panne de moteur:1 M_panne:1*
?engine failure, breakdown?
INVLVD_PATIENT
M_arr?t:2 immobilisation:1
?immobilization?
CAUSES
souffler:1 reprendre haleine:1
?catch one?s breath?
M_arr?t:6 stop:1
?halt?
XPOS_NEAR_SYN
Figure 1: The MOTION source domain with corpus-specific highlights.
Dotted lines stand for relations that we added. These
were labeled using EWN relation types (Vossen,
1999), where possible. As obvious from Figure 1,
the domain graph would be separate partitions with-
out our additional relations, especially those of
the INVOLVED type. Conceptual relations (?typi-
cally. . . ?) are thus a necessary addition to lexical re-
lations (?necessarily. . . ?) in order to represent con-
ceptual source domains.
The map representing the source domain is a re-
sult of our corpus investigation of this specific tar-
get domain corpus. The structure of the source do-
main is not intended to be a general representation of
this domain, nor does it imply fixed domain bound-
aries. Rather, the network shows the elements of the
source domain that mapped onto the target domain
from corpus attestations. If the same source domain
were to be mapped onto some other target domain,
other synsets might be used. A lexico-conceptual re-
source encoding general information on this source
domain would thus have to contain more synsets and
relations than those displayed in Figure 1.
The choice of source domains as well as of cer-
tain lexical items from within a source domain has
the effect of ?highlighting and hiding? certain as-
pects of the target domain. For example, among
the numerous hyponyms of the central ?move? synset
{se de?placer:1 se mouvoir:1 aller:3}?most of which
are not displayed in Figure 1?, the European Con-
stitution corpus shows a tendency towards lexi-
cal metaphors in synsets containing the verb tra-
verser - ?traverse?. This profiles the path compo-
nent of the motion event. The path itself is fur-
ther emphasized by lexical metaphors related to
the ?move? synset by INVOLVED LOCATION and
INVOLVED DIRECTION. Also vehicles as instru-
ments play a role in the conceptualization, but not
all vehicles have metaphorical attestations in the cor-
pus: only train - ?train? and bateau - ?boat? are found
during a cross-check. Finally, synsets referring to
11
the contrary of ?move? are contained within the map
of the source domain. Even the ?motor? (as a vehi-
cle part) and its ?breakdown? (causing ?immobiliza-
tion?) are thus lexically and conceptually integrated
in the MOTION domain derived from our corpus.
All these highlightings and hidings can be inter-
preted with respect to the situation of Europe before
the referendum on its Constitution: Europe is made
cognitively accessible as a multi-passenger vehicle
in motion on a path, which has not yet arrived but is
facing obstacles to its motion, possibly resulting in
being stopped.
7 Conclusion and Outlook
A method for quickly finding large amounts of lex-
ical metaphors and characterizing their source do-
mains has been exemplified, given a target domain
corpus. The method makes use of collocate explo-
ration of a target domain keyword, in order to iden-
tify the most promising source domains. Over 1,000
manual annotations have been obtained and will be
integrated into the Hamburg Metaphor Database.
This outnumbers by far the results of previous stud-
ies filed within HMD, which originated under simi-
lar conditions but did not resort to a corpus manager.
Our method is different from automated work on
metaphor recognition such as (Mason, 2004) and
(Gedigian et al, 2006) in that it includes nouns as
parts of speech. Implementing it in an automated
system would require more sophisticated lexical-
conceptual resources, representing information on
concrete domains (possible source domains). In par-
ticular, the addition of lexical and conceptual links
between verb and noun synsets is crucial for estab-
lishing a connected source domain graph.
Acknowledgements
Thanks to Patrick Hanks, Jana Klawitter, and three
anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments. ?
This work was supported by a fellowship within the
Postdoc-Programme of the German Academic Ex-
change Service (DAAD), granted to the second au-
thor.
References
John A. Barnden, Sheila Glasbey, Mark Lee, and Alan M.
Wallington. 2002. Reasoning in metaphor under-
standing: The ATT-Meta approach and system. In
Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics (COLING 2002), pages
1188?1193, Taipei, Taiwan.
Charles J. Fillmore, Christopher R. Johnson, and Miriam
R. L. Petruck. 2003. Background to FrameNet. Inter-
national Journal of Lexicography, 16(3):235?250.
Matt Gedigian, John Bryant, Srini Narayanan, and Bran-
imir Ciric. 2006. Catching metaphors. In Proceedings
of the 3rd Workshop on Scalable Natural Language
Understanding, pages 41?48, New York City.
George Lakoff and Mark Johnson. 1980. Metaphors we
live by. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
George Lakoff. 1987. Women, fire, and dangerous
things: what categories reveal about the mind. Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Mark Lee. 2006. Methodological issues in build-
ing a corpus of doctor-patient dialogues annotated for
metaphor. In Cognitive-linguistic approaches: What
can we gain by computational treatment of data? A
Theme Session at DGKL-06/GCLA-06, pages 19?22,
Munich, Germany.
Birte Lo?nneker and Carina Eilts. 2004. A current re-
source and future perspectives for enriching WordNets
with metaphor information. In Proceedings of the 2nd
International Conference of the Global WordNet Asso-
ciation, pages 157?162, Brno, Czech Republic.
James H. Martin. 1994. MetaBank: A knowledge-base
of metaphoric language conventions. Computational
Intelligence, 10(2):134?149.
Zachary J. Mason. 2004. CorMet: A computational,
corpus-based conventional metaphor extraction sys-
tem. Computational Linguistics, 30(1):23?44.
Pavel Rychly? and Pavel Smrz?. 2004. Manatee, Bonito
and Word Sketches for Czech. In Proceedings of the
Second International Conference on Corpus Linguis-
tics, pages 124?132, Saint-Petersburg.
Helmut Schmid. 1994. Probabilistic part-of-speech tag-
ging using decision trees. In International Conference
on New Methods in Language Processing, Manchester,
UK.
Achim Stein and Helmut Schmid. 1995. Etiquetage
morphologique de textes franc?ais avec un arbre de
de?cisions. Traitement automatique des langues, 36(1-
2):23?35.
Piek Vossen. 1999. EuroWordNet General Document.
Version 3. Technical report, University of Amsterdam.
12
119
120
121
122
Is there a way to represent metaphors in WordNets?
Insights from the Hamburg Metaphor Database
Birte Lo?nneker
Institute for Romance Languages
University of Hamburg
D-20146 Hamburg, Germany
birte.loenneker@uni-hamburg.de
Abstract
This paper addresses the question whether
metaphors can be represented in Word-
Nets. For this purpose, domain-centered
data is collected from the Hamburg
Metaphor Database, an online source cre-
ated for the study of possible metaphor
representations in WordNets. Based on
the results of the analyses of French and
German corpus data and EuroWordNet,
the implementation problem is discussed.
It can be shown that a much more com-
plete representation of synsets and rela-
tions between synsets in the source do-
main as well as a clearer indication of
the level of figurativity for individual
synsets are needed before global concep-
tual metaphors can be dealt with in Word-
Nets.
1 Introduction
Based on corpus analyses of the Italian lexemes
colpire and colpo (Alonge and Castelli, 2002a)
and arrivare and separarsi (Alonge and Castelli,
2002b), Alonge and Castelli note that some impor-
tant metaphorical senses of these lexemes are not
covered by ItalWordNet, a further development of
the Italian part of the lexical database EuroWordNet
(EWN) (Vossen, 1999). They claim that metaphori-
cal data should be added to WordNets on two differ-
ent levels, or in two different ways:
1. Missing figurative senses, which turn out from
the corpus analyses, can be added directly as
new synsets (sets of semantically equivalent
words, cf. Vossen (1999, 18)).
2. ?Pre-existent knowledge which constrains our
possibility to produce and/or understand novel
metaphoric expressions? (Alonge and Castelli,
2002b, 1951) should be encoded at a higher
level, because this knowledge concerns not
only single synsets, but whole conceptual do-
mains.
Alonge and Castelli work in the frame-
work of conceptual metaphors introduced by
Lakoff and Johnson (1980). They think that the
most appropriate level for representing conceptual
knowledge which underlies systematic metaphors
is a level similar to the Inter-Lingual-Index (ILI) in
EuroWordNet (EWN). This index is an unstructured
fund of concepts providing the mapping across
languages (cf. Vossen (1999, 39)). A special case
of an ILI entry is a so-called composite ILI-record,
by which regular polysemy can be covered (cf.
Vossen (1999, 40?43)). For example, the fact that
the lexeme university can refer to a building as well
as to an organization is represented by a composite
ILI, and this polysemy extends to all other lexemes
(?literals? in EWN terminology) which are members
of the respective synsets. During the construction
of EWN, language-independent composite ILIs
were used, and overgenerated polysemic relations
had to be deleted for each individual language. In
order to reduce such overgeneration, Alonge and
Castelli propose to add composite indexes similar
to composite ILIs to each individual WordNet
instead of defining general ILIs for WordNets in all
languages, and to use this composite index also for
representing regular polysemy caused by conceptual
metaphors (cf. Alonge and Castelli (2002b, 1952)).
In this paper, we present some broader anal-
yses using the current online data of the Ham-
burg Metaphor Database1 described in (Eilts and
Lo?nneker, 2002). The Hamburg Metaphor Database
(HMD) contains corpus examples in French and
German as well as synsets from EWN to which
the metaphorically used lexemes belong, and labels
for source and target domains of the metaphors in
two different naming systems. EWN synsets are
split into two groups in HMD: Those that already
have a figurative meaning in the respective WordNet
(French or German EWN), and those that contain
the metaphorically used lexeme in its literal mean-
ing. Query parameters include the synsets and the
annotated source and target domains of the metaphor
as well as the language of the corpus example. The
aim of HMD is to study the possibility of system-
atically representing information on metaphors and
potential metaphorical mappings in WordNets (cf.
Eilts and Lo?nneker (2002, 100?101)).
Taking advantage of the domain based view of
HMD data, we focus on two domains represented in
the database, POLITICS and SPORTS (Section 2).
Based on the results of the analyses, we discuss
the implementation issue in more depth (Section 3).
Section 4 is the conclusion.
2 Insights from the Hamburg Metaphor
Database
This section contains analyses of material gathered
from the Hamburg Metaphor Database. Subsec-
tion 2.1 presents some main metaphorical mapping
lines in the field of POLITICS, Subsection 2.2 anal-
yses a conceptual metaphor for the target domain
SPORTS.
2.1 Mappings in the POLITICS domain
The data for the analyses are defined by those en-
tries in the Hamburg Metaphor Database that have
as their target domain 1. POLITIK (POLITICS) and
2. PARTEI (POLITICAL PARTY). The first query
yields 25 results, the second one 26.
1http://www.rrz.uni-hamburg.de/metaphern/index en.html
[27 April 2003].
POLITICS IS FIGHT. Having a closer look at
the source domains for the target domain POLI-
TICS, we find that the main source is the FIGHT
domain (?KAMPF?), which is encoded in 20 out of
the 25 entries.2 In what follows, we will concentrate
on the 16 examples in French language that instanti-
ate the POLITICS IS FIGHT conceptual metaphor.
Considering the synset level, we note that some
synsets are represented by more than one of their
lexemes (?literals?) in the corpus text: These are
combat:2 bagar[r]e:1 bataille:4 lutte:1 ?the act of
fighting; any contest or struggle? ? represented by
bataille, combat and lutte in political context ?,
triomphe:1 victoire:1 ?a successful ending of a
contest? ? represented by both triomphe and vic-
toire ? and vainqueur:1 triomphateur:1 gagnant:1
?the contestant who wins the contest? ? represented
by triomphateur and vainqueur ?.3 This fact shows
that the conceptual view, which is reflected by
the synsets insofar as every synset can be seen as
a concept, is an appropriate way of approaching
metaphorical mappings.
In contrast to the results of Alonge and Castelli,
who find a lot of missing metaphorical senses in
ItalWordNet (cf. Section 1), most of the metaphori-
cally used lexemes in POLITICS IS FIGHT as col-
lected from HMD are actually represented in synsets
which already have a metaphorical sense in EWN, or
at least have been interpreted as such by HMD en-
coders. Only three lexemes out of 13, guerre ?war?,
revanche ?revenge?, and bataillon ?battalion?, do not
correspond to figurative synsets. While guerre and
bataillon can be found in their ?literal? meaning
in the French EWN (cf. synsets guerre:1 ?the
waging of an armed conflict against an enemy? and
revanche:1 ?the act of taking revenge?), batail-
lon, a collective participant of FIGHT, is completely
missing from the French EWN.
The conceptual metaphor POLITICS IS FIGHT
is only one of several possible metaphorical con-
2In terms of the Berkeley metaphor list (Lakoff et al, 1991),
this mapping can be seen either as THEORETICAL DEBATE
IS COMPETITION or as COMPETITION IS FIGHT. If a
MENTAL EVENT (like THEORETICAL DEBATE) is a spe-
cialisation of an EVENT (like COMPETITION), then the first
metaphor can be interpreted as a specialisation of the second
one.
3In this paper, each synset is followed by its English gloss
when it is mentioned for the first time.
ceptualisations of POLITICS. Examples of other
source domains encoded for this target in HMD
are SPORTS, THEATER, and STUDY. The POL-
ITICS IS FIGHT metaphor will thus highlight the
competitive aspects of politics: POLITICS in this
metaphor is narrowed down to POLITICAL COM-
PETITION. This COMPETING scene has physi-
cal aspects or at least physical ?roots? and is an
example of a conventional metaphor, ?a metaphor
we are hardly ever conscious of?, because it is one
of the ordinary ways of talking about politics (cf.
Lakoff and Johnson (1980, 5)). The metaphorically
used lexemes of the HMD example sentences and
their EWN synsets show that several elements of a
FIGHT scene, as well as the name of the event itself,
are present in the mapping:
 Names for the whole event are combat:2
bagar[r]e:1 bataille:4 lutte:1 and guerre:1.
 Names for events or scenes seen from
the perspective of one of the participants
are de?fendre:3 lutter pour:2 ?[argue in
defense] of causes, principles, or ideas?,
e?craser:3 ?make ineffective?, perte:7
?the act of losing?, triomphe:1 victoire:1
and revanche:1. With the exception of
de?fendre:3 lutter pour:2, which can be used
to refer to the whole action, cause or purpose
of a FIGHT as well as of POLITICS, all the
events denoted by these synsets occur only at
certain moments of the FIGHT, or of a specific
political action.
 Finally, the metaphorical synset vainqueur:1
triomphateur:1 gagnant:1 is used to refer to
one of the participants in the POLITICAL
COMPETITION, with respect to its outcome.
It turns out from this analysis that meronymy
and participant (EWN: ?INVOLVED?) relations
also play a role in the mapping of this conceptual
metaphor. Unfortunately, the synsets guerre:1 and
combat:2 bagar[r]e:1 bataille:4 lutte:1, which rep-
resent the concepts of the whole competing event,
and the other involved synsets, do not display many
of these relations in the French EWN. Consulting
EWN, we find only the following non-taxonomic re-
lations (i.e. neither hyperonymic nor hyponymic re-
lations) for all the synsets mentioned above as refer-
ring to mapped aspects of the event:
 guerre:1 has mero part bataille:2 con-
frontation:1 conflit:1 lutte:5 combat:1 ?an en-
gagement fought between two military forces?
 combat:2 bagar[r]e:1 bataille:4 lutte:1
has mero part coup:3 ?a powerful stroke
with the fist or weapon?
 vainqueur:1 triomphateur:1 gagnant:1
antonym perdant:2 non-valeur:1 ?a contes-
tant who loses the contest?
 triomphe:1 victoire:1 antonym de?faite:2
?an unsuccessful ending?
The stated subevents in this list are not bound to
the overall event, and no participant relations are en-
coded for any event or subevent in EWN. This lack
in relations means that the structure of the source
domain is not visible from EuroWordNet.
Figure 1: Literal and possibly figurative synsets.
action:4 acte:6
action de groupe:1
collision:2 bataille:1 lutte:2
?an open clash between two
opposing groups?
combat:2 bagar[r]e:1
bataille:4 lutte:1 [F?]
?the act of fighting; 
any contest or struggle?
coup:3 [L]
? a powerful stroke with 
the fist or weapon?
has_mero_part
guerre:1 [L]
?the waging of
an armed conflict ...?
has_holo_part
has_holo_part
action militaire:1 action:8 [L]
?a military engagement?
lutte:3 bataille:3 [L]
?a hostile meeting
of opposing 
military forces...?
combat:1 lutte:5 
conflit:1confrontation:1 
bataille:2 [L]
?an engagement fought 
between military forces?
[L] literal
[F] figurative
has_hyponym
Furthermore, it is sometimes difficult to tell
whether a synset has an intended figurative mean-
ing or not, let alne which synsets are re-
lated by a literal-figurative relation. Consider
the conceptual-semantic relations of the synsets
bataille:2 confrontation:1 conflit:1 lutte:5 com-
bat:1 and combat:2 bagar[r]e:1 bataille:4 lutte:1
as represented in EWN, displayed in Figure 1. For
two reasons, it is sensible to believe that the second
one has a figurative meaning, as opposed to the first
one:
1. combat:2 bagar[r]e:1 bataille:4 lutte:1 is de-
fined as ?[. . . ]; any contest or strugggle?, which
might also refer to non-military and possibly
non-physical violence.
2. There are no other synsets containing the lex-
emes bataille and lutte for which a figurative
reading in the ?conflict? sense would be possi-
ble.
On the other hand, the gloss of the synset
coup:3 ?a powerful stroke with the fist or weapon?,
which is encoded to be a part of combat:2
bagar[r]e:1 bataille:4 lutte:1, gives a clearly literal
meaning to coup:3, which results in an incon-
sistency between the possibly metaphorical sense
of the holonym and the strictly literal sense of the
meronym (part).
A POLITICAL PARTY IS A FAMILY. Another
conceptual metaphor that turns out to be frequent in
the politics domain, at least in German texts, is the
one in which a POLITICAL PARTY (?PARTEI?) is
viewed in terms of a FAMILY (?FAMILIE?).4 This
conceptual metaphor is mainly a mapping of one so-
cial group to another (cf. Eilts and Lo?nneker (2002,
107)). A query for these source and target domains
yields 20 results for German, which will be the sub-
ject of the following analysis.
A closer look at the synsets shows a slightly dif-
ferent picture from what we obtained in the last anal-
ysis. 19 distinct lexemes are used, but only five of
them are present in German EWN synsets. These
refer mainly to individual family members: Vater
?father?, Bruder ?brother?, Schwester ?sister?, Enkel
?grandchild?, out of which only Vater can be found
in a figurative synset (Vater:2 ?a person who holds
an important or distinguished position in some orga-
nization [. . . ]?).
The low coverage of the lexemes is also due
to the current practice in HMD not to encode
parts of compounds as individual lexemes (cf.
Eilts and Lo?nneker (2002, 107)). In doing so, the
following additional family member lexemes cov-
ered by the German EWN would appear: Mut-
ter ?mother? (cf. Mutterpartei), Vetter ?cousin? (cf.
Vetternwirtschaft), and three further occurrences of
4A different conceptual source domain for POLITICAL
PARTY attested in HMD is BUILDING.
Vater (cf. Vaterfigur, Vatermord, ?Ubervater). The
most direct mapping of the metaphor is indeed rep-
resented in the lexeme Parteifamilie ?family of a
political party?, which summarises the whole con-
ceptual metaphor in one word. While it would be
interesting to further discuss the topic of German
compounds, for the sake of brevity we will go on
to other aspects of the conceptual metaphor that are
concerned by the mapping.
In addition to a neutral reference to individual
family members, two other referring methods can be
detected from the metaphorically used lexemes not
encoded in the German EWN:
1. collective nouns for younger members of the
family: Nachwuchs ?offspring? (in the com-
pounds Nachwuchskraft, Nachwuchspolitiker
and Parteinachwuchs);
2. subconcepts or referring expressions encom-
passing specific role/character attributions:
Ziehkind ?foster child? and Patriarch ?patri-
arch?.
In the German EWN, family member synsets are
not linked to the family synset (Familie:1) itself.
It seems that with a few synset additions to the
German EWN, compound splitting, and the con-
nection of the family members to the family synset
using the has holo member relation, the mapping
of this conceptual metaphor could be implemented
more easily than the one previously discussed. How-
ever, as further elements in the mapping show, also
this social group metaphor can be extended to an
event metaphor. The lexemes Erbe (covered by the
German EWN as Erbe:1 ?any acquisition from
past generations?, represented also in the compound
Erblast) and Hinterlassenschaft, which could be
added to the Erbe:1 synset5 but has also other
senses, actually denote ?participants? in the seman-
tic patient role of an event. The ?inheritage? (in form
of qualities, power and achievements, but also neg-
ative characteristics and problems) is handed over
from one member of the political party, usually
mapped to the father of the family, to other mem-
bers, preferably younger or less experienced ones.
5Cf. the corresponding verb synset in the German EWN:
vererben:1 hinterlassen:1.
Only this inheriting event conveys also meaning to
the position of these members in the political party.
2.2 Mappings in the SPORTS domain
SPORTS IS FIGHT. Turning to the field of
sports, we query the Hamburg Metaphor Database
for all French examples of the target domain
SPORTS (?SPORT?). In the 34 results, the list of
source domains shows that FIGHTING (?KAMPF?,
16 times), also in its special form of WAR
(?KRIEG?, 8 times), is the predominant source
metaphorically used to view this target domain.6
The following analysis will be based on the
24 French examples instantiating either the con-
ceptual metaphor SPORTS IS FIGHT (?SPORT
IST KAMPF?) or SPORT IS WAR (?SPORT IST
KRIEG?). 21 distinct lexemes occur in the exam-
ples; only two of them are not represented in any
synset in the French EWN, the others instantiate 6
distinct synsets with literal meaning and 13 distinct
synsets with figurative meaning, following the inter-
pretation of HMD.
Even more clearly than in the POLITICS IS
FIGHT conceptual metaphor, the resulting synsets
show that not only the event itself, but several
aspects of the FIGHT event are mapped across
domains in the SPORTS IS FIGHT (containing
SPORTS IS WAR) metaphor. The examples anal-
ysed are from a football corpus and can be narrowed
down to A MATCH (as a sports event) IS A FIGHT.
The mapped aspects of the event are enumerated in
the list below. If a synset is contained in the French
EWN only in a literal meaning, we indicate this by
the addition of [L]. Note that events and subevents
can equally be expressed by verb or noun synsets.
1. There are synsets referring to the entire
FIGHT event matched to the SPORTS event:
combat:2 bagar[r]e:1 bataille:4 lutte:1,
lutter:4 se battre:4 ?be engaged in a fight;
carry on a fight? [L], guerre:1 [L].
2. Actions of a participant or several participants
collectively are represented by e?craser:3
6The main mapping lines in Berkeley terms are again COM-
PETITION IS FIGHT (17 times; also as COMPETITION IS
PHYSICAL AGGRESSION (2 times), cf. ?COMPETITION IS
1 ON 1 PHYSICAL AGGRESSION, Source domains: 1-on-1
physical aggression, fight. Target domain: competition?(Lakoff
et al, 1991, 66)) and COMPETITION IS WAR (8 times).
?make ineffective?, de?fier:1 provoquer:1
?Fischer challenged Spassky to a match?,
manoeuvre:1 ?a move made to gain a tactical
end?, armer:2 consolider:3 renforcer:1 ?sup-
port or hold steady, as if with a brace?.
3. Singular actions occurring during the event,
in which a ?hostile action? is performed not
against a person, but against an object (here:
the ball), are represented in coup:5 ?the act of
swinging or striking at a ball [. . . ]?, frapper:7
?hit a ball?.
4. The result of the event or of a subevent seen
from a participant-dependent view is present in
triomphe:1 victoire:1 and conque?te:2 ?the
act of conquering? [L].
5. The participants of the event can be identi-
fied by the synsets adversaire:2 opposant:1
partie adverse:1 ?a hostile person who tries
to do damage to you?, opposant:2 adver-
saire:1 ennemi:3 ?a contestant that you are
matched against? and agresseur:1 attaquant:1
?person who attacks someone? [L]. For some
of the participants, collective nouns are used:
de?fense:10 ?the defensive football play-
ers [. . . ]?
6. Finally, the instrument can be mapped:
arme:1 ?weaponry used in fighting or hunt-
ing? [L] (here used to refer to one of the football
players and his special qualities).
In some examples, a quite radical type switching
occurs. Actions performed by at least one person,
as subevents of the sports event (match), are rep-
resented in EWN only in synsets denoting the par-
ticipants performing these actions: attaque:6 ?the
team that has the ball (or puck) and is trying to score?
(here in e?tre a` l?attaque), de?fense:3 ?the team that
is trying to prevent the other team from scoring?
(here in faire une grosse de?fense). A place involved
in the source domain, camp:4 bivouac:1 ?tempo-
rary living quarters, specially built by the army for
soldiers?, is used to refer to the players of a team and
only attested by camp in the corpus.
The uncovered lexemes instantiate still other as-
pects of the event. Duel ?duel? refers to a part of
the event from a participant-independent view, while
the remaining lexeme, offensif ?aggressive?, charac-
terises one of the participants or his actions. Again,
with the exception of some antonymy encodings,
there are no relations in EWN binding any of these
elements together.
3 Implementation issues
Based on the results of the analyses in Sec-
tion 2, the idea of a composite index for regular
metaphorical mappings which was brought
forward by Alonge and Castelli (2002a) and
Alonge and Castelli (2002b) will be discussed. A
necessary continuation of the work by Alonge and
Castelli, who do not deal with implementation
details, is to discuss this issue in more depth.
Alonge and Castelli propose to deal with
metaphorical mappings using a kind of composite
index. This sort of index has already been in use
in form of a composite Inter-Lingual-Index during
the construction of EWN and accounted for regu-
lar metonymic polysemy (cf. Section 1). Figure 2
shows an example of an existing composite ILI from
EWN. It indicates that there is a metonymic poly-
semy of the lexeme country, which has three senses
(cf. ?gloss?):
1. territory which has been singled out for some
purpose;
2. the people of a nation or country or a commu-
nity of persons bound by a common heritage;
3. the people, government and territory of a state.
The effect of the composite ILI is that each synset
identified by one of the three target ILIs contains an
eq metonym relation to the composite ILI, and this
in all languages involved in EWN. By accessing this
relation from one of the individual synsets, the user
can thus see which synsets are bound together by the
metonymic relation. However, considering figura-
tivity aspects, there is no rule defining which synset
should be the literal one, and this information cannot
be obtained accessing the synsets.
Let us consider an encoding of the conceptual
metaphor POLITICS IS FIGHT in such a compos-
ite index. As we have seen, all encoded aspects of
this metaphor are in some way related to an over-
all event. One of the most general source events
Figure 2: A composite EuroWordNet ILI.
0 ILI_RECORD
1 PART_OF_SPEECH "n"
1 ADD_ON_ID 30
1 GLOSS "territory which has been singled out for some purpose"
"the people of a nation or country or a community of persons
bound by a common heritage"
"the people, government and territory of a state"
1 VARIANTS
2 LITERAL "country"
3 SENSE 1
2 LITERAL "country"
3 SENSE 2
2 LITERAL "country"
3 SENSE 3
1 EQ_RELATION "eq_metonym"
2 TARGET_ILI
3 WORDNET_OFFSET 5400698
[={country:1 state:1 land:3 nation:1}]
3 WORDNET_OFFSET 5208026
[={nation:2 nationality:1 land:2 country:2 a people:1}]
3 WORDNET_OFFSET 5209013
[={state:1 nation:1 country:1 commonwealth:1 res publica:1
body politic:1}]
Figure 3: Metaphorical composite index entries.
[...]
1 GLOSS "an armed conflict against an enemy"
a political conflict"
1 VARIANTS
2 LITERAL "guerre"
3 SENSE 1
2 LITERAL "guerre"
3 SENSE 2
1 EQ_RELATION "eq_metaphor"
2 TARGET_ILI
3 WORDNET_OFFSET 540597
[={guerre:1}]
3 WORDNET_OFFSET ToBeCreated
[...]
1 GLOSS "an engagement fought between two military forces"
"the act of fighting; any contest or struggle"
1 VARIANTS
2 LITERAL "lutte"
3 SENSE 5
2 LITERAL "lutte"
3 SENSE 1
1 EQ_RELATION "eq_metaphor"
2 TARGET_ILI
3 WORDNET_OFFSET 535646
[={bataille:2 confrontation:1 conflit:1 lutte:5 combat:1}]
3 WORDNET_OFFSET 645833
[={lutte:1 bataille:4 bagar[r]e:1 combat:2}]
can be referred to by the French literal guerre ?war?.
In a composite index for the conceptual metaphor
A POLITICAL CONFLICT IS A WAR it could be
stated that guerre means ?an armed conflict against
an enemy?, but also (figuratively) ?a political con-
flict?. The figurative synset does not yet exist in
EWN, so it should be created. A similar composite
index could be used to bind together already existing
different senses of lutte ?fight?. The respective parts
of the composite index entries are shown in Figure 3.
This representation would ensure eq metaphor
links from all included synsets to the composite
index entry. Though, it would still not be clear
which synset bears the literal meaning. As there
could be several figurative meanings derived from
the same literal synset (for example, a figurative
meaning of guerre ?a sports event? could be added),
the index would not solve the problem of telling
whether a literal-figurative relation exists between
given synsets, and even whether a synset has a fig-
urative meaning or not. A convention could be es-
tablished that the first synset mentioned in the com-
posite index entry has to be the literal one. How-
ever, if the composite index exists for each language
separately, as it might be requested because of dif-
ferent use of conceptual metaphors in different lan-
guages, and if it covers only the existing literal and
metaphorical synsets, there seems to be no need to
encode the literal-figurative relation at a higher level
than the synset itself. A new conceptual-semantic
relation like derived from literal could be used as
well, and would keep track of the direction of the
mapping.
Alonge and Castelli (2002b) note that a compos-
ite index for metaphors could account for more than
one mapping and mention as an example the reg-
ular polysemy of motion verbs which can be used
to metaphorically refer to stages in a love relation-
ship. As a result of the analyses performed on data
from the Hamburg Metaphor Database and the im-
plementation possibilities presented above, it turns
out that indeed a composite index can only be useful
if it accounts for several, and ideally for all map-
pings which occur within one encompassing con-
ceptual metaphor. Only a generalisation from one
index entry to all synsets related to the source synset
will be able to cover also novel metaphorical uses of
words within existing conceptual metaphors.
As we have seen from the analyses, in most
cases the most general mapping of the conceptual
metaphor links a source event to a target event. This
mapping is the one that will have to be manually en-
coded after analyses of texts dealing with different
topics. However, for the mapping of all other as-
pects, metaphorical relations could be supposed and
? in an automated or assisted way ? added to the
index. The fact of linking an entity to another by a
metaphorical index should then result in the creation
of corresponding synsets in the target domain for all
entities (hyponyms, parts, participants, etc.) that are
related to the source entity by sense relations. The
easiest way to create such a (potential) metaphorical
synset would be to copy the lexemes of the literal
synset and to add a predefined gloss.
For example, if a metaphorical relation is in-
stalled between guerre:1 and the newly created
guerre:2, metaphorical synsets and relations for
all its hyponyms, parts, subevents, participants etc.,
as mentioned in the analyses, should also be cre-
ated. Standard glosses with variables for the dif-
ferent mapped events and elements would adapt to
these new synsets. For example, in the gloss
a [e?tre:1 mortel:1 mortel:1 homme:7] that par-
ticipates in a [POLITICAL COMPETITION] and
can be compared to a [vainqueur:1 triomphateur:1
gagnant:1] that participates in a[n] [ARMED
CONFLICT]
the event names are taken from the glosses of tar-
get and source event respectively, and the participant
description (its topmost hyperonym as well as its
source name) from the source synset. For more de-
tails on WordNet glosses, cf. Pala and Smrz (2002).
This method of adding a composite index for
global conceptual metaphors has its limits for dif-
ferent reasons:
 First of all, the status of the French and German
EWN do not allow such a mapping, because
they encode only very few non-taxonomic re-
lations. Some examples from the analyses even
show that the set of encodable relations from
EWN would not be sufficient to cover the struc-
ture of all domains. Analyses of source do-
mains in the framework of semantic frames
(Fillmore and Atkins, 1994)7 or concept frames
(Lo?nneker, 2002) can help identifying needed
conceptual-semantic relationships and instanti-
ations of them.
 A lot of figurative synsets are already present
in EWN and often differ slightly from the lit-
eral synsets in their lexemes, so that many du-
plicates would be created.
 Automatically created index entries would con-
tain no information about whether an individual
mapping is actually attested or not.
7Cf. also the FrameNet Database:
http://framenet.icsi.berkeley.edu [27 April 2003].
These considerations show that there is still a lot
of work to do before a representation of whole struc-
tures of conceptual metaphors can be envisaged.
Based on detailed analyses of corpora from differ-
ent domains, the coverage of source domains both
in synsets and in relations has to be improved, and
the status of individual synsets regarding their level
of figurativity has to be clarified. It can be hoped
that new tools like VisDic (Pavelek and Pala, 2002;
Horak et al, 2003) and DEB (Smrz? and Povolny?,
2003) for editing lexical databases will enable the
integration of independent further developments of
EWN (for example GermaNet) with EWN data and
the creation of new relationships.
4 Conclusion
The answer to the question whether metaphors can
be represented in WordNets depends on the interpre-
tation of metaphor.
With respect to EuroWordNet, if individual lex-
emes with metaphorical meaning are considered, it
can be stated that a lot of them are already repre-
sented by synsets that can or must be used figura-
tively. What is missing are relations between literal
and figurative individual synsets.
If a metaphor is considered as a structured map-
ping of one conceptual domain to another, the pro-
ductivity of the envisaged index, as well as its poten-
tial to account for new metaphorical word senses,
increases drastically. Unfortunately, so does also
the complexity of the implementation task, for ex-
ample by means of a composite metaphorical in-
dex. The analyses of two different target domains,
POLITICS and SPORTS, show that at first a much
more encompassing representation of the source do-
mains, mainly events and their characteristics like
parts, participants, actions and characteristics of the
participants, is necessary in order to represent the
domain structure. This can be achieved by encoding
more instances of EWN relations like Meronymy
and ROLE/INVOLVED, as well as possibly addi-
tional relations.
For the time being, continuing the domain cen-
tered perspective adopted by the Hamburg Metaphor
Database, the following research lines seem the most
promising:
1. More clearly identify literal and figurative
synsets in the mapped domains, and their link-
ing relation.
2. Individuate elements in source domains and the
conceptual-semantic relations between them.
Acknowledgements
I am grateful to Carina Eilts from the Hamburg
Metaphor Database for her great help. My thanks
also go to Toma?s? Pavelek, Pavel Smrz? and the
anonymous reviewers for their comments.
References
Antonietta Alonge and Margherita Castelli. 2002a.
Metaphoric expressions: an analysis of data from a
corpus and the ItalWordNet database. In Proceedings
of the First Global WordNet Conference, pages 342?
350, Mysore, India.
Antonietta Alonge and Margherita Castelli. 2002b.
Which way should we go? Metaphoric expressions
in lexical resources. In Proceedings of the third Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC-
02), volume VI, pages 1948?1952, Las Palmas, Gran
Canaria.
Carina Eilts and Birte Lo?nneker. 2002. The Hamburg
Metaphor Database. metaphorik.de, 03:100?110.
Charles J. Fillmore and B. T. Sue Atkins. 1994. Starting
where the dictionaries stop: The challenge of corpus
lexicography. In B. T. Sue Atkins and Antonio Zam-
polli, editors, Computational Approaches to the Lexi-
con, pages 349?393. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Ales Horak, Karel Pala, and Pavel Smrz. 2003. Lexical
semantic networks and ontologies in XML, their view-
ing and authoring. To appear in Proceedings of the
Workshop on WWW Based Communities For Knowl-
edge Presentation, Sharing, Mining and Protection -
PSMP 2003, within CIC 2003 (International Confer-
ence on Communications in Computing), Las Vegas,
Nevada, USA.
George Lakoff and Mark Johnson. 1980. Metaphors we
live by. University of Chicago Press, Chicago/London.
George Lakoff, Jane Espenson, and Alan Schwartz.
1991. Master metaphor list, Second draft copy.
http://cogsci.berkeley.edu [27 April 2003].
Birte Lo?nneker. 2002. Building concept frames based
on text corpora. In Proceedings of the 3rd Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Evalu-
ation (LREC-02), volume I, pages 216?223, Las Pal-
mas, Gran Canaria, Spain.
Karel Pala and Pavel Smrz. 2002. Glosses in WordNet
1.5 and their standardization/consistency. In Proceed-
ings of the LREC Workshop on WordNet Structures and
Standardisation, and How These Affect WordNet Ap-
plications and Evaluation, pages 20?23, Las Palmas,
Gran Canaria.
Tomas Pavelek and Karel Pala. 2002. WordNet stan-
dardization from a practical point of view. In Proceed-
ings of the LREC Workshop on WordNet Structures and
Standardisation, and How These Affect WordNet Ap-
plications and Evaluation, pages 30?34, Las Palmas,
Gran Canaria.
Pavel Smrz? and Martin Povolny?. 2003. DEB ? Dic-
tionary Editing and Browsing. In Proceedings of the
EACL-03 Workshop on Language Technology and the
Semantic Web: The 3rd Workshop on NLP and XML
(NLPXML-2003), pages 49?55, Budapest, Hungary.
Piek Vossen. 1999. EuroWordNet general doc-
ument Version 3, Final. http://www.illc.uva.nl/
EuroWordNet/docs.html [27 April 2003].
Abstract 
The paper proposes an architecture for advanced 
NLG systems that handle narratives. Special 
attention is paid to document planning. Domain 
modelling and meta-knowledge modelling for a 
narratological structurer are exemplified. 
1 Introduction 
Natural Language Generation (NLG) systems usually focus 
on descriptive text types. Narrative structures are under-
represented in NLG. However, they are encountered in 
many naturally occurring texts, and not only in fiction. 
Often, texts are composed of segments with different 
prevailing functions: some are descriptive, some argumenta-
tive, others narrative. Therefore, knowledge about narratives 
can be useful also for NLG systems that deal with ?classi-
cal? NLG tasks. For example, a system that is expected to 
describe and compare objects in a museum could include 
narrative passages about their use, history or discovery. 
The discipline concerned with the structure of narrative 
[Barthes, 1966] and narrative discourse [Genette, 1980] is 
called narratology. Narratologists distinguish between two 
main representational domains of narratives: 1. the story 
(histoire) as the totality of the narrated events, abstracted 
from their disposition in the text; and 2. the discourse 
(r?cit) that narrates them [Genette, 1988:13]. 
Narratology has identified a number of descriptive 
parameters. As can be seen from the explanations in Table 1 
(see Appendix), many parameters describe phenomena that 
relate discourse to story in a specific way. 
This paper envisages an NLG system with improved 
abilities to deal with narrative discourse. Section 2 summa-
rises the relation between Story Generation and NLG. In 
Section 3, an architecture for a narratologically enhanced 
NLG system is proposed. Section 4 outlines one of the de-
scriptive parameters, illustrating the kind of knowledge that 
can be acquired from narratology. Section 5 exemplifies the 
domain modelling, a prerequisite for modelling narratologi-
cal knowledge. Section 6 formalises the selected narra-
tological parameter, discusses its mapping onto discourse 
graphs used in NLG, and exemplifies its use in a system. 
Section 7 concludes the paper and mentions future work. 
2 Story Generation and NLG 
This section gives a brief overview of the relationship 
between Story Generation (SG) and NLG. Subsection 2.1 
describes the architectural gap between SG and NLG. 
Subsection 2.2 discusses the contribution of an existing 
system to fill that gap. An extended account of work in SG 
cannot be provided here. P?rez y P?rez and Sharples [2004] 
compare and evaluate three recent SG systems. For a 
discussion of earlier systems, see [Ryan, 1991:233?248]. 
2.1 The Story Generation-NLG Gap 
Story Generators aim to produce interesting, understand-
able, artistic, and creative stories [Turner, 1994:15]. In 
doing so, they focus on the story (histoire) representational 
domain. For example, the generator MINSTREL [Turner, 
1994] achieves not only thematic and consistency goals, but 
also ?dramatic? and ?presentational? goals solely by adding 
or transforming story events and background information. 
The story content is directly mapped onto the output text. 
SG faces the difficult problem of finding an interesting 
and logically coherent event sequence (story). Less energy 
is spent on other tasks, especially at discourse and surface 
level. In fact, most implemented SG systems use templates 
of different varieties for NLG. Document structuring and 
microplanning as NLG processing stages [Reiter, 1994; 
Reiter and Dale, 2000:60] are usually skipped in SG, so that 
SG and NLG architectures can be confronted as in Figure 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Story Generation and Natural Language Generation 
Narratological Knowledge for Natural Language Generation 
Birte L?nneker 
Narratology Research Group Hamburg 
Institut f?r Germanistik II, University of Hamburg 
Von-Melle-Park 6, D-20146 Hamburg 
birte.loenneker@uni-hamburg.de 
Content det.
Doc. structuring
Document planner
Microplanner
Surface realizer
Communicative goal
Document plan
(Abstract) text specification
Surface text
Determine content (story), directly
associated with structure (discourse)
Template filling
of given genre
(Abstract) content specification
Surface narrative
Implicit goal: Write coherent narrative
Tr
ad
iti
on
al
 S
G General N
LG
2.2 STORYBOOK 
The existence of a gap between SG and NLG has also been 
discussed by Callaway and Lester [2002]. To remedy the 
situation, they implemented STORYBOOK, an ?architecture 
for narrative prose generation? [2002:228]. The input to 
STORYBOOK must be a ?narrative stream that reflects the 
orderly progression of events, descriptions and states? 
[Callaway and Lester, 2002:231], produced by a hypotheti-
cal Story Generator. STORYBOOK expects this input stream 
to contain so-called narrative primitives that specify scene 
changes and other aspects such as: 
? narrative person and focalization (?person, omnis-
cience? [Callaway and Lester, 2002:221]); 
? details about dialogue realization (e.g. whether an 
inquit phrase such as ?he said? should precede, follow 
or interrupt direct speech, or whether it should be 
omitted altogether [Callaway and Lester, 2002:225]). 
Person and focalization are classical narratological pa-
rameters [Genette, 1980]. It is not clear from Callaway and 
Lester [2002] how many different values STORYBOOK actu-
ally implements for these parameters; their example tale is 
invariably rendered by a ?third person disembodied? narra-
tor [2002:230]. ? The question of whether or not a charac-
ter utterance is to be provided with an inquit phrase is 
sometimes subsumed under the narrative distance parameter 
(cf. Table 1): Direct speech framed by inquit phrases is defi-
nitely considered as imitating, but the highest level of imita-
tion is achieved by the reproduction of unframed direct 
speech [Fludernik, 2005; Genette, 1988:56]. 
In STORYBOOK, many decisions concerning discourse 
still lie with the Story Generator that is supposed to produce 
a stream with narrative primitives. STORYBOOK itself nei-
ther decides about narrative person, focalization, or distance 
for any given passage, nor is it concerned with any other 
narratological parameters listed in Table 1. Rather, 
STORYBOOK focuses on microplanning and surface phe-
nomena with special attention to features particular to nar-
rative. The architectural contribution of STORYBOOK can 
thus be seen as reducing the gap between SG and NLG to 
approximately the microplanner level, where STORYBOOK, 
as a specialized NLG system, takes over from a hypothetical 
Story Generator (see Figure 2). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Story Generation and STORYBOOK 
3 Narratology for NLG 
Narratological aspects influence on all architectural modules 
[Reiter, 1994] or representation levels [Cahill et al, 2000] 
of NLG. The most important decisions of a narratologically 
enhanced system concern the document planner with its 
content determination and document structuring sub-
tasks (Subsections 3.1?3.2). Microplanning and surface 
realization (Subsection 3.3) are supposed to resemble classi-
cal NLG processes. As further explained below, the archi-
tecture of the envisaged system corresponds to Figure 3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Narratologically enhanced Story Generation-NLG system 
3.1 Content Determination 
In a narratologically enriched NLG system, a ?narrative 
content determination module? might be implemented as a 
Story Generator. The Story Generator decides 
? what it considers to be a minimal story [Prince, 1973], 
? what it considers a good story (cf. Subsection 2.1), 
? how to select the content that represents the story: 
events, participants, and their relations. 
However, if narratological discourse parameters are to be 
applied, certain story events or participants are required. For 
example, the narrative levels parameter presupposes the 
existence of at least one NARRATING action among the story 
events of the (first) narrative (see Sections 4?6). 
This means that an entirely data-driven, pipelined process 
where content determination precedes document structuring 
[Reiter and Dale, 2000:111] will not use the full potential of 
a narratologically enhanced document planner. Rather, the 
content determination module (the Story Generator) should 
be able to satisfy constraints issued by the document 
structurer. These constraints might well take the form of 
modification requests after a first output attempt of the Story 
Generator. Therefore, a hypothesis-driven architecture in 
which the system switches back and forth between content 
determination and document structuring seems well suited 
for the task at hand (see the double arrow in Figure 3). 
3.2 Document Structuring 
In the envisaged architecture, the document structurer 
receives the narrative content representation from the Story 
Generator. In its simplest form, this input is a sequence of 
events together with their participants. The structurer shares 
a domain model with the Story Generator, where the 
semantics of events and participants are represented. 
Determine content
(story) and
part of structure
(esp. causality)
Story Generator
of given genre
Goal: Write coherent narrative
NLGNarratological structurer
Microplanner
Surface realizer
Document plan
(Abstract) text specification
Surface text
Vary (order, person,
point of view,...);
representation
create discourse
sentation
Abstract
content
repre?
Microplanner
Surface realizer
(Abstract) text specification
Narrative stream
Surface text
person, focalization, speech reproduction
Determine content (story), decide about
of genre: fairy tale
StoryBook
Hypothetical SG
Implicit goal: Write coherent narrative
By default, the incoming event sequence is considered as 
corresponding to a discourse related by the NarrativeSe-
quence discourse relation1 (for discourse relations, cf. Sub-
section 6.3). The sequence might have additional internal 
structure, because most Story Generators represent conse-
quences of events and/or episodes, and therefore some kind 
of causality [e.g. Gerv?s et al, 2004; P?rez y P?rez and 
Sharples, 2004; Turner, 1994]. 
Combining this information with information from the 
ontology and with narratological knowledge, the narra-
tological document structurer creates variation in discourse. 
Most narrative parameters presented in Table 1 influence on 
this representational domain. Amongst others, the Narra-
tological Structurer can perform the following tasks, some 
of them in interaction with the Story Generator: 
? modify the order of events or episodes, tag the shifted 
elements as flashbacks or flashforwards, and accord-
ingly modify the discourse relations (a Cause relation 
might become an Explanation relation because of the 
inverted event order); 
? create ellipsis by suppressing events or episodes that 
the reader might as well infer; 
? add or remove narrative levels (Sections 4?6); 
? decide about point of view and focalization for the 
entire narrative or, rather, for certain episodes, and ac-
cordingly present or suppress events and relations. 
The produced document plan contains discourse relations 
and narratological information for nodes and leaves, which 
can be further used in microplanning and surface realization. 
3.3 Microplanning and Surface Realization 
The microplanner performs lexicalisation and aggregation 
and generates referring expressions. Besides the usual 
constraints, it respects narratological contraints. For exam-
ple, certain values of focalization and point of view can 
cause ?unusual? referring expressions: personal pronouns 
might be used for initial reference [Harweg, 1968: 163?
166], or indefinite referring expressions for subsequent 
reference [Ushie, 1986; Wiebe and Rapaport, 1988]. The 
choice of vocabulary, tense, and syntactic complexity can as 
well depend on narratological factors. 
The surface realizer turns the microplanner output into 
natural language text. See [Callaway and Lester, 2002:224] 
for narrative-related issues in surface realization. 
4 The Narrative Levels Parameter 
The narrative levels parameter will be used to illustrate the 
kind of knowledge that can be acquired from narratology for 
integration into a narratologically enhanced NLG system. 
Narratives can consist of different levels: There are ?tales 
within tales within tales? [Barth, 1984]. Genette [1988:85] 
illustrates this phenomenon by a figure similar to Figure 4, 
                                                 
1 Similar to the relations Narration [Asher and Lascarides, 
2003:162?165] or Occasion [Hobbs, 1990:86?89]. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Narrative levels 
in which person i produces an utterance a that contains the 
production of another utterance b by person j. Talking about 
narratives, the ?persons? in Genette?s drawing correspond to 
narrative instances (narrators). Narrative instance i might 
not be identified by any referring expression throughout the 
utterances produced by i (and j): i can be ?absent from the 
story? or heterodiegetic [Genette, 1980:244?245]. Narrative 
instance j, on the other hand, necessarily has to be identical 
to a character in story a. Finally, j might be absent (or not) 
from the ?inner? narration b that he himself produces (see 
Table 1 on Person). 
The generation of a narration within a narration presup-
poses the existence of a NARRATING action in the ?outer? 
narration: in Figure 4, a NARRATING action (where j tells b) 
occurs within outer narration a.2 Therefore, before narrative 
levels will be modelled in detail (Section 6), Section 5 will 
be concerned with a definition of NARRATING. 
Genette?s [1980:244] considerations suggest that narra-
tive levels is one of the simpler narratological parameters. 
For example, he claims that any narrative can be converted 
into an inner narration by adding ?presentational? outer nar-
rations [Genette, 1988:95]. It should thus be possible to 
enable a generation system to create narrativel levels. 
5 NARRATING and Related Frames 
This section proposes representation structures for 
NARRATING (Subsection 5.1) and related frames, especially 
the NARRATED frame (Subsection 5.2). A frame is consid-
ered to represent structured knowledge about a given con-
cept. In terms of NLG tasks, this modelling corresponds to 
setting up part of a domain model for content determination 
[Reiter and Dale, 2000:86?89]. 
The modelling is supported by concordances from the 
German DWDS corpus.3 Contexts of verb forms of erz?hlen 
(?tell; narrate?) were investigated, because they ?evoke? the 
target frame NARRATING. As DWDS texts are of several 
types, the results reflect general (not only literary) language 
use. The analysed corpus material stems from texts pub-
lished between 1990 and 1999. The modelling is also partly 
inspired by the SUMO4 upper ontology [Niles and Pease, 
2001]. SUMO does not yet include the NARRATING concept. 
5.1 The NARRATING Frame 
The NARRATING frame is an indirect subframe of ACTION. 
Narratological theories [Chatman, 1978:44?45] agree with 
                                                 
2 ?Inside? vs. ?outside? narrations [Barth, 1984:233] are also 
called ?framed? vs. ?framing? or ?embedded? vs. ?embedding?. 
3 http://www.dwds.de [Query date: 24 January, 2005]. 
4 http://ontology.teknowledge.com/ [10 March, 2005]. 
i
j
a
b
current ontologies like SUMO on the fact that an action is 
performed intentionally by a cognitive agent. The NARRAT-
ING frame thus inherits an Agent slot which I relabel 
NarrativeInstance for better orientation (cf. Table 5). 
The NARRATING frame is related to other frames sub-
sumed under the superframe COMMUNICATION_ACTION. 
That superframe represents an action in which typically at 
least two participants exchange messages. In the present 
investigation, NARRATING actions are assumed to express 
this content linguistically; therefore, NARRATING is here also 
a subframe of LINGUISTIC_COMMUNICATION (cf. Figure 5). 
In the NARRATING frame, the content is represented as 
complex filler of the Narrated slot; a more detailed 
modelling of the NARRATED frame follows in Subsection 
5.2. NARRATING is a special subframe of COMMUNICA-
TION_ACTION insofar as it usually restricts the direction of 
the information flow between the participants: One of them 
is the (main) producer, the other one the (main) recipient of 
NARRATED. The respective participant slots are the above 
mentioned NarrativeInstance, and the Addressee. Typical-
ly, the Addressee or ?narratee? [Genette, 1980] is a cogni-
tive agent different from NarrativeInstance. Nevertheless, 
the current model also allows the same individual to act 
simultaneously as both NarrativeInstance and Addressee: 
cognitive agents may ?tell a story to themselves?. 
Comments and questions produced by the Addressee, 
concerning the Narrated, deserve some attention. The pre-
sent conceptualization considers that even if comments and 
questions interrupt of the flow of Narrated, they do not 
necessarily mark the end of a NARRATING action (see also 
Subsection 5.2). 
Some other slots of NARRATING are inherited from the 
ACTION or EVENT frames. In the DWDS corpus material (cf. 
Table 2, Appendix), examples of fillers of Motivation, 
Consequence/Aim, ParallelEvent, Time, Place, and Man-
ner are encountered. Typically, one of the Consequences of 
NARRATING is a change of the Addressee?s mental state: the 
Narrated is added to her or his knowledge. This conse-
quence seems to belong to the lexico-semantic knowledge 
about NARRATING or, probably, COMMUNICATION_ACTIONS 
in general, and is rarely mentioned explicitly in texts. 
Table 3 gives an overview of the NARRATING frame. It 
also maps slot names on binary relation labels and formu-
lates restrictions for the fillers. However, as a representation 
of a conceptual entity, it does not specify linguistic restric-
tions such as ?addressee-oriented, non-message-oriented? 
which are considered to hold language-specifically for indi-
vidual verbs [Bateman et al, 1994]. For the use in a specific 
NLG system, the frame and its slots thus need to be mapped 
onto the lexicon used by that system during lexicalisation. 
5.2 The NARRATED Frame 
A text can refer to different aspects of what is narrated in a 
NARRATING action. Hence, instead of introducing further 
slots within the NARRATING frame, the filler of Narrated 
will itself be represented as a frame (cf. Table 4, Appendix). 
One way of referring to the NARRATED_LINGUISTIC_MES-
SAGE, abbreviated as NARRATED, is to mention the Text- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Frame hierarchy containing NARRATING 
NARRATING 
Slot Relation Filler Restriction 
NarrativeInstance isCausedBy CognitiveAgent (> 0) 
Narrated produces Narrated (1) 
Addressee isAddressedTo CognitiveAgent (>= 0)
Motivation isMotivatedBy AbstractEntity (>= 0) 
Consequence/Aim causes Event (> 0) 
ParallelEvent overlapsWith Event (>= 0) 
Time happensAtTime TimePosition (> 0) 
Place locatedAt PhysicalEntity (> 0) 
Manner is Attribute (>= 0) 
Table 3: The NARRATING frame 
Type of the narrated material. Typically, this is a literary 
genre, or one of its parts. Further, the NARRATED uses a 
MessageSupport, which might be written (e.g. book, let-
ter), spoken (e.g. speech, song) or thought (e.g. dream). 
Thought seems to lend itself to somewhat problematic sub-
divisions; see e.g. [Genette, 1980:231] on ?retrospections?. 
The abstract content of NARRATED is represented linguis-
tically through a LinguisticSurfaceForm. As can be seen 
from the DWDS corpus, the LinguisticSurfaceForm oc-
curs as a new sentence or clause, and can be more or less 
?direct?. Research on the reproduction of speech is an area 
of both narratology and linguistics. Usually, the forms direct 
speech (D in Table 4), free indirect speech and indirect 
speech (I in Table 4) are distinguished in increasing order of 
narrative distance (see Table 1) [Fludernik, 2005]. 
Comments and questions produced by the Addressee of a 
NARRATING action, concerning the Narrated, should also be 
part of the LinguisticSurfaceForm: Metaphorically speak-
ing, they might be seen as discursive catalysts or parasites of 
that surface form. 
Finally, the Topic slot of the NARRATED frame is typical-
ly filled by sentence constituents like objects or preposi-
tional phrases. Since these constituents can themselves be 
complex, the topic might be quite detailed, taking the form 
of a summary. Still, it does not provide access to the 
?original? linguistic surface form. With respect to narrative, 
this category is also referred to as narrative report of 
discourse or content summary [Fludernik, 2005]. 
Figure 6 illustrates the knowledge modelled by 
NARRATED and related frames. 
Happening
Event (Process)
Action
... ...Experiencing...
CommunicationAction ...
...LinguisticCommunication
DirectingCommittingNarratingReporting ...
produces(LinguisticMessage)
produces(NarratedLinguisticMessage)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6: The NARRATED_LINGUISTIC_MESSAGE frame 
At a meta-level, the NARRATED frame can be mapped 
onto representation structures of the envisaged system that 
combines SG and NLG (cf. Figure 3 above). The TextType 
is implicitly given in the goal of the Story Generator; also 
the Topic or a topic restriction is often given at this stage. 
The Support is, depending on the stage of processing, some 
digital entity, written (printed), or possibly speech. The Ab-
stractContent is the ?abstract? output of a Story Generator 
(the product of content determination). The LinguisticSur-
faceForm corresponds to the final NLG output based on 
this abstract content. Using knowledge and reasoning proce-
dures, a system might additionally or alternatively summa-
rise AbstractContent into a phrase that represents Topic. 
6 Representing Narrative Levels 
This section is concerned with describing a formalism that 
should enable a discourse planner to handle narrative levels 
(see Section 4). Via the formalism, the system can be told 
? how many levels a generated narrative should have, 
? which narrative instance should be the ?direct? 
mediator to the reader, and 
? how outer and inner narrations, or parts thereof, 
should follow each other in discourse. 
The basic ingredients for the formalism (Subsection 6.1) 
are applied to a description of example constellations (Sub-
section 6.2) and mapped onto discourse relations (Subsec-
tion 6.3). Subsection 6.4 briefly exemplifies the cooperation 
between Story Generator and Narratological Structurer. 
6.1 Basic Ingredients: Classes and Relations 
Three classes and two relations need to be modelled to 
represent possible structures of global narratives with 
respect to their levels. 
NARRATION 
An instance of NARRATED is a NARRATION if its Linguistic-
SurfaceForm is of the subtype DirectLinguisticSurface-
Form (and is, as such, explicitly present in the output text). 
This narratological constraint correctly excludes from 
opening a new narrative level such NARRATING actions 
which are merely mentioned, or whose NARRATED is 
reproduced indirectly. 
NARRATIVE_INSTANCE 
A NARRATIVE_INSTANCE is a cognitive agent that occupies 
the agent role (NarrativeInstance slot) of a NARRATING 
action. Neither the instance itself nor the action needs to be 
referred to directly in the surface form of any NARRATION. 
For example, if i isA NARRATIVE_INSTANCE, the variable 
i is not necessarily ?resolved? against a character name. 
toldBy(NARRATION, NARRATIVE_INSTANCE) 
The relation toldBy(a,i) holds if there is a NARRATING action 
x, a NARRATION a and a NARRATIVE_INSTANCE i such that 
both isCausedBy(x,i) and produces(x,a) are true (Table 3). 
toldIn(NARRATION, NARRATION) 
ToldIn(b,a) or ?b is told in a? holds if there is a NARRATION 
b, a NARRATION a, and a NARRATING action x such that: 
? a is not b; 
? a is an event sequence such that one of its events is x; 
? produces(x,b). 
DISCOURSE_SEQUENCE 
A DISCOURSE_SEQUENCE is an ordered list of variables 
standing for different NARRATIONS, as they sequentially oc-
cur within the discourse of a global narrative. In a DIS-
COURSE_SEQUENCE, the same variable may appear more 
than once: for example, an outer narration can frame an 
inner narration at the start and the end of a discourse. 
Variables for separated parts of the same narration receive 
numbered subscripts (see a1 and a2 in Figure 7 below). 
6.2 Example Constellations 
Type 0: Zero-Instantiation 
Zero instantiation of the narrative levels parameter occurs if 
there is no change in level. There is only one narration, told 
by a narrative instance. An example of this type is the fable 
The Fox and the Crow by Aesop, because neither the fox 
nor the crow produce any narrations. The instantiation of the 
classes and relations corresponds to the scenario in Table 5. 
I am not aware of any Story Generator (cf. Section 2) that 
exceeds the zero instantiation. This would mean that con-
temporary Story Generators ignore narrative levels. 
Type 1: Outer and one Inner Narration 
A typical pattern of Type 1 is as follows: An outer narration 
contains a NARRATING action whose agent is a narrative 
instance different from that of the outer narration. The NAR-
RATED of this action is the inner narration. After the NAR-
RATING action, the rest of the outer narration is told (Table 6). 
An example is Heart of Darkness (1902) by Joseph 
Conrad. A homodiegetic narrative instance i (= ?I?) tells 
outer narration a, while j (= ?Marlow?) tells inner b: 
 
 
 
Figure 7: Narrative levels and discourse sequence 
uses MessageSupport
isOfTextType TextType
hasForm LinguisticSurfaceForm
isAbout Topic
Relation Filler Restriction
LinguisticSurfaceForm
MsgSupport
IndirectLSFFreeIndirectLSFDirectLSF
Written Thought
Spoken
NarratedLinguisticMessage
represents(AbstractContent)
i
j
a
b
b
a
1
a
2
Classes and Relations Instantiation 
Narration a 
NarrativeInstance i 
Attribution of NarrativeInstance toldBy(a,i) 
Attribution of Narration -- 
Sequence discourse_sequence=[a] 
Table 5: Zero-Instantiation of Narrative Levels 
Classes and Relations Instantiation 
Narration a,b 
NarrativeInstance i,j 
Attribution of NarrativeInstance toldBy(a,i), toldBy(b,j) 
Attribution of Narration toldIn(b,a) 
Sequence discourse_sequence=[a1,b,a2] 
Table 6: One Inner Narration; Framing Outer Narration 
[a1 toldBy i] ? there was nothing else to do till the end of 
the flood; [...] we knew we were fated [...] to hear about one 
of Marlow's inconclusive experiences. 
?[b toldBy j] I don't want to bother you much with what 
happened to me personally,? [comment by i] he began, 
showing in this remark the weakness of many tellers of tales 
[...]; ?[b toldBy j] yet to understand the effect of it on me 
you ought to know how I got out there, [...], how I went up 
that river to the place where I first met the poor chap. [...] 
?[b toldBy j] I had then, as you remember, just returned 
to London [...].?5 
The ?implicit inquit? phrase he began [...] is a comment 
by i concerning the Manner of NARRATING. It is not mod-
elled in the discourse_sequence (see also Subsections 5.1?
5.2 on comments). ? The closing part of outer narrative a in 
Heart of Darkness is very short (cf. Figure 8, Appendix). 
Type 1 has some variants. For instance, an outer narration 
might not be resumed at the end of the discourse (Table 7, 
Appendix), as in Abb? Pr?vost?s Manon Lescaut (1731). In 
contrast, an outer narration (here: b) might manifest itself in 
discourse only after the NARRATED (here: a) produced in the 
NARRATING action it contains (Table 8, Appendix). Philip 
Roth?s novel Portnoy's Complaint (1969) shows this pattern. 
Yet another variant occurs when the narrative instances of 
outer and inner narration are identical (Table 9, Appendix). 
An example is Balzac?s Sarrasine (1831), where a homo-
diegetic narrator (i) tells a first narration (a) to an ?un-
known? addressee (the ?reader?). In the course of a, a NAR-
RATING action is performed by i himself, but with a different 
addressee, namely a character in a (cf. Figure 9, Appendix). 
Other Types: More Than Two Narrations 
More than two NARRATIONS can easily be combined 
extending the patterns presented above. 
Common ?outward? extensions of levels include explicit 
introductory or closing NARRATING actions, often produced 
on written support by (fictional) editors, translators or 
?discoverers? of the inner narration. An example is the 
                                                 
5 http://www.online-literature.com/conrad/heart_of_darkness/ 
[10 March, 2005]. 
novel Der goldne Spiegel (?The golden mirror?, 1772) by 
Christoph Martin Wieland, for which a structure with three 
opening narrations ?leading to? the innermost narration d, 
has been identified6 (cf. Table 10, Appendix). 
At least equally common are ?inward? extensions of the 
levels. While several NARRATING actions within one and the 
same outer narration are considered to produce parallel 
inner narrations at the same level, further levels are added 
when a narration is produced within an inner narration. In 
The 1001 Nights, Scheherazade entertains King Shahryar 
with parallel inner narrations. In these narrations, the char-
acters sometimes tell one another stories, which are inner 
narrations at the next level. Table 11 (Appendix) shows a 
simplified version of The 1001 Nights, in which Sche-
herazade (j) tells only three stories (b,c,d). The third level is 
added by narration e, told by a character (k) of narration d. 
6.3 Discourse Graphs 
The basic assumption underlying discourse graphs is that 
discourse relations (e.g. [Mann and Thompson, 1988; 
Hobbs, 1990:83?111; Asher and Lascarides, 2003]) exist 
between discourse segments, where a segment is either a 
proposition or a graph consisting of already related proposi-
tions. Most theories assume that a limited set of discourse 
relations covers all semantic links that might exist between 
discourse segments. 
Based on the status of segments they relate, multinuclear 
and nucleus-satellite discourse relations can be distin-
guished. The definition of nuclearity by Mann and Thomp-
son [1988:266] is centered around the notions of compre-
hensibility (a text is less understandable if a nucleus is 
deleted), substitutability (satellites can more easily be 
replaced) and writer's purpose (nuclei are more essential). 
Similarly, Hobbs [1990:104] subdivides discourse relations 
into coordinating and subordinating. 
There are correspondences to narratological theory (e.g. 
[Barthes, 1966; Pavel, 1985; Chatman, 1978]). Chatman 
subdivides events, as constituting elements of story, into 
kernels and satellites. Kernels cannot be deleted without 
disturbing the logic of the plot. Satellites contribute first of 
all aesthetically, so that their deletion is logically possible. 
A difference lies in the size of the analysed segments. 
Linguistically inspired theories include propositions 
(clauses) as basic level, but descriptions using these theories 
often stop at the level of one or several paragraphs (an ex-
ception is [Longacre, 2003]). Narratological analyses usu-
ally concentrate on larger segments, represented by para-
phrases of their propositions [Chatman, 1978:54]. 
Discourse Graphs for Type 1 Narrative Levels 
To a certain degree, the narratological description of narra-
tive levels constrains which relations might hold between 
narrations of a ?levelled? global narrative. Still, it does not 
completely disambiguate the global discourse structure. 
In fact, in a typical Type 1 narrative (Table 6), the inner 
narration b might be related in two competing ways to nar-
                                                 
6 By J?rg Sch?nert in FGN Forum Narratologie 
(http://www.narrport.uni-hamburg.de/) on 21 December, 2004. 
ration a. The first analysis relates a and b based on a local, 
lexical consideration: a NARRATION is regarded as an argu-
ment of the verb phrase that evokes NARRATING. This is 
illustrated by Example (1). If NARRATED TextType filler 
(e.g. ?a story?) is present in a sentence, the English verb tell 
allows an implicit LinguisticSurfaceRealization (1a). This 
? initially underspecified ? argument of tell might then be 
realized in a subsequent sentence (1b), so that an Elabora-
tion relation holds between (1a) and (1b). In nucleus-satel-
lite terms, (1a) is a nucleus elaborated by (1b). 
(1) a. [a toldBy i] John told a story to Mary. b. ?[b 
toldBy j] I was seventeen years old, and [...].? 
The proposed analysis is in line with Asher and 
Lascarides [2003:285], who identify an Elaboration relation 
between the propositions (2a) and (2b) of Example (2). 
(2) a. John made a promise to Mary. b. He would 
phone her. 
The possibility that the resulting discourse graph (Figure 
10) indeed holds for a global narrative increases if the 
NarrativeSequence representing narration b is relatively 
short. This also confirms that in these cases, the DirectLin-
guisticSurfaceRepresentation of the content of b is an 
aesthetical choice rather than a ?plot-logical? necessity. 
The presented analysis based on local features does not 
always seem globally appropriate as well. Outer narrations 
often set the background for a (longer) inner narration at the 
start of the discourse_sequence, and draw conclusions, 
interpret or evaluate it at the end. Figure 11 shows the 
corresponding graph, in which the segment representing 
narration b is nucleus of two relations.7 This corresponds to 
a ?schema? identified by Mann and Thompson [1988:247]. 
Danlos [2004:130] presents similar double-nuclear struc-
tures (?factorized? nuclei) at the sentence level. 
Both presented graphs are plausible. The final choice for 
a given global narrative depends not on narratological dis-
course description alone, but on story contents as well. 
6.4 Processing Examples 
This subsection briefly sketches two examples of how the 
Story Generator and the Narratological Structurer (cf. Fig-
ure 3) could cooperate during the creation of typical Type 1 
narrative levels (cf. Subsection 6.2). 
Adding an Outer Narration 
The Story Generator creates Story A. Respecting the condi-
tions for a Type 1 narrative, the Narratological Structurer 
requests an additional Story B, with some restrictions: 
? B is shorter than A; 
? B contains a NARRATING event. 
The Story Generator generates Story B. This might be a 
minimal story consisting of the events MEETING (of char-
acters c1 and c2), NARRATING (of a story by c1), REACTION 
(of c2). Upon receipt of B, the Narratological Structurer fills 
                                                 
7 At a global level, the Background relation can be compared 
only in a very abstract way to the definitions given by Asher and 
Lascarides [2003:165?168] or Mann and Thompson [1988:273]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10: Discourse Graph 1 for Type 1, Framing Outer Narration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11: Discourse Graph 2 for Type 1, Framing Outer Narration 
Story A into the Narrated slot of the NARRATING event in 
B, tags it as direct speech for the subsequent processing 
modules, and arranges all contents into a discourse tree 
corresponding to Figure 11. Story A has become an inner 
narration and a nucleus, Story B is the outer narration. 
Adding an Inner Narration 
The Story Generator creates Story A which contains a 
NARRATING event. The Narratological Structurer requests an 
additional Story B, with the following restrictions: 
? B is shorter than A; 
? the contents of B illustrate a part of A, for example an 
event present in A, or a character trait of the Narra-
tiveInstance of the NARRATING event. 
The Story Generator generates Story B. For instance, the 
illustration of A might be achieved by similarity: if Story A 
contains a CRIME event (e.g. KIDNAPPING), Story B can con-
tain a CRIME event as well (e.g. ROBBERY). The Narratologi-
cal Structurer now fills the new Story B into the Narrated 
slot of the NARRATING event in A, tags it as direct speech, 
and arranges all contents into a discourse tree, this time 
corresponding to Figure 10. Story A has become an outer 
narration, Story B is the inner narration and a satellite. 
7 Conclusions and Future Work 
The proposed system architecture combines Story Genera-
tion, narratological structuring and traditional NLG compo-
nents into an advanced NLG system for the production of 
narratives. Starting with the narrative levels parameter, do-
main modelling and meta-knowledge modelling for the 
Narratological Structurer were exemplified. Future work 
will include comments by narrators, some of which can be 
compared to ?global level? discourse markers. 
Further narratological parameters will be modelled, and 
constraints will be formulated for their accumulation. A 
cognitive approach might work out their aesthetical effects. 
a1
NarrativeSequence
a2
NarrativeSequenceElaboration
[31]John told:[1?30] [33][32] [34]
"Outer Narration" a
NarrativeSequence
NarrativeSequence
"Inner Narration" b
Satellite
Nucleus
[35?40]
a1
NarrativeSequence
[1?3]
a2
NarrativeSequence
[13?15]
Background Interpretation/Evaluation/...
NarrativeSequence
"Outer Narration" a
NarrativeSequence
"Inner Narration" b
SatelliteSatellite Nucleus Nucleus
[4?12]
For example, certain receptional states or strategies could be 
identified as ?prototypically? activated, enabled, or blocked 
by a given combination of narratological parameter instan-
tiations. Finally, content-related studies will lead to concrete 
proposals for the interaction between a Narratological Struc-
turer and one of the existing Story Generators. 
Acknowledgments 
This research is supported by DFG (German Research 
Foundation) grant ME 1546/2-1. Thanks go to all members 
of the Narratology Research Group Hamburg, especially to 
Rolf Krause, Jan Christoph Meister and Stefanie Thiedig, as 
well as to three anonymous reviewers for their comments. 
References 
[Asher and Lascarides, 2003] Nicholas Asher and Alex Las-
carides. Logics of Conversation. Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge and New York, 2003. 
[Barth, 1984] John Barth. The Friday Book, chapter Tales 
Within Tales Within Tales, pages 213?252. John 
Hopkins University Press, Baltimore and London, 1984. 
[Barthes, 1966] Roland Barthes. Introduction ? l'analyse 
structurale du r?cit. Communications, 8:1?27, 1966. 
[Bateman et al, 1994] John Bateman, Bernardo Magnini 
and Fabio Rinaldi. The Generalized {Italian, German, 
English} Upper Model. In Proceedings of the ECAI-94 
Workshop on Implemented Ontologies, pages 35?45, 
Amsterdam, August 1994. 
[Cahill et al, 2000] L. Cahill, C. Doran, R. Evans, R. Kib-
ble, C. Mellish, D. Paiva, M. Reape, D. Scott, and N. 
Tipper. Enabling Resource Sharing in Language Gen-
eration: An Abstract Reference Architecture. Technical 
Paper, MITRE, 2000. 
[Callaway and Lester, 2002] Charles B. Callaway and James 
C. Lester. Narrative Prose Generation. Artificial Intelli-
gence, 139(2):213?252, August 2002. 
[Chatman, 1978] Seymour B. Chatman. Story and Dis-
course. Narrative Structure in Fiction and Film. Cornell 
University Press, Ithaca, NY, 1978. 
[Danlos, 2004] Laurence Danlos. Discourse Dependency 
Structures as constrained DAGs. In Proceedings of the 
5th SIGDIAL Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue, 
pages 127?135, Cambridge, MA, April 2004. 
[Fludernik, 2005] Monika Fludernik. Speech Representa-
tion. In David Herman, Manfred Jahn and Marie-Laure 
Ryan, editors, Routledge Encyclopedia of Narrative 
Theory, pages 558?563. Routledge, London, 2005. 
[Genette, 1980] G?rard Genette. Narrative Discourse. An Es-
say in Method. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY, 1980. 
[Genette, 1988] G?rard Genette. Narrative Discourse Revis-
ited. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY, 1988. 
[Gerv?s et al, 2004] Pablo Gerv?s, Bel?n D?az-Agudo, Fe-
derico Peinado, and Raquel Herv?s. Story Plot Genera-
tion based on CBR. In Applications and Innovations in 
Intelligent Systems XII (at AI-2004), pages 33?46, 
Cambridge, UK, December 2004. 
[Harweg, 1968] Roland Harweg. Pronomina und Text-
konstitution. Fink, M?nchen, 1968. 
[Hobbs, 1990] Jerry R. Hobbs. Literature and Cognition. 
CSLI, Stanford, CA, 1990. 
[Longacre, 2003] Robert E. Longacre. Holistic Textlinguis-
tics. Electronic working paper, SIL International, 2003. 
[Mann and Thompson, 1988] William C. Mann and Sandra 
A. Thompson. Rhetorical Structure Theory. Toward a 
Functional Theory of Text Organisation. Text, 8(3):243?
281, 1988. 
[Niles and Pease, 2001] Ian Niles and Adam Pease. Towards 
a Standard Upper Ontology. In Proceedings of the 2nd 
International Conference on Formal Ontology in Informa-
tion Systems, pages 2?9, Ogunquit, ME, October 2001. 
[Pavel, 1985] Thomas G. Pavel. The Poetics of Plot. The 
Case of English Renaissance Drama. Manchester Uni-
versity Press, Manchester, 1985. 
[P?rez y P?rez and Sharples, 2004] Rafael P?rez y P?rez and 
Mike Sharples. Three computer-based models of story-
telling: BRUTUS, MINSTREL and MEXICA. Knowl-
edge-Based Systems, 17:15?29, 2004. 
[Prince, 1973] Gerald Prince. A Grammar of Stories. An 
Introduction. Mouton, The Hague and Paris, 1973. 
[Reiter, 1994] Ehud Reiter. Has a Consensus NL Generation 
Architecture Appeared, and is it Psycholinguistically Plau-
sible? In Proceedings of the 7th International Workshop 
on Natural Language Generation, pages 163?170, Ken-
nebunkport, ME, June 1994. 
[Reiter and Dale, 2000] Ehud Reiter and Robert Dale. Build-
ing Natural Language Generation Systems. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, 2000.  
[Rumelhart, 1975] David Rumelhart. Notes on a Schema for 
Stories. In Daniel G. Bobrow, editor, Representation and 
Understanding. Studies in Cognitive Science, pages 211?
236. Academic Press, New York et al, 1975. 
[Ryan, 1991] Marie-Laure Ryan. Possible Worlds, Artificial 
Intelligence, and Narrative Theory. Indiana University 
Press, Bloomington and Indianapolis, 1991. 
[Turner, 1994] Scott R. Turner. The Creative Process: A 
Computer Model of Storytelling. Lawrence Erlbaum, 
Hillsdale, 1994. 
[Ushie, 1988] Yukiko Ushie. ?Corepresentation?. A Textual 
Function of the Indefinite Expression. Text, 6(4):427?
446, 1986. 
[Wiebe and Rapaport, 1988] Janyce M. Wiebe and William 
J. Rapaport. A Computational Theory of Perspective and 
Reference in Narrative. In Proceedings of the 26th 
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, pages 131?138, Buffalo, NY, June 1988. 
 
A Appendix
Parameter Explanation 
Time: Order Sequence in which events are told, in comparison with the sequence in which they ?actually happened?. In 
synchrony, the event sequence in discourse corresponds to the sequence of the story. Anachronies can take the 
form of flashbacks (retrospectives) or flashforwards (anticipations). 
Time: Speed Relation between story time and discourse time. Congruence exists probably only in single scenes; otherwise 
timelapses (accelerations), time jumps (ellipsis), time expansions (decelerations), or pauses are used to achieve 
different degrees of expliciteness and emphasis. 
Time: Frequence Relation between the number of times a (similar) event happened, and the number of times an event is told. The 
following realizations are distinguished: singulative (one-to-one relation), repetitive (?recount several times what 
happened once?), and iterative (?recount once what happened several times?). 
Mood: Distance Combination of amount of information conveyed and narrator intrusion. Stereotypically, detailed information and 
low narrator participation indicate imitation or ?direct? dramatic mode, as opposed to a ?distant?, mediated 
narrative mode. This parameter also affects the way in which speech is reproduced. 
Mood: Focalisation Accessibility of knowledge needed to select story events for presentation in discourse. If a narrative instance 
disposes of unrestricted knowledge of the story world, it uses external focalization; if the knowledge is restricted to 
a character's field of perception, focalization is internal. 
Mood: 
Point of view 
Spatial, temporal, and ideological points of view from which events are described. Events can be described from 
the point of view of different characters. This parameter covers more aspects than focalization. 
Voice: 
Time of narration 
Time relation of the narrating action to the story event. Events can be told while they are happening (concurrently), 
retrospectively, or prospectively. 
Voice: Person Narrator participation. A homodiegetic narrative instance is a character of the current narration (grammatical 
realization typically in the first person), while a heterodiegetic narrative instance is ?absent? from the current 
narrative and not referred to. In a second-person narrative, the protagonist is the reader. 
Table 1: Selected Narratological Parameters in Discourse Domain 
NARRATING 
das gro?e brasilianische M?dchen ?the tall 
Brasilian girl? 
ein Beobachter ?an observer? 
Narrative 
Instance 
metonymic 
 
eine Legende ?a legend? 
die Briefe ?the letters? 
die Orte ?the locations? 
Addressee jedem, der mich danach fragt ?everyone who 
asks me about it? 
den Eltern ?to the parents? 
Motivation Die Impulse, aus denen heraus [erz?hlt wird], 
sind unterschiedlich ?The impulses why 
something [is told] are different? 
Consequence/
Aim 
[Ich erz?hle dir das] deshalb, damit du heute 
schon wei?t, da? alles seinen Preis hat. ?[I tell 
you this] so that you already today know that 
everything has its price.? 
Wir haben uns bepi?t vor Lachen[, als Kai 
erz?hlte,...] ?We pissed ourself laughing [when 
Kai told...]? 
ParallelEvent W?hrend sie a?en, [erz?hlte er von seinen 
Br?dern.] ?While they were eating, [he was 
talking about his brothers.]? 
Time nach zwei Schlucken Bier ?after two sips of beer? 
am Abend ?in the evening? 
Place in der Schule ?at school?; zu Hause ?at home? 
Manner mit fast kindlicher Begeisterung ?with almost 
childlike enthusiasm? 
geheimnisvoll tuend ?with mysterious ado? 
Table 2: Fillers of the NARRATING frame in DWDS corpus 
NARRATED_LINGUISTIC_MESSAGE 
TextType Geschichte ?story? 
L?gengeschichten ?cock and bull stories? 
Anekdoten ?anecdotes? 
M?rchen ?fairy tales? 
Tr?ume ?dreams? 
Witze ?jokes? 
Episoden aus der Geschichte ?story episodes? 
Support in seinem Buch ?in his book? 
von ihrem eigenen Leben ?about her own life? 
von seinem Ausreiseantrag ?about his emigra-
tion application [from Eastern Germany]? 
[die Geschichte] eines Gastarbeiters ?[the 
story] of a foreign worker? 
[Geschichten] von den Reihern ?[stories] 
about the herons? 
Frauen[geschichten] ?women [stories]? 
Topic 
mehr oder weniger spannende Kriegsaben-
teuer ?more or less thrilling war adventures? 
was ?ber ihre anderen Hamster ?something 
about her other hamsters? 
Linguistic 
Surface 
Realization 
D ?Von Kreta aus?[, erz?hlte er weiter,] 
?sind wir nach Rhodos gefahren.? 
??From Crete?[, he went ahead telling,] 
?we went to Rhodos.?? 
[erz?hlte er:] ?Sie waren Zwillinge. 
[...]? ?[he told:] ?They were twins. [...]?? 
? continued on the next page ? 
NARRATED_LINGUISTIC_MESSAGE (ctd.) 
Linguistic 
Surface 
Realization 
(continued) 
I [Dieser Mann hat uns gerade erz?hlt,] 
da? vor seinen Augen ein Toter 
wiederauferstanden ist ?[This man has 
just told us] that someone rose from the 
dead right before his eyes? 
[Runge erz?hlt,] er habe gelegentlich 
eines Aufenthaltes in Kopenhagen zwei 
M?nner karikiert, die sp?ter, von der 
Polizei gesucht, anhand seiner Zeichnung 
ausfindig gemacht werden konnten. 
?[Runge tells] he had caricatured two 
men during a stay in Copenhagen, who 
later on, being searched for by the police, 
could be found with his drawing.? 
Table 4: Fillers of the NARRATED frame in DWDS corpus 
Classes and Relations Instantiation 
Narration a,b 
NarrativeInstance i,j 
Attribution of NarrativeInstance toldBy(a,i), toldBy(b,j) 
Attribution of Narration toldIn(b,a) 
Sequence discourse_sequence=[a,b] 
Table 7: One Inner Narration; Opening Outer Narration only 
Classes and Relations Instantiation 
Narration a,b 
NarrativeInstance i,j 
Attribution of NarrativeInstance toldBy(a,i), toldBy(b,j) 
Attribution of Narration toldIn(a,b) 
Sequence discourse_sequence=[a,b] 
Table 8: One Inner Narration; Closing Outer Narration only 
Classes and Relations Instantiation 
Narration a,b 
NarrativeInstance i 
Attribution of NarrativeInstanc toldBy(a,i), toldBy(b,i) 
Attribution of Narration toldIn(b,a) 
Sequence discourse-sequence=[a1,b,a2] 
Table 9: One Inner Narration with Constant NarrativeInstance 
Classes and Relations Instantiation 
Narration a,b,c,d 
NarrativeInstance i,j,k,l 
Attribution of 
NarrativeInstance 
toldBy(a,i), toldBy(b,j), toldBy(c,k), 
toldBy(d,l) 
Attribution of Narration toldIn(b,a), toldIn(c,b), toldIn(d,c) 
Sequence discourse-sequence=[a,b,c,d] 
Table 10: Three Opening Narrations; Fourth Level 
 
 
Classes and Relations Instantiation 
Narration a,b,c,d,e 
NarrativeInstance i,j,k 
Attribution of 
NarrativeInstance 
toldBy(a,i), toldBy(b,j), toldBy(c,j), 
toldBy(d,j), toldBy(e,k) 
Attribution of Narration toldIn(b,a), toldIn(c,a), toldIn(d,a), 
toldIn(e,d) 
Sequence discourse-
sequence=[a1,b,a2,c,a3,d1,e,d2,a4] 
Table 11: Parallel Inner Narrations; Third Level 
[a2 toldBy i] Marlow ceased, and sat apart [...] in the pose of a 
meditating Buddha. Nobody moved [...]. ?We have lost the first of 
the ebb,? said the Director suddenly. I raised my head. The offing 
was barred by a black bank of clouds, and the tranquil waterway 
leading to the uttermost ends of the earth flowed sombre under an 
overcast sky? seemed to lead into the heart of an immense 
darkness. 
Figure 8: The closing part of narration a in Heart of Darkness 
[a1 toldBy i] The next evening we were seated [...] in a dainty 
little salon, she on a couch, I on cushions [...]. 
?Go on,? she said. ?I am listening.? 
?But I dare not begin. [...].? 
?Speak.? 
?I obey.  
?[b toldBy i] Ernest-Jean Sarrasine was the only son of a 
prosecuting attorney of Franche-Comte,? [comment by i] I began 
[...]. ?[b toldBy i] His father had [...] amassed a fortune [...], then 
[...].? 
Figure 9: The same narrative instance tells two narrations (from 
Sarrasine by Honor? de Balzac8) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
8 http://www.gutenberg.org/etext/1826 [10 March, 2005]. 
