Proceedings of the NAACL HLT Workshop on Computational Approaches to Linguistic Creativity, pages 9?16,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Topic Model Analysis of Metaphor Frequency for Psycholinguistic Stimuli
Steven Bethard
Computer Science Department
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
bethard@stanford.edu
Vicky Tzuyin Lai
Department of Linguistics
University of Colorado
295 UCB, Boulder CO 80309
vicky.lai@colorado.edu
James H. Martin
Department of Computer Science
University of Colorado
430 UCB, Boulder CO 80309
james.martin@colorado.edu
Abstract
Psycholinguistic studies of metaphor process-
ing must control their stimuli not just for
word frequency but also for the frequency
with which a term is used metaphorically.
Thus, we consider the task of metaphor fre-
quency estimation, which predicts how often
target words will be used metaphorically. We
develop metaphor classifiers which represent
metaphorical domains through Latent Dirich-
let Allocation, and apply these classifiers to
the target words, aggregating their decisions to
estimate the metaphorical frequencies. Train-
ing on only 400 sentences, our models are able
to achieve 61.3% accuracy on metaphor clas-
sification and 77.8% accuracy on HIGH vs.
LOW metaphorical frequency estimation.
1 Introduction
Psycholinguistic studies of metaphor try to under-
stand metaphorical language comprehension by pre-
senting subjects with linguistic stimuli and observ-
ing their responses. Recent work has observed such
responses at the electrophysiological level, measur-
ing brain electrical activity as the stimuli are read
(Coulson and Petten, 2002; Tartter et al, 2002; Iaki-
mova et al, 2005; Arzouan et al, 2007; Lai et al,
2007). All these studies have attempted to make
comparisons across different types of stimuli (e.g.
literal vs. metaphorical) by holding the frequen-
cies of the target words constant across experimental
conditions. For example, Tartter et al (2002) com-
pared the metaphorical and literal sentences his face
was contorted by an angry cloud and his face was
contorted by an angry frown, where the two sen-
tences end in different words, but where the final
words cloud and frown had similar word frequen-
cies. As another example, Lai et al (2007) com-
pared the metaphorical and literal sentences Their
theories have collapsed and The old building has
collapsed, where the two sentences end in exactly
the same words, so the target word frequencies
across conditions were perfectly matched. In both
designs, controlling for word frequency allowed the
researchers to attribute the differences in experimen-
tal conditions to interesting factors, like figurativity,
rather than simple word frequency.
However, word frequency is not the only type of
frequency relevant to such experiments. In particu-
lar, metaphorical frequency, that is, how inherently
metaphorical one word is as compared to another,
may also play an important role in explaining the
psycholinguistic results. For example, if collapsed
is usually used literally, a greater processing effort
may be observed when a metaphorical instance of
collapsed is presented. Likewise, if collapsed is
usually used metaphorically, greater effort may be
observed when a literal instance is presented. Psy-
cholinguistic studies of metaphor have not, to date,
controlled for such metaphorical frequency because
there were no corpora or algorithms which could
provide the needed metaphorical frequencies.
The present study aims to address this deficiency
by producing models which can automatically esti-
mate how often a word is used metaphorically. We
build these models using only 50 examples each of
a small number of target words (< 10), rather than
requiring 50 or more examples of every target word
9
(100+) in the stimuli, as would be required by stan-
dard corpus linguistics methods. Our approach is
also novel in that it combines metaphor classifica-
tion with statistical topic models. Topic models are
intuitively promising for our task because they pro-
duce topics that seem to translate well to the theory
of conceptual domains, which suggests that, for ex-
ample, conceptual domains such as THEORIES and
BUILDINGS are used to understand Their theories
have collapsed. These topic models also show some
promise for distinguishing conventional metaphors
from novel metaphors.
2 Prior Work
Two types of prior research inform our current
study: corpus analyses investigating metaphor fre-
quency by hand, and machine learning models that
classify text as either literal or metaphorical. The
latter could be used to estimate metaphor frequen-
cies by applying the classifier to a corpus and aggre-
gating the classifications.
2.1 Metaphor Frequency
Researchers have manually estimated several differ-
ent kinds of metaphor frequency. Pollio et al (1990)
looked at overall metaphorical frequency, perform-
ing an exhaustive analysis of a variety of texts, and
concluding that there were about five metaphors for
every 100 words of text. Martin (1994) looked at
the frequency of different types of metaphor, us-
ing a sample of 600 sentences from the Wall Street
Journal (WSJ), and concluded among other things
that the most frequent type of WSJ metaphor was
VALUE is LOCATION, e.g. Spain Fund tumbled
23%. Martin (2006) looked at conditional probabil-
ities of metaphor, for example noting that in 2400
WSJ sentences, the probability of seeing an instance
of a metaphor was greatly increased after a first in-
stance had already been observed. However, none of
these studies provided the metaphorical frequencies
of individual words needed for our research.
Sardinha (2008) performed what is probably clos-
est to the type of analysis we are interested in.
Using a corpus of Portuguese conference calls,
Berber Sardinha identified 432 terms that were used
metaphorically. He then took 100 instances of each
of these terms in a general Brazilian corpus and
manually annotated them as being either literal or
metaphorical. Berber Sardinha found that on aver-
age these terms were used metaphorically 70% of
the time, and provided analysis of the metaphor-
ical frequencies of a number of individual terms.
While it is exactly these kinds of individual term
frequencies that we are after, we cannot use Berber
Sardinha?s data because his corpus was in Por-
tuguese while we are interested in English. This
brings out one of the main drawbacks of the corpus
annotation approach: moving to a new language (or
even a new genre) requires an extensive manual an-
notation project. Our goal is to avoid such costs by
taking advantage of machine learning techniques for
automatically identifying metaphorical text.
2.2 Metaphor Classification
Recent years have seen a rising interest in metaphor
classification systems. Birke and Sarkar (2006) took
a semi-supervised approach, collecting noisy exam-
ples of literal and non-literal sentences from both
WordNet and metaphor dictionaries, and using a
word-based measure of sentence similarity to group
sentences into literal and non-literal clusters. They
evaluated on hand-annotated sentences for 25 target
words and reported an F-score of 0.538, a substantial
improvement over the 0.294 majority class baseline.
Gedigian et al (2006) approached metaphor
identification as supervised classification, annotat-
ing around 4000 WSJ motion words as literal or
metaphorical, and training a maximum entropy clas-
sifier using as features based on named entities,
WordNet and semantic roles. They achieved an ac-
curacy of 95.1%, a decent improvement over the
very high majority class baseline of 93.8%.
Krishnakumaran and Zhu (2007) focused on three
syntactically constrained sub-types of metaphors:
nouns joined by be, nouns following verbs, and
nouns following adjectives. They combined Word-
Net hypernym information with bigram statistics
and a threshold, and evaluated their algorithm on
the Berkeley Master Metaphor List (Lakoff, 1994),
achieving an accuracy of around 46%.
All of these approaches produced models which
could be applied to new text to identify metaphors,
but each has some drawbacks for our task. The
WSJ study of Gedigian et al (2006) found 94% of
their target words to be metaphorical, a vastly differ-
10
Target L M M%
attacked 32 18 36%
born 45 5 10%
budding 16 34 68%
collapsed 10 40 80%
digest 7 43 86%
drifted 16 34 68%
floating 25 25 50%
sank 31 19 38%
spoke 47 3 6%
Total 229 221 49%
Table 1: Metaphorical (M) and literal (L) counts, and
metaphorical percentage (M%), for the annotated verbs.
ent number from the 49% for our target words (see
Section 3). Krishnakumaran and Zhu (2007) con-
sidered only a few different syntactic constructions,
but we need to consider all the ways a metaphor
may be expressed to evaulate overall metaphor fre-
quency. Birke and Sarkar (2006) did consider a va-
riety of target words in unrestricted text, but relied
on large scale language resources like WordNet and
metaphor dictionaries, while we are interested in ap-
proaches that are less resource intensive.
Thus, rather than basing our models on these prior
systems, we develop a novel approach to metaphor
frequency estimation based on using topic models to
operationalize metaphorical domains.
3 Data
The first step in building models of metaphorical
frequency is obtaining data for training and evalu-
ation. In one of the post-hoc analyses of the Lai et
al. (2007) experiment, 50 sentences from the British
National Corpus (BNC, 2007) were gathered for
each of nine of their target words. They annotated
each instance as either literal or metaphorical, and
then used these annotations to calculate metaphori-
cal frequencies for analysis.
This data served as our starting point for exploring
computational approaches to estimating metaphor-
ical frequency. Table 1 shows the nine verbs and
their metaphorical frequencies. Table 2 shows some
examples. Some verbs, such as digest, are almost al-
ways used metaphorically (86% of the time), while
other verbs, such as spoke, are almost always used
L Aye, that?s where I was born and reared.
M VATman threatens our budding entrepreneurs.
M Suddenly all her bravado collapsed.
L This makes it easier for us to digest the wheat.
L Gulls drifted lethargically on the swell.
M My heart sank as I looked around.
Table 2: Examples of sentences with metaphorical (M)
and literal (L) target words.
T# Most frequent words
00 book (4%) write (2%) read (2%) english (2%)
17 record (3%) music (2%) band (2%) play (2%)
42 social (3%) history (2%) culture (1%) society (1%)
58 film (3%) play (2%) theatre (1%) women (1%)
82 dog (9%) rabbit (2%) ferret (1%) pet (1%)
Table 3: Example topics (T#) from the BNC and their
most frequent words. Numbers in parentheses indicate
the percent of the topic each word represents.
literally (94% of the time). Annotation of just 50
instances of each of these nine verbs was time con-
suming, and yet to fully re-analyze the ERP results,
metaphorical frequencies would be needed for all of
the over 100 target words. Thus our goal was to au-
tomate this process.
4 Topic Models
Our approach to estimating metaphorical frequen-
cies was first to classify words in unrestricted text
as literal or metaphorical, and then to aggregate
those decisions to estimate a frequency. Thus, we
first needed to build a model which could iden-
tify metaphorical expressions. Our approach to this
problem was based on the theory of conceptual do-
mains, in which metaphors are seen as taking terms
from one domain (e.g. attacked) and applying them
to another domain (e.g. argument).
To operationalize these domains, we employed
statistical topic models, in particular, Latent Dirich-
let Allocation (LDA) (Blei et al, 2003). Intuitively,
LDA looks at how words co-occur in the documents
of a large corpus, and identifies topics or groups of
words that are semantically similar. For example,
Table 3 shows a few topics from the BNC. These
topics can be thought of as grouping words by their
semantic domains. For example, we might think of
topic 00 as the Book domain and topic 42 as the Soci-
ety domain. Because LDA generates topics that look
11
much like the source and target domains associated
with metaphors, we expect that LDA can provide a
boost to metaphor identification models.
The LDA algorithm is usually presented as a gen-
erative model, that is, as an imagined process that
someone might go through when writing a text. This
generative process looks something like:
1. Decide what topics you want to write about.
2. Pick one of those topics.
3. Think of words used to discuss that topic.
4. Pick one of those words.
5. To generate the next word, go back to 2.
This is a somewhat unrealistic description of the
writing process, but it gets at the idea that the words
in a document are topically coherent. Formally, the
process above can be described as:
1. For each document d select a topic distribution
?d ? Dir(?)
2. Select a topic z ? ?d
3. For each topic select a word distribution
?z ? Dir(?)
4. Select a word w ? ?z
The goal of the LDA learning algorithm then is to
maximize the likelihood of our documents, where
for one document p(d|?, ?) = ?Ni=1 p(wi|?, ?). Es-
timating these probabilities can be done in a few dif-
ferent ways, but in this paper we use Gibbs sampling
as it has been widely implemented and was available
in the LingPipe toolkit (Alias-i, 2008).
Gibbs sampling starts by randomly assigning top-
ics to all words in the corpus. Then the word-topic
distributions and document-topic distributions are
estimated using the following equations:
P (zi|zi?, wi, di, wi?, di?, ?, ?) = ?ij?jd?T
t=1 ?it?td
?ij = Cwordij+??W
k=1 Cwordkj+W?
?jd = Cdocdj+??T
k=1 Cdocdk+T?
Cwordij is the number of times word i was assigned
topic j, Cdocdj is the number of times topic j ap-
pears in document d, W is the total number of
unique words in the corpus, and T is the number
of topics requested. In essence, we count the num-
ber of times that a word is assigned a topic and
the number of times a topic appears in a document,
and we use these numbers to estimate word-topic
and document-topic probabilities. Once topics have
been assigned and distributions have been calcu-
lated, Gibbs sampling repeats the process, this time
selecting a new topic for each word by looking at
the calculated probabilities. The process is repeated
until the distributions become stable or a set number
of iterations is reached.
We ran LDA over the documents in the BNC, ex-
tracting 100 topics after 2000 iterations of Gibbs
sampling. We left the ? and ? parameters at their
LingPipe defaults of 0.1 and 0.01, respectively. Ta-
ble 3 shows some of the resulting topics.
5 Metaphor Frequency
Our primary goal was to use the topics produced by
LDA to help characterize words in terms of their
metaphorical frequency. We approached this prob-
lem by first training metaphor classifiers based on
LDA topics to identify target words in text as lit-
eral or metaphorical. Then we ran these classifiers
over unseen data, and aggregated the individual de-
cisions. The result is an approximate metaphorical
frequency for each word. The following sections de-
tail this process and discuss our preliminary results.
5.1 Metaphor Classification
Our data is composed of 50 sentences for each of
nine target words, with each sentence annotated as
either metaphorical or literal. We treated this as a
classification task, where the classifier took as input
a sentence containing a target word, and produced as
output either LITERAL or METAPHORICAL.
We trained support vector machine (SVM) clas-
sifiers on this data, using LDA topics as features.
For each of the sentences in our data, we used the
LDA topic models to assign topic probability distri-
butions to each of the words in the sentence. We then
summed the topic distributions over all the words in
the sentence to produce a sentence-wide topic dis-
tribution. The result was that for each sentence we
could say something like ?this sentence was com-
posed of 5% topic 00, 2% topic 01, 8% topic 02,
etc.? We used these sentence-level topic probabil-
ity distributions as features for an SVM classifier, in
particular, SVMperf (Joachims, 2005).
We compared this SVM-LDA model against two
baselines. The first was the standard majority class
12
classifier, which simply assigns all instances in the
test data whichever label (metaphorical or literal)
was most comon in the training data.
The second baseline was an SVM based on TF-
IDF features, a well known document classification
model (Joachims, 1998; Sebastiani, 2002; Lewis et
al., 2004). Under this approach, there is a numeric
feature for each of the 3000+ words in the training
data, and each word feature is assigned the weight:
|{w ? doc : w = word}|
|{w ? doc}| ?log
|{d ? docs}|
|{d ? docs : w ? d}|
Essentially, this formula means that the weight in-
creases with the number of times the word occurs
in the document, and decreases with the number of
documents in the corpus that contain that word. The
vectors of TF-IDF features are then normalized to
have Euclidean length 1.0, using the formula:
weight(word) = tf-idf(word)? ?
word?
tf-idf(word?)2
To evaluate our model against both the majority
class and the TF-IDF baselines, we ran nine-fold
cross-validations, where each fold corresponded to
a single target word. Note that this means that we
trained our models on the sentences of eight target
words, and tested on the sentences of the ninth tar-
get word. This is a harder evaluation than a strat-
ified cross-validation where all target words would
have been observed during training. But it is a much
more realistic evaluation for our task, where we want
to learn enough about metaphors from nine target
words that we can automatically classify instances
of the remaining 95.
Table 4 compares the performance of our SVM-
LDA model and the baseline models1. The major-
ity class classifier performs poorly, achieving only
26.4% accuracy2. The TF-IDF based model per-
forms much better, at 50.7% accuracy. However, our
SVM based on LDA features outperforms both base-
line models, achieving 54.9% accuracy.
1For all models, hyper parameters (the cost parameter, the
loss function, etc.) were set using only the training data of each
fold by running an inner eight-fold cross validation.
2This might be initially surprising since our corpus was 49%
metaphorical. Consider, however, that during cross validation,
holding out a more metaphorical target word for testing means
that our training data is more literal, and vice versa.
Model Accuracy
Majority Class 26.4%
SVM + TF-IDF 50.7%
SVM + LDA topics 54.9%
SVM + LDA topics + LDA groups 61.3%
Table 4: Model performance on the literal vs. metaphor-
ical classification task.
Type Most frequent words
CONCRETE book write read english novel
ABSTRACT god church christian jesus spirit
MIXED sleep dream earth theory moon
OTHER many time only number large
Table 5: Examples of annotated topics.
5.2 Annotating Topics
The metaphor classification results showed the ben-
efit of operationalizing metaphor domains as LDA
topics. But metaphors are typically viewed as map-
ping a concrete source domain onto an abstract tar-
get domain, and our LDA topics had no direct notion
of this concrete/abstract distinction. To try to repre-
sent this distinction, we manually annotated3 the 100
LDA topics with one of four labels: CONCRETE,
ABSTRACT, MIXED or OTHER. Table 5 shows ex-
amples of the annotated topics.
We then used the annotated topics to generate new
features for our classifiers. In addition to the original
100 topic probability features, we provided four new
probability features, one for each of our labels, cal-
culated by taking the sum of the probabilities of the
corresponding topics. For example, since topics 07,
13, 37 and 77 were identified as ABSTRACT topics,
the probability of the new ABSTRACT feature was
just the sum of the probabilities of the topic features
07, 13, 37 and 77. The last row of Table 4 shows
the performance of the SVM model trained with the
augmented feature set. This model outperforms all
our other models, achieving an accuracy of 61.3%
on the literal vs. metaphorical distinction.
These results are interesting because they show
that human analysis of LDA topics can add substan-
tial value for machine learning models at a low cost.
Annotating the entire set of 100 topics took under
3All annotation was performed by a single annotator. Future
work will measure inter-annotator agreement.
13
Model Accuracy
Majority Class 0.0%
SVM + TF-IDF 22.2%
SVM + LDA topics 55.6%
SVM + LDA topics + LDA groups 77.8%
Table 6: Model performance on the HIGH vs. LOW
metaphor frequency prediction task.
an hour, and yet provided a 6% gain in model ac-
curacy. The speed of annotation suggests that LDA
topics are conceptually accessible to humans, and
the performance boost suggests that manual group-
ing of LDA topics may be a fruitful area for feature
engineering.
5.3 Predicting Metaphorical Frequencies
Having constructed successful metaphor classifica-
tion models, we return to our question of metaphor-
ical frequency. Given a target word, can we pre-
dict the frequency with which that word will be
used metaphorically? Our models are not accurate
enough that we can expect the frequencies derived
from them to be exact predictions of metaphorical
frequency. But we may be able to distinguish, for
example, words with high metaphorical frequency
from words with low metaphorical frequency.
Thus, we evaluate our models on the binary task
of assigning target words an overall metaporical fre-
quency, either HIGH (? 50%) or LOW (< 50%). We
can perform this evaluation using the same data and
cross validation technique as before, this time exam-
ining each testing fold (which corresponds to a sin-
gle target word) and aggregating the metaphor clas-
sifications to get a metaphorical frequency estimate
of that target. Table 6 shows how the models fared
on this task. The majority class model misclassified
all the words, and the TF-IDF model managed to get
only two of the nine correct. The LDA models per-
formed better, with the model including the grouped
topic features achieving 77.8% accuracy. This sug-
gests that our model may already be good enough
to use for analysis of the original Lai experimental
data. Of course, this evaluation was carried out only
over the nine available target words, so additional
evaluation will be necessary to confirm these trends.
To further analyze our model performance, we
looked at the metaphorical frequency estimates for
Word True Predicted Difference
attacked 36% 24% -12%
born 10% 2% -8%
budding 68% 98% +30%
collapsed 80% 98% +18%
digest 86% 40% -46%
drifted 68% 92% +24%
floating 50% 100% +50%
sank 38% 26% -12%
spoke 6% 62% +56%
Table 7: Model performance on the HIGH vs. LOW
metaphor frequency prediction task.
each target word. Table 7 shows the estimates of
our best model along with the true metaphorical fre-
quencies. The three target words with the largest dif-
ferences between true and predicted accuracies are
spoke, floating and digest, with spoke and floating
predicted to be much more metaphorical than they
actually are, and digest predicted to be much less.
We also performed some analysis of the model er-
rors. In many cases it was difficult to judge why the
model succeeded or failed in identifying a metaphor,
but a couple of things stood out. First, 70% of the
digest instances our model misclassified were Di-
gest (capitalized), e.g. Middle East Economic Di-
gest. Our topic models were trained on all lower-
cased words, so Digest and digest were not distin-
guished. Re-training the models without collaps-
ing the case distinctions might address this prob-
lem. Second, spoke seems to be an inherently harder
term to classify because it co-occurs with so many
other topics. About 40% of the spoke instances oc-
curred as spoke of or spoke about, where speaking
about a metaphorical topic caused spoke to be inter-
preted metaphorically, and speaking about a literal
topic caused spoke to be interpreted literally. Ad-
dressing this problem would probably require some
understanding of argument structure, perhaps akin
to what was done by Gedigian et al (2006).
6 Metaphor Novelty
As a final exploration of topic models for metaphor-
ical domains, we considered metaphorical novelty,
as used in the original Lai experiment. In particular,
we were interested in how LDA topics might reflect
14
Type Stimulus Sentence
LIT Every soldier in the frontline was attacked
CON Every point in my argument was attacked
NOV Every second of our time was attacked
ANOM Every drop of rain was attacked
LIT The old building has collapsed
CON Their theories have collapsed
NOV Their compromises have collapsed
ANOM The apples have collapsed
Table 8: Example stimuli: literal (LIT), conventional
metaphor (CON), novel metaphor (NOV) and anomalous
(ANOM).
more conventional or more novel metaphors. In the
Lai experiment, conventional and novel metaphors
for a particular target word shared the same source
domain (e.g. WAR) but differed in the target domain
(e.g. ARGUMENT vs. TIME). If LDA topics are
a good operationalization of such domains, then it
should be possible use LDA topics to distinguish be-
tween conventional and novel metaphors.
To explore this area, we employed the stimuli
from the Lai experiment, and looked in particular
at the conventional and novel conditions. The Lai
experiment used 104 different target words, so these
data included 104 conventional metaphors and 104
novel metaphors. Novel metaphors were generated
for the Lai experiment by considering a conventional
source-target mapping and selecting a new target
domain. For example, the conventional metaphor
Every point in my argument was attacked maps
the source domain WAR to the target domain AR-
GUMENT, while the novel metaphor Every second
of our time was attacked maps the source domain
WAR to the target domain TIME. Table 8 shows ex-
ample stimulus sentences from the Lai experiment.
Though these experimental stimuli have the draw-
back of being manually constructed, not collected
from a corpus, they have the advantage of being
already annotated with a definition of novelty that
clearly distinguishes the two types of metaphors.
We performed a simple correlational analysis us-
ing the conventional and novel metaphors from the
Lai experiment. We produced topic distributions for
each stimulus, using our topic models trained on the
BNC. We then labeled conventional metaphors as -1
and novel metaphors as +1, and identified the top-
-0.19 like house old shop door look street room
-0.18 darlington programme club said durham hall
-0.15 film play theatre women actor work perform
-0.14 area local plan develop land house rural urban
-0.14 any sale good publish custom product price
Table 9: Top 5 topics correlated with conventionality.
0.20 freud sexual sophie male joanna people female
0.17 doctor leed rory dalek fergus date subject aug
0.13 book write read english novel publish reader
0.11 lorton kirov dougal jed manville vologski celia
0.09 war british france britain french nation europe
Table 10: Top 5 topics correlated with novelty.
ics that correlated best with this distinction. Table 9
shows the most negatively correlated (conventional)
topics and Table 10 shows the most positively corre-
lated (novel) topics.
Though even the best correlations are somewhat
low, there seem to be some trends in this analysis.
Conventional metaphors seem to correspond more
to concrete terms, like house, club, play and sale.
Novel metaphors have less of a coherent theme, in-
cluding terms like freud and sexual as well as names
like Rory, Kirov and Britain. This may reflect a
real distinction in the use of conventional and novel
metaphors, or it may be an artifact of how the exper-
imental stimuli were created. A deeper investigation
into the relations between LDA topics and metaphor
novelty will probably require annotating sentences
from some naturally occuring data.
7 Conclusions
We presented a novel two-phase approach to the task
of metaphorical frequency estimation. First, exam-
ples of a target word were automatically classified
as literal or metaphorical, and then these classifi-
cations were aggregated to estimate how often the
target word was used metaphorically. Our classi-
fiers operationalized metaphorical source and target
domains using topics derived from Latent Dirichlet
Allocation. Support vector machine classifiers took
these topic probability distributions and learned to
classify sentences as literal or metaphorical. These
models achieved 61.3% accuracy on the classifiation
task, and their aggregated classifications produced
an accuracy of 77.8% on the task of distinguishing
15
between target words with high and low metaphori-
cal frequencies.
Future work will perform a larger scale eval-
uation, and will use our model?s metaphorical
frequency estimates to analyze psycholinguistic
data. In particular, we will split the conventional
metaphorical sentences of Lai et al (2007) into
low and high-frequency items. If the low and
high frequency items display significantly differ-
ent brainwave patterns, then this could suggest that
metaphorical frequency of a given word plays a crit-
ical role in metaphor comprehension.
Future work will also explore frequency effects
that consider the sentential context in the stimulus
items. For example, a context like ?Their theories
have ? probably gives a higher expectation of a
metaphorical word filling in the blank than a context
like ?The old building has ?. Having a measure
of how much the words in the preceding context pre-
dict an upcoming metaphor would provide another
useful stimulus control.
References
Alias-i. 2008. LingPipe 3.7.0. http://alias-
i.com/lingpipe/, October.
Yossi Arzouan, Abraham Goldstein, and Miriam Faust.
2007. Brainwaves are stethoscopes: ERP correlates
of novel metaphor comprehension. Brain Research,
1160:69?81, July.
Julia Birke and Anoop Sarkar. 2006. A clustering ap-
proach for nearly unsupervised recognition of non-
literal language. In European Chapter of the ACL
(EACL).
David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jordan.
2003. Latent dirichlet alocation. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 3:993?1022.
BNC. 2007. The british national corpus, version 3
(BNC XML edition). Distributed by Oxford Univer-
sity Computing Services on behalf of the BNC Con-
sortium. http://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk/.
Seana Coulson and Cyma Van Petten. 2002. Conceptual
integration and metaphor: an event-related potential
study. Memory & Cognition, 30(6):958?68, Septem-
ber. PMID: 12450098.
Matt Gedigian, John Bryant, Srini Narayanan, and Bran-
imir Ciric. 2006. Catching metaphors. In Workshop
On Scalable Natural Language Understanding.
Galina Iakimova, Christine Passerieux, Jean-Paul Lau-
rent, and Marie-Christine Hardy-Bayle. 2005.
ERPs of metaphoric, literal, and incongruous seman-
tic processing in schizophrenia. Psychophysiology,
42(4):380?390.
Thorsten Joachims, 1998. Text categorization with Sup-
port Vector Machines: Learning with many relevant
features, pages 137?142. Springer Berlin / Heidel-
berg.
Thorsten Joachims. 2005. A support vector method for
multivariate performance measures. In Proceedings of
the 22nd international conference on Machine learn-
ing, pages 377?384, Bonn, Germany. ACM.
Saisuresh Krishnakumaran and Xiaojin Zhu. 2007.
Hunting elusive metaphors using lexical resources. In
Workshop on Computational Approaches to Figurative
Language.
Vicky Tzuyin Lai, Tim Curran, and Lise Menn.
2007. The comprehension of conventional and novel
metaphors: An ERP study. In 13th Annual Confer-
ence on Architectures and Mechanisms for Language
Processing, August.
George Lakoff. 1994. Conceptual metaphor WWW
server. http://cogsci.berkeley.edu/lakoff/.
David D. Lewis, Yiming Yang, Tony G. Rose, and Fan
Li. 2004. RCV1: a new benchmark collection for text
categorization research. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 5:361?
397.
James H. Martin. 1994. MetaBank: a Knowledge-Base
of metaphoric language conventions. Computational
Intelligence, 10(2):134?149.
James H. Martin. 2006. A rational analysis of the con-
text effect on metaphor processing. In Stefan Th. Gries
and Anatol Stefanowitsch, editors, Corpus-Based Ap-
proaches to Metaphor and Metonymy. Mouton de
Gruyter.
Howard R. Pollio, Michael K. Smith, and Marilyn R. Pol-
lio. 1990. Figurative language and cognitive psychol-
ogy. Language and Cognitive Processes, 5:141?167.
Tony Berber Sardinha. 2008. Metaphor probabilities
in corpora. In Mara Sofia Zanotto, Lynne Cameron,
and Marilda do Couto Cavalcanti, editors, Confronting
Metaphor in Use, pages 127?147. John Benjamins.
Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2002. Machine learning in auto-
mated text categorization. ACM Computing Surveys
(CSUR), 34(1):1?47.
Vivien C. Tartter, Hilary Gomes, Boris Dubrovsky, So-
phie Molholm, and Rosemarie Vala Stewart. 2002.
Novel metaphors appear anomalous at least momen-
tarily: Evidence from N400. Brain and Language,
80(3):488?509, March.
16
Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Creating Speech and Language Data with Amazon?s Mechanical Turk, pages 122?130,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Crowdsourcing and language studies: the new generation of linguistic data
Robert Munroa Steven Bethardb Victor Kupermana Vicky Tzuyin Laic
Robin Melnicka Christopher Pottsa Tyler Schnoebelena Harry Tilya
aDepartment of Linguistics, Stanford University
bDepartment of Computer Science, Stanford University
cDepartment of Linguistics, University of Colorado
{rmunro,bethard,vickup,rmelnick,cgpotts,tylers,hjt}
@stanford.edu
vicky.lai@colorado.edu
Abstract
We present a compendium of recent and cur-
rent projects that utilize crowdsourcing tech-
nologies for language studies, finding that the
quality is comparable to controlled labora-
tory experiments, and in some cases superior.
While crowdsourcing has primarily been used
for annotation in recent language studies, the
results here demonstrate that far richer data
may be generated in a range of linguistic dis-
ciplines from semantics to psycholinguistics.
For these, we report a number of successful
methods for evaluating data quality in the ab-
sence of a ?correct? response for any given
data point.
1 Introduction
Crowdsourcing?s greatest contribution to language
studies might be the ability to generate new kinds
of data, especially within experimental paradigms.
The speed and cost benefits for annotation are cer-
tainly impressive (Snow et al, 2008; Callison-
Burch, 2009; Hsueh et al, 2009) but we hope to
show that some of the greatest gains are in the very
nature of the phenomena that we can now study.
For psycholinguistic experiments in particular, we
are not so much utilizing ?artificial artificial? intelli-
gence as the plain intelligence and linguistic intu-
itions of each crowdsourced worker ? the ?voices
in the crowd?, so to speak. In many experiments
we are studying gradient phenomena where there
are no right answers. Even when there is binary
response we are often interested in the distribution
of responses over many speakers rather than spe-
cific data points. This differentiates experimentation
from more common means of determining the qual-
ity of crowdsourced results as there is no gold stan-
dard against which to evaluate the quality or ?cor-
rectness? of each individual response.
The purpose of this paper is therefore two-fold.
We summarize seven current projects that are utiliz-
ing crowdsourcing technologies, all of them some-
what novel to the NLP community but with potential
for future research in computational linguistics. For
each, we also discuss methods for evaluating quality,
finding the crowdsourced results to often be indistin-
guishable from controlled laboratory experiments.
In Section 2 we present the results from seman-
tic transparency experiments showing near-perfect
interworker reliability and a strong correlation be-
tween crowdsourced data and lab results. Ex-
tending to audio data, we show in Section 3
that crowdsourced subjects were statistically in-
distinguishable from a lab control group in seg-
mentation tasks. Section 4 shows that labora-
tory results from simple Cloze tasks can be repro-
duced with crowdsourcing. In Section 5 we offer
strong evidence that crowdsourcing can also repli-
cate limited-population, controlled-condition lab re-
sults for grammaticality judgments. In Section 6 we
use crowdsourcing to support corpus studies with a
precision not possible with even very large corpora.
Moving to the brain itself, Section 7 demonstrates
that ERP brainwave analysis can be enhanced by
crowdsourced analysis of experimental stimuli. Fi-
nally, in Section 8 we outline simple heuristics for
ensuring that microtasking workers are applying the
linguistic attentiveness required to undertake more
complex tasks.
122
2 Transparency of phrasal verbs
Phrasal verbs are those verbs that spread their mean-
ing out across both a verb and a particle, as in ?lift
up?. Semantic transparency is a measure of how
strongly the phrasal verb entails the component verb.
For example, to what extent does ?lifting up? entail
?lifting?? We can see the variation between phrasal
verbs when we compare the transparency of ?lift up?
to the opacity of ?give up?.
We conducted five experiments around seman-
tic transparency, with results showing that crowd-
sourced results correlate well with each other and
against lab data (? up to 0.9). Interrater reliability is
also very high: ? = 0.823, which Landis and Koch
(1977) would call ?almost perfect agreement.?
The crowdsourced results reported here represent
judgments by 215 people. Two experiments were
performed using Stanford University undergradu-
ates. The first involved a questionnaire asking par-
ticipants to rate the semantic transparency of 96
phrasal verbs. The second experiment consisted of
a paper questionnaire with the phrasal verbs in con-
text. That is, the first group of ?StudentLong? par-
ticipants rated the similarity of ?cool? to ?cool down?
on a scale 1-7:
cool cool down
The ?StudentContext? participants performed the
same basic task but saw each verb/phrasal verb pair
with an example of the phrasal verb in context.
With Mechanical Turk, we had three conditions:
TurkLong: A replication of the first questionnaire
and its 96 questions.
TurkShort: The 96-questions were randomized into
batches of 6. Thus, some participants ended up giv-
ing responses to all phrasal verbs, while others only
gave 6, 12, 18, etc responses.
TurkContext: A variation of the ?StudentContext?
task ? participants were given examples of the
phrasal verbs, though as with ?TurkShort?, they were
only asked to rate 6 phrasal verbs at a time.
What we find is a split into relatively high and low
correlations, as Figure 1 shows. All Mechanical
Turk tests correlate very well with one another (all
? > 0.7), although the tasks and raters are differ-
ent. The correlation between the student participants
who were given sentence contexts and the workers
TurkLong
2 3 4 5 6 2 3 4 5 6
2.0
3.5
5.0
2
3
4
5
6
r = 0.92
p = 0
rs = 0.92
p = 0
TurkShort
r = 0.74
p = 0
rs = 0.73
p = 0
r = 0.77
p = 0
rs = 0.75
p = 0
TurkContext
3
4
5
6
2
3
4
5
6 r = 0.68
p = 0
rs = 0.67
p = 0
r = 0.7
p = 0
rs = 0.67
p = 0
r = 0.9
p = 0
rs = 0.9
p = 0
StudentContext
2.0 3.5 5.0
r = 0.46
p = 0
rs = 0.46
p = 0
r = 0.48
p = 0
rs = 0.48
p = 0
3 4 5 6
r = 0.46
p = 0
rs = 0.45
p = 0
r = 0.41
p = 0
rs = 0.44
p = 0
2.5 3.5 4.5 5.5
2.5
3.5
4.5
5.5StudentLong
Figure 1: Panels at the diagonal report histograms of dis-
tributions of ratings across populations of participants;
panels above the diagonal plot the locally weighted scat-
terplot smoothing Lowess functions for a pair of corre-
lated variables; panels below the diagonal report correla-
tion coefficients (the r value is Pearson?s r, the rs value
is Spearman?s ?) and respective ? values.
who saw context is especially high (0.9). All corre-
lations with StudentLong are relatively low, but this
is actually true for StudentLong vs. StudentContext,
too (? = 0.44), even though both groups are Stan-
ford undergraduates.
Intra-class correlation coefficients (ICC) measure
the agreement among participants, and these are
high for all groups except StudentLong. Just among
StudentLong participants, the ICC consistency is
only 0.0934 and their ICC agreement is 0.0854.
Once we drop StudentLong, we see that all of the
remaining tests have high consistency (average of
0.78 for ICC consistency, 0.74 for ICC agreement).
For example, if we combine TurkContext and Stu-
dentContext, ICC consistency is 0.899 and ICC
agreement of 0.900. Cohen?s kappa measurement
also measures how well raters agree, weeding out
chance agreements. Again, StudentLong is an out-
lier. Together, TurkContext / StudentContext gets a
weighted kappa score of 0.823 ? the overall average
(excepting StudentLong) is ? = 0.700.
More details about the results in this section can
be found in Schnoebelen and Kuperman (submit-
ted).
123
3 Segmentation of an audio speech stream
The ability of browsers to present multimedia re-
sources makes it feasible to use crowdsourcing tech-
niques to generate data using spoken as well as writ-
ten stimuli. In this section we report an MTurk repli-
cation of a classic psycholinguistic result that relies
on audio presentation of speech. We developed a
web-based interface that allows us to collect data
in a statistical word segmentation paradigm. The
core is a Flash applet developed using Adobe Flex
which presents audio stimuli and collects participant
responses (Frank et al, submitted).
Human children possess a remarkable ability to
learn the words and structures of languages they are
exposed to without explicit instruction. One partic-
ularly remarkable aspect is that unlike many written
languages, spoken language lacks spaces between
words: from spoken input, children learn not only
the mapping between meanings and words but also
what the words themselves are, with no direct infor-
mation about where one ends and the next begins.
Research in statistical word segmentation has shown
that both infants and adults use statistical properties
of speech in an unknown language to infer a proba-
ble vocabulary. In one classic study, Saffran, New-
port & Aslin (1996) showed that after a few minutes
of exposure to a language made by randomly con-
catenating copies of invented words, adult partici-
pants could discriminate those words from syllable
sequences that also occurred in the input but crossed
a word boundary. We replicated this study showing
that cheap and readily accessible data from crowd-
sourced workers compares well to data from partic-
ipants recorded in person in the lab.
Participants heard 75 sentences from one of 16 ar-
tificially constructed languages. Each language con-
tained 2 two-syllable, 2 three-syllable, and 2 four
syllable words, with syllables drawn from a possi-
ble set of 18. Each sentence consisted of four words
sampled without replacement from this set and con-
catenated. Sentences were rendered as audio by
the MBROLA synthesizer (Dutoit et al, 1996) at a
constant pitch of 100Hz with 25ms consonants and
225ms vowels. Between each sentence, participants
were required to click a ?next? button to continue,
preventing workers from leaving their computer dur-
ing this training phase. To ensure workers could ac-
Figure 2: Per-subject correct responses for lab and MTurk
participants. Bars show group means, and the dashed line
indicates the chance baseline.
tually hear the stimuli, they were first asked to enter
an English word presented auditorily.
Workers then completed ten test trials in which
they heard one word from the language and one non-
word made by concatenating all but the first syllable
of one word with the first syllable of another. If the
words ?bapu? and ?gudi? had been presented adja-
cently, the string ?pugu? would have been heard, de-
spite not being a word of the language. Both were
also displayed orthographically, and the worker was
instructed to click on the one which had appeared in
the previously heard language.
The language materials described above were
taken from a Saffran et al (1996) replication re-
ported as Experiment 2 in Frank, Goldwater, Grif-
fiths & Tenenbaum (under review). We compared
the results from lab participants reported in that ar-
ticle to data from MTurk workers using the applet
described above. Each response was marked ?cor-
rect? if the participant chose the word rather than the
nonword. 12 lab subjects achieved 71% correct re-
sponses, while 24 MTurk workers were only slightly
lower at 66%. The MTurk results proved signif-
icantly different from a ?random clicking? base-
line of 50% (t(23) = 5.92, p = 4.95 ? 10?06)
but not significantly different from the lab subjects
(Welch two-sample t-test for unequal sample sizes,
t(21.21) = ?.92, p = .37). Per-subject means for
the lab and MTurk data are plotted in Figure 2.
124
4 Contextual predictability
As psycholinguists build models of sentence pro-
cessing (e.g., from eye tracking studies), they need
to understand the effect of the available sentence
context. One way to gauge this is the Cloze task pro-
posed in Taylor (1953): participants are presented
with a sentence fragment and asked to provide the
upcoming word. Researchers do this for every word
in every stimulus and use the percentage of ?correct?
guesses as input into their statistical and computa-
tional models.
Rather than running such norming studies on un-
dergraduates in lab settings (as is typical), our results
suggest that psycholinguists will be able to crowd-
source these tasks, saving time and money without
sacrificing reliability (Schnoebelen and Kuperman,
submitted).
Our results are taken from 488 Americans, rang-
ing from age 16-80 (mean: 34.49, median: 32,
mode: 27) with about 25% each from the East and
Midwest, 31% from the South, the rest from the
West and Alaska. They represent a range of educa-
tion levels, though the majority had been to college:
about 33.8% had bachelor?s degrees, another 28.1%
had some college but without a degree.
By contrast, the lab data was gathered from 20
participants, all undergraduates at the University of
Massachusetts at Amherst in the mid-1990?s (Re-
ichle et al, 1998). Both populations provided judg-
ments on 488 words in 48 sentences. In general,
crowdsourcing gave more diverse responses, as we
would expect from a more diverse population.
The correlation between lab and crowdsourced
data by Spearman?s rank correlation is 0.823 (? <
0.0001), but we can be even more conservative by
eliminating the 124 words that had predictability
scores of 0 across both groups. By and large, the
lab participants and the workers are consistent in
which words they fail to predict. Even when we
eliminate these shared zeros, the correlation is still
high between the two data sets: weighted ? = 0.759
(? < 0.0001).
5 Judgment studies of fine-grained
probabilistic grammatical knowledge
Moving to syntax, we demonstrate here that gram-
maticality judgments from lab studies can also be
Figure 3: Mean ?that?-inclusion ratings plotted against
corresponding corpus-model predictions. The solid line
would represent perfect alignment between judgments
and corpus model. Non-parametric Lowess smoothers il-
lustrate the significant correlation between lab and crowd
population results.
reproduced through crowdsourcing.
Corpus studies of spontaneous speech suggest
that grammaticality is gradient (Wasow, 2008), and
models of English complement clause (CC) and rel-
ative clause (RC) ?that?-optionality have as their
most significant factor the predictability of embed-
ding, given verb (CC) and head noun (RC) lemma
(Jaeger, 2006; Jaeger, in press). Establishing that
these highly gradient factors are similarly involved
in judgments could provide evidence that such fine-
grained probabilistic knowledge is part of linguistic
competence.
We undertook six such judgment experiments:
two baseline studies with lab populations then four
additional crowdsourced trials via MTurk.
Experiment 1, a lab trial (26 participants, 30
items), began with the models of RC-reduction de-
veloped in Jaeger (2006). Corpus tokens were
binned by relative model-predicted probability of
?that?-omission. Six tokens were extracted at ran-
dom from each of five bins (0??<20% likelihood of
?that?-inclusion; 20??<40%; and so on). In a gra-
dient scoring paradigm with 100 points distributed
between available options (Bresnan, 2007) partici-
125
pants rated how likely each choice ? with or without
?that? ? was as the continuation of a segment of dis-
course. As hypothesized, mean participant ratings
significantly correlate with corpus model predictions
(r = 0.614, ? = 0.0003).
Experiment 2 (29 participants) replicated Exper-
iment 1 to address concerns that subjects might be
?over-thinking? the process. We used a timed forced-
choice paradigm where participants had from 5 to 24
seconds (varied as a linear function of token length)
to choose between the reduced/unreduced RC stim-
uli. These results correlate even more closely with
predictions (r = 0.838, ? < 0.0001).
Experiments 3 and 4 replicated 1 and 2 on MTurk
(1200 tasks each). Results were filtered by volun-
teered demographics to select the same subject pro-
file as the lab experiments. Response-time outliers
were also excluded to avoid fast-click-through and
distracted-worker data. Combined, these steps elim-
inated 384 (32.0%) and 378 (31.5%) tasks, respec-
tively, with 89 and 66 unique participants remaining.
While crowdsourced measures might be expected to
yield lower correlations due to such unbalanced data
sets, the results remain significant in both trials (r =
0.562, ? = 0.0009; r = 0.364, ? = 0.0285), offer-
ing strong evidence that crowdsourcing can replicate
limited-population, controlled-condition lab results,
and of the robustness of the alignment between pro-
duction and judgment models. Figure 3 compares
lab and crowd population results in the 100-point
task (Experiments 1 and 3).
Experiments 5 and 6 (1600 hits each) employed
the same paradigms via MTurk to investigate ?that?-
mentioning in CCs, where predictability of embed-
ding is an even stronger factor in the corpus model.
Filtering reduced the data by 590 (36.9%) and 863
(53.9%) hits. As with the first four experiments,
each of these trials produced significant correlations
(r = 0.433, ? = 0.0107; r = 0.500, ? = 0.0034; re-
spectively). Finally, mixed-effect binary logistic re-
gression models ? with verb lemma and test subject
ID as random effects ? were fitted to these judgment
data. As in the corpus-derived models, predictability
of embedding remains the most significant factor in
all experimental models.
The results across both lab and crowdsourced
studies suggest that speakers consider the same fac-
tors in judgment as in production, offering evidence
Figure 4: Odds ratio of a Nominal Agent being embed-
ded within a Sentential Agent or non-Agent, relative to
random chance. (? < 0.001 for all)
that competence grammar includes access to prob-
ability distributions. Meanwhile, the strong cor-
relations across populations offer encouraging evi-
dence in support of using the latter in psycholinguis-
tic judgment research.
6 Confirming corpus trends
Crowdsourcing can also be used to establish the va-
lidity of corpus trends found in otherwise skewed
data. The experiments in this section were mo-
tivated by the NomBank corpus of nominal pred-
icate/arguments (Meyers et al, 2004) where we
found that an Agent semantic role was much more
likely to be embedded within a sentential Agent. For
example, (1) is more likely than (2) to receive the
Agent interpretation for the ?the police?, but both
have same potential range of meanings:
(1) ?The investigation of the police took 3 weeks to
complete?
(2) ?It took 3 weeks to complete the investigation of
the police?
While the trend is significant (? < 0.001), the
corpus is not representative speech.
First, there are no minimal pairs of sentences in
NomBank like (1) and (2) that have the same poten-
tial range of meanings. Second, the s-genitive (?the
police?s investigation?) is inherently more Agen-
tive than the of-genitive (?the investigation of the
police?) and it is also more compact. Sentential
subjects tend to be lighter than objects, and more
likely to realize Agents, so the resulting correlation
could be indirect. Finally, if we sampled only the
predicates/arguments in NomBank that are frequent
in different sentential positions, we are limited to:
126
?earning, product, profit, trading, loss, share, rate,
sale, price?. This purely financial terminology is not
representative of a typical acquisition environment ?
no child should be exposed to only such language ?
so it is difficult to draw broad conclusions about the
cognitive viability of this correlation, even within
English. It is because of factors like these that cor-
pus linguistics has been somewhat of a ?poor cousin?
to theoretical linguistics.
Therefore, two sets of experiments were under-
taken to confirm that the trend is not epiphenomenal,
one testing comprehension and one testing produc-
tion.
The first tested thousands of workers? interpre-
tations of sentences like those in (1) and (2), over
a number of predicate/argument pairs (?shooting of
the hunters?, ?destruction of the army? etc). Work-
ers were asked their interpretation of the most likely
meaning. For example, does (1) mean: ?a: the po-
lice were doing the investigation? or ?b: the po-
lice are being investigated?. To control for errors
or click-throughs, two plainly incorrect options were
included. We estimate the erroneous response rate at
about 0.4% ? less than many lab studies.
For the second set of experiments, workers were
asked to reword an unambiguous sentence using a
given phrase. For example, rewording the following
using ?the investigation of the police?:
(3) ?Following the shooting of a commuter in Oak-
land last week, a reporter has uncovered new evi-
dence while investigating the police involved.?
We then (manually) recorded whether the required
phrase was in a sentential Agent or non-Agent posi-
tion.
Figure 4 gives the results from the corpus analy-
sis and both experiments. The results clearly show
a significant trend for all, and that the NomBank
trend falls between the comprehension and produc-
tion tasks, which would be expected for this highly
edited register. It therefore supports the validity of
the corpus results.
The phenomena likely exists to aid comprehen-
sion, as the cognitive realization of just one role
needs to be activated at a given moment. Despite
the near-ubiquity of ?Agent? in studies of semantic
roles, we do not yet have a clear theory of this lin-
guistic entity, or even firm evidence of its existence
Figure 5: Distribution of metaphorical frequencies.
(Parikh, 2010). This study therefore goes some way
towards illuminating this. More broadly, the experi-
ments in this section support the wider use of crowd-
sourcing as a tool for language cognition research in
conjunction with more traditional corpus studies.
7 Post-hoc metaphorical frequency
analysis of electrophysiological responses
Beyond reproducing laboratory and corpus studies,
crowdsourcing also offers the opportunity to newly
analyze data drawn from many other experimental
stimuli. In this section, we demonstrate that crowd-
sourced workers can help us better understand ERP
brainwave data by looking at how frequently words
are used metaphorically.
Recent work in event related potentials (ERP) has
suggested that even conventional metaphors, such as
?All my ideas were attacked? require additional pro-
cessing effort in the brain as compared to literal sen-
tences like ?All the soldiers were attacked? (Lai et
al., 2009). This study in particular observed an N400
effect where negative waves 400 milliseconds after
the presentation of the target words (e.g. attacked)
were larger when the word was used metaphorically
than when used literally.
The proposed explanation for this effect is that
metaphors really do demand more from the brain
than literal sentences. However, N400 effects are
also observed when subjects encounter something
that is semantically inappropriate or unexpected.
While the Lai experiment controlled for overall
word frequency, it might be possible to explain away
these N400 effects if it turned out that in the real
127
world the target words were almost always used
literally, so that seeing them used metaphorically
would be semantically incongruous.
To test this alternative hypothesis, we gathered
sense frequency distributions for each of the target
words ? the hypothesis predicts that these should
be skewed towards literal senses. For each of the
104 target words, we selected 50 random sentences
from the American National Corpus (ANC), fill-
ing in with British National Corpus sentences when
there were too few in the ANC. We gave the sen-
tences to crowdsourced workers and asked them to
label each target word as being used literally or
metaphorically. Each task contained one sentence
for each of the 104 target words, with the order of
words and the literal/metaphorical buttons random-
ized. Each sentence was annotated 5 times.
To encourage native speakers of English, we had
the MTurk service require that our workers be within
the United States, and posted the text ?Please ac-
cept this HIT only if you are a native speaker of En-
glish? in bold at the top of each HIT. We also used
Javascript to force workers to spend at least 2 sec-
onds on each sentence and we rejected results from
workers that had chance level (50%) agreement with
the other workers.
Though our tasks produced words annotated with
literal and metaphorical tags, we were less inter-
ested in the individual annotations (though agree-
ment was decent at 73%) and more interested in the
overall pattern for each target word. Some words,
like fruit, were almost always used literally (92%),
while other words, like hurdle were almost always
used metaphorically (91%) .
Overall, the target words had a mean metaphor-
ical frequency of 53%, indicating that their literal
and metaphorical senses were used in nearly equal
proportions. Figure 5 shows that the metaphorical
frequencies follow roughly a bell-curved distribu-
tion1, which is especially interesting given that the
target words were hand-selected for the Lai experi-
ment and not drawn randomly from a corpus. We did
not observe any skew towards literal senses as the
alternative hypothesis would have predicted. This
suggests that the findings of Lai, Curran, and Menn
1A Shapiro-Wilk test fails to reject the null hypothesis of a
normal distribution (p=0.09).
Item type correct incorrect
?easy? 60 2
?promise? 59 3
stacked genitive 55 7
Table 1: Response data for three control items, with the
goal of identifying workers who lack the requisite atten-
tiveness. All show high attentiveness. The difference be-
tween the ?easy? and ?stacked genitive? is trending but not
significant (? = 0.0835), indicating that any of these may
be used.
(2009) cannot be dismissed based on a sense fre-
quency argument.
We also took advantage of the collected sense fre-
quency distributions to re-analyze data from the Lai
experiment. We split the target words into a high bin
(average 72% metaphorical) and a low bin (average
33% metaphorical), matching the number of items
and average word log-frequency per bin. Looking at
the average ERPs (brain waves) over time for each
bin revealed that when subjects were reading novel
metaphors, there was a significant difference (p =
.01) at about 200ms (P200) between the ERPs for
the highly literal words and the ERPs for the highly
metaphorical words. Thus, not only does metaphori-
cal frequency influence figurative language process-
ing, but it does so much earlier than semantic effects
are usually observed (e.g. N400 effects at 400ms)2.
8 Screening for linguistic attentiveness
For annotation tasks, crowdsourcing is most suc-
cessful when the tasks are designed to be as simple
as possible, but in experimental work we don?t al-
ways want to target the shallowest knowledge of the
workers, so here we seek to discover just how atten-
tive the workers really are.
When running psycholinguistics experiments in
the lab, the experimenters generally have the chance
to interact with participants. It is not uncommon
for prospective subjects to be visibly exhausted, dis-
tracted, or inebriated, or not fluent in the given lan-
guage to a requisite level of competence. When
these participants turn up as outliers in the experi-
mental data, it is easy enough to see why ? they
fell asleep, couldn?t understand the instructions, etc.
2These results are consistent with recent findings that irony
frequency may also produce P200 effects (Regel et al, 2010).
128
With crowdsourcing we lose the chance to have
these brief but valuable encounters, and so anoma-
lous response data are harder to interpret.
We present two simple experiments for measuring
linguistic attentiveness, which can be used as one
component of a language study or to broadly evalu-
ate the linguistic competency of the workers. Taking
well-known constructions from the literature, we se-
lected constructions that: (a) exist in most (perhaps
all) dialects of English; (b) involve high frequency
lexical items; and (c) tend to be acquired relatively
late by first-language learners.
We have found two constructions from Carol
Chomsky?s (1969) work on first-language acquisi-
tion to be particularly useful:
(4) John is easy to see.
(5) John is eager to see.
Example (4) is accurately paraphrased as ?It is easy
to see John?, where John is the object of ?see?,
whereas (5) is accurately paraphrased as ?John is ea-
ger for John to see?, where John is the subject of
?see?. A similar shift happens with ?promise?:
(6) Bozo told Donald to sing.
(7) Bozo promised Donald to sing.
We presented workers with a multiple-choice ques-
tion that contained both subject and object para-
phrases as options.
In similar experiments, we adapted examples
from Roeper (2007), who looked at stacked prenom-
inal possessive constructions:
(8) John?s sister?s friend?s car.
These are cross-linguistically rare and challenging
even for native speakers. As above, the workers
were asked to choose between paraphrases.
Workers who provide accurate judgments are
likely to have a level of English competence and de-
votion to the task that suffices for many language
experiments. The results from one short audio study
are given in Table 1. They indicate a high degree of
attentiveness; as a group, our subjects performed at
the near-perfect levels we expect for fluent adults.
We predict that adding tasks like these to experi-
ments will not only screen for attentiveness, but also
prompt for greater attention from an otherwise dis-
tracted worker, improving results at both ends.
9 Conclusions
While crowdsourcing was first used by linguists for
annotation, we hope that the results here demon-
strate the potential for far richer studies. In a
range of linguistic disciplines from semantics to
psycholinguistics it enables systematic, large-scale
judgment studies that are more affordable and con-
venient than expensive, time-consuming lab-based
studies. With crowdsourcing technologies, linguists
have a reliable new tool for experimentally investi-
gating language processing and linguistic theory.
Here, we have reproduced many ?classic? large-
scale lab studies with a relative ease. We can en-
vision many more ways that crowdsourcing might
come to shape new methodologies for language
studies. The affordability and agility brings experi-
mental linguistics closer to corpus linguistics, allow-
ing the quick generation of targeted corpora. Multi-
ple iterations that were previously possible only over
many years and several grants (and therefore never
attempted) are now possible in a matter of days. This
could launch whole new multi-tiered experimental
designs, or at the very least allow ?rapid prototyp-
ing? of experiments for later lab-based verification.
Crowdsourcing also brings psycholinguistics
much closer to computational linguistics. The
two fields have always shared empirical data-driven
methodologies and computer-aided methods. We
now share a work-space too. Historically, NLP has
necessarily drawn corpora from the parts of linguis-
tic theory that have stayed still long enough to sup-
port time-consuming annotation projects. The re-
sults here have implications for such tasks, includ-
ing parsing, word-sense disambiguation and seman-
tic role labeling, but the most static parts of a field
are rarely the most exciting. We therefore predict
that crowdsourcing will also lead to an expanded,
more dynamic NLP repertoire.
Finally, for the past half-century theoretical lin-
guistics has relied heavily on ?introspective? corpus
generation, as the rare edge cases often tell us the
most about the boundaries of a given language. Now
that we can quickly and confidently generate empir-
ical results to evaluate hypotheses drawn from intu-
itions about the most infrequent linguistic phenom-
ena, the need for this particular fallback has dimin-
ished ? the stimuli are abundant.
129
Acknowledgements
We owe thanks to many people, especially within
the Department of Linguistics at Stanford, which has
quickly become a hive of activitiy for crowdsourced
linguistic research. In particular, we thank Tom Wa-
sow for his guidance in Section 5, Chris Manning for
his guidance in Section 6, and Florian T. Jaeger for
providing the corpus-derived base models in Section
5 (Jaeger, 2006). We also thank Michael C. Frank
for providing the design, materials, and lab data used
to evaluate the methods in Section 3. Several of the
projects reported here were supported by Stanford
Graduate Fellowships.
References
Joan Bresnan. 2007. Is syntactic knowledge probabilis-
tic? Experiments with the English dative alternation.
In Sam Featherston and Wolfgang Sternefeld, editors,
Roots: Linguistics in search of its evidential base,
pages 75?96. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin.
Chris Callison-Burch. 2009. Fast, cheap, and cre-
ative: evaluating translation quality using Amazon?s
Mechanical Turk. In EMNLP ?09: Proceedings of
the 2009 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 286?295.
Carol Chomsky. 1969. The Acquisition of Syntax in Chil-
dren from 5 to 10. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Thierry Dutoit, Vincent Pagel, Nicolas Pierret, Franois
Bataille, and Olivier van der Vrecken. 1996. The
MBROLA project: Towards a set of high quality
speech synthesizers free of use for non commercial
purposes. In Fourth International Conference on Spo-
ken Language Processing, pages 75?96.
Michael Frank, Harry Tily, Inbal Arnon, and Sharon
Goldwater. submitted. Beyond transitional probabili-
ties: Human learners impose a parsimony bias in sta-
tistical word segmentation.
Michael Frank, Sharon Goldwater, Thomas Griffiths, and
Joshua Tenenbaum. under review. Modeling human
performance in statistical word segmentation.
Pei-Yun Hsueh, Prem Melville, and Vikas Sindhwani.
2009. Data quality from crowdsourcing: a study of
annotation selection criteria. In Proceedings of the
NAACL HLT 2009 Workshop on Active Learning for
Natural Language Processing, pages 27?35.
Florian Jaeger. 2006. Redundancy and syntactic reduc-
tion in spontaneous speech. Ph.D. thesis, Stanford
University, Stanford, CA.
Florian Jaeger. in press. Redundancy and reduction:
Speakers manage syntactic information density. Cog-
nitive Psychology.
Vicky Tzuyin Lai, Tim Curran, and Lise Menn. 2009.
Comprehending conventional and novel metaphors:
An ERP study. Brain Research, 1284:145?155, Au-
gust.
Richard Landis and Gary Koch. 1977. The measurement
of observer agreement for categorical data. Biomet-
rics, 33(1).
Adam Meyers, Ruth Reeves, Catherine Macleod, Rachel
Szekely, Veronika Zielinska, Brian Young, , and Ralph
Grishman. 2004. Annotating noun argument structure
for NomBank. In Proceedings of LREC-2004.
Prashant Parikh. 2010. Language and Equilibrium. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.
Stefanie Regel, Seana Coulson, and Thomas C. Gunter.
2010. The communicative style of a speaker can af-
fect language comprehension? ERP evidence from the
comprehension of irony. Brain Research, 1311:121?
135.
Erik D. Reichle, Alexander Pollatsek, Donald L. Fisher,
and Keith Rayner. 1998. Toward a model of eye
movement control in reading. Psychological Review,
105:125?157.
Tom Roeper. 2007. The Prism of Grammar: How Child
Language Illuminates Humanism. MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, MA.
Jenny R. Saffran, Richard N. Aslin, and Elissa L. New-
port. 1996. Word segmentation: The role of distribu-
tional cues. Journal of memory and language, 35:606?
621.
Tyler Schnoebelen and Victor Kuperman. submitted. Us-
ing Amazon Mechanical Turk for linguistic research:
Fast, cheap, easy, and reliable.
Rion Snow, Brendan O?Connor, Daniel Jurafsky, and An-
drew T. Ng. 2008. Cheap and fast?but is it good?:
evaluating non-expert annotations for natural language
tasks. In EMNLP ?08: Proceedings of the Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 254?263.
Wilson Taylor. 1953. Cloze procedure: A new tool for
measuring readability. Journalism Quarterly, 30:415?
433.
Tom Wasow. 2008. Gradient data and gradient gram-
mars. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of
the Chicago Linguistics Society, pages 255?271.
130
