Coling 2010: Poster Volume, pages 630?638,
Beijing, August 2010
Enhancing Multi-lingual Information Extraction
via Cross-Media Inference and Fusion 
Adam Lee, Marissa Passantino, Heng Ji 
Computer Science Department 
Queens College and Graduate Center 
City University of New York 
hengji@cs.qc.cuny.edu
Guojun Qi, Thomas Huang 
Department of Electrical and Computer  
Engineering & Beckman Institute 
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
huang@ifp.uiuc.edu
Abstract
We describe a new information fusion 
approach to integrate facts extracted 
from cross-media objects (videos and 
texts) into a coherent common represen-
tation including multi-level knowledge 
(concepts, relations and events). Beyond 
standard information fusion, we ex-
ploited video extraction results and sig-
nificantly improved text Information Ex-
traction. We further extended our meth-
ods to multi-lingual environment (Eng-
lish, Arabic and Chinese) by presenting 
a case study on cross-lingual comparable 
corpora acquisition based on video com-
parison.
1 Introduction 
An enormous amount of information is widely 
available in various data modalities (e.g. speech, 
text, image and video). For example, a Web 
news page about ?Health Care Reform in 
America? is composed with texts describing 
some events (e.g., Final Senate vote for the 
reform plans, Obama signs the reform 
agreement), images (e.g., images about various 
government involvements over decades) and 
videos/speech (e.g. Obama?s speech video about 
the decisions) containing additional information 
regarding the real extent of the events or 
providing evidence corroborating the text part. 
These cross-media objects exist in redundant 
and complementary structures, and therefore it 
is beneficial to fuse information from various 
data modalities. The goal of our paper is to 
investigate this task from both mono-lingual and 
cross-lingual perspectives. 
  The processing methods of texts and 
images/videos are typically organized into two 
separate pipelines. Each pipeline has been 
studied separately and quite intensively over the 
past decade. It is critical to move away from 
single media processing, and instead toward 
methods that make multiple decisions jointly 
using cross-media inference. For example, video 
analysis allows us to find both entities and 
events in videos, but it?s very challenging to 
specify some fine-grained semantic types such 
as proper names (e.g. ?Obama Barack?) and 
relations among concepts; while the speech 
embedded and the texts surrounding these 
videos can significantly enrich such analysis. On 
the other hand, image/video features can 
enhance text extraction.  For example, entity 
gender detection from speech recognition output 
is challenging because of entity mention 
recognition errors. However, gender detection 
from corresponding images and videos can 
achieve above 90% accuracy (Baluja and Rowley, 
2006). In this paper, we present a case study on 
gender detection to demonstrate how text and 
video extractions can boost each other. 
  We can further extend the benefit of cross-
media inference to cross-lingual information 
extraction (CLIE). Hakkani-Tur et al (2007) 
found that CLIE performed notably worse than 
monolingual IE, and indicated that a major 
cause was the low quality of machine translation 
(MT). Current statistical MT methods require 
large and manually aligned parallel corpora as 
input for each language pair of interest. Some 
recent work (e.g. Munteanu and Marcu, 2005; Ji, 
2009) found that MT can benefit from multi-
lingual comparable corpora (Cheung and Fung, 
2004), but it is time-consuming to identify pairs 
of comparable texts; especially when there is 
630
lack of parallel information such as news release 
dates and topics. However, the images/videos 
embedded in the same documents can provide 
additional clues for similarity computation 
because they are ?language-independent?. We 
will show how a video-based comparison 
approach can reliably build large comparable 
text corpora for three languages: English, 
Chinese and Arabic. 
2 Baseline Systems 
We apply the following state-of-the-art text and 
video information extraction systems as our 
baselines. Each system can produce reliable 
confidence values based on statistical models. 
2.1 Video Concept Extraction 
The video concept extraction system was 
developed by IBM for the TREC Video 
Retrieval Evaluation (TRECVID-2005) 
(Naphade et al, 2005). This system can extract 
2617 concepts defined by TRECVID, such as 
"Hospital", "Airplane" and "Female-Person". It 
uses support vector machines to learn the 
mapping between low level features extracted 
from visual modality as well as from transcripts 
and production related meta-features. It also 
exploits a Correlative Multi-label Learner (Qi et 
al., 2007), a Multi-Layer Multi-Instance Kernel 
(Gu et al, 2007) and Label Propagation through 
Linear Neighborhoods (Wang et al, 2006) to 
extract all other high-level features. For each 
classifier, different models are trained on a set 
of different modalities (e.g., the color moments, 
wavelet textures, and edge histograms), and the 
predictions made by these classifiers are 
combined together with a hierarchical linearly-
weighted fusion strategy across different 
modalities and classifiers. 
2.2 Text Information Extraction 
We use a state-of-the-art IE system (Ji and 
Grishman, 2008) developed for the Automatic 
Content Extraction (ACE) program1 to process 
texts and automatic speech recognition output. 
The pipeline includes name tagging, nominal 
mention tagging, coreference resolution, time 
expression extraction and normalization, rela-
tion extraction and event extraction. Entities 
1 http://www.nist.gov/speech/tests/ace/ 
include coreferred persons, geo-political entities 
(GPE), locations, organizations, facilities, vehi-
cles and weapons; relations include 18 types 
(e.g. ?a town some 50 miles south of Salzburg?
indicates a located relation.); events include the 
33 distinct event types defined in ACE 2005 
(e.g. ?Barry Diller on Wednesday quit as chief 
of Vivendi Universal Entertainment.? indicates a 
?personnel-start? event). Names are identified 
and classified using an HMM-based name tag-
ger. Nominals are identified using a maximum 
entropy-based chunker and then semantically 
classified using statistics from ACE training 
corpora. Relation extraction and event extraction 
are also based on maximum entropy models, 
incorporating diverse lexical, syntactic, semantic 
and ontological knowledge. 
3 Mono-lingual Information Fusion 
and Inference 
3.1 Mono-lingual System Overview 
                                                 
                        
                         
Figure 1. Mono-lingual Cross-Media  
Information Fusion and Inference Pipeline 
Figure 1 depicts the general procedure of our 
mono-lingual information fusion and inference 
Multi-media  
Document 
Enhanced  
Concepts/Entities 
Relations/Events
Texts
Text Information
Extraction
Video Concept 
Extraction 
Entities/ 
Relations/Events
Concepts 
Partitioning 
Multi-level Concept Fusion 
ASR
Global Inference 
Speech Videos/Images 
631
approach. After we apply two baseline systems 
to the multi-media documents, we use a novel 
multi-level concept fusion approach to extract a 
common knowledge representation across texts 
and videos (section 3.2), and then apply a global 
inference approach to enhance fusion results 
(section 3.3). 
3.2 Cross-media Information Fusion 
? Concept Mapping 
For each input video, we apply automatic speech 
recognition to obtain background texts. Then we 
use the baseline IE systems described in section 
2 to extract concepts from texts and videos. We 
construct mappings on the overlapped facts 
across TRECVID and ACE. For example, 
?LOC.Water-Body? in ACE is mapped to 
?Beach, Lakes, Oceans, River, River_Bank? in 
TRECVID.
  Due to different characteristics of video clips 
and texts, these two tasks have quite different 
granularities and focus. For example, 
?PER.Individual? in ACE is an open set includ-
ing arbitrary names, while TRECVID only cov-
ers some famous proper names such as 
?Hu_Jintao? and ?John_Edwards?. Geopolitical 
entities appear very rarely in TRECVID because 
they are more explicitly presented in back-
ground texts. On the other hand, TRECVID de-
fined much more fine-grained nominals than 
ACE, for example, ?FAC.Building-Grounds? in 
ACE can be divided into 52 possible concept
types such as ?Conference_Buildings? and 
?Golf_Course? because they can be more easily 
detected based on video features. We also notice 
that TRECVID concepts can include multiple 
levels of ACE facts, for example 
?WEA_Shooting? concept can be separated into 
?weapon? entities and ?attack? events in ACE. 
These different definitions bring challenges to 
cross-media fusion but also opportunities to ex-
ploit complementary facts to refine both pipe-
lines. We manually resolved these issues and 
obtained 20 fused concept sets. 
? Time-stamp based Multi-level Projection 
After extracting facts from videos and texts, we 
conduct information fusion at all possible levels: 
name, nominal, coreference link, relation or 
event mention. We rely on the timestamp infor-
mation associated with video keyframes or shots 
(sequential keyframes) and background speech 
to align concepts. During this fusion process, we 
compare the normalized confidence values pro-
duced from two pipelines to resolve the follow-
ing three types of cases:
? Contradiction ? A video fact contradicts a 
text fact; we only keep the fact with higher 
confidence.
? Redundancy ? A video fact conveys the 
same content as (or entails, or is entailed by) 
a text fact; we only keep the unique parts of 
the facts. 
? Complementary ? A video fact and a text 
fact are complementary; we merge these 
two to form more complete fact sets. 
? A Common Representation 
In order to effectively extract compact informa-
tion from large amounts of heterogeneous data, 
we design an integrated XML format to repre-
sent the facts extracted from the above multi-
level fusion. We can view this representation as 
a set of directed ?information graphs? G={Gi
(Vi, Ei)}, where Vi is the collection of concepts 
from both texts and videos, and Ei is the collec-
tion of edges linking one concept to the other, 
labeled by relation or event attributes. An exam-
ple is presented in Figure 2. This common rep-
resentation is applied in both mono-lingual and 
multi-lingual information fusion tasks described 
in next sections. 
Figure 2. An example for cross-media common 
fact representation  
3.3 Cross-media Information Inference 
? Uncertainty Problem in Cross-Media Fu-
sion
However, such a simple merging approach usu-
ally leads to unsatisfying results due to uncer-
tainty. Uncertainty in multimedia is induced 
from noise in the data acquisition procedure 
Child 
PLO
British 
Mandate of
Palestine 
Safed
Mahmoud 
Abbas
Leader
Birth-Place
Located
Amina Abbas 
Spouse
Yasser
 Abbas
PLO
Elected/
2008-11-23 
632
(e.g., noise in automatic speech recognition re-
sults and low-quality camera surveillance vid-
eos) as well as human errors and subjectivity. 
Unstructured texts, especially those translated 
from foreign languages, are difficult to interpret. 
In addition, automatic IE systems for both vid-
eos and texts tend to produce errors.  
? Case Study on Mention Gender Detection 
We employ cross-media inference methods to 
reduce uncertainty. We will demonstrate this 
approach on a case study of gender detection for 
persons. Automatic gender detection is crucial 
to many natural language processing tasks such 
as pronoun reference resolution (Bergsma, 
2005). Gender detection for last names has 
proved challenging; Gender for nominals can be 
highly ambiguous in various contexts. Unfortu-
nately most state-of-the-art approaches discover 
gender information without considering specific 
contexts in the document. The results were 
stored either as a knowledge base with prob-
abilities (e.g. Ji and Lin, 2009) or as a static 
gazetteer (e.g. census data). Furthermore, speech 
recognition normally performs poorly on names, 
which brings more challenges to gender detec-
tion for mis-spelled names.   
  We consider two approaches as our baselines. 
The first baseline is to discover gender knowl-
edge from Google N-grams using specific lexi-
cal patterns (e.g. ?[mention] and 
his/her/its/their?) (Ji and Lin, 2009). The other 
baseline is a gazetteer matching approach based 
on census data including person names and gen-
der information, as used in typical text IE sys-
tems.  
  We introduce the third method based on 
male/female concept extraction from associated 
background videos. These concepts are detected 
from context-dependent features (e.g. face rec-
ognition). If there are multiple persons in one 
snippet associated with one shot, we propagate 
gender information to all instances.
  We then linearly combine these three methods 
based on confidence values. For example, the 
confidence of predicting a name mention n as a 
male (M) can be computed by combining prob-
abilities P(n, M, method):
confidence(n,male)=?1*P(n,M,ngram)+
?2*P(n,M,census) +?3*P(n,M,video)
  In this paper we used?1=0.1, ?2=0.1 
and?3=0.8 which are optimized from a devel-
opment set. 
4 Cross-lingual Comparable Corpora 
Acquisition
In this section we extend the information fusion 
approach to a task of discovering comparable 
corpora.
4.1 Comparable Documents  
Figure 3 presents an example of cross-lingual 
comparable documents. They are both about the 
rescue activities for the Haiti earthquake. 
Figure 3. An example for cross-lingual  
multi-media comparable documents 
Figure 4. Cross-lingual Comparable Text  
Corpora Acquisition based on
Video Similarity Computation 
Multi-media  
Document in 
Language j
Multi-media 
Document in
Language i
Facts-Vi
Similarity Computation 
Text T i Video V i
Concept 
Extraction 
Facts-Vj
Video V i 
Concept 
Extraction 
Text T j
Similarity>??
Comparable Docu-
ments <Ti, Tj>
633
  Traditional text translation based methods tend 
to miss such pairs due to poor translation quality 
of informative words (Ji et al, 2009). However, 
the background videos and images are language-
independent and thus can be exploited to iden-
tify such comparable documents. This provides 
a cross-media approach to break language bar-
rier.
4.2 Cross-lingual System Overview 
Figure 4 presents the general pipeline of discov-
ering cross-lingual comparable documents based 
on background video comparison. The detailed 
video similarity computation method is pre-
sented in next section. 
4.3 Video Concept Similarity Computation 
Most document clustering systems use represen-
tations built out of the lexical and syntactic at-
tributes. These attributes may involve string 
matching, agreement, syntactic distance, and 
document release dates. Although gains have 
been made with such methods, there are clearly 
cases where shallow information will not be suf-
ficient to resolve clustering correctly. Therefore, 
we should therefore expect a successful docu-
ment comparison approach to exploit world 
knowledge, inference, and other forms of se-
mantic information in order to resolve hard 
cases. For example, if two documents include 
concepts referring to male-people, earthquake 
event, rescue activities, and facility-grounds 
with similar frequency information, we can de-
termine they are likely to be comparable. In this 
paper we represent each video as a vector of 
semantic concepts extracted from videos and 
then use standard vector space model to com-
pute similarity.  
  Let A=(a1, ?a|?|) and B=(b1, ?b|?|) be such 
vectors for a pair of videos, then we use cosine 
similarity to compute similarity: 
| |
1
| | | |2 2
1 1
cos( , ) i ii
i ii i
a b
A B
a b
=
= =
?
=
? ?
?
? ?
,
where |? | contains all possible concepts. We 
use traditional TF-IDF (Term Frequency-Inverse 
Document Frequency) weights for the vector 
elements ai and bi. Let C be a unique concept, V
is a video consisting of a series of k shots V = 
{S1, ?, Sk}, then: 
1
( , ) ( , )
k
ii
tf C V tf C S k
=
=?
Let p(C, Si) denote the probability that C is ex-
tracted from Si, we define two different ways to 
compute term frequency tf (C, Si):
(1) ( , ) ( , )i itf C S confidence C S=
and
(2) ( , )( , ) iconfidence C Sitf C S ?=
Where Confidence (C, Si) denotes the probabil-
ity of detecting a concept C in a shot Si:
( , ) ( , )i iconfidence C S p C S= if ( , )ip C S ?> ,
                                       otherwise 0. 
Let: ( , ) 1idf C S = if ( , )ip C S ?> , otherwise 0, 
assuming there are j shots in the entire corpus, 
we calculate idf as follows: 
1
( , ) log / ( , )
j
i
i
idf C V j df C S
=
? ?
= ? ?
? ?
?
5 Experimental Results 
This section presents experimental results of all 
the three tasks described above. 
5.1 Data
We used 244 videos from TRECVID 2005 data 
set as our test set. This data set includes 133,918 
keyframes, with corresponding automatic 
speech recognition and translation results (for 
foreign languages) provided by LDC.   
5.2 Information Fusion Results 
Table 1 shows information fusion results for 
English, Arabic and Chinese on multiple levels. 
It indicates that video and text extraction pipe-
lines are complementary ? almost all of the 
video concepts are about nominals and events; 
while text extraction output contains a large 
amount of names and relations. Therefore the 
results after information fusion produced much 
richer knowledge. 
634
Annotation Lev-
els
English Chinese Arabic 
# of videos 104 84 56 
Video Concept 250880 221898 197233 
Name 17350 22154 20057 
Nominal 31528 21852 16253 
Relation 9645 20880 16584 
Text
Event 31132 10348 7148 
Table 1. Information Fusion Results  
  It?s also worth noting that the number of con-
cepts extracted from videos is similar across 
languages, while much fewer events are ex-
tracted from Chinese or Arabic because of 
speech recognition and machine translation er-
rors. We took out 1% of the results to measure 
accuracy against ground-truth in TRECVID and 
ACE training data respectively; the mean aver-
age precision for video concept extraction is 
about 33.6%. On English ASR output the text-
IE system achieved about 82.7% F-measure on 
labeling names, 80.5% F-measure on nominals 
(regardless of ASR errors), 66% on relations 
and 64% on events. 
5.3 Information Inference Results 
From the test set, we chose 650 persons (492 
males and 158 females) to evaluate gender dis-
covery. For baselines, we used Google n-gram 
(n=5) corpus Version II including 1.2 billion 5-
grams extracted from about 9.7 billion sentences 
(Lin et al, 2010) and census data including  
5,014 person names with gender information. 
  Since we only have gold-standard gender in-
formation on shot-level (corresponding to a 
snippet in ASR output), we asked a human an-
notator to associate ground-truth with individual 
persons. Table 2 presents overall precision (P), 
recall (R) and F-measure (F).  
Methods P R F 
Google N-gram 89.1% 70.2% 78.5%
Census 96.2% 19.4% 32.4%
Video Extraction 88.9% 73.8% 80.6%
Combined 89.3% 80.4% 84.6%
Table 2.  Gender Discovery Performance 
  Table 2 shows that video extraction based ap-
proach can achieve the highest recall among all 
three methods. The combined approach 
achieved statistically significant improvement 
on recall. 
  Table 3 presents some examples (?F? for fe-
male and ?M? for male). We found that most 
speech name recognition errors are propagated 
to gender detection in the baseline methods, for 
example, ?Sala Zhang? is mis-spelled in speech 
recognition output (the correct spelling should 
be ?Sarah Chang?) and thus Google N-gram 
approach mistakenly predicted it as a male. 
Many rare names such as ?Wu Ficzek?, 
?Karami? cannot be predicted by the baselines,  
  Error analysis on video extraction based ap-
proach showed that most errors occur on those 
shots including multiple people (males and fe-
males). In addition, since the data set is from 
news domain, there were many shots including 
reporters and target persons at the same time. 
For example, ?Jiang Zemin? was mistakenly 
associated with a ?female? gender because the 
reporter is a female in that corresponding shot. 
5.4 Comparable Corpora Acquisition Re-
sults
For comparable corpora acquisition, we meas-
ured accuracy for the top 50 document pairs. 
Due to lack of answer-keys, we asked a bi-
lingual human annotator to judge results manu-
ally. The evaluation guideline generally fol-
lowed the definitions in (Cheung and Fung, 
2004). A pair of documents is judged as compa-
rable if they share a certain amount of informa-
tion (e.g. entities, events and topics). 
Without using IDF, for different parameter ?
and ? in the similarity metrics, the results are 
summarized in Figure 5. For comparison we 
present the results for mono-lingual and cross- 
lingual separately. Figure 5 indicates that as the 
threshold and normalization values increase, the 
accuracy generally improves. It?s not surprising 
that mono-lingual results are better than cross-
lingual results, because generally more videos 
with comparable topics are in the same language.   
635
Mention
Google
N-gram 
Census
Video
Extraction
Correct
Answer
Context Sentence 
Zhang
Sala
M: 1 
F: 0 
-
F: 0.699 
M: 0.301 
F
World famous meaning violin soloist 
Zhang Sala recently again to Toronto sym-
phony orchestra... 
Peter
M: .979 
F: 0.021 
M: 1 
M: 0.699 
F: 0.301 
M
Iraq, there are in Lebanon Paris pass Peter
after 10 five Dar exile without peace... 
Wu
Ficzek
-
M: 0.699 
F: 0.301 
M
If you want to do a good job indeed Wu
Ficzek
President
M: .953 
F: 0.047 
-
M: 0.704 
F: 0.296 
M
Labor union of Arab heritage publishers 
president to call for the opening of the 
Arab Book Exhibition. 
Jiang
Zemin 
M: 1 
F: 0 
-
F: 0.787 
M: 0.213 
M
It has never stopped the including the for-
mer CPC General Secretary Jiang Zemin? 
Karami 
M: 1 
F: 0 
-
M: 0.694 
F: 0.306 
M
all the Gamal Ismail introduced the needs 
of the Akkar region, referring to the desire 
on the issue of the President Karami to 
give priority disadvantaged areas 
Table 3. Examples for Mention Gender Detection 
Figure 5. Comparable Corpora Acquisition  
without IDF 
  We then added IDF to the optimized threshold 
and obtained results in Figure 6. The accuracy 
for both languages was further enhanced. We can 
see that under any conditions our approach can 
discover comparable documents reliably. In or-
der to measure the impact of concept extraction 
errors, we also evaluated the results for using 
ground-truth concepts as shown in Figure 6. Sur-
prisingly it didn?t provide much higher accuracy 
than automatic concept extraction, mainly be-
cause the similarity can be captured by some 
dominant video concepts. 
Figure 6. Comparable Corpora Acquisition with 
IDF (?=0.6)
6 Related Work 
A large body of prior work has focused on multi-
media information retrieval and document classi-
fication (e.g. Iria and Magalhaes, 2009).  State-
of-the-art information fusion approaches can be 
divided into two groups: formal ?top-down? 
methods from the generic knowledge fusion 
community and quantitative ?bottom-up? tech-
niques from the Semantic Web community (Ap-
priou et al, 2001; Gregoire, 2006). However, 
very limited research methods have been ex-
636
plored to fuse automatically extracted facts from 
texts and videos/images. Our idea of conducting 
information fusion on multiple semantic levels is 
similar to the kernel method described in (Gu et 
al., 2007). 
  Most previous work on cross-media information 
extraction focused on one single domain (e.g. e-
Government (Amato et al, 2010); soccer game 
(Pazouki and Rahmati, 2009)) and struc-
tured/semi-structured texts (e.g. product cata-
logues (Labsky et al, 2005)). Saggion et al 
(2004) described a multimedia extraction ap-
proach to create composite index from multiple 
and multi-lingual sources. We expand the task to 
the more general news domain including unstruc-
tured texts and use cross-media inference to en-
hance extraction performance. 
  Some recent work has exploited analysis of as-
sociated texts to improve image annotation (e.g. 
Deschacht and Moens, 2007; Feng and Lapata, 
2008). Some recent research demonstrated cross-
modal integration can provide significant gains 
in improving the richness of information. For 
example, Oviatt et al (1997) showed that speech 
and pen-based gestures can provide complemen-
tary capabilities because basic subject, verb, and 
object constituents almost always are spoken, 
whereas those describing locative information 
invariably are written or gestured. However, not 
much work demonstrated an effective method of 
using video/image annotation to improve text 
extraction. Our experiments provide some case 
studies in this new direction. Our work can also 
be considered as an extension of global back-
ground inference (e.g. Ji and Grishman, 2008) to 
cross-media paradigm. 
  Extensive research has been done on video clus-
tering. For example, Cheung and Zakhor (2000)
used meta-data extracted from textual and hyper-
link information to detect similar videos on the 
web; Magalhaes et al (2008) described a seman-
tic similarity metric based on key word vectors 
for multi-media fusion. We extend such video 
similarity computing approaches to a multi-
lingual environment. 
7 Conclusion and Future Work 
Traditional Information Extraction (IE) ap-
proaches focused on single media (e.g. texts), 
with very limited use of knowledge from other 
data modalities in the background. In this paper 
we propose a new approach to integrate informa-
tion extracted from videos and texts into a coher-
ent common representation including multi-level 
knowledge (concepts, relations and events). Be-
yond standard information fusion, we attempted 
global inference methods to incorporate video 
extraction and significantly enhanced the per-
formance of text extraction. Finally, we extend 
our methods to multi-lingual environment (Eng-
lish, Arabic and Chinese) by presenting a case 
study on cross-lingual comparable corpora acqui-
sition.
  We used a dataset which includes videos and 
associated speech recognition output (texts), but 
our approach is applicable to any cases in which 
texts and videos appear together (from associated 
texts, captions etc.). The proposed common rep-
resentation will provide a framework for many 
byproducts. For example, the monolingual fused 
information graphs can be used to generate ab-
stractive summaries. Given the fused information 
we can also visualize the facts from background 
texts effectively. We are also interested in using 
video information to discover novel relations and 
events which are missed in the text IE task. 
Acknowledgement 
This work was supported by the U.S. Army Re-
search Laboratory under Cooperative Agreement 
Number W911NF-09-2-0053, the U.S. NSF 
CAREER Award under Grant IIS-0953149, 
Google, Inc., DARPA GALE Program, CUNY 
Research Enhancement Program, PSC-CUNY 
Research Program, Faculty Publication Program 
and GRTI Program. The views and conclusions 
contained in this document are those of the au-
thors and should not be interpreted as represent-
ing the official policies, either expressed or im-
plied, of the Army Research Laboratory or the 
U.S. Government. The U.S. Government is au-
thorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for 
Government purposes notwithstanding any copy-
right notation here on. 
References 
Amato, F., Mazzeo, A.,  Moscato, V. and Picariello, 
A.  2010. Information Extraction from Multimedia 
Documents for e-Government Applications. 
Information Systems: People, Organizations, Insti-
tutions, and Technologies. pp. 101-108. 
637
Appriou A., A. Ayoun, Benferhat, S., Besnard, P., 
Cholvy, L., Cooke, R., Cuppens, F., Dubois, D., 
Fargier, H., Grabisch, M., Kruse, R., Lang, J. 
Moral, S., Prade, H., Saffiotti, A., Smets, P., Sos-
sai, C. 2001. Fusion: General concepts and charac-
teristics. International Journal of Intelligent Sys-
tems 16(10).
Baluja, S. and Rowley, H. 2006. Boosting Sex Identi-
fication Performance. International Journal of 
Computer Vision. 
Bergsma, S. 2005. Automatic Acquisition of Gender 
Information for Anaphora Resolution. Proc. Cana-
dian AI 2005. 
Cheung, P. and Fung P. 2004. Sentence Alignment in 
Parallel, Comparable, and Quasi-comparable Cor-
pora. Proc.  LREC 2004. 
Cheung, S.-C.  and Zakhor, A. 2000. Efficient video 
similarity measurement and search. Proc. IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Image Processing. 
Deschacht K. and Moens M. 2007. Text Analysis for 
Automatic Image Annotation. Proc. ACL 2007. 
Feng, Y. and Lapata, M. 2008. Automatic Image An-
notation Using Auxiliary Text Information. Proc. 
ACL 2008. 
Gregoire, E. 2006. An unbiased approach to iterated 
fusion by weakening. Information Fusion. 7(1). 
Gu, Z., Mei, T., Hua, X., Tang, J., Wu, X. 2007. 
Multi-Layer Multi-Instance Kernel for Video Con-
cept Detection. Proc. ACM Multimedia 2007. 
Hakkani-Tur, D., Ji, H. and Grishman, R. 2007. Using 
Information Extraction to Improve Cross-lingual 
Document Retrieval. Proc. RANLP 2007 Workshop 
on Multi-Source Multi-lingual Information Extrac-
tion and Summarization.
Iria, J. and Magalhaes, J. 2009. Exploiting Cross-
Media Correlations in the Categorization of Mul-
timedia Web Documents. Proc. CIAM 2009. 
Ji, H. and Grishman, R. 2008. Refining Event Extrac-
tion Through Cross-document Inference. Proc. 
ACL 2008. 
Ji, H. 2009. Mining Name Translations from Compa-
rable Corpora by Creating Bilingual Information 
Networks. Proc. ACL-IJCNLP 2009 workshop on 
Building and Using Comparable Corpora (BUCC 
2009): from parallel to non-parallel corpora.
Ji, H., Grishman, R., Freitag, D., Blume, M., Wang, 
J., Khadivi, S., Zens, R., and Ney, H. 2009. Name 
Translation for Distillation. Handbook of Natural 
Language Processing and Machine Translation: 
DARPA Global Autonomous Language Exploita-
tion. Springer. 
Ji, H. and Lin, D. 2009. Gender and Animacy Knowl-
edge Discovery from Web-Scale N-Grams for Un-
supervised Person Mention Detection. Proc. PA-
CLIC 2009. 
Oviatt, S. L., DeAngeli, A., & Kuhn, K. 1997. Inte-
gration and synchronization of input modes during 
multimodal human-computer interaction. Proceed-
ings of Conference on Human Factors in Comput-
ing Systems (CHI?97), 415-422. New York: ACM 
Press.
Labsky, M., Praks, P., Sv?atek1, V., and Svab, O. 
2005. Multimedia Information Extraction from 
HTML Product Catalogues. Proc. 2005 
IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on Web 
Intelligence. pp. 401 ? 404.   
Lin, D., Church, K.,  Ji, H., Sekine, S., Yarowsky, D.,  
Bergsma, S., Patil, K., Pitler, E., Lathbury, R., Rao, 
V., Dalwani, K. and Narsale, S. 2010. New Data, 
Tags and Tools for Web-Scale N-grams. Proc. 
LREC 2010. 
Magalhaes, J., Ciravegna, F. and Ruger, S. 2008. Ex-
ploring Multimedia in a Keyword Space. Proc. 
ACM Multimedia 2008. 
Munteanu, D. S. and Marcu D. 2005. Improving Ma-
chine Translation Performance by Exploiting Non-
Parallel Corpora. Computational Linguistics. Vol-
ume 31, Issue 4. pp. 477-504. 
Naphade, M. R., Kennedy, L., Kender, J. R., Chang, 
S.-F., Smith, J. R., Over, P., and Hauptmann, A. A 
light scale concept ontology for multimedia under-
standing for TRECVID 2005. Technical report, 
IBM, 2005. 
Pazouki, E. and Rahmati, M. 2009. A novel multime-
dia data mining framework for information extrac-
tion of a soccer video stream. Intelligent Data 
Analysis. pp. 833-857. 
Qi,G.-J., Hua,X.-S., Rui, Y., Tang, J., Mei, T., and 
Zhang,H.-J. 2007. Correlative Multi-label Video 
Annotation. Proc. ACM Multimedia 2007.
Saggion, H., Cunningham, H., Bontcheva, K., 
Maynard, D., Hamza, O., and Wilks, Y. 2004. Mul-
timedia indexing through multi-source and multi-
language information extraction: the MUMIS pro-
ject. Data Knowlege Engineering, 48, 2, pp. 247-
264. 
Wang, F. and Zhang, C. 2006. Label propagation 
through linear neighborhoods. Proc. ICML 2006.
638
Cross-lingual Slot Filling from Comparable Corpora
Matthew Snover, Xiang Li, Wen-Pin Lin, Zheng Chen, Suzanne Tamang,
Mingmin Ge, Adam Lee, Qi Li, Hao Li, Sam Anzaroot, Heng Ji
Computer Science Department
Queens College and Graduate Center
City University of New York
New York, NY 11367, USA
msnover@qc.cuny.edu, hengji@cs.qc.cuny.edu
Abstract
This paper introduces a new task of
crosslingual slot filling which aims to dis-
cover attributes for entity queries from
crosslingual comparable corpora and then
present answers in a desired language. It is
a very challenging task which suffers from
both information extraction and machine
translation errors. In this paper we ana-
lyze the types of errors produced by five
different baseline approaches, and present
a novel supervised rescoring based valida-
tion approach to incorporate global evi-
dence from very large bilingual compara-
ble corpora. Without using any additional
labeled data this new approach obtained
38.5% relative improvement in Precision
and 86.7% relative improvement in Recall
over several state-of-the-art approaches.
The ultimate system outperformed mono-
lingual slot filling pipelines built on much
larger monolingual corpora.
1 Introduction
The slot filling task at NIST TAC Knowledge
Base Population (KBP) track (Ji et al, 2010)
is a relatively new and popular task with the
goal of automatically building profiles of enti-
ties from large amounts of unstructured data,
and using these profiles to populate an existing
knowledge base. These profiles consist of nu-
merous slots such as ?title?, ?parents? for per-
sons and ?top-employees? for organizations. A
variety of approaches have been proposed to ad-
dress both tasks with considerable success; nev-
ertheless, all of the KBP tasks so far have been
limited to monolingual processing. However, as
the shrinking fraction of the world?s Web pages
are written in English, many slot fills can only
be discovered from comparable documents in
foreign languages. By comparable corpora we
mean texts that are about similar topics, but
are not in general translations of each other.
These corpora are naturally available, for ex-
ample, many news agencies release multi-lingual
news articles on the same day. In this paper we
propose a new and more challenging crosslin-
gual slot filling task, to find information for any
English query from crosslingual comparable cor-
pora, and then present its profile in English.
We developed complementary baseline ap-
proaches which combine two difficult problems:
information extraction (IE) and machine trans-
lation (MT). In this paper we conduct detailed
error analysis to understand how we can exploit
comparable corpora to construct more complete
and accurate profiles.
Many correct answers extracted from our
baselines will be reported multiple times in any
external large collection of comparable docu-
ments. We can thus take advantage of such in-
formation redundancy to rescore candidate an-
swers. To choose the best answers we consult
large comparable corpora and corresponding IE
results. We prefer those answers which fre-
quently appear together with the query in cer-
tain IE contexts, including co-occurring names,
coreference links, relations and events. For ex-
ample, we prefer ?South Korea? instead of ?New
York Stock Exchange? as the ?per:employee of ?
answer for ?Roh Moo-hyun? using global ev-
idence from employment relation extraction.
Such global knowledge from comparable corpora
110
Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Building and Using Comparable Corpora, pages 110?119,
49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
Portland, Oregon, 24 June 2011. c?2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
provides substantial improvement over each in-
dividual baseline system and even state-of-the-
art monolingual slot filling systems. Compared
to previous methods of exploiting comparable
corpora, our approach is novel in multiple as-
pects because it exploits knowledge from: (1)
both local and global statistics; (2) both lan-
guages; and (3) both shallow and deep analysis.
2 Related Work
Sudo et al (2004) found that for a crosslin-
gual single-document IE task, source language
extraction and fact translation performed no-
tably better than machine translation and tar-
get language extraction. We observed the same
results. In addition we also demonstrate that
these two approaches are complementary and
can be used to boost each other?s results in a
statistical rescoring model with global evidence
from large comparable corpora.
Hakkani-Tur et al (2007) described a filtering
mechanism using two crosslingual IE systems
for improving crosslingual document retrieval.
Many previous validation methods for crosslin-
gual QA, such as those organized by Cross Lan-
guage Evaluation Forum (Vallin et al, 2005), fo-
cused on local information which involves only
the query and answer (e.g. (Kwork and Deng,
2006)), keyword translation (e.g. (Mitamura et
al., 2006)) and surface patterns (e.g. (Soubbotin
and Soubbotin, 2001)). Some global valida-
tion approaches considered information redun-
dancy based on shallow statistics including co-
occurrence, density score and mutual informa-
tion (Clarke et al, 2001; Magnini et al, 2001;
Lee et al, 2008), deeper knowledge from depen-
dency parsing (e.g. (Shen et al, 2006)) or logic
reasoning (e.g. (Harabagiu et al, 2005)). How-
ever, all of these approaches made limited efforts
at disambiguating entities in queries and limited
use of fact extraction in answer search and vali-
dation.
Several recent IE studies have stressed the
benefits of using information redundancy on
estimating the correctness of the IE out-
put (Downey et al, 2005; Yangarber, 2006;
Patwardhan and Riloff, 2009; Ji and Grish-
man, 2008). Some recent research used com-
parable corpora to re-score name translitera-
tions (Sproat et al, 2006; Klementiev and Roth,
2006) or mine new word translations (Fung and
Yee, 1998; Rapp, 1999; Shao and Ng, 2004; Tao
and Zhai, 2005; Hassan et al, 2007; Udupa et
al., 2009; Ji, 2009). To the best of our knowl-
edge, this is the first work on mining facts from
comparable corpora for answer validation in a
new crosslingual entity profiling task.
3 Experimental Setup
3.1 Task Definition
The goal of the KBP slot filling task is to extract
facts from a large source corpus regarding cer-
tain attributes (?slots?) of an entity, which may
be a person or organization, and use these facts
to augment an existing knowledge base (KB).
Along with each slot answer, the system must
provide the ID of a document which supports
the correctness of this answer. KBP 2010 (Ji et
al., 2010) defines 26 types of attributes for per-
sons (such as the age, birthplace, spouse, chil-
dren, job title, and employing organization) and
16 types of attributes for organizations (such
as the top employees, the founder, the year
founded, the headquarters location, and the sub-
sidiaries).
The new problem we define in this paper is an
extension of this task to a crosslingual paradigm.
Given a query in a target language t and a col-
lection of documents in a source language s,
a system must extract slot answers about the
query and present the answers in t. In this pa-
per we examine a specific setting of s=Chinese
and t=English.
To score crosslingual slot filling, we pool all
the system responses and group equivalent an-
swers into equivalence classes. Each system re-
sponse is rated as correct, wrong, inexact or re-
dundant. Given these judgments, we calculate
the precision, recall and F-measure of each sys-
tem, crediting only correct answers.
3.2 Data and Query Selection
We use the comparable corpora of English
TDT5 (278,358 documents) and Chinese TDT5
111
(56,424 documents) as our source collection.
For query selection, we collected all the en-
tities from the entire source collection and
counted their frequencies. We then selected 50
informative entities (25 persons and 25 organiza-
tions) which were located in the middle range of
frequency counts. Among the 25 person queries,
half are Chinese-specific names, and half are
non-Chinese names. The 25 organizations fol-
low a representative distribution according to
the entity subtypes defined in NIST Automatic
Content Extraction (ACE) program1.
3.3 Baseline Pipelines
3.3.1 Overview
We employ the following two types of base-
line crosslingual slot filling pipelines to process
Chinese documents. Figure 1 and Table 1 shows
the five system pipelines we have used to con-
duct our experiments.
Type A Translate Chinese texts into English,
and apply English slot filling systems to the
translations.
Type B Translate English queries into Chinese,
apply Chinese slot filling systems to Chinese
texts, and translate answers back to English. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Machine 
Translation 
English 
Texts 
Chinese 
Texts 
English Candidate Answers 
English
Query
English Slot Filling 
 Answer 
Translation  Pattern Matching 
 Supervised
Classification
Chinese Slot Filling 
 Supervised 
Classification 
Chinese 
Query 
 Query 
Translation
Figure 1: Overview of Baseline Crosslingual Slot Fill-
ing Pipelines
1http://www.itl.nist.gov/iad/mig/tests/ace/
 
Pipeline Label Components Data 
(1) English Supervised Classification Mono-
lingual (2) English Pattern Matching 
English 
TDT5 
 
(3) 
MT+English 
Supervised 
Classification Type A  
(4) 
MT+English 
Pattern Matching Cross-lingual 
Type 
B 
 
 
(5) 
Query Translation 
+Chinese Supervised 
Classification 
+Answer Translation 
Chinese 
TDT5 
 
 
 
Table 1: Monolingual and Crosslingual Baseline Slot
Filling Pipelines
3.3.2 Monolingual Slot Filling
We applied a state-of-the-art bilingual slot
filling system (Chen et al, 2010) to process
bilingual comparable corpora. This baseline
system includes a supervised ACE IE pipeline
and a bottom-up pattern matching pipeline.
The IE pipeline includes relation extraction and
event extraction based on maximum entropy
models that incorporate diverse lexical, syntac-
tic, semantic and ontological knowledge. The
extracted ACE relations and events are then
mapped to KBP slot fills. In pattern matching,
we extract and rank patterns based on a dis-
tant supervision approach (Mintz et al, 2009)
that uses entity-attribute pairs from Wikipedia
Infoboxes and Freebase (Bollacker et al, 2008).
We set a low threshold to include more answer
candidates, and then a series of filtering steps
to refine and improve the overall pipeline re-
sults. The filtering steps include removing an-
swers which have inappropriate entity types or
have inappropriate dependency paths to the en-
tities.
3.3.3 Document and Name Translation
We use a statistical, phrase-based MT sys-
tem (Zens and Ney, 2004) to translate Chinese
documents into English for Type A Approaches.
The best translation is computed by using a
weighted log-linear combination of various sta-
tistical models: an n-gram language model, a
phrase translation model and a word-based lex-
112
icon model. The latter two models are used in
source-to-target and target-to-source directions.
The model scaling factors are optimized with re-
spect to the BLEU score similar to (Och, 2003).
The training data includes 200 million running
words in each language. The total language
model training data consists of about 600 mil-
lion running words.
We applied various name mining approaches
from comparable corpora and parallel corpora,
as described in (Ji et al, 2009) to extract and
translate names in queries and answers in Type
B approaches. The accuracy of name translation
is about 88%. For those names not covered by
these pairs, we relied on Google Translate 2 to
obtain results.
4 Analysis of Baseline Pipelines
In this section we analyze the coverage (Sec-
tion 4.1) and precision (Section 4.2) results of
the baseline pipelines. We then illustrate the
potential for global validation from comparable
corpora through a series of examples.
4.1 Coverage Analysis: Toward
Information Fusion
Table 2 summarizes the Precision (P), Recall
(R) and F-measure (F) of baseline pipelines and
the union of their individual results.
Table 2: Baseline Pipeline Results 
System P R F 
(1) 0.08 0.54 0.15 
(2) 0.02 0.35 0.03 Mono- 
lingual Union of 
(1)+(2) 
0.03 0.69 0.05 
(3) 0.04 0.04 0.04 
(4) 0.03 0.25 0.05 
Union of 
(3)+(4) 0.03 0.26 0.05 
(5) 0.04 0.46 0.08 
Cross- 
lingual 
Union of 
(3)+(4)+(5) 0.03 0.56 0.05 
Compara
ble 
Corpora 
Union of 
(1)+(2)+(3)+
(4)+(5) 
0.02 1 0.04 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2http://translate.google.com/
Although crosslingual pipelines used a much
smaller corpus than monolingual pipelines, they
extracted comparable number of correct answers
(66 vs. 81) with a slightly better precision.
In fact, the crosslingual pipeline (5) performs
even better than monolingual pipeline (2), es-
pecially on the employment slots. In particu-
lar, 96.35% of the correct answers for Chinese-
specific person queries (e.g. ?Tang Jiaxuan?)
were extracted from Chinese data. Even for
those facts discovered from English data, they
are about quite general slots such as ?title? and
?employee of ?. In contrast, Chinese data covers
more diverse biographical slots such as ?family
members? and ?schools attended?.
Compared to the union of Type A approaches
(pipelines (3)+(4)), Pipeline (5) returned many
more correct answers with higher precision. The
main reason is that Type A approaches suffer
from MT errors. For example, MT mistakenly
translated the query name ?Celine Dion? into
?Clinton? and thus English slot filling compo-
nents failed to identify any answers. One can
hypothesize that slot filling on MT output can
be improved by re-training extraction compo-
nents directly from MT output. However, our
experiments of learning patterns from MT out-
put showed negative impact, mainly because
MT errors were too diverse to generalize. In
other cases even though slot filling produced cor-
rect results, MT still failed to translate the an-
swer names correctly. For example, English slot
filling successfully found a potential answer for
?org:founded by? of the query ?Microsoft? from
the following MT output: ?The third largest of
the Microsoft common founder Alan Doss , aged
50, and net assets of US 22 billion.?; however,
the answer string ?Paul Allen? was mistakenly
translated into ?Alan Doss?. MT is not so cru-
cial for ?per:title? slot because it does not require
translation of contexts.
To summarize, 59% of the missing errors were
due to text, query or answer translation errors
and 20% were due to slot filling errors. Never-
theless, the union of (3)+(4)+(5) still contain
more correct answers. These baseline pipelines
were developed from a diverse set of algorithms,
and typically showed strengths in specific slots.
113
In general we can conclude that monolin-
gual and crosslingual pipelines are complemen-
tary. Combining the responses from all baseline
pipelines, we can get similar number of correct
answers compared to one single human annota-
tor.
4.2 Precision Analysis: Toward Global
Validation
The spurious errors from baseline crosslingual
slot filling pipelines reveal both the shortcom-
ings of the MT system and extraction across
languages. Table 3 shows the distribution of
spurious errors.
Pipeline Spurious Errors Distribution
Content Translation 
+ Extraction 
85% 
Query Translation 13% 
Type A 
Answer Translation 2% 
Word Segmentation 34% 
Relation Extraction 33% 
Coreference 17% 
Semantic Type 13% 
Type B 
Slot Type 3% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 3: Distribution of Spurious Errors
Table 3 indicates a majority (85%) of spurious
errors from Type A pipelines were due to ap-
plying monolingual slot filling methods to MT
output which preserves Chinese structure.
As demonstrated in previous work (e.g. (Par-
ton and McKeown, 2010; Ji et al, 2009)),
we also found that many (14.6%) errors were
caused by the low quality of name translation
for queries and answers.
For example, ?????/McGinty? was mis-
takenly translated into the query name ?Kim
Jong-il?, which led to many incorrect answers
such as ?The British Royal joint military re-
search institute? for ?per:employee of ?.
In contrast, the spurious errors from Type B
pipelines were more diverse. Chinese IE com-
ponents severely suffered from word segmen-
tation errors (34%), which were then directly
propagated into Chinese document retrieval and
slot filling. Many segmentation errors occurred
with out-of-vocabulary names, especially per-
son names and nested organization names. For
example, the name ????/Yao Mingbao? was
mistakenly segmented into two words ???/Yao
Ming? and ??/bao?, and thus the document was
mistakenly retrieved for the query ?Yao Ming?.
In many cases (33%) Chinese relation and
event extraction components failed to cap-
ture Chinese-specific structures due to the lim-
ited size of training corpora. For example,
from the context ???????????????
?/Xiao Wan-chang, who were invited to be-
come the economics consultant for Chen Shui-
bian?, Chinese slot filling system mistakenly ex-
tracted ?consultant? as a ?per:title? answer for
the query ?Chen Shui-bian? using a common
pattern ?<query><title>?.
13% of errors were caused due to invalid se-
mantic types for certain slots. For example,
many metaphoric titles such as ?tough guy?
don?t match the definition of ?per:title? in the
annotation guideline ?employment or member-
ship position?.
5 Global Validation
Based on the above motivations we propose to
incorporate global evidence from a very large
collection of comparable documents to refine
local decisions. The central idea is to over-
generate candidate answers from multiple weak
baselines to ensure high upper-bound of recall,
and then conduct effective global validation to
filter spurious errors while keeping good answers
in order to enhance precision.
5.1 Supervised Rescoring
Ideally, we want to choose a validation model
which can pick out important features in a con-
text wider than that used by baseline pipelines.
Merging individual systems to form the union of
answers can be effective, but Table 2 shows that
simple union of all pipelines produced worse F-
measure than the best pipeline.
In this paper we exploit the reranking
paradigm, commonly used in information re-
trieval, to conduct global validation. By model-
ing the empirical distribution of labeled training
data, statistical models are used to identify the
114
strengths and weaknesses (e.g. high and low pre-
cision slots) of individual systems, and rescore
answers accordingly. Specially, we develop a
supervised Maximum Entropy (MaxEnt) based
model to rescore the answers from the pipelines,
selecting only the highest-scoring answers.
The rescorer was trained (using cross-
validation) on varying subsets of the features.
The threshold at which an answer is deemed to
be true is chosen to maximize the F-Measure on
the training set.
5.2 Validation Features
Table 4 describes the validation features used for
rescoring, where q is the query, q? the Chinese
translation of q, t the slot type, a the candidate
answer, a? the Chinese form of a, s the context
sentence and d is the context document support-
ing a.
The feature set benefits from multiple dimen-
sions of crosslingual slot filling. These features
were applied to both languages wherever anno-
tation resources were available.
In the KBP slot filling task, slots are of-
ten dependent on each other, so we can im-
prove the results by improving the ?coherence?
of the story (i.e. consistency among all gener-
ated answers - query profiles). We use feature
f2 to check whether the same answer was gen-
erated for conflicting slots, such as per:parents
and per:children.
Compared to traditional QA tasks, slot fill-
ing is a more fine-grained task in which differ-
ent slots are expected to obtain semantically
different answers. Therefore, we explored se-
mantic constraints in both local and global con-
texts. For example, we utilized bilingual name
gazetteers from ACE training corpora, Google
n-grams (Ji and Lin, 2009) and the geonames
website 3 to encode features f6, f8 and f9; The
org:top members/employees slot requires a sys-
tem to distinguish whether a person member/
employee is in the top position, thus we encoded
f10 for this purpose.
The knowledge used in our baseline pipelines
is relatively static ? it is not updated during the
3http://www.geonames.org/statistics/
extraction process. Achieving high performance
for cross-lingual slot filling requires that we take
a broader view, one that looks outside a sin-
gle document or a single language in order to
exploit global knowledge. Fortunately, as more
and more large crosslingual comparable corpora
are available, we can take advantage of informa-
tion redundancy to validate answers. The basic
intuition is that if a candidate answer a is cor-
rect, it should appear together with the query
q repeatedly, in different documents, or even in
certain coreference links, relations and events.
For example, ?David Kelly - scientist?, and
??????/Shintaro Ishihara - ??/governor?
pairs appear frequently in ?title? coreference
links in both English and Chinese corpora;
?Elizabeth II? is very often involved in an ?em-
ployment? relation with ?United Kingdom? in
English corpora. On the other hand, some in-
correct answers with high global statistics can be
filtered out using these constraints. For exam-
ple, although the query ????/Tang Jiaxuan?
appears frequently together with the candidate
per:title answer ???/personnel?, it is linked by
few coreference links; in contrast, it?s coreferen-
tial with the correct title answer ?????/State
Council member? much more frequently.
We processed cross-lingual comparable cor-
pora to extract coreference links, relations and
events among mentions (names, nominals and
time expressions etc.) and stored them in an
external knowledge base. Any pair of <q, a>
is then compared to the entries in this knowl-
edge base. We used 157,708 documents from
Chinese TDT5 and Gigaword to count Chinese
global statistics, and 7,148,446 documents from
DARPA GALE MT training corpora to count
English global statistics, as shown in features
f12 and f13. Fact based global features f14, f15,
f16 and f17, were calculated from 49,359 Chi-
nese and 280,513 English documents (annotated
by the bilingual IE system in Section 3.3.2.
6 Experiments
In this section, we examine the overall perfor-
mance of this method. We then discuss the
usefulness of the individual sets of features. In
115
Characteristics 
Scope Depth Language 
Description 
f1: frequency of <q, a, t> that appears in all baseline outputs Global 
(Cross-
system) 
Shallow 
 English f2: number of conflicting slot types in which answer a appears in all baseline 
outputs 
f3: conjunction of t and whether a is a year answer Shallow English 
f4: conjunction of t and whether a includes numbers or letters 
f5: conjunction of place t and whether a is a country name 
f6: conjunction of per:origin t and whether a is a nationality 
f7: if t=per:title, whether a is an acceptable title 
f8: if t requires a name answer, whether a is a name 
Local 
Deep 
 
English 
 
f9: whether a has appropriate semantic type 
f10: conjunction of org:top_members/employees and whether there is a high-level 
title in s 
Global 
(Within-
Document) 
Deep English 
f11: conjunction of alternative name and whether a is an acronym of q 
Chinese f12: conditional probability of q/q' and a/a' appear in the same document Shallow 
(Statistics) English f13: conditional probability  of q/q' and a/a' appear in the same sentence 
Both f14:  co-occurrence of q/q' and a/a'  appear in coreference links 
English f15: co-occurrence of q/q' and a/a'  appear in relation/event links 
English f16: conditional probability of q/q' and a/a' appear in relation/event links 
Global 
(Cross-
document 
in 
comparable 
corpora) 
Deep 
(Fact-
based) 
English f17: mutual information of q/q' and a/a' appear in relation/event links 
 
Table 4: Validation Features for Crosslingual Slot Filling
the following results, the baseline features are
always used in addition to any other features.
6.1 Overall Performance
Because of the data scarcity, ten-fold cross-
validation, across queries, was used to train
and test the system. Quantitative results after
combining answers from multiple pipelines are
shown in Table 5. We used two basic features,
one is the slot type and the other is the entity
type of the query (i.e. person or organization).
This basic feature set is already successful in im-
proving the precision of the pipelines, although
this results in a number of correct answers be-
ing discarded as well. By adding the additional
validation features described previously, both
the f-score and precision of the models are im-
proved. In the case of the cross-lingual pipelines
(3+4+5) the number of correct answers chosen
is almost doubled while increasing the precision
of the output.
6.2 Impact of Global Validation
A comparison of the benefits of global versus lo-
cal features are shown in Table 6, both of which
dramatically improve scores over the baseline
features. The global features are universally
Pipelines F P R
Basic Features
1+2 0.31 0.31 0.30
3+4+5 0.26 0.39 0.20
1+2+3+4+5 0.27 0.29 0.25
Full Features
1+2 0.37 0.30 0.46
3+4+5 0.36 0.35 0.37
1+2+3+4+5 0.31 0.28 0.35
Table 5: Using Basic Features to Filter Answers
more beneficial than the local features, although
the local features generate results with higher
precision at the expense of the number of correct
answers returned. The global features are espe-
cially useful for pipelines 3+4+5, where the per-
formance using just these features reaches those
of using all other features ? this does not hold
true for the monolingual pipelines however.
6.3 Impact of Fact-driven Deep
Knowledge
The varying benefit of fact-driven cross-
document features and statistical cross-
document features are shown in Table 7.
116
Pipelines F P R
Local Features
1+2 0.34 0.35 0.33
3+4+5 0.29 0.40 0.22
1+2+3+4+5 0.27 0.32 0.24
Global Features
1+2 0.35 0.30 0.42
3+4+5 0.37 0.36 0.38
1+2+3+4+5 0.33 0.29 0.38
Table 6: The Benefit of Global versus Local Features
While both feature sets are beneficial, the
monolingual pipelines (1+2) benefit more
from statistical features while the cross-lingual
pipelines (3+4+7) benefit slightly more from
the fact-based features. Despite this bias, the
overall results when the features are used in
all pipelines are very close with the fact-based
features being slightly more useful overall.
Pipelines F P R
Fact-Based Features
1+2 0.33 0.27 0.42
3+4+5 0.35 0.43 0.29
1+2+3+4+5 0.30 0.27 0.34
Statistical Features
1+2 0.37 0.34 0.40
3+4+5 0.34 0.35 0.33
1+2+3+4+5 0.29 0.25 0.34
Table 7: Fact vs. Statistical Cross-Doc Features
Translation features were only beneficial to
pipelines 3, 4, and 5, and provided a slight in-
crease in precision from 0.39 to 0.42, but pro-
vided no noticeable benefit when used in con-
junction with results from pipelines 1 and 2.
This is because the answers where translation
features would be most useful were already be-
ing selected by pipelines 1 and 2 using the base-
line features.
6.4 Discussion
The use of any re-scoring, even with baseline
features, provides large gains over the union of
the baseline pipelines, removing large number
of incorrect answers. The use of more sophis-
ticated features provided substantial gains over
the baseline features. In particular, global fea-
tures proved very effective. Further feature en-
gineering to address the remaining errors and
the dropped correct answer would likely provide
increasing gains in performance.
In addition, two human annotators, indepen-
dently, conducted the same task on the same
data, with a second pass of adjudication. The F-
scores of inter-annotator agreement were 52.0%
for the first pass and 73.2% for the second pass.
This indicates that slot filling remains a chal-
lenging task for both systems and human anno-
tators?only one monolingual system exceeded
30% F-score in the KBP2010 evaluation.
7 Conclusion and Future Work
Crosslingual slot filling is a challenging task
due to limited performance in two separate ar-
eas: information extraction and machine trans-
lation. Various methods of combining tech-
niques from these two areas provided weak yet
complementary baseline pipelines. We proposed
an effective approach to integrate these base-
lines and enhance their performance using wider
and deeper knowledge from comparable cor-
pora. The final system based on cross-lingual
comparable corpora outperformed monolingual
pipelines on much larger monolingual corpora.
The intuition behind our approach is that
over-generation of candidate answers from weak
baselines provides a potentially strong recall
upper-bound. The remaining enhancement be-
comes simpler: filtering errors. Our experiments
also suggest that our rescoring models tend to
over-fit due to small amount of training data.
Manual annotation and assessment are quite
costly, motivating future work in active learning
and semi-supervised learning methods. In addi-
tion, we plan to apply our results as feedback to
improve MT performance on facts using query
and answer-driven language model adaptation.
We have demonstrated our approach on English-
Chinese pair, but the framework is language-
independent; ultimately we would like to extend
the task to extracting information from more
languages.
117
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the U.S. NSF CAREER
Award under Grant IIS-0953149 and PSC-CUNY
Research Program. Any opinions, findings, and con-
clusions or recommendations expressed in this mate-
rial are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.
References
K. Bollacker, R. Cook, and P. Tufts. 2008. Free-
base: A shared database of structured general hu-
man knowledge. In Proc. National Conference on
Artificial Intelligence.
Zheng Chen, Suzanne Tamang, Adam Lee, Xiang Li,
Marissa Passantino, and Heng Ji. 2010. Top-
down and bottom-up: A combined approach to
slot filling. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
6458:300?309, December.
C. L. A. Clarke, G. V. Cormack, and T.R. Lynam.
2001. Exploiting redundancy in question answer-
ing. In Proc. SIGIR2001.
Doug Downey, Oren Etzioni, and Stephen Soderland.
2005. A Probabilistic Model of Redundancy in
Information Extraction. In Proc. IJCAI 2005.
Pascale Fung and Lo Yuen Yee. 1998. An ir ap-
proach for translating new words from nonparallel
and comparable texts. In COLING-ACL.
Dilek Hakkani-Tur, Heng Ji, and Ralph Grishman.
2007. Using information extraction to improve
cross-lingual document retrieval. In Proc. RANLP
workshop on Multi-source, Multilingual Informa-
tion Extraction and Summarization.
S. Harabagiu, D. Moldovan, C. Clark, M. Bowden,
A. Hickl, and P. Wang. 2005. Employing two
question answering systems in trec 2005. In Proc.
TREC2005.
Ahmed Hassan, Haytham Fahmy, and Hany Has-
san. 2007. Improving named entity translation
by exploiting comparable and parallel corpora. In
RANLP.
Heng Ji and Ralph Grishman. 2008. Refining Event
Extraction through Cross-Document Inference. In
Proc. of ACL-08: HLT, pages 254?262.
Heng Ji and Dekang Lin. 2009. Gender and animacy
knowledge discovery from web-scale n-grams for
unsupervised person mention detection. In Proc.
PACLIC2009.
Heng Ji, Ralph Grishman, Dayne Freitag, Matthias
Blume, John Wang, Shahram Khadivi, Richard
Zens, and Hermann Ney. 2009. Name translation
for distillation. Handbook of Natural Language
Processing and Machine Translation: DARPA
Global Autonomous Language Exploitation.
Heng Ji, Ralph Grishman, Hoa Trang Dang, and
Kira Griffitt. 2010. An overview of the tac2010
knowledge base population track. In Proc.
TAC2010.
Heng Ji. 2009. Mining name translations from com-
parable corpora by creating bilingual information
networks. In ACL-IJCNLP 2009 workshop on
Building and Using Comparable Corpora (BUCC
2009): from Parallel to Non-parallel Corpora.
Alexandre Klementiev and Dan Roth. 2006. Named
entity transliteration and discovery from multilin-
gual comparable corpora. In HLT-NAACL 2006.
K.-L. Kwork and P. P. Deng. 2006. Chinese
question-answering: Comparing monolingual with
english-chinese cross-lingual results. In Asia In-
formation Retrieval Symposium.
Cheng-Wei Lee, Yi-Hsun Lee, and Wen-Lian Hsu.
2008. Exploring shallow answer ranking features
in cross-lingual and monolingual factoid question
answering. Computational Linguistics and Chi-
nese Language Processing, 13:1?26, March.
B. Magnini, M. Negri, R. Prevete, and H. Tanev.
2001. Is it the right answer?: Exploiting web
redundancy for answer validation. In Proc.
ACL2001.
Mike Mintz, Steven Bills, Rion Snow, and Dan Ju-
rafsky. 2009. Distant supervision for relation ex-
traction without labeled data. In ACL-IJCNLP
2009.
Teruko Mitamura, Mengqiu Wang, Hideki Shima,
and Frank Lin. 2006. Keyword translation accu-
racy and cross-lingual question answering in chi-
nese and japanese. In EACL 2006 Workshop on
MLQA.
F. J. Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training in
statistical machine translaton. In Proc.ACL2003.
Kristen Parton and Kathleen McKeown. 2010. Mt
error detection for cross-lingual question answer-
ing. Proc. COLING2010.
Siddharth Patwardhan and Ellen Riloff. 2009. A
Unified Model of Phrasal and Sentential Evidence
for Information Extraction. In Proc. EMNLP
2009.
Reinhard Rapp. 1999. Automatic identification of
word translations from unrelated english and ger-
man corpora. In ACL 1999.
Li Shao and Hwee Tou Ng. 2004. Mining new word
translations from comparable corpora. In COL-
ING2004.
D. Shen, G. Saarbruechen, and D. Klakow. 2006.
Exploring correlation of dependency relation
paths for answer extraction. In Proc. ACL2006.
118
M. M. Soubbotin and S. M. Soubbotin. 2001. Pat-
terns of potential answer expressions as clues to
the right answers. In Proc. TREC2001.
Richard Sproat, Tao Tao, and ChengXiang Zhai.
2006. Named entity transliteration with compa-
rable corpora. In ACL 2006.
Kiyoshi Sudo, Satoshi Sekine, and Ralph Grishman.
2004. Cross-lingual information extraction evalu-
ation. In Proc. COLING2004.
Tao Tao and Chengxiang Zhai. 2005. Mining com-
parable bilingual text corpora for cross-language
information integration. In Proc. KDD2005.
Raghavendra Udupa, K. Saravanan, A. Kumaran,
and Jagadeesh Jagarlamudi. 2009. Mint: A
method for effective and scalable mining of named
entity transliterations from large comparable cor-
pora. In EACL2009.
Alessandro Vallin, Bernardo Magnini, Danilo Gi-
ampiccolo, Lili Aunimo, Christelle Ayache, Petya
Osenova, Anselmo Peas, Maaren de Rijke, Bogdan
Sacaleanu, Diana Santos, and Richard Sutcliffe.
2005. Overview of the clef 2005 multilingual ques-
tion answer track. In Proc. CLEF2005.
Roman Yangarber. 2006. Verification of Facts across
Document Boundaries. In Proc. International
Workshop on Intelligent Information Access.
Richard Zens and Hermann Ney. 2004. Improve-
ments in phrase-based statistical machine transla-
tion. In Proc. HLT/NAACL 2004.
119
