Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 541?550,
Portland, Oregon, June 19-24, 2011. c?2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
Knowledge-Based Weak Supervision for Information Extraction
of Overlapping Relations
Raphael Hoffmann, Congle Zhang, Xiao Ling, Luke Zettlemoyer, Daniel S. Weld
Computer Science & Engineering
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195, USA
{raphaelh,clzhang,xiaoling,lsz,weld}@cs.washington.edu
Abstract
Information extraction (IE) holds the promise
of generating a large-scale knowledge
base from the Web?s natural language text.
Knowledge-based weak supervision, using
structured data to heuristically label a training
corpus, works towards this goal by enabling
the automated learning of a potentially
unbounded number of relation extractors.
Recently, researchers have developed multi-
instance learning algorithms to combat the
noisy training data that can come from
heuristic labeling, but their models assume
relations are disjoint ? for example they
cannot extract the pair Founded(Jobs,
Apple) and CEO-of(Jobs, Apple).
This paper presents a novel approach for
multi-instance learning with overlapping re-
lations that combines a sentence-level extrac-
tion model with a simple, corpus-level compo-
nent for aggregating the individual facts. We
apply our model to learn extractors for NY
Times text using weak supervision from Free-
base. Experiments show that the approach
runs quickly and yields surprising gains in
accuracy, at both the aggregate and sentence
level.
1 Introduction
Information-extraction (IE), the process of generat-
ing relational data from natural-language text, con-
tinues to gain attention. Many researchers dream of
creating a large repository of high-quality extracted
tuples, arguing that such a knowledge base could
benefit many important tasks such as question an-
swering and summarization. Most approaches to IE
use supervised learning of relation-specific exam-
ples, which can achieve high precision and recall.
Unfortunately, however, fully supervised methods
are limited by the availability of training data and are
unlikely to scale to the thousands of relations found
on the Web.
A more promising approach, often called ?weak?
or ?distant? supervision, creates its own training
data by heuristically matching the contents of a
database to corresponding text (Craven and Kum-
lien, 1999). For example, suppose that r(e1, e2) =
Founded(Jobs,Apple) is a ground tuple in the
database and s =?Steve Jobs founded Apple, Inc.?
is a sentence containing synonyms for both e1 =
Jobs and e2 = Apple, then s may be a natural
language expression of the fact that r(e1, e2) holds
and could be a useful training example.
While weak supervision works well when the tex-
tual corpus is tightly aligned to the database con-
tents (e.g., matching Wikipedia infoboxes to as-
sociated articles (Hoffmann et al, 2010)), Riedel
et al (2010) observe that the heuristic leads to
noisy data and poor extraction performance when
the method is applied more broadly (e.g., matching
Freebase records to NY Times articles). To fix
this problem they cast weak supervision as a form of
multi-instance learning, assuming only that at least
one of the sentences containing e1 and e2 are ex-
pressing r(e1, e2), and their method yields a sub-
stantial improvement in extraction performance.
However, Riedel et al?s model (like that of
previous systems (Mintz et al, 2009)) assumes
that relations do not overlap ? there cannot
exist two facts r(e1, e2) and q(e1, e2) that are
both true for any pair of entities, e1 and e2.
Unfortunately, this assumption is often violated;
541
for example both Founded(Jobs, Apple) and
CEO-of(Jobs, Apple) are clearly true. In-
deed, 18.3% of the weak supervision facts in Free-
base that match sentences in the NY Times 2007 cor-
pus have overlapping relations.
This paper presents MULTIR, a novel model of
weak supervision that makes the following contri-
butions:
? MULTIR introduces a probabilistic, graphical
model of multi-instance learning which handles
overlapping relations.
? MULTIR also produces accurate sentence-level
predictions, decoding individual sentences as
well as making corpus-level extractions.
? MULTIR is computationally tractable. Inference
reduces to weighted set cover, for which it uses
a greedy approximation with worst case running
time O(|R| ? |S|) where R is the set of possi-
ble relations and S is largest set of sentences for
any entity pair. In practice, MULTIR runs very
quickly.
? We present experiments showing that MULTIR
outperforms a reimplementation of Riedel
et al (2010)?s approach on both aggregate (cor-
pus as a whole) and sentential extractions.
Additional experiments characterize aspects of
MULTIR?s performance.
2 Weak Supervision from a Database
Given a corpus of text, we seek to extract facts about
entities, such as the company Apple or the city
Boston. A ground fact (or relation instance), is
an expression r(e) where r is a relation name, for
example Founded or CEO-of, and e = e1, . . . , en
is a list of entities.
An entity mention is a contiguous sequence of tex-
tual tokens denoting an entity. In this paper we as-
sume that there is an oracle which can identify all
entity mentions in a corpus, but the oracle doesn?t
normalize or disambiguate these mentions. We use
ei ? E to denote both an entity and its name (i.e.,
the tokens in its mention).
A relation mention is a sequence of text (in-
cluding one or more entity mentions) which states
that some ground fact r(e) is true. For example,
?Steve Ballmer, CEO of Microsoft, spoke recently
at CES.? contains three entity mentions as well as a
relation mention for CEO-of(Steve Ballmer,
Microsoft). In this paper we restrict our atten-
tion to binary relations. Furthermore, we assume
that both entity mentions appear as noun phrases in
a single sentence.
The task of aggregate extraction takes two inputs,
?, a set of sentences comprising the corpus, and an
extraction model; as output it should produce a set
of ground facts, I , such that each fact r(e) ? I is
expressed somewhere in the corpus.
Sentential extraction takes the same input and
likewise produces I , but in addition it also produces
a function, ? : I ? P(?), which identifies, for
each r(e) ? I , the set of sentences in ? that contain
a mention describing r(e). In general, the corpus-
level extraction problem is easier, since it need only
make aggregate predictions, perhaps using corpus-
wide statistics. In contrast, sentence-level extrac-
tion must justify each extraction with every sentence
which expresses the fact.
The knowledge-based weakly supervised learning
problem takes as input (1) ?, a training corpus, (2)
E, a set of entities mentioned in that corpus, (3) R,
a set of relation names, and (4), ?, a set of ground
facts of relations in R. As output the learner pro-
duces an extraction model.
3 Modeling Overlapping Relations
We define an undirected graphical model that al-
lows joint reasoning about aggregate (corpus-level)
and sentence-level extraction decisions. Figure 1(a)
shows the model in plate form.
3.1 Random Variables
There exists a connected component for each pair of
entities e = (e1, e2) ? E ? E that models all of
the extraction decisions for this pair. There is one
Boolean output variable Y r for each relation name
r ? R, which represents whether the ground fact
r(e) is true. Including this set of binary random
variables enables our model to extract overlapping
relations.
Let S(e1,e2) ? ? be the set of sentences which
contain mentions of both of the entities. For each
sentence xi ? S(e1,e2) there exists a latent variable
Zi which ranges over the relation names r ? R and,
542
E ? E 
? 
R 
S 
?? 
(a)
Steve Jobs was founder  
of Apple. 
Steve Jobs, Steve Wozniak and 
Ronald Wayne founded Apple. 
Steve Jobs is CEO of  
Apple. 
founder ?? founder none 
0 
?????? 
1 0 0 
?? ?? 
... 
... 
... 
????????? ????????? ????????? 
(b)
Figure 1: (a) Network structure depicted as plate model and (b) an example network instantiation for the pair of entities
Steve Jobs, Apple.
importantly, also the distinct value none. Zi should
be assigned a value r ? R only when xi expresses
the ground fact r(e), thereby modeling sentence-
level extraction.
Figure 1(b) shows an example instantiation of the
model with four relation names and three sentences.
3.2 A Joint, Conditional Extraction Model
We use a conditional probability model that defines
a joint distribution over all of the extraction random
variables defined above. The model is undirected
and includes repeated factors for making sentence
level predictions as well as globals factors for ag-
gregating these choices.
For each entity pair e = (e1, e2), define x to
be a vector concatenating the individual sentences
xi ? S(e1,e2), Y to be vector of binary Y
r random
variables, one for each r ? R, and Z to be the vec-
tor of Zi variables, one for each sentence xi. Our
conditional extraction model is defined as follows:
p(Y = y,Z = z|x; ?)
def
=
1
Zx
?
r
?join(yr, z)
?
i
?extract(zi, xi)
where the parameter vector ? is used, below, to de-
fine the factor ?extract.
The factors ?join are deterministic OR operators
?join(yr, z)
def
=
{
1 if yr = true ? ?i : zi = r
0 otherwise
which are included to ensure that the ground fact
r(e) is predicted at the aggregate level for the as-
signment Y r = yr only if at least one of the sen-
tence level assignments Zi = zi signals a mention
of r(e).
The extraction factors ?extract are given by
?extract(zi, xi)
def
= exp
?
?
?
j
?j?j(zi, xi)
?
?
where the features ?j are sensitive to the relation
name assigned to extraction variable zi, if any, and
cues from the sentence xi. We will make use of the
Mintz et al (2009) sentence-level features in the ex-
peiments, as described in Section 7.
3.3 Discussion
This model was designed to provide a joint approach
where extraction decisions are almost entirely driven
by sentence-level reasoning. However, defining the
Y r random variables and tying them to the sentence-
level variables, Zi, provides a direct method for
modeling weak supervision. We can simply train the
model so that the Y variables match the facts in the
database, treating the Zi as hidden variables that can
take any value, as long as they produce the correct
aggregate predictions.
This approach is related to the multi-instance
learning approach of Riedel et al (2010), in that
both models include sentence-level and aggregate
random variables. However, their sentence level
variables are binary and they only have a single ag-
gregate variable that takes values r ? R ? {none},
thereby ruling out overlapping relations. Addition-
ally, their aggregate decisions make use of Mintz-
style aggregate features (Mintz et al, 2009), that col-
lect evidence from multiple sentences, while we use
543
Inputs:
(1) ?, a set of sentences,
(2)E, a set of entities mentioned in the sentences,
(3) R, a set of relation names, and
(4) ?, a database of atomic facts of the form
r(e1, e2) for r ? R and ei ? E.
Definitions:
We define the training set {(xi,yi)|i = 1 . . . n},
where i is an index corresponding to a particu-
lar entity pair (ej , ek) in ?, xi contains all of
the sentences in ? with mentions of this pair, and
yi = relVector(ej , ek).
Computation:
initialize parameter vector ?? 0
for t = 1...T do
for i = 1...n do
(y?, z?)? arg maxy,z p(y, z|xi; ?)
if y? 6= yi then
z? ? arg maxz p(z|xi,yi; ?)
?? ? + ?(xi, z?)? ?(xi, z?)
end if
end for
end for
Return ?
Figure 2: The MULTIR Learning Algorithm
only the deterministic OR nodes. Perhaps surpris-
ing, we are still able to improve performance at both
the sentential and aggregate extraction tasks.
4 Learning
We now present a multi-instance learning algo-
rithm for our weak-supervision model that treats the
sentence-level extraction random variables Zi as la-
tent, and uses facts from a database (e.g., Freebase)
as supervision for the aggregate-level variables Y r.
As input we have (1) ?, a set of sentences, (2)
E, a set of entities mentioned in the sentences, (3)
R, a set of relation names, and (4) ?, a database
of atomic facts of the form r(e1, e2) for r ? R and
ei ? E. Since we are using weak learning, the Y r
variables in Y are not directly observed, but can be
approximated from the database ?. We use a proce-
dure, relVector(e1, e2) to return a bit vector whose
jth bit is one if rj(e1, e2) ? ?. The vector does not
have a bit for the special none relation; if there is no
relation between the two entities, all bits are zero.
Finally, we can now define the training set to be
pairs {(xi,yi)|i = 1 . . . n}, where i is an index
corresponding to a particular entity pair (ej , ek), xi
contains all of the sentences with mentions of this
pair, and yi = relVector(ej , ek).
Given this form of supervision, we would like to
find the setting for ? with the highest likelihood:
O(?) =
?
i
p(yi|xi; ?) =
?
i
?
z
p(yi, z|xi; ?)
However, this objective would be difficult to op-
timize exactly, and algorithms for doing so would
be unlikely to scale to data sets of the size we con-
sider. Instead, we make two approximations, de-
scribed below, leading to a Perceptron-style addi-
tive (Collins, 2002) parameter update scheme which
has been modified to reason about hidden variables,
similar in style to the approaches of (Liang et al,
2006; Zettlemoyer and Collins, 2007), but adapted
for our specific model. This approximate algorithm
is computationally efficient and, as we will see,
works well in practice.
Our first modification is to do online learning
instead of optimizing the full objective. Define the
feature sums ?(x, z) =
?
j ?(xj , zj) which range
over the sentences, as indexed by j. Now, we can
define an update based on the gradient of the local
log likelihood for example i:
? logOi(?)
??j
= Ep(z|xi,yi;?)[?j(xi, z)]
?Ep(y,z|xi;?)[?j(xi, z)]
where the deterministic OR ?join factors ensure that
the first expectation assigns positive probability only
to assignments that produce the labeled facts yi but
that the second considers all valid sets of extractions.
Of course, these expectations themselves, espe-
cially the second one, would be difficult to com-
pute exactly. Our second modification is to do
a Viterbi approximation, by replacing the expecta-
tions with maximizations. Specifically, we compute
the most likely sentence extractions for the label
facts arg maxz p(z|xi,yi; ?) and the most likely ex-
traction for the input, without regard to the labels,
arg maxy,z p(y, z|xi; ?). We then compute the fea-
tures for these assignments and do a simple additive
update. The final algorithm is detailed in Figure 2.
544
5 Inference
To support learning, as described above, we need
to compute assignments arg maxz p(z|x,y; ?) and
arg maxy,z p(y, z|x; ?). In this section, we describe
algorithms for both cases that use the deterministic
OR nodes to simplify the required computations.
Predicting the most likely joint extraction
arg maxy,z p(y, z|x; ?) can be done efficiently
given the structure of our model. In particular, we
note that the factors ?join represent deterministic de-
pendencies between Z and Y, which when satisfied
do not affect the probability of the solution. It is thus
sufficient to independently compute an assignment
for each sentence-level extraction variable Zi, ignor-
ing the deterministic dependencies. The optimal set-
ting for the aggregate variables Y is then simply the
assignment that is consistent with these extractions.
The time complexity is O(|R| ? |S|).
Predicting sentence level extractions given weak
supervision facts, arg maxz p(z|x,y; ?), is more
challenging. We start by computing extraction
scores ?extract(xi, zi) for each possible extraction as-
signment Zi = zi at each sentence xi ? S, and
storing the values in a dynamic programming table.
Next, we must find the most likely assignment z that
respects our output variables y. It turns out that
this problem is a variant of the weighted, edge-cover
problem, for which there exist polynomial time op-
timal solutions.
Let G = (E ,V = VS ? Vy) be a complete
weighted bipartite graph with one node vSi ? V
S for
each sentence xi ? S and one node v
y
r ? Vy for each
relation r ? R where yr = 1. The edge weights are
given by c((vSi , v
y
r ))
def
= ?extract(xi, zi). Our goal is
to select a subset of the edges which maximizes the
sum of their weights, subject to each node vSi ? V
S
being incident to exactly one edge, and each node
vyr ? Vy being incident to at least one edge.
Exact Solution An exact solution can be obtained
by first computing the maximum weighted bipartite
matching, and adding edges to nodes which are not
incident to an edge. This can be computed in time
O(|V|(|E| + |V| log |V|)), which we can rewrite as
O((|R|+ |S|)(|R||S|+ (|R|+ |S|) log(|R|+ |S|))).
Approximate Solution An approximate solution
can be obtained by iterating over the nodes in Vy,
????????  ???????????  
?? ?? ?? 
????????????? ???????????????? 
????? 
Figure 3: Inference of arg maxz p(Z = z|x,y) requires
solving a weighted, edge-cover problem.
and each time adding the highest weight incident
edge whose addition doesn?t violate a constraint.
The running time is O(|R||S|). This greedy search
guarantees each fact is extracted at least once and
allows any additional extractions that increase the
overall probability of the assignment. Given the
computational advantage, we use it in all of the ex-
perimental evaluations.
6 Experimental Setup
We follow the approach of Riedel et al (2010) for
generating weak supervision data, computing fea-
tures, and evaluating aggregate extraction. We also
introduce new metrics for measuring sentential ex-
traction performance, both relation-independent and
relation-specific.
6.1 Data Generation
We used the same data sets as Riedel et al (2010)
for weak supervision. The data was first tagged with
the Stanford NER system (Finkel et al, 2005) and
then entity mentions were found by collecting each
continuous phrase where words were tagged iden-
tically (i.e., as a person, location, or organization).
Finally, these phrases were matched to the names of
Freebase entities.
Given the set of matches, define ? to be set of NY
Times sentences with two matched phrases, E to be
the set of Freebase entities which were mentioned in
one or more sentences, ? to be the set of Freebase
facts whose arguments, e1 and e2 were mentioned in
a sentence in ?, and R to be set of relations names
used in the facts of ?. These sets define the weak
supervision data.
6.2 Features and Initialization
We use the set of sentence-level features described
by Riedel et al (2010), which were originally de-
545
veloped by Mintz et al (2009). These include in-
dicators for various lexical, part of speech, named
entity, and dependency tree path properties of entity
mentions in specific sentences, as computed with the
Malt dependency parser (Nivre and Nilsson, 2004)
and OpenNLP POS tagger1. However, unlike the
previous work, we did not make use of any features
that explicitly aggregate these properties across mul-
tiple mention instances.
The MULTIR algorithm has a single parameter T ,
the number of training iterations, that must be spec-
ified manually. We used T = 50 iterations, which
performed best in development experiments.
6.3 Evaluation Metrics
Evaluation is challenging, since only a small per-
centage (approximately 3%) of sentences match
facts in Freebase, and the number of matches is
highly unbalanced across relations, as we will see
in more detail later. We use the following metrics.
Aggregate Extraction Let ?e be the set of ex-
tracted relations for any of the systems; we com-
pute aggregate precision and recall by comparing
?e with ?. This metric is easily computed but un-
derestimates extraction accuracy because Freebase
is incomplete and some true relations in ?e will be
marked wrong.
Sentential Extraction Let Se be the sentences
where some system extracted a relation and SF be
the sentences that match the arguments of a fact in
?. We manually compute sentential extraction ac-
curacy by sampling a set of 1000 sentences from
Se ? SF and manually labeling the correct extrac-
tion decision, either a relation r ? R or none. We
then report precision and recall for each system on
this set of sampled sentences. These results provide
a good approximation to the true precision but can
overestimate the actual recall, since we did not man-
ually check the much larger set of sentences where
no approach predicted extractions.
6.4 Precision / Recall Curves
To compute precision / recall curves for the tasks,
we ranked the MULTIR extractions as follows. For
sentence-level evaluations, we ordered according to
1http://opennlp.sourceforge.net/
Recall
Precision
0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
SOLOR
Riedel et al, 2010
MULTIR
Figure 4: Aggregate extraction precision / recall curves
for Riedel et al (2010), a reimplementation of that ap-
proach (SOLOR), and our algorithm (MULTIR).
the extraction factor score ?extract(zi, xi). For aggre-
gate comparisons, we set the score for an extraction
Y r = true to be the max of the extraction factor
scores for the sentences where r was extracted.
7 Experiments
To evaluate our algorithm, we first compare it to an
existing approach for using multi-instance learning
with weak supervision (Riedel et al, 2010), using
the same data and features. We report both aggregate
extraction and sentential extraction results. We then
investigate relation-specific performance of our sys-
tem. Finally, we report running time comparisons.
7.1 Aggregate Extraction
Figure 4 shows approximate precision / recall curves
for three systems computed with aggregate metrics
(Section 6.3) that test how closely the extractions
match the facts in Freebase. The systems include the
original results reported by Riedel et al (2010) as
well as our new model (MULTIR). We also compare
with SOLOR, a reimplementation of their algorithm,
which we built in Factorie (McCallum et al, 2009),
and will use later to evaluate sentential extraction.
MULTIR achieves competitive or higher preci-
sion over all ranges of recall, with the exception
of the very low recall range of approximately 0-
1%. It also significantly extends the highest recall
achieved, from 20% to 25%, with little loss in preci-
sion. To investigate the low precision in the 0-1% re-
call range, we manually checked the ten highest con-
546
Recall
Precision
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
SOLOR
MULTIR
Figure 5: Sentential extraction precision / recall curves
for MULTIR and SOLOR.
fidence extractions produced by MULTIR that were
marked wrong. We found that all ten were true facts
that were simply missing from Freebase. A manual
evaluation, as we perform next for sentential extrac-
tion, would remove this dip.
7.2 Sentential Extraction
Although their model includes variables to model
sentential extraction, Riedel et al (2010) did not re-
port sentence level performance. To generate the
precision / recall curve we used the joint model as-
signment score for each of the sentences that con-
tributed to the aggregate extraction decision.
Figure 4 shows approximate precision / recall
curves for MULTIR and SOLOR computed against
manually generated sentence labels, as defined in
Section 6.3. MULTIR achieves significantly higher
recall with a consistently high level of precision. At
the highest recall point, MULTIR reaches 72.4% pre-
cision and 51.9% recall, for an F1 score of 60.5%.
7.3 Relation-Specific Performance
Since the data contains an unbalanced number of in-
stances of each relation, we also report precision and
recall for each of the ten most frequent relations. Let
SMr be the sentences where MULTIR extracted an
instance of relation r ? R, and let SFr be the sen-
tences that match the arguments of a fact about re-
lation r in ?. For each r, we sample 100 sentences
from both SMr and S
F
r and manually check accu-
racy. To estimate precision P?r we compute the ratio
of true relation mentions in SMr , and to estimate re-
call R?r we take the ratio of true relation mentions in
SFr which are returned by our system.
Table 1 presents this approximate precision and
recall for MULTIR on each of the relations, along
with statistics we computed to measure the qual-
ity of the weak supervision. Precision is high for
the majority of relations but recall is consistently
lower. We also see that the Freebase matches are
highly skewed in quantity and can be low quality for
some relations, with very few of them actually cor-
responding to true extractions. The approach gener-
ally performs best on the relations with a sufficiently
large number of true matches, in many cases even
achieving precision that outperforms the accuracy of
the heuristic matches, at reasonable recall levels.
7.4 Overlapping Relations
Table 1 also highlights some of the effects of learn-
ing with overlapping relations. For example, in the
data, almost all of the matches for the administra-
tive divisions relation overlap with the contains re-
lation, because they both model relationships for a
pair of locations. Since, in general, sentences are
much more likely to describe a contains relation, this
overlap leads to a situation were almost none of the
administrate division matches are true ones, and we
cannot accurately learn an extractor. However, we
can still learn to accurately extract the contains rela-
tion, despite the distracting matches. Similarly, the
place of birth and place of death relations tend to
overlap, since it is often the case that people are born
and die in the same city. In both cases, the precision
outperforms the labeling accuracy and the recall is
relatively high.
To measure the impact of modeling overlapping
relations, we also evaluated a simple, restricted
baseline. Instead of labeling each entity pair with
the set of all true Freebase facts, we created a dataset
where each true relation was used to create a dif-
ferent training example. Training MULTIR on this
data simulates effects of conflicting supervision that
can come from not modeling overlaps. On average
across relations, precision increases 12 points but re-
call drops 26 points, for an overall reduction in F1
score from 60.5% to 40.3%.
7.5 Running Time
One final advantage of our model is the mod-
est running time. Our implementation of the
547
Relation
Freebase Matches MULTIR
#sents % true P? R?
/business/person/company 302 89.0 100.0 25.8
/people/person/place lived 450 60.0 80.0 6.7
/location/location/contains 2793 51.0 100.0 56.0
/business/company/founders 95 48.4 71.4 10.9
/people/person/nationality 723 41.0 85.7 15.0
/location/neighborhood/neighborhood of 68 39.7 100.0 11.1
/people/person/children 30 80.0 100.0 8.3
/people/deceased person/place of death 68 22.1 100.0 20.0
/people/person/place of birth 162 12.0 100.0 33.0
/location/country/administrative divisions 424 0.2 N/A 0.0
Table 1: Estimated precision and recall by relation, as well as the number of matched sentences (#sents) and accuracy
(% true) of matches between sentences and facts in Freebase.
Riedel et al (2010) approach required approxi-
mately 6 hours to train on NY Times 05-06 and 4
hours to test on the NY Times 07, each without pre-
processing. Although they do sampling for infer-
ence, the global aggregation variables require rea-
soning about an exponentially large (in the number
of sentences) sample space.
In contrast, our approach required approximately
one minute to train and less than one second to test,
on the same data. This advantage comes from the
decomposition that is possible with the determinis-
tic OR aggregation variables. For test, we simply
consider each sentence in isolation and during train-
ing our approximation to the weighted assignment
problem is linear in the number of sentences.
7.6 Discussion
The sentential extraction results demonstrates the
advantages of learning a model that is primarily
driven by sentence-level features. Although previ-
ous approaches have used more sophisticated fea-
tures for aggregating the evidence from individual
sentences, we demonstrate that aggregating strong
sentence-level evidence with a simple deterministic
OR that models overlapping relations is more effec-
tive, and also enables training of a sentence extractor
that runs with no aggregate information.
While the Riedel et al approach does include a
model of which sentences express relations, it makes
significant use of aggregate features that are primar-
ily designed to do entity-level relation predictions
and has a less detailed model of extractions at the
individual sentence level. Perhaps surprisingly, our
model is able to do better at both the sentential and
aggregate levels.
8 Related Work
Supervised-learning approaches to IE were intro-
duced in (Soderland et al, 1995) and are too nu-
merous to summarize here. While they offer high
precision and recall, these methods are unlikely to
scale to the thousands of relations found in text on
the Web. Open IE systems, which perform self-
supervised learning of relation-independent extrac-
tors (e.g., Preemptive IE (Shinyama and Sekine,
2006), TEXTRUNNER (Banko et al, 2007; Banko
and Etzioni, 2008) and WOE (Wu and Weld, 2010))
can scale to millions of documents, but don?t output
canonicalized relations.
8.1 Weak Supervision
Weak supervision (also known as distant- or self su-
pervision) refers to a broad class of methods, but
we focus on the increasingly-popular idea of using
a store of structured data to heuristicaly label a tex-
tual corpus. Craven and Kumlien (1999) introduced
the idea by matching the Yeast Protein Database
(YPD) to the abstracts of papers in PubMed and
training a naive-Bayes extractor. Bellare and Mc-
Callum (2007) used a database of BibTex records
to train a CRF extractor on 12 bibliographic rela-
tions. The KYLIN system aplied weak supervision
to learn relations from Wikipedia, treating infoboxes
as the associated database (Wu and Weld, 2007);
Wu et al (2008) extended the system to use smooth-
ing over an automatically generated infobox taxon-
548
omy. Mintz et al (2009) used Freebase facts to train
100 relational extractors on Wikipedia. Hoffmann
et al (2010) describe a system similar to KYLIN,
but which dynamically generates lexicons in order
to handle sparse data, learning over 5000 Infobox
relations with an average F1 score of 61%. Yao
et al (2010) perform weak supervision, while using
selectional preference constraints to a jointly reason
about entity types.
The NELL system (Carlson et al, 2010) can also
be viewed as performing weak supervision. Its ini-
tial knowledge consists of a selectional preference
constraint and 20 ground fact seeds. NELL then
matches entity pairs from the seeds to a Web cor-
pus, but instead of learning a probabilistic model,
it bootstraps a set of extraction patterns using semi-
supervised methods for multitask learning.
8.2 Multi-Instance Learning
Multi-instance learning was introduced in order to
combat the problem of ambiguously-labeled train-
ing data when predicting the activity of differ-
ent drugs (Dietterich et al, 1997). Bunescu and
Mooney (2007) connect weak supervision with
multi-instance learning and extend their relational
extraction kernel to this context.
Riedel et al (2010), combine weak supervision
and multi-instance learning in a more sophisticated
manner, training a graphical model, which assumes
only that at least one of the matches between the
arguments of a Freebase fact and sentences in the
corpus is a true relational mention. Our model may
be seen as an extension of theirs, since both models
include sentence-level and aggregate random vari-
ables. However, Riedel et al have only a single ag-
gregate variable that takes values r ? R ? {none},
thereby ruling out overlapping relations. We have
discussed the comparison in more detail throughout
the paper, including in the model formulation sec-
tion and experiments.
9 Conclusion
We argue that weak supervision is promising method
for scaling information extraction to the level where
it can handle the myriad, different relations on the
Web. By using the contents of a database to heuris-
tically label a training corpus, we may be able to
automatically learn a nearly unbounded number of
relational extractors. Since the processs of match-
ing database tuples to sentences is inherently heuris-
tic, researchers have proposed multi-instance learn-
ing algorithms as a means for coping with the result-
ing noisy data. Unfortunately, previous approaches
assume that all relations are disjoint ? for exam-
ple they cannot extract the pair Founded(Jobs,
Apple) and CEO-of(Jobs, Apple), because
two relations are not allowed to have the same argu-
ments.
This paper presents a novel approach for multi-
instance learning with overlapping relations that
combines a sentence-level extraction model with a
simple, corpus-level component for aggregating the
individual facts. We apply our model to learn extrac-
tors for NY Times text using weak supervision from
Freebase. Experiments show improvements for both
sentential and aggregate (corpus level) extraction,
and demonstrate that the approach is computation-
ally efficient.
Our early progress suggests many interesting di-
rections. By joining two or more Freebase tables,
we can generate many more matches and learn more
relations. We also wish to refine our model in order
to improve precision. For example, we would like
to add type reasoning about entities and selectional
preference constraints for relations. Finally, we are
also interested in applying the overall learning ap-
proaches to other tasks that could be modeled with
weak supervision, such as coreference and named
entity classification.
The source code of our system, its out-
put, and all data annotations are available at
http://cs.uw.edu/homes/raphaelh/mr.
Acknowledgments
We thank Sebastian Riedel and Limin Yao for shar-
ing their data and providing valuable advice. This
material is based upon work supported by a WRF /
TJ Cable Professorship, a gift from Google and by
the Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) under
prime contract no. FA8750-09-C-0181. Any opin-
ions, findings, and conclusion or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the view of the Air
Force Research Laboratory (AFRL).
549
References
Michele Banko and Oren Etzioni. 2008. The tradeoffs
between open and traditional relation extraction. In
Proceedings of 46th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics (ACL-08), pages
28?36.
Michele Banko, Michael J. Cafarella, Stephen Soderland,
Matthew Broadhead, and Oren Etzioni. 2007. Open
information extraction from the web. In Proceedings
of the 20th International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (IJCAI-07), pages 2670?2676.
Kedar Bellare and Andrew McCallum. 2007. Learn-
ing extractors from unlabeled text using relevant
databases. In Sixth International Workshop on Infor-
mation Integration on the Web.
Razvan Bunescu and Raymond Mooney. 2007. Learning
to extract relations from the web using minimal super-
vision. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL-
07).
Andrew Carlson, Justin Betteridge, Bryan Kisiel, Burr
Settles, Estevam R. Hruschka Jr., and Tom M.
Mitchell. 2010. Toward an architecture for never-
ending language learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-10).
Michael Collins. 2002. Discriminative training meth-
ods for hidden markov models: Theory and experi-
ments with perceptron algorithms. In Proceedings of
the 2002 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP-2002).
Mark Craven and Johan Kumlien. 1999. Constructing
biological knowledge bases by extracting information
from text sources. In Proceedings of the Seventh Inter-
national Conference on Intelligent Systems for Molec-
ular Biology, pages 77?86.
Thomas G. Dietterich, Richard H. Lathrop, and Toma?s
Lozano-Pe?rez. 1997. Solving the multiple instance
problem with axis-parallel rectangles. Artificial Intel-
ligence, 89:31?71, January.
Jenny Rose Finkel, Trond Grenager, and Christopher
Manning. 2005. Incorporating non-local informa-
tion into information extraction systems by gibbs sam-
pling. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL-
05), pages 363?370.
Raphael Hoffmann, Congle Zhang, and Daniel S. Weld.
2010. Learning 5000 relational extractors. In Pro-
ceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics (ACL-10), pages
286?295.
Percy Liang, A. Bouchard-Co?te?, Dan Klein, and Ben
Taskar. 2006. An end-to-end discriminative approach
to machine translation. In International Conference on
Computational Linguistics and Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (COLING/ACL).
Andrew McCallum, Karl Schultz, and Sameer Singh.
2009. Factorie: Probabilistic programming via imper-
atively defined factor graphs. In Neural Information
Processing Systems Conference (NIPS).
Mike Mintz, Steven Bills, Rion Snow, and Daniel Juraf-
sky. 2009. Distant supervision for relation extrac-
tion without labeled data. In Proceedings of the 47th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL-2009), pages 1003?1011.
Joakim Nivre and Jens Nilsson. 2004. Memory-based
dependency parsing. In Proceedings of the Conference
on Natural Language Learning (CoNLL-04), pages
49?56.
Sebastian Riedel, Limin Yao, and Andrew McCallum.
2010. Modeling relations and their mentions without
labeled text. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth Euro-
pean Conference on Machine Learning (ECML-2010),
pages 148?163.
Yusuke Shinyama and Satoshi Sekine. 2006. Preemptive
information extraction using unrestricted relation dis-
covery. In Proceedings of the Human Language Tech-
nology Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computation Linguistics (HLT-
NAACL-06).
Stephen Soderland, David Fisher, Jonathan Aseltine, and
Wendy G. Lehnert. 1995. Crystal: Inducing a concep-
tual dictionary. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth In-
ternational Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(IJCAI-1995), pages 1314?1321.
Fei Wu and Daniel S. Weld. 2007. Autonomously se-
mantifying wikipedia. In Proceedings of the Inter-
national Conference on Information and Knowledge
Management (CIKM-2007), pages 41?50.
Fei Wu and Daniel S. Weld. 2008. Automatically refin-
ing the wikipedia infobox ontology. In Proceedings of
the 17th International Conference on World Wide Web
(WWW-2008), pages 635?644.
Fei Wu and Daniel S. Weld. 2010. Open information
extraction using wikipedia. In The Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL-
2010), pages 118?127.
Limin Yao, Sebastian Riedel, and Andrew McCallum.
2010. Collective cross-document relation extraction
without labelled data. In Proceedings of the 2010 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP-2010), pages 1013?1023.
Luke Zettlemoyer and Michael Collins. 2007. Online
learning of relaxed CCG grammars for parsing to log-
ical form. In Proceedings of the Joint Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing and Computational Natural Language Learning
(EMNLP-CoNLL-2007).
550
Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 First International Workshop on Formalisms and Methodology for Learning by Reading, pages 87?95,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Machine Reading at the University of Washington
Hoifung Poon, Janara Christensen, Pedro Domingos, Oren Etzioni, Raphael Hoffmann,
Chloe Kiddon, Thomas Lin, Xiao Ling, Mausam, Alan Ritter, Stefan Schoenmackers,
Stephen Soderland, Dan Weld, Fei Wu, Congle Zhang
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
{hoifung,janara,pedrod,etzioni,raphaelh,chloe,tlin,xiaoling,mausam,
aritter,stef,soderland,weld,wufei,clzhang}@cs.washington.edu
Abstract
Machine reading is a long-standing goal of AI
and NLP. In recent years, tremendous progress
has been made in developing machine learning
approaches for many of its subtasks such as
parsing, information extraction, and question
answering. However, existing end-to-end so-
lutions typically require substantial amount of
human efforts (e.g., labeled data and/or man-
ual engineering), and are not well poised for
Web-scale knowledge acquisition. In this pa-
per, we propose a unifying approach for ma-
chine reading by bootstrapping from the easi-
est extractable knowledge and conquering the
long tail via a self-supervised learning pro-
cess. This self-supervision is powered by joint
inference based on Markov logic, and is made
scalable by leveraging hierarchical structures
and coarse-to-fine inference. Researchers at
the University of Washington have taken the
first steps in this direction. Our existing work
explores the wide spectrum of this vision and
shows its promise.
1 Introduction
Machine reading, or learning by reading, aims to
extract knowledge automatically from unstructured
text and apply the extracted knowledge to end tasks
such as decision making and question answering. It
has been a major goal of AI and NLP since their
early days. With the advent of the Web, the billions
of online text documents contain virtually unlimited
amount of knowledge to extract, further increasing
the importance and urgency of machine reading.
In the past, there has been a lot of progress in
automating many subtasks of machine reading by
machine learning approaches (e.g., components in
the traditional NLP pipeline such as POS tagging
and syntactic parsing). However, end-to-end solu-
tions are still rare, and existing systems typically re-
quire substantial amount of human effort in manual
engineering and/or labeling examples. As a result,
they often target restricted domains and only extract
limited types of knowledge (e.g., a pre-specified re-
lation). Moreover, many machine reading systems
train their knowledge extractors once and do not
leverage further learning opportunities such as ad-
ditional text and interaction with end users.
Ideally, a machine reading system should strive to
satisfy the following desiderata:
End-to-end: the system should input raw text, ex-
tract knowledge, and be able to answer ques-
tions and support other end tasks;
High quality: the system should extract knowledge
with high accuracy;
Large-scale: the system should acquire knowledge
at Web-scale and be open to arbitrary domains,
genres, and languages;
Maximally autonomous: the system should incur
minimal human effort;
Continuous learning from experience: the
system should constantly integrate new infor-
mation sources (e.g., new text documents) and
learn from user questions and feedback (e.g.,
via performing end tasks) to continuously
improve its performance.
These desiderata raise many intriguing and chal-
lenging research questions. Machine reading re-
search at the University of Washington has explored
87
a wide spectrum of solutions to these challenges and
has produced a large number of initial systems that
demonstrated promising performance. During this
expedition, an underlying unifying vision starts to
emerge. It becomes apparent that the key to solving
machine reading is to:
1. Conquer the long tail of textual knowledge via
a self-supervised learning process that lever-
ages data redundancy to bootstrap from the
head and propagates information down the long
tail by joint inference;
2. Scale this process to billions of Web documents
by identifying and leveraging ubiquitous struc-
tures that lead to sparsity.
In Section 2, we present this vision in detail, iden-
tify the major dimensions these initial systems have
explored, and propose a unifying approach that sat-
isfies all five desiderata. In Section 3, we reivew
machine reading research at the University of Wash-
ington and show how they form synergistic effort
towards solving the machine reading problem. We
conclude in Section 4.
2 A Unifying Approach for Machine
Reading
The core challenges to machine reading stem from
the massive scale of the Web and the long-tailed dis-
tribution of textual knowledge. The heterogeneous
Web contains texts that vary substantially in subject
matters (e.g., finance vs. biology) and writing styles
(e.g., blog posts vs. scientific papers). In addition,
natural languages are famous for their myraid vari-
ations in expressing the same meaning. A fact may
be stated in a straightforward way such as ?kale con-
tains calcium?. More often though, it may be stated
in a syntactically and/or lexically different way than
as phrased in an end task (e.g., ?calcium is found in
kale?). Finally, many facts are not even stated ex-
plicitly, and must be inferred from other facts (e.g.,
?kale prevents osteoporosis? may not be stated ex-
plicitly but can be inferred by combining facts such
as ?kale contains calcium? and ?calcium helps pre-
vent osteoporosis?). As a result, machine reading
must not rely on explicit supervision such as manual
rules and labeled examples, which will incur pro-
hibitive cost in the Web scale. Instead, it must be
able to learn from indirect supervision.





	






Figure 1: A unifying vision for machine reading: boot-
strap from the head regime of the power-law distribu-
tion of textual knowledge, and conquer the long tail in
a self-supervised learning process that raises certainty on
sparse extractions by propagating information via joint
inference from frequent extractions.
A key source of indirect supervision is meta
knowledge about the domains. For example, the
TextRunner system (Banko et al, 2007) hinges on
the observation that there exist general, relation-
independent patterns for information extraction. An-
other key source of indirect supervision is data re-
dundancy. While a rare extracted fact or inference
pattern may arise by chance of error, it is much less
likely so for the ones with many repetitions (Downey
et al, 2010). Such highly-redundant knowledge can
be extracted easily and with high confidence, and
can be leveraged for bootstrapping. For knowledge
that resides in the long tail, explicit forms of redun-
dancy (e.g., identical expressions) are rare, but this
can be circumvented by joint inference. For exam-
ple, expressions that are composed with or by sim-
ilar expressions probably have the same meaning;
the fact that kale prevents osteoporosis can be de-
rived by combining the facts that kale contains cal-
cium and that calcium helps prevent osteoporosis via
a transitivity-through inference pattern. In general,
joint inference can take various forms, ranging from
simple voting to shrinkage in a probabilistic ontol-
ogy to sophisticated probabilistic reasoning based
on a joint model. Simple ones tend to scale bet-
ter, but their capability in propagating information
is limited. More sophisticated methods can uncover
implicit redundancy and propagate much more in-
88
formation with higher quality, yet the challenge is
how to make them scale as well as simple ones.
To do machine reading, a self-supervised learning
process, informed by meta knowledege, stipulates
what form of joint inference to use and how. Effec-
tively, it increases certainty on sparse extractions by
propagating information from more frequent ones.
Figure 1 illustrates this unifying vision.
In the past, machine reading research at the Uni-
versity of Washington has explored a variety of so-
lutions that span the key dimensions of this uni-
fying vision: knowledge representation, bootstrap-
ping, self-supervised learning, large-scale joint in-
ference, ontology induction, continuous learning.
See Section 3 for more details. Based on this ex-
perience, one direction seems particularly promising
that we would propose here as our unifying approach
for end-to-end machine reading:
Markov logic is used as the unifying framework for
knowledge representation and joint inference;
Self-supervised learning is governed by a joint
probabilistic model that incorporates a small
amount of heuristic knowledge and large-scale
relational structures to maximize the amount
and quality of information to propagate;
Joint inference is made scalable to the Web by
coarse-to-fine inference.
Probabilistic ontologies are induced from text to
guarantee tractability in coarse-to-fine infer-
ence. This ontology induction and popula-
tion are incorporated into the joint probabilistic
model for self-supervision;
Continuous learning is accomplished by combin-
ing bootstrapping and crowdsourced content
creation to synergistically improve the reading
system from user interaction and feedback.
A distinctive feature of this approach is its empha-
sis on using sophisticated joint inference. Recently,
joint inference has received increasing interest in
AI, machine learning, and NLP, with Markov logic
(Domingos and Lowd, 2009) being one of the lead-
ing unifying frameworks. Past work has shown that
it can substantially improve predictive accuracy in
supervised learning (e.g., (Getoor and Taskar, 2007;
Bakir et al, 2007)). We propose to build on these ad-
vances, but apply joint inference beyond supervised
learning, with labeled examples supplanted by indi-
rect supervision.
Another distinctive feature is that we propose
to use coarse-to-fine inference (Felzenszwalb and
McAllester, 2007; Petrov, 2009) as a unifying
framework to scale inference to the Web. Es-
sentially, coarse-to-fine inference leverages the
sparsity imposed by hierarchical structures that
are ubiquitous in human knowledge (e.g., tax-
onomies/ontologies). At coarse levels (top levels in
a hierarchy), ambiguities are rare (there are few ob-
jects and relations), and inference can be conducted
very efficiently. The result is then used to prune un-
promising refinements at the next level. This process
continues down the hierarchy until decision can be
made. In this way, inference can potentially be sped
up exponentially, analogous to binary tree search.
Finally, we propose a novel form of continuous
learning by leveraging the interaction between the
system and end users to constantly improve the per-
formance. This is straightforward to do in our ap-
proach given the self-supervision process and the
availability of powerful joint inference. Essentially,
when the system output is applied to an end task
(e.g., answering questions), the feedback from user
is collected and incorporated back into the system
as a bootstrap source. The feedback can take the
form of explicit supervision (e.g., via community
content creation or active learning) or indirect sig-
nals (e.g., click data and query logs). In this way,
we can bootstrap an online community by an initial
machine reading system that provides imperfect but
valuable service in end tasks, and continuously im-
prove the quality of system output, which attracts
more users with higher degree of participation, thus
creating a positive feedback loop and raising the ma-
chine reading performance to a high level that is dif-
ficult to attain otherwise.
3 Summary of Progress to Date
The University of Washington has been one of the
leading places for machine reading research and has
produced many cutting-edge systems, e.g., WIEN
(first wrapper induction system for information ex-
traction), Mulder (first fully automatic Web-scale
question answering system), KnowItAll/TextRunner
(first systems to do open-domain information extrac-
89
tion from the Web corpus at large scale), Kylin (first
self-supervised system for Wikipedia-based infor-
mation extraction), UCR (first unsupervised corefer-
ence resolution system that rivals the performance of
supervised systems), Holmes (first Web-scale joint
inference system), USP (first unsupervised system
for semantic parsing).
Figure 2 shows the evolution of the major sys-
tems; dashed lines signify influence in key ideas
(e.g., Mulder inspires KnowItAll), and solid lines
signify dataflow (e.g., Holmes inputs TextRunner tu-
ples). These systems span a wide spectrum in scal-
ability (assessed by speed and quantity in extrac-
tion) and comprehension (assessed by unit yield of
knowledge at a fixed precision level). At one ex-
treme, the TextRunner system is highly scalable, ca-
pable of extracting billions of facts, but it focuses on
shallow extractions from simple sentences. At the
other extreme, the USP and LOFT systems achieve
much higher level of comprehension (e.g., in a task
of extracting knowledge from biomedical papers and
answering questions, USP obtains more than three
times as many correct answers as TextRunner, and
LOFT obtains more than six times as many correct
answers as TextRunner), but are much less scalable
than TextRunner.
In the remainder of the section, we review the
progress made to date and identify key directions for
future work.
3.1 Knowledge Representation and Joint
Inference
Knowledge representations used in these systems
vary widely in expressiveness, ranging from sim-
ple ones like relation triples (<subject, relation,
object>; e.g., in KnowItAll and TextRunner), to
clusters of relation triples or triple components (e.g.,
in SNE, RESOLVER), to arbitrary logical formulas
and their clusters (e.g., in USP, LOFT). Similarly,
a variety forms of joint inference have been used,
ranging from simple voting to heuristic rules to so-
phisticated probabilistic models. All these can be
compactly encoded in Markov logic (Domingos and
Lowd, 2009), which provides a unifying framework
for knowledge representation and joint inference.
Past work at Washington has shown that in su-
pervised learning, joint inference can substantially
improve predictive performance on tasks related to
machine reading (e.g., citation information extrac-
tion (Poon and Domingos, 2007), ontology induc-
tion (Wu and Weld, 2008), temporal information
extraction (Ling and Weld, 2010)). In addition, it
has demonstrated that sophisticated joint inference
can enable effective learning without any labeled
information (UCR, USP, LOFT), and that joint in-
ference can scale to millions of Web documents by
leveraging sparsity in naturally occurring relations
(Holmes, Sherlock), showing the promise of our uni-
fying approach.
Simpler representations limit the expressiveness
in representing knowledge and the degree of sophis-
tication in joint inference, but they currently scale
much better than more expressive ones. A key direc-
tion for future work is to evaluate this tradeoff more
thoroughly, e.g., for each class of end tasks, to what
degree do simple representations limit the effective-
ness in performing the end tasks? Can we automate
the choice of representations to strike the best trade-
off for a specific end task? Can we advance joint
inference algorithms to such a degree that sophisti-
cated inference scales as well as simple ones?
3.2 Bootstrapping
Past work at Washington has identified and lever-
aged a wide range of sources for bootstrapping. Ex-
amples include Wikipedia (Kylin, KOG, IIA, WOE,
WPE), Web lists (KnowItAll, WPE), Web tables
(WebTables), Hearst patterns (KnowItAll), heuristic
rules (TextRunner), semantic role labels (SRL-IE),
etc.
In general, potential bootstrap sources can be
broadly divided into domain knowledge (e.g., pat-
terns and rules) and crowdsourced contents (e.g., lin-
guistic resources, Wikipedia, Amazon Mechanical
Turk, the ESP game).
A key direction for future work is to combine
bootstrapping with crowdsourced content creation
for continuous learning. (Also see Subsection 3.6.)
3.3 Self-Supervised Learning
Although the ways past systems conduct self-
supervision vary widely in detail, they can be di-
vided into two broad categories. One uses heuristic
rules that exploit existing semi-structured resources
to generate noisy training examples for use by su-
pervised learning methods and with cotraining (e.g.,
90

	


		

	
 	