Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, ACL 2010, pages 440?443,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
YSC-DSAA: An Approach to Disambiguate Sentiment Ambiguous 
Adjectives Based On SAAOL  
Shi-Cai Yang 
Ningbo University of Technology 
Ningbo, Zhejiang, China 
nbcysc@126.com 
Mei-Juan Liu 
Zhejiang Ocean University  
Zhoushan, Zhejiang, China 
azalea1212@126.com 
 
  
 
Abstract 
 
In this paper, we describe the system we de-
veloped for the SemEval-2010 task of disam-
biguating sentiment ambiguous adjectives 
(hereinafter referred to SAA). Our system cre-
ated a new word library named SAA-Oriented 
Library consisting of positive words, negative 
words, negative words related to SAA, posi-
tive words related to SAA, and inverse words, 
etc. Based on the syntactic parsing, we ana-
lyzed the relationship between SAA and the 
keywords and handled other special processes 
by extracting such words in the relevant sen-
tences to disambiguate sentiment ambiguous 
adjectives. Our micro average accuracy is 
0.942, which puts our system in the first place. 
 
1 Introduction 
We participated in disambiguating sentiment 
ambiguous adjectives task of SemEval-2010(Wu 
and Jin, 2010). 
Together 14 sentiment ambiguous adjectives 
are chosen by the task organizers, which are all 
high-frequency words in Mandarin Chinese. 
They are: ?|big, ?|small, ?|many, ?|few, ?
|high, ? |low, ? |thick, ? |thin, ? |deep, ?
|shallow, ? |heavy, ? |light, ?? |huge, ??
|grave. These adjectives are neutral out of con-
text, but when they co-occur with some target 
nouns, positive or negative emotion will be 
evoked. The task is designed to automatically 
determine the semantic orientation of these sen-
timent ambiguous adjectives within context: 
positive or negative (Wu and Jin, 2010). For in-
stance, ???? |the price is high? indicates 
negative meaning, while ????|the quality is 
high? has positive connotation. 
Considering the grammar system of contem-
porary Chinese, a word is one of the most basic 
linguistic granularities consisting of a sentence. 
Therefore, as for the sentiment classification of a 
sentence, the sentiment tendency of a sentence 
can be identified on the basis of that of a word. 
Wiebe et al (2004) proposed that whether a sen-
tence is subjective or objective should be dis-
criminated according to the adjectives in it. On 
the basis of General Inquirer Dictionary, A 
Learner?s Dictionary of Positive and Negative 
Words, HowNet , A Dictionary of Positive Words 
and A Dictionary of Negative Words etc., Wang 
et al(2009) built a word library for Chinese sen-
timent words to discriminate the sentiment cate-
gory of a sentence using the weighted linear 
combination method.  
Unlike the previous researches which have not 
taken SAA into consideration specially in dis-
criminating the sentiment tendency of a sentence, 
in the SemEval-2010 task of disambiguating sen-
timent ambiguous adjectives, systems have to 
predict the sentiment tendency of these fourteen 
adjectives within specific context.  
From the view of linguistics, first we devel-
oped a SAA?oriented keyword library, then ana-
lyzed the relationship between the keywords in 
the clauses and SAA, and classified its positive 
or negative meaning of SAA by extracting the 
clauses related to SAA in the sentence. 
2 SAAOL  
We create a SAA-oriented library marked as 
SAAOL which is made up of positive and nega-
tive words irrelevant to context, negative words 
related to SAA (NSAA), positive words related 
to SAA (PSAA), and inverse words. The above 
five categories of words are called keywords for 
short in the paper. 
Positive and negative words irrelevant to con-
text refer to the traditional positive or negative 
words which are gathered from The Dictionary 
440
of Positive Words(Shi, 2005), The Dictionary of 
Negative Words(Yang, 2005), HowNet 1  and 
other network resources, such as Terms of Ad-
verse Drug Reaction, Codes of Diseases and 
Symptoms, etc. 
Distinguishing from the traditional positive 
and negative words, NSAA and PSAA in our 
SAAOL refer to those positive and negative 
words which are related to SAA, yet not classi-
fied into the positive and negative words irrele-
vant to context mentioned above. 
We divide SAA into two categories: A cate-
gory and B category listed in Table 1. 
 
A category B category 
?|big ?|small 
?|many ?|few 
?|high ?|low 
?|thick ?|thin 
?|deep ?|shallow 
?|heavy ?|light 
??|huge  
??|grave  
Table 1: SAA Classification Table 
 
We identify whether a word belongs to NSAA 
or not on the following principle: any words 
when used with A category are negative; con-
versely, when used with B category, they are 
positive. 
For example, in the following clauses,  
?????|oil prices are high?, 
?????|the responsibility is important?,  
?????| the task is very heavy?,  
??????|the workload is very large?, 
 ???|oil prices?, ???|responsibility?, ??
?|task?, ????|workload? are NSAA. 
Correspondingly, we identify whether a word 
belongs to PSAA or not on the following princi-
ple: any words when used with A category are 
positive; however, when used with B category, 
they are negative. 
In the clauses,  
?????| much food?,  
?????| efficiency is extremely low?,  
??????|interest rate on deposit is high?, 
??? | food?, ??? | efficiency?, ?????
|interest rate on deposit? are PSAA. 
In general, when two negative words are used 
together, the sentiment tendency that they show 
is negative. For instances, ???????
                                                 
1 http://www.keenage.com. 
|incidence of diabetes?, ?????|virus infec-
tion?, ?????|destruction of wars?. However, 
in certain cases, some words play a part in elimi-
nating negative meaning when used with nega-
tive words, for example, ?? |anti-? , ???
|restrain?, ??? |avoid?, ?? |resist?, ???
|reduce?, ??? |fall?, ??? |decrease?, ???
|control?, ??? |cost?, ??? |oppose?, ???
|decrease?, ?? |non-?, ?? |not?. These special 
words are called inverse words in our SAAOL. 
In the following instances, ?????|reduce 
the injury?, ?????| curb inflation?, ???
|anti-war?, the words ???|injury?, ???| infla-
tion?, and ? ??|war? themselves are all nega-
tive. When used with the inverse words???
|reduce ?, ???| curb?, ??|anti-?, they express 
positive meaning instead. 
On the basis of the above collected word li-
brary, we discriminate manually the positive and 
negative meaning, PSAA, NSAA, and inverse 
words in 50,000 Chinese words according to 
Richard Xiao?s Top 50,000 Chinese Word Fre-
quency List, which collects the frequency of the 
top 50000 Chinese words covered in the just 
published frequency dictionary of Mandarin 
Chinese based on a balanced corpus of ca. 50 
million words. The list is available at 
http://www.lancs.ac.uk/fass/projects
/corpus/data/top50000_Chinese_words.
zip.  
Based on HowNet lexical semantic similarity 
computing(Liu, 2002), Yang and Wu(2009) se-
lected the new positive and negative bench-mark 
words to identify the sentiment tendency by 
adopting the improved benchmark words and the 
modified method of computing similarity be-
tween words and benchmark words. Their ac-
curacy rate arrived at 98.94%.  
In light of the errors of manual calibration, we 
extended the keywords in SAAOL by applying 
Yang and Wu?s (2009) method and added syn-
onymic and antonymous words in it. Eventually 
we proofread and revised manually the new ex-
tended keywords. 
3 Our method  
According to the structural characteristics of the 
sentence, the sentence can be divided into simple 
sentences and complex sentences. A simple sen-
tence consists of a single clause which contains a 
subject and a predicate and stands alone as its 
own sentence. However, a complex sentence is 
the one which is linked by conjunctions or con-
441
sists of at least two or more clauses without any 
conjunctions in it. 
A complicated sentence in structure is divided 
into several clauses in accordance with punctua-
tions, such as a full stop, or a exclamatory mark, 
or a comma, or a semicolon, etc. We analyze the 
syntax of the clause by extracting the clause in-
cluding SAA and the adjacent one. We extract 
SAAOL keywords in the selected clauses, and 
then analyze the grammatical relationship be-
tween the keywords and SAA. 
Wang et als research of extraction technology 
based on the dependency relation of Chinese sen-
timental elements indicated that the dependency 
analyzer designed by Stanford University had not 
showed a high rate of accuracy. And the wrong 
dependency relation will interfere with the sub-
sequent parsing process seriously (Wang, et al, 
2009).  
Taking the above factors into consideration, 
we have not analyzed the dependency relation at 
present. Through studying abundant instances, 
we specialize in the structural relationship be-
tween the keywords and SAA to extract the rela-
tion patterns which have a higher occurrence fre-
quency. In the meantime, inverse words are proc-
essed particularly. Eventually we supplemented 
modification of the inaccuracy of automatic 
segmented words and some special adverbs, such 
as ?| prejudiced, ?|excessive, ?|too. 
 
To sum up, based on the word library SAAOL 
and structural analysis, SAA classification pro-
cedures are as follows: 
 
? Step 1 Extract unidentified clauses in-
cluding SAA; 
? Step 2 Extract the keywords in SAAOL 
from the clause; 
? Step 3 Label the sentiment tendency of 
each sentiment word by using SAAOL; 
? Step 4 Discriminate the positive or nega-
tive meaning of a sentence in accordance 
with the different relationships. If there are 
no keywords in the sentence, perform step 
5; otherwise, discrimination is over. 
? Step 5 Extract the clauses next to SAA, 
and identify them according to Steps 2-4. 
If there are no extractable clauses, mark 
them as SAA which will be recognized. A 
is for the positives, and B for the negatives. 
4 Evaluation  
In disambiguating sentiment ambiguous adjec-
tives task of SemEval-2010, there are 2917 in-
stances in test data for 14 Chinese sentiment am-
biguous adjectives. According to the official re-
sult of the task, our micro average accuracy is 
0.942, which puts our system in the first position 
among the participants. 
Depending upon the answers from organizers 
of the task, we notice that errors occur mainly in 
the following cases. 
Firstly, there is a key word related to SAA, but 
it has no such key word in our SAAOL. 
For instance, 
???????? pf ????<head>?
</head>? | Why is the usage rate of pf so high 
in my computer?  
?pf???|The usage rate of pf? should be 
NSAA, but it does not exist in our SAAOL. 
Secondly, the sentence itself is too compli-
cated to be analyzed effectively in our system so 
far. 
Thirdly, as the imperfection of SAAOL itself, 
there are some inevitable mistakes in it.  
For instance, 
?????????????<head>?
</head> | The diver?s feat is extremely difficult. 
It is generally known that if the bigger the dif-
ficulty of the dive is, the better the diver?s per-
formance will be, both of which are of propor-
tional relation. However, generally speaking, the 
degree of difficulty is negative. For this reason, 
we made a mistake in such instance. 
5 Conclusions  
In this paper, we describe the approach taken by 
our systems which participated in the disambigu-
ating sentiment ambiguous adjectives task of 
SemEval-2010.  
We created a new word library named 
SAAOL. Through gathering words from relative 
dictionaries, HowNet, and other network re-
sources, we discriminated manually the positive 
and negative meaning, PSAA, NSAA, and in-
verse words in 50,000 Chinese words according 
to Richard Xiao?s Top 50,000 Chinese Word 
Frequency List. And then we extended the key-
words in SAAOL by applying Yang?s (2009) 
method and added synonymic and antonymous 
words in it. Eventually the new extended key-
words were proofread and revised manually. 
Based on SAAOL and structural analysis, we 
describe a procedure to disambiguate sentiment 
442
ambiguous adjectives. Evaluation results show 
that this approach achieves good performance in 
the task. 
 
References  
Qun Liu, JianSu Li. 2002. Calculation of semantic 
similarity of words based on the HowNet. The 
Third Chinese Lexical Semantics Workshop. 
Tai Bei. 
Jilin Shi, Yinggui Zhu. 2005. A Dictionary of Posi-
tive Words. Lexicographical Publishing House, 
Chengdu, Sichuan. 
Su Ge Wang, An Na Yang, De Yu Li. 2009. Research 
on sentence sentiment classification based on Chi-
nese sentiment word table. Computer Engineer-
ing and Applications, 45(24):153-155. 
Qian Wang, TingTing He, et al 2009. Research on 
dependency Tree-Based Chinese sentimental ele-
ments extraction, Advances of Computational 
Linguistics in China, 624-629. 
Janyce Wiebe, Theresa Wilson, et al 2004. Learning 
subjective language. Computational Linguistics, 
30(3): 277-308. 
Yunfang Wu, Peng Jin. SemEval-2010 task 18: Dis-
ambiguating sentiment ambiguous adjectives.  
Yu bing Yang, Xian wei Wu. Improved lexical se-
mantic tendentiousness recognition computing. 
2009. Computer Engineering and Applications, 
45(21): 91-93. 
 Ling Yang, Yinggui Zhu. 2005. A Dictionary of 
Negative Words. Lexicographical Publishing 
House, Chengdu, Sichuan. 
 
443
