Chinese Personal Name Disambiguation: 
 Technical Report of Natural Language Processing Lab of 
Xiamen University 
Xiang Zhu, Xiaodong Shi, Ningfeng Liu, YingMei Guo, Yidong Chen 
Natural Language Processing Lab, Department of Cognitive Science, Xiamen 
University , Xiamen 361005 
zhuxiang_sm@163.com,mandel@xmu.edu.cn,nffliu@gmail.com 
Abstract 
This report presents the work of our 
group in the Chinese personal name 
disambiguation workshop. We propose a 
system which uses a HAC algorithm to 
cluster the mentions referring to the same 
person with features extracted from the 
documents.  
1 Introduction 
Personal name disambiguation is actually a 
task to group those documents according to 
whether the given personal name appearing 
in that document refers to the same person in 
reality. It becomes an active research topic 
recently, and the evaluation campaign for the 
English personal name has been held twice. 
Chinese personal name disambiguation is 
thought to be more challenging due to the 
need for word segmentation which could 
bring errors into the subsequent processes. 
The most widely used method for personal 
name disambiguation is unsupervised 
clustering, we adopt a Hierarchical 
Agglomerative Clustering algorithm in our 
system, which is also the most popular 
clustering algorithm used by the teams of the 
second Web People Search Evaluation 
campaign. 
The remaining part of this report is 
organized as follows. Section 2 introduces 
the document preprocessing. Section 3 
describes the feature used for the clustering 
and the section 4 addresses the clustering 
algorithm. The workshop requests two 
different tests, a formal test, and a diagnosis 
test, we will discuss the difference between 
them with our system?s result in section 5. 
2 Document preprocessing  
Different from the document preprocessing 
for English, we have to use a segmentation 
tool and a part-of-speech tagger to do some 
preprocessing work. For example, without 
the segmenting process, the documents only 
contain the string ???????? could be 
clustered when the query name is ????, 
and we need the part-of-speech tagger to 
detect whether the Chinese word ??? ? 
stands for a personal name or a toponym. 
Our experiments prove that the system is 
sensitive to the tools? performance, the 
different result between the formal test and 
the diagnosis test also proves this.  
These tools are trained with the 90% data 
of The People's Daily published in 
Jan.1998,and tested with the others 10% data. 
The performances of the tools are? 
 Precision Recall F 
seg 97.746% 97.793% 97.769% 
tag 94.197% 94.242% 94.219% 
Table 1: the performances of the tools 
3 Extracted features 
As mentioned previously, our goal is to 
group those documents. In our approach, 
each document is represented by a vector of 
features extracted from it automatically. We 
use three kinds of token-based features:  
   1) Nouns occur around the ambiguous 
personal name. 
This kind of features is selected based on 
the idea that words around the ambiguous 
personal name are more relevant to it, and 
Nouns can provide a more diagnostic 
description of the person. We use a window 
to select the nouns. 
   2) Personal names (except the ambiguous 
personal name) and toponyms occur in the 
document. 
It is intuitive that the identical person 
often associated with the same personal 
names and toponyms. 
   3)  Words with high TFIDF value. In our 
final system, we use the ten words with 
highest TFIDF value. 
This kind of features can reflect the theme 
of an article, an identical person often be 
mentioned in articles with the same theme. 
Using these features simultaneously can 
alleviate the problem caused by spare data. 
The following table presents a quantitative 
analysis: 
used features highest F score on 
dev data 
Feature 1 83.76 
Feature 1,2 86.18 
Feature 1,3 84.83 
Feature 1,2,3 86.76 
Table 2:analysis of features 
These results are obtained by using a 
initial version of the preprocessing toools, 
and when we improve the performances of 
the tools, the highest F score increases from 
86.76 to 89.61 . 
The similarity between documents was 
measured with the cosine of feature vectors. 
When computing the similarity between two 
documents, we proposed a weighting method 
for the features as:  
If the token occurs in the document, the 
weight will be 1, else 0. 
We have tried another method that count 
the tokens? weight by its frequency, but 
experiments prove it is a less effective one, 
we can interpret it by this example: 
If a word "??" which refers to a person 
named " ? ? " appears twice in one 
document  while three times in another 
document, these two documents are very 
likely referring to the same person, but the 
latter weighting method decreases the 
similarity between them.   
4 Clustering algorithm 
A Hierarchical Agglomerative Clustering 
algorithm is adopted in our system, which 
determines the number of the cluster by a 
fixed similarity threshold learned from the 
train data. At each stage of the clustering, the 
two most similar clusters are merged into a 
new one, and other clusters? similarities with 
the new cluster is the larger one of their 
similarities with the two old clusters. 
We have tried some other clustering 
methods such as modified k-means 
clustering with the same features, but the 
performances are worse. 
A pre-judgment stage before clustering is 
useful in the experiment, which can be done 
as follow: 
If two documents have the same triple 
tokens ?token1 token2 PersonName? (token2 
is tagged as noun), then they are classified to 
one cluster. 
5 Result and discussion 
The difference between the formal test and 
the diagnosis test is that the ambiguous 
personal name in each document have been 
told in the latter, but you have to find it in the 
former by yourself. The method we adopt to 
detect the ambiguous personal name in the 
formal test is to find the token which is 
tagged as personal name while contains the 
query name. 
   Our system?s performances are:  
B-Cubed precision Recall F 
Formal 
test 
90.55 84.88 85.72 
Diagnosis 
test 
89.84 89.84 89.08 
Table 3: the performances in the B-Cubed 
criterion 
P-IP P IP F 
Formal 
test 
93.3 89.22 89.9 
Diagnosis 
test 
92.77 93.33 92.71 
Table 4: the performances in the P-IP 
criterion 
From the results we can know that 
Chinese personal name disambiguation can 
be affected by the segmentation tool and the 
part-of-speech tagger. 
References 
Y. Chen, S. Y. M. Lee, and C.-R. Huang. 
Polyuhk: A robust information extraction 
system for web personal names. In 2nd Web 
People Search Evaluation Workshop (WePS 
2009), 18th WWW Conference, 2009.  
J. Gong and D. Oard. Determine the entity 
number in hierarchical clustering for web 
personal name disambiguation. In 2nd Web 
People Search Evaluation Workshop (WePS 
2009), 18th WWW Conference, 2009. 
P. Kalmar and D. Freitag. Features for web 
person disambiguation. In 2nd Web People 
Search Evaluation Workshop (WePS 2009), 
18th WWW Conference, 2009. 
