Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Computational Linguistics (Coling 2010), pages 725?733,
Beijing, August 2010
TimeML Events Recognition and Classification:
Learning CRF Models with Semantic Roles
Hector Llorens, Estela Saquete, Borja Navarro-Colorado
Natural Language Processing Group
University of Alicante
{hllorens,stela,borja}@dlsi.ua.es
Abstract
This paper analyzes the contribution of se-
mantic roles to TimeML event recognition
and classification. For that purpose, an
approach using conditional random fields
with a variety of morphosyntactic features
plus semantic roles features is developed
and evaluated. Our system achieves an
F1 of 81.4% in recognition and a 64.2%
in classification. We demonstrate that the
application of semantic roles improves the
performance of the presented system, es-
pecially for nominal events.
1 Introduction
Event recognition and classification has been
pointed out to be very important to improve com-
plex natural language processing (NLP) applica-
tions such as automatic summarization (Daniel et
al., 2003) and question answering (QA) (Puste-
jovsky, 2002). Natural language (NL) texts often
describe sequences of events in a time line. In the
context of summarization, extracting such events
may aid in obtaining better summaries when these
have to be focused on specific happenings. In
the same manner, the access to such information
is crucial for QA systems attempting to address
questions about events.
The analysis of events as well as the classifica-
tion of the different forms they adopt in NL text is
not a new issue (Vendler, 1967). It relates not only
to linguistics but different scientific areas such as
philosophy, psychology, etc.
In NLP, different definitions of event can be
found regarding the target application.
On the one hand, in topic detection and track-
ing (Allan, 2002), event is defined as an instance
of a topic identified at document level describing
something that happen (e.g., ?wars?). The aim of
this task is to cluster documents on the same topic,
that is to say, the same event.
On the other hand, information extraction (IE)
provides finer granularity event definitions. IE
proposes standard schemes to annotate the indi-
vidual events within the scope of a document.
STAG scheme (2000) was aimed to identify events
in news and their relationship with points in a tem-
poral line. More recently, TimeML (Pustejovsky
et al, 2003a) presented a rich specification for an-
notating events in NL text extending the features
of the previous one.
This paper is focused on the TimeML view of
events. TimeML defines events as situations that
happen or occur, or elements describing states
or circumstances in which something obtains or
holds the truth. These events are generally ex-
pressed by tensed or untensed verbs, nominaliza-
tions, adjectives, predicative clauses or preposi-
tional phrases. TimeML guidelines define seven
classes of events:
? Reporting. Action of a person or organization declar-
ing or narrating an event (e.g., ?say?)
? Perception. Physical perception of another event (e.g.,
?see?, ?hear?)
? Aspectual. Aspectual predication of another event
(e.g., ?start?, ?continue?)
? I Action. Intensional action (e.g., ?try?)
? I State. Intensional state (e.g., ?feel?, ?hope?)
? State. Circumstance in which something holds the
truth (e.g., ?war?, ?in danger?)
? Occurrence. Events that describe things that happen
(e.g., ?erupt?, ?arrive?)
The following sentence shows an example of an
occurrence event and a state event.
It?s <EVENT class="OCCURRENCE">turning</EVENT>
out to be another <EVENT class="STATE">bad</EVENT>
financial week.
725
The automatic annotation of events has been
addressed with different data-driven approaches.
Current approaches are mainly based on mor-
phosyntactic information. Our hypothesis is that
semantic roles, as higher language level analysis
information, may be useful as additional feature
to improve the performance of such approaches.
Within this setting, the main objective of this
paper is to analyze (1) the contribution of seman-
tic roles, as additional feature, and (2) the influ-
ence of conditional random fields (CRFs), as ma-
chine learning (ML) technique, in the events auto-
matic recognition and classification task.
This paper is structured as follows. Firstly,
related work in the task is reviewed in Section
2. The next section provides a detailed descrip-
tion of our proposal to address event recognition
and classification. After that, Section 4 includes
an evaluation of the proposal, and a comparative
analysis of the results. Finally, conclusions are
drawn in Section 5.
2 Related Work
There is only one corpus available annotated with
TimeML events: TimeBank (Pustejovsky et al,
2003b). Hence, all the approaches regarding
TimeML events extraction have been evaluated
using this corpus.
EVITA system (Saur?? et al, 2005) recognizes
events by combining linguistic and statistical tech-
niques. The main features used to manually
encode event recognition rules are the follow-
ing: part-of-speech (PoS) tagging, lemmatizing,
chunking, lexical lookup and contextual pars-
ing. Furthermore, WordNet information com-
bined with Bayesian learned disambiguation was
used to identify nominal events. EVITA obtained
74.03% precision, 87.31% recall, and 80.12%
F?=1 in event recognition over TimeBank.
Boguraev and Ando (2005) present an evalu-
ation on automatic TimeML events annotation.
They set out the task as a classification prob-
lem and used a robust risk minimization (RRM)
classifier to solve it. The F?=1 results obtained
by a 5-fold cross validation over TimeBank were
78.6% for recognition and 61.3% for classifica-
tion. Moreover, they evaluated the impact of ap-
plying word-profiling techniques over their ap-
proach to exploit unannotated data. Using this ad-
ditional information, the F?=1 results improved to
80.3% and 64.0%. In this evaluation, neither pre-
cision nor recall were given.
STEP (Bethard and Martin, 2006) is a system
for TimeML event recognition and classification.
This approach uses a rich set of textual, morpho-
logical, dependency andWordNet hypernymy fea-
tures to build a Support Vector Machine (SVM)
model. The model was trained using 9/10 of the
TimeBank. The test, carried out using the remain-
ing 1/10 of the corpus, obtained a 82.0% preci-
sion, 70.6% recall and 75.9% F?=1 for recognition
and a 66.7% precision, 51.2% recall and 57.9%
F?=1 for classification.
Finally, March and Baldwin (2008) present an
evaluation on event recognition using a multi-
class classifier (BSVM). The main features used
to train the classifier are word and PoS context
window, stop words removal and feature general-
ization through words grouping (numbers, named
entities, etc.). The result for the best feature com-
bination in a 10-fold cross validation over Time-
Bank was 76.4% F?=1.
It is worth mentioning that there are two ver-
sions of the TimeBank corpus, 1.1 and 1.2. The
latest version is the current gold standard. Both
versions consist of the same documents1, mainly
news articles and transcribed broadcast news from
different domains. EVITA is the only reference
which used TimeBank 1.2 while the rest of re-
viewed references used TimeBank 1.1.
3 Our proposal: semantic roles
enhancing a CRF model
In this section, the motivation for our proposal,
and our specific approach are presented.
3.1 Motivation
The next two subsections describe the main
feature (semantic roles) and the ML algorithm
(CRFs) we selected to address event recognition
and classification; and the reasons why we think
they could be useful in that task.
1Except 3 documents removed in TimeBank 1.2
726
3.1.1 Semantic roles
Semantic role labeling (SRL) has achieved im-
portant results in the last years (Gildea and Juraf-
sky, 2002). For each predicate in a sentence, se-
mantic roles identify all constituents, determining
their arguments (agent, patient, etc.) and their ad-
juncts (locative, temporal, etc.). Currently, there
exist different role sets aimed to cover opposed re-
quirements. They range from more specific, such
as FrameNet (Baker et al, 1998), to more general
like PropBank (Palmer et al, 2005). Figure 1 il-
lustrates a semantic role labeled sentence.
Figure 1: Semantic roles example
Many research efforts into the application of se-
mantic roles demonstrated that this information is
useful for different NLP purposes (Melli et al,
2006). Focusing on TimeML, semantic roles have
been applied to temporal expressions recognition
(Llorens et al, 2009), and temporal links classi-
fication (Hage`ge and Tannier, 2007). However,
they have not been used to recognize and classify
TimeML events.
Semantic roles provide structural relations of
the predicates in which events may participate.
Beyond syntactic relations expressed by means of
the different types of phrases, semantic roles give
further information about semantic relations be-
tween the arguments of a predicate. Therefore,
as richer information, roles may better distinguish
tokens to be candidate events. In addition, differ-
ent semantic role settings may represent specific
event classes.
Example 1 shows four sentences annotated with
PropBank semantic roles (in square brackets) in
which the noun ?control? participates. In the sen-
tences 1 and 2, ?control? does not represent an
event, while in the sentences 3 and 4, it repre-
sents an state event. It can be seen that the noun
?control?, when it is contained by A1 role it may
represent an event. However, it is not an event
when contained by A0 or AM-MNR roles. The
analysis may also take into account the governing
verb. In the example, we could specify that ?con-
trol? represents an event when contained by A1
role of ?seek? and ?obtain? verbs; and the oppo-
site for the A0 role of ?emerge? and the AM-MNR
of ?had?.
(1) 1. ?[Control procedures A0] will emerge?
2. ?[Iraq A0] had [thousands of Americans A1] [under
its control AM-MNR]?
3. ?[Crane Co. A0] may obtain [control of Milton Roy
Corp. A1]?
4. ?[Pattison?s A0] decided to seek [control A1]?
Our hypothesis is that semantic roles, as ad-
ditional information, may help in the recogni-
tion and classification of events. The information
about the role of a token and the verb it depends
on, or the set of roles of the sentence, could be
useful for determining whether a token or a se-
quence of tokens is an event or not. Due to the
fact that roles represent high level information in
NL text, they are more independent from word to-
kens. Hence, roles may aid in learning more gen-
eral models that could improve the results of ap-
proaches focused on lower level information.
3.1.2 CRF probabilistic model
Conditional Random Fields is a popular and ef-
ficient ML technique for supervised sequence la-
beling (Lafferty et al, 2001). CRFs are undirected
graphical models, a special case of conditionally-
trained finite state machines. A key advantage of
CRFs is their flexibility to include a wide variety
of arbitrary, non-independent features of the input.
We see the task set out in this paper as a se-
quence labeling problem. Assume X is a random
variable over data sequences to be labeled, and Y
is a random variable over the corresponding label
sequences (hidden), being all Y components (Yi)
members of a finite label alphabet ?. X might
range over NL sentences and Y range over event
annotations of those sentences, with ? the set of
possible event IOB22 labels. The following ex-
ample illustrates the event recognition problem.
(2) X Y
was ?
another ? B-EVENT
bad ? ? = I-EVENT
week ? O
2IOB2 format: (B)egin, (I)nside, and (O)utside
727
The variables X and Y are jointly distributed
over both label and observation sequences. How-
ever, unlike Hidden Markov Models (generative)
in which p(X,Y ), CRFs (discriminative) con-
struct a conditional model from paired observa-
tion and label sequences: p(Y |X). Graphically,
CRFs are represented by undirected graphs, G =
(V,E) such that Y = (Yv), v  V , so that Y is
indexed by the vertices of G. Then (X,Y ) is a
conditional random field if Yv variables obey the
Markov property with respect to the graph when
conditioned on X:
P (Yv|X,Yw, v 6= w) = P (Yv|X,Yw, v ? w),
where v ? w means that Yv and Yw are connected
neighbors in G.
To extend the problem to event classification,
the alphabet ? must be extended with the event
classes (state, aspectual, etc.).
CRFs have been successfully applied to many
sequence labeling tasks (Sha and Pereira, 2003;
McCallum and Li, 2003).
From our point of view, the task addressed in
this paper is well suited for this ML technique.
Events may depend on structural properties of NL
sentences. Not only the word sequence, but mor-
phological, syntactic and semantic information is
related with the event structure (Tenny and Puste-
jovsky, 2000).
For example, sequences of verbs may represent
i action+occurrence or aspectual+occurrence
events (see Example 3).
(3) ?The president will <EVENT class="i action"> try
</EVENT> to <EVENT class="occurrence"> assist
</EVENT> to the <EVENT class="occurrence">
conference </EVENT>?
?Saddam will <EVENT class="aspectual"> begin
</EVENT> <EVENT class="occurrence"> withdrawing
</EVENT> troops from Iranian territory on Friday?
In addition, for instance, many state event in-
stances are represented by ?to be? plus a variable
quality (see Example 4).
(4) ?It is <EVENT class="occurrence"> turning
</EVENT> out to be another <EVENT class="state">
bad </EVENT> financial week.?
Given this analysis, our hypothesis is that CRFs
will be useful in the recognition of events in which
the sequential and structural properties are rele-
vant.
3.2 Approach description
This paper proposes CRFs as learning method
to infer an event recognition and classification
model. Our system includes CRF++ toolkit3 for
training and testing our approach. The learning
process was done using CRF-L2 algorithm and
hyper-parameter C=1.
The definition of the features is crucial for the
architecture of the system. The features used in
our approach are grouped in two feature sets. On
the one hand, general features, which comprise
morphosyntactic and ontological information. On
the other hand, semantic roles features, which are
the main focus of this paper.
The general features used to train our CRF
model are described regarding each language
analysis level.
? Morphological: The lemma and PoS con-
text, in a 5-window (-2,+2), was employed.
This basic linguistic feature showed good re-
sults in different NLP tasks, as well as in
event recognition and classification (March
and Baldwin, 2008). Tokenization, PoS and
lemmatization were obtained using TreeTag-
ger (Schmid, 1994).
? Syntactic: Different events are contained in
particular types of phrases and syntactic de-
pendencies. This feature tries to tackle this
by considering syntactic information. Char-
niak parser (Charniak and Johnson, 2005)
was used to obtain the syntactic tree.
? Lexical semantics: WordNet (Fellbaum,
1998) top ontology classes have been widely
used to represent word meaning at ontologi-
cal level, and demonstrated its worth in many
tasks. We obtained the four top classes for
each word.
The specific semantic roles features used to en-
hance the training framework of the CRF model
were developed considering PropBank role set.
PropBank was applied in our system due to the
high coverage it offers in contrast to FrameNet.
In order to get PropBank semantic roles, the CCG
3http://crfpp.sourceforge.net/
728
SRL tool (Punyakanok et al, 2004) was used for
labeling the corpus.
? Role: For each token, we considered the role
regarding the verb the token depends on. Se-
mantic roles information may be useful for
distinguish particular lemmas that are events
only when appearing under a precise role.
? Governing verb: The verb to which the cur-
rent token holds a particular role. This may
distinguish tokens appearing under the influ-
ence of different verbs.
? Role+verb combination: The previous two
features were combined to capture the rela-
tion between them. This introduces new clas-
sification information by distinguishing roles
depending on different verbs. The impor-
tance of this falls especially on the numbered
roles of PropBank (A0, A1, ...) holding dif-
ferent meanings when depending on different
verbs.
? Role configuration: This consists of the set
of roles depending on the verb the token de-
pends on. This may be particularly useful
for distinguish different sentence settings and
thus, whether a token denotes an event in a
particular sentence type.
The system consists of two main processes.
Firstly, given TimeML annotated text, it obtains
the defined features plus the IOB2 tags of the an-
notated events. Then, using this data the system
learns (trains) a model for event recognition and
a model for event classification. Secondly, given
plain text, it automatically gets the defined fea-
tures using the described tools. With this data,
the system applies the learned models to recog-
nize and classify TimeML events.
4 Evaluation
In this section, firstly, the corpus, criteria and mea-
sures are defined. Secondly, the results obtained
by our approach are presented. After that, the con-
tribution of our approach is measured through dif-
ferent experiments: (1) general contribution, (2)
semantic roles contribution, and (3) CRFs contri-
bution. And finally, our approach is compared to
the state of the art systems.
4.1 Corpus, criteria and measures
For the evaluation, the TimeBank 1.2 corpus
(7881 events) was used without modification. All
the results reported in this evaluation were ob-
tained using a 5-fold cross validation. The n-fold
train-test sets were built sorting the corpus files
alphabetically and then sequentially select each
set regarding the documents size. It is important
to highlight the latter because if the n-folds were
made regarding the number of documents, the sets
had not been homogeneous due to the differences
in TimeBank document sizes.
Only annotations matching the exact event span
were considered as correct in recognition and
classification, requiring also the class matching in
the second case.
The following measures were used to score the
evaluated approaches.
? Precision correct annotationstotal approach annotations
? Recall correct annotationtotal corpus annotations
? F?=1 2 ? precision ? recallprecision + recall
4.2 Our approach results
Table 1 shows the results obtained by our ap-
proach for both recognition and classification of
events. The last column (BF) indicates the best
F?=1 results obtained in the individual folds.
Precision Recall F?=1 BF
Recognition 83.43 79.54 81.40 82.43
Classification 68.84 60.15 64.20 69.68
Table 1: Our approach (CRF+Roles) results
The results show a high F?=1 score in both
recognition and classification, showing a good
balance between precision and recall. This indi-
cates that our approach is appropriate to address
this task.
Focusing on classification task, Table 2 shows
the detailed scores for each event class.
Looking at the specific class results, reporting
obtained the best results. This is due to the fact
that 80% of reporting events are represented by
lemmas ?say? and ?report? with PoS ?VBD? and
?VBZ?. Occurrence, perception, aspectual and
i state obtained classification results over 50%.
729
Class (instances) Precision Recall F?=1
Reporting (1021) 91.90 89.18 90.51
Perception (48) 65.93 66.83 66.37
Aspectual (258) 81.35 47.00 59.57
I Action (673) 51.40 29.30 37.32
I State (582) 68.44 43.70 53.34
State (1107) 50.01 24.84 33.19
Occurrence (4192) 66.73 72.07 69.29
Table 2: CRF+Roles 5-fold detailed results
Although perception and aspectual are quite re-
stricted to some lemmas, they obtained results be-
low reporting. This is due to the fact that Time-
Bank contains very few examples of these classes.
I action and state show poorer results. In the
case of the former, this is because some non-
intensional verbs (e.g., ?look?) appear in the cor-
pus as i action under certain conditions, for exam-
ple, when there is modality or these verbs appear
in conditional sentences. This suggests the neces-
sity of incorporating a word sense disambiguation
(WSD) technique. Our approach did not take into
account this information and thus the results are
lower for this event class. In the case of state, the
reasons for the low performance are the richness
of this event class by means of lemmas, PoS, and
phrases.
Finally, Table 3 shows the results of our ap-
proach by word class.
Precision Recall F?=1
Verb 91.56 92.15 91.33
Recognition Noun 72.67 48.26 58.42
Adj. 66.78 38.09 48.35
Verb 73.86 74.21 73.51
Classification Noun 62.73 41.33 49.53
Adj. 55.69 31.12 40.41
Table 3: CRF+Roles 5-fold word class results
It may be seen that the best results in both
recognition and classification are obtained in verb
events, followed by noun and adjective.
4.3 Contribution analysis
This subsection details the contribution of each as-
pect of our approach through three comparative
experiments.
First experiment: general contribution
This experiment measures the general contribu-
tion of our approach by comparing its results with
a baseline. TimeBank was analyzed to find a ba-
sic general rule to annotate events. The events are
mainly denoted by verbs, pertaining to occurrence
class. Hence, we propose a baseline that annotates
all verbs as occurrence events. Table 4 shows re-
sults obtained by this baseline for both recognition
and classification of events.
Prec. Recall F?=1
Our approach Recog. 83.43 79.54 81.40
Class. 68.84 60.15 64.20
Baseline Recog. 72.50 65.20 68.60
Class. 46.01 53.19 49.34
Table 4: Our approach vs Baseline results
Given the simplicity of the baseline, the results
obtained are quite high. However, our approach
F?=1 significantly improves baseline by 19% for
recognition and 30% for classification.
Second experiment: roles contribution
The main objective of this paper is to determine
the impact of semantic roles in this task. To quan-
tify it, a non-roles version of our approach was
evaluated. This version only uses the general fea-
tures described in section 3. Table 5 shows the
results obtained.
Precision Recall F?=1
Our approach Recog. 83.43 79.54 81.40
Class. 68.84 60.15 64.20
Non-roles Recog. 82.96 74.81 78.67
Class. 67.53 54.80 60.50
Table 5: Our approach vs Non-roles results
Comparing these results with the ones obtained
by our full featured approach, the application
of roles improved especially the recall. Specifi-
cally, recall improved by 6% and 10% for recog-
nition and classification respectively. The main
improvement was achieved by state and occur-
rence classes (60% of the total improvement), es-
pecially, nominal events of that classes that con-
centrate around the 70% of the total contribution.
To illustrate corpus examples that have been
improved by roles, Example 5 shows two sen-
tences containing state events that were correctly
tagged by the roles approach and missed by the
730
non-roles. In the examples, the TimeML events
annotation and below the semantic roles annota-
tion is reported.
(5) ?There are still few buyers and the mood is <EVENT
class=STATE>gloomy</EVENT>?
?[There A0] are [still AM-TMP] [few buyers A1] and [the
mood A0] is [gloomy AM-MNR]?
?Security is now <EVENT>better</EVENT>?
?[Security A0] is [now AM-TMP] [better AM-MNR]?
In these cases, AM-MNR role information lead to
a correct state event recognition.
Third experiment: CRFs contribution
In order to measure the CRFs contribution to this
task, an extra experiment was carried out. This
consisted of comparing, under the same setting,
CRFs with a popular learning technique: support
vector machines (SVM). As in Bethard and Mar-
tin (2006), YamCha4 software was used (parame-
ters: C=1 and polynomial degree=2).
Table 6 shows the results obtained by the SVM-
based approach in recognition and Table 7 reports
the improvement (CRFs over SVM) distribution
in the different word classes.
Precision Recall F?=1
Our approach (CRF) 83.43 79.54 81.40
SVM 80.00 75.10 77.40
Table 6: Our approach (CRF) vs SVM results
Verb Noun Adj. Adv. Prep.
General 22% 71% 5% 1% 1%
Table 7: CRF improvement distribution among
the word classes
These results verify that CRF improves SVM
F?=1 by 5% in this task. Furthermore, especially
noun events take advantage of using CRF.
Finally, Figure 2 illustrates the results of our ap-
proach over the described experiments.
4.4 Comparison with the state of the art
Most systems found in the literature are data-
driven approaches using morphosyntactic fea-
tures. SVM based approaches (Bethard and Mar-
tin, 2006; March and Baldwin, 2008) achieved,
4http://chasen.org/?taku/software/YamCha/
Figure 2: F?=1 Results
approximately, 76% and 58% F?=1 in event
recognition and classification respectively. Bogu-
raev and Ando (2005) used a robust risk mini-
mization classifier to address this task and ob-
tained 78.6% and 61% (without exploiting unan-
notated data). These results are very similar to the
ones obtained by our non-roles approach. This
suggests that using, apart from morphosyntactic
features, additional features based on semantic
roles could improve the approaches.
EVITA system (Saur?? et al, 2005) combines
linguistic and statistical techniques. On the one
hand, it consists of a set of manually encoded rules
based on morphosyntactic information. On the
other hand, it includes a Bayesian learned disam-
biguation module to identify nominal events. The
later was trained and tested using the whole cor-
pus, therefore, the results could be inflated by this
fact. For that reason, Bethard and Martin (2006)
presented an EVITA implementation (Sim-Evita)
to compare the results. Sim-Evita obtains an 73%
and 51% F?=1 in event recognition and classifica-
tion respectively. These results suggest that data-
driven improve rule-based approaches.
Only STEP evaluation showed detailed classifi-
cation results. We agree that state events are the
most complex and heterogeneous ones. Focus-
ing on such events, our F?=1 results (33%) im-
prove Bethard?s (25%) by 32%. Regarding the
results obtained for each word class. Bethard?s
results presented good performance on classify-
ing verb events (71%), but lower results in noun
events (34%). Our approach results for noun
events (49%) improve theirs by 44%. This sug-
gests that the application of semantic roles en-
ables our approach on making more general pre-
dictions. In this manner, our system may recog-
731
nize unseen nominal event instances as long as
they share, with the seen instances, some semantic
roles features.
5 Conclusions and Further Work
This paper presented an approach for the recogni-
tion and classification of TimeML events consist-
ing of a CRF model learned using semantic roles
as main feature. In addition to morphosyntactic
features, the model was enhanced including ex-
tra semantic information, semantic role labeling,
used for other applications with satisfactory re-
sults, but never employed before for this purpose.
Our proposal was evaluated using the gold stan-
dard corpus, TimeBank 1.2, and the results ob-
tained were analyzed and compared to measure
the impact of both semantic roles and CRFs in the
described task.
The obtained F?=1 results demonstrated that
semantic roles are useful to recognize (81.43%)
and classify (64.20%) TimeML events, improv-
ing the presented baseline by 19% for recogni-
tion and 30% for classification. Specifically, Se-
mantic roles employed as additional feature im-
proved the recall of the non-roles version by 6%
and 10% for recognition and classification respec-
tively. This indicates that roles features led to
more general models capable of better annotat-
ing unseen instances. The roles contribution was
more significant in state and occurrence classes of
noun events, concentrating around the 70% of the
improvement.
Furthermore, it was verified that CRFs achieve
higher results than models learned using other
ML techniques such as SVM (5% improvement),
contributing especially to nominal events. This
demonstrated that CRF models are appropriate to
face the task.
Finally, to the extent our results are compara-
ble to state of the art evaluations, ours outper-
form the F?=1 scores in both recognition and clas-
sification. Especially, our approach showed bet-
ter performance than related works in state (32%
improvement) and nominal events (44% improve-
ment). Hence, the extension of the current ap-
proaches with semantic roles features could bene-
fit their performance.
The main difficulties found in the task ad-
dressed in this paper are related to i action and
state events. In the former, we detected that
modality and the word senses are important and
must be treated to distinguish such events. In
the later, although they were improved by our
approach, state events are still the most com-
plex class of events due to their richness in con-
trast to the reduced size of the training data. We
agree with related literature that event classifi-
cation results are still below other tasks perfor-
mance, which indicates that this task is inherently
complex and more training data may lead to sig-
nificant improvements.
As further work we propose, firstly, improv-
ing the i action results by taking into account the
modality considering the AM-MOD role, and the
word senses using a WSD technique. Secondly,
the application of FrameNet role set (finer granu-
larity) to determine which kind of roles are better
to improve the current event annotation systems.
Acknowledgments
This paper has been supported by the Spanish
Government, projects TIN-2006-15265-C06-01, TIN-
2009-13391-C04-01 and PROMETEO/2009/119, where
Hector Llorens is funded (BES-2007-16256).
References
Allan, James. 2002. Topic Detection and Tracking:
Event-Based Information Organization. Kluwer
Academic Publishers, Norwell, MA, USA.
Baker, Collin F., Charles J. Fillmore, and John B.
Lowe. 1998. The Berkeley FrameNet Project. In
COLING-ACL, pages 86?90.
Bethard, Steven and James H. Martin. 2006. Identi-
fication of event mentions and their semantic class.
In EMNLP: Proceedings of the Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in NLP, pages 146?154. ACL.
Boguraev, Branimir and Rie Kubota Ando. 2005. Ef-
fective Use of TimeBank for TimeML Analysis. In
Annotating, Extracting and Reasoning about Time
and Events 05151.
Charniak, Eugene and Mark Johnson. 2005. Coarse-
to-fine n-best parsing and maxent discriminative
reranking. In 43rd Annual Meeting of the ACL.
Daniel, Naomi, Dragomir Radev, and Timothy Allison.
2003. Sub-event based multi-document summariza-
732
tion. In HLT-NAACL Text summarization workshop,
pages 9?16. ACL.
Fellbaum, Christiane. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic
Lexical Database (Language, Speech, and Commu-
nication). MIT Press.
Gildea, Daniel and Daniel Jurafsky. 2002. Automatic
labeling of semantic roles. Computational Linguis-
tics, 28(3):245?288.
Hage`ge, Caroline and Xavier Tannier. 2007. XRCE-
T: XIP temporal module for TempEval campaign.
In TempEval (SemEval), pages 492?495, Prague,
Czech Republic. ACL.
Lafferty, John D., Andrew McCallum, and Fernando
C. N. Pereira. 2001. Conditional random fields:
Probabilistic models for segmenting and labeling
sequence data. In Proceedings of the 18th ICML,
pages 282?289. Morgan Kaufmann.
Llorens, Hector, Borja Navarro, and Estela Saquete.
2009. Using Semantic Networks to Identify Tem-
poral Expressions from Semantic Roles. In VI
RANLP, pages 219?224.
March, Olivia and Timothy Baldwin. 2008. Auto-
matic event reference identification. In ALTA 2008,
pages 79?87, Australia.
McCallum, Andrew and Wei Li. 2003. Early results
for named entity recognition with conditional ran-
dom fields, feature induction and web-enhanced lex-
icons. In HLT-NAACL, pages 188?191.
Melli, G., Y. Liu Z. Shi, Y. Wang, and F. Popowich.
2006. Description of SQUASH, the SFU Question
Answering Summary Handler for the DUC-2006
Summarization Task. In DUC.
Palmer, Martha, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
2005. The Proposition Bank: An Annotated Corpus
of Semantic Roles. Computational Linguistics, 31.
Punyakanok, Vasin, Dan Roth, W. Yih, D. Zimak, and
Y. Tu. 2004. Semantic role labeling via generalized
inference over classifiers. InHLT-NAACL (CoNLL),
pages 130?133. ACL.
Pustejovsky, James, Jose? M. Castan?o, Robert Ingria,
Roser Saur??, Robert Gaizauskas, Andrea Setzer, and
Graham Katz. 2003a. TimeML: Robust Specifica-
tion of Event and Temporal Expressions in Text. In
IWCS-5.
Pustejovsky, James, Patrik Hanks, Roser Saur??, A. See,
Robert Gaizauskas, Andrea Setzer, Dragomir R.
Radev, Beth Sundheim, David Day, Lisa Ferro, and
M. Lazo. 2003b. The TIMEBANK Corpus. In Cor-
pus Linguistics, pages 647?656.
Pustejovsky, James. 2002. TERQAS: Time and Event
Recognition for Question Answering Systems. In
ARDA Workshop.
Saur??, Roser, Robert Knippen, Marc Verhagen, and
James Pustejovsky. 2005. Evita: A robust event
recognizer for qa systems. In HLT/EMNLP. ACL.
Schmid, Helmut. 1994. Probabilistic part-of-speech
tagging using decision trees. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on New Methods in Lan-
guage Processing, pages 44?49.
Setzer, Andrea and Robert Gaizauskas. 2000.
Annotating Events and Temporal Information in
Newswire Texts. In LREC 2000, pages 1287?1294.
Sha, Fei and Fernando C. N. Pereira. 2003. Shal-
low parsing with conditional random fields. InHLT-
NAACL.
Tenny, Carol and James Pustejovsky. 2000. Events as
Grammatical Objects. The Converging Perspectives
of Lexical Semantics and Syntax. CSLI.
Vendler, Zeno, 1967. Linguistics and philosophy,
chapter Verbs and times, pages 97?121. Cornell
University Press, Ithaca, NY.
733
Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, ACL 2010, pages 284?291,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
TIPSem (English and Spanish):
Evaluating CRFs and Semantic Roles in TempEval-2
Hector Llorens, Estela Saquete, Borja Navarro
University of Alicante
Alicante, Spain
{hllorens,stela,borja}@dlsi.ua.es
Abstract
This paper presents TIPSem, a system to
extract temporal information from natural
language texts for English and Spanish.
TIPSem, learns CRF models from training
data. Although the used features include
different language analysis levels, the ap-
proach is focused on semantic informa-
tion. For Spanish, TIPSem achieved the
best F1 score in all the tasks. For English,
it obtained the best F1 in tasks B (events)
and D (event-dct links); and was among
the best systems in the rest.
1 Introduction
The automatic treatment of time expressions,
events and their relations over natural language
text consists of making temporal elements ex-
plicit through a system that identifies and anno-
tates them following a standard scheme. This in-
formation is crucial for other natural language pro-
cessing (NLP) areas, such as summarization or
question answering. The relevance of temporal in-
formation has been reflected in specialized confer-
ences (Schilder et al, 2007) and evaluation forums
(Verhagen et al, 2007).
We present a system to tackle the six different
tasks related to multilingual temporal information
treatment proposed in TempEval-2. Particularly,
in this evaluation exercise, TimeML (Pustejovsky
et al, 2003) is adopted as temporal annotation
scheme. In this manner, the tasks require partic-
ipating systems to automatically annotate differ-
ent TimeML elements. Firstly, task A consists
of determining the extent of time expressions as
defined by the TimeML TIMEX3 tag, as well as
the attributes ?type? and ?value?. Secondly, task
B addresses the recognition and classification of
events as defined by TimeML EVENT tag. Fi-
nally, tasks C to F comprise the categorization of
different temporal links (TimeML LINKs). Figure
1 illustrates the TimeML elements in a sentence.
Figure 1: TimeML example
In the context of TempEval-2, we tackle all
tasks for English and Spanish with a data-driven
system. This consists of CRF models inferred
from lexical, syntactic and semantic information
of given training data.
Our main approach, TIPSem (Temporal
Information Processing based on Semantic in-
formation), is focused on semantic roles and
semantic networks. Furthermore, we present
a secondary approach, TIPSem-B (TIPSem-
Baseline), which contrary to the former does not
consider semantic information.
The main objectives of this paper are (1) evalu-
ating the performance of TIPSem comparing it to
other participating systems and (2) measuring the
contribution of semantic information to different
TempEval-2 tasks though the comparison between
our systems: TIPSem and TIPSem-B.
This paper is structured as follows. Our ap-
proach to address the TempEval-2 tasks is moti-
vated in Section 2 and described in Section 3. The
results obtained in the evaluation are shown and
analyzed in Section 4. Finally, conclusions are
drawn in Section 5.
2 Approach motivation
The next two subsections describe the two main
characteristics of our approach, CRFs and seman-
tic roles, and the reasons why we think they could
be useful to tackle TimeML annotation.
284
2.1 CRF probabilistic model
Conditional Random Fields is a popular and effi-
cient ML technique for supervised sequence label-
ing (Lafferty et al, 2001). In the recognition prob-
lem raised by TempEval-2 tasks A and B, assume
X is a random variable over data sequences to be
labeled, and Y is a random variable over the corre-
sponding label sequences, being all Y components
(Y
i
) members of a finite label alphabet ?. X might
range over the sentences and Y range over possi-
ble annotations of those sentences, with ? the set
of possible event IOB21 labels. The following ex-
ample illustrates the problem.
(1) X Y
That ? B-TIMEX3
was ? B-EVENT
another ? ? = I-TIMEX3
bad ? I-EVENT
week ? O
Then, CRFs construct a conditional model from
paired observations and label sequences: p(Y |X).
To extend the problem to classification, X is re-
placed with elements to be classified and ? is re-
placed with the possible classes, for instance, in
task A X = {TIMEX3 instances in text} and
? = {DATE, DURATION, SET, TIME}.
From our point of view, CRFs are well suited
to address TempEval-2 tasks. Firstly, TimeML
elements depend on structural properties of sen-
tences. Not only the word sequence, but mor-
phological, syntactic and semantic structure is re-
lated with them. Secondly, some TIMEX3 and
EVENT elements are denoted by sequences of
words, therefore the CRFs are very appropriate.
2.2 Semantic roles
Semantic role labeling (SRL) has achieved impor-
tant results in the last years (Gildea and Jurafsky,
2002; Moreda et al, 2007). For each predicate in a
sentence, semantic roles identify all constituents,
determining their arguments (agent, patient, etc.)
and their adjuncts (locative, temporal, etc.). Fig-
ure 2 illustrates a semantic role labeled sentence.
Figure 2: Semantic roles example
Semantic roles provide structural relations of
the predicates in which TimeML elements may
1IOB2 format: (B)egin, (I)nside, and (O)utside
participate. Beyond syntactic relations expressed
by means of the different types of phrases, seman-
tic roles give further information about semantic
relations between the arguments of a predicate.
Due to the fact that roles represent high level in-
formation, they are more independent from word
tokens. Hence, roles may aid in learning more
general models that could improve the results of
approaches focused on lower level information.
3 Our approach: TIPSem
As defined in previous section, this paper pro-
poses CRF as learning method to infer models to
face the TempEval-2 tasks. Specifically, CRF++
toolkit2 was used for training and testing our ap-
proach. The learning process was done using
the parameters: CRF-L2 algorithm and hyper-
parameter C=1.
In order to set out the approach architecture and
select the features for learning, we divided the
tasks proposed in the evaluation exercise into four
groups: recognition, classification, normalization
and link-categorization. Each group represents a
kind of problem to be resolved. Recognition prob-
lem is present in TIMEX3 and EVENT bounding
(tasks A and B). Classification problem appears in
TIMEX3 type and EVENT class attributes (tasks
A and B). Normalization arises in TIMEX3 value
attribute (task A). And link-categorization is ap-
plied to different kind of link relations (tasks C to
F). Each group uses a particular feature set to learn
an annotation model. The features of these sets are
grouped in two subsets. On the one hand, general
features, which are widely used in different NLP
fields and represent lower language analysis lev-
els. On the other hand, semantic features, which
are a novelty in the task and our main focus.
TIPSem system uses all the features defined
above. However, to measure the influence of se-
mantic information in temporal information treat-
ment, TIPSem-B system was implemented ex-
cluding the semantic features.
3.1 Recognition
In recognition, the features are obtained at token
level, that is to say, each token has its own set of
features.
Regarding each language analysis level, the
general features used to train our CRF model are:
2http://crfpp.sourceforge.net/
285
? Morphological: The lemma and part-of-
speech (PoS) context, in a 5-window (-2,+2),
was employed due to the good results it
achieved in other NLP tasks. Tokenization,
PoS and lemmatization were obtained using
TreeTagger (Schmid, 1994) for English, and
were got from AnCora (Taule? et al, 2008) for
Spanish.
? Syntactic: Different TimeML elements are
contained in particular types of phrases. This
feature tries to capture this fact by consider-
ing phrase level syntactic information. The
syntactic tree was obtained using Charniak
parser (Charniak and Johnson, 2005) for En-
glish, and AnCora for Spanish.
? Polarity, tense and aspect: These were ob-
tained using PoS and a set of handcrafted
rules (e.g., will+verb ? future).
The semantic level features used to enhance the
training framework of the CRF model are:
? Role: For each token, we considered the
role regarding the verb the token depends on.
To get semantic roles, CCG SRL tool (Pun-
yakanok et al, 2004) was used for English,
and AnCora for Spanish.
? Governing verb: The verb to which the cur-
rent token holds a particular role. This may
distinguish tokens appearing under the influ-
ence of different verbs.
? Role+verb combination: The previous two
features were combined to capture the rela-
tion between them. This introduces addi-
tional information by distinguishing roles de-
pending on different verbs. The importance
of this falls especially on the numbered roles
(A0, A1, etc.) meaning different things when
depending on different verbs.
? Role configuration: This feature is only
present in verb tokens heading a sentence or
sub-sentence. This consists of the set of roles
depending on the verb. This may be particu-
larly useful for distinguish different sentence
settings.
? Lexical semantics: WordNet (Fellbaum,
1998) top ontology classes have been widely
used to represent word meaning at ontologi-
cal level, and demonstrated its worth in many
tasks. TIPSem uses the top four classes
for each word. For Spanish, EuroWordNet
(Vossen, 1998) was used.
In this manner, given a list of tokens and its fea-
tures, the trained recognition model will assign to
each token one of the valid labels. For instance,
in the case of TIMEX3 recognition: B-TIMEX3,
I-TIMEX3 or O.
3.2 Classification
Classification features, used to get TIMEX3 types
and EVENT classes, are basically the same as the
ones used for recognition. However, the main
difference is that the features are not obtained
at token level but at TIMEX3 or EVENT level.
This implies that the word context is set to the
extent of each element (TIMEX3 and EVENT),
as well as all the features have as many values
as tokens comprises the element (e.g., element-
tokens=?next Monday?, PoS-feature=?JJ+NNP?).
Hence, following this description, the classifica-
tion models will assign to each element one of the
valid classes. For example, in the case of TIMEX3
typing: DATE, DURATION, SET or TIME.
3.3 Normalization
As in classification the features are obtained at
TIMEX3 level. Furthermore, word-spelled num-
bers contained in the TIMEX3 extent are trans-
lated to their numerical value (e.g., ?three days?
? ?3 days?).
Normalization process consists of two main
steps: (1) obtain the normalization type and (2)
apply the corresponding normalization rules.
The first step applies a CRF model that uses the
same features as the previous two plus TIMEX3
pattern. This new feature consists of the tokens
comprised by the TIMEX3 but replacing num-
bers by NUM, temporal units, such as years or
days, by TUNIT, months by MONTH, and week-
days by WEEKDAY. In other words, ?next Mon-
day? would result in ?next WEEKDAY? and ?June
1999? in ?MONTH NUM?. Once the model is
trained, for each new TIMEX3 it assigns a normal-
ization type. We define seven normalization types:
Period, ISO, ISO set, ISO function, present ref,
past ref and future ref.
The second step uses as input the output of the
first one. Each normalization type has its own nor-
malization rules.
286
? Period: Apply rules to convert period-like
TIMEX3 (?3 days?) into P NUM TUNIT
normalized period (?P3D?).
? ISO: Apply rules to convert any-format ex-
plicit date or time into a valid ISO 8601 stan-
dard date.
? ISO set: Apply rules to get a valid ISO-
like set from a TIMEX3 set (?monthly? ?
XXXX-XX).
? ISO function: This is the most complex
type. The system applies different functions
to get a valid ISO date or time in a valid gran-
ularity from DCT3 dates. Here, time direc-
tion indicators like ?next? or ?previous?, as
well as verbal tenses are used.
? Present ref, past ref and future ref: these
are already normalized.
3.4 Link-categorization
Each one of link-related tasks (C to F) has its own
link-categorization features. Nevertheless, all link
types share some of them.
? Task C: For categorizing the relation be-
tween an EVENT and a TIMEX3, the system
takes into account the following features:
? Heading preposition if the event or the
TIMEX3 are contained by a preposi-
tional phrase as in ?before the meeting?,
where ?meeting? is the event and ?be-
fore? the heading preposition.
? Syntactic relation of the event and the
TIMEX3 in the sentence. This feature
may be evaluated as: same sentence,
same subsentence or same phrase.
? Time position. If the event is not di-
rectly linked with the relation TIMEX3
but related to another TIMEX3, the time
position represents whether the event
is before, overlap or after the relation
TIMEX3.
? Interval. This feature is 0 unless there
appears some interval indicator token
near the TIMEX3. This is useful to
identify overlap-and-after and overlap-
and-before categories.
? TIMEX3 type.
3Date Creation Time
? Semantic roles if the event or the
TIMEX3 are contained by a tempo-
ral subordination (labeled with tempo-
ral role), for example, in ?after he left
home?, ?left? is the event and ?after? the
subordinating element (role feature).
? Task D: To determine the relationship be-
tween an event and the DCT, TIPSem uses
the same features as in task C except in-
terval. In addition, all the features related
to TIMEX3 are now related to the closer
TIMEX3 (if exists) in the event sentence. In
this manner, the time position is calculated by
comparing DCT and that TIMEX3.
? Task E: Relations between two main events
are categorized using only four features: the
tense and aspect of the two events, the syn-
tactic relation between them, and the time po-
sition, calculated using the closer TIMEX3 to
each event.
? Task F: For categorizing subordinated
events, TIPSem uses the subordinating
element of temporal roles containing each
event (if present), the heading preposition of
a prepositional phrases containing each event
(if present), as well as the tense and aspect.
To illustrate the system architecture, Figure 3
summarizes the strategies that TIPSem follows
to tackle the tasks proposed in the TempEval-2
framework.
Figure 3: TIPSem architecture
287
4 Evaluation
The test corpus consists of 17K words for English
and 10K words for Spanish, in which approxi-
mately a half part correspond to tasks A and B,
and the other half to tasks C, D, E and F. The per-
formance is measured using precision, recall and
F
?=1
metrics. A scoring script is provided. This
counts correct instances at token level for tasks A
and B, and at temporal link level for the rest.
Next subsections show the results obtained by
TIPSem system in each one of the TempEval-2
tasks for English (EN) and Spanish (ES). More-
over, a final subsection illustrates the F
?=1
results
in three comparative graphs. In tasks A and B, pre-
cision, recall and F
?=1
are given. In tasks C to E,
links tasks precision, recall and F
?=1
are the same
because our system does not consider the NONE
value. Hence, only F
?=1
is given. Tasks E and
F were not considered for Spanish in TempEval-
2 evaluation and thus Spanish is excluded from
those subsections.
For each task, scores in which our system ob-
tained the first place in the evaluation exercise are
in bold. Furthermore, in all cases the best score
obtained by participating systems is reported. Fi-
nally, the influence of semantic information in
terms of improvement is indicated and analyzed
through the comparison with TIPSem-B system,
which exclude the features related with semantics.
4.1 Task A: TIMEX3
Table 1 shows the results obtained by our ap-
proaches in TIMEX3 recognition, typing and ISO
8601 normalization (value).
System lang Prec. Rec. F
?=1
type value
TIPSem EN 0.92 0.80 0.85 0.92 0.65
TIPSem ES 0.95 0.87 0.91 0.91 0.78
TIPSem-B EN 0.88 0.60 0.71 0.88 0.59
TIPSem-B ES 0.97 0.81 0.88 0.99 0.75
Table 1: Task A - English and Spanish
As shown in results, TIPSem obtains the best re-
sults for Spanish in all measures except for ?value?
attribute, in which the best system obtained a 0.83.
Another system obtained the same recall (0.87)
but a lower precision (0.90), and thus a F
?=1
of
(0.88) below TIPSem score (0.91). For English,
our main approach obtained the best precision.
However, another system obtained the best recall
(0.91). The best F
?=1
was 0.86. Regarding type
attribute, TIPSem obtained values closer to best
system (0.98). Finally, in normalization, which
is the only attribute that is not annotated by a
purely data-driven process, best system surpassed
TIPSem in 0.20.
These results indicate that CRFs represent an
appropriate ML technique to learn models for an-
notating TIMEX3. Furthermore, they show that
normalization process used by TIPSem could be
improved using other techniques.
Specifically, the usage of semantic information
improved the capability of learned models to gen-
eralize rules. For instance in time expressions, if
an unseen instance is contained by a temporal role
is a clear candidate to be a time expression. Hence,
they improve system recall (33% EN, 7% ES).
4.2 Task B: EVENT
Table 2 shows the results obtained by our ap-
proaches in recognizing and classifying events.
System lang Prec. Recall F
?=1
class
TIPSem EN 0.81 0.86 0.83 0.79
TIPSem ES 0.90 0.86 0.88 0.66
TIPSem-B EN 0.83 0.81 0.82 0.79
TIPSem-B ES 0.92 0.85 0.88 0.66
Table 2: Task B - English and Spanish
In this tasks, TIPSem obtained the best re-
sults in TempEval-2 for Spanish and English in
both recognition and classification. Although for
English another system achieved the best recall
(0.88), it obtained a lower precision (0.55); and
thus a 0.68 F
?=1
. This indicates that our approach
obtains the best F
?=1
(0.83) with a well-balanced
precision and recall.
Again, the usage of semantic information im-
proves the capability of learned models to gen-
eralize, which improves the recall (6% EN, 1%
ES). For events, the improvement is lower than for
TIMEX3 because, contrary to TIMEX3, they are
not clearly defined by specific roles. In this case,
features like role configuration, semantic classes,
or role-governing verb are more useful.
Other attributes present in events such as polar-
ity, mood and tense obtained values of about 90%.
However, to get the values for these attributes the
system applies a set of handcrafted rules and then
the results are not relevant for our approach.
4.3 Task C: LINKS - Events and TIMEXs
Table 3 shows the results obtained by our ap-
proaches in categorizing EVENT-TIMEX3 links.
288
System lang F
?=1
TIPSem EN 0.55
TIPSem ES 0.81
TIPSem-B EN 0.54
TIPSem-B ES 0.81
Table 3: Task C - English and Spanish
TIPSem was the only system participating in
this task for Spanish. Nevertheless, 0.81 is a high
score comparing it to English best score (0.63).
Our system, for English, is 8 points below top
scored system.
In this task, the application of semantic roles in-
troduced an improvement of 2% in F
?=1
.
4.4 Task D: LINKS - Events and DCTs
Table 4 shows the results obtained by our ap-
proaches in categorizing events with respect to the
creation time of a document.
System lang F
?=1
TIPSem EN 0.82
TIPSem ES 0.59
TIPSem-B EN 0.81
TIPSem-B ES 0.59
Table 4: Task D - English and Spanish
Task D is successfully covered by TIPSem ob-
taining the best results in the evaluation.
It seems that the relation of events with doc-
ument creation time strongly depends on tense
and aspect, as well as the event position in time
with respect to DCT when defined by neighboring
TIMEX3.
Furthermore, the learned CRF models take ad-
vantage of using temporal semantic roles informa-
tion. Specifically, the usefulness of semantic roles
in this task was quantified to 2%.
4.5 Task E: LINKS - Main events
Table 5 shows the results obtained by our ap-
proaches in categorizing main events relations in
text.
System lang F
?=1
TIPSem EN 0.55
TIPSem-B EN 0.55
Table 5: Task E - English
In this task, our system obtains the second
place. However, the top scored achieved a 0.56.
Again, the tense and aspect features, as well as
the events position in time resulted useful to tackle
this task. In this case, semantic roles information
is not used so TIPSem and TIPSem-B are equiva-
lent.
4.6 Task F: LINKS - Subordinated events
Table 6 shows the results obtained by our ap-
proaches in categorizing events relations with the
events they syntactically govern.
System lang F
?=1
TIPSem EN 0.59
TIPSem-B EN 0.60
Table 6: Task F - English
Categorizing subordinated events TIPSem ob-
tained the second place. Best score was 0.66. In
this task, the application of roles did not help and
decreased the score in one point. The cause may
be that for this task roles are not relevant but noisy.
In this case, some extra information extending se-
mantic roles is needed to turn them into a useful
feature.
4.7 Comparative graphs
This subsection presents the TIPSem F
?=1
re-
sults in three graphs. Figure 4 illustrates the re-
sults for English indicating the higher and lower
scores achieved by TempEval-2 participating sys-
tems. Figure 5 shows the same for Spanish but,
due to the fact that TIPSem was the only partici-
pant in tasks B, C and D, the graph includes En-
glish min. and max. scores as indirect assessment.
Finally, Figure 6, compares the TIPSem results for
English and Spanish.
Figure 4: English F
?=1
comparative
Figure 4 shows how TIPSem achieved, in gen-
eral, a high performance for English.
289
Figure 5: Spanish F
?=1
indirect assessment
For Spanish we can only report indirect assess-
ment comparing the results to English scores. It
can be seen that the quality of the results is similar
for tasks A and B, but seems to be inverted in tasks
C and D.
Figure 6: TIPSem EN - ES F
?=1
comparative
Finally, in this graph comparing TIPSem re-
sults, we observe that our approach achieved simi-
lar performance for both languages in tasks A and
B. This indicates that for this tasks, the approach is
valid for both languages. However, as in the previ-
ous graph, it seems that for English TIPSem per-
forms worse in task C and better in task D while
for Spanish it does right the opposite.
The train and test corpora were reviewed to an-
alyze this fact. On the one hand, the reason for
the high performance in task C for Spanish was
the high amount of ?overlap? instances in both
corpora. This trained the CRF model for catego-
rizing event-timex links as ?overlap? in most of
cases. On the other hand, the cause of the Spanish
low performance in task D is ?vague? links. The
features defined in TIPSem cannot distinguish be-
tween ?overlap? and ?vague?. Due to the fact that
?vague? links are quite popular in Spanish test set,
the results decreased. This did not affect to En-
glish results because of the spareness of ?vague?
links.
5 Conclusions and Further Work
This paper presented a system for automatically
treating temporal information of natural language
texts as required in the TempEval-2 evaluation ex-
ercise, in particular, following TimeML specifica-
tions.
Our system, TIPSem, is a data-driven approach
and consists of different CRF models learned us-
ing semantic information as main feature. CRFs
were used taking into account that data-driven ap-
proaches have obtained good results in many NLP
tasks, and due to their appropriateness in sequence
labeling problems and problems in which struc-
tural properties are relevant, as those proposed in
TempEval-2. Furthermore, the models were en-
hanced using semantic information. Roles have
been applied in other NLP fields with successful
results, but never employed before for this pur-
pose. With these two main characteristics, we de-
signed a complete learning environment selecting,
in addition to roles, different language analysis
level properties as features to train the models.
The results obtained for English and Spanish
in the evaluation exercise were satisfactory and
well-balanced between precision and recall. For
Spanish, TIPSem achieved the best F
?=1
in all
tasks. For English, it obtained the best F
?=1
in
event recognition and classification (task B), and
event and document creation time links catego-
rization (task D). Furthermore, in general, all the
results of TIPSem were very competitive and were
among the top scored systems. This verifies that
our approach is appropriate to address TempEval-
2 tasks.
Regarding multilinguality, the approach was
proven to be valid for different languages (English
and Spanish). This was also verified for Catalan
language by earlier versions of TIPSem (Llorens
et al, 2009). In fact, the data-driven part of the
system could be considered language independent
because it has been applied to different languages
and could be applied to other languages without
adaptation, provided that there are tools available
to get the morphosyntactic and semantic informa-
tion required by the approach. It has to be high-
290
lighted that to apply TIPSem-B only morphosyn-
tactic information is required. Only the normaliza-
tion of time expressions is a language dependent
process in our system and requires the construc-
tion of a set of rules for each target language.
The contribution of semantic information to
temporal information treatment was more signif-
icant in recall and the improvement was concen-
trated in tasks A and B (approx. 12% recall im-
provement). Although, TIPSem-B achieved lower
results they are high enough to confirm that that
most of temporal elements strongly depends on
lexical and morphosyntactic information.
The main errors and difficulties of our approach
in this evaluation exercise are related to TIMEX3
normalization (value attribute). A pure ML ap-
proach for solving this problem is not trivial, at
least, using our approach philosophy. The treat-
ment of normalization functions is an inherently
complex task and requires many training data to be
automatically learned. This required us to include
in the system some handcrafted rules to enable the
system for this task.
As further work we propose improving the
TIMEX3 normalization by replacing handcrafted
normalization rules with machine learned ones
by combining statistic techniques and multilingual
temporal knowledge resources (ontologies). Fur-
thermore, link-categorization will be analyzed in
more detail in order to include more features to im-
prove the models. Finally, the suggested language
independence of the approach will be tested using
TempEval-2 available data for other languages.
Acknowledgments
This paper has been supported by the Spanish
Government, projects TIN-2006-15265-C06-01, TIN-
2009-13391-C04-01 and PROMETEO/2009/119, where
Hector Llorens is funded under a FPI grant (BES-
2007-16256).
References
Eugene Charniak and Mark Johnson. 2005. Coarse-
to-fine n-best parsing and maxent discriminative
reranking. In 43rd Annual Meeting of the ACL.
Christiane Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic
Lexical Database (Language, Speech, and Commu-
nication). MIT Press.
Daniel Gildea and Daniel Jurafsky. 2002. Automatic
labeling of semantic roles. Computational Linguis-
tics, 28(3):245?288.
John D. Lafferty, Andrew McCallum, and Fernando
C. N. Pereira. 2001. Conditional random fields:
Probabilistic models for segmenting and labeling se-
quence data. In Proceedings of the 18th ICML,
pages 282?289. Morgan Kaufmann.
Hector Llorens, Borja Navarro, and Estela Saquete.
2009. Deteccio?n de Expresiones Temporales
TimeML en Catala?n mediante Roles Sema?nticos y
Redes Sema?nticas. In Procesamiento del Lenguaje
Natural (SEPLN), number 43, pages 13?21.
Paloma Moreda, Borja Navarro, and Manuel Palomar.
2007. Corpus-based semantic role approach in in-
formation retrieval. Data Knowledge Engineering,
61(3):467?483.
Vasin Punyakanok, Dan Roth, W. Yih, D. Zimak, and
Y. Tu. 2004. Semantic role labeling via generalized
inference over classifiers. In HLT-NAACL (CoNLL),
pages 130?133. ACL.
James Pustejovsky, Jose? M. Castan?o, Robert Ingria,
Roser Saur??, Robert Gaizauskas, Andrea Setzer, and
Graham Katz. 2003. TimeML: Robust Specifica-
tion of Event and Temporal Expressions in Text. In
IWCS-5.
Frank Schilder, Graham Katz, and James Pustejovsky.
2007. Annotating, Extracting and Reasoning About
Time and Events (Dagstuhl 2005), volume 4795 of
LNCS. Springer.
Helmut Schmid. 1994. Probabilistic part-of-speech
tagging using decision trees. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on New Methods in Lan-
guage Processing, pages 44?49.
Mariona Taule?, M. Antonia Mart??, and Marta Recasens.
2008. AnCora: Multilevel Annotated Corpora for
Catalan and Spanish. In ELRA, editor, LREC, Mar-
rakech, Morocco.
Marc Verhagen, Robert Gaizauskas, Mark Hepple,
Frank Schilder, Graham Katz, and James Puste-
jovsky. 2007. Semeval-2007 task 15: Tempeval
temporal relation identification. In Proceedings of
the 4th International Workshop on Semantic Evalu-
ations, pages 75?80, Prague. ACL.
Piek Vossen. 1998. EuroWordNet: a multilingual
database with lexical semantic networks. Kluwer
Academic Publishers, MA, USA.
291
Second Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), Volume 2: Seventh International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluation (SemEval 2013), pages 1?9, Atlanta, Georgia, June 14-15, 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
SemEval-2013 Task 1: TEMPEVAL-3: Evaluating Time Expressions,
Events, and Temporal Relations
Naushad UzZaman?1, Hector Llorens?1, Leon Derczynski?,
Marc Verhagen?, James Allen? and James Pustejovsky?
?: University of Rochester, USA; ?: University of Alicante, Spain
?: Department of Computer Science, University of Sheffield, UK
?: Computer Science Department, Brandeis University, USA
1: Nuance Communications
naushad@cs.rochester.edu, hllorens@dlsi.ua.es, leon@dcs.shef.ac.uk
Abstract
Within the SemEval-2013 evaluation exercise, the
TempEval-3 shared task aims to advance research
on temporal information processing. It follows on
from TempEval-1 and -2, with: a three-part struc-
ture covering temporal expression, event, and tem-
poral relation extraction; a larger dataset; and new
single measures to rank systems ? in each task and in
general. In this paper, we describe the participants?
approaches, results, and the observations from the
results, which may guide future research in this area.
1 Introduction
The TempEval task (Verhagen et al, 2009) was added as a
new task in SemEval-2007. The ultimate aim of research
in this area is the automatic identification of temporal ex-
pressions (timexes), events, and temporal relations within
a text as specified in TimeML annotation (Pustejovsky et
al., 2005). However, since addressing this aim in a first
evaluation challenge was deemed too difficult a staged
approach was suggested.
TempEval (henceforth TempEval-1) was an initial
evaluation exercise focusing only on the categorization of
temporal relations and only in English. It included three
relation types: event-timex, event-dct,1 and relations be-
tween main events in consecutive sentences.
TempEval-2 (Verhagen et al, 2010) extended
TempEval-1, growing into a multilingual task, and con-
sisting of six subtasks rather than three. This included
event and timex extraction, as well as the three relation
tasks from TempEval-1, with the addition of a relation
task where one event subordinates another.
TempEval-3 (UzZaman et al, 2012b) is a follow-up
to TempEval 1 and 2, covering English and Spanish.
TempEval-3 is different from its predecessors in a few
respects:
1DCT stands for document creation time
Size of the corpus: the dataset used has about 600K
word silver standard data and about 100K word gold stan-
dard data for training, compared to around 50K word cor-
pus used in TempEval 1 and 2. Temporal annotation is
a time-consuming task for humans, which has limited
the size of annotated data in previous TempEval exer-
cises. Current systems, however, are performing close to
the inter-annotator reliability, which suggests that larger
corpora could be built from automatically annotated data
with minor human reviews. We want to explore whether
there is value in adding a large automatically created sil-
ver standard to a hand-crafted gold standard.
End-to-end temporal relation processing task: the
temporal relation classification tasks are performed from
raw text, i.e. participants need to extract their own events
and temporal expressions first, determine which ones to
link and then obtain the relation types. In previous Tem-
pEvals, gold timexes, events, and relations (without cate-
gory) were given to participants.
Temporal relation types: the full set of temporal re-
lations in TimeML are used, rather than the reduced set
used in earlier TempEvals.
Platinum test set: A new test dataset has been devel-
oped for this edition. It is based on manual annotations
by experts over new text (unseen in previous editions).
Evaluation: we report a temporal awareness score for
evaluating temporal relations, which helps to rank sys-
tems with a single score.
2 Data
In TempEval-3, we reviewed and corrected existing cor-
pora, and also released new corpora.
2.1 Reviewing Existing Corpora
We considered the existing TimeBank (Pustejovsky et al,
2003) and AQUAINT2 data for TempEval-3. TempEval-
2See http://timeml.org/site/timebank/timebank.html
1
Entity Agreement
Event 0.87
Event class 0.92
Timex 0.87
Timex value 0.88
Table 1: Platinum corpus entity inter-annotator agreement.
Corpus # of words Standard
TimeBank 61,418 Gold
AQUAINT 33,973 Gold
TempEval-3 Silver 666,309 Silver
TempEval-3 Eval 6,375 Platinum
TimeBank-ES Train 57,977 Gold
TimeBank-ES Eval 9,833 Gold
Table 2: Corpora used in TempEval-3.
1 and TempEval-2 had the same documents as TimeBank
but different relation types and events.
For both TimeBank and AQUAINT, we, (i) cleaned up
the formatting for all files making it easy to review and
read, (ii) made all files XML and TimeML schema com-
patible, (iii) added some missing events and temporal ex-
pressions. In TimeBank, we, (i) borrowed the events from
the TempEval-2 corpus and (ii) borrowed the temporal re-
lations from TimeBank corpus, which contains a full set
of temporal relations. In AQUAINT, we added the tem-
poral relations between event and DCT (document cre-
ation time), which was missing for many documents in
that corpus. These existing corpora comprised the high-
quality component of our training set.
2.2 New Corpora
We created two new datasets: a small, manually-
annotated set over new text (platinum); and a machine-
annotated, automatically-merged dataset based on out-
puts of multiple systems (silver).
The TempEval-3 platinum evaluation corpus was anno-
tated/reviewed by the organizers, who are experts in the
area. This process used the TimeML Annotation Guide-
lines v1.2.1 (Saur?? et al, 2006). Every file was anno-
tated independently by at least two expert annotators, and
a third was dedicated to adjudicating between annotations
and merging the final result. Some annotators based their
work on TIPSem annotation suggestions (Llorens et al,
2012b). The GATE Annotation Diff tool was used for
merging (Cunningham et al, 2013), a custom TimeML
validator ensured integrity,3 and CAVaT (Derczynski and
Gaizauskas, 2010) was used to determine various modes
of TimeML mis-annotation and inconsistency that are in-
expressable via XML schema. Post-exercise, that corpus
(TempEval-3 Platinum with around 6K tokens, on com-
pletely new text) is released for the community to review
3See https://github.com/hllorens/TimeML-validator
and improve.4 Inter-annotator agreement (measured with
F1, as per Hripcsak and Rothschild (2005)) and the num-
ber of annotation passes per document were higher than
in existing TimeML corpora, hence the name. Details are
given in Table 1. Attribute value scores are given based
on the agreed entity set. These are for exact matches.
The TempEval-3 silver evaluation corpus is a 600K
word corpus collected from Gigaword (Parker et
al., 2011). We automatically annotated this corpus
by TIPSem, TIPSem-B (Llorens et al, 2013) and
TRIOS (UzZaman and Allen, 2010). These systems were
retrained on the corrected TimeBank and AQUAINT cor-
pus to generate the original TimeML temporal relation
set. We then merged these three state-of-the-art sys-
tem outputs using our merging algorithm (Llorens et al,
2012a). In our selected merged configuration all entities
and relations suggested by the best system (TIPSem) are
added in the merged output. Suggestions from other sys-
tems (TRIOS and TIPSem-B) are added in the merged
output, only if they are also supported by another system.
The weights considered in our configuration are: TIPSem
0.36, TIPSemB 0.32, TRIOS 0.32.
For Spanish, Spanish TimeBank 1.0 corpus (Saur?? and
Badia, 2012) wads used. It is the same corpus that was
used in TempEval-2, with a major review of entity anno-
tation and an important improvement regarding temporal
relation annotation. For TempEval-3, we converted ES-
TimeBank link types to the TimeML standard types based
on Allen?s temporal relations (Allen, 1983).
Table 2 summarizes our released corpora, measured
with PTB-scheme tokens as words. All data produced
was annotated using a well-defined subset of TimeML,
designed for easy processing, and for reduced ambigu-
ity compared to standard TimeML. Participants were en-
couraged to validate their submissions using a purpose-
built tool to ensure that submitted runs were legible. We
called this standard TimeML-strict, and release it sepa-
rately (Derczynski et al, 2013).
3 Tasks
The three main tasks proposed for TempEval-3 focus on
TimeML entities and relations:
3.1 Task A (Timex extraction and normalization)
Determine the extent of the timexes in a text as defined
by the TimeML TIMEX3 tag. In addition, determine the
value of the features TYPE and VALUE. The possible
values of TYPE are time, date, duration, and set; VALUE
is a normalized value as defined by the TIMEX3 standard.
4In the ACL data and code repository, reference ADCR2013T001.
See also https://bitbucket.org/leondz/te3-platinum
2
3.2 Task B (Event extraction and classification)
Determine the extent of the events in a text as defined by
the TimeML EVENT tag and the appropriate CLASS.
3.3 Task ABC (Annotating temporal relations)
This is the ultimate task for evaluating an end-to-end sys-
tem that goes from raw text to TimeML annotation of
entities and links. It entails performing tasks A and B.
From raw text extract the temporal entities (events and
timexes), identify the pairs of temporal entities that have
a temporal link (TLINK) and classify the temporal re-
lation between them. Possible pair of entities that can
have a temporal link are: (i) main events of consecu-
tive sentences, (ii) pairs of events in the same sentence,
(iii) event and timex in the same sentence and (iv) event
and document creation time. In TempEval-3, TimeML
relation are used, i.e.: BEFORE, AFTER, INCLUDES, IS-
INCLUDED, DURING, SIMULTANEOUS, IMMEDIATELY
AFTER, IMMEDIATELY BEFORE, IDENTITY, BEGINS,
ENDS, BEGUN-BY and ENDED-BY.
In addition to this main tasks, we also include two extra
temporal relation tasks:
Task C (Annotating relations given gold entities)
Given the gold entities, identify the pairs of entities that
have a temporal link (TLINK) and classify the temporal
relations between them.
Task C relation only (Annotating relations given gold
entities and related pairs) Given the temporal entities
and the pair of entities that have a temporal link, classify
the temporal relation between them.
4 Evaluation Metrics
The metrics used to evaluate the participants are:
4.1 Temporal Entity Extraction
To evaluate temporal entities (events and temporal ex-
pressions), we need to evaluate, (i) How many entities are
correctly identified, (ii) If the extents for the entities are
correctly identified, and (iii) How many entity attributes
are correctly identified. We use classical precision and
recall for recognition.
How many entities are correctly identified: We evalu-
ate our entities using the entity-based evaluation with the
equations below.
Precision = |Sysentity?Refentity||Sysentity|
Recall = |Sysentity?Refentity||Refentity|
where, Sysentity contains the entities extracted by the
system that we want to evaluate, and Refentity contains
the entities from the reference annotation that are being
compared.
If the extents for the entities are correctly identified:
We compare our entities with both strict match and re-
laxed match. When there is a exact match between the
system entity and gold entity then we call it strict match,
e.g. ?sunday morning? vs ?sunday morning?. When there
is a overlap between the system entity and gold entity
then we call it relaxed match, e.g. ?sunday? vs ?sunday
morning?. When there is a relaxed match, we compare
the attribute values.
How many entity attributes are correctly identified: We
evaluate our entity attributes using the attribute F1-score,
which captures how well the system identified both the
entity and attribute (attr) together.
Attribute Recall =
|{?x | x?(Sysentity?Refentity)?Sysattr(x)==Refattr(x)}|
|Refentity|
Attribute Precision =
|{?x | x?(Sysentity?Refentity)?Sysattr(x)==Refattr(x)}|
|Sysentity|
Attribute F1-score = 2?p?rp+r
Attribute (Attr) accuracy, precision and recall can be
calculated as well from the above information.
Attr Accuracy = Attr F1 / Entity Extraction F1
Attr R = Attr Accuracy * Entity R
Attr P = Attr Accuracy * Entity P
4.2 Temporal Relation Processing
To evaluate relations, we use the evaluation metric pre-
sented by UzZaman and Allen (2011).5 This metric cap-
tures the temporal awareness of an annotation in terms
of precision, recall and F1 score. Temporal awareness
is defined as the performance of an annotation as identi-
fying and categorizing temporal relations, which implies
the correct recognition and classification of the tempo-
ral entities involved in the relations. Unlike TempEval-
2 relation score, where only categorization is evaluated
for relations, this metric evaluates how well pairs of enti-
ties are identified, how well the relations are categorized,
and how well the events and temporal expressions are ex-
tracted.
Precision =
|Sys?relation?Ref
+
relation|
|Sys?relation|
Recall =
|Ref?relation?Sys
+
relation|
|Ref?relation|
where, G+ is the closure of graph G and G? is the
reduced of graph G, where redundant relations are re-
moved.6
We calculate the Precision by checking the number
of reduced system relations (Sys?relation) that can be veri-
fied from the reference annotation temporal closure graph
(Ref+relation), out of number of temporal relations in the
5We used a minor variation of the formula, where we consider the
reduced graph instead of all system or reference relations. Details can
be found in Chapter 6 of UzZaman (2012).
6A relation is redundant if it can be inferred through other relations.
3
strict value
F1 P R F1 F1
HeidelTime-t 90.30 93.08 87.68 81.34 77.61
HeidelTime-bf 87.31 90.00 84.78 78.36 72.39
HeidelTime-1.2 86.99 89.31 84.78 78.07 72.12
NavyTime-1,2 90.32 89.36 91.30 79.57 70.97
ManTIME-4 89.66 95.12 84.78 74.33 68.97
ManTIME-6 87.55 98.20 78.99 73.09 68.27
ManTIME-3 87.06 94.87 80.43 69.80 67.45
SUTime 90.32 89.36 91.30 79.57 67.38
ManTIME-1 87.20 97.32 78.99 70.40 67.20
ManTIME-5 87.20 97.32 78.99 69.60 67.20
ManTIME-2 88.10 97.37 80.43 72.22 66.67
ATT-2 85.25 98.11 75.36 78.69 65.57
ATT-1 85.60 99.05 75.36 79.01 65.02
ClearTK-1,2 90.23 93.75 86.96 82.71 64.66
JU-CSE 86.38 93.28 80.43 75.49 63.81
KUL 83.67 92.92 76.09 69.32 62.95
KUL-TE3RunABC 82.87 92.04 75.36 73.31 62.15
ClearTK-3,4 87.94 94.96 81.88 77.04 61.48
ATT-3 80.85 97.94 68.84 72.34 60.43
FSS-TimEx 85.06 90.24 80.43 49.04 58.24
TIPSem (TE2) 84.90 97.20 75.36 81.63 65.31
Table 3: Task A - Temporal Expression Performance.
reduced system relations (Sys?relation). Similarly, we
calculate the Recall by checking the number of reduced
reference annotation relations (Ref?relation) that can be
verified from the system output?s temporal closure graph
(Sys+relation), out of number of temporal relations in the
reduced reference annotation (Ref?relation).
This metric evaluates Task ABC together. For Task C
and Task C - relation only, all the gold annotation entities
were provided and then evaluated using the above metric.
Our evaluation toolkit that evaluated TempEval-3 par-
ticipants is available online.7
5 Evaluation Results
The aim of this evaluation is to provide a meaningful re-
port of the performance obtained by the participants in
the tasks defined in Section 3.
Furthermore, the results include TIPSem as reference
for comparison. This was used as a pre-annotation system
in some cases. TIPSem obtained the best results in event
processing task in TempEval-2 and offered very compet-
itive results in timex and relation processing. The best
timex processing system in TempEval-2 (HeidelTime) is
participating in this edition as well, therefore we included
TIPSem as a reference in all tasks.
We only report results in main measures. Results are
divided by language and shown per task. Detailed scores
can be found on the task website.8
7See http://www.cs.rochester.edu/u/naushad/temporal
8See http://www.cs.york.ac.uk/semeval-2013/task1/
5.1 Results for English
5.1.1 Task A: Timexes
We had nine participants and 21 unique runs for tem-
poral expression extraction task, Task A. Table 3 shows
the results. Details about participants? approaches can be
found in Table 4.
We rank the participants for Task A on the F1 score
of most important timex attribute ? Value. To get the
attribute Value correct, a system needs to correctly nor-
malise the temporal expression. This score (Value F1)
captures the performance of extracting the timex and
identifying the attribute Value together (Value F1 = Timex
F1 * Value Accuracy).
Participants approached the temporal expression ex-
traction task with rule-engineered methods, machine
learning methods and also hybrid methods. For temporal
expression normalization (identifying the timex attribute
value), all participants used rule-engineered approaches.
Observations: We collected the following observa-
tions from the results and from participants? experiments.
Strategy: Competition was close for timex recogni-
tion and the best systems all performed within 1% of
each other. On our newswire corpus, statistical systems
(ClearTK) performed best at strict matching, and rule-
engineered system best at relaxed matching (NavyTime,
SUTime, HeidelTime).
Strategy: post-processing, on top of machine learning-
base temporal expression extraction, provided a statisti-
cally significant improvement in both precision and recall
(ManTIME).
Data: using the large silver dataset, alone or together
with human annotated data, did not give improvements in
performance for Task A. Human-annotated gold standard
data alone provided the best performance (ManTIME).
Data: TimeBank alone was better than TimeBank and
AQUAINT together for Task A (ClearTK).
Features: syntactic and gazetteers did not provide any
statistically significant increment of performance with re-
spect to the morphological features alone (ManTIME).
Regarding the two sub-tasks of timex annotation,
recognition and interpretation/normalisation, we noticed
a shift in the state of the art. While normalisation is
currently (and perhaps inherently) done best by rule-
engineered systems, recognition is now done well by a
variety of methods. Where formerly, rule-engineered
timex recognition always outperformed other classes of
approach, now it is clear that rule-engineering and ma-
chine learning are equally good at timex recognition.
5.1.2 Task B: Events
For event extraction (Task B) we had seven participants
and 10 unique runs. The results for this task can be found
in Table 6. We rank the participants for TaskB on the F1
score of most important event attribute ? Class. Class
4
Strategy System Training data Classifier used
Data-driven ATT-1, 2, 3 TBAQ + TE3Silver MaxEnt
ClearTK-1, 2 TimeBank SVM, Logit
ClearTK-3, 4 TBAQ SVM, Logit
JU-CSE TBAQ CRF
ManTIME-1 TBAQ + TE3Silver CRF
ManTIME-3 TBAQ CRF
ManTIME-5 TE3Silver CRF
Temp : ESAfeature TBAQ MaxEnt
Temp : WordNetfeature TBAQ MaxEnt
TIPSem (TE2) TBAQ CRF
Rule-based FSS-TimEx (EN) None None
FSS-TimEx (ES) None None
HeidelTime-1.2, bf (EN) None None
HeidelTime-t (EN) TBAQ None
HeidelTime (ES) Gold None
NavyTime-1, 2 None None
SUTime None None
Hybrid KUL TBAQ + TE3Silver Logit + post-processing
KUL-TE3RunABC TBAQ +TE3Silver Logit + post-processing
ManTIME-2 TBAQ + TE3Silver CRF + post-processing
ManTIME-4 TBAQ CRF + post-processing
ManTIME-6 TE3Silver CRF + post-processing
Table 4: Automated approaches for TE3 Timex Extraction
Strategy System Training data Classifier used Linguistic
Knowledge
Data-driven ATT-1, 2, 3 TBAQ + TE3Silver MaxEnt ms, ss
ClearTK-1, 2 TimeBank SVM, Logit ms
ClearTK-3, 4 TBAQ SVM, Logit ms
JU-CSE TBAQ CRF
KUL TBAQ +TE3Silver Logit ms, ls
KUL-TE3RunABC TBAQ +TE3Silver Logit ms, ls
NavyTime-1 TBAQ MaxEnt ms, ls
NavyTime-2 TimeBank MaxEnt ms, ls
Temp : ESAfeature TBAQ MaxEnt ms, ls, ss
Temp : WordNetfeature TBAQ MaxEnt ms, ls
TIPSem (TE2) TBAQ CRF/SVM ms, ls, ss
Rule-based FSS-TimEx (EN) None None ls, ms
FSS-TimEx (ES) None None ls, ms
Table 5: Automated approaches for Event Extraction
5
F1 P R class F1
ATT-1 81.05 81.44 80.67 71.88
ATT-2 80.91 81.02 80.81 71.10
KUL 79.32 80.69 77.99 70.17
ATT-3 78.63 81.95 75.57 69.55
KUL-TE3RunABC 77.11 77.58 76.64 68.74
ClearTK-3,4 78.81 81.40 76.38 67.87
NavyTime-1 80.30 80.73 79.87 67.48
ClearTK-1,2 77.34 81.86 73.29 65.44
NavyTime-2 79.37 80.52 78.26 64.81
Temp:ESAfeature 68.97 78.33 61.61 54.55
JU-CSE 78.62 80.85 76.51 52.69
Temp:WordNetfeature 63.90 78.90 53.69 50.00
FSS-TimEx 65.06 63.13 67.11 42.94
TIPSem (TE2) 82.89 83.51 82.28 75.59
Table 6: Task B - Event Extraction Performance.
F1 P R
ClearTK-2 30.98 34.08 28.40
ClearTK-1 29.77 34.49 26.19
ClearTK-3 28.62 30.94 26.63
ClearTK-4 28.46 29.73 27.29
NavyTime-1 27.28 31.25 24.20
JU-CSE 24.61 19.17 34.36
NavyTime-2 21.99 26.52 18.78
KUL-TE3RunABC 19.01 17.94 20.22
TIPSem (TE2) 42.39 38.79 46.74
Table 7: Task ABC - Temporal Awareness Evaluation (Task C
evaluation from raw text).
F1 captures the performance of extracting the event and
identifying the attribute Class together (Class F1 = Event
F1 * Class Accuracy).
All the participants except one used machine learning
approaches. Details about the participants? approaches
and the linguistic knowledge9 used to solve this problem,
and training data, are in Table 5.
Observations: We collected the following observa-
tions from the results and from participants? experiments.
Strategy: All the high performing systems for event
extraction (Task B) are machine learning-based.
Data: Systems using silver data, along with the hu-
man annotated gold standard data, performed very well
(top three participants in the task ? ATT, KUL, KUL-
TE3RunABC). Additionally, TimeBank and AQUAINT
together performed better than just TimeBank alone
(NavyTime-1, ClearTK-3,4).
Linguistic Features: Semantic features (ls and ss) have
played an important role, since the best systems (TIPSem,
ATT1 and KUL) include them. However, these three are
not the only systems using semantic features.
9Abbreviations used in the table: TBAQ ? TimeBank + AQUAINT
corpus ms ? morphosyntactic information, e.g. POS, lexical informa-
tion, morphological information and syntactic parsing related features;
ls ?lexical semantic information, e.g. WordNet synsets; ss ? sentence-
level semantic information, e.g. Semantic Role labels.
F1 P R
ClearTK-2 36.26 37.32 35.25
ClearTK-4 35.86 35.17 36.57
ClearTK-1 35.19 37.64 33.04
UTTime-5 34.90 35.94 33.92
ClearTK-3 34.13 33.27 35.03
NavyTime-1 31.06 35.48 27.62
UTTime-4 28.81 37.41 23.43
JU-CSE 26.41 21.04 35.47
NavyTime-2 25.84 31.10 22.10
KUL-TE3RunABC 24.83 23.35 26.52
UTTime-1 24.65 15.18 65.64
UTTime-3 24.28 15.10 61.99
UTTime-2 24.05 14.80 64.20
TIPSem (TE2) 44.25 39.71 49.94
Table 8: Task C - TLINK Identification and Classification.
F1 P R
UTTime-1, 4 56.45 55.58 57.35
UTTime-3, 5 54.70 53.85 55.58
UTTime-2 54.26 53.20 55.36
NavyTime-1 46.83 46.59 47.07
NavyTime-2 43.92 43.65 44.20
JU-CSE 34.77 35.07 34.48
Table 9: Task C - relation only: Relation Classification.
5.1.3 Task C: Relation Evaluation
For complete temporal annotation from raw text (Task
ABC - Task C from raw text) and for temporal relation
only tasks (Task C, Task C relation only), we had five
participants in total.
For relation evaluation, we primarily evaluate on Task
ABC (Task C from raw text), which requires joint entity
extraction, link identification and relation classification.
The results for this task can be found in Table 7.
While TIPSem obtained the best results in task ABC,
especially in recall, it was used by some annotators to
pre-label data. In the interest of rigour and fairness, we
separate out this system.
For task C, for provided participants with entities and
participants identified: between which entity pairs a rela-
tion exists (link identification); and the class of that rela-
tion. Results are given in Table 8. We also evaluate the
participants on the relation by providing the entities and
the links (performance in Table 9) ? TIPSem could not be
evaluated in this setting since the system is not prepared
to do categorization only unless the relations are divided
as in TempEval-2. For these Task C related tasks, we had
only one new participant, who didn?t participate in Task
A and B: UTTime.
Identifying which pair of entities to consider for tem-
poral relations is a new task in this TempEval challenge.
The participants approached the problems in data-driven,
rule-based and also in hybrid ways (Table 1010). On
10New abbreviation in the table, e-attr ? entity attributes, e.g. event
class, tense, aspect, polarity, modality; timex type, value.
6
Strategy System Training data Classifier used Linguistic
Knowledge
Data-driven ClearTK-1 TimeBank SVM, Logit e-attr, ms
ClearTK-2 TimeBank + Bethard et al (2007) SVM, Logit e-attr, ms
ClearTK-3 TBAQ SVM, Logit e-attr, ms
ClearTK-4 TBAQ + Muller?s inferences SVM, Logit e-attr, ms
KULRunABC TBAQ SVM, Logit ms
Rule-based JU-CSE None None
UTTime-1, 2 ,3 None None
TIPSem (TE2) None None e-attr, ms, ls, ss
Hybrid NavyTime-1 TBAQ MaxEnt ms
NavyTime-2 TimeBank MaxEnt ms
UTTime-4 TBAQ Logit ms, ls, ss
UTTime-5 TBAQ + inverse relations Logit ms, ls, ss
Table 10: Automated approaches for TE3 TLINK Identification
Strategy System Training data Classifier used Linguistic
Knowledge
Data-driven ClearTK-1 TimeBank SVM, Logit ms, ls
ClearTK-2 TimeBank + Bethard et al (2007) SVM, Logit ms, ls
ClearTK-3 TBAQ SVM, Logit ms, ls
ClearTK-4 TBAQ + Muller?s inferences SVM, Logit ms, ls
JU-CSE TBAQ CRF
KULRunABC TBAQ SVM, Logit ms
NavyTime-1 TBAQ MaxEnt ms, ls
NavyTime-2 TimeBank MaxEnt ms, ls
UTTime-1,4, 2 TBAQ Logit ms, ls, ss
UTTime-3,5 TBAQ + inverse relations Logit ms, ls, ss
TIPSem (TE-2) TBAQ CRF/SVM ms, ls, ss
Table 11: Automated approaches for Relation Classification
the other hand, all the participants used data-driven ap-
proaches for temporal relations (Table 11).
Observations: We collected the following observa-
tions from the results and from participants? experiments.
Strategy: For relation classification, all participants
used partially or fully machine learning-based systems.
Data: None of the participants implemented their sys-
tems training on the silver data. Most of the systems use
the combined TimeBank and AQUAINT (TBAQ) corpus.
Data: Adding additional high-quality relations, either
Philippe Muller?s closure-based inferences or the verb
clause relations from Bethard et al (2007), typically in-
creased recall and the overall performance (ClearTK runs
two and four).
Features: Participants mostly used the morphosyntac-
tic and lexical semantic information. The best perform-
ing systems from TempEval-2 (TIPSem and TRIOS) ad-
ditionally used sentence level semantic information. One
participant in TempEval-3 (UTTime) also did deep pars-
ing for the sentence level semantic features.
Features: Using more Linguistic knowledge is impor-
tant for the task, but it is more important to execute it
properly. Many systems performed better using less lin-
guistic knowledge. Hence a system (e.g. ClearTK) with
basic morphosyntactic features is hard to beat with more
semantic features, if not used properly.
entity extraction
strict relaxed
F1 F1 P R value
HeidelTime 85.3 90.1 96.0 84.9 87.5
TIPSemB-F 82.6 87.4 93.7 81.9 82.0
FSS-TimEx 49.5 65.2 86.6 52.3 62.7
Table 12: Task A: Temporal Expression (Spanish).
class tense aspect
F1 P R F1 F1 F1
FSS-TimEx 57.6 89.8 42.4 24.9 - -
TIPSemB-F 88.8 91.7 86.0 57.6 41.0 36.3
Table 13: Task B: Event Extraction (Spanish).
Classifier: Across the various tasks, ClearTK tried
Mallet CRF, Mallet MaxEnt, OpenNLP MaxEnt, and LI-
BLINEAR (SVMs and logistic regression). They picked
the final classifiers by running a grid search over models
and parameters on the training data, and for all tasks, a
LIBLINEAR model was at least as good as all the other
models. As an added bonus, it was way faster to train
than most of the other models.
6 Evaluation Results (Spanish)
There were two participants for Spanish. Both partici-
pated in task A and only one of them in task B. In this
7
F1 P R
TIPSemB-F 41.6 37.8 46.2
Table 14: Task ABC: Temporal Awareness (Spanish).
entity extraction attributes
strict relaxed val type
F1 F1 P R F1 F1
HeidelTime 86.4 89.8 94.0 85.9 87.5 89.8
FSS-TimEx 42.1 68.4 86.7 56.5 48.7 65.8
TIPSem 86.9 93.7 98.8 89.1 75.4 88.0
TIPSemB-F 84.3 89.9 93.0 87.0 82.0 86.5
Table 15: Task A: TempEval-2 test set (Spanish).
case, TIPSemB-Freeling is provided as a state-of-the-art
reference covering all the tasks. TIPSemB-Freeling is the
Spanish version of TIPSem with the main difference that
it does not include semantic roles. Furthermore, it uses
Freeling (Padro? and Stanilovsky, 2012) to obtain the lin-
guistic features automatically.
Table 12 shows the results obtained for task A. As it
can be observed HeidelTime obtains the best results. It
improves the previous state-of-the-art results (TIPSemB-
F), especially in normalization (value F1).
Table 13 shows the results from event extraction. In
this case, the previous state-of-the-art is not improved.
Table 14 only shows the results obtained in temporal
awareness by the state-of-the-art system since there were
not participants on this task. We observe that TIPSemB-F
approach offers competitive results, which is comparable
to results obtained in TE3 English test set.
6.1 Comparison with TempEval-2
TempEval-2 Spanish test set is included as a subset of this
TempEval-3 test set. We can therefore compare the per-
formance across editions. Furthermore, we can include
the full-featured TIPSem (Llorens et al, 2010), which
unlike TIPSemB-F used the AnCora (Taule? et al, 2008)
corpus annotations as features including semantic roles.
For timexes, as can be seen in Table 15, the origi-
nal TIPSem obtains better results for timex extraction,
which favours the hypothesis that machine learning sys-
tems are very well suited for this task (if the training data
is sufficiently representative). However, for normaliza-
tion (value F1), HeidelTime ? a rule-engineered system ?
obtains better results. This indicates that rule-based ap-
proaches have the upper hand in this task. TIPSem uses
class tense aspect
F1 P R F1 F1 F1
FSS-TimEx 59.0 90.3 43.9 24.6 - -
TIPSemB-F 90.2 92.5 88.0 58.6 39.7 38.1
TIPSem 88.2 90.6 85.8 58.7 84.9 78.7
Table 16: Task B: TempEval-2 test set (Spanish).
a partly data-driven normalization approach which, given
the small amount of training data available, seemed less
suited to the task.
Table 16 shows event extraction performance in TE2
test set. TIPSemB-F and TIPSem obtained a similar per-
formance. TIPSemB-F performed better in extraction and
TIPSem better in attribute classification.
7 Conclusion
In this paper, we described the TempEval-3 task within
the SemEval 2013 exercise. This task involves identify-
ing temporal expressions (timexes), events and their tem-
poral relations in text. In particular participating systems
were required to automatically annotate raw text using
TimeML annotation scheme
This is the first time end-to-end systems are evalu-
ated with a new single score (temporal awareness). In
TempEval-3 participants had to obtain temporal relations
from their own extracted timexes and events which is a
very challenging task and was the ultimate evaluation aim
of TempEval. It was proposed at TempEval-1 but has not
been carried out until this edition.
The newly-introduced silver data proved not so useful
for timex extraction or relation classification, but did help
with event extraction. The new single-measure helped to
rank systems easily.
Future work could investigate temporal annotation in
specific applications. Current annotations metrics evalu-
ate relations for entities in the same consecutive sentence.
For document-level understanding we need to understand
discourse and pragmatic information. Temporal question
answering-based evaluation (UzZaman et al, 2012a) can
help us to evaluate participants on document level tempo-
ral information understanding without creating any addi-
tional training data. Also, summarisation, machine trans-
lation, and information retrieval need temporal annota-
tion. Application-oriented challenges could further re-
search in these areas.
From a TimeML point of view, we still haven?t tack-
led subordinate relations (TimeML SLINKs), aspectual
relations (TimeML ALINKs), or temporal signal anno-
tation (Derczynski and Gaizauskas, 2011). The critical
questions of which links to annotate, and whether the cur-
rent set of temporal relation types are appropriate for lin-
guistic annotation, are still unanswered.
Acknowledgments
We thank the participants ? especially Steven Bethard,
Jannik Stro?tgen, Nate Chambers, Oleksandr Kolomiyets,
Michele Filannino, Philippe Muller and others ? who
helped us to improve TempEval-3 with their valuable
feedback. The third author also thanks Aarhus Univer-
sity, Denmark who kindly provided facilities.
8
References
J. F. Allen. 1983. Maintaining knowledge about temporal in-
tervals. Communications of the ACM, 26(11):832?843.
S. Bethard, J. H. Martin, and S. Klingenstein. 2007. Timelines
from text: Identication of syntactic temporal relations. In
Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Semantic
Computing.
H. Cunningham, V. Tablan, A. Roberts, and K. Bontcheva.
2013. Getting More Out of Biomedical Documents with
GATE?s Full Lifecycle Open Source Text Analytics. PLoS
computational biology, 9(2):e1002854.
L. Derczynski and R. Gaizauskas. 2010. Analysing Temporally
Annotated Corpora with CAVaT. In Proceedings of the 7th
International Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation, pages 398?404.
L. Derczynski and R. Gaizauskas. 2011. A Corpus-based Study
of Temporal Signals. In Proceedings of the 6th Corpus Lin-
guistics Conference.
L. Derczynski, H. Llorens, and N. UzZaman. 2013. TimeML-
strict: clarifying temporal annotation. CoRR, abs/1304.
G. Hripcsak and A. S. Rothschild. 2005. Agreement, the f-
measure, and reliability in information retrieval. Journal of
the American Medical Informatics Association, 12(3):296?
298.
H. Llorens, E. Saquete, and B. Navarro. 2010. TIPSem (En-
glish and Spanish): Evaluating CRFs and Semantic Roles in
TempEval-2. In Proceedings of the 5th International Work-
shop on Semantic Evaluation, pages 284?291. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
H. Llorens, N. UzZaman, and J. Allen. 2012a. Merging Tem-
poral Annotations. In Proceedings of the TIME Conference.
H. Llorens, E. Saquete, and B. Navarro-Colorado. 2012b. Au-
tomatic system for identifying and categorizing temporal re-
lations in natural language. International Journal of Intelli-
gent Systems, 27(7):680?703.
H. Llorens, E. Saquete, and B. Navarro-Colorado. 2013. Ap-
plying Semantic Knowledge to the Automatic Processing of
Temporal Expressions and Events in Natural Language. In-
formation Processing & Management, 49(1):179?197.
L. Padro? and E. Stanilovsky. 2012. Freeling 3.0: Towards wider
multilinguality. In Proceedings of the Language Resources
and Evaluation Conference (LREC 2012), Istanbul, Turkey,
May. ELRA.
R. Parker, D. Graff, J. Kong, K. Chen, and K. Maeda.
2011. English Gigaword Fifth Edition. LDC catalog ref.
LDC2011T07.
J. Pustejovsky, P. Hanks, R. Saur??, A. See, R. Gaizauskas,
A. Setzer, D. Radev, B. Sundheim, D. Day, L. Ferro, et al
2003. The TimeBank corpus. In Corpus Linguistics.
J. Pustejovsky, B. Ingria, R. Saur??, J. Castano, J. Littman,
R. Gaizauskas, A. Setzer, G. Katz, and I. Mani. 2005. The
specification language TimeML. The Language of Time: A
reader, pages 545?557.
R. Saur?? and T. Badia. 2012. Spanish TimeBank 1.0. LDC
catalog ref. LDC2012T12.
R. Saur??, J. Littman, B. Knippen, R. Gaizauskas, A. Setzer, and
J. Pustejovsky. 2006. TimeML Annotation Guidelines Ver-
sion 1.2.1.
M. Taule?, M. A. Mart?, and M. Recasens. 2008. Ancora: Mul-
tilevel annotated corpora for catalan and spanish. In Pro-
ceedings of the 6th International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC-2008).
N. UzZaman and J. Allen. 2010. TRIPS and TRIOS system for
TempEval-2: Extracting temporal information from text. In
Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluation, pages 276?283. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
N. UzZaman and J. Allen. 2011. Temporal Evaluation. In Pro-
ceedings of The 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies.
N. UzZaman, H. Llorens, and J. Allen. 2012a. Evaluating tem-
poral information understanding with temporal question an-
swering. In Proceedings of IEEE International Conference
on Semantic Computing.
N. UzZaman, H. Llorens, J. F. Allen, L. Derczynski, M. Ver-
hagen, and J. Pustejovsky. 2012b. TempEval-3: Evaluating
Events, Time Expressions, and Temporal Relations. CoRR,
abs/1206.5333.
N. UzZaman. 2012. Interpreting the Temporal Aspects of Lan-
guage. Ph.D. thesis, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY.
M. Verhagen, R. Gaizauskas, F. Schilder, M. Hepple,
J. Moszkowicz, and J. Pustejovsky. 2009. The TempEval
challenge: identifying temporal relations in text. Language
Resources and Evaluation, 43(2):161?179.
M. Verhagen, R. Saur??, T. Caselli, and J. Pustejovsky. 2010.
SemEval-2010 task 13: TempEval-2. In Proceedings of the
5th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, pages
57?62. Association for Computational Linguistics.
9
