Coling 2008: Proceedings of the workshop on Cognitive Aspects of the Lexicon (COGALEX 2008), pages 39?46
Manchester, August 2008
First ideas of user-adapted views of lexicographic data 
exemplified on OWID and elexiko 
 
Carolin M?ller-Spitzer 
Institut f?r Deutsche Sprache 
R 5, 6-13 
D-68161 Mannheim 
mueller-spitzer@ids-
mannheim.de  
Christine M?hrs 
Institut f?r Deutsche Sprache 
R 5, 6-13 
D-68161 Mannheim 
moehrs@lexik.ids-
mannheim.de 
 
1
 
Abstract 
This paper is a project report of the lexi-
cographic Internet portal OWID, an 
Online Vocabulary Information System 
of German which is being built at the In-
stitute of German Language in Mann-
heim (IDS). Overall, the contents of the 
portal and its technical approaches will 
be presented. The lexical database is 
structured in a granular way which al-
lows to extend possible search options 
for lexicographers. Against the back-
ground of current research on using elec-
tronic dictionaries, the project OWID is 
also working on first ideas of user-
adapted access and user-adapted views of 
the lexicographic data. Due to the fact 
that the portal OWID comprises diction-
aries which are available online it is pos-
sible to change the design and functions 
of the website easily (in comparison to 
printed dictionaries). Ideas of implement-
ing user-adapted views of the lexico-
graphic data will be demonstrated by us-
ing an example taken from one of the 
dictionaries of the portal, namely elexiko. 
1 Project report 
The Online-Wortschatz-Informationssystem 
Deutsch (OWID; Online Vocabulary Information 
System of German), a project of the Institut f?r 
Deutsche Sprache (IDS; Institute of German 
Language) in Mannheim is a lexicographic Inter-
                                                 
? 2008. Licensed under the Creative Commons Attri-
bution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported 
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-
sa/3.0/). Some rights reserved. 
net portal containing both, various electronic dic-
tionary resources that are currently being com-
piled at the IDS on the one hand and external 
resources on the other hand which will be in-
cluded additionally in the near future (cf. 
www.owid.de). Originally, the project had its 
roots based in the IDS project elexiko, a lexico-
graphic enterprise, which develops a new corpus-
based dictionary of contemporary German. It 
formed the basis of a lexicographic information 
portal for the IDS (cf. Klosa et al 2006). The 
main emphasis of OWID is on the integration of 
different academic lexicographic resources with 
the focus on contemporary German. Presently, 
the following dictionaries are included in OWID: 
? elexiko: This electronic dictionary consists 
of an index of about 300.000 short entries 
with information on spelling and syllabica-
tion, including information about inflection 
(from www.canoo.net). In the near future, 
further information (e.g. on word formation) 
and corpus samples will be added for all lex-
emes. Furthermore, elexiko comprises over 
900 fully elaborated entries of headwords 
which are highly frequent in the underlying 
corpus. These contain extensive semantic-
pragmatic descriptions of lexical items in ac-
tual language use. The dictionary is being ex-
tended continuously by further elaborated 
entries (cf. Klosa et al 2006). 
? Neologismenw?rterbuch (Dictionary of 
Neologisms): This electronic dictionary de-
scribes about 800 new words and new mean-
ings of established words in detail which 
emerged in the German vocabulary during 
the 1990s. This dictionary is also being up-
graded constantly.  
? Wortverbindungen online (Collocations 
Online): This resource of OWID publishes 
the research results of the project Usuelle 
39
OWID DTD-library 
modules for the 
whole OWID portal 
 
 allg-entities.dtd 
(DTD for general enti-
ties) 
allg-elemente.dtd 
(DTD for general ele-
ments and attributes) 
 
modules for cross-
dictionary object 
groups 
 
ewl-objekte.dtd 
(DTD for objects of 
single-word-items) 
mwl-objekte.dtd 
(DTD for objects of 
multi-word-items) 
ewl_mwl-
objekte.dtd 
(DTD for objects of 
single-word-and multi-
word-tems) 
ewl-grammatik.dtd 
(DTD for grammatical 
objects) 
modules for object 
groups of specific 
dictionaries  
 
 elexiko-allgobj.dtd 
(DTD for general objects 
of elexiko) 
neo-allgobj.dtd 
(DTD for general objects 
of the neologism-
dictionary) 
 
Head-DTDs for 
each dictionary 
 
elexiko-ewl.dtd 
(Head-DTD for elexiko) 
 
neo-ewl.dtd 
(Head-DTD for single-
word-items of the neolo-
gism-dictionary) 
 
neo-mwl.dtd 
(Head-DTD for multi-
word-items of the neolo-
gism-dictionary) 
 
mwl.dtd 
(Head-DTD for 
multi-word-items of the 
project ?Usuelle Wort-
verbindungen?) 
 
zeitreflexion1945-
55.dtd 
(Head-DTD for the 
discourse-dictionary 
1945-55) 
Table 1. OWID DTD-library 
Wortverbindungen. These concern different 
fixed multiword combinations. Currently, 25 
detailed entries for fixed multiword combi-
nations and 100 shorter entries dealing with 
collocations are available to users. 
? Diskursw?rterbuch 1945-55 (Discourse 
Dictionary 1945-55): This dictionary is a ref-
erence work resulting from a larger study of 
lexemes that establish the notional area of 
?guilt? in the early post-war era (1945-55), 
published in 2005.  
In the near future, the ?Handbuch Deutscher 
Kommunikationsverben? (Handbook of German 
Communication Verbs) with approximately 350 
paradigms of communication verbs as well as the 
?VALBU ? Valenzw?rterbuch deutscher Ver-
ben? (Valency Dictionary of German Verbs) will 
be published in OWID.  
It has always been an explicit goal of OWID 
not to present a random collection of unrelated 
dictionary resources but to build a network of 
interrelated lexicographic products. Therefore it 
was necessary to maintain the independence of 
each individual dictionary project while, at the 
same time, to ensure the integration of all the 
different data. Even though, the different lexico-
graphic resources may appear to be very diverse 
at first glance, they share some of their data 
modelling features. Both, the common intergra-
tion and the individual independence of each pro-
ject are reflected in the current online presenta-
tion of the portal. On the welcome page of 
OWID the user can choose which dictionary s/he 
wants to use. If s/he looks up a word in all dic-
tionaries of the portal there is a coloured marker 
indicating the corresponding dictionary resource 
(black = elexiko, blue = Neologism, green = Dis-
course dictionary, red = Collocations). In addi-
tion, there are links and cross-references between 
the products (see for example the interrelation 
between the entry ?Liebe macht blind? in the 
dictionary ?Collocations Online? and the entries 
?Liebe? / ?blind? in elexiko). This kind of inter-
relation will be expanded in the future. 
Another goal is to provide a basis for user-
adapted access to the lexicographic data. ?It is 
one thing to be able to store ever more data, but 
another thing entirely to present just the data us-
ers want in response to a particular look-up? (de 
Schryver 2003: 178). Hence, the core of the pro-
ject is the design of an innovative concept of data 
modelling and structuring. 
2 Data Modelling 
As emphasised before, the contents of the indi-
vidual participating projects and their compiled 
lexicographic resources in OWID are independ-
ent of each other. However, it has been obvious 
from the very beginning that the value of OWID 
would be increased, if more common access 
structures for the different contents were to be 
developed and if the lexicographic data had been 
40
 Figure 1: Advanced search options for lexicographers 
interlinked even more adequately. So on the one 
hand, in order to guarantee a basis for a common 
access structure to the all contents, consistent 
principles for modelling and structuring the con-
tents were applied to all integrated products. On 
the other hand, OWID is also kept open for the 
possible integration of externally developed lexi-
cographic resources, namely reference works that 
are written outside the IDS. However, externally 
compiled data has to be structured in accordance 
to the OWID modelling concept. 
The approach chosen here not only guarantees 
to connect different lexicographic products under 
the management of OWID on the macro structure 
level ? which means the level of the headwords ? 
but also makes it possible to access the dictionar-
ies on a more granular level. OWID attempts to 
harmonise modelling on the level of the content 
structure, that is, the level of the individual lexi-
cographic information unit rather than organizing 
the different lexicographic processes independ-
ently. 
OWID uses a single modelling process for all 
projects: For each individual resource, a specifi-
cally-tailored XML-DTD and XML-schema 
were developed respectively. Each individual 
information unit is granularly tagged in all entry 
structures, so that automatic access to each con-
tent unit is ensured. The dictionary entries are 
then written in an XML editor and stored in an 
Oracle database system. For presentation pur-
poses, the XML data are transformed by an 
XSLT stylesheet to HTML (cf. M?ller-Spitzer 
2007). 
A DTD library was created for OWID where 
specific DTDs contain all entities, elements, or 
attributes that are shared by all entry structures in 
order to provide a uniform structure for lexico-
graphic information of the same type which is 
contained in the different dictionaries (cf. Tab. 
1). The modelling shows which information is 
accessible across the different dictionaries (the 
results from the different dictionaries are marked 
in different colours). This type of data modelling 
? a singular specificially-tailored but explicitly 
synchronised modelling for diverse lexicographic 
resources ? can be considered to be an innovative 
approach of a new kind, as Schlaps (2007) and 
Kunze / Lemnitzer (2007) have recently ex-
plained. 
We decided to use a specifically-tailored mod-
elling because the XML-structure also serves as a 
model for compiling the lexicographic entries in 
the XML-Editor. What this means for lexicogra-
phers is that the more individually customised 
the XML-structure is, the less one needs an addi-
tional manual for comply with the entry struc-
ture. However, one could easily transform this 
structure into a specific standard such as LMF or 
TEI because the structure is very fine-grained. 
The following XML detail of the entry ?emailen? 
from the Dictionary of Neologisms illustrating 
the tagging of information on valency gives an 
example for the overall granularity of tagging. 
 
41
<vb-valenz-neu> 
 
<satzbauplan> 
<satzbauplanA>jemand emailt (jemandem) (et-
was)</satzbauplanA> 
 
</satzbauplan> 
<satzbauplan> 
<satzbauplanA> jemand emailt (etwas) an je-
manden</satzbauplanA> 
</satzbauplan> 
 
<satzbauplan> 
<satzbauplanA>jemand emailt, dass 
[...]</satzbauplanA> 
</satzbauplan> 
 
<vb-komplemente-neu> 
 
<subjekt-komp-neu obligatorisch="ja"> 
<nom-nominalphrase-neu/> 
</subjekt-komp-neu> 
 
<objekt-komp-vb obligatorisch="nein"> 
<dat-nominalphrase-vb/> 
</objekt-komp-vb> 
 
<objekt-komp-vb obligatorisch="nein"> 
<akk-nominalphrase-vb/> 
<dass-satz-vb/> 
</objekt-komp-vb> 
 
<objekt-komp-vb obligatorisch="ja"> 
<praepositionalphrase-vb praepositi-
on="an"/> 
</objekt-komp-vb> 
 
</vb-komplemente-neu> 
</vb-valenz-neu> 
 
Within our internal editorial system, lexicog-
raphers are able to use this structure for advanced 
searches (with XPath expressions). For example, 
one can search for all regular verbs 
(//vollverb) which have obligatory object 
complements (//objekt-komp-
vb/@obligatorisch="ja" which are realised 
as a dative NP (//dat-nominalphrase-vb). 
In this example, the search results are entries 
from elexiko as well as from the neologism-
dictionary (cf. Fig. 1). We are planning to pro-
vide these extended search options also for us-
ers.2 
Moreover, it would be possible to involve the 
user in the process of deciding which information 
should be presented on the website. As ex-
plained, every information unit in the dictionaries 
is encoded separately. Against this background, 
we can think of customizing the microstructure 
by the users themselves (in addition to the ex-
tended search for example in elexiko). So the 
user could select the type of information s/he 
                                                 
2
 The development of the Electronic Dictionary Ad-
ministration System (cf. Fig. 1) is a work of Roman 
Schneider, a researcher of the IDS. 
wants to use individually. Fig. 2 shows what 
such a presentation could look like. At the top of 
the page, the user is able to select the type of in-
formation which s/he wants to see directly un-
derneath. If s/he wants to change the options s/he 
can use the update button in order to modulate 
the desktop view. In this example, the two differ-
ent senses of the entry ?Meer? are shown side by 
side with the chosen kind of information (here 
the definition together with typical uses of the 
headword). This kind of presentation enables the 
users to compare this information given for the 
two senses at one sight. 
3 Research on using electronic diction-
aries 
Research on using dictionaries is a core field of 
study in lexicography (cf. Wang 2001 or Atkins 
1998). Fortunately, in the last two decades, re-
search on using printed dictionaries has attracted 
the attention of more researchers. Although 
Engelberg and Lemnitzer had noticed in 2001 
that there are only little inquiries about influ-
ences on the users? behaviour in relation to inno-
vations in the field of electronic lexicography (cf. 
Engelberg and Lemnitzer 2001), in the last few 
years research on electronic dictionaries has 
grown. 
Such metalexicographic research plays a ma-
jor role with regard to monitoring the dictionary 
user on the Internet ? for example in the analysis 
of log-files. At the moment, there are not many 
research reports about the analysis of log-files. 
?Although the proposal to draw upon log files in 
order to improve dictionaries was already ex-
pressed in the mid-1980s [?], and although nu-
merous researchers have reiterated this idea in 
recent years [?], very few reports have been 
published of real-world dictionaries actually 
marking use of this strategy? (de Schryver and 
Joffe 2004, 187). The studies and methods men-
tioned here are interesting for research on using 
electronic dictionaries especially because an 
electronic dictionary is a product which can be 
modulated and updated immediately. Log-files 
can show what the user has inserted into the 
search box and how the user has navigated (cf. 
de Schryver and Joffe 2004). However, good 
results are only seen with this method if the data-
base of the dictionary is created with a flat struc-
ture. In the actual log- files we only see which 
word the user has typed in the search box. We 
can not easily detect in which way and how com-
fortly the user navigates through the entry or 
42
 Figure 2. Online view of elexiko with an information display for customizing the microstructure dy-
namically 
which information s/he has looked at more 
closely. However, this is exactly the type of in-
formation we are looking for. Therefore, other 
methods like standardised evaluation, interviews 
etc. also have to be taken into account. Analysing 
log-files can not substitute these methods alone. 
OWID is also gradually putting user research 
into practice: Firstly, OWID has been making 
use of the analysis of log-files for some time. 
Secondly, a standardised online survey was con-
ducted in the context of an MA thesis (cf. 
Scherer 2008). Finally, a short study based on 
interviews of OWID and in particular of elexiko, 
one of the dictionaries of the portal, was carried 
out. 
Although currently the modelling is used 
mainly in the lexicographic process there is still a 
lot of room for further development of the abili-
ties to present the structured information. The 
capability of data modelling in OWID should be 
visible for lexicographers as well as for users (cf. 
M?ller-Spitzer 2007). Involving the user and 
his/her requirements in searching and navigating 
through OWID is the starting point for defining 
user-adapted views of the lexicographic data. 
4 Defining user-adapted Views 
As shown above, the lexicographic contents are 
structured granulary and strictly content-based. 
This technology allows to define user-adapted 
views of the lexicographic data. Printed diction-
aries cannot offer this option. A printed diction-
ary is designed for a specific user type and for 
specific situations of use as a whole. In OWID, 
the data for electronic dictionaries is initially or-
ganised independently of its users. In a second 
step, lexicographic information can be used as 
the foundation of the definition of user-specific 
layers (e.g. based on the technology of XSLT-
stylesheets) in order to filter relevant data for a 
specific situation of use ?on demand?. Know-
legde on what users prototypically look for in 
printed dictionaries is established by numerous 
research works. For example someone who uses 
a dictionary to understand a text wants to get a 
short overview on the meaning of a word. If 
someone has to produce a text it is more helpful 
to get word information about correct spelling, 
grammar, typical uses, collocations or sense-
related items. Furthermore lexicographers of 
43
 Figure 3. Extracts of XML-entities and their possible online view for learners of German as a foreign 
language (entry w?nschen, part ?Grammar? for the meaning 'ersehnen') 
electronic dictionaries can go into detail about 
the demands of learners of German as foreign 
language (L2-Learners) resp. German native 
speakers. By taking this into consideration, one 
can think of developing different profiles for dif-
ferent user situations. According to a chosen pro-
file the lexicographic information is then pre-
sented in a specialised way. This would be an-
other form of a user-adapted view (besides cus-
tomizing the microstructure dynamically as it is 
shown in Fig. 2). In elexiko, one of the dictionar-
ies of OWID, the online view presents the lexi-
cographic data in one standardised view. How-
ever, the technical conditions can also allow to 
show the same XML-data of an entry in different 
ways for different user groups. As an example 
one can see the part ?Grammar? in elexiko in 
Figure 3 and 4 differing in comprehensiveness. 
Detailed information on inflection and word or-
der are very important for L2-Learners. There-
fore such information is presented more exten-
sively in Fig. 3. In comparison native speakers 
know intuitionally the inflection of words or the 
realization of different sentence constructions. In 
Fig. 4 one can see a shortened presentation of 
grammatical information of the same XML-data. 
This example illustrates the general principle of 
defining different user-adapted views of one lexi-
cographic data. It is important that the different 
user-adapted presentations of the part ?Gram-
mar? in elexiko or every other part of word in-
formation in elexiko can be realised without 
changing the data. The only change happens in 
the stylesheet. Other views completely different 
from the actually used stylesheet can be imag-
ined easily. We will discuss further examples in 
the talk. 
For a printed dictionary it is sufficient to de-
fine the types of information that shall be in-
cluded for the intendend user. Questions of pres-
entation are discussed on this basis and along the 
strong tradition for the layout of printed diction-
aries. When compiling user-adapted views of a 
general lexicographic data for an electronic me-
dium we have to consider:  
How do users navigate in electronic dictionar-
ies especially in a dictionary portal? How do they 
use the search options? Which form of nesting 
the specific word information is user friendly and 
when does clearness suffer? (Cf. Almind 2005) 
More specifically we need to ask: Should a user 
(i.e. while using a dictionary) create a profile at 
44
 Figure 4. Extracts of XML-entities and their possible online view for German native speakers 
the beginning of a session (e.g. user type: non-
native speaker, situation of use: reception of a 
text) and should s/he navigate in all articles with 
this profile? Or is it more user friendly to being 
able to change ones profile and look at the same 
entry with different profiles which means cus-
tomizing the microstructure dynamically? 
As OWID fulfills all technical requirements 
for a user-adapted presentation, as shown above, 
this project will be able to realise innovative 
forms of access to the lexicographic data. Re-
search on the use of the dictionaries published in 
OWID will be the basis on which different forms 
of presentation will be developed. 
References 
Almind, Richard. 2005. Designing Internet Dictionar-
ies, in: Hermes 34:37-54. 
Atkins, B. T. Sue (Ed.) (1998): Using dictonaries. 
Studies of dictionary use by language learners and 
translators. (= Lexicographica. Series maior 88), 
T?bingen. 
De Schryver, Gilles-Maurice. 2003. Lexicographer?s 
Dreams in the Electronic-Dictionary Age, in: In-
ternational Journal of Lexicography 16 (2):143-
199. 
De Schryver, Gilles Maurice / Joffe, David. 2004. On 
How Electronic Dictionaries are Really Used, in: 
Proceedings of the Eleventh EURALEX Interna-
tional Congress, EURALEX 2004, Lorient, France. 
Vol. I, ed. by Geoffrey Williams / Sandra Ves-
sier:187?196.  
Engelberg, Stefan / Lemnitzer, Lothar. 2001. Lexiko-
graphie und W?rterbuchbenutzung. T?bingen: 
Stauffenburg. 
Klosa, Annette / Schn?rch, Ulrich / Storjohann, Petra. 
2006. ELEXIKO - A lexical and lexicological, cor-
pus-based hypertext information system at the In-
stitut f?r Deusche Sprache, Mannheim, in: Pro-
ceedings of the 12th EURALEX International 
Congress (Atti del XII Congresso Internazionale di 
Lessicografia), EURALEX 2006, Turin, Italy, Sep-
tember 6th-9th, 2006. Vol. 1, ed. by Carla Marello et 
al., Alessandria:425-430. 
Kunze, Claudia / Lemnitzer, Lothar. 2007. Computer-
lexikographie. Eine Einf?hrung. T?bingen: Narr. 
M?ller-Spitzer, Carolin (2007): Das elexiko-Portal: 
Ein neuer Zugang zu lexikografischen Arbeiten am 
Institut f?r Deutsche Sprache, in: Datenstrukturen 
f?r linguistische Ressourcen und ihre Anwendun-
gen. Proceedings of the Biennial GLDV Confer-
ence 2007 (April 11-13, 2007, Eberhard Karls Uni-
versit?t T?bingen), ed. by Georg Rehm / Andreas 
Witt / Lothar Lemnitzer:179-188. 
Scherer, Tanja. 2008. Umsetzung von Zugriffsstruktu-
ren bei Online-W?rterb?chern. Unver?ffentlichte 
Magisterarbeit an der Universit?t Mannheim, Phi-
45
losophische Fakult?t, Seminar f?r Deutsche Philo-
logie, Germanistische Linguistik (Prof. Dr. L. M. 
Eichinger). 
Schlaps, Christiane. 2007. Grundfragen der elektroni-
schen Lexikographie. Elexiko ? das Online-
Informationssystem zum deutschen Wortschatz. Ed. 
by Ulrike Hass. Berlin, New York: de Gruyter 
2005. Short review?. Lexicographica 22:311-314. 
Wang, Weiwei. 2001. Zweisprachige Fachlexikogra-
phie. Benutzungsforschung, Typologie und mikro-
strukturelle Konzeption, Frankfurt a.M. (= Ange-
wandte Sprachwissenschaft 8). 
46
