Proceedings of the 2010 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing, ACL 2010, pages 132?140,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15 July 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Towards Event Extraction from Full Texts on Infectious Diseases
Sampo Pyysalo? Tomoko Ohta? Han-Cheol Cho? Dan Sullivan?
Chunhong Mao? Bruno Sobral? Jun?ichi Tsujii??? Sophia Ananiadou??
?Department of Computer Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
?Virginia Bioinformatics Institute, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia, USA
?School of Computer Science, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
?National Centre for Text Mining, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
{smp,okap,priancho,tsujii}@is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp
{dsulliva,cmao,sobral}@vbi.vt.edu
Sophia.Ananiadou@manchester.ac.uk
Abstract
Event extraction approaches based on ex-
pressive structured representations of ex-
tracted information have been a significant
focus of research in recent biomedical nat-
ural language processing studies. How-
ever, event extraction efforts have so far
been limited to publication abstracts, with
most studies further considering only the
specific transcription factor-related subdo-
main of molecular biology of the GENIA
corpus. To establish the broader relevance
of the event extraction approach and pro-
posed methods, it is necessary to expand
on these constraints. In this study, we pro-
pose an adaptation of the event extraction
approach to a subdomain related to infec-
tious diseases and present analysis and ini-
tial experiments on the feasibility of event
extraction from domain full text publica-
tions.
1 Introduction
For most of the previous decade, biomedical In-
formation Extraction (IE) efforts have focused pri-
marily on tasks that allow extracted information
to be represented as simple pairs of related enti-
ties. This representation is applicable to many IE
targets of interest, such as gene-disease associa-
tions (Chun et al, 2006) and protein-protein inter-
actions (Ne?dellec, 2005; Krallinger et al, 2007).
However, it has limited applicability to advanced
applications such as semantic search, Gene On-
tology term annotation, and pathway extraction,
tasks for which and relatively few resources or sys-
tems (e.g. (Rzhetsky et al, 2004)) have been intro-
duced. A number of recent studies have proposed
more expressive representations of extracted in-
formation, introducing resources supporting ad-
vanced IE approaches (Pyysalo et al, 2007; Kim
et al, 2008; Thompson et al, 2009; Ananiadou
et al, 2010a). A significant step in the develop-
ment of domain IE methods capable of extract-
ing this class of representations was taken in the
BioNLP?09 shared task on event extraction, where
24 teams participated in an IE task setting requir-
ing the extraction of structured representations of
multi-participant biological events of several types
(Kim et al, 2009).
While the introduction of structured event ex-
traction resources and methods has notably ad-
vanced the state of the art in biomedical IE rep-
resentations, the focus of event extraction studies
carries other limitations frequently encountered in
domain IE efforts. Specifically, resources anno-
tated for biomedical events contain exclusively
texts from publication abstracts, typically further
drawn from small subdomains of molecular biol-
ogy. These choices constrain not only the types of
texts but also the types of events considered, re-
stricting the applicability of event extraction. This
paper presents results from one ongoing effort to
extend an event extraction approach over these
boundaries, toward event extraction from full text
documents in the domain of infectious diseases.
In this study, we consider the subdomain related
to Type IV secretion systems as a model subdo-
main of interest within the broad infectious dis-
eases domain. Type IV secretion systems (T4SS)
are mechanisms for transferring DNA and pro-
teins across cellular boundaries. T4SS are found
in a broad range of Bacteria and in some Ar-
chaea. These translocation systems enable gene
transfer across cellular membranes thus contribut-
ing to the spread of antibiotic resistance and viru-
132
Figure 1: Event representation example. Inhibition of binding caused by phosphorylation is represented
using three events. The shaded text background identifies the text bindings of the events and entities.
lence genes making them an especially important
mechanism in infectious disease research (Juhas et
al., 2008). Type IV secretion systems are found in
plant pathogens, such as Agrobacterium tumefa-
ciens, the cause of crown gall disease as well as in
animal pathogens, such as Helicobacter pylori, a
cause of severe gastric disease. The study of T4SS
has been hampered by the lack of consistent termi-
nology to describe genes and proteins associated
with the translocation mechanism thus motivating
the use of natural language processing techniques
to enhance information retrieval and information
extraction from relevant literature.
2 Event Extraction for the T4SS Domain
This section presents the application of an event
extraction approach to the T4SS domain.
2.1 Event Extraction
We base our information extraction approach on
the model introduced in the BioNLP?09 shared
task on event extraction. Central to this approach
is the event representation, which can capture
the association of multiple participants in varying
roles and numbers and treats events as primary ob-
jects of annotation, thus allowing events to be par-
ticipants in other events. Further, both entities and
events are text-bound, i.e. anchored to specific ex-
pressions in text (Figure 1).
The BioNLP?09 shared task defined nine event
types and five argument types (roles): Theme spec-
ifies the core participant(s) that an event affects,
Cause the cause of the the event, Site a specific
domain or region on a participant involved in the
event, and ToLoc and AtLoc locations associated
with localization events (Table 1). Theme and
Cause arguments may refer to either events or
gene/gene product entities, and other arguments
refer to other physical entities. The Theme ar-
gument is always mandatory, while others can be
omitted when a relevant participant is not stated.
The event types were originally defined to cap-
ture statements of biologically relevant changes in
Event type Args Example
Gene expression T 5-LOX is coexpressed
Transcription T IL-4 transcription
Protein catabolism T IkB-A proteolysis
Localization T,L translocation of STAT6
Phosphorylation T,S NF90 was phosphorylated
Binding T+,S+ Nmi interacts with STAT
Regulation T,C,S IL-4 gene control
Positive regulation T,C,S IL-12 induced binding
Negative regulation T,C,S suppressed dimerization
Table 1: Event types targeted in the BioNLP?09
shared task and their arguments, with minimal
examples of each event type. Arguments ab-
breviate for (T)heme, (C)ause, (S)ite and L for
ToLoc/AtLoc, with ?+? identifying arguments
than can occur multiple times. The expression
marked as triggering the event shown in italics.
the state of entities in a target subdomain involv-
ing transcription factors in human blood cells. In
adapting the approach to new domains, some ex-
tension of the event types is expected to be nec-
essary. By contrast, the argument types and the
general design of the representation are intended
to be general, and to maintain compatibility with
existing systems we aim to avoid modifying these.
2.2 T4SS Domain
A corpus of full-text publications relating to the
T4SS subdomain of the infectious diseases do-
main annotated for biological entities and terms of
interest to domain experts was recently introduced
by (Ananiadou et al, 2010b). In the present study,
we use this corpus as a reference standard defin-
ing domain information needs. In the following
we briefly describe the corpus annotation and the
view it provides of the domain.
The T4SS corpus annotation covers four classes
of tagged entities and terms: Bacteria, Cellular
components, Biological Processes, and Molecular
functions. The latter three correspond to the three
Gene Ontology (GO) (Ashburner et al, 2000) top-
level sub-ontologies, and terms of these types were
annotated with reference to both GO and relevance
to the interests of domain experts, with guidelines
133
Bacterium
A. tumefaciens 32.7%
H. pylori 20.0%
L. pneumophila 16.3%
E. coli 12.3%
B. pertussis 3.0%
Cell component
T4SS 5.2%
Ti plasmid 5.1%
outer membrane 4.2%
membrane 3.5%
genome 3.4%
Biological process
virulence 14.1%
conjugation 7.9%
localization 6.1%
nuclear import 5.8%
transfer 5.1%
Molecular function
nucleotide-binding 20.3%
ATPase activity 17.3%
NTP-binding 14.7%
ATP-binding 12.2%
DNA-binding 9.1%
Table 2: Most frequently tagged terms (after normalization) and their relative frequencies of all tagged
entities of each of the four types annotated in the T4SS corpus.
Type Annotations
Bacteria 529
Cellular component 2237
Biological process 1873
Molecular function 197
Table 3: Statistics for the existing T4SS corpus
annotation.
requiring that marked terms be both found in GO
and associated with T4SS. These constraints as-
sure that the corpus is relevant to the informa-
tion needs of biologists working in the domain and
that it can be used as a reference for the study of
automatic GO annotation. In the work introduc-
ing the corpus, the task of automatic GO anno-
tation was studied as facilitating improved infor-
mation access, such as advanced search function-
ality: GO annotation can allow for search by se-
mantic classes or co-occurrences of terms of speci-
fied classes. The event approach considered in this
study further extends on these opportunities in in-
troducing a model allowing e.g. search by specific
associations of the concepts of interest.
The previously created annotation of the T4SS
corpus covers 27 full text publications totaling
15143 pseudo-sentences (text sentences plus table
rows, references, etc.) and 244942 tokens.1 A to-
tal of nearly 5000 entities and terms are annotated
in these documents; Table 2 shows the most fre-
quently tagged terms of each type after basic nor-
malization of different surface forms, and Table 3
gives the per-class statistics. Domain characteris-
tics are clearly identifiable in the first three tagged
types, showing disease-related bacteria, their ma-
jor cellular components, and processes related to
movement, reproduction and infection. The last
term type is dominated by somewhat more generic
binding-type molecular functions.
In addition to the four annotated types it was
1While the document count is modest compared to that
of abstract-based corpora, we estimate that in terms of the
amount of text (tokens) the corpus corresponds to over 1000
abstracts, comparable in size to e.g. the GENIA event corpus
(Kim et al, 2008).
recognized during the original T4SS corpus anno-
tation that genes and gene products are centrally
important for domain information needs, but their
annotation was deferred to focus on novel cate-
gories. As part of the present study, we introduce
annotation for gene/gene product (GGP) mentions
(Section 3.2), and in the following discussion of
applying an event extraction approach to the do-
main the availability of this class annotation as an
additional category is assumed.
2.3 Adaptation of the Event Model
The event model involves two primary categories
of representation: physical entities such as genes
and proteins are elementary (non-structured) and
their mentions annotated as typed spans of text,2
and events and processes (?things that happen?)
are represented using the structured event repre-
sentation described in Section 2.1. This division
applies straightforwardly to the T4SS annotations,
suggesting an approach where bacteria and cell
components retain their simple tagged-term repre-
sentation and the biological processes and molec-
ular functions are given an event representation.
In the following, we first analyze correspondences
between the latter two classes and BioNLP?09
shared task events, and then proceed to study the
event arguments and their roles as steps toward a
complete event model for the domain.
Molecular functions, the smallest class tagged
in the T4SS corpus, are highly uniform: almost
75% involve binding, immediately suggesting rep-
resentation using the Binding class of events de-
fined in the applied event extraction model. The
remaining functions are ATPase activity, together
with its exact GO synonyms (e.g. ATP hydrolase
activity) accounting for 19% of the terms, the gen-
eral type hydrolysis (4.5%), and a small number
of rare other functions. While these have no cor-
respondence with previously defined event types,
2Normalization identifying e.g. the Uniprot entry corre-
sponding to a protein mention may also be necessary, but here
excluded from consideration an independent issue.
134
Class Category Freq
Location
Transfer 27.6%
Localization 15.6%
Import/export 14.5%
Virulence 14.1%
High-level Assembly 8.7%
process Conjugation 8.3%
Secretion 8.1%
(Other) 1.8%
Table 4: Categorization of T4SS corpus biologi-
cal processes and relative frequency of mentions
of each category of the total tagged.
their low overall occurrence counts make them of
secondary interest as extraction targets.
The biological processes are considerably more
diverse. To identify general categories, we per-
formed a manual analysis of the 217 unique nor-
malized terms annotated in the corpus as biologi-
cal processes (Table 4). We find that the majority
of the instances (58%) relate to location or move-
ment. As related types of statements are anno-
tated as Localization events in the applied model,
we propose to apply this event type and differen-
tiate between the specific subtypes on the basis of
the event arguments. A further 39% are of cate-
gories that can be viewed as high-level processes.
These are distinct from the events considered in
the BioNLP?09 shared task in involving coarser-
grained events and larger-scale participants than
the GGP entities considered in the task: for ex-
ample, conjugation occurs between bacteria, and
virulence may involve a human host.
To analyze the role types and arguments char-
acteristic of domain events, we annotated a small
sample of tagged mentions for the most fre-
quent types in the broad classification discussed
above: Binding for Molecular function, Transfer
for Location-related, and Virulence for High-level
process. The statistics of the annotated 65 events
are shown in Tables 5, 6 and 7. For Binding, we
find that while an estimated 90% of events in-
volve a GGP argument, the other participant of
the binding is in all cases non-GGP, most fre-
quently of Nucleotide type (e.g. NTP/ATP). While
only GGP Binding arguments were considered in
the shared task events, the argument structures are
typical of multi-participant binding and this class
of expressions are in scope of the original GE-
NIA Event corpus annotation (Kim et al, 2008).
Event annotations could thus potentially be de-
rived from existing data. Localization event
arguments show substantially greater variety and
Freq Arguments
78% Theme: GGP, Theme: Nucleotide
5.5% Theme: GGP, Theme: DNA
5.5% Theme: GGP, Theme: Sugar
5.5% Theme: Protein family, Theme: DNA
5.5% Theme: Protein, Theme: Nucleotide
Table 5: Binding event arguments.
Freq Arguments
16% Theme: DNA, From/To: Organism
16% Theme: DNA
16% Theme: Cell component
12% Theme: DNA, To: Organism
8% Theme: Protein family, From/To: Organism
4% Theme: GGP
4% Theme: GGP, To: Organism
4% Theme: GGP, From: Organism
4% Theme: Protein family, From: Organism
4% Theme: Protein family
4% Theme: Organism, To: Cell component
4% Theme: DNA From: Organism, To: Cell component
4% (no arguments)
Table 6: Localization (Transfer) event arguments.
Freq Arguments
64% Cause: GGP
16% Theme:Organism, Cause: GGP
8% Cause: Organism
8% (no arguments)
4% Cause: Protein family
Table 7: Process (Virulence) arguments.
some highly domain-specific argument combina-
tions, largely focusing on DNA and Cell compo-
nent (e.g. phagosome) transfer, frequently involv-
ing transfer between different organisms. While
the participants are almost exclusively of types
that do not appear in Localization events in exist-
ing annotations, the argument structures are stan-
dard and in our judgment reasonably capture the
analyzed statements, supporting the applicability
of the general approach. Finally, the argument
analysis shown in Table 7 supports the previous
tentative observation that the high-level biologi-
cal processes are notably different from previously
considered event types: for over 80% of these pro-
cesses no overtly stated Theme could be identified.
We take this to indicate that the themes ? the core
participants that the processes concern ? are ob-
vious in the discourse context and their overt ex-
pression would be redundant. (For example, in
the context virulence obviously involves a host and
conjugation involves bacteria.) By contrast, in the
corpus the entities contributing to these processes
are focused: a participant we have here analyzed
as Cause is stated in over 90% of cases. This
135
Sentences Tokens
Abstracts 150 3789
Full texts 448 13375
Total 598 17164
Table 8: Statistics for the selected subcorpus.
novel pattern of event arguments suggests that the
event model should be augmented to capture this
category of high-level biological processes. Here,
we propose an event representation for these pro-
cesses that removes the requirement for a Theme
and substitutes instead a mandatory Cause as the
core argument. In the event annotation and exper-
iments, we focus on this newly proposed class.
3 Annotation
This section describes the new annotation intro-
duced for the T4SS corpus.
3.1 Text Selection
The creation of exhaustive manual annotation for
the full T4SS corpus represents a considerable an-
notation effort. Due to resource limitations, for
this study we did not attempt full-scope annota-
tion but instead selected a representative subset of
the corpus texts. We aimed to select texts that pro-
vide good coverage of the text variety in the T4SS
corpus and can be freely redistributed for use in re-
search. We first selected for annotation all corpus
documents with at least a freely available PubMed
abstract, excluding 3 documents. As the corpus
only included a single freely redistributable Open
Access paper, we extended full text selection to
manuscripts freely available as XML/HTML (i.e.
not only PDF) via PubMed Central. While these
documents cannot be redistributed in full, their
text can be reliably combined with standoff anno-
tations to recreate the annotated corpus.
In selected full-text documents, to focus anno-
tation efforts on sections most likely to contain re-
liable new information accessible to natural lan-
guage processing methods, we further selected the
publication body text, excluding figures and tables
and their captions, and removed Methods and Dis-
cussion sections. We then removed artifacts such
as page numbers and running heads and cleaned
remaining errors from PDF conversion of the orig-
inal documents. This selection produced a subcor-
pus of four full-text documents and 19 abstracts.
The statistics for this corpus are shown in Table 8.
GGP GGP/sentence
Abstracts 124 0.82
Full texts 394 0.88
Total 518 0.87
Table 9: Statistics for the GGP annotation.
3.2 Gene/Gene Product Annotation
As gene and gene product entities are central to
domain information needs and the core entities of
the applied event extraction approach, we first in-
troduced annotation for this entity class. We cre-
ated manual GGP annotation following the an-
notation guidelines of the GENIA GGP Corpus
(Ohta et al, 2009). As this corpus was the source
of the gene/protein entity annotation provided as
the basis of the BioNLP shared task on event ex-
traction, adopting its annotation criteria assures
compatibility with recently introduced event ex-
traction methods. Briefly, the guidelines spec-
ify tagging for minimal continuous spans of spe-
cific gene/gene product names, without differen-
tiating between DNA/RNA/protein. A ?specific
name? is understood to be a a name that allows
a domain expert to identify the entry in a rele-
vant database (Entrez gene/Uniprot) that the name
refers to. Only GGP names are tagged, excluding
descriptive references and the names of related en-
tities such as complexes, families and domains.
The annotation was created on the basis of an
initial tagging created by augmenting the output
of the BANNER tagger (Leaman and Gonzalez,
2008) by dictionary- and regular expression-based
tagging. This initial high-recall markup was then
corrected by a human annotator. To confirm that
the annotator had correctly identified subdomain
GGPs and to check against possible error intro-
duced through the machine-assisted tagging, we
performed a further verification of the annotation
on approx. 50% of the corpus sentences: we com-
bined the machine- and human-tagged annotations
as candidates, removed identifying information,
and asked two domain experts to identify the cor-
rect GGPs. The two sets of independently pro-
duced judgments showed very high agreement:
holding one set of judgments as the reference stan-
dard, the other would achieve an f-score of 97%
under the criteria presented in Section 4.2. We
note as one contributing factor to the high agree-
ment that the domain has stable and systematically
applied GGP naming criteria. The statistics of the
full GGP annotation are shown in Table 9.
136
Events Event/sentence
Abstracts 15 0.1
Full texts 5 0.01
Additional 80 2.2
Total 100 0.16
Table 10: Statistics for the event annotation.
3.3 Event Annotation
Motivated by the analysis described in Section 2.3,
we chose to focus on the novel category of asso-
ciations of GGP entities in high-level processes.
Specifically, we chose to study biological pro-
cesses related to virulence, as these are the most
frequent case in the corpus and prototypical of the
domain. We adopted the GENIA Event corpus an-
notation guidelines (Kim et al, 2008), marking as-
sociations between specific GGPs and biological
processes discussed in the text even when these
are stated speculatively or their existence explic-
itly denied. As the analysis indicated this category
of processes to typically involve a single stated
participant in a fixed role, annotations were ini-
tially recorded as (GGP, process) pairs and later
converted into an event representation.
During annotation, the number of annotated
GGP associations with the targeted class of pro-
cesses in the T4SS subcorpus was found to be too
low to provide material for both training and test-
ing a supervised learning-based event extraction
approach. To extend the source data, we searched
PubMed for cases where a known T4SS-related
protein co-occurred with an expression known to
relate to the targeted process class (e.g. virulence,
virulent, avirulent, non-virulent) and annotated a
further set of sentences from the search results for
both GGPs and their process associations. As the
properties of these additional examples could not
be assured to correspond to those of the targeted
domain texts, we used these annotations only as
development and training data, performing evalu-
ation on cases drawn from the T4SS subcorpus.
As the annotation target was novel, we per-
formed two independent sets of judgments for all
annotated cases, jointly resolving disagreements.
Although initial agreement was low, for a final set
of judgments we measured high agreement, corre-
sponding to 93% f-score when holding one set of
judgments as the gold standard. The statistics of
the annotation are shown in Table 10. Annotations
are sparse in the T4SS subcorpus and, as expected,
very dense in the targeted additional data.
4 Experiments
4.1 Methods
For GGP tagging experiments, we applied a state-
of-the-art tagger with default settings as reference
and a custom tagger for adaptation experiments.
As the reference tagger, we applied a recent re-
lease of BANNER (Leaman and Gonzalez, 2008)
trained on the GENETAG corpus (Tanabe et al,
2005). The corpus is tagged for gene and protein-
related entities and its texts drawn from a broad
selection of PubMed abstracts. The current revi-
sion of the tagger3 achieves an f-score of 86.4%
on the corpus, competitive with the best result re-
ported in the BioCreative II evaluation (Wilbur et
al., 2007), 87.2%. The custom tagger4 follows the
design of BANNER in both the choice of Con-
ditional Random Fields (Lafferty et al, 2001) as
the applied learning method and the basic feature
design, but as a key extension can further adopt
features from external dictionaries as both positive
and negative indicators of tagged entities. Tagging
experiments were performed using a document-
level 50/50 split of the GGP-annotated subcorpus.
For event extraction, we applied an adapta-
tion of the approach of the top-ranking system in
the BioNLP?09 shared task (Bjo?rne et al, 2009):
all sentences in the input text were parsed with
the McClosky-Charniak (2008) parser and the re-
sulting phrase structure analyses then converted
into the Stanford Dependency representation us-
ing conversion included in the Stanford NLP tools
(de Marneffe et al, 2006). Trigger recognition
was performed with a simple regular expression-
based tagger covering standard surface form vari-
ation. Edge detection was performed using a su-
pervised machine learning approach, applying the
LibSVM (Chang and Lin, 2001) Support Vector
Machine implementation with a linear kernel and
the feature representation of Bjo?rne et al (2009),
building largely around the shortest dependency
path connecting a detected trigger with a candi-
date participant. The SVM regularization parame-
ter was selected by a sparse search of the parame-
ter space with evaluation using cross-validation on
the training set. As the class of events targeted for
extraction in this study are of a highly restricted
type, each taking only of a single mandatory Cause
argument, the construction of events from detected
3http://banner.sourceforge.net
4http://www-tsujii.is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp/
NERsuite/
137
Precision Recall F-score
Abstracts 68.1% 89.5% 77.3%
Full texts 56.9% 80.7% 66.7%
Total 59.4% 82.8% 69.2%
Table 11: Initial GGP tagging results.
triggers and edges could be implemented as a sim-
ple deterministic rule.
4.2 Evaluation Criteria
For evaluating the performance of the taggers we
apply a relaxed matching criterion that accepts a
match between an automatically tagged and a gold
standard entity if the two overlap at least in part.
This relaxation is adopted to focus on true tagging
errors. The GENETAG entity span guidelines dif-
fer from the GENIA GGP guidelines adopted here
in allowing the inclusion of e.g. head nouns when
names appear in modifier position, while the an-
notation guidelines applied here require marking
only the minimal name.5 When applying strict
matching criteria, a substantial number of errors
may trace back to minor boundary differences
(Wang et al, 2009), which we consider of sec-
ondary interest to spurious or missing tags. Over-
all results are microaverages, that is, precision, re-
call and f-score are calculated from the sum of true
positive etc. counts over individual documents.
For event extraction, we applied the BioNLP?09
shared task event extraction criteria (Kim et al,
2009) with one key change: to make it possible
to evaluate the extraction of the high-level pro-
cess participants, we removed the requirement that
all events must define a Theme as their core argu-
ment.
4.3 Gene/Gene Product Tagging
The initial GGP tagging results using BANNER
are shown in Table 11. We find that even for the
relaxed overlap matching criterion, the f-score is
nearly 10% points lower than reported on GENE-
TAG in the evaluation on abstracts. For full texts,
performance is lower yet by a further 10% points.
In both cases, the primary problem is the poor
precision of the tagger, indicating that many non-
GGPs are spuriously tagged.
To determine common sources of error, we per-
formed a manual analysis of 100 randomly se-
lected falsely tagged strings (Table 12). We find
5GENETAG annotations include e.g. human ets-1 protein,
whereas the guidelines applied here would require marking
only ets-1.
Category Freq Examples
GGP family or group 34% VirB, tmRNA genes
Figure/table 26% Fig. 1B, Table 1
Cell component 10% T4SS, ER vacuole
Species/strain 9% E. coli, A348deltaB4.5
Misc. 9% step D, Protocol S1
GGP domain or region 4% Pfam domain
(Other) 8% TrIP, LGT
Table 12: Common sources of false positives in
GGP tagging.
Precision Recall F-score
Abstracts 90.5% 95.7% 93.1%
Full texts 90.0% 93.2% 91.6%
Total 90.1% 93.8% 91.9%
Table 13: GGP tagging results with domain adap-
tation.
that the most frequent category consists of cases
that are arguably correct by GENETAG annota-
tion criteria, which allow named protein families
of groups to be tagged. A similar argument can
be made for domains or regions. Perhaps not sur-
prisingly, a large number of false positives relate
to features common in full texts but missing from
the abstracts on which the tagger was trained, such
as figure and table references. Finally, systematic
errors are made for entities belonging to other cat-
egories such as named cell components or species.
To address these issues, we applied a domain-
adapted custom tagger that largely replicates the
features of BANNER, further integrating infor-
mation from the UMLS Metathesaurus,6 which
provides a large dictionary containing terms cov-
ering 135 different semantic classes, and a cus-
tom dictionary of 1081 domain GGP names, com-
piled by (Ananiadou et al, 2010b). The non-GGP
UMLS Metathesaurus terms provided negative in-
dicators for reducing spurious taggings, and the
custom dictionary positive indicators. Finally, we
augmented the GENETAG training data with 10
copies7 of the training half of the T4SS GGP cor-
pus as in-domain training data.
Table 13 shows the results with the domain-
adapted tagger. We find dramatically improved
performance for both abstracts and full texts,
showing results competitive with the state of the
art performance on GENETAG (Wilbur et al,
2007). Thus, while the performance of an un-
adapted tagger falls short of both results reported
6http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/
7As the GENETAG corpus is considerably larger than the
T4SS GGP corpus, replication was used to assure that suffi-
cient weight is given to the in-domain data in training.
138
Precision Recall F-score
Co-occurrence 65% 100% 78%
Machine learning 81% 85% 83%
Table 14: Event extraction results.
on GENETAG and levels necessary for practi-
cal application, adaptation addressing common
sources of error through the adoption of general
and custom dictionaries and the use of a small
set of in-domain training data was successful in
addressing these issues. The performance of the
adapted tagger is notably high given the modest
size of the in-domain data, perhaps again reflect-
ing the consistent GGP naming conventions of the
subdomain.
4.4 Event Extraction
We performed an event extraction experiment fol-
lowing the training and test split described in Sec-
tion 3.3. Table 14 shows the results of the ap-
plied machine learning-based method contrasted
with a co-occurrence baseline replacing the edge
detection with a rule that extracts a Cause edge for
all trigger-GGP combinations co-occurring within
sentence scope. This approach achieves 100% re-
call as the test data was found to only contain
events where the arguments are stated in the same
sentence as the trigger.
The results show that the machine learning ap-
proach achieves very high performance, matching
the best results reported for any single event type
in the BioNLP?09 shared task (Kim et al, 2009).
The very high co-occurrence baseline result sug-
gests that the high performance largely reflects the
relative simplicity of the task. With respect to
the baseline result, the machine-learning approach
achieves a 21% relative reduction in error.
While this experiment is limited in both scope
and scale, it suggests that the event extraction ap-
proach can be beneficially applied to detect do-
main events represented by novel argument struc-
tures. As a demonstration of feasibility the result
is encouraging for both the applicability of event
extraction to this specific new domain and for the
adaptability of the approach to new domains in
general.
5 Discussion and Conclusions
We have presented a study of the adaptation of an
event extraction approach to the T4SS subdomain
as a step toward the introduction of event extrac-
tion to the broader infectious diseases domain. We
applied a previously introduced corpus of subdo-
main full texts annotated for mentions of bacte-
ria and terms from the three top-level Gene On-
tology subontologies as a reference defining do-
main information needs to study how these can
be met through the application of events defined
in the BioNLP?09 Shared Task on event extrac-
tion. Analysis indicated that with minor revision
of the arguments, the Binding and Localization
event types could account for the majority of both
biological processes and molecular functions of
interest. We further identified a category of ?high-
level? biological processes such as the virulence
process typical of the subdomain, which necessi-
tated extension of the considered event extraction
model.
Based on argument analysis, we proposed a rep-
resentation for high-level processes in the event
model that substitutes Cause for Theme as the
core argument. We further produced annotation
allowing an experiment on the extraction of the
dominant category of virulence processes with
gene/gene product (GGP) causes, annotating 518
GGP mentions and 100 associations between these
and the processes. Experiments indicated that with
annotated in-domain resources both the GGP enti-
ties and their associations with processes could be
extracted with high reliability.
In future work we will extend the model and
annotation proposed in this paper to the broader
infectious diseases domain, introducing annotated
resources and extraction methods for advanced in-
formation access. All annotated resources intro-
duced in this study are available from the GENIA
project homepage.8
Acknowledgments
This work was partially supported by Grant-in-Aid
for Specially Promoted Research (MEXT, Japan),
the National Institutes of Health, grant number
HHSN272200900040C, and the Joint Information
Systems Committee (JISC, UK).
References
Sophia Ananiadou, Sampo Pyysalo, Junichi Tsujii, and
Douglas B. Kell. 2010a. Event extraction for sys-
tems biology by text mining the literature. Trends in
Biotechnology. (to appear).
8http://www-tsujii.is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp/
GENIA/
139
Sophia Ananiadou, Dan Sullivan, Gina-Anne Levow,
Joseph Gillespie, Chunhong Mao, Sampo Pyysalo,
Jun?ichi Tsujii, and Bruno Sobral. 2010b. Named
entity recognition for bacterial type IV secretion sys-
tems. (manuscript in review).
M Ashburner, CA Ball, JA Blake, D Botstein, H But-
ler, JM Cherry, AP Davis, K Dolinski, SS Dwight,
JT Eppig, MA Harris, DP Hill, L Issel-Tarver,
A Kasarskis, S Lewis, JC Matese, JE Richardson,
M Ringwald, GM Rubin, and G Sherlock. 2000.
Gene ontology: tool for the unification of biology.
Nature genetics, 25:25?29.
Jari Bjo?rne, Juho Heimonen, Filip Ginter, Antti Airola,
Tapio Pahikkala, and Tapio Salakoski. 2009. Ex-
tracting complex biological events with rich graph-
based feature sets. In Proceedings of the BioNLP
2009 Workshop Companion Volume for Shared Task,
pages 10?18, Boulder, Colorado, June. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Chih-Chung Chang and Chih-Jen Lin, 2001. LIB-
SVM: a library for support vector machines.
Software available at http://www.csie.ntu.
edu.tw/?cjlin/libsvm.
Hong-Woo Chun, Yoshimasa Tsuruoka, Jin-Dong
Kim, Rie Shiba, Naoki Nagata, Teruyoshi Hishiki,
and Jun?ichi Tsujii. 2006. Extraction of gene-
disease relations from medline using domain dic-
tionaries and machine learning. In Proceedings of
the Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing (PSB?06),
pages 4?15.
Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Bill MacCartney, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2006. Generating Typed
Dependency Parses from Phrase Structure Parses. In
Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC?06),
pages 449?454.
Mario Juhas, Derrick W. Crook, and Derek W. Hood.
2008. Type IV secretion systems: tools of bacterial
horizontal gene transfer and virulence. Cellular mi-
crobiology, 10(12):2377?2386.
Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, and Jun?ichi Tsujii.
2008. Corpus annotation for mining biomedical
events from lterature. BMC Bioinformatics, 9(1):10.
Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, Sampo Pyysalo, Yoshi-
nobu Kano, and Jun?ichi Tsujii. 2009. Overview
of BioNLP?09 Shared Task on Event Extraction.
In Proceedings of Natural Language Processing
in Biomedicine (BioNLP) NAACL 2009 Workshop,
pages 1?9.
Martin Krallinger, Florian Leitner, and Alfonso Valen-
cia. 2007. Assessment of the Second BioCreative
PPI task: Automatic Extraction of Protein-Protein
Interactions. In L. Hirschman, M. Krallinger, and
A. Valencia, editors, Proceedings of Second BioCre-
ative Challenge Evaluation Workshop, pages 29?39.
John D. Lafferty, Andrew McCallum, and Fernando
C . N. Pereira. 2001. Conditional random fields:
Probabilistic models for segmenting and labeling se-
quence data. In ICML ?01: Proceedings of the
18th International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing, pages 282?289.
R. Leaman and G. Gonzalez. 2008. Banner: an ex-
ecutable survey of advances in biomedical named
entity recognition. Pacific Symposium on Biocom-
puting, pages 652?663.
David McClosky and Eugene Charniak. 2008. Self-
Training for Biomedical Parsing. In Proceedings of
the 46th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics - Human Language Technolo-
gies (ACL-HLT?08), pages 101?104.
Claire Ne?dellec. 2005. Learning Language in
Logic - Genic Interaction Extraction Challenge. In
J. Cussens and C. Ne?dellec, editors, Proceedings
of the 4th Learning Language in Logic Workshop
(LLL05), pages 31?37.
Tomoko Ohta, Jin-Dong Kim, Sampo Pyysalo, and
Jun?ichi Tsujii. 2009. Incorporating GENETAG-
style annotation to GENIA corpus. In Proceedings
of Natural Language Processing in Biomedicine
(BioNLP) NAACL 2009 Workshop, pages 106?107,
Boulder, Colorado. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Sampo Pyysalo, Filip Ginter, Juho Heimonen, Jari
Bjo?rne, Jorma Boberg, Jouni Ja?rvinen, and Tapio
Salakoski. 2007. BioInfer: A corpus for infor-
mation extraction in the biomedical domain. BMC
Bioinformatics, 8(50).
Andrey Rzhetsky, Ivan Iossifov, Tomohiro Koike,
Michael Krauthammer, Pauline Kra, Mitzi Mor-
ris, Hong Yu, Pablo Ariel Duboue?, Wubin Weng,
W. John Wilbur, Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou, and
Carol Friedman. 2004. GeneWays: A system for
extracting, analyzing, visualizing, and integrating
molecular pathway data. Journal of Biomedical In-
formatics, 37(1):43?53.
Lorraine Tanabe, Natalie Xie, Lynne Thom, Wayne
Matten, and John Wilbur. 2005. Genetag: a tagged
corpus for gene/protein named entity recognition.
BMC Bioinformatics, 6(Suppl 1):S3.
Paul Thompson, Syed Iqbal, John McNaught, and
Sophia Ananiadou. 2009. Construction of an anno-
tated corpus to support biomedical information ex-
traction. BMC Bioinformatics, 10(1):349.
Yue Wang, Jin-Dong Kim, Rune Saetre, Sampo
Pyysalo, and Jun?ichi Tsujii. 2009. Investigat-
ing heterogeneous protein annotations toward cross-
corpora utilization. BMC Bioinformatics, 10(1):403.
John Wilbur, Lawrence Smith, and Lorraine Tanabe.
2007. BioCreative 2. Gene Mention Task. In
L. Hirschman, M. Krallinger, and A. Valencia, ed-
itors, Proceedings of Second BioCreative Challenge
Evaluation Workshop, pages 7?16.
140
Proceedings of BioNLP Shared Task 2011 Workshop, pages 26?35,
Portland, Oregon, USA, 24 June, 2011. c?2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
Overview of the Infectious Diseases (ID) task of
BioNLP Shared Task 2011
Sampo Pyysalo? Tomoko Ohta? Rafal Rak?? Dan Sullivan? Chunhong Mao?
Chunxia Wang? Bruno Sobral? Jun?ichi Tsujii? Sophia Ananiadou??
?Department of Computer Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
?Virginia Bioinformatics Institute, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia, USA
?School of Computer Science, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
?National Centre for Text Mining, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
?Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China
{smp,okap}@is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp jtsujii@microsoft.com
{dsulliva,cmao,cwang,sobral}@vbi.vt.edu
{rafal.rak,sophia.ananiadou}@manchester.ac.uk
Abstract
This paper presents the preparation, resources,
results and analysis of the Infectious Diseases
(ID) information extraction task, a main task
of the BioNLP Shared Task 2011. The ID
task represents an application and extension
of the BioNLP?09 shared task event extrac-
tion approach to full papers on infectious dis-
eases. Seven teams submitted final results to
the task, with the highest-performing system
achieving 56% F-score in the full task, com-
parable to state-of-the-art performance in the
established BioNLP?09 task. The results in-
dicate that event extraction methods general-
ize well to new domains and full-text publi-
cations and are applicable to the extraction of
events relevant to the molecular mechanisms
of infectious diseases.
1 Introduction
The Infectious Diseases (ID) task of the BioNLP
Shared Task 2011 (Kim et al, 2011a) is an infor-
mation extraction task focusing on the biomolecu-
lar mechanisms of infectious diseases. The primary
target of the task is event extraction (Ananiadou et
al., 2010), broadly following the task setup of the
BioNLP?09 Shared Task (BioNLP ST?09) (Kim et
al., 2009).
The task concentrates on the specific domain of
two-component systems (TCSs, or two-component
regulatory systems), a mechanism widely used by
bacteria to sense and respond to the environment
(Thomason and Kay, 2000). Typical TCSs con-
sist of two proteins, a membrane-associated sensor
kinase and a cytoplasmic response regulator. The
sensor kinase monitors changes in the environment
while the response regulator mediates an adaptive
response, usually through differential expression of
target genes (Mascher et al, 2006). TCSs have many
functions, but those of particular interest for infec-
tious disease researchers include virulence, response
to antibiotics, quorum sensing, and bacterial cell at-
tachment (Krell et al, 2010). Not all TCS functions
are well known: in some cases, TCSs are involved
in metabolic processes that are difficult to precisely
characterize (Wang et al, 2010). TCSs are of in-
terest also as drugs designed to disrupt TCSs may
reduce the virulence of bacteria without killing it,
thus avoiding the potential selective pressure of an-
tibiotics lethal to some pathogenic bacteria (Gotoh
et al, 2010). Information extraction techniques may
support better understanding of these fundamental
systems by identifying and structuring the molecu-
lar processes underlying two component signaling.
The ID task seeks to address these opportuni-
ties by adapting the BioNLP ST?09 event extraction
model to domain scientific publications. This model
was originally introduced to represent biomolecu-
lar events relating to transcription factors in human
blood cells, and its adaptation to a domain that cen-
trally concerns both bacteria and their hosts involves
a variety of novel aspects, such as events concerning
whole organisms, the chemical environment of bac-
teria, prokaryote-specific concepts (e.g. regulons as
elements of gene expression), as well as the effects
of biomolecules on larger-scale processes involving
hosts such as virulence.
26
2 Task Setting
The ID task broadly follows the task definition and
event types of the BioNLP ST?09, extending it with
new entity categories, correspondingly broadening
the scope of events, and introducing a new class of
events, high-level biological processes.
2.1 Entities
The ID task defines five core types of entities:
genes/gene products, two-component systems, reg-
ulons/operons, chemicals, and organisms. Follow-
ing the general policy of the BioNLP Shared Task,
the recognition of the core entities is not part of
the ID task. As named entity recognition (NER)
is considered in other prominent domain evaluations
(Krallinger et al, 2008), we have chosen to isolate
aspects of extraction performance relating to NER
from the main task of interest, event extraction, by
providing participants with human-created gold an-
notations for core entities. These annotations are
briefly presented in the following.
Mentions of names of genes and their products
(RNA and proteins) are annotated with a single
type, without differentiating between subtypes, fol-
lowing the guidelines of the GENIA GGP corpus
(Ohta et al, 2009). This type is named PRO-
TEIN to maintain consistency with related tasks
(e.g. BioNLP ST?09), despite slight inaccuracy
for cases specifically referencing RNA or DNA
forms. Two-component systems, consisting of two
proteins, frequently have names derived from the
names of the proteins involved (e.g. PhoP-PhoR
or SsrA/SsrB). Mentions of TCSs are annotated as
TWO-COMPONENT-SYSTEM, nesting PROTEIN an-
notations if present. Regulons and operons are col-
lections of genes whose expression is jointly regu-
lated. Like the names of TCSs, their names may de-
rive from the names of the involved genes and pro-
teins, and are annotated as embedding PROTEIN an-
notations when they do. The annotation does not
differentiate between the two, marking both with a
single type REGULON-OPERON.
In addition to these three classes relating to genes
and proteins, the core entity annotation recognizes
the classes CHEMICAL and ORGANISM. All men-
tions of formal and informal names of atoms, inor-
ganic compounds, carbohydrates and lipids as well
as organic compounds other than amino acid and nu-
cleic acid compounds (i.e. gene/protein-related com-
pounds) are annotated as CHEMICAL. Mentions of
names of families, genera, species and strains as
well as non-name references with comparable speci-
ficity are annotated as ORGANISM.
Finally, the non-specific type ENTITY1 is defined
for marking entities that specify additional details of
events such as the binding site in a BINDING event or
the location an entity moves to in a LOCALIZATION
event. Unlike the core entities, annotations of the
generic ENTITY type are not provided for test data
and must be detected by participants addressing the
full task.
2.2 Relations
The ID task involves one relation, EQUIV, defin-
ing entities (of any of the core types) to be equiv-
alent. This relation is used to annotate abbreviations
and local aliases and it is not a target of extraction,
but provided for reference and applied in evaluation,
where references to any of a set of equivalent entities
are treated identically.
2.3 Events
The primary extraction targets of the ID task are the
event types summarized in Table 1. These are a su-
perset of those targeted in the BioNLP ST?09 and its
repeat, the 2011 GE task (Kim et al, 2011b). This
design makes it possible to study aspects of domain
adaptation by having the same extraction targets in
two subdomains of biomedicine, that of transcrip-
tion factors in human blood cells (GE) and infectious
diseases. The events in the ID task extend on those
of GE in the inclusion of additional entity types
as participants in previously considered event types
and the introduction of a new type, PROCESS. We
next briefly discuss the semantics of these events,
defined (as in GE) with reference to the community-
standard Gene Ontology (Ashburner et al, 2000).
We refer to (Kim et al, 2008; Kim et al, 2009) for
the ST?09/GE definitions.
1In terms of the GENIA ontology, ENTITY is used to mark
e.g. PROTEIN DOMAIN OR REGION references. Specific types
were applied in manual annotation, but these were replaced
with the generic ENTITY in part to maintain consistency with
BioNLP ST?09 data and to reduce the NER-related demands
on participating systems by not requiring the assignment of de-
tailed types.
27
Type Core arguments Additional arguments
GENE EXPRESSION Theme(PROTEIN or REGULON-OPERON)
TRANSCRIPTION Theme(PROTEIN or REGULON-OPERON)
PROTEIN CATABOLISM Theme(PROTEIN)
PHOSPHORYLATION Theme(PROTEIN) Site(ENTITY)
LOCALIZATION Theme(Core entity) AtLoc(ENTITY), ToLoc(ENTITY)
BINDING Theme(Core entity)+ Site(ENTITY)+
PROCESS Participant(Core entity)?
REGULATION Theme(Core entity / Event), Cause(Core entity / Event)? Site(ENTITY), CSite(ENTITY)
POSITIVE REGULATION Theme(Core entity / Event), Cause(Core entity / Event)? Site(ENTITY), CSite(ENTITY)
NEGATIVE REGULATION Theme(Core entity / Event), Cause(Core entity / Event)? Site(ENTITY), CSite(ENTITY)
Table 1: Event types and their arguments. The type of entity allowed as argument is specified in parenthesis. ?Core en-
tity? is any of PROTEIN, TWO-COMPONENT-SYSTEM, REGULON-OPERON, CHEMICAL, or ORGANISM. Arguments
that can be filled multiple times marked with ?+?, non-mandatory core arguments with ??? (all additional arguments
are non-mandatory).
The definitions of the first four types in Table 1
are otherwise unchanged from the ST?09 definitions
except that GENE EXPRESSION and TRANSCRIP-
TION extend on the former definition in recogniz-
ing REGULON-OPERON as an alternative unit of ex-
pression. LOCALIZATION, taking only PROTEIN
type arguments in the ST?09 definition, is allowed
to take any core entity argument. This expanded
definition remains consistent with the scope of the
corresponding GO term (GO:0051179). BINDING
is similarly extended, giving it a scope largely con-
sistent with GO:0005488 (binding) but also encom-
passing GO:0007155 (cell adhesion) (e.g. a bac-
terium binding another) and protein-organism bind-
ing. The three regulation types (REGULATION,
POSITIVE REGULATION, and NEGATIVE REGULA-
TION) likewise allow the new core entity types as
arguments, but their definitions are otherwise un-
changed from those in ST?09, that is, the GENIA on-
tology definitions. As in these resources, regulation
types are used not only for the biological sense but
also to capture statements of general causality (Kim
et al, 2008). As in ST?09, all events of types dis-
cussed above require a Theme argument: only events
involving an explicitly stated theme (of an appropri-
ate type) should be extracted. All other arguments
are optional.
The PROCESS type, new to ID, is used to annotate
high-level processes such as virulence, infection and
resistance that involve infectious organisms. This
type differs from the others in that it has no manda-
tory arguments: the targeted processes should be ex-
tracted even if they have no explicitly stated partici-
pants, reflecting that they are of interest even without
the further specification. When stated, the involved
participants are captured using the generic role type
Participant. Figure 1 shows an illustration of some
of the the ID task extraction targets.
We term the first five event types in Table 1 taking
exactly one Theme argument as their core argument
simple events. In analysis we further differentiate
non-regulation events (the first seven) and regulation
(the last three), which is known to represent partic-
ular challenges for extraction in involving events as
arguments, thus creating nested event structures.
2.4 Event modifications
The ID task defines two event modification ex-
traction targets, NEGATION and SPECULATION.
These modifications mark events as being explic-
itly negated (e.g. virB is not expressed) or stated in
a speculative context (e.g. virB may be expressed).
Both may apply simultaneously. The modification
definitions are identical to the ST?09 ones, includ-
ing the representation in which modifications (un-
like events) are not assigned text bindings.
3 Data
The ID task data were newly annotated for the
BioNLP Shared Task and are not based on any previ-
ously released resource. Annotation was performed
by two teams, one in Tsujii laboratory (University
of Tokyo) and one in Virginia Bioinformatics Insti-
tute (Virginia Tech). The entity and event annotation
28
Figure 1: Example event annotation. The association of a TCS with an organism is captured through an event structure
involving a PROCESS (?virulence?) and POSITIVE REGULATION. Regulation types are used to capture also statements
of general causality such as ?is essential for? here. (Simplified from PMC ID 2358977)
Journal # Published
PLoS Pathogens 9 2006?2010
PLoS One 7 2008?2010
BMC Genomics 3 2008?2010
PLoS Genetics 2 2007?2010
Open Microbiology J. 2 2008?2010
BMC Microbiology 2 2008?2009
Other 5 2007?2008
Table 2: Corpus composition. Journals in which selected
articles were published with number of articles (#) and
publication years.
design was guided by previous studies on NER and
event extraction in a closely related domain (Pyysalo
et al, 2010; Ananiadou et al, 2011).
3.1 Document selection
The training and test data were drawn from the pri-
mary text content of recent full-text PMC open ac-
cess documents selected by infectious diseases do-
main experts (Virginia Tech team) as representative
publications on two-component regulatory systems.
Table 2 presents some characteristics of the corpus
composition. To focus efforts on natural language
text likely to express novel information, we excluded
tables, figures and their captions, as well as methods
sections, acknowledgments, authors? contributions,
and similar meta-content.
3.2 Annotation
Annotation was performed in two primary stages,
one for marking core entities and the other for events
and secondary entities. As a preliminary processing
step, initial sentence segmentation was performed
with the GENIA Sentence Splitter2. Segmentation
errors were corrected during core entity annotation.
Core entity annotation was performed from the
basis of an automatic annotation created using se-
lected existing taggers for the target entities. The
2http://www-tsujii.is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp/
?y-matsu/geniass/
Entity type prec. rec. F
PROTEIN 54.64 39.64 45.95
CHEMICAL 32.24 19.05 23.95
ORGANISM 90.38 47.70 62.44
TWO-COMPONENT-SYSTEM 87.69 47.24 61.40
Table 3: Automatic core entity tagging performance.
following tools and settings were adopted, with pa-
rameters tuned on initial annotation for two docu-
ments:
PROTEIN: NeMine (Sasaki et al, 2008) trained on
the JNLPBA data (Kim et al, 2004) with threshold
0.05, filtered to only GENE and PROTEIN types.
ORGANISM: Linnaeus (Gerner et al, 2010) with
?variant matching? for species names variants.
CHEMICAL: OSCAR3 (Corbett and Murray-Rust,
2006) with confidence 90%.
TWO-COMPONENT-SYSTEM: Custom regular ex-
pressions.
Initial automatic tagging was not applied for en-
tities of the REGULON-OPERON type or the generic
ENTITY type (for additional event arguments). All
automatically generated annotations were at least
confirmed through manual inspection, and the ma-
jority of the automatic annotations were revised in
manual annotation. Table 3 summarizes the tag-
ging performance of the automatic tools as measured
against the final human-annotated training and de-
velopment datasets.3
Annotation for the task extraction targets ? events
and event modifications ? was created entirely man-
ually without automatic annotation support to avoid
any possible bias toward specific extraction meth-
ods or approaches. The Tsujii laboratory team orga-
3It should be noted that these results are low in part due to
differences in annotation criteria (see e.g. (Wang et al, 2009))
and to data tagged using the ID task annotation guidelines not
being applied for training; training on the newly annotated data
is expected to allow notably more accurate tagging.
29
Item Train Devel Test Total
Articles 15 5 10 30
Sentences 2,484 709 1,925 5118
Words 74,439 21,225 57,489 153,153
Core entities 6,525 1,976 4,239 12,740
Events 2,088 691 1,371 4150
Modifications 95 45 74 214
Table 4: Statistics of the ID corpus.
nized the annotation effort, with a coordinating an-
notator with extensive experience in event annota-
tion (TO) leading annotator training and annotation
scheme development. Detailed annotation guide-
lines (Pyysalo et al, 2011) extending on the GE-
NIA annotation guidelines were developed jointly
with all annotators and refined throughout the an-
notation effort. Based on measurements of inter-
annotator consistency between annotations indepen-
dently created by the two teams, made throughout
annotator training and primary annotation (exclud-
ing final corpus cleanup), we estimate the consis-
tency of the final entity annotation to be no lower
than 90% F-score and that of the event annotation to
be no lower than 75% F-score for the primary eval-
uation criteria (see Section 4).
3.3 Datasets and statistics
Initial annotation was produced for the selected sec-
tions (see Section 3.1) in 33 full-text articles, of
which 30 were selected for the final dataset as repre-
sentative of the extraction targets. These documents
were split into training, development and test sets of
15, 5 and 10 documents, respectively. Participants
were provided with all training and development set
annotations and test set core entity annotations. The
overall statistics of the datasets are given in Table 4.
As the corpus consists of full-text articles, it con-
tains a somewhat limited number of articles, but in
other terms it is of broadly comparable size to the
largest of the BioNLP ST corpora: the corpus word
count, for example, corresponds to that of a cor-
pus of approximately 800 PubMed abstracts, and the
core entity count is comparable to that in the ST?09
data. However, for reasons that may relate in part to
the domain, the event count is approximately a third
of that for the ST?09 data. In addition to having less
training data, the entity/event ratio is thus consider-
ably higher (i.e. there are more candidates for each
true target), suggesting that the ID data could be ex-
pected to provide a more challenging extraction task.
4 Evaluation
The performance of participating systems was
evaluated in terms of events using the standard
precision/recall/F-score metrics. For the primary
evaluation, we adopted the standard criteria defined
in the BioNLP?09 shared task. In brief, for deter-
mining whether a reference annotation and a pre-
dicted annotation match, these criteria relax exact
matching for event triggers and arguments in two
ways: matching of text-bound annotation (event
triggers and ENTITY type entities) allows limited
boundary variation, and only core arguments need to
match in nested event arguments for events to match.
For details of the matching criteria, please refer to
Kim et al (2009).
The primary evaluation for the task requires the
extraction of all event arguments (both core and ad-
ditional; see Table 1) as well as event modifications
(NEGATION and SPECULATION). This is termed
the full task. We additionally report extraction re-
sults for evaluation where both the gold standard ref-
erence data and the submission events are reduced
to only core arguments, event modifications are re-
moved, and resulting duplicate events removed. We
term this the core task. In terms of the subtask divi-
sion applied in the BioNLP?09 Shared Task and the
GE task of 2011, the core task is analogous to sub-
task 1 and the full task analogous to the combination
of subtasks 1?3.
5 Results
5.1 Participation
Final results to the task were successfully submitted
by seven participants. Table 5 summarizes the in-
formation provided by the participating teams. We
note that full parsing is applied in all systems, with
the specific choice of the parser of Charniak and
Johnson (2005) with the biomedical domain model
of McClosky (2009) and conversion into the Stan-
ford Dependency representation (de Marneffe et al,
2006) being adopted by five participants. Further,
five of the seven systems are predominantly machine
learning-based. These can be seen as extensions of
trends that were noted in analysis of the BioNLP
30
NLP Events Other resources
Rank Team Org Word Parse Trig. Arg. Group. Modif. Corpora Other
1 FAUST 3NLP
CoreNLP,
SnowBall
McCCJ + SD (UMass+Stanford as features) GE word clusters
2 UMass 1NLP
CoreNLP,
SnowBall
McCCJ + SD Joint, dual dec.+MIRA 1-best - GE -
3 Stanford 3NLP CoreNLP McCCJ + SD MaxEnt Joint, MSTParser - GE word clusters
4 ConcordU 2NLP - McCCJ + SD dict rules rules rules -
triggers and
hedge words
5 UTurku 1BI Porter McCCJ + SD SVM SVM SVM SVM - hedge words
6 PNNL
1CS, 1NLP,
2BI
Porter Stanford SVM SVM rules - GE UMLS, triggers
7 PredX 1CS, 1NLP LGP LGP dict rules rules - - UMLS, triggers
Table 5: Participants and summary of system descriptions. Abbreviations: Trig./Arg./Group./Modif.=event trigger
detection/argument detection/argument grouping/modification detection, BI=Bioinformatician, NLP=Natural Lan-
guage Processing researcher, CS=Computer scientist, CoreNLP=Stanford CoreNLP, Porter=Porter stemmer, Snow-
ball=Snowball stemmer McCCJ=McClosky-Charniak-Johnson parser, LGP=Link Grammar Parser, SD=Stanford De-
pendency conversion, UMLS=UMLS resources (e.g. lexicon, metamap)
ST?09 participation. In system design choices, we
note an indication of increased use of joint models
as opposed to pure pipeline designs, with the three
highest-ranking systems involving a joint model.
Several participants compiled dictionaries of
event trigger words and two dictionaries of hedge
words from the data. Four teams, including the three
top-ranking, used the GE task corpus as supplemen-
tary material, indicating that the GE annotations are
largely compatible with ID ones (see detailed results
below). This is encouraging for future applications
of the event extraction approach: as manual annota-
tion requires considerable effort and time, the ability
to use existing annotations is important for the feasi-
bility of adaptation of the approach to new domains.
While several participants made use of support-
ing syntactic analyses provided by the organizers
(Stenetorp et al, 2011), none applied the analyses
for supporting tasks, such as coreference or entity
relation extraction results ? at least in cases due to
time constraints (Kilicoglu and Bergler, 2011).
5.2 Evaluation results
Table 6 presents the primary results by event type,
and Table 7 summarizes these results. The full
task requires the extraction of additional arguments
and event modifications and involves multiple novel
challenges from previously addressed domain tasks
including a new subdomain, full-text documents,
several new entity types and a new event category.
Team recall prec. F-score
FAUST 48.03 65.97 55.59
UMass 46.92 62.02 53.42
Stanford 46.30 55.86 50.63
ConcordU 49.00 40.27 44.21
UTurku 37.85 48.62 42.57
PNNL 27.75 52.36 36.27
PredX 22.56 35.18 27.49
Table 7: Primary evaluation results.
Nevertheless, extraction performance for the top
systems is comparable to the state-of-the-art results
for the established BioNLP ST?09 task (Miwa et al,
2010) as well as its repetition as the 2011 GE task
(Kim et al, 2011b), where the highest overall result
for the primary evaluation criteria was also 56% F-
score for the FAUST system (Riedel et al, 2011).
This result is encouraging regarding the ability of
the extraction approach and methods to generalize
to new domains as well as their applicability specifi-
cally to texts on the molecular mechanisms of infec-
tious diseases.
We note that there is substantial variation in the
relative performance of systems for different en-
tity types. For example, Stanford (McClosky et
al., 2011) has relatively low performance for simple
events but achieves the highest result for PROCESS,
while UTurku (Bjo?rne and Salakoski, 2011) results
show roughly the reverse. This suggests further po-
tential for improvement from system combinations.
31
FAUST UMass Stanford ConcordU UTurku PNNL PredX Size
GENE EXPRESSION 70.68 66.43 54.00 56.57 64.88 53.33 0.00 512
TRANSCRIPTION 69.66 68.24 60.00 70.89 57.14 0.00 53.85 77
PROTEIN CATABOLISM 75.00 72.73 20.00 66.67 33.33 11.76 0.00 33
PHOSPHORYLATION 64.00 66.67 40.00 54.55 60.61 64.29 40.00 69
LOCALIZATION 33.33 14.29 31.58 20.00 66.67 20.69 0.00 49
Simple event total 68.47 63.55 52.72 56.78 62.67 43.87 18.18 740
BINDING 31.30 34.62 23.44 40.00 22.22 20.00 28.28 156
PROCESS 65.69 62.26 73.57 67.17 41.57 51.04 53.27 901
Non-regulation total 63.78 60.68 63.59 62.43 46.39 47.34 43.65 1797
REGULATION 35.44 30.49 17.67 19.43 22.96 0.00 2.16 267
POSITIVE REGULATION 47.50 49.49 34.78 23.41 41.28 24.60 21.02 455
NEGATIVE REGULATION 58.86 60.45 44.44 47.96 52.11 25.70 9.49 260
Regulation total 47.07 46.65 33.02 28.87 39.49 18.45 9.71 982
Subtotal 57.28 55.03 52.09 46.60 43.33 37.53 28.38 2779
NEGATION 0.00 0.00 0.00 22.92 32.91 0.00 0.00 96
SPECULATION 0.00 0.00 0.00 3.23 15.00 0.00 0.00 44
Modification total 0.00 0.00 0.00 11.82 26.89 0.00 0.00 140
Total 55.59 53.42 50.63 44.21 42.57 36.27 27.49 2919
Table 6: Primary evaluation F-scores by event type. The ?size? column gives the number of annotations of each type
in the given data (training+development). Best result for each type shown in bold.
The best performance for simple events and for
PROCESS approaches or exceeds 70% F-score, ar-
guably approaching a sufficient level for user-facing
applications of the extraction technology. By con-
trast, BINDING and regulation events, found chal-
lenging in ST?09 and GE, remain problematic also
in the ID task, with best overall performance below
50% F-score. Only two teams, UTurku and Con-
cordU (Kilicoglu and Bergler, 2011), attempted to
extract event modifications, with somewhat limited
performance. The difficulty of correct extraction of
event modifications is related in part to the recursive
nature of the problem (similarly as for nested reg-
ulation events): to extract a modification correctly,
the modified event must also be extracted correctly.
Further, only UTurku predicted any instances of sec-
ondary arguments. Thus, teams other than UTurku
and ConcordU addressed only the core task extrac-
tion targets. With the exception of ConcordU, all
systems clearly favor precision over recall (Table 7),
in many cases having over 15% point higher preci-
sion than recall. This a a somewhat unexpected in-
version, as the ConcordU system is one of the two
rule-based in the task, an approach typically associ-
ated with high precision.
The five top-ranking systems participated also in
the GE task (Kim et al, 2011b), which involves a
subset of the ID extraction targets. This allows ad-
ditional perspective into the relative performance of
the systems. While there is a 13% point spread in
overall results for the top five systems here, in GE
all these systems achieved F-scores ranging between
50?56%. The results for FAUST, UMass and Stan-
ford were similar in both tasks, while the ConcordU
result was 6% points higher for GE and the UTurku
result over 10% points higher for GE, ranking third
after FAUST and UMass. These results suggest that
while the FAUST and UMass systems in particular
have some systematic (e.g. architectural) advantage
at both tasks, much of the performance difference
observed here between the top three systems and
those of ConcordU and UTurku is due to strengths
or weaknesses specific to ID. Possible weaknesses
may relate to the treatment of multiple core entity
types (vs. only PROTEIN in GE) or challenges re-
lated to nested entity annotations (not appearing in
GE). A possible ID-specific strength of the three
top-ranking systems is the use of GE data for train-
ing: Riedel and McCallum (2011) report an esti-
mated 7% point improvement and McClosky et al
(2011) a 3% point improvement from use of this
data; McGrath et al (2011) estimate a 1% point im-
provement from direct corpus combination. The in-
tegration strategies applied in training these systems
32
Team recall prec. F-score ?
FAUST 50.62 66.06 57.32 1.73
UMass 49.45 62.11 55.06 1.64
Stanford 48.87 56.03 52.20 1.57
ConcordU 50.77 43.25 46.71 2.50
UTurku 38.79 49.35 43.44 0.87
PNNL 29.36 52.62 37.69 1.42
PredX 23.67 35.18 28.30 0.81
Table 8: Core task evaluation results. The ? column
gives the F-score difference to the corresponding full task
(primary) result.
could potentially be applied also with other systems,
an experiment that could further clarify the relative
strengths of the various systems. The top-ranking
five systems all participated also in the EPI task
(Ohta et al, 2011), for which UTurku ranked first
with FAUST having comparable performance for the
core task. While this supports the conclusion that
ID performance differences do not reflect a simple
universal ranking of the systems, due to many sub-
stantial differences between the ID and EPI setups it
is not straightforward to identify specific reasons for
relative differences to performance at EPI.
Table 8 summarizes the core task results. There
are only modest and largely consistent differences to
the corresponding full task results, reflecting in part
the relative sparseness of additional arguments: in
the training data, for example, only approximately
3% of instances of event types that can potentially
take additional arguments had at least one additional
argument. While event modifications represent a
further 4% of full task extraction targets not required
for the core task, the overall low extraction perfor-
mance for additional arguments and modifications
limits the practical effect of these annotation cate-
gories on the performance difference between sys-
tems addressing only the core targets and those ad-
dressing the full task.
6 Discussion and Conclusions
We have presented the preparation, resources, re-
sults and analysis of the Infectious Diseases (ID)
task of the BioNLP Shared Task 2011. A corpus
of 30 full-text publications on the two-component
systems subdomain of infectious diseases was cre-
ated for the task in a collaboration of event annota-
tion and domain experts, adapting and extending the
BioNLP?09 Shared Task (ST?09) event representa-
tion to the domain.
Seven teams submitted final results to the ID task.
Despite the novel challenges of full papers, four new
entity types, extension of event scopes and the intro-
duction of a new event category for high-level pro-
cesses, the highest results for the full ID task were
comparable to the state-of-the-art performance on
the established ST?09 data, showing that the event
extraction approach and present systems generalize
well and demonstrating the feasibility of event ex-
traction for the infectious diseases domain. Analy-
sis of results suggested further opportunities for im-
proving extraction performance by combining the
strengths of various systems and the use of other
event resources.
The task design takes into account the needs
of supporting practical applications, and its results
and findings will be adopted in future development
of the Pathosystems Resource Integration Center4
(PATRIC). Specifically, PATRIC will combine do-
main named entity recognition and event extraction
to mine the virulence factor literature and integrate
the results with literature search and retrieval ser-
vices, protein feature analysis, and systems such as
Disease View.5 Present and future advances at the
ID event extraction task can thus assist biologists in
efforts of substantial public health interest.
The ID task will be continued as an open
shared task challenge with data, supporting re-
sources, and evaluation tools freely available from
the shared task site, http://sites.google.
com/site/bionlpst/.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Grant-in-Aid for Spe-
cially Promoted Research (MEXT, Japan). This
project has been funded in whole or in part with Fed-
eral funds from the National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Department of Health and Human Services, under
Contract No. HHSN272200900040C, awarded to
BWS Sobral.
4http://patricbrc.org
5See for example http://patricbrc.org/portal/
portal/patric/DiseaseOverview?cType=
taxon&cId=77643
33
References
Sophia Ananiadou, Sampo Pyysalo, Jun?ichi Tsujii, and
Douglas B. Kell. 2010. Event extraction for sys-
tems biology by text mining the literature. Trends in
Biotechnology, 28(7):381?390.
Sophia Ananiadou, Dan Sullivan, William Black, Gina-
Anne Levow, Joseph J. Gillespie, Chunhong Mao,
Sampo Pyysalo, BalaKrishna Kolluru, Junichi Tsujii,
and Bruno Sobral. 2011. Named entity recognition
for bacterial type IV secretion systems. PLoS ONE,
6(3):e14780.
M Ashburner, CA Ball, JA Blake, D Botstein, H Butler,
JM Cherry, AP Davis, K Dolinski, SS Dwight, JT Ep-
pig, MA Harris, DP Hill, L Issel-Tarver, A Kasarskis,
S Lewis, JC Matese, JE Richardson, M Ringwald,
GM Rubin, and G Sherlock. 2000. Gene ontology:
tool for the unification of biology. Nature genetics,
25:25?29.
Jari Bjo?rne and Tapio Salakoski. 2011. Generaliz-
ing biomedical event extraction. In Proceedings of
the BioNLP 2011 Workshop Companion Volume for
Shared Task, Portland, Oregon, June. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Eugene Charniak and Mark Johnson. 2005. Coarse-
to-Fine n-Best Parsing and MaxEnt Discriminative
Reranking. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL?05), pages 173?180.
Peter Corbett and Peter Murray-Rust. 2006. High-
throughput identification of chemistry in life science
texts. Computational Life Sciences II, pages 107?118.
Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Bill MacCartney, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2006. Generating Typed
Dependency Parses from Phrase Structure Parses. In
Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC?06),
pages 449?454.
Martin Gerner, Goran Nenadic, and Casey M. Bergman.
2010. LINNAEUS: a species name identification sys-
tem for biomedical literature. BMC bioinformatics,
11(1):85+, February.
Yasuhiro Gotoh, Yoko Eguchi, Takafumi Watanabe, Sho
Okamoto, Akihiro Doi, and Ryutaro Utsumi. 2010.
Two-component signal transduction as potential drug
targets in pathogenic bacteria. Current Opinion in Mi-
crobiology, 13(2):232?239. Cell regulation.
Halil Kilicoglu and Sabine Bergler. 2011. Adapting a
general semantic interpretation approach to biological
event extraction. In Proceedings of the BioNLP 2011
Workshop Companion Volume for Shared Task, Port-
land, Oregon, June. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, Yoshimasa Tsuruoka,
Yuka Tateisi, and Nigel Collier, editors. 2004. Intro-
duction to the bio-entity recognition task at JNLPBA,
Geneva, Switzerland.
Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, and Jun?ichi Tsujii. 2008.
Corpus annotation for mining biomedical events from
lterature. BMC Bioinformatics, 9(1):10.
Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, Sampo Pyysalo, Yoshi-
nobu Kano, and Jun?ichi Tsujii. 2009. Overview
of BioNLP?09 Shared Task on Event Extraction.
In Proceedings of Natural Language Processing in
Biomedicine (BioNLP) NAACL 2009 Workshop, pages
1?9.
Jin-Dong Kim, Sampo Pyysalo, Tomoko Ohta, Robert
Bossy, and Jun?ichi Tsujii. 2011a. Overview
of BioNLP Shared Task 2011. In Proceedings of
the BioNLP 2011 Workshop Companion Volume for
Shared Task, Portland, Oregon, June. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Jin-Dong Kim, Yue Wang, Toshihisa Takagi, and Aki-
nori Yonezawa. 2011b. Overview of the Genia Event
task in BioNLP Shared Task 2011. In Proceedings
of the BioNLP 2011 Workshop Companion Volume for
Shared Task, Portland, Oregon, June. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
M. Krallinger, A. Morgan, L. Smith, F. Leitner, L. Tan-
abe, J. Wilbur, L. Hirschman, and A. Valencia.
2008. Evaluation of text-mining systems for biology:
overview of the Second BioCreative community chal-
lenge. Genome biology, 9(Suppl 2):S1.
Tino Krell, Jess Lacal, Andreas Busch, Hortencia Silva-
Jimnez, Mara-Eugenia Guazzaroni, and Juan Luis
Ramos. 2010. Bacterial sensor kinases: Diversity in
the recognition of environmental signals. Annual Re-
view of Microbiology, 64(1):539?559.
Thorsten Mascher, John D. Helmann, and Gottfried Un-
den. 2006. Stimulus perception in bacterial signal-
transducing histidine kinases. Microbiol. Mol. Biol.
Rev., 70(4):910?938.
David McClosky, Mihai Surdeanu, and Christopher Man-
ning. 2011. Event extraction as dependency parsing
for bionlp 2011. In Proceedings of the BioNLP 2011
Workshop Companion Volume for Shared Task, Port-
land, Oregon, June. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
David McClosky. 2009. Any Domain Parsing: Auto-
matic Domain Adaptation for Natural Language Pars-
ing. Ph.D. thesis, Department of Computer Science,
Brown University.
Liam McGrath, Kelly Domico, Courtney Corley, and
Bobbie-Jo Webb-Robertson. 2011. Complex biologi-
cal event extraction from full text using signatures of
linguistic and semantic features. In Proceedings of
34
the BioNLP 2011 Workshop Companion Volume for
Shared Task, Portland, Oregon, June. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Makoto Miwa, Sampo Pyysalo, Tadayoshi Hara, and
Jun?ichi Tsujii. 2010. Evaluating dependency repre-
sentation for event extraction. In Proceedings of COL-
ING?10, pages 779?787.
Tomoko Ohta, Jin-Dong Kim, Sampo Pyysalo, Yue
Wang, and Jun?ichi Tsujii. 2009. Incorporating
GENETAG-style annotation to GENIA corpus. In
Proceedings of BioNLP?09, pages 106?107.
Tomoko Ohta, Sampo Pyysalo, and Jun?ichi Tsujii. 2011.
Overview of the Epigenetics and Post-translational
Modifications (EPI) task of BioNLP Shared Task
2011. In Proceedings of the BioNLP 2011 Workshop
Companion Volume for Shared Task, Portland, Oregon,
June. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Sampo Pyysalo, Tomoko Ohta, Han-Cheol Cho, Dan Sul-
livan, Chunhong Mao, Bruno Sobral, Jun?ichi Tsujii,
and Sophia Ananiadou. 2010. Towards event extrac-
tion from full texts on infectious diseases. In Proceed-
ings of BioNLP?10, pages 132?140.
Sampo Pyysalo, Tomoko Ohta, Rafal Rak, Dan Sulli-
van, Chunhong Mao, Chunxia Wang, Bruno Sobral,
Jun?ichi Tsujii, and Sophia Ananiadou. 2011. An-
notation guidelines for infectious diseases event cor-
pus. Technical report, Tsujii Laboratory, University of
Tokyo. To appear.
Sebastian Riedel and Andrew McCallum. 2011. Ro-
bust biomedical event extraction with dual decompo-
sition and minimal domain adaptation. In Proceedings
of the BioNLP 2011 Workshop Companion Volume for
Shared Task, Portland, Oregon, June. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Sebastian Riedel, David McClosky, Mihai Surdeanu, An-
drew McCallum, and Chris Manning. 2011. Model
combination for event extraction in bionlp 2011. In
Proceedings of the BioNLP 2011 Workshop Compan-
ion Volume for Shared Task, Portland, Oregon, June.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yutaka Sasaki, Yoshimasa Tsuruoka, John McNaught,
and Sophia Ananiadou. 2008. How to make the most
of NE dictionaries in statistical NER. BMC bioinfor-
matics, 9 Suppl 11.
Pontus Stenetorp, Goran Topic?, Sampo Pyysalo, Tomoko
Ohta, Jin-Dong Kim, and Jun?ichi Tsujii. 2011.
BioNLP Shared Task 2011: Supporting Resources. In
Proceedings of the BioNLP 2011 Workshop Compan-
ion Volume for Shared Task, Portland, Oregon, June.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Peter Thomason and Rob Kay. 2000. Eukaryotic sig-
nal transduction via histidine-aspartate phosphorelay.
J Cell Sci, 113(18):3141?3150.
Yue Wang, Jin-Dong Kim, Rune S?tre, Sampo Pyysalo,
and Jun?ichi Tsujii. 2009. Investigating heteroge-
neous protein annotations toward cross-corpora uti-
lization. BMC Bioinformatics, 10(403).
Chunxia Wang, Jocelyn Kemp, Isabel O. Da Fonseca,
Raymie C. Equi, Xiaoyan Sheng, Trevor C. Charles,
and Bruno W. S. Sobral. 2010. Sinorhizobium
meliloti 1021 loss-of-function deletion mutation in
chvi and its phenotypic characteristics. Molecular
Plant-Microbe Interactions, 23(2):153?160.
35
