Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 670?679,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 27?31, 2011. c?2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
Divide and Conquer:
Crowdsourcing the Creation of Cross-Lingual Textual Entailment Corpora
Matteo Negri
FBK-irst
Trento, Italy
negri@fbk.eu
Luisa Bentivogli
FBK-irst
Trento, Italy
bentivo@fbk.eu
Yashar Mehdad
FBK-irst and University of Trento
Trento, Italy
mehdad@fbk.eu
Danilo Giampiccolo
CELCT
Trento, Italy
giampiccolo@celct.it
Alessandro Marchetti
CELCT
Trento, Italy
amarchetti@celct.it
Abstract
We address the creation of cross-lingual tex-
tual entailment corpora by means of crowd-
sourcing. Our goal is to define a cheap and
replicable data collection methodology that
minimizes the manual work done by expert
annotators, without resorting to preprocess-
ing tools or already annotated monolingual
datasets. In line with recent works empha-
sizing the need of large-scale annotation ef-
forts for textual entailment, our work aims to:
i) tackle the scarcity of data available to train
and evaluate systems, and ii) promote the re-
course to crowdsourcing as an effective way
to reduce the costs of data collection without
sacrificing quality. We show that a complex
data creation task, for which even experts usu-
ally feature low agreement scores, can be ef-
fectively decomposed into simple subtasks as-
signed to non-expert annotators. The resulting
dataset, obtained from a pipeline of different
jobs routed to Amazon Mechanical Turk, con-
tains more than 1,600 aligned pairs for each
combination of texts-hypotheses in English,
Italian and German.
1 Introduction
Cross-lingual Textual Entailment (CLTE) has been
recently proposed by (Mehdad et al, 2010; Mehdad
et al, 2011) as an extension of Textual Entailment
(Dagan and Glickman, 2004). The task consists of
deciding, given a text (T) and an hypothesis (H) in
different languages, if the meaning of H can be in-
ferred from the meaning of T. As in other NLP appli-
cations, both for monolingual and cross-lingual TE,
the availability of large quantities of annotated data
is an enabling factor for systems development and
evaluation. Until now, however, the scarcity of such
data on the one hand, and the costs of creating new
datasets of reasonable size on the other, have repre-
sented a bottleneck for a steady advancement of the
state of the art.
In the last few years, monolingual TE corpora for
English and other European languages have been
created and distributed in the framework of sev-
eral evaluation campaigns, including the RTE Chal-
lenge1, the Answer Validation Exercise at CLEF2,
and the Textual Entailment task at EVALITA3. De-
spite the differences in the design of the tasks, all
the released datasets were collected through simi-
lar procedures, always involving expensive manual
work done by expert annotators. Moreover, in the
data creation process, large amounts of hand-crafted
T-H pairs often have to be discarded in order to re-
tain only those featuring full agreement, in terms of
the assigned entailment judgements, among multiple
annotators. The amount of discarded pairs is usually
high, contributing to increase the costs of creating
textual entailment datasets4.
The issues related to the shortage of datasets and
the high costs for their creation are more evident
1http://www.nist.gov/tac/2011/RTE/
2http://nlp.uned.es/clef-qa/ave/
3http://www.evalita.it/2009/tasks/te
4For instance, in the first five RTE Challenges, the aver-
age effort needed to create 1,000 pairs featuring full agreement
among 3 annotators was around 2.5 person-months. Typically,
around 25% of the original pairs had to be discarded during the
process, due to low inter-annotator agreement (Bentivogli et al,
2009).
670
in the CLTE scenario, where: i) the only dataset
currently available is an English-Spanish corpus ob-
tained by translating the RTE-3 corpus (Negri and
Mehdad, 2010), and ii) the application of the stan-
dard methods adopted to build RTE pairs requires
proficiency in multiple languages, thus significantly
increasing the costs of the data creation process.
To address these issues, in this paper we devise
a cost-effective methodology to create cross-lingual
textual entailment corpora. In particular, we focus
on the following problems:
(1) Is it possible to collect T-H pairs minimizing
the intervention of expert annotators? To address
this question, we explore the feasibility of crowd-
sourcing the corpus creation process. As a contri-
bution beyond the few works on TE/CLTE data ac-
quisition, we define an effective methodology that:
i) does not involve experts in the most complex (and
costly) stages of the process, ii) does not require pre-
processing tools, and iii) does not rely on the avail-
ability of already annotated RTE corpora.
(2) How can we guarantee good quality of the col-
lected data at a low cost? We address the quality
control issue through the decomposition of a com-
plex task (i.e. creating and annotating entailment
pairs) into smaller sub-tasks. Complex tasks are usu-
ally hard to explain in a simple way understandable
to non-experts, difficult to accomplish, and not suit-
able for the application of the quality-check mecha-
nisms provided by current crowdsourcing services.
Our ?divide and conquer? solution represents the
first attempt to address a complex task involving
content generation and labelling through the defini-
tion of a cheap and reliable pipeline of simple tasks
which are easy to define, accomplish, and control.
(3) Can we adapt such methodology to collect
cross-lingual T-H pairs? We tackle this question
by separating the problem of creating and annotating
TE pairs from the issues related to the multilingual
dimension. Our solution builds on the assumption
that entailment annotations can be projected across
aligned T-H pairs in different languages. In this
case, a complex multilingual task is reduced to a se-
quence of simpler subtasks where the most difficult
one, the generation of entailment pairs, is entirely
monolingual. Besides ensuring cost-effectiveness,
our solution allows us to overcome the problem of
finding workers that are proficient in multiple lan-
guages. Moreover, since the core monolingual tasks
of the process are carried out by manipulating En-
glish texts, we are able to address the very large
community of English speaking workers, with a
considerable reduction of costs and execution time.
Finally, as a by-product of our method, the acquired
pairs are fully aligned for all language combinations,
thus enabling meaningful comparisons between sce-
narios of different complexity (monolingual TE, and
CLTE between close or distant languages).
We believe that, in the same spirit of recent works
promoting large-scale annotation efforts around en-
tailment corpora (Sammons et al, 2010; Bentivogli
et al, 2010), the proposed approach and the resulting
dataset5 will contribute to meeting the strong need
for resources to develop and evaluate novel solutions
for textual entailment.
2 Related Works
Crowdsourcing services, such as Amazon Mechan-
ical Turk6 (MTurk) and CrowdFlower7, have been
recently used with success for a variety of NLP ap-
plications (Callison-Burch and Dredze, 2010). The
idea is that the acquisition and annotation of large
amounts of data needed to train and evaluate NLP
tools can be carried out in a cost-effective manner
by defining simple Human Intelligence Tasks (HITs)
routed to a crowd of non-expert workers (aka ?Turk-
ers?) hired through on-line marketplaces.
As regards textual entailment, the first work ex-
ploring the use of crowdsourcing services for data
annotation is described in (Snow et al, 2008), which
shows high agreement between non-expert annota-
tions of the RTE-1 dataset and existing gold standard
labels assigned by expert labellers.
Focusing on the actual generation of monolingual
entailment pairs, (Wang and Callison-Burch, 2010)
experiments the use of MTurk to collect facts and
counter facts related to texts extracted from an ex-
isting RTE corpus annotated with named entities.
Taking a step beyond the task of annotating exist-
5The CLTE corpora described in this paper will be made
freely available for research purposes through the website of
the funding EU Project CoSyne (http://www.cosyne.eu/).
6https://www.mturk.com/
7Although MTurk is directly accessible only to US citizens,
the CrowdFlower service (http://crowdflower.com/) provides an
interface to MTurk for non-US citizens.
671
ing datasets, and showing the feasibility of involving
non-experts also in the generation of TE pairs, this
approach is more relevant to our objectives. How-
ever, at least two major differences with our work
have to be remarked. First, they still use avail-
able RTE data to obtain a monolingual TE corpus,
whereas we pursue the more ambitious goal of gen-
erating from scratch aligned CLTE corpora for dif-
ferent language combinations. To this aim, we do
not resort to already annotated data, nor language-
specific preprocessing tools. Second, their approach
involves qualitative analysis of the collected data
only a posteriori, after manual removal of invalid
and trivial generated hypotheses. In contrast, our
approach integrates quality control mechanisms at
all stages of the data collection/annotation process,
thus minimizing the recourse to experts to check the
quality of the collected material.
Related research in the CLTE direction is re-
ported in (Negri and Mehdad, 2010), which de-
scribes the creation of an English-Spanish corpus
obtained from the RTE-3 dataset by translating the
English hypotheses into Spanish. Translations have
been crowdsourced adopting a methodology based
on translation-validation cycles, defined as separate
HITs. Although simplifying the CLTE corpus cre-
ation problem, which is recast as the task of translat-
ing already available annotated data, this solution is
relevant to our work for the idea of combining gold
standard units and ?validation HITS? as a way to
control the quality of the collected data at runtime.
3 Quality Control of Crowdsourced Data
The design of data acquisition HITs has to take into
account several factors, each having a considerable
impact on the difficulty of instructing the workers,
the quality and quantity of the collected data, the
time and overall costs of the acquisition. A major
distinction has to be made between jobs requiring
data annotation, and those involving content gener-
ation. In the former case, Turkers are presented with
the task of labelling input data referring to a fixed
set of possible values (e.g. making a choice between
multiple alternatives, assigning numerical scores to
rank the given data). In the latter case, Turkers are
faced with creative tasks consisting in the production
of textual material (e.g. writing a correct translation,
or a summary of a given text).
The ease of controlling the quality of the acquired
data depends on the nature of the job. For annotation
jobs, quality control mechanisms can be easily set up
by calculating Turkers? agreement, by applying vot-
ing schemes, or by adding hidden gold units to the
data to be annotated8. In contrast, the quality of the
results of content generation jobs is harder to assess,
due to the fact that multiple valid results are accept-
able (e.g. the same content can be expressed, trans-
lated, or summarized in different ways). In such sit-
uations the standard quality control mechanisms are
not directly applicable, and the detection of errors
requires either costly manual verification at the end
of the acquisition process, or more complex and cre-
ative solutions integrating HITs for quality check.
Most of the approaches to content generation pro-
posed so far rely on post hoc verification to fil-
ter out undesired low-quality data (Mrozinski et al,
2008; Mihalcea and Strapparava, 2009; Wang and
Callison-Burch, 2010). The few solutions integrat-
ing validation HITs address the translation of sin-
gle sentences, a task that is substantially different
from ours (Negri and Mehdad, 2010; Bloodgood and
Callison-Burch, 2010). Compared to sentence trans-
lation, the task of creating CLTE pairs is both harder
to explain without recurring to notions that are dif-
ficult to understand to non-experts (e.g. ?seman-
tic equivalence?, ?unidirectional entailment?), and
harder to execute without mastering these notions.
To tackle these issues the ?divide and conquer? ap-
proach described in the next section consists in the
decomposition of a difficult content generation job
into easier subtasks that are: i) self-contained and
easy to explain, ii) easy to execute without any NLP
expertise, and iii) suitable for the integration of a va-
riety of runtime control mechanisms (regional qual-
ifications, gold units, ?validation HITs?) able to en-
sure a good quality of the collected material.
8Both MTurk and CrowdFlower provide means to check
workers? reliability, and weed out untrusted ones without money
waste. These include different types of qualification mecha-
nisms, the possibility of giving work only to known trusted
Turkers (only with MTurk), and the possibility of adding hid-
den gold standard units in the data to be annotated (offered as a
built-in mechanism only by CrowdFlower).
672
4 CLTE Corpus Creation Methodology
Our approach builds on a pipeline of HITs routed to
MTurk?s workforce through the CrowdFlower inter-
face. The objective is to collect aligned T-H pairs
for different language combinations, reproducing an
RTE-like annotation style. However, our annotation
is not limited to the standard RTE framework, where
only unidirectional entailment from T to H is con-
sidered. As a useful extension, we annotate any pos-
sible entailment relation between the two text frag-
ments, including: i) bidirectional entailment (i.e.
semantic equivalence between T and H), ii) unidi-
rectional entailment from T to H, and iii) unidirec-
tional entailment from H to T. The resulting pairs
can be easily used to generate not only standard RTE
datasets9, but also general-purpose collections fea-
turing multi-directional entailment relations.
4.1 Data Acquisition and Annotation
We collect large amounts of CLTE pairs carrying out
the most difficult part of the process (the creation of
entailment-annotated pairs) at a monolingual level.
Starting from a set of parallel sentences in n lan-
guages, (e.g. L1, L2, L3), n entailment corpora are
created: one monolingual (L1/L1), and n-1 cross-
lingual (L1/L2, and L1/L3).
The monolingual corpus is obtained by modify-
ing the sentences only in one language (L1). Orig-
inal and modified sentences are then paired and an-
notated to form an entailment dataset for L1. The
CLTE corpora are obtained by combining the mod-
ified sentences in L1 with the original sentences in
L2 and L3, and projecting to the multilingual pairs
the annotations assigned to the monolingual pairs.
In principle, only two stages of the process re-
quire crowdsourcing multilingual tasks, but do not
concern entailment annotations. The first one, at the
beginning of the process, aims to obtain a set of par-
allel sentences to start with, and can be done in dif-
ferent ways (e.g. crowdsourcing the translation of
a set of sentences). The second one, at the end of
the process, consists of translating the modified L1
sentences into other languages (e.g. L2) in order to
extend the corpus to cover new language combina-
9With the positive examples drawn from bidirectional and
unidirectional entailments from T to H, and the negative ones
drawn from unidirectional entailments from H to T.
tions (e.g. L2/L2, L2/L3).
The execution of the two ?multilingual? stages is
not strictly necessary but depends on: i) the avail-
ability of parallel sentences to start the process, and
ii) the actual objectives in terms of language combi-
nations to be covered10.
As regards the first stage, in this work we started
from a set of 467 English/Italian/German aligned
sentences extracted from parallel documents down-
loaded from the Cafebabel European Magazine11.
Concerning the second multilingual stage, we per-
formed only one round of translations from En-
glish to Italian to extend the 3 combinations ob-
tained without translations (ENG/ENG, ENG/ITA,
and ENG/GER) with the new language combina-
tions ITA/ITA, ITA/ENG, and ITA/GER.
STEP1:	 ?Sentence	 ?modifica?on	 ?(monolingual)	 ?
STEP3:	 ?Transla?on	 ?(mul?lingual)	 ?
GER	 ? ENG	 ?
ENG1	 ?
ITA	 ?
ITA1	 ? ITA	 ?ENG	 ? ENG1	 ?
STEP2:	 ?TE	 ?annota?on	 ?(monolingual)	 ?
Monolingual	 ?TE	 ?corpus	 ?
Cross-??lingual	 ?TE	 ?corpus	 ?
ENG1	 ?GER	 ?
ENG1	 ?ITA	 ?
TE	 ?annota?ns	 ?projec?n	 ?	 ?	 ?
ITA1	 ? GER	 ?
ITA1	 ? ENG	 ?
Figure 1: Corpus creation process.
The main steps of our corpus creation process,
depicted in Figure 1, can be summarized as follows:
Step1: Sentence modification. The original
English sentences (ENG) are modified through
(monolingual) generation HITs asking Turkers to:
i) preserve the meaning of the original sentences
using different surface forms, or ii) slightly change
their meaning by adding or removing content. Our
assumption, in line with (Bos et al, 2009), is that
10Starting from parallel sentences in n languages, the n cor-
pora obtained without recurring to translations can be aug-
mented, by means of translation HITs, to create the full set of
language combinations. Each round of translation adds 1 mono-
lingual corpus, and n-1 CLTE corpora.
11http://www.cafebabel.com/
673
another way to think about entailment is to consider
whether one text T1 adds new information to the
content of another text T: if so, then T is entailed by
T1.
The result of this phase is a set of texts (ENG1)
that can be of three types:
1. Paraphrases of the original ENG texts, that will
be used to create bidirectional entailment pairs
(ENG?ENG1);
2. More specific sentences (the outcome of
content addition operations), used to create
ENG?ENG1 unidirectional entailment pairs;
3. More general sentences (the outcome of
content removal operations), used to create
ENG?ENG1 unidirectional entailment pairs.
Step2: TE Annotation. Entailment pairs com-
posed of the original sentences (ENG) and the modi-
fied ones (ENG1) are used as input of (monolingual)
annotation HITs asking Turkers to decide which of
the two texts contains more information. As a re-
sult, each ENG/ENG1 pair is annotated as an ex-
ample of uni-/bidirectional entailment, and stored in
the monolingual English corpus. Since the original
ENG texts are aligned with the ITA and GER texts,
the entailment annotations of ENG/ENG1 pairs can
be projected to the other language pairs and the
ITA/ENG1 and GER/ENG1 pairs are stored in the
CLTE corpus. The possibility of projecting TE an-
notations is based on the assumption that the seman-
tic information is mostly preserved during the trans-
lation process. This particularly holds at the deno-
tative level (i.e. regarding the truth values of the
sentence) which is crucial to semantic inference. At
other levels (e.g. lexical) there might be slight se-
mantic variations which, however, are very unlikely
to play a crucial role in determining entailment rela-
tions.
Step3: Translation. The modified sentences
(ENG1) are translated into Italian (ITA1) through
(multilingual) generation HITs reproducing the ap-
proach described in (Negri and Mehdad, 2010). As
a result, three new datasets are produced by au-
tomatically projecting annotations: the monolin-
gual ITA/ITA1, and the cross-lingual ENG/ITA1 and
GER/ITA1.
Since the solution adopted for sentence transla-
tion does not present novelty factors, the remainder
of this paper will omit further details on it. Instead,
the following sections will focus on the more chal-
lenging tasks of sentence modification and TE anno-
tation.
4.2 Crowdsourcing Sentence Modification and
TE Annotation
Sentence modification and TE annotation have been
decomposed into a pipeline of simpler monolingual
English sub-tasks. Such pipeline, depicted in Figure
2, involves several types of generation/annotation
HITs designed to be easily understandable to non-
experts. Each HIT consists of: i) a set of instruc-
tions for a specific task (e.g. paraphrasing a text),
ii) the data to be manipulated (e.g. an English sen-
tence), and iii) a test to check workers? reliability.
To cope with the quality control issues discussed in
Section 3, such tests are realized using gold stan-
dard units, either hidden in the data to be annotated
(annotation HITs) or defined as test questions that
workers must correctly answer (generation HITs).
Moreover, regional qualifications are applied to all
HITs. As a further quality check, all the annotation
HITs consider Turkers? agreement as a way to filter
out low quality results (only annotations featuring
agreement among 4 out of 5 workers are retained).
The six HITs defined for each subtask can be de-
scribed as follows:
1. Paraphrase (generation). Modify an En-
glish text (ENG), in order to produce a semantically
equivalent variant (ENG1). As a reliability test, be-
fore creating the paraphrase workers are asked to
judge if two English sentences contain the same in-
formation.
2. Grammaticality (annotation). Decide if an
English sentence is grammatically correct. This val-
idation HIT represents a quality check of the out-
put of each generation task (i.e. paraphrasing, and
add/remove information HITs).
3. Bidirectional Entailment (annotation). De-
cide whether two English sentences, the original
ENG and the modified ENG1, contain the same in-
formation (i.e. are semantically equivalent).
4a. Add Information (generation). Modify an
English text to create a more specific one by adding
content. As a reliability test, before generating the
674
Figure 2: Sentence modification and TE annotation pipeline.
new sentence workers are asked to judge which of
two given English sentences is more detailed.
4b. Remove Information (generation). Mod-
ify an English text to create a more general one by
removing part of its content. As a reliability test, be-
fore generating the new sentence workers are asked
to judge which of two given English sentences is less
detailed.
5. Unidirectional Entailment (annotation). De-
cide which of two English sentences (the original
ENG, and a modified ENG1) provides more infor-
mation.
These HITs are combined in an iterative pro-
cess that alternates text generation, grammaticality
check, and entailment annotation steps. As a result,
for each original ENG text we obtain multiple ENG1
variants of the three types (paraphrases, more gen-
eral texts, and more specific texts) and, in turn, a set
of annotated monolingual (ENG/ENG1) TE pairs.
As described in Section 4.1, the resulting mono-
lingual English TE corpus (ENG/ENG1) is used to
create the following mono/cross-lingual TE corpora:
? ITA/ENG1, and GER/ENG1 (by projecting TE
annotations)
? ITA/ITA1, GER/ITA1, and ENG/ITA1 (by
translating the ENG1 texts into Italian, and pro-
jecting TE annotations)
5 The Resulting CLTE Corpora
This section provides a quantitative and qualita-
tive analysis of the results of our corpus creation
methodology, focusing on the collected ENG-ENG1
monolingual dataset. It has to be remarked that, as
an effect of the adopted methodology, all the obser-
vations and the conclusions drawn hold for the col-
lected CLTE corpora as well.
5.1 Quantitative Analysis
Table 1 provides some details about each step of the
pipeline shown in Figure 2. For each HIT the table
presents: i) the number of items (sentences, or pairs
of sentences) given in input, ii) the number of items
(sentences or annotations) produced as output, iii)
the number of items discarded when the agreement
threshold was not reached, iv) the number of entail-
ment pairs added to the corpus, v) the time (days and
hours) required by the MTurk workforce to complete
the job, and vi) the cost of the job.
In HIT-1 (Paraphrase) 1,414 paraphrases were
collected asking three different meaning-preserving
modifications of each of the 467 original sen-
tences12. From a practical point of view, such redun-
dancy aims to ensure a sufficient number of gram-
matically correct and semantically equivalent mod-
ified sentences. From a theoretical point of view,
12Often, crowdsourced jobs return a number of output items
that is slightly larger than required, due to the labour distribution
mechanism internal to MTurk.
675
HIT # Input items # Output items # Discarded items # Pairs to corpus MTurk time Cost ($)
1. Paraphrase 467 1,414 5d+10.5h 45.48
2. Grammaticality 1,414 1,326 88 (6.22%) 1d+15h 56.88
3. Bidirectional Ent. 1,326 1,213 113 (8.52%) 301 3d+2h 53.47
(yes=1,205 no=8)
4a. Add Info 452 916 3d 37.02
4b. Remove Info 452 923 2d+22h 29.73
2. Grammaticality 1,839 1,749 90 (4.89%) 2d+5h 64.37
3. Bidirectional Ent. 1,749 1,438 311 (17.78%) 148 3d+20.5h 70.52
(yes=148 no=1,290)
5. Unidirectional Ent. 1,298 1,171 127 (9.78%) 1,171 8.5h 78.24
(491 + 680)
TOTAL 721 1,620 22d+11h 435.71
Table 1: The monolingual dataset creation pipeline.
collecting many variants of a small pool of origi-
nal sentences aims to create pairs featuring different
entailment relations with similar superficial forms.
This, in principle, should allow to obtain a dataset
which requires TE systems to focus more on deeper
semantic phenomena than on the surface realization
of the pairs.
The collected paraphrases were sent as input to
HIT-2 (Grammaticality). After this validation HIT,
the number of acceptable paraphrases was reduced
to 1,326 (with 88 discarded sentences, correspond-
ing to 6.22% of the total).
The retained paraphrases were paired with their
corresponding original sentences, and sent to HIT-3
(Bidirectional Entailment) to be judged for semantic
equivalence. The pairs marked as bidirectional en-
tailments (1,205) were divided in three groups: 25%
of the pairs (301) were directly stored in the final
corpus, while the ENG1 paraphrases of the remain-
ing 75% (904) were equally distributed to the next
modification steps.
In both HIT-4a (Add Information) and HIT-4b
(Remove information) two new modified sentences
were asked for each of the 452 paraphrases received
as input. The sentences collected in these generation
tasks were respectively 916 and 923.
The new modified sentences were sent back to
HIT-2 (Grammaticality) and HIT-3 (Bidirectional
Entailment). As a result 1,438 new pairs were cre-
ated; out of these, 148 resulted to be bidirectional
entailments and were stored in the corpus.
Finally, the 1,298 entailment pairs judged as non-
bidirectional in the two previously completed HIT-
3 (8+1,290) were given as input to HIT-5 (Unidi-
rectional Entailment). The pairs which passed the
agreement threshold were classified according to the
judgement received, and stored in the corpus as uni-
directional entailment pairs.
The analysis of Table 1 allows to formulate
some considerations. First, the percentage of dis-
carded items confirms the effectiveness of decom-
posing complex generation tasks into simpler sub-
tasks that integrate validation HITs and quality
checks based on non-experts? agreement. In fact, on
average, around 9.5% of the generated items were
discarded without experts? intervention13. Second,
the amount of discarded items gives evidence about
the relative difficulty of each HIT. As expected,
we observe lower rejection rates, corresponding to
higher inter-annotator agreement, for grammatical-
ity HITs (5.55% on average) than for more complex
entailment-related tasks (12.02% on average).
Looking at costs and execution time, it is hard
to draw definite conclusions due to several factors
that influence the progress of the crowdsourced jobs
(e.g. the fluctuations of Turkers? performances, the
time of the day at which jobs are posted, the dif-
ficulty to set the optimal cost for a given HIT14).
On the one hand, as expected, the more creative
?Add Info? task proved to be more demanding than
the ?Remove Info?: even though it was paid more,
13Moreover, it is worthwhile noticing that around 20% of the
collected items were automatically rejected (and not paid) due
to failures on the gold standard controls created both for gener-
ation and annotation tasks.
14The payment for each HIT was set on the basis of a pre-
vious feasibility study aimed at determining the best trade-off
between cost and execution time. However, replicating our ap-
proach would not necessarily result in the same costs.
676
it still took little more time to be completed. On
the other hand, although the ?Unidirectional Entail-
ment? task was expected to be more difficult and
thus rewarded more than the ?Bidirectional Entail-
ment? one, in the end it took notably less time to
be completed. Nevertheless, the overall figures (435
USD, and about 22.5 days of MTurk work to com-
plete the process)15 clearly demonstrate the effec-
tiveness of the approach. Even considering the time
needed for an expert to manage the pipeline (i.e. one
week to prepare gold units, and to handle the I/O of
each HIT), these figures show that our methodology
provides a cheaper and faster way to collect entail-
ment data in comparison with the RTE average costs
reported in Section 1.
As regards the amount of data collected, the re-
sulting corpus contains 1,620 pairs with the fol-
lowing distribution of entailment relations: i) 449
bidirectional entailments, ii) 491 ENG?ENG1 uni-
directional entailments, and iii) 680 ENG?ENG1
unidirectional entailments.
It must be noted that our methodology does not
lead to the creation of pairs where some information
is provided in one text and not in the other, and vice-
versa, as Example 1 shows:
Example 1.
ENG: New theories were emerging in the field of psychology.
ENG1: New theories were rising, which announced a kind of
veiled racism.
These negative examples in both directions repre-
sent a natural extension of the dataset, relevant also
for specific application-oriented scenarios, and their
creation will be addressed in future work.
Besides the achievement of our primary objec-
tives, the adopted approach led to some interesting
by-products. First, the generated corpora are per-
fectly suitable to produce entailment datasets simi-
lar to those used in the traditional RTE evaluation
framework. In particular, considering any possible
entailment relation between two text fragments, our
annotation subsumes the one proposed in RTE cam-
paigns. This allows for the cost-effective genera-
tion of RTE-like annotations from the acquired cor-
15Although by projecting annotations the ENG1/ITA and
ENG1/GER CLTE corpora came for free, the ITA1/ITA,
ITA1/ENG, and ITA1/GER combinations created by crowd-
sourcing translations added 45 USD and approximately 5 days
to these figures.
pora by combining ENG?ENG1 and ENG?ENG1
pairs to form 940 positive examples (449+491),
keeping the 680 ENG?ENG1 as negative exam-
ples. Moreover, by swapping ENG and ENG1 in the
unidirectional entailment pairs, 491 additional nega-
tive examples and 680 positive examples can be eas-
ily obtained.
Finally, the output of HITs 1-2-3 in Table 1 rep-
resents per se a valuable collection of 1,205 para-
phrases. This suggests the great potential of crowd-
sourcing for paraphrase acquisition.
5.2 Qualitative Analysis
Through manual verification of more than 50% of
the corpus (900 pairs), a total number of 53 pairs
(5.9%) were found incorrect. The different errors
were classified as follows:
Type 1: Sentence modification errors. Generation
HITs are a minor source of errors, being responsible
for 10 problematic pairs. These errors are either in-
troduced by generating a false statement (Example
2), or by forming a not fully understandable, awk-
ward, or non-natural sentence (Example 3).
Example 2.
ENG: Kosovo was the subject of major riots in 1989.
ENG1: The Russian city of Kosovo was the subject of ...
Example 3.
ENG: Balat is the Kurdish-Armenian district of Instanbul.
ENG1: Balat is a place, which is the Kurdish-Armenian ...
Type 2: TE annotation errors. The notion of con-
taining more/less information, used in the ?Unidi-
rectional Entailment? HIT, can mostly be applied
straightforwardly to the entailment definition. How-
ever, the concept of ?more/less detailed?, which gen-
erally works for factual statements, in some cases is
not applicable. In fact, the MTurk workers have reg-
ularly interpreted the instructions about the amount
of information as concerning the quantity of con-
cepts contained in a sentence. This is not always cor-
responding to the actual entailment relation between
the sentences. As a consequence, 43 pairs featur-
ing wrong entailment annotations were encountered.
These errors can be classified as follows:
a) 13 pairs, where the added/removed information
changes the meaning of the sentence. In these cases,
the modified sentence was judged more/less specific
677
than the original one, leading to unidirectional en-
tailment annotation. On the contrary, in terms of
the standard entailment definition, the correct anno-
tation is ?no entailment? (as in Example 4, which
was annotated as ENG?ENG1):
Example 4.
ENG: If you decide to live in Bulgaria, you have to like
difficulties because they are not difficulties, they are challenges.
ENG1: You have to like difficulties as they are not difficulties,
they are challenges.
b) 10 pairs where the incorrect annotation is due to
a coreference problem, as in:
Example 5.
ENG: John Smith is the new CEO of the company.
ENG1: He is the new CEO of the company.
These pairs were labelled as unidirectional entail-
ments (in the example above ENG?ENG1), under
the assumption that a proper name is more specific
and informative than a pronoun. However, adher-
ing to the TE definition, co-referring expressions are
equivalent, and their realization does not play any
role in the entailment decision. This implies that the
correct entailment annotation is ?bidirectional?.
c) 9 pairs where the sentences are semantically
equivalent, but contain a piece of information which
is explicit in one sentence, and implicit in the other.
In these cases, Turkers judged the sentence contain-
ing the explicit mention as more specific, and thus
the pair was annotated as unidirectional entailment.
Example 6.
ENG: I hear the click of the trigger and the burst of bullets
reach me immediately.
ENG1: I hear the trigger and the burst of bullets reach me
instantly.
In Example 6, the expression ?the trigger? in ENG1
implicitly means ?the click of the trigger?, mak-
ing the two sentences equivalent, and the entailment
bidirectional (instead of ENG?ENG1).
d) 7 pairs where the information removed from or
added to the sentence is not relevant to the entail-
ment relation. In these cases, the modified sen-
tence was judged less/more specific than the origi-
nal one (and thus considered as unidirectional entail-
ment), even though the correct judgement is ?bidi-
rectional?, as in:
Example 7.
ENG: At the same time, AKP is struggling with its approach to
the EU.
ENG1: AKP is struggling with its approach to the European
Union.
e) 4 pairs where the added/removed information
concerns universally quantified general statements,
about which the interpretation of ?more/less spe-
cific? given by Turkers resulted in the wrong anno-
tation.
Example 8.
ENG: I think the success of multicultural couples depends on
the size of the cultural gap between the two partners
ENG1: I believe the success of the couples depends on the size
of the cultural gap between the 2 partners.
In Example 8, the additional information (?mul-
ticultural?) restricts the set to which it refers
(?couples?) making ENG entailed by ENG1, and
not vice versa as resulted from Turkers? annotation.
In light of this analysis, we conclude that the sen-
tence modification methodology proved to be suc-
cessful, as the low number of Type 1 errors shows.
Considering that the most expensive phase in the
creation of a TE dataset is the generation of the
pairs, this is a significant achievement. Differently,
the entailment assessment phase appears to be more
problematic, accounting for the majority of errors.
As shown by Type 2 errors, this is due to a par-
tial misalignment between the instructions given in
our HITs, and the formal definition of textual en-
tailment. For this reason, further experimentation
will explore different ways to instruct workers (e.g.
asking to consider proper names and pronouns as
equivalent) in order to reduce the amount of errors
produced. As a final remark, considering that in the
creation of a TE dataset the manual check of the an-
notated pairs represents a minor cost, even the in-
volvement of experts to filter out wrong annotations
would not decrease the cost-effectiveness of the pro-
posed methodology.
6 Conclusions
There is an increasing need of annotated data to
develop new solutions to the Textual Entailment
problem, explore new entailment-related tasks, and
set up experimental frameworks targeting real-world
applications. Following the recent trends promot-
ing annotation efforts that go beyond the estab-
lished RTE Challenge framework (unidirectional en-
tailment between monolingual T-H pairs), in this
678
paper we addressed the multilingual dimension of
the problem. Our primary goal was the creation of
large-scale collections of entailment pairs for differ-
ent language combinations. Besides that, we consid-
ered cost effectiveness and replicability as additional
requirements. To achieve our objectives, we devel-
oped a ?divide and conquer? methodology based on
crowdsourcing. Our approach presents several key
innovations with respect to the related works on TE
data acquisition. These include the decomposition
of a complex content generation task in a pipeline
of simpler subtasks accessible to a large crowd of
non-experts, and the integration of quality control
mechanisms at each stage of the process. The result
of our work is the first large-scale dataset contain-
ing both monolingual and cross-lingual corpora for
several combinations of texts-hypotheses in English,
Italian, and German. Among the advantages of our
method it is worth mentioning: i) the full alignment
between the created corpora, ii) the possibility to
easily extend the dataset to new languages, and iii)
the feasibility of creating general-purpose corpora,
featuring multi-directional entailment relations, that
subsume the traditional RTE-like annotation.
Acknowledgments
This work has been partially supported by the EC-
funded project CoSyne (FP7-ICT-4-24853). The au-
thors would like to thank Emanuele Pianta for the
helpful discussions, and Giovanni Moretti for the
valuable support in the creation of the CLTE dataset.
References
Luisa Bentivogli, Ido Dagan, Hoa Trang Dang, Danilo
Giampiccolo, and Bernardo Magnini. 2009. The Fifth
PASCAL Recognizing Textual Entailment Challenge.
Proceedings of TAC 2009.
Luisa Bentivogli, Elena Cabrio, Ido Dagan, Danilo Gi-
ampiccolo, Medea Lo Leggio, and Bernardo Magnini.
2010. Building Textual Entailment Specialized Data
Sets: a Methodology for Isolating Linguistic Phenom-
ena Relevant to Inference. Proceedings of LREC 2010.
Michael Bloodgood and Chris Callison-Burch. 2010.
Using Mechanical Turk to Build Machine Translation
Evaluation Sets. Proceedings of the NAACL 2010
Workshop on Creating Speech and Language Data
With Amazons Mechanical Turk.
Johan Bos, Fabio Massimo Zanzotto, and Marco Pennac-
chiotti. 2009. Textual Entailment at EVALITA 2009.
Proceedings of EVALITA 2009.
Chris Callison-Burch and Mark Dredze. 2010. Creat-
ing Speech and Language Data With Amazons Me-
chanical Turk. Proceedings NAACL-2010 Workshop
on Creating Speech and Language Data With Amazons
Mechanical Turk.
Ido Dagan and Oren Glickman. 2004. Probabilistic tex-
tual entailment: Generic applied modeling of language
variability. Proceedings of the PASCAL Workshop of
Learning Methods for Text Understanding and Min-
ing.
Yashar Mehdad, Matteo Negri, and Marcello Federico.
2010. Towards Cross-Lingual Textual Entailment.
Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2010.
Yashar Mehdad, Matteo Negri, and Marcello Federico.
2011. Using Bilingual Parallel Corpora for Cross-
Lingual Textual Entailment. Proceedings of ACL-HLT
2011.
Rada Mihalcea and Carlo Strapparava. 2009. The Lie
Detector: Explorations in the Automatic Recognition
of Deceptive Language. Proceedings of ACL 2009.
Joanna Mrozinski, Edward Whittaker, and Sadaoki Furui.
2008. Collecting a Why-Question Corpus for Devel-
opment and Evaluation of an Automatic QA-System.
Proceedings of ACL 2008.
Matteo Negri and Yashar Mehdad. 2010. Creating a Bi-
lingual Entailment Corpus through Translations with
Mechanical Turk: $100 for a 10-day Rush. Proceed-
ings of the NAACL 2010 Workshop on Creating Speech
and Language Data With Amazons Mechanical Turk.
Mark Sammons, V. G. Vinod Vydiswaran, and Dan Roth.
2010. Ask Not What Textual Entailment Can Do for
You... Proceedings of ACL 2010.
Rion Snow, Brendan O?Connor, Daniel Jurafsky and An-
drew Y. Ng. 2008. Cheap and Fast - But is it Good?
Evaluating Non-Expert Annotations for Natural Lan-
guage Tasks. Proceedings of EMNLP 2008.
Rui Wang and Chris Callison-Burch. 2010. Cheap Facts
and Counter-Facts. Proceedings of the NAACL 2010
Workshop on Creating Speech and Language Data
With Amazons Mechanical Turk.
679
First Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), pages 399?407,
Montre?al, Canada, June 7-8, 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
Semeval-2012 Task 8:
Cross-lingual Textual Entailment for Content Synchronization
Matteo Negri
FBK-irst
Trento, Italy
negri@fbk.eu
Alessandro Marchetti
CELCT
Trento, Italy
amarchetti@celct.it
Yashar Mehdad
FBK-irst
Trento, Italy
mehdad@fbk.eu
Luisa Bentivogli
FBK-irst
Trento, Italy
bentivo@fbk.eu
Danilo Giampiccolo
CELCT
Trento, Italy
giampiccolo@celct.it
Abstract
This paper presents the first round of the
task on Cross-lingual Textual Entailment for
Content Synchronization, organized within
SemEval-2012. The task was designed to pro-
mote research on semantic inference over texts
written in different languages, targeting at the
same time a real application scenario. Par-
ticipants were presented with datasets for dif-
ferent language pairs, where multi-directional
entailment relations (?forward?, ?backward?,
?bidirectional?, ?no entailment?) had to be
identified. We report on the training and test
data used for evaluation, the process of their
creation, the participating systems (10 teams,
92 runs), the approaches adopted and the re-
sults achieved.
1 Introduction
The cross-lingual textual entailment task (Mehdad et
al., 2010) addresses textual entailment (TE) recog-
nition (Dagan and Glickman, 2004) under the new
dimension of cross-linguality, and within the new
challenging application scenario of content synchro-
nization.
Cross-linguality represents a dimension of the TE
recognition problem that has been so far only par-
tially investigated. The great potential for integrat-
ing monolingual TE recognition components into
NLP architectures has been reported in several ar-
eas, including question answering, information re-
trieval, information extraction, and document sum-
marization. However, mainly due to the absence of
cross-lingual textual entailment (CLTE) recognition
components, similar improvements have not been
achieved yet in any cross-lingual application. The
CLTE task aims at prompting research to fill this
gap. Along such direction, research can now ben-
efit from recent advances in other fields, especially
machine translation (MT), and the availability of: i)
large amounts of parallel and comparable corpora in
many languages, ii) open source software to com-
pute word-alignments from parallel corpora, and iii)
open source software to set up MT systems. We
believe that all these resources can positively con-
tribute to develop inference mechanisms for multi-
lingual data.
Content synchronization represents a challenging
application scenario to test the capabilities of ad-
vanced NLP systems. Given two documents about
the same topic written in different languages (e.g.
Wiki pages), the task consists of automatically de-
tecting and resolving differences in the information
they provide, in order to produce aligned, mutually
enriched versions of the two documents. Towards
this objective, a crucial requirement is to identify the
information in one page that is either equivalent or
novel (more informative) with respect to the content
of the other. The task can be naturally cast as an
entailment recognition problem, where bidirectional
and unidirectional entailment judgments for two text
fragments are respectively mapped into judgments
about semantic equivalence and novelty. Alterna-
tively, the task can be seen as a machine translation
evaluation problem, where judgments about seman-
tic equivalence and novelty depend on the possibility
to fully or partially translate a text fragment into the
other.
399
Figure 1: ?bidirectional?, ?forward?, ?backward? and
?no entailment? judgments for SP/EN CLTE pairs.
The recent advances on monolingual TE on the
one hand, and the methodologies used in Statisti-
cal Machine Translation (SMT) on the other, offer
promising solutions to approach the CLTE task. In
line with a number of systems that model the RTE
task as a similarity problem (i.e. handling similar-
ity scores between T and H as useful evidence to
draw entailment decisions), the standard sentence
and word alignment programs used in SMT offer a
strong baseline for CLTE. However, although repre-
senting a solid starting point to approach the prob-
lem, similarity-based techniques are just approx-
imations, open to significant improvements com-
ing from semantic inference at the multilingual
level (e.g. cross-lingual entailment rules such as
?perro???animal?). Taken in isolation, similarity-
based techniques clearly fall short of providing an
effective solution to the problem of assigning direc-
tions to the entailment relations (especially in the
complex CLTE scenario, where entailment relations
are multi-directional). Thanks to the contiguity be-
tween CLTE, TE and SMT, the proposed task pro-
vides an interesting scenario to approach the issues
outlined above from different perspectives, and large
room for mutual improvement.
2 The task
Given a pair of topically related text fragments (T1
and T2) in different languages, the CLTE task con-
sists of automatically annotating it with one of the
following entailment judgments (see Figure 1 for
Spanish/English examples of each judgment):
? bidirectional (T1?T2 & T1?T2): the two
fragments entail each other (semantic equiva-
lence);
? forward (T1?T2 & T16?T2): unidirectional
entailment from T1 to T2;
? backward (T16?T2 & T1?T2): unidirectional
entailment from T2 to T1;
? no entailment (T16?T2 & T16?T2): there is
no entailment between T1 and T2 in both direc-
tions;
In this task, both T1 and T2 are assumed to be
true statements. Although contradiction is relevant
from an application-oriented perspective, contradic-
tory pairs are not present in the dataset created for
the first round of the task.
3 Dataset description
Four CLTE corpora have been created for the fol-
lowing language combinations: Spanish/English
(SP-EN), Italian/English (IT-EN), French/English
(FR-EN), German/English (DE-EN). The datasets
are released in the XML format shown in Figure 1.
3.1 Data collection and annotation
The dataset was created following the crowdsourc-
ing methodology proposed in (Negri et al, 2011),
which consists of the following steps:
1. First, English sentences were manually ex-
tracted from copyright-free sources (Wikipedia
and Wikinews). The selected sentences repre-
sent one of the elements (T1) of each entail-
ment pair;
2. Next, each T1 was modified through crowd-
sourcing in various ways in order to ob-
tain a corresponding T2 (e.g. introduc-
ing meaning-preserving lexical and syntactic
changes, adding and removing portions of
text);
3. Each T2 was then paired to the original T1,
and the resulting pairs were annotated with one
of the four entailment judgments. In order to
reduce the correlation between the difference
in sentences? length and entailment judgments,
400
only the pairs where the difference between the
number of words in T1 and T2 (length diff ) was
below a fixed threshold (10 words) were re-
tained.1 The final result is a monolingual En-
glish dataset annotated with multi-directional
entailment judgments, which are well dis-
tributed over length diff values ranging from 0
to 9;
4. In order to create the cross-lingual datasets,
each English T1 was manually translated into
four different languages (i.e. Spanish, German,
Italian and French) by expert translators;
5. By pairing the translated T1 with the cor-
responding T2 in English, four cross-lingual
datasets were obtained.
To ensure the good quality of the datasets, all the
collected pairs were manually checked and corrected
when necessary. Only pairs with agreement between
two expert annotators were retained. The final result
is a multilingual parallel entailment corpus, where
T1s are in 5 different languages (i.e. English, Span-
ish, German, Italian, and French), and T2s are in En-
glish. It?s worth mentioning that the monolingual
English corpus, a by-product of our data collection
methodology, will be publicly released as a further
contribution to the research community.2
3.2 Dataset statistics
Each dataset consists of 1,000 pairs (500 for training
and 500 for test), balanced across the four entail-
ment judgments (bidirectional, forward, backward,
and no entailment).
For each language combination, the distribu-
tion of the four entailment judgments according to
length diff is shown in Figure 2. Vertical bars rep-
resent, for each length diff value, the proportion
of pairs belonging to the four entailment classes.
As can be seen, the length diff constraint applied
to the length difference in the monolingual English
1Such constraint has been applied in order to focus as much
as possible on semantic aspects of the problem, by reduc-
ing the applicability of simple association rules such as IF
length(T1)>length(T2) THEN T1?T2.
2The cross-lingual datasets are already available for research
purposes at http://www.celct.it/resourcesList.
php. The monolingual English dataset will be publicly released
to non participants in July 2012.
pairs (step 3 of the creation process) is substantially
reflected in the cross-lingual datasets for all lan-
guage combinations. In fact, as shown in Table 1,
the majority of the pairs is always included in the
same length diff range (approximately [-5,+5]) and,
within this range, the distribution of the four classes
is substantially uniform. Our assumption is that such
data distribution makes entailment judgments based
on mere surface features such as sentence length in-
effective, thus encouraging the development of alter-
native, deeper processing strategies.
SP-EN IT-EN FR-EN DE-EN
Forward 104 132 121 179
Backward 202 182 191 123
No entailment 163 173 169 174
Bidirectional 175 199 193 209
ALL 644 686 674 685
Table 1: CLTE pairs distribution within the -5/+5
length diff range.
4 Evaluation metrics and baselines
Evaluation results have been automatically com-
puted by comparing the entailment judgments re-
turned by each system with those manually assigned
by human annotators. The metric used for systems?
ranking is accuracy over the whole test set, i.e. the
number of correct judgments out of the total number
of judgments in the test set. Additionally, we calcu-
lated precision, recall, and F1 measures for each of
the four entailment judgment categories taken sep-
arately. These scores aim at giving participants the
possibility to gain clearer insights into their system?s
behavior on the entailment phenomena relevant to
the task.
For each language combination, two baselines
considering the length difference between T1 and T2
have been calculated (besides the trivial 0.25 accu-
racy score obtained by assigning each test pair in the
balanced dataset to one of the four classes):
? Composition of binary judgments (Bi-
nary). To calculate this baseline an SVM
classifier is trained to take binary entailment
decisions (?YES?, ?NO?). The classifier uses
length(T1)/length(T2) as a single feature to
check for entailment from T1 to T2, and
length(T2)/length(T1) for the opposite direc-
tion. For each test pair, the unidirectional
401
010
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
-21 -18 -15 -12 -9 -6 -3 0 3 6 9
no_entailmentforwardbidirectionalbackward
(a) SP-EN
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
-17 -14 -11 -8 -5 -2 1 4 7 10
no_entailmentforwardbidirectionalbackward
(b) IT-EN
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
-21 -18 -15 -12 -9 -6 -3 0 3 6 9 12
no_entailmentforwardbidirectionalbackward
(c) FR-EN
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
-14 -10 -7 -4 -1 2 5 8 11 14 17
no_entailmentforwardbidirectionalbackward
(d) DE-EN
Figure 2: CLTE pairs distribution for different length diff values across all datasets.
judgments returned by the two classifiers are
composed into a single multi-directional judg-
ment (?YES-YES?=?bidirectional?, ?YES-
NO?=?forward?, ?NO-YES?=?backward?,
?NO-NO?=?no entailment?);
? Multi-class classification (Multi-class). A
single SVM classifier is trained with the same
features to directly assign to each pair one of
the four entailment judgments.
Both the baselines have been calculated with the
LIBSVM package (Chang and Lin, 2011), using a
linear kernel with default parameters. Baseline re-
sults are reported in Table 2.
Although the four CLTE datasets are derived from
the same monolingual EN-EN corpus, baseline re-
sults present slight differences due to the effect of
translation into different languages.
SP-EN IT-EN FR-EN DE-EN
1-class 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25
Binary 0.34 0.39 0.39 0.40
Multi-class 0.43 0.44 0.42 0.42
Table 2: Baseline accuracy results.
5 Submitted runs and results
Participants were allowed to submit up to five runs
for each language combination. A total of 17 teams
registered to participate in the task and downloaded
the training set. Out of them, 12 downloaded the
test set and 10 (including one of the task organizers)
submitted valid runs. Eight teams produced submis-
sions for all the language combinations, while two
teams participated only in the SP-EN task. In total,
92 runs have been submitted and evaluated (29 for
SP-EN, and 21 for each of the other language pairs).
402
Despite the novelty and the difficulty of the problem,
these numbers demonstrate the interest raised by the
task, and the overall success of the initiative.
System name SP-EN IT-EN FR-EN DE-EN
BUAP run1 0.350 0.336 0.334 0.330
BUAP run2 0.366 0.344 0.342 0.268
celi run1 0.276 0.278 0.278 0.280
celi run2 0.336 0.338 0.300 0.352
celi run3 0.322 0.334 0.298 0.350
celi run4 0.268 0.280 0.280 0.274
DirRelCond3 run1 0.300 0.280 0.362 0.336
DirRelCond3 run2 0.300 0.284 0.360 0.336
DirRelCond3 run3 0.300 0.338 0.384 0.364
DirRelCond3 run4 0.344 0.316 0.384 0.374
FBK run1* 0.502 - - -
FBK run2* 0.490 - - -
FBK run3* 0.504 - - -
FBK run4* 0.500 - - -
HDU run1 0.630 0.554 0.564 0.558
HDU run2 0.632 0.562 0.570 0.552
ICT run1 0.448 0.454 0.456 0.460
JU-CSE-NLP run1 0.274 0.316 0.288 0.262
JU-CSE-NLP run2 0.266 0.326 0.294 0.296
JU-CSE-NLP run3 0.272 0.314 0.296 0.264
Sagan run1 0.342 0.352 0.346 0.342
Sagan run2 0.328 0.352 0.336 0.310
Sagan run3 0.346 0.356 0.330 0.332
Sagan run4 0.340 0.330 0.310 0.310
SoftCard run1 0.552 0.566 0.570 0.550
UAlacant run1 LATE 0.598 - - -
UAlacant run2 0.582 - - -
UAlacant run3 LATE 0.510 - - -
UAlacant run4 0.514 - - -
Highest 0.632 0.566 0.570 0.558
Average 0.440 0.411 0.408 0.408
Median 0.407 0.350 0.365 0.363
Lowest 0.274 0.326 0.296 0.296
Table 3: Accuracy results (92 runs) over the 4 lan-
guage combinations. Highest, average, median and low-
est scores are calculated considering the best run for each
team (*task organizers? system).
Accuracy results are reported in Table 3. As can
be seen from the table, overall accuracy scores are
quite different across language pairs, with the high-
est result on SP-EN (0.632), which is considerably
higher than the highest score on DE-EN (0.558).
This might be due to the fact that most of the partic-
ipating systems rely on a ?pivoting? approach that
addresses CLTE by automatically translating T1 in
the same language of T2 (see Section 6). Regard-
ing the DE-EN dataset, pivoting methods might be
penalized by the lower quality of MT output when
German T1s are translated into English.
The comparison with baselines results leads to in-
teresting observations. First of all, while all systems
significantly outperform the lowest 1-class baseline
(0.25), both other baselines are surprisingly hard to
beat. This shows that, despite the effort in keep-
ing the distribution of the entailment classes uni-
form across different length diff values, eliminating
the correlation between sentences? length and cor-
rect entailment decisions is difficult. As a conse-
quence, although disregarding semantic aspects of
the problem, features considering such information
are quite effective.
In general, systems performed better on the SP-
EN dataset, with most results above the binary base-
line (8 out of 10), and half of the systems above the
multi-class baseline. For the other language pairs
the results are lower, with only 3 out of 8 partici-
pants above the two baselines in all datasets. Aver-
age results reflect this situation: the average scores
are always above the binary baseline, whereas only
the SP-EN average result is higher than the multi-
class baseline(0.44 vs. 0.43).
To better understand the behaviour of each sys-
tem (also in relation to the different language com-
binations), Table 4 provides separate precision, re-
call, and F1 scores for each entailment judgment,
calculated over the best runs of each participating
team. Overall, the results suggest that the ?bidi-
rectional? and ?no entailment? categories are more
problematic than ?forward? and ?backward? judg-
ments. For most datasets, in fact, systems? perfor-
mance on ?bidirectional? and ?no entailment? is sig-
nificantly lower, typically on recall. Except for the
DE-EN dataset (more problematic on ?forward?),
also average F1 results on these judgments are lower.
This might be due to the fact that, for all datasets, the
vast majority of ?bidirectional? and ?no entailment?
judgments falls in a length diff range where the dis-
tribution of the four classes is more uniform (see
Figure 2).
Similar reasons can justify the fact that ?back-
ward? entailment results are consistently higher on
all datasets. Compared with ?forward? entailment,
these judgments are in fact less scattered across the
entire length diff range (i.e. less intermingled with
the other classes).
403
6 Approaches
A rough classification of the approaches adopted by
participants can be made along two orthogonal di-
mensions, namely:
? Pivoting vs. Cross-lingual. Pivoting meth-
ods rely on the automatic translation of one of
the two texts (either single words or the en-
tire sentence) into the language of the other
(typically English) in order perform monolin-
gual TE recognition. Cross-lingual methods as-
sign entailment judgments without preliminary
translation.
? Composition of binary judgments vs. Multi-
class classification. Compositional approaches
map unidirectional entailment decisions taken
separately into single judgments (similar to the
Binary baseline in Section 4). Methods based
on multi-class classification directly assign one
of the four entailment judgments to each test
pair (similar to our Multi-class baseline).
Concerning the former dimension, most of the
systems (6 out of 10) adopted a pivoting approach,
relying on Google Translate (4 systems), Microsoft
Bing Translator (1), or a combination of Google,
Bing, and other MT systems (1) to produce English
T2s. Regarding the latter dimension, the composi-
tional approach was preferred to multi-class classi-
fication (6 out of 10). The best performing system
relies on a ?hybrid? approach (combining monolin-
gual and cross-lingual alignments) and a compo-
sitional strategy. Besides the frequent recourse to
MT tools, other resources used by participants in-
clude: on-line dictionaries for the translation of sin-
gle words, word alignment tools, part-of-speech tag-
gers, NP chunkers, named entity recognizers, stem-
mers, stopwords lists, and Wikipedia as an external
multilingual corpus. More in detail:
BUAP [pivoting, compositional] (Vilarin?o et al,
2012) adopts a pivoting method based on translating
T1 into the language of T2 and vice versa (Google
Translate3 and the OpenOffice Thesaurus4). Simi-
larity measures (e.g. Jaccard index) and rules are
3http://translate.google.com/
4http://extensions.services.openoffice.
org/en/taxonomy/term/233
respectively used to annotate the two resulting sen-
tence pairs with entailment judgments and combine
them in a single decision.
CELI [cross lingual, compositional & multi-
class] (Kouylekov, 2012) uses dictionaries for word
matching, and a multilingual corpus extracted from
Wikipedia for term weighting. Word overlap and
similarity measures are then used in different ap-
proaches to the task. In one run (Run 1), they are
used to train a classifier that assigns separate en-
tailment judgments for each direction. Such judg-
ments are finally composed into a single one for each
pair. In the other runs, the same features are used for
multi-class classification.
DirRelCond3 [cross lingual, compositional]
(Perini, 2012) uses bilingual dictionaries (Freedict5
and WordReference6) to translate content words into
English. Then, entailment decisions are taken com-
bining directional relatedness scores between words
in both directions (Perini, 2011).
FBK [cross lingual, compositional & multi-
class] (Mehdad et al, 2012a) uses cross-lingual
matching features extracted from lexical phrase ta-
bles, semantic phrase tables, and dependency rela-
tions (Mehdad et al, 2011; Mehdad et al, 2012b;
Mehdad et al, 2012c). The features are used for
multi-class and binary classification using SVMs.
HDU [hybrid, compositional] (Wa?schle and
Fendrich, 2012) uses a combination of binary clas-
sifiers for each entailment direction. The classifiers
use both monolingual alignment features based on
METEOR (Banerjee and Lavie, 2005) alignments
(translations obtained from Google Translate), and
cross-lingual alignment features based on GIZA++
(Och and Ney, 2000) (word alignments learned on
Europarl).
ICT [pivoting, compositional] (Meng et al,
2012) adopts a pivoting method (using Google
Translate and an in-house hierarchical MT system),
and the open source EDITS system (Kouylekov and
Negri, 2010) to calculate similarity scores between
monolingual English pairs. Separate unidirectional
entailment judgments obtained from binary classi-
fier are combined to return one of the four valid
CLTE judgments.
5http://www.freedict.com/
6http://www.wordreference.com/
404
SP-EN
Forward Backward No entailment Bidirectional
System name P R F1 P R F1 P R F1 P R F1
BUAP spa-eng run2 0,337 0,664 0,447 0,406 0,568 0,473 0,333 0,088 0,139 0,391 0,144 0,211
celi spa-eng run2 0,324 0,368 0,345 0,411 0,368 0,388 0,306 0,296 0,301 0,312 0,312 0,312
DirRelCond3 spa-eng run4 0,358 0,608 0,451 0,444 0,448 0,446 0,286 0,032 0,058 0,243 0,288 0,264
FBK spa-eng run3 0,515 0,704 0,595 0,546 0,568 0,557 0,447 0,304 0,362 0,482 0,440 0,460
HDU spa-eng run2 0,607 0,656 0,631 0,677 0,704 0,690 0,602 0,592 0,597 0,643 0,576 0,608
ICT spa-eng run1 0,750 0,240 0,364 0,440 0,472 0,456 0,395 0,560 0,464 0,436 0,520 0,474
JU-CSE-NLP spa-eng run1 0,211 0,288 0,243 0,272 0,296 0,284 0,354 0,232 0,280 0,315 0,280 0,297
Sagan spa-eng run3 0,225 0,200 0,212 0,269 0,224 0,245 0,418 0,448 0,432 0,424 0,512 0,464
SoftCard spa-eng run1 0,602 0,616 0,609 0,650 0,624 0,637 0,471 0,448 0,459 0,489 0,520 0,504
UAlacant spa-eng run1 LATE 0,689 0,568 0,623 0,645 0,728 0,684 0,507 0,544 0,525 0,566 0,552 0,559
AVG. 0,462 0,491 0,452 0,476 0,5 0,486 0,412 0,354 0,362 0,43 0,414 0,415
IT-EN
Forward Backward No entailment Bidirectional
System name P R F1 P R F1 P R F1 P R F1
BUAP ita-eng run2 0,324 0,456 0,379 0,327 0,672 0,440 0,538 0,056 0,101 0,444 0,192 0,268
celi ita-eng run2 0,349 0,360 0,354 0,455 0,36 0,402 0,294 0,320 0,307 0,287 0,312 0,299
DirRelCond3 ita-eng run3 0,323 0,488 0,389 0,480 0,288 0,360 0,331 0,368 0,348 0,268 0,208 0,234
HDU ita-eng run2 0,564 0,600 0,581 0,628 0,648 0,638 0,551 0,520 0,535 0,500 0,480 0,490
ICT ita-eng run1 0,661 0,296 0,409 0,554 0,368 0,442 0,427 0,448 0,438 0,383 0,704 0,496
JU-CSE-NLP ita-eng run2 0,240 0,280 0,258 0,339 0,480 0,397 0,412 0,280 0,333 0,359 0,264 0,304
Sagan ita-eng run3 0,306 0,296 0,301 0,252 0,216 0,233 0,395 0,512 0,446 0,455 0,400 0,426
SoftCard ita-eng run1 0,602 0,616 0,609 0,617 0,696 0,654 0,560 0,448 0,498 0,481 0,504 0,492
AVG. 0,421 0,424 0,410 0,457 0,466 0,446 0,439 0,369 0,376 0,397 0,383 0,376
FR-EN
Forward Backward No entailment Bidirectional
System name P R F1 P R F1 P R F1 P R F1
BUAP fra-eng run2 0,447 0,272 0,338 0,291 0,760 0,420 0,250 0,016 0,030 0,449 0,320 0,374
celi fra-eng run2 0,316 0,296 0,306 0,378 0,360 0,369 0,270 0,296 0,282 0,244 0,248 0,246
DirRelCond3 fra-eng run3 0,393 0,576 0,468 0,441 0,512 0,474 0,387 0,232 0,290 0,278 0,216 0,243
HDU fra-eng run2 0,564 0,672 0,613 0,582 0,736 0,650 0,676 0,384 0,490 0,500 0,488 0,494
ICT fra-eng run1 0,750 0,192 0,306 0,517 0,496 0,506 0,385 0,656 0,485 0,444 0,480 0,462
JU-CSE-NLP fra-eng run3 0,215 0,208 0,211 0,289 0,296 0,292 0,341 0,496 0,404 0,333 0,184 0,237
Sagan fra-eng run1 0,244 0,168 0,199 0,297 0,344 0,319 0,394 0,568 0,466 0,427 0,304 0,355
SoftCard fra-eng run1 0,551 0,608 0,578 0,649 0,696 0,672 0,560 0,488 0,521 0,513 0,488 0,500
AVG. 0,435 0,374 0,377 0,431 0,525 0,463 0,408 0,392 0,371 0,399 0,341 0,364
DE-EN
Forward Backward No entailment Bidirectional
System name P R F1 P R F1 P R F1 P R F1
BUAP deu-eng run1 0,395 0,120 0,184 0,248 0,224 0,235 0,344 0,688 0,459 0,364 0,288 0,321
celi deu-eng run2 0,347 0,416 0,378 0,402 0,392 0,397 0,339 0,312 0,325 0,319 0,288 0,303
DirRelCond3 deu-eng run4 0,429 0,312 0,361 0,408 0,552 0,469 0,367 0,320 0,342 0,298 0,312 0,305
HDU deu-eng run1 0,559 0,528 0,543 0,600 0,696 0,644 0,540 0,488 0,513 0,524 0,520 0,522
ICT deu-eng run1 0,718 0,224 0,341 0,493 0,552 0,521 0,390 0,512 0,443 0,439 0,552 0,489
JU-CSE-NLP deu-eng run2 0,182 0,048 0,076 0,307 0,496 0,379 0,315 0,560 0,403 0,233 0,080 0,119
Sagan deu-eng run1 0,250 0,168 0,201 0,239 0,256 0,247 0,405 0,600 0,484 0,443 0,344 0,387
SoftCard deu-eng run1 0,568 0,568 0,568 0,611 0,640 0,625 0,521 0,488 0,504 0,496 0,504 0,500
AVG. 0,431 0,298 0,332 0,414 0,476 0,440 0,403 0,496 0,434 0,390 0,361 0,368
Table 4: precision, recall and F1 scores, calculated for each team?s best run for all the language combinations.
JU-CSE-NLP [pivoting, compositional] (Neogi
et al, 2012) uses Microsoft Bing translator7 to pro-
duce monolingual English pairs. Separate lexical
mapping scores are calculated (from T1 to T2 and
vice-versa) considering different types of informa-
tion and similarity metrics. Binary entailment de-
7http://www.microsofttranslator.com/
cisions are then heuristically combined into single
decisions.
Sagan [pivoting, multi-class] (Castillo and Car-
denas, 2012) adopts a pivoting method using Google
Translate, and trains a monolingual system based on
a SVM multi-class classifier. A CLTE corpus de-
rived from the RTE-3 dataset is also used as a source
of additional training material.
405
SoftCard [pivoting, multi-class] (Jimenez et al,
2012) after automatic translation with Google Trans-
late, uses SVMs to learn entailment decisions based
on information about the cardinality of: T1, T2, their
intersection and their union. Cardinalities are com-
puted in different ways, considering tokens in T1 and
T2, their IDF, and their similarity (computed with
edit-distance)
UAlacant [pivoting, multi-class] (Espla`-Gomis
et al, 2012) exploits translations obtained from
Google Translate, Microsoft Bing translator, and the
Apertium open-source MT platform (Forcada et al,
2011).8 Then, a multi-class SVM classifier is used
to take entailment decisions using information about
overlapping sub-segments as features.
7 Conclusion
Despite the novelty of the problem and the diffi-
culty to capture multi-directional entailment rela-
tions across languages, the first round of the Cross-
lingual Textual Entailment for Content Synchroniza-
tion task organized within SemEval-2012 was a suc-
cessful experience. This year a new interesting chal-
lenge has been proposed, a benchmark for four lan-
guage combinations has been released, baseline re-
sults have been proposed for comparison, and a
monolingual English dataset has been produced as
a by-product which can be useful for monolingual
TE research. The interest shown by participants
was encouraging: 10 teams submitted a total of 92
runs for all the language pairs proposed. Overall,
the results achieved on all datasets are encourag-
ing, with best systems significantly outperforming
the proposed baselines. It is worth observing that the
nature of the task, which lies between semantics and
machine translation, led to the participation of teams
coming from both these communities, showing in-
teresting opportunities for integration and mutual
improvement. The proposed approaches reflect this
situation, with teams traditionally working on MT
now dealing with entailment, and teams tradition-
ally participating in the RTE challenges now dealing
with cross-lingual alignment techniques. Our ambi-
tion, for the future editions of the CLTE task, is to
further consolidate the bridge between the semantics
and MT communities.
8http://www.apertium.org/
Acknowledgments
This work has been partially supported by the EC-
funded project CoSyne (FP7-ICT-4-24853). The
authors would also like to acknowledge Giovanni
Moretti from CELCT for evaluation scripts and
technical assistance, and the volunteer translators
that contributed to the creation of the dataset:
Mar??a Sol Accossato, Laura Barthe?le?my, Clau-
dia Biacchi, Jane Brendler, Amandine Chantrel,
Hanna Cheda Patete, Ellen Clancy, Rodrigo Damian
Tejeda, Daniela Dold, Valentina Frattini, Debora
Hedy Amato, Geniz Hernandez, Be?ne?dicte Jean-
nequin, Beate Jones, Anne Kauffman, Marcia Laura
Zanoli, Jasmin Lewis, Alicia Lo?pez, Domenico Los-
eto, Sabrina Luja?n Sa?nchez, Julie Mailfait, Gabriele
Mark, Nunzio Pruiti, Lourdes Rey Cascallar, Sylvie
Martlew, Aleane Salas Velez, Monica Scalici, An-
dreas Schwab, Marianna Sicuranza, Chiara Sisler,
Stefano Tordazzi, Yvonne.
References
Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. 2005. METEOR:
An Automatic Metric for MT Evaluation with Im-
proved Correlation with Human Judgments. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACL Workshop on Intrinsic and Ex-
trinsic Evaluation Measures for Machine Translation
and/or Summarization, pages 65?72.
Julio Castillo and Marina Cardenas. 2012. Sagan: A
Cross Lingual Textual Entailment system based on
Machine Traslation. In Proceedings of the 6th Inter-
national Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval
2012).
Chih-Chung Chang and Chih-Jen Lin. 2011. Libsvm:
a library for support vector machines. ACM Trans-
actions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST),
2(3):27.
Ido Dagan and Oren Glickman. 2004. Probabilistic Tex-
tual Entailment: Generic Applied Modeling of Lan-
guage Variability. In Proceedings of the PASCAL
Workshop of Learning Methods for Text Understand-
ing and Mining.
Miquel Espla`-Gomis, Felipe Sa?nchez-Mart??nez, and
Mikel L. Forcada. 2012. UAlacant: Using Online
Machine Translation for Cross-Lingual Textual Entail-
ment. In Proceedings of the 6th International Work-
shop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2012).
Mikel L. Forcada, Ginest??-Rosell Mireia, Nordfalk Jacob,
O?Regan Jim, Ortiz-Rojas Sergio, Pe?rez-Ortiz Juan A.,
Sa?nchez-Mart??nez Felipe, Ram??rez-Sa?nchez Gema,
406
and Tyers Francis M. 2011. Apertium: a Free/Open-
Source Platform for Rule-Based Machine Translation.
Machine Translation, 25(2):127?144. Special Issue:
Free/Open-Source Machine Translation.
Sergio Jimenez, Claudia Becerra, and Alexander Gel-
bukh. 2012. Soft Cardinality + ML: Learning Adap-
tive Similarity Functions for Cross-lingual Textual En-
tailment. In Proceedings of the 6th International
Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2012).
Milen Kouylekov and Matteo Negri. 2010. An open-
source package for recognizing textual entailment. In
Proceedings of the ACL 2010 System Demonstrations.
Milen Kouylekov. 2012. CELI: An Experiment with
Cross Language Textual Entailment. In Proceedings
of the 6th International Workshop on Semantic Evalu-
ation (SemEval 2012).
Yashar Mehdad, Matteo Negri, and Marcello Federico.
2010. Towards Cross-Lingual Textual Entailment. In
Proceedings of the 11th Annual Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (NAACL HLT 2010).
Yashar Mehdad, Matteo Negri, and Marcello Federico.
2011. Using Bilingual Parallel Corpora for Cross-
Lingual Textual Entailment. In Proceedings of the
49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies
(ACL HLT 2011).
Yashar Mehdad, Matteo Negri, and Jose? G. C. de Souza.
2012a. FBK: Cross-Lingual Textual Entailment With-
out Translation. In Proceedings of the 6th Interna-
tional Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval
2012).
Yashar Mehdad, Matteo Negri, and Marcello Federico.
2012b. Detecting Semantic Equivalence and Informa-
tion Disparity in Cross-lingual Documents. In Pro-
ceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2012).
Yashar Mehdad, Matteo Negri, and Marcello Federico.
2012c. Match without a Referee: Evaluating MT Ade-
quacy without Reference Translations. In Proceedings
of the 7th Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation
(WMT 2012).
Fandong Meng, Hao Xiong, and Qun Liu. 2012. ICT:
A Translation based Cross-lingual Textual Entailment.
In Proceedings of the 6th International Workshop on
Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2012).
Matto Negri, Luisa Bentivogli, Yashar Mehdad, Danilo
Giampiccolo, and Alessandro Marchetti. 2011. Di-
vide and Conquer: Crowdsourcing the Creation of
Cross-Lingual Textual Entailment Corpora. Proceed-
ings of the 2011 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 2011).
Snehasis Neogi, Partha Pakray, Sivaji Bandyopadhyay,
and Alexander Gelbukh. 2012. JU-CSE-NLP: Lan-
guage Independent Cross-lingual Textual Entailment
System. In Proceedings of the 6th International Work-
shop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2012).
Franz J. Och and Hermann Ney. 2000. Improved Sta-
tistical Alignment Models. In Proceedings of the 38th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL 2000).
Alpa?r Perini. 2011. Detecting textual entailment
with conditions on directional text relatedness scores.
Studia Universitatis Babes-Bolyai Series Informatica,
LVI(2):13?18.
Alpa?r Perini. 2012. DirRelCond3: Detecting Textual
Entailment Across Languages With Conditions On Di-
rectional Text Relatedness Scores. In Proceedings of
the 6th International Workshop on Semantic Evalua-
tion (SemEval 2012).
Darnes Vilarin?o, David Pinto, Mireya Tovar, Saul Leo?n,
and Esteban Castillo. 2012. BUAP: Lexical and
Semantic Similarity for Cross-lingual Textual Entail-
ment. In Proceedings of the 6th International Work-
shop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2012).
Katharina Wa?schle and Sascha Fendrich. 2012. HDU:
Cross-lingual Textual Entailment with SMT Features.
In Proceedings of the 6th International Workshop on
Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2012).
407
Second Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), Volume 2: Seventh International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluation (SemEval 2013), pages 25?33, Atlanta, Georgia, June 14-15, 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Semeval-2013 Task 8:
Cross-lingual Textual Entailment for Content Synchronization
Matteo Negri
FBK-irst
Trento, Italy
negri@fbk.eu
Alessandro Marchetti
CELCT
Trento, Italy
amarchetti@celct.it
Yashar Mehdad
UBC
Vancouver, Canada
mehdad@cs.ubc.ca
Luisa Bentivogli
FBK-irst
Trento, Italy
bentivo@fbk.eu
Danilo Giampiccolo
CELCT
Trento, Italy
giampiccolo@celct.it
Abstract
This paper presents the second round of the
task on Cross-lingual Textual Entailment for
Content Synchronization, organized within
SemEval-2013. The task was designed to pro-
mote research on semantic inference over texts
written in different languages, targeting at the
same time a real application scenario. Par-
ticipants were presented with datasets for dif-
ferent language pairs, where multi-directional
entailment relations (?forward?, ?backward?,
?bidirectional?, ?no entailment?) had to be
identified. We report on the training and test
data used for evaluation, the process of their
creation, the participating systems (six teams,
61 runs), the approaches adopted and the re-
sults achieved.
1 Introduction
The cross-lingual textual entailment task (Mehdad et
al., 2010) addresses textual entailment (TE) recog-
nition (Dagan and Glickman, 2004) under the new
dimension of cross-linguality, and within the new
challenging application scenario of content synchro-
nization. Given two texts in different languages, the
cross-lingual textual entailment (CLTE) task con-
sists of deciding if the meaning of one text can be
inferred from the meaning of the other text. Cross-
linguality represents an interesting direction for re-
search on recognizing textual entailment (RTE), es-
pecially due to its possible application in a vari-
ety of tasks. Among others (e.g. question answer-
ing, information retrieval, information extraction,
and document summarization), multilingual content
synchronization represents a challenging application
scenario to evaluate CLTE recognition components
geared to the identification of sentence-level seman-
tic relations.
Given two documents about the same topic writ-
ten in different languages (e.g. Wikipedia pages),
the content synchronization task consists of au-
tomatically detecting and resolving differences in
the information they provide, in order to produce
aligned, mutually enriched versions of the two docu-
ments (Monz et al, 2011; Bronner et al, 2012). To-
wards this objective, a crucial requirement is to iden-
tify the information in one page that is either equiv-
alent or novel (more informative) with respect to the
content of the other. The task can be naturally cast
as an entailment recognition problem, where bidi-
rectional and unidirectional entailment judgements
for two text fragments are respectively mapped into
judgements about semantic equivalence and novelty.
The task can also be seen as a machine translation
evaluation problem, where judgements about se-
mantic equivalence and novelty depend on the pos-
sibility to fully or partially translate a text fragment
into the other.
The recent advances on monolingual TE on the
one hand, and the methodologies used in Statisti-
cal Machine Translation (SMT) on the other, offer
promising solutions to approach the CLTE task. In
line with a number of systems that model the RTE
task as a similarity problem (i.e. handling similar-
ity scores between T and H as features contributing
to the entailment decision), the standard sentence
and word alignment programs used in SMT offer
a strong baseline for CLTE (Mehdad et al, 2011;
25
Figure 1: Example of SP-EN CLTE pairs.
Mehdad et al, 2012). However, although repre-
senting a solid starting point to approach the prob-
lem, similarity-based techniques are just approx-
imations, open to significant improvements com-
ing from semantic inference at the multilingual
level (e.g. cross-lingual entailment rules such as
?perro???animal?). Taken in isolation, similarity-
based techniques clearly fall short of providing an
effective solution to the problem of assigning direc-
tions to the entailment relations (especially in the
complex CLTE scenario, where entailment relations
are multi-directional). Thanks to the contiguity be-
tween CLTE, TE and SMT, the proposed task pro-
vides an interesting scenario to approach the issues
outlined above from different perspectives, and of-
fers large room for mutual improvement.
Building on the success of the first CLTE evalua-
tion organized within SemEval-2012 (Negri et al,
2012a), the remainder of this paper describes the
second evaluation round organized within SemEval-
2013. The following sections provide an overview
of the datasets used, the participating systems, the
approaches adopted, the achieved results, and the
lessons learned.
2 The task
Given a pair of topically related text fragments (T1
and T2) in different languages, the CLTE task con-
sists of automatically annotating it with one of the
following entailment judgements (see Figure 1 for
Spanish/English examples of each judgement):
? bidirectional (T1?T2 & T1?T2): the two
fragments entail each other (semantic equiva-
lence);
? forward (T1?T2 & T16?T2): unidirectional
entailment from T1 to T2;
? backward (T16?T2 & T1?T2): unidirectional
entailment from T2 to T1;
? no entailment (T16?T2 & T16?T2): there is
no entailment between T1 and T2 in either di-
rection;
In this task, both T1 and T2 are assumed to be
true statements. Although contradiction is relevant
from an application-oriented perspective, contradic-
tory pairs are not present in the dataset.
3 Dataset description
The CLTE-2013 dataset is composed of four CLTE
corpora created for the following language combi-
nations: Spanish/English (SP-EN), Italian/English
(IT-EN), French/English (FR-EN), German/English
(DE-EN). Each corpus consists of 1,500 sentence
pairs (1,000 for training and 500 for test), balanced
across the four entailment judgements.
In this year?s evaluation, as training set we used
the CLTE-2012 corpus1 that was created for the
SemEval-2012 evaluation exercise2 (including both
training and test sets). The CLTE-2013 test set was
created from scratch, following the methodology de-
scribed in the next section.
3.1 Data collection and annotation
To collect the entailment pairs for the 2013 test set
we adopted a slightly modified version of the crowd-
sourcing methodology followed to create the CLTE-
2012 corpus (Negri et al, 2011). The main differ-
ence with last year?s procedure is that we did not
take advantage of crowdsourcing for the whole data
collection process, but only for part of it.
As for CLTE-2012, the collection and annotation
process consists of the following steps:
1. First, English sentences were manually ex-
tracted from Wikipedia and Wikinews. The se-
lected sentences represent one of the elements
(T1) of each entailment pair;
1http://www.celct.it/resources.php?id page=CLTE
2http://www.cs.york.ac.uk/semeval-2012/task8/
26
2. Next, each T1 was modified in various ways
in order to obtain a corresponding T2. While
in the CLTE-2012 dataset the whole T2 cre-
ation process was carried out through crowd-
sourcing, for the CLTE-2013 test set we crowd-
sourced only the first phase of T1 modification,
namely the creation of paraphrases. Focusing
on the creation of high quality paraphrases, we
followed the crowdsourcing methodology ex-
perimented in Negri et al (2012b), in which
a paraphrase is obtained through an itera-
tive modification process of an original sen-
tence, by asking workers to introduce meaning-
preserving lexical and syntactic changes. At
each round of the iteration, new workers are
presented with the output of the previous iter-
ation in order to increase divergence from the
original sentence. At the end of the process,
only the more divergent paraphrases according
to the Lesk score (Lesk, 1986) are selected. As
for the second phase of T2 creation process,
this year it was carried out by expert annota-
tors, who followed the same criteria used last
year for the crowdsourced tasks, i.e. i) remove
information from the input (paraphrased) sen-
tence and ii) add information from sentences
surrounding T1 in the source article;
3. Each T2 was then paired to the original T1, and
the resulting pairs were annotated with one of
the four entailment judgements. In order to re-
duce the correlation between the difference in
sentences? length and entailment judgements,
only the pairs where the difference between the
number of words in T1 and T2 (length diff ) was
below a fixed threshold (10 words) were re-
tained.3 The final result is a monolingual En-
glish dataset annotated with multi-directional
entailment judgements, which are well dis-
tributed over length diff values ranging from 0
to 9;
4. In order to create the cross-lingual datasets,
each English T1 was manually translated into
3Such constraint has been applied in order to focus as much
as possible on semantic aspects of the problem, by reduc-
ing the applicability of simple association rules such as IF
length(T1)>length(T2) THEN T1?T2.
four different languages (i.e. Spanish, German,
Italian and French) by expert translators;
5. By pairing the translated T1 with the cor-
responding T2 in English, four cross-lingual
datasets were obtained.
To ensure the good quality of the datasets, all the
collected pairs were cross-annotated and filtered to
retain only those pairs with full agreement in the
entailment judgement between two expert annota-
tors. The final result is a multilingual parallel en-
tailment corpus, where T1s are in 5 different lan-
guages (i.e. English, Spanish, German, Italian, and
French), and T2s are in English. It is worth men-
tioning that the monolingual English corpus, a by-
product of our data collection methodology, will be
publicly released as a further contribution to the re-
search community.
3.2 Dataset statistics
As described in section 3.1, the methodology fol-
lowed to create the training and test sets was the
same except for the crowdsourced tasks. This al-
lowed us to obtain two datasets with the same bal-
ance across the entailment judgements, and to keep
under control the distribution of the pairs for differ-
ent length diff values in each language combination.
Training Set. The training set is composed of
1,000 CLTE pairs for each language combina-
tion, balanced across the four entailment judge-
ments (bidirectional, forward, backward, and
no entailment). As shown in Table 1, our data col-
lection procedure led to a dataset where the major-
ity of the pairs falls in the +5 -5 length diff range
for each language pair (67.2% on average across the
four language pairs). This characteristic is partic-
ularly relevant as our assumption is that such data
distribution makes entailment judgements based on
mere surface features such as sentence length inef-
fective, thus encouraging the development of alter-
native, deeper processing strategies.
Test Set. The test set is composed of 500 entail-
ment pairs for each language combination, balanced
across the four entailment judgements. As shown
in Table 2, also in this dataset the majority of the
collected entailment pairs is uniformly distributed
27
(a) SP-EN (b) IT-EN
(c) FR-EN (d) DE-EN
Figure 2: Pair distribution in the 2013 test set: total number of pairs (y-axis) for different length diff values (x-axis).
SP-EN IT-EN FR-EN DE-EN
Forward 104 132 121 179
Backward 202 182 191 123
No entailment 163 173 169 174
Bidirectional 175 199 193 209
ALL 644 686 674 685
% (out of 1,000) 64.4 68.6 67.4 68.5
Table 1: Training set pair distribution within the -5/+5
length diff range.
in the [-5,+5] length diff range (68.1% on average
across the four language pairs).
However, comparing training and test set for
each language pair, it can be seen that while the
Spanish-English and Italian-English datasets are ho-
mogeneous with respect to the length diff feature,
the French-English and German-English datasets
present noticeable differences between training and
test set. These figures show that, despite the consid-
erable effort spent to produce comparable training
SP-EN IT-EN FR-EN DE-EN
backward 82 89 82 102
bidirectional 89 92 90 106
forward 69 78 76 98
no entailment 71 80 59 100
ALL 311 339 307 406
% (out of 500) 62.2 67.8 61.4 81.2
Table 2: Test set pair distribution within the -5/+5
length diff range.
and test sets, the ideal objective of a full homogene-
ity between the datasets for these two languages was
difficult to reach.
Complete details about the distribution of the
pairs in terms of length diff for the four cross-
lingual corpora in the test set are provided in Figure
2. Vertical bars represent, for each length diff value,
the proportion of pairs belonging to the four entail-
ment classes.
28
4 Evaluation metrics and baselines
Evaluation results have been automatically com-
puted by comparing the entailment judgements re-
turned by each system with those manually assigned
by human annotators in the gold standard. The met-
rics used for systems? ranking is accuracy over the
whole test set, i.e. the number of correct judge-
ments out of the total number of judgements in the
test set. Additionally, we calculated precision, re-
call, and F1 measures for each of the four entail-
ment judgement categories taken separately. These
scores aim at giving participants the possibility to
gain clearer insights into their system?s behaviour on
the entailment phenomena relevant to the task.
To allow comparison with the CLTE-2012 re-
sults, the same three baselines were calculated on the
CLTE-2013 test set for each language combination.
The first one is the 0.25 accuracy score obtained by
assigning each test pair in the balanced dataset to
one of the four classes. The other two baselines con-
sider the length difference between T1 and T2:
? Composition of binary judgements (Bi-
nary). To calculate this baseline an SVM
classifier is trained to take binary en-
tailment decisions (?YES?, ?NO?). The
classifier uses length(T1)/length(T2) and
length(T2)/length(T1) as features respectively
to check for entailment from T1 to T2 and vice-
versa. For each test pair, the unidirectional
judgements returned by the two classifiers are
composed into a single multi-directional judge-
ment (?YES-YES?=?bidirectional?, ?YES-
NO?=?forward?, ?NO-YES?=?backward?,
?NO-NO?=?no entailment?);
? Multi-class classification (Multi-class). A
single SVM classifier is trained with the same
features to directly assign to each pair one of
the four entailment judgements.
Both the baselines have been calculated with the
LIBSVM package (Chang and Lin, 2011), using de-
fault parameters. Baseline results are reported in Ta-
ble 3.
Although the four CLTE datasets are derived from
the same monolingual EN-EN corpus, baseline re-
sults present slight differences due to the effect of
translation into different languages. With respect to
last year?s evaluation, we can observe a slight drop
in the binary classification baseline results. This
might be due to the fact that the length distribution
of examples is slightly different this year. How-
ever, there are no significant differences between the
multi-class baseline results of this year in compar-
ison with the previous round results. This might
suggest that multi-class classification is a more ro-
bust approach for recognizing multi-directional en-
tailment relations. Moreover, both baselines failed
in capturing the ?no-entailment? examples in all
datasets (F1no?entailment = 0).
SP-EN IT-EN FR-EN DE-EN
1-class 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25
Binary 0.35 0.39 0.37 0.39
Multi-class 0.43 0.44 0.42 0.42
Table 3: Baseline accuracy results.
5 Submitted runs and results
Like in the 2012 round of the CLTE task, partici-
pants were allowed to submit up to five runs for each
language combination. A total of twelve teams reg-
istered for participation and downloaded the train-
ing set. Out of them, six4 submitted valid runs.
Five teams produced submissions for all the four
language combinations, while one team participated
only in the DE-EN task. In total, 61 runs have been
submitted and evaluated (16 for DE-EN, and 15 for
each of the other language pairs).
Accuracy results are reported in Table 4. As can
be seen from the table, the performance of the best
systems is quite similar across the four language
combinations, with the best submissions achieving
results in the 43.4-45.8% accuracy interval. Simi-
larly, also average and median results are close to
each other, with a small drop on DE-EN. This drop
might be explained by the difference between the
training and test set with respect to the length diff
feature. Moreover, the performance of DE-EN auto-
matic translation might affect approaches based on
?pivoting?, (i.e. addressing CLTE by automatically
translating T1 in the same language of T2, as de-
scribed in Section 6).
4Including the task organizers.
29
System name SP-EN IT-EN FR-EN DE-EN
altn run1* 0.428 0.432 0.420 0.388
BUAP run1 0.364 0.358 0.368 0.322
BUAP run2 0.374 0.358 0.364 0.318
BUAP run3 0.380 0.358 0.362 0.316
BUAP run4 0.364 0.388 0.392 0.350
BUAP run5 0.386 0.360 0.372 0.318
celi run1 0.340 0.324 0.334 0.342
celi run2 0.342 0.324 0.340 0.342
ECNUCS run1 0.428 0.426 0.438 0.422
ECNUCS run2 0.404 0.420 0.450 0.436
ECNUCS run3 0.408 0.426 0.458 0.432
ECNUCS run4 0.422 0.416 0.436 0.452
ECNUCS run5 0.392 0.402 0.442 0.426
SoftCard run1 0.434 0.454 0.416 0.414
SoftCard run2 0.432 0.448 0.426 0.402
umelb run1 ? ? ? 0.324
Highest 0.434 0.454 0.458 0.452
Average 0.404 0.404 0.401 0.378
Median 0.428 0.426 0.420 0.369
Lowest 0.342 0.324 0.340 0.324
Table 4: CLTE-2013 accuracy results (61 runs) over the
4 language combinations. Highest, average, median and
lowest scores are calculated considering only the best run
for each team (*task organizers? system).
Compared to the results achieved last year, shown
in Table 5, a sensible decrease in the highest scores
can be observed. While in CLTE-2012 the top sys-
tems achieved an accuracy well above 0.5 (with a
maximum of 0.632 in SP-EN), the results for this
year are far below such level (the peak is now at
45,8% for FR-EN). A slight decrease with respect
to 2012 can also be noted for average performances.
However, it?s worth remarking the general increase
of the lowest and median scores, which are less sen-
sitive to isolate outstanding results achieved by sin-
gle teams. This indicates that a progress in CLTE
research has been made building on the lessons
learned after the first round of the initiative.
To better understand the behaviour of each sys-
tem, Table 6 provides separate precision, recall, and
F1 scores for each entailment judgement, calculated
over the best runs of each participating team. In
contrast to CLTE-2012, where the ?bidirectional?
and ?no entailment? categories consistently proved
to be more problematic than ?forward? and ?back-
ward? judgements, this year?s results are more ho-
mogeneous across the different classes. Neverthe-
less, on average, the classification of ?bidirectional?
pairs is still worse for three language pairs (SP-EN,
IT-EN and FR-EN), and results for ?no entailment?
are lower for two of them (SP-EN and DE-EN).
SP-EN IT-EN FR-EN DE-EN
Highest 0.632 0.566 0.570 0.558
Average 0.440 0.411 0.408 0.408
Median 0.407 0.350 0.365 0.363
Lowest 0.274 0.326 0.296 0.296
Table 5: CLTE-2012 accuracy results. Highest, average,
median and lowest scores are calculated considering only
the best run for each team.
As regards the comparison with the baselines,
this year?s results confirm that the length diff -based
baselines are hard to beat. More specifically, most
of the systems are slightly above the binary classi-
fication baseline (with the exception of the DE-EN
dataset where only two systems out of six outper-
formed it), whereas for all the language combina-
tions the multi-class baseline was beaten only by the
best participating system.
This shows that, despite the effort in keeping the
distribution of the entailment classes uniform across
different length diff values, eliminating the correla-
tion between sentence length and correct entailment
decisions is difficult. As a consequence, although
disregarding semantic aspects of the problem, fea-
tures considering length information are quite ef-
fective in terms of overall accuracy. Such features,
however, perform rather poorly when dealing with
challenging cases (e.g. ?no-entailment?), which are
better handled by participating systems.
6 Approaches
A rough classification of the approaches adopted by
participants can be made along two orthogonal di-
mensions, namely:
? Pivoting vs. Cross-lingual. Pivoting meth-
ods rely on the automatic translation of one of
the two texts (either single words or the en-
tire sentence) into the language of the other
(typically English) in order perform monolin-
gual TE recognition. Cross-lingual methods
assign entailment judgements without prelim-
inary translation.
? Composition of binary judgements vs.
Multi-class classification. Compositional ap-
proaches map unidirectional (?YES?/?NO?)
30
SP-EN
Forward Backward No entailment Bidirectional
System name P R F1 P R F1 P R F1 P R F1
altn full spa-eng 0.509 0.464 0.485 0.440 0.264 0.330 0.464 0.416 0.439 0.357 0.568 0.438
BUAP spa-eng run5 0.446 0.360 0.398 0.521 0.296 0.378 0.385 0.456 0.418 0.300 0.432 0.354
celi spa-eng run2 0.396 0.352 0.373 0.431 0.400 0.415 0.325 0.328 0.327 0.245 0.288 0.265
ECNUCS spa-eng run1 0.458 0.432 0.444 0.533 0.320 0.400 0.406 0.416 0.411 0.380 0.544 0.447
SoftCard spa-eng run1 0.462 0.344 0.394 0.619 0.480 0.541 0.418 0.472 0.444 0.325 0.440 0.374
AVG. 0.454 0.390 0.419 0.509 0.352 0.413 0.400 0.418 0.408 0.321 0.454 0.376
IT-EN
Forward Backward No entailment Bidirectional
System name P R F1 P R F1 P R F1 P R F1
altn full ita-eng 0.448 0.376 0.409 0.417 0.344 0.377 0.512 0.496 0.504 0.374 0.512 0.432
BUAP ita-eng run4 0.418 0.328 0.368 0.462 0.384 0.419 0.379 0.440 0.407 0.327 0.400 0.360
celi ita-eng run1 0.288 0.256 0.271 0.395 0.408 0.402 0.336 0.304 0.319 0.279 0.328 0.301
ECNUCS ita-eng run1 0.422 0.456 0.438 0.592 0.336 0.429 0.440 0.440 0.440 0.349 0.472 0.401
SoftCard ita-eng run1 0.514 0.456 0.483 0.612 0.480 0.538 0.392 0.464 0.425 0.364 0.416 0.388
AVG. 0.418 0.374 0.394 0.496 0.390 0.433 0.412 0.429 0.419 0.339 0.426 0.376
FR-EN
Forward Backward No entailment Bidirectional
System name P R F1 P R F1 P R F1 P R F1
altn full fra-eng 0.405 0.392 0.398 0.420 0.296 0.347 0.500 0.440 0.468 0.381 0.552 0.451
BUAP fra-eng run4 0.407 0.472 0.437 0.431 0.376 0.402 0.379 0.376 0.378 0.352 0.344 0.348
celi fra-eng run2 0.394 0.344 0.368 0.364 0.376 0.370 0.352 0.352 0.352 0.263 0.288 0.275
ECNUCS fra-eng run3 0.422 0.432 0.427 0.667 0.352 0.461 0.514 0.432 0.470 0.383 0.616 0.472
SoftCard fra-eng run2 0.477 0.416 0.444 0.556 0.400 0.465 0.412 0.432 0.422 0.335 0.456 0.386
AVG. 0.421 0.411 0.415 0.488 0.360 0.409 0.431 0.406 0.418 0.343 0.451 0.386
DE-EN
Forward Backward No entailment Bidirectional
System name P R F1 P R F1 P R F1 P R F1
altn full deu-eng 0.432 0.408 0.420 0.378 0.272 0.316 0.445 0.392 0.417 0.330 0.480 0.391
BUAP deu-eng run4 0.364 0.344 0.354 0.389 0.280 0.326 0.352 0.352 0.352 0.317 0.424 0.363
celi deu-eng run1 0.346 0.352 0.349 0.414 0.424 0.419 0.351 0.264 0.301 0.272 0.328 0.297
ECNUCS deu-eng run4 0.429 0.432 0.430 0.611 0.352 0.447 0.415 0.392 0.403 0.429 0.632 0.511
SoftCard deu-eng run1 0.511 0.368 0.428 0.527 0.384 0.444 0.417 0.400 0.408 0.317 0.504 0.389
umelb deu-eng run1 0.323 0.320 0.321 0.240 0.184 0.208 0.362 0.376 0.369 0.347 0.416 0.378
AVG. 0.401 0.371 0.384 0.426 0.316 0.360 0.390 0.363 0.375 0.335 0.464 0.389
Table 6: Precision, recall and F1 scores, calculated for each team?s best run for all the language combinations.
entailment decisions taken separately into sin-
gle judgements (similar to the Binary baseline
in Section 4). Methods based on multi-class
classification directly assign one of the four en-
tailment judgements to each test pair (similar to
our Multi-class baseline).
In contrast with CLTE-2012, where the combina-
tion of pivoting and compositional methods was the
option adopted by the majority of the approaches,
this year?s solutions do not show a clear trend. Con-
cerning the former dimension, participating systems
are equally distributed in cross-lingual and pivoting
methods relying on external automatic translation
tools. Regarding the latter dimension, in addition
to compositional and multi-class strategies, also al-
ternative solutions that leverage more sophisticated
meta-classification strategies have been proposed.
Besides the recourse to MT tools (e.g. Google
Translate), other tools and resources used by partic-
ipants include: WordNet, word alignment tools (e.g.
Giza++), part-of-speech taggers (e.g. Stanford POS
Tagger), stemmers (e.g. Snowball), machine learn-
ing libraries (e.g. Weka, SVMlight), parallel corpora
(e.g. Europarl), and stopword lists. More in detail:
ALTN [cross-lingual, compositional] (Turchi
and Negri, 2013) adopts a supervised learning
method based on features that consider word align-
ments between the two sentences obtained with
GIZA++ (Och et al, 2003). Binary entailment
judgements are taken separately, and combined into
final CLTE decisions.
BUAP [pivoting, multi-class and meta-
classifier] (Vilarin?o et al, 2013) adopts a pivoting
method based on translating T1 into the language of
31
T2 and vice versa (using Google Translate5). Sim-
ilarity measures (e.g. Jaccard index) and features
based on n-gram overlap, computed at the level of
words and part of speech categories, are used (either
alone or in combination) by different classification
strategies including: multi-class, a meta-classifier
(i.e. combining the output of 2/3/4-class classifiers),
and majority voting.
CELI [cross-lingual, meta-classifier]
(Kouylekov, 2013) uses dictionaries for word
matching, and a multilingual corpus extracted
from Wikipedia for term weighting. A variety of
distance measures implemented in the RTE system
EDITS (Kouylekov and Negri, 2010; Negri et
al., 2009) are used to extract features to train a
meta-classifier. Such classifier combines binary
decisions (?YES?/?NO?) taken separately for each
of the four CLTE judgements.
ECNUCS [pivoting, multi-class] (Jiang and
Man, 2013) uses Google Translate to obtain the En-
glish translation of each T1. After a pre-processing
step aimed at maximizing the commonalities be-
tween the two sentences (e.g. abbreviation replace-
ment), a number of features is extracted to train
a multi-class SVM classifier. Such features con-
sider information about sentence length, text sim-
ilarity/difference measures, and syntactic informa-
tion.
SoftCard [pivoting, multi-class] (Jimenez et al,
2013) after automatic translation with Google Trans-
late, uses SVMs to learn entailment decisions based
on information about the cardinality of: T1, T2, their
intersection and their union. Cardinalities are com-
puted in different ways, considering tokens in T1 and
T2, their IDF, and their similarity.
Umelb [cross-lingual, pivoting, compositional]
(Graham et al, 2013) adopts both pivoting and
cross-lingual approaches. For the latter, GIZA++
was used to compute word alignments between the
input sentences. Word alignment features are used
to train binary SVM classifiers whose decisions are
eventually composed into CLTE judgements.
7 Conclusion
Following the success of the first round of the Cross-
lingual Textual Entailment for Content Synchroniza-
5http://translate.google.com/
tion task organized within SemEval-2012, a second
evaluation task has been organized within SemEval-
2013. Despite the decrease in the number of partic-
ipants (six teams - four less than in the first round
- submitted a total of 61 runs) the new experience
is still positive. In terms of data, a new test set
has been released, extending the old one with 500
new CLTE pairs. The resulting 1,500 cross-lingual
pairs, aligned over four language combinations (in
addition to the monolingual English version), and
annotated with multiple entailment relations, repre-
sent a significant contribution to the research com-
munity and a solid starting point for further develop-
ments.6 In terms of results, in spite of a significant
decrease of the top scores, the increase of both me-
dian and lower results demonstrates some encour-
aging progress in CLTE research. Such progress is
also demonstrated by the variety of the approaches
proposed. While in the first round most of the
teams adopted more intuitive and ?simpler? solu-
tions based on pivoting (i.e. translation of T1 and
T2 in the same language) and compositional entail-
ment decision strategies, this year new ideas and
more complex solutions have emerged. Pivoting and
cross-lingual approaches are equally distributed, and
new classification methods have been proposed. Our
hope is that the large room for improvement, the in-
crease of available data, and the potential of CLTE
as a way to address complex NLP tasks and applica-
tions will motivate further research on the proposed
problem.
Acknowledgments
This work has been partially supported by the EC-
funded project CoSyne (FP7-ICT-4-248531). The
authors would also like to acknowledge Pamela
Forner and Giovanni Moretti from CELCT, and the
volunteer translators that contributed to the creation
of the dataset: Giusi Calo, Victoria D??az, Bianca
Jeremias, Anne Kauffman, Laura Lo?pez Ortiz, Julie
Mailfait, Laura Mora?n Iglesias, Andreas Schwab.
6Together with the datasets derived from translation of the
RTE data (Negri and Mehdad, 2010), this is the only material
currently available to train and evaluate CLTE systems.
32
References
Amit Bronner, Matteo Negri, Yashar Mehdad, Angela
Fahrni, and Christof Monz. 2012. Cosyne: Synchro-
nizing multilingual wiki content. In Proceedings of
WikiSym 2012.
Chih-Chung Chang and Chih-Jen Lin. 2011. Libsvm:
a library for support vector machines. ACM Trans-
actions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST),
2(3):27.
Ido Dagan and Oren Glickman. 2004. Probabilistic Tex-
tual Entailment: Generic Applied Modeling of Lan-
guage Variability. In Proceedings of the PASCAL
Workshop of Learning Methods for Text Understand-
ing and Mining.
Yvette Graham, Bahar Salehi, and Tim Baldwin. 2013.
Unimelb: Cross-lingual Textual Entailment with Word
Alignment and String Similarity Features. In Proceed-
ings of the 7th International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluation (SemEval 2013).
Zhao Jiang and Lan Man. 2013. ECNUCS: Recognizing
Cross-lingual Textual Entailment Using Multiple Fea-
ture Types. . In Proceedings of the 7th International
Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2013).
Sergio Jimenez, Claudia Becerra, and Alexander Gel-
bukh. 2013. Soft Cardinality-CLTE: Learning to Iden-
tify Directional Cross-Lingual Entailmens from Car-
dinalities and SMT. In Proceedings of the 7th Inter-
national Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval
2013).
Milen Kouylekov and Matteo Negri. 2010. An open-
source package for recognizing textual entailment. In
Proceedings of the ACL 2010 System Demonstrations.
Milen Kouylekov. 2013. Celi: EDITS and Generic Text
Pair Classification. In Proceedings of the 7th Inter-
national Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval
2013).
Michael Lesk. 1986. Automated Sense Disambiguation
Using Machine-readable Dictionaries: How to Tell a
Pine Cone from an Ice Cream Cone. In Proceedings
of the 5th annual international conference on Systems
documentation (SIGDOC86).
Yashar Mehdad, Matteo Negri, and Marcello Federico.
2010. Towards Cross-Lingual Textual Entailment. In
Proceedings of the 11th Annual Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (NAACL HLT 2010).
Yashar Mehdad, Matteo Negri, and Marcello Federico.
2011. Using Bilingual Parallel Corpora for Cross-
Lingual Textual Entailment. In Proceedings of the
49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies
(ACL HLT 2011).
Yashar Mehdad, Matteo Negri, and Marcello Federico.
2012. Detecting Semantic Equivalence and Informa-
tion Disparity in Cross-lingual Documents. In Pro-
ceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2012).
Christof Monz, Vivi Nastase, Matteo Negri, Angela
Fahrni, Yashar Mehdad, and Michael Strube. 2011.
Cosyne: a framework for multilingual content syn-
chronization of wikis. In Proceedings of WikiSym
2011.
Matteo Negri and Yashar Mehdad. 2010. Creating a Bi-
lingual Entailment Corpus through Translations with
Mechanical Turk: $100 for a 10-day Rush. In Pro-
ceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Cre-
ating Speech and Language Data with Amazons? Me-
chanical Turk.
Matteo Negri, Milen Kouylekov, Bernardo Magnini,
Yashar Mehdad, and Elena Cabrio. 2009. Towards ex-
tensible textual entailment engines: the edits package.
In AI* IA 2009: Emergent Perspectives in Artificial In-
telligence, pages 314?323. Springer.
Matto Negri, Luisa Bentivogli, Yashar Mehdad, Danilo
Giampiccolo, and Alessandro Marchetti. 2011. Di-
vide and Conquer: Crowdsourcing the Creation of
Cross-Lingual Textual Entailment Corpora. Proceed-
ings of the 2011 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 2011).
Matteo Negri, Alessandro Marchetti, Yashar Mehdad,
Luisa Bentivogli, and Danilo Giampiccolo. 2012a.
Semeval-2012 Task 8: Cross-lingual Textual Entail-
ment for Content Synchronization. In Proceedings of
the 6th International Workshop on Semantic Evalua-
tion (SemEval 2012).
Matteo Negri, Yashar Mehdad, Alessandro Marchetti,
Danilo Giampiccolo, and Luisa Bentivogli. 2012b.
Chinese Whispers: Cooperative Paraphrase Acqui-
sition. In Proceedings of the Eight International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC12), volume 2, pages 2659?2665.
F. Och, H. Ney, F. Josef, and O. H. Ney. 2003. A system-
atic comparison of various statistical alignment mod-
els. Computational Linguistics.
Marco Turchi and Matteo Negri. 2013. ALTN: Word
Alignment Features for Cross-Lingual Textual Entail-
ment. In Proceedings of the 7th International Work-
shop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2013).
Darnes Vilarin?o, David Pinto, Saul Leo?n, Yuridiana
Alema?n, and Helena Go?mez-Adorno. 2013. BUAP:
N -gram based Feature Evaluation for the Cross-
Lingual Textual Entailment Task. In Proceedings of
the 7th International Workshop on Semantic Evalua-
tion (SemEval 2013).
33
Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on ?Collaboratively Constructed Semantic Resources?, Coling 2010, pages 19?27,
Beijing, August 2010
Extending English ACE 2005 Corpus Annotation with Ground-truth
Links to Wikipedia
Luisa Bentivogli
FBK-Irst
bentivo@fbk.eu
Pamela Forner
CELCT
forner@celct.it
Claudio Giuliano
FBK-Irst
giuliano@fbk.eu
Alessandro Marchetti
CELCT
amarchetti@celct.it
Emanuele Pianta
FBK-Irst
pianta@fbk.eu
Kateryna Tymoshenko
FBK-Irst
tymoshenko@fbk.eu
Abstract
This paper describes an on-going annota-
tion effort which aims at adding a man-
ual annotation layer connecting an exist-
ing annotated corpus such as the English
ACE-2005 Corpus to Wikipedia. The an-
notation layer is intended for the evalua-
tion of accuracy of linking to Wikipedia in
the framework of a coreference resolution
system.
1 Introduction
Collaboratively Constructed Resources (CCR)
such as Wikipedia are starting to be used for a
number of semantic processing tasks that up to
few years ago could only rely on few manually
constructed resources such as WordNet and Sem-
Cor (Fellbaum, 1998). The impact of the new re-
sources can be multiplied by connecting them to
other existing datasets, e.g. reference corpora. In
this paper we will illustrate an on-going annota-
tion effort which aims at adding a manual anno-
tation layer connecting an existing annotated cor-
pus such as the English ACE-2005 dataset1 to a
CCR such as Wikipedia. This effort will produce
a new integrated resource which can be useful for
the coreference resolution task.
Coreference resolution is the task of identify-
ing which mentions, i.e. individual textual de-
scriptions usually realized as noun phrases or pro-
nouns, refer to the same entity. To solve this
task, especially in the case of non-pronominal co-
reference, researchers have recently started to ex-
ploit semantic knowledge, e.g. trying to calculate
1http://projects.ldc.upenn.edu/ace/
the semantic similarity of mentions (Ponzetto and
Strube, 2006) or their semantic classes (Ng, 2007;
Soon et al, 2001). Up to now, WordNet has been
one of the most frequently used sources of se-
mantic knowledge for the coreference resolution
task (Soon et al, 2001; Ng and Cardie, 2002). Re-
searchers have shown, however, that WordNet has
some limits. On one hand, although WordNet has
a big coverage of the English language in terms
of common nouns, it still has a limited coverage
of proper nouns (e.g. Barack Obama is not avail-
able in the on-line version) and entity descrip-
tions (e.g. president of India). On the other hand
WordNet sense inventory is considered too fine-
grained (Ponzetto and Strube, 2006; Mihalcea and
Moldovan, 2001). In alternative, it has been re-
cently shown that Wikipedia can be a promising
source of semantic knowledge for coreference res-
olution between nominals (Ponzetto and Strube,
2006).
Consider some possible uses of Wikipedia.
For example, knowing that the entity men-
tion ?Obama? is described on the Wikipedia
page Barack_Obama2, one can benefit from
the Wikipedia category structure. Categories as-
signed to the Barack_Obama page can be used
as semantic classes, e.g. ?21st-century presidents
of the United States?. Another example of a
useful Wikipedia feature are the links between
Wikipedia pages. For instance, some Wikipedia
pages contain links to the Barack_Obama page.
Anchor texts of these links can provide alterna-
2The links to Wikipedia pages are given displaying only
the last part of the link which corresponds to the title of the
page. The complete link can be obtained adding this part to
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/.
19
tive names of this entity, e.g. ?Barack Hussein
Obama? or ?Barack Obama Junior?.
Naturally, in order to obtain semantic knowl-
edge about an entity mention from Wikipedia
one should link this mention to an appropriate
Wikipedia page, i.e. to disambiguate it using
Wikipedia as a sense inventory. The accuracy
of linking entity mentions to Wikipedia is a very
important issue. For example, such linking is a
step of the approach to coreference resolution de-
scribed in (Bryl et al, 2010). In order to evaluate
this accuracy in the framework of a coreference
resolution system, a corpus of documents, where
entity mentions are annotated with ground-truth
links to Wikipedia, is required.
The possible solution of this problem is to ex-
tend the annotation of entity mentions in a corefer-
ence resolution corpus. In the recent years, coref-
erence resolution systems have been evaluated on
various versions of the English Automatic Content
Extraction (ACE) corpus (Ponzetto and Strube,
2006; Versley et al, 2008; Ng, 2007; Culotta et
al., 2007; Bryl et al, 2010). The latest publicly
available version is ACE 20053.
In this paper we present an extension of ACE
2005 non-pronominal entity mention annotations
with ground-truth links to Wikipedia. This exten-
sion is intended for evaluation of accuracy of link-
ing entity mentions to Wikipedia pages. The an-
notation is currently in progress. At the moment
of writing this paper we have completed around
55% of the work. The extension can be exploited
by coreference resolution systems, which already
use ACE 2005 corpus for development and testing
purposes, e.g. (Bryl et al, 2010). Moreover, En-
glish ACE 2005 corpus is multi-purpose and can
be used in other information extraction (IE) tasks
as well, e.g. relation extraction. Therefore, we
believe that our extension might also be useful for
other IE tasks, which exploit semantic knowledge.
In the following we start by providing a brief
overview of the existing corpora annotated with
links to Wikipedia. In Section 3 we describe some
characteristics of the English ACE 2005 corpus,
which are relevant to the creation of the extension.
Next, we describe the general annotation princi-
3http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/Catalog/
CatalogEntry.jsp?catalogId=LDC2006T06
ples and the procedure adopted to carry out the
annotation. In Section 4 we present some anal-
yses of the annotation and statistics about Inter-
Annotator Agreement.
2 Related work
Recent approaches to linking terms to Wikipedia
pages (Cucerzan, 2007; Csomai and Mihalcea,
2008; Milne and Witten, 2008; Kulkarni et al,
2009) have used two kinds of corpora for eval-
uation of accuracy: (i) sets of Wikipedia pages
and (ii) manually annotated corpora. In Wikipedia
pages links are added to terms ?only where
they are relevant to the context?4. Therefore,
Wikipedia pages do not contain the full annotation
of all entity mentions. This observation applies
equally to the corpus used by (Milne and Wit-
ten, 2008), which includes 50 documents from the
AQUAINT corpus annotated following the same
strategy5. The corpus created by (Cucerzan, 2007)
contains annotation of named entities only6. It
contains 756 annotations, therefore for our pur-
poses it is limited in terms of size.
Kulkarni et al (2009) have annotated 109 doc-
uments collected from homepages of various sites
with as many links as possible7. Their annotation
is too extensive for our purposes, since they do not
limit annotation to the entity mentions. To tackle
this issue, one can use an automatic entity mention
detector, however it is likely to introduce noise.
3 Creating the extension
The task consists of manually annotating the
non-pronominal mentions contained in the En-
glish ACE 2005 corpus with links to appropriate
Wikipedia articles. The objective of the work is
to create an extension of ACE 2005, where all the
mentions contained in the ACE 2005 corpus are
disambiguated using Wikipedia as a sense reposi-
tory to point to. The extension is intended for the
4http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Wikipedia:Manual_of_Style
5http://www.nzdl.org/wikification/
docs.html
6http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/
um/people/silviu/WebAssistant/TestData/
7http://soumen.cse.iitb.ac.in/?soumen/
doc/CSAW/
20
evaluation of accuracy of linking to Wikipedia in
the framework of a coreference resolution system.
3.1 The English ACE 2005 Corpus
The English ACE 2005 corpus is composed of
599 articles assembled from a variety of sources
selected from broadcast news programs, newspa-
pers, newswire reports, internet sources and from
transcribed audio. It contains the annotation of a
series of entities (person, location, organization)
for a total of 15,382 different entities and 43,624
mentions of these entities. A mention is an in-
stance of a textual reference to an object, which
can be either named (e.g. Barack Obama), nom-
inal (e.g. the president), or pronominal (e.g. he,
his, it). An entity is an aggregate of all the men-
tions which refer to one conceptual entity. Beyond
the annotation of entities and mentions, ACE 05
contains also the annotation of local co-reference
for the entities; this means that mentions which
refer to the same entity in a document have been
marked with the same ID.
3.2 Annotating ACE 05 with Wikipedia
Pages
For the purpose of our task, not all the
ACE 05 mentions are annotated, but only the
named (henceforth NAM) and nominal (hence-
forth NOM) mentions. The resulting additional
annotation layer will contain a total of 29,300
mentions linked to Wikipedia pages. As specif-
ically regards the annotation of NAM mentions,
information about local coreference contained in
ACE 05 has been exploited in order to speed up
the annotation process. In fact, only the first
occurrence of the NAM mentions in each doc-
ument has been annotated and the annotation is
then propagated to all the other co-referring NAM
mentions in the document.
Finally, it must be noted that in ACE 05, given
a complex entity description, both the full ex-
tent of the mention (e.g. president of the United
States) and its syntactic head (e.g. ?president?)
are marked. In our Wikipedia extension only the
head of the mention is annotated, while the full ex-
tent of the mention is available from the original
ACE 05 corpus.
3.3 General Annotation Principles
Depending on the mention type to be annotated,
i.e. NAM or NOM, a different annotation strategy
has been followed. Each mention of type NAM
is annotated with a link to a Wikipedia page de-
scribing the referred entity. For instance, ?George
Bush? is annotated with a link to the Wikipedia
page George_W._Bush.
NOM mentions are annotated with a link to the
Wikipedia page which provides a description of
its appropriate sense. For instance, in the exam-
ple ?I was driving Northwest of Baghdad and I
bumped into these guys going around the capi-
tal? the mention ?capital? is linked to the page
which provides a description of its meaning, i.e.
Capital_(political). Note that the object
of linking is the textual description of an entity,
and not the entity itself. In the example, even
though from the context it is clear that the mention
?capital? refers to Baghdad, we provide a link to
the concept of capital and not to the entity Bagdad.
As a term can have both a more generic sense
and a more specific one, depending on the context
in which it occurs, mentions of type NOM can of-
ten be linked to more than one Wikipedia page.
Whenever possible, the NOM mentions are anno-
tated with a list of links to appropriate Wikipedia
pages in the given context. In such cases, links
are sorted in order of relevance, where the first
link corresponds to the most specific sense for that
term in its context, and therefore is regarded as the
best choice. For instance, for the NOM mention
head ?President? which in the context identifies
the United States President George Bush the an-
notation?s purpose is to provide a description of
the item ?President?, so the following links are
selected as appropriate: President_of_the_
United_States and President.
The correct interpretation of the term is strictly
related to the context in which the term occurs.
While performing the annotation, the context of
the entire document has always been exploited in
order to correctly identify the specific sense of the
mention.
3.4 Annotation Procedure
The annotation procedure requires that the men-
tion string is searched in Wikipedia in order to
21
find the appropriate page(s) to be used for anno-
tating the mention. In the annotation exercise, the
annotators have always taken into consideration
the context where a mention occurs, searching for
both the generic and the most specific sense of the
mention disambiguated in the context. In fact, in
the example provided above, not only ?President?,
but also ?President of the United States? has been
queried in Wikipedia as required by the context.
Not only the context, but also some features of
Wikipedia must be mentioned as they affect the
annotation procedure:
a. One element which contributes to the choice
of the appropriate Wikipedia page(s) for
one mention is the list of links proposed in
Wikipedia?s Disambiguation pages. Disam-
biguation pages are non-article pages which
are intended to allow the user to choose from
a list of Wikipedia articles defining different
meanings of a term, when the term is am-
biguous. Disambiguation pages cannot be
used as links for the annotation as they are
not suitable for the purposes of this task. In
fact, the annotator?s task is to disambiguate
the meaning of the mention, so one link,
pointing to a specific sense, is to be cho-
sen. Disambiguation pages should always be
checked as they provide useful suggestions
in order to reach the appropriate link(s).
b. In the same way as Disambiguation pages,
Wikitionary cannot be used as linking page,
as it provides a list of possible senses for a
term and not only one specific sense which is
necessary to disambiguate the mention.
c. In Wikipedia, terms may be redirected to
other terms which are related in terms of
morphological derivation; i.e. searching for
the term ?Senator? you are automatically
redirected to ?Senate?; or querying ?citizen?
you are automatically redirected to ?citizen-
ship?. Redirections have always been con-
sidered appropriate links for the term.
Some particular rules have been followed in order
to deal with specific cases in the annotation, which
are described below:
1. As explained before in Section 3.2, as a gen-
eral rule the head of the ACE 05 mention
is annotated with Wikipedia links. In those
cases where the syntactic head of the men-
tion is a multiword lexical unit, the ACE 05
practice is to mark as head only the rightmost
item of the multiword. For instance, in the
case of the multiword ?flight attendant? only
?attendant? is marked as head of the men-
tion, although ?flight attendant? is clearly a
multiword lexical unit that should be anno-
tated as one semantic whole. In our anno-
tation we take into account the meaning of
the whole lexical unit; so, in the above exam-
ple, the generic sense of ?attendant? has not
been given, whereas Flight_attendant
is considered as the appropriate link.
2. In some cases, in ACE 2005 pronouns like
?somebody?, ?anybody?, ?anyone?, ?one?,
?others?, were incorrectly marked as NOM
(instead of PRO). Such cases, which amount
to 117, have been marked with the tag ?No
Annotation?.
3. When a page exists in Wikipedia for a given
mention but not for the specific sense in that
context the ?Missing sense? annotation has
been used. One example of ?Missing sense?
is for instance the term ?heart? which has 29
links proposed in the ?Disambiguation page?
touching different categories (sport, science,
anthropology, gaming, etc.), but there is no
link pointing to the sense of ?center or core of
something?; so, when referring to the heart
of a city, the term has been marked as ?Miss-
ing sense?.
4. When no article exists in Wikipedia for a
given mention, the tag ?No page? has been
adopted.
5. Nicknames, i.e. descriptive names used
in place of or in addition to the official
name(s) of a person, have been treated as
NAM. Thus, even if nicknames look like de-
scriptions of individuals (and their reference
should not be solved, following the general
rule), they are actually used and annotated as
22
Number of annotated mentions 16310
Number of single link mentions 13774
Number of multi-link mentions 1458
Number of ?No Page? annotations 481
Number of ?Missing Sense? 480
annotations
Number of ?No Annotation? 117
annotations
Total number of links 16851
Total number of links in multi-link 3077
mentions
Table 1: Annotation data
proper names aliases. For example, given the
mention ?Butcher of Baghdad?, whose head
?Butcher? is to be annotated, the appropriate
Wikipedia link is Saddam_Hussein, auto-
matically redirected from the searched string
?Butcher of Baghdad?. The link Butcher
is not appropriate as it provides a description
of the mention. It is interesting the fact that
Wikipedia itself redirects to the page of Sad-
dam Hussein.
4 The ACE05-WIKI Extension
Up to now, the 55% of the markable men-
tions have been annotated by one annotator,
amounting to 16,310 mentions. This annotation
has been carried out by CELCT in a period
of two months from February 22 to April 30,
2010, using the on-line version of Wikipedia,
while the remaining 45% of the ACE mentions
will be annotated during August 2010. The
complete annotation will be freely available
at: http://www.celct.it/resources.
php?id_page=acewiki2010, while the
ACE 2005 corpus is distributed by LDC8.
4.1 Annotation Data Analysis
Table 1 gives some statistics about the overall
annotation. In the following sections, mentions
annotated with one link are called ?single link?,
whereas, mentions annotated with more than one
link are named ?multi-link?.
These data refer to the annotation of each sin-
gle mention. It is not possible to give statis-
tics at the entity level, as mentions have differ-
8http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/Catalog/
CatalogEntry.jsp?catalogId=LDC2006T06
Annotation Mention Type
NAM NOM
Single link mentions 6589 7185
Multi-link mentions 79 1379
Missing sense 96 384
No Page 440 41
Table 2: Distinction of NAM and NOM in the an-
notation
ent ID depending on the documents they belong
to, and the information about the cross-document
co-reference is not available. Moreover, mentions
of type NOM are annotated with different links
depending on their disambiguated sense, making
thus impossible to group them together.
Most mentions have been annotated with only
one link; if we consider multi-link mentions, we
can say that each mention has been assigned an
average of 2,11 links (3,077/1,458).
Data about ?Missing sense? and ?No page?
are important as they provide useful information
about the coverage of Wikipedia as sense in-
ventory. Considering both ?Missing sense? and
?No page? annotations, the total number of men-
tions which have not been linked to a Wikipedia
page amounts to 6%, equally distributed between
?Missing sense? and ?No page? annotations. This
fact proves that, regarded as a sense inventory,
Wikipedia has a broad coverage. As Table 2
shows, the mentions for which more than one link
was deemed appropriate are mostly of type NOM,
while NAM mentions have been almost exclu-
sively annotated with one link only. The very few
cases in which a NAM mention is linked to more
than one Wikipedia page are primarily due to (i)
mistakes in the ACE 05 annotation (for example,
the mention ?President? was erroneously marked
as a NAM); (ii) or to cases where nouns marked
as NAM could also be considered as NOMs (see
for instance the mention ?Marine?, to mean the
Marine Corps).
Table 2 provides also statistics about the ?Miss-
ing sense? and ?No page? cases provided on men-
tions divided among the NAM and NOM type.
The ?missing sense? annotation concerns mostly
the NOM category, whereas the NAM category
is hardly affected. This attests the fact that per-
sons, locations and organizations are well repre-
23
sented in Wikipedia. This is mainly due to the
encyclopedic nature of Wikipedia where an arti-
cle may be about a person, a concept, a place,
an event, a thing etc.; instead, information about
nouns (NOM) is more likely to be found in a
dictionary, where information about the meanings
and usage of a term is provided.
4.2 Inter-Annotator Agreement
About 3,100 mentions, representing more than
10% of the mentions to be annotated, have been
annotated by two annotators in order to calculate
Inter-Annotator Agreement.
Once the annotations were completed, the
two annotators carried out a reconciliation phase
where they compared the two sets of links pro-
duced. Discrepancies in the annotation were
checked with the aim of removing only the more
rough errors and oversights. No changes have
been made in the cases of substantial disagree-
ment, which has been maintained.
In order to measure Inter-Annotator Agree-
ment, two metrics were used: (i) the Dice coeffi-
cient to measure the agreements on the set of links
used in the annotation9 and (ii) two measures of
agreement calculated at the mention level, i.e. on
the group of links associated to each mention.
The Dice coefficient is computed as follows:
Dice = 2C/(A + B)
where C is the number of common links chosen by
the two annotators, while A and B are respectively
the total number of links selected by the first and
the second annotator. Table 3 shows the results
obtained both before and after the reconciliation
9The Dice coefficient is a typical measure used to com-
pare sets in IR and is also used to calculate inter-annotator
agreement in a number of tasks where an assessor is allowed
to select a set of labels to apply to each observation. In fact,
in these cases measures such as the widely used K are not
good to calculate agreement. This is because K only offers
a dichotomous distinction between agreement and disagree-
ment, whereas what is needed is a coefficient that also allows
for partial disagreement between judgments. In fact, in our
case we often have a partial agreement on the set of links
given for each mention. Also considering only the mentions
for which a single link has been chosen, it is not possible
to calculate K statistics in a straightforward way as the cate-
gories (i.e. the possible Wikipedia pages) in some cases can-
not be determined a priori and are different for each mention.
Due to these factors chance agreement cannot be calculated
in an appropriate way.
BEFORE AFTER
reconciliation reconciliation
DICE 0.85 0.94
Table 3: Statistics about Dice coefficient
BEFORE AFTER
reconciliation reconciliation
Complete 77.98% 91.82%
On first link 84.41% 95.58%
Table 4: Agreement at the mention level
process. Agreement before reconciliation is satis-
factory and shows the feasibility of the annotation
task and the reliability of the annotation scheme.
Two measures of agreement at the mention
level are also calculated. To this purpose, we
count the number of mentions where annotators
agree, as opposed to considering the agreement on
each link separately. Mention-level agreement is
calculated as follows:
Number of mentions with annotation in agreement
Total number of annotated mentions
We calculate both ?complete? agreement and
agreement on the first link. As regards the first
measure, a mention is considered in complete
agreement if (i) it has been annotated with the
same link(s) and (ii) in the case of multi-link men-
tions, links are given in the same order. As for the
second measure, there is agreement on a mention
if both the annotators chose the same first link (i.e.
the one judged as the most appropriate), regard-
less of other possible links assigned to that men-
tion. Table 4 provides data about both complete
agreement and first link agreement, calculated be-
fore and after the annotators reconciliation.
4.3 Disagreement Analysis
Considering the 3,144 double-annotated men-
tions, the cases of disagreements amount to 692
(22,02%) before the reconciliation while they are
reduced to 257 (8,18%) after that process. It is in-
teresting to point out that the disagreements affect
the mentions of type NOM in most of the cases,
whereas mentions of type NAM are involved only
in 3,8% of the cases.
Examining the two annotations after the recon-
ciliation, it is possible to distinguish three kinds
of disagreement which are shown in Table 5 to-
24
Number of
Disagreement type Disagreements
1) No matching in the link(s)
proposed
105 (40,85%)
2) No matching on the first link,
but at least one of the other links
is the same
14 (5,45%)
3) Matching on the first link and
mismatch on the number of ad-
ditional links
138 (53,70%)
Total Disagreements 257
Table 5: Types of disagreements
gether with the data about their distribution. An
example of disagreement of type (1) is the anno-
tation of the mention ?crossing?, in the following
context: ?Marines from the 1st division have se-
cured a key Tigris River Crossing?. Searching for
the word ?river crossing? in the Wikipedia search-
box, the Disambiguation Page is opened and a
list of possible links referring to more specific
senses of the term are offered, while the generic
?river crossing? sense is missing. The annota-
tors are required to choose just one of the possi-
ble senses provided and they chose two different
links pointing to pages of more specific senses:
{Ford_%28river%29} and {Bridge}.
Another example is represented by the annota-
tion of the mention ?area? in the context : ?Both
aircraft fly at 125 miles per hour gingerly over en-
emy area?. In Wikipedia no page exists for the
specific sense of ?area? appropriate in the con-
text. Searching for ?area? in Wikipedia, the page
obtained is not suitable, and the Disambiguation
page offers a list of various possible links to either
more specific or more general senses of the term.
One annotator judged the more general Wikipedia
page Area_(subnational_entity) as ap-
propriate to annotate the mention, while the sec-
ond annotator deemed the page not suitable and
thus used the ?Missing sense? annotation.
Disagreement of type (2) refers to cases where
at least one of the links proposed by the annota-
tors is the same, but the first (i.e. the one judged
as the most suitable) is different. Given the fol-
lowing context: ?Tom, You know what Liber-
als want?, the two annotation sets provided for
the mention ?Liberal? are: {Liberalism} and
{Liberal_Party, Modern_liberalism_
in_the_United_States, Liberalism}.
The first annotator provided only one link for
the mention ?liberal?, which is different from the
first link provided by second annotator. However,
the second annotator provided also other links,
among which there is the link provided by the first
annotator.
Another example is represented by the annota-
tion of the mention ?killer?. Given the context:
?He?d be the 11th killer put to death in Texas?, the
two annotators provided the following link sets:
{Assassination, Murder} and {Murder}.
Starting from the Wikipedia disambiguation page,
the two annotators agreed on the choice of one of
the links but not on the first one.
Disagreement of type (3) refers to cases where
both annotators agree on the first link, correspond-
ing to the most specific sense, but one of them
also added link(s) considered appropriate to an-
notate the mention. Given the context: ?7th Cav-
alry has just taken three Iraqi prisoners?, the an-
notations provided for the term ?prisoners? are:
{Prisoner_of_war} and {Prisoner_of_
war, Incarceration}. This happens when
more than one Wikipedia pages are appropriate to
describe the mention.
As regards the causes of disagreement, we see
that the cases of disagreement mentioned above
are due to two main reasons:
a. The lack of the appropriate sense in
Wikipedia for the given mention
b. The different interpretation of the context in
which the mention occurs.
In cases of type (a) the annotators adopted differ-
ent strategies to perform their task, that is:
i. they selected a more general sense (i.e.
?area? which has been annotated with
Area_(subnational_entity)),
ii. they selected a more specific sense (see for
example the annotations of the mentions
?river crossing?).
iii. they selected the related senses proposed by
the Wikipedia Disambiguation page (as in
the annotation of ?killer? in the example
above).
25
Disagreement Reas. a Reas. b Tot
type (see above)
1) No match 95 10 105
2) No match on 4 10 14
first link
3) Mismatch on 138 138
additional links
Total 99 158 257
(38,5%) (61,5%)
Table 6: Distribution of disagreements according
to their cause
iv. they used the tag ?Missing sense?.
As Wikipedia is constantly evolving, adding
new pages and consequently new senses, it is
reasonable to think that the considered elements
might find the appropriate specific/general link as
time goes by.
Case (b) happens when the context is ambigu-
ous and the information provided in the text al-
lows different possible readings of the mention
to be annotated, making thus difficult to disam-
biguate its sense. These cases are independent
from Wikipedia sense repository but are related to
the subjectivity of the annotators and to the inher-
ent ambiguity of text.
Table 6 shows the distribution of disagreements
according to their cause. Disagreements of type 1
and 2 can be due to both a and b reasons, while
disagreements of type 3 are only due to b.
The overall number of disagreements shows
that the cases where the two annotators did not
agree are quite limited, amounting only to 8%.
The analyses of the disagreements show some
characteristics of Wikipedia considered as sense
repository. As reported in Table 8, in the 61,5%
of the cases of disagreement, the different anno-
tations are caused by the diverse interpretation
of the context and not by the lack of senses in
Wikipedia. It is clear that Wikipedia has a good
coverage and it proves to be a good sense disam-
biguation tool. In some cases it reveals to be too
fine-grained and in other cases it remains at a more
general level.
5 Conclusion
This paper has presented an annotation work
which connects an existing annotated corpus such
as the English ACE 2005 dataset to a Collabo-
ratively Constructed Semantic Resource such as
Wikipedia. Thanks to this connection Wikipedia
becomes an essential semantic resource for the
task of coreference resolution. On one hand, by
taking advantage of the already existing annota-
tions, with a relatively limited additional effort,
we enriched an existing corpus and made it useful
for a new NLP task which was not planned when
the corpus was created. On the other hand, our
work allowed us to explore and better understand
certain characteristics of the Wikipedia resource.
For example we were able to demonstrate in quan-
titative terms that Wikipedia has a very good cov-
erage, at least as far as the kind of entity men-
tions which are contained in the ACE 2005 dataset
(newswire) is concerned.
Acknowledgments
The research leading to these results has re-
ceived funding from the ITCH project (http://
itch.fbk.eu), sponsored by the Italian Min-
istry of University and Research and by the Au-
tonomous Province of Trento and the Copilosk
project (http://copilosk.fbk.eu), a Joint
Research Project under Future Internet - Internet
of Content program of the Information Technol-
ogy Center, Fondazione Bruno Kessler.
We thank Giovanni Moretti from CELCT for
technical assistance.
References
Bryl, Volha, Claudio Giuliano, Luciano Serafini, and
Kateryna Tymoshenko. 2010. Using background
knowledge to support coreference resolution. In
Proceedings of the 19th European Conference on
Artificial Intelligence (ECAI 2010), August.
Csomai, Andras and Rada Mihalcea. 2008. Linking
documents to encyclopedic knowledge. IEEE Intel-
ligent Systems, 23(5):34?41.
Cucerzan, Silviu. 2007. Large-scale named entity
disambiguation based on Wikipedia data. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2007 Joint Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and Com-
putational Natural Language Learning (EMNLP-
CoNLL), pages 708?716, Prague, Czech Republic,
June. Association for Computational Linguistics.
26
Culotta, Aron, Michael L. Wick, and Andrew McCal-
lum. 2007. First-order probabilistic models for
coreference resolution. In Human Language Tech-
nology Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association of Computational Linguistics,
pages 81?88.
Fellbaum, Christiane, editor. 1998. WordNet: an elec-
tronic lexical database. MIT Press.
Kulkarni, Sayali, Amit Singh, Ganesh Ramakrishnan,
and Soumen Chakrabarti. 2009. Collective anno-
tation of wikipedia entities in web text. In KDD
?09: Proceedings of the 15th ACM SIGKDD inter-
national conference on Knowledge discovery and
data mining, pages 457?466, New York, NY, USA.
ACM.
Mihalcea, Rada and Dan I. Moldovan. 2001.
Ez.wordnet: Principles for automatic generation of
a coarse grained wordnet. In Russell, Ingrid and
John F. Kolen, editors, FLAIRS Conference, pages
454?458. AAAI Press.
Milne, David and Ian H. Witten. 2008. Learning
to link with wikipedia. In CIKM ?08: Proceed-
ing of the 17th ACM conference on Information and
knowledge management, pages 509?518, New York,
NY, USA. ACM.
Ng, Vincent and Claire Cardie. 2002. Improving ma-
chine learning approaches to coreference resolution.
In ACL ?02: Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meet-
ing on Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 104?111.
Ng, Vincent. 2007. Semantic class induction and
coreference resolution. In ACL 2007, Proceed-
ings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, June 23-30, 2007,
Prague, Czech Republic, pages 536?543.
Ponzetto, S. P. and M. Strube. 2006. Exploiting se-
mantic role labeling, WordNet and Wikipedia for
coreference resolution. Proceedings of the main
conference on Human Language Technology Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the As-
sociation of Computational Linguistics, pages 192?
199.
Soon, Wee Meng, Hwee Tou Ng, and Daniel
Chung Yong Lim. 2001. A machine learning ap-
proach to coreference resolution of noun phrases.
Computational Linguistic, 27(4):521?544.
Versley, Yannick, Simone Paolo Ponzetto, Massimo
Poesio, Vladimir Eidelman, Alan Jern, Jason Smith,
Xiaofeng Yang, and Alessandro Moschitti. 2008.
Bart: a modular toolkit for coreference resolution.
In Proceedings of the 46th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics on Hu-
man Language Technologies, pages 9?12.
27
