Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Computational Semantics, pages 264?267,
Tilburg, January 2009. c?2009 International Conference on Computational Semantics
The NOMAGE Project
Coding the semantic features of French
nominalizations
Antonio Balvet* Pauline Haas* Richard Huyghe**
Anne Jugnet* Rafael Mar??n*
*Univ. Lille 3/CNRS UMR STL 8163 **Univ. Paris 7
1 From verbs to nouns
From the work of (Lees, 1960), through (Chomsky, 1970) and (Grimshaw,
1990), to more recent studies, nominalizations have occupied a central place
in grammatical analysis, with a focus on morphological and syntactic as-
pects. More recently, researchers have begun to address a specific issue
often neglected before, i.e. the semantics of nominalizations, and its im-
plications for Natural Language Processing applications such as electronic
ontologies or Information Retrieval. We focus on precisely these issues in the
research project NOMAGE (ANR-07-JCJC-0085-01), a young researchers?
project funded by the French National Research Agency (ANR). The present
submission outlines this ongoing semantic annotation project. Several previ-
ous works on the semantics of deverbal nouns (Haas & Huyghe, to appear),
(Haas, Huyghe, & Mar??n, 2008) and (Huyghe & Mar??n, 2007), indicate that
nominals inherit certain aspectual properties from their associated verbs.
This is particularly clear when comparing telic verb (accomplishment and
achievement) vs. atelic verb (state and activity) nominal derivations. For
example, telic verb nominal derivations may appear in an N position such as
in (1a) and (1b) while this position is not available to stative verb nominal
derivations.
(1) a. Le N a eu lieu a` tel endroit / a` tel moment
The N occurred in that place / at that time
b. Le lieu du N
The place of the N
264
The behavior of activity verb nominal derivations, in contrast, is not as
clear. At least two different subclasses should be considered: one composed
of nominals such as natation ?swimming? or jardinage ?gardening? which,
like states, are not acceptable in such contexts; and a second group with
cases such as manifestation ?demonstration? or discussion ?discussion? which,
surprisingly, are indeed acceptable in such contexts. This distinction is
correlated with another feature: its countability; nominalizations such as
natation are mass nouns, while those such as manifestation are count nouns.
2 Annotating semantic properties in context
Based on the aforementioned works, we may note that while some aspectual
features are indeed inherited by the nominal form of the verb, this is not al-
ways the case, and the effects are not always the same as in the original verb
form. Detecting such discrepancies between verbal and nominal domains,
together with finding the most useful linguistic tests to account for the se-
mantics of deverbal nouns, are two of the main issues the NOMAGE project
aims to address. Based on these preliminary findings, we have just started a
manual semantic annotation task on the French Treebank (Abeille?, 2003) ?a
1 million-word tagged, parsed and functionally annotated corpus? centred
on aspectual properties. The first nominal candidates annotated so far are
those ending in -ment and -age suffixes, which represent 2154 items (out of
9853 candidates), respectively 1611 -ment and 543 -age nouns, of which only
1409 and 382 where deemed relevant. For this annotation task, one of the
main challenges has been to adapt the semantic tests used (transformations)
to real-life sentences. Based on the data gathered so far, we have proposed a
higher-level semantic classification for those nouns, as shown in the table be-
low, thus allowing us to analyse the distribution of aspectual classes among
different suffixes, and to compare stative vs. non-stative interpretations of
nominalizations.
Suffix type -age -ment
Stative 0% 3.4%
Dynamic 46.33% 59.76%
Concrete 7.85% 26.96%
Uncategorizable 45.8% 7.88%
As the table above shows, the majority of the processed nominalizations
fall into the Dynamic category; Stative nouns are very rare (3.4% of the
-ment nominalizations), to the extent that no occurrence of a -age noun
265
could be found. For -ment nouns, around 30% of the cases are Concrete
interpretations, e.g.: ba?timent ?building?. As for the -age nouns, over 45%
are not categorizable based on the annotations gathered so far: in half of the
Uncategorizable cases, a truly underspecified reading seems to apply, while
in the rest of the cases, the interpretation of the utterance does not depend
on the fine-grained semantic categorization considered above. An example
of such an underspecified reading is emballage ?packaging?, as in leader eu-
rope?en et troisie`me mondial de l?emballage ?european first and world-class
third positions in packaging?, with both a Dynamic and Concrete readings.
3 Perspectives
In the course of the NOMAGE project, subsequent annotation campaigns
will be undertaken. Our aim is to collect enough consistent data to train
a semantic tagger, based on tools developed by members of the project?s
consortium. Preliminary experiments on functional tagging described in
(Moreau et al, submitted) show the need to supplement the French Tree-
bank and other usable corpora with basic information such as: headed-
ness for nouns; predicative nature for verbs, nouns and adjectives; and the
adjunct/argument distinction for NPs. The data obtained will form the
groundwork of a semantic lexicon of nominalizations for French, a resource
intended for both human and machine use in NLP and IR applications. For
example, the high-level distinctions discussed above, namely Stative, Dy-
namic and Concrete interpretation could prove useful in tasks such as au-
tomatic Word Sense Disambiguation (e.g. ?construction? in a Concrete vs.
a Dynamic interpretation) and Topic Detection and Tracking (e.g. spotting
different instances of a given Event).
References
Abeille?, A. (2003). Treebanks, Building and Using Parsed Corpora. Dordrecht,
Kluwer.
Chomsky, N. (1970). Remarks on nominalization. In R. Jacobs & P. Rosenbaum
(Eds.), Readings in english transformational grammar. Waltham (MA): Ginn
and Co.
Grimshaw, J. (1990). Argument structure. Cambridge/ London: The MIT Press.
Haas, P., & Huyghe, R. (to appear). Les proprie?te?s aspectuelles des noms
d?activite?s. Cahiers Chronos.
Haas, P., Huyghe, R., & Mar??n, R. (2008). Du verbe au nom: calques et de?calages
aspectuels. In J. Durand, B. Habert, & B. Laks (Eds.), Congre`s mondial de
linguistique franc?aise CMLF?08 (p. 2051-2065). Paris.
266
Huyghe, R., & Mar??n, R. (2007). L?he?ritage aspectuel des noms de?verbaux en
franc?ais et en espagnol. Faits de Langues, 30, 265-273.
Lees, R. B. (1960). The grammar of english nominalizations. The Hague: Mouton
de Gruyter.
Moreau, E., Tellier, I., Balvet, A., Laurence, G., Rozenknop, A., & Poibeau, T.
(submitted). Learning function tags in a french treebank using CRF. In
Proceedings of the eacl?09 conference.
267
