Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 Main Conference Poster Sessions, pages 563?570,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Segmented and unsegmented dialogue-act annotation with statistical
dialogue models?
Carlos D. Mart??nez Hinarejos, Ramo?n Granell, Jose? Miguel Bened??
Departamento de Sistemas Informa?ticos y Computacio?n
Universidad Polite?cnica de Valencia
Camino de Vera, s/n, 46022, Valencia
{cmartine,rgranell,jbenedi}@dsic.upv.es
Abstract
Dialogue systems are one of the most chal-
lenging applications of Natural Language
Processing. In recent years, some statis-
tical dialogue models have been proposed
to cope with the dialogue problem. The
evaluation of these models is usually per-
formed by using them as annotation mod-
els. Many of the works on annotation
use information such as the complete se-
quence of dialogue turns or the correct
segmentation of the dialogue. This in-
formation is not usually available for dia-
logue systems. In this work, we propose a
statistical model that uses only the infor-
mation that is usually available and per-
forms the segmentation and annotation at
the same time. The results of this model
reveal the great influence that the availabil-
ity of a correct segmentation has in ob-
taining an accurate annotation of the dia-
logues.
1 Introduction
In the Natural Language Processing (NLP) field,
one of the most challenging applications is dia-
logue systems (Kuppevelt and Smith, 2003). A
dialogue system is usually defined as a com-
puter system that can interact with a human be-
ing through dialogue in order to complete a spe-
cific task (e.g., ticket reservation, timetable con-
sultation, bank operations,. . . ) (Aust et al, 1995;
Hardy et al, 2002). Most dialogue system have a
characteristic behaviour with respect to dialogue
? Work partially supported by the Spanish project
TIC2003-08681-C02-02 and by Spanish Ministry of Culture
under FPI grants.
management, which is known as dialogue strat-
egy. It defines what the dialogue system must do
at each point of the dialogue.
Most of these strategies are rule-based, i.e., the
dialogue strategy is defined by rules that are usu-
ally defined by a human expert (Gorin et al, 1997;
Hardy et al, 2003). This approach is usually diffi-
cult to adapt or extend to new domains where the
dialogue structure could be completely different,
and it requires the definition of new rules.
Similar to other NLP problems (like speech
recognition and understanding, or statistical ma-
chine translation), an alternative data-based ap-
proach has been developed in the last decade (Stol-
cke et al, 2000; Young, 2000). This approach re-
lies on statistical models that can be automatically
estimated from annotated data, which in this case,
are dialogues from the task.
Statistical modelling learns the appropriate pa-
rameters of the models from the annotated dia-
logues. As a simplification, it could be considered
that each label is associated to a situation in the di-
alogue, and the models learn how to identify and
react to the different situations by estimating the
associations between the labels and the dialogue
events (words, the speaker, previous turns, etc.).
An appropriate annotation scheme should be de-
fined to capture the elements that are really impor-
tant for the dialogue, eliminating the information
that is irrelevant to the dialogue process. Several
annotation schemes have been proposed in the last
few years (Core and Allen, 1997; Dybkjaer and
Bernsen, 2000).
One of the most popular annotation schemes at
the dialogue level is based on Dialogue Acts (DA).
A DA is a label that defines the function of the an-
notated utterance with respect to the dialogue pro-
cess. In other words, every turn in the dialogue
563
is supposed to be composed of one or more ut-
terances. In this context, from the dialogue man-
agement viewpoint an utterance is a relevant sub-
sequence . Several DA annotation schemes have
been proposed in recent years (DAMSL (Core and
Allen, 1997), VerbMobil (Alexandersson et al,
1998), Dihana (Alca?cer et al, 2005)).
In all these studies, it is necessary to annotate
a large amount of dialogues to estimate the pa-
rameters of the statistical models. Manual anno-
tation is the usual solution, although is very time-
consuming and there is a tendency for error (the
annotation instructions are not usually easy to in-
terpret and apply, and human annotators can com-
mit errors) (Jurafsky et al, 1997).
Therefore, the possibility of applying statistical
models to the annotation problem is really inter-
esting. Moreover, it gives the possibility of evalu-
ating the statistical models. The evaluation of the
performance of dialogue strategies models is a dif-
ficult task. Although many proposals have been
made (Walker et al, 1997; Fraser, 1997; Stolcke
et al, 2000), there is no real agreement in the NLP
community about the evaluation technique to ap-
ply.
Our main aim is the evaluation of strategy mod-
els, which provide the reaction of the system given
a user input and a dialogue history. Using these
models as annotation models gives us a possible
evaluation: the correct recognition of the labels
implies the correct recognition of the dialogue sit-
uation; consequently this information can help the
system to react appropriately. Many recent works
have attempted this approach (Stolcke et al, 2000;
Webb et al, 2005).
However, many of these works are based on the
hypothesis of the availability of the segmentation
into utterances of the turns of the dialogue. This is
an important drawback in order to evaluate these
models as strategy models, where segmentation is
usually not available. Other works rely on a de-
coupled scheme of segmentation and DA classifi-
cation (Ang et al, 2005).
In this paper, we present a new statistical model
that computes the segmentation and the annota-
tion of the turns at the same time, using a statis-
tical framework that is simpler than the models
that have been proposed to solve both problems
at the same time (Warnke et al, 1997). The results
demonstrate that segmentation accuracy is really
important in obtaining an accurate annotation of
the dialogue, and consequently in obtaining qual-
ity strategy models. Therefore, more accurate seg-
mentation models are needed to perform this pro-
cess efficiently.
This paper is organised as follows: Section 2,
presents the annotation models (for both the un-
segmented and segmented versions); Section 3,
describes the dialogue corpora used in the ex-
periments; Section 4 establishes the experimental
framework and presents a summary of the results;
Section 5, presents our conclusions and future re-
search directions.
2 Annotation models
The statistical annotation model that we used ini-
tially was inspired by the one presented in (Stol-
cke et al, 2000). Under a maximum likeli-
hood framework, they developed a formulation
that assigns DAs depending on the conversation
evidence (transcribed words, recognised words
from a speech recogniser, phonetic and prosodic
features,. . . ). Stolcke?s model uses simple and
popular statistical models: N-grams and Hidden
Markov Models. The N-grams are used to model
the probability of the DA sequence, while the
HMM are used to model the evidence likelihood
given the DA. The results presented in (Stolcke et
al., 2000) are very promising.
However, the model makes some unrealistic as-
sumptions when they are evaluated to be used as
strategy models. One of them is that there is a
complete dialogue available to perform the DA
assignation. In a real dialogue system, the only
available information is the information that is
prior to the current user input. Although this al-
ternative is proposed in (Stolcke et al, 2000), no
experimental results are given.
Another unrealistic assumption corresponds to
the availability of the segmentation of the turns
into utterances. An utterance is defined as a
dialogue-relevant subsequence of words in the cur-
rent turn (Stolcke et al, 2000). It is clear that the
only information given in a turn is the usual in-
formation: transcribed words (for text systems),
recognised words, and phonetic/prosodic features
(for speech systems). Therefore, it is necessary to
develop a model to cope with both the segmenta-
tion and the assignation problem.
Let Ud1 = U1U2 ? ? ?Ud be the sequence of DA
assigned until the current turn, corresponding to
the first d segments of the current dialogue. Let
564
W = w1w2 . . . wl be the sequence of the words
of the current turn, where subsequences W ji =
wiwi+1 . . . wj can be defined (1 ? i ? j ? l).
For the sequence of words W , a segmentation
is defined as sr1 = s0s1 . . . sr, where s0 = 0 and
W = W s1s0+1W
s2
s1+1 . . .W
sr
sr?1+1. Therefore, the
optimal sequence of DA for the current turn will
be given by:
U? = argmax
U
Pr(U |W l1, U
d
1 ) =
argmax
Ud+rd+1
?
(sr1,r)
Pr(Ud+rd+1 |W
l
1, U
d
1 )
After developing this formula and making sev-
eral assumptions and simplifications, the final
model, called unsegmented model, is:
U? = argmax
Ud+rd+1
max
(sr1,r)
d+r?
k=d+1
Pr(Uk|U
k?1
k?n?1) Pr(W
sk?d
sk?(d+1)+1
|Uk)
This model can be easily implemented using
simple statistical models (N-grams and Hidden
Markov Models). The decoding (segmentation
and DA assignation) was implemented using the
Viterbi algorithm. A Word Insertion Penalty
(WIP) factor, similar to the one used in speech
recognition, can be incorporated into the model to
control the number of utterances and avoid exces-
sive segmentation.
When the segmentation into utterances is pro-
vided, the model can be simplified into the seg-
mented model, which is:
U? = argmax
Ud+rd+1
d+r?
k=d+1
Pr(Uk|U
k?1
k?n?1) Pr(W
sk?d
sk?(d+1)+1
|Uk)
All the presented models only take into account
word transcriptions and dialogue acts, although
they could be extended to deal with other features
(like prosody, sintactical and semantic informa-
tion, etc.).
3 Experimental data
Two corpora with very different features were
used in the experiment with the models proposed
in Section 2. The SwitchBoard corpus is com-
posed of human-human, non task-oriented dia-
logues with a large vocabulary. The Dihana corpus
is composed of human-computer, task-oriented di-
alogues with a small vocabulary.
Although two corpora are not enough to let us
draw general conclusions, they give us more reli-
able results than using only one corpus. Moreover,
the very different nature of both corpora makes
our conclusions more independent from the cor-
pus type, the annotation scheme, the vocabulary
size, etc.
3.1 The SwitchBoard corpus
The first corpus used in the experiments was the
well-known SwitchBoard corpus (Godfrey et al,
1992). The SwitchBoard database consists of
human-human conversations by telephone with no
directed tasks. Both speakers discuss about gen-
eral interest topics, but without a clear task to ac-
complish.
The corpus is formed by 1,155 conversations,
which comprise 126,754 different turns of spon-
taneous and sometimes overlapped speech, using
a vocabulary of 21,797 different words. The cor-
pus was segmented into utterances, each of which
was annotated with a DA following the simpli-
fied DAMSL annotation scheme (Jurafsky et al,
1997). The set of labels of the simplified DAMSL
scheme is composed of 42 different labels, which
define categories such as statement, backchannel,
opinion, etc. An example of annotation is pre-
sented in Figure 1.
3.2 The Dihana corpus
The second corpus used was a task-oriented cor-
pus called Dihana (Bened?? et al, 2004). It is com-
posed of computer-to-human dialogues, and the
main aim of the task is to answer telephone queries
about train timetables, fares, and services for long-
distance trains in Spanish. A total of 900 dialogues
were acquired by using the Wizard of Oz tech-
nique and semicontrolled scenarios. Therefore,
the voluntary caller was always free to express
him/herself (there were no syntactic or vocabu-
lary restrictions); however, in some dialogues, s/he
had to achieve some goals using a set of restric-
tions that had been given previously (e.g. depar-
ture/arrival times, origin/destination, travelling on
a train with some services, etc.).
These 900 dialogues comprise 6,280 user turns
and 9,133 system turns. Obviously, as a task-
565
Utterance Label
YEAH, TO GET REFERENCES AND THAT, SO, BUT, UH, I DON?T FEEL COMFORTABLE ABOUT LEAVING MY KIDS IN A BIG
DAY CARE CENTER, SIMPLY BECAUSE THERE?S SO MANY KIDS AND SO MANY <SNIFFING> <THROAT CLEARING>
Yeah, aa
to get references and that, sd
so, but, uh, %
I don?t feel comfortable about leaving my kids in a big day care center, simply because there?s so
many kids and so many <sniffing> <throat clearing> sd
I THINK SHE HAS PROBLEMS WITH THAT, TOO.
I think she has problems with that, too. sd
Figure 1: An example of annotated turns in the SwitchBoard corpus.
oriented and medium size corpus, the total number
of different words in the vocabulary, 812, is not as
large as the Switchboard database.
The turns were segmented into utterances. It
was possible for more than one utterance (with
their respective labels) to appear in a turn (on av-
erage, there were 1.5 utterances per user/system
turn). A three-level annotation scheme of the ut-
terances was defined (Alca?cer et al, 2005). These
labels represent the general purpose of the utter-
ance (first level), as well as more specific semantic
information (second and third level): the second
level represents the data focus in the utterance and
the third level represents the specific data present
in the utterance. An example of three-level anno-
tated user turns is given in Figure 2. The corpus
was annotated by means of a semiautomatic pro-
cedure, and all the dialogues were manually cor-
rected by human experts using a very specific set
of defined rules.
After this process, there were 248 different la-
bels (153 for user turns, 95 for system turns) using
the three-level scheme. When the detail level was
reduced to the first and second levels, there were
72 labels (45 for user turns, 27 for system turns).
When the detail level was limited to the first level,
there were only 16 labels (7 for user turns, 9 for
system turns). The differences in the number of
labels and in the number of examples for each la-
bel with the SwitchBoard corpus are significant.
4 Experiments and results
The SwitchBoard database was processed to re-
move certain particularities. The main adaptations
performed were:
? The interrupted utterances (which were la-
belled with ?+?) were joined to the correct
previous utterance, thereby avoiding inter-
ruptions (i.e., all the words of the interrupted
utterance were annotated with the same DA).
Table 1: SwitchBoard database statistics (mean for
the ten cross-validation partitions)
Training Test
Dialogues 1,136 19
Turns 113,370 1,885
Utterances 201,474 3,718
Running words 1,837,222 33,162
Vocabulary 21,248 2,579
? All the words were transcribed in lowercase.
? Puntuaction marks were separated from
words.
The experiments were performed using a cross-
validation approach to avoid the statistical bias
that can be introduced by the election of fixed
training and test partitions. This cross-validation
approach has also been adopted in other recent
works on this corpus (Webb et al, 2005). In our
case, we performed 10 different experiments. In
each experiment, the training partition was com-
posed of 1,136 dialogues, and the test partition
was composed of 19 dialogues. This proportion
was adopted so that our results could be compared
with the results in (Stolcke et al, 2000), where
similar training and test sizes were used. The
mean figures for the training and test partitions are
shown in Table 1.
With respect to the Dihana database, the prepro-
cessing included the following points:
? A categorisation process was performed for
categories such as town names, the time,
dates, train types, etc.
? All the words were transcribed in lowercase.
? Puntuaction marks were separated from
words.
? All the words were preceded by the speaker
identification (U for user, M for system).
566
Utterance 1st level 2nd level 3rd level
YES, TIMES AND FARES.
Yes, Acceptance Dep Hour Nil
times and fares Question Dep Hour,Fare Nil
YES, I WANT TIMES AND FARES OF TRAINS THAT ARRIVE BEFORE SEVEN.
Yes, I want times and fares of trains that arrive before seven. Question Dep Hour,Fare Arr Hour
ON THURSDAY IN THE AFTERNOON.
On thursday Answer Day Day
in the afternoon Answer Time Time
Figure 2: An example of annotated turns in the Dihana corpus. Original turns were in Spanish.
Table 2: Dihana database statistics (mean for the
five cross-validation partitions)
Training Test
Dialogues 720 180
Turns 12,330 3,083
User turns 5,024 1,256
System turns 7,206 1,827
Utterances 18,837 4,171
User utterances 7,773 1,406
System utterances 11,064 2,765
Running words 162,613 40,765
User running words 42,806 10,815
System running words 119,807 29,950
Vocabulary 832 485
User vocabulary 762 417
System vocabulary 208 174
A cross-validation approach was adopted in Di-
hana as well. In this case, only 5 different parti-
tions were used. Each of them had 720 dialogues
for training and 180 for testing. The statistics on
the Dihana corpus are presented in Table 2.
For both corpora, different N-gram models,
with N = 2, 3, 4, and HMM of one state were
trained from the training database. In the case of
the SwitchBoard database, all the turns in the test
set were used to compute the labelling accuracy.
However, for the Dihana database, only the user
turns were taken into account (because system
turns follow a regular, template-based scheme,
which presents artificially high labelling accura-
cies). Furthermore, in order to use a really sig-
nificant set of labels in the Dihana corpus, we
performed the experiments using only two-level
labels instead of the complete three-level labels.
This restriction allowed us to be more independent
from the understanding issues, which are strongly
related to the third level. It also allowed us to con-
centrate on the dialogue issues, which relate more
Table 3: SwitchBoard results for the segmented
model
N-gram Utt. accuracy Turn accuracy
2-gram 68.19% 59.33%
3-gram 68.50% 59.75%
4-gram 67.90% 59.14%
to the first and second levels.
The results in the case of the segmented ap-
proach described in Section 2 for SwitchBoard are
presented in Table 3. Two different definitions of
accuracy were used to assess the results:
? Utterance accuracy: computes the proportion
of well-labelled utterances.
? Turn accuracy: computes the proportion of
totally well-labelled turns (i.e.: if the la-
belling has the same labels in the same or-
der as in the reference, it is taken as a well-
labelled turn).
As expected, the utterance accuracy results are
a bit worse than those presented in (Stolcke et al,
2000). This may be due to the use of only the
past history and possibly to the cross-validation
approach used in the experiments. The turn accu-
racy was calculated to compare the segmented and
the unsegmented models. This was necessary be-
cause the utterance accuracy does not make sense
for the unsegmented model.
The results for the unsegmented approach for
SwitchBoard are presented in Table 4. In this case,
three different definitions of accuracy were used to
assess the results:
? Accuracy at DA level: the edit distance be-
tween the reference and the labelling of the
turn was computed; then, the number of cor-
rect substitutions (c), wrong substitutions (s),
deletions (d) and insertions (i) was com-
567
Table 4: SwitchBoard results for the unsegmented
model (WIP=50)
N-gram DA acc. Turn acc. Segm. acc.
2-gram 38.19% 39.47% 38.92%
3-gram 38.58% 39.61% 39.06%
4-gram 38.49% 39.52% 38.96%
puted, and the accuracy was calculated as
100 ? c(c+s+i+d) .
? Accuracy at turn level: this provides the pro-
portion of well-labelled turns, without taking
into account the segmentation (i.e., if the la-
belling has the same labels in the same or-
der as in the reference, it is taken as a well-
labelled turn).
? Accuracy at segmentation level: this pro-
vides the proportion of well-labelled and seg-
mented turns (i.e., the labels are the same as
in the reference and they affect the same ut-
terances).
The WIP parameter used in Table 4 was 50,
which is the one that offered the best results. The
segmentation accuracy in Table 4 must be com-
pared with the turn accuracy in Table 3. As Table 4
shows, the accuracy of the labelling decreased dra-
matically. This reveals the strong influence of the
availability of the real segmentation of the turns.
To confirm this hypothesis, similar experiments
were performed with the Dihana database. Ta-
ble 5 presents the results with the segmented cor-
pus, and Table 6 presents the results with the un-
segmented corpus (with WIP=50, which gave the
best results). In this case, only user turns were
taken into account to compute the accuracy, al-
though the model was applied to all the turns (both
user and system turns). For the Dihana corpus,
the degradation of the results of the unsegmented
approach with respect to the segmented approach
was not as high as in the SwitchBoard corpus, due
to the smaller vocabulary and complexity of the
dialogues.
These results led us to the same conclusion,
even for such a different corpus (much more la-
bels, task-oriented, etc.). In any case, these ac-
curacy figures must be taken as a lower bound on
the model performance because sometimes an in-
correct recognition of segment boundaries or dia-
logue acts does not cause an inappropriate reaction
of the dialogue strategy.
Table 5: Dihana results for the segmented model
(only two-level labelling for user turns)
N-gram Utt. accuracy Turn accuracy
2-gram 75.70% 74.46%
3-gram 76.28% 74.93%
4-gram 76.39% 75.10%
Table 6: Dihana results for the unsegmented
model (WIP=50, only two-level labelling for user
turns)
N-gram DA acc. Turn acc. Segm. acc.
2-gram 60.36% 62.86% 58.15%
3-gram 60.05% 62.49% 57.87%
4-gram 59.81% 62.44% 57.88%
An illustrative example of annotation errors in
the SwitchBoard database, is presented in Figure 3
for the same turns as in Figure 1. An error anal-
ysis of the segmented model was performed. The
results reveals that, in the case of most of the er-
rors were produced by the confusion of the ?sv?
and ?sd? classes (about 50% of the times ?sv? was
badly labelled, the wrong label was ?sd?) The sec-
ond turn in Figure 3 is an example of this type of
error. The confusions between the ?aa? and ?b?
classes were also significant (about 27% of the
times ?aa? was badly labelled, the wrong label was
?b?). This was reasonable due to the similar defini-
tions of these classes (which makes the annotation
difficult, even for human experts). These errors
were similar for all the N-grams used. In the case
of the unsegmented model, most of the errors were
produced by deletions of the ?sd? and ?sv? classes,
as in the first turn in Figure 3 (about 50% of the
errors). This can be explained by the presence of
very short and very long utterances in both classes
(i.e., utterances for ?sd? and ?sv? did not present a
regular length).
Some examples of errors in the Dihana corpus
are shown in Figure 4 (in this case, for the same
turns as those presented in Figure 2). In the seg-
mented model, most of the errors were substitu-
tions between labels with the same first level (es-
pecially questions and answers) where the second
level was difficult to recognise. The first and third
turn in Figure 4 are examples of this type of er-
ror. This was because sometimes the expressions
only differed with each other by one word, or
568
Utt Label
1 % Yeah, to get references and that, so, but, uh, I don?t
2 sd
feel comfortable about leaving my kids in a big day care center, simply because
there?s so many kids and so many <sniffing> <throat clearing>
Utt Label
1 sv I think she has problems with that, too.
Figure 3: An example of errors produced by the model in the SwitchBoard corpus
the previous segment influence (i.e., the language
model weight) was not enough to get the appro-
priate label. This was true for all the N-grams
tested. In the case of the unsegmented model, most
of the errors were caused by similar misrecogni-
tions in the second level (which are more frequent
due to the absence of utterance boundaries); how-
ever, deletion and insertion errors were also sig-
nificant. The deletion errors corresponded to ac-
ceptance utterances, which were too short (most
of them were ?Yes?). The insertion errors corre-
sponded to ?Yes? words that were placed after a
new-consult system utterance, which is the case
of the second turn presented in Figure 4. These
words should not have been labelled as a separate
utterance. In both cases, these errors were very
dependant on the WIP factor, and we had to get
an adequate WIP value which did not increase the
insertions and did not cause too many deletions.
5 Conclusions and future work
In this work, we proposed a method for simultane-
ous segmentation and annotation of dialogue ut-
terances. In contrast to previous models for this
task, our model does not assume manual utterance
segmentation. Instead of treating utterance seg-
mentation as a separate task, the proposed method
selects utterance boundaries to optimize the accu-
racy of the generated labels. We performed ex-
periments to determine the effect of the availabil-
ity of the correct segmentation of dialogue turns
in utterances in the statistical DA labelling frame-
work. Our results reveal that, as shown in previ-
ous work (Warnke et al, 1999), having the correct
segmentation is very important in obtaining accu-
rate results in the labelling task. This conclusion
is supported by the results obtained in very differ-
ent dialogue corpora: different amounts of training
and test data, different natures (general and task-
oriented), different sets of labels, etc.
Future work on this task will be carried out
in several directions. As segmentation appears
to be an important step in these tasks, it would
be interesting to obtain an automatic and accu-
rate segmentation model that can be easily inte-
grated in our statistical model. The application of
our statistical models to other tasks (like VerbMo-
bil (Alexandersson et al, 1998)) would allow us to
confirm our conclusions and compare results with
other works.
The error analysis we performed shows the need
for incorporating new and more reliable informa-
tion resources to the presented model. Therefore,
the use of alternative models in both corpora, such
as the N-gram-based model presented in (Webb et
al., 2005) or an evolution of the presented statis-
tical model with other information sources would
be useful. The combination of these two models
might be a good way to improve results.
Finally, it must be pointed out that the main task
of the dialogue models is to allow the most correct
reaction of a dialogue system given the user in-
put. Therefore, the correct evaluation technique
must be based on the system behaviour as well
as on the accurate assignation of DA to the user
input. Therefore, future evaluation results should
take this fact into account.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank Nick Webb, Mark Hep-
ple and Yorick Wilks for their comments and
suggestions and for providing the preprocessed
SwitchBoard corpus. We also want to thank the
anonymous reviewers for their criticism and sug-
gestions.
References
N. Alca?cer, J. M. Bened??, F. Blat, R. Granell, C. D.
Mart??nez, and F. Torres. 2005. Acquisition and
labelling of a spontaneous speech dialogue corpus.
In Proceedings of SPECOM, pages 583?586, Patras,
Greece.
Jan Alexandersson, Bianka Buschbeck-Wolf, Tsu-
tomu Fujinami, Michael Kipp, Stephan Koch, Elis-
569
Utterance 1st level 2nd level
Yes, times Acceptance Dep Hour,Fare
and fares Question Dep Hour,Fare
Yes, I want Acceptance Dep Hour,Fare
times and fares of trains that arrive before seven. Question Dep Hour,Fare
On thursday in the afternoon Answer Time
Figure 4: An example of errors produced by the model in the Dihana corpus
abeth Maier, Norbert Reithinger, Birte Schmitz,
and Melanie Siegel. 1998. Dialogue acts in
VERBMOBIL-2 (second edition). Technical Report
226, DFKI GmbH, Saarbru?cken, Germany, July.
J. Ang, Y. Liu, and E. Shriberg. 2005. Automatic dia-
log act segmentation and classification in multiparty
meetings. In Proceedings of the International Con-
ference of Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Process-
ings, volume 1, pages 1061?1064, Philadelphia.
H. Aust, M. Oerder, F. Seide, and V. Steinbiss. 1995.
The philips automatic train timetable information
system. Speech Communication, 17:249?263.
J. M. Bened??, A. Varona, and E. Lleida. 2004. Dihana:
Dialogue system for information access using spon-
taneous speech in several environments tic2002-
04103-c03. In Reports for Jornadas de Seguimiento
- Programa Nacional de Tecnolog??as Informa?ticas,
Ma?laga, Spain.
Mark G. Core and James F. Allen. 1997. Coding di-
alogs with the damsl annotation scheme. In Work-
ing Notes of AAAI Fall Symposium on Communica-
tive Action in Humans and Machines, Boston, MA,
November.
Layla Dybkjaer and Niels Ole Bernsen. 2000. The
mate workbench.
N. Fraser, 1997. Assessment of interactive systems,
pages 564?614. Mouton de Gruyter.
J. Godfrey, E. Holliman, and J. McDaniel. 1992.
Switchboard: Telephone speech corpus for research
and development. In Proc. ICASSP-92, pages 517?
520.
A. Gorin, G. Riccardi, and J. Wright. 1997. How may
i help you? Speech Communication, 23:113?127.
Hilda Hardy, Kirk Baker, Laurence Devillers, Lori
Lamel, Sophie Rosset, Tomek Strzalkowski, Cris-
tian Ursu, and Nick Webb. 2002. Multi-layer di-
alogue annotation for automated multilingual cus-
tomer service. In Proceedings of the ISLE Workshop
on Dialogue Tagging for Multi-Modal Human Com-
puter Interaction, Edinburgh, Scotland, December.
Hilda Hardy, Tomek Strzalkowski, and Min Wu. 2003.
Dialogue management for an automated multilin-
gual call center. In Proceedings of HLT-NAACL
2003 Workshop: Research Directions in Dialogue
Processing, pages 10?12, Edmonton, Canada, June.
D. Jurafsky, E. Shriberg, and D. Biasca. 1997. Switch-
board swbd-damsl shallow- discourse-function an-
notation coders manual - draft 13. Technical Report
97-01, University of Colorado Institute of Cognitive
Science.
J. Van Kuppevelt and R. W. Smith. 2003. Current
and New Directions in Discourse and Dialogue, vol-
ume 22 of Text, Speech and Language Technology.
Springer.
A. Stolcke, N. Coccaro, R. Bates, P. Taylor, C. van Ess-
Dykema, K. Ries, E. Shriberg, D. Jurafsky, R. Mar-
tin, and M. Meteer. 2000. Dialogue act modelling
for automatic tagging and recognition of conversa-
tional speech. Computational Linguistics, 26(3):1?
34.
Marilyn A. Walker, Diane Litman J., Candace A.
Kamm, and Alicia Abella. 1997. PARADISE: A
framework for evaluating spoken dialogue agents.
In Philip R. Cohen and Wolfgang Wahlster, edi-
tors, Proceedings of the Thirty-Fifth Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics and Eighth Conference of the European Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 271?280, Somerset, New Jersey. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
V.Warnke, R. Kompe, H. Niemann, and E. No?th. 1997.
Integrated Dialog Act Segmentation and Classifica-
tion using Prosodic Features and Language Models.
In Proc. European Conf. on Speech Communication
and Technology, volume 1, pages 207?210, Rhodes.
V. Warnke, S. Harbeck, E. No?th, H. Niemann, and
M. Levit. 1999. Discriminative Estimation of Inter-
polation Parameters for LanguageModel Classifiers.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Acous-
tics, Speech, and Signal Processing, volume 1, pages
525?528, Phoenix, AZ, March.
N. Webb, M. Hepple, and Y. Wilks. 2005. Dialogue
act classification using intra-utterance features. In
Proceedings of the AAAI Workshop on Spoken Lan-
guage Understanding, Pittsburgh.
S. Young. 2000. Probabilistic methods in spoken di-
alogue systems. Philosophical Trans Royal Society
(Series A), 358(1769):1389?1402.
570
Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Computational Semantics, pages 299?304,
Tilburg, January 2009. c?2009 International Conference on Computational Semantics
A Study of a Segmentation Technique for Dialogue
Act Assignation
?
Carlos-D. Mart??nez-Hinarejos
Instituto Tecnolo?gico de Informa?tica, Universidad Polite?cnica de Valencia
Valencia, Spain
cmartine@dsic.upv.es
1 Introduction
A dialogue system is usually defined as a computer system that interacts
with a human user to achieve a task using dialogue [5]. In these systems,
the computer must know the meaning and intention of the user input, in
order to give the appropriate answer. The user turns must be interpreted
by the system, taking only into account the essential information, i.e, their
semantics for the dialogue process and the task to be accomplished. This
information is usually represented by labels called Dialogue Acts (DA) [2]
which label different segments of the turn known as utterances [8]. The DA
labels usually take into account the semantics of the utterance with respect
to the dialogue process, but they can include semantic information related
to the task the dialogue is about.
Therefore, the correct assignation of DA to a user turn is crucial to the
correct behaviour of the dialogue system. Several models have been proposed
to perform this assignation. In the recent years, probabilistic models have
gained importance in this task [8]. In the assignation task, these models
are applied on non-annotated dialogues. Most of the previous work done on
the assignation of DA is performed on user turns segmented into utterances,
although the availability of the segmentation is not usual in the dialogue
corpora nor in a real dialogue system.
The proposed assignation models can be easily adapted to the lack of
segmentation into utterances. In this article, we present a model based on
?
Work supported by the EC (FEDER) and the Spanish MEC under grant TIN2006-
15694-CO2-01 and by the Spanish research programme Consolider Ingenio 2010: MIPRCV
(CSD2007-00018)
1
299
Hidden Markov Model (HMM) and N-grams that can be applied to seg-
mented and unsegmented turns. The results show that the lack of segmen-
tation causes many errors in the assignation of DA. Therefore, we propose
another model based on N-grams (NGT model) that segments a user turn
into utterances previously to the DA assignation.
2 Models
The statistical model that provides the DA assignation uses the current
turn word sequence W and the previous DA sequence U
?
to obtain the
optimum DA sequence
?
U that maximises the posterior probability of U , i.e.,
?
U = argmax
U
Pr(U |W,U
?
). This formula can be developed as presented
in [6] to obtain:
?
U = argmax
U
?
r,s
r
1
r
?
k=1
Pr(u
k
|u
k?1
k?n?1
) Pr(W
s
k
s
k?1
+1
|u
k
) (1)
In this equation, Pr(u
k
|u
k?1
k?n?1
) can be modelled as an N-gram (of degree
n) and Pr(W
s
k
s
k?1
+1
|u
k
) as a HMM. This model can be used when there is an
available segmentation by simply eliminating the sum and prod operators
and fixing the s
k
values to those provided by the segmentation.
The NGT model [7] can provide a segmentation of a dialogue turn. This
model is inspired in the GIATI methodology [3], which relies on the concept
of alignment between the input and the output sentences. In our case, the
input sequence is the dialogue turn, and the output sequence is the utter-
ances boundaries. A re-labelling process is applied on this pair of sequences
to convert them to an unique sequence where input and output are joined.
From this sequence that includes the utterance boundaries, an N-gram
can be inferred. We implemented the Viterbi search to work directly on the
N-gram that acts as a transducer, and gives the name to the model: N-gram
transducers (NGT).
Therefore, given an NGT model and an unsegmented turn, a segmenta-
tion of the turn into utterances can be obtained by using the Viterbi search.
In the next section we present the experiments that verify the accuracy of
the segmentations provided by this model along with the results the HMM-
based model provides with these segmentations.
2
300
3 Experiments and discussion
In this section, we compare the performance of the HMM-based model when
using the correct segmentation into utterances, the NGT segmentation and
when no segmentation of the turns is given. The experiments were performed
on the SwitchBoard corpus [4] and on the Dihana corpus [1] (with the two
and three-level labels). All the experiments were performed using a cross-
validation approach. Some simplifications were performed on the corpora
before training the models and performing the experiments.
The HMM model is trained for each DA label from the utterances of
the training dialogues annotated with the corresponding label. The N-gram
model is trained from the sequences of DA labels in the training dialogues.
In the NGT model, the training dialogues were re-labelled to obtain the
sequences of words with the attached utterance boundaries. From these se-
quences, different N-grams were inferred with N values from 2 to 5. These
N-grams were used to obtain the segmentation of the turns in the test dia-
logues into utterances.
The decoding step was performed using the Viterbi algorithm. In the
case of the segmented dialogues, the segmentation was fixed to that pro-
vided in the manual annotation or by NGT. In the case of the unsegmented
turns, the search was performed on the complete turn and the optimal DA
assignation provided the segmentation as a by-product.
We can compute the accuracy of the segmentation given by the NGT
model and the HMM-based model from the reference segmentation. These
results are presented in Table 1, along with the error in the number of ut-
terances (for bigram). In general, the NGT model provides a more accurate
segmentation of the dialogue turns. The reduction of the segmentation er-
rors is quite significant, with relative reductions of more than a 20%. This is
in general true for the estimation of the correct number of utterances (except
for Dihana 2-levels). With these results, we can expect that the decoding
of the HMM-based model using the NGT segmentation would be of higher
quality than the decodings on the unsegmented turns.
The results are shown in Table 2. The evaluation is done with two
measures: complete turn DA error (all the labels must be coincident) and
DAER (like WER for speech recognition systems but at the DA level). As
was expected, the number of erroneously labelled turns increases with the
unsegmented approach for both measures. This relative increase is lower in
the simpler dialogue corpora than in the more complex corpora. The results
for the NGT model are with a bigram, and they show that in the case of
the SwitchBoard corpus, the quality of the DA assignation is quite better,
3
301
Table 1: Segmentation errors for complete turn with the NGT and HMM-
based model, and errors in the number of estimated utterances for bigrams.
Best results for each corpus are shown in boldface.
Model Corpus / Ngram dgr. 2 3 4 5 Utt. error
SwitchBoard 26.1 26.8 28.9 31.6 23.0
NGT Dihana 2-levels 9.6 10.0 10.1 9.7 9.6
Dihana 3-levels 13.6 11.9 12.4 11.3 12.8
SwitchBoard 41.4 41.6 41.8 42.1 34.7
HMM Dihana 2-levels 14.2 13.9 13.9 13.8 6.0
Dihana 3-levels 38.8 38.6 38.6 38.6 17.3
but in the rest of cases the improvement is not significant or even negative
(Dihana 2-level).
The results show that the clearest source of errors in DA assignation
that the NGT model can produce is due to the split of the turn into a
wrong number of utterances. This clearly induces an erroneous assignment
of the DA sequence to the turn, as the number of labels will be different
to the reference and, consequently, the turn will be counted as erroneous.
Even in the case of DAER error, this fact is present: for Dihana 2-levels, the
unsegmented labelling provides a lower error rate than the NGT-segmented
one. This is sound with the error in the number of segments that provide
the HMM-based and the NGT model (Table 1, last column).
Therefore, we can see a clear correlation between the assignation of an
incorrect number of utterances and the error rates in DA assignation when
using NGT-segmented turns or unsegmented turns. Consequently, we can
conclude that segmenting into the correct number of utterances is critical
to obtain a correct assignation of DA. The DAER rate presented in Table 2
confirms that considering only the turns with an incorrect segmentation but
a correct number of utterances, many of them present a correct assignation
of DA.
The main conclusion we can extract from these experiments and results
is that a correct hypothesis on the number of utterances of a dialogue turn
is needed to obtain a correct assignation of DA to that turn, and that the
accuracy of the segmentation is not so important.
Following these conclusions, future work will be directed to the obtain-
ment of models that, given a dialogue turn, provide its number of utterances.
4
302
Table 2: Errors for complete turn DA assignation and DAER results (for
bigrams) with different segmentation conditions. Best results for each corpus
are shown in boldface.
Segmentation Corpus / Ngram dgr. 2 3 4 5 DAER
SwitchBoard 38.3 38.1 38.7 39.7 38.3
Correct Dihana 2-levels 21.6 21.1 20.8 21.0 20.1
Dihana 3-levels 24.6 24.0 24.2 24.8 24.7
SwitchBoard 48.1 48.0 48.5 49.3 43.2
NGT Dihana 2-levels 27.1 26.8 26.6 26.4 29.0
Dihana 3-levels 30.6 30.0 30.1 30.7 30.6
SwitchBoard 59.6 59.0 59.6 61.0 60.7
Unsegmented Dihana 2-levels 24.6 24.3 24.4 24.6 24.0
Dihana 3-levels 32.5 31.6 31.9 32.4 33.2
This hypothesis on the number of utterances can be used to restrict the ex-
ploration of possible segmentations in both the presented models and it can
help to obtain better results.
Other work can be done to improve the models or the use of other seg-
mentation models. This can help us to obtain more general conclusions on
the importance of segmentation for the DA assignation task.
References
[1] N. Alcacer, J.M. Bened??, F.Blat, R.Granell, C.D. Mart??nez, and
F.Torres. Acquisition and Labelling of a Spontaneous Speech Dialogue
Corpus. In SPECOM, pages 583?586, Patras,Grecia, 2005.
[2] H. Aust, M. Oerder, F. Seide, and V. Steinbiss. The philips automatic
train timetable information system. Speech Communication, 17:249?263,
1995.
[3] F. Casacuberta, E. Vidal, and D. Pico?. Inference of finite-state trans-
ducers from regular languages. Pattern Recognition, 38:1431?1443, 2005.
[4] J. Godfrey, E. Holliman, and J. McDaniel. Switchboard: Telephone
speech corpus for research and development. In Proc. ICASSP-92, pages
517?520, 1992.
5
303
[5] J. Van Kuppevelt and R. W. Smith. Current and New Directions in
Discourse and Dialogue, volume 22 of Text, Speech and Language Tech.
Springer, 2003.
[6] C-D. Martinez-Hinarejos, J-M. Benedi, and R. Granell. Statistical frame-
work for a spanish spoken dialogue corpus. Speech Comm., 50:992?1008,
2008.
[7] C.D. Mart??nez-Hinarejos. Automatic annotation of dialogues using n-
grams. In Proceedings of TSD 2006, LNCS/LNAI 4188, pages 653?660,
Brno, Czech Republic, Sep 2006. Springer-Verlag.
[8] A. Stolcke, N. Coccaro, R. Bates, P. Taylor, C. van Ess-Dykema, K. Ries,
E. Shriberg, D. Jurafsky, R. Martin, and M. Meteer. Dialogue act mod-
elling for automatic tagging and recognition of conversational speech.
Computational Linguistics, 26(3):1?34, 2000.
6
304
Proceedings of SIGDIAL 2009: the 10th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group in Discourse and Dialogue, pages 333?336,
Queen Mary University of London, September 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Simultaneous dialogue act segmentation and labelling using lexical and
syntactic features
Ramon Granell, Stephen Pulman
Oxford University Computing Laboratory,
Wolfson Building, Parks Road,
Oxford, OX1 3QD, England
ramg@comlab.ox.ac.uk
sgp@clg.ox.ac.uk
Carlos-D. Mart??nez-Hinarejos
Instituto Tecnolo?gico de Informa?tica,
Universidad Polite?cnica de Valencia,
Camino de Vera, s/n, 46022, Valencia, Spain
cmartine@dsic.upv.es
Abstract
Segmentation of utterances and annotation
as dialogue acts can be helpful for sev-
eral modules of dialogue systems. In this
work, we study a statistical machine learn-
ing model to perform these tasks simulta-
neously using lexical features and incorpo-
rating deterministic syntactic restrictions.
There is a slight improvement in both seg-
mentation and labelling due to these re-
strictions.
1 Introduction
Dialogue acts (DA) are linguistic abstractions that
are commonly accepted and employed by the the
dialogue community. In the framework of dia-
logue systems, they can be helpful to identify and
model user intentions and system answers by the
dialogue manager. Furthermore, in other dialogue
modules such as the automatic speech recognizer
or speech synthesiser, DA information may be also
used to increase their performance.
Many researchers have studied automatic DA
labelling using different techniques. However, in
most of this work it is common to assume that the
dialogue turns are already segmented into separate
utterances, where each utterance corresponds to
just one DA label, as in (Stolcke et al(2000); Ji
and Bilmes (2005); Webb et al(2005)). This is
not a realistic situation because the segmentation
of turns into utterances is not a trivial problem.
There have been many previous approaches to
segmentation of turns prior to DA labelling, be-
ginning with (Stolcke and Shriberg (1996)). Typ-
ically some combination of words and part of
speech (POS) tags is used to predict segmentation
boundaries. In this work we make use of a sta-
tistical model to solve both the DA labelling task
and the segmentation task simultaneously, follow-
ing (Ang et al(2005); Mart??nez-Hinarejos et al
(2006)). Our aim is to see whether going beyond
the word n-gram models can improve accuracy,
using syntactic information (constituent structure)
obtained from the dialogue transcriptions. We ex-
amine whether this information can improve the
segmentation of the dialogue turns into DA seg-
ments. Intuitively, it seems logical to believe that
most of these segments must coincide with partic-
ular syntactic structures, and that segment bound-
aries would respect constituent boundaries.
2 Dialogue data
The dialogue corpus used to perform the exper-
iments is the Switchboard database (SWBD). It
consists of human-human conversations by tele-
phone about generic topics. There are 1155 5-
minute conversations, comprising approximately
205000 utterances and 1.4 million words. The size
of the vocabulary is approximately 22000 words.
All this corpus has been manually annotated at
the dialogue act level using the SWBD-DAMSL
scheme, (Jurafsky et al(1997)), consisting of 42
different labels. Every dialogue turn was manu-
ally segmented into utterances. The average num-
ber of segments (utterances) per dialogue turn is
1.78 with a standard deviation of 1.41. Each utter-
ance was assigned one SWBD-DAMSL label (see
Figure 1).
3 Syntactic analysis of DA segments
An initial analysis of the syntactic structures of the
dialogue data was performed to study their possi-
ble relevance for DA segmentation.
333
- $LAUGH he waits until it gets about seventeen below up here $SEG and then he calls us , $SEG
sd sd
- he waits until it gets about seventeen below up here and then he calls us .
Figure 1: The first row is an original segmented dialogue turn, where the $SEG label indicates the end
of a DA segment. The second row contains the corresponding DA label for each segment, where ?sd?
corresponds to the SWBD-DAMSL label of Statement non-opinion. The third row is the input for the
parser.
3.1 Parsing of spontaneous dialogues
One of the main problems we face when we try
to syntactically analyse a corpus transcribed from
spontaneous speech by different people such as
SWBD corpus, is the inconsistency of annotation
conventions for spontaneous speech phenomena
and punctuation marks. This can be problematic
for parsers, as they work at the sentence level.
Some of the dialogue turns of the SWBD corpus
are not transcribed using consistent punctuation
conventions. We therefore carried out some pre-
processing so that all turns end with proper punc-
tuation marks. Additionally, the non-verbal labels
(e.g. $LAUGH, $OVERLAP, $SEG, ...) are re-
moved. In Figure 1 there is an example of this
process.
The Stanford Parser, (Klein and Manning
(2003)) was used for the syntactic analysis of the
transcriptions of SWBD dialogues. The English
grammar used to train the parser is based on the
standard LDC Penn Treebank WSJ training sec-
tions 2-21. Is is important to remark that the nature
of the training corpus (journalistic style reports)
is different from the transcriptions of spontaneous
speech conversations. We would therefore expect
a decrease in accuracy. As output of the parsing
process, a tree that contains syntactic structures
was provided (e.g. see Figure 2).
3.2 Syntactic features and segmentation
As we are interested in studying the coincidence
of syntactic structures with DA segments, we will
select two general features for each word (see Fig-
ure 3):
? Most general syntactic category that starts
with a word, (MGSS), i.e., the root of the cur-
rent subtree of the syntactic analysis, (e.g. in
Figure 2, ?CC? is the MGSS of the first word
of the second segment, ?and?).
? Most general syntactic category that ends
with a word, (MGSE), i.e., the root of the
(ROOT
(S (: -)
(S
(NP (PRP he))
(VP (VBZ waits)
(SBAR (IN until)
(S
(NP (PRP it))
(VP (VBZ gets)
(PP (IN about)
(NP (NN seventeen)))
(PP (IN below)
(ADVP (RB up) (RB here))))))))
(CC and)
(S
(ADVP (RB then))
(NP (PRP he))
(VP (VBZ calls)
(NP (PRP us))))
(. .)))
Figure 2: Example of the syntactic analysis of the
dialogue turn that appears in Figure 1.
subtree of the syntactic analysis that ends
with that word, (e.g. in Figure 2, ?S? is
the MGSE of last word of the first segment,
?here?).
Using these features, we have analysed the syn-
tactic categories of boundary words of segments.
Particularly, it seems interesting to studyMGSE of
last word of the segment and MGSS of first word
of the segment, because it indicates which syntac-
tic structure ends before the segment boundary and
which one starts after it. As there is always the be-
ginning of a segment with the first word of the turn
and the end of a segment with the last word of the
turn, we are ignoring these for the analysis, be-
cause we are looking for intra-turn segments. Re-
sults of this analysis can be seen in Table 1.
4 The model
The statistical model used to DA label and
segment the dialogues is extensively explained
in (Mart??nez-Hinarejos (2008)). Basically, it is
334
ROOT+-+: $LAUGH S+he+NP VP+waits+VBZ SBAR+until+IN S+it+NP VP+gets+VBZ
PP+about+IN NP+seventeen+PP PP+below+IN ADVP+up+RB RB+here+S $SEG
CC+and+CC S+then+ADVP NP+he+NP VP+calls+VBZ NP+us+S .+.+ROOT $SEG
Figure 3: For each word of the example turn of Figure 1, MGSS (item before the word) and MGSE (item
after the word) are obtained from the tree of Figure 2. Non-verbal labels were reincorporated.
MGSE MGSS
Occ % Cat Occ % Cat
33516 37.1 , 30318 33.5 ROOT
30640 33.9 ROOT 19988 22.1 CC
7801 8.6 : 13275 14.7 NP
7134 7.9 S 10187 11.3 S
2687 3.0 NP 3508 3.9 SBAR
2319 2.6 PRN 3421 3.8 ADVP
750 0.8 VP 2034 2.2 VP
531 0.6 ADVP 1957 2.2 INTJ
478 0.5 PP 1300 1.4 UH
465 0.5 RB 972 1.1 PP
4078 4.5 Other 3481 3.8 Other
Table 1: Occurrences and percentage of the syn-
tactic categories that correspond with the most fre-
quent MGSE of the last segment word (except last
segment) andMGSS of the first segment word (ex-
cept first segment).
based on a combination of a Hidden Markov
Model at lexical level and a Language Model (n-
gram) at DA level. The Viterbi algorithm is used
to find the most likely sequence of DA labels ac-
cording to the trained models. The segmentation
is obtained from the jumps between DAs of this
sequence.
The previous section has shown that the MGSE
and MGSS for the segments boundary words are
concentrated in a small set of categories (see Ta-
ble 1). Therefore, one quick and easy way to in-
corporate this information to the existing model is
to add some restrictions during the decoding pro-
cess, giving the model:
U? = argmax
U
max
r,sr1
r?
k=1
Pr(uk|u
k?1
k?n?1) ?
?Pr(W sksk?1+1|uk)?(xsk)
where U? is the sequence of DAs that we will get
from the annotation/segmentation process. The
search process produces a segmentation s =
(s0, s1, . . . , sr), that divides the word sequence
W into the segments W s1s0+1W
s2
s1+1 . . .W
sr
sr?1+1.
Each segment is assigned to a DA ui that forms
the DA sequence U = u1 . . . ur. xi corresponds
to the syntactic features of the i word that can be
MGSE, MGSS or both of them, and
?(xi) =
?
?
?
1 if xi ? X
0 otherwise
where X can be a subset of all the possible syn-
tactic categories that correspond to:
1. the most frequent MGSE of last segment
word, if x is MGSE.
2. the most frequent MGSS of first segment
word, if x is MGSS
3. the most frequent combinations of both pre-
vious sets.
It means that we will only allow a segment end-
ing when the MGSE of a word is in this set, or
a start of a segment when the MGSS of the fol-
lowing word is in the corresponding set or both
conditions at the same time.
5 Experiments and results
Ten cross-validation experiments were performed
for each model using, in each experiment a train-
ing partition composed of 1136 dialogues and
a test set of 19 dialogues, as in (Stolcke et al
(2000); Webb et al(2005); Mart??nez-Hinarejos
et al(2006)). The N-grams were obtained using
the SLM toolkit (Rosenfeld (1998)) with Good-
Turing discounting and the HMMs were trained
using the Baum-Welch algorithm. We use the fol-
lowing evaluation measures:
? To evaluate the labelling, we use the DA Er-
ror Rate (equivalent to Word Error Rate) and
the percentage of error labelling of whole
turns.
? For the segment evaluation, we only check
where the segments bounds are produced
(word position in the segment), making use
of F-score obtained from precision and recall.
335
The results from using different sizes for the set
X are shown for labelling performance in Tables 2
and 3, and F-score of the segmentation in Table 4.
Model/SizeX 5 10 20 All
MGSE 53.31 54.76 54.60 54.76
MGSS 53.35 52.76 54.92 54.76
Both 53.58 52.84 54.76 54.76
Table 2: DAER for models using MGSE, MGSS
and both features. SizeX indicates the size of the
set of most frequent categories accepted. Without
syntactic categories (baseline) we obtain a DAER
of 54.41.
Model/SizeX 5 10 20 All
MGSE 53.61 55.41 55.34 55.77
MGSS 53.61 53.32 55.63 55.77
Both 53.46 53.10 55.19 55.77
Table 3: Percentage of error of labelling of com-
plete turns for all the possible models. The base-
line value is 55.41.
Model / SizeX 5 10 20 All
MGSE 73.08 71.18 71.44 71.17
MGSS 73.60 73.72 71.44 71.17
Both 74.36 74.08 71.75 71.16
Table 4: F-score of segmentation. The baseline
value is 71.17.
6 Discussion and future work
In this work, we have used lexical and syntactic
features for labelling and segmenting DAs simul-
taneously. Syntactic features obtained automati-
cally were deterministically applied during the sta-
tistical decoding process. There is a slight im-
provement using syntactic information, obtaining
better results than reported in other work such
as (Mart??nez-Hinarejos et al(2006)). The F-score
of the segmentation improves 3% using the syn-
tactic features, however values are slightly worse
(2%) than results in (Stolcke and Shriberg (1996)).
As future work, we think that incorporating the
syntactic information in a non-deterministic way
might further improve the annotation and segmen-
tation scores. Furthermore, it is possible to make
use of additional information from the syntactic
structure, rather than just the boundary informa-
tion we are currently using. Finally, an evalua-
tion over different corpora must be done to check
both the performance of the proposed model and
the reusability of the syntactic sets.
Acknowledgments
This work was partially funded by the Compan-
ions project (http://www.companions-project.org)
sponsored by the European Commission as part of
the Information Society Technologies (IST) pro-
gramme under EC grant number IST-FP6-034434.
References
Ang J., Liu Y., Shriberg E. 2005. Automatic Dialog Act
Segmentation and Classification in Multiparty Meet-
ings. Proc. ICASSP, Philadelphia, USA, pp. 1061-
1064
Ji, G and Bilmes, J. 2005. Dialog act tagging using
graphical models. Proc. ICASSP, Philadelphia, USA
Jurafsky, D. Shriberg, E., Biasca, D. 1997. Switchboard
swbd-damsl shallow- discourse-function annotation
coders manual. Tech. Rep. 97-01, University of Col-
orado Institute of Cognitive Science
Klein D. and Manning, C. D. 2003. Accurate Unlex-
icalized Parsing. Proc. ACL, Sapporo, Japan, pp.
423-430
Mart??nez-Hinarejos, C. D., Granell, R., Bened??, J. M.
2006. Segmented and unsegmented dialogue-act
annotation with statistical dialogue models. Proc.
COLING/ACL Sydney, Australia, pp. 563-570
Mart??nez-Hinarejos, C. D., Bened??, J. M., Granell, R.
2008. Statistical framework for a spanish spoken
dialogue corpus. Speech Communication, vol. 50,
number 11-12, pp. 992-1008
Rosenfeld, R. 1998. The cmu-cambridge statistical
language modelling toolkit v2. Technical report,
Carnegie Mellon University
Stolcke, A. and Shriberg, E. 1996. Automatic linguis-
tic segmentation of conversational speech. Proc. of
ICSLP, Philadelphia, USA
Stolcke, A., Coccaro, N., Bates, R., Taylor, P., van
Ess-Dykema, C., Ries, K., Shriberg, E., Jurafsky,
D., Martin, R., Meteer, M. 2000. Dialogue act
modelling for automatic tagging and recognition
of conversational speech. Computational Linguistics
26 (3), 1-34
Webb, N., Hepple, M., Wilks, Y. 2005. Dialogue act
classification using intra-utterance features. Proc. of
the AAAI Workshop on Spoken Language Under-
standing. Pittsburgh, USA
336
