Proceedings of the ACL 2010 Student Research Workshop, pages 61?66,
Uppsala, Sweden, 13 July 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
 
 
 
 
 
Expanding Verb Coverage in Cyc With VerbNet 
 
Clifton J. McFate 
Northwestern University 
Evanston, Il. USA. 
c-mcfate@northwestern.edu 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
 
A robust dictionary of semantic frames is an 
essential element of natural language 
understanding systems that use ontologies.  
However, creating lexical resources that 
accurately capture semantic representations en 
masse is a persistent problem. Where the sheer 
amount of content makes hand creation 
inefficient, computerized approaches often 
suffer from over generality and difficulty with 
sense disambiguation. This paper describes a 
semi-automatic method to create verb 
semantic frames in the Cyc ontology by 
converting the information contained in 
VerbNet into a Cyc usable format. This 
method captures the differences in meaning 
between types of verbs, and uses existing 
connections between WordNet, VerbNet, and 
Cyc to specify distinctions between individual 
verbs when available. This method provides 
27,909 frames to OpenCyc which currently 
has none and can be used to extend 
ResearchCyc as well. We show that these 
frames lead to a 20% increase in sample 
sentences parsed over the Research Cyc verb 
lexicon. 
1 Introduction 
The Cyc1 knowledge base represents general 
purpose knowledge across a vast array of 
domains. Low level event and individual facts 
are contained in larger definitional hierarchical 
representations and contextualized through 
microtheories (Matuszek et al 2006). Higher 
order predicates built into Cyc?s formal 
language, CycL, allow efficient inferencing 
about context and meta-language reasoning 
above and beyond first-order logic rules 
(Ramachandran et al 2005).  
 Because of the expressiveness and size of the 
ontology, Cyc has been used in NL applications 
                                                          
1
 http://www.opencyc.org/cyc 
including word sense disambiguation and rule 
acquisition by reading (Curtis, Cabral, & Baxter, 
2006; Curtis et al 2009). Such applications use 
NL-to-Cycl parsers which use Cyc semantic 
frames to convert natural language into Cyc 
representations. These frames represent sentence 
content through a set of propositional logic 
assertions that first reify the sentence in terms of 
a real world event and then define the semantic 
relationships between the elements of the 
sentence, as described later. Because these 
parsers require semantic frames to represent 
sentence content, existing parsers are limited due 
to Cyc?s limited coverage (Curtis et al 2009). 
The goal is to increase this coverage by 
automatically translating the class frames in 
VerbNet into individual verb templates. 
2 Previous Work 
The Cyc knowledge base is continuously 
expanding and much work has been done on 
automatic fact acquisition as well as merging 
ontologies. However, the semantic frames remain 
mostly hand-made in ResearchCyc2 and non-
existent in the open-license OpenCyc3. 
Translating VerbNet frames into Cyc will expand 
the natural language capabilities of both.  
 There has been previous research on mapping 
existing Cyc templates to VerbNet, but thus far 
these approaches have not created new templates 
to address Cyc?s lapses in coverage. One such 
attempt, King and Crouch?s (2005) unified 
lexicon, compiled many lexical resources into a 
unified representation. While this research 
created a valuable resource, it did not extend the 
existing Cyc coverage. Of the 45, 704 entries in 
the UL only 3,544 have Cyc entries (King & 
Crouch, 2005). 
 Correspondences between a few VerbNet 
frames and ResearchCyc templates have also 
been mapped out through the VxC VerbNet Cyc 
                                                          
2
 http://research.cyc.com 
3  http://opencyc.org 
61
  
Mapper (Trumbo 2006). These mappings became 
a standard that we later used to evaluate the 
quality of our created frames. 
 A notable exception to the hand-made 
paradigm is Curtis et als (2009) TextLearner 
which uses rules and existing semantic frames to 
handle novel sentence structures. Given an 
existing template that fits some of the syntactic 
constraints of the sentence, TextLearner will 
attempt to create a new frame by suggesting a 
predicate that fits the missing part. Often these 
are general underspecified predicates, but 
TextLearner is able to use common sense 
reasoning and existing facts to find better 
matches (Curtis et al 2009).  
 While TextLearner improves its performance 
with time, it is not an attempt to create new 
frames on a large scale. Creating generalized 
frames based on verb classes will increase the 
depth of the Cyc Lexicon quickly. Furthermore, 
automatic processes like those in TextLearner 
could be used to make individual verb semantic 
frames more specific. 
3 VerbNet 
VerbNet is an extension of Levin?s (1993) verb 
classes that uses the class structure to apply 
general syntactic frames to member verbs that 
have those syntactic uses and similar semantic 
meanings (Kipper et al 2000). The current 
version has been expanded to include class 
distinctions not included in Levin?s original 
proposal (Kipper et al  2006). 
 VerbNet is an appealing lexical resource for 
this task because it represents semantic meaning 
as the union of both syntactic structure and 
semantic predicates. VerbNet uses Lexicalized 
Tree Adjoining Grammar to generate the 
syntactic frames. The syntactic roles in the frame 
are appended with general thematic roles that fill 
arguments of semantic predicates. Each event is 
broken down into a tripartite structure as 
described by Moens & Steedman (1988) and uses 
a time modifier for each predicate to indicate 
when specific predicates occur in the event. This 
allows for a dynamic representation of change 
over an event. (Kipper et al 2000).   
 This approach is transferable to Cyc?s 
semantic templates in which syntactic slots fill 
predicate arguments in the context of a specific 
syntactic frame. Both also have extensive 
connections to WordNet2.0, an electronic edition 
of Miller?s (1985) WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998). 
4 Method 
The general method for creating semantic 
templates in Cyc requires creating Verb Class 
Frames and then using Cyc predicates and 
heuristic rules to create individual frames for 
each member verb. 
4.1 OpenCyc 
The existing semantic templates are accessible 
through the ResearchCyc KB. However, for the 
purposes of this study the OpenCyc KB was 
used. The OpenCyc KB is an open source 
version of ResearchCyc that contains much of 
the definitional information and higher order 
predicates, but has had much of the lower level 
specific facts and the entire word lexicon 
removed (Matuszek et al 2006). However, the 
assertions generated by this method are fully 
usable in ResearchCyc. OpenCyc was used so as 
to minimize the effect of existing semantic 
frames on new frame creation. Since OpenCyc 
and VerbNet are open-licensed, our translation 
provides an open-license extension to OpenCyc 
to support its use in natural language research.  
4.2 Knowledge Representation 
The primary difficulty with integrating VerbNet 
frames into Cyc was overcoming differences in 
knowledge representation. Cyc semantic 
templates reify events as an instance of a 
collection of events. The arguments correspond 
to syntactic roles. The following is a semantic 
template for a ditransitive use of the word give 
from ResearchCyc. 
 
(verbSemTrans Give-TheWord 0 
(PPCompFrameFn 
 DitransitivePPFrameType To-TheWord) 
(and 
(isa ACTION GivingSomething) 
 
(objectGiven ACTION OBJECT) 
(giver ACTION SUBJECT) 
(givee ACTION OBLIQUE-OBJECT))) 
However, VerbNet uses semantic predicates that 
describe relationships between two thematic 
roles. The following is a frame for the VerbNet 
class Give as presented in the Unified Verb 
Index4. 
NP V NP PP.recipient     
example  
                                                          
4 http://verbs.colorado.edu/verb-index/ 
62
  
 "They lent a bicycle to me."     
syntax  
 Agent V Theme {to} Recipient     
semantics  
-has_possession(start(E), Agent,                                     
Theme)  
-has_possession(end(E), Recipient,  
Theme) 
-transfer(during(E), Theme) 
 -cause(Agent, E) 
 The predicate has_possession occurs 
twice, at the beginning and end of the event. In 
one case the Agent has possession and in the 
second the Recipient does. Both refer to the 
Theme which is being transferred. 
 In Cyc the hasPossession relationship to 
Agent and Recipient is represented with the 
predicates giver and givee. The subject and 
oblique-object of the sentence fill those 
arguments, and the actual change of possession is 
represented by the collection of events 
GivingSomething. The VerbNet Theme is the 
object in objectGiven. Thus an individual 
VerbNet semantic predicate often has a many-to-
one mapping with Cyc predicates.  
4.3 Predicates 
To account for representation differences, a 
single Cyc predicate was mapped to a unique 
combination of Verbnet predicate and thematic 
role (ie. Has_Possession Agent at 
start(E) => givee). 56 of these mappings 
were done by hand. Though far from exhaustive, 
these hand mappings represent many frequently 
used predicates in VerbNet. The hand mapping 
was done by looking at the uses of the predicate 
across different classes.  
 Because the mappings were not exhaustive, a 
safety net automatically catches predicates that 
haven?t been mapped. The VerbNet predicates 
Cause and InReactionTo corresponded to the 
Cyc predicates performedBy, doneBy, and 
causes-Underspecified. These predicates 
were selected whenever the VerbNet predicates 
occurred with a theme role that was the subject 
of the sentence. The more specific 
performedBy was selected in cases where the 
frame?s temporal structure suggested a result. 
The predicate doneBy was selected in other 
cases. The causes-Underspecified predicate 
was used in frames whose time modifiers 
suggested that they were continuous states. The 
predicates patientGeneric and 
patientGeneric-Direct were used when a 
predicate was not found for a required object or 
oblique object. 
 Some Cyc templates don?t have predicates that 
reference the event. For example, the verb touch 
can be efficiently represented with the relation 
(objectsInContact :SUBJECT :OBJECT). 
Situations like this were hand assigned. 
4.4 Collections 
In Cyc, concepts are represented by collections.  
Inheritance between collections is specified by 
the genls relationship, which can be viewed as 
subset. Most verb frames have an associated 
collection of events of which each use is an 
instance. The associated collection of the class 
frame templates was automatically selected using 
the common link that both resources share with 
WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998).  To do this, the 
WordNet synsets of the member verbs for a class 
were matched with their Cyc-WordNet 
synonymousExternalConcept assertion. The 
Cyc representation became a denoted collection. 
The most general collection out of the list of 
viable collections was chosen as the general class 
frame collection. The number of genls links to 
a collection was used as a proxy for generality. 
In the case of a tie the first was chosen. 
 While the most general collection was used for 
the class semantic frame, at the level of 
individual verb frames the specific synset 
denoted collection was substituted for the more 
general one when applicable. Verbs with 
multiple meanings across classes were given a 
unique index number for each sense. However, 
within a given class each word only received one 
denotation. The general class level collection was 
used in cases where no Cyc-WordNet-VerbNet 
link existed. If no verb had a synset in Cyc, the 
general collection Situation was used. 
4.5 Subcategorization Frames 
Each syntactic frame is a subcategorization 
frame or a subset of one. In this case, the naming 
conventions were different between VerbNet and 
Cyc. Frames with prepositions kept Cyc?s 
notation for prepositional phrases. However, 
since VerbNet had a much broader coverage the 
VerbNet subcat names were kept. 
4.6 Assertions 
The process above was used to create general 
class frames, for example,  
 
(verbClassSemTrans give-13.1 
(TransitiveNPFrame)  
63
  
(and  
(isa :ACTION 
MakingSomethingAvailable)  
(patient-GenericDirect :ACTION 
:OBJECT)  
(performedBy :ACTION :SUBJECT) 
(fromPossessor :ACTION :SUBJECT) 
(objectOfPossessionTransfer :ACTION 
:OBJECT))) 
 
These frames use more generic collections and 
apply to a VerbNet class rather than a specific 
verb. 
 Specific verb semantic templates were created 
by inferring that each member verb of a VerbNet 
class participated in every template in a class. 
Again, collections were taken from existing 
WordNet connections if possible. The output was 
assertions in the Cyc semantic template format: 
 
(verbSemTrans Loan-TheWord 0 
(PPCompFrameFn NP-PP (WordFn to)) 
(and  
(isa :ACTION Lending)  
(patient-GenericDirect :ACTION 
:OBJECT)  
(performedBy :ACTION :SUBJECT)  
(fromPossessor :ACTION :SUBJECT) 
(toPossessor :ACTION :OBLIQUE-
OBJECT)  
(objectOfPossessionTransfer :ACTION 
:OBJECT))) 
 
 This method for giving class templates to each 
verb in a class was written as a Horn clause for 
the FIRE reasoning engine. FIRE is a reasoning 
engine that incorporates both logical inference 
based on axioms and analogy-based reasoning 
over a Cyc-derived knowledge base (Forbus, 
Mostek, & Ferguson, 2002).  FIRE could then be 
queried for implied verb templates which became 
the final list of verb templates. 
4.7 Subclasses 
VerbNet has an extensive classification system 
involving subclasses. Subclasses contain verbs 
that take all of the syntactic formats of the main 
class plus additional frames that verbs in the 
main class cannot. 
 Verbs in a subclass inherit frames from their 
superordinate classes. FIRE was used again to 
create the verb semantic templates.  
 Each subclass template?s collection was 
selected using the same process as the main 
class. If no subclass member had a Cyc 
denotation, then the main class collection was 
used. 
5 Results 
The end result of this process was the creation of 
27,909 verb semantic template assertions for 
5,050 different verbs. This substantially increases 
the number of frames for ResearchCyc and 
creates frames for OpenCyc. 
 To test the accuracy of the results and their 
contribution to the knowledge base we ran two 
tests. The first was to compare our frames with 
the 139 hand-checked VxC matches by hand. Of 
the 139 frames from VxC, 81 were qualified as 
?good? matches, and 58 as ?maybe? (Trumbo, 
2006). Since these frames already existed in Cyc 
and were hand matched we used them as the 
current gold standard for what a VerbNet frame 
translated into Cyc should look like.  
 Matches between frames were evaluated along 
several criteria. First was whether the frame had 
as good a syntactic parse as the manual version. 
This was defined as having predicates that 
addressed all syntactic roles in the sentence or, if 
not enough, as many as the VxC match. 
Secondly we asked if the collection was similar 
to the manual version. Frames with collections 
that were too specific, unrelated, or just 
Situation were discarded. Because frame-
specific predicates were not created on a large 
scale, a frame was not rejected for using general 
predicates.  
 It is important to note a difference in matching 
methodology between the VxC matches and our 
frames. First, the VxC mappings included frames 
in Cyc that only partially matched more 
syntactically robust VerbNet frames. Our frames 
were only included if they matched the intended 
VerbNet syntactic frame. Because of this some 
of our frames beat the VxC gold standard for 
syntactic completeness. The VxC frames also 
included multiple similar senses for an individual 
verb. Our verbs had one denotation per class or 
subclass. Thus in some cases our frames failed 
not from over generalizing but because they were 
only meant to represent one meaning per class. 
Since the strength of our approach lies in 
generating a near exhaustive list of syntactic 
frames and not multiple word senses, these kinds 
of failures are not necessarily representative of 
the success of the frames as a whole. 
 A total of 55 frames (39.5%) were correct with 
seventeen (30.9%) of the correct frames having a 
more complete syntactic parse than the manually 
mapped frame. 48 frames (34.5%) were rejected 
only for having too general or specific a 
collection; however ten (20.8%) of the collection 
64
  
rejected frames had a more complete parse than 
their manual counterparts. Thus 103 frames 
(74.1%) were as syntactically correct or better 
than the existing Cyc frame mapped to that 
VerbNet frame. Nine (6.47%) frames failed 
syntactically, with four (44.4%) of the syntax 
failures also having the wrong collection. 
Thirteen frames ( 9.3%) were not matched. 
 Fifteen frames (10.8%) from the Hold class, 
were separated out for a formatting error that 
resulted in a duplicate, though not syntactically 
incorrect, predicate. The predicate repeated was 
(objectsInContact :ACTION :OBJECT). 12 
of 15 frames (80%) had accurate collections. 
 The second test compared the results of a 
natural language understanding system using 
either ResearchCyc alone or a version of 
ResearchCyc with our frames substituted for 
theirs.  The test corpus was 50 randomly selected 
example sentences from the VerbNet frame 
examples.  We used the EA NLU parser, which  
uses a bottom-up chart parser and compositional 
semantics to convert the semantic content of a 
sentence in CycL (Tomai & Forbus 2009). 
Possible frames are returned in choice sets. A 
parse was judged correct if it returned a verb 
frame for the central verb of the example 
sentence that either wholly or in combination 
with preposition frames addressed the syntactic 
constituents of the sentence with an acceptable 
collection and acceptable predicates. Again 
general predicates were acceptable. 
 ResearchCyc got sixteen out of 50 frames 
correct (32%). Eleven frames (22%) did not 
return a template but did return a denotation to a 
Cyc collection. Twelve verbs (24%) retuned 
nothing, while eleven (22%) returned frames that 
were either not the correct syntactic frame or 
were a different sense of the verb. 
 EA NLU running the VerbNet generated 
frames got 26 out of 50 (52%) frames correct. 
Twelve frames (24%) returned nothing. Eight 
frames, (16%) failed because of a too specific or 
too general collection. Four generated frames 
(8%) were either not the correct syntactic frame 
or were for a different sense of the verb. This 
was an overall 20% improvement in accuracy. 
 Five (10%) parses using the VerbNet 
generated correct frames that were labeled as 
noisy. Noisy frames had duplicate predicates or 
more general predicates in addition to the 
specific ones. The Hold frames separated out in 
the VxC test are an example of noisy frames. 
None of these frames were syntactically incorrect 
or contradictory. The redundant predicates arise 
because the predicate safety net had to be greedy. 
This was in the interest of capturing more 
complex frames that may have multiple relations 
for the same thematic role in a sentence. 
 This evaluation is based on parser recall and 
frame semantic accuracy only. As would be 
expected, adding more frames to the knowledge 
base did result in more parser retrievals and 
possible interpretations. The implications for this 
on word sense disambiguation is evaluated 
further in the discussion. To improve predicate 
specificity, the next phase of research with these 
frames will be to implement predicate 
strengthening methods that move down the 
hierarchy to find more specific predicates to 
replace the generalized ones. Thus in the future 
precision both in terms of frame retrieval and 
predicate specificity will be a vital metric for 
evaluating success. 
6 Discussion 
As has been demonstrated in this approach and in 
previous research like Curtis et als (2009)  
TextLearner, Cyc provides powerful reasoning 
capabilities that can be used to successfully infer 
more specific information from general existing 
facts. We hope that future research is able to use 
this feature to provide more specific individual 
frames. Because Cyc is consistently changing 
and growing, an approach that uses Cyc 
relationships will be able to improve as the 
knowledge base improves its coverage. 
 While many of the frames are general, they 
provide a solid foundation for further research. 
As they are now, the added 27,909 frames 
increase the language capabilities of OpenCyc 
which previously had none. For ResearchCyc the 
contribution is less clear-cut. The 27,909 
VerbNet frames have approximately 7.93 times 
the coverage of the existing 3,517 ResearchCyc 
frames5 and they improved ResearchCyc parser 
performance by 20%. However, with 35% of 
frames in the VxC comparison and 16% in the 
parse test failing because of collections, and  
10.8% of the VxC comparison set and 10% of 
correct parses classified as noisy, these frames 
are not as precise as the existing frames. The 
goal of these frames is not necessarily to replace 
the existing frames, but rather to extend coverage 
and provide a platform for further development 
whether by hand or through automatic methods. 
Precision can be improved upon in future 
                                                          
5
 D. Lenat briefing, March 15, 2006 
65
  
research and is facilitated by the expressiveness 
of Cyc. Predicate strengthening, using existing 
relationships to infer more specific predicates, is 
the next step in creating robust frames.  
 Additionally, there is a tradeoff between the 
number of frames covered and efficiency of 
disambiguation. More frame choices make it 
harder for parsers to choose the correct frame, 
but it will hopefully improve their handling of 
more complex sentence structures. 
 One possible solution to competition and over-
generality is to add verbs incrementally by class. 
The class based approach makes it easy to 
separate verbs by types, such as verbs that relate 
to mechanical processes or emotion verbs. One 
could use classes of frames to strengthen specific 
areas of parsing while choosing not to take verbs 
from a class covering a domain that the parser 
already performs strongly in. This approach can 
reduce interference with existing domains that 
have been hand built and extended beyond the 
standard Cyc KB for individual research.  
 Furthermore, semi-automatic approaches like 
this generate information more quickly than one 
could do by hand. Thus an approach to 
computational verb semantic representation that 
is rooted in classes can take advantage of modern 
reasoning sources like Cyc to efficiently create 
semantic knowledge.  
 
Acknowledgments 
This research was supported by the Air Force 
Office of Scientific Research and Northwestern 
University. A special thanks to Kenneth Forbus 
and the members of QRG for their continued 
invaluable guidance. 
 
References 
Crouch, Dick, and Tracy Holloway King. 2005. 
Unifying Lexical Resources. In Proceedings of the 
Interdisciplinary Workshop on the Identification and 
Representation of Verb Features and Verb Classes, 
Saarbruecken, Germany 
 
Curtis, John, David Baxter, Peter Wagner, John 
Cabral, Dave Schneider, and Michael Witbrock. 2009. 
Methods of Rule Acquisition in the TextLearner 
Systerm. In Proceedings of the 2009 AAAI Spring 
Symposium on Learning by Reading and Learning to 
Read, pages 22-28, Palo Alto, CA. AAAI Press. 
 
Curtis, John, John Cabral, and David Baxter. 2006.  
On the Application of the Cyc Ontology to Word 
Sense Disambiguation. In Proceedings of the 
Nineteenth International FLAIRS Conference, pages 
652-657, Melbourne Beach, FL. 
 
Fellbaum, Christiane. Ed. 1998. WordNet: An 
Electronic Database. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
 
Forbus, Kenneth, Thomas Mostek , and Ron 
Ferguson. 2002. An Analogy Ontology for Integrating 
Analogical Processing and First-principle Reasoning. 
In Proceedings of the Thirteenth Conference on 
Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence. 
Menlo Park, CA. AAAI Press. 
 
Kipper, Karin, Hoa Trang Dang, and Martha Palmer. 
2000.  Class-Based Construction of a Verb Lexicon. 
In AAAI-2000 Seventeenth National Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence, Austin, TX. 
 
Kipper, Karin,  Anna Korhonen, Neville Ryant, and 
Martha Palmer. 2006. Extending VerbNet with Novel 
Verb Classes. In Fifth International Conference on 
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2006). 
Genoa, Italy.  
 
Levin, Beth. 1993. English Verb Classes and 
Alternation: A Preliminary Investigation. The 
University of Chicago Press, Chicago. 
 
Matuszek, Cynthia, John Cabral, Michael Witbrock, 
and John DeOliveira. 2006. An Introduction to the 
Syntax and Content of Cyc. In Proceedings of the 
2006 AAAI Spring Symposium on Formalizing and 
Compiling Background Knowledge and Its 
Applications to Knowledge Representation and 
Question Answering, Stanford, CA. 
 
Moens, Marc, and Mark Steedman. 1988. Temporal 
Ontology and Temporal Reference. Computational 
Linguistics. 14(2):15-28. 
 
Miller, G. 1985. WORDNET: A Dictionary Browser. 
In Proceedings of the First International Conference 
on Information in Data. 
 
Ramachandran, Deepak, Pace Reagan, and Keith 
Goolsbey. 2005. First-Orderized Research Cyc: 
Expressivity and Efficiency in a Common-Sense 
Ontology. In Papers from the AAAI Workshop on 
Contexts and Ontologies: Theory, Practice and 
Applications. Pittsburgh, PA. 
 
Tomai, Emmet, and Kenneth Forbus. 2009. EA NLU: 
Practical Language Understanding for Cognitive 
Modeling. In Proceedings of the 22nd International 
Florida Artificial Intelligence Research Society 
Conference, Sanibel Island, FL. 
 
Trumbo, Derek. 2006. VxC: A VerbNet-Cyc Mapper. 
http://verbs.colorado.edu/verb-index/vxc/ 
66
Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics:shortpapers, pages 363?367,
Portland, Oregon, June 19-24, 2011. c?2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
 
 
 
 
 
NULEX: An Open-License Broad Coverage Lexicon 
 
 
Clifton J. McFate Kenneth D. Forbus 
Northwestern University Northwestern University 
Evanston, IL. USA. Evanston, IL. USA 
c-mcfate@northwestern.edu forbus@northwestern.edu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
 
Broad coverage lexicons for the English 
language have traditionally been handmade. 
This approach, while accurate, requires too 
much human labor. Furthermore, resources 
contain gaps in coverage, contain specific 
types of information, or are incompatible with 
other resources. We believe that the state of 
open-license technology is such that a 
comprehensive syntactic lexicon can be 
automatically compiled. This paper describes 
the creation of such a lexicon, NU-LEX, an 
open-license feature-based lexicon for general 
purpose parsing that combines WordNet, 
VerbNet, and Wiktionary and contains over 
100,000 words. NU-LEX was integrated into a 
bottom up chart parser. We ran the parser 
through three sets of sentences, 50 sentences 
total, from the Simple English Wikipedia and 
compared its performance to the same parser 
using Comlex. Both parsers performed almost 
equally with NU-LEX finding all lex-items for 
50% of the sentences and Comlex succeeding 
for 52%. Furthermore, NULEX?s 
shortcomings primarily fell into two 
categories, suggesting future research 
directions. 
1 Introduction 
 While there are many types of parsers 
available, all of them rely on a lexicon of words, 
whether syntactic like Comlex, enriched with 
semantics like WordNet, or derived from tagged 
corpora like the Penn Treebank (Macleod et al 
1994; Fellbaum, 1998; Marcus et al 1993). 
However, many of these resources have gaps that 
the others can fill in. WordNet, for example, only 
contains open-class words, and it lacks the 
extensive subcategorization frame and agreement 
information present in Comlex (Miller et al 
1993; Macleod et al 1994). Comlex, while 
syntactically deep, doesn?t have tagged usage 
data or semantic groupings (Macleod et al 
1994). Furthermore, many of these resources do 
not map to one another or have restricted 
licenses. 
 The goal of our research was to create a 
syntactic lexicon, like Comlex, that unified 
multiple existing open-source resources 
including Felbaum?s (1998) WordNet, Kipper et 
al?s (2000) VerbNet, and Wiktionary. 
Furthermore, we wanted it to have direct links to 
frame semantic representations via the open-
license OpenCyc knowledge base. 
 The result was NU-LEX a lexicon of over 
100,000 words that has the coverage of 
WordNet, is enriched with tense information 
from automatically screen-scrapping 
Wiktionary1, and contains VerbNet 
subcategorization frames. This lexicon was 
incorporated into a bottom-up chart parser, 
EANLU, that connects the words to Cyc 
representations (Tomai & Forbus 2009). Each 
entry is represented by Cyc assertions and 
contains syntactic information as a set of features 
consistent with previous feature systems (Allen 
1995; Macleod et al 1994). 
                                                          
1
 http://www.wiktionary.org/ 
363
2 Previous Work 
 Comlex is handmade and contains 38,000 
lemmas. It represents words in feature value lists 
that contain lexical data such as part of speech, 
agreement information, and syntactic frame 
participation (Macleod et al 1994). Furthermore, 
Comlex has extensive mappings to, and uses 
representations compatible with, multiple lexical 
resources (Macleod et al 1994). 
Attempts to automatically create syntactic 
lexical resources from tagged corpora have also 
been successful. The Penn Treebank is one such 
resource (Marcus et al 1993). These resources 
have been successfully incorporated into 
statistical parsers such as the Apple Pie parser 
(Sekine & Grishman, 1995). Unfortunately, they 
still require extensive labor to do the annotations. 
NU-LEX is different in that it is automatically 
compiled without relying on a hand-annotated 
corpus. Instead, it combines crowd-sourced data, 
Wiktionary, with existing lexical resources. 
 This research was possible because of the 
existing lexical resources WordNet and VerbNet. 
WordNet is a virtual thesaurus that groups words 
together by semantic similarity into synsets 
representing a lexical concept (Felbaum, 1998). 
VerbNet is an extension of Levin?s (1993) verb 
class research. It represents verb meaning in a 
class hierarchy where each verb in a class has 
similar semantic meanings and identical syntactic 
usages (Kipper et al 2000). Since its creation it 
has been expanded to include classes not in 
Levin?s original research (Kipper et al 2006). 
These two resources have already been mapped, 
which facilitated applying subcategorization 
frames to WordNet verbs. 
 Furthermore, WordNet has existing links to 
OpenCyc. OpenCyc is an open-source version of 
the ResearchCyc knowledge base that contains 
hierarchical definitional information but is 
missing much of the lower level instantiated facts 
and linguistic knowledge of ResearchCyc 
(Matuszek et al 2006). Previous research by 
McFate (2010) used these links and VerbNet 
hierarchies to create verb semantic frames which 
are used in EANLU, the parser NU-LEX was 
tested on. 
3 Creating NU-LEX 
The NU-LEX describes words as CycL 
assertions. Each form of a word has its own 
entry. For the purposes of integration into a 
parser that already uses Comlex, the formatting 
was kept similar. Because the lexification 
process is automatic, formatting changes are easy 
to implement. 
3.1 Nouns 
Noun lemmas were initially taken from 
Fellbaum?s (1998) WordNet index. Each Lemma 
was then queried in Wiktionary to retrieve its 
plural form resulting in a triple of word, POS, 
and plural form: 
 
(boat Noun (("plural" "boats"))) 
 
This was used to create a definition for each 
form. Each definition contains a list of WordNet 
synsets from the original word, the orthographic 
word form which was assumed to be the same as 
the word, countability taken from Wiktionary 
when available, the root which was the base form 
of the word, and the agreement which was either 
singular or plural. 
 
(definitionInDictionary WordNet "Boat"         
 (boat (noun 
(synset ("boat%1:06:01:?            
     ?boat%1:06:00::")) 
(orth "boat") 
(countable +) 
(root boat) (agr 3s)))) 
3.2 Verbs 
Like Nouns, verb base lemmas were taken from 
the WordNet index. Similarly, each verb was 
queried in Wiktionary to retrieve its tense forms 
resulting in a list similar to that for nouns:  
 
(give Verb (( 
("third-person singular simple present" 
"gives")  
("present participle" "giving")  
("simple past" "gave")  
("past participle" "given")))) 
 
These lists in turn were used to create the word, 
form, and agreement information for a verb 
entry. The subcategorization frames were taken 
directly from VerbNet. Root and Orthographical 
form were again kept the same. 
 
(definitionInDictionary WordNet "Give"    
 (give (verb  
  (synset ("give%2:41:10::?     
      ?"give%2:34:00::")) 
  (orth "give")  
  (vform pres)  
  (subcat (? S np-v-np-np-pp.asset 
   np-v-np-pp.recipient-pp.asset 
   np-v-np-pp.asset 
   np-v-pp.recipient 
   np-v-np 
   np-v-np-dative-np 364
   np-v-np-pp.recipient))  
  (root give)  
  (agr (? a 1s 2s 1p 2p 3p))))) 
3.3 Adjectives and Adverbs 
Adjectives and adverbs were simply taken from 
WordNet. No information from Wiktionary was 
added for this version of NU-LEX, so it does not 
include comparative or superlative forms. This 
will be added in future iterations by using 
Wiktionary. The lack of comparatives and 
superlatives caused no errors. Each definition 
contains the Word, POS, and Synset list: 
 
(definitionInDictionary WordNet "Funny" 
 (funny (adjective  
  (root funny)  
   (orth "funny")  
  (synset ("funny%4:02:01::"     
      "funny%4:02:00::"))))) 
3.4 Manual Additions 
WordNet only contains open-class words: 
Nouns, Adjectives, Adverbs, and Verbs (Miller 
et al 1993). Thus determiners, subordinating 
conjunctions, coordinating conjunctions, and 
pronouns all had to be hand created. 
Likewise, Be-verbs had to be manually added 
as the Wiktionary page proved too difficult to 
parse. These were the only categories added. 
Notably, proper names and cardinal numbers 
are missing from NU-LEX. Numbers are 
represented as nouns, but not as cardinals or 
ordinals. These categories were not explicit in 
WordNet (Miller et al 1993). 
4 Experiment Setup 
The sample sentences consisted of 50 samples 
from the Simple English Wikipedia2 articles on 
the heart, lungs, and George Washington. The 
heart set consisted of the first 25 sentences of the 
article, not counting parentheticals. The lungs set 
consisted of the first 13 sentences of the article. 
The George Washington set consisted of the first 
12 sentences of that article. These sets 
corresponded to the first section or first two 
sections of each article. There were 239 unique 
words in the whole set out of 599 words total. 
 Each set was parsed by the EANLU parser. 
EANLU is a bottom-up chart parser that uses 
compositional semantics to translate natural 
language into Cyc predicate calculus 
representations (Tomai & Forbus 2009). It is 
based on a Allen?s (1995) parser. It runs on top 
                                                          
2
 http://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page 
of the FIRE reasoning engine which it uses to 
query the Cyc KB (Forbus et al 2010). 
Each sentence was evaluated as correct based 
on whether or not it returned the proper word 
forms. Since we are not evaluating EANLU?s 
grammar, we did not formally evaluate the 
parser?s ability to generate a complete parse from 
the lex-items, but we note informally that parse 
completeness was generally the same.  Failure 
occurred if any lex-item was not retrieved or if 
the parser was unable to parse the sentence due 
to system memory constraints.  
5 Results 
Can NU-LEX perform comparably to existing 
syntactic resources despite being automatically 
compiled from multiple resources? Does its 
increased coverage significantly improve 
parsing? How accurate is this lexicon? 
In particular we wanted to uncover words that 
disappeared or were represented incorrectly as a 
result of the screen-scraping process. 
Overall, across all 50 samples NU-LEX and 
Comlex performed similarly. NULEX got 25 out 
of 50 (50%) correct and Comlex got 26 out of 50 
(52%) of the sentences correct. The two systems 
made many of the same errors, and a primary 
source of errors was the lack of proper nouns in 
either resource. Proper nouns caused seven 
sentences to fail in both parsers or 29% of total 
errors.  
Of the NU-LEX failures not caused by proper 
nouns, five of them (20%) were caused by 
lacking cardinal numbers. The rest were due to 
missing lex-items across several categories. 
Comlex primarily failed due to missing medical 
terminology in the lungs and heart test set. 
Out of the total 239 unique words, NULEX 
failed on 11 unique words not counting proper 
nouns or cardinal numbers. One additional 
failure was due to the missing pronoun 
?themselves? which was retroactively added to 
the hand created pronoun section. This a failure 
rate of 4.6%. Comlex failed on 6 unique words, 
not counting proper nouns, giving it a failure rate 
of 2.5%. 
5.1 The Heart 
For the heart set 25 sentences were run through 
the parser. Using NU-LEX, the system correctly 
identified the lex-items for 17 out of 25 
sentences (68%). Of the sentences it did not get 
correct, five were incorrect only because of the 
365
lack of cardinal number representation. One 
failed because of system memory constraints. 
Using Comlex, the parser correctly identified 
all lex-items for 16 out of 25 sentences (64%). 
The sentences it got wrong all failed because of 
missing medical terms. In particular, atrium and 
vena cava caused lexical errors. 
5.2 The Lungs 
For the lung set 13 sentences were run through 
the parser. Using NU-LEX the system correctly 
identified all lex-items for 6 out of 13 sentences 
(46%). Two errors were caused by the lack of 
cardinal number representation and one sentence 
failed due to memory constraints. One sentence 
failed because of the medical specific term para-
bronchi.  
 Four additional errors were due to a 
malformed verb definitions and missing lexitems 
lost during screen scraping. 
Using Comlex the parser correctly identified 
all lex-items for 7 out of 13 sentences (53%).  
Five failures were caused by missing lex-items, 
namely medical terminology like alveoli and 
parabronchi. One sentence failed due to system 
memory constraints. 
5.3 George Washington 
For the George Washington set 12 sentences 
were run through the parser. This was a set that 
we expected to cause problems for NU-LEX and 
Comlex because of the lack of proper noun 
representation. NU-LEX got only 2 out of 12 
correct and seven of these errors were caused by 
proper nouns such as George Washington.  
Comlex did not perform much better, getting 3 
out of 12 (25%) correct. All but one of the 
Comlex errors was caused by missing proper 
nouns. 
6 Discussion 
NU-LEX is unique in that it is a syntactic lexicon 
automatically compiled from several open-source 
resources and a crowd-sourced website. Like 
these resources it too is open-license. We?ve 
demonstrated that its performance is on par with 
existing state of the art resources like Comlex. 
By virtue of being automatic, NU-LEX can be 
easily updated or reformatted. Because it scrapes 
Wiktionary for tense information, NU-LEX can 
constantly evolve to include new forms or 
corrections. As its coverage (over 100,000 
words) is derived from Fellbaum?s (1998) 
WordNet, it is also significantly larger than 
existing similar syntactic resources.  
NU-LEX?s first trial demonstrated that it was 
suitable for general purpose parsing. However, 
much work remains to be done. The majority of 
errors in the experiments were caused by either 
missing numbers or missing proper nouns. 
Cardinal numbers could be easily added to 
improve performance. Furthermore, solutions to 
missing numbers could be created on the 
grammar side of the process. 
 Missing proper nouns represent both a gap and 
an opportunity. One approach in the future could 
be to manually add important people or places as 
needed. Because the lexicon is Cyc compliant, 
other options could include querying the Cyc KB 
for people and then explicitly representing the 
examples as definitions. This method has already 
proven successful for EANLU using 
ResearchCyc, and could transfer well to 
OpenCyc. Screen-scraping Wiktionary could also 
yield proper nouns. 
With proper noun and number coverage, total 
failures would have been reduced by 48%. Thus, 
simple automated additions in the future can 
greatly enhance performance. 
Errors caused by missing or malformed 
definitions were not abundant, showing up in 
only 12 of the 50 parses and under half of the 
total errors. The total error rate for words was 
only 4.6%. We believe that improvements to the 
screen-scrapping program or changes in 
Wiktionary could lead to improvements in the 
future. 
Because it is CycL compliant the entire 
lexicon can be formally represented in the Cyc 
knowledge base (Matuszek et al 2006). This 
supports efficient reasoning and allows systems 
that use NU-LEX to easily make use of the Cyc 
KB. It is easily adaptable in LISP or Cyc based 
applications. When partnered with the EANLU 
parser and McFate?s (2010) OpenCyc verb 
frames, the result is a semantic parser that uses 
completely open-license resources.  
It is our hope that NU-LEX will provide a 
powerful tool for the natural language 
community both on its own and combined with 
existing resources. In turn, we hope that it 
becomes better through use in future iterations. 
 
References 
Allen, James. 1995. Natural Language 
Understanding: 2nd edition. Benjamin/Cummings 
Publishing Company, Inc. Redwood City, CA. 
  366
Fellbaum, Christiane. Ed. 1998. WordNet: An 
Electronic Database. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
 
Forbus, K., Hinrichs, T., de kleer, J., and Usher, J.  
2010.FIRE: Infrastructure for Experience-based 
Systems with Common Sense. AAAI Fall Symposium 
on Commonsense Knowledge. Menlo Park, CA. 
AAAI Press. 
 
Kipper, Karin, Hoa Trang Dang, and Martha Palmer. 
2000.  Class-Based Construction of a Verb Lexicon. 
In AAAI-2000 Seventeenth National Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence, Austin, TX. 
 
Kipper, Karin,  Anna Korhonen, Neville Ryant, and 
Martha Palmer. 2006. Extending VerbNet with Novel 
Verb Classes. In Fifth International Conference on 
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2006). 
Genoa, Italy.  
 
Levin, Beth. 1993. English Verb Classes and 
Alternation: A Preliminary Investigation. The 
University of Chicago Press, Chicago. 
 
Macleod, Catherine, Ralph Grishman, and Adam 
Meyers. 1994 Creating a Common Syntactic 
Dictionary of English. Presented at SNLR: 
International Workshop on Sharable Natural 
Language Resources,  Nara, Japan. 
 
Marcus, Mitchell, Beatrice Santorini, Mary Ann 
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a large annotated 
corpus of English: the Penn Treebank.  Computational 
Linguistics. 19(2): 313-330. 
 
Matuszek, Cynthia, John Cabral, Michael Witbrock, 
and John DeOliveira. 2006. An Introduction to the 
Syntax and Content of Cyc. In Proceedings of the 
2006 AAAI Spring Symposium on Formalizing and 
Compiling Background Knowledge and Its 
Applications to Knowledge Representation and 
Question Answering, Stanford, CA. 
 
McFate, Clifton. 2010. Expanding Verb Coverage in 
Cyc With VerbNet. In proceedings of the ACL 2010 
Student Research Workshopl. Uppsala, Sweden,  
 
Miller, George, Richard Beckwith, Christiane 
Fellbaum, Derek Gross, and Katherine Miller. 1993. 
Introduction to WordNet: An On-line Lexical 
Database. In Fellbaum, Christiane. Ed. 1998. 
WordNet: An Electronic Database. MIT Press, 
Cambridge, MA. 
 
Sekine, Satoshi, and Ralph Grishman. 1995. A 
Corpus-based Probabilistic Grammar with Only Two 
Non-terminals. In Fourth International Workshop on 
Parsing Technologies. Prague, Czech Republic. 
Tomai, Emmet, and Kenneth Forbus. 2009. EA NLU: 
Practical Language Understanding for Cognitive 
Modeling. In Proceedings of the 22nd International 
Florida Artificial Intelligence Research Society 
Conference, Sanibel Island, FL. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
367
