Proceedings of the Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL 2010, pages 100?108,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Complex Predicates annotation in a corpus of Portuguese
Iris Hendrickx, Ama?lia Mendes, S??lvia Pereira, Anabela Gonc?alves and Ine?s Duarte
Centro de Lingu??stica da Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal
{iris, amalia.mendes}@clul.ul.pt
Abstract
We present an annotation scheme for the
annotation of complex predicates, under-
stood as constructions with more than one
lexical unit, each contributing part of the
information normally associated with a
single predicate. We discuss our anno-
tation guidelines of four types of com-
plex predicates, and the treatment of sev-
eral difficult cases, related to ambiguity,
overlap and coordination. We then discuss
the process of marking up the Portuguese
CINTIL corpus of 1M tokens (written and
spoken) with a new layer of information
regarding complex predicates. We also
present the outcomes of the annotation
work and statistics on the types of CPs that
we found in the corpus.
1 Introduction
Complex predicates are predicates composed of
more than one element but functionally equiva-
lent to a single predicate. Examples of complex
predicates (CPs) are constructions of verb+noun,
like have a rest, take a walk, and constructions
verb+verb, like the constructions with a causative
verb in Portuguese, like mandar ler o livro a
algue?m ?make read the book to someone?. These
constructions raise interesting questions regard-
ing the aspectual, semantic and syntactic proper-
ties which underlie the relationship between the
elements of the CP. There are different theoret-
ical perspectives on the compositional nature of
CPs. For example, in the case of constructions of
the type verb+noun, the verb is either considered
a light verb (Jespersen, 1949) or a support verb
(Gross, 1981), in the sense that it has lost part or
all of its meaning and has no predicative value in
the construction, or as an auxiliary verb with as-
pectual properties (Abeille? et al, 1998).
Our hypothesis is that both elements of the CP
seem to contribute to the properties of complex
predicates, in such a way that the argument struc-
ture and the attribution of thematic roles are deter-
mined by both constituents through the combina-
tion of their thematic structures (Grimshaw, 1988).
One has to address several important questions: is
there a systematic relationship between the syn-
tactic and semantic selection properties of the two
elements? How do the argument structure of the
light verb and the derived noun combine and con-
tribute to define the complex predicate? To study
these questions we annotated the Portuguese CIN-
TIL corpus (Barreto et al, 2006) with a new layer
on CPs. By taking into consideration different
types of CPs and by using corpus data for our anal-
ysis of their properties, the objective is to present
a unified approach to CP formation, along which
the CP constructions available in Portuguese may
be accounted for, namely in what concerns their
lexico-syntactic properties and their interpretation.
Here we focus on the corpus annotation of com-
plex predicates. This paper is structured as fol-
lows. In section 2 we discuss related work on the
annotation of CPs in other languages. In section 3
we present a typology of complex predicates. In
section 4 we detail our the annotation schema and
also focus on several specific cases of CPs and the
annotation labels for these cases. In section 5 we
give more information about the CINTIL corpus
and in 6 we show the outcomes of the annotations
and present statistics on the types of CPs that we
found in the corpus. We conclude in section 7.
2 Related Work
For other languages, people have proposed dif-
ferent representations for CPs and for some lan-
guages there are corpora available enhanced with
CP labeling. The Prague TreeBank for Czech,
which is based on a dependency grammar, labels
CPs explicitly. A complex predicate is represented
100
by two nodes: the verb node is assigned a func-
tor according to the function of the entire complex
predicate in the sentence structure; the nominal
node is assigned the CPHR functor, which signals
that it is a part of a multi-word predicate, and is
represented as an immediate daughter of the node
for the verbal component (Mikulova? et al, 2006;
Cinkova? and Kola?r?ova?, 2005).
For German there is an example corpus anno-
tated with verb phrases and light verbs (Fellbaum
et al, 2006). However, only idiomatic expressions
are labeled in this German corpus while we focus
on non-idiomatic CPs. Calzolari et al (2002) treat
support verb constructions (verb+noun), and focus
their attention, just like we did in our approach,
on constructions where the subject of the verb is a
participant in the event denoted by the noun. Their
objective is however not corpus annotation, but the
creation of a computational lexicon of MWEs with
both syntactic and semantic information.
Also the field of semantic or thematic role label-
ing investigates constructions of verb+noun, but it
focuses on predicate-argument structures in gen-
eral, while we focus on a specific type of re-
lations. FrameNet uses frame semantics theory
to represent such predicate-argument structures
which also includes handling complex predicates
(e.g. (Johnson and Fillmore, 2000)). For Ger-
man, there exists a fully annotated corpus with
semantic frames (Erk et al, 2003). The basis of
the Framenet semantic annotation are conceptual
frames expressing an event or object and the se-
mantic arguments (frame elements) that are (oblig-
atory or optional) parts of the frames. They also
specifically address support verbs and observe that
support verbs often occur with nouns expressing
an event (Johansson and Nugues, 2006). In a
Framenet semantic annotation, support verbs are
not considered as parts of frames or as part of the
frame elements, they are annotated with a specific
?support verb? label. We, on the contrary, view CP
as one semantic and syntactic unit.
In Nombank, a distinction is made between id-
ioms (which in principle are not marked) and light
verb plus noun combinations, which are to be an-
notated, and criteria are given to make such dis-
tinction (English (Meyers, 2007), Chinese (Xue,
2006)). In (1) we show a NomBank annotation
example of the sentence with a complex predicate.
Usually, CPs of the type verb+verb are treated
as infinitive dependent clauses and are not anno-
tated as CPs (cf. the Penn Treebank (Marcus et
al., 1993) and the Portuguese treebank Cordial-
SIN (Carrilho and Magro, 2009)).
(1) ?The campaign takes advantage of the
eye-catching photography.?
SUPPORT = takes
REL = advantage
ARG0 = the campaign
ARG1 = of the eye-catching photography
3 Typology of complex predicates
We consider CPs as constructions sharing certain
properties defined in Butt (1995). A complex
predicate has: a multi-headed and complex argu-
ment structure; more than one lexical unit, each
contributing part of the information normally as-
sociated with a single predicate and a grammatical
functional structure equal to the one of a simple
predicate. Several types of constructions are in ac-
cordance to this definition of CPs: (i) two main
verbs, forming a restructuring construction, like
querer estudar ?to want to study? (ii) two main
verbs in a causative construction, like fazer rir
?to make laugh?; (iii) a light verb followed by a
noun: dar um passeio ?to take a walk?, ter medo
?to have fear?; (iv) a light verb followed by a sec-
ondary predicate: either an adjective, like tornar
a histo?ria cred??vel ?make the story believable?, or
a prepositional phrase, like fazer x em pedac?os ?to
make x into pieces?; (v) two concatenated verbs
(serial verb constructions), like O Pedro pegou e
despediu-se (lit: ?Pedro took and said goodbye?).
This last construction is mostly restricted to the
informal spoken register. Regarding constructions
(i) and (ii) with two main verbs, it is generally as-
sumed that these CPs include at least two verbs
which behave as a single constituent under local
phenomena such as Clitic Climbing or Long Ob-
ject Movement (Kayne, 1975; Gonc?alves, 2002;
Gonc?alves, 2003). Each one of the verbs preserves
its own argument structure.
In the case of constructions (iii) involving a
light verb and a noun derived from a verb, one of
the most frequently referred property is the possi-
bility of being paraphrased by the main verb from
which the noun is derived (see example 2), al-
though this is not a necessary condition.
(2) (a) dar um contributo /contribuir
?to give a contribution? / ?to contribute?
(b) ter um desmaio / desmaiar
?to have a blackout? / ?to faint?
101
Light verbs occurring in these constructions
have a rather similar semantics across different
languages and involve mostly verbs like have, take
and give in English (Bowern, 2006) and ter ?to
have?, dar ?to give?, fazer ?to make? in Portuguese.
Furthermore, both the light verb and the derived
noun contribute to predicate information and ar-
gument structure and theta-role assignment appear
to be determined simultaneously by the two con-
stituents. It is important to determine the exact na-
ture of the semantic contribution of light verbs to
the whole predicate and the similarities and differ-
ences between the light verb construction and its
lexicalized verbal counterpart, if it exists.
4 Annotation system
The corpus annotation focused on four of the types
of CPs listed in the previous section, excluding
type (iv): constructions where a main verb is fol-
lowed by a secondary predicate, due to time limi-
tations. Constructions with a light verb (type (iii))
were consequently restricted to verb+noun. We
only annotated constructions in which the subject
of the CP controlled the event denotated by the
noun. For example, constructions like Mary gave
a talk where Mary is the one who is presenting,
and not any other entity. We excluded cases where
the subject does not seem to obligatorily control
the event (e.g. dar um t??tulo ?to give a title?).
We further restricted our annotation to a partic-
ular set of nouns:
? nouns derived from a verb, like dar um pas-
seio ?to take a walk? (lit: ?to give a walk?);
? nouns expressing an emotion, i.e., psych-
nouns like ter medo ?to be afraid? (lit: ?to
have fear?);
Nouns derived from a verb are very common.
For example, half of the nouns in the English
Nombank corpus that have semantic frame ele-
ments are actually nominalizations from verbs as
stated on the NomBank homepage1.
The restrictions on the type of noun occurring
in CPs lead to the exclusion of constructions with
idiomatic meaning (like dar a ma?o ?to give a
hand?)2.
The annotation guidelines follow the results of
our study of CPs under a generative grammar
1http://nlp.cs.nyu.edu/ meyers/NomBank.html
2These are currently under study in the scope of a project
on multi-word expressions in Portuguese.
framework, and are consequently theory-oriented.
We didn?t include for the moment semantic and as-
pectual information in our annotation of CPs. We
have undertaken some work on the aspectual in-
formation conveyed by both light verb and noun
and on the aspectual restrictions that hold between
the two elements (Duarte et al 2009) and we plan
to latter partially integrate those findings in our an-
notation system.
We divided the annotation of the CPs in two
main groups: verb+verb constructions (type (i),
(ii), (v) as described in section 3) and verb+noun
constructions (type (iii)). The verb+verb con-
structions are denoted with the tag [CV] and the
noun+verb constructions with [CN]. Furthermore,
inside the verb+verb category, we make distinc-
tions between restructuring constructions (tagged
as [CVR]), causative constructions ([CVC]) and
constructions with coordinated verbs ([CVE]). Ex-
ample 3 gives an illustration of each of these sub-
types. For the verb+noun constructions we distin-
guish contexts with bare nouns ([CNB]) and con-
texts where a determiner precedes the noun (just
tagged as [CN]) (cf.example 4).
(3) (a) porque nos [CVR]queriam convidar
because [they] us wanted to invite
?because they wanted to invite us?
(b) veio abalar estes alicerces espirituais
[CVC]fazendo traduzir ao rapaz
?Pucelle? de Voltaire
he shacked these spiritual foundations
by making translate to the boy
?Pucelle? by Voltaire
?he shacked these spiritual foundations
by making the boy translate ?Pucelle?
by Voltaire?
(c) e [CVE]vai um e conta ao outro
and goes one and tells to the other
?and he tells the other?
(4) (a) Facto que leva a CGD a considerar que
na?o [CNB]tem obrigac?o?es em relac?a?o
aos trabalhadores.
?The fact that leads the CGD to believe
that it doesn?t have obligations towards
the workers.?
(b) o erro de [CN]fazer uma interpretac?a?o
literal
?the error of making a literal
interpretation?
102
There is also information on the typical position
of the element inside the CP (position 1, 2, etc.),
as well as on its contextual position in the corpus
(B=Beginning, I=Intermediate, E=End). With typ-
ical position we refer to the ordering of elements
of the CP in its canonical form, corresponding to
the descriptions and examples given in section 3.
The typical and contextual position can differ as is
illustrated in example 5.
(5) depois de um[CN2 B] aviso[CN3 I]
dado[CN1 E]
?after a warning was given?
The elements forming the CP may not be con-
tiguous and in that case only the elements pertain-
ing to the CP are annotated. In example 6 the ad-
verb logo ?immediately? is not a part of the CP
and consequently is not annotated. Also, only the
main verb is annotated and not the auxiliary verbs
which might occur (cf. the auxiliary tinha ?had? is
not tagged in 7).
(6) dar[CN1 B] logo uma[CN2 I]
ajuda[CN3 E]
give immediately an help
?give help immediately?
(7) tinha dado[CN1 B] uma[CN2 I]
ajuda[CN3 E]
had given an help
?had given help?
The categories and tags which compose our an-
notation system provide an overview of different
contexts of CP constructions encountered in au-
thentic data, which is a major goal of this annota-
tion project.
The process of annotation was based on con-
cordances extraction using lists of verbs entering
restructuring constructions (type (i)), given in 8
and lists of causative verbs (type (ii)), shown in
9. Considering the large candidate list of possible
CPs with light verbs, the annotation first focused
on constructions with verbs ter, dar and fazer fol-
lowed by a noun. For CPs with coordinated verbs
(type (v)), a list of typical verbs entering the con-
struction was elaborated, shown in 10, and applied
to a search pattern (two verbs separated by a con-
junction and possibly by some other lexical ele-
ment). Concordances retrieved were then manu-
ally evaluated.
(8) querer ?want?
desejar ?desire?
costumar ?use to?
tentar ?try?
pretender ?want?
tencionar ?make plan to?
conseguir ?succeed?
(9) mandar ?order?
deixar ?let?
fazer ?make?
(10) ir ?go?
agarrar ?grab?
pegar ?hold?
Information on the categories, tags, restrictions
and special cases (discussed in section 4.1) were
described in the annotation guidelines.
4.1 Special cases
The observation of corpus data pointed to a range
of specific situations requiring new categories and
tags.
4.1.1 Ambiguity
Some contexts in the corpus are clearly cases of
CPs and are straightforwardly annotated as CPs,
like restructuring constructions with clitic climb-
ing (cf. 3a) and causative constructions with two
internal arguments like in example 3b. Also exam-
ple 11 is a clear case where the subject of the lower
verb occurs as an indirect object (aos cidada?os
em geral) and the that-clause which is the direct
object of the lower verb (que a fotoco?pia corre-
sponde a um acto de pirataria inaceita?vel) is re-
analyzed as the direct object of the CP. Other clear
cases of CPs are pronominal passives where the di-
rect object of the second verb occurs as subject of
the higher verb (Long Object Movement), produc-
ing subject-verb agreement (this construction was
not encountered in the corpus, a possible example
would be (12)).
(11) fazer perceber aos cidada?os em geral, que a
fotoco?pia corresponde a um acto de pirataria
inaceita?vel
?make understand to all citizens that a
photocopy corresponds to an act of
unacceptable piratery?
(12) Querem-se estudar os problemas.
?want-3PL.PASS study the problems?
103
Other contexts are clearly not instances of CPs
and as such are not annotated. This is the case
of constructions with a restructuring verb without
clitic climbing, as in example 13.
(13) querem perpetua? -lo
?[they] want to perpetuate it?
But many CPs can have an ambiguous interpreta-
tion between a complex predicate construction and
a construction with a main verb and an embedded
infinitive clause, and we found it relevant to mark
those constructions with the information of ambi-
guity (tag [ VINF]). For example, contexts similar
to (12) but with a singular NP, as in example 14a,
can receive two possible structural interpretations:
the NP justic?a ?justice? can be interpreted as the
subject of the higher verb (a long object movement
construction and consequently a CP construction)
or as the direct object of the second verb (an im-
personal construction). In (14b) we show how we
annotated this example using a label expressing
the ambiguity.
(14) (a) Pretende-se cometer justic?a.
Aims-IMP to commit justice [IMP =
Impersonal]
?One wants to commit justice?
(b) Pretende[CVR VINF1 B]-se
cometer[CVR VINF2 E] (...) justic?a
4.1.2 Overlapping CPs
Beside these examples, the corpus includes con-
structions in which one of the elements of a CP
(restructuring type) is also part of another CP
(causative type), so that two CPs are in fact super-
posed. In these cases, the element which is part of
both CPs receives a double tag (see the verb deixar
in example 15).
(15) na?o o queriam[CVR1 B]
deixar[CVR2 E][CVC VINF1 B]
fugir[CVC VINF2 E]
not him want to let escape
?they didn?t want to let him escape?
4.2 Coordination inside CPs
There are also occurrences of coordination inside
the CP, possible when two CPs share the same
higher verb (light verb, restructuring or causative
verb). The coordinated elements of the CP are
tagged with extra information on their first or
second position in the coordinated structure (tags
[CVR2 1] and [CVR2 2], cf. 16). The coordi-
nation is usually marked with a conjunction, like
in example 16 with a restructuring construction,
equivalent in fact to two CPs querer ouvir and
querer registar. However, in the spoken subpart
of the corpus there may be no overt connector and
just a slight pause as in example 17 (the pause is
marked by ?/?).
(16) para quem o quis[CVR1 B]
ouvir[CVR2 1 E] e eventualmente
registar[CVR2 2 E]
to whom him wanted to listen and eventually
register
?to whom wanted to listen and eventually
register him?
(17) no?s temos[CN1 B] uma[CN2 1 I]
tristeza[CN3 1 E] / uma[CN2 2 I]
frustrac?a?o[CN3 2 E] muito grande
?we have a sadness / a frustration very deep?
5 Corpus constitution
The CINTIL corpus3 contains 1 million tokens and
was compiled using different existing resources
developed at the Centre of Linguistics of the Uni-
versity of Lisbon (CLUL): the written corpus Pa-
role (Bacelar do Nascimento et al, 1998), the
spoken corpus C-ORAL-ROM (Bacelar do Nasci-
mento et al, 2005) and new written texts from the
Reference Corpus of Contemporary Portuguese-
CRPC (Bacelar do Nascimento, 2000), a large
monitor corpus with over 300M words. One third
of the corpus is composed of transcribed spoken
materials (both formal and informal) and the re-
maining two thirds are composed of written mate-
rials.
This corpus has been previously annotated and
manually revised (Barreto et al, 2006), in a joint
project of NLX-FCUL4 and CLUL. The CINTIL
corpus has important features, compared to other
resources for Portuguese, namely the depth of its
linguistic information, its size, range of domains
and sources, and level of accuracy. The annotation
comprises information on part-of-speech (POS),
lemma and inflection, multi-word expressions per-
taining to the class of adverbs and to the closed
POS classes, and multi-word proper names (for
3The CINTIL corpus is available for online queries (//cin-
til.ul.pt) through the use of a concordancer adapted to Por-
tuguese.
4http://nlx.di.fc.ul.pt
104
named entity recognition), together with specific
categories for spoken texts (like Emphasis (/EMP),
Extra-linguistic (/EL), Fragment (/FRG)). Below
is an excerpt of the POS annotation and lemmati-
zation where tags follow the order [lemma/ POS
category # inflected features [named entity] ].
(18) pretende/PRETENDER/vpi#3s[O]
reconverter/RECONVERTER/inf-nifl[O]
o/O/da#ms[O]
centro/CENTRO/cn#ms[B-LOC]
de/de/prep[I-LOC]
Matosinhos/MATOSINHOS/pnm[I-LOC]
In the next section we present the results of the
addition of a new layer of information on complex
predicates to this corpus.
6 Annotation results
The annotation of the whole corpus was done man-
ually by one MA student who was well familiar
with the task. A concordancer was used to iden-
tify possible complex predicate structures. Diffi-
cult cases were picked out and discussed with two
other persons to reach an agreement on the anno-
tation. Several of such hard cases were then added
to the annotation guidelines. After manual annota-
tion, the annotations were checked with a script to
check the consistency of the labels and to correct
some minor errors.
To validate the annotations we performed a
small experiment. A second person annotated
a small sample of sentences independently of
the first annotator. Next we compute the inter-
annotator agreement on the two different annota-
tions. This gives us some indication of the diffi-
culty of the task and the consistency of the label-
ing of the first annotator. We computed the kappa
statistics (Cohen, 1960) on the complex predicates
labeled by the two annotators in 50 sentences. We
acknowledge that this is just a very small sample,
yet this gave us a kappa value of .81 which indi-
cates a high overlap between both annotations.
In Table 1 we list the frequencies of the com-
plex predicates found in the CINTIL corpus. In
total we found 1981 CPs, the majority (1292 CPs)
are combinations of a verb with a noun. For the
verb predicates the table clearly shows that these
cases are mostly ambiguous. We also looked at the
occurrences of the more complex events described
in section 4.1 presented in table 2. We encoun-
tered 28 cases of coordinated complex predicates
label written spoken total
CV total 470 219 689
CVR 34 47 81
CVC 13 3 16
CVE 0 1 1
CVR VINF 300 143 443
CVC VINF 123 25 148
CN total 706 586 1292
CNB 353 213 566
CN 353 373 726
total 1176 805 1981
Table 1: Number of annotated complex predicates
in the spoken and written parts of the CINTIL cor-
pus.
label written spoken total
CV ambiguity 423 168 591
coordination 15 13 28
overlap 6 10 16
Table 2: Zooming in on the frequencies of the spe-
cial cases (sec. 4.1) in the CINTIL corpus.
and 14 times a verb was part of two different CPs
at the same time. The CPs with verb+verb con-
structions show a very high number of ambiguous
occurrences. It is clear that in most cases the con-
text of such a construction does not provide suffi-
cient evidence to disambiguate it. We only found
a handful of cases in which the context did resolve
the ambiguity.
We also looked into the ordering of the CPs
in the corpus. To what extent do the CPs occur
in their canonical form? Table 3 shows the re-
sults. We found a change in ordering only for the
verb+noun CPs. For the CPs with a bare noun we
found only 9 cases of non-canonical order. For
CPs with an NP with a determiner-noun combina-
tion we did see more variation in order, of the total
number of 726 occurrences, 16.9% had a different
word order.
We also wanted to see if all the verbs used to
identify CP constructions (verbs listed in 8 9, 10
plus the 3 light verbs) were equally present in
the CINTIL corpus or if there was any significant
lexical difference. We present the results of the
frequencies of the verbs of each CP type in Ta-
bles 4, 5, 7 and 6. When comparing the list in
105
label written spoken total % of occ
CN 86 37 123 16.9
CNB 7 2 9 1.6
Table 3: Number of complex predicates that do
not follow their canonical form. The last column
presents the percentage of the total number of CN
or CNB occurrences that are not in their canonical
form.
8 with the verbs in Table 4, we can see that the
verbs desejar and tencionar were included for the
query of restructuring predicates but do not oc-
cur in the corpus in CP constructions. Out of
the five verbs, querer ?want? is clearly the most
frequent in both written and spoken sub-parts of
the corpus. Apart from conseguir ?succeed?, the
rest of the verbs have very low frequencies, and
costumar ?use to? is only present in the spoken
corpus, while the opposite is true for pretender
?want?, a verb associated to a more formal regis-
ter. In causative constructions with CPs (Table 5
), the verb fazer ?make? is clearly prominent in the
written corpus, although it does not occur in the
spoken one. The only causative verb in CP con-
structions in the spoken corpus is mandar ?order?.
In causative constructions, contrary to restructur-
ing ones, the genre seems to influence the lexical
choice of the higher verb of the complex predicate.
CVR written spoken
conseguir 6 7
costumar 0 3
pretender 2 0
querer 25 34
tentar 1 3
total 34 47
Table 4: frequencies of the main verb in CVR
complex predicates.
The verb+noun constructions are divided in two
different tables, according to our categorization in
bare nouns (Table 6) and nouns preceded by a de-
terminer (Table 7). The same three verbs enter the
constructions although their frequencies are differ-
ent in the two different structures: the verb fazer
is clearly dominant when followed by a noun pre-
ceded by a determiner, while the verb ter is the
CVC written spoken
deixar 1 0
fazer 11 0
mandar 1 3
total 13 3
Table 5: frequencies of the main verb in CVC
complex predicates.
more frequent light verb with bare nouns.
CNB written spoken
dar 69 27
fazer 87 52
ter 197 134
total 353 213
Table 6: frequencies of the main verb in CNB
complex predicates
CN written spoken
dar 79 34
fazer 193 231
ter 81 108
total 353 373
Table 7: frequencies of the main verb in CN com-
plex predicates.
7 Final remarks
We presented the annotation process of complex
predicates in the CINTIL corpus. We first ex-
plained our theoretical framework and gave a
broad typology of CPs. Next we detailed the anno-
tation schema that we used and zoomed in on some
difficult cases. We presented the outcomes of the
annotation work. We gave a first broad statistical
analysis of the annotations, and next we zoomed
in on some insights in characteristics of CPs in
Portuguese that this new annotation layer has of-
fered. This new resource provides diversified au-
thentic data that will enable a general overview of
CP constructions and can shed new light on the
Syntax-Semantics interface. It is also an important
part for forthcoming tasks of syntactic and seman-
tic corpus annotation.
In the future we plan to further analyze the re-
sults of the verb+verb types of CPs. The large
106
number of ambiguous cases and the few contexts
which give us definite clues for categorizing the
sequence as a CP challenges our concept of com-
plex predicates. The causative and restructuring
constructions require more attention and further
study. As to the verb+noun constructions, we want
to examine the contexts with and without deter-
miner to see if the same CP can occur in both
structures. We also want to look further into the
high frequency of specific light verbs with bare
nouns and the possible relationship with the se-
mantics of the light verbs. In this study we re-
stricted the annotation to a particular group of light
verbs. In a next step we would like to look at a
broader list to try to establish the necessary prop-
erties to categorize a verb as a light verb. We
plan to address, for example, certain contexts of
psych-nouns like sentir medo ?feel fear?, experi-
enciar uma profunda emoc?a?o ?experience a deep
emotion?, where the predicative nature of the verb
is unclear. We also plan to enlarge our description
and annotation of CPs to include idiomatic expres-
sions with light verbs.
References
A. Abeille?, D. Godard, and I. Sag, 1998. Complex
Predicates in Nonderivational Syntax, volume 30 of
Syntax and Semantics, chapter Two Kinds of Com-
position in French Complex predicates. San Diego
Academic Press, San Diego.
M. F. P. Bacelar do Nascimento, P. Marrafa, L.A.S.
Pereira, R. Ribeiro, R. Veloso, and L. Wittmann.
1998. Le-parole - do corpus a` modelizac?a?o da
informac?a?o lexical num sistema-multifunc?a?o. In Ac-
tas do XIII Encontro da Associac?a?o Portuguesa de
Lingu??stica, APL, pages 115?134, Lisboa.
M. F. Bacelar do Nascimento, J. Bettencourt
Gonc?alves, R. Veloso, S. Antunes, F. Barreto,
and R. Amaro, 2005. C-ORAL-ROM: Integrated
Reference Corpora for Spoken Romance Languages,
chapter The Portuguese Corpus, pages 163?207.
Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins Pub-
lishing Company, Studies in Corpus Linguistics.
Editors: E. Cresti and M. Monegnia.
M. F. Bacelar do Nascimento, 2000. Corpus,
Me?thodologie et Applications Linguistiques, chapter
Corpus de Re?fe?rence du Portugais Contemporain,
pages 25?30. H. Champion et Presses Universitaires
de Perpignan, Paris. Editor: M. Bilger.
F. Barreto, A. Branco, E. Ferreira, A. Mendes, M. F. P.
Bacelar do Nascimento, F. Nunes, and J. Silva.
2006. Open resources and tools for the shallow pro-
cessing of portuguese. In Proceedings of the 5th In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC2006), Genoa, Italy.
C. Bowern. 2006. Inter theorical approaches to com-
plex verb constructions: position paper. In The
Eleventh Biennal Rice University Linguistics Sym-
posium.
E. Carrilho and C. Magro, 2009. Syntactic Anno-
tation System Manual of corpus CORDIAL-SIN.
http://www.clul.ul.pt/sectores/variacao/cordialsin/
Syntactic%20annotation%20manual.html.
S. Cinkova? and V. Kola?r?ova?. 2005. Nouns as compo-
nents of support verb constructions in the prague de-
pendency treebank. In Insight into Slovak and Czech
Corpus Linguistics. Veda Bratislava.
J. Cohen. 1960. A coefficient of agreement for nom-
inal scales. Education and Psychological Measure-
men, 20:37?46.
K. Erk, A. Kowalski, S. Pado?, and M. Pinkal. 2003.
Towards a resource for lexical semantics: A large
german corpus with extensive semantic annotation.
In Proceedings of the 41st Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pages 537?
544, Sapporo, Japan, July. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
C. Fellbaum, A. Geyken, A. Herold, F. Koerner, and
G. Neumann. 2006. Corpus-based studies of ger-
man idioms and light verbs. International Journal
of Lexicography, 19(4):349?360.
A. Gonc?alves. 2002. The causee in the faire-inf con-
struction of portuguese. Journal of Portuguese Lin-
guistics.
A. Gonc?alves. 2003. Defectividade funcional e pred-
icados complexos em estruturas de controlo do por-
tugue?s. In I. Castro and I. Duarte, editors, Mis-
celnea de estudos em homenagem a Maria Helena
Mira Mateus, volume I. Imprensa Nacional-Casa da
Moeda.
J. Grimshaw. 1988. Light verbs and marking. Lin-
guistic Inquiry, 19(2):205?232.
M. Gross. 1981. Les bases empiriques de la notion de
pre?dicat se?mantique. Langages, 63:7?52.
O. Jespersen. 1949. A Modern English Grammar on
Historical Principles. Londres: George Allen &
Unwin; Copenhaga: Ejnar Munksgaard.
R. Johansson and P. Nugues. 2006. Automatic anno-
tation for all semantic layers in FrameNet. In Pro-
ceedings of EACL-2006, Trento, Italy, April 15-16.
C. R. Johnson and C. J. Fillmore. 2000. The framenet
tagset for frame-semantic and syntactic coding of
predicate-argument structure. In Proceedings of the
1st Meeting of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (ANLP-
NAACL 2000), pages 56?62, Seattle WA.
107
R. Kayne. 1975. French Syntax: the Transformational
Cycle. The MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
M. Marcus, S. Santorini, and M. Marcinkiewicz. 1993.
Building a Large Annotated Corpus of English:
the Penn Treebank. Computational Linguistics,
19(2):313?330.
M.Butt. 1995. The Structure of Complex Predicates in
Urdu. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.
A. Meyers. 2007. Annotation guidelines for
nombank ? noun argument structure for prop-
bank. Technical report, New York University.
http://nlp.cs.nyu.edu/meyers/nombank/nombank-
specs-2007.pdf.
M. Mikulova?, A. Be?mova?, J. Hajic?, E. Hajickova?, and
J. Havelka et al 2006. Annotation on the tec-
togrammatical level in the prague dependency tree-
bank annotation manual. technical report. Technical
Report UFAL CKL Technical Report TR-2006-35,
U?FAL MFF UK, Prague, Czech Rep.
N. Xue. 2006. Annotating the predicate-argument
structure of chinese nominalizations. In Proceed-
ings of the LREC 2006, pages 1382?1387, Genoa,
Italy.
108
Proceedings of the Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL 2010, pages 152?156,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Proposal for Multi-Word Expression Annotation in Running Text
Iris Hendrickx, Ama?lia Mendes and Sandra Antunes
Centro de Lingu??stica da Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal
{iris, amalia.mendes, sandra.antunes}@clul.ul.pt
Abstract
We present a proposal for the annotation
of multi-word expressions in a 1M corpus
of contemporary portuguese. Our aim is
to create a resource that allows us to study
multi-word expressions (MWEs) in their
context. The corpus will be a valuable ad-
ditional resource next to the already ex-
isting MWE lexicon that was based on a
much larger corpus of 50M words. In this
paper we discuss the problematic cases for
annotation and proposed solutions, focus-
ing on the variational properties of MWEs.
1 Introduction
Given the widespread studies of co-occurring
words phenomenon, the term ?multi-word expres-
sion? (MWE) usually refers to a sequence of words
that act as a single unit, embracing all different
types of word combinations. Their study is of
extreme importance for computational linguistics,
where applications find notorious difficulties when
dealing with them (Sag et al, 2002).
Having a well-balanced corpus annotated with
multi-word expressions offers the possibility to
analyze the behavior of MWEs as they appear in
running text. Such corpus will contain a rich and
diversified set of MWE and also be an excellent
resource to evaluate automatic MWE identifica-
tion systems. Here we propose our approach to
the manual annotation of the CINTIL corpus (Bar-
reto et al, 2006) with MWE information. This
Portuguese corpus of 1M tokens is a balanced cor-
pus of both spoken and written data from different
sources and has been previously annotated with
linguistic information such as part-of-speech and
lemma and inflection.
As the starting point for our annotation project,
we want to use a Portuguese MWE lexicon con-
taining approximately 14,000 entries. The lexi-
con contains besides idiomatic expressions, also
many collocations: expressions of frequently co-
occurring words that do not show syntactic or se-
mantic fixedness. We are mostly interested in the
idiomatic expressions and will only mark up these
in the corpus.
2 Related Work
There is already quite some work about the cre-
ation and representation of MWE lexicons (Bald-
win and Kim, 2010). Most of the currently avail-
able corpora annotated with MWE information
consist of a collection of extracted sentences con-
taining a MWE (for example the data sets in the
MWE 2008 shared task1). Fellbaum et al (2006)
report on a larger German example corpus consist-
ing of MWEs with their surrounding sentences.
There are also data sets specifically designed for
automatic MWE identification, in which part of
the sentences contains an idiomatic expression and
the other part expresses a literal meaning (e.g.
(Sporleder and Li, 2009)). An example of a bal-
anced corpus fully annotated with MWEs is the
Prague Treebank which is enriched with a diverse
set of MWE annotations (Bo?hmova? et al, 2005).
3 MWE Lexicon
Our annotation proposal uses information from
a lexicon of MWE for Portuguese (available on-
line2). This lexicon is implemented on a MySQL
relational database. The MWEs were extracted
from a 50M words balanced corpus of Portuguese.
The MWE are organized under canonical forms.
Also inflectional variations of the canonical forms
are recorded, in total the lexicon contains 14,153
canonical forms and 48,154 MWEs variations. For
each of those several examples are collected from
the corpus. Each MWE entry is also assigned
1More infomation at: http://multiword.sourceforge.net/
2MWE lexicon: http://www.clul.ul.pt/sectores/linguistica
de corpus/manual combinatorias online.php
152
to one or multiple word lemmas, of a total num-
ber of 1180 single word lemmas. The MWE
were selected from a sorted list of n-grams based
on the mutual information measure (Church and
Hanks, 1990) and validated manually (Mendes et
al., 2006; Antunes et al, 2006; Bacelar do Nasci-
mento et al, 2006).
4 Proposed annotation
In this section we discuss our approach to the an-
notation of MWEs in the corpus.
4.1 Typology
We want to classify each idiomatic MWE occur-
ring in the CINTIL corpus according to a typol-
ogy that expresses the typical properties of the
MWE. Although the lexicon of MWEs covers a
wide range of units, from idiomatic expressions
to collocations, we decided to restrict our anno-
tation of the corpus to cases of idiomatic MWEs
because those are the problematic ones for any
task of semantic annotation and disambiguation.
The MWE lexicon does not provide labels for id-
iomatic vs. compositional expressions, so this in-
formation will have to be added during the anno-
tation task. Identifying idiomatic MWEs is not a
simple task. For clear cases of idiomatic units, the
global meaning can not be recovered by the sum of
the individual meanings of the elements that com-
pose the expression.
In other cases, only part of the MWE has an id-
iomatic meaning, while one or more of the ele-
ments are used in their literal meaning (e.g sau?de
de ferro ?iron health?). Deciding if one of the ele-
ments of the MWE is literal or not depends in fact
of our definition of literal: if we consider it to be
the first prototypical meaning of a word, this very
restrictive definition will trigger us to label a large
number of MWEs as idiomatic. Other MWEs are
compositional but receive an additional meaning,
like carta?o vermelho in football, which is literally
a red card but has an additional meaning of pun-
ishment.
We want to cover these different cases in our an-
notation, and to establish a typology that takes into
account morpho-syntactic and semantic aspects of
the MWE: its functional part-of-speech (PoS) cat-
egory, the PoS categories of its internal elements,
its fixed or semi-fixed nature, its global or partial
idiomatic property and motivation, and possible
additional meanings.
4.2 Division by syntactic category
When studying the MWE lexicon, we noticed dif-
ferent properties of MWEs according to their syn-
tactic patterns. Consequently, we propose to di-
vide our annotation guidelines according to each
syntactic pattern and to establish different proper-
ties that enables us to distinguish literal from id-
iomatic usage. At the sentence level, MWEs such
as proverbs or aphorisms (e.g. a?gua mole em pe-
dra dura tanto bate ate? que fura lit. ?water in hard
rock beats so long that it finally breaks?) have spe-
cific properties: they do not accept any possible
syntactic changes like passivization or relativiza-
tion, they do not accept any inflectional variation,
the only possible change is lexical (when speakers
substitute one or more elements, like we will dis-
cuss in section 4.4). However fixed, the meaning
of this example is clearly motivated and composi-
tional in the sense that it is recovered by the mean-
ing of the individual elements. On the contrary,
MWEs which are verb phrases will admit much
more morpho-syntactic variation. Moreover, noun
phrases raise specific issues: the most syntacti-
cally fixed units will be very close or identical to
compound nouns. For example, the meaning of
the prepositional modifier of the noun can be lit-
eral but the overall expression will still be used as
a compound and will denote a very specific entity,
frequently from domain-specific languages (pro-
jecto de lei ?project of legislation?, contrato de
compra e venda ?sell contract?). Moreover, the
prepositional and adjectival modifiers of the noun
will express many different semantic relationships
(part of, made of, used for) which interact with the
meaning (literal or idiomatic) of the noun (Calzo-
lari et al, 2002). Establishing specific guidelines
for these different types of MWEs will enable a
more accurate annotation. To decide upon the dif-
ficult cases of idiomatic and non-idiomatic usage,
we plan to use the intuitions of different annota-
tors.
4.3 Linking to MWE lexicon
We will annotate each encountered MWE in the
corpus with a link to the MWE-entry in the lexi-
con, instead of labelling each MWE with its typol-
ogy. This way we link each MWE to its canonical
form and other additional information. Moreover,
we can easily gather all occurrences of one par-
ticular canonical MWE and check its variation in
the corpus. It will also allow us to work with a
153
more detailed typology and will give us the possi-
bility to revise it during the annotation process. It
might be difficult to establish beforehand very pre-
cise guidelines that will apply to all the MWEs and
even to all the MWEs of a specific subtype. Of-
ten, guidelines are constantly in need of revision as
we encounter slightly different contexts who chal-
lenges decisions previously taken.
The corpus annotation will enable us to extend
the information in the MWE lexicon with typol-
ogy labels regarding the whole expression (func-
tion, idiomatic meaning) but also regarding indi-
vidual words of the expression as to whether they
are obligatory or not.
We plan to add a meaning to idiomatic expres-
sions using a dictionary. We expect that MWEs
will be unambiguous: they have the same meaning
each time they are used. In some cases, the syn-
onym or paraphrase proposed for the MWE might
not be able to replace the MWE in the corpus
context. For example, the MWE a`s ma?os cheias
means em grande quantidade ?in large quantity?,
but this meaning can not always replace the MWE
in context.
The annotation process of fully fixed expres-
sions could be retrieved automatically. For the
variable expressions we will combine automatic
retrieval with manual validation, Here the auto-
matic retrieval step will aim for a high recall and
select all sentences that contain the lemmas of
the MWE. Without doubt our corpus will contain
many MWEs that are not yet listed in the MWE
lexicon. Therefore each sentence will need to be
checked manually for MWEs. We can create the
links between the lexicon and MWEs in the cor-
pus automatically, but again, as not all MWEs will
occur in the lexicon, we will need to do a manual
validation of the automatic labelling and also add
newly discovered MWEs to the lexicon.
4.4 MWE Variation
Corpus analysis clearly shows that MWEs have
different types of internal variation. Following
Moon (1998), we will also assume that, in most of
the cases, these expressions ?have fixed or canon-
ical forms and that variations are to some extent
derivative or deviant?. The canonical forms of
(variable) expressions are listed in the MWE lex-
icon. Mapping MWE occurrences in the corpus
to their canonical form can be a hard task depend-
ing on the flexibility of the MWE. In the next part
we discuss our proposal how to handle the anno-
tation of several types of variation in MWEs: lex-
ical, syntactic and structural variation, lexical in-
sertions and truncation of MWEs.
4.4.1 Lexical diversity
MWEs have a wide range of lexical variation and
it can apply to any type of grammatical category,
although we do notice that verb variation is the
commonest type. Studying the lexicon showed
us that there is a group of cases in which a word
in a MWE can only be replaced by another word
from a very limited set (usually not larger than 10
words) of synonyms or antonyms. For these cases
this set is already recorded in the MWE lexicon.
We mark these variable words as: ?obligatory parts
of the MWE and member of a specified list?. In 1
we show an example: the canonical form followed
by a sentence containing this MWE and the En-
glish translations.
Many MWEs also contain parts that are almost
lexically free or only restricted to a semantic class
such as person or named entity. These elements
are represented in the MWE lexicon with a pro-
noun (e.g. algue?m, algum (?someone?, ?some-
thing?)) or the tag NOUN (with possible gen-
der/number restrictions) when a pronoun cannot
substitute the free part. When marking up these
elements in the corpus, we will label them with
a reference to the pronoun used in the canonical
form (example 2).
(1) dizer/ sair da boca para fora
(to say / to get out from the mouth outside)
Arrependeu-se com o que lhe saiu da boca
para fora
?She regretted her slip of the tongue?
(2) estar nas ma?os de ALGUE?M
A nossa vida esta? nas ma?os de Deus
?Our life is in the hands of God?
MWEs are not always contiguous: it is frequent
to encounter insertion of lexical elements which
do not belong to the canonical form of the MWE.
Often, the function of the inserted elements is ad-
verbial, quantificational or emphatic. Or the MWE
occurs in a negative context, by the insertion of the
adverb na?o. Such inserted elements that are not
part of the MWE are not labelled. This is the case
of the quantifier muitas in (3), which is not part
of the canonical form of the MWE dar voltas a`
cabec?a ?to think?.
154
(3) Dei muitas voltas a` cabec?a para encontrar
uma soluc?a?o.
?I?ve been thinking a lot to find a solution.?
Another type of MWE variation is truncation:
only a part of the full expression is lexically re-
alized. This phenomenon usually occurs with
proverbs and sayings. For example in 4 the brack-
eted part was not realized in the sentence, but it
is part of the canonical form in the MWE lexicon.
When marking up such truncated expressions we
do not label explicitly this phenomenon, we just
mark up the occurring part with a reference link to
MWEs in the lexicon.
(4) mais vale um pa?ssaro na ma?o (do que dois a
voar)
?bird in the hand is worth (two in the bush)?
4.4.2 Syntactic variation
An obvious form of syntactic variation is inflec-
tion of verbs and nouns. Since Portuguese is
a highly inflectional language, practically all the
verbs that occur in MWEs inflect, except for some
fixed sayings. Also shifting from active to passive
voice leads to syntactic variation. We do not label
auxiliary verbs as part of the MWE.
Several MWEs that have a free part such as ex-
ample 2 do not only exhibit lexical variation but
also syntactic variation: pronominalization (estar
nas ma?os dele) or with a possessive form (estar
nas suas ma?os). In such cases we will mark up
possessives as part of the MWE but give them an
additional label to signal that they are optional el-
ements. However, possessives are not always op-
tional, sometimes it is an obligatory part of the
canonical form and we will annotate it normally
(e.g. o lea?o mostra a sua rac?a. ?the lion shows
what he?s made off?).
Also permutations of the MWE can occur
(ex.5). We do not signal this phenomenon in our
annotation as this can easily be detected when
comparing to the canonical form.
(5) estar de ma?os e pe?s atados / estar de pe?s e
ma?os atados
?to be tied hand and foot/ foot and hand?
4.4.3 Structural variation
True idioms are both semantically and syntacti-
cally fixed. However, language use is creative and
can lead to MWEs that only partly match the ?real?
MWE as listed in the MWE lexicon. For these
cases we mark up the different part with an extra
label to clarify which part exactly varies. For ex-
ample 6.
(6) no poupar e? que esta? o ganho
in the saving is the profit
no esperar / provar / comparar e? que esta?
o ganho
in waiting / proving / comparing is the profit
(7) ja? dei voltas e voltas a` cabec?a
?thoughs went on and on in my mind?
(8) ALGO e? a ma?e de todas NOUN-PL
?something is the mother of all x?
a educac?a?o e? a ma?e de todas as civilizac?o?es
a liberdade e? a ma?e de todas as virtudes
?education is the mother of all civilizations?
?freedom is the mother of all virtues?
Another interesting case is shown in example 7 in
wich a part of the MWE is duplicated for empha-
sis. This should be treated differently than the ex-
ample in 3. In these cases we will label the du-
plicated part as ?part of the MWE but optional?
(similar to possessives).
There are cases in which part of the MWE may
vary without any apparent limits, while the other
part remains fixed. An example can be found in 8.
These are actually just an extension of ones we al-
ready discussed (see example 2) and we treat them
in the same matter.
5 Conclusion
In sum, we propose to split the annotation of
MWEs to develop separate annotation guidelines
for the grammatical categories, as we have ob-
served that e.g. nominal MWEs behave differ-
ently than verbal MWEs. Each MWE in the run-
ning text will be linked to its canonical form in the
lexicon. The lexicon itself will be enhanced with
additional information such as typology informa-
tion and MWE meaning. Special elements of the
MWE such as optional or variable parts will be ex-
plicitly marked as such both in the lexicon and in
the annotation of the MWE in the corpus. We are
convinced that the implementation of our proposal
will lead to a rich new resource that can help us
study the behavior of MWE in more depth. We
also plan to use this resource for the development
and evaluation of automatic MWE identification
systems.
155
References
S. Antunes, M. F. Bacelar do Nascimento, J. M. Caster-
leiro, A. Mendes, L. Pereira, and T. Sa?. 2006. A lex-
ical database of portuguese multiword expressions.
In LNAI, volume 3960, pages 238?243. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, (PROPOR 2006).
M. F. Bacelar do Nascimento, A. Mendes, and S. An-
tunes, 2006. Spoken Language Corpus and Linguis-
tic Informatics, chapter Typologies of MultiWord
Expressions Revisited: A Corpus-driven Approach,
pages 227?244. Coll. Usage-Based Linguistic Infor-
matics, vol.V. John Benjamins.
T. Baldwin and S. Nam Kim. 2010. Multiword ex-
pressions. In Nitin Indurkhya and Fred J. Damerau,
editors, Handbook of Natural Language Process-
ing, Second Edition. CRC Press, Taylor and Francis
Group, Boca Raton, FL. ISBN 978-1420085921.
F. Barreto, A. Branco, E. Ferreira, A. Mendes, M. F. P.
Bacelar do Nascimento, F. Nunes, and J. Silva.
2006. Open resources and tools for the shallow pro-
cessing of portuguese. In Proceedings of the 5th In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC2006), Genoa, Italy.
A. Bo?hmova?, S. Cinkova?, and E. Hajic?ova?. 2005. A
Manual for Tectogrammatical Layer Annotation of
the Prague Dependency Treebank (English transla-
tion). Technical report, U?FAL MFF UK, Prague,
Czech Republic.
N. Calzolari, C. Fillmore, R. Grishman, N. Ide,
A. Lenci, C. MacLeod, and A. Zampolli. 2002.
Towards best practice for multiword expressions in
computational lexicon. In Proceedings of the Third
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC?2002), pages 1934?1940,
Las Palmas, Spain.
K.W. Church and P. Hanks. 1990. Word association
norms, mutual information, and lexicography. Com-
putational Linguistics, 16(1):22?29.
C. Fellbaum, A. Geyken, A. Herold, F. Koerner, and
G. Neumann. 2006. Corpus-based studies of ger-
man idioms and light verbs. International Journal
of Lexicography, 19(4):349?360.
A. Mendes, M. F. Bacelar do Nascimento, S. Antunes,
and L. Pereira. 2006. COMBINA-PT: a large
corpus-extracted and hand-checked lexical database
of portuguese multiword expressions. In Proceed-
ings of LREC 2006, pages 1900?1905, Genoa, Italy.
R. Moon. 1998. Fixed expressions and idioms in en-
glish: A corpus-based approach. In Oxford Studies
in Lexicography and Lexicology. Clarendon Press,
Oxford.
I. Sag, T. Baldwin, F. Bond, A. Copestake, and
D. Flickinger. 2002. Multiword Expressions: A
Pain in the Neck for NLP. In Proceedings of
CICLING-2002.
C. Sporleder and L. Li. 2009. Unsupervised recog-
nition of literal and non-literal use of idiomatic ex-
pressions. In Proceedings of the 12th Conference
of the European Chapter of the ACL (EACL 2009),
pages 754?762, Athens, Greece, March. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
156
Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2013), pages 87?92,
Atlanta, Georgia, 13-14 June 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
MWE in Portuguese: Proposal for a Typology  
for Annotation in Running Text 
 
 
Sandra Antunes and Am?lia Mendes 
Centro de Lingu?stica da Universidade de Lisboa 
Av. Prof. Gama Pinto, 2 
1649-003 Lisboa, Portugal 
{sandra.antunes, amalia.mendes}@clul.ul.pt 
  
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
Based on a lexicon of Portuguese MWE, this 
presentation focuses on an ongoing work that 
aims at the creation of a typology that de-
scribes these expressions taking into account 
their semantic, syntactic and pragmatic prop-
erties. We also plan to annotate each MWE-
entry in the mentioned lexicon according to 
the information obtained from that typology. 
Our objective is to create a valuable resource, 
which will allow for the automatic identifica-
tion MWE in running text and for a deeper 
understanding of these expressions in their 
context. 
1 Introduction 
As it is widely known, the lexicon does not consist 
mainly of simple lexical items but appears to be 
populated with numerous chunks, more or less 
predictable, though not fixed (Firth, 1955). In fact, 
the development of computer technologies and 
corpus-based approaches has enabled the identifi-
cation of complex patterns of word associations, 
proving that the speakers use a large number of 
preconstructed phrases that constitute single choic-
es (Sinclair, 1991:110). Several studies have also 
shown that great part of a speaker?s lexicon is 
composed by these word associations (Jackendoff, 
1997; Fellbaum, 1998). These multiword expres-
sions (MWE)1 appear in every kind of spoken and 
                                                          
1
 The term multiword expression will be used to refer to any 
sequence of words that act as a single unit, embracing all dif-
ferent types of word combinations (collocations, compound 
nouns, light verbs, institutionalized phrases, idioms, etc.). 
written discourse and, despite the fact that they 
don?t pose any problems from the speaker?s point 
of view (we easily recognize that they function as a 
single unit that may have a specific meaning), nat-
ural language processing (NLP) applications, on 
the other hand, find notorious difficulties when 
dealing with them (Sag et al, 2000). 
Bearing in mind the extreme importance of the 
study of this linguistic phenomenon for the im-
provement of NLP systems, this paper will address 
an ongoing analysis that aims to create a typology 
for MWE in Portuguese (based on a MWE lexicon 
previously extracted from a 50 million word writ-
ten corpus) that will be used to enrich that lexicon 
with extensive information regarding these expres-
sions. This annotated lexicon will be a resource 
that will allow for the annotation of these expres-
sions in running text (Hendrickx et al, 2010a). 
This presentation will briefly discuss compila-
tion of the lexicon and the methodology adopted 
for MWE selection and organization (section 2), 
the typology based on syntactic, semantic and sta-
tistic criteria (section 3), the annotation proposal of 
the lexicon (section 4) and applications of the work 
(section 5). 
2 MWE: Corpus and Lexicon 
The work we are going to present used the lexicon 
of word combinations2 that was created within the 
scope of the project COMBINA-PT ? Word Com-
binations in Portuguese Language3. The corpus 
used for their extraction was 50 million word writ-
                                                          
2
 The lexicon is available at Meta-Share repository: 
http://www.meta-net.eu/meta-share. 
3
 https://www.clul.ul.pt/en/research-teams/187-combina-pt-
word-combinations-in-portuguese-language 
87
ten corpus extracted from the Reference Corpus of 
Contemporary Portuguese4, and has the constitu-
tion presented in Table 1 (Mendes et al, 2006): 
 
CORPUS CONSTITUTION 
Newspapers   30.000.000 
Books   10.917.889 
Magazines   
  7.500.000 
Miscellaneous   1.851.828 
Leaflets   104.889 
Supreme court verdicts   313.962 
Parliament sessions   277.586 
TOTAL   50.966.154 
Table 1. Constitution of the corpus 
 
 The MWE in the lexicon are organized in order 
to identify a main lemma (from which the MWE 
was selected) and a group lemma, which corre-
sponds to the canonical form of the MWE and 
covers all the variants that occurred in the corpus. 
Concordances lines for each MWE are also avail-
able in KIWIC format. Table 2 illustrates some 
MWE that were identified when analyzing the 
lemma fogo ?fire?. 
 
Main Lemma 
fogo ?fire? 
Group Lemma 
arma de fogo ?firearm? 
Concordances 
uma arma de fogo relativamente leve 
?a relatively light firearm? 
800 mil portugueses possuem armas de fogo 
?800 thousand Portuguese have firearms? 
Group Lemma 
baptismo de fogo ?baptism of fire? 
Concordances 
teve o seu baptismo de fogo no assalto 
?he had his baptism of fire in a robbery? 
Group Lemma 
fogo cruzado ?crossfire? 
Concordances 
civis apanhados no fogo cruzado entre o ex?rcito 
?civilians were caught in a crossfire between the army? 
Group Lemma 
fogo de artif?cio ?firework? 
Concordances 
espect?culos de fogo de artif?cio 
?firework shows? 
? 1 hora haver? fogos de artif?cio 
?there will be fireworks at 1:00 a.m.? 
Table 2. Example of MWE for the lemma fogo ?fire? 
 
                                                          
4
 CRPC is a monitor corpus of 311 million words, constituted 
by sampling from several types of written and spoken text and 
comprising all the national and regional varieties of Portu-
guese (https://www.clul.ul.pt/en/research-teams/183-
reference-corpus-of-contemporary-portuguese-crpc). 
In all, the lexicon comprises 1.180 main lemmas, 
14.153 group lemmas and 48.154 word combina-
tions. 
 Mendes et al (2006) describe the criteria used 
for MWE selection: following the results of previ-
ous studies (Evert and Krenn, 2001; Pereira and 
Mendes, 2002), the authors first selected groups 
with MI5 values between 8 and 10, and, throughout 
manual validation, applied several criteria upon 
which usually relies the definition of a MWE: 
a) lexical and syntactic fixedness that can be ob-
served through the possibility of replacing ele-
ments, inserting modifiers, changing the 
syntagmatic structure or gender/number features; 
b) total or partial loss of compositional meaning, 
which means that the meaning of the expressions 
can not be predicted by the meaning of the parts; 
c) frequency of occurrence, which means that the 
expressions may be semantically compositional but 
occur with high frequency, revealing sets of fa-
voured co-occurring forms, which could tell that 
they may be in their way to a possible fixedness. 
3 Data Analysis: Towards a Typology 
In contrast to languages for which there is a wide 
range of studies regarding MWE both from a lin-
guistic and a computational point of view, for Por-
tuguese little work has been done so far. Great part 
of the existing studies had paid more attention to 
idiomatic expressions and compound nouns in 
general, relegating the analysis of other types of 
expressions to the morphossyntactic properties of 
its elements (Mac?rio Lopes, 1992; Chacoto, 1994; 
Baptista, 1994; Vilela, 2002; Ranchhod, 2003)6. 
Considering the existence of different types of 
MWE with different degrees of syntactic and se-
mantic cohesion, our analysis tries to categorize 
these expressions taking into account their lexical, 
syntactic, semantic and pragmatic properties. Thus, 
from a semantic standpoint, three major classes 
were considered: (i) expressions with composition-
al meaning (p?o de centeio ?rye bread?); (ii) ex-
pressions with partial idiomatic meaning, i.e., at 
least one of the elements keeps its literal meaning 
                                                          
5
 Statistical association measure (Church and Hanks, 1990). 
6
 Some research has been carried out regarding the identifica-
tion and annotation of Complex Predicates, usually called in 
the literature Light Verb Constructions or Support Verb Con-
structions (Hendrickx et al, 2010b; Duran et al, 2011; Zeller 
and Pad?, 2012). 
88
(vontade de ferro ?iron will?); (iii) expressions with 
total idiomatic meaning (p?s de galinha ?crow?s 
feet?). 
 Note, however, that one may find notorious dif-
ficulties regarding the evaluation of the meaning of 
certain expressions that seems to be linked to two 
major factors: (i) the polysemous nature of the 
words (it is necessary to establish a boundary be-
tween compositional and figurative meanings. If 
we consider the literal meaning to be the first pro-
totypical meaning of a word, this restrictive defini-
tion will trigger us to consider a large number of 
MWE as idiomatic); (ii) the awareness of the se-
mantic motivation that had led to the idiomatic 
meanings, which depends on cultural and social 
factors. 
 This semantic criterion implies that the same 
type of MWE may occur in different classes. It is 
the case with compound nouns. Although we tried 
to accentuate the different degrees of lexicalization 
of this type of expressions, we are acutely aware 
that drawing this dividing line neither is easy nor 
allows for accurate definitions and divisions. 
 Within each of these three semantic categories, 
the expressions are also analyzed according to their 
grammatical category and lexical and syntactic 
fixedness. Regarding the latest aspect, the expres-
sions may be: (i) fixed (no variation); (ii) semi-
fixed (nominal/verbal inflection)7; (iii) with varia-
tion: lexical (permutation, replacement of ele-
ments, insertion of modifiers) and/or syntactic 
(constructions with passives, relatives, pronouns, 
extraction, adjectival vs. prepositional modifiers). 
 Our typology relies, then, on several categories, 
some of which we will briefly present. 
 
Expressions with Compositional Meaning 
 Favoured co-occurring forms ? expressions that 
occurred with high frequency in the corpus, reveal-
ing a tendency to co-occur in certain contexts (p?o 
seco ?dry bread?, desvendar o mist?rio ?unravel the 
mystery?). Expressions with full lexical and syn-
tactic variation8. 
 Compound nouns ? expressions that represent a 
single concept (noite de n?pcias ?wedding night?, 
cama de casal ?double bed?, cavalo alaz?o9 ?chest-
nut horse?, Idade do Ferro ?Iron Age?). Usually, 
                                                          
7
 Since Portuguese is a highly inflectional language, practical-
ly all the verbs and nouns that occur in MWE inflect. 
8
 More examples of variation will be included in Section 4. 
9
 ?Lexikalische Solidarit?ten? (Coseriu, 1967). 
these expressions are semi-fixed. However, we 
also observed that some combinations may occur 
in a small distributional paradigm (cama de 
solteiro ?single bed?) that allows for predicative 
constructions (a cama ? de solteiro lit. ?the bed is 
single?). Entities are fixed. 
 Institutionalized expressions ? expressions ob-
served with higher frequency than any alternative 
lexicalization of the same concept (lufada de ar 
fresco ?breath of fresh air?, condenar ao fracasso 
?doomed to failure?, abrir um precedente ?set a 
precedent?). Apart from inflection, since there are 
alternative expressions, we also observed lexical 
variation, such as substitution (rajada de ar fresco 
?rush of fresh air?), insertion of modifiers 
(condenar este projecto ao fracasso lit. ?to doom 
this project to failure?) and change in the syntag-
matic structure (o precedente foi aberto ?a prece-
dent has been set?, abertura de um precedente lit. 
?the opening of a precedent?). 
 Ligh verb constructions ? expressions where 
the noun is used in a normal sense and the verb 
meaning appears to be bleached (dar um passeio 
?take a walk?). Expressions with lexical and syn-
tactic variation (substitution, insertion of modifi-
ers, change in the syntagmatic structure). 
 proverbs (no poupar ? que est? o ganho ?profit 
is in saving?). Despite our conception of proverbs 
as frozen expressions, the fact is that speakers? lex-
ical creativity may result in the production of ex-
pressions such as no 
anunciar/atacar/descontar/esperar/comparar ? 
que est? o ganho ?profit is in announc-
ing/attacking/discounting/waiting/comparing?. 
 
Expressions with Partial Idiomatic Meaning 
 Expressions with an additional meaning that 
can not be derived from the meaning of its parts10, 
(cintur?o negro ?black belt? + martial arts expert, 
abrir a boca ?open the mouth? + to speak/to yawn, 
deitar as m?os ? cabe?a lit. ?throw the hands in the 
head? (throw one?s hands up) + despair). Nominal 
expressions are semi-fixed while verbal expres-
sions may undergo inflection and lexical variation, 
such as substitution (levar/lan?ar as m?os ? 
cabe?a lit. ?put/lay the hands in the head?) and in-
sertion of modifiers (deitou logo as m?os ? cabe?a 
lit. ?put immediately his hands in his head?). 
                                                          
10
 Quasi-phrasemes or quasi-idioms (Mel?cuk, 1998). 
89
 Compound nouns: (i) the meaning does not oc-
cur in any other combination (sorriso amarelo lit. 
?yellow smile? ? yellow = wry); (ii) the meaning 
may occur in different combinations (caf? fresco 
?fresh coffe?, p?o fresco ?fresh bread? ? fresh = 
recent); (iii) periphrastic nouns11 (continente negro 
?black continent? = Africa); (iv) entities (dama de 
ferro ?iron lady?). Apart from inflection, some ex-
pressions are subject to lexical and syntactic varia-
tion, namely insertion of modifiers (sorriso muito 
amarelo lit. ?smile very yellow?), alternation be-
tween simple elements and elements with suffixes 
(sorrisinho amarelo lit. ?little yellow smile?) and 
alternation between adjectival and prepositional 
modifiers (sil?ncio mortal ?deadly silence?, 
sil?ncio de morte ?silence of death?). Entities are 
fixed. 
 
Expressions with Total Idiomatic Meaning 
 Expressions transposed to another semantic 
field by metaphoric process (balde de ?gua fria 
?cold shower?, faca de dois gumes ?double-edge 
knife?, esticar o pernil ?kick the bucket?, deitar 
?gua na fervura ?pour oil on troubled waters?, a 
sangue frio ?in cold blood?). Adverbial expressions 
are fixed. Some of the nominal and verbal struc-
tures may undergo lexical and syntactic variation, 
such as substitution (arma/espada/pau de dois 
gumes ?double-edge weapon/sword/stick?), inser-
tion of modifiers (deitar mais ?gua na fervura 
?pour more oil on troubled waters?), permutation 
(estar de m?os e p?s atados ?bound hand and foot?, 
estar de p?s e m?os atados ?bound foot and hand? 
(helpless)) and occurrence both in negative and 
affirmative sentences (ter olhos na cara lit. ?have 
eyes in the face? (put things in perspective), n?o ter 
olhos na cara lit. ?do not have eyes in the face?). 
 Compound nouns (flor de estufa ?greenhouse 
plant? (delicate person); m?o de ferro ?iron fist?). 
Apart from inflection, we observed alternation be-
tween simple elements and elements with suffixes. 
 Proverbs (gr?o a gr?o enche a galinha o papo 
lit. ?grain by grain the hen fills its belly? (little 
strokes fell great oaks)). As in compositional prov-
erbs, we also observed lexical variation (gr?o a 
gr?o enche muita gente o papo lit. ?grain by grain 
lots of people fill their bellies?). 
 
                                                          
11
 Cf. Sanrom?n, 2000. 
 In what idiomatic expressions are concerned, it 
is important to note the fact that the transposition 
of an expression to another semantic field is a syn-
chronic process that usually implies that at some 
point in time (including the present day) the ex-
pressions may simultaneously present composi-
tional and idiomatic meanings (porto de abrigo 
?harbor?; ?safe haven?). Curiously, from a statisti-
cal point of view, our study showed that the idio-
matic meaning is the one that usually presents high 
frequency of occurrence. This information, togeth-
er with the interpretation of the context, may help 
the automatic systems to decide whether they face 
a compositional or idiomatic expression. 
 In a sweeping look at the data, we observed that 
MWE show particular properties according to their 
syntactic pattern. Thus, at the sentence level (prov-
erbs and aphorisms), MWE usually do not accept 
syntactic changes (the possible change seems to be 
lexical, when speakers substitute one or more ele-
ments), while verb phrases admit much more 
morphossyntactic variation. Noun phrases, on the 
other hand, raise specific issues. Compositional 
groups can behave as idiomatic ones and it is not 
always easy to distinguish them. The modifiers of 
the noun can express different semantic relations 
(part of, made of, used for) that may interact with 
the meaning (literal or idiomatic) of the noun. 
4 Annotation of the Lexicon 
The information presented on our typology will 
allow us to enrich the lexicon mentioned in Section 
2. Our purpose is to have each MWE entry in the 
lexicon labeled regarding: (i) canonical form of the 
expression; (ii) definition of idiomatic expressions 
through synonyms or literal paraphrases; (iii) 
grammatical category of both the expression and 
its elements; (iv) idiomatic property and additional 
meanings; (v) possible variation; (vi) function of 
MWE parts (e.g., obligatory, optional, free). 
 As we have seen before, MWE have different 
types of variation for which we have to account 
for. We will briefly discuss our proposal for han-
dling the annotation of some cases of lexical and 
syntactic variation in the lexicon. 
 
Lexical Variation 
 Insertion of modifiers ? lexical elements (usual-
ly with an emphatic function) that do not belong to 
the canonical form are not part of the MWE and 
90
are not labeled (sorriso muito amarelo lit. ?smile 
very yellow?). 
 Lexical substitution ? This variation is restrict-
ed to limited set of alternatives. This set is record-
ed in the MWE lexicon as ?obligatory parts of the 
MWE and member of a set list? (com-
er/vender/comprar/impingir/levar gato por lebre 
lit. ?eat/sell/buy/impose/take a cat instead of a 
hare? (buy a pig in a poke)). 
 Free lexical elements ? These elements are 
marked in the lexicon with, e. g., a pronoun 
(ALGU?M ?someone?, ALGUM ?something?) or a 
particular phrase (NP, PP) (estar nas m?os de 
ALGU?M  ?to be in the hands of someone?). 
There are also cases where parts of the MWE may 
freely vary, while other parts remain fixed (a 
educa??o ? a m?e de todas as civiliza??es ?educa-
tion is the mother of all civilizations?, a liberdade ? 
a m?e de todas as virtudes ?liberty is the mother of 
all virtues?). These cases are treated likewise 
(ALGO ? a m?e de todas as NOUN-PL ?something 
is the mother of all NOUN-PL?) 
Also, since creative use of language can lead to 
MWEs that only partly match the canonical MWE 
(cf. proverbs), we label these parts as 'different 
from canonical form'. 
 
Syntactic Variation 
 Pronouns/Possessives ? These elements will be 
marked up as part of the MWE, but will have an 
additional label to signal that they are optional 
(estar nas m?os dele/estar nas suas m?os ?to be in 
the hands of him?/?to be in his hands?). 
 From active to passive voice ? Auxiliary verbs 
are not labeled as part of the MWE (passar ALGO 
a pente fino/ALGO foi passado a pente fino lit. 
?pass something with a fine tooth-
comb?/?something was passed with a fine tooth-
comb? (to scrutinize)). 
 
 According to Hendrickx et al (2010a), this an-
notated lexicon could be the basis for the annota-
tion of idiomatic MWE in running text12. Each 
MWE encountered in the corpus would be annotat-
ed with a link to the corresponding entry in the 
lexicon. Linking each MWE to its canonical form 
                                                          
12
 The authors? approach is to annotate CINTIL corpus, a 1M 
word corpus of both spoken and written data from different 
sources that has been previously annotated with linguistic 
information such as part-of-speech, lemma, inflection, proper 
names, etc. (http://cintil.ul.pt/pt/). 
would allow for an easier detection of all occur-
rences of one particular MWE and check its varia-
tion in the corpus. The annotation process would 
combine automatic retrieval with manual valida-
tion in order to better account for variable expres-
sions. Without doubt, the corpus would contain 
many MWE that were not yet listed in the lexicon. 
Therefore, each sentence would need to be checked 
manually for new MWE and the newly discovered 
expression would be manually added to the lexi-
con. 
5 Conclusion 
This paper has shown the ongoing research that 
aims to describe, as detailed as possible, the syn-
tactic and semantic properties of different types of 
Portuguese MWE. During our analysis, we en-
countered two major problems: (i) the evaluation 
of the meaning of certain expressions (composi-
tional or idiomatic); (ii) the attempt to account for 
all possible lexical and syntactic variation. The 
information obtained from the typology will be 
used to annotate a MWE lexicon. Having a re-
source with such information (that includes addi-
tional meanings, possible variation that accounts 
for obligatory and optional elements, etc.) will be 
of extreme value for the development and evalua-
tion of automatic MWE identification systems. 
References 
Baptista Jorge. 1994. Estabelecimento e Formaliza??o 
de Classes de Nomes Compostos. MA Thesis, Facul-
dade de Letras da Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon. 
Chacoto Lu?sa. 1994. Estudo e Formaliza??o das Pro-
priedades L?xico-Sint?cticas das Express?es Fixas 
Proverbiais. MA Thesis, Faculdade de Letras da 
Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa. 
Church Kenneth and Patrick Hanks. 1990. Word Asso-
ciation Norms, Mutual Information and Lexico-
graphy. Proceedings of the 27th Annual Meeting of 
the Association for Computational Linguistics. Van-
couver, Canada, pp. 76-83. 
Coseriu Eugenio. 1967. Lexikalische Solidarit?ten. Poe-
tica 1. pp. 293-303. 
Duran Magali Sanches, Carlos Ramish, Sandra Maria 
Alu?sio and Aline Villavicencio. 2011. Identifying 
and Analyzing Brazilian Portuguese Complex Predi-
cates. Proceedings of the Workshop on Multiword 
Expressions. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics. Portland, Oregon, USA, pp. 74-82. 
91
Evert Stephan and Brigitte Krenn. 2001. Methods for 
the Qualitative Evaluation of Lexical Association 
Measures. Proceedings of the 39th Annual Meeting 
of the Association for Computational Linguistics. 
Toulouse, France, pp. 188-195. 
Fellbaum Christiane. 1998. An WordNet Electronic Lex-
ical Database. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Firth R. John. 1955. Modes of meaning. Papers in Lin-
guistics 1934-1951. London, Oxford University 
Press, pp. 190-215. 
Hendricks Iris, Am?lia Mendes and Sandra Antunes. 
2010a. Proposal for Multi-word Expression Annota-
tion in Running Text. Proceedings of the fourth Lin-
guistic Annotation Workshop. Association for 
Computational Linguistics. Uppsala, Sweden, pp. 
152-156. 
Hendricks Iris, Am?lia Mendes, S?lvia Pereira, Anabela 
Gon?alves and In?s Duarte. 2010b. Complex Predi-
cates annotation in a corpus of Portuguese. Proceed-
ings of the fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop. 
Association for Computational Linguistics. Uppsala, 
Sweden, pp 100-108. 
Jackendoff Ray. 1997. The Architecture of the Lan-
guage Faculty. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Mac?rio Lopes Ana Cristina. 1992. Texto Proverbial 
Portugu?s: elementos para uma an?lise sem?ntica e 
pragm?tica. PhD Dissertation, Universidade de 
Coimbra, Coimbra. 
Mel??uk Igor. 1998. Collocations and Lexical Func-
tions. Cowie, A. P. (ed.), Phraseology. Theory, 
Analysis, and Applications. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, pp. 23-53. 
Mendes Am?lia, Sandra Antunes, Maria Fernanda Bace-
lar do Nascimento, Jo?o M. Casteleiro, Lu?sa Pereira 
and Tiago S?. 2006. COMBINA-PT: A Large Cor-
pus-extracted and Hand-checked Lexical Database of 
Portuguese Multiword Expressions. Proceedings of 
the Fifth International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation. Genoa, Italy, pp. 1900-1905. 
Pereira Lu?sa and Am?lia Mendes. 2002. An Electronic 
Dictionary of Collocations for European Portuguese: 
Methodology, Results and Applications. Braasch, A. 
and C. Povlsen (eds.), Proceedings of the 10th Inter-
national Congress of the European Association for 
Lexicography. Copenhagen, Denmark, vol. II, pp. 
841-849. 
Ranchhod Elisabete. 2003. O Lugar das Express?es 
?Fixas? na Gram?tica do Portugu?s. Castro, I. and I. 
Duarte (eds.), Raz?es e Emo??o. Miscel?nea de 
Estudos oferecida a Maria Helena Mira Mateus. 
Imprensa Nacional Casa da Moeda, Lisboa, pp. 239-
254. 
Sag Ivan, Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann Copes-
take and Dan Flickinger. 2002. Multiword Expres-
sions: A Pain in the Neck for NLP. Gelbukh A. (ed.), 
Proceedings of the Third International Conference 
on Intelligent Text Processing and Computational 
Linguistics. Mexico City, Mexico, pp. 1-15. 
Sanrom?n A. Iriarte. 2000. A Unidade Lexicogr?fica. 
Palavras, Coloca??es, Frasemas, Pragmatemas. 
PhD Dissertation, Universidade do Minho, Braga. 
Sinclair John. 1991. Corpus, Concordance and Colloca-
tion. Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
Vilela M?rio. 2002. Met?foras do Nosso Tempo. Alme-
dina, Coimbra. 
Zeller Britta and Sebastian Pad?. 2012. Corpus-Based 
Acquisition of Support Verb Constructions for Por-
tuguese. Proceedings of the 10th International Con-
ference on Computational Processing of the 
Portuguese Language. Coimbra, Portugal, pp. 73-84. 
 
92
Proceedings of the 7th Linguistic Annotation Workshop & Interoperability with Discourse, pages 228?237,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9, 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Annotating the Interaction between Focus and Modality: the case of exclusive particles 
Am?lia Mendes*, Iris Hendrickx*?, Agostinho Salgueiro*, Luciana ?vila*? * Centro de Lingu?stica da Universidade de Lisboa ? Center for Language Studies, Radboud University Nijmegen ? PosLin-Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais / Capes {amalia.mendes,iris}@clul.ul.pt, agostinhomms@gmail.com,  lucianabeatrizavila@gmail.com      Abstract 
We discuss in this paper a proposal to inte-grate the annotation of contexts with focus-sensitive expressions (namely the Portu-guese exclusive adverb s? ?only?) in a mo-dality scheme. We describe some properties of contexts involving both exclusive parti-cles and modal triggers and discuss how to integrate this with an existing annotation scheme implemented for European Portu-guese. We present the results of the applica-tion of this annotation scheme to a sample of 100 sentences. 
1  Introduction Modality in language has been studied extensive-ly (see Portner (2009) for an overview). In recent years, the study of modality has been associated with a trend in Information Extraction applica-tions that aim to identify personal opinions in sentiment analysis and opinion mining (Wiebe et al, 2005), to identify events which are factual, probable or uncertain, as well as speculation and negation. This trend has lead to the development of several practical annotation schemes for mo-dality (Sauri et al, 2006; Szarvas et al, 2008; Baker et al, 2010, Matsuyoshi et al, 2010).   Most of these annotation schemes focus on the annotation of modal elements like modal verbs or adverbs, but in the present study we go one step deeper and discuss the complex interaction between modality and focus in Portuguese. Our notion of modality focuses on the expression of the opinion and attitude of the speaker or the agent towards the proposition (Palmer, 1986). This attitude or opinion towards a state or event can assume diverse values. For example, the speaker (or subject) may consider something to be possible, probable or certain (epistemic mo-
dality), he might be obliged or allowed to do it (deontic modality), or he wants or fears it (voli-tive modality). Frequently, several modal expres-sions interact to compose the overall modal meaning of the sentence. Non modal elements can also directly influence the modality type and alter the meaning of the sentence. One such ele-ment, rather well studied, is the negation marker (Morante, 2010; Morante and Sporleder, 2012). In this paper however we discuss the element focus, taken as a means to ?give prominence to meaning-bearing elements in an expression.? (Krifka, 1995:240). The prominent constituent is called the focus, while the complement notion is called the background. We are especially con-cerned with the interaction between modality and a subtype of focus-sensitive expressions named exclusive particles (Beaver and Clark, 2008), and, for the purposes of this paper, we will center our discussion on the adverb s? ?only?. Our goal is to study closely how exclusive particles affect and alter the modal meaning of the sentence. By performing a systematic annota-tion of these interactions in examples drawn from a large corpus we better comprehend the role that these particles play and the different type of effects that exclusive particles can have.  Most annotation schemes for modality focus on English but resources are now being devel-oped for other languages including Portuguese. Hendrickx et al (2012b) have previously devel-oped an annotation scheme for European Portu-guese and applied it to a corpus of 2000 sentences. ?vila & Mello (2013) presented an annotation scheme for Brazilian Portuguese speech data, applied to information units. Here we look at the interaction between focus-sensitive adverbs and modality and discuss how to integrate these findings in the annotation scheme of Hendrickx et al (2012a). 
228
The structure of the paper is as follows. In sec-tion 2, we review related work in the field of modality, its annotation in texts, focus-sensitive expressions and the semantics of the exclusives. The discussion of the specific contexts with ad-verb s? and a modality trigger is presented in section 3. We analyze the interaction between triggers and this specific adverb, focusing on the scope of the adverb and its influence over the modal value of the sentence. In section 4.1, we briefly summarize the annotation scheme for modality in Portuguese developed by Hendrickx et al (2012a). We then demonstrate the imple-mentation of our findings about adverb s? in this annotation scheme in section 4.2. We discuss the results of the annotation of a sample of 100 sen-tences in 4.3 and conclude in section 5. 2 Related work The literature on modality proposes different typologies. In linguistics, most modal systems are based on the contrast between epistemic and deontic modality. While the epistemic value is stable across typologies, the other values that are contrasted with it vary considerably. Some pro-posals distinguish between epistemic, partici-pant-internal and participant-external modality (Van der Auwera and Plungian, 1998), or be-tween epistemic, speaker-oriented modality and agent-oriented modality (Bybee et al, 1994). Other values generally considered are, for exam-ple, volition, related to the notions of will, hope and wish; evaluation, concerning the speaker?s evaluation of facts and situations; and commis-sives, used by the speaker to express his com-mitment to make something happen (Palmer, 1986). Although most of the literature is centered on verbal expressions of modality (mostly semi-auxiliary verbs like may, should, can), studies on adverbs and modality have also been carried out for English (cf. Hoye, 1997). In the literature on practical corpus annotation of modality, the attention focuses on the distinc-tion between factual and non-factual infor-mation, as many NLP applications need to know what is presented as factual and certain and what is presented as non-factual or probable. Opposed to the theoretical typologies of modality, these schemes describe in detail which elements in the text are actually involved in the expression of modality and their roles. These are the subject of the modality (source) and the elements in its scope (target/scope/focus). Other schemes (Baker et al, 2010; Matsuyoshi et al, 2010; Sau-
ri et al, 2006) also determine the relation be-tween sentences in text, identifying temporal and conditional relations between events or the eval-uation of the degree of relevance of some infor-mation within a text, rather than classifying modal values.  Rooth (1992) claims that the effects of focus on semantics can be said to be the introduction of a set of alternatives that contrasts with the ordi-nary semantic meaning of a sentence and that there are lexical items and construction specific-rules that refer directly to the notion of focus. The phenomenon of focalization is taken to be a grammatical feature that semantically conveys (i) newness/information update; (ii) answering the ?current question?; (iii) contrast; (iv) invocation of alternatives. In terms of semantic annotation, Matsuyoshi et al (2010) propose an annotation scheme for representing extended modality of event mentions in Japanese. This scheme in-cludes seven components among them the Focus, which represents the focus of negation, inference or interrogative. There are no works on the annotation of focus and its relation with modality in Portuguese, in any of its variants. This is an attempt to put the two notions together and propose a scheme that describes the scope of exclusive particles and its impact on the meaning of the expressed modali-ty. 3 Interaction between adverbs and modal value In this section, we discuss in detail the possible interactions between the adverb s? and modal expressions in the text. We extracted our exam-ples from the online search platform of the Cor-pus de Refer?ncia do Portugu?s Contempor?neo (CRPC)1, a highly diverse corpus of 312 million words covering a large variety of textual genres and Portuguese varieties (G?n?reux et al, 2012).  The adverb s? is considered a focus-sensitive particle (Beaver & Clark, 2008; Aloni et al, 1999), defined as a word which semantics ?in-volves essential reference to the information structure of the sentence containing it? (Aloni et al, 1999:1). The meaning of only consists of asserting that no proposition from the set of relevant contrasts other than the one expressed is true (von Fintel, 1994). The standard views on exclusive particles consider that ?the position of focal accent identi-
                                                            1http://alfclul.clul.ul.pt/CQPweb/crpcweb23/index.php 
229
fies the constituent associated with only? (Dryer, 1994:2). Dryer (1994) and Schwarzschild (1997), on the other hand, assume that general principles of discourse could explain focus-sensitivity. Exclusives can also downtone, by underlining the fact that this proposition ?is not the strongest that in principle might have been the case?, a function called Mirative (Beaver & Clark 2008: 250).  Constructions with exclusives involve a posi-tive and a negative component: the positive is called the prejacent and, in sentence (1a), it is equivalent to ?he wants to go home?; the negative is called the universal and corresponds in (1a) to ?he does not want to do anything else?. (1) a. Ele s? quer ir para casa.    ?He only wants to go home.?  b. As actividades de campanha eleitoral s? podem ser financiadas por subven??o es-tatal.    ?The activities of the election campaign can only be financed by public funding.? We will discuss in the following subsections some properties of constructions with exclusives and modal triggers. 3.1 Scope of the exclusive particle Exclusives give prominence to a constituent in the sentence, called the focus. In sentence (1a), s? has scope over the modal trigger (quer ?wants?) and its target (ir para casa ?to go home?). The scope of s? can also be a smaller constituent inside the target. In (1b), s? has scope over the by-phrase (por subven??o estatal ?by public funding?), and in (2), over a temporal ad-junct. The adverb s? could also occur immediate-ly before the temporal adjunct keeping the same focus reading as in (2) (s? depois de constru?do o novo pal?cio da justi?a). (2) O presidente respondeu que tal s? dever? acontecer depois de constru?do o novo pal?-cio da justi?a.   ?The president answered that it should/can only happen after the new courthouse is built.? Two other possibilities are illustrated in (3) and (4): in (3), the focus is the subject tu ?you? and in (4) is the quantifier 7 ?seven?:  (3)  S? tu eras capaz de fazer juntar tanta gente. ?Only you could bring together so many people.? 
(4) Claro que s? podem estar 7 jogadores em campo. ?Obviously there can only be 7 players in the field.? As these examples show, the exclusive parti-cle is not necessarily contiguous to its focus. The analysis of a sample of the occurrences of the exclusive s? with a modal trigger in the CRPC corpus shows that in most cases s? has scope over a specific constituent, rather than over the full target of the modal trigger.  There can be ambiguity in the scope of the ex-clusive particle s? in certain contexts. This is the case when the focus can be interpreted as the full target of the modal trigger or as a specific con-stituent inside the target. We illustrate such cases in sentence (5): this sentence can be interpreted as ?the only thing I?m capable of doing is to ask a metaphysical question? or ?the only question I?m capable of asking is a metaphysical one?.  (5) S? sou capaz de colocar ao Sr. Ministro uma quest?o metaf?sica.   ?I?m only capable of asking a metaphysical question to Mr. Minister.? However, in most contexts, there seems to be one preferential interpretation, in spite of the un-derlying ambiguity.  3.2 From possibility to necessity In contexts where the verb poder has an epistem-ic reading, the exclusive can restrict the set of possibilities to the one presented in the sentence (x and only x), as illustrated in (6).  (6)  Isto s? pode ter sido um acidente.   ?This can only have been an accident? By restricting the set of possible situations to one, the adverb leads to an overall reading of the sentence as expressing epistemic necessity. Sen-tence (6) has indeed an equivalent modal mean-ing to (7) and to a double negative polarity (over the modal verb and over its target), as in (8).  (7) Isto tem de ter sido um acidente.  ?It had to be an accident? (8) Isto n?o pode n?o ter sido um acidente.   ?It could not not have been an accident?	 ?The scope of the focus-sensitive particle plays an important role on whether an epistemic trigger may be interpreted as having a necessity reading or not (cf. 3.2). Contrary to (6), the interpretation of (9) is one of epistemic possibility, although the particle s? is present. In this case, the particle has scope over a specific constituent, the tem-
230
poral adjunct, which establishes a condition over the modal trigger. But in (9b), without the tem-poral adjunct, the scope of s? is coincident with the target of the modal trigger and the interpreta-tion is one of necessity, as paraphrased by ?the member of parliament MFL has to be right?. (9) a. Ora, a Sr.? Deputada MFL s? pode ter raz?o quando acertar nalguma previs?o.   ?Well, the member of parliament MFL may only be right when at least one of her forecasts turn out correct.?  b. Ora, a Sr.? Deputada MFL s? pode ter raz?o.    ?Well, the member of parliament MFL can only be right.? This restriction holds for stative targets, as in (9a), and also for eventive targets, although in this case the possibility or necessity reading is also determined by the tense of the verbal predi-cate. The necessity reading is only associated to eventive targets temporally located in the past, and is not available, for example, in the sentence ele s? pode ir ao cinema ?he may only go to the cinema?, where the target is temporally located in the future.  It seems that when the target of the modal trigger is a state or a past event, the exclusive particle leads to a necessity reading instead of a possibility reading, as long as the scope of s? is the full target of the modal trigger and not a dif-ferent constituent. However, we need to assess these factors against more corpus data.  If we compare (6) with a related declarative sentence (cf. isto foi um acidente ?it was an acci-dent?), we see that the declarative has an asser-tive value over the situation it denotes, while (6) establishes a set of possibilities and strongly as-serts a single one, in what is considered by Moreira (2005) as a case of overmodalization. The verb dever ?have to? can occur in contexts similar to (6), as exemplified in (10). However, the sentence with dever expresses the most prob-able event and does not entail an epistemic ne-cessity reading, contrary to (6) with verb poder. (10)  Isso s? deve ter sido um acidente.    ?This was probably only an accident? In (10), the sentence merely states that this is probably what happened. The fact that the neces-sity reading does not arise from (10), contrary to (6), follows from the differences that exist be-tween the possibility and the probability reading. The possibility reading in (6) denotes one partic-
ular event out of a set of possible ones and (6) singles out one possibility as the only valid one, affecting the truth-value of the set of alternatives considered. Sentence (10) denotes that this par-ticular event is more probable to be true than other alternatives. So, in this sentence the exclu-sive strengthens the value of this probability but does not establish it as a single one. It is conse-quently a scalar use of the exclusive, in the sense that there is an ordering of propositions from weaker to stronger.  3.3 Contexts where s? is required Contrary to sentences (6), where the adverb s? can be present or not (with effects on the inter-pretation), in sentences like (11), with the same modal verb, the adverb is required.  (11)  Sr. Deputado, s? pode estar a brincar!  ?Congressman, you must be kidding!? These are discursive contexts with a distinc-tive prosody consisting of a rising tone, marked in writing by the punctuation. The modal inter-pretation of (11) is one of epistemic necessity, as in (6). However, the equivalent sentence without s? is not acceptable (*Sr. Deputado, pode estar a brincar! ?Congressman, you can be kidding?). Contrary to (6), the speaker does not consider that a set of possibilities exist, from which one is singled out, but rather takes only into considera-tion the situation that the sentence denotes (to be kidding) and emphasizes it.  3.4 S? in ambiguous modal contexts  The presence of s? can resolve ambiguity at the modal value level. For example, sentence (11a) might be interpreted as expressing a possibility or an internal capacity of the law itself. Howev-er, in sentence (12b), the presence of the adverb s? blocks the participant internal reading. Sen-tence (12b) does not mean that this is the only property of the law but rather that it is inevitable that it reduces injustice. It has the same necessity value as (6). (12) a. A nova lei pode reduzir a injusti?a.   ?The new legislation can reduce injus-tice?  b. A nova lei s? pode reduzir a injusti?a.   ?The new legislation can only reduce injustice?  
3.5 Weak alternative Besides highlighting one alternative, the exclu-sive particle can also mark this alternative as 
231
weaker than expected. This is frequently the case with deontic modality, as illustrated in (13): the process to participate is presented as surprisingly easy.  (13) Para participar s? tem de contactar a organi-za??o atrav?s dos telefones 96... ou 91...   ?To participate, you only have to contact the organization through the phone numbers??  
3.6 Contrastive value  The epistemic subvalues belief and knowledge are expressed by main verbs like achar ?to be-lieve? and saber ?to know?. When the adverb s? occurs in these contexts, it has mainly a discur-sive function: it establishes a contrast with some-thing that was previously said in the conversation. We exemplify such conversational contexts in (14): (14) A: Eu n?o acho que ele seja corrupto.   ?I don?t think he is corrupted?  B: Eu s? sei que ele fez grandes dep?sitos em offshores.   ?I only know that he made big deposits in offshores? The different contexts discussed in this section show that the interpretation of s? with modal trigger is complex and varies according to the lexical trigger and its value, but also to the lin-guistic context and to pragmatic factors.  4 Corpus Annotation  In this section, we first report on the annotation scheme previously implemented for Portuguese, in 4.1. We then discuss how to integrate our find-ings regarding the adverb s? ?only?, in 4.2, and report on the results of the annotation of a sam-ple corpus in 4.3. 4.1 Annotation scheme for Portuguese The annotation scheme for Portuguese presented in Hendrickx et al (2012a) follow a theoretical-ly-oriented perspective, but also addresses cer-tain modal values that are important for practical applications in Information Extraction.  The an-notation is not restricted to modal verbs and in-stead covers several parts of speech with modal value: nouns, adjectives and adverbs. Tense, however, is not included, although it has an im-portant part in the modal interpretation of sen-tences. Also, only modal events are annotated, not entities. The approach is very similar to the approach taken in the OntoSem (Mcshane et al, 
2005) annotation scheme for modality (Niren-burg and McShane, 2008).  Seven main modal values are considered (ep-istemic, deontic, participant-internal, volition, evaluation, effort and success), and several sub- values, based on the modality litterature, but also on studies focused on corpus annotation and in-formation extraction (e.g. (Palmer, 1986; van der Auwera and Plungian, 1998; Baker et al, 2010)). There are five sub-values for epistemic modality: knowledge, belief, doubt, possibility and inter-rogative. Contexts traditionally considered of the modal type ?evidentials? (i.e, supported by evi-dence) are annotated as epistemic belief. Two subvalues are identified for deontic modality: deontic obligation and deontic permission  (this includes what is sometimes considered partici-pant-external modality, as in van der Auwera and Plungian (1998)). Participant-internal modality is subdivided into necessity and capacity. Four oth-er values are included: evaluation, volition and, following Baker et al (2010), effort and success.   The annotation scheme comprises several components to be tagged: (a) the trigger, i.e, the lexical element conveying the modal value ? we choose to tag the smallest possible unit (noun, verb, etc.); (b) the target, expressed typically by a clause and tagged maximally to include all rel-evant parts; (c) the source of the event mention (speaker or writer) and (d) the source of the mo-dality (agent or experiencer), to distinguish be-tween the person who is producing the sentence with modal value and the person who is 'under-going' the modality. The trigger receives two attributes: Modal value (selection out of 13 pos-sible values); and Polarity (positive or negative). The polarity attribute regards the value of the trigger and not of the full sentence.  This scheme has been applied to the manual annotation of a corpus sample of approximately 2000 sentences using the MMAX2 annotation software tool2 (M?ller and Strube, 2006). Sen-tences were extracted from the online search platform of written corpus CRPC.  4.2 Annotation of contexts with the adverb s?  We will discuss in this subsection how to inte-grate our findings regarding the exclusive adverb s? in modal contexts into an annotation scheme. For this purpose, we revised the modality scheme of Hendrickx et al (2012b) to address the annotation of focus-sensitive particles in                                                             2 http://mmax2.sourceforge.net/ 
232
modal contexts. Instead of considering focus as an independent scheme, we treat it inside mo-dality, inspired by the approach taken regarding polarity. The existence of a focus-sensitive parti-cle is marked with an attribute of the trigger called ?focus?. This attribute has, for now, three possible values: none, exclusive, additive (for particles like tamb?m ?also?). The list can be en-larged in the future to address other categories of focus-sensitive particles. The focus particle does not typically have scope over the modal trigger, but rather over other components of the modal scheme (like the target or the source of modali-ty). However, we decided to mark focus infor-mation in the trigger component, inspired by the approach of Miwa et al (2012), since we are considering it as the main element that subsumes the total information regarding the modal event.  The component ?focus cue? was added to the modal scheme to identify the focus-sensitive par-ticle in the text. The scope of the focus-sensitive particle is an important aspect to consider in the annotation (cf. 3.1) and we decided to mark the scope of the particle with an extra component named ?focus scope?. The ?focus cue? and the ?focus scope? markables are linked to the trigger and, consequently, to the modal event. We illus-trate in (15) the focus scope component of the annotation, as well as the features in the trigger component that are associated to the focus-sensitive particle. (15) H? quem defenda que os medicamentos s? devem ser usados numa primeira fase do tratamento.   ?Some people argue that medical drugs should only be used in the first stage of the treatment.?  Trigger: devem   Modal value: deontic_obligation   Focus: exclusive  Focus cue: s? Focus scope: numa primeira fase do trata-mento   There may be ambiguity regarding the scope of the focus particle (cf. 3.4) and a feature ?am-biguity? is attributed to the focus scope compo-nent to deal with such cases. We mark the scope constituent according to the most natural inter-pretation and fill in the ambiguity feature if more than one interpretation is possible, as illustrated in (16). 
(16) Portanto, s? temos de votar a proposta 525-C, do PSD.   ?So, we only have to vote proposal 525-C, of PSD.?  Trigger: temos de   Modal value: deontic_obligation   Focus: exclusive  Focus cue: s? Focus scope: a proposta 525-C, do PSD Ambiguity: votar a proposta 525-C, do PSD When there are two consecutive modal trig-gers, we only give information on the focus-sensitive particle in the annotation of the first trigger. For example, in (17), the first trigger (dever?) is annotated with features ?focus? and ?focus cue?, and the modal set includes the ?fo-cus scope? component. The second modal trigger (poder) is part of the target component of the first trigger and is consequently under the scope of its focus related features. (17) O plantel do Estrela da Amadora s? dever? poder voltar a contar com o guardi?o Tiago durante a pr?xima semana.   ?The team of Estrela da Amadora shall only be able to count again on the goalkeeper Ti-ago during next week.? In what concerns the necessity reading with poder, we believe that the regularities that we discussed in 3.2 allow us to recover the adequate modal value without the need of any special fea-ture but the annotation discussed in the next sec-tion will prove if this is indeed the case or if a special feature has to be devised to handle these cases.   The non-optional nature of s? in contexts as the one illustrated in (10) can be dealt with by selecting both s? and the modal verb as a compo-site trigger. This solution would handle the fact that s? is required in these contexts and would help identifying constructions which have a spe-cific prosodic pattern. The modal value epistem-ic_necessity would be, in this case, attributed to both elements. We do not propose this solution, however, for cases like (6) and (18b) because s? is optional in those contexts and the necessity reading follows from the compositional nature of the exclusive, the modal trigger and the target.   In contexts like (13), the exclusive singles out one alternative and also comments on the fact that it is weaker than expected (for example, eas-ier in (13)). However, there is no change in the modal value and the annotation scheme can be 
233
applied. To cope with these cases, we added the attribute ?focus value? in the trigger component, and consider for now 3 possible values: none, mirative (Beaver and Clark, 2008) and contras-tive (as in sentence (14)).  4.3 Results of the annotation This scheme has been applied, using MMAX2 software, to the manual annotation of a corpus sample of 100 sentences extracted from the online search platform of written corpus CRPC. The 100 sentences all contain the focus particle s? in the context of a verbal modal trigger, and are not syntactically annotated. We considered, for this purpose, 5 modal verbs: poder ?can/may?, dever ?must?, ter de ?have to?, ser capaz de ?be able to?, querer ?want?, most of them covering more than one modal value. We selected a higher number of sentences with poder, dever and ter de because these modal verbs have proved to be more complex and would therefore provide a good test for our anno-tation scheme. The sentences were selected from a randomly ordered list, and cover different text types. Table 1 presents the distribution of modal values in our sample, taking into consideration only modal events that include the focus-sensitive particle s?: we observed that deontic obligation and epistemic possibility are the most frequent values.  Modal value Freq. Deontic obligation 37 Epistemic possibility 30 Participant-internal  capacity 15 Volition 13 Deontic permission  5 Total 100 Table 1: Frequency information about the modal values encountered in the corpus sample.  All ambiguous cases regarding modal value involve the verb poder ?can/may?, which can denote readings of deontic permission, epistemic possibility and participant-internal capacity. The other four modal verbs are never marked as hav-ing more than one modal reading in the context. The most frequent ambiguity in this sample in-volves the two modal values: epistemic possibil-ity and deontic permission. In three cases, the annotator marked the trigger as having a deontic permission reading, and considered it ambiguous (ambiguity feature of the trigger) with an epis-
temic possibility value. In two other contexts, the opposite choice was made: epistemic possibility was the marked value and deontic permission was annotated as a possible alternative value. The other four cases of modal ambiguity involve epistemic possibility and participant-internal ca-pacity: in two cases, the former was selected as the most salient value, while the opposite choice was made in the other two cases. The most frequent constituents in the scope of the exclusive in our annotation are temporal ad-juncts, with a total of 27 cases. The verb dever stands out, with 14 occurrences, out of the total of 27. The second most frequent type of focus (freq. 23) corresponds to cases where the exclu-sive has scope over the whole target of the modal trigger. The two most frequent verbs with this type of focus are querer and ter de (in fact, all but two occurrences of querer are of this kind). The two most paradigmatic modal verbs, poder and dever, never occur with the whole target as focus, but rather favour cases where s? has scope over different constituents of the sentence. There is a large set of possible constituents which re-ceive the focus of the exclusives: subjects (7), objects (9), quantifiers (5), predicative adjectives (1), by-phrases in passive constructions (3), tem-poral adjuncts (27), locative adjuncts (1), condi-tional clauses (5), prepositional phrases (7), and adverbial phrases (3). While dever shows a pref-erence for the construction with a temporal ad-junct, the verb poder presents low frequencies of a large set of these possibilities. There are 5 cases of ambiguity in the scope of the focus particle, 2 with ter de ?have to?, 2 with ser capaz de ?to be able to? and one with poder ?can?. This is perhaps a surprisingly low number compared to our comments in subsection 3.1. Although focus scope is potentially extremely ambiguous, it turns out that the linguistic context seems to lead to one specific interpretation re-garding the constituent under focus. In the 5 am-biguous cases, the scope of the focus particle can be understood as a specific constituent included in the target of the modal trigger, or it can be the whole event denoted by the target.  The interpretation of the exclusive and the verb poder as a case of epistemic necessity oc-curs a single time in our annotation, with a sta-tive target in the future tense. No case of contrastive value (cf. (14)) was encountered, but this is certainly due to the fact that we annotated single sentences out of context, and also to the fact that we didn?t select knowledge verbs, which typically allow this value. Also, no case of 
234
non-optional exclusive particle was found in our set of sentences. We did, however, identify 7 contexts with ter de and 3 contexts with querer, which denote a weaker alternative than expected and were marked with the value ?mirative?. Overall, the proposed solution for handling the complex annotation of the interaction between exclusive particles and modality captured all cases we encountered in our small sample of 100 sentences. However, the annotation of more data is required to evaluate if our modal scheme can deal with the discursive values assumed by the exclusive in certain contexts. Two different human annotators performed the annotation of a subset of 50 sentences with s? independently. We conducted a small study to measure the inter-annotator agreement (IAA) for this annotation task. Such a study gives us in-formation about the feasibility of the annotation scheme and about the level of detail of our guidelines. We computed IAA using the kappa-statistic (Cohen, 1960) for each field in the anno-tation3. The trigger achieved a kappa value of 0.85, while the modal value attained a value of 0.83. Although the task involved a higher level of complexity due to the annotation of both modal and focus information, the results are in line with the ones reported in Hendrickx et al (2012b) and, for English, in Matsuyoshi et al (2010). We also measured the kappa value for the target component, which attained 0.64. For the focus scope an inter-annotator agreement of 0.63 is achieved. These are lower scores than the ones achieved for trigger and modal value, which is due to small differences in the delimitation of the constituents between the two annotators (for example, the inclusion or not of an adjunct).  5 Conclusion In this paper, we have presented a detailed analy-sis of the interaction between the exclusive s? and modal expressions occurring in texts.  As Portner puts it ?It seems that modality is not something that one simply observes, but ra-ther something that one discovers, perhaps only after careful work.? (Portner, 2009:1) and this is what we have attempted in this study. We presented the extension of a modality scheme developed for Portuguese to account for focus-sensitive particles in modal contexts and our experience in annotating a sample of 100 sentences with this extended scheme. Data show                                                             3 Note that we are very strict in the computation, only full string matches are counted as agreement. 
that this is a complex issue that needs to consider the modal value, the linguistic context and each modal trigger. The annotation confirms the dual nature of exclusives, due to the fact that in cer-tain contexts they both signal one of the possible alternatives and describe it as weaker that would be expected by the participants. The scope of the focus particle plays an important role in the meaning of the sentence since it adds a condition to the modal value and can affect the global meaning of the sentence. Discursive aspects have also to be taken into consideration and evaluated against our annotation scheme. As a next step we aim to study a context larger than the sentence for the annotation of the inter-action between modals and exclusives. We plan to proceed with the analysis of the interaction of s? in a larger number of modal contexts and also to enlarge the analysis to other adverbs of the same type, like apenas and unicamente. Another objective is to explore the combined effects of polarity, modality and this type of adverbs, and to later contrast the results with other Romance languages, as well as English. Acknowledgments This work was in part supported by FCT (PEst-OE-LIN-UI0214-2013). Luciana ?vila was sup-ported by grant CAPES (BEX-Proc. no 9537-12-0). The authors would like to thank the anony-mous reviewers for their helpful comments.  References Maria Aloni, David Beaver, and Brady Clark. 1999. Focus and Topic Sensitive Operators. In Paul Dekker (ed.), Proceedings of the Twelfth Amster-dam Colloquium, ILLC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Luciana Beatriz ?vila, and Heliana Mello. 2013. Challenges in modality annotation in a Brazilian Portuguese spontaneous speech corpus. In Pro-ceedings of  WAMM-IWCS2013, Potsdam, Germa-ny. Kathrin Baker, Michael Bloodgood, Bonnie Dorr, Nathaniel W. Filardo, Lori Levin, and Christine Pi-atko. 2010. A modality lexicon and its use in au-tomatic tagging. In Proceedings of LREC?10, Valletta, Malta. ELRA, 1402-1407. Kathryn Baker, Bonnie Dorr, Michael Bloodgood, Chris Callison-Burch, Nathaniel Filardo, Christine Piatko, Lori Levin, and Scott Miller. 2012. Use of Modality and Negation in Semantically-Informed 
235
Syntactic MT. Computational Linguistics. 38(2): 411-438 David Beaver and Brady Z. Clark. 2008. Sense and Sensitivity. How Focus Determines Meaning. Wyley-Blackwell, Oxford, UK. Joan L. Bybee, Revere Perkins, and William Pagliuca. 1994. The evolution of grammar: Tense, aspect and modality in the languages of the world. Uni-versity of Chicago Press, Chicago, USA. Jacob Cohen. 1960. A coefficient of agreement for nominal scales. Education and Psychological Measurement, 20:37-46. Philip W. Davis. 2009. The constitution of focus. Available at: http://www.philipwdavis.com/sands03.pdf. Ac-cessed: March 28, 2013. Matthew S. Dryer. 1994. The pragmatics of associa-tion with only. Paper presented at the 1994 Winter Meeting of the L.S.A. Boston, Massachussets, USA. Rich?rd Farkas, Veronika Vincze, Gy?rgy M?ra, J?nos Csirik, and Gy?rgy Szarvas. 2010. The conll-2010 shared task: Learning to detect hedges and their scope in natural language text. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning, ACL, 1-12. Michel G?n?reux, Iris Hendrickx, and Am?lia Mendes. 2012. Introducing the Reference Corpus of Contemporary Portuguese On-Line". In Pro-ceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation - LREC 2012, Istanbul, May 21-27, 2012, pp. 2237-2244. Iris Hendrickx, Am?lia Mendes, Silvia Mencarelli, and Agostinho Salgueiro. 2012a. Modality Annota-tion Manual, version 1.0. Centro de Lingu?stica da Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal. Iris Hendrickx, Am?lia Mendes, and Silvia Menca-relli. 2012b. Modality in Text: a Proposal for Cor-pus Annotation. In Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation - LREC 2012, Istanbul, May 21-27, 2012, pp. 1805-1812. Leo Hoye. 1997. Adverbs and Modality in English. Longman, London, UK. Manfred Krifka. 1995. Focus and the Interpretation of Generic Sentences. In Gregory N. Carlson and Francis Jeffry Pelletier (eds). The Generic Book. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, USA, 238-264. Suguru Matsuyoshi, Megumi Eguchi, Chitose Sao, Koji Murakami, Kentaro Inui, and Yuji Matsumo-to. 2010. Annotating event mentions in text with modality, focus, and source information. In Pro-ceedings of LREC?10, Valletta, Malta. ELRA. 
Marjorie McShane, Sergei Nirenburg, Stephen Beale, and Thomas O?Hara. 2005. Semantically rich hu-man-aided machine annotation. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Frontiers in Corpus Annotations II: Pie in the Sky, 68-75. ACL. Makoto Miwa, Paul Thompson, John McNaught, Douglas B Kell and Sophia Ananiadou. 2012. Ex-tracting semantically enriched events from biomed-ical literature. BMC Bioinformatics 13:108. Roser Morante. 2010. Descriptive analysis of nega-tion cues in biomedical texts. In Proceedings of LREC?10, Valletta, Malta. ELRA, 1429-1436. Roser Morante and Caroline Sporleder. 2012. Modali-ty and Negation: An Introduction to the Special Is-sue. Computational Linguistics, 38(2):223-260. Benjamim Moreira. 2005. Estudo de alguns marcado-res enunciativos do portugu?s. PhD Dissertation. Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, Faculda-de de Filologia, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. Christoph M?ller and Michael Strube. 2006. Multi-level annotation of linguistic data with MMAX2. In Corpus Technology and Language Pedagogy: New Resources, New Tools, New Methods, 197-214. Peter Lang. Sergei Nirenburg and Marjorie McShane. 2008. An-notating modality. Technical report, University of Maryland, Baltimore County, March 19, 2008. F?tima Oliveira. 1988. Para uma sem?ntica e prag-m?tica de DEVER e PODER. Ph.D. thesis, Univer-sidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal. Frank R. Palmer. 1986. Mood and Modality. Cam-bridge textbooks in linguistics. Cambridge Univer-sity Press. Paul Portner. 2009. Modality. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK. Mats Rooth. 1992. A theory of focus interpretation. Natural Language Semantics 1: 75-116. Roser Saur?, Marc Verhagen, and James Pustejovsky. 2006. Annotating and recognizing event modality in text. In Proceedings of the 19th International FLAIRS Conference. Roger Schwarzschild. 1997. Why some foci must associate. Unpublished ms. Rutgers University. Gy?rgy Szarvas, Veronika Vincze, Ric?rd Farkas, and J?nos Csirik. 2008. The BioScope corpus: annota-tion for negation, uncertainty and their scope in bi-omedical texts. BioNLP 2008: Current Trends in Biomedical Natural Language Processing, Colum-bus, Ohio, USA, 38-45. Paul Thompson, Giulia Venturi, John Mcnaught, Simonetta Montemagni, and Sophia Ananiadou. 2008. Categorising modality in biomedical texts. In Proceedings of the LREC 2008 Workshop on 
236
Building and Evaluating Resources for Biomedical Text Mining, Marrakech, Morocco, 27-34. Johan Van der Auwera and Vladimir A. Plungian. 1998. Modality?s semantic map. Linguistic Typol-ogy, 2(1): 79-124. Veronika Vincze, Gy?rgy Szarvas, M?ra Gy?rgy, Tomoko Ohta, and Rich?rd Farkas. 2011. Linguis-tic scope-based and biological event-based specu-lation and negation annotations in the bioscope and genia event corpora. Journal of Biomedical Seman-tics, 2(5). Kai-Uwe Von Fintel, 1994. Restriction on Quantifier Domains. UMass Amherst dissertation, Amherst, Massachussets, USA. Janyce Wiebe, Theresa Wilson, and Claire Cardie. 2005. Annotating expressions of opinions and emotions in language. Language Resources and Evaluation, 39:165-210. 
237
