Proceedings of the Second Workshop on NLP Challenges in the Information Explosion Era (NLPIX 2010), pages 21?30,
Beijing, August 2010
Automatic Classification of Semantic Relations
between Facts and Opinions
Koji Murakami? Eric Nichols? Junta Mizuno?? Yotaro Watanabe?
Hayato Goto? Megumi Ohki? Suguru Matsuyoshi? Kentaro Inui? Yuji Matsumoto?
?Nara Institute of Science and Technology
?Tohoku University
{kmurakami,matuyosi,hayato-g,megumi-o,matsu}@is.naist.jp
{eric-n,junta-m,inui}@ecei.tohoku.ac.jp
Abstract
Classifying and identifying semantic re-
lations between facts and opinions on
the Web is of utmost importance for or-
ganizing information on the Web, how-
ever, this requires consideration of a
broader set of semantic relations than are
typically handled in Recognizing Tex-
tual Entailment (RTE), Cross-document
Structure Theory (CST), and similar
tasks. In this paper, we describe the con-
struction and evaluation of a system that
identifies and classifies semantic rela-
tions in Internet data. Our system targets
a set of semantic relations that have been
inspired by CST but that have been gen-
eralized and broadened to facilitate ap-
plication to mixed fact and opinion data
from the Internet. Our system identi-
fies these semantic relations in Japanese
Web texts using a combination of lexical,
syntactic, and semantic information and
evaluate our system against gold stan-
dard data that was manually constructed
for this task. We will release all gold
standard data used in training and eval-
uation of our system this summer.
1 Introduction
The task of organizing the information on the In-
ternet to help users find facts and opinions on
their topics of interest is increasingly important
as more people turn to the Web as a source of
important information. The vast amounts of re-
search conducted in NLP on automatic summa-
rization, opinion mining, and question answer-
ing are illustrative of the great interest in mak-
ing relevant information easier to find. Provid-
ing Internet users with thorough information re-
quires recognizing semantic relations between
both facts and opinions, however the assump-
tions made by current approaches are often in-
compatible with this goal. For example, the
existing semantic relations considered in Rec-
ognizing Textual Entailment (RTE) (Dagan et
al., 2005) are often too narrow in scope to be
directly applicable to text on the Internet, and
theories like Cross-document Structure Theory
(CST) (Radev, 2000) are only applicable to facts
or second-hand reporting of opinions rather than
relations between both.
As part of the STATEMENT MAP project we
proposed the development of a system to sup-
port information credibility analysis on the Web
(Murakami et al, 2009b) by automatically sum-
marizing facts and opinions on topics of inter-
est to users and showing them the evidence and
conflicts for each viewpoint. To facilitate the de-
tection of semantic relations in Internet data, we
defined a sentence-like unit of information called
the statement that encompasses both facts and
opinions, started compiling a corpus of state-
ments annotated with semantic relations (Mu-
rakami et al, 2009a), and begin constructing a
system to automatically identify semantic rela-
tions between statements.
In this paper, we describe the construction and
evaluation of a prototype semantic relation iden-
tification system. We build on the semantic rela-
tions proposed in RTE and CST and in our pre-
vious work, refining them into a streamlined set
of semantic relations that apply across facts and
opinions, but that are simple enough to make
automatic recognition of semantic relations be-
tween statements in Internet text possible.Our
semantic relations are [AGREEMENT], [CON-
FLICT], [CONFINEMENT], and [EVIDENCE].
[AGREEMENT] and [CONFLICT] are expansions
of the [EQUIVALENCE] and [CONTRADICTION]
21
relations used in RTE. [CONFINEMENT] and
[EVIDENCE] are new relations between facts
and opinions that are essential for understanding
how statements on a topic are inter-related.
Our task differs from opinion mining and sen-
timent analysis which largely focus on identify-
ing the polarity of an opinion for defined param-
eters rather than identify how facts and opinions
relate to each other, and it differs from web doc-
ument summarization tasks which focus on ex-
tracting information fromweb page structure and
contextual information from hyperlinks rather
than analyzing the semantics of the language on
the webpage itself.
We present a system that automatically iden-
tifies semantic relations between statements in
Japanese Internet texts. Our system uses struc-
tural alignment to identify statement pairs that
are likely to be related, then classifies seman-
tic relations using a combination of lexical, syn-
tactic, and semantic information. We evaluate
cross-statement semantic relation classification
on sentence pairs that were taken from Japanese
Internet texts on several topics and manually an-
notated with a semantic relation where one is
present. In our evaluation, we look closely at the
impact that each of the resources has on semantic
relation classification quality.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows.
In Section 2, we discuss related work in summa-
rization, semantic relation classification, opinion
mining, and sentiment analysis, showing how
existing classification schemes are insufficient
for our task. In Section 3, we introduce a set of
cross-sentential semantic relations for use in the
opinion classification needed to support informa-
tion credibility analysis on the Web. In Section
4, we present our cross-sentential semantic re-
lation recognition system, and discuss the algo-
rithms and resources that are employed. In Sec-
tion 5, we evaluate our system in a semantic rela-
tion classification task. In Section 6, we discuss
our findings and conduct error analysis. Finally,
we conclude the paper in Section 7.
2 Related Work
2.1 Recognizing Textual Entailment
Identifying logical relations between texts is the
focus of Recognizing Textual Entailment, the
task of deciding whether the meaning of one
text is entailed from another text. A major
task in the RTE Challenge (Recognizing Tex-
tual Entailment Challenge) is classifying the se-
mantic relation between a Text (T) and a Hy-
pothesis (H) into [ENTAILMENT], [CONTRA-
DICTION], or [UNKNOWN]. Over the last sev-
eral years, several corpora annotated with thou-
sands of (T,H) pairs have been constructed for
this task. In these corpora, each pair was tagged
indicating its related task (e.g. Information Ex-
traction, Question Answering, Information Re-
trieval or Summarization).
The RTE Challenge has successfully em-
ployed a variety of techniques in order to rec-
ognize instances of textual entailment, including
methods based on: measuring the degree of lex-
ical overlap between bag of words (Glickman
et al, 2005; Jijkoun and de Rijke, 2005), the
alignment of graphs created from syntactic or se-
mantic dependencies (Marsi and Krahmer, 2005;
MacCartney et al, 2006), statistical classifiers
which leverage a wide range of features (Hickl
et al, 2005), or reference rule generation (Szpek-
tor et al, 2007). These approaches have shown
great promise in RTE for entailment pairs in the
corpus, but more robust models of recognizing
logical relations are still desirable.
The definition of contradiction in RTE is that
T contradicts H if it is very unlikely that both T
and H can be true at the same time. However, in
real documents on the Web, there are many pairs
of examples which are contradictory in part, or
where one statement confines the applicability of
another, as shown in the examples in Table 1.
2.2 Cross-document Structure Theory
Cross-document Structure Theory (CST), devel-
oped by Radev (2000), is another task of rec-
ognizing semantic relations between sentences.
CST is an expanded rhetorical structure analy-
sis based on Rhetorical Structure Theory (RST:
(William and Thompson, 1988)), and attempts
to describe the semantic relations that exist
between two or more sentences from differ-
ent source documents that are related to the
same topic, as well as those that come from
a single source document. A corpus of cross-
document sentences annotated with CST rela-
tions has also been constructed (The CSTBank
Corpus: (Radev et al, 2003)). CSTBank is
organized into clusters of topically-related ar-
ticles. There are 18 kinds of semantic rela-
tions in this corpus, not limited to [EQUIVA-
LENCE] or [CONTRADICTION], but also includ-
ing [JUDGEMENT], [ELABORATION], and [RE-
22
Query Matching sentences Output
??????????????
???
?????????????????????????????????? ??
The cavity-prevention effects are greater the more Xylitol is included. [AGREEMENT].
????????????????????????????? ??
Xylitol is effective at preventing
cavities.
Xylitol shows effectiveness at maintaining good oral hygiene and preventing cavities. [AGREEMENT]
???????????????????????????????????
?????????????
??
There are many opinions about the cavity-prevention effectiveness of Xylitol, but it
is not really effective.
[CONFLICT]
?????????
???????????????????????????????? ??
Reduced water, which has weak alkaline ions, supports the health of you and your
family.
[AGREEMENT]
?????????????????????????????????? ??
Reduced water is good for the
health.
Reduced water is said to remove active oxygen from the body, making it effective at
promoting good health.
[AGREEMENT]
??????????????????????? ??
Even if oxidized water tastes good, it does not help one?s health. [CONFLICT]
??????????????
???
???????????????????????????????????
?????????
??
Isoflavone is effective at
maintaining good health.
Taking too much soy isoflavone as a supplement will have a negative effect on one?s
health
[CONFINEMENT]
Table 1: Example semantic relation classification.
FINEMENT]. Etoh et al (Etoh and Okumura,
2005) constructed a Japanese Cross-document
Relation Corpus, and they redefined 14 kinds of
semantic relations in their corpus.
CST was designed for objective expressions
because its target data is newspaper articles re-
lated to the same topic. Facts, which can be ex-
tracted from newspaper articles, have been used
in conventional NLP research, such as Informa-
tion Extraction or Factoid Question Answering.
However, there are a lot of opinions on the Web,
and it is important to survey opinions in addition
to facts to give Internet users a comprehensive
view of the discussions on topics of interest.
2.3 Cross-document Summarization Based
on CST Relations between Sentences
Zhang and Radev (2004) attempted to classify
CST relations between sentence pairs extracted
from topically related documents. However, they
used a vector space model and tried multi-class
classification. The results were not satisfactory.
This observation may indicate that the recog-
nition methods for each relation should be de-
veloped separately. Miyabe et al (2008) at-
tempted to recognize relations that were defined
in a Japanese cross-document relation corpus
(Etoh and Okumura, 2005). However, their tar-
get relations were limited to [EQUIVALENCE]
and [TRANSITION]; other relations were not tar-
geted. Recognizing [EVIDENCE] is indispens-
able for organizing information on the Internet.
We need to develop satisfactory methods of [EV-
IDENCE] recognition.
2.4 Opinion Mining and Sentiment Analysis
Subjective statements, such as opinions, have
recently been the focus of much NLP re-
search including review analysis, opinion ex-
traction, opinion question answering, and senti-
ment analysis. In the corpus constructed in the
Multi-Perspective Question Answering (MPQA)
Project (Wiebe et al, 2005), individual expres-
sions are tagged that correspond to explicit men-
tions of private states, speech event, and expres-
sive subjective elements.
The goal of opinion mining to extract expres-
sions with polarity from texts, not to recognize
semantic relations between sentences. Sentiment
analysis also focus classifying subjective expres-
sions in texts into positive/negative classes. In
comparison, although we deal with sentiment in-
formation in text, our objective is to recognize
semantic relations between sentences. If a user?s
query requires positive/negative information, we
will also need to extract sentences including sen-
timent expression like in opinion mining, how-
ever, our semantic relation, [CONFINEMENT], is
more precise because it identifies the condition
or scope of the polarity. Queries do not neces-
sarily include sentiment information; we also ac-
cept queries that are intended to be a statement
of fact. For example, for the query ?Xylitol is
effective at preventing cavities.? in Table 1, we
extract a variety of sentences from the Web and
recognize semantic relations between the query
and many kinds of sentences.
23
3 Semantic Relations between
Statements
In this section, we define the semantic relations
that we will classify in Japanese Internet texts as
well as their corresponding relations in RTE and
CST. Our goal is to define semantic relations that
are applicable over both fact and opinions, mak-
ing them more appropriate for handling Internet
texts. See Table 1 for real examples.
3.1 [AGREEMENT]
A bi-directional relation where statements have
equivalent semantic content on a shared topic.
Here we use topic in a narrow sense to mean that
the semantic contents of both statements are rel-
evant to each other.
The following is an example of [AGREE-
MENT] on the topic of bio-ethanol environmental
impact.
(1) a. Bio-ethanol is good for the environment.
b. Bio-ethanol is a high-quality fuel, and it
has the power to deal with the environ-
ment problems that we are facing.
Once relevance has been established,
[AGREEMENT] can range from strict logi-
cal entailment or identical polarity of opinions.
Here is an example of two statements that
share a broad topic, but that are not classified as
[AGREEMENT] because preventing cavities and
tooth calcification are not intuitively relevant.
(2) a. Xylitol is effective at preventing cavities.
b. Xylitol advances tooth calcification.
3.2 [CONFLICT]
A bi-directional relation where statements have
negative or contradicting semantic content on a
shared topic. This can range from strict logical
contradiction to opposite polarity of opinions.
The next pair is a [CONFLICT] example.
(3) a. Bio-ethanol is good for our earth.
b. There is a fact that bio-ethanol further the
destruction of the environment.
3.3 [EVIDENCE]
A uni-directional relation where one statement
provides justification or supporting evidence for
the other. Both statements can be either facts or
opinions. The following is a typical example:
(4) a. I believe that applying the technology of
cloning must be controlled by law.
b. There is a need to regulate cloning, be-
cause it can be open to abuse.
The statement containing the evidence con-
sists of two parts: one part has a [AGREEMENT]
or [CONFLICT] with the other statement, the
other part provides support or justification for it.
3.4 [CONFINEMENT]
A uni-directional relation where one statement
provides more specific information about the
other or quantifies the situations in which it ap-
plies. The pair below is an example, in which
one statement gives a condition under which the
other can be true.
(5) a. Steroids have side-effects.
b. There is almost no need to worry about
side-effects when steroids are used for lo-
cal treatment.
4 Recognizing Semantic Relations
In order to organize the information on the
Internet, we need to identify the [AGREE-
MENT], [CONFLICT], [CONFINEMENT], and
[EVIDENCE] semantic relations. Because iden-
tification of [AGREEMENT] and [CONFLICT] is
a problem of measuring semantic similarity be-
tween two statements, it can be cast as a sen-
tence alignment problem and solved using an
RTE framework. The two sentences do not need
to be from the same source.
However, the identification of [CONFINE-
MENT] and [EVIDENCE] relations depend on
contextual information in the sentence. For ex-
ample, conditional statements or specific dis-
course markers like ?because? act as important
cues for their identification. Thus, to identify
these two relations across documents, we must
first identify [AGREEMENT] or [CONFLICT] be-
tween sentences in different documents and then
determine if there is a [CONFINEMENT] or [EV-
IDENCE] relation in one of the documents.
Furthermore, the surrounding text often con-
tains contextual information that is important for
identifying these two relations. Proper handling
of surrounding context requires discourse analy-
sis and is an area of future work, but our basic
detection strategy is as follows:
1. Identify a [AGREEMENT] or [CONFLICT] re-
lation between the Query and Text
2. Search the Text sentence for cues that iden-
tify [CONFINEMENT] or [EVIDENCE]
24
3. Infer the applicability of the [CONFINE-
MENT] or [EVIDENCE] relations in the Text
to the Query
4.1 System Overview
We have finished constructing a prototype sys-
tem that detects semantic relation between state-
ments. It has a three-stage architecture similar to
the RTE system of MacCartney et al (2006):
1. Linguistic analysis
2. Structural alignment
3. Feature extraction for detecting [EVIDENCE]
and [CONFINEMENT]
4. Semantic relation classification
However, we differ in the following respects.
First, our relation classification is broader than
RTE?s simple distinction between [ENTAIL-
MENT], [CONTRADICTION], and [UNKNOWN];
in place of [ENTAILMENT] and [CONTRA-
DICTION, we use broader [AGREEMENT] and
[CONFLICT] relations. We also consider cover
gradations of applicability of statements with the
[CONFINEMENT] relation.
Second, we conduct structural alignment with
the goal of aligning semantic structures. We do
this by directly incorporating dependency align-
ments and predicate-argument structure informa-
tion for both the user query and the Web text
into the alignment scoring process. This allows
us to effectively capture many long-distance
alignments that cannot be represented as lexical
alignments. This contrasts with MacCartney et
al. (2006), who uses dependency structures for
the Hypothesis to reduce the lexical alignment
search space but do not produce structural align-
ments and do not use the dependencies in detect-
ing entailment.
Finally, we apply several rich semantic re-
sources in alignment and classification: extended
modality information that helps align and clas-
sify structures that are semantically similar but
divergent in tense or polarity; and lexical simi-
larity through ontologies like WordNet.
4.2 Linguistic Analysis
In order to identify semantic relations between
the user query (Q) and the sentence extracted
from Web text (T), we first conduct syntactic and
semantic linguistic analysis to provide a basis for
alignment and relation classification.
For syntactic analysis, we use the Japanese
dependency parser CaboCha (Kudo and Mat-
!"#$%&'!"#$!%&'()*'+$! ()*!,'-!.-'/'0+1!#$)23#!+,-!$4$50*$!./!%&!6! 7!!"#$%&'!"#$!%&'()*'+$!01234!'&3$'.'-'&%&!
567!*)-%'8&!
897:;!&85#!)&!9!3-$)3/$+3!
<=>?@A/!#)&!:$$+!&#';+!
()BC-! B! C!?!
)!
5!:!J!3'!#)*$!!#$)23#!)..2%5)0'+&!
C!J!
J!
B!
B!C!
Figure 1: An example of structural alignment
sumoto, 2002) and the predicate-argument struc-
ture analyzer ChaPAS (Watanabe et al, 2010).
CaboCha splits the Japanese text into phrase-like
chunks and represents syntactic dependencies
between the chunks as edges in a graph. Cha-
PAS identifies predicate-argument structures in
the dependency graph produced by CaboCha.
We also conduct extended modality analysis
using the resources provided by Matsuyoshi et
al. (2010), focusing on tense, modality, and po-
larity, because such information provides impor-
tant clues for the recognition of semantic rela-
tions between statements.
4.3 Structural Alignment
In this section, we describe our approach to
structural alignment. The structural alignment
process is shown in Figure 1. It consists of the
following two phases:
1. lexical alignment
2. structural alignment
We developed a heuristic-based algorithm to
align chunk based on lexical similarity infor-
mation. We incorporate the following informa-
tion into an alignment confidence score that has
a range of 0.0-1.0 and align chunk whose scores
cross an empirically-determined threshold.
? surface level similarity: identical content
words or cosine similarity of chunk contents
? semantic similarity of predicate-argument
structures
predicates we check for matches in predi-
cate entailment databases (Hashimoto et
al., 2009; Matsuyoshi et al, 2008) consid-
ering the default case frames reported by
ChaPAS
arguments we check for synonym or hy-
pernym matches in the Japanese WordNet
(2008) or the Japanese hypernym collec-
tion of Sumida et al (2008)
25
>?@???????????????????AB?C????DEF)!
>?'???????????????????AB?C????GHF)!I!
T :!
H :!
(field) (in)!(agricultural chemicals) (ACC)! (use)!
(field) (on)!(agricultural chemicals) (ACC)! (spray)!
Figure 2: Determining the compatibility of se-
mantic structures
We compare the predicate-argument structure
of the query to that of the text and determine
if the argument structures are compatible. This
process is illustrated in Figure 2 where the T(ext)
?Agricultural chemicals are used in the field.? is
aligned with the H(ypothesis) ?Over the field,
agricultural chemicals are sprayed.? Although
the verbs used and sprayed are not directly se-
mantically related, they are aligned because they
share the same argument structures. This lets up
align predicates for which we lack semantic re-
sources. We use the following information to de-
termine predicate-argument alignment:
? the number of aligned children
? the number of aligned case frame arguments
? the number of possible alignments in a win-
dow of n chunk
? predicates indicating existence or quantity.
E.g. many, few, to exist, etc.
? polarity of both parent and child chunks us-
ing the resources in (Higashiyama et al,
2008; Kobayashi et al, 2005)
We treat structural alignment as a machine
learning problem and train a Support Vector Ma-
chine (SVM) model to decide if lexically aligned
chunks are semantically aligned.
We train on gold-standard labeled alignment
of 370 sentence pairs. This data set is described
in more detail in Section 5.1. As features for our
SVM model, we use the following information:
? the distance in edges in the dependency graph
between parent and child for both sentences
? the distance in chunks between parent and
child in both sentences
? binary features indicating whether each
chunk is a predicate or argument according
to ChaPAS
? the parts-of-speech of first and last word in
each chunk
? when the chunk ends with a case marker, the
case of the chunk , otherwise none
? the lexical alignment score of each chunk
pair
4.4 Feature Extraction for Detecting
Evidence and Confinement
Once the structural alignment system has iden-
tified potential [AGREEMENT] or [CONFLICT]
relations, we need to extract contextual cues in
the Text as features for detecting [CONFINE-
MENT] and [EVIDENCE] relations. Conditional
statements, degree adverbs, and partial negation,
which play a role in limiting the scope or degree
of a query?s contents in the statement, can be im-
portant cues for detecting the these two semantic
relations. We currently use a set of heuristics to
extract a set of expressions to use as features for
classifying these relations using SVM models.
4.5 Relation Classification
Once the structural alignment is successfully
identified, the task of semantic relation classi-
fication is straightforward. We also solve this
problem with machine learning by training an
SVM classifier. As features, we draw on a com-
bination of lexical, syntactic, and semantic infor-
mation including the syntactic alignments from
the previous section. The feature set is:
alignments We define two binary function,
ALIGNword(qi, tm) for the lexical align-
ment and ALIGNstruct((qi, qj), (tm, tk))
for the structural alignment to be true if and
only if the node qi, qj ? Q has been seman-
tically and structurally aligned to the node
tm, tk ? T . Q and T are the (Q)uery and the
(T)ext, respectively. We also use a separate
feature for a score representing the likelihood
of the alignment.
modality We have a feature that encodes all of
the possible polarities of a predicate node
from modality analysis, which indicates the
utterance type, and can be assertive, voli-
tional, wish, imperative, permissive, or in-
terrogative. Modalities that do not repre-
sent opinions (i.e. imperative, permissive and
interrogative) often indicate [OTHER] rela-
tions.
antonym We define a binary function
ANTONYM(qi, tm) that indicates if
the pair is identified as an antonym. This
information helps identify [CONFLICT].
26
Relation Measure 3-class Cascaded 3-class ?
[AGREEMENT] precision 0.79 (128 / 162) 0.80 (126 / 157) +0.01
[AGREEMENT] recall 0.86 (128 / 149) 0.85 (126 / 149) -0.01
[AGREEMENT] f-score 0.82 0.82 -
[CONFLICT] precision 0 (0 / 5) 0.36 (5 / 14) +0.36
[CONFLICT] recall 0 (0 / 12) 0.42 (5 / 12) +0.42
[CONFLICT] f-score 0 0.38 +0.38
[CONFINEMENT] precision 0.4 (4 / 10) 0.8 (4 / 5) +0.4
[CONFINEMENT] recall 0.17 (4 / 23) 0.17 (4 / 23) -
[CONFINEMENT] f-score 0.24 0.29 +0.05
Table 2: Semantic relation classification results comparing 3-class and cascaded 3-class approaches
negation To identify negations, we primar-
ily rely on a predicate?s Actuality value,
which represents epistemic modality and
existential negation. If a predicate pair
ALIGNword(qi, tm) has mismatching actu-
ality labels, the pair is likely a [OTHER].
contextual cues This set of features is used to
mark the presence of any contextual cues
that identify of [CONFINEMENT] or [EVI-
DENCE] relations in a chunk . For example,
??? (because)? or ??? (due to)? are typ-
ical contextual cues for [EVIDENCE], and ?
?? (when)? or ???? (if)? are typical for
[CONFINEMENT].
5 Evaluation
5.1 Data Preparation
In order to evaluate our semantic relation clas-
sification system on realistic Web data, we con-
structed a corpus of sentence pairs gathered from
a vast collection of webpages (2009a). Our basic
approach is as follows:
1. Retrieve documents related to a set number
of topics using the Tsubaki1 search engine
2. Extract real sentences that include major sub-
topic words which are detected based on
TF/IDF in the document set
3. Reduce noise in data by using heuristics to
eliminate advertisements and comment spam
4. Reduce the search space for identifying sen-
tence pairs and prepare pairs, which look fea-
sible to annotate
5. Annotate corresponding sentences with
[AGREEMENT], [CONFLICT], [CONFINE-
MENT], or [OTHER]
1http://tsubaki.ixnlp.nii.ac.jp/
Although our target semantic relations in-
clude [EVIDENCE], they difficult annotate con-
sistently, so we do not annotate them at this
time. Expanding our corpus and semantic re-
lation classifier to handle [EVIDENCE] remains
and area of future work.
The data that composes our corpus comes
from a diverse number of sources. A hand sur-
vey of a random sample of the types of domains
of 100 document URLs is given below. Half of
the URL domains were not readily identifiable,
but the known URL domains included govern-
mental, corporate, and personal webpages. We
believe this distribution is representative of in-
formation sources on the Internet.
type count
academic 2
blogs 23
corporate 10
governmental 4
news 5
press releases 4
q&a site 1
reference 1
other 50
We have made a partial release of our corpus
of sentence pairs manually annotated with the
correct semantic relations2. We will fully release
all the data annotated semantic relations and with
gold standard alignments at a future date.
5.2 Experiment Settings
In this section, we present results of empiri-
cal evaluation of our proposed semantic rela-
tion classification system on the dataset we con-
structed in the previous section. For this experi-
ment, we use SVMs as described in Section 4.5
2http://stmap.naist.jp/corpus/ja/
index.html (in Japanese)
27
to classify semantic relations into one of the four
classes: [AGREEMENT], [CONFLICT], [CON-
FINEMENT], or [OTHER] in the case of no re-
lation. As data we use 370 sentence pairs that
have been manually annotated both with the cor-
rect semantic relation and with gold standard
alignments. Annotations are checked by two na-
tive speakers of Japanese, and any sentence pair
where annotation agreement is not reached is
discarded. Because we have limited data that is
annotated with correct alignments and semantic
relations, we perform five-fold cross validation,
training both the structural aligner and semantic
relation classifier on 296 sentence pairs and eval-
uating on the held out 74 sentence pairs. The
figures presented in the next section are for the
combined results on all 370 sentence pairs.
5.3 Results
We compare two different approaches to classi-
fication using SVMs:
3-class semantic relations are directly classified
into one of [AGREEMENT], [CONFLICT],
and [CONFINEMENT] with all features de-
scribed in 4.5
cascaded 3-class semantic relations are first
classified into one of [AGREEMENT], [CON-
FLICT] without contextual cue features. Then
an additional judgement with all features de-
termines if [AGREEMENT] and [CONFLICT]
should be reclassified as [CONFINEMENT]
Initial results using the 3-class classifica-
tion model produced high f-scores for [AGREE-
MENT] but unfavorable results for [CONFLICT]
and [CONFINEMENT]. We significantly im-
proved classification of [CONFLICT] and [CON-
FINEMENT] by adopting the cascaded 3-class
model. We present these results in Table 2 and
successfully recognized examples in Table 1.
6 Discussion and Error Analysis
We constructed a prototype semantic relation
classification system by combining the compo-
nents described in the previous section. While
the system developed is not domain-specific and
capable of accepting queries on any topic, we
evaluate its semantic relation classification on
several queries that are representative of our
training data.
Figure 3 shows a snapshot of the semantic re-
lation classification system and the various se-
mantic relations it recognized for the query.
Baseline Structural Upper-boundAlignment
Precision 0.44 0.52 0.74(56/126) (96/186) (135/183)
Recall 0.30 0.52 0.73(56/184) (96/184) (135/184)
F1-score 0.36 0.52 0.74
Table 3: Comparison of lexical, structural, and
upper-bound alignments on semantic relation
classification
In the example (6), recognized as [CONFINE-
MENT] in Figure 3, our system correctly identi-
fied negation and analyzed the description ?Xyl-
itol alone can not completely? as playing a role
of requirement.
(6) a. ?????????????????
(Xylitol is effective at preventing cavi-
ties.)
b. ?????????????????
????
(Xylitol alone can not completely prevent
cavities.)
Our system correctly identifies [AGREE-
MENT] relations in other examples about re-
duced water from Table 1 by structurally align-
ing phrases like ?promoting good health? and
?supports the health? to ?good for the health.?
These examples show how resources like
(Matsuyoshi et al, 2010) and WordNet (Bond et
al., 2008) have contributed to the relation clas-
sification improvement of structural alignment
over them baseline in Table 3. Focusing on sim-
ilarity of syntactic and semantic structures gives
our alignment method greater flexibility.
However, there are still various examples
which the system cannot recognized correctly.
In examples on cavity prevention, the phrase
?effective at preventing cavities? could not be
aligned with ?can prevent cavities? or ?good for
cavity prevention,? nor can ?cavity prevention?
and ?cavity-causing bacteria control.?
The above examples illustrate the importance
of the role played by the alignment phase in the
whole system?s performance.
Table 3 compares the semantic relation classi-
fication performance of using lexical alignment
only (as the baseline), lexical alignment and
structural alignment, and, to calculate the maxi-
mum possible precision, classification using cor-
rect alignment data (the upper-bound). We can
28
Figure 3: Alignment and classification example for the query ?Xylitol is effective at preventing
cavities.?
see that structural alignment makes it possible to
align more words than lexical alignment alone,
leading to an improvement in semantic relation
classification. However, there is still a large gap
between the performance of structural alignment
and the maximum possible precision. Error anal-
ysis shows that a big cause of incorrect classifi-
cation is incorrect lexical alignment. Improving
lexical alignment is a serious problem that must
be addressed. This entails expanding our cur-
rent lexical resources and finding more effective
methods of apply them in alignment.
The most serious problem we currently face is
the feature engineering necessary to find the op-
timal way of applying structural alignments or
other semantic information to semantic relation
classification. We need to conduct a quantita-
tive evaluation of our current classification mod-
els and find ways to improve them.
7 Conclusion
Classifying and identifying semantic relations
between facts and opinions on the Web is of ut-
most importance to organizing information on
the Web, however, this requires consideration of
a broader set of semantic relations than are typi-
cally handled in RTE, CST, and similar tasks. In
this paper, we introduced a set of cross-sentential
semantic relations specifically designed for this
task that apply over both facts and opinions. We
presented a system that identifies these semantic
relations in Japanese Web texts using a combina-
tion of lexical, syntactic, and semantic informa-
tion and evaluated our system against data that
was manually constructed for this task. Prelimi-
nary evaluation showed that we are able to detect
[AGREEMENT] with high levels of confidence.
Our method also shows promise in [CONFLICT]
and [CONFINEMENT] detection. We also dis-
cussed some of the technical issues that need to
be solved in order to identify [CONFLICT] and
[CONFINEMENT].
Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the National Institute
of Information and Communications Technology
Japan.
References
Bond, Francis, Hitoshi Isahara, Kyoko Kanzaki, and
Kiyotaka Uchimoto. 2008. Boot-strapping a
wordnet using multiple existing wordnets. In Proc.
of the 6th International Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC?08).
Dagan, Ido, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini.
2005. The pascal recognising textual entailment
challenge. In Proc. of the PASCAL Challenges
Workshop on Recognising Textual Entailment.
Etoh, Junji and Manabu Okumura. 2005. Cross-
document relationship between sentences corpus.
29
In Proc. of the 14th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Natural Language Processing, pages 482?
485. (in Japanese).
Glickman, Oren, Ido Dagan, and Moshe Koppel.
2005. Web based textual entailment. In Proc. of
the First PASCAL Recognizing Textual Entailment
Workshop.
Hashimoto, Chikara, Kentaro Torisawa, Kow
Kuroda, Masaki Murata, and Jun?ichi Kazama.
2009. Large-scale verb entailment acquisition
from the web. In Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP2009), pages 1172?1181.
Hickl, Andrew, John Williams, Jeremy Bensley, Kirk
Roberts, Bryan Rink, and Ying Shi. 2005. Recog-
nizing textual entailment with lcc?s groundhog sys-
tem. In Proc. of the Second PASCAL Challenges
Workshop.
Higashiyama, Masahiko, Kentaro Inui, and Yuji Mat-
sumoto. 2008. Acquiring noun polarity knowl-
edge using selectional preferences. In Proc. of the
14th Annual Meeting of the Association for Natu-
ral Language Processing.
Jijkoun, Valentin and Maarten de Rijke. 2005. Rec-
ognizing textual entailment using lexical similar-
ity. In Proc. of the First PASCAL Challenges Work-
shop.
Kobayashi, Nozomi, Kentaro Inui, Yuji Matsumoto,
Kenji Tateishi, and Toshikazu Fukushima. 2005.
Collecting evaluative expressions for opinion ex-
traction. Journal of natural language processing,
12(3):203?222.
Kudo, Taku and Yuji Matsumoto. 2002. Japanese
dependency analysis using cascaded chunking. In
Proc of CoNLL 2002, pages 63?69.
MacCartney, Bill, Trond Grenager, Marie-Catherine
de Marneffe, Daniel Cer, and Christopher D.
Manning. 2006. Learning to recognize fea-
tures of valid textual entailments. In Proc. of
HLT/NAACL 2006.
Marsi, Erwin and Emiel Krahmer. 2005. Classifi-
cation of semantic relations by humans and ma-
chines. In Proc. of ACL-05 Workshop on Empiri-
cal Modeling of Semantic Equivalence and Entail-
ment, pages 1?6.
Matsuyoshi, Suguru, Koji Murakami, Yuji Mat-
sumoto, and Kentaro Inui. 2008. A database of re-
lations between predicate argument structures for
recognizing textual entailment and contradiction.
In Proc. of the Second International Symposium
on Universal Communication, pages 366?373, De-
cember.
Matsuyoshi, Suguru, Megumi Eguchi, Chitose Sao,
Koji Murakami, Kentaro Inui, and Yuji Mat-
sumoto. 2010. Annotating event mentions in text
with modality, focus, and source information. In
Proc. of the 7th International Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC?10), pages 1456?1463.
Miyabe, Yasunari, Hiroya Takamura, and Manabu
Okumura. 2008. Identifying cross-document re-
lations between sentences. In Proc. of the 3rd In-
ternational Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (IJCNLP-08), pages 141?148.
Murakami, Koji, Shouko Masuda, Suguru Mat-
suyoshi, Eric Nichols, Kentaro Inui, and Yuji Mat-
sumoto. 2009a. Annotating semantic relations
combining facts and opinions. In Proceedings of
the Third Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages
150?153, Suntec, Singapore, August. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Murakami, Koji, Eric Nichols, Suguru Matsuyoshi,
Asuka Sumida, Shouko Masuda, Kentaro Inui, and
Yuji Matsumoto. 2009b. Statement map: Assist-
ing information credibility analysis by visualizing
arguments. In Proc. of the 3rd ACM Workshop
on Information Credibility on the Web (WICOW
2009), pages 43?50.
Radev, Dragomir, Jahna Otterbacher,
and Zhu Zhang. 2003. CSTBank:
Cross-document Structure Theory Bank.
http://tangra.si.umich.edu/clair/CSTBank.
Radev, Dragomir R. 2000. Common theory of infor-
mation fusion from multiple text sources step one:
Cross-document structure. In Proc. of the 1st SIG-
dial workshop on Discourse and dialogue, pages
74?83.
Sumida, Asuka, Naoki Yoshinaga, and Kentaro Tori-
sawa. 2008. Boosting precision and recall of hy-
ponymy relation acquisition from hierarchical lay-
outs in wikipedia. In Proc. of the 6th International
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC?08).
Szpektor, Idan, Eyal Shnarch, and Ido Dagan. 2007.
Instance-based evaluation of entailment rule acqui-
sition. In Proc. of the 45th Annual Meeting of the
Association of Computational Linguistics, pages
456?463.
Watanabe, Yotaro, Masayuki Asahara, and Yuji Mat-
sumoto. 2010. A structured model for joint learn-
ing of argument roles and predicate senses. In Pro-
ceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation of Computational Linguistics (to appear).
Wiebe, Janyce, Theresa Wilson, and Claire Cardie.
2005. Annotating expressions of opinions and
emotions in language. Language Resources and
Evaluation, 39(2-3):165?210.
William, Mann and Sandra Thompson. 1988.
Rhetorical structure theory: towards a functional
theory of text organization. Text, 8(3):243?281.
Zhang, Zhu and Dragomir Radev. 2004. Combin-
ing labeled and unlabeled data for learning cross-
document structural relationships. In Proc. of the
Proceedings of IJC-NLP.
30
Recognizing Confinement in Web Texts
Megumi Ohki?
Suguru Matsuyoshi?
Junta Mizuno?
Kentaro Inui?
Nara Insutitute of Science and Technology?
Eric Nichols?
Koji Murakami??
Shouko Masuda?
Yuji Matsumoto?
Tohoku University?
{megumi-o,shouko,matuyosi,matsu}@is.naist.jp
{eric,junta-m,inui}@tohoku.ac.jp
koji.murakami@mail.rakuten.co.jp
Abstract
In the Recognizing Textual Entailment (RTE) task, sentence pairs are classified into one of three se-
mantic relations: ENTAILMENT, CONTRADICTION or UNKNOWN. While we find some sentence pairs
hold full entailments or contradictions, there are a number of pairs that partially entail or contradict one
another depending on a specific situation. These partial contradiction sentence pairs contain useful infor-
mation for opinion mining and other such tasks, but it is difficult for Internet users to access this knowledge
because current frameworks do not differentiate between full contradictions and partial contradictions. In
this paper, under current approaches to semantic relation recognition, we define a new semantic relation
known as CONFINEMENT in order to recognize this useful information. This information is classified as
either CONTRADICTION or ENTAILMENT. We provide a series of semantic templates to recognize CON-
FINEMENT relations in Web texts, and then implement a system for recognizing CONFINEMENT between
sentence pairs. We show that our proposed system can obtains a F-score of 61% for recognizing CON-
FINEMENT in Japanese-language Web texts, and it outperforms a baseline which does not use a manually
compiled list of lexico-syntactic patterns to instantiate the semantic templates.
1 Introduction
On the Internet, there are various kinds of documents, and they often include conflicting opinions or
differing information on a single topic. Collecting and organizing this diverse information is an important
part of multi-document summarization.
When searching with a particular query on the Internet, we want information that tells us what other
people think about the query: e.g. do they believe it is true or not; what are the necessary conditions
for it to apply. For example, consider the hypothetical search results for the query given in (1). You get
opinion (2a), which supports the query, and opinion (2b) which opposes it.
(1) Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay.
(2) a. Xylitol can prevent tooth decay.
b. Xylitol is not effective at all at preventing tooth decay.
A major task in the Recognizing Textual Entailment (RTE) Challenge (Giampiccolo et al (2007)) is
classifying the semantic relation between a Text and a Hypothesis into ENTAILMENT, CONTRADICTION,
or UNKNOWN. Murakami et al (2009) report on the STATEMENT MAP project, the goal of which is
to help Internet users evaluate the credibility of information sources by analyzing supporting evidence
from a variety of viewpoints on their topics of interest and presenting them to users together with the
supporting evidence in a way that makes it clear how they are related. A variety of techniques have been
successfully employed in the RTE Challenge in order to recognize instances of textual entailment.
?Current afflication: Rakuten Institute of Technology
215
However, as far as we know, there have been no studies on recognizing sentences which specify condi-
tions under which a query applies, despite the fact that these relations are useful information for Internet
users. Such useful sentences are plentiful on the Web. Consider the following examples of CONTRA-
DICTION and ENTAILMENT.
(3) a. Xylitol can not prevent tooth decay if it not at least 50%.
b. The effect of Xylitol on preventing tooth decay is limited.
In example (3a), the necessary condition to prevent tooth decay by Xylitol is ?it contains at least fifty
percent Xylitol?. That condition is expressed by the phrase in bold in (3a). This sentence informs users
that if they want to prevent tooth decay, the products they use must contain a certain amount of Xylitol to
be effective. In example (3b), we obtain information on uncertainty of Xylitol?s tooth decay prevention
effectiveness from the phrase ?is limited?. It tells that Xylitol is not necessarily effective at preventing
tooth decay, and thus it is not completely in agreement with or contradiction to the original sentence (1).
It is important to recognize the semantic relation shown in (3) because it provides more specific infor-
mation about the query or specifies the conditions under which the statement holds or does not. This is
valuable information for Internet users and needs to be distinguished from fully contradicting or agreeing
opinions.
We call this semantic relation CONFINEMENT because it confines the situation under which a query
applies. In this paper, we give a language independent definition of the CONFINEMENT relation in pred-
icate logic and provide a framework for detecting the relation through a series of semantic templates that
take logical and semantic features as input. We implement a system that detects CONFINEMENT rela-
tions between sentence pairs in Japanese by instantiating the semantic templates using rules and a list of
lexico-semantic patterns. Finally, we conduct empirical evaluation of recognition of the CONFINEMENT
relation between queries and sentences in Japanese-language Web texts.
2 Related Work
In RTE research, only three types of relations are defined: ENTAILMENT, CONTRADICTION, and
UNKNOWN. RTE is an important task and has been the target of much research (Szpektor et al (2007);
Sammons et al (2009)). However, none of the previous research has introduced relations corresponding
to CONFINEMENT.
Cross-document Structure Theory (CST, Radev (2000)) is another approach to recognizing semantic
relations between sentences. CST is an extended rhetorical structure analysis based on Rhetorical Struc-
ture Theory (RST). It attempts to describe the semantic relations between two or more sentences from
different source documents that are related to the same topic. It defines 18 kinds of semantic relations
between sentences. Etoh and Okumura (2005) constructed a Japanese Cross-document Relation Corpus
and defined 14 kinds of semantic relations. It is difficult to consider CONFINEMENT relations in the
CST categorical semantic relations because it focuses on comparing sentences in terms of equivalence
and difference between sentences. At first glance, CONFINEMENT may seem to be defined in terms of
difference between sentences, but this approach does not capture the idea of restriction on a sentence?s
applicability. Thus, it is beyond the scope of CST.
In the field of linguistics, Nakagawa and Mori (1995) discussed restrictions as represented in the
four Japanese subordinate clause patterns. Abe (1996) researched the role of quantifiers in quantitative
restrictions and the role of ??? (only).? There is much other researches on expressions representing
?confinement? in a sentence in linguistics. These expressions are useful in order to recognize phrases
which contradict each other. However, as far as we know, there is no research on the relation of CON-
FINEMENT between two sentences in the linguistics literature. The absence of related research makes
defining and recognizing CONFINEMENT a very challenging task.
3 The CONFINEMENT Relation
We present the definition of the CONFINEMENT relation and describe its differences from ENTAIL-
MENT and CONTRADICTION. In essence, a pair of sentences is in the CONFINEMENT relation if either
the premise or consequent of the second sentence has a certain condition or restriction, and without such
condition or restriction the pair is equivalent to either ENTAILMENT or CONTRADICTION.
216
Consider an example of CONFINEMENT setence pair: (2a) and (3a). The statement ?it (Xylitol) is not at
least 50%? is a condition of the statement ?Xylitol can not prevent tooth decay.? It is a CONTRADICTION
if the conditional statement is satisfied. Because the truth value of the whole statement depends on
various conditions to be satisfied, it is important to properly define a framework to define them.
3.1 A Logical Definition of CONFINEMENT
We present a definition of CONFINEMENT in predicate logic. We define CONFINEMENT as a semantic
relation between two sentences, where the first sentence corresponds to RTE?s Hypothesis, or the user
Query, and the second sentence corresponds to RTE?s Text that has some semantic relation with the
Query, which we want to identify.
Here we consider sentence pairs where the Query matches the logical pattern ?x(P (x) ? C(x)),
where we call P (x) the Premise and C(x) the Consequence. There are many ways of representing
sentences as logical expressions, and we think that the logical pattern (?(P (x) ? C(x))) can cover a
variety of queries. For example, the sentence ?Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay.? can be
represented as ?x(isXylitol(x) ? effectiveAtPreventingToothDecay(x)). Consider the case where one
sentence contains only a Consequence. This case can be regarded as a special case of the above formula.
We write such a sentence as ?x(T ? C(x)) showing that the Premise is always True.
In this paper, we limit discussion of the CONFINEMENT relation to the Query matching to the above
logical pattern. Recognizing CONFINEMENT between the Text and the Query having more complex
semantic patterns is an area of future work. Here, we split the definition of CONFINEMENT into subtypes
according to: (i) conditions to satisfy in addition to the Premise, and (ii) limitations on the degree of the
Consequence.
Premise side Additional conditions for achieving the Consequence
Explicit constraint
Some conditional sentences use an expression correspoinding to logical ?only if,? which explicitly
means two way conditions as the following formula.
?x((P (x) ?AdditionalCondition(x) ? C(x)) (1)
?(P (x) ? ?AdditionalCondition(x) ? ?C(x)))
For example, S1 in Table 1, ?Xylitol is effective at preventing cavities only when it is 100%?,
explicitly specify that Xylitol is effective if it is 100% and is not effective if it is not 100%. So,
we assume the form of the above formula for this type of statement.
Implicit constraint
This type of sentence specifies an additional condition on the Premise and is represented by the
following formula. The Premise needs to be satisfied for the consequence to be achieved.
?x((P (x) ?AdditionalCondition(x) ? C(x)) (2)
Example S5 in Table 1 says ?Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay if it is 100%?, which
is assumed by Formula (2). S5 does not contain an expression such as ?only (??)?, which
explicitly specifies that C(x) does not hold when an additional condition is not satisfied. One may
understand that it implicitly means ?Xylitol is not effective at preventing tooth decay if it is not
100%,? but S5 does not structly require this.
Consequence side Constraints on the degree of achieving the Consequence
There are sentences in partial entailment or contradiction where the degree of achieving of the Con-
sequence is limited. To represent these limitations on the Consequence side, we define a CONFINE-
MENT relation where the degrees of the Consequence are limited as in Example (3b). We define the
following formula to represent these limitations on the Consequence side.
?x((P (x) ? Cr(x)) (3)
Cr(x) represents C(x) with additional restriction. For example, S3 in Table 1 says that Xylitol is
somewhat effective at preventing tooth decay, which means that there are cases in which Xylitol can
not prevent tooth decay. In the case of S3, Cr(x) is ?is a bit effective?. This type of CONFINE-
MENT provides valuable information about Xylitol?s limited ability to promote dental hygiene in S3.
217
All CONFINEMENTs on the Consequence side are of type EXPLICIT CONFINEMENT, because they
explicitly mean that a part of the Consequence is achieved but no other parts are achieved.
3.2 Semantic Templates
We propose a series of semantic templates to classify sentence pairs into one of the CONFINEMENT
relation subtypes we define. The semantic templates take a set of features as input and use their values
to categorize the sentence pair. In Section 4, we evaluate the coverage of the semantic templates by
classifying a small set of sentence pairs using manually set feature values. In Section 6, we provide
more realistic evaluation by using a proposed system to set the feature values automatically and classify
sentence pairs as ENTAILMENT / CONTRADICTION, or CONFINEMENT.
We assume that each sentence consists of a Premise and Consequence, and that each sentence pair
which has a CONFINEMENT relation contains at least one additional condition or one additional limitation
as defined in Section 3.1.
We know that there are a variety of expressions that indicate the presence of a CONFINEMENT relation.
For example, both ?Only 100% pure Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay.? and ?Xylitol is not
effective at preventing tooth decay unless it is 100% pure.? are CONFINEMENTs of ?Xylitol is effective
at preventing tooth decay.? Since it is impossible to handle all possible expressions that indicate CON-
FINEMENT, we focus on covering as many as possible with three features: (1) the type of constraint, (2)
the type of Premise, and (3) the type of Consequence. The features are defined in more detail below.
IF-Constraint This feature indicates the type of logical constraint in the Text sentence. Its values can
be ?IF,? ?ONLY-IF.?
Premise This feature indicates the type of Premise in the Text sentence. The value ?P+A? or ?notP+A?
means there is an Additional Condition on the Premise. The value ?P? or ?notP? means there is just
a Premise. ?not? represents the Premise have a negation.
Consequence This feature indicates the type of Consequence. Its possible values are ?C? (just a Conse-
quence), ?notC? (negated Consequence), ?Cr? or ?notCr? (certain partial Consequence).
Semantic templates consist of a tuple of four feature values and a mapping to the confinement type they
indicate. A full list of templates is given in Table 1. In the templates, a wildcard asterisk ?*? indicates
that any feature value can match in that slot of the template. The abbreviations ENT, CONT and CONF
stand for ENTAILMENT, CONFINEMENT and CONFINEMENT respectively.
Semantic templates are applied in turn from top pattern by determining the value of each feature and
looking up the corresponding relation type in Table 1. We give a classification examples below. The user
query is sentence S0. Sentences S1 are Web texts.
Query : S0. Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay.
Text [ONLY-IF P(x) ? AC(x) then C(x) ]: S1. Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay when you
take it every day without fail.
In Example, IF-Constraint is ?ONLY-IF?, Premise is ?P+A?, and the type of Consequence is ?C?.
This instance has an additional condition and the Consequence matches the Query, so it is identified as
an EXPLICIT CONFINEMENT.
4 Verifying Semantic Templates
In this section, we verify the effectiveness of semantic templates in recognizing CONFINEMENT rela-
tions by testing them on real-world data in Japanese. To directly evaluate the quality of the templates,
we construct a small data set of sentence pairs and manually annotate them with the correct values for
each of the features defined in Section 3.2.
4.1 Data
We constructed the Development set and the Open-test set of sample Japanese user queries and Inter-
net text pairs following the methodology of Murakami et al (2009). However, Murakami et al (2009)
annotated Query-Text pairs with coarse-grained AGREEMENT and CONFLICT relations that subsume the
218
Table 1: Semantic templates for recognizing CONFINEMENT
Semantic features Relation Number of Number of Example
IF-constraint Premise Consequence positive negative S0:?????????????????.
example example Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay.
ONLY-IF P+A * EXPLICIT 8 0 S1:??????? 100%?????????????????.
CONF Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay only when it is 100%.
ONLY-IF notP+A * EXPLICIT 0 0 S2:??????? 50%??????????????????????.
CONF Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay only when it is not under 50%.
* * Cr EXPLICIT 11 0 S3:??????????????????????.
CONF Xylitol is a bit effective at preventing tooth decay.
* * notCr EXPLICIT 12 0 S4:????????????????????????.
CONF Xylitol is not almost of effective at preventing tooth decay.
IF P+A * IMPLICT 62 0 S5:??????? 100%???????????????.
CONF Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay if it is 100%.
IF notP+A * IMPLICIT 1 0 S6:??????? 100%???????????????????.
CONF Xylitol is not effective at preventing tooth decay if it is not 100%
IF P C ENT 279 0 S7:???????????????????????.
Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay if it is eaten.
IF notP C CONT 0 0 S8:????????????????????????.
Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay if it is not eaten.
IF P notC CONT 13 0 S9:????????????????????????.
Xylitol is not effective at preventing tooth decay if it is eaten.
IF notP notC ENT 0 0 S10:????????????????????????.
Xylitol is not effective at preventing tooth decay if it is not eaten.
ONLY-IF P C ENT 3 0 S11:??????????????????????????.
Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay only when it is eaten.
ONLY-IF notP C CONT 0 0 S12:?????????????????????????????.
Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay only when it is not eaten.
ONLY-IF P notC CONT 0 0 S13:??????????????????????????.
Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay only when it is eaten.
ONLY-IF notP notC ENT 0 0 S14:?????????????????????????????.
Xylitol is not effective at preventing tooth decay only when it is not eaten.
Table 2: Data set (Counts of sentences out of parenthesis and statements in parentheses)
Entailment Contradiction Confinement All
Development 258 (282) 8 (13) 79 (94) 345 (389)
Open-test 230 170 200 600
RTE relations of ENTAILMENT and CONTRADICTION. As our task is to discriminate between CON-
FINEMENT and RTE relations, we annotate each sentence pair or each statement1 pair with one of the
following relations instead: ENTAILMENT, CONTRADICTION, or CONFINEMENT. In the case of CON-
FINEMENT, we annotate Query-Text pairs which are not full ENTAILMENT or CONTRADICTION but
these Text partially agrees and disagrees with the Query. Annotations were checked by two native speak-
ers of Japanese, and any sentence pair where annotation agreement is not reached was discarded. Table
2 shows that how many sentences or statements are in each data set. Annotated statements counts are
written in parentheses. We use the Development set for evaluation of verifying semantic templates and
develop list of lexical and syntactic patterns for semantic features extraction, and the Open-test set for
evaluation in Section 6.
4.2 Verification Result
After the data was prepared, we annotated it with the correct feature values for use with the semantic
templates. This was done by manually checking for words or phrases in the sentences that indicated one
of the features in Table 1. Once the features were set, we used them to classify each sentence pair.
We give the numbers of instances that we could confirm for each pattern in the sixth column of Table
1 and the numbers of negative instances in the seventh column, which satisfy semantic template but does
not agree Relation values in the fifth column. As a result we find that there were no statement pairs that
could not be successfully classified. We grasp CONFINEMENT relation with semantic templates for the
most part. This verification data does not cover all combinations of patterns in our semantic templates, so
we can not rule out the possibility of existence of an exception that cannot be classified by the semantic
templates. However, we find these results to be an encouraging indication of the usefulness of semantic
templates. Here are some example classifications found in the verification data.
Coordinate clauses Combining multiple of IMPLICIT CONFINEMENTs results in an EXPLICIT CON-
FINEMENT relation
(4)S0. ????????????.
Steroid has side-effects.
S1. ???????????????????????????????????????
1Murakami et al define a ?statement? as the smallest unit that can convey a complete thought or viewpoint. In practice, this
can be a sentence or something smaller such as a clause.
219
???????????????????.
Long-term use of steroid causes side-effects, but there is no need to worry about side-effects
in short-term usage.
In Example (4), S1 is an EXPLICIT CONFINEMENT for S0. This is derived from the combination of
CONFINEMENT of the two coordinate clauses of S1: the former phrase ?Long-term use of steroid causes
side-effects? of S1 is an IMPLICIT CONFINEMENT for S0 by our semantic templates and the latter phrase
is an IMPLICIT CONFINEMENT for S0.
Additional information for whole Query Combining of a CONTRADICTION and an IMPLICIT CON-
FINEMENT result in an EXPLICIT CONFINEMENT
(5)S0. ????????????????.
Xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay.
S1. ??????????????????????,???????????????????????????????????????.
Tooth decay can not be prevented with Xylitol alone, but it can be fundamentally prevented
with an appropriate diet and by taking Xylitol after every meal.
The first clause before the comma in S1 of Example (5) corresponds to the entire sentence of S0. The
second clause after the comma helps us recognize that it is a CONFINEMENT relation. This instance
is also a combination of semantic templates, so we need to recognize negation of each statement and
adversative conjunction but we do not need to add new features to Table 1.
5 Proposed System
We propose a system which uses semantic templates for recognizing CONFINEMENT consists of six
steps: (I) linguistic analysis, (II) structural alignment, (III) Premise and Consequence identification,
(IV) semantic feature extraction, (V) adversative conjunction identification, and (VI) semantic template
application. Figure 1 shows the work flow of the system. This system takes as input corresponding to S0
and S1, and return a semantic relation.
5.1 I. Linguistic Analysis
In linguistic analysis, we conduct word segmentation, POS tagging, dependency parsing, and extended
modality analysis. This linguistic analysis acts as the basis for alignment and semantic feature extrac-
tion. For syntactic analysis, we identify words and POS tags with the Japanese morphological analyser
Mecab2, and we use the Japanese dependency parser CaboCha (Kudo and Matsumoto (2002)) to pro-
duce dependency trees. We also conduct extended modality analysis using the resources provided by
Matsuyoshi et al (2010).
5.2 II. Structural Alignment
To identify the consequence of S0 in S1, we use Structural Alignment (Mizuno et al (2010)). In Struc-
tural Alignment, dependency parent-child links are aligned across sentences using a variety of resources
to ensure semantic relatedness.
5.3 III. Premise and Consequence identification
In this step, we identify the Premise and the Consequence in S1. When a sentence pair satisfies all
items is satisfying, we can identify a focused chunk as the Consequence in S1:
1. A chunk?s modality in S0 is assertion, this chunk is the Consequence in S0
2. A chunk in S1 align with the Consequence in S0
We identify the Premise in S1 when a sentence pair satisfies first, and either second or third item of
the following conditions:
1. A case particle of chunks in S0 is either ?? (agent marker)? or ?? (topic marker)? and these chunks
are children of the Consequence in S0?s dependency tree
2. The subject in S0 aligns with the subject of S1
3. All of the dependants of the expression ??? (to, for)? have alignments in S0 dependency tree
2http://chasen.org/taku/ software/mecab/.
220
Figure 1: An overview of a proposal system to recognize CONFINEMENT
5.4 IV. Semantic Feature Extraction
We extract features for the semantic templates using a list of lexical and syntactic patterns. These
patterns were manually compiled using the development data set introduced in Section 4. Features for
the semantic templates are then automatically extracted by applying these patterns to input sentence
pairs. The following overviews our extraction approach for each feature.
5.4.1 IF-Constraint Feature Extraction
Using CaboCha, we manually constructed lists of words and their POS that are indicators of the
semantic condition under which a Premise occurs. We extract as features any words in the input sentences
that appear in the list with the corresponding POS. The ?IF? lexical type lists conjunctions that are the
results of a conditional chunk or noun phrases that indicate a case or situation. The ?ONLY-IF? lexical
type is used to represent the most constraining situations. The following is our list of expressions.
? IF: ?? (in case),?/??/? (when),?/??/?? (if),? (with)
? ONLY-IF: ??/??? (for this time), ??/??/?? (only), ??? (for the first time), ?? (to,
for)
5.4.2 Premise Feature Extraction
We treat the words or phrases which are extracted from the constraint as conditions, and need to decide
whether a given condition is the Premise or an additional condition for the Premise. The Premise is set
to ?P? when first step and either the second or third step of the following conditions are satisfied, and it
is set to ?P+A? otherwise:
1. ? The condition have children in the S1?s dependency tree or the condition?s children are not aligned
to chunks in S0
2. ? The condition?s parent in S0?s dependency tree has any chunk with a child aligned with the Conse-
quence in S0, or the condition?s parent is not aligned with chunks in S0
3. ? The condition?s parent does not have any expression with the meaning of ?use? in the S0?s depen-
dency tree
When these step are satisfied and negation exists in conditional chunks, Premise is set to ?notP+A,? if
these step are not satisfied, Premise is set to ?notP.? In the third step, we identify expressions with the
meaning of ?use? with our lexical list. For example ?? (use), ??? (eat), ?? (take) and so on. If
the condition?s parent has words in our lexical list, we identify that ?Xylitol? and ?eating Xylitol? and
?using Xylitol? are equivalent.
5.4.3 Consequence Feature Extraction
This feature is used to indicate the semantic relationship between Consequences of the sentences pair.
Sentences with Consequences that share a certain amount of similarity in polarity and syntax are judged
to have ENTAILMENT, otherwise they are in CONTRADICTION. In order to be judged as ENTAILMENT,
the following conditions must all be true:
1. The modality of the Consequences must be identical.
2. The polarity of the Consequences must be identical as indicated by the resources in (Sumida et al
(2008))
3. The Premises of both sentences must align with each other
221
4. ? The sentences must not contain expressions that limit range or degree such as ????? (almost)?
or ??? (degree)?
When all item are satisfied, the Consequence is set to ?C?, otherwise it is set to ?notC.? We identify
whether the consequence has expressions which limit the degree or not. The Consequence is set to ?Cr?
or ?notCr? when the following all conditions is satisfied:
1. Any of the children of the Consequence align with a chunk in S0?s dependency tree.
2. ? There are expressions limiting the degree of the Consequence or the siblings in S1?s dependency
tree
When this two steps are satisfied and the all four steps to judge whether sentence pairs is ENTAILMENT
or not are not satisfied, Consequence is set to ?notCr.?
5.5 V. Adversative Conjunction Identification
We manually compiled a list of target expressions including conjunctions such as ?? (but).? When a
S1 chunk containing an adversative conjunction that aligns with the Premise of S0 or the S0?s Premise
depends on S1 chunk containing an adversative conjunction, we set each feature set in a chunk before an
adversative conjunction and after an adversative conjunction to semantic templates.
5.6 VI. Semantic Template Application
We apply semantic feature extracted in Step IV to semantic templates. If S1 matches multiple semantic
templates with an adversative conjunction from Step V, we combine the semantic templates. We get a
relation for a sentence pair in this step.
5.7 Example of Semantic Features Extraction
Feature extraction is illustrated in greater detail in the examples S0 which is the query and S1 in
Table 1. First, we identify words represented IF-Constraint is ?ONLY-IF?: ?? (when)? is in S1 and the
conditional chunk has a word ??? (only).? Next, we evaluate each the type of Premise of each chunk to
determine if it is a premise or an additional condition. The subject word ?Xylitol? align between S0 and
S1, and the conditional chunk?s sibling in dependency tree of S1 is a chunk which has the subject. And
the conditional chunk have a child which is not aligned any chunk in S0, it is ?100%? (100%).? And the
conditional chunk has no negations. So, Premise is set to ?P+A.? Finally, we check if the consequences
to the conditions are aligned to the verbs and nouns indicating consequences in S0: ?prevent? and ?is
effective? are aligned, the modality and polarity of the Consequence are identical, these depended on by
the condition, and the Consequence has no expressions which limited range or degree. Consequence is
set to ?C.?We set the semantic template features and get a result which the sentences relation is EXPLICIT
CONFINEMENT. Ideally patterns for setting semantic feature for semantic templates should be learned
automatically, but this remains an area of future work. Nonetheless, our current experiment gives a good
measure of the effectiveness of semantic templates in recognizing CONFINEMENT relations.
6 Evaluation
In Section 4, we verified that the semantic templates defined in Section 3.2 can successfully classify
semantic relations as CONFINEMENT given the correct feature values. In this Section, we present the
results of an experiment in a more realistic setting by using semantic templates together with the features
automatically extracted as described with our proposed system in Section 5 to determine whether or not
a sentence pair has a CONFINEMENT relation.
6.1 Setting up Evaluation
While more research on recognizing ENTAILMENT or CONTRADICTION between sentences pairs is
necessary, it is important to recognize new relations that cannot be analysed in existing frameworks in
order to provide Internet users with the information they need. Thus, We assume that unrelated sentence
pairs will be discarded before classification, in this experiment we focus only on the recognition of
CONFINEMENT relations. So our goal in this experiment is to classify between CONFINEMENT and NOT
CONFINEMENT. We will evaluate determining whether CONFINEMENT sentence pairs are Explicit or
Implicit in future. In our experiment, we used a gold data for structural alignment to evaluate semantic
feature extraction.
222
Table 3: Results of recognizing confinement relations with our proposal system
Recall Precision F-Score
proposed system 0.65(129/200) 0.57(129/225) 0.61
baseline system 0.96(192/200) 0.34(192/562) 0.50
Table 4: Instances of incorrect classification
S0 S1
A ???????????????. ??????????????????????????????.
False A person can regain their health with isoflavon. Excess intake of isoflavon to boost its health effects is prohibited.
Negative B ?????????????????. ?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????.
Xylitol has effects on preventing tooth decay. The use of xylitol is effective at preventing tooth decay when done while eating properly and brushing one?s
teeth regularly.
C ????????????????????. ?????????????????????????????????????.
Xylitol can prevent tooth decay. It is a big mistake to think that one can prevent tooth decay if they put Xylitol in ? their mouth.
False D ??????????????. ???????????????????????????.
Positive Steroids can cure illnesses. Atrophic dermatitis will heal completely if steroid use is stopped.
E ???????????????. ?????????????????????????????????????????????.
Side effects are a worry for steroids. The amount of steroids or period of time that causes side effects differs from person to person.
6.2 Baseline System
We developed a baseline system that does not use our manually-compiled lexico-syntactic patterns
in order to act as a point of comparison for the proposed system in evaluating their contribution to
CONFINEMENT recognition.
The baseline system consists of performing all of the steps from of our proposed system that do not
rely on manually compiled lexico-syntactic patterns. Step relying on these resources are marked with a
? in Section 5 and are skipped in the baseline. Essentially, we conduct Steps I, II, and III, the parts of
Step IV that can be done without manually-compiled patterns, and, finally, Step VI.
In Step IV, we determine if there are any limitations on the Consequence in the Consequence Feature
subset, but we do not judge whether the Consequence is ENTAILMENT or CONTRADICTION in the
baseline system.
6.3 Result and Error Analysis
The results are given in Table 3. We find that our system has much higher precision than the baseline,
improving by over 20%. In our system, the list of semantic patterns is effective at recognizing CON-
FINEMENT. On the other hand recall has gone down compared to the baseline. The baseline judged that
almost sentences are CONFINEMENT, so the list of semantic patterns employed in our rule-based system
is useful at eliminating false positives. Table 4 shows some instances of incorrect classification. Each
instance is a pair (S0, S1).
Example A-S1 means ?Excess intake of isoflavon can not boost one?s health? and ?excess intake? is
an additional condition for A-S1. In this case ?excess? is a lexical specifier of the specific condition and
is indicated by the particle ???. The particle ?? (topic marker)? is not currently used as a feature in the
semantic templates since it is very noisy, so this instance can not be detected. We need to expand our
method of acquiring semantic patterns to better handle such cases.
The additional condition phrase in Example B-S1 modifies ?The use of Xylitol? instead of ?is effective
at preventing tooth decay?, preventing us from properly recognizing the limiting condition in this case.
We need to conduct deeper scopal analysis to determine when the modifier of an embedded chunk should
be considered as an additional condition.
Example C-S1 is an instance where the system fails to recognize that ?put in their mouth? is an expres-
sion meaning ?use? since our lists of lexical words for features did not have it. We should increase our
ability to recognize synonyms of ?to use? by automatically mining data for paraphrases or approaching
it as a machine learning task in order to handle examples like C-S1. On the other hands ?if steroid use
is stopped? in example D-S1 is the premise which should indicate an IF condition and Negation exists,
however we can not recognize it correctly since the phrase lacks negation. We will make a list of words
and phrases that are antonyms of ?use? in order to recognize such instances.
The condition in example E-S1 is about how side-effects appear, and not a condition for the other
sentence example E-S0. This instance requires detailed semantic analysis and cannot be solved with
alignment-based approaches. It represents a very difficult class of problems.
223
7 Conclusion
On theWeb, much of the information and opinions we encounter indicates the conditions or limitations
under which a statement is true. This information is important to Internet users who are interested in
determining the validity of a query of interest, but such information cannot be represented under the
prevalent RTE framework containing only ENTAILMENT and CONTRADICTION.
In this paper, we provided a logical definition of the CONFINEMENT relation and showed how it
could be used to represent important information that is omitted under an RTE framework. We also
proposed a set of semantic templates that use set of features extracted from sentences pairs to recognize
CONFINEMENT relations between two sentences. Preliminary investigations showed that given correct
feature input, semantic templates could effectively recognize CONFINEMENT relations.
In addition, we presented empirical evaluation of the effectiveness of semantic templates and
automatically-extracted features at recognizing CONFINEMENT between user queries and Web text pairs,
and conducted error analysis of the results. Currently, our system does not deal with unknown instances
well since it extracts features for semantic template using manually constructed lexical patterns. In fu-
ture work, we will learn features for the semantic templates directly from data to better handle unknown
instances.
Acknowledgment
This work is supported by the National Institute of Information and Communications Technology
Japan.
References
Abe, T. (1996). Restriction with? dake ?and modification with quantifier. Tsukuba Japanese Research 1, 4?20. in Japanese.
Etoh, J. and M. Okumura (2005). Cross-document relationship between sentences corpus. In Proceedings of the 14th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Natural Language Processing, pp. 482?485. (in Japanese).
Giampiccolo, D., B. Magnini, I. Dagan, and B. Dolan (2007). The third pascal recognizing textual entailment challenge. In
Proceedings of the ACL-PASCAL Workshop on Textual Entailment and Paraphrasing, RTE ?07, Morristown, NJ, USA, pp.
1?9. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Kudo, T. and Y. Matsumoto (2002). Japanese dependency analysis using cascaded chunking. In CoNLL 2002: In Proceedings
of the 6th Conference on Natural Language Learning 2002 (COLING 2002 Post-Conference Workshops), pp. 63?69.
Matsuyoshi, S., M. Eguchi, C. Sao, K. Murakami, K. Inui, and Y. Matsumoto (2010). Annotating event mentions in text
with modality, focus, and source information. In Proceedings of the 7th International Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC?10).
Mizuno, J., H. Goto, Y. Watanabe, K. Murakami, K. Inui, and Y. Matsumoto (2010). Local Structural Alignment for Recogniz-
ing Semantic Relations between Sentences. In Proceedings of IPSJ-NL196. (in Japanese).
Murakami, K., S. Matsuyoshi, K. Inui, and Y. Matsumoto (2009). A corpus of statement pairs with semantic relations in
Japanese. In Proceedings of the 15th Annual Meeting of the Association for Natural Language Processing.
Murakami, K., E. Nichols, S. Matsuyoshi, A. Sumida, S. Masuda, K. Inui, and Y. Matsumoto (2009). Statement map: As-
sisting information credibility analysis by visualizing arguments. In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM Workshop on Information
Credibility on the Web (WICOW 2009), pp. 43?50.
Nakagawa, H. and T. Mori (1995). Pragmatic analysis of aspect morphemes in manual sentences in Japanese. The Association
for Natural Language Processing 2(4), 19 ? 36. in Japanese.
Radev, D. R. (2000). Common theory of information fusion from multiple text sources step one: Cross-document structure. In
Proceedings of the 1st SIGdial workshop on Discourse and dialogue, pp. 74?83.
Sammons, M., V. G. V. Vydiswaran, T. Vieira, N. Johri, M.-W. Chang, D. Goldwasser, V. Srikumar, G. Kundu, Y. Tu, K. Small,
J. Rule, Q. Do, and D. Roth (2009). Relation alignment for textual entailment recognition. In Proceedings of Recognizing
Textual Entailment 2009.
Sumida, A., N. Yoshinaga, and K. Torisawa (2008). Boosting precision and recall of hyponymy relation acquisition from
hierarchical layouts in Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 6th International Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC?08).
Szpektor, I., E. Shnarch, and I. Dagan (2007). Instance-based evaluation of entailment rule acquisition. In Proceedings of the
45th Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics, pp. 456?463.
224
