Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Second Workshop on Computational Approaches to Linguistic Creativity, pages 40?48,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Representing Story Plans in SUMO 
 
 
Jeffrey Cua   
Center for Human Language Technologies 
De La Salle University, Manila, Philippines 
  cuajeffreyleonardcompro1@yahoo.com 
Ethel Ong  
College of Computer Studies 
De La Salle University, Manila, Philippines 
ethel.ong@delasalle.ph 
 
Ruli Manurung 
Faculty of Computer Science 
University of Indonesia, Jakarta, Indonesia 
maruli@cs.ui.ac.id 
 
 
Adam Pease 
Articulate Software 
Angwin, California, USA 
apease@articulatesoftware.com 
 
 
Abstract 
Automatic story generation systems require a 
body of commonsense knowledge about the 
basic relationships between concepts we find 
everyday in our world in order to produce in-
teresting narratives that describe human ac-
tions and world events. This paper presents an 
ongoing work that investigates the use of 
Suggested Upper Merged Ontology (SUMO) 
to represent storytelling knowledge and its in-
ference engine Sigma to query actions and 
events that may take place in the story to be 
generated. The resulting story plan (fabula) is 
also represented in SUMO, allowing for a sin-
gle story representation to be realized in vari-
ous human languages. 
1 Introduction 
People combine words and events from their 
knowledge source of words, their meanings and 
their relationships in order to tell stories about their 
lives, their communities, and their daily expe-
riences. In order for computers to achieve the same 
level of expressiveness to provide a more fluent 
man-machine interaction, they must be provided 
with the same collection of knowledge about the 
basic relationships between things and events. 
Picture Books (Solis et al 2009), an automatic 
story generator that generates story text for child-
ren from a given input set of picture elements 
(backgrounds, characters and objects), utilized a 
semantic ontology whose design has been adapted 
from ConceptNet (Liu and Singh, 2004). The 
background serves as the setting of the story and is 
also used to determine the theme. Semantic con-
cepts needed by the story planner, specifically ob-
jects, story events, and character actions are 
classified according to the semantic categories of 
ConceptNet, namely things, spatial, events, ac-
tions, and functions. This mapping approach con-
strained the flexibility of the system, as new 
themes would entail repopulating the sequences of 
possible events manually into the knowledge base. 
Events and actions are selected according to their 
associated themes, and not marked with precondi-
tions that specify constraints under which certain 
actions can be performed and the corresponding 
consequential events that may arise. 
Swartjes (2006) developed a story world ontolo-
gy containing two layers, the upper story world 
ontology and the domain-specific world ontology. 
The upper story world ontology is independent of 
any story structures or story domains and models a 
vast amount of possible actions and events. It is 
also limited to high-level concepts that are meta, 
generic or abstract to address a broad range of do-
main areas. A domain-specific story world ontolo-
gy, on the other hand, applies the upper story 
world ontology to a certain story domain. 
Kooijman (2004) suggests the use of the Sug-
gested Upper Merged Ontology (SUMO) as an 
upper ontology to capture the semantics of world 
knowledge. SUMO (Niles and Pease, 2001) is an 
40
open source formal and public ontology. It is a col-
lection of well-defined and well-documented con-
cepts, interconnected into a logical theory. It 
numbers some 20,000 terms and 70,000 axioms. 
Axioms are in first-order logic form (with some 
higher order extensions) and reflect commonsense 
notions that are generally recognized among the 
concepts. They place a constraint on the interpreta-
tion of concepts and provide guidelines for auto-
mated reasoning systems such as Sigma (Pease, 
2003). Formal terms in SUMO are mapped to syn-
sets in WordNet (Pease, 2006). 
There are other noteworthy ontologies that can 
be considered. Like SUMO, Cyc (Lenat, 1995) is a 
large-scale, language-independent and extensible 
knowledge base and commonsense reasoning en-
gine, but it is proprietary and its open-source ver-
sion, OpenCyc1, has no inference rules. DOLCE 
(Gangemi, 2003) is a small-scale descriptive on-
tology with a cognitive orientation. BFO (Smith, 
1998) is another small-scale upper ontology sup-
porting domain ontologies developed for scientific 
research domain, such as biomedicine. Thus, no 
ontology other than SUMO had the characteristics 
of being comprehensive enough to include forma-
lizations that represent detailed elements of every-
day life (e.g., furniture, breaking an object, 
emotion), being open-source, having expressive-
ness of at least first order predicate calculus so that 
arbitrary rules about actions and consequences can 
be represented, having an associated open-source 
first-order inference engine, and a language gener-
ation capability so that stories can be automatically 
presented in multiple human languages 
This paper presents SUMOs (SUMO Stories), 
an automatic story generator that uses first-order 
logic to declaratively describe models of the world, 
specifically those aspects of the world that 
represent storytelling knowledge for children?s 
stories of the fable form. The story planner then 
utilizes an open source browsing and inference 
engine Sigma to infer this knowledge to generate a 
story plan (fabula) also in first-order logic form.  
Using first-order logic enables a less restricted 
semantics compared to description logic, which is 
commonly used for knowledge representation of 
large ontologies. Though having lesser constraints 
will have an impact on the speed of inference, it is 
overcome by the advantage of having greater re-
                                                          
1
 OpenCyc web site, http://www.opencyc.org/ 
presentational capability. In particular, the axi-
omatic nature of actions and their consequences, so 
essential for reasoning about narrative structures, is 
not supported by description logics, which focus 
on category and instance membership reasoning. 
Section 2 provides a background on the know-
ledge required by story generation and how these 
were represented in Picture Books, which is used 
as the basis for the storytelling knowledge. Section 
3 discusses the representation of the storytelling 
knowledge to SUMO. The SUMOs architecture 
depicting the interaction between the story planner 
and Sigma to derive the story plan is then pre-
sented in Section 4. The paper concludes with a 
summary of what we have accomplished so far, 
and presents further work that can be done. 
2 Storytelling Knowledge  
Theune and her colleagues (2006) presented five 
levels of the different aspects of a story that must 
be represented in the semantic network. These are 
the story world knowledge, character representa-
tions, a causal and temporal network to represent 
plot structures, representational model of narrato-
logical concepts, and the representation of the sto-
ry?s potential effects on the user. Only the first four 
levels are included in this study. 
According to Swartjes (2006), a story is com-
posed of a story world where the story takes place, 
the characters that interact in the story world, and 
the associated objects. Consider the story generat-
ed by Picture Books in Table 1 about Rizzy the 
rabbit who learns to be honest (Hong et al 2008). 
The afternoon was windy. Rizzy the rabbit was in the 
dining room. She played near a lamp. Rizzy broke the 
lamp. She was scared. Mommy Francine saw that the 
lamp was broken. Rizzy told Mommy Francine that Da-
niel broke the lamp. Daniel the dog told her that he did 
not break the lamp. Daniel was upset. He got punished. 
Mommy Francine told Daniel that he was grounded. He 
cried. Rizzy felt guilty. She told Mommy Francine that 
she broke the lamp. Mommy Francine told Rizzy that 
she should have been honest. Rizzy apologized to 
Mommy Francine. Mommy Francine forgave Rizzy. 
Rizzy apologized to Daniel. He forgave her. Mommy 
Francine told Rizzy to be honest. She told her that being 
honest is good. From that day onwards, Rizzy always 
was honest. 
Table 1. Sample story generated by Picture Books 
(Hong et al 2008) 
41
The story elements in Table 1 were determined 
from the background (i.e., dining room), the cha-
racters (i.e., Rizzy and her mommy Francine) and 
object (i.e., lamp) that the child user places into 
his/her picture using the Picture Editor of the sys-
tem in Figure 1. 
The background serves as the main setting of the 
story, and combined with the selected objects, is 
used to determine the theme. Consider the bed-
room setting. If the associated object is a lamp, 
then the theme is about bravery (i.e., do not be 
afraid of the dark). If the object is a set of toy 
blocks, the theme can be about being neat. In Pic-
ture Books, such associations are manually deter-
mined and entered into the database. In SUMOs, 
these associations should be inferred automatically 
through axioms that should be commonsense, and 
not be explicit encoding of narrative knowledge.  
 
Figure 2. Picture Editor (Hong et al 2008) 
 
Stories generated by Picture Books follow a ba-
sic plot dictated by Machado (2003) that flows 
from negative to positive and comprises four sub-
plots, namely the problem, rising action, solution 
and climax. The theme is subdivided into these 
four subplots, each representing a major event in 
the story. 
Each subplot contains at least two author goals 
representing the goal of the scene and the corres-
ponding consequence of the goal. An author goal is 
translated into one or more character goals, each 
representing an action performed by the character 
(main, secondary, or adult character) in order to 
achieve the author goal. A character goal translates 
directly to one declarative sentence in the generat-
ed story. Table 2 shows the author goals and the 
character goals for some of the sentences in the 
story in Table 1. 
The design of the character goal is based from 
the action operators of Uijlings (2006) which is 
easily transformed to a declarative sentence in ac-
tive voice using the surface realizer simpleNLG 
(Venour and Reiter, 2008). In the case of Picture 
Books, however, the approach resulted in a story 
where every sentence describes an action or a feel-
ing (i.e., scared, guilty, upset) that is performed by 
the character, as seen in Table 1. 
Subplot #1 
Author goal 1.1: 
Goal of the scene Child is doing an activity 
Character goal <character> plays <object> 
Resulting text Rizzy the rabbit played near a lamp. 
Author goal 1.2: 
Goal consequence Child caused a problem 
Character goal <character> destroys <object> 
Resulting text Rizzy broke the lamp. 
Subplot #2 
Author goal 2.1: 
Goal of the scene Child lied 
Character goal 
<main character> told <adult 
character> that <secondary 
character> <did the action> 
Resulting text Rizzy told Mommy Francine that Daniel the dog broke the lamp. 
Author goal 2.2: 
Goal consequence Another child gets punished 
Character goal #1 <secondary character> receives 
<punishment> 
Resulting text #1 Daniel the dog got punished. 
Character goal #2 
<adult character> issues <pu-
nishment> to <secondary cha-
racter> 
Resulting text #2 Mommy Francine told Daniel 
that he was grounded. 
Table 2. Sample author goals and character goals asso-
ciated with the theme Being Honest (Hong et al 2008) 
 
The story planner of Picture Books utilizes two 
types of knowledge, the operational knowledge 
and the domain knowledge. The operational know-
ledge contains a static description of the different 
backgrounds and their associated themes and ob-
jects, the child characters and their corresponding 
parent characters, as well as the occupation of the 
42
parents. For each theme, the set of character goals 
needed to instantiate the major events in the theme 
are also specified.  
The domain knowledge, on the other hand, con-
tains a semantic description of objects and events 
that can occur, as well as actions that can be per-
formed. For example, breaking an object results to 
getting punished, and grounded is a form of pu-
nishment. 
Character goals are instantiated by accessing the 
semantic ontology to search for concepts that are 
directly related to the input concept. There are two 
search methods. The first method searches for 
another concept that has a relationship with the 
given concept while satisfying the semantic cate-
gory. For example, ontoSpatial(?play?) triggers a 
search for all concepts connected to play within the 
spatial semantic category, such as the semantic 
relationship locationOf(?play?, ?park?). The second 
method searches for a path that semantically re-
lates the two given concepts. For example, ontoAc-
tion(?vase?, ?method of destruction?) triggers a 
search for a path to relate how a vase can be de-
stroyed, and yields the following relationships: 
CapableOf(?break?, ?vase?) 
Isa(?method of destruction?, ?break?)  
3 Representing Storytelling Knowledge in 
SUMO 
A crucial part of the work involved in the devel-
opment of SUMOs is the representation of the sto-
rytelling knowledge and the evolving story plan in 
SUMO and the use of the Sigma reasoning engine 
to infer story facts and events. 
The storytelling knowledge represented in 
SUMO includes the semantic description about 
concepts, objects and their relationships. From a 
given input set of story elements comprising the 
selected background, characters, and objects, a 
query is sent to Sigma to determine a possible 
starting action that can be performed by the main 
character in the story. The story then progresses 
based on the relationships of character actions and 
reactions, which are the stored facts in SUMO. 
Similar to Picture Books, the resulting story plan 
is created based on a pre-authored plot of problem, 
rising action, resolution and climax. But instead of 
attaching the next set of actions and emotions of 
characters to author goals, in SUMOs, the set of 
actions that a character can do ? reaction to events 
and objects, experience emotions such as joy and 
sadness, and subsequent actions based on their 
emotions ? are represented in SUMO logic. 
The storytelling knowledge was formulated us-
ing a set of predicates that can be classified into 
four main types. Factual predicates specify proper-
ties of characters, objects, and locations. Semantic 
predicates define the semantic relationships be-
tween concepts. Actions and events predicates de-
fine the causal relationships between actions and 
events. Thematic predicates represent a new set of 
predicates to relate story themes to actions. 
3.1 Conceptualizing Story Characters, Ob-
jects, and Backgrounds 
Factual predicates represent the characters, their 
roles, the locations, and the objects that may com-
prise a story. The class and subclass axioms of 
SUMO2 are used to define the set of characters, 
objects and locations.  
Children?s stories of the fable form are por-
trayed by animals that can capture the  imagina-
tion and attention of the readers. Animal characters 
are given names, such as Ellen the elephant, Rizzy 
the rabbit, and Leo the lion, to give the impression 
that the characters are friends that the children are 
getting to know better through reading the story 
(Solis et al 2009). Representing this in SUMO 
entails the use of the subclass axiom to represent 
class inheritance as shown below: 
(subclass RabbitCharacter StoryCharacter) 
Class definitions include slots that describe the 
attributes of instances of the class and their rela-
tions to other instances (Noy, 2001). A character in 
SUMOs has the attributes type (whether adult or 
child), gender, and name. An example axiom to 
represent a female child RabbitCharacter whose 
name will be ?Rizzy? is shown below. Similar 
axioms are defined for all the other characters. 
(=> 
  (and 
    (instance ?RABBIT RabbitCharacter) 
    (attribute ?RABBIT Female) 
    (attribute ?RABBIT Child)) 
  (name ?RABBIT "Rizzy")) 
Backgrounds and objects are also defined using 
the subclass axiom and inherit from existing 
classes in SUMO, for example, 
                                                          
2
 SUMO Ontology Portal, http://www.ontologyportal.org/ 
43
(subclass LivingRoom Room) 
(subclass Lamp LightFixture) 
(subclass Lamp ElectricDevice) 
(attribute Lamp Fragile) 
Further definitions can be provided for living 
room to differentiate it from other rooms, such as 
being disjoint from bathroom, and has a primary 
purpose of supporting social interaction, as shown 
below. Similarly, the definition for lamp can also 
be extended to distinguish it from other electric 
light fixtures, e.g., a lamp is moveable unlike a 
chandelier, but is plugged in when operating unlike 
a flashlight. 
(=> 
 (instance ?R LivingRoom) 
     (hasPurpose ?R 
          (exists (?S) 
              (and 
              (instance ?S SocialInteraction) 
              (located ?S ?R))))) 
(disjoint  LivingRoom Bathroom) 
3.2 Representing Semantic Concepts 
Aside from the properties of objects that are mod-
eled using the attribute axiom, semantic relation-
ships that may hold between two concepts 
involving types of activities or actions, character 
emotions, locations of objects, and abilities of cha-
racters or objects must also be modeled. Table 3 
shows sample semantic relationships for these con-
cepts as represented in Picture Books, following 
the semantic categories of ConceptNet (Liu and 
Singh, 2004). 
Objects IsA (doll, toys) 
Activities IsA (play games, activity) 
Concepts 
IsA (grounded, punishment) 
IsA (disorder, problem) 
IsA (no appetite, problem) 
IsA (dizzy, discomfort) 
IsA (itchy, discomfort) 
Emotions IsA (happy, emotion) IsA (scared, emotion) 
Reaction to 
Events 
EffectOf (break object, scared) 
EffectOf (meet new friends, smile) 
Location LocationOf (toys, toy store) 
Capability 
CapableOf (lamp, break) 
CapableOf (glass of water, break) 
CanBe (toys, scattered) 
Table 3. Semantic relationships in Picture Books based 
on ConceptNet (Hong et al 2008) 
In SUMOs, all isA(entity1, entity2) relations 
were replaced with the axiom (subclass entity1 
entity2). To specify that an entity is in a location, 
i.e., locationOf(toys, toy store), first, we create an 
instance of a toystore and then specify that a cer-
tain toy instance is in that toystore, as follows:  
(=> 
    (instance ?TOYSTORE ToyStore) 
    (exists (?TOY) 
        (and 
            (instance ?TOY Toy) 
            (located ?TOY ?TOYSTORE)))) 
The capability axiom is used to conceptualize 
the capability relation (capability ?process ?role 
?obj). It specifies that ?obj has the specified ?role 
in the ?process. For example, a lamp or a glass is 
the patient (receiver) of the process breaking, 
while a toy is the patient for the process scattering. 
(capability Breaking experiencer Lamp) 
(capability Breaking experiencer Glass) 
(capability Scattering experiencer Toy) 
Reaction to events is expressed using the if-else 
axiom of SUMO, for example, if a child character 
causes an accident (a damage), then he/she will 
feel anxiety. Emotions are represented using the 
attribute relation. 
 (=> 
    (and 
      (instance ?ACCIDENT Damaging) 
      (instance ?CHARACTER StoryCharacter) 
      (attribute ?CHARACTER Child) 
      (agent ?ACCIDENT ?CHARACTER)) 
    ((attribute ?CHARACTER Anxiety))) 
3.3 Conceptualizing Actions and Events 
Swartjes (2006) noted that organizing actions and 
events, and causally relating them, is an essential 
step in story generation. Independent of the story 
plot, the causes and effects of character actions can 
be used to describe the events that form the story.  
Actions define activities that can be performed 
by a character in the story, such as play, tell a lie, 
or cry. Events, on the other hand, occur in the story 
as a result of performing some actions, such as a 
lamp breaking as a result of a character or an ob-
ject hitting it. Swartjes (2006) further notes that 
events are not executed by a character. 
Action predicates are used to define the actions 
that may take place given a set of world state. Con-
sider the axiom below which provides a set of four 
44
possible actions ? RecreationOrExercise, Looking, 
Maintaining, and Poking ? that can be performed 
(as an agent) or experienced by a child character 
who is situated near a lamp object in the story 
world. These four actions are subclasses of the In-
tentionalProcess of SUMO. 
 (=> 
  (and 
    (orientation ?CHARACTER ?OBJECT Near) 
    (instance ?CHARACTER StoryCharacter) 
    (attribute ?CHARACTER Child) 
    (instance ?OBJECT Lamp)) 
  (and 
    (capability RecreationOrExercise  
experiencer ?CHARACTER) 
    (capability Looking experiencer ?CHARACTER) 
    (capability Maintaining experiencer ?CHARACTER) 
    (capability Poking experiencer ?CHARACTER))) 
Again, the capability relation is used but in this 
instance, to specify that the character has the role 
of experiencing the specified process. While both 
the agent and the experiencer roles represent the 
doer of a process, an experiencer does not entail a 
causal relation between its arguments. 
Event predicates are used to model explicit 
events that may take place as a result of some cha-
racter actions. Consider again the exists axiom be-
low which states that an instance of an event (in 
this case damaging) can occur when there is a 
child character (the agent) playing near a fragile 
object. The subprocess axiom is used to represent a 
temporally distinguished part of a process and also 
expresses a chain of cause and effect subprocesses 
for playing and damaging. The recipient (patient) 
of the event is the object. 
(=> 
 (and 
   (agent ?X ?CHARACTER) 
   (instance ?CHARACTER StoryCharacter) 
   (attribute ?CHARACTER Child) 
   (instance ?OBJECT Object) 
   (attribute ?OBJECT Fragile) 
   (instance ?X RecreationOrExercise) 
   (orientation ?CHARACTER ?OBJECT Near) 
 (exists (?DAMAGE) 
   (and 
     (instance ?DAMAGE Damaging) 
     (subProcess ?DAMAGE ?X) 
     (agent ?DAMAGE ?CHARACTER) 
     (patient ?DAMAGE ?OBJECT)))) 
Although suitable for inference, the given axiom 
does not fully capture the desired truth as the no-
tion of time is not represented. The axiom says ?if 
a child plays at any point in time, and is near an 
object at any point in time (not necessarily while 
playing), then the object gets damaged during 
playing?.  The more accurate axiom below uses 
holdsDuring to show that the time frames of the 
actual playing and being near the object are the 
same, thus increasing the likelihood of the charac-
ter who is playing to cause the damage. 
(=> 
 (and 
   (instance ?X RecreationOrExercise) 
   (agent ?X ?CHARACTER) 
   (instance ?CHARACTER StoryCharacter) 
   (attribute ?CHARACTER Child) 
   (instance ?OBJECT Object) 
   (attribute ?OBJECT Fragile) 
   (holdsDuring (WhenFn ?X) 
       (orientation ?CHARACTER ?OBJECT Near)) 
(exists (?DAMAGE) 
   (and 
     (instance ?DAMAGE Damaging) 
     (subProcess ?DAMAGE ?X) 
     (agent ?DAMAGE ?CHARACTER) 
     (patient ?DAMAGE ?OBJECT)))) 
As the representation shows, SUMO is quite ca-
pable of encoding temporal properties of events 
with its temporal qualification. However, inferenc-
ing with rules involving time relations between 
events is currently not supported by Sigma (Corda 
et al 2008). Nevertheless, efforts are underway to 
perform true higher-order logical inference (Sut-
cliffe et al 2009). 
The next step involves deriving axioms to 
represent the different ways in which an object can 
be damaged depending on its attribute, for exam-
ple, fragile objects can break while paper-based 
objects such as books and paintings can be torn. 
Consideration must also be made to determine if a 
damage is an accident or intentional. 
3.4 Conceptualizing Story Themes 
Themes can also be mapped to SUMO as thematic 
predicates, and the story planner can identify a 
theme either based on the first action that was per-
formed, or based on user selection. In the latter 
case, when Sigma returns all possible actions, the 
planner can choose one based on the theme. 
45
4 System Architecture 
The architecture of SUMOs, shown in Figure 2, 
has two main modules, the Story Editor and the 
Story Planner, both of which interact with Sigma3 
to retrieve story facts from the SUMO ontology as 
well as to assert new axioms representing the de-
veloping story plan back to SUMO. 
 
Figure 2. Architecture of SUMOs 
 
The Story Editor handles the generation of as-
sertions corresponding to the input picture ele-
ments specified by the user.  
The Story Planner is responsible for planning 
the flow of events in the story. It uses a meta-
knowledge about children?s story comprising of 
five phases ? introduction, problem, rising action, 
solution, and climax. The planner determines and 
phrases the queries that are sent to Sigma and ge-
nerates additional axioms based on the query re-
sults in order to expand the story plan. The 
generated axioms are asserted back to Sigma for 
inclusion in the SUMO ontology to be used again 
for further inferencing.  
Queries sent to Sigma can be classified into 
three categories. Concept-based queries concern 
classes and instances, and are used to determine 
direct and indirect subclass and class-instance rela-
tionships while relation-based queries infer know-
ledge by considering transitivity, symmetry and 
inversion of relations (Corda et al 2008). Action-
based queries identify a set of actions based on the 
                                                          
3
 Sigma Knowledge Engineering Environment,  
http://sigmakee.sourceforge.net  
current world state to drive the story. A fourth cat-
egory, time-event queries, currently not supported 
by Sigma, should reason about temporal and event-
based specifications. 
The interaction between the Story Planner and 
Sigma in Figure 2 raises an issue of search control. 
In Picture Books and SUMOs, information that 
guides the story planning can be bottom-up, i.e. the 
actions and events are determined based on what is 
possible within the story ontology, e.g. through the 
various capability axioms, or top-down, i.e. actions 
are selected based on Machado's narrative subplot 
knowledge. Currently, the Story Planner is respon-
sible for managing the process. However, if both 
these sources of knowledge and constraints can be 
represented in first-order logic, the search control 
of the story planning process can be recast as a 
theorem proving task, i.e. one that searches for a 
proof that satisfies all constraints. This is a future 
research direction. 
The following section presents a more detailed 
trace of system operation and the contents of a sto-
ry plan in first-order logic. 
4.1 Generating Story Plans 
The first part of the story plan contains assertions 
to represent the initial elements of the story. Using 
the story in Table 1 as an example, lines 1 to 6 be-
low assert the main child character and her parent, 
while lines 7 to 8 assert the background and the 
object, respectively.  
1>   (instance Rabbit1 RabbitCharacter) 
2>  (attribute Rabbit1 Child) 
3>  (attribute Rabbit1 Female) 
4>  (instance Rabbit2 RabbitCharacter) 
5>  (attribute Rabbit2 Adult) 
6>  (attribute Rabbit2 Female) 
7>  (instance LivingRoom1 LivingRoom) 
8>  (instance Lamp1 Lamp) 
The next step involves initializing the locations 
of these story elements. Currently, it is setup that 
all objects would be situated in the background and 
the first child character would always be near the 
first object, as shown in the assertions below.  
9>  (located Rabbit1 LivingRoom1) 
10>  (located Lamp1 LivingRoom1) 
11>  (orientation Rabbit1 Lamp1 Near) 
This, however, creates the assumption that the 
child character is already in the location near ob-
jects which he will interact with, which may not 
return 
results 
abstract 
story plan 
assertions 
assertions 
obtain 
results 
Story 
Editor SUMO 
Ontology 
(Story 
Ontology) 
SIGMA  
(Inference 
Engine) 
Story 
Planner 
Story plan  
(SUMO) 
query 
46
necessarily be true and reduces the flexibility of 
the system. In order to create more varied stories, 
the initial location can be identified based on the 
theme and the first event that the user would want 
to likely happen in the story. 
From the initial set of assertions, the story plan-
ner issues its first concept-based query to Sigma 
with ?(name Rabbit1 ?X)? to determine a name for 
the main character, Rabbit1, and receives ?Rizzy? 
as a result. This is asserted to the story plan as: 
12>  (name Rabbit1 ?Rizzy?) 
The next query is the first action-based query 
used to determine the first action to start the story 
flow. Given ?(capability ?X experiencer Rabbit1)?, 
which is intended for identifying the set of possible 
starting actions that the main character, Rabbit1, 
can perform with the object in the background, 
Sigma returns the following list (assuming the sto-
ry facts given in the previous section):  
X = [RecreationOrExercise, Looking, 
Maintaining, Poking]  
Assuming the planner selects RecreationOrEx-
ercise, the following assertions are then added to 
the story plan: 
13>  (instance RecOrEx1 RecreationOrExercise)  
14>  (agent RecOrEx1 Rabbit1) 
At this point, the introduction phase of the story 
plan has been completed. The problem phase be-
gins with a query to identify any instances of prob-
lems that can occur, i.e. ?(instance ?X Damaging)?. 
Damaging the object lamp causes its attribute to be 
changed, and again we query Sigma for this 
change of state with ?(attribute Lamp1 ?X)? yielding 
the result broken, and the corresponding emotional 
state of the character ?(attribute Rabbit1 ?X)?. The 
following assertions were added to the plan: 
15>  (instance (sk0 Rabbit1 Lamp1   
                   RecOrEx1) Damaging) 
16>  (attribute Lamp1 Broken) 
17>  (attribute Rabbit1 Anxiety) 
While a full explanation of skolemization is not 
possible here for space reasons, we note that the 
second argument of assertion #15 (derived from 
Sigma?s answer to the query) stands for the exis-
tence of an unnamed term, in this case, that there is 
an instance of a Damaging process. The agent 
(Rabbit1), patient (Lamp1), and the action (RecO-
rEx1) that caused the problem were all provided in 
the query result. 
4.2 Generating Surface Text 
SUMO-based story plans provide a form of inter-
lingua where story details are represented in logi-
cal form. The logical representation allows 
generation of the same story in different languages 
(that are connected to WordNet). Sigma already 
has a language generator, with templates for Eng-
lish, and an initial set for Tagalog (Borra et al 
2010).  Work is currently underway to enhance the 
existing language generator in Sigma and make the 
generated text more natural. Sigma can then be 
used to generate stories automatically from the 
knowledge asserted in the story generation process. 
5 Conclusions and Further Work 
The paper presented a preliminary work aimed at 
representing storytelling knowledge in SUMO and 
using Sigma as inference engine to assist the plan-
ner in generating story plans. Further work focuses 
on modeling the emotional state of the character as 
a result of some event (e.g., feeling worried, guilty 
or scared due to causing some problems in the 
world state), changes in character traits as the story 
progresses (e.g., from negative trait to positive trait 
as the story flows from rule violation to value ac-
quisition), and enhancing the representation for 
story themes. Once a set of knowledge has been 
developed, these should be evaluated systematical-
ly through validation of the rules for logical consis-
tency with the theorem prover. A future goal is to 
apply the metrics proposed by Callaway & Lester 
(2002) in StoryBook to evaluate with actual users 
if the generated stories are better and more varied 
as compared to that of Picture Books. 
Although SUMO is quite capable of 
representing time and sequences, reasoning with 
temporally qualified expression is challenging for 
any theorem prover. The works of (Sutcliffe et al 
2009) to extend the inference engine to handle rea-
soning over temporal relations should be explored 
further to allow SUMOs to generate story plans 
that consider temporal relations between actions 
and events. 
Finally, story generators will benefit its readers 
if the generated stories are narrated orally. SUMOs 
can be explored further to model various emotions 
to provide annotations in the surface story text 
which will then be fed to a text to speech tool for 
speech generation. 
47
References 
Borra, A., Pease, A., Roxas, R. and Dita, S. 2010. Intro-
ducing Filipino WordNet. In: Principles, Construc-
tion and Application of Multilingual Wordnets: 
Proceedings of the 5th Global WordNet Conference, 
Mumbai, India. 
Callaway, C. B., and Lester, J. C. 2002. Narrative Prose 
Generation. Artificial Intelligence, 139(2):213-252, 
Elsevier Science Publishers Ltd., Essex, UK.  
Corda, I., Bennett, B., and Dimitrova, V. 2008. Interact-
ing with an Ontology to Explore Historical Domains. 
Proceedings of the 2008 First International Work-
shop on Ontologies in Interactive Systems, 65-74, 
IEEE Computer Society. 
Gangemi, A., Guarino, N., Masolo, C., and Oltramari, 
A. 2003. AI Magazine, 24(3):13-24, Association for 
the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence. 
Kooijman, R. 2004. De virtuele verhalenverteller: 
voorstel voor het gebruik van een upper-ontology en 
een nieuwe architectuur. Technical  Report. Universi-
ty of Twente, Department of Electrical Engineering, 
Mathematics and Computer Science. 
Hong, A., Solis, C., Siy, J.T., and Tabirao, E. 2008. Pic-
ture Books: Automated Story Generator. Undergra-
duate Thesis, De La Salle University, Manila, 
Philippines. 
Lenat, D.B. 1995. Cyc: A Large-Scale Investment in 
Knowledge Infrastructure, Communications of the 
ACM, 38(11).  
Liu, H. and Singh, P. 2004. Commonsense Reasoning in 
and over Natural Language. Proceedings of the 8th 
International Conference on Knowledge-Based Intel-
ligent Information and Engineering Systems, 293-
306, Wellington, New Zealand, Springer Berlin. 
Machado, J. 2003. Storytelling. In Early Childhood 
Experiences in Language Arts: Emerging Literacy, 
304-319. Clifton Park, N.Y., Thomson/Delmar 
Learning. 
Niles, I. and Pease, A. 2001. Towards A Standard Upper 
Ontology.   Proceedings of Formal Ontology in 
Information Systems (FOIS 2001), 2-9, October 17-
19, Ogunquit, Maine, USA. 
Noy, N. and McGuinness, D. 2001. Ontology Develop-
ment 101: A Guide to Creating Your First Ontology. 
Stanford Knowledge Systems Laboratory Technical 
Report KSL-01-05 and Stanford Medical Informatics 
Technical Report SMI-2001-0880, March 2001. 
Ong, E. 2009. Prospects in Creative Natural Language 
Processing. Proceedings of the 6th National Natural 
Language Processing Research Symposium, De La 
Salle University, Manila, Philippines. 
 
 
 
 
 
Pease, A. 2006. Formal Representation of Concepts: 
The Suggested Upper Merged Ontology and Its Use 
in Linguistics. Ontolinguistics. How Ontological Sta-
tus Shapes the Linguistic Coding of Concepts. Schal-
ley, A.C. and Zaefferer, D. (ed.), Vorbereitung 
Berlin, New York. 
Pease, A. 2003. The Sigma Ontology Development En-
vironment. Working Notes of the IJCAI-2003 Work-
shop on Ontology and Distributed Systems, vol. 71 of 
CEUR Workshop Proceeding series. 
Riedl, M. and Young, R.M. 2004. An Intent-Driven 
Planner for Multi-Agent Story Generation. Proceed-
ings of the Third International Joint Conference on 
Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, 186-
193, Washington DC, USA, IEEE Computer Society. 
Smith, B. 1998. The Basic Tools of Formal Ontology. 
Formal Ontology in Information Systems, Nicola Gu-
arino (ed),  IOS Press, Washington. Frontiers in Ar-
tificial Intelligence and Applications, 19-28. 
Solis, C., Siy, J.T., Tabirao, E., and Ong, E. 2009. Plan-
ning Author and Character Goals for Story Genera-
tion. Proceedings of the NAACL Human Language 
Technology 2009 Workshop on Computational Ap-
proaches to Linguistic Creativity, 63-70, Boulder, 
Colorado, USA. 
Sutcliffe, G., Benzm?ller, C., Brown, C.E., and Theiss, 
F. 2009. Progress in the Development of Automated 
Theorem Proving for Higher-order Logic. Automated 
Deduction, 22nd International Conference on Auto-
mated Deduction, Montreal, Canada, August 2-7, 
2009. Proceedings of the Lecture Notes in AI, vol. 
5663, 116-130, 2009, Springer. 
Swartjes, I. 2006. The Plot Thickens: Bringing Structure 
and Meaning into Automated Story Generation. Mas-
ter's Thesis, University of Twente, The Netherlands. 
Theune, M., Nijholt, A., Oinonen, K., and Uijlings J. 
2006. Designing a Story Database for Use in Auto-
matic Story Generation.  Proceedings 5th Interna-
tional Conference Entertainment Computing, 
Cambridge, UK. Lecturer Notes in Computer 
Science, 4161:298-301, Heidelberg, Springer Berlin. 
Uijlings, J.R.R. 2006. Designing a Virtual Environment 
for Story Generation. MS Thesis, University of Ams-
terdam, The Netherlands. 
Venour, C. and Reiter, E. 2008. A Tutorial for Sim-
plenlg. http://www.csd.abdn.ac.uk/~ereiter/simplenlg 
WordNet. 2006. WordNet: A Lexical Database for the 
English Language. Princeton University, New Jersey. 
48
Zock/Rapp/Huang (eds.): Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of the Lexicon, pages 138?143,
Dublin, Ireland, August 23, 2014.
Default Physical Measurements in SUMO
Francesca Quattri
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Hong Kong
francesca.quattri@connect.polyu.hk
Adam Pease
?
adam.pease@articulatesoftware.com
John P. M
c
Crae
Universit?at Bielefeld
Germany
jmccrae@cit-ec.uni-bielefeld.de
Abstract
The following paper presents a further extension of the Suggested Upper Merged Ontology
(SUMO), i. e. the development of default physical measurements for most of its classes
(Artifacts, Devices, Objects) and respective children. The extension represents an ar-
bitrary, computable and reproducible approximation of defaults for upper and middle-level con-
cepts. The paper illustrates advantages of such extension, challenges encountered during the
compilation, related work and future research.
1 Introduction
Over the last fourteen years SUMO (Pease, 2011; Niles and Pease, 2001) has been developed into a large,
general-domain ontology, which currently
1
includes 20,000 terms and 80,000 axioms stated in higher-
order logic (Pease and Schulz, 2014). SUMO provides an open source environment for the development
of logical theories called SIGMA (Pease, 2011; Pease, 2003b). This enables the manipulation of different
formal languages (including TPTP and OWL), (Adam Pease and Sams, 2003; Pease, 2003a). Among
them, the logical formal language SUO-KIF has been selected for the development of knowledge-based
(or KB) terms, through which SUMO can be searched. Another possible search of terms in SUMO is via
the Princeton WordNet ?, to which the ontology has been fully mapped(Pease and Niles, 2003; Pease
and Li, 2003; Pease and Murray, 2003).
In the first part of this paper, after introducing SUMO in generic terms, we explain the motivation
behind the undergone extension of 300+ physical default measurements (the term ?default? is hereby used
as synonym for ?approximation? or ?estimation?). The second part deals with the advantages and issues
encountered during the compilation of the defaults, and presents some practical examples of defaults and
higher-order annotation. Related research and future work follow.
2 Default physical measurements in SUMO
The original intent behind the development of default physical measurements in SUMO is to provide
factual peer-reviewed information about physical measurements of ontological classes. Almost all ap-
proximations of the default values have been established with reference to current ISO standards or norms
set by governmental regulations. Only in the case that standard values are not provided or could not be
retrieved, the compiler of the defaults has relied on personal judgment. In both cases, all defaults have
been manually double-checked for validity by the compiler and the SUMO developer.
SUMO seems to be one of the first general-knowledge ontologies to provide extensive information on
physical default measurements. Other data bases like DBpedia have (according to the authors? knowl-
edge) just recently started to provide a similar kind of information.
2
The physical defaults represent a big
repository of approximated values based on physical properties, such as length, volume, size, width and
?
Same affiliation of the first author.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence. Page numbers and proceedings footer
are added by the organisers. Licence details: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
1
As for the year 2014.
2
http://dbpedia.org/property/reference
138
height. The approximation, as the term itself says, is partly arbitrary, computable, and comprehensively
conducted. The measurements are formalized in minimum and maximum default values. The wording
?maximum? and ?minimum? should not been treated as the highest and lowest values attached to the
respective Artifacts, but as some high or low values these Entitys can own.
2.1 Advantages
We believe that the compilation of the defaults accomplishes three major advantages in the current format
of the SUMO ontology:
1. Ontological formalization.
2. Objective adjustable values of physical properties.
3. Computable reproducible estimations of physical values.
Point (1) mirrors SUMO attempt as extensive ontology of general knowledge. Natural language fails
in providing specificity for every single word and predicate, partly due to polysemy, synonymy as well as
objective limitations of extensive precise formal description. We often refer to a term in vague sense and
meaning, such as in the case of ?car? or ?truck?. For further specification of the same, we tend to create
new lemmas, derivatives and compounds. SUMO underscores a lemma in its definitional and ontolog-
ical extent and the defaults consider the lemma as prototypical. As for its definitional extent, SUMO
provides the definition of the lemma as reported in the Princeton WordNet ?. As ontological and proto-
typical entity, the lemma is described in first-order and/or higher-order logic and thus transformed into a
SUO-KIF KB term. In the case of Truck, the term is enlisted under TransportationDevice
in SUMO. The following description in first-order logic (containing the quantifier ?exists?) specifi-
cally states: ?If a TransportationDevice is an instance of a Truck, then there exists a kind
of Object such that a kind of Object is a subclass of Object and kind of Object is a Cargo type
of TransportationDevice.
(=>
(instance ?T Truck)
(exists (?L)
(and
(subclass ?L Object)
(cargoType ?T ?L))))
Figure 1.: Example of a first-order axiom in SUO-KIF
Entity 2
Physical 5
Object 11
Artifact 58
Device 112
TransportationDevice 9
Vehicle 12
LandVehicle 10
RoadVehicle 6
PoweredVehicle 12
SelfPoweredRoadVehicle 4
CargoVehicle 1
Truck 3
MilitarySupplyTruck
LightTruck
TruckTractor 1
PeterbiltTruck
Figure 2.: Graphic documentation of the relation subclass for the term Truck with relative enumerated
direct-children
Fig. 2 represents a graphic documentation of the same term as taxonomically listed (with the selected
levels ?above? and ?below? Truck set to the value 10). The graph can be further extended to more levels,
thus enabling a comprehensive look of all the branches that depart from the upper concept Entity. As
for fig. 2., SUMO provides a specific taxonomy of the different kinds of Truck.
139
The default measurements in fig. 3 have been partly set by looking at standard measures for the same
Artifact
3
:
;; Truck
(defaultMinimumLength Truck (MeasureFn 39 Foot))
(defaultMaximumLength Truck (MeasureFn Fn 49 Foot))
(defaultMinimumHeight Truck (MeasureFn 13 Foot))
(defaultMaximumHeight Truck (MeasureFn 15 Foot))
(defaultMinimumWidth Truck (MeasureFn 8.4 Foot))
(defaultMaximumWidth Truck (MeasureFn 9 Foot))
;;Vehicle
(defaultMinimumLength Vehicle (MeasureFn 13.5 Foot))
(defaultMaximumLength Vehicle (MeasureFn 14 Foot))
(defaultMinimumHeight Vehicle (MeasureFn 4.6 Foot))
(defaultMaximumHeight Vehicle (MeasureFn 4.8 Foot))
(defaultMinimumWeight Vehicle (MeasureFn 1 TonMass))
(defaultMaximumWeight Vehicle (MeasureFn 1.7 TonMass))
Figure 3.: Extensions of physical defaults for Truck and Vehicle
In fig. 4 the physical default values for CreditCard have been established according to the interna-
tional standard ISO/IEC 7810:2003.
;;CreditCard
(defaultMinimumLength CreditCard (MeasureFn 3.4 Inch))
(defaultMaximumLength CreditCard (MeasureFn 3.4 Inch))
(defaultMinimumHeight CreditCard (MeasureFn 2.1 Inch))
(defaultMaximumHeight CreditCard (MeasureFn 2.1 Inch))
Figure 4.: Extensions of physical defaults for CreditCard
The (2) advantage in having physical default measurements is the objectivity of the properties they
are calculated upon. The defaults are set on objectively comparable properties, such as height, volume,
weight, length and width. These are all features of size and mass that can be counted and approximated,
with different units of measures.
Finally, the (3) advantage that we reckon exists in having the defaults is their computability. De-
spite being relative and partially arbitrary measures
4
, the defaults are adjustable and reproducible, which
makes them adaptable to representation models, peer-review and further estimations. We believe that this
way of calculating defaults of physical Objects is certainly more reliable than other attempted methods
(e. g. (Bennett, 2001):117-118).
5
2.2 Issues encountered during the research
Some challenges were encountered during the compilation of default measurements.
? The defaults cover classes of upper concepts in SUMO, and part of their children, but not the
predicates that can possibly collocate with them. For example, concepts like Aircraft or
Helicopter are covered in SUMO, but not expressions like ?light aircraft? or ?civilian helicopter?.
Sometimes, SUMO already provides a logical description of these adjectives as incorporated in
the concept itself, as in the case of MilitaryAircraft, SelfPoweredRoadVehicle, or
PrintedBook (fig. 4), meaning that rather then specifying the predicate, a new term is created.
SUMO users should bare in mind that the Artifacts in SUMO always aim at representing a
3
As in the case of Truck the defaults have been established by looking at the standard sizes as set by the U.S. Department of
Transportation and Federal Highway Administration, http://www.ops.fhwa.dot.gov/freight/sw/index.htm
4
As previously discussed in the paper, the defaults have been assigned on a subjective basis in case standard defaults could
not been retrieved/are not available. Also, the defaults sometimes apply to one country?s regulations, and are therefore not
internationally valid. Finally, the defaults have been given with selected units of measures (e. g. inches instead of centimeters,
or pounds instead of kilograms. This specified, one should bear in mind the intention of the default extensions, namely to
provide an approximation of prototypical, not universal Artifacts.
5
Bennett, in his study on physical objects and geographic concepts, tries to delimit the boundaries of vague entities by providing
answers to size-related questions (e. g. ?How large an area must a forest occupy? Are there any constraints in its shape? Must
it be maximal or could it share a border with another region of forest??). In SUMO, we believe that the defaults, through which
some of these questions can be answered, are more reliable, since anchored to standard values.
140
prototypical form of the same Object, i. e. a kind that is possibly shared in the collective think-
ing. The representation for Book as showed below aims therefore at representing the possibly most
commonly form of Book known, namely a printed and not an electronic version of the same.
(=>
(instance ?BOOK PrintedBook)
(exists (?SHEET1 ?SHEET2)
(and
(component ?SHEET1 ?BOOK)
(component ?SHEET2 ?BOOK)
(instance ?SHEET1 PrintedSheet)
(instance ?SHEET2 PrintedSheet)
(not
(equal ?SHEET1 ?SHEET2)))))
(=>
(and
(instance ?ARTICLE1 Article)
(instance ?BOOK Book)
(subsumesContentInstance ?BOOK ?
ARTICLE1))
(exists (?ARTICLE2)
(and
(instance ?ARTICLE2 Article)
(not
(equal ?ARTICLE2 ?ARTICLE1))
(subsumesContentInstance ?
BOOK ?ARTICLE2))))
Figure 5.: Comparison between the logical annotation for Book in SUMO with the collocational
unit printed + Book
It needs to be specified that the concept of Attribute in SUMO is differently interpreted from the
concept of predicate or adjective in natural language. Attributes in the Upper Merged Ontology are
instances of upper classes, but there also exists classes of Attributes. The Attribute class can
contain subclasses (e. g. Female, Male, BiologicalAttribute), but these have not been
assigned default physical values. The motivation is basically that we cannot numerically define
abstracta, such as gender, color, or emotions and feelings. In the case of abstract concepts, such as
StockMarket or InterestRate, we have tried to figure out these, where possible, as physical
objects (e. g. the place where financial transactions take place, or the sheet where rates are printed
on).
Other sort of literally definable attributes (including comparative forms) are included in SUMO
in the form of relations, which express, inter alia, equations and inequalities (greaterThan,
smallerThan, larger, earlier, interiorPart, temporalPart, (Pease,
2011):113). Finally, what is defined in SUMO as PhysicalAttribute should
not be confused with the physical default values added to the ontology. Instances of
this class include Compliance, Conductivity, Flammable, Inductance,
MutualInductance, Resistivity, Stiffness.
Despite the lack of a comprehensive cover of linguistically definable collocational compounds in
SUMO (as above mentioned), we estimate that it is not impossible to approximate values for them,
given the existence of defaults for the concept that carries the predicate. For instance, it can be
derived that BigHouse (not enlisted in SUMO) is something that can be 1.9 times bigger than a
Studio, or 0.1 times smaller than a Mansion, once the standard values for House, Studio
and Mansion are given.
Given a partial ordering of gradable adjectives
6
that apply to a particular noun, we could create
axioms (thus inducing a productive process) which would then partition the physical space with
respect to that particular adjective. The fact that we have axioms would eventually release us from
defining defaults for each class. In other words, the most frequently an adjective collocates with a
class or a subclass, the higher is the chance to develop an axiom(s) that enables us to calculate the
defaults for these same classes automatically.
? SUMO provides ontological information regarding concepts in their a-contextual and unidiomatic
form. SUMO terms are not polysemous, therefore there is no notion of reusing a term to mean
something else. This also means that specific cases of use for a term in specific ontologies, or
as applied to metaphorical/idiomatic expressions, are not taken into account (e.?g. turning tables?;
?cleared table?). Instead, we specialize terms via subclassing and adding axioms on the subclasses
term when a new term is needed for a specific domain.
6
As interpreted by: (de Melo and Bansal, 2013; Schulam and Fellbaum, 2010; de Melo, 2014a; de Melo, 2014b).
141
? The defaults are based on arbitrary subjective approximations of prototypes. The provided informa-
tion has been carefully peer-reviewed and the defaults can be used, re-used, or changed according
to the user?s needs. The intent is in fact to provide a basic estimation of the physical values for that
concept. Furthermore, we have used specific units of measurements to carry on the approximations
(e. g. inches versus centimeters, tons and pounds versus kilos). We acknowledge that this might
hinder or slow down the reausability process.
3 Practical applications of defaults in linguistic disambiguation
Since the development of the first several hundreds physical default measurements, their applicability
and usefulness has been tested in two research studies.
7
The defaults have proven helpful in linguistic
analysis, particularly in the disambiguation of vague terms, such as vague predicates and concepts, as
well as more complex linguistic forms, such as similes and metaphors. The advantage of having physical
defaults based on standards and norms has given further validity to the disambiguation process.
3.1 Default measurements and adjectives (lemonOILS and SUMO
The use of first order logic seems to break in the case of adjectives. In a recent research, we therefore
make an in-depth analysis of different kinds of attributes and how they can be represented in different
ontology-lexicon interfaces (lemonOILS and SUMO), and discuss the implications of the modelling with
application to ontology-based question answering.
3.2 Default measurements, metaphors and similes
In another current study (see previous footnote), we use default physical measurements to disambiguate
similes frommetaphors. Starting from the claim that the taught difference between metaphors and similes
in terms of which has or does not have ?like? or ?as? in its form is not a linguistically and cognitively
satisfactory statement, we design a computable model to test the validity of novel metaphors and similes
and use the physical default measurements for our purpose.
4 Future work
The extension of physical default measurements in SUMO is not intended to be the last of its kind. In our
future work, we plan for instance a better specification of dimensionality. During the compilation of the
physical defaults, we have in fact sometimes encountered the challenge of defining first the geometrical
property proper of the concept. For instance, taking a Leaf, do we usually refer to its length, or to its
height? Google can help to a certain extent in cases like this. A better disambiguation of contextually
dependent measurements (length versus height, or width versus length) is therefore needed. A further
improvement includes the compilation of mostly all subclasses and their children in higher-order logic
as KB terms, as well as the assignment to them of physical defaults. To enable an automatic productive
process in the generation of automatic axioms (as mentioned in 2.2), both with respect to collocational
forms and with regards to the similar physical defaults that may exist between parent and child, we still
need to evaluate whether there should exist a mechanism for conflict resolution or overwrite. If we take
for instance the example of Snake, we consider at the moment that this instance of Reptile most
probably can inherit some of the properties of the parent, and viceversa. As showed in 2.1 (fig. 3) above
though, this derivation does not seem so obvious or even applicable, since there might be prototypical
properties that might appear for one concept, but not for the other, or given the too high discrepancy of
measurements.
Finally, once this comprehensive framework of properties and intuitive specification of defaults has
been created, we could conduct psycholinguistic empirical experiments to determine what are the de-
faults and prototypes and examples that different classes of human beings hold to be true. This could
give us indication on how and if prototypicality overlayers with dimensionality.
7
Submitted accepted papers for the CogALex Workshop, COLING 2014, Dublin, Ireland and the CCLCC Workshop at ESSLI
2014, Tuebingen, Germany.
142
5 Conclusion
In this paper we present a current extension of the general-domain ontology SUMO, i. e. the compilation
of default physical measurements for 300+ classes and subclasses. The aim of this extension is to provide
a peer-reviewed reliable, reusable and reproducible estimation of physical values for the ontology. The
defaults have already proven to be helpful in the disambiguation of vague predicates and concepts, as
well as similes and metaphors. As open-source application, constantly updated and improved, it is
planned to apply further changes to the SUMO ontology, which include an even more comprehensive
development of physical defaults, as well as the inclusion of other defaults for other properties. Despite
their approximation, the defaults represent a computational ground for representation models and further
calculations.
References
W.R. Murray Adam Pease and Michael Sams. 2003. Applying formal methods and representations in a natural
language tutor to teach tactical reasoning. In Proceedings of the 11
th
International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence in Education (AIED) Conference, pages 349?356. IOS Publications.
Brandon Bennett. 2001. Application of supervaluation semantics to vaguely defined concepts. In Daniel R.
Montello, editor, Proceedings of the 5
th
International Conference on Spatial Information Theory (COSIT?01),
number 2205 in LNCS, pages 108?123, Morro Bay. Springer.
Gerard de Melo and Mohit Bansal. 2013. Good, great, excellent: Global inference of semantic intensities. Trans-
actions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 1:279?290.
Gerard de Melo. 2014a. From linked data to tighly integrated data. LREC 2014 Workshop on Linked Data in
Linguistics (LDL-2014). Invited speaker.
Gerard de Melo. 2014b. Link prediction in semantic knowledge graphs. The Hong Kong Polytechnic University,
March. Invited speaker.
Ian Niles and Adam Pease. 2001. Towards a standard upper ontology. In Christopher A. Welty and Barry Smith,
editors, Proceedings of the 2
nd
International Conference on Formal Ontology in Information Systems (FOIS
2001).
Adam Pease and John Li. 2003. Agent-mediated knowledge engineering collaboration. In Proceedings of the
AAAI 2003 Spring Symposium on Agent-Mediated Knowledge Management.
Adam Pease and W.R. Murray. 2003. An english to logic translator for ontology-based knowledge representation
languages. In Proceedings of the 2003 IEEE International Conference on Natural Language Processing and
Knowledge Engineering, pages 777?783.
Adam Pease and Ian Niles. 2003. Linking lexicons and ontologies: Mapping wordnet to the suggested upper
merged ontology. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Information and Knowledge Engi-
neering, pages 412?416.
Adam Pease and Stephan Schulz. 2014. Knowledge engineering for large ontologies with sigmakee 3.0. Submit-
ted accepted version for journal paper.
Adam Pease. 2003a. Mapping linguistic elements to logical expressions. In Workshop on Ontological Knowledge
and Linguistic Coding at the 25
th
Annual Meeting of the German Linguistics Society (Deutsche Gesellschaft
f
?
?ur Sprachwissenschaft).
Adam Pease. 2003b. The sigma ontology development environment. In Working Notes of the IJCAI-2003 Work-
shop on Ontology and Distributed Systems, volume 71.
Adam Pease. 2011. Ontology: A Practical Guide. Articulate Software Press, Angwin, CA.
Peter F. Schulam and Christiane Fellbaum. 2010. Automatically determining the semantic gradiation of german
adjectives. In Proceedings of KONVENS.
143
