Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of the Lexicon (CogALex 2010), pages 75?84,
Beijing, August 2010
Lexical Access, a Search-Problem
Michael Zock (1), Didier Schwab (2) and Nirina Rakotonanahary (2)
(1) LIF-CNRS, TALEP, 163, Avenue de Luminy
(2) LIG-GETALP, University of Grenoble
zock@free.fr, didier.schwab@imag.fr, damanidaddy@msn.com
Abstract
Our work is confined to word access,
that is, we present here our ideas of how to
improve electronic dictionaries in order to
help language producers (speaker/writer)
to find the word they are looking for. Our
approach is based on psychological find-
ings (representation, storage and access of
information in the human mind), observed
search strategies and typical navigational
behavior.
If one agrees with the idea that lex-
ical access (word finding) is basically a
search problem, then one may still want
to find out where and how to search.
While the space, i.e. the semantic map
in which search takes place is a resource
problem,? any of the following could be
used: dictionary, corpus, thesauraus, etc.
or a mix of them,? its exploration is typ-
ically a search problem. Important as it
may be, the building of a high quality re-
source is not the focus of this work, we
rely on an existing one, and while we
are concerned with its quality, we will be
mostly concerned here with search meth-
ods, in order to determine the best.
1 Problem: find the needle in a haystack
One of the most vexing problems in speaking or
writing is that one knows a given word, yet one
fails to access it when needed. This kind of search
failure, often referred to as dysnomia or Tip of the
Tongue-problem, occurs not only in communica-
tion, but also in other activities of everyday life.
Being basically a search problem it is likely to oc-
cur whenever we look for something that exists
in real world (objects) or our mind: dates, phone
numbers, past events, peoples? names, or you just
name it.
As one can see, we are concerned here with the
problem of words, or rather, how to find them in
the place where they are stored: the human brain,
or an external resource, a dictionary. Our work
being confined to lexical access, we would like
to develp a semantic map and a compass to help
language producers to find the word they are look-
ing for. More precisely, we try to build an index
and a navigational tool allowing people to access
words no matter how incomplete their conceptual
input may be. Our approach is based on psy-
chological findings concerning the mental lexicon
(Aitchison, 2003; Levelt et al, 1999), i.e. storage
and access of information in the human mind, ob-
served search strategies and typical navigational
behavior.
2 Consider the following elements before
attempting an engineering solution
Before conceiving a roadmap leading to an en-
gineering solution it may be useful to consider
certain points. The list here below is by no
means complete, neither is the following discus-
sion. Nevertheless we believe that the following
points are worth consideration: features of the
mental lexicon, how to build and use the resource,
searching, ranking and weights, interface prob-
lems. For reasons of space constraints we will
touch briefly only upon some of these points.
Our main goal is the enhancement of electronic
dictionaries to help speakers or writers to find
75
quickly and intuitively the word they are looking.
To achieve this target we take inspiration in the
findings concerning the human brain (structure,
process) when it tries access words in the mental
lexicon.
2.1 The mental lexicon, a small-world
network?
While forms (lemma) and meanings (lexical con-
cepts, definitions) are stored side by side in pa-
per dictionaries (holistic presentation), the hu-
man brain stores them differently. The informa-
tion concerning meaning, forms and sound is dis-
tributed across various layers. Lexical fragmen-
tation or information distribution is supported by
many empirical findings,1 and while this fact is
arguably the reason accounting for word access
problems, it is probably also the explanation of
the power and the flexibility of the human mind
which generally manages to find in no time the
right term after having searched for it in a huge
store of words.
While it is still not entirely clear what is stored,
or whether anything is stored at all 2 coming close
to the kind of information generally found in dic-
tionaries, it does seem clear though that the struc-
ture of mental lexicon is a multidimensional net-
work in which the user navigates. ?Entries in the
lexicon are not islands; the lexicon has an inter-
nal structure. Items are connected or related in
various ways...There are item relations within and
between entries.? (Levelt, 1989). While the for-
mer relate meanings and forms: syntactic (part
of speech), morphological, phonological informa-
tion, the latter connect lexical entries.3 In sum,
1Speech errors (Fromkin, 1980), studies on aphasia (Dell
et al, 1997; Blanken et al, 2004) or response times i.e.
chronometric studies (Levelt et al, 1999), neuroimaging
(Shafto et al, 2007; Kikyo et al, 2001), eye movements,
(Roelofs, 2004), experiments on priming (Schvaneveldt et
al., 1976) or the tip of the tongue problem (TOT) (Brown
and McNeill, 1996).
2An important feature of the mental lexicon lies in the
fact that the entries are not accessed but activated (Marslen-
Wilson, 1990; Altmann, 1997). Of course, such a detail can
have far reaching consequences concerning knowledge rep-
resentation and use, i.e. structure and process.
3These are typically the kind of relations we can find in
WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998), which happens to be quite rich
in this respect, but relatively poor with regard to intrinsic, i.e.
intralexical information.
lexical networks store or encode the information
people typically have with regard to words, and
finding the needed information, amounts to enter
the graph at some point,? in the case of writing or
speaking, usually a node dedicated to meaning,?
and to follow the links until one has reached the
goal (target word). While computer scientists
call this kind of search ?navigation?, psychologists
prefer the term ?activation spreading. While not
being exactly the same, functionally speaking they
are equivalent though.
As every day language experience shows,
things may go wrong, we lack information, hence
we get blocked. Yet when trying to complete the
puzzle we do not start from scratch, we rely on
existing information, which, in terms of the net-
work metaphor means that we start from (infor-
mation underlying) a word being close to the tar-
get word.4
It is interesting to note, that our lexical graphs
seem to have similar characteristics as small-
world networks. These latter are a type of graph
in which most nodes, eventhough not being direct
neighbors, can be reached via a small number of
clicks, about 6, regardless of the starting point.
This property of networks, where objects, or the
nodes standing for them, are highly connected has
first been described by Frigyes Karinthy (1929)
a Hungarian writer, to be tested then many years
later by a social psychologist (Milgram, 1961).
Nodes can be anything, people, words, etc. If they
represent people, than edges specify their relation-
ship, i.e. the very fact that they know each other,
that they are friends, etc. Given this high connec-
tivity, anything seems to be at the distance of a few
mouse clicks. Hence, it is easy to connect peo-
ple or to find out who entertains with whom what
kind of relationship. Obviously, there is a strik-
ing similarity to our lexical graphs, and the small-
world feature has been tested by mathematicians,
who concluded that the distance for words is even
smaller than in the original Milgram experiments,
namely 4 rather than 6. Indeed, (Motter et al,
2002) and colleagues could show that more than
4As TOT experiments have shown (Brown and McNeill,
1996), people always know something concerning the target
word (meaning, form, relation to other words), hence finding
a word in such a situation amounts to puzzle-completion.
76
99 percent of the word pairs of their corpus could
be connected in 4 steps at the most.
2.2 Building the resource
There are two elements we need to get a clearer
picture of: the nature of the resource (semantic
map), and the search method i.e. the way to ex-
plore it. Concerning the resource, there are many
possible sources (dictionary, thesaurus, corpora,
or a mix of all this) and many ways of build-
ing it. Since our main goal is the building of
an index based on the notion of word relations
(triples composed of two terms and a link), the
two prime candidates are of course corpora and
association lists like the ones collected by psy-
chologists. While the former are raw data, con-
taining the information in a more or less hidden
form, the latter (often) contain the data explicitely,
but they are scarce, subject to change, and some of
the links are questionable.5
Corpora: Concerning the resource the follow-
ing points deserve consideration: size, representa-
tivity and topic sensitivity.
? Size or coverage: While size or coverage are
critical variables, they should not be overem-
phasized though, trading quantity against
quality. We need to define the meaning of
quality here, and whether, when or how lack
of quality can be (partially) compensated by
quantity. In other words, we need to define
thresholds. In the absence of clear guidelines
it is probably wise to strive for a good bal-
ance between the two, which again assumes
that we know what quality means.
? Representativity: Obviously, the system we
have in mind is only as good as the data we
use, i.e. the purity/accuracy and represen-
tativity of the word/feature-association lists.
5This flaw is due to the experimental protocol. Subjects
are asked to give the first word coming to their mind right
after a stimulas. Not having been asked to specify the link it
is the experimenter who does so. Yet, many word pairs,? say,
cat and dog,? allow for various links (love, tease, chase, etc.),
and it is not obvious at all which is the one intended by the
user. This problem could have been avoided to a large extent
if the instruction had been, ?build a sentence containing the
following word?. Another potential problem may be due to
the distance between the source and the target word: the link
may be mediated.
No single set of data (dictionary, corpus, the-
saurus) will ever suffice to capture the knowl-
edge people have. While it would be unreal-
istic to try to model the semantic map of ev-
eryone, it is not unreasonable to try to reach
an average user, say someone who has been
to school and is a computer literate. If we
want to capture the world-knowledge of this
kind of user (target), than we must beware
that it is contained in the material we use,
since our resource will be based on this data.
Hence, taking as corpus only the newspapers
read by an elite (say, Le Monde, in France),
will surely not suffice to capture the informa-
tion we need, as it will not relate information
ordinary citizens, say sport fans, are famil-
iar with or interested in. In sum, we need to
take a wide variety of sources to extract then
the needed information. While there is short-
age of some document types needed, there
are nevertheless quite a few sources one may
consider to begin with: Wikipedia, domain
taxonomies, topic signatures, (Lin and Hovy,
2000), a database like (http://openrdf.org),
etc.
? Topic sensitivity
Weights are important, but they tend to
change dynamically with time and the topic.
Think of the word ?piano? uttered in the con-
texts of a ?concert? or ?household moving?. It
is only in this latter case that this term evokes
ideas like size or weight. The dynamic re-
compution of weights as a function of topic
changes requires that the system be able to
recognize the topic changes, as otherwise it
might mislead the user by providing of in-
adequate weights. For some initial work see
(Ferret and Zock, 2006).
Association lists: Psychologists have built such
lists already decades ago (Deese, 1965; Schvan-
eveldt, 1989). Similar lists are nowadays freely
available on the web. For example, for English
there is the Edinburgh Associative Thesaurus 6
and the compilation done by Nelson and his col-
leagues in Florida 7. There are also some re-
6http://www.eat.rl.ac.uk/
7http://cyber.acomp.usf.edu/FreeAssociation/
77
sources for German (see 8 or 9), for Japanese,10
and probably many other languages.
While association lists are generally built man-
ually, one can also try to do so automatically or
with the help of people (see section 5 in (Zock
and Bilac, 2004)). JeuxdeMot (JdM), a collec-
tively built resource focusing on French being an
example in case.11
2.3 Searching
The goal of searching is more complex than one
might think. Of course, ultimately one should find
the object one is looking for,12 but the very pro-
cess should also be carried out quickly and natu-
rally. In addition we want to allow for recovery in
case of having taken the wrong turn, and we want
to avoid looping, that is, walking in circles, with-
out ever getting closer to the goal. Last, but not
least we want to make sure that stored informa-
tion can also be accessed.
That this is less obvious than it might seem at
first sight has been shown by (Zock and Schwab,
2008). Taking two resources (WN and Wikipedia)
that contain both a given target word, we wanted
to see whether we could access it or not. The
target word was ?vintage?. In order to find it we
provided two access keys, i.e. trigger words:
?wine? and ?harvest?. Combining the two produced
a list of 6 items in the case of WN and 45 in the
case of Wikipedia, yet, while the latter displayed
the target word, it was absent from the list pro-
duced by WN. This example illustrates the fact
that our claim concerning storage and acess is well
founded. Having stored something does by no
means guarantee its access.
In the next sections we will present a small ex-
periment concerning search.
3 System architecture
To allow for word access, we need at least two
components: an index, i.e. a resource, repre-
senting or encoding the way words are connected
8http://www.schulteimwalde.de/resource.html
9http://www.coli.uni-saarland.de/projects/nag/
10http://www.valdes.titech.ac.jp/ terry/jwad.html
11http://www.lirmm.fr/jeuxdemots/rezo.php
12This poses special requirements concerning the organi-
zation, indexing and ranking of the data, i.e. words. We will
not get into these issues here.
(database or semantic network encoding associa-
tive relations between words) and an efficient
search algorithm to find the needed information,
in our case, words.
In other words, since search requires a map or a
resource in which to search and a good algorithm
to perform the search, we are keen in finding out
how different resources (for example, Wikipedia,
WordNet or JeuxdeMots) and various search al-
gorithms might affect efficiency of word access.
While there is a link between (the quality of) the
resource and the searching, we will separate the
two, focusing here mainly on the search algo-
rithms and possible ways to evaluate them.

	








	






