  
ASSESSMENT  AND DEVELOPMENT OF POS TAG SET 
FOR TELUGU
Dr.Rama Sree R.J  
Rashtriya Sanskrit 
Vidyapeetha,  
Tirupati 
rjramasree@yahoo.com 
 
Dr.Uma Maheswara Rao G 
Central University 
Hyderabad 
guraohyd@yahoo.com 
 
 
Dr. Madhu Murthy K.V 
S.V.U.College of 
Engineering 
Tirupati 
kvmmurthy@yahoo.com 
ABSTRACT 
 
In this paper, we first had a overall study of 
existing POS tag sets for European and Indian 
languages.  Till now, most of the research 
done on POS tagging is for English.  We 
observed that even though the research on 
POS tagging for English is done  exhaustively,  
part-of-speech annotation  in various research 
applications is incomparable which is 
variously due to the variations in tag set 
definitions. We understand that the morpho-
syntactic features of the language and the 
degree of desire to represent the granularity of 
these morpho-syntactic  features, domain etc., 
decide the tags in the tag set.  We then 
examined how POS tagset design has to be 
handled for Indian languages, taking Telugu 
language into consideration.   
 
 
1. Introduction  
Annotation is the process of adding some  
additional information (grammatical features 
like word category, case indicator, other 
morph features) about the word  to each word 
of the text. This additional information is 
called a tag.  The set of all these tags is called 
a tag set.  When words are considered in 
isolation, they can have one or  more number 
of  tags for each word.  But when these words 
are used in a certain context, the tags 
representing morphological and syntactic 
feature reduce to one tag.  The information to 
be captured as a tag is an application specific 
issue (Anne,1997, David, 1994 and David, 
1995). A number of tag sets have been evolved 
for a number of languages.  These tag sets not 
only differ with each other from language to 
language, but vary within the language itself.  
The reasons for the variation  of tags in the tag  
sets are as follows.  As taggers give additional 
information like grammatical features such as 
number, gender, person, case markers for noun 
inflections; tense markers for verbal 
inflections, the  number of tags used by 
different systems varies  depending on the 
information encoded in the tag. However the 
tag set design plays  a vital role  when data is 
tagged according to it and hence it affects the  
development of NLP application tools  within  
and across that language.  Language 
independent representation of a tag set help to 
find out  the  hidden information like context, 
structure, syntactic and  semantic aspect of the 
word.  It also gives an overview of language 
modeling features.  
2. Desirable Features of a Tag Set 
Unfortunately, there does not seem to be much 
literature on standard tag set design.  There is a 
need to have standard tag set labels for the 
words to encode the same linguistic 
information across the languages.  The tag set 
labels of a given language should satisfy the 
following characteristics. 
(1) The words carrying same syntactic, 
categorical information should be grouped 
under the same tag.  For example, all 
adjectives should be tagged as JJ.   
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
85
  
(2) The words which  have same syntax and 
come under different categories  should  
clearly be distinguished depending on the 
categorical sense  in which it is used in the 
given context.  For example,  the word 
book can be tagged both as noun (NN)  
and Verb (VB). 
(3) The tag set  should also help us to classify 
and predict the sense, category of the 
unknown and foreign words.  For example, 
consider the sentence,   ?Give it to xyxxy?, 
POS tagger should be in a position to 
predict xyxxy  (or any non-sensical string)  
could be a noun. 
3. Sources of Variations among  POS Tag 
Sets  for English 
 In order to identify the reasons for tag set 
variations for English,  the  tag sets viz.,  the 
Penn Treebank (Mitchel, 1993) tag set(PT), 
UCREL CLAWS7 tag set (UCREL_C7), the 
International Corpus  of English (ICE)  tag set 
(Greenbaum, 1992)  and the Brown Corpus 
(BC) tag set (Green, 1997) for English are 
examined; the POS tag labels are extracted for 
some important  morpho-syntactic features  
and studied to demonstrate the present study.   
After a careful study, the following points 
were observed with  regard to the differences 
in POS tag sets. 
(i) Desire to capture more semantic content:  
BC, ICE, URCEL  tag set are  making 
more subtle distinctions within one 
category than PT.  For example,  POS tags 
for adjectives- PT is not making any clear 
distinction for adjectives other than JJ, JJS, 
JJR, whereas other tag sets are  
maintaining fine   granularity.   Such 
differences can be observed for several 
morpho-syntactic features.  
(ii) Corpus Coverage: Depending on the 
syntactic distribution of the test corpus 
under consideration, there may be 
variations.  For example, BC tag set made 
a wide provision for foreign words (not 
shown in the above table). In British 
corpus, there may be a possibility of the 
presence of the test corpus where more 
number of words are borrowed from other 
languages   into English. 
(iii) Desire for precision:  The reason for 
more number of tags in a tag set is to 
precisely capture all linguistic criteria 
which describe morpho-syntactic features 
in detail.  However, there should be a 
balance between theoretical and actual 
distribution of these syntactic features. 
4. Tag Sets for Indian Languages 
The two POS tag sets developed  for Hindi 
(revised on Nov 15, 2003) and Telugu by IIIT, 
Hyderabad and    CALTS, Hyderabad 
respectively are examined and the following  
points are observed.  
Telugu POS  tag set  contains more number of 
POS tag labels.  This difference is due to the 
reason that Telugu is more inflective than 
Hindi.  In Hindi nouns are non-inflectional.  
Karaka  roles are not encoded in Hindi  noun 
word forms as in Telugu.   Similarly main 
verbal roots appear as non-inflective in Hindi. 
The verbs co-occur with tense, aspect and 
modality as separate words  whereas   aspect 
and modality  are packed into  a single  verbal 
inflection word in Telugu.  For example, 
consider the following sentences. 
English: Ram          killed           Ravana. 
Hindi :   RAm ne    mArA         Ravana ko. 
Telugu:  RAmudu   caMpAdu    RAvanunni. 
 
For convenience, the word order is maintained 
as it is in all the three languages.   In case of 
English language,  position gives    the roles 
played by Rama (subject) and Ravana (object).  
In case of Hindi, case markers ne and  ko exist,  
but they  do not inflect  Ram and Ravana.  But 
Telugu noun inflections give the information 
of case markers also.  Hence there are 
differences in the tag labels of  Hindi and 
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
86
  
Telugu language tag sets.   In order to capture 
these syntactic (more over they are also 
semantic) information, Telugu  has more 
number of POS tags (nn1,nn2,nn3, 
nn4,nn5,nn6,nn7) in the place of a single tag 
(nn) of  Hindi. 
The POS tags of Telugu are described below 
in detail. 
(i) Nouns (nAma vAcakAlu- nn) :These tags 
capture the nouns and their roles played in the 
sentence.  The different tags in the subclass are 
nn1,nn2,nn3,nn4,nn5, nn6 and nn7.  
Depending on the vibhakti, the nouns get the 
number label to main class, i.e., nn based  on 
the karaka relations. The tag nni stands for 
noun oblique form indicating that the noun is 
in a position to get attached with the 
succeeding noun inflection. 
(ii) Locative affixes (swAna vAcakAlu ? nl) 
:Here some locative prepositions   combined 
with the six vibhaktis are listed  as nl1 (pEna- 
????), nl4 (pEki-??? ?), nl5 (pEnuMdi-????????), 
nl6 (pEni-??? ) etc. 
(iii) Prepositions (Vibhakti ? pp):Sometimes 
prepositions can occur independently.  For 
example, varaku (????).   Hence all vibhaktis 
are labelled as pp1,pp2 etc.  
(iv) Pronouns (sarva nAmAlu - pr) :Like 
nouns, all  pronouns  form inflections with 
vibhaktis.  Accordingly they are named as pr1, 
pr2 etc. 
(v)  Adjectives (Visheshana) : Special type of 
adjectives  like Verbal adjectives ( kriya 
visheshana)  as vjj, Nominal adejctives 
(saMjna viseshana) as jj and noninfinitive 
verbal adjectives (sahAyaka asamapaka kriya) 
as ajj etc. 
(vi) Other  syntactic categories :  The tags 
for other syntactic categories  like quantifiers 
as qf, negative meanings as ng etc., are  given. 
 
5.  Improvement of Telugu Tag Set 
In addition to the above  mentioned tags, some 
new tags are introduced  to capture and 
provide  finer discrimination of  the semantic 
content of some of the linguistic expressions  a 
corpus of 12,000 words.  They are explained 
briefly in the succeeding  paragraphs. 
(a) Verbal finite negative :  Some words like 
kAxu (????), lexu (????) are verbal finites but 
they give the negative meaning of the verbal 
action. If they are tagged  simply as  vf, it is 
undestood that  some action has taken place.  
But these words are used in negative sense.    
In order to capture this feature, we have 
labelled  them  as vng. 
(b) Verbal nouns wih vibhakti:   Verbal 
nouns behave in the same way as nouns do,  in 
forming their inflections with  vibhaktis like 
AdataM-(????),    Adatanni-(??????), 
Adatamcewa (???? ??? ) etc.  At present they 
are labelled as nn1, nn2, nn3 etc. depening on 
the affix.  In doing so, the semantic content of 
verb is lost.  This would lead to difficulties in 
disambiguating words at the semantic level.  
Hence the introduction of POS tags like vnn1, 
vnn2 etc  is proposed. 
(c) Words expressing doubts: There are  
linguistic  expressions that express the 
doubtfulness as explained below. 
Doubtfulness of :   
(i) Verbal finites:Words like uMxo (????) 
vunnavo (?????) etc., express the 
doubtfullness of the occurrence of action.  
To capture this semantic discrimination, 
POS tag vfw  is introduced. Previously they 
are labelled as vf. 
(ii) Nouns: Words which express  the 
doubtfulness a noun participation in the 
action like rAmudo (??????), axo (???) 
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
87
  
etc.  Instead of labelling them nn1, they are 
labelled them with the tag nnw.   
The above mentioned  improvements made to 
the existing POS tag sets and the  advantages  
thereof are as follows. 
(i) A finer discrimination is made.  For 
example consider vfw.  In the absence of 
this tag, the verbal inflections   which end 
with lexu (????) could be tagged as vf.  
Due to this, the verbal inflections which 
are completed can be clearly distinguished 
from theose  verbal inflections where  
action has not  been completed. 
(ii)  vnn  tag captures more information that 
the noun present in the verbal inflection is  
just a  simple common noun.  In the 
absence of this tag, words erroneously 
labelled as nn to which it does not really 
belong.  So these tags accurately capture 
the information  present in the words. 
6. Conclusion 
It is strongly felt that all Indian languages 
should have the same tag set so that the 
annotated corpus  in corresponding languages 
may be useful in  cross lingual NLP 
applications, reducing much load on language 
to language transfer engines. This point can be 
well explained by taking analogy of  existing 
script representation for Indian Languages.  
The   ISCII and Unicode representations for all 
Indian languages  can be viewed appropriately 
in the languages we like,  just by setting their 
language code.  There is no one-to-one  
alphabet mapping in the scripts of Indian 
Languages.  For example, the short e,o ( ?,?)  
are present in Telugu, while they are not 
available in Hindi, Sanskrit etc.  Similarly 
alphabet variations between Telugu and Tamil 
exist.  Even then, all these issues are taken 
care of,  in the process of language to language 
script conversion.  Similarly POS variations 
across Indian Languages also should be taken 
care of. 
References: 
 
 
Anne Schiller, Simone Teufel, Christine 
Thielen. 1995.  Guidelines f?r das 
Tagging deutscher Textcorpus mit 
STTS. Universit?ten Stuttgart und 
T?bingen.   
David Elworthy. 1994.  Automatic error 
detection in part of speech tagging. In 
Proceedings of the International 
Conference on New Methods in Language 
Processing, Manchester.  
David Elworthy. 1995. Tagset Design and 
Inflected Languages. In Proceedings of 
the ACL SIGDAT Workshop, Dublin. 
Mitchell P Marcus, Beatrice Santorini,  
Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz. 1993.  
Building a Large Annotated Corpus of 
English: The Penn Treebank.   
Computational Linguistics.  Volume 19, 
Number 2,  pp. 313--330 (Special Issue on 
Using Large Corpus).  
Greenbaum S. 1992. The ICE tag set 
manual. University College London.  
Green B, Rubun G. 1971. Automated 
Grammatical Tagging of English.  In 
Department of Linguistics, Brown 
University. 
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
88
