Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Speech and Language Processing for Assistive Technologies, pages 1?9,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Using NLG and Sensors to Support Personal Narrative for 
Children with Complex Communication Needs 
 
 
Rolf Black Joe Reddington, Ehud Reiter, Nava Tintarev Annalu Waller 
School of Computing Department of Computing Science School of Computing 
University of Dundee            University of Aberdeen University of Dundee            
rolfblack@ 
computing.dundee.ac.uk 
{j.reddington, e.reiter  n.tintarev}@abdn.ac.uk awaller@ 
computing.dundee.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract 
We are building a tool that helps children with 
Complex Communication Needs1 (CCN) to 
create stories about their day at school. The 
tool uses Natural Language Generation (NLG) 
technology to create a draft story based on 
sensor data of the child?s activities, which the 
child can edit. This work is still in its early 
stages, but we believe it has great potential to 
support interactive personal narrative which is 
not well supported by current Augmentative 
and Alternative Communication (AAC) tools. 
1 Introduction 
Many tools have been developed to help children and 
adults who cannot speak (or who have limited speech) 
communicate better.  However, most of these tools have 
focused on supporting communication for practical 
goals, such as ?I am thirsty.? But human communica-
tion is also used for social goals; we develop friendships 
and other inter-personal relationships via social interac-
tion and communication. The bulk of conversation is 
characterized by free narrative (Cheepen 1988). One of 
the most important types of conversational narrative is 
personal narrative: someone telling a story about what 
happened to him or her. 
 People with limited or no functional speech do tell 
stories, but these tend to be in monologue form, or in a 
sequence of pre-stored utterances on voice output com-
munication aids (Waller 2006). Individuals who use 
                                                          
1
 The term Complex Communication Needs (CCN) describes 
individuals who, due to motor, language, cognitive, and/or 
sensory perceptual impairments (e.g., as a result of cerebral 
palsy), do not develop speech and language skills as expected. 
This heterogeneous group typically experiences restricted 
access to the environment, limited interactions with their 
communication partners, and few opportunities for communi-
cation (Light and Drager 2007). 
Augmentative and Alternative Communication (AAC) 
tools tend to be passive, responding to questions with 
single words or short sentences (e.g. Soto, Hartmann et 
al. 2006) and if able to initiate and maintain extended 
conversations tend to relate experience word for word 
each time they tell a story, even though much of conver-
sation is reused (Clarke and Clarke 1977). This is time 
consuming and physically exhausting ? typical rates 
range from 8 to 10 words per minute up to 12 to 15 per 
minute when techniques such as word prediction are 
used (Higginbotham, Shane et al 2007), with the result 
that people seldom engage in storytelling. Despite the 
importance of narrative, little work has been done on 
specific tools to help language-impaired individuals 
engage in personal storytelling. In this paper, we de-
scribe our work in progress on building a tool that uses 
Natural Language Generation (NLG) technology to help 
children tell stories about their day at school, describing 
both the work we have done to date, and the challenges 
that we face in further developing this concept. 
2 Background 
2.1 AAC 
Technology underpins much of Augmentative and Al-
ternative Communication (AAC), a field that attempts to 
augment natural speech and provides alternative ways to 
communicate for people with limited or no speech. At 
the simplest level, people with Complex Communica-
tion Needs (CCN) can cause a pre-stored message to be 
spoken by activating a single switch. At the most so-
phisticated level, literate users can generate novel text 
using input methods ranging from a single switch to a 
full keyboard.  
Despite advances in AAC, there are still many indi-
viduals for whom communication remains problematic. 
Although some individuals with CCN become effective 
communicators, most do not ? they tend to be passive 
communicators, responding mainly to questions or 
prompts at a one or two word level. Conversational 
1
skills such as initiation, elaboration and storytelling are 
seldom observed (Waller 2006). 
One reason for the reduced levels of communicative 
ability is the cognitive demands of AAC interfaces. Cur-
rent AAC technology provides the user with a purely 
physical link to speech output. The user is required to 
have sufficient cognitive abilities and physical stamina 
to translate what they want to say into the sequence of 
operations needed to produce the desired output. Mne-
monic codes and dynamic displays (Beukelman and 
Mirenda 2005) provide some help in the retrieval 
process, but users still have to master complex retrieval 
and production strategies.  
A second reason for the impoverished quality of 
conversation is the focus of AAC devices on transac-
tional communication; conversation which expresses 
needs wants and information transfer, for example, ?I 
am thirsty?, ?I use a straw for drinking?. Instead, inter-
active conversation is characterized by free narrative 
and phatic conversation, for example, ?Guess what 
happened this morning??, ?Hello?, and ?How are 
you?? Without easy access to extended interactive 
communication, it is difficult to develop the skills 
needed to initiate new topics and engage in storytelling.  
2.2 Importance of Narrative 
 Conversational narratives (oral stories told during 
interactive conversations) are crucial to social engage-
ment. Narratives provide a means for people to relate 
and share experiences, develop organizational skills, 
work through problems, develop self image, express 
personality, give form and meaning to life, and allow 
people to be interesting entertainers (Waller 2006).  
 Narrative skills develop experientially with children 
being able to engage in storytelling even before they are 
verbal (Bruner 1975). Early personal experience stories 
consist of a high point, for example, ?Mummy fall!? 
with adults scaffolding the full story, eliciting the ?who?, 
?what?, ?when? and ?where?. However, not all expe-
riences make good stories. An experience becomes a 
story if the storyteller has an emotional connection to 
the event (Labov, 1972), or if the event is unusual (Qua-
sthoff & Nikolaus, 1982). 
 Parents of typically developing children encourage 
development of narrative skills by eliciting stories from 
their children (Peterson and McCabe 1983), but the de-
velopment of narrative skills is problematic for people 
with CCN. We recall a study where disabled children 
were told different stories more often than typically 
developing peers who were read the same story night 
after night (Light, Binger et al 1994). In doing so, the 
disabled children did not have the chance to learn the 
sequence of stories, or the structure commonly used in 
narrative such as beginning, middle and end. As such, 
initially children should use the same story template 
consistently until they are ready to progress to another 
one. 
 It is difficult to provide access to event information 
which may become a story, and few AAC systems pro-
vide support for interactive story narration. However 
NLG gives us a possibility to change the underlying 
paradigm of AAC. Instead of placing the entire cogni-
tive load on the user, AAC devices can be designed to 
support the retrieval of story events and the scaffolding 
of story narration for individuals with CCN. 
2.3 NLG, Data-to-text 
NLG systems generate texts in English (or other human 
languages) from non-linguistic data (Reiter and Dale 
2000).  Our vision is to use an NLG system to generate 
a draft story, which the child can edit.  The non-
linguistic input to our story-generator is sensor data 
about the child?s activities, including location data 
(where the child was) and interaction data (what people 
and objects the child interacted with).  We also want to 
allow teachers and school staff to enter information 
about the child?s activities (such as voice messages). 
 A number of data-to-text systems (Reiter 2007) have 
been developed in recent years, which generate English 
summaries of sensor and other numerical data.  The 
most popular application area has been weather fore-
casting (generating textual weather forecasts from the 
results of a numerical atmosphere simulation model), 
and indeed several weather forecast generators have 
been fielded and used operationally (Goldberg, Driedger 
et al 1994; Reiter, Sripada et al 2005). A number of 
data-to-text systems have also been developed in the 
medical community, such as BabyTalk (Gatt, Portet et 
al. 2009), which generates summaries of clinical data 
from a neonatal intensive care unit, and the commercial 
Narrative Engine (Harris 2008) which summarizes data 
acquired during a doctor/patient encounter. 
 Most previous research in data-to-text has focused 
on summarizing technical data for expert users, with the 
goal of effectively communicating key information.  In 
our work, in contrast, the focus is on summarizing data 
about everyday events, with the goal of having some-
thing interesting to talk about.  There has been consider-
able work in the computational creativity community on 
generating interesting stories (P?r?z and Sharples 2004), 
but it has focused on fictional written stories, where the 
computer system can say whatever it wishes, without 
the constraint of describing real events. 
 Most previous work in NLG has focused on com-
puter systems which generate texts without human in-
put.  However, in our case we want children to be able 
to annotate (evaluate) and edit stories, as far as their 
abilities permit.  There has been some research on hu-
man post-editing of NLG texts (Sripada, Reiter et al 
2005), but this has focused on editing at the text level.  
2
Since editing at the text level is very laborious for AAC 
users, we need a higher-level interface that lets children 
edit content and structure without needing to type 
words.  We also want children to be able to control how 
a story is narrated, perhaps in response to a listener?s 
questions or body language.  For example children may 
wish to add comments such as ?It was awesome!?, or 
tell events out of sequence. 
    In short, we need to develop interfaces and interac-
tion techniques that allow our users to control the NLG 
system.  Unfortunately there has been very little pre-
vious work on this topic, indeed almost nothing is 
known about Human-Computer Interaction aspects of 
NLG systems.  Developing a better understanding of 
these aspects is one of the main research challenges we 
face from an NLG perspective. 
3 Current and ongoing work 
3.1 ?How was School today??? 
We developed an initial version of ?How was School 
today??? in 2009; see Reiter et al(2009) for more de-
tails about this system. 
 
 
 
Fig. 1: Participating pupil with support worker:  
The prototype system is mounted on the wheelchair, and 
the pupil has access to the system via head switch con-
trolled row/column scanning. 
 
 This system used Radio Frequency Identification 
(RFID), an emerging application in AAC to identify or 
give access to relevant vocabulary (Bart, Riny et al 
2008; DeRuyter and Fried-Oken 2010). Sensors were 
used to track both location (by putting tags on doors, 
which were automatically sensed by a long-range RFID 
reader) and interaction (by asking staff to manually 
swipe RFID cards in a short-range reader when the child 
interacted with a person or object). Staff could also 
record spoken messages about interesting events during 
the day (see Fig. 1). 
The software analyzed this data to remove sensor noise, 
and then compared it to a timetable which specified 
where children were supposed to be, what they were 
supposed to be doing and which teacher was supposed 
to be taking the class throughout the day.  This allowed 
the software to both fill in missing information, and to 
identify divergences from the schedule. The result of 
this process was a series of events (which corresponded 
to classes, for example, maths class), each of which had 
a set of associated messages (interactions during the 
event, divergence from schedule, etc.). 
 After the data analysis was completed, an NLG sys-
tem identified the events most interesting (to the child), 
using a heuristic that took into consideration both how 
inherent interesting an event was (for example, lunch 
was regarded as an inherently interesting event that 
children were likely to want to talk about) and also 
whether an event was unusual or not.  The latter is based 
on the observation that most personal narratives focus 
on unexpected or unusual events.  Unusual events were 
identified by the presence of recorded voice messages 
and by divergence from the timetable, e.g. a different 
teacher present or a different location. The system se-
lected the five most ?interesting? events and displayed 
them to the child in a simple visual editing interface.  In 
this interface the child could delete events he/she did 
not wish to talk about, and also annotate events with 
simple opinions (evaluations), such as I liked it, using 
the evaluation buttons on the interface, generating ap-
propriate utterances according to the last narrated event 
or message.(see Fig. 2).  
     When editing was finished, the NLG system generat-
ed texts describing the events and messages, which the 
child communicated using a simple narration interface 
(which was similar to the editing interface). Emphasis 
was placed on providing quick access to messages to 
minimize the length of pauses between utterances due to 
the physical accessing difficulties of the users. The 
narrative model is based on the Labov social narrative 
model (Labov 1972) which emphasizes the highpoint 
and evaluation. The dialogue model from beginning 
through to highpoint to the end with the user being able 
to add evaluations at any point of the narration. Stories 
are initially chronological order but interactively under 
the control of the user. This control of narration differs 
significantly from current AAC interventions where 
narrative tends to be output in a monologue format.  
 From an NLG perspective, the system was fairly 
straightforward. The most challenging microplanning 
tasks were choosing connectives, time phrases, lexical 
variety in embellishments, and pronouns based on dis-
course context. Connectives and time phrases were ne-
cessary since children could narrate events in different 
orders (for example, ?I went to maths.  Then I went to 
lunch? versus ?I went to lunch.  Before lunch, I went to 
maths?).  Document structuring  was simple because we 
Short range RFID reader 
and microphone for voice 
message recording 
Visual interface 
Access switch in head 
rest 
Long range RFID reader 
3
assumed that the children would choose their own order 
in which to narrate events. In fact some children are not 
able to do this; such children would need to be sup-
ported by a more sophisticated document planner that 
had a model of appropriate text structures in this do-
main. 
 We asked two children to use the system for one 
week for a qualitative formative evaluation.  Research-
ers supplied ongoing support during this, primarily trial 
observing how the children used the system, and dis-
cussing it with teachers, therapists and parents.  Gener-
ally it worked well for one child, Julie2, who had severe 
motor impairment (no independent means of mobility 
and interacted with a computer using a head switch with 
row/column scanning, see Fig. 1). Her expressive abili-
ties were limited but her comprehension skills were 
comparable to her non-disabled peers with some deve-
lopmental delay. The other child, Jessica, had more 
cognitive impairment, and found the interface too diffi-
cult. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2: Example screenshot from interface 
1: Navigation: Day and date of story, maximum of five 
story events, exit; 2: Event messages, numbers vary for 
each event. Here: 2 computer-generated messages, 3 
recorded messages, 1 user added evaluation; 
3: Sequential message navigation: previous, repeat, 
next; 4: Evaluation: delete event, negative evaluation, 
positive evaluation; 
 
   
 In a second evaluation, a third child, Eric, joined and 
all three children used the system over two weeks each. 
In this evaluation, we asked teachers and other staff to 
use the system without on-site support from the re-
searchers. This highlighted many practical usability 
issues, such as delays caused by starting the system in 
the morning, and problems caused by limited battery 
life. We eliminated the long-range RFID sensor because 
of its difficult setup; instead we asked staff to swipe 
                                                          
2
 The names of the children mentioned in this paper are 
changed to ensure anonymity. 
door cards when children entered rooms.  However, this 
strategy was not successful, as it was difficult for staff 
to remember to swipe both interactions and location 
changes. 
 The participants took the system home for use with 
their parents who gave positive feedback but also re-
ported issues with system usability (e.g. lack of access 
to stories from previous days) or suitability (too compli-
cated interface for Jessica).   
 Eric?s timetable was different from Julie and Jessi-
ca?s, because he visited college one morning a day, and 
we could not collect data during this period. Since some 
of the most exciting events in a school day happen out-
side the school building (sports and school trips as well 
as college), in the long term we do need to see if we can 
collect data outside as well as inside the school.  
3.2 HWST example 
     Julie used the system on her DynaVox? Vmax? 
Voice Output Communication Aid (VOCA) via head 
switch using row/column scanning. The above transcript 
shows an extract of a conversation Julie had with her 
Speech and Language Therapist (SLT) on day three 
about her experiences during day two. The researcher 
(RA) had been present all day for technical support. The 
conversation extract starts with Julie reporting about her 
morning break.  
     In this example Julie is able to quickly reply to con-
text related questions from her communication partner 
using the evaluations (?So what happened?? ? ?It was 
fun!?). Compared to conversations usually observed 
between aided and unaided partners Julie is able to con-
trol the conversation when starting a new topic after 
talking about the morning break, inviting her communi-
cation partner to prompt for more detailed information. 
Julie provides this with her next generated phrase. 
When she is asked about the event she replies with an 
evaluation the system has generated in relation to its 
previously generated message ?A visitor was there.?. 
We note that the system is able to refer to the correct 
gender of the visitor. 
 
1 Julie {next} [I had break.] 
2 Julie {next} [Lesley was there.] 
3 SLT Lesley was there?  
4 Julie ((Opens mouth in agreement, then turns back 
to screen)) 
5 SLT Ok mhmh. So what happened? 
6 Julie {positive evaluation} [It was fun.] 
7 SLT Oh good! ((laughs)) I?m glad to hear it! 
8 RA We like Lesley. 
9 SLT ((nods in direction of RA)) 
10 Julie ((smiles)) 
11 Julie:  {next} [Then I went to Junior Primary in-
stead of Reading Class.] 
1 
2 
3 
4 
4
12 SLT: Right, you went to Junior Primary? I wonder 
why that was?  
13 Julie: {next} [A visitor was there.] 
14 SLT:  Oh, a visitor, right. Wonder what the visitor 
was doing?  
15 Julie: {next} [?The dental hygienist came to give a 
talk.?] 
16 SLT: Oh, dental hygienist. 
17 Julie:  {previous} [A visitor was there.] 
18 SLT: That was the visitor, okay. That?s why you 
went to junior primary, uhm, what did you 
think of the talk? 
19 Julie:  {positive evaluation} [She was nice.] 
20 SLT: She was nice, that was good! ((laughs)) 
 
Notation: 
- Switch selected button by Julie: {curly brackets} 
- Natural speech: standard text.  
- Computer generated language accessed using one 
button: [standard text in square brackets].  
- Recorded messages accessed using one button: 
[?quoted standard text in square brackets?]. 
- Paralinguistic behaviors:  
((standard text in double brackets)).  
 
3.3  ?How was School Today? ? in the Wild 
We have now started a new project to further develop 
our work, called ?How was School today??? ? in the 
Wild (?in the wild? indicates that the focus is on how the 
technology works in a real school environment). The 
basic goal is to improve the system sufficiently so that it 
can be tried out over a period of several months, with 
children with varying levels and types of impairments; 
we will also work with several schools in the initial 
phase, although for practical reasons the evaluations 
may be at just one school. 
     During this project we will do some work on the 
issues described in Section 4; in particular we will try to 
make the system usable by children with different im-
pairments and ability levels (Section 4.1). This means 
having a very simple interface for children with consi-
derable cognitive impairments (such as Jessica); but 
also giving children with more cognitive abilities the 
opportunity to exert more control over the story (during 
both editing and narration), for example by supporting a 
richer range of annotations, and by making it easier to 
describe events and messages in any order. 
     Another intermediate goal is to improve the integra-
tion of voice messages entered by staff with the com-
puter-generated messages. This could be done by some 
combination of training staff to enter messages in a spe-
cific way (referring to the child in the first person); ask-
ing staff to annotate the messages so the computer 
knows something about their content; and/or using 
speech recognition to analyze the voice messages. In 
general there is a lot of interesting information that can 
only come from staff, and we need to think about the 
best way to help staff enter information in a way that is 
easy for them and useful for our system. 
 Now that a complete system is built, we are also able 
to thoroughly and formally evaluate the system. Mul-
tiple baseline single case study methodology will be 
used (Schlosser 2003) to evaluate the use and impact of 
our system. We intend to have up to four children (with 
varying ability levels) use the system for a period of 3 
months. This will give us a chance to observe the im-
pact of the system on the users and their environment 
such as the children?s interaction with the system and 
how staff at the school envisage using this new tool. 
The observations will be supported by semi-structured 
interviews with the children, their classroom teacher, 
their speech and language therapist and a parent. 
 We will look at the children?s conversations (with 
and without using our system) about interesting, staged 
events with different partners, analyzing them conversa-
tional characteristics such as narrative initiation, struc-
ture, length and evaluation. Analysis methods will 
include the Revised Edinburgh Functional Communica-
tion Profile (REFCP) (Wirz, Skinner et al 1990). 
     However, much of our focus will be on addressing 
the practical issues that make it difficult to use our cur-
rent research prototype over a period of months.  We 
have identified many such issues, both from our pre-
vious evaluations (Section 3.1) and also from a ques-
tionnaire that was distributed to school staff during an 
in-service day. 
      Location tracking ? There are problems with both 
of the techniques we have tried to date (automatically 
reading RFID tags on doors, and asking staff to swipe 
location information).  In this project we intend to try 
tracking the location of a child using Wi-Fi location 
tracking, which seems to be rapidly gaining popularity 
in the commercial world (Liu, Sen et al 2008). 
 Data entry, 2D bar codes ? We need to allow staff 
to easily enter and update information about the children 
(for example, their timetables) and sensor tags (e.g., if a 
new tag is given to a visitor).  For the latter, we want to 
investigate 2D bar codes, which could allow encoding 
of alphanumeric input data without reference to a cen-
tral database. 
 Portability, battery life ? The current system runs on 
a tablet PC (8?-12? touch screen, generic or VOCA 
hardware). During the evaluation, late powering up, run-
down batteries or simply forgetting a component caused 
significant data loss and usability issues. A future proto-
type should favor an ?always-on? system, such as a mo-
bile phone, allowing for easy portability and extended 
battery life. 
 Story generation ? The prototype system was only 
able to create a story towards the end of a day and gave 
5
only access to stories generated on that day. However, 
often the user desired to tell stories that had occurred on 
previous days, or to, say, tell a story at lunch that oc-
curred in the morning.  When data was insufficient for 
the system to create a story, the only output was an error 
message ?Can?t generate story right now.? This fru-
strated users, so future systems should be able to deliver 
a story with incomplete data.  
 Voice messages ? as mentioned above, we want to 
handle these in a more sophisticated way.  From a more 
practical perspective, we also want to make it easier for 
staff to listen to and change previously recorded mes-
sages.  We also want to allow parents to record messag-
es about events at home. 
4 Long-term vision and issues 
4.1 Supporting children with different levels 
and types of impairment 
A key issue in AAC is of course the diversity of AAC 
users. Children with CCN differ enormously in terms of 
cognitive ability, motor ability, and social ability. This 
was clear even in our initial evaluation where we 
worked just with two children, and discovered that our 
interface worked well for Julie but not Jessica. 
 Julie has little functional speech and severe physical 
impairments, and accesses her VOCA using a head 
switch through the slow process of scanning the inter-
face. Her VOCA interface consists of a grid of 15 to 30 
buttons per page, with more than 20 pages of vocabu-
lary. However, her cognitive skills were sufficient for 
her to master the interface on the second day. She used 
the system quite successfully, as shown in the example 
in Section 3.2.  
 Jessica also has severe physical impairments but 
does not use technology to support her communication 
(she has functional speech).  She has cognitive impair-
ments, which (amongst other things) affect her ability to 
remember and place events correctly in time. She had 
more difficulty mastering the interface than Julie. We 
simplified the interface for her (no editing, minimal 
control of narration), and then she displayed pragmatics 
known from typical language development in children, 
by telling her story with no room for interaction of her 
communication partner.  
 We also need to keep in mind that abilities are not 
static, but are likely to progress with age (see also Sec-
tion 4.2) and (hopefully) with the assistance of commu-
nication aids. For example, the WriteTalk project 
showed how pupils were both able to initiate and con-
trol communication more effectively with Talk:About? 
and how their formal writing skills improved over time 
(Waller et al, 1999). 
 In summary, some children may need a very simple 
interface because of cognitive impairments, but this 
should grow with them.  For example, the best narration 
tool for Jessica at her current stage of development is 
probably a single button that advances sequentially 
through the computer-generated story. The challenge is 
to provide an interface that Jessica can initially use via 
repeatedly pressing an ?Advance? button, but which 
gives her the possibility of exerting more control as her 
skills and abilities develop. 
 Other children (such as Julie) may have motor diffi-
culties that restrict the way in which they can interact 
with computer systems, and thus may require simple 
controls although they have reasonable cognitive skills. 
Restricted motor skills make certain tasks, such as en-
tering an arbitrary word, quite difficult and time con-
suming; hence the interface must avoid such tasks, and 
instead endeavor to give the child as much control as 
possible with a minimum amount of data entry.  Once 
these users master a basic story telling structure, it may 
help them develop their conversation skills if they use a 
wide variety of conversation patterns.  For this purpose, 
it may be worthwhile for the system to randomly vary 
the structure and language used in the narratives. 
 Still other children, for example on the autistic spec-
trum, may have good cognitive and motor abilities, but 
not have the experience of expressive communication 
necessary to develop interactive skills. These children 
are more likely to benefit from a system that supports 
the pragmatics of language in general and personal narr-
ative in particular.  For example, children on the high 
functioning end of autism may be comfortable with ra-
ther advanced software, which can help them adapt their 
storytelling according to the intended listener.  Indeed, 
giving these children more complex controls, if done 
correctly, can make the software fun and challenging in 
a positive way. 
     In the long term, as we broaden the range of children 
we work with, there may be overlaps between our work 
and research on tools to help typically developing child-
ren create stories, such as Robertson and Good (2005), 
and also between our work and research on tools to help 
adults with CCN tell personal narratives, such as Demp-
ster (2008).  Ideally it would be very nice to combine 
these efforts and create a story telling tool that could be 
used across the age and impairment spectrum. 
4.2 Narrative across the lifespan 
We would like our tool to be able to support children 
over time, as their abilities grow and as their expe-
riences accumulate. From the perspective of changing 
abilities, the challenge is to offer children an interface 
which is not only appropriate for their current stage of 
development (Sect 4.1), but also allows and indeed en-
6
courages them to exert more control over story content, 
language, and narration as their abilities grow. 
 We would also like our tool to become a repository 
of a child?s personal stories. The ability to relate rele-
vant stories can influence the quality of life, as well as 
social development and successful transitions. The life 
stories of people who use AAC are often held by parents 
and siblings (e.g., stories relating to health care 
(Hemsley, Balandin et al 2007)), and there is the inevit-
able concern that these stories and others are lost as 
parents age and siblings move away.  
 Technology has the potential both to support the 
acquisition of conversational skills for people who use 
AAC and to provide a repository for life stories. In the 
context of our work, it is essential that we provide ways 
of enabling children to develop their narrative skills so 
that they are more able to manage their own story repo-
sitory. In terms of development, young children will 
narrate recent stories regardless of conversational con-
text. By enabling the child to develop story structure by 
scaffolding interaction and enabling children to easily 
annotate stories, the child will begin to anticipate and 
control conversation. 
 Conversational narratives have traditionally not been 
supported by AAC tools partly due to the fact that they 
are so nebulous; they emerge during interactive conver-
sation (to date, events have to be manually input into a 
system and it is difficult to predict what events will be-
come a story); ?new? stories are repeated often (to date it 
is difficult to save conversation online); as stories age 
they are repeated in context (retrieval is often contextual 
e.g. topic based) and they grow longer having more em-
bellishments added to them. The technology we are de-
veloping provides an opportunity for children to access 
information about personal events over time, which they 
can communicate and narrate during a conversation. 
They can also evaluate (annotate) their stories, thereby 
embellishing and lengthening the stories.  However this 
will only be possible if the children can easily access 
previously experienced, generated and saved stories.  
 We can provide fast access to recent stories while 
anticipating the use of older stories such as for example 
those which closely match the current conversation top-
ic. In a research prototype called PROSE (Waller and 
Newell 1997), stories had to be physically tagged; there 
is now the potential to automate topic matching by re-
cognizing topic words spoken by a listener and parsing 
stored information for appropriate stories. Over a life-
time, some stories may fall into disuse, while others will 
be weighted more strongly depending on frequency of 
use and relevance. 
4.3 True dialogue in narration 
The ultimate goal of our research is to enable children to 
tell stories in the context of a social dialogue; for exam-
ple, we want children to be able to chat to their parents 
and other interested parties about what they did during 
the day.  
 Our current system incorporates a simple model of a 
conversation, where children are restricted at any point 
to choosing from a small number of options. The child 
chooses an event to talk about, and then goes through 
the sequence of messages associated with that event.  
The child has the freedom to switch to a different event, 
hence controlling the conversation, and to add annota-
tions/evaluations (for example ?it was fun!?). 
     This is adequate in many cases, but in the long term 
we would like to support more complex conversations; 
for example interrupting a discussion about today?s 
events to talk about what happened yesterday, or to dis-
cuss a particular teacher instead of an event.  We would 
also like children to easily be able to add conversational 
phrases, such as ?Guess what happened today at 
school?. 
 Because our children have motor and cognitive im-
pairments, we cannot present them with a large number 
of options for conversational moves. Ideally, the system 
would detect what the conversational partner wishes to 
talk about, and from this present the child with a small 
number of appropriate choices. For example, if the con-
versational partner asks the child what happened over 
the past week, our system would detect this and then 
give the child the option of talking about any individual 
weekday or the week in general. 
 One way of detecting what the conversational part-
ner intends is to use speech recognition and Natural 
Language Processing (NLP) technology to analyze what 
he or she says. Speech and NLP technology tend to 
work best when it is possible to train the system to the 
user?s voice, and also (in essence) train the user to un-
derstand what the speech/NLP system can and cannot 
do. This should be possible in our context, at least for 
people (such as parents) with whom the child regularly 
interacts. 
 Another possibility is to create a graphical user in-
terface for the conversational partner, perhaps on the 
same device that the child uses, which the partner could 
use to indicate what he/she wants to talk about.  This is 
probably technically easier, but does move away from 
the goal of having as natural a dialogue as possible. 
4.4 Pragmatics of interacting with others 
Currently, ?How was School today??? supports story-
telling between language-impaired children and adults 
who are the children?s parents, carers, teachers, and 
therapists.  But of course for normally developing child-
ren, many of their most important social interactions are 
with other children. 
 An interesting example here is the STANDUP sys-
tem, which was developed to help children who use 
7
AAC create and tell novel punning riddles. The study 
results suggested that children saved the jokes so that 
they could retell them to friends and family (Waller, 
Black et al 2009). Whilst the evidence is anecdotal, 
there did also appear to be a marked increase in joke 
telling by participants, both amongst their peers and 
with adults in the home environment. Hence STANDUP 
succeeded in supporting interaction with other children 
as well as with adults. 
 One of the key challenges in interacting with other 
children, and indeed with adults who are not formally 
involved in the care or teaching of the child, is to adapt 
the story to the interests of the recipients. In other 
words, a child?s parents and teachers will not insist on 
stories that are interesting to them, but other conversa-
tional partners will.  These conversational partners may 
also need additional information.  For example ?Jane 
came to take me to the OT room? makes more sense if 
the recipient knows that Jane is the occupational therap-
ist; parents and teachers already know this, but other 
people may need to be told this. Also if the conversa-
tional partner was present at an event, this should be 
acknowledged and indeed used in the story. For exam-
ple, "Did you really enjoy maths? I thought it was bor-
ing!? 
 In short, telling stories to peers and adults who do 
not know the child well requires adapting the story to 
the interests, knowledge, and involvement of the part-
ner; this is part of learning pragmatics. This is not some-
thing we are looking at currently, but it is something 
that we hope to look at in the future. 
4.5 Security and privacy issues 
We need to ensure that data about the children is private 
and secure.  Taken to its logical conclusion, our project 
would result in an intimate record of the child's life at 
school, home and beyond.  It is important that both the 
raw data and the generated content are under the control 
of the child and his/her guardians, with the child exer-
cising as much control as possible. This is especially 
important since children with learning difficulties are 
very vulnerable; there is potential for great harm if data 
about a child?s activities got into the hands of a mali-
cious outsider. 
 In a study on the software tool TalksBac, which 
supports personal narrative (Waller, Dennis et al 1997), 
privacy issues were coded along with stories. This al-
lowed the NLG process to decide the appropriateness of 
telling a story to a specific communication partner. 
Children in general do not care who they tell their sto-
ries to. Only when older children learn to distinguish 
which story is appropriate for a conversation partner. 
This process could be embedded into the prediction 
algorithm that presents stories for narration. Currently 
prediction on AAC devices only support character, word 
or phrase selection.   
 Another concern is information that is embarrassing 
or otherwise puts the child in a negative light; for exam-
ple, imagine a staff member entered the voice message 
"I refused to eat my lunch today".  We believe that the 
child should be free to delete such messages; she should 
never be forced to include material in a story that she 
does not want to include. 
 A related issue is whether we should allow stories 
generated for one child to use information acquired 
about another child.  In principle this is very valuable, 
for example it allows messages such as ?Jane didn?t eat 
her lunch today?. But is this acceptable from the pers-
pective of ensuring the privacy of data about Jane?s ac-
tivities? On the other hand, this is exactly the sort of 
thing that a normally developed child would say about a 
classmate. 
5 Conclusion 
In addition to having difficulty in communicating de-
sires and needs, language-impaired children also find it 
hard to participate in social linguistic interaction that 
would help create and build up friendships and other 
interpersonal relationships.  We believe that we can help 
these children participate in such interactions by giving 
them a tool that helps them tell a story about their day at 
school, by using an NLG system that has access to sen-
sor and other data about the child?s activities. We are 
still at an early stage in this work, but our initial proto-
type system has shown great potential to improve the 
quality of life of children with limited speech. Our cur-
rent work plans to explore this potential further while 
evaluating the efficacy of the system for four children 
with varying ability levels.  
Acknowledgements 
We would like to express our thanks to the children, 
their parents and staff and the special school where this 
project had its base. Without their valuable contribu-
tions and feedback this research would not have been 
possible. We would also like to thank DynaVox Sys-
tems Ltd for supplying the communication devices to 
run our system on. 
 This research was supported by the UK Engineering 
and Physical Sciences Research Council under grants 
EP/F067151/1, EP/F066880/1, EP/E011764/1, 
EP/H022376/1, and EP/H022570/1. 
8
References 
Agrawal, R. and Ramakrishnan, S. (2000) Privacy-
preserving data mining. ACM International 
Conference on Management of Data, pp. 439--450, 
Bart, H., V. Riny, et al (2008). LinguaBytes. 
Proceedings of the 7th international conference on 
Interaction design and children. Chicago, Illinois, 
ACM: 17-20. 
Beukelman, D. R. and P. Mirenda (2005). Augmentative 
and Alternative Communication: Management of 
Severe Communication Disorders in Children and 
Adults. Baltimore, Paul H. Brookes Publishing Co. 
Bruner, J. (1975). "From communication to language: A 
psychological perspective." Cognition 3: 255-289. 
Cheepen, C. (1988). The predictability of  informal 
conversation. Oxford, Printer Publishers Ltd. 
Clarke, H. H. and E. V. Clarke (1977). Psychology and 
Language. New York, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. 
Dempster, M. (2008). Using natural language 
generation to encourage effective communication in 
nonspeaking people. Proceedings of Young 
Researchers Consortium, ICCHP'08. 
DeRuyter and Fried-Oken. (2010). "Context-sensitive 
messaging with RFID technology."   Retrieved 2010, 
April 10, from http://aac-rerc.psu.edu/index.php/projecttypes/list 
Gatt, A., F. Portet, et al (2009). "From Data to Text in 
the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit: Using NLG 
Technology for Decision Support and Information 
Management." AI Communications 22: 153-186. 
Goldberg, E., N. Driedger, et al (1994). "Using natural-
language processing to produce weather forecasts." 
IEEE Expert 9(2): 45-53. 
Harris, M. (2008). Building a Large-Scale Commer-cial 
NLG System for an EMR. Proc of INLG-2008. 
Hemsley, B., S. Balandin, et al (2007). "Family 
caregivers discuss roles and  needs in supporting 
adults with cerebral palsy and complex 
communication needs in the hospital setting." 
Journal of Developmental and Physical Disabilities 
19(2): 115-124. 
Higginbotham, D. J., H. Shane, et al (2007). "Access to 
AAC: Present, past, and future." Augmentative & 
Alternative Communication 23(3): 243-257. 
Labov, W. (1972). Language in the inner city: Studies in 
the Black English Vernacular. Philadelphia, 
University of Pennsylvania Press. 
Light, J., C. Binger, et al (1994). "Story Reading 
interactions between preschoolers who use AAC and 
their mothers." Augmentative and Alternative 
Communication 10: 255-268. 
Light, J. and K. Drager (2007). "AAC Technologies for 
Young Children with Complex Communication 
Needs: State of the Science and Future Research 
Directions." Augmentative and Alternative 
Communication 23(3): pp. 204 ? 216. 
Liu, X., A. Sen, et al (2008). A Software Client for Wi-
Fi Based Real-Time Location Tracking of Patients. 
Medical Imaging and Informatics. 
Berlin/Heidelberg, Springer. 4987/2008: 141-150. 
P?r?z, R. P. y. and M. Sharples (2004). "Three 
Computer-Based Models of StoryTelling: BRUTUS, 
MINSTREL, and MEXICA." Knowledge-Based 
Systems 17: 15-29. 
Peterson, C. and A. McCabe (1983). Developmental 
psycholinguistics: Three ways of looking at a child?s 
narrative. New York, Plenum. 
Reiter, E. (2007). An Architecture for Data-to-Text 
Systems. ENLG-2007. 
Reiter, E. and R. Dale (2000). Building Natural-
Language Generation Systems., Cambridge 
University Press. 
Reiter, E., S. Sripada, et al (2005). "Choosing Words in 
Computer-Generated Weather Forecasts." Artificial 
Intelligence 167: 137-169. 
Reiter, E., R. Turner, et al (2009). Using NLG to Help 
Language-Impaired Users Tell Stories and 
Participate in Social Dialogues. ENLG2009. Athens, 
Greece, Association for Computational Linguistics. 
Robertson, J. and J. Good (2005). "Story creation in 
virtual game worlds." Communications of the ACM 
48: 61-65. 
Schlosser, R. W. (2003). The Efficacy of Augmentative 
and Alternative Communication. San Diego, 
Elsevier Science. 
Soto, G., E. Hartmann, et al (2006). "Exploring the 
Elements of Narrative that Emerge in the 
Interactions between an 8-Year-Old Child who uses 
an AAC Device and her Teacher." Augmentative 
and Alternative Communication 22(4): pp. 231 - 
241. 
Sripada, S., E. Reiter, et al (2005). Evaluating an NLG 
System using Post-Edit Data: Lessons Learned. 
Proceedings of ENLG-2005, 10th European 
Workshop on Natural Language Generation, 
Aberdeen, Scotland. 
Waller, A. (2006). "Communication Access to 
Conversational Narrative." Topics in Language 
Disorders 26(3): 221-239. 
Waller, A., R. Black, et al (2009). "Evaluating the 
STANDUP Pun Generating Software with Children 
with Cerebral Palsy." ACM Trans. Access. Comput. 
1(3): 27. 
Waller, A., F. Dennis, et al (1997). "Evaluating the use 
of TalksBac, a predictive communication device for 
non-fluent aphasic adults." International Journal of 
Language and Communication Disorders 33: 45-70. 
Waller, A. and A. F. Newell (1997). "Towards a 
narrative based communication system." European 
Journal of Disorders of Communication 32: 289-
306. 
 
9
Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Speech and Language Processing for Assistive Technologies, pages 32?42,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 30, 2011. c?2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
Trap Hunting: Finding Personal Data Management Issues in Next
Generation AAC Devices
Joseph Reddington
Royal Holloway College
Egham, UK
j.reddington@rhul.ac.uk
Lizzie Coles-Kemp
Royal Holloway College
Egham, UK
lizzie.coles-kemp@rhul.ac.uk
Abstract
Advances in natural language generation and
speech processing techniques, combined with
changes in the commercial landscape, have
brought within reach dramatic improvements
in Augmentative Alternative Communication
(AAC). These improvements, though over-
whelmingly positive, amplify a family of per-
sonal data use problems. This paper argues
that the AAC design and implementation pro-
cess needs to identify and address personal
data use problems. Accordingly, this paper
explores personal data management problems
and proposes responses. This paper is situated
in the context of AAC technology but the re-
sponses could be generalised for other com-
munities affected by low digital literacy, low
literacy levels and cognitive challenges.
1 Introduction
Electronic Augmentative and Alternative Commu-
nication (AAC) systems enable individuals with se-
vere speech impairment to verbally communicate
their needs, often using Text-to-Speech technology.
Such devices are designed to give communication
impaired people greater independence and improved
opportunities of social integration. The devices en-
able users to construct utterances, many of which de-
scribe themselves or aspects of their lives, including
their actions with others and, as such, can be con-
sidered ?personal data?. Recent work by Patel and
Radhakrishnan (2007), Black et al (2010), Reiter
et al (2009), and Reddington and Tintarev (2011)
makes explicit use of personal data (about both the
user and other parties) to improve the functionality
of AAC devices. Depending on context, the use of
these utterances, in an institutional setting, may be
controlled under data protection legislation, or (e.g.
domestically) their use may be influenced more by
social norms within the context. A key factor in per-
sonal data management is the highly contextual na-
ture of privacy related issues; privacy concerns and
practices are situated in their context (Nissenbaum,
2009) and influenced by cultural issues (Milberg et
al., 2000).
The diversity of technology in the AAC sector
is set to increase dramatically. Apple?s iPad1 has
caused a huge investment in tablet technology. Mul-
tiple, third party applications (e.g. proloque2go2,
myVoice3, and verbally4) already exist that allow
this new range of tablets to function as AAC devices.
The effect of this research movement maturing
at a time when many new devices and producers
are entering the market foreshadows probable ma-
jor changes and innovations in coming years. This
includes a risk of the ?panoply of different privacy
problems? that privacy theorist Solove (2008) fore-
saw as a result of diversifying and enhancing tech-
nologies.
The authors? position is that it is very timely to
explore personal data management problems in this
new AAC landscape and in so doing identify traps
that AAC design might stumble into as this technol-
ogy change gathers pace. This perspective can con-
1http://www.apple.com/ipad/, retrieved May 2011
2http://www.proloquo2go.com, retrieved May 2011
3http://new.myvoiceaac.com, retrieved May 2011
4http://verballyapp.com/index.html,retrieved May 2011
32
tribute to the design of technologies and governance
structures that are able to both identify and respond
to such traps.
As AAC devices are designed to be used in all ar-
eas of the AAC user?s life, there are a broad range
of personal data management problems, which are
highly context sensitive and incorporate legal, so-
cial, and technical issues. This complex problem
space centres on informational privacy issues that
contribute to a wider family of personal data man-
agement problems that can be found in contexts of
AAC use.
This paper situates the personal data management
problems in the use of natural language generation
and speech processing techniques in AAC. It consid-
ers all of the following as personal data: utterances
constructed by the system, communication logs and
re-communication of stored utterances. Following
an overview of state-of-the-art AAC and discussion
of how functionality development in next-generation
AAC devices maps to the use of personal data, Sec-
tion 2 identifies and explores personal data use prob-
lems in three AAC-specific examples. Section 3
presents possible responses to problems introduced
by the examples and Section 4 considers a gov-
ernance framework that enables emergent personal
data management problems with future AAC de-
vices to be identified and considers its applicability
for other communities.
1.1 Personal data generated, and used, by AAC
devices
Today, AAC devices may excel at needs-based com-
munication (e.g. ?I am hungry?, ?I?m cold?, ?get
the phone?) but they are limited for real conversa-
tion (Soto et al, 2006). So, in the current genera-
tion of AAC devices, the implications for both per-
sonal data generation and its use are relatively small
because the linguistic capabilities are small. Typi-
cal AAC devices tend towards a hierarchical struc-
ture of pages, each of which typically focuses on a
context (e.g. shopping) or a category (e.g. clothes,
sports), rather than observations or recent personal
stories (Beukelman and Mirenda, 2005). However,
Higginbotham et al (2007) report that spontaneous
conversation with typical devices is slow and diffi-
cult (new utterances are typically constructed at a
rate of between 8 and 10 words per minute, slightly
more if e.g. word prediction is used). Todman et
al. (2008) propose utterance-based devices in which
devices focus on prepared phrases to facilitate social
communication rather than needs-based communi-
cation; however, in general, new utterances must be
prepared in advance either by the user or a carer,
with a large time and energy cost. It is this im-
plementation of functionality designed to speed up
utterance production that restricts the production of
personal data rather than the underlying technology.
A study by Rackensperger et al (2005) shows that
using pre-programmed phrases can reduce the abil-
ity for self-expression; as a result, the range of per-
sonal data produced is likely to be limited. As an
example, there is a particular difficulty in commu-
nicating recent or single use events such as talking
about one?s day or talking about yesterday?s tele-
vision: such utterances are expensive to prepare in
advance due to the potential for limited and low-
probability use. Thus, AAC users tend to be pas-
sive, responding to questions with single words or
short sentences, and personal stories tend to be told
as a monologue or a sequence of pre-stored utter-
ances (Soto et al, 2006).
To develop the potential for interaction, and there-
fore increase the degree to which AAC devices can
support increased independence, recent research has
examined the potential for location-aware devices
to offer different content to the user under differ-
ent conditions (Dominowska et al, 2002; Patel and
Radhakrishnan, 2007), and for devices that generate
new phrases automatically. In the later case: Black
et al (2010) use external data to populate a commu-
nication device, and Reiter et al (2009) use a NLG
engine to generate text from a database of personal
facts. These innovations could allow users to in-
crease social interaction and reduce the device main-
tenance, complementing the growing range of AAC
systems with internet connectivity.
1.1.1 Impact on personal data
As the capability for interaction increases, the po-
tential for increased personal data also increases.
For example:
? utterances generated from geo-location enabled
devices can potentially include information
about people (data subjects) other than the
33
AAC user, as well as increased information
about the device users themselves;
? utterances generated from input by teachers,
care staff and parents can again potentially con-
tain information about other data subjects, as
well as increase the range of information about
device users themselves;
? internet access as a medium brings a range of
issues for personal data use in terms of the
methods used to broadcast and replay utter-
ances and it greatly increases the possibilities
for data input (potentially including informa-
tion about third parties) into the utterances;
? the general browsing facility of internet access
increases the ability of users to communicate
with the wider world, carrying with it a set
of personal data management and privacy is-
sues, much of which is the subject of on-going
research (Kani-Zabihi and Coles-Kemp, 2010;
Kumaraguru and Cranor, 2005; Spiekermann
and Cranor, 2009).
Increasing the potential for interaction and giving
more control to the AAC user will increase the range
of personal data generated and hence the range of
potential personal data use problems. Moreover,
the increased creation of novel utterances and wider
opportunity to relay such utterances potentially in-
crease intellectual property issues.
AAC devices are designed to increase social inter-
action in all settings and therefore the devices, and
their supporting approaches, must be equally effec-
tive in all situations. This is a challenge for any type
of personal data management that includes aspects
of privacy. Also, AAC users themselves develop
their uses and desires for communication (Rack-
ensperger et al, 2005). Therefore, any approach to
personal data management has to be highly context
sensitive and capable of responding to changing re-
quirements.
1.2 Related work in AAC literature
Although ethics in the context of complex disabil-
ities is well studied, there is little direct research
into privacy and personal data management issues
in AAC: much of the work is in small accompany-
ing sections to other research contributions and fo-
cuses directly on personal data dissemination. For
example, Smith (2005) notes that externally dis-
played lexicons (such as a communications board)
violate some aspects of privacy and proposes finding
ways to ensure that vocabulary can be delivered dis-
creetly without affecting access. Similarly, Black et
al. (2010) address privacy as part of a discussion of
security. Additionally, there is some meta-work that
looks at the ethics of research into AAC rather than
AAC itself: Pennington et al (2007) notes that the
data collected by AAC devices makes identification
of the individual trivial, especially when considering
the relatively small pool of users, a theme that is also
examined in work by Lesher et al (2000) on logging
output of AAC devices.
Privacy has also been raised explicitly in the
AAC community by researchers considering de-
sign frameworks for next generation devices, e.g.,
Rackensperger et al (2005) and DeRuyter et al
(2007). There is also a growing body of AAC re-
search that, in discussing next generation AAC tech-
nology, raises a wide range of implicit issues re-
lated to privacy and ICT mediated communication.
These issues include: anonymity; personalisation of
services; identity management; autonomy; and the
changing of relationship boundaries through media-
tion. These are topics that feature in traditional pri-
vacy research, but with added complexity.
Therefore, work on the future of AAC and in-
ternet connectivity (in particular key features high-
lighted in DeRuyter et al (2007)) have great bear-
ing on personal data management, although privacy
and personal data management are not directly dis-
cussed. DeRuyter et al (2007) discuss simplified
usability, including ?embeddedness? functionality:
making AAC devices unobtrusive in their environ-
ment. When simplifying usability, there is a ten-
sion between requiring user intervention and deci-
sion making automation. For example, where should
consent mechanisms related to personal information
disclosure be placed?
Discussions on future AAC functionality also em-
phasise adaptive technology that personalises AAC
use so that AAC devices are able to recognise a user
and adjust functionality accordingly (DeRuyter et
al., 2007). However, adaptation algorithms designed
34
to anticipate or assess user capabilities will make ad-
justments to functionality based on logs of personal
data and usage patterns and thus implicitly process
personal data. The ability to adjust such algorithms
would give users and their carers increased control
over the use of this personal data. In addition, adjust-
ing the capabilities of Internet-enabled AAC devices
is likely to also result in changes to the disclosure
of a user?s personal data. This disclosure would be
determined using a logic internal to the adaptation
algorithms. Making the logic explicit to users and
their carers would make both the personal data dis-
closure implications of adjustment visible and give
greater control over disclosure.
2 Examples
Given the situated nature of informational privacy,
in order to explore personal data management is-
sues meaningfully, it is vital to situate the evalua-
tion policy and its related personal data management
issues into a particular context. We have selected
three AAC-specific examples through which to ex-
plore the issues in particular contexts.
This section describes three illustrative scenarios
for potential personal data use problems. They are
broadly based on the categories of generated con-
tent in Reddington and Tintarev (2011) and are con-
structed with input from legal experts, youth work
practitioners, and disability officers. The examples
situate the personal data management problems be-
fore analysis in Section 3.
2.1 Example 1 - Creating Novel Utterances
The simplest, and least intrusive level of automati-
cally generated content contains inferred utterances
that can be deduced from logs of previous utter-
ances. Thus, if a device logged the phrase ?Hello
Mary? and later ?Thanks Mary? the phrase ?Today I
spent time with Mary? could be added to the list of
available phrases. It is trivial to imagine other pos-
sible situations where this is applicable - ?My com-
munications unit has been away for repair?, ?I was
up very late last night?, and ?I like to talk about foot-
ball?, are all deducible from previous utterances.
We consider an AAC user Alice, who is solely
reliant on her AAC device for communication and
is non-literate. Alice is able to generate novel ut-
terances using utterance segments programmed by
care staff and by taking advantage of inferred utter-
ances that her device has been designed to provide.
Alice has the right to delete certain utterances but
care staff and family members are able to restore the
deleted utterances. The digest of Alice?s activities
are backed up every day and could be placed in a
catalogue of utterances that the care provider uses at
promotional events or on the provider?s website.
This scenario raises issues related to intellectual
property rights, ownership, and the management of
personal data. The management issues centre on
control of data, and rights to recover deleted items.
2.2 Example 2 - Implicit and Explicit Personal
Data Exchange Rules
The second and third levels of automatically gen-
erated content involve receiving data from network
portals (such as the internet) and local sensors. For
example: ?It?s very warm today?, and ?It rained
on Friday!?. Also included is media data: ?On
YouTube I watched the ?Star Wars Kid? video ?, or
?New series of Doctor Who!?.
A useful context here is the ?How was School To-
day...?? (HWST) project (Black et al, 2010; Red-
dington and Tintarev, 2011), which generates stories
for students with complex communication needs at
a special needs school. The project logs interactions
with people, objects and location changes. This sen-
sor data is supplemented with timetable information
(to infer classes based on time and location) and
voice recordings, before new content is generated.
Consider that Alice is in a class and that her AAC
device reads information from sensors to generate
novel content in a similar way to the HWST sys-
tem. Also in class is Charlie, a typically developing
child. Charlie?s actions are also recorded by the sen-
sors and he takes part in activities with Alice. Al-
ice is able to report Charlie?s behaviour to her par-
ents and to other class members. Unlike when her
classmate Charlie verbally communicates about his
school day, Alice?s utterances take a permanent form
and can be replayed and reused. Charlie is not really
aware of this capability and what this means. Char-
lie?s parents are aware that Alice has some kind of
communication device and that sensors are used at
school but are not clear on the details. Alice?s Mum
puts some of Alice?s stories, including the one about
35
Figure 1: An example information flow
Charlie and the water fight, up on their family blog.
This scenario raises issues of consent to obtain
data from sensor sources and of processing the sen-
sor data. It also raises questions related to the dis-
semination of personal data - about the user and
other data subjects. In this scenario, personal data is
processed in two contexts: school and Alice?s home.
This shows the complex array of stakeholders in-
volved in managing personal data. Moreover, there
are questions of how non-AAC users are informed
of the implications of AAC use in the school or in
any other setting. Implicitly there is a problem of
ensuring that AAC and non-AAC users are treated
equally in terms of the personal data rights, which in
turn raises issues of how verbal and AAC generated
utterances are valued in the social context.
2.3 Example 3 - Control over Data Sharing
An additional level of complexity is the creation of
narrative flow. Narratives are groups of messages
that together relate an experience or tell a story. This
adds the problem of creating a narrative structure
and consistent style to the data-mining exercise (for
NLG work on the importance of narrative informa-
tion exchange see e.g. (Reiter et al, 2008)). An
example might be:
I had my breakfast quickly because I was
excited to go to the arcade. I got on the
bus, I went to the arcade, I played in the
arcade and won a cuddly bear.
Now consider that Alice and Charlie are joined
by Bob, who is also an AAC user on the same sys-
tem as Alice. Alice and Bob?s devices are capable of
sharing data at all levels. At the device level, Alice
and Bob share raw data to confirm, for example, that
their system clocks are in sync and that they have the
same records of people who are in the same room. It
is also possible at the social episode level that Al-
ice?s system can import utterances from Bob?s sys-
tem so that Alice could say ?Bob liked the swim-
ming?. It is important to note that in this scenario,
if Alice deletes an utterance from her machine ?The
teacher gave me a bad mark on my work?, Bob could
still use the deleted story because Alice is unable to
delete the disseminations. However, data sharing is
not only between device users. Data sharing could
also take place between the agencies involved in Al-
ice and Bob?s care and support. Figure 1 shows this
data sharing taking place on three levels: device, in-
dividual AAC user, and institutional.
This scenario raises the issues of personal data
flow control and indicates that controls for the flow
of personal data have to be set at all three levels.
Importantly, when personal data flows are managed
at these levels responses will always be sociotech-
nical in nature; therefore they include technical re-
sponses, governance responses and technology prac-
tice responses. This is a familiar combination of re-
36
sponses in privacy management (Paine et al, 2007)
3 Finding traps and responding to them
Section 2 demonstrated a family of personal data use
problems. These problems address various aspects
of using personal data in the context of AAC de-
vices. Our family of problems partly relate to the
oft used definition of privacy from Westin (1967):
?the claim of individuals, groups, or institutions to
determine for themselves when, how, and to what
extent information about them is communicated to
others?. This is not a hierarchy with a root problem
and a tree structure of related problems but a fam-
ily of problems with complex relations and which
are enmeshed rather than conceptually linear. An-
alytically, the family has four members: IPR; com-
pliance responsibility; institutional personal data ac-
cess and disclosure rights; and individual personal
data access and disclosure rights. Each family mem-
ber is addressed in this section. Whitley points out
that Whitley (2009) ?Wittgenstein (1956) tells us
that language is a social activity and hence that spe-
cialised terms like privacy are arrived at socially.?.
The social construction of concepts related to per-
sonal data mean that personal data issues will be en-
meshed in particular contexts and, as a result, the
significance of these issues will vary from context to
context.
Discussions with legal experts and practitioners
(see Acknowledgements) revealed that responses to
these problems occur at the institutional, individ-
ual, and technical levels, and an individual inter-
pretation of personal data management issues under-
pins all responses. This is true of all personal data
management issues; however, in the case of AAC
users, the individual level will be a unique combina-
tion of AAC user, family, and care workers. At the
next level is the sociocultural system in place within
each institutional context, which contains the per-
sonal data management policies, procedures, prac-
tices and institutional values. This sociocultural sys-
tem is supported by technological controls used to
control personal data information flow.
Unlike spoken conversation, AAC devices create
embodiments of conversations that can be perma-
nently stored or logged. Then conversations become
data that largely focuses on living individuals, ei-
ther the users themselves or their family and friends.
Under certain conditions processing this data will be
regulated by data protection legislation. In other set-
tings the processing will be governed more by so-
cial norms. Furthermore, the permanent nature of
these embodiments means that they can carry copy-
right. Then there is a natural question of informa-
tion flow control, the need for rights management
and traditional information security issues such as
confidentiality and access control. However, privacy
is also an elastic concept (Allen, 1988) and is often
considered wider than the Westin definition, includ-
ing aspects of identity and relationship management.
As the work of Smith (2005) and Rackensperger
et al (2005) shows, use of AAC devices is related
to notions of self and relationship to others. The
notions of self and relationship to others are a cen-
tral aspect of privacy (Kani-Zabihi and Coles-Kemp,
2010) (Barnard-Wills and Ashenden, 2010) and the
link between personal data use and privacy and iden-
tity issues should not be ignored when considering
these personal data management problems.
3.1 A Family of Personal Data Use Problems
Practically, any technical, regulatory, or social re-
sponse to personal data use issues in AAC must be
able to operate in a range of contexts and support a
user as they blend and adjust contexts. For example,
an AAC user may use their device at home, in formal
education, in youth group activities, and in social
settings. These different contexts may include many
of the same people, but the personal data control
requirements and the regulatory and personal data
management frameworks are likely to differ from
context to context. A further level of complexity in
the case of AAC users is that capabilities and back-
grounds differ widely within the AAC community
(DeRuyter et al, 2007) and any personal data man-
agement approach has to adjust to these varying ca-
pabilities and different perspectives.
Technical responses would primarily be formed
by meshing the AAC functionality into the underly-
ing technical architecture of each device. Technical
responses include personal information flow control
over the network; encryption of sensitive utterances,
e.g. health or financial information (such as credit
card numbers), stored on the AAC device; access
control to location databases and so on.
37
3.1.1 Management of IPR
Automatically generated text in AAC devices can
be coupled or merged with input from other sources,
increasing the ability of users to develop additional
novel utterances. Given the digital nature of the ut-
terances, there is potentially a close comparison with
music copyright, which has three sets of rights: me-
chanical, rights related to the creation of the lyrics
and performing. Using music copyright as the paral-
lel, consider the situation where an AAC user, Alice
say, imports text from a novel under copyright (me-
chanical rights) and adapts it by adding other text
and other copyright material in order to create her
own monologue (intellectual property rights). An-
other AAC user, Bob say, then downloads Alice?s
monologue and performs it through his AAC de-
vice at a concert for a school (performing rights).
Clearly the majority of instances carry an implicit
rights clearance, particularly in the content and per-
forming rights elements of this example. However,
if the monologue was posted on YouTube and then
became sampled by a recording artist or made into a
digital novel, rights clearance may not apply. Com-
municating the rules relating to copyright and ensur-
ing understanding can be problematic.
Social and institutional responses to IPR prob-
lems are largely related to awareness training and
the agreement of ?ground rules? or social contracts in
communities such as schools and youth clubs where
the legal issues and social expectations are made
clear. The traditional methods for negotiating and
agreeing ground rules is heavily based on the use of
informational literature, one-to-one and group dis-
cussion (Barnard-Wills and Ashenden, 2010). These
methods do not translate well into an environment
where users may have cognitive development issues,
or may be non-literate. It could be envisaged that
guardians and parents would be used to negotiate
and agree the ground rules and then left with the
task of communicating the ground rules to their de-
pendents. The difficulty in this is that at the same
time, AAC users can become very skilled in the
use of technology and may well develop practices
that involve copyright material, in a way that their
guardians have not been able to communicate effec-
tively. In order to respond to this mismatch of ca-
pabilities, methods of engagement need to be sought
that ensure AAC users are as integral as possible to
the establishment of such rules.
3.1.2 Management of compliance responsibility
Due to the digital nature of AAC utterances, per-
sonal data output by a device is regulated by data
protection legislation when being processed in the
context of institutions such as schools, health, or so-
cial service. In the UK, this legislation is the Data
Protection Act 1998. Under the Act there are eight
principles of personal data management and the re-
quirement that there must be a data controller who
is responsible for compliance with the legislation.
The term ?data subject? denotes individuals to whom
the personal data relates. If Alice and Bob were
young adults with sufficient cognitive abilities they
would likely be the data controllers. However, as
speech, language and communication disabilities are
regularly a pan-disability, Alice and Bob may also
be cognitively impaired and a parent or guardian is
likely to be regarded as the data controller.
Typically, the mechanism for specifying compli-
ance requirements is via the creation of a compli-
ance schedule. In the case of AAC use, a compliance
schedule for AAC devices is likely to be between the
institution (school or health services) and the par-
ents. The compliance schedule would establish the
responsibility for data processing and agree the rela-
tionship between parents and institutions. Note that
the AAC user?s capabilities for technology can po-
tentially exceed that of their guardians and parents.
The relationship the AAC user has to the technol-
ogy is quite possibly very different from that of the
parent or guardian. If effective compliance manage-
ment is to be achieved, new engagement methods
need to be sought to ensure that AAC users are ac-
tively engaged in the establishment of compliance
schedules. The connection between the individual,
the institution (school) and privacy legislation is il-
lustrated in Figure 2.
3.1.3 Management of institutional personal
data access and disclosure rights
A set of rights must be agreed as part of the com-
pliance schedule when AAC devices are used in
school and healthcare settings. Many AAC devices
have their data backed up to a central database. An
38
Figure 2: This diagram adapts the characterisation of in-
stitutional culture found in (Allaire and Firsirotu, 1984)
issue arises as to who has the right to back up or ac-
cess the AAC data. AAC devices that can restore
data that a user has deleted raise particular prob-
lems, which relate to who has the right to restore the
data and the subsequent disclosure rights that this
individual would have. Problems also occur as to
whether other AAC users have the right to down-
load content from another AAC device and the sub-
sequent disclosure rights that this would afford.
AAC users will typically have considerable inter-
vention from education and health support workers.
Unlike spoken forms of conversations in other care
situations, AAC utterances have a digital embodi-
ment. This allows different teams in the care, ed-
ucation and support of the user to easily share ut-
terances, and it may be deemed to make care more
effective to do so. From an institutional perspective,
data sharing policies should be set up to state which
aspects of AAC utterances can be shared, the people
that such utterances can be shared with, and a need
for transparency in the logic used to interpret the ut-
terances. In addition, the compliance schedule could
specify which data transfers are permitted.
3.1.4 Management of individual personal data
access and disclosure rights
Whilst many institutional issues are related to per-
sonal data use, importantly, AAC users are likely to
use devices for personal data disclosure outside of
the institutional context as part of family and social
life. In this instance processing is controlled by so-
cial norms and practices that could be considered a
social contract (Milne and Gordon, 1993).
From a social perspective, developing social con-
tracts or norms organically responds to problems re-
lated to publishing of data about other data subjects,
misuse of the AAC user?s personal data by friends
and family, and unintentional copyright infringe-
ments. In the scenario of AAC use, these social con-
tracts and norms are re-enforced with education and
awareness briefings (Bogdanovic et al, 2009) that
are typically driven by the education and health in-
stitutions. As part of these ground rules, the degree
of anonymity in any disclosures and the rights of
non-AAC users to have their personal data removed
from an AAC device are agreed or follow a socially
accepted path. From a technical perspective, the de-
vice interface could be developed to include utter-
ances about information disclosure and feelings of
privacy. The log files could also include information
disclosure and processing comments that practition-
ers and family members might wish to discuss or
consider. Role play games could also be considered
as a way of re-enforcing and encouraging ground
rules.
4 AAC personal data management
framework
As illustrated in Figure 2, personal data manage-
ment within the AAC context is complex and any
response to a personal data management problem
has both technical, governance and cultural aspects.
These responses have to be adaptive to differing lev-
els of capabilities and different contextual require-
ments. Any technical response has to be scalable to
enable users with different privacy and technical re-
quirements to have access to their personal data con-
trolled accordingly so that, where practical, users are
able to have some control over their personal data.
This scaleability can, in part, be addressed by the de-
sign and implementation of the personal data man-
agement framework.
39
4.1 Extending the existing framework
The personal data management problems related to
AAC use have links with work in the mainstream
privacy and consent research communities. Sec-
tion 2 illustrates that AAC use adds additional lay-
ers of complexity to privacy and consent issues and,
as a result, adds additional requirements to any per-
sonal data management framework. Due to space
constraints the factors are merely highlighted to note
that each is a large piece of research in its own right.
The required extensions fall into three areas:
4.1.1 Technical capability
Technical capability, in addition to education, is a
factor in assessing ability to manage privacy (Coles-
Kemp et al, 2010; Kumaraguru and Cranor, 2005;
Buchanan et al, 2007) because a relatively sophisti-
cated level of technical capability is required to im-
plement the privacy controls. Technical capability
and education levels are likely to be lower, on aver-
age, in AAC users.
4.1.2 Family roles
AAC users typically remain ?scaffolded? by fam-
ily and the family will therefore remain involved in
decisions about personal data disclosure. Whilst,
family plays an important role at the start of an indi-
vidual?s internet journey5, typically this intervention
recedes over time and the design of privacy controls
does not traditionally cater for varying levels of user
independence in decision making. This needs to be
addressed by the management framework.
4.1.3 Governance system design
Responses to personal data management issues
use a governance system composed of policy, reg-
ulation, and practices to support the use of pri-
vacy enhancing technologies. Engagement with
such a system is notoriously inconsistent because of
language and conceptual complexities (Kani-Zabihi
and Coles-Kemp, 2010; Bogdanovic et al, 2009;
Bonnici and Coles-Kemp, 2010; McDonald and
Cranor, 2008; McDonald and Cranor, 2009). It is
reasonable to assume that such a governance sys-
tem would require specific modifications for the
5UK online Centres (2010) ?Digital engagement un-
derstanding customers?, a study (available for download at
www.ukonlinecentres.com/research/research/centres-research)
AAC community to make policies more understand-
able, to allow for adaptations in privacy and internet
safety education and to enable the role of family in
decision support. However, it should also be kept
in mind that similar modifications could be made
for other communities with lower levels of digital
literacy, literacy and cognitive challenges. Whilst
the problems themselves are AAC-specific and the
problems are brought about, in part, by the direction
of development of AAC technology, the governance
responses respond to underlying problems found in
a range of communities.
5 Conclusions
Advances in text-to-speech technology and mobile
computing have made a range of AAC devices avail-
able to the public. Advances in natural language
generation and speech processing techniques have
co-incided with changes to the commercial land-
scape to bring dramatic advances in AAC capabil-
ities within reach. These advances in AAC design,
though overwhelmingly positive, do result in a fam-
ily of personal data use problems that were not en-
countered with previous generations of the devices.
This paper argued that AAC devices can only signifi-
cantly support users with communication difficulties
to achieve greater independence and social inclusion
if their design and implementation both addresses
and identifies personal data problems.
Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank the staff of the HWST
project, the Natural Language Generation Group
at Aberdeen and the Sociotechnical Group, within
the Information Security Group at Royal Holloway.
The work was developed with input from legal ex-
perts, youth work practitioners, and disability offi-
cers: in particular Robert Carolina, Amanda Gerry,
and Karen Wood are gratefully acknowledged. Sim-
ilarly, the insights of Nava Tintarev, Sarah Mof-
fat, and Margaret Mitchell made this work pos-
sible. This paper was produced in collaboration
with the Visualisation and Other Methods of Ex-
pression (VOME) project, which is supported by
the Technology Strategy Board; the Engineering and
Physical Sciences Research Council and the Eco-
nomic and Social Research Council [grant number
EP/G00255X/1].
40
References
Y. Allaire and M.E. Firsirotu. 1984. Theories of organi-
zational culture. Organization studies, 5(3):193.
A.L. Allen. 1988. Uneasy access: Privacy for women in
a free society. Rowman & Littlefield Pub Inc.
S. Balandin, N. Berg, and A. Waller. 2006. Assessing
the loneliness of older people with cerebral palsy. Dis-
ability & Rehabilitation, 28(8):469?479.
D. Barnard-Wills and D. Ashenden. 2010. Public sector
engagement with online identity management. Iden-
tity in the Information Society, pages 1?18.
DR Beukelman and P. Mirenda. 2005. Augmentative and
alternative communication: Supporting children and
adults with complex communication needs3rd ed. Paul
H. Brookes, Baltimore, MD.
R. Black, J. Reddington, E. Reiter, N. Tintarev, and
A. Waller. 2010. Using NLG and sensors to support
personal narrative for children with complex commu-
nication needs. In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT
2010 Workshop on Speech and Language Processing
for Assistive Technologies, pages 1?9, Los Angeles,
California, June. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
D. Bogdanovic, C. Crawford, and L. Coles-Kemp. 2009.
The need for enhanced privacy and consent dialogues.
Information Security Technical Report, 14(3):167?
172.
C.J. Bonnici and L. Coles-Kemp. 2010. Principled
Electronic Consent Management: A Preliminary Re-
search Framework. In 2010 International Conference
on Emerging Security Technologies, pages 119?123.
IEEE.
T. Buchanan, C. Paine, A.N. Joinson, and U.D. Reips.
2007. Development of measures of online privacy
concern and protection for use on the internet. Jour-
nal of the American Society for Information Science
and Technology, 58(2):157?165.
L. Coles-Kemp and E. Kani-Zabihi. 2010. On-line pri-
vacy and consent: a dialogue, not a monologue. In
Proceedings of the 2010 workshop on New security
paradigms, pages 95?106. ACM.
L. Coles-Kemp, Y.L. Lai, M. Ford, and C. Hyperion.
2010. Privacy on the Internet: Attitudes and Be-
haviours.
J. Cornwell, I. Fette, G. Hsieh, M. Prabaker, J. Rao,
K. Tang, K. Vaniea, L. Bauer, L. Cranor, J. Hong,
et al 2007. User-controllable security and privacy
for pervasive computing. In Mobile Computing Sys-
tems and Applications, 2007. HotMobile 2007. Eighth
IEEE Workshop on, pages 14?19. IEEE.
F. DeRuyter, D. McNaughton, K. Caves, D.N. Bryen, and
M.B. Williams. 2007. Enhancing AAC connections
with the world. Augmentative and Alternative Com-
munication, 23(3):258?270.
E. Dominowska, D. Roy, and R. Patel. 2002. An adaptive
context-sensitive communication aid. In Proceedings
of the 17th Annual International Conference Technol-
ogy and Persons with Disabilities.
P. Golle, F. McSherry, and I. Mironov. 2008. Data collec-
tion with self-enforcing privacy. ACM Transactions on
Information and System Security (TISSEC), 12(2):1?
24.
D. J. Higginbotham, H.Shane, S. Russell, and K.Caves.
2007. Access to AAC: Present, past, and fu-
ture. Augmentative and Alternative Communication,
23(3):243?257.
M.A. Kamp, P. Slotty, S. Sarikaya-Seiwert, H.J. Steiger,
and D. Hanggi. Traumatic brain injuries in illustrated
literature: experience from a series of over 700 head
injuries in the asterix comic books. Acta Neurochirur-
gica, pages 1?5.
E. Kani-Zabihi and L. Coles-Kemp. 2010. Service Users
Requirements for Tools to Support Effective On-line
Privacy and Consent Practices. In Procedings of the
15th Conference on Secure IT Systems, Nordic 2010.
C.M. Karat, C. Brodie, and J. Karat. 2006. Usable pri-
vacy and security for personal information manage-
ment. Communications of the ACM, 49(1):56?57.
P. Kumaraguru and L.F. Cranor. 2005. Privacy indexes:
A survey of westins studies. Institute for Software Re-
search International.
G.W. Lesher, G.J. Rinkus, B.J. Moulton, and D.J. Higgin-
botham. 2000. Logging and analysis of augmentative
communication. In Proceedings of the RESNA Annual
Conference. Citeseer.
A.M. McDonald and L.F. Cranor. 2008. The cost of read-
ing privacy policies. ACM Transactions on Computer-
Human Interaction, 4(3):1?22.
A. McDonald and L. Cranor. 2009. An empirical study
of how people perceive online behavioral advertising.
S.J. Milberg, H.J. Smith, and S.J. Burke. 2000. Infor-
mation privacy: Corporate management and national
regulation. Organization Science, pages 35?57.
G.R. Milne and M.E. Gordon. 1993. Direct mail privacy-
efficiency trade-offs within an implied social contract
framework. Journal of Public Policy & Marketing,
12(2):206?215.
H. Nissenbaum. 2009. Privacy in context: Technology,
policy, and the integrity of social life. Stanford Law
Books.
C. Paine, U.D. Reips, S. Stieger, A. Joinson, and
T. Buchanan. 2007. Internet users? perceptions of
privacy concerns? and privacy actions?. International
Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 65(6):526?536.
41
R. Patel and R. Radhakrishnan. 2007. Enhancing Access
to Situational Vocabulary by Leveraging Geographic
Context. Assistive Technology Outcomes and Benefits,
page 99.
L. Pennington, J. Marshall, and J. Goldbart. 2007. De-
scribing participants in AAC research and their com-
municative environments: Guidelines for research and
practice. Disability & Rehabilitation, 29(7):521?535.
T. Rackensperger, C. Krezman, D. Mcnaughton, M.B.
Williams, and K. D?silva. 2005. When I first got it,
I wanted to throw it off a cliff: The challenges and
benefits of learning AAC technologies as described by
adults who use AAC. Augmentative and Alternative
Communication, 21(3):165?186.
J. Reddington and N. Tintarev. 2011. Automatically gen-
erating stories from sensor data. In Proceedings of the
15th international conference on Intelligent user inter-
faces, pages 407?410. ACM.
S. Reilly, J. Douglas, and J. Oates. 2004. Evidence-based
practice in speech pathology. Whurr, London.
E. Reiter, F. Portet A. Gatt, and M. van der Meulen. 2008.
The importance of narrative and other lessons from an
evaluation of an NLG system that summarises clinical
data. In International Natural Language Generation
Conference (INLG), pages 147?156.
E. Reiter, R. Turner, N. Alm, R. Black, M. Dempster,
and A. Waller. 2009. Using NLG to help language-
impaired users tell stories and participate in social di-
alogues. In European Workshop on Natural Language
Generation (ENLG-09).
M.M. Smith. 2005. The dual challenges of aided com-
munication and adolescence. Augmentative and Alter-
native Communication, 21(1):67?79.
D.J. Solove. 2008. Understanding privacy. Harvard uni-
versity press.
G. Soto, E. Hartmann, and D. Wilkins. 2006. Exploring
the elements of narrative that emerge in the interac-
tions between an 8-year-old child who uses an AAC
device and her teacher. Augmentative and Alternative
Communication, 22(4):231?241.
S. Spiekermann and L.F. Cranor. 2009. Engineering pri-
vacy. Software Engineering, IEEE Transactions on,
35(1):67?82.
J. Todman, N. Alm, J. Higginbotham, and P. File. 2008.
Whole utterance approaches in AAC. Augmentative
and Alternative Communication, 24(3):235?254.
A.F. Westin. 1967. Privacy and freedom, volume 97.
London.
E.A. Whitley. 2009. Informational privacy, consent and
the. Information security technical report, 14(3):154?
159.
L. Wittgenstein. 1956. Philosophical investiga-
tions.(trans. GEM Anscombe) Basil Blackwell.
42
Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Speech and Language Processing for Assistive Technologies (SLPAT), pages 1?8,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, August 26 2014. c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
Standing on the shoulders of giants: attacking the meta-problems of
technical AAC research
Joseph Reddington
joe@joereddington.com
Abstract
Augmentative Alternative Communica-
tion (AAC) policy suffers from a lack of
large scale quantitative evidence on the de-
mographics of users and diversity of de-
vices.
The 2013 Domesday Dataset was created
to aid formation of AAC policy at the
national level. The dataset records pur-
chases of AAC technology by the UK?s
National Health Service between 2006 and
2012; giving information for each item on:
make, model, price, year of purchase, and
geographic area of purchase. The dataset
was designed to help answer open ques-
tions about the provision of AAC services
in the UK; and the level of detail of the
dataset is such that it can be used at the
research level to provide context for re-
searchers and to help validate (or not) as-
sumptions about everyday AAC use.
This paper examine three different ways
of using the Domesday Dataset to pro-
vide verified evidence to support, or refute,
assumptions, uncover important research
problems, and to properly map the tech-
nological distinctiveness of a user commu-
nity.
1 Introduction
Technical researchers in the AAC community are
required to make certain assumptions about the
state of the community when choosing research
projects that are calculated to make the most ef-
fective use of research resources for the greatest
possible benefit.
A particular issue is estimating how easily tech-
nical research can achieve wide scale adoption or
commercial impact. For example, (Szekely et al.,
2012) uses a webcam and facial analysis to al-
low a user to control expressive features of their
synthetic speech by means of facial expressions.
Such work is clearly useful, but it is difficult to as-
sess its potential commercial impact without also
knowing what proportion of currently available
AAC devices include webcams and how that pro-
portion is changing over time. Similarly, corpus
based approaches such as (Mitchell and Sproat,
2012) could potentially be brought to market very
quickly, but that potential can only be assessed
if we also have some awareness of the range and
popularity of AAC devices that either have space
for such a corpus or the internet capability to ac-
cess one. Unfortunately, even though there are a
range of AAC focused meta-studies in the litera-
ture (see, for example, (Pennington et al., 2003;
Pennington et al., 2004; Hanson et al., 2004; Al-
well and Cobb, 2009)) they give little information
on the technical landscape of AAC.
This paper examines three issues of interest to
technical researchers in AAC, each from a differ-
ent stage in the research lifecycle. It then shows
how the Domesday Dataset (Reddington, 2013)
can provide evidence to support, or refute, as-
sumptions, uncover important research problems,
and map the technological distinctiveness of a user
community.
This paper is structured as follows, Section 2 in-
troduces the Domesday Dataset and discusses the
context it is used in in this work. Section 3 exam-
ines the issue that little is known about the preva-
lence of equipment within the AAC user commu-
nity, and because of this lack of information it is
difficult to establish baselines, or contexts. We
1
show how the Domesday Dataset can allow re-
searchers to ground their assumptions in empirical
data.
Section 4 examines a cultural shift in AAC tech-
nology. The arrival of the iPad and other tablets in
the field has caused a great deal of change and it
is unclear what the long term implications will be.
We believe it is important to provide hard data on
the direct economic changes that have occurred in
the marketplace. The Domesday Dataset allows
us to examine the number of physical devices pur-
chased before and after the tablet explosion.
Section 5 examines the issue of transferability.
It is assumed by many AAC professionals that the
ability for AAC users to transfer page sets between
different devices is a significant issue for AAC
users. This section first shows how we can de-
rive some context information from the Domesday
Dataset and goes on to discuss the sociotechnical
context of the problem space.
2 The Domesday Dataset
In 2013 the Domesday Dataset was created to aid
formation of AAC policy at the national level. The
dataset records purchases of AAC technology by
the UK?s National Health Service between 2006
and 2012; giving information on make, model,
price, year of purchase, and geographic area of
purchase for each item. It was formed by sub-
mitting freedom of information requests to every
NHS (National Health Service) trust asking for de-
tails of all AAC devices provided since 2006. The
requests required the year of purchase, make, and
manufacture of each device. The full details of the
construction are reported in (Reddington, 2013).
At the time of writing, the Domesday Dataset
contained details of 9,157 purchases from NHS
Trusts. (Reddington, 2013) estimates that the
trusts that have responded cover approximately
90% of the UK population. All versions of the
dataset are held online and licensed under an Open
Data Commons Attribution License. The dataset
meets the requirements for three star linked open
data according to (Berners-Lee, 2010). A sample
of information appearing in the Domesday Dataset
is given in Table 1. The dataset was not only in-
tended to shape UK policy and research, but also
as a snapshot for international researchers: allow-
ing comparison of manufacturers, types of aids,
budgets, and prevalence within a tight geograph-
ical domain.
There are, of course, caveats to consider before
using the Domesday Dataset. Firstly, for privacy
reasons, it is presented with no connection to any
other element of AAC provision: it is impossible
to match equipment with a particular user.
Secondly, the NHS does not have the complete
information: information from AAC manufactur-
ers shows that only 44% of sales and 38% of
the spend were by the NHS. Even with complete
data from the public bodies, researchers would be
forced to extrapolate the information, perhaps con-
firming the trends by means of another research
methodology. This work makes the assumption
that the relative frequency of AAC purchases and
trends in the UK are reflected in the dataset. We
are careful not to over-analyse this information,
but we do note that having a complete list of
NHS purchases, even if they only cover 44% of
a county?s purchases, is vastly more detailed than
any previous record of AAC provision. Potential
problems with the dataset underrepresenting tablet
sales are discussed in Section 4.
3 Research Granularity
Little is known about the prevalence of equipment
within the AAC user community, and because of
this lack of information it is difficult to establish
baselines, or contexts. Perhaps worse, when re-
searchers propose solutions, they must also make
a range of assumptions about the applicability of
their work to the wider AAC audience. We can,
for example, imagine an innovative new model
for AAC not being successful because it requires
a consistent internet connection from the device,
which perhaps only 5% of users have. The ma-
jority of AAC research is devoted to building up
a library of case studies to show the benefits of
AAC for user groups. This focus on social is-
sues in AAC research is laudable, and vital for
the overall area; however, researchers working in
the assistive technology field would be more ef-
fective if they could answer direct questions about
need, capability and technology. For example, a
researcher who must choose between supporting a
project that reduces errors in word-prediction us-
ing eye-gaze by 20%, or a project that makes Step-
By-Step devices more responsive and intuitive to
use for children, faces a difficult choice without
evidence. If the researcher could check that in a
particular geographic area there were 45 eye-gaze
systems and nearly 600 Step-by-Steps, then that
2
Purchase year Manufacturer Model Num. Unit Price Total Price
2006 Liberator E-Tran Frame 1 ?120.00 ?120.00
2006 Servox Digital Electronic Larynx 2 ?520.00 ?1,040.00
2006 Ablenet Armstrong Mount 1 ?190.00 ?190.00
2006 Ablenet Big Mack 6 ?84.00 ?504.00
2007 Inclusive Switchit ?Bob the Builder? 1 ?49.00 ?49.00
2007 Cricksoft Crick USB Switch Box 2 ?99.00 ?198.00
2007 Sensory Software Joycable2 1 ?49.00 ?49.00
2007 Dynavox Boardmaker 1 ?209.00 ?209.00
2007 ELO LCD Touch Monitor 1 ?419.00 ?419.00
2008 Ablenet iTalk2 Communication Aid 2 ?95.00 ?190.00
2008 Attainment Company Inc Go Talk(unknown type) 4 ?130.00 ?520.00
2008 Aug. Communication Inc. Talking Photo Album 2 ?18.91 ?37.82
Table 1: Extract from the Domesday Dataset, taken from (Reddington, 2013) (Geograpic information
held seperately)
might influence the decision1 (at a higher level this
is, of course, the calculation that one expects fund-
ing bodies to make when awarding the grants that
allow projects to even begin). Having quantita-
tive manufacturing data also supports much more
general estimations of research impact, as well
as helping research groups evaluate possible com-
mercial partners.
Even within the United States, which is the ma-
jor market for manufacturers, and the most ac-
tive area for AAC research, the complexities of its
healthcare system, differing state legislation, and
disability culture make estimation difficult. Even
the strong efforts that have been made (Matas et
al., 1985; Bloomberg and Johnson, 1990; Binger
and Light, 2006; Huer, 1991) give estimations of
need and use, but none that can be expected to give
the granularity that technologists need for their in-
vestigation, or even to frame research questions.
3.1 What Domesday tells us
To illustrate the use of the Domesday Dataset for
technical researchers, we give some simple results
regarding the popularity of various types of AAC
device. Table 2 shows the list of most common
?high tech? AAC purchases by the NHS in Scot-
land, ordered by the number of units purchased be-
tween 2006 and 2012. Table 3 gives the same table
for purchases in England. Both tables are based on
a relatively open definition of ?high tech? AAC:
these lists include only devices that can produce a
range of different utterances, and allow those ut-
1In either direction of course, depending on the weighting
given to a variety of other factors.
Rank Model Units
1 Lightwriter (SL35/SL40) 37
2 GoTalk (all types) 34
3 iPads and iPods 15
4 Springboard Lite 12
5 Vantage Lite 6
6 SuperTalker 6
7 Dynamo 6
8 V Max 5
9 Tech/Speak 32 x 6 4
10 Liberator 14 4
11 C12 + CEYE 4
Table 2: The 11 most common ?high tech? speech
aids purchased by the NHS in Scotland 2005-2011
terances to be selected by icon, or keyboard. As
a result they do not include such devices as, for
example: Big Macks; Digital Electronic Larynxs;
Jelly Bean Twists; Step?by-Steps; MegaBees and
many others, which are included in the Domesday
Dataset. As discussed in Section 2 we do not ad-
vise the direct quoting of these figures without first
being familiar with the caveats discussed in (Red-
dington, 2013). The figures should be considered
comparative only.
Some of the more counter-intuitive results from
Tables 2 and 3 include the general absence (with
the notable exception of the iPad/iPod) of touch
screen devices. Indeed, both the Lightwriter and
the GoTalk range comfortably sell more than twice
as many units as their nearest touchscreen rival.
A more sobering result to consider for re-
searchers in technical AAC is the popularity of
3
Rank Model Units
1 Lightwriter (SL35/SL40) 77
2 GoTalk (all types) 74
3 iPad/iPod/iPhone 29
4 Springboard Lite 27
5 V Max 11
6 Dynamo 10
7 SuperTalker 7
8 Vantage Lite 6
9 Tech/Speak 32 x 6 6
10 Chatbox 5
11 C12 + CEYE 4
Table 3: The 11 most common ?high tech? speech
aids purchased by the NHS in England 2005-2011
devices that are less obvious targets for cus-
tomisation and improvement. The GoTalk and
Tech/Speak ranges are solid favourites for a par-
ticular section of the market and part of their ap-
peal is that they are relatively ?non-technical?2 and
are much easier for users and staff to get to grips
with: this appeal is somewhat in tension with ad-
vanced features like automatic generation of con-
tent and voice banking. It is entirely possible that
technical research would have more impact if it
focuses on making high-capability devices more
acceptable to existing users rather than increasing
the already impressive capability of existing de-
vices.
Another aspect of interest is the speed at which
the AAC market changes with respect to the ex-
isting landscape. The Dynavox Dynamo, for ex-
ample, is a popular device in both tables, but it
has been discontinued for some time. Section 5
explores some of the issues that this situation can
raise. Finally we consider that there are some sys-
tems that we would have expected to appear in
these lists that are absent: for example, Dynavox?s
Xpress and Maestro or Tobii?s MyTobii, and Lib-
erator?s Nova. Speculating on why some products
become more popular is beyond the scope of this
work; however, we do consider it an area for future
interest.
This section has shown that examining the
Domesday Dataset at even the most basic level
identifies a range of factors that can help contex-
tualise the technical landscape for researchers in
AAC. To return to the examples given in the in-
2For example, neither device has a LCD screen, instead
they have buttons with printed icons
troduction, we can see how it would be simple
for (Szekely et al., 2012) to use the iPod and iPad?s
position in the marketplace as evidence for the po-
tential of their work and we can see how corpus
based approaches such as (Mitchell and Sproat,
2012) can use the range of AAC devices with in-
ternet connections to inform the design process.
We note that as the data covers a five year period
it is possible to examine ?fashions? as purchases
rise and fall and even map the gradual spread geo-
graphically.
4 Tablets and other animals
This section examines the extent to which the in-
troduction of tablet-based AAC has altered the
user community at the technical level and dis-
cusses how this data can be used by technical re-
searchers.
Since 2010, when Apple released the iPad, there
have been major upheavals in the AAC market,
caused by the explosion in tablet computing. From
an engineering perspective, the iPad only suf-
fers in comparison to existing devices in terms
of ruggedness; however, at potentially one quarter
the price3, it is comparatively replaceable. From a
software perspective the iPad gives many ?cottage
industry? developers for AAC a low cost way to
enter the market. Such developers already include
Alexicom, TapToTalk, AssistiveWare, and over
100 others. Such developers are well placed to
take advantage of the platform?s underlying hard-
ware.
Apples?s position as a top-tier technology gi-
ant, along with the iPad?s position as the dominant
tablet platform can be seen as a serious change
to the AAC industry as a whole. However, for
many working within the AAC community, it is
unclear what the long term implications will be.
Apple represents the most successful of a large
group of companies such as Samsung, HP, and (via
the Android operating system, and the purchase
of Motorola) Google (Weber, 2011) that have in-
vested heavily in tablet technology. It is conceiv-
able that one or more manufacturers will develop
a ?ruggedised? tablet for military or medical use.
Such a tablet, particularly if using the Android op-
erating system, which has a large group of dedi-
cated AAC developers (Higginbotham and Jacobs,
2011), would open a ?second front? from the point
of view of the existing manufacturers, as it would
3Based on estimates from (Reddington, 2013)
4
remove many of the perceived weaknesses of the
iPad (fragility, waterproofing, volume).
The picture is muddied greatly because neither
the major AAC manufacturers nor Apple release
reliable sales figures. This results in the uncom-
fortable situation for users, professionals, and re-
searchers alike, that we are simultaneously being
told that ?The iPad is simply the flavour of the
month at the moment and it is just the effect of
hype? and ?The major manufacturers simply can?t
compete at any level other than eye-gaze?.
Of course, the issue of the overall effective-
ness of tablet-based AAC must be paramount for
the general AAC community, and there is a large
amount of research resources investigating this.
This paper simply attempts to provide some hard
data on the technical changes that have occurred
in the marketplace since 2010.
4.1 Domesday on tablet AAC
If we assume an average lifespan of four years per
device, then Table 2 and Table 3 can be consid-
ered to give a reasonable approximation of the rel-
ative popularity of AAC devices currently active
in the UK AAC community. As discussed in Sec-
tion 3, touchscreen and other high-capability de-
vices are not dominating the market, but we can
deduce that Apple devices have a strong market
share compared to devices with similar capabili-
ties. In Table 2 and Table 3 iPads and other Ap-
ple devices are shown to be approximately even
in terms of units shipped with established touch-
screen systems such as the Springboard Lite. It
would be difficult to argue that Apple devices were
not a major part of the AAC landscape.
A factor in these estimations must be the rela-
tively recent explosion in table computing. If we
limit our data to only purchases since 2010 (as
shown in Table 4), we see that Apple devices dom-
inate the sector and we would expect that when the
Domesday Dataset is extended in 2014, we shall
see that Apple devices have achieved the position
of market leader in terms of AAC devices in use.
4.1.1 Other tablets
We note that, other than some appearances of the
FuturePad Windows system (running Grid 2 soft-
ware and predating the tablet explosion), there are
no tablet purchases in the dataset that are not an
Apple device. This is a somewhat unexpected find:
the Android app store shows hundreds of thou-
sands of downloads (worldwide) for AAC appli-
cations for the Android platform. Some potential
explanations for this tension are discussed in the
following section, but we consider this an area for
future research.
4.1.2 Potential understatement of tablet sales
Section 2 discussed some caveats about informa-
tion in the Domesday Dataset, in particular that it
only examines purchases in the medical sector and
is understood to cover less than half of the AAC
market. We note here that these caveats may dis-
proportionately affect tablet computing purchases.
For example, the relatively low cost of tablet
devices means that there is a growing possibil-
ity that the paradigms used by service providers
are no longer fit for purpose. Whereas previous
paradigms may have involved users waiting two
years for a ?7000 communication aid, with ?3000
worth of support and training, the same users may
now, out of desperation, opt to pay out of their own
pocket for a ?700 tablet with ?app?. In terms of the
goals of this paper, such situations artificially de-
press the recorded purchases of tablet devices, and
in terms of the goals of the AAC community, the
choice of a ?better device later or cheaper device
now? may not be to the long term benefit of users,
or society.
Moreover, we can also imagine situations where
tablet devices are already present in an AAC user?s
life before they become used as a dedicated de-
vice. In the same way that family members often
?hand down? older phones to parents or children
when they upgrade, we have anecdotal evidence
of situations were ?Chris can try an app on Steve?s
old iPad while he is at university and then we?ll
buy Steve a new one if that works?. Such prac-
tices would again artificially depress the number
of purchases recorded.
In this work we concentrate on only the re-
ports of purchase of physical tablets. Although
the Domesday Dataset does contain app purchases
where they have been recorded by the NHS, the
wide range of AAC applications, both free and
paid for, and their transferability between devices
mean that only the most vague of comparisons
could be made.
Even without these caveats, it is clear from ex-
amination of the Domesday Dataset that, in the
UK at least, Apple devices like the iPad have be-
come a large part of the technical AAC landscape
and we note that their level of hardware and strong
developer communities make them attractive tar-
5
Rank Model Units
1 iPad/iPod/iPhone 25
2 GoTalk (all types) 10
3 Lightwriter (SL35/SL40) 10
4 Springboard Lite 6
5 EC02 6
6 C12 + CEYE 3
7 SuperTalker 2
8 Dynavox Maestro 2
9 Powerbox 7 2
10 S5 2
11 Dynavox (type unknown) 2
Table 4: The 11 most common ?high tech? speech
aids purchased by the NHS in England 2010-2011
gets for researchers building prototype AAC de-
vices.
5 Transferability of data
It is assumed by many AAC professionals that
transferability, the ability for AAC users to trans-
fer page sets between different devices, is a sig-
nificant issue for AAC users. Unfortunately there
is no previous academic research to support this
in general or estimate the size of the problem
space. This section first shows how we can derive
some contextual information from the Domesday
Dataset and goes on to discuss the sociotechnical
context of the problem space.
We can examine the set of devices purchased
in the years 2006-2012 and check to see if they
were still available to purchase in 2012. From this
we can estimate the lifespan of each device to ex-
tract the set of devices that are ?irreplaceable? in
the sense that the same model cannot be purchased
in cases of loss.
A large proportion of the devices listed in the
Domesday Dataset are no longer available to buy4;
however, they are still in service and, in some
cases, still in manufacturer?s warranty. The result-
ing set of irreplaceable devices is large and this
information supports a need for more research.
These irreplaceable devices contextualise a
space in which a range of sociotechnical issues at
the social and economic level have special reso-
nance with the AAC user community (for work
examining the reliability of AAC devices and their
4The Domesday Dataset has examples from major man-
ufactures that include the DV4, the Dynamo, the Vanguard,
the Springboard, and many others.
likely length of time before needing repairs please
see, for example, (Shepherd et al., 2009; Ball et
al., 2007)).
As discussed in (Reddington and Coles-Kemp,
2011; Coles-Kemp et al., 2011), the custom utter-
ances and user history on a device form not only a
large part of the user?s way of interacting with the
world, but often, their memories and sense of self.
It is recognised by manufacturers that this data
is precious and many manufacturers of electronic
AAC systems offer the functionality to back up the
devices to external storage. However, in the event
of irrecoverable hardware failure, such backups
are only generally useful if the user?s replacement
device is of the same model as the existing device
(in some cases, manufacturers can transfer back-
ups between different models of the same manu-
facturer). If it is the case that an AAC device?s
functional lifespan is longer than the device sales
lifespan, then it is also the case that massive in-
formation loss must occur when a range?s devices
reach the end of their lifespan and users are shifted
onto other devices.
Moreover, because AAC device backups are
not held in a common format, it is difficult for
AAC users to transfer sets of pages between de-
vices at all. If a user wishes to switch from, say
Proloque2go to Dynavox, then the only way to
transfer potentially key parts of their identity and
memory between the devices is for the user, or
care staff, to laboriously recreate systems by hand.
This results in users having difficulties ?trying out?
new systems, and the occasional sight of a user
with two AAC devices: one that is failing but
has the full range of utterances, and a more mod-
ern device that may be clearer and more effective,
but which does not yet have all the necessary ut-
terances. Finally, the lack of a common format
stands as a barrier to the deployment of a truly
?open source? page and symbol set that could be
used across formats and developed independently
of hardware manufactures.
It is the author?s position that this shows a clear
and present need for not only a standardised for-
mat for transferring sets of pages between devices
but also that this standardised format be open and
accessible to researchers. We consider these to
be a counterpart of the work in (Deruyter et al.,
2007); however, where (Deruyter et al., 2007) fo-
cused on increased interoperability between AAC
and mainstream technologies, we argue in favour
6
of increased interoperability between the devices
themselves. The work is perhaps philosophically
closer to the work of (Lesher et al., 2000b; Lesher
et al., 2000a), which seeks to produce universal
standards of logging of AAC utterances for re-
search purposes. We argue that a standardised
format would also allow technical researchers to
develop their prototypes to interface directly with
a user?s existing systems. This would produce a
much more seamless way of testing innovations,
without the need to introduce users to dedicated
equipment or a specialised app for testing a partic-
ular innovation in AAC technology.
6 Discussion
Research in AAC policy and technology suffers
greatly from a lack of large scale quantitative ev-
idence on the prevalence of devices, and the de-
mographics of users. This work has shown that
the Domesday Dataset can be used at the research
level to provide context for researchers and to help
validate (or not) assumptions about everyday AAC
use. This work examined three different issues
of interest to technical researchers in AAC, each
from a different stage in the research lifecycle. It
provided a case study in using the dataset to gain
an understanding of the level of technology cur-
rently deployed in the UK AAC community, and
exposed a number of open research questions.
This work also gave an analysis of the impact
of the explosion in tablet computing on the AAC
technological landscape. We provided evidence
that Apple devices are already a significant part
of the AAC community and that we expect their
presence to grow as older devices phase out of the
market.
Finally we considered how the Domesday
Dataset suggests that product function lifespan
may be longer than the product sales lifespan in
AAC technology and discussed the consequences
of this from a sociotechnological perspective. This
work has pushed the AAC research agenda in a
direction more attractive to larger studies, com-
mercial manufactures, and quantitative research
to support the traditionally qualitatively focused
field. The range of possibilities for AAC research
includes: more accurate estimates of populations
of AAC users, and levels of AAC use; the ability
to evaluate the potential impact of research pro-
totypes and methodologies; and the ability to ex-
amine those sectors of the AAC industry that have
been most successful at delivering improved func-
tionality to users.
6.1 Future research agenda
At the more fundamental level we hope that this
work encourages public debate about where the
trade-offs lie in terms of targeting technical re-
search in both AAC and the wider intellectual dis-
ability field. It is the author?s position that stake-
holders at all levels in AAC should be involved in
debate on the areas of focus for research resources.
Moreover, we believe that an open format
for transferring sets of pages between devices is
needed, and that such a format will improve both
user experience, commercial competition, and re-
search effectiveness. We would welcome further
work.
Acknowledgments
This research was made possible by the large
range of contributors to the construction of
the Domesday Dataset, including staff at Toby
Churchill and Liberator Ltd. We also thank, Pam
Enderby, Alex John, Sarah Creer, and the team
at Sheffield University, along with Tom Bamber
at Loughborough University, and Selina Sutton at
Newcastle University.
7
References
Morgen Alwell and Brian Cobb. 2009. Social
and communicative interventions and transition out-
comes for youth with disabilities a systematic re-
view. Career Development for Exceptional Individ-
uals, 32(2):94?107.
Laura J Ball, David R Beukelman, Elizabeth Anderson,
Denise V Bilyeu, Julie Robertson, and Gary L Pat-
tee. 2007. Duration of aac technology use by per-
sons with als. Journal of Medical Speech Language
Pathology, 15(4):371.
Tim Berners-Lee. 2010. Linked
data. Personal website
(?http://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/LinkedData.html?),
Jun.
Cathy Binger and Janice Light. 2006. Demographics
of preschoolers who require aac. Language, Speech,
and Hearing Services in Schools, 37(3):200.
Karen Bloomberg and Hilary Johnson. 1990. A
statewide demographic survey of people with severe
communication impairments. Augmentative and Al-
ternative Communication, 6(1):50?60.
L. Coles-Kemp, J. Reddington, and P.A.H. Williams.
2011. Looking at clouds from both sides: The ad-
vantages and disadvantages of placing personal nar-
ratives in the cloud. Information Security Technical
Report, 16(3):115?122.
Frank Deruyter, David McNaughton, Kevin Caves,
Diane Nelson Bryen, and Michael B Williams.
2007. Enhancing aac connections with the
world. Augmentative and Alternative Communica-
tion, 23(3):258?270.
EK Hanson, KM Yorkston, and DR Beukelman. 2004.
Speech supplementation techniques for dysarthria: a
systematic review. Journal of Medical Speech Lan-
guage Pathology, 12.
Jeff Higginbotham and Steve Jacobs. 2011. The fu-
ture of the android operating system for augmen-
tative and alternative communication. Perspectives
on Augmentative and Alternative Communication,
20(2):52?56.
Mary Blake Huer. 1991. University students using
augmentative and alternative communication in the
usa: A demographic study. Augmentative and Alter-
native Communication, 7(4):231?239.
Gregory W Lesher, Bryan J Moulton, Gerard Rinkus,
and D Jeffery Higginbotham. 2000a. A univer-
sal logging format for augmentative communication.
Citeseer.
Gregory W Lesher, Gerard J Rinkus, Bryan J Moulton,
and D Jeffery Higginbotham. 2000b. Logging and
analysis of augmentative communication. In Pro-
ceedings of the RESNA Annual Conference.
Judy Matas, Pamela Mathy-Laikko, David Beukelman,
and Kelly Legresley. 1985. Identifying the non-
speaking population: A demographic study. Aug-
mentative and Alternative Communication, 1(1):17?
31.
Margaret Mitchell and Richard Sproat. 2012.
Discourse-based modeling for aac. In Proceedings
of the Third Workshop on Speech and Language
Processing for Assistive Technologies, pages 9?18,
Montre?al, Canada, June. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Lindsay Pennington, Juliet Goldbart, and Julie Mar-
shall. 2003. Speech and language therapy to im-
prove the communication skills of children with
cerebral palsy. Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews, 3.
Lindsay Pennington, Juliet Goldbart, and Julie Mar-
shall. 2004. Interaction training for conversational
partners of children with cerebral palsy: a system-
atic review. International Journal of Language &
Communication Disorders, 39(2):151?170.
J. Reddington and L. Coles-Kemp. 2011. Trap hunt-
ing: Finding personal data management issues in
next generation aac devices. Proceedings of the sec-
ond workshop on speech and language processing
for assistive technologies, pages 32?42.
Joseph Reddington. 2013. The Domesday dataset:
linked and open data in disability studies. Journal
of Intellectual Disabilities, 17(2):107?121.
Tracy A Shepherd, Kent A Campbell, Anne Marie Ren-
zoni, and Nahum Sloan. 2009. Reliability of speech
generating devices: A 5-year review. Augmentative
and Alternative Communication, 25(3):145?153.
Eva Szekely, Zeeshan Ahmed, Joao P. Cabral, and Julie
Carson-Berndsen. 2012. Winktalk: a demonstra-
tion of a multimodal speech synthesis platform link-
ing facial expressions to expressive synthetic voices.
In Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Speech
and Language Processing for Assistive Technolo-
gies, pages 5?8, Montre?al, Canada, June. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Tim Weber. 2011. BBC News - Google to buy Mo-
torola Mobility, last retrieved September 2011.
8
