Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation , pages 125?129,
Athens, Greece, 30 March ? 31 March 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
English-Czech MT in 2008 ?
Ondr?ej Bojar, David Marec?ek, Va?clav Nova?k, Martin Popel,
Jan Pta?c?ek, Jan Rous?, Zdene?k ?Zabokrtsky?
Charles University, Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics
Malostranske? na?m. 25, Praha 1, CZ-118 00, Czech Republic
{bojar,marecek,novak,ptacek,zabokrtsky}@ufal.mff.cuni.cz
{popel,jan.rous}@matfyz.cz
Abstract
We describe two systems for English-to-
Czech machine translation that took part
in the WMT09 translation task. One of
the systems is a tuned phrase-based system
and the other one is based on a linguisti-
cally motivated analysis-transfer-synthesis
approach.
1 Introduction
We participated in WMT09 with two very dif-
ferent systems: (1) a phrase-based MT based
on Moses (Koehn et al, 2007) and tuned for
English?Czech translation, and (2) a complex
system in the TectoMT platform ( ?Zabokrtsky? et
al., 2008).
2 Data
2.1 Monolingual Data
Our Czech monolingual data consist of (1)
the Czech National Corpus (CNC, versions
SYN200[056], 72.6%, Kocek et al (2000)), (2)
a collection of web pages downloaded by Pavel
Pecina (Web, 17.1%), and (3) the Czech mono-
lingual data provided by WMT09 organizers
(10.3%). Table 1 lists sentence and token counts
(see Section 2.3 for the explanation of a- and t-
layer).
Sentences 52 M
with nonempty t-layer 51 M
a-nodes (i.e. tokens) 0.9 G
t-nodes 0.6 G
Table 1: Czech monolingual training data.
? The work on this project was supported by the grants
MSM0021620838, 1ET201120505, 1ET101120503, GAUK
52408/2008, M?SMT ?CR LC536 and FP6-IST-5-034291-STP
(EuroMatrix).
2.2 Parallel Data
As the source of parallel data we use an internal
release of Czech-English parallel corpus CzEng
(Bojar et al, 2008) extended with some additional
texts. One of the added sections was gathered
from two major websites containing Czech sub-
titles to movies and TV series1. The matching of
the Czech and English movies is rather straight-
forward thanks to the naming conventions. How-
ever, we were unable to reliably determine the se-
ries number and the episode number from the file
names. We employed a two-step procedure to au-
tomatically pair the TV series subtitle files. For
every TV series:
1. We clustered the files on both sides to remove
duplicates
2. We found the best matching using a provi-
sional translation dictionary. This proved to
be a successful technique on a small sample
of manually paired test data. The process was
facilitated by the fact that the correct pairs of
episodes usually share some named entities
which the human translator chose to keep in
the original English form.
Table 2 lists parallel corpus sizes and the distri-
bution of text domains.
English Czech
Sentences 6.91 M
with nonempty t-layer 6.89 M
a-nodes (i.e. tokens) 61 M 50 M
t-nodes 41 M 33 M
Distribution: [%] [%]
Subtitles 68.2 Novels 3.3
Software Docs 17.0 Commentaries/News 1.5
EU (Legal) Texts 9.5 Volunteer-supplied 0.4
Table 2: Czech-English data sizes and sources.
1www.opensubtitles.org and titulky.com
125
2.3 Data Preprocessing using TectoMT
platform: Analysis and Alignment
As we believe that various kinds of linguistically
relevant information might be helpful in MT, we
performed automatic analysis of the data. The
data were analyzed using the layered annotation
scheme of the Prague Dependency Treebank 2.0
(PDT 2.0, Hajic? and others (2006)), i.e. we used
three layers of sentence representation: morpho-
logical layer, surface-syntax layer (called analyti-
cal (a-) layer), and deep-syntax layer (called tec-
togrammatical (t-) layer).
The analysis was implemented using TectoMT,
( ?Zabokrtsky? et al, 2008). TectoMT is a highly
modular software framework aimed at creating
MT systems (focused, but by far not limited to
translation using tectogrammatical transfer) and
other NLP applications. Numerous existing NLP
tools such as taggers, parsers, and named entity
recognizers are already integrated in TectoMT, es-
pecially for (but again, not limited to) English and
Czech.
During the analysis of the large Czech mono-
lingual data, we used Jan Hajic??s Czech tagger
shipped with PDT 2.0, Maximum Spanning Tree
parser (McDonald et al, 2005) with optimized set
of features as described in Nova?k and ?Zabokrtsky?
(2007), and a tool for assigning functors (seman-
tic roles) from Klimes? (2006), and numerous other
components of our own (e.g. for conversion of an-
alytical trees into tectogrammatical ones).
In the parallel data, we analyzed the Czech side
using more or less the same scenario as used for
the monolingual data. English sentences were an-
alyzed using (among other tools) Morce tagger
Spoustova? et al (2007) and Maximum Spanning
Tree parser.2
The resulting deep syntactic (tectogrammatical)
Czech and English trees are then aligned using T-
aligner?a feature based greedy algorithm imple-
mented for this purpose (Marec?ek et al, 2008). T-
aligner finds corresponding nodes between the two
given trees and links them. For deciding whether
to link two nodes or not, T-aligner makes use of
a bilingual lexicon of tectogrammatical lemmas,
morphosyntactic similarities between the two can-
didate nodes, their positions in the trees and other
similarities between their parent/child nodes. It
2In some previous experiments (e.g. ?Zabokrtsky? et al
(2008)), we used phrase-structure parser Collins (1999) with
subsequent constituency-dependency conversion.
also uses word alignment generated from surface
shapes of sentences by GIZA++ tool, Och and Ney
(2003). We use acquired aligned tectogrammatical
trees for training some models for the transfer.
As analysis of such amounts of data is obvi-
ously computationally very demanding, we run it
in parallel using Sun Grid Engine3 cluster of 40
4-CPU computers. For this purpose, we imple-
mented a rather generic tool that submits any Tec-
toMT pipeline to the cluster.
3 Factored Phrase-Based MT
We essentially repeat our experiments from last
year (Bojar and Hajic?, 2008): GIZA++ align-
ments4 on a-layer lemmas (a-layer nodes corre-
spond 1-1 to surface tokens), symmetrized using
grow-diag-final (no -and) heuristic5 .
Probably due to the domain difference (the test
set is news), including Subtitles in the parallel data
and Web in the monolingual data did not bring any
improvement that would justify the additional per-
formance costs. For most of the phrase-based ex-
periments, we thus used only 2.2M parallel sen-
tences (27M Czech and 32M English tokens) and
43M Czech sentences (694 M tokens).
In Table 3 below, we report the scores for the
following setups selected from about 50 experi-
ments we ran in total:
Moses T is a simple phrase-based translation (T)
with no additional factors. The translation is
performed on truecased word forms (i.e. sen-
tence capitalization removed unless the first
word seems to be a name). The 4-gram lan-
guage model is based on the 43M sentences.
Moses T+C is a factored setup with form-to-form
translation (T) and target-side morphological
coherence check following Bojar and Hajic?
(2008). The setup uses two language mod-
els: 4-grams of word forms and 7-grams of
morphological tags.
Moses T+C+C&T+T+G 84k is a setup desirable
from the linguistic point of view. Two in-
dependent translation paths are used: (1)
form?form translation with two target-side
checks (lemma and tag generated from the
target-side form) as a fine-grained baseline
3http://gridengine.sunsource.net/
4Default settings, IBM models and iterations: 153343.
5Later, we found out that the grow-diag-final-and heuris-
tic provides insignificantly superior results.
126
with the option to resort to (2) an independent
translation of lemma?lemma and tag?tag
finished by a generation step that combines
target-side lemma and tag to produce the fi-
nal target-side form.
We use three language models in this setup
(3-grams of forms, 3-grams of lemmas, and
10-grams of tags).
Due to the increased complexity of the setup,
we were able to train this model on 84k par-
allel sentences only (the Commentaries sec-
tion) and we use the target-side of this small
training data for language models, too.
For all the setups we perform standard MERT
training on the provided development set.6
4 Translation Setup Based on
Tectogrammatical Transfer
In this translation experiment, we follow the tradi-
tional analysis-transfer-synthesis approach, using
the set of PDT 2.0 layers: we analyze the input
English sentence up to the tectogrammatical layer
(through the morphological and analytical ones),
then perform the tectogrammatical transfer, and
then synthesize the target Czech sentence from its
tectogrammatical representation. The whole pro-
cedure consists of about 80 steps, so the following
description is necessarily very high level.
4.1 Analysis
Each sentence is tokenized (roughly according to
the Penn Treebank conventions), tagged by the En-
glish version of the Morce tagger Spoustova? et al
(2007), and lemmatized by our lemmatizer. Then
the dependency parser (McDonald et al, 2005) is
applied. Then the analytical trees resulting from
the parser are converted to the tectogrammatical
ones (i.e. functional words are removed, only
morphologically indispensable categories are left
with the nodes using a sequence of heuristic proce-
dures). Unlike in PDT 2.0, the information about
the original syntactic form is stored with each t-
node (values such as v:inf for an infinitive verb
form, v:since+fin for the head of a subor-
dinate clause of a certain type, adj:attr for
an adjective in attribute position, n:for+X for a
given prepositional group are distinguished).
6We used the full development set of 2k sentences for
?Moses T? and a subset of 1k sentences for the other two
setups due to time constraints.
One of the steps in the analysis of English is
named entity recognition using Stanford Named
Entity Recognizer (Finkel et al, 2005). The nodes
in the English t-layer are grouped according to the
detected named entities and they are assigned the
type of entity (location, person, or organization).
This information is preserved in the transfer of the
deep English trees to the deep Czech trees to al-
low for the appropriate capitalization of the Czech
translation.
4.2 Transfer
The transfer phase consists of the following steps:
? Initiate the target-side (Czech) t-trees sim-
ply by ?cloning? the source-side (English) t-
trees. Subsequent steps usually iterate over
all t-nodes. In the following, we denote a
source-side t-node as S and the correspond-
ing target-side node as T.
? Translate formemes using
two probabilistic dictionaries
(p(T.formeme|S.formeme, S.parent.lemma)
and p(T.formeme|S.formeme)) and a few
manual rules. The formeme translation
probability estimates were extracted from a
part of the parallel data mentioned above.
? Translate lemmas using a probabilistic dictio-
nary (p(T.lemma|S.lemma)) and a few rules
that ensure compatibility with the previously
chosen formeme. Again, this probabilistic
dictionary was obtained using the aligned
tectogrammatical trees from the parallel cor-
pus.
? Fill the grammatemes (deep-syntactic equiv-
alent of morphological categories) gender
(for denotative nouns) and aspect (for verbs)
according to the chosen lemma. We also
fix grammateme values where the English-
Czech grammateme correspondence is non-
trivial (e.g. if an English gerund expression is
translated to Czech as a subordinating clause,
the tense grammateme has to be filled). How-
ever, the transfer of grammatemes is defi-
nitely much easier task than the transfer of
formemes and lemmas.
4.3 Synthesis
The transfer step yields an abstract deep
syntactico-semantical tree structure. Firstly,
127
we derive surface morphological categories
from their deep counterparts taking care of their
agreement where appropriate and we also remove
personal pronouns in subject positions (because
Czech is a pro-drop language).
To arrive at the surface tree structure, auxil-
iary nodes of several types are added, including
(1) reflexive particles, (2) prepositions, (3) subor-
dinating conjunctions, (4) modal verbs, (5) ver-
bal auxiliaries, and (6) punctuation nodes. Also,
grammar-based node ordering changes (imple-
mented by rules) are performed: e.g. if an English
possessive attribute is translated using Czech gen-
itive, it is shifted into post-modification position.
After finishing the inflection of nouns, verbs,
adjectives and adverbs (according to the values of
morphological categories derived from agreement
etc.), prepositions may need to be vocalized: the
vowel -e or -u is attached to the preposition if the
pronunciation of prepositional group would be dif-
ficult otherwise.
After the capitalization of the beginning of each
sentence (and each named entity instance), we ob-
tain the final translation by flattening the surface
tree.
4.4 Preliminary Error Analysis
According to our observations most errors happen
during the transfer of lemmas and formemes.
Usually, there are acceptable translations of
lemma and formeme in respective n-best lists
but we fail to choose the best one. The sce-
nario described in Section 4.2 uses quite a
primitive transfer algorithm where formemes
and lemmas are translated separately in two
steps. We hope that big improvements could
be achieved with more sophisticated algo-
rithms (optimizing the probability of the whole
tree) and smoothed probabilistic models (such
as p(T.lemma|S.lemma, T.parent.lemma) and
p(T.formeme|S.formeme, T.lemma, T.parent.lemma)).
Other common errors include:
? Analysis: parsing (especially coordinations
are problematic with McDonald?s parser).
? Transfer: the translation of idioms and col-
locations, including named entities. In these
cases, the classical transfer at the t-layer
is not appropriate and utilization of some
phrase-based MT would help.
? Synthesis: reflexive particles, word order.
5 Experimental Results and Discussion
Table 3 reports lowercase BLEU and NIST scores
and preliminary manual ranks of our submissions
in contrast with other systems participating in
English?Czech translation, as evaluated on the
official WMT09 unseen test set. Note that auto-
matic metrics are known to correlate quite poorly
with human judgements, see the best ranking but
?lower scoring? PC Translator this year and also
in Callison-Burch et al (2008).
System BLEU NIST Rank
Moses T 14.24 5.175 -3.02 (4)
Moses T+C 13.86 5.110 ?
Google 13.59 4.964 -2.82 (3)
U. of Edinburgh 13.55 5.039 -3.24 (5)
Moses T+C+C&T+T+G 84k 10.01 4.360 -
Eurotran XP 09.51 4.381 -2.81 (2)
PC Translator 09.42 4.335 -2.77 (1)
TectoMT 07.29 4.173 -3.35 (6)
Table 3: Automatic scores and preliminary human
rank for English?Czech translation. Systems in
italics are provided for comparison only. Best re-
sults in bold.
Unfortunately, this preliminary evaluation sug-
gests that simpler models perform better, partly
because it is easier to tune them properly both
from computational point of view (e.g. MERT
not stable and prone to overfitting with more fea-
tures7), as well as from software engineering point
of view (debugging of complex pipelines of tools
is demanding). Moreover, simpler models run
faster: ?Moses T? with 12 sents/minute is 4.6
times faster than ?Moses T+C?. (Note that we have
not tuned either of the models for speed.)
While ?Moses T? is probably nearly identical
setup as Google and Univ. of Edinburgh use,
the knowledge of correct language-dependent to-
kenization and the use of relatively high quality
large language model data seems to bring moder-
ate improvements.
6 Conclusion
We described our experiments with a complex lin-
guistically motivated translation system and vari-
ous (again linguistically-motivated) setups of fac-
tored phrase-based translation. An automatic eval-
uation seems to suggest that simpler is better, but
we are well aware that a reliable judgement comes
only from human annotators.
7For ?Moses T+C+C&T+T+G?, we observed BLEU
scores on the test set varying by up to five points absolute
for various weight settings yielding nearly identical dev set
scores.
128
References
Ondr?ej Bojar and Jan Hajic?. 2008. Phrase-Based and
Deep Syntactic English-to-Czech Statistical Ma-
chine Translation. In Proceedings of the Third
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages
143?146, Columbus, Ohio, June. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Ondr?ej Bojar, Miroslav Jan??c?ek, Zdene?k ?Zabokrtsky?,
Pavel ?Ces?ka, and Peter Ben?a. 2008. CzEng 0.7:
Parallel Corpus with Community-Supplied Transla-
tions. In Proceedings of the Sixth International Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC?08), Mar-
rakech, Morocco, May. ELRA.
Chris Callison-Burch, Cameron Fordyce, Philipp
Koehn, Christof Monz, and Josh Schroeder. 2008.
Further meta-evaluation of machine translation. In
Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Statisti-
cal Machine Translation, pages 70?106, Columbus,
Ohio, June. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Michael Collins. 1999. Head-driven Statistical Mod-
els for Natural Language Parsing. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
Jenny Rose Finkel, Trond Grenager, and Christopher
Manning. 2005. Incorporating non-local informa-
tion into information extraction systems by gibbs
sampling. In ACL ?05: Proceedings of the 43rd
Annual Meeting on Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 363?370, Morristown, NJ, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jan Hajic? et al 2006. Prague Dependency Treebank
2.0. CD-ROM, Linguistic Data Consortium, LDC
Catalog No.: LDC2006T0 1, Philadelphia.
Va?clav Klimes?. 2006. Analytical and Tectogrammat-
ical Analysis of a Natural Language. Ph.D. thesis,
Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles Uni-
versity, Prague, Czech Rep.
Jan Kocek, Marie Kopr?ivova?, and Karel Kuc?era, edi-
tors. 2000. ?Cesky? na?rodn?? korpus - u?vod a pr???ruc?ka
uz?ivatele. FF UK - ?U ?CNK, Praha.
Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondr?ej Bojar, Alexandra
Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open
Source Toolkit for Statistical Machine Translation.
In ACL 2007, Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics Companion Volume Proceedings of the Demo
and Poster Sessions, pages 177?180, Prague, Czech
Republic, June. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
David Marec?ek, Zdene?k ?Zabokrtsky?, and Va?clav
Nova?k. 2008. Automatic Alignment of Czech and
English Deep Syntactic Dependency Trees. In Pro-
ceedings of European Machine Translation Confer-
ence (EAMT 08), pages 102?111, Hamburg, Ger-
many.
Ryan McDonald, Fernando Pereira, Kiril Ribarov, and
Jan Hajic?. 2005. Non-projective dependency
parsing using spanning tree algorithms. In HLT
?05: Proceedings of the conference on Human Lan-
guage Technology and Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 523?530, Vancou-
ver, British Columbia, Canada.
Va?clav Nova?k and Zdene?k ?Zabokrtsky?. 2007. Feature
engineering in maximum spanning tree dependency
parser. In Va?clav Matous?ek and Pavel Mautner, ed-
itors, Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, Pro-
ceedings of the 10th I nternational Conference on
Text, Speech and Dialogue, Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science, pages 92?98, Pilsen, Czech Repub-
lic. Springer Science+Business Media Deutschland
GmbH.
Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A System-
atic Comparison of Various Statistical Alignment
Models. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19?51.
Drahom??ra Spoustova?, Jan Hajic?, Jan Votrubec, Pavel
Krbec, and Pavel Kve?ton?. 2007. The best of two
worlds: Cooperation of statistical and rule-based
taggers for czech. In Proceedings of the Work-
shop on Balto-Slavonic Natural Language Process-
ing, ACL 2007, pages 67?74, Praha.
Zdene?k ?Zabokrtsky?, Jan Pta?c?ek, and Petr Pajas. 2008.
TectoMT: Highly Modular Hybrid MT System
with Tectogrammatics Used as Transfer Layer. In
Proc. of the ACL Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation, pages 167?170, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
129
