Proceedings of the EACL 2009 Workshop on GEMS: GEometical Models of Natural Language Semantics, pages 17?24,
Athens, Greece, 31 March 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Unsupervised Classification with Dependency Based Word Spaces
Klaus Rothenh?usler and Hinrich Sch?tze
Institute for Natural Language Processing
University of Stuttgart
Stuttgart, Germany
{Klaus.Rothenhaeusler, Hinrich.Schuetze}@ims.uni-stuttgart.de
Abstract
We present the results of clustering exper-
iments with a number of different evalu-
ation sets using dependency based word
spaces. Contrary to previous results we
found a clear advantage using a parsed
corpus over word spaces constructed with
the help of simple patterns. We achieve
considerable gains in performance over
these spaces ranging between 9 and 13%
in absolute terms of cluster purity.
1 Introduction
Word space models have become a mainstay in the
automatic acquisition of lexical semantic knowl-
edge. The computation of semantic relatedness of
two words in such models is based on their distri-
butional similarity. The most crucial way in which
such models differ is the definition of distribu-
tional similarity: In a regular word space model
the observed distribution concerns the immediate
neighbours of a word within a predefined win-
dow to the left and right (Sch?tze, 1992; Sahlgren,
2006). Early on in the development as an alter-
native models were proposed that relied on the
similarity of the distribution of syntactic relations
(Hindle, 1990; Pad? and Lapata, 2007). More
recently the distribution of the occurrence within
simple patterns defined in the form of regular ex-
pressions that are supposed to capture explicit se-
mantic relations was explored as the basis of distri-
butional similarity (Almuhareb and Poesio, 2004).
Whereas dependency based semantic spaces
have been shown to surpass other word space mod-
els for a number of problems (Pad? and Lapata,
2007; Lin, 1998), for the task of categorisation
simple pattern based spaces have been shown to
perform equally good if not better (Poesio and Al-
muhareb, 2005b; Almuhareb and Poesio, 2005b).
We want to show that dependency based spaces
also fare better in these tasks if the dependency re-
lations used are selected reasonably. At the same
time we want to show that such a system can be
built with freely available components and with-
out the need to rely on the index of a proprietary
search engine vendor.
We propose to use the web acquired data of the
ukWaC (Ferraresi et al, 2008), which is huge but
still manageable and comes in a pre-cleaned ver-
sion with HTML markup removed. It can easily
be fed into a parser like MiniPar which allows for
the subsequent extraction of dependency relations
of different types and complexity. In particular we
work with dependency paths that can reach beyond
direct dependencies as opposed to Lin (1998) but
in the line of Pado and Lapata (2007). In contrast
to the latter, however, different paths that end in
the same word are not generally mapped to the
same dimension in our model. A path in a depen-
dency graph can pass through several nodes and
encompass different relations.
We experimented with two sets of nouns pre-
viously used in the literature for word clustering.
The nouns in both sets are taken from a number
of different WordNet categories. Hence, the task
consists in clustering together the words from the
same category. By keeping the clustering algo-
rithm constant, differences in performance can be
attributed to the differences of the word represen-
tations.
The next section provides a formal description
of our word space model. Section 3 reports on our
clustering experiments with two sets of concepts
used previously to evaluate the categorisation abil-
ities of word spaces. Section 4 discusses these re-
17
sults and draws some conclusions.
2 Word Space Construction
We follow the formalisation and terminology de-
veloped in Pado and Lapata (2007) according to
which a dependency based space is determined by
the sets of its basis elements B and targets T that
form a matrix M = B ? T , a similarity function
S that assigns a real-valued similarity measure to
pairs of elements from T , the association measure
A that captures the strength of the relation between
a target and a basis element, the context selection
function cont, the basis mapping function ? and
the path value function v. Our set of targets is al-
ways a subset of the lemmas output by MiniPar.
The remaining elements are defined in this section.
We use pi to denote a path in a dependency graph
which is conceived of as an undirected graph for
this purpose. So, in general a dependency path has
an upward and downward part where one can have
length zero. All the paths used to define the con-
texts for target words are anchored there, i.e. they
start from the target.
In choosing the context definitions that deter-
mine what dependency paths are used in the con-
struction of the word vectors, we oriented our-
selves at the sets proposed in Pado and Lap-
ata (2007). As Pado and Lapata (2007) achieved
their best results with it we started from their
medium sized set of context definitions, from
which we extracted the appropriate ones for our
experiments and added some that seemed to make
sense for our purposes: As our evaluation sets con-
sist entirely of nouns, we used only context defi-
nitions that start at a noun. Thereby we can en-
sure that only nominal uses are recorded in a word
vector if a target word can have different parts of
speech. The complete set of dependency relations
our context selection function cont comprises is
given in Figure 1 along with an example for each.
We only chose paths that end in an open word
class assuming that they are more informative
about the meaning of a target word. Paths end-
ing in a preposition for instance, as used by
Pado and Lapata (2007), were not considered. For
the same reason we implemented a simple stop
word filter that discards paths ending in a pronoun,
which are assigned the tag N by MiniPar just like
any other noun.
On the other hand we added the relation be-
tween a prepositional complement and the noun it
modifies (appearing as relation IX in Figure 1) as
a close approximation of the pattern used by (Al-
muhareb and Poesio, 2004) to identify attributes
of a concept as detailed in the next section. Path
specifications X and XI are also additions we
made that are thought to gather additional attribute
values to the ones already covered by III.
As a basis mapping function ? we used a gen-
eralisation of the one used by Grefenstette (1994)
and Lin (1998). They map a dependency between
two words to a pair consisting of the relation la-
bel l and the end word of the dependency end(pi).
As we use paths that span more than a single re-
lation, this approach is not directly applicable to
our setup. Instead we use a mapping function that
maps a path to the sequence of edge labels through
which it passes combined with the end word:
?(pi) = (l(pi),end(pi))
where l(?) is a labelling function that returns
the sequence of edge labels for a given path.
With this basis mapping function the nodes or
words respectively through which a path passes
are all neglected except for the node where the
path ends. So, for the noun human the se-
quence human and mouse genome as well as
the sequence human and chimpanzee genome
increase the count for the same basis element
:N:conj:N:*:N:nn:N:genome. Here we
use a path notation of the general form:
(: POS : rel : POS : {word,?})n
where POS is a part of speech, rel a relation and
word a node label, i.e. a lemma, all as produced
by MiniPar. The length of a path is determined by
n and the asterisk (*) indicates that a node label is
ignored by the basis mapping function.
As an alternative we experimented with a lexi-
cal basis mapping function that maps a path to its
end word:
?(pi) = end(pi)
This reduces the number of dimensions consider-
ably and yields semantic spaces that are similar
to window based word spaces. As this mapping
function consistently delivered worse results, we
dropped it from our evaluation.
Considering that (Pad? and Lapata, 2007) only
reported very small differences for different path
valuation functions, we only used a constant valu-
ation of paths:
vconst(pi) = 1
18
(I) the subject of a verb
All humans die.
PreDet
N
Vpre
subj
(II) an object of a verb
Gods from another world created humans
V
N
subj obj
(III) modified by an adjective
Young dogs are like young humans
VBE
Prep
A
N
s pred
pcomp
-n
mod
(IV) linked to another noun via a genitive relation
The human?s eyes glimmered with comprehension
Det
N
N
V
det
subj mod
gen
(V) part of a nominal complex
The human body presents a problem.
Det N
N
V
subj
det
obj
nn
(VI) part of a conjunction
Humans and animals are equally fair game.
N
U N
VBE
s
punc
pred
conj
(VII) the subject of a predicate noun
Humans are the only specie that has sex for pleasure.
N
VBE
N
C
s
det, m
od
pred
rel
subj
(VIII) the subject of a predicate adjective
Humans are fallible.
N
VBE
A
s pred
subj
(IX) the prepositional complement modifying a noun
You must get into the mind of humans.
N Aux
V
Det
N
Prep
N
s aux
det
obj
mod
pcomp
-n
(X) the prepositional complement modifying a
noun that is the subject of a predicate adjective
The nature of humans is corrupt.
N
Prep
N
VBE
A
s
mod
pcomp
-n
pred
(XI) the prepositional complement modifying a noun that is the subject of a predicate noun
Chief diseases of humans are infections.
N
Prep
N
VBE
N
s
mod
pcomp
-n
pred
(XII) relations I-IV and VI-XI above but now with the target as part of a complex noun phrase as shown for
a conjunction relation (VI) in the example
They interrogated him about the human body and reproduction.
Prep
Det N
N
U N
mod
det
pcomp-n
puncnn conj
Figure 1: Context definitions used in the construction of our word spaces. All examples show contexts
for the target human. Greyed out parts are just for illustrative purposes and have no impact on the word
vectors. The examples are slightly simplified versions of sentences found in ukWaC.19
Thus, an occurrence of any path, irrespective of
length or grammatical relations that are involved,
increases the count of the respective basis element
by one.
We implemented three different association
functions, A, to transform the raw frequency
counts and weight the influence of the different co-
occurrences. We worked with an implementation
of the log likelihood ratio (g-Score) as proposed
by Dunning (1993) and two variants of the t-score,
one considering all values (t-score) and one where
only positive values (t-score+) are kept following
the results of Curran and Moens (2002). We also
experimented with different frequency cutoffs re-
moving dimensions that occur very frequently or
very rarely.
3 Evaluation
For all our experiments we used the ukWaC cor-
pus1 to construct the word spaces, which was
parsed using MiniPar. The latter provides lemma
information, which we used as possible target and
context words. The word vectors we built from
this data were represented as pseudo documents in
an inverted index. To our knowledge the experi-
ments described in this paper are the first to work
with a completely parsed version of the ukWaC.
For the evaluation the word vectors for the
test sets were clustered into a predefined number
of clusters corresponding to the number of con-
cept classes from which the words were drawn.
All experiments were conducted with the CLUTO
toolkit (Karypis, 2003) using the repeated bisec-
tions clustering algorithm with global optimisa-
tion and the cosine as a distance measure to main-
tain comparability with related work, e.g. Ba-
roni et al (2008).
As the main evaluation measure we used pu-
rity for the whole set as supplied by CLUTO. For
a clustering solution ? of n clusters and a set of
classes C, purity can be defined as:
purity(?,C) = 1
n
?
k
max
j
|?k ? c j|
where ?k denotes the set of terms in a cluster and
c j the set of terms in a class. This aggregate mea-
sure of purity corresponds to the weighted sum of
purities for the individual clusters, which is de-
fined as the ratio of items in a cluster that belong
to the majority class. The results for the two test
1http://wacky.sslmit.unibo.it
sets we used are described in the following two
subsections.
3.1 Results for 214 nouns from
Almuhareb and Poesio (2004)
The first set we worked with was introduced by
Almuhareb and Poesio (2004) and consists of 214
nouns from 13 different categories in WordNet. In
the original paper the best results were achieved
with vector representations built from concept at-
tributes and their values as identified by simple
patterns. For the identification of attribute values
of a concept C the following pattern was used
?[a|an|the] * C [is|was]?
It will find instances such as an adult human is
identifying adult as a value for an attribute (age)
of [HUMAN] (we use small capitals enclosed in
square brackets to denote a concept). Attributes
themselves are searched with the pattern
?the * of the C [is|was]?
A match for the concept [HUMAN] would be the
dignity of the human is, which yields dignity as
an attribute. These patterns were translated into
queries and submitted to the Google2 search en-
gine.
We compare our dependency based spaces with
the results achieved with the pattern based ap-
proach in Table 1.
association
measure
g-score t-score t-score+
dependency
based space
77.1% 85.5% 96.7%
window based
space
84.1% 82.7% 89.3%
pattern based
space
- - 85.5%
Table 1: Categorisation results for the 214
concepts and 13 classes proposed in Al-
muhareb and Poesio (2004), which is also
the source of the result for the pattern based space.
They only used t-score+. The numbers given are
the best accuracies achieved under the different
settings.
For the window based space we used the best
performing in a free association task with a win-
dow size of six words to each side and all the
2http://www.google.com
20
context accuracy # dimensions
(I) 82.2% 7359
(II) 92.5% 6680
(III) 88.3% 45322
(IV) ? 37231
(V) 82.2% 240157
(VI) 95.3% 93917
(VII) 86.9% 45527
(VIII) 77.1% 5245
(IX) 91.6% 87765
(X) ? 2186
(XI) ? 6967
(XII) 93.0% 188763
Table 2: Clustering results using only one kind of
path specification. For (IV), (X) and (XI) purity
values are missing because vectors for some of the
words could not be built.
words that appeared at least two times as dimen-
sions ignoring stop words. The effective dimen-
sionality of the so built word vectors is 417 837.
The results for the dependency based spaces
were built by selecting all paths without any
frequency thresholds which resulted in a set of
767 119 dimensions.
As can be seen, both window and dependency
based spaces exceed the pattern based space for
certain association measures. But the dependency
space also has a clear advantage over the window
based space. In particular the t-score+ measure
yields very good results. In contrast the g-score
offers the worst results with the t-score retaining
negative values somewhere in between. For our
further experiments we hence used the t-score+ as-
sociation measure.
3.1.1 Further Analysis
We ran a number of experiments to quantify the
impact the different kinds of paths have on the
clustering result. We first built spaces using only
a single kind of path to find out how good each
performs on its own. The result can be found in
Table 2. For some of the words in the evaluation
set no contexts could be found when only one of
the two most complex context specifications (X),
(XI) was used or when the context was reduced to
the genitive relation (IV). Apart from that the re-
sults suggest that even a single type of relation on
its own can prove highly effective. Especially the
conjunctive relation (VI) performs very well with
a purity value of 95.3%.
removed context accuracy
(I) 97.2%
(II) 97.7%
(III) 97.2%
(IV) 97.2%
(V) 98.1%
(VI) 96.3%
(VII) 97.2%
(VIII) 97.2%
(IX) 96.7%
(X) 97.2%
(XI) 97.2%
(XII) 96.7%
Table 3: Clustering results for spaces with one
context specification removed.
To further clarify the role of the different kinds
of contexts, we ran the experiment with word
spaces where we removed each one of the twelve
context specifications in turn. The results as given
in Table 3 are a bit astonishing at first sight: Only
the removal of the conjunctive relation actually
leads to a decrease in performance. All the other
contexts seem to be either redundant ? with per-
formance staying the same when they are removed
? or even harmful ? with performance increasing
once they are removed. Having observed this, we
tried to remove further context specifications and
surprisingly found that the best performance of
98.1% can be reached by only including the con-
junction (VI) and the object (II) relations. The di-
mensionality of these vectors is only a fraction of
the original ones with 100 597.
The result for the best performing dependency
based space listed in the table is almost perfect.
Having a closer look at the results reveals that in
fact only four words are put into a wrong cluster.
These words are: lounge, pain, mouse, oyster.
The first is classified as [BUILDING] instead of
[FURNITURE]. In the case of lounge the misclas-
sification seems to be attributable to the ambiguity
of the word which can either denote a piece of fur-
niture or a waiting room. The latter is apparently
the more prominent sense in the data. In this usage
the word often appears in conjunctions with room
or hotel just like restaurant, inn or clubhouse.
Pain is misclassified as an [ILLNESS] instead
of a [FEELING] which is at least a close miss.
The misclassification of mouse as a [BODY PART]
seems rather odd on the other hand. The reason for
21
it becomes apparent when looking at the most de-
scriptive and discriminating features of the [BODY
PART] cluster: In both lists the highest in the rank-
ing is the dimension :N:mod:A:left, i.e. left
as an adjectival modifier of the word in question.
The prominence of this particular modification is
of course due to the fact that a lot of body parts
come in pairs and that the members of these pairs
are commonly identified by assigning them to the
left or right half of the body. Certainly, the word
mouse enters this cluster not through its sense of
mouse1 as an animal but rather through its sense of
mouse2 as a piece of computer equipment that has
two buttons, which are also referred to as the left
and right one. Unfortunately, MiniPar frequently
resolves left in a wrong way as a modifier of mouse
instead of button.
Finally for oyster which is put into the [EDIBLE
FRUIT] instead of the [ANIMAL] cluster it is con-
spicuous that oyster is the only sea animal in the
evaluation set and consequently it rarely occurs
in conjunctions with the other animals. Conjunc-
tions, however, seem to be the most important fea-
tures for defining all the clusters. Additionally
oyster scores low on a lot of dimensions that are
typical for a big number of the members of the an-
imal cluster, e.g. :N:obj:V:kill.
3.2 Results for 402 words from
Almuhareb and Poesio (2005a)
In Poesio and Almuhareb (2005a) a larger evalu-
ation set is introduced that comprises 402 nouns
sampled from the hierarchies under the 21 unique
beginners in WordNet. The words were also cho-
sen so that candidates from different frequency
bands and different levels of ambiguity were rep-
resented. Further results using this set are reported
in Almuhareb and Poesio (2005b). The best result
was obtained with the attribute pattern alone and
filtering to include only nouns. We tried to assem-
ble word vectors with the same patterns based on
the ukWaC corpus. But even if we included both
patterns, we were only able to construct vectors
for 363 of the 402 words. For 118 of them the
number of occurrences, on which they were based,
was less than ten. This gives an impression of the
size of the index that is necessary for such an ap-
proach. To date such an immense amount of data
is only available through proprietary search engine
providers. This makes a system dependant upon
the availability of an API of such a vendor. In fact
the version of the Google API on which the orig-
inal experiments relied has since been axed. Our
approach circumvents such problems.
We ran analogous experiments to the ones de-
scribed in the previous section on this evaluation
set, now producing 21 clusters. The results given
in Table 4 are for a dependency space without any
frequency thresholds and the complete set of con-
text specifications as defined above. The settings
for the window based space were also the same
(6 words to each side). Again the results achieved
with the t-score+ association were clearly superior
to the others and were used in all the following
experiments. Unsurprisingly, for this more diffi-
cult task the performance is not as good as for the
smaller set but nevertheless the superiority of the
dependency based space is clearly visible with an
absolute increase in cluster purity of 8.2% com-
pared with the pattern based space.
association
measure
g-score t-score t-score+
dependency
based space
67.9% 67.2% 79.1%
window based
space
65.7% 60.7% 67.9%
pattern based
space
- - 70.9%
Table 4: Categorisation results for the 402
concepts and 21 classes proposed in Al-
muhareb and Poesio (2005a) which is also
the source of the result for the pattern based
space. The numbers given are the best accuracies
achieved under the different settings.
3.2.1 Further Analysis
Again we ran further experiments to determine the
impact of the different kinds of relations. The re-
moval of any single context specification leads to
a performance drop with this evaluation set. The
smallest decrease is observed when removing con-
text specification XII. However, as we had seen in
the previous experiment with the smaller set that
only two context specifications suffice to reach
peak performance, we conducted another exper-
iment where we started from the best perform-
ing space constructed from a single context spec-
ification (the conjunction relation, VI) and suc-
cessively added the specification that led to the
biggest performance gain. The crucial results are
22
majority class concepts
solid tetrahedron, salient, ring, ovoid, octahedron, knob, icosahedron, fluting, dome, dodecahedron,
cylinder, cuboid, cube, crinkle, concavity, samba, coco, nonce, divan, ball, stitch, floater, trove,
hoard, mouse
time yesteryear, yesterday, tonight, tomorrow, today, quaternary, period, moment, hereafter, gesta-
tion, future, epoch, day, date, aeon, stretch, snap, throb, straddle, nap
motivation wanderlust, urge, superego, obsession, morality, mania, life, impulse, ethics, dynamic, con-
science, compulsion, plasticity, opinion, acceptance, sensitivity, desire, interest
assets wager, taxation, quota, profit, payoff, mortgage, investment, income, gain, fund, credit, cap-
ital, allotment, allocation, possession, inducement, incentive, disincentive, deterrence, share,
sequestrian, cheque, check, bond, tailor
district village, town, sultanate, suburb, state, shire, seafront, riverside, prefecture, parish, metropolis,
land, kingdom, county, country, city, canton, borough, borderland, anchorage, tribe, nation,
house, fen, cordoba, faro
legal document treaty, statute, rescript, obligation, licence, law, draft, decree, convention, constitution, bill,
assignment, commencement, extension, incitement, caliphate, clemency, venture, dispensation
physical property weight, visibility, temperature, radius, poundage, momentum, mass, length, diameter, deflec-
tion, taper, indentation, droop, corner, concavity
social unit troop , team, platoon, office, legion, league, household, family, department, confederacy, com-
pany, committee, club, bureau, brigade, branch, agency
atmospheric
phenomenon
wind, typhoon, tornado, thunderstorm, snowfall, shower, sandstorm, rainstorm, lightning, hur-
ricane, fog, drizzle, cyclone, crosswind, cloudburst, cloud, blast, aurora, airstream, glow
social occasion wedding, rededication, prom, pageantry, inaugural, graduation, funeral, fundraiser, fiesta, fete,
feast, enthronement, dance, coronation, commemoration, ceremony, celebration, occasion, raf-
fle, beano
monetary unit zloty, yuan, shilling, rupee, rouble, pound, peso, penny, lira, guilder, franc, escudo, drachma,
dollar, dirham, dinar, cent
tree sycamore, sapling, rowan, pine, palm, oak, mangrove, jacaranda, hornbeam, conifer, cinchona,
casuarina, acacia, riel
chemical element zinc, titanium, silver, potassium, platinum, oxygen, nitrogen, neon, magnesium, lithium, iron,
hydrogen, helium, germanium, copper, charcoal, carbon, calcium, cadmium, bismuth, alu-
minium, gold
illness smallpox, plague, meningitis, malnutrition, leukemia, hepatitis, glaucoma, flu, eczema, dia-
betes, cirrhosis, cholera, cancer, asthma, arthritis, anthrax, acne, menopause
feeling wonder, shame, sadness, pleasure, passion, love, joy, happiness, fear, anger, heaviness, cool-
ness, torment, tenderness, suffering, stinging
vehicle van, truck, ship, rocket, pickup, motorcycle, helicopter, cruiser, car, boat, bicycle, automobile,
airplane, aircraft, jag
creator producer, photographer, painter, originator, musician, manufacturer, maker, inventor, farmer,
developer, designer, craftsman, constructor, builder, artist, architect, motivator
pain toothache, soreness, sting, soreness, sciatica, neuralgia, migraine, lumbago, headache, earache,
burn, bellyache, backache, ache, rheumatism, pain
animal zebra, turtle, tiger, sheep, rat, puppy, monkey, lion, kitten, horse, elephant, dog, deer, cow, cat,
camel, bull, bear
game whist, volleyball, tennis, softball, soccer, rugby, lotto, keno, handball, golf, football, curling,
chess, bowling, basketball, baccarat, twister
edible fruit watermelon, strawberry, pineapple, pear, peach, orange, olive, melon, mango, lemon, kiwi,
grape, cherry, berry, banana, apple, oyster, walnut, pistachio, mandarin, lime, fig, chestnut
Figure 2: Optimal clustering for large evaluation set.
contexts used purity
(VI) 73.4%
(VI), (II) 76.6%
(VI), (II), (III) 80.1%
Table 5: Clustering the larger evaluation set with
an increasing number of context specifications.
given in Table 5. As can be seen the object re-
lation is added first again. This time though the
inclusion of adjectival modification brings another
performance increase which is even one per cent
above the result for the space built from all possi-
ble relations. The addition of any further contexts
consistently degrades performance. The clustering
solution thus produced is given in Figure 2. From
the 1 872 698 dimension used in the original space
only 341 214 are retained.
4 Discussion and Conclusion
Our results are counterintuitive at first sight as it
could be expected that a larger number of differ-
ent contexts would increase performance. Instead
we see the best performance with only a very lim-
23
ited set of possible contexts. We suspect that this
behaviour is due to a large amount of correlation
between the different kinds of contexts. The ad-
dition of further contexts beyond a certain point
therefore has no positive effect. As an indication
for this it might be noticed that the three context
specifications that yield the best result for the 402
word set comprise relations with the three main
open word classes. It is to be expected that they
contribute orthogonal information that covers cen-
tral dimensions of meaning. The slight decrease
in performance that can be observed when further
contexts are added is probably due to chance fluc-
tuations and almost certainly not significant; with
significance being hard to determine for any of the
results.
However, it is obviously necessary to cover a
basic variety of features. Patterns which are used
to explicitly track semantic relations on the tex-
tual surface seem to be too restrictive. Informa-
tion accessible from co-occurring verbs for exam-
ple is completely lost. In a regular window based
word space such information is retained and its
performance is competitive with a pattern based
approach. This method is obviously too liberal,
though, if compared to the dependency spaces.
In general we were able to show that seman-
tic spaces are obviously able to capture categori-
cal knowledge about concepts best when they are
built from a syntactically annotated source. This
is true even if the context specification used is not
the most parsimonious. The problem of determin-
ing the right set of contexts is therefore rather an
optimisation issue than a question of using depen-
dency based spaces or not. It is a considerable one,
though, as computations are much cheaper with
vectors of reduced dimensionality, of course.
For the categorisation task the inclusion of more
complex relations reaching over several dependen-
cies does not seem to be helpful considering they
can all be dropped without a decrease in perfor-
mance. As Pado and Lapata (2007) reached better
results in their experiments with a broader set of
context specifications we conclude that the selec-
tion of the kinds of context to include when con-
structing a word space depends largely on the task
at hand.
References
A. Almuhareb and M. Poesio. 2004. Attribute-
based and value-based clustering: An evaluation.
In Dekang Lin and Dekai Wu, editors, Proceedings
of EMNLP 2004, pages 158?165, Barcelona, Spain,
July. Association for Computational Linguistics.
M. Poesio and A. Almuhareb. 2005a. Concept learn-
ing and categorization from the web. In Proceedings
of CogSci2005 - XXVII Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, pages 103?108, Stresa,
Italy.
A. Almuhareb and M. Poesio. 2005b. Finding at-
tributes in the web using a parser. In Proceedings
of Corpus Linguistics, Birmingham.
Marco Baroni, Stefan Evert, and Alessandro Lenci, ed-
itors. 2008. ESSLLI Workshop on Distributional
Lexical Semantics, Hamburg, August.
J. R. Curran and M. Moens. 2002. Improvements in
automatic thesaurus extraction. In Proceedings of
the ACL-02 workshop on Unsupervised lexical ac-
quisition, pages 59?66, Morristown, NJ, USA. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
T. Dunning. 1993. Accurate methods for the statistics
of surprise and coincidence. Computational Lin-
guistics, 19(1):61?74.
A. Ferraresi, E. Zanchetta, M. Baroni, and S. Bernar-
dini. 2008. Introducing and evaluating ukwac, a
very large web-derived corpus of english. In Pro-
ceedings of the WAC4 Workshop at LREC 2008.
G. Grefenstette. 1994. Explorations in Automatic The-
saurus Discovery. Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Dordrecht.
D. Hindle. 1990. Noun classification from predicate-
argument structures. In Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 268?275.
G. Karypis. 2003. Cluto: A clustering toolkit. tech-
nical report 02-017. Technical report, University of
Minnesota, November.
D. Lin. 1998. Automatic retrieval and clustering of
similar words. In COLING-ACL, pages 768?774.
S. Pad? and M. Lapata. 2007. Dependency-based con-
struction of semantic space models. Comput. Lin-
guist., 33(2):161?199.
M. Poesio and A. Almuhareb. 2005b. Identifying con-
cept attributes using a classifier. In Proceedings of
the ACL-SIGLEX Workshop on Deep Lexical Acqui-
sition, pages 18?27, Ann Arbor, Michigan, June. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
M. Sahlgren. 2006. The Word Space Model. Ph.D.
thesis, Department of Linguistics, Stockholm Uni-
versity.
H. Sch?tze. 1992. Dimensions of meaning. In Super-
computing ?92: Proceedings of the 1992 ACM/IEEE
conference on Supercomputing, pages 787?796, Los
Alamitos, CA, USA. IEEE Computer Society Press.
24
