Proceedings of the 2009 Workshop on Text and Citation Analysis for Scholarly Digital Libraries, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 36?44,
Suntec, Singapore, 7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Detecting key sentences for automatic assistance in peer reviewing      
research articles in educational sciences 
 
 
?gnes S?ndor 
Xerox Research Centre Europe  
6. ch. Maupertuis 38240 Meylan,  
France 
A.Sandor@xrce.xerox.com 
Angela Vorndran 
DIPF   
Schlossstrasse 29, 60486 Frankfurt,  
Germany 
vorndran@dipf.de 
 
  
Abstract 
The evaluation of scientific performance is 
gaining importance in all research disciplines. 
The basic process of the evaluation is peer 
reviewing, which is a time-consuming activ-
ity. In order to facilitate and speed up peer 
reviewing processes we have developed an 
exploratory NLP system in the field of educa-
tional sciences. The system highlights key 
sentences, which are supposed to reflect the 
most important threads of the article The 
highlighted sentences offer guidance on  the 
content-level while structural elements ? the 
title, abstract, keywords, section headings ? 
give an orientation about the design of the ar-
gumentation in the article. The system is im-
plemented using a discourse analysis module 
called concept matching applied on top of the 
Xerox Incremental Parser, a rule-based de-
pendency parser. The first results are promis-
ing and indicate the directions for the future 
development of the system.  
1 Introduction 
With the increase of centrally allocated re-
search funding, the growing number of confer-
ences, workshops and journals, the evaluation of 
scientific articles has become a central problem 
of the scientific community (see for example 
Whitley and Gl?ser, 2007).  The evaluation of 
articles consists in peer reviewing, i.e. peers? 
reading, understanding and commenting the arti-
cles. The peer reviewing process is a matter of 
extensive research (e.g. Bornmann 2003, Lu 
2005, 2008) discussing its reliability and evalua-
tion methods.  
Peer reviewing is a very time-consuming as-
signment, and Natural Language Processing 
(NLP) technologies might provide tools that  
 
 
could shorten the time that peer reviewers take to 
process the articles. 
Within the 7th framework EU project, Euro-
pean Educational Research Quality Indicators 
(http://www.eerqi.eu), we have set up this goal, 
and are developing a tool for providing assis-
tance to peer reviewers in educational sciences. 
We do not know of any other work with this per-
spective. 
Our approach consists in highlighting key sen-
tences in the articles that can be regarded as the 
logical backbone of the article. Our tool does not 
evaluate, but aims at focusing the evaluator?s 
attention on the parts of the texts that are relevant 
as a basis for his/her judgment. Nor does this tool 
check if the texts conform to some formal norms 
of scientific writing. 
We regard highlighting key sentences as a 
complement to the processing guidance that the 
structural layout of the articles provides. The 
structural layout of scientific articles ? title, ab-
stract, keywords, section headings ? guide the 
reader in processing the logical, argumentative 
and content-wise development of the article at 
different levels: The title is the brief indication of 
the topic, the keywords yield the conceptual con-
text of the topic, the abstract provides a concise 
summary of the problems and results, and the 
section headings guide the reader step by step in 
the development of the article. Besides these 
waymarkers, the highlighted key sentences are 
meant to be an intermediary representation of 
content development between the title, the key-
words, the abstract and the section headings on 
the one hand and the whole article on the other 
hand.  
Since we define key sentences as those sen-
tences that sum up the main messages of the arti-
cles, and since peer reviewing consists in judging 
the scientific value of the main messages, we 
36
assume that highlighting key sentences both 
helps understanding and provides evidence for 
the peer reviewer?s evaluation. By highlighting 
we intend to add a relevant and coherent dimen-
sion of the representation of the flow of the arti-
cle, which is otherwise hidden, and which the 
reader has to discover in order to understand the 
article.  
Highlighting is carried out using the Xerox In-
cremental Parser (XIP), a rule-based dependency 
parser (Ait-Mokhtar et al, 2002). 
We will first provide a brief review of related 
work. This is followed by the description of the 
role of structural layout in educational research 
articles, which we wish to complement by high-
lighting sentences.  In the subsequent sections we 
define the attributes of key sentences that serve 
as a basis for their detection and describe the 
natural language processing system. In the suc-
ceeding section we present our first tests for 
validating our approach, and finally we draw 
some conclusions and indicate the directions in 
which we plan to carry on this work. 
2 Related work 
Our work is in line with the growing amount of 
research in documentation sciences and natural 
language processing that takes into account the 
argumentative structure of research articles in 
tasks such as information retrieval, information 
extraction, navigation within documents and 
summarization. 
In the domain of information retrieval as far 
back as the beginning of the 1990?s Liddy (1991) 
claimed that additional functions for search in-
struments could benefit from including the dis-
course-level context of the retrieved search terms 
in the interpretation of the results. Liddy stressed 
the ?semantic roles? of concepts in a document 
as opposed to the simple occurrence of search 
terms. Oddy et al (1992) proceed in this line of 
research and state that discourse-level structures 
in research texts could be useful to support re-
trieval for the user because they represent struc-
tural qualities recognized by the reader inde-
pendent of the topic of the research. Both con-
centrate on the analysis of abstracts of research 
articles and propose a system to combine topical 
with structural information in the retrieval proc-
ess. 
Kando (1997) also emphasizes the impor-
tance of the discourse-level context of search 
terms in the retrieved documents. The allocation 
of retrieved passages to functional units and thus 
the possibility to gain information about article 
structures provides a valuable opportunity to im-
prove the user?s assessment of the retrieved 
documents. A similar method of annotating text 
passages according to their function in the text is 
conducted by Mizuta et al (2006) with the objec-
tive of categorizing articles in different document 
genres.  
Teufel and Moens (2002) base automatic 
summarization on extracting sentences annotated 
with respect to their discourse function in the 
text.  
Lisacek et al(2005) detect sentences in bio-
medical articles that describe substantially new 
research based on analyzing discourse functions. 
Another line of research to exploit the argu-
mentative structure for navigation and informa-
tion extraction is inspired by the semantic web. 
Instead of automatically discovering argument 
structures in texts, the approach aims at creating 
conceptually motivated processing editors in 
which the users insert content according to its 
argumentative function. (see for example Uren et 
al., 2007, Couto and Minel, 2007.) 
3 The structure of educational research 
articles   
Research articles in the educational sciences tend 
to display a very heterogeneous structure, like 
articles in many other fields in social sciences 
and humanities. While the thematic contents of 
the articles are structured according to the re-
quirements of the topic, frequent occurrences of 
a unifying structure are introductory and con-
cluding chapters. However, where these chapters 
appear they do not display uniform headings (cf. 
Fiedler, 1991:98). Likewise Ruiying and Allison 
(2004) show, for example, that the structure of 
research articles in linguistics is does not con-
form to a common model, and section headings 
in many cases do not refer to the function of the 
chapter but to the thematic contents. Brett (1994) 
and Holmes (1997) observe basic structural fea-
tures in the articles in political sciences and soci-
ology. They state, however, that the section 
headings are usually not standardized. 
 In contrast to the heterogeneity of the structure 
and section headings of research articles in social 
sciences and humanities those in the hard sci-
ences show a relatively uniform structure, and 
often follow the well-known pattern of Introduc-
tion ? Methods ? Results ? Discussion, which 
renders their reading easier.  
37
The structural heterogeneity of social science 
and humanities research articles, and particularly 
those within educational sciences, derives from 
the coverage of a wide range of research prob-
lems and the consequential variation the methods 
applied. This discipline includes theoretically 
embedded discussions as well as empirical stud-
ies or material for school praxis. These differ-
ences in the referenced subjects are reflected in 
the way the research articles are organized and 
presented. Montesi and Owen (2008:151) notice 
a high grade of liberty granted by the educational 
sciences journals for the presentation of submit-
ted papers. They also describe a clear distinction 
between qualitative and quantitative approaches 
in research articles, the latter displaying a closer 
connection in structural aspects to the exact sci-
ences than the former. 
In the framework of this study we compared 
the structural properties of fifteen articles from 
three journals: the British Journal of Educational 
Studies (BJES), the Educational Psychology Re-
view (EPR) and the International Journal of Edu-
cational Research (IJER). These are educational 
research journals covering a wide variety of top-
ics from educational psychology to school in-
struction. We have made the following observa-
tions: 
a) Some section headings follow the functional 
structuring of natural science articles, some 
do not. About half of the articles contain an 
?Introduction? and/or a ?Conclusion?, one 
third has a ?Methods? section and 26% of the 
articles has a section entitled ?Results?, 
?Findings? or ?Conclusion?. Thus a basis for 
a functionally orientated article structure can 
be perceived in the first and last chapters of 
most of the articles.  Nearly 60% of the sec-
tion headings, however, are oriented towards 
aspects of the content of the articles and 
show no predefined form. 
b) All of the articles are preceded by an abstract 
and eleven of them have keywords assigned 
to them.  
The keywords play an important role in our 
highlighting approach, since they are sup-
posed to convey the basis for topical rele-
vance. The number of keywords assigned per 
article is between two and nine. While some 
keywords are applied only a few times in the 
article, others are used 60 or even over 100 
times. In some cases the keywords are very 
common words (?teachers?, ?education?) and 
they are used frequently throughout the text. 
In these cases the highlighted sentences are 
supposed to indicate relevant, terminological 
uses of those common, non-specialised 
words. In other cases the keywords are rare, 
but they are terms used in reduced contexts, 
for example, terminological expressions re-
lated to the field of research. Those are very 
useful for a quick overview over the research 
topic. Keywords appearing very rarely or not 
at all  often belong to a more general level of 
terminology. 
From an information extraction point of view 
the importance of the terms in the thread of 
the article is known to be related to their 
places of occurrence: in the title, the abstract, 
the section headings or even in the titles of 
the bibliography terms have more signifi-
cance than in the rest of the article. This 
property of terms is used in search options in 
digital libraries. An appearance of the query 
term in the introduction or conclusion could 
also be a hint for the term being relevant for 
the scientific context or the results of the 
study whereas terms referring to the method-
ology or rather non-specific terms do not 
convey much information about the central 
contents of the text. 
c) The abstract is supposed to sum up the most 
important aspects of a research article. The 
articles analyzed show that in general the 
sentences in the abstract correspond to asser-
tions made throughout the articles in most of 
the different sections. In a few cases most 
sentences of the abstract were also taken up 
in the introductory or concluding part of the 
article with a summarizing function. 
In this section we have shown that owing to the 
large number of research fields in educational 
sciences there is a high variety in the structural 
design and organisation of the contents of educa-
tional science research articles. In contrast to 
research literature in the natural sciences, the 
understanding of educational sciences articles is 
not promoted by predefined structuring of the 
contents. Additionally, a terminological vague-
ness sometimes stands in the way of using key-
words as reliable content indicators. In our ap-
proach we therefore aim at a representation of 
article contents independent of the structural 
properties of the articles.  
4 The detection of key sentences 
In defining the characteristic features of key 
sentences that serve as a basis for their detection 
we rely on the kinds of judgments peer review 
38
evaluations are supposed to make (Bridges 
2008).1 We have summed up these judgments as 
follows:  the relevance of the topic, the clarity of 
the problem statement, the coherence of the ar-
gumentation and the well-foundedness of the 
conclusions. These criteria of judgment are often 
presented as questions in the evaluation forms 
that peer reviewers are asked to fill in.  Based on 
these evaluation criteria we define key sentences 
as sentences that describe research problems, 
purposes and conclusions related to the topic of 
the articles as indicated by the keywords.  
  The key sentences receive two types of labels in 
our system: SUMMARY ? the sentences that 
convey either the goal or the conclusion - or 
PROBLEM ? the sentences that mention re-
search problems. Some sentences get both labels. 
Labeling is carried out by rules, which rely on 
the conceptual definition of SUMMARY and 
PROBLEM sentences as we show below. 
   In order to explain the conceptual definition we 
present a series of examples. The following 
SUMMARY and PROBLEM sentences are the 
first and last three key sentences detected in the 
same article (Barrow, 2008). In the first series of 
examples the keywords are underlined: 
 
Beginning: 
(1) PROBLEM: The most challenging ques-
tions concern whether the body provides an 
alternative route to knowledge, if so of 
what. 
(2) PROBLEM_SUMMARY I do not question 
this belief, but in this paper I shall try to 
differentiate between and evaluate a num-
ber of quite distinct claims about the impor-
tance of the body  in relation to schooling in 
general and education in particular. 
(3) PROBLEM: However, to assume, as some 
philosophers would, that acceptance of that 
premise concludes the debate on the ques-
tion of education and the body, by implic-
itly claiming that education has nothing to 
do with the body per se, would be absurd. 
End: 
(4) SUMMARY: Do I therefore conclude, as 
rationalist philosophers of education are 
generally supposed to conclude, that educa-
tion has nothing to do with the body? 
                                                          
1 In a preliminary experiment we tried to identify key sen-
tences in an example-based way. Six scholars marked the 
key sentences in four articles from four domains according 
to the same evaluation criteria. There were hardly any over-
laps. This led us to define key sentences. 
(5) PROBLEM: Second, while most of the 
claims made about the body and knowledge 
are variously opaque, suspect, or clearly 
wrong, it remains true that to be fully aware 
of or to fully understand an art form such as 
ballet, you need to engage in it. 
(6) PROBLEM: More generally, let us attempt 
to articulate more straightforward argu-
ments for the inclusion of sports and other 
forms of bodily activity in the school cur-
riculum than obscure and unconvincing 
claims to the effect that they are necessary, 
sufficient or even directly relevant to well-
developed and well-rounded educational 
understanding. 
 
It is apparent from these sentences that ap-
proaching the task by providing a normalized 
factual extraction related to the keywords as in 
traditional information extraction would be both 
very problematic - even in an intellectual (as op-
posed to automatic) way - and may also be use-
less in the case of an article whose discipline is 
not related to describing facts, but rather to argu-
ing about concepts. On the other hand, the hu-
man reader clearly seizes that these sentences do 
describe problems, aims and conclusions related 
to the underlined keywords.2  In the next step we 
define the characteristic features of SUMMARY 
and PROBLEM sentences as being conveyed 
independently of the factual propositions.   
The features of the key sentences are assigned 
by applying the concept-matching framework 
described in the following series of examples. 
This framework had previously been success-
fully used in revealing argumentative functions 
of research articles in a text-mining application 
of biomedical abstracts (Lisacek et al, 2005) and 
in citation-type analysis (S?ndor et al, 2006). 
(Besides processing scientific articles, concept 
matching has also been used in risk detection in 
S?ndor, 2009.) 
   The features of key sentences are determined 
by the argumentative expressions in the sen-
tences, which in some way comment on the core 
factual propositions. In the next series of exam-
ples we have underlined these argumentative 
expressions in the same set of sentences: 
 
 
 
                                                          
2 At this point we do not attempt to specify the kind of rela-
tionship between the argument types and the keywords: this 
relationship remains simple co-occurrence.  
39
Beginning: 
(1) PROBLEM: The most challenging ques-
tions concern whether the body provides an 
alternative route to knowledge, if so of 
what. 
(2) PROBLEM_SUMMARY I do not question 
this belief, but in this paper I shall try to 
differentiate between and evaluate a num-
ber of quite distinct claims about the impor-
tance of the body  in relation to schooling in 
general and education in particular. 
(3) PROBLEM: However  to assume, as some 
philosophers would, that acceptance of that 
premise concludes the debate on the ques-
tion of education and the body, by implic-
itly claiming that education has nothing to 
do with the body per se, would be absurd. 
End: 
(4) SUMMARY: Do I therefore conclude, as 
rationalist philosophers of education are 
generally supposed to conclude, that educa-
tion has nothing to do with the body? 
(5) PROBLEM: Second, while most of the 
claims made about the body and knowledge 
are variously opaque, suspect, or clearly 
wrong, it remains true that to be fully aware 
of or to fully understand an art form such as 
ballet, you need to engage in it. 
(6) PROBLEM: More generally, let us attempt 
to articulate more straightforward argu-
ments for the inclusion of sports and other 
forms of bodily activity in the school cur-
riculum than obscure and unconvincing 
claims to the effect that they are necessary, 
sufficient or even directly relevant to well-
developed and well- rounded educational 
understanding.  
 
The detection is based on the words under-
lined. The system recognizes them since they 
belong to a database of previously compiled sets 
of words. The sets correspond to more or less 
loosely understood semantic fields that have 
been found to be relevant in scholarly argumen-
tation in the previous applications of the concept-
matching framework. The compilation of the 
lists has been entirely manual. Starting from a 
small number of seed words we incrementally 
extend the list over subsequent analyses and test-
ing. Having worked out a first concept-matching  
system, its modification for a new scholarly do-
main takes some weeks provided that a suffi-
ciently large corpus is available. We are carrying 
out experiments for automatic enrichment with 
the help of Wordnet, but the results have not 
been satisfactory up to this point. However, since 
the semantic fields concerned contain a relatively 
well-identifiable vocabulary within the genre of 
scholarly writing, most of these words can be 
obtained from textbooks on academic writing.  
In the concept-matching framework these sets 
of words and expressions are called constituent 
concepts. In previous applications nine constitu-
ent concepts have been identified for labeling 
argumentative sentences (S?ndor, 2007). Out of 
these we use five here: MENTAL, IDEA, PUB-
LICATION, DEICTIC, CONTRAST.  
In the present system we have used all the 
words that have been compiled for labeling ar-
gumentative functions of biomedical research 
abstracts, and we have added a few others after 
having studied some educational research arti-
cles. Augmenting the list of words in the con-
stituent concepts undoubtedly increases the cov-
erage of the system, although we have found that 
the words already compiled yield fairly large 
coverage. 
In terms of the constituent concepts we define 
PROBLEMs as CONTRASTed IDEAs or CON-
TRASTs in MENTAL operations involved in 
research, while  SUMMARIES of one's research 
goals and conclusions  consist in pointing out in 
the current (DEICTIC) PUBLICATION one's 
(DEICTIC) IDEAs or MENTAL operations. We 
cite now the example sentences only through the 
constituent concepts of PROBLEM and SUM-
MARY: 
 
Beginning: 
(1) PROBLEM: ... challenging[C,M] ques-
tions[C,M] ... whether[C] ... alternative[C] 
... to knowledge[I]  ...  
(2) PROBLEM_SUMMARY: I[D] ... ques-
tion[C,M] this belief[M] ... in this[D] pa-
per[P]... 
(3) PROBLEM: However[C]  to assume[C,M], 
... that acceptance[MC] ... concludes[C,M] 
the debate[C,I] ..., by ... claiming[C,M] ... 
would be absurd[C]. 
End: 
(4) SUMMARY: ...I[D] ... conclude[C,M] ... 
(5) PROBLEM: ... while[C] ... the claims[I] ... 
are  ... wrong[C] ... 
(6) PROBLEM: ... unconvincing[C,M] 
claims[I] ... 
 
   It is apparent that the words that represent the 
constituent concepts in these sentential skeletons 
constitute purely argumentative expressions and 
are void of any factual proposition.  
40
However, not all sentences containing these 
words convey the target concepts. Consider for 
example the following sentence from a research 
article (Meinberg and Stern, 2003.): 
 
(7) Only 1.8% of the claims were attributed to 
wrong-site surgery, but 84% of the claims 
due to wrong-site surgery resulted in pay-
ment to the plaintiff compared ...  
 
In order to differentiate between relevant and 
irrelevant ways of combining the constituent 
concepts in a sentence our framework proposes 
syntactic criteria: sentences are labeled in case 
the constituent concepts are in syntactic depend-
ency relationship with each other. The kind of 
syntactic relationship is not specified. 
The restriction of syntactic dependencies is 
especially relevant in the case when the constitu-
ent concepts are function words (like e.g. not) or 
have a general sense (like e.g. work).  At this 
point we have not measured the impact of this 
restriction on recall and precision. 
  We have built the concept-matching grammar 
for labeling argumentation types on top of a gen-
eral-purpose dependency grammar developed in 
XIP. In the concept-matching grammar we de-
fine the argumentative expressions as those syn-
tactic dependencies where both words belong to 
the particular concepts that constitute the target 
concepts as defined above. The only exceptions 
to the syntactic constraint are sentential adverbs 
(like ?however?), for which the XIP grammar 
does not extract any syntactic dependencies. The 
highlighted sentences are those that contain the 
labeled argumentative expressions. 
5 First tests 
Our exploratory system is based on several con-
secutive hypotheses, the validity of which should 
be tested incrementally.  
The first hypothesis is that the key sentences 
relevant for peer reviewing are those that de-
scribe the problems, aims and results in the arti-
cles, and that these sentences contain the key-
words provided with the articles. The second 
hypothesis is that these sentences can be detected 
using the concept-matching grammar. Finally the 
third hypothesis is that highlighting these sen-
tences can save peer reviewers? time evaluating 
articles.  
Owing to the complexity and relative vague-
ness of the task, we have not been able to set up 
either a formal or a statistically significant 
evaluation up to now.  For this article we have 
carried out an initial internal test3 towards the 
validation of the first two hypotheses.  
In a test corpus of five articles from the three 
educational research journals mentioned in Sec-
tion 3 (BJES, EPR, IJES) we checked if the sen-
tences highlighted by the system convey relevant 
information in the argumentative development of 
the paper and if we find other key sentences that 
are not highlighted. Next we analyzed the causes 
of silence and noise in order to evaluate our basic 
assumptions. 
 Table 1 summarizes the results of the test 
over the five articles in terms of recall and preci-
sion of the key sentences, and also indicates the 
percentage of key sentences out of all the sen-
tences in the articles. Recall is defined as the 
number of correct sentences highlighted divided 
by the total number of sentences that we consid-
ered to be key sentences. Precision is defined as 
the number of correct sentences highlighted di-
vided by the total number of sentences high-
lighted. 
Table 2 shows if the missing sentences identi-
fied as key sentences by the evaluator contain 
keywords or not. It also displays the number of 
missing sentences in each article by type of error. 
Table 3 shows the number of false positive sen-
tences according to the types of the causes of the 
error. 
 
 
Article Recall Precision Key 
sentences 
(Number 
of sen-
tences) 
BJES-1 77% 67%    17% 
(195) 
BJES-2 69% 77%    11% 
(240) 
EPR-1 39% 59%  8% 
(331) 
EPR-2 30% 100%  3% 
(330) 
IJER-1 35% 67%  2% 
(526) 
 
Table 1. Recall and precision of key sentences 
detected and percentage of key sentences out of 
all the sentences in the article 
 
 
                                                          
3 This test was carried out by one of the co-authors of this 
article who did not take part in the development of the NLP 
system. 
41
Article Keywords 
in sentence 
yes      no    
 
1 
 
2 
 
3 
 
BJES-1 6 1 4 2 3 
BJES-2 5 1 1 - 5 
EPR-1 13 12 3 6 16 
EPR-2 13 10 - - 23 
IJER-1 8 3 - 1 10 
All 45 27 8 9 57 
 
Table 2. Causes of silence: 1.Incorrect analysis 
by the parser; 2.Inadequacy of the framework for 
the task; 3. Not SUMMARY or PROBLEM sen-
tence according to our definition 
 
 
Article 1 2 3 
BJES-1 6 1 3 
BJES-2 1 2 4 
EPR-1 6 - 5 
EPR-2 - - - 
IJER-1 1 - 2 
All 14 3 14 
 
Table 3. Causes of noise: 1.The sentence 
matches the rules but is not important enough; 
2.Incorrect analysis by the parser 3.Inadequacy 
of the framework for the task 
 
We can observe significant differences accord-
ing to the journals with respect to both hypothe-
ses that we have tested. The three journals deal 
with rather different research topics ranging from 
theoretical discussions to empirical studies of 
students? behavior. According to our results the 
important passages of these articles are charac-
terized by different attributes: while in empirical 
studies more or less definite results can be pre-
sented, theoretical discussions rest more on a 
discursive level offering less clear conclusions to 
be identified as SUMMARY or PROBLEM sen-
tences. This is reflected on the one hand in the 
differences in recall and precision among the 
journals and on the other hand in the differences 
in the number of sentences missing due to error-
type 3 in Table 2.  
In the EPR and in the IJER we found more 
key sentences that are neither SUMMARY nor 
PROBLEM sentences according to our definition 
than in the BJES. Most of these sentences con-
vey definitions related to the key concept. Thus 
our first hypothesis seems to hold more for em-
pirical studies than for theoretical ones. In order 
to increase the coverage of key sentences the 
system should be completed so that it also de-
tects definitions, especially in the case of theo-
retical articles. 
As for the presence of keywords in the key 
sentences, our results show that this is a relevant 
condition, however not necessary since a number 
of key sentences identified do not contain key-
words. Further study is needed to identify the 
characteristic features of key sentences without 
keywords. We have carried out an additional test 
to see if the correct key sentences cover all the 
keywords in the list. In the five articles we have 
only found one keyword that was not present in 
any of the key sentences, but this word appeared 
only once in the whole article. The fact that rela-
tively few sentences are detected in the articles 
and that in these sentences all the keywords are 
covered supports the hypothesis that the key sen-
tences do play an important role in the thread of 
the article. 
Among the errors leading to both silence and 
noise we have found a number of cases where 
the concept-matching framework in its present 
form is not convenient for the task of detecting 
key sentences that satisfy the conditions or filter-
ing erroneous sentences. The reason for this in 
both cases is that the unit of concept-matching is 
the sentence, whereas in these cases a single sen-
tence does not provide enough context for identi-
fying or for specifying the target concepts re-
spectively. Since the number of errors due to this 
reason is not very high we do not consider that 
these results invalidate the second hypothesis. 
The number of such false positives is quite sig-
nificant, however, which might be disturbing for 
the user of the system. This kind of error could 
be overcome by enlarging the scope of concept-
matching beyond the sentence. In this way we 
could filter out these false positives. 
In a significant number of cases noise is not 
due to an error in the system but to the fact that 
the sentence is not important enough with respect 
to the development of the whole article. Whether 
this kind of noise is a significant disturbing fac-
tor for the user is to be tested in subsequent 
evaluation by users. 
Finally, we have found few errors due to bugs 
in the grammar, which indicates that the recogni-
tion of SUMMARY and PROBLEM sentences is 
relatively reliable. These results also contribute 
to suggesting that the second hypothesis seems to 
hold.  
42
6 Conclusion 
In this article we have presented an exploratory 
system for highlighting key sentences containing 
keywords in order to support peer review. The 
selected sentences are supposed to help peer re-
viewers of articles in educational sciences to fo-
cus their attention on some relevant textual evi-
dence for formulating their judgments. We have 
argued that even if the structural characteris-
tics? the abstract, the keywords and the section 
headings?guide the reader in following the de-
velopment of the article, content-oriented high-
lighting of key sentences might enhance the 
quick understanding of the core contents.  
Although the subjects of educational science 
research articles display very heterogeneous 
structures and contents, the system could identify 
a number of sentences containing the main 
statements of the articles. Text-inherent devel-
opments not accompanied by structural signs like 
the outcomes of empirical studies or the contents 
of a theoretical discussion about abstract terms 
could be identified using automatic text analysis, 
which can possibly save intellectual effort of sci-
entists. The time-consuming task of reviewing a 
growing number of research publications, hardly 
manageable when studying each submitted 
manuscript thoroughly, could thus be facilitated 
and supported and less threatened to be replaced 
by wholly automatic metric systems when time 
constraints become more severe.  
The method we have developed is imple-
mented in XIP, a rule-based dependency parser. 
It uses pre-existing lexical resources and applies 
the concept-matching framework. 
The results of our first tests suggest that two of 
our three initial hypotheses are partially valid. 
According to our first hypothesis the key sen-
tences relevant for peer reviewing are those that 
describe the problems, aims and results in the 
articles. We have found that sentences conveying 
definitions, especially in theoretical articles, 
should also be highlighted as key sentences. The 
second hypothesis is that these sentences can be 
detected using the concept-matching grammar. 
We have found in the majority of cases that this 
hypothesis is valid, however, enlarging the unit 
of concept-matching to multiple sentences would 
improve the performance.  
Based on this result we are undertaking a user 
evaluation to measure the time needed to peer 
review these articles with and without highlight-
ing.  We are also planning to extend the system 
in the two directions suggested by the test re-
sults. 
Besides providing assistance to peer reviewers 
the system presented here could be used in other 
applications, which we would like to explore in 
future projects. The possibilities include improv-
ing search functionalities in digital libraries, dis-
playing electronic documents by linking key-
words to key sentences and discourse-based 
navigation.  
 
Acknowledgments 
The research leading to these results has received 
funding from the European Community's Sev-
enth Framework Programme under grant agree-
ment n? 217549. 
We would like to thank Alexander Botte, 
Aaron Kaplan, Peter Meyer and our partners in 
the EERQI project for their valuable contribu-
tions and suggestions. 
References  
Salah A?t-Mokhtar, Jean-Pierre Chanod, and Claude 
Roux. 2002. Robustness beyond shallowness: in-
cremental dependency parsing. Natural Language 
Engineering, 8(2/3):121-144. 
 
Robin Barrow. 2008. Education and the Body: Prole-
gomena.  British Journal of Educational Studies 
56(3):272-285. 
Lutz Bornmann and Hans-Dieter Daniel. 2003. Begu-
tachtung durch Fachkollegen in der Wissenschaft. 
Stand der Forschung zur Reliabilit?t, Fairness und 
Validit?t des Peer-Review-Verfahrens.  Universit?t 
auf dem Pr?fstand. Konzepte und Befunde der 
Hochschulforschung. (S. Schwarz and U. Teichler, 
Eds.). Campus Verlag Frankfurt/New York: 207-
225. 
Paul Brett. 1994. A genre analysis of the results sec-
tion of sociology articles. English for Specific Pur-
poses, 13(1):47-59.   
David Bridges. 2008. Criteria of Quality in Educa-
tional Research. Working Group Report of the 1st 
EERQI Workshop, 20-21 June 2008. Leuven. Pro-
ject Internal Document. 
Javier Couto and Jean-Luc Minel. 2007. NaviTexte : a 
Text Navigation Tool. Artificial Intelligence and 
Human-Oriented Computing, Lecture Notes in Ar-
tificial Intelligence, 4733, Springer, Berlin, Hei-
delberg. 
Susanne Fiedler. 1991. Fachtextlinguistische 
Untersuchungen zum Kommunikationsbereich der 
P?dagogik dargestellt an relevanten 
Fachtextsorten im Englischen. Lang, Frankfurt 
a.M. 
43
Richard Holmes. 1997. Genre analysis, and the social 
sciences: An investigation of the structure of re-
search article discussion sections in three disci-
plines. English for Specific Purposes, 16(4):321-
337.   
Noriko Kando. 1997. Text-level structure of research 
papers: Implications for text-based information 
processing systems. Proceedings of the 19th Brit-
ish Computer Society Annual Colloquium of Infor-
mation Retrieval Research, Sheffield University, 
Sheffield, UK, 68-81.  
Elizabeth D. Liddy. 1991. The discourse-level struc-
ture of empirical abstracts: an exploratory study. 
Information Processing and Management, 
27(1):55-81. 
Fr?d?rique Lisacek, Christine Chichester, Aaron Kap-
lan, and ?gnes Sandor. 2005. Discovering para-
digm shift patterns in biomedical abstracts: appli-
cation to neurodegenerative diseases. First Interna-
tional Symposium on Semantic Mining in Biomedi-
cine, Cambridge, UK, April 11-13, 2005. 
Yanping Lu. 2005. Editorial Peer Review in Educa-
tion: Mapping the Field. Australian Association for 
Research in Education 2004 conference papers, 
Melbourne, Australia (Jeffery, P. L., Ed.):1-19.  
Yanping Lu. 2008. Peer review and its contribution to 
manuscript quality: an Australian perspective. 
Learned Publishing, 21(3):307-316. 
Eric G. Meinberg and Peter J. Stern. 2003. Incidence 
of Wrong-Site Surgery Among Hand Surgeons. 
The Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery (American) 
85:193-197. 
Yoko Mizuta, Anna Korhonen, Tony Mullen, and 
Nigel Collier. 2006. Zone analysis in biology arti-
cles as a basis for information extraction. Interna-
tional Journal of Medical Informatics, 75(6):468-
87.  
Michaela Montesi and John Mackenzie Owen. 2008. 
Research journal articles as document genres: ex-
ploring their role in knowledge organization. Jour-
nal of Documentation, 64(1):143-167.   
 Robert N. Oddy, Elizabeth D. Liddy, Bhaskaran 
Balakrishnan, Ann Bishop, Joseph Elewononi and 
Eileen Martin. 1992. Towards the use of situational 
information in information retrieval. Journal of 
Documentation, 48(2):123-171. 
Yang Ruiying and Desmond Allison. 2004. Research 
articles in applied linguistics: structures from a 
functional perspective. English for Specific Pur-
poses, 23(3):264-279.   
?gnes S?ndor, Aaron Kaplan and Gilbert Rondeau. 
2006. Discourse and citation analysis with concept-
matching. International Symposium: Discourse 
and document (ISDD), Caen, France, June  15-
16, 2006. 
?gnes S?ndor. 2007. Modeling metadiscourse con-
veying the author?s rhetorical strategy in biomedi-
cal research abstracts. Revue Fran?aise de Linguis-
tique Appliqu?e 200(2):97-109. 
?gnes S?ndor. 2009. Automatic detection of dis-
course indicating emerging risk. To appear in 
Critical Approaches to Discourse Analysis across 
Disciplines. Risk as Discourse ? Discourse as Risk: 
Interdisciplinary perspectives. 
Simone Teufel and Marc Moens. 2002. Summarizing 
scientific articles: experiments with relevance and 
rhetorical status. Computational Linguistics, 
28(4):409-445. 
Victoria Uren, Simon Buckingham Shum, Clara 
Mancini, and Gangmin Li. 2007. Modelling Natu-
ralistic Argumentation in Research Literatures: 
Representation and Interaction Design Issues. In-
ternational Journal of Intelligent Systems, (Special 
Issue on Computational Models of Natural Argu-
ment, Eds: C. Reed and F. Grasso), 22(1):17-47. 
Richard Whitley and Jochen Gl?ser. 2007. The 
Changing Governance of Sciences: The Advent Of 
Research Evaluation Systems. Springer 
 
44
Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 10?17,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 12 July 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
Identifying Claimed Knowledge Updates  
in Biomedical Research Articles 
?gnes S?ndor Anita de Waard 
Xerox Research Centre Europe Elsevier Labs, USA 
Agnes.Sandor@xrce.xerox.com A.Dewaard@elsevier.com 
 
 
Abstract 
Key knowledge components of biological 
research papers are conveyed by 
structurally and rhetorically salient 
sentences that summarize the main findings 
of a particular experiment. In this article 
we define such sentences as Claimed 
Knowledge Updates (CKUs), and propose 
using them in text mining tasks. We 
provide evidence that CKUs convey the 
most important new factual information, 
and thus demonstrate that rhetorical 
salience is a systematic discourse structure 
indicator in biology articles along with 
structural salience. We assume that CKUs 
can be detected automatically with state-of-
the-art text analysis tools, and suggest 
some applications for presenting CKUs in 
knowledge bases and scientific browsing 
interfaces. 
1 Introduction 
Biomedical research articles describe newly 
discovered biological findings, and in doing so, 
update the readers? knowledge on a particular 
topic. These two functions of research articles ? 
describing reality and updating knowledge in a 
field ? mobilize different forms of linguistic 
expression: on the one hand, in order to describe 
pieces of reality, the authors refer to biological 
objects and relationships among them, and on the 
other hand, they shape the way in which new 
knowledge is inserted into existing accumulated 
knowledge, through argumentation, discourse and 
rhetorical structure. The designers of text mining 
systems are increasingly aware of the importance 
of integrating both aspects into annotation 
schemes, and thus models of argumentation, 
discourse and rhetorical structure are becoming 
integrated with models of biological reality in 
modern annotation systems, such as described in 
Liakata et al (2010), Nawaz et al (2010), Wilbur 
et al (2006), S?ndor (2007), Teufel (1999) and  
Collier (2006). 
Models of biological knowledge are commonly 
mapped to well-defined linguistic elements like 
named entities (mostly noun phrases), relationships 
between the entities (mostly predicates), and these 
are reliably detected with state-of-the-art text-
mining tools (e.g., Nawaz et al 2010). But the 
detection of argumentation, discourse and 
rhetorical structures, and the association of 
linguistic expressions with these elements, is far 
less straightforward. The great number of proposed 
approaches already makes it clear that it is difficult 
to provide easily applicable and generally accepted 
annotation guidelines, which can easily be 
implemented in a web-based environment. An 
ideal discourse annotation system would be 
straightforward to use, and it would not require any 
learning ? in the same way that using hyperlinks is 
a straightforward way to create references. Such an 
annotation model should also provide a substantial 
improvement to users who want to find relevant 
new knowledge.  
Here, we propose a simple discourse annotation 
model to detect the main new knowledge claims in 
biology research papers. We also propose some 
suggestions for the implementation of the 
automatic detection of this model. 
 
2 Claimed Knowledge Updates 
 
Biomedical articles contain a great number of 
biological propositions, but not all of them are 
equally relevant: some are central claims, while 
others merely support the findings; some are 
factual, while others are merely hypothesized. The 
authors often summarize their main findings in the 
10
title, section titles and caption titles. In addition to 
these  ?   structurally  defined  ?  summaries,     the  
authors also formulate their main findings in 
rhetorically salient sentences. This rhetorical 
salience is conveyed via metadiscourse, by which 
the authors explicitly attribute the findings to 
themselves, and state that they are based on the 
current empirical work, such as: ?Our results 
demonstrate?, ?In the present study we identified?.  
We will call biological propositions summarized in 
such structurally or rhetorically salient sentences 
Claimed Knowledge Updates (CKU).    
We hypothesize that a listing of the CKUs in a 
paper constitutes new main knowledge provided in 
that paper, and thus we propose that their detection 
may play an important role in text mining.  
We define CKUs as follows:   
1. A CKU expresses a verbal or nominal 
proposition about biological entities.  
2. A CKU is a new proposition. 
3. The authors present the CKU as factual. 
4. A CKU is derived from the experimental work 
described in the article. 
5. The ownership of the proposition is attributed 
to the author(s) of the article. 
6. 4) and 5) are either explicitly expressed or are 
implicitly conveyed by a structural position as 
title, section or caption title. 
As an example, Table 1 contains some CKUs from 
an article on Spinal Muscular Atrophy (Akten et 
al., 2011). The metadiscourse indicating CKUs is 
given in bold.  
In studying this paper, we found a striking 
regularity in the appearance of CKUs throughout 
the article: the Abstract, the Introduction, the 
Results and the Discussion sections are repeat the 
same CKUs, as follows: 
? in the Abstract they appear as a list of findings;  
? in the Introduction, they are inserted within the 
context of previous knowledge;  
? in the Results section, they are explained 
within the context of the authors? work, and 
thus provide empirical evidence;  
and finally,  
? in the Discussion, they are presented in the 
perspective of the advances in the research 
domain.   
In other words, the four predefined structural units 
of research articles give an indicator of the 
underlying CKU organization. This regularity 
shows that rhetorical salience is systematically 
related to structural organization, and thus that the 
placement of the CKUs in the text can be a marker 
for discourse structure in biological research 
articles.
 
  3   Automatic detection of CKUs 
 
  According   to our definition, a  CKU  is  a  factual     
  proposition   referring    to   a   bio-event,   and   its  
  discourse   function  is    updating   knowledge:  its  
  source is the author of the current  article,   and   its  
  basis  is  the  experimental findings of the    current  
 
Table 1. Sentences and CKUs from Akten et al
Sentence CKU 
Here we used mass 
spectrometry to 
identifyHuD as a novel 
neuronal SMN-interacting 
partner. 
HuD is a neuronal 
SMN-interacting 
partner. 
Our analysis of known 
HuD-associated mRNAs in 
neurons identified cpg15 
mRNA as a highly abundant 
mRNA in HuDIPs compared 
with other known targets of 
HuD, such as GAP43 and 
Tau. 
cpg15 mRNA is a 
highly abundant 
mRNA in HuDIPs 
Our finding that SMN 
protein associates with HuD 
protein and the HuD target 
cpg15 mRNA in neurons led 
us to ask whether SMN 
deficiency affects the 
abundance or cellular 
distribution of cpg15 
mRNA. 
SMN protein 
associates with HuD 
protein 
SMN protein 
associates with cpg15 
mRNA 
11
 
 
 
Title Abstract Introduction Results Figures Discussion Citation 
Event 
representation 
Interaction 
of survival 
of motor 
neuron 
(SMN) and 
HuD 
proteins 
[with m 
RNA 
cpg15rescue
s motor 
neuron 
axonal 
deficits] 
Here we 
used mass 
spectrometry 
to 
identifyHuD 
as a novel 
neuronal 
SMN-
interacting 
partner. 
 
Here we 
identifyHuD 
asa novel 
interacting 
partner of 
SMN,  
Together 
with our co-
IP data, 
these results 
indicate that 
SMN 
associates 
with HuD in 
motor 
neurons 
 
SMN 
interacts 
with HuD. 
Our MS and 
co-IP data 
demonstrat
e a strong 
interaction 
between 
SMN and 
HuD in 
spinal motor 
neuron 
axons. 
Furthermore, 
these 
findings are 
consistent 
with recent 
studies 
demonstrati
ng that the 
interaction 
of HuD with 
the spinal 
muscular 
atrophy 
(SMA) 
protein SMN 
? 
Entity1: 
HuD 
 
Entity2: 
SMN 
 
Relation: 
Interaction 
 
Location: 
Motor 
neurons 
 
Table 2. The same bio-event repeated in the different sections of the paper, a citation, and its 
representation 
article, and its basis is the experimental findings of 
the current article. The discourse function is 
indicated either by the proposition?s structural 
position within the article or by metadiscourse.  
We suggest detecting CKUs in three steps, 
combining state-of-the art document processing 
tools:  
1. identifying structural discourse markers;  
2. identifying rhetorical discourse markers,  
3. extracting factual bio-events.  
 
Structural indicators, i.e. the title, section titles 
or figure captions, are detected through markup in 
a straightforward way, if the article is encoded in a 
structured document format (e.g., XML). If this is 
not the case, a special conversion tool should be 
applied, as described in e.g. D?jean and Meunier 
(2007) to convert unstructured documents to 
structured documents. 
Metadiscourse indicators, which convey both 
that the source of the new knowledge is attributed 
to the author(s) and that it is factual, such as ?here 
we demonstrate?, ?our results identify?, etc. could 
be detected by local pattern-matching rules in the 
majority of cases, since the authors often use 
highly recurring forms to express them. However, 
in some cases the expressions are somewhat more 
complex, and thus do not match local patterns. In 
order to ensure better performance, which is 
important due to the relevance and relatively small 
number of the claims to detect, we could apply the 
concept-matching methodology as described in 
S?ndor (2007), which takes syntactic dependencies 
into account. This methodology consists of 
identifying specific kinds of metadiscourse as the 
realizations of patterns of concepts, which are 
present as semantic features in syntactically 
connected words and expressions. 
To detect CKUs, we assume that these are 
indicated minimally by two co-occurring concepts: 
a first concept, which we call DEICTIC, and which 
conveys reference to the current work (here, we, 
our, these), and a second concept, which is a 
subclass of what we call MENTAL_OPERATION 
(identify, demonstrate, find, etc.). This specific 
subclass is a list of verbs and their nominalizations 
that belong to the category of ?certainty verbs? in 
Thomas and Hawes (1994). This minimal pattern 
detects expressions like ?we identify? or ?our 
finding?. In expressions like ?these results 
indicate? or ?our data demonstrate?, the DEICTIC 
concept is linked to the certainty verb in an indirect 
way, since it is the modifier of the subject of the 
certainty verb.  
This subject refers to the ?base? factor of the 
bio-event (i.e. the indication comes from ?results?, 
and the demonstration from ?data?, see De Waard 
and Pander Maat (2009)), and thus it is also part of 
the metadiscourse. Its relevant semantic feature is 
called SCOPE in the concept-matching systems. In 
12
summary, CKU-specific metadiscourse is covered 
by the pattern DEICTIC + SCOPE + 
MENTAL_OPERATION, where the ?+? sign 
indicates a syntactic relationship. 
Consider the three sentences containing CKUs 
in Table 1. The metadiscourse is in bold: 
(1) Here we used mass spectrometry to identify 
HuD as a novel neuronal SMN-interacting 
partner. 
(2) Our analysis of known HuD-associated 
mRNAs in neurons identified cpg15 mRNA as 
a highly abundant mRNA in HuDIPs 
compared with other known targets of HuD, 
such as GAP43 and Tau. 
(3) Together with our co-IP data, these results 
indicate that SMN associates with HuDin 
motor neurons, and that these two proteins 
colocalize in granules within motor neuron 
axons. 
While (3) follows a straightforward local pattern, 
in sentences (1) and (2) the relationship between 
?we? and ?identify? and ?our analysis? and 
?identify? needs deep syntactic analysis. This 
analysis is carried out by the Xerox Incremental 
Parser (XIP) (A?t et al 2000), on top of which we 
have implemented concept-matching rules for 
detecting metadiscourse indicating CKUs.  
   We developed a simple concept-matching 
grammar based on the rules described above, and 
assessed the results of the automatic detection of 
the rhetorical indicators of CKUs in two papers. 
With respect to our manual annotation of CKUs 
the coverage is 81% and 80% and the precision is 
62% and 51% respectively.  
   Once the metadiscourse is detected, another 
module should be applied for detecting bio-events, 
i.e. factual propositions that involve biological 
entities. This step can be executed by a state-of-
the-art biological parser that detects factual bio-
events, like the one by Nawaz et al (2010). 
Subsequent integration of factual bio-event 
extraction should improve the precision, because 
the metadiscourse by itself does not guarantee the 
factuality of the bio-events, as in the following 
sentence: 
(4) Our findings provide further support for the   
hypothesis that SMN can associate with 
multiple RBPs to regulate axonal mRNA 
levels in neurons, and that the different SMN?
RBP complexes may be defined by their 
mRNA contents. 
4   Validation: are CKUs indeed the main 
claims? 
To test whether CKUs represent indeed the main 
claims of biology papers we carried out the 
following checks:   
1. First, we asked a domain specialist both to 
validate the CKUs as main claims, and select 
them in two of full-text papers. 
2. Second, we analyzed how a source paper is 
cited in other papers, and investigated whether 
the descriptions given in the referring texts 
correspond to the CKUs in the cited papers. 
We discuss these forms of validation in turn.  
4.1   Validation by domain specialists 
We carried out the validation in two steps. In the 
first step we manually highlighted the CKUs in 
two papers according to the definition given in 
section 2, above, and asked a biologist to select the 
sentences that were relevant claims of the article. 
In this step all the CKUs have been validated. This 
indicates that if biologists are provided with a list 
of CKUs annotated by non-specialists based on 
discourse indicators, they do get access to relevant 
claims of the articles. 
In the second step we asked the biologist to 
highlight the sentences that conform to the 6 points 
of our definition of CKUs. In the first article she 
selected 26 sentences, out of which only 12 
sentences were conform to the definition of CKUs. 
The article contains 4 further CKUs, which the 
biologist did not select. Out of the 14 sentences 
that were highlighted by the biologist and that did 
not satisfy the definition of CKUs, 5 do not satisfy 
one important criterion of CKUs, that of factuality. 
The remaining 9 sentences were factual, but did 
not explicitly attribute the proposition to the 
authors of the article, i.e. did not contain 
metadiscourse that characterizes CKUs.  In the 
second article the biologist selected 48 sentences, 
out of which 24 were indeed CKUs, and there is no 
more CKU is the article. Similarly to the first 
article, 3 out of the remaining sentences were not 
factual and 21 did not contain metadiscourse. 
This experiment leads us to three interesting 
observations: 
1. A list of CKUs is meaningful for the biologist, 
however, CKUs do not provide an exhaustive 
and well-definable list of main claims. 
13
2. The definition of the CKUs is difficult to apply 
for a biologist who is not trained in rhetorical 
analysis. 
3. The notion of a ?main claim? is not 
straightforward to define formally. 
4.2   Citing sentences collection 
Work on citation-based summarization (e.g. 
Kaplan et al, 2009, Jbara and Radev, 2011, Nakov 
et al, 2004) focuses on creating ?a summation of 
multiple scholars? viewpoints [?] using its set of 
citation sentences?. If we accept the premise of this 
work, which is that a collection of citation 
sentences offer a good overview of the cited 
papers, then CKUs should be well-represented in 
the collection of cited sentences.  As a second 
check, we identified a collection of 20 citations of 
a full-text paper (Voorhoeve et al, 2006) and 
compared the citing sentences to the CKUs 
detected in this paper. We found that in all cases 
the citing sentences could be linked back to the 
CKUs (and indeed offer a good summary of the 
cited paper).  
5   Discussion 
5.1   Related work 
De Waard and Pander Maat (2012) propose a 
model for epistemic classification of bio-events 
that consists of three parts: epistemic value (from 
factual through various degrees of certainty until 
lack of knowledge); base (grounding for the 
knowledge: reasoning, data or unidentified); source 
(author, named external source, implicit, 
attribution to the author, nameless external source, 
no source of knowledge). Each bio-event is 
characterized by a combination of the three factors. 
CKUs represent a special case in this system: their 
epistemic value is factual, their base is data derived 
from the work described in the article, and their 
source is the author. Whereas De Waard and 
Pander Maat do not differentiate among the 
various combinations of the factors, we propose to 
handle this unique combination on its own right, 
since it fulfills a special discourse function in the 
article, which facilitates access to the main claims.  
    Each of the three factors that characterize CKUs 
is taken into account in various text-mining 
systems, however, to our knowledge, no other 
system defines a discourse function in terms of 
these three factors. Nawaz et al (2010) detect 
factual bio-events, but they do not detect 
authorship and base. The same holds for the 
annotation guidelines developed by and Wilbur et 
al. (2006). Teufel (2000) considers authorship but 
does not consider factuality and base. Blake (2010) 
differentiates among several kinds of base and 
considers only factual bio-events, but does not 
consider authorship.  
Jaime-Sis? (2011) makes the same observation 
as we do: the authors summarize and repeat the 
main findings in every section of the articles. She 
attributes this phenomenon to the authors? 
adaptation to electronic publishing, where there is 
the possibility to navigate in the text. Repetition 
facilitates this navigation. Based on interviews 
with researchers and the analysis of 20 biology 
articles, she concludes that summarizing sentences 
that repeat the main findings in each section of 
biology articles are crucial both in writing and 
reading practices:  ?Aware of the scientists? 
reading practices, both editors and writers 
contribute to ensure that, whatever section of the 
text is scanned, and regardless of the reasons of 
approaching the article, the reader obtains the most 
newsworthy information, as if each of the sections 
could stand alone.? (p. 87) ?Noteworthy 
information? is mostly expressed by CKUs, 
although Jaime-Sis? does not provide a rhetorically 
based definition of summarizing sentences. 
5.2   Proposed applications 
We argue that the detection of Claimed Knowledge 
Updates constitutes a relevant goal for text-mining. 
CKUs are systematically signaled either by their 
position within the paper or by specific rhetorical 
discourse markers. This demonstrates that they 
constitute a systematic discourse organizing factor 
of articles. Moreover, CKUs can be detected by 
integrating state-of-the-art tools.  
The detection of new factual knowledge could 
be useful in several tasks, such as summarization, 
information extraction, updating ontologies and 
knowledge bases, etc.  
In particular, we wish to propose two use cases: 
first, the identification of CKUs could improve the 
output of automated knowledge bases that rely on 
text mining. Several text mining systems aim to 
provide multi-dimensional characterizations of bio-
events, both academic systems such as 
14
MEDIE1and iHoP2, and commercial systems such 
as Ariadne3and BEL4. In none of these systems, 
however, are the various bio-events detected 
differentiated according to their role in updating 
knowledge. Showing only the CKUs, and not all 
the claims, would greatly enhance the efficiency 
and use of these automated knowledge bases. For 
example, the output of the query ?LATS2? as a 
subject in MEDIE returned the following 
sentences:  
1. LATS2 is a member of the LATS tumor 
suppressor family.   
2. The differences in the expression levels of the 
LATS2, S100A2 and hTERT genes in different 
types of NSCLC are significant.   
3. LATS2 is a new member of the LATS tumour 
suppressor family.   
4. Among the growing list of putative Mdm2-
regulated proteins are several proteins playing 
a key role in the control of cell proliferation 
such as pRb, E2F1/DP1, Numb, Smads, Lats2 
or IGF-1R.  
5. In addition, modulation of novel target genes 
such as LATS2 and GREB1 were identified to 
be mediated by Nrf2.   
6. Here, we show that LATS proteins 
(mammalian orthologs of Warts) interact 
directly with YAP in mammalian cells and that 
ectopic expression of LATS1, but not LATS2, 
effectively suppresses the YAP phenotypes  
7. The tumor suppressor genes NEO1 and 
LATS2, and the estrogen receptor gene ESR1, 
all have binding sites for p53 and hsa-mir-
372/373. 
 
It is clear - even without studying the textual 
context - that not all of these sentences refer to a 
new finding pertaining to LATS2, which is what 
the user would like to see, and what a CKU parser 
would provide.  
A second possible application of CKU detection 
could be the presentation of CKUs as metadata in 
biomedical publications, to aid the navigation 
within and among collections of biology articles. 
This is illustrated in a mock-up (Figure), which 
extends the PNAS publication scheme with an 
additional column presenting CKUs. The column 
                                                          
1http://www.nactem.ac.uk/medie/ 
2http://www.ihop-net.org/UniPub/iHOP/ 
3http://www.ariadnegenomics.com/ 
4 http://www.openbel.org 
in the middle is a part of the standard PNAS 
layout, and it points to the past, i.e. to existing 
articles that the current article draws on. But the 
third new column on the right extracts CKUs put 
forward in the current article. According to where 
the CKUs are, the readers can learn what type of 
arguments they could find to support them in the 
text to the left: in the introduction - background 
knowledge; in the results - experiments; in the 
discussion - various other links and implications; 
in the Figures - the illustration of the experiments. 
To support both of these applications, CKUs 
could be marked up by the authors of the article 
during authoring or submission, making use of 
tools that identify CKUs. The systematic 
annotation of CKUs by the authors could provide 
them with a structural template against which they 
could check the article?s coherence, and act in a 
role similar to a Structured Digital Abstract, 
proposed by Gerstein et al (2007), as a ?computer-
readable summary of pertinent facts?. These CKUs 
could then be added directly to a bio-event 
representation framework, where biological 
entities, interaction types, locations, etc. are 
structurally marked for easy information 
extraction. In this way, the user can easily track the 
grounding of a specific bio-event in past work, 
present experiments and future possibilities? and 
eventually, do better science. 
15
  
 
Figure Mockup of presenting CKUs in publications
 
Acknowledgements 
We are indebted and deeply grateful to Prof. 
Maryanne Martone from the University of San 
Diego for her generous help in annotating the 
CKUs in our texts, and to our anonymous 
reviewers for helping us improve this paper. 
References  
Salah A?t-Mokhtar, Jean-Pierre Chanod, and Claude 
Roux. 2002. Robustness beyond shallowness: 
incremental dependency parsing. Natural Language 
Engineering, 8(2/3):121-144. 
Amjad Abu-Jbara and Dragomir Radev. 2011. Coherent 
Citation-Based Summarization of Scientific Papers. 
Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 
500?509, Portland, Oregon, June 19-24, 2011  
Akten, Bikem, Min JeongKye, Le T. Hao, Mary H. 
Wertz, Sasha Singh, DuyuNie, Jia Huang, Tanuja T. 
Merianda, Jeffery L. Twiss, Christine E. Beattie, 
Judith A. J. Steen, and Mustafa Sahin. 2011. 
Interaction of survival of motor neuron (SMN) and 
HuD proteins with mRNA cpg15 rescues motor 
neuron axonal deficits, ProcNatlAcadSci U S A. 
2011 Jun 21;108(25):10337-42. 
Catherine Blake. 2010. Beyond genes, proteins, and 
abstracts: Identifying scientific claims from full-text 
biomedical articles. Journal of Biomedical 
Informatics archive Volume 43 Issue 2, April, 2010 
Pablo Ciccarese, Elizabeth Wu, June Kinoshita, Gwen 
Wong, Marco Ocana, Alan Ruttenberg, and Tim 
Clark. 2008. The SWAN Biomedical Discourse 
Ontology.J Biomed Inform. 2008 Oct;41(5):739-51. 
Epub 2008 May 4.. PMID: 18583197 
Herv?Dejean and Jean-Luc Meunier. 2007.  Logical 
Document conversion: combining functional and 
formal knowledge. Symposium on Document 
Engineering, Winnipeg, Canada, August 28-31, 
2007. 
Mark Gerstein, Michael Seringhausand and Stanley 
Field. 2007. Structured digital abstract makes text 
mining easy, Nature 447, 142 (10 May 2007) | 
doi:10.1038/447142a 
Mercedes Jaime-Sis?. 2011. Summarizing Findings: An 
All-Pervasive Move In Open Access Biomedical 
Research Articles Involves Rephrasing Strategies. In 
Researching Specialized Languages.Studies in 
Corpus Linguistics 47.Edited by Bhatia, Vijay, 
S?nchez Hern?ndez, Purificaci?n and P?rez-Paredes, 
Pascual.Published by John Benjamins. Pp. 71-88. 
Amjadabu Jbara and Dragomir R. Radev. 2011. 
Coherent citation-based summarization of scientific 
16
papers. In Proceedings of ACL 2011, Portland, 
Oregon, 2011. 
Dain Kaplan, Ryu Iida and Takenobu Tokunaga. 2009. 
Automatic Extraction of Citation Contexts for 
Research Paper Summarization: A Coreference-chain 
based Approach, Proceedings of the 2009 Workshop 
on Text and Citation Analysis for Scholarly Digital 
Libraries, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 88?95, Suntec, 
Singapore, 7 August 2009. 
Maria Liakata, Simone Teufel, Advaith Siddharthan and 
Colin Batchelor. 2010. Corpora for conceptualisation 
and zoning of scientific papersProceedings of the 
Seventh conference on International Language 
Resources and Evaluation (LREC?10), Malta. 
Yoko Mizuta, Anna Korhonen, Tony Mullen, and Nigel 
Collier. 2006. Zone analysis in biology articles as a 
basis for information extraction.International Journal 
of Medical Informatics. 75(6): 468-487. 
Preslav I. Nakov, Ariel S. Schwartz, A., and Marti 
Hearst. 2004. Citances: Citation Sentences for 
Semantic Analysis of Bioscience Text, in the 
SIGIR'04 Workshop on Search and Discovery in 
Bioinformatics. 
Raheel Nawaz, Paul Thompson, John McNaught, 
Sophia Ananiadou. 2010.  Meta-Knowledge 
Annotation of Bio-Events. Proceedings of the 
Seventh International Conference on Language 
Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2010). 
Cameron Neylon. 2012. Network Enabled Research: 
Maximise scale and connectivity, minimise friction, 
Blog post, February 2012, 
http://cameronneylon.net/blog/network-enabled-
research/ 
?gnes S?ndor. 2007. Modeling metadiscourse 
conveying the author's rhetorical strategy in 
biomedical research abstracts. Revue Fran?aise de 
Linguistique Appliqu?e 200(2):97--109. 
Simone Teufel. 1999. Argumentative Zoning: 
Information Extraction from ScientificText. PhD 
Thesis. 
Simone Teufel and Marc Moens. 2000. What's yours 
and what's mine: Determining intellectual attribution 
in scientific text. Proceedings of the 2000 Joint 
SIGDAT conference on Empirical methods in natural 
language processing and very large corpora. 
Sarah Thomas and Thomas P. Hawes. 1994. Reporting 
Verbs in Medical Journal Articles. English for 
Specific Purposes, v13 n2 p129-48 1994. 
P. Mathijs Voorhoeve, Carlos le Sage, et. Al. 2006. A 
genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-
373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors. Cell. 
2006 Mar 24;124(6):1169-81. 
Anita de Waard, Simon Buckingham Shum, Annamaria 
Carusi, Jack Park, Mathias Samwald, and ?gnes 
S?ndor. 2009. Hypotheses, evidence and 
relationships: The HypER approach for representing 
scientific knowledge claims. In: Proceedings 8th 
International Semantic Web Conference, Workshop 
on Semantic Web Applications in Scientific 
Discourse. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 
Springer Verlag: Berlin, 26 Oct 2009, Washington 
DC. 
Anita de Waard and Henk Pander Maat 2009. 
Categorizing Epistemic Segment Types in Biology 
Research Articles. Workshop on Linguistic and 
Psycholinguistic Approaches to Text Structuring 
(LPTS 2009), September 21-23 2009 
Anita de Waard,. and Pander Maat., H.P.M., 2012.  
Workshop on Detecting Structure in Scientific 
Discourse, ACL 2012, Jeju Island, Korea (this 
workshop).  
W. John Wilbur, Andrey Rzhetsky and Hagit Shatkay. 
2006. New directions in biomedical text annotation: 
definitions, guidelines and corpus construction, BMC 
Bioinformatics, vol. 7, no. (356) 
 
17
