Designing a Common POS-Tagset Framework for Indian Languages 
Sankaran Baskaran, Microsoft Research India. Bangalore. baskaran@microsoft.com 
Kalika Bali, Microsoft Research India. Bangalore. kalikab@microsoft.com 
Tanmoy Bhattacharya, Delhi University, Delhi. tanmoy1@gmail.com 
Pushpak Bhattacharyya, IIT-Bombay, Mumbai. pb@cse.iitb.ac.in 
Girish Nath Jha, Jawaharlal Nehru University, Delhi. girishj@mail.jnu.ac.in 
Rajendran S, Tamil University, Thanjavur. raj_ushush@yahoo.com 
Saravanan K, Microsoft Research India, Bangalore. v-sarak@microsoft.com 
Sobha L, AU-KBC Research Centre, Chennai. sobha@au-kbc.org 
Subbarao K V. Delhi. kvs2811@yahoo.com
 
 
Abstract 
Research in Parts-of-Speech (POS) tagset 
design for European and East Asian lan-
guages started with a mere listing of impor-
tant morphosyntactic features in one lan-
guage and has matured in later years to-
wards hierarchical tagsets, decomposable 
tags, common framework for multiple lan-
guages (EAGLES) etc. Several tagsets 
have been developed in these languages 
along with large amount of annotated data 
for furthering research. Indian Languages 
(ILs) present a contrasting picture with 
very little research in tagset design issues. 
We present our work in designing a com-
mon POS-tagset framework for ILs, which 
is the result of in-depth analysis of eight 
languages from two major families, viz. 
Indo-Aryan and Dravidian. Our framework 
follows hierarchical tagset layout similar to 
the EAGLES guidelines, but with signifi-
cant changes as needed for the ILs. 
1 Introduction 
A POS tagset design should take into consideration 
all possible morphosyntactic categories that can 
occur in a particular language or group of languag-
es (Hardie, 2004). Some effort has been made in 
the past, including the EAGLES guidelines for 
morphosyntactic annotation (Leech and Wilson, 
1996) to define guidelines for a common tagset 
across multiple languages with an aim to capture 
more detailed morphosyntactic features of these 
languages.  
However, most of the tagsets for ILs are lan-
guage specific and cannot be used for tagging data 
in other language. This disparity in tagsets hinders 
interoperability and reusability of annotated corpo-
ra. This further affects NLP research in resource 
poor ILs where non-availability of data, especially 
tagged data, remains a critical issue for researchers. 
Moreover, these tagsets capture the morphosyntac-
tic features only at a shallow level and miss out the 
richer information that is characteristic of these 
languages. 
The work presented in this paper focuses on de-
signing a common tagset framework for Indian 
languages using the EAGLES guidelines as a mod-
el. Though Indian languages belong to (mainly) 
four distinct families, the two largest being Indo-
Aryan and Dravidian, as languages that have been 
in contact for a long period of time, they share sig-
nificant similarities in morphology and syntax. 
This makes it desirable to design a common tagset 
framework that can exploit this similarity to facili-
tate the mapping of different tagsets to each other. 
This would not only allow corpora tagged with 
different tagsets for the same language to be reused 
but also achieve cross-linguistic compatibility be-
tween different language corpora. Most important-
ly, it will ensure that common categories of differ-
ent languages are annotated in the same way. 
In the next section we will discuss the impor-
tance of a common standard vis-?-vis the currently 
available tagsets for Indian languages. Section 3 
will provide the details of the design principles 
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
89
behind the framework presented in this paper. Ex-
amples of tag categories in the common framework 
will be presented in Section 4. Section 5 will dis-
cuss the current status of the paper and future steps 
envisaged.  
2 Common Standard for POS Tagsets 
Some of the earlier POS tagsets were designed 
for English (Greene and Rubin, 1981; Garside, 
1987; Santorini, 1990) in the broader context of 
automatic parsing of English text. These tagsets 
popular even today, though designed for the same 
language differ significantly from each other mak-
ing the corpora tagged by one incompatible with 
the other. Moreover, as these are highly language 
specific tagsets they cannot be reused for any other 
language without substantial changes this requires 
standardization of POS tagsets (Hardie 2004).  
Leech and Wilson (1999) put forth a strong argu-
ment for the need to standardize POS tagset for 
reusability of annotated corpora and interopera-
bility across corpora in different languages. 
EAGLES guidelines (Leech and Wilson 1996) 
were a result of such an initiative to create stan-
dards that are common across languages that share 
morphosyntactic features. 
Several POS tagsets have been designed by a 
number of research groups working on Indian 
Languages though very few are available publicly 
(IIIT-tagset, Tamil tagset). However, as each of 
these tagsets have been motivated by specific re-
search agenda, they differ considerably in terms of 
morphosyntactic categories and features, tag defi-
nitions, level of granularity, annotation guidelines 
etc. Moreover, some of the tagsets (Tamil tagset) 
are language specific and do not scale across other 
Indian languages. This has led to a situation where 
despite strong commonalities between the lan-
guages addressed resources cannot be shared due 
to incompatibility of tasgets. This is detrimental to 
the development of language technology for Indian 
languages which already suffer from a lack of ade-
quate resources in terms of data and tools. 
In this paper, we present a common framework 
for all Indian languages where an attempt is made 
to treat equivalent morphosyntactic phenomena 
consistently across all languages. The hierarchical 
design, discussed in detail in the next section, also 
allows for a systematic method to annotate lan-
guage particular categories without disregarding 
the shared traits of the Indian languages.  
3 Design Principles 
Whilst several large projects have been concerned 
with tagset development very few have touched 
upon the design principles behind them. Leech 
(1997), Cloeren (1999) and Hardie (2004) are 
some important examples presenting universal 
principles for tagset design. 
In this section we restrict the discussion to the 
principles behind our tagset framework. Important-
ly, we diverge from some of the universal prin-
ciples but broadly follow them in a consistent way.  
Tagset structure: Flat tagsets just list down the 
categories applicable for a particular language 
without any provision for modularity or feature 
reusability. Hierarchical tagsets on the other hand 
are structured relative to one another and offer a 
well-defined mechanism for creating a common 
tagset framework for multiple languages while 
providing flexibility for customization according to 
the language and/ or application. 
Decomposability in a tagset alows different fea-
tures to be encoded in a tag by separate sub-stings. 
Decomposable tags help in better corpus analysis 
(Leech 1997) by allowing to search with an un-
derspecified search string. 
In our present framework, we have adopted the 
hierarchical layout as well as decomposable tags 
for designing the tagset. The framework will have 
three levels in the hierarchy with categories, types 
(subcategories) and features occupying the top, 
medium and the bottom layers. 
What to encode? One thumb rule for the POS 
tagging is to consider only the aspects of morpho-
syntax for annotation and not that of syntax, se-
mantics or discourse. We follow this throughout 
and focus only on the morphosyntactic aspects of 
the ILs for encoding in the framework. 
Morphology and Granularity: Indian languag-
es have complex morphology with varying degree 
of richness. Some of the languages such as those of 
the Dravidian family also display agglutination as 
an important characteristic. This entails that mor-
phological analysis is a desirable pre-process for 
the POS tagging to achieve better results in auto-
matic tagging. We encode all possible morphosyn-
tactic features in our framework assuming the exis-
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
90
tence of morphological analysers and leave the 
choice of granularity to users. 
As pointed out by Leech (1997) some of the 
linguistically desirable distinctions may not be 
feasible computationally. Therefore, we ignore 
certain features that may not be computationally 
feasible at POS tagging level. 
Multi-words: We treat the constituents of Mul-
ti-word expressions (MWEs) like Indian Space 
Research Organization as individual words and tag 
them separately rather than giving a single tag to 
the entire word sequence. This is done because: 
Firstly, this is in accordance with the standard 
practice followed in earlier tagsets. Secondly, 
grouping MWEs into a single unit should ideally 
be handled in chunking. 
Form vs. function: We try to adopt a balance 
between form and function in a systematic and 
consistent way through deep analysis. Based on 
our analysis we propose to consider the form in 
normal circumstances and the function for words 
that are derived from other words. More details on 
this will be provided in the framework document 
(Baskaran et al2007) 
Theoretical neutrality: As Leech (1997) points 
out the annotation scheme should be theoretically 
neutral to make it clearly understandable to a larger 
group and for wider applicability. 
Diverse Language families: As mentioned ear-
lier, we consider eight languages coming from two 
major language families of India, viz. Indo-Aryan 
and Dravidian. Despite the distinct characteristics 
of these two families, it is however striking to note 
the typological parallels between them, especially 
in syntax. For example, both families follow SOV 
pattern. Also, several Indo-Aryan languages such 
as Marathi, Bangla etc. exhibit some agglutination, 
though not to the same extent of Dravidian. Given 
the strong commonalities between the two families 
we decided to use a single framework for them 
4 POS Tagset Framework for Indian lan-
guages 
The tagset framework is laid out at the following 
four levels similar to EAGLES. 
I. Obligatory attributes or values are generally 
universal for all languages and hence must be 
included in any morphosyntactic tagset. The 
major POS categories are included here. 
II. Recommended attributes or values are recog-
nised to be important sub-categories and fea-
tures common to a majority of languages.  
III. Special extensions1 
a. Generic attributes or values 
b. Language-specific attributes or values are 
the attributes that are relevant only for few lan-
guages and do not apply to most languages. 
All the tags were discussed and debated in detail 
by a group of linguists and computer scien-
tists/NLP experts for eight Indian languages viz. 
Bengali, Hindi, Kannada, Malayalam, Marathi, 
Sanskrit, Tamil and Telugu.  
Now, because of space constraints we present 
only the partial tagset framework. This is just to 
illustrate the nature of the framework and the com-
plete version as well as the rationale for different 
categories/features in the framework can be found 
in Baskaran et al (2007).2 
In the top level the following 12 categories are 
identified as universal categories for all ILs and 
hence these are obligatory for any tagset. 
 
1. [N] Nouns 7.   [PP] Postpositions  
2. [V] Verbs  8.   [DM] Demonstratives 
3. [PR] Pronouns  9.   [QT] Quantifiers 
4. [JJ] Adjectives  10. [RP] Particles  
5. [RB] Adverbs  11. [PU] Punctuations  
6. [PL] Participles  12. [RD] Residual3 
 
The partial tagset illustrated in Figure 1 high-
lights entries in recommended and optional catego-
ries for verbs and participles marked for three le-
vels.4 The features take the form of attribute-value 
pairs with values in italics and in some cases (such 
as case-markers for participles) not all the values 
are fully listed in the figure. 
5 Current Status and Future Work 
In the preceding sections we presented a common 
framework being designed for POS tagsets for In-
dian Languages. This hierarchical framework has 
                                                 
1
 We do not have many features defined under the special 
extensions and this is mainly retained for any future needs. 
2 Currently this is just the draft version and the final version 
will be made available soon 
3 For words or segments in the text occurring outside the gam-
bit of grammatical categories like foreign words, symbols,etc.   
4  These are not finalised as yet and there might be some 
changes in the final version of the framework. 
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
91
three levels to permit flexibility and interoperabili-
ty between languages. We are currently involved in 
a thorough review of the present framework by 
using it to design the tagset for specific Indian lan-
guages. The issues that come up during this 
process will help refine and consolidate the 
framework further.  In the future, annotation guide-
lines with some recommendations for handling 
ambiguous categories will also be defined.  With 
the common framework in place, it is hoped that 
researchers working with Indian Languages would 
be able to not only reuse data annotated by each 
other but also share tools across projects and lan-
guages. 
References 
Baskaran S. et al 2007. Framework for a Common 
     Parts-of-Speech Tagset for Indic Languages. (Draft) 
    http://research.microsoft.com/~baskaran/POSTagset/ 
  
Cloeren, J. 1999. Tagsets. In Syntactic Wordclass Tagging, 
ed. Hans van Halteren, Dordrecht.: Kluwer Academic. 
Hardie, A . 2004. The Computational Analysis of Morpho-
syntactic Categories in Urdu. PhD thesis submitted to 
Lancaster University. 
Greene, B.B. and Rubin, G.M. 1981. Automatic grammati-
cal tagging of English. Providence, R.I.: Department of 
Linguistics, Brown University 
Garside, R. 1987 The CLAWS word-tagging system. In 
The Computational Analysis of English, ed. Garside, 
Leech and Sampson, London: Longman. 
Leech, G and Wilson, A. 1996. Recommendations for the 
Morphosyntactic Annotation of Corpora. EAGLES Re-
port EAG-TCWG-MAC/R. 
Leech, G. 1997. Grammatical Tagging. In Corpus Annota-
tion: Linguistic Information from Computer Text Cor-
pora, ed: Garside, Leech and McEnery, London: Long-
man  
Leech, G and Wilson, A. 1999. Standards for Tag-sets. In 
Syntactic Wordclass Tagging, ed. Hans van Halteren, 
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic. 
Santorini, B. 1990. Part-of-speech tagging guidelines for 
the Penn Treebank Project. Technical report MS-CIS-
90-47, Department of Computer and Information 
Science, University of Pennsylvania 
IIIT-tagset. A Parts-of-Speech tagset for Indian languages. 
http://shiva.iiit.ac.in/SPSAL2007/iiit_tagset_guidelines.
pdf 
Tamil tagset. AU-KBC Parts-of-Speech tagset for Tamil. 
http://nrcfosshelpline.in/smedia/images/downloads/Tam
il_Tagset-opensource.odt 
Aspect 
 Perfect 
 Imperfect 
 Progressive 
Mood 
 Declarative 
 Subjunctative/   
        Hortative 
 Conditional 
 Imperative 
 Presumptive 
Level - 3 
Nouns 
Verbs 
Pronouns 
Adjectives 
Adverbs 
Postpositions 
Demonstratives 
Quantifiers 
Particles 
Punctuations 
Residual Participles 
Level - 1 
Type 
 Finite 
 Auxiliary 
 Infinitive 
 Non-finite 
 Nominal 
Gender 
 Masculine 
 Feminine 
 Neuter 
Number 
 Singular 
 Plural/Hon. 
 Dual 
 Honourific 
Person 
 First 
 Second 
 Third 
Tense 
 Past 
 Present 
 Future 
Negative 
Type 
 General 
 Adjectival 
 Verbal 
 Nominal 
Gender 
 As in verbs 
Number 
 Singular 
 Plural 
 Dual 
Case 
 Direct 
 Oblique 
Case-markers 
 Ergative 
 Accusative 
 etc. 
Tense 
 As in verbs 
Negative 
Level - 2 
Fig-1. Tagset framework - partial representation 
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
92
