Relations between Inflectional and Derivation Patterns
Karel Pala
Faculty of Informatics
Masaryk University Brno
pala@fi.muni.cz
Radek Sedla?c?ek
Faculty of Informatics
Masaryk University Brno
rsedlac@fi.muni.cz
Marek Veber
Faculty of Informatics
Masaryk University Brno
mara@fi.muni.cz
Abstract
One of the main goals of this paper is
to describe a formal procedure linking
inflectional and derivational processes
in Czech and to indicate that they can
be, if appropriate tools and resources
are used, applied to other Slavonic lan-
guages. The tools developed at the NLP
Laboratory FI MU, have been used,
particularly the morphological analyser
ajka and the program I par for pro-
cessing and maintaining the morpholog-
ical database.
1 Introduction
In this paper we report on an exploration of the
relations between inflection and word derivation
(WD) in Czech. At first the inflectional morphol-
ogy has to be mentioned which deals with forma-
tion of word forms by inflection, i. e. by mor-
phological processes like the declension of nouns,
adjectives, pronouns and numerals, the conjuga-
tion of verbs, and also forming degrees of ad-
jectives and adverbs. The inflectional morphol-
ogy (in Czech) is formally quite well described
and at present we have reliable software tools at
our disposal that make it possible both to generate
and recognise arbitrary Czech word forms. They
are ajka a morphological analyser and genera-
tor (Sedla?c?ek and Smrz?, 2001) and I par a pro-
gram for morphological database (Veber, 2002).
The second area is derivational morphology,
i. e. word derivation as such ? it describes the pro-
cesses of the derivation of new words (one word
expressions) as distinct from basic ones (word
bases). These processes operate on the morpheme
level whose results follow from the ways of com-
bining morphemes (prefixes, stems or roots, in-
fixes, suffixes) using suffixation, prefixation and
stem alterations (infixation). We have to bear in
mind that the consequences of these formal pro-
cesses have a semantic nature.
The relations between the WD processes and in-
flectional morphology have been extensively stud-
ied in Czech linguistic literature, see e. g. (Dokulil,
1962; Karl??k et al, 1995; Petr, 1986) where one
may find informal descriptions of the WD pro-
cesses using terms like ?fundace? (basic deriva-
tion), as well as mutation, transposition, modifi-
cation, adaptation, and others.
The most interesting linguistic analyses link the
derivation patterns with the inflectional ones. For
example, in Karl??k (1995) it is pointed out that the
nouns with the suffix -tel having agentive meaning
belong to the inflectional paradigm muz? (man). In
other words, it is possible to say that some inflec-
tional patterns determine the sets of derivational
suffixes forming semantically consistent groups of
nouns.
In this paper we set it as our task to map the re-
lations between inflectional and word derivational
patterns. In comparison with previous research
we present the exploration of a large collection
of data: our stem dictionary for Czech contains
385,066 items. The association of selected in-
flectional and WD patterns has been performed
semi-automatically with the tool I par and the
Czech morphological database which contains all
the necessary information about the inflectional
paradigms in Czech (2,042 paradigms for all 10
POS).
The WD relations as they are described in the
linguistic WD theories can be, after some modifi-
cations, appropriately linked to the semantic rela-
tions as they are used in contemporary ontologies
and then applied within the inference engines that
form a necessary part of the natural language pro-
cessing mechanisms.
However, it is true that algorithmic descriptions
of WD relations have been worked out only re-
cently and they do not cover the WD processes in
all their complexity but just at the basic level.
2 Inflectional analysis
The inflectional analysis is a part of the complex
morphemic decomposition of a word and its first
task is to identify in a given word form the stem
and ending. If the word form is not a lemma (ba-
sic form of the word) it is necessary to associate
the stem with its respective ending.
It has to be kept in mind that the derivational anal-
ysis deals only with lemmata and not with the in-
dividual word forms.
For the purpose of this work we perform
inflectional analysis with the tool (program)
ajka (Sedla?c?ek, 1999) which is further devel-
oped in the NLP Laboratory (Sedla?c?ek and Smrz?,
2001) at FI MU. It is also used as a standard tool
for lemmatization (identification of the basic word
forms) and as a morphological tagger.
3 The Basic WD Relation = ?fundace?
In the Czech WD theory all words belonging to a
given word stock are classified either as motivated
or non-motivated.
For motivated words we are able to describe
their meaning using another word or words, e. g.
cvic?is?te? (exercising ground, drill square) is a place
where exercising is done. Non-motivated words
cannot be described in the same way. Their mean-
ing consists only in signifying the thing, which
is why they are sometimes called words-signs, as
e. g. stu?l (table), tra?va (grass). Thus it is obvious
that when making WD analyses we are more inter-
ested in motivated words, since only they display
the derivational structure from which we are able
to reconstruct the process of their formation.
Formation of motivated word follows the ba-
sic WD relation called ?fundace? (Dokulil, 1962).
When we find the ?fundace?-relation for all moti-
vated words we obtain a complex of relations that
form a hierarchical structure. In WD theory this
structure is usually called word derivation nest,
word derivation lattice and word derivation se-
quence. Word derivation nests (WDN) will be our
principal focus.
WDN can be defined as a set of all related
words that gather around a common stem. The
core of WDN is a root of the non-motivated word
and other words in WDN are derived from it ei-
ther directly as in led (ice)?led-ovy? (icy) or indi-
rectly through another related word. In this way
word derivation sequences are created, such as led
(ice)?led-ovy? (icy)?ledov-ec (glacier)?ledovc-
ovy? (glacial).
The appropriate formal apparatus for repre-
senting these relations and structures are graphs.
For this purpose the special types of graphs (see
Fig. 1), particularly graph-trees are used which
further link up into forests. Strictly speaking we
are dealing mainly with forests.
The tree nodes are labelled with lemmata, and
the next node is created dependent on its predeces-
sor. The individual trees then represent the WDN,
the WD unions have just one level, subtrees and
sequence correspond to the paths in the graph.
4 The Semantic Aspects of the Basic WD
Relation
The semantic component of the ?fundace?-
relation consists in the fact that meaning of
?funded? words can be derived from the mean-
ing of the ?funding? one, that they are semanti-
cally linked and that language users know these
relations and use them in understanding language
and also in enriching their knowledge about the
universe. Thus uc?itel (teacher) je ten, kdo uc??? (is
the one who teaches), zoubek (small tooth) je maly?
zub (is a tooth of small size). The meaning that
follows from the WD relations is usually labelled
as word derivation or internal meaning. This is a
rather narrow point of view, typical of linguistic
WD theories, since there is no reason to introduce
separate semantic relations ? they are the same as
other semantic relations, for example the Internal
Language Relations defined within EuroWordNet
1, 2 (Vossen, 1998).
For the computer processing of the word mean-
ings, it is necessary to bear in mind that seman-
tic relations have a common nature irrespective of
the forms by which they are expressed. From this
point of view, it is obvious that there is no rele-
vant difference between WD meaning and ?nor-
mal? lexical meaning as it is treated within the
framework of semantic networks that are nowa-
days so popular in NLP and Language Engineer-
ing. Thus WDN can be understood as semantic
networks of a special sort that will soon become
relevant in the area of knowledge representation.
5 Word Derivation Analysis
The purpose of WD analysis is to find out the WD
structure of the ?funded? word by applying the ba-
sic WD relation, i. e. to find out its WD base and
the respective formant (see below).
WD base can be defined as the part of the
?funded? word that is taken over from the ?fund-
ing? word. Typically it is an identical string that
occurs in both ?funded? and ?funding? word ?
various phonological alternations can take place
here, of course. For example, pole (field)?pol-n??
(field-ADJ).
The procedure works in the following way: an
element is added to the WD base of the word (typ-
ically root or stem) and together they form a new
word. The added element is usually called formant
in Czech WD theory (Dokulil, 1962) and can be
formed by one or more morphemes. A formant
can be
? a suffix kotel-na (boiler room), which classi-
fies a word as belonging to a more general se-
mantic group (here the Czech suffix -na with
the inflectional morpheme -a at its end cre-
ates the names of places),
? the ending zka?z-a (destruction) where the in-
flectional morpheme also operates as deriva-
tional morpheme or the derivational mor-
pheme can be considered to be empty,
? prefix s-lepit (glue back together) which just
modifies the meaning of the word but does
not change its POS and inflectional paradigm.
Compound formants are also possible, and may
consist either of a prefix combined with suffix,
e. g. in pr???-ruc?-n?? (reference) or prefix combined
with an ending pr?ed-me?st-?? (suburb).
6 Relations between Inflection and
Derivation
The data that can be found in the existing re-
sources, e. g. (Karl??k et al, 1995) are limited in
number ? they contain selected examples only and
show only the main types of WD processes. In-
formation about the functional load of the individ-
ual suffixes is either missing or is only outlined by
means of expressions like ?very frequent?, ?fre-
quent?, ?less frequent? without giving any num-
bers.
To explore the situation more adequately we
used a more representative collection of data, par-
ticularly the morphological database I par to-
gether with the stem dictionary which is a part of
the morphological analyser ajka.
In other words, all the items in the stem dic-
tionary are associated with their respective inflec-
tional paradigm(s), e. g. for nouns there are 746 in-
flectional paradigms that presently cover 131,188
noun stems. The number of the noun paradigms
looks quite large but one should bear in mind that
in our algorithmic description of Czech inflection
we deal with a detailed hierarchical subclassifica-
tion of the noun paradigms which, however, is just
based on the 14 main paradigms as they are given
in standard grammars of Czech.
The present data allow us to find the functional
load defined as the number of nouns with the given
suffix and particular semantic feature, e. g. agen-
tive, instrument or property etc. First we have to
know for a certain suffix how many lemmata oc-
cur with the given suffix, Table 1 shows that -a?k
has 1,379 occurrences. However, it is more im-
portant to know the specific semantic features that
indicate which semantic classes the nouns ending
with -a?k belong to ? this is obtained in the pro-
cess of finding which nouns belong in which in-
flectional paradigms. If we look at the tags we can
see that Czech nouns with the suffix -a?k fall into
two large groups ? those denoting agentives and
other animate beings (total 733 nouns) and those
denoting inanimate things such as instruments and
others (total 633, not classified 13). In the case
of -a?k its functional load is distributed evenly.
freq. % pattern gender sem. feature
641 47.1 vlk MANIM. agentives
326 23.6 flok MINAN.
263 19.1 krk MINAN.
77 5.6 ?Ste?rba?k MANIM. family names
16 1.2 dupa?k MINAN.
10 0.7 Azte?k MANIM. names of tribes
10 0.7 hr?iba?k MINAN.
7 0.5 pulc???k MINAN. names of fungi
6 0.4 koza?k MINAN.
5 0.4 duba?k MINAN.
5 0.4 Batak MANIM. ethnic groups
13 1.0 various not classified
? 1,379
Table 1: SUBST MASK, suffix: -a?k
freq. % pattern gender sem. feature
908 93.9 uc?itel MANIM. agentives
15 1.6 bez MINAN. not classified
11 1.1 mocnitel MINAN. math. expr.
8 0.8 souc?initel MINAN. math. expr.
7 0.7 hotel MINAN. hotels
5 0.5 c??l MINAN. not classified
4 0.4 stroj MINAN. not classified
4 0.4 soute?z? FEMIN. not classified
3 0.3 obyvatel MANIM. inhabitants
2 0.2 stras?pytel MANIM. not classified
? 967
Table 2: SUBST, suffix: -tel
7 Rules for WD Processes
So far we have been talking about the derivation of
word forms in terms of morphemes, stems, roots,
lemmata, etc. More formally, WD processes em-
ploy strings of letters (morphemes) carrying gram-
matical and lexical information. It can be observed
that the WD processes have quite a regular nature,
thus one can express them by means of certain
rules (WD patterns)
WD is a hierarchically structured process,
which will be reflected in the construction of the
rules (WD patterns) ? we will build them as cas-
cades going from simpler to more complicated
patterns.
We start from a linguist?s hypothesis which de-
fines a pattern capturing the changes between the
word forms and other constraints on the form
of grammatical tags associated with the searched
entries. Then we can automatically look up n-
The following n-tuple has to be searched for:
form POS-tag condition
1. S-zace SUBST FEM
2. S-sticky? ADJ
3. S-sta SUBST MAS ANIMAL
4. S-smus SUBST MAS UNANIMAL
where ?S-? is arbitrary but has to be an identical
string for all members of the n-tuple
Table 3: searching the relations, verifying hy-
potheses
tuples of the entries in the existing morphological
database (using the I par tool), where
1. all the members (=entries) exist in the
database;
2. the members of n-tuple fulfil the required hy-
pothesis, i. e. the changes between the strings
belonging to the individual members of the
n-tuple are described in given pattern and en-
tries correspond to the additional constraints.
Suppose that there is an algorithm (see Sec-
tion 7.1) which in the respective morphological
database will find the n-tuples (see Table 4) match-
ing the hypothesis formulated by a linguist (see
Table 3). The linguist can take the derived list of
n-tuples and determine which n-tuples are correct
and which not. The list of the positive examples
will arise together with the list of exceptions not
matching the formulated hypothesis, e. g. pr???t ?
pr???tel, word form pr???tel (friend) is derived from
?pr?a?t (to wish sb well)?, not ?pr???t se (to argue
with sb)?.
It is now clear that by using a hierarchical con-
nection of the new pattern to the original one (for
the individual members of the n-tuple) it is pos-
sible to derive from a single entry not only the
neighbouring entries in the n-tuple but also other
word forms (generated from the entries included
in the n-tuple by means of the respective original
patterns).
If the changes in the word form put into effect
by the (new) pattern express1 a well-defined se-
mantic relation, the entries can be ?virtualized?,
1for the newly generated word form it is also possible to
derive algorithmically (infer) lexical meaning
1st member 2nd member 3rd member 4th member
Patterns: ru?z?e otrocky? P husita P komunismus
realizace realisticky? realista realismus
centralizace centralisticky? centralista centralismus
humanizace humanisticky? humanista humanismus
idealizace idealisticky? idealista idealismus
komunizace komunisticky? komunista komunismus
. . . . . . . . . . . .
Patterns: ru?z?e staror?ecky? P husita P komunismus
romanizace romanisticky? romanista romantismus
spiritualizace spiritualisticky? spiritualista spiritualismus
synchronizace synchronisticky? synchronista synchronismus
kolektivizace kolektivisticky? kolektivista kolektivismus
modernizace modernisticky? modernista modernismus
. . . . . . . . . . . .
Table 4: searching of the relations, verifying hypotheses, output
thus we do not need to keep all entries in the lex-
icon but only those entries which are basic (moti-
vating) word forms for the neighbouring entries of
the found n-tuples.
The entries that are thereby eliminated from the
lexicon can be constructed according to the new
pattern from the basic (motivating) word form.
The original word forms can be determined algo-
rithmically and their original lexical meaning can
be inferred as well.
We will reduce the lexicon using the description
of the WD process which yields the predictable
changes in the semantics of the derived entries.
The WD process can be illustrated by the Fig. 1.
It can be seen that the sub-entries humanizace (hu-
manisation), humanisticky (humanistically ADV),
humanisticky? (humanistic ADJ), humanistc?in (hu-
manist?s FEM POSS ADJ), humanistka (human-
ist FEM), humanistu?v (humanist?s MAS POSS
ADJ), humanista (humanist MAS), humanismus
(humanism), can be assigned:
1. either to the respective infl. paradigms:
humanizace:ru?z?e
humanisticky:otrocky
humanisticky?:otrocky?
humanistc?in:matc?in
humanistka:matka
humanistu?v:otcu?v
humanista:husita
humanismus:komunismus
2. or to:
humanizace:ru?z?e
humanisticky?:otrocky? P
humanista:husita P
humanismus:komunismus
3. or to a deriv. pattern (meta-pattern):
humanismus:komunismus P
In the second and third cases, the reduction
of the lexicon can be observed. The pattern
komunismus P derives the word forms by ex-
changing the string at the end of the basic (moti-
vating) word form:
smus ? zace, sticky, sta, smus
and the corresponding change of the attributes of
the constructed tag.
For an implementation of these WD patterns, a
parallel with Finite State Automata (FST) is use-
ful. The property of chaining (Roche and Schabes,
1997) is very suitable here ? it allows us to build
WD patterns as hierarchical modules. This prop-
erty makes it possible to limit the duplicity of the
stored information and increase their lucidity.
7.1 WD Relation Mining
We explained how to extend the morphological
database employing the regular changes of word
forms that can be observed in the course of the
WD processes (Osolsobe? et al, 2002). We have
shown that if the WD processes are described by
the rules it is possible to reduce our stem dictio-
nary and eventually to obtain a dictionary of roots.
To make the process of searching for the dis-
crete description of WD processes simpler we
have implemented an algorithm that looks up the
relations between the strings corresponding to the
individual entries in the morphological database.
The input for the algorithm is a description of
the variations of the individual word forms to-
gether with conditions placed on the attributes of
the respective grammatical tags.
komunismus P
humani?smus
komunismus
humanismus
husita P
humanist?a
husita
humanista
otcu?v
humanistu?v
matka P
humanist?ka
matka
humanistka
matc?in
humanistc?in
otrocky? P
humanistick?y?
otrocky?
humanisticky?
otrocky
humanisticky
ru?z?e
humanizace
.....................................................................
..
smus
.........................
.sta
................................
..
a
..........................
.u?v
.........
.........
.........
......
..ka .....................................
ka
..............
.........
..c?in
....
....
....
....
.........sticky
.................
.
y?
.................
.y
....
....
....
....
....
....
....
....
....
....
....
....
....
....
....
....
.......
zace
Figure 1: Using the derivational pattern to reduce the stem dictionary
To describe the variations of the word forms we
will use:
? variables $1, $2, . . . (values ? ??),
? constants / ?affixes? : A1,1, A1,2, . . . ? ??
? concatenation operator ?
? strings Si ? {Ai,1, Ai,2, . . .$1,$2, . . .}?
? conditions ? constraints on the values of
given attributes, eventually a determination
whether the given word form has to be
present in the database: C1, C2, . . .
7.1.1 Input
The task assumes:
? n . . . number of the word forms searched for,
? n-tuple: (S1, C1) . . . (Sn, Cn).
The Si strings should be written in such a way
so as not to contain the pairs constant ? constant,
variable ? variable standing adjacent.
? two neighbouring constants can be merged
into one
? two variables can be separated by  constant
(empty string).
? if the variable at beginning is required, or at
the end of the string, then we set Ai,1, or Ai,m
? 
Each string Si thus can be given without loosing
any generality in the following way:
Si ? Ai,1 ? $1?Ai,2 ? $2?
Ai,3 ? . . .? $m?Ai,m+1 (1)
We know that Ai,j are constants and $j vari-
ables which can take values from ??. For an arbi-
trary string Si, a regular grammar can be written
(see Eq. 2).
S ? Ai,1$1N1
N1 ? Ai,2$2N2
. . .
Nm ? Ai,m+1
$1| . . . |$m ? E
E ? a|aE|b|bE| . . .
where E ? ??
(2)
It can be seen that for each string Si a non-
deterministic transducer can be constructed that
takes a word form on the input and on the output,
it produces a set of all acceptable evaluations of
the variables $1 . . .$m, i. e. a set (possibly empty)
of the m-tuples of members of set ??.
7.1.2 The Algorithm
First we have to select the pairs (Si, Ci) for
which the requirement in the condition states that
their corresponding word forms have to occur in
the database. Those word forms, strings and pairs
will be called located. The word forms that we
can determine from the located ones after substi-
tution values for the variables in the strings will be
labelled as inferred.
We can speak here about free and bound occur-
rences of the variables. Free variables will be de-
termined during the computation of the same au-
tomaton in which they take place. Bound vari-
ables are dependent on the computation of other
automata. The values are instantiated for bound
variables before the computing the automaton in
which the variables occur. Thus we can work with
them in a given automaton as with the constants ?
this simplifies the automaton.
When a given word form is accepted by the
transducer (for string Si) we obtain the respective
evaluation variables included in Si as an output. If
the same variables occur also in other strings they
can be substituted (instantiated) by the values.
Thus step by step we will construct the respec-
tive FS automata for located strings Si using the
instantiation of the variables. If the automaton
does not contain any free variables it is obvious
that the respective pair is inferred (it can be lo-
cated at the same time) ? these will be labelled as
inferred+located).
The order in which the individual automata will
be applied can be optimised. A certain part of the
state space being searched can be eliminated in ad-
vance based on conditions Ci, i. e. it is enough
to search/eliminate entries associated with the pat-
terns which guarantee/eliminate some attributes of
the tag.
We suppose that by means of located strings all
the variables used in the inferred strings can be in-
stantiated in such a way that we will be able to de-
termine correctly inferred word forms relying only
on the knowledge of the located word forms, i. e.
in the cases where the inferred strings do not con-
tain free variables. In the opposite case the algo-
rithm has to stop prematurely.
The optimisation will determine the order in
which the individual automata containing free
variables will be applied.
We will start with the first automaton following
the order determined by the optimisation. Step by
step we will go through all the entries and then
for all possible evaluations we will instantiate the
variables and continue with searching the entries
acceptable for the next automaton (according to
the given ordering), i. e. we look for the next ele-
ment of the respective n-tuple.
If we succeed in the instantiation of all vari-
ables and determine all inferred word forms and if
all inferred+located word forms are found in the
database then the currently determined n-tuple can
be sent to the output.
8 The First Results from our Data
Table 5 displays the individual steps taken dur-
ing forming the respective WD nest. The step A
(see Table 5) consisted in the derivation of mas-
culine possessives using suffix -u?v. It is obvious
that this derivation is regular, the number of lem-
mata has not changed ? all of them have been as-
signed to the paradigm for the possessives otcu?v
(father?s). In the step B the gender of noun is
changed from masculine to feminine using suf-
fix -ka. Moreover, in this step the paradigms
neume?tel a Koca?b nM have been removed. Also
the number of lemmata assigned to the paradigm
uc?itel (teacher) has been reduced to half, i. e. from
908 to 454. This means that according to our data
(our morphological database) half of the agentives
cannot form the feminine counterpart and this re-
sult can be expected to be confirmed by examin-
ing a larger corpus. The step C is again regu-
lar ? it consists in the derivation of feminine pos-
sessives using suffix -in with a number of lem-
mata not being changed. In the step D the ad-
jectives are formed by means of suffix -sky? and
this process is less regular. From the possible 454
lemmata belonging to the paradigm uc?itel the ad-
jectives are derived only from 113+21+16=150.
Moreover, these adjectives split into three adjec-
tive paradigms praz?sky? (Prague), spolec?ensky? (so-
cial) and kremz?sky? (Crems) depending on whether
they form a comparative and adverb or not. The
following step is again regular ? it involves the
derivation of adverbs from adjectives by shorten-
ing the last vowel from y? to y. It can be seen
that from the adjectives belonging to the paradigm
kremz?sky? such adverbs cannot be formed at all.
The step E is irregular as well and it involves the
derivation of the nouns from the respective adjec-
tives by replacing the suffix -sky? for -stv??.
9 Conclusions
The purpose of the paper is to show how se-
lected word derivation relations in Czech can be
described using the morphological analyser ajka
and the program I par which works with the
Czech morphological database. The Czech data
necessary for this description are: stem dictionary
used by ajka containing 385,066 Czech stems
908 uc?itel,otcu?v
3 obyvatel,otcu?v
2 pr???tel,otcu?v
1 neume?tel,otcu?v
1 Koca?b nM,otcu?v
A
?
454 uc?itel,otcu?v,matka
2 obyvatel,otcu?v,matka
2 pr???tel,otcu?v,matka B?
454 uc?itel,otcu?v,matka,matc?in
2 obyvatel,otcu?v,matka,matc?in
2 pr???tel,otcu?v,matka,matc?in
C ?
113 uc?itel,otcu?v,matka,matc?in,praz?sky?,praz?sky
21 uc?itel,otcu?v,matka,matc?in,spolec?ensky?,spolec?ensky
2 obyvatel,otcu?v,matka,matc?in,praz?sky?,praz?sky
D
?
113 uc?itel,otcu?v,matka,matc?in,praz?sky?
21 uc?itel,otcu?v,matka,matc?in,spolec?ensky?
16 uc?itel,otcu?v,matka,matc?in,kremz?sky?
2 obyvatel,otcu?v,matka,matc?in,praz?sky?
E ?
46 uc?itel,otcu?v,matka,matc?in,praz?sky?,praz?sky,staven??
19 uc?itel,otcu?v,matka,matc?in,spolec?ensky?,spolec?ensky,staven??
Table 5: WD nest for -tel
belonging to the 10 parts of speech, the Czech
morphological database comprising 2,042 inflec-
tional paradigms and the set of the Czech suffixes
mentioned in this paper (-tel, -a?k, -u?v, -ka, -in,
-sky?, -cky?, -sky, -cky, -stv??, -ismus, -ista, -izace).
Within this task we also demonstrated, using the
selected examples, how the inflectional paradigms
can be employed to create more general but less
regular word derivation patterns, how both can be
linked together and how WD patterns can be used
to describe the selected WD processes in an algo-
rithmic way. This we regard as a relevant contribu-
tion to the theory. In our opinion these examples
are general enough to show that the whole WD
system for Czech can be grasped successfully in
this way.
In this research we are working with Czech data
only, but we firmly believe that if similar data for
Russian, Slovak, Croatian or Serbian etc., were
supplied similar results would be arrived at. It is,
of course, obvious that different WD rules have to
be formulated for other Slavonic languages but if a
similar system of inflectional paradigms were used
and the corresponding groups of suffixes as well,
using tools like ajka and I par would enable
the mapping of word derivation relations accord-
ingly.
The continuation of this research will lead to
building a Czech Derivation Dictionary integrated
with WD rules and thus later yielding a WD au-
tomaton for Czech.
Acknowledgement
This work was supported by Ministry of Educa-
tion, Research Program CEZ:J07/98:143300003.
References
Milos? Dokulil. 1962. Tvor?en?? slov v c?es?tine? 1 (Word
Derivation in Czech). Nakladatelstv?? ?CSAV, Praha.
In Czech.
Petr Karl??k, Marek Nekula, and Zdenka Rus??nova?.
1995. Pr???ruc?n?? mluvnice c?es?tiny (Reference Gram-
mar of Czech). Nakladatelstv?? Lidove? noviny, Praha.
In Czech.
Lauri Karttunen and Kent Wittenburg. 1983. A Two-
Level Morphological Analysis of English. In Texas
Linguistic Forum, volume 22, pages 217?228.
Kla?ra Osolsobe?, Karel Pala, Radek Sedla?c?ek, and
Marek Veber. 2002. A Procedure for Word Deriva-
tional Processes Concerning Lexicon Extension in
Highly Inflected Languages. In Proceedings of the
Conference LREC2002, volume 3, pages 998?1003,
Las Palmas, May 29-31. ELRA.
Jan Petr. 1986. Mluvnice c?es?tiny II. (Grammar of
Czech). Academia, Praha. In Czech.
Emmanuel Roche and Yves Schabes, editors. 1997.
Finite-State Language Processing. MIT Press.
Radek Sedla?c?ek. 1999. Morfologicky? analyza?tor
c?es?tiny (Morphological Analyser of Czech). Mas-
ter?s thesis, FI MU, Brno. In Czech.
Radek Sedla?c?ek and Pavel Smrz?. 2001. A New Czech
Morphological Analyser ajka. In Proceedings of
TSD 2001, pages 100?107, Berlin. Springer-Verlag.
Marek Veber. 2002. Na?stroje pro textove? korpusy a
morfologicke? databa?ze (Tools for Text Corpora and
Morphological Databases). Ph.D. thesis, FI MU,
Brno. In Czech.
Piek Vossen. 1998. Set of Common Base Concepts in
EuroWordNet-2. Technical Report 2D001, Depart-
ment of Computational Linguistics, Amsterodam,
October.
