Creating a Test Corpus of Clinical Notes Manually Tagged for Part-of-Speech 
Information 
Serguei  PAKHOMOV 
Division of Medical Informatics 
Research, Mayo Clinic  
Rochester, MN 
Pakhomov.Serguei@mayo.edu 
Anni  CODEN 
IBM, T.J. Watson Research 
Center, 
Hawthorne, NY 10532 
anni@us.ibm.com  
Christopher   CHUTE 
Division of Medical 
Informatics Research, Mayo 
Clinic Rochester, MN 
Chute@mayo.edu 
 
Abstract 
This paper presents a project whose main goal 
is to construct a corpus of clinical text 
manually annotated for part-of-speech 
information. We describe and discuss the 
process of training three domain experts to 
perform linguistic annotation. We list some of 
the challenges as well as encouraging results 
pertaining to inter-rater agreement and 
consistency of annotation. We also present 
preliminary experimental results indicating the 
necessity for adapting state-of-the-art POS 
taggers to the sublanguage domain of medical 
text. 
1 Introduction 
Having reliable part-of-speech (POS) 
information is critical to successful implementation 
of Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques 
for processing unrestricted text in the biomedical 
domain. State-of-the-art automated POS taggers 
achieve accuracy of 93% - 98% and the most 
successful implementations are based on statistical 
approaches to POS tagging. Taggers based on 
Hidden Markoff Model (HMM) technology 
currently appear to be in the lead. The prime public 
domain examples of such implementations include 
the Trigrams?n?Tags tagger (Brandts 2000), Xerox 
tagger (Cutting et al 1992) and LT POS tagger 
(Mikheev 1997). Maximum Entropy (MaxEnt) 
based taggers also seem to perform very well        
(Ratnaparkhi 1996, Jason Baldridge, Tom Morton, 
and Gann Bierner  http://maxent.sourceforge.net ).  
One of the issues with statistical POS taggers is 
that most of them need a representative amount of 
hand-labeled training data either in the form of a 
comprehensive lexicon and a corpus of untagged 
data or a large corpus of text annotated for POS or 
a combination of the two. Currently, most of the 
POS tagger accuracy reports are based on the 
experiments involving Penn Treebank data 
(Marcus, 1993). The texts in Treebank represent 
the general English domain. It is not entirely clear 
how representative the general English language 
vocabulary and structure are of a specialized sub-
domain such as clinical reports.  
A well-recognized problem is that the accuracy 
of all current POS taggers drops dramatically on 
unknown words. For example, while the TnT 
tagger performs at 97% accuracy on known words 
in the Treebank, the accuracy drops to 89% on 
unknown words (Brandts, 2000). The LT POS 
tagger is reported to perform at 93.6-94.3% 
accuracy on known words and at 87.7-88.7% on 
unknown words using a cascading unknown word 
?guesser? (Mikheev, 1997). The overall results for 
both of  these taggers are much closer to the high 
end of the spectrum because the rate of the 
unknown words in the tests performed on the Penn 
Treebank corpus is generally relatively low ? 2.9% 
(Brandts, 2000). From these results, we can 
conclude that the higher the rate of unknown 
vocabulary, the lower the overall accuracy will be, 
necessitating the adaptation of the taggers trained 
on Penn Treebank  to sublanguage domains with 
vocabulary that is substantially different from the 
one represented by the Penn Treebank corpus.  
Based on the observable differences between 
the clinical and the general English  discourse and 
POS tagging accuracy results on unknown 
vocabulary, it is reasonable to assume that a tagger 
trained on general English may not perform as well 
on clinical notes, where the percentage of unknown 
words will increase. To test this assumption, a 
?gold standard? corpus of clinical notes needs to be 
manually annotated for POS information. The 
issues with the annotation process constitute the 
primary focus of this paper. 
We describe an effort to train three medical 
coding experts to mark the text of clinical notes for 
part-of-speech information. The motivation for 
using medical coders rather than trained linguists is 
threefold. First of all, due to confidentiality 
restrictions, in order to develop a corpus of hand 
labeled data from clinical notes one can only use 
personnel authorized to access patient information. 
The only way to avoid it, is to anonymize the notes 
prior to POS tagging which in itself is a difficult 
and expensive process (Ruch et al 2000). Second, 
medical coding experts are well familiar with 
62
clinical discourse, which helps especially with 
annotating medicine specific vocabulary. Third, 
the fact that POS tagging can be viewed as a 
classification task makes the medical coding 
experts highly suitable because their primary 
occupation and expertise is in classifying patient 
records for subsequent retrieval.    
We show that, given a good set of guidelines, 
medical coding experts can be trained in a limited 
amount of time to perform a linguistic task such as 
POS annotation at a high level of agreement on 
both clinical notes and Penn Treebank data. 
Finally, we report on a set of training experiments 
performed with the TnT tagger (Brandts, 2000) 
using the Penn Treebank as well as the newly 
developed medical corpus.. 
2 Annotation  
Prior to this study, the three annotators who 
participated in it had a substantial experience in 
coding clinical diagnoses but virtually no 
experience in POS markup. The training process 
consisted of a general and rather superficial 
introduction to the issues in linguistics as well as 
some formal training using the POS tagging 
guidelines developed by Santoriny (1991) for 
tagging Penn Treebank data. The formal training 
was followed by informal discussions of the data 
and difficult cases pertinent to the clinical notes 
domain which often resulted in slight 
modifications to the Penn Treebank guidelines. 
The annotation process consisted of 
preprocessing and editing. The pre-processing 
includes sentence boundary detection, tokenization 
and priming with part-of-speech tags generated by 
a MaxEnt tagger (Maxent 1.2.4 package (Baldridge 
et al)) trained on Penn Treebank data. 
Automatically annotated notes were then presented 
to the domain experts for editing. 
3 Annotator agreement 
In order to establish reliability of the data, we 
need to ensure internal as well as external 
consistency of the annotation. First of all, we need 
to make sure that the annotators agree amongst 
themselves (internal consistency) on how they 
mark up text for part-of-speech information. 
Second, we need to find out how closely the 
annotators generating data for this study agree with 
the annotators of an established project such as 
Penn Treebank (external consistency). If both tests 
show relatively high levels of agreement, then we 
can safely assume that the annotators in this study 
are able to generate part-of-speech tags for 
biomedical data that will be consistent with a 
widely recognized standard and can work 
independently of each other thus tripling the 
amount of manually annotated data.  
3.1 Methods 
Two types of measures of consistency were 
computed ? absolute agreement and Kappa 
coefficient. The absolute agreement (Abs Agr) was 
calculated by dividing the total number of times all 
annotators agreed on  a tag over the total number 
of tags. 
Kappa coefficient is given in (1) (Carletta 1996) 
(1) 
)(1
)()(
EP
EPAPKappa ?
?=  
 
where P(A) is the proportion of times the 
annotators actually agree and P(E) is the 
proportion of times the annotators are expected to 
agree due to chance3. 
The Absolute Agreement is most informative 
when computed over several sets of labels and 
where one of the sets represents the ?authoritative? 
set. In this case, the ratio of matches among all the 
sets including the ?authoritative? set to the total 
number of labels shows how close the other sets 
are to the ?authoritative? one. The Kappa statistic 
is useful in measuring how consistent the 
annotators are compared to each other as opposed 
to an authority standard.   
3.2 Annotator consistency 
In order to test for internal consistency, we 
analyzed inter-annotator agreement where the three 
annotators tagged the same small corpus of clinical 
dictations.  
 
File ID Abs agr. Kappa N Samples 
1137689 93.24% 0.9527 755 
1165875 94.59% 0.9622 795 
1283904 89.79% 0.9302 392 
1284881 90.42% 0.9328 397 
1307526 84.43% 0.8943 347 
Total   2686 
Average 90.49% 0.9344  
Table 1. Annotator agreement results based on 5 
clinical notes 
                                                     
3 A  very detailed explanation of the terms used in the formula for 
Kappa computation as well as concrete examples of how it is 
computed are provided in Poessio and Vieira (1988). 
63
The results were compared and the Kappa-
statistic was used to calculate the inter-annotator 
agreement. The results of this experiment are 
summarized in Table 1. For the absolute 
agreement, we computed the ratio of how many 
times all three annotators agreed on a tag for a 
given token to the total number of tags. 
Based on the small pilot sample of 5 clinical 
notes (2686 words), the Kappa test showed a very 
high agreement coefficient ? 0.93. An acceptable 
agreement for most NLP classification tasks lies 
between 0.7 and 0.8 (Carletta 1996, Poessio and 
Vieira 1988). Absolute agreement numbers are 
consistent with high Kappa as they show an 
average of 90% of all tags in the test documents 
assigned exactly the same way by all three 
annotators. 
The external consistency with the Penn Treebank 
annotation was computed using a small random 
sample of 939 words from the Penn Treebank 
Corpus annotated for POS information.  
 
Annotator Abs agr 
A1 88.17% 
A2 87.85% 
A3 87.85% 
Average 87.95% 
Table 2. Absolute agreement results based on 5 
clinical notes with an ?authority? label set. 
The results in Table 2 show that the three 
annotators are on average 88% consistent with the 
annotators of the Penn Treebank corpus.  
3.3 Descriptive statistics for the corpus of 
clinical notes 
  The annotation process resulted in a corpus of 
273 clinical notes annotated with POS tags. The 
corpus contains 100650 tokens from 8702 types 
distributed across 7299 sentences. Table 3 displays 
frequency counts for the top most frequent 
syntactic categories. 
Category Count % total 
NN 18372 18% 
IN 8963 9% 
JJ 8851 9% 
DT 6796 7% 
NNP 4794 5% 
Table 3 Syntactic category distribution in the 
corpus of clinical notes. 
The distribution of syntactic categories suggests 
the predominance of nominal categories, which is 
consistent with the nature of clinical notes 
reporting on various patient characteristics such as 
disorders, signs and symptoms. 
Another important descriptive characteristic of 
this corpus is that the average sentence length is 
13.79 tokens per sentence, which is relatively short 
as compared to the Treebank corpus where the 
average sentence length is 24.16 tokens per 
sentence. This supports our informal observation 
of the clinical notes data containing multiple 
sentence fragments and short diagnostic 
statements. Shorter sentence length implies greater 
number of inter-sentential transitions and therefore 
is likely to present a challenge for a stochastic 
process.   
4 Training a POS tagger on medical data 
In order to test some of our assumptions 
regarding how the differences between general 
English language and the language of clinical notes 
may affect POS tagging, we have trained the 
HMM-based TnT tagger (Brandts, 2000) with 
default parameters at the tri-gram level both on 
Penn Treebank and the clinical notes data. We 
should also note that the tagger relies on a 
sophisticated ?unknown? word guessing algorithm 
which computes the likelihood of a tag based on 
the N last letters of the word, which is meant to 
leverage the word?s morphology in a purely 
statistical manner.  
The clinical notes data was split at random 10 
times in 80/20 fashion where 80% of the sentences 
were used for training and 20% were used for 
testing. This technique is a variation on the classic 
10-fold validation and appears to be more suitable 
for smaller amounts of data.  
We conducted two experiments. First, we 
computed the correctness of the Treebank model 
on each fold of the clinical notes data. We tested 
the Treebank model on the 10 folds rather than the 
whole corpus of clinical notes in order to produce 
correctness results on exactly the same test data as 
would be used for validation tests of models build 
from the clinical notes data. Then, we computed 
the correctness of each of the 10 models trained on 
each training fold of the clinical notes data using 
the corresponding testing fold of the same data for 
testing. 
 
Table 4 Correctness results for the Treebank 
model. 
Correctness was computed simply as the 
percentage of correct tag assignments of the POS 
tagger (hits) to the total number of tokens in the 
test set. Table 4 summarizes the results of testing 
the Treebank model, while Table 5 summarizes the 
Split Hits Total Correctness 
Average 21826.3 24309 89.79% 
64
testing results for the models trained on the clinical 
notes. 
 
The average correctness of the Treebank model 
tested on clinical notes is ~88%, which is 
considerably lower than the state-of-the-art 
performance of the TnT tagger - ~96%. Training 
the tagger on a relatively small amount of clinical 
notes data brings the performance much closer to 
the state-of-the-art ? ~95%. 
 
Table 5 Correctness results for the clinical notes 
model. 
5 Discussion 
The results of this pilot project are encouraging. 
It is clear that with appropriate supervision, people 
who are well familiar with medical content can be 
reliably trained to carry out some of the tasks 
traditionally done by trained linguists.  
This study also indicates that an automatic POS 
tagger trained on data that does not include clinical 
documents may not perform as well as a tagger 
trained on data from the same domain. A 
comparison between the Treebank and the clinical 
notes data shows that the clinical notes corpus 
contains 3,239 lexical items that are not found in 
Treebank. The Treebank corpus contains over 
40,000 lexical items that are not found in the 
corpus of clinical notes. 5,463 lexical items are 
found in both corpora.  In addition to this 37% out-
of-vocabulary rate (words in clinical notes but not 
the Treebank corpus), the picture is further 
complicated by the differences between the n-gram 
tag transitions within the two corpora. For 
example, the likelihood of a DT ? NN bigram is 1 
in Treebank and 0.75 in the clinical notes corpus. 
On the other hand, JJ ? NN transition in the 
clinical notes is 1 but in the Treebank corpus it has 
a likelihood of 0.73. This is just to illustrate the 
fact that not only the ?unknown? out-of-vocabulary 
items may be responsible for the decreased 
accuracy of POS taggers trained on general 
English domain and tested on the clinical notes 
domain, but the actual n-gram statistics may be a 
major contributing factor.    
6 Conclusion 
Several questions remain unresolved. First of all, 
it is unclear how much domain specific data is 
enough to achieve state-of-the-art performance on 
POS tagging. Second, given that it is somewhat 
easier to develop lexicons for POS tagging than to 
annotate corpora, we need to find out how 
important the corpus statistics are as opposed to a 
domain specific lexicon. In other words, can we 
achieve state-of-the-art performance in a 
specialized domain by simply adding the 
vocabulary from the domain to the POS tagger?s 
lexicon? We intend to address both of these 
questions with further experimentation. 
7 Acknowledgements 
Our thanks go to Barbara Abbot, Pauline Funk 
and Debora Albrecht for their persistent efforts in 
the difficult task of corpus annotation. This work 
has been carried out under the NLM Training 
Grant # T15  LM07041-19.  
References 
Baldridge, J., Morton, T., and Bierner, G URL: 
http://maxent.sourceforge.net 
Brandts, T (2000) ?TnT ? A Statistical Part-of-Speech 
Tagger.? In Proc. NAACL/ANLP-2000. 
Carletta,  J.  (1996). Assiessing agreement on 
classification tasks: The Kappa statistic. 
Computational Linguistics, 22(2) pp. 249-254.  
Cutting, D., Kupiec, J., Pedersen, J, and Sibun, P. A 
(1992). Practical POS Tagger. In Proc. ANLP?92. 
Jurafski D. and Martin J. (2000). Speech and Language 
Processing. Prentice Hall, NJ. 
Manning, C. and Shutze H. (1999). Foundations of 
Statistical Natural Language Processing. MIT Press, 
Cambridge, MA. 
Marcus, M., B. Santorini, and M. A. Marcinkiewicz 
(1993). Building a large annotated corpus of English: 
the Penn Treebank. Computational Linguistics 19, 
297-352. 
Mikheev, A. (1997). Automatic Rule Induction for 
Unknown-Word Guessing. Computational Linguistics 
23(3): 405-423  
Poessio, M. and Vieira, R. (1988). ?A corpus based 
investigation of definite description use? 
Computational Linguistics, pp 186-215. 
Ratnaparkhi A. (1996). A maximum entropy part of 
speech tagger. In Proceedings of the conference on 
empirical methods in natural language processing, 
May 1996, University of Pennsylvania 
Ruch P, Baud RH, Rassinoux AM, Bouillon P, Robert 
G. Medical document anonymization with a semantic 
lexicon. Proc AMIA Symp. 2000; 729-33. 
Santorini B. (1991). Part-of-Speech Tagging Guidelines 
for the Penn Treebank Project. Technical Report. 
Department of Computer and Information Science, 
University of Pennsylvania. 
UMLS. (2001). UMLS Knowledge Sources (12th ed.). 
Bethesda (MD): National Library of Medicine.   
 
 
Split Hits Total Correctness 
Average 23018.4 24309 94.69% 
65
