Coling 2010: Poster Volume, pages 1140?1148,
Beijing, August 2010
A Method for Automatically Generating a Mediatory
Summary to Verify Credibility of Information on the Web
Hideyuki Shibuki and Takahiro Nagai and Masahiro Nakano
Rintaro Miyazaki and Madoka Ishioroshi and Tatsunori Mori
Graduate School of Environment and Information Sciences,
Yokohama National University
{shib, nagadon, nakano, rintaro, ishioroshi, mori}@forest.eis.ynu.ac.jp
Abstract
In this paper, we propose a method for
mediatory summarization, which is a
novel technique for facilitating users?
assessments of the credibility of infor-
mation on the Web. A mediatory sum-
mary is generated by extracting a pas-
sage from Web documents; this sum-
mary is generated on the basis of its
relevance to a given query, fairness,
and density of keywords, which are fea-
tures of the summaries constructed to
determine the credibility of informa-
tion on the Web. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of the generated me-
diatory summary in comparison with
the summaries of Web documents pro-
duced by Web search engines.
1 Introduction
Many pages on the Web contain incorrect or
unverifiable information. Therefore, there is a
growing demand for technologies that can en-
able us to obtain reliable information. How-
ever, it would be almost impossible to auto-
matically ascertain the accuracy of informa-
tion presented on the Web. Hence, the second-
best approach is the development of a sup-
porting method for judging the credibility of
information on the Web.
Presently, when we wish to judge the credi-
bility of information on the Web, we often read
some relevant Web documents retrieved via
Web search engines. However, Web search en-
gines do not provide any suggestions in cases
where the content of some documents conflicts
with the content of other documents. Further-
more, the retrieved documents are too many
to read and may not be ranked according to
the credibility of the information they provide.
In other words, information retrieval is not
sufficient to support users? assessments of the
credibility of information, and therefore, ad-
ditional techniques are required for the same.
Several previous researches have been con-
ducted for developing such techniques. Juffin-
ger et al (2009) ranked blogs in terms of
their concurrence with well-verified informa-
tion from sources such as a news corpus.
Miyazaki et al (2009) devised a method for
extracting the description of the information
sender, namely, the person or organization
providing texts in Web pages. Ohshima et
al. (2009) proposed a method for reranking
Web pages according to users? regionality,
which depends on two factors: uniformity and
proximity. While the abovementioned stud-
ies mainly facilitate users? assessments of the
credibility of individual Web pages, the fol-
lowing studies deal with the issues of cred-
ibility of information in multiple documents
on the Web. Murakami et al (2009) pro-
posed a method to analyze semantic rela-
tionships such as agreement, conflict, or ev-
idence between texts on the Web. Kawahara
et al (2009) reported a method for present-
ing overviews of evaluative information such
as positive/negative opinions.
Although the above techniques facilitate
users? assessments of credibility of information
on the Web, there is still room for methods
that support users? judgment. For example,
when the truth of a statement1 ?Diesel en-
gines are harmful to the environment? is to
1In this paper, a statement is defined as text such
as an opinion, evaluation, or objective fact.
1140
	
	
				
		
	