Anaphora Resolution and Minimal Models
Ariel Cohen
Ben-Gurion University, Israel
arikc@ bgu. ac. il
Abstract
Some anaphora resolution algorithms are based on model builders, and use the
fact that they generate minimal models: only those elements that are necessary
are postulated to exist in the model. In this way, such systems have the desirable
property that if anaphora can be resolved to a linguistically available antecedent,
this resolution applies, and only if there is no suitable antecedent, a deictic reading
is generated.
In this paper I formalize the entailments that follow from such anaphora reso-
lution algorithms. In particular, I will suggest a simple, linguistically motivated,
underspecified representation for anaphora?DRT, and place the burden of the res-
olution of anaphora and its consequences on an independently motivated logic for
default reasoning?Default Logic.
1 Introduction
Consider a simple case of ambiguous anaphoric reference:
(1) I had gone to see John before I visited Bill and Mary. He doesn?t want
to speak with her.
What can we say about the resolution of the anaphora? The pronoun her
probably refers to Mary; the pronoun he is ambiguous between John and Bill,
but most likely refers to John. And either pronoun (or both) may be used
deictically, referring to some other individual that is not denoted by a linguistic
antecedent. What we would like is a system that allows us to represent all
these options, pick those we consider plausible, and draw some inferences even
in the absence of a clear resolution.
Intuitively, the deictic interpretation is dispreferred; we will assume it only
if there is no suitable linguistic antecedent. An elegant explanation of this fact
can be provided by anaphora resolution algorithms that use domain building
techniques (e.g., [1,10,11]). Model builders receive as input a set of proposi-
tions, and produce a model for them if such exists. Typically, the models so
generated are minimal, i.e. models whose domain is only as large as it needs to
be. Thus, if the referent of the pronoun can be identified with a linguistic an-
tecedent, no additional elements need to be postulated. Only if this turns out
to be impossible, will an additional element be added to the model, resulting
in the deictic reading.
The goal of this paper is not to propose new algorithms, but to formalize
the idea of using minimal models to resolve (pronominal) anaphora, and the
conclusions that can be drawn by such a system in case the anaphora is not
resolved. 1
2 An Underspecified Representation for Anaphora
As the discourse in (1) exemplifies, anaphora is often ambiguous. Moreover,
the deictic possibility always exists, so it is always possible, in principle, that
what we had identified as the antecedent of a pronoun actually is not, and the
pronoun is used deictically. In the case of (1), since we have two pronouns,
one with three possible interpretations (John, Bill, or the deictic use) and the
other with two (Mary or deictic), we will have six potential interpretations.
We need to be able to represent the ambiguity, but still draw inferences as best
we can on the basis of what we know. This calls for some sort of underspecified
representation, and some inference mechanism to derive conclusions from it.
Many special formalisms have been proposed, whose sole purpose is to
allow efficient representation of and reasoning with underspecification. I will
not, however, go down this road, for several reasons. A formalism that is not
independently motivated on linguistic grounds, and whose sole justification
is to represent underspecification, may work in a practical system, but its
explanatory adequacy from a linguistic point of view would be dubious. To
give one example, recall that deictic readings of a pronoun are always possible,
and this is the case across languages. Why is this? Why don?t we have
languages where pronouns are restricted to linguistic antecedents only, and
deictic readings are indicated only by, say, demonstratives? A formalism that
is only geared toward underspecification would be quite adequate if pronouns
could only refer to linguistic antecedents, and it is hard to see why it would
necessitate the availability of deictic readings. It is, of course, preferable to
have the possibility of deictic readings follow directly from the representation,
thus explaining the puzzle.
Furthermore, a nonstandard representation will typically require nonstan-
dard inference methods, especially tailored for the representation. 2 Again,
these inference methods would not be independently justified, unlike rules of
common-sense inference that must, in one way or another, be used in order to
understand natural language.
1 While this paper only deals with pronominal anaphora, the approach may be extended
to handle definite descriptions?see [6,7]) for an account based on model building.
2 Though see [15], who uses a nonstandard representation of anaphora, but applies Default
Logic to generate its perceived readings.
An additional reason for keeping the representation as simple and as close
to standard linguistic representations as possible is the fact that it is not likely
to be replaced by a fully specified representation during the interpretation
process. Normally, one uses an underspecified representation in the hope
that, in the fullness of time, or as the need arises, it will be fully specified. In
this sense, an underspecified representation is only a ?temporary measure.?
However, because it is always possible to interpret pronouns deictically, we can
never fully specify the representation. The possibility always exists that we
will receive later some information that will force us to interpret the pronoun
deictically and undo our previous resolution. Hence, the representation of
anaphora cannot be treated as a temporary measure, and must be as close as
possible to the fully motivated representation.
In this paper I am going to suggest that we don?t need to look far for a
representation and its associated inference method. A standard, linguistically
motivated representation, without special machinery for underspecification,
will do. 3 For concreteness, I choose Discourse Representation Theory ([9]).
Thus, for example, the discourse in (1) will be represented by the following
DRS (here and elsewhere, ignoring tense and the possibility of a collective
reading of the conjunction):
(2)
x y z u v
John(x)
Bill(y)
Mary(z)
go-to-see(I,x)
visit(I,y)
visit(I,z)
male(u)
female(v)
?want-to-speak(u,v)
Note that this DRS does not resolve the anaphora. In this representation,
u and v are subject to existential closure, and all we know is that some an-
tecedent exists. So, in effect, the DRS (2) is an underspecified representation,
containing all the possible ways of resolving the anaphora. Any specific res-
olution of the anaphora results in the addition of equalities identifying the
referents of the pronouns. For example:
3 Of course, it may be the case that some sort of special underspecified representation is
needed for other reasons, e.g., to represent scope ambiguities. All I claim is that such special
representations are not necessitated by the need to represent anaphora.
(3)
x y z u v
John(x)
Bill(y)
Mary(z)
go-to-see(I,x)
visit(I,y)
visit(I,z)
male(u)
female(v)
?want-to-speak(u,v)
u=x
v=z
The problem of anaphora resolution now becomes the problem of inferring
the necessary equalities from the representation. Of course, DRT places some
constraints on acceptable antecedents?they have to be accessible. Accessibil-
ity constraints can be modeled simply as inequalities between all inaccessible
pairs of discourse referents. Additional constraints come from our world knowl-
edge. For example, if we know that her must refer to a female individual, and
that John is not female, we know that John cannot be a suitable antecedent.
3 Default Logic
Inferring the equalities identifying pronoun with antecedent must be nonmono-
tonic: we may later find that our anaphora resolution was wrong, and revise it.
Some form of nonmonotonic reasoning, attempting to derive consistent conclu-
sions from an incomplete description of the world, is independently necessary
for any kind of system that attempts to draw inferences from natural lan-
guage texts. Thus, instead of devising a special form of inference mechanism
for our underspecified representation, I will use well studied and independently
motivated mechanisms for nonmonotonic reasoning (cf. [12,15]).
Specifically, I choose Default Logic ([17]). Default Logic is one of the most
widely used nonmonotonic formalisms and may be the only one that has a
clearly useful contribution to the wider field of computer science through logic
programming and database theory.
A default theory is a pair (D,A), where D is a set of defaults and A is a set
of first-order sentences (axioms). Defaults are expressions of the form
(4)
?(x) : ?1(x), . . . , ?m(x)
?(x)
,
where ?(x), ?1(x), . . . , ?m(x), m ? 1, and ?(x) are formulas of first-order logic
whose free variables are among x = x1, . . . , xn. A default is closed if none of
?, ?1, . . . , ?m, and ? contains a free variable. Otherwise it is open.
Roughly speaking, the intuitive meaning of a default is as follows. For
every n-tuple of objects t = t1, . . . , tn, if ?(t) is believed, and the ?i(t)s are
consistent with one?s beliefs, then one is permitted to deduce ?(t).
Crucial to the interpretation of Default Logic is the notion of an extension.
Roughly speaking, an extension of a default theory is a set of statements
containing all the logical entailments of the theory, plus as many of the default
inferences as can be consistently believed. Sometimes a default theory has
more than one extension, as in the well known Nixon diamond. Suppose we
have the following set of defaults:
(5)
{
Quaker(x) : pacifist(x)
pacifist(x) ,
Republican(x) : ?pacifist(x)
?pacifist(x)
}
.
If Nixon is both a Quaker and a Republican, in one extension he will be
pacifist, and in another he won?t be. So, is Nixon a pacifist or isn?t he?
When faced with multiple extensions, there are two general strategies we
can use to decide which conclusions to accept: skeptical or credulous reason-
ing. Skeptical reasoning means taking only what is true in all extensions. In
the case of the Nixon diamond, we will believe neither that Nixon is a pacifist,
nor that he is not a pacifist. Credulous reasoning means picking one exten-
sion, based on whatever principles one deems appropriate, and accepting its
conclusions. This means we will pick one extension, perhaps using our knowl-
edge of Nixon?s statements and actions, and based on this extension, conclude
whether he is a pacifist or not.
4 Equality by Default
4.1 A default rule for equality
Resolving anaphora means generating an equality between two discourse ref-
erents. I suggest that we will generate such an equality by default: we assume
that two elements are equal if they cannot be proved to be different. The idea
underlying this notion has been proposed, though not formalized, in [2]. Char-
niak?s approach is further explored in [5], and formalized more fully in [3,4].
The idea of equality by default can be implemented in Default Logic very
simply, by adding the following default:
(6)
: x = y
x = y
This default rule means that whenever it is consistent to assume that two
elements are the same, conclude that they are. 4 What does it mean to say
that it is consistent to assume x = y? It means that it not known that x 6= y.
From the axioms of equality it follows that this is equivalent to saying that
there is no property ? s.t. we know ?(x) but we also know ??(y).
4.2 Minimality of models
In order to explain what it means for the models of our theory to be mini-
mal, we will need some definitions. In particular, since (6) is an open default,
we need to provide a semantic definition of extensions of open default theo-
ries. Since model builders generate what are, in essence, Herbrand models,
it seems natural to assume that the theory domain is a Herbrand universe
(cf. [14, Chapter 1, ?3]). Fortunately, such a definition has already been pro-
posed ([13,8]), and I will follow it here.
Suppose we have a first order language L, and we augment it with a set of
new constants, b, calling the resulting language Lb. The set of all closed terms
of the language Lb is called the Herbrand universe of Lb and is denoted T Lb .
A Herbrand b-interpretation is a set of closed atomic formulas of Lb.
Let w be a Herbrand b-interpretation and let ? be a closed formula over
Lb. We say that w satisfies ?, denoted w |= ?, if the following holds:
(i) If ? is an atomic formula, then w |= ? if and only if ? ? w;
(ii) w |= ? ? ? if and only if w 6|= ? or w |= ?;
(iii) w |= ?? if and only if w 6|= ?; and
(iv) w |= ?x?(x) if and only if for each t ? T Lb , w |= ?(t).
For a Herbrand b-interpretation w, the Lb-theory of w, denoted ThLb(w),
is the set of all closed formulas of Lb satisfied by w. For a set of Herbrand
b-interpretations W , the Lb-theory of W , denoted ThLb(W ), is the set of all
closed formulas of Lb satisfied by all elements of W .
Let E be a set of closed formulas over Lb. We say that w is a Herbrand
b-model of E, denoted by w |= E, if E ? ThLb(w).
Extensions of open default theories are then defined as follows:
Definition 1 (cf. [8, Definition 27]) Let b be a set of new constant symbols
and let (D,A) be a default theory. For any set of Herbrand b-interpretations
W let ?b(D,A)(W ) be the largest set V of Herbrand b-models of A that satisfies
the following condition.
For any default
?(x) : ?1(x), ?2(x), . . . , ?m(x)
?(x)
? D and any tuple t of ele-
ments of T Lb if V |= ?(t) and W 6|= ??i(t), i = 1, 2, . . . ,m, then V |= ?(t).
A set of sentences E is called a b-extension for (D,A) if E = ThLb(W )
4 Note that this is, in a sense, the opposite of the Unique Name Assumption ([16]). The
uniqueness of names can still be ensured, by following standard DRT practice and defining
appropriate external anchors.
for some fixpoint W of ?b(D,A).
It has been shown ([4]) that if E is a b-extension for the default theory({
:x=y
x=y
}
, A
)
, and w is a Herbrand b-model of E, then w is minimal. That is
to say, there is no Herbrand b-model w? of E such that
(7) {?t1, t2? : w |= t1 = t2} ? {?t1, t2? : w? |= t1 = t2}.
In other words, the proposed default theory minimizes the number of different
elements in the models, as desired.
4.3 Deictic interpretations
It turns out that using Herbrand models has a consequence that is particularly
important for our purposes. Note that the new elements introduced in b, by
being new, are equal by default to any term. In particular, they are are equal
by default to any pronoun; this is the reason why deictic interpretations of
pronouns are always possible. Hence, we have a logical explanation for a
linguistic phenomenon?the universal availability of deictic readings.
Note that this theory allows deictic readings, but only as a last resort,
when no other readings are possible. Given the discourse in (1), we have a
good reason to believe that her refers to Mary, i.e. v = z. It is true that we
have in the Herbrand model additional new terms, but this does not negate
the minimality of the model. Since these terms are new, nothing is known
about them and consequently it is consistent to assume that, for any such
new term ni, v = ni. It is also consistent to hold the conjunction of all
these beliefs, namely the belief that n1 = n2 = n3 = ? ? ? = v. So, the model is,
indeed, minimal; the addition of new constants does not mean that they denote
additional entities. Thus, we capture the intuition that deictic readings are
dispreferred, and are only available when no suitable antecedent is available.
Note that if we didn?t have this requirement of minimality, deictic readings
would be on an equal footing with anaphoric readings.
If necessary, however, we can get a deictic interpretation, i.e. equate the
pronoun with an element that is different from all other discourse referents.
This happens when no possible antecedent is available, i.e. for every discourse
referent t other than v, we know, or can deduce v 6= t. Then, we will have an
extension where for some new term ni, v = ni. By the axioms of equality, ni
will not be equal to any of the other discourse referents, hence the domain will
not be minimal. Of course, we may have an extension where the new terms
are be equal to other terms, but none will be equal to v; but this extension
will not constitute resolution of the anaphora, and will therefore be ruled out.
5 Inference
Let us see the kinds of inferences that this theory gives rise to. First, note that,
although we are quite liberal in our assumption of equality, we can still rule
out inappropriate antecedents. Recall that antecedents that are not accessible,
in the DRT sense, will be explicitly stated to be different from the pronoun.
Hence, obviously, it will not be consistent to assume that they are, so such
equalities will arise in any extension.
We can also rule out antecedents that are semantically incompatible. For
example, if we know that male(u) but ?male(z), we cannot assume u = z;
this is because if u is male and z is female, they have to be different, by the
axioms of equality.
But suppose we have two acceptable antecedents for a pronoun u: in our
example, it is possible that u = x (John), but it is also possible that u = y
(Bill). If we know that they are different people, we know x 6= y, so it is
impossible to believe both u = x and u = y. We will therefore have two
extensions: in one of them, the pronoun is equated with John, and in the
other, with Bill.
How do we deal with these extensions? If we prefer one antecedent over
the other, for reasons of pragmatic plausibility or salience, we apply credulous
reasoning and pick the appropriate extension. In this extension, the pronoun
will be equated with the chosen antecedent; hence, by the nature of equality,
all properties of the antecedent will also hold of the pronoun.
At other times, however, the anaphora may be genuinely ambiguous, and
we may have no reason to prefer one reading over the other. In this case, it
makes sense to apply skeptical reasoning, and accept only what is true in all
candidate extensions.
Consider, for example, the following discourse:
(8) John met Bill at the ice cream parlor. He was upset.
In this case, the pronoun may be equated with either John or Bill, and there
are no good grounds, without further context, to decide between them. Yet,
we do know something about the antecedent of the pronoun: he was at the
ice cream parlor. We know this because we know that both John and Bill
were there, and the pronoun refers to one of them. Skeptical reasoning will,
indeed, give us precisely this result, since in both extensions, the pronoun has
the properties that its antecedent has.
But now suppose that one possible antecedent has a property than the
other one lacks:
(9) John walked along the sidewalk and saw Bill inside the ice cream
parlor. He was upset.
In this case, Bill has the property of being inside the ice cream parlor, but
John does not. Thus, in one extension, the pronoun will have this property,
and in another?its negation. If we have no reason to prefer one extension
over the other, we will apply skeptical reasoning, and will not conclude of the
referent either that he is or that he is not inside the ice cream parlor. This
appears intuitively correct.
Now suppose we know that some property holds of one potential an-
tecedent, but we don?t know whether it holds of another:
(10) While eating ice cream, John saw Bill at the ice cream parlor. He was
upset.
We know that John was eating ice cream, but we do not know whether Bill
was eating ice cream too or not. In this case, intuitively, we cannot conclude
about the antecedent of the pronoun that he was eating ice cream, although
this is consistent with him being either John or Bill. Indeed ,the proposed
system conforms with this judgment. This is because in one extension, the
one where the pronoun is associated with John, the property of eating ice
cream is predicated of the discourse referent corresponding to the pronoun.
But in the other extension, neither this property nor its negation will be so
predicated. So, in this extension it will not be true that ?he? is eating ice
cream, hence skeptical reasoning will not license this inference.
Note that I have ignored here the addition of the new terms. The reason
is simple: since they are new, they do not make a difference to the inference
patterns discussed above. Consider, for example, the inference associated
with (8) again. Suppose we have a new term ni. So long as it is possible to
find at least one antecedent to the pronoun, a model for the deictic reading,
i.e. where the pronoun is equated with ni but with no other element, will
not be minimal, hence it will not be the model of any extension. In every
extension, then, the pronoun u will be equated with some discourse referent
x. Now, suppose ni = x. In this case, by the axioms of equality, ni will also
have the property of being at the ice cream parlor, hence skeptical reasoning
will still conclude that the pronoun has this property. Alternatively, suppose
ni 6= x (perhaps because it is associated deictically with another pronoun).
Now, it follows that ni 6= u, so whether or not ni was at the ice cream parlor
should have no effect on whether ?he? was.
6 Conclusion
I have proposed a theory of the representation of anaphora, based on the as-
sumption that if two elements cannot be proved to be different, then they
can be assumed to be equal. This assumption is implemented using a stan-
dard linguistic representation (DRT) and a standard default reasoning system
(Default Logic), and this requires no special mechanisms for representation or
inference. Yet this conceptually simple theory appears to produce exactly the
sort of inferences regarding anaphora that are intuitively desirable.
References
[1] Baumgartner, P. and M. Ku?hn, Abducing coreference by model construction,
Journal of Language and Computation 1 (2000), pp. 175?190.
[2] Charniak, E., Motivation analysis, abductive unification and nonmonotonic
equality, Artificial Intelligence 34 (1988), pp. 275?295.
[3] Cohen, A., M. Kaminski and J. A. Makowsky, Indistinguishability by default,
in: S. Artemov, H. Barringer, A. S. d?Avila Garcez, L. C. Lamb and J. Woods,
editors, We Will Show Them: Essays in Honour of Dov Gabbay, College
Publications, 2005 pp. 415?428.
[4] Cohen, A., M. Kaminski and J. A. Makowsky, Applying default logic to
anaphora, vagueness, and uncertain reasoning (in preparation).
[5] Cohen, A. and J. A. Makowsky, Two approaches to nonmonotonic equality,
Technical Report CIS-9317, Technion?Israel Institute of Technology (1993).
[6] Gardent, C. and K. Konrad, Definites and the proper treatment of rabbits, in:
C. Monz and M. de Rijke, editors, Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Inference
in Computational Semantics, ICOS-1, 1999, pp. 53?69.
[7] Gardent, C. and K. Konrad, Interpreting definites using model generation,
Journal of Logic, Language and Information 1 (2000), pp. 193?209.
[8] Kaminski, M., A comparative study of open default theories, Artificial
Intelligence 77 (1995), pp. 285?319.
[9] Kamp, H. and U. Reyle, ?From Discourse to Logic,? Kluwer Academic
Publishers, Dordrecht, 1993.
[10] Kohlhase, M., Model generation for discourse representation theory, in:
W. Horn, editor, Proceedings of the 14th European Conference on Artifical
Intelligence, 2000, pp. 441?445.
[11] Konrad, K., ?Model Generation for Natural Language Interpretation and
Analysis,? Ph.D. thesis, University of Saarlandes, Saarbru?cken (2000).
[12] Lascarides, A. and N. Asher, Temporal interpretation, discourse relations and
common sense entailments, Linguistics and Philosophy 16 (1993), pp. 437?493.
[13] Lifschitz, V., On open defaults, in: J. Lloyd, editor, Computational Logic:
Symposium Proceedings (1990), pp. 80?95.
[14] Lloyd, J., ?Foundation of logic programming, second extended edition,?
Springer?Verlag, Berlin, 1993.
[15] Poesio, M., Semantic ambiguity and perceived ambiguity, in: K. van Deemter and
S. Peters, editors, Semantic Ambiguity and Underspecification, CSLI, Stanford,
1996 pp. 159?201.
[16] Reiter, R., Equality and domain closure in first order databases, Journal of the
ACM 27 (1980), pp. 235?249.
[17] Reiter, R., A logic for default reasoning, Artificial Intelligence 13 (1980), pp. 81?
132.
