Multidimensional markup and heterogeneous linguistic resources
Maik Stu?hrenberg Andreas Witt Daniela Goecke
Faculty for Linguistics and Literature
Bielefeld University, Germany
{maik.stuehrenberg|andreas.witt|daniela.goecke|dieter.metzing|oliver.schonefeld}@uni-bielefeld.de
Dieter Metzing Oliver Schonefeld
Abstract
The paper discusses two topics: firstly an
approach of using multiple layers of an-
notation is sketched out. Regarding the
XML representation this approach is sim-
ilar to standoff annotation. A second topic
is the use of heterogeneous linguistic re-
sources (e.g., XML annotated documents,
taggers, lexical nets) as a source for semi-
automatic multi-dimensional markup to
resolve typical linguistic issues, dealing
with anaphora resolution as a case study.1
1 Introduction ? Why (and how) to use
heterogeneous linguistic resources
A large and diverse amount of linguistic resources
(audio and video recodings, textual recordings)
has been piled up during various projects all over
the world. A reasonable subset of these resources
consists of machine-readable structured linguis-
tic documents (often XML annotated), dictionar-
ies, grammars or ontologies. Sometimes these
are available to the public on the Web, cf. Si-
mons (2004). The availability allows for the so-
phisticated examination of linguistic questions and
the reuse of existing linguistic material. Espe-
cially corpora annotated for discourse-related phe-
nomena have become an important source for var-
ious linguistic studies. Besides annotated corpora
external knowledge bases like lexical nets (e.g.,
WordNet, GermaNet) and grammars, can be used
to support several linguistic processes.
Although XML has recently established itself
as the technology and format of choice the be-
fore mentioned resources remain heterogeneous
1The work presented in this paper is part of the project A2
Sekimo of the Research Group Text-technological modelling
of information funded by the German Research Foundation.
in respect of the data format (i.e., the underlying
schema) or the functionality provided. A simple
approach to make use of different resources is to
use them one by one, starting with raw text data (or
annotated XML) as input and providing the output
of the first process (e.g., a tagger) as input for the
next step (e.g., a parser). However, this method
may lead to several problems. One possible prob-
lem of this method is that the output format of one
processing resource can be unemployable as input
format for the next. Another potential problem of
using XML annotated documents is overlapping
annotation. And finally it is sometimes necessary
(or desirable) to process only parts of the input
document.
The structure of the paper is as follows: In Sec-
tion 2 our approach of representing multiple anno-
tations is desribed, in Section 3 the use of multi-
root trees for the representation of heterogeneous
ressources is presented. As a case study, the res-
olution of anaphoric relations is described in Sec-
tion 4.
2 Multiple annotations
Representing data corresponding to different lev-
els of annotation is a fundamental problem of text-
technological research. Renear et al (1996) dis-
cuss the OHCO-Thesis2 as one of the basic as-
sumptions about the structure of text and show that
this assumption cannot be upheld consistently. Be-
ing based on the OHCO-Thesis most markup lan-
guages (including SGML and XML) are designed
in principle to represent one structure per docu-
ment. Options to resolve this problem are dis-
cussed in Barnard et al (1995) and several other
2The OHCO-Thesis, first presented in DeRose et al
(1990) states ?that text is best represented as an ordered hier-
archy of content object (OHCO).?
85
proposals. To avoid drawbacks of the above men-
tioned approaches Witt (2002; 2004) discusses an
XML based solution which is used in our project.
2.1 Representation
We address the issue of overlapping markup by
using separate annotations of relevant phenomena
(e.g., syntactic information, POS, document struc-
ture) according to different document grammars,
i.e., the same textual data is encoded several times
(in separate files). One advantage of this multiple
annotation is that the modeling of information on
a level A is not dependent in any way on a level
B (in contrast to the standoff annotation model
described by Thompson and McKelvie (1997),
where a primary modeling level is needed). Addi-
tional annotation layers can be added easily with-
out any changes to the layers already established.
The primary data (i.e., the text which will be an-
notated) is separated from the markup and serves
as key element for establishing relations between
the annotation tiers. Witt et al (2005) describe a
knowledge representation format (in the program-
ming language Prolog3) which can be used to draw
inferences between separate levels of annotations
and in which the parts of text (the PCDATA in
XML terms) are used as an absolute reference sys-
tem and as link between the levels of annotation
(cf. Bayerl et al (2003)).
This representation format allows us to use var-
ious linguistic resources. A Python script con-
verts the different annotation layers (XML Docu-
ments) to the above mentioned Prolog representa-
tion which serves as input for the unification pro-
cess. The elements, attributes and text of all an-
notation layers are stored as Prolog predicates. As
a requirement all files must be identical with re-
spect to their underlying character data, what we
call identity of primary data.
2.2 Unification
Figure 1 shows the architecture used for the uni-
fication process. Different annotation layers are
unified, i.e., merged into one output fact base.
A script reconverts the Prolog representation into
one well-formed XML document containing the
annotations from the layers plus the textual con-
tent. In case of overlapping elements (which may
be the result of the unification), it converts those
3An additional representation format integrates the repre-
sentation of multi-rooted trees developed in the NITE-Project
(cf. Carletta et al (2003)).
elements to milestones or fragments (cf. TEI
Guidelines (2004)) according to parameter op-
tions. A Java-based GUI is available to ease the
use of the above mentioned framework.
3 Multi-rooted trees
Based on the before mentioned architecture we
now focus on the usage of heterogeneous linguis-
tic resources (as described in in Section 1) in or-
der to semi-automatically add layers of markup to
various XML (or plain text) documents. We pre-
fer the term multi-rooted trees in favor of multi-
ple annotations, i.e., different layers of annotation
are stored in a single representation (based on the
above mentioned architecture). The input docu-
ment is separated into the textual information and
the annotation tree (if there is any). Both of these
are provided as input for linguistic resources. The
output of this process (typically an XML anno-
tated document) is again separated into text and
markup and serves as input for another resource.
Figure 2 gives an overview over the process.
4 Heterogeneous linguistic resources for
anaphora resolution: a case study
We use multi-rooted trees in order to annotate and
model coreferential phenomena and anaphoric re-
lations (cf. Sasaki et al(2002)). Base for the
resolution of anaphoric relations (both pronomi-
nal anaphora and definite description anaphora) is
a small test corpus containing German newspaper
articles and scientific articles in German and En-
glish. Figure 3 shows an excerpt of a German
newspaper article taken from ?Die Zeit?. In this
example the first linguistic resource to apply is
a parser (in our case Machinese Syntax by Con-
nexor Oy). As a second step an XSLT script uses
the input document and the parser output and tags
discourse entities (see element de in Figure 3) by
judging several syntactic criteria provided by the
parser. The discourse entities mark the starting
point to determine anaphora-antecedent-relations
between pairs of discourse entities.
In order to resolve bridging relations (e.g.,
?door? as a meronym of ?room?), WordNet (Ger-
maNet for German texts) is used as a linguistic
resource to establish relationships between dis-
course entities according to the information stored
in the synsets4. By now, we use an Open Source
4A synset represents a concept and consists of a set of one
or more synonyms.
86
Figure 1: Overview of the architecture
Figure 2: Using heterogeneous linguistic resources
1 <doc_article>
2 <doc_sect1>
3 <doc_title/>
4 <doc_para>
5 <chs_sentence id="s22">
6 <chs_de deLemma="rolf" deID="de_n_078" deType="nom">Marie Rolfs</chs_de> ist <
chs_de deLemma="jahr" deID="de_n_079" deType="nom">vier Jahre</chs_de> alt.
7 </chs_sentence>
8 <chs_sentence id="s23">
9 Mit <chs_de deLemma="petra" deID="de_n_080" deType="nom">ihrer
Zwillingsschwester Petra</chs_de>, <chs_de deLemma="bruder" deID="de_n_081"
deType="nom">ihrem achtja?hrigen Bruder</chs_de> und <chs_de deLemma="mutter"
deID="de_n_082" deType="nom">ihrer Mutter Sabine</chs_de> wohnt <chs_de deLemma
="sie" deID="de_n_083" deType="nom">sie</chs_de> in <chs_de deLemma="
dreizimmerwohnung" deID="de_n_084" deType="nom">einer Dreizimmerwohnung in <
chs_de deLemma="rahlstedt" deID="de_n_085" deType="nom">Rahlstedt a<chs_de
deLemma="stadt#rand" deID="de_n_086" deType="nom">m o?stlichen Hamburger
Stadtrand</chs_de> </chs_de> </chs_de>.
10 </chs_sentence>
11 <chs_semRel>
12 <chs_cospecLink relType="poss" phorIDRef="de_n_080" antecedentIDRefs="de_n_078"/>
13 <chs_cospecLink relType="poss" phorIDRef="de_n_081" antecedentIDRefs="de_n_078"/>
14 <chs_cospecLink relType="poss" phorIDRef="de_n_082" antecedentIDRefs="de_n_078"/>
15 <chs_cospecLink relType="ident" phorIDRef="de_n_083" antecedentIDRefs="de_n_078"/
>
16 </chs_semRel>
17 </doc_para>
18 </doc_sect1>
19 </doc_article>
Figure 3: An extract of a German newspaper article marked up by several linguistic resources
87
native XML database5 as test tool for querying the
GermaNet data6. Resolving synonymous or hy-
peronymous anaphoric relations is done by using
XPath or XQuery queries on pairs of discourse en-
tities. Bridging relations are harder to track down
and will be focused on in the near future.
Figure 3 shows the shortened and manually re-
vised output of the anaphora resolution. In this
example two annotation layers have been merged:
the logical document structure (in our case a mod-
dified version of DocBook, doc) and the level
of semantic relations (chs). The logical docu-
ment structure describes the organisation of the
text document in terms of chapters, sections, para-
graphs, and the like. The level of semantic re-
lations describes discourse entities and relations
between them. Corpus investigations give rise to
the supposition that the logical text structure in-
fluences the search scope of candidates for an-
tecedents. Anaphoric relations are annotated with
a cospecLink element (lines 12 to 15). The
attribute relType holds the type of relation be-
tween two discourse entities. Line 15 is an exam-
ple of an identity relation between discourse entity
de n 078 (?Marie Rolfs?, line 6) and discourse
entity de n 083 (?sie?, line 9) whereby the first
is marked as antecedent.
5 Conclusion
The architecture shown in this paper provides ac-
cess to multiple layers of linguistic annotation and
allows for the reuse and integration of existing lin-
guistic resources. The resulting additional annota-
tion layers are extremely useful for solving com-
plex linguistic issues like anaphora resolution. It
is our goal to enable a semi-automatic anaphora
resolution by the end of the project life-span.
References
Barnard, David, Burnard, Lou, Gaspart, Jean-Pierre
Gaspart, Price, Lynne A., Spergerg-McQueen, C. M.
and Giovanni Battista Varile. 1995. Hierarchical en-
coding of text: Technical problems and SGML solu-
tions. Computers and the Humanities, 29(3):211?
231.
Bayerl, Petra Saskia, Lu?ngen, Harald, Goecke,
Daniela, Witt, Andreas and Daniel Naber. 2003.
5eXist (http://www.exist-db.org)
6GermaNet is available as an XML representation which
can be stored (and queried) in the above mentioned (and ad-
ditional) native XML database.
Methods for the semantic analysis of document
markup. In Proceedings of the 2003 ACM sym-
posium on Document engineering, pages 161?170,
New York, NY, USA. ACM Press.
Carletta, Jean Kilgour, Jonathan, O?Donnel, Timothy
J., Evert, Stefan and Holger Voormann. 2003. The
NITE Object Model Library for Handling Structured
Linguistic Annotation on Multimodal Data Sets. In
Proceedings of the EACL Workshop on Language
Technology and the Semantic Web (3rd Workshop on
NLP and XML (NLPXML-2003)), Budapest, Hun-
gary.
DeRose, Steven J., Durand, David G., Mylonas, Elli
and Allen H. Renear. 1990. What is text, really?
Journal of Computing in Higher Education, 1(2):3?
26.
Renear, Allen, Mylonas, Elli and David Durand. 1996.
Refining our notion of what text really is: The prob-
lem of overlapping hierarchies. Research in Hu-
manities Computing. Selected Papers from the ALL-
C/ACH Conference, Christ Church, Oxford, April
1992, 4:263?280.
Sasaki, Felix, Wegener, Claudia, Metzing, Dieter Met-
zing and Jens Po?nninghaus. 2002. Co-reference
annotation and resources: A multilingual corpus of
typologically diverse languages. In Proceedings of
the 3nd International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC 2002), pages 1225?
1230, Las Palmas.
Simons, Gary, Lewis, William, Farrar, Scott, Langen-
doen, Terence, Fitzsimons, Brian and Hector Gon-
zalez. 2004. The Semantics of Markup: Map-
ping LegacyMarkup Schemas to a Common Seman-
tics. In Graham Wilcock, Nancy Ide and Laurent
Romary, editor, Proceedings of the 4th Workshop
on NLP and XML (NLPXML-2004), pages 25?32,
Barcelona, Spain, July. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Sperberg-McQueen, C. M. and Lou Burnard, editor.
2004. Guidelines for Text Encoding and Inter-
change. published for the TEI Consortium by Hu-
manities Computing Unit, University of Oxford.
Thompson, Henry S. and David McKelvie. 1997. Hy-
perlink semantics for standoff markup of read-only
documents. In Proceedings of SGML Europe ?97:
The next decade ? Pushing the Envelope, pages 227?
229, Barcelona.
Witt, Andreas, Goecke, Daniela, Sasaki, Felix and Har-
ald Lu?ngen. 2005. Unification of XML Documents
with Concurrent Markup. Literary and Lingustic
Computing, 20(1):103?116.
Witt, Andreas. 2002. Meaning and interpretation of
concurrent markup. In ALLCACH2002, Joint Con-
ference of the ALLC and ACH, Tu?bingen.
Witt, Andreas. 2004. Multiple hierarchies: new as-
pects of an old solution. In Proceedings of Extreme
Markup Languages.
88
Proceedings of the Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 140?147,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Web-based Annotation of Anaphoric Relations and Lexical Chains
Maik St?hrenberg and Daniela Goecke and Nils Diewald and Alexander Mehler
Bielefeld University
Germany
{maik.stuehrenberg|daniela.goecke|nils.diewald|alexander.mehler}@uni-bielefeld.de
Irene Cramer
Dortmund University
Germany
irene.cramer@uni-dortmund.de
Abstract
Annotating large text corpora is a time-
consuming effort. Although single-user an-
notation tools are available, web-based an-
notation applications allow for distributed
annotation and file access from different lo-
cations. In this paper we present the web-
based annotation application Serengeti for
annotating anaphoric relations which will be
extended for the annotation of lexical chains.
1 Introduction
The relevance of corpus work for different tasks in
the fields of linguistics is widely accepted. This
holds especially for the area of (semi-)automatic
text and discourse analysis which demands reference
corpora in which instances of various levels of dis-
course structure have been annotated. Such anno-
tation tasks are typically carried out by a combina-
tion of automatic and manual techniques. Manual
annotation of large text corpora is a time consum-
ing effort. Therefore, annotation tools are an indis-
pensable means to overcome the limits of manual
annotations. In spite of their limited level of au-
tomatization, such tools nevertheless help to semi-
automatically support the annotation process and to
secure consistency of manual annotations. This pa-
per describes such an annotation tool which focuses
on a certain type of discourse structures. More
specifically, we deal with anaphoric relations and
lexical cohesion. Our starting point is the obser-
vation that these two resources of textual cohesion
(Halliday and Hasan, 1976) homogeneously induce
chain-like discourse structures: one the one hand we
have reference chains started by some antecedence
and continued by some anaphora linked to the same
antecedence. On the other hand, lexical cohesion
generates so called lexical chains of semantically
related tokens. Based on this observation we de-
scribe the annotation tool Serengeti which reflects
this structural homogeneity on the level of its struc-
tural representation model as well as by its proce-
dural annotation model. Serengeti includes an an-
notation scheme which is extended in order to sup-
port the annotation of reference chains and lexical
chains. The paper is organized as follows: Section
2.1 describes the application scenario of anaphoric
relations and the scheme we use to annotate them.
Section 2.2 deals with the second application sce-
nario: lexical chains. As our starting point was the
former scenario, its extension to the latter one will be
motivated by a separate case study of lexical chain-
ing. Section 3 refers to related work, while Section
4 describes our annotation tool in detail. Finally, the
application of Serengeti to annotating lexical chains
is described in Section 5.
2 Annotating Large Text Corpora
The main focus of the joint work presented in this
paper1 is text technological information modelling
and analysis of various types of discourse. Within
our research group we deal with the integration of
1The work presented in this paper is a joint ef-
fort of the projects A2, A4 and B1 of the Research
Group Text-technological modelling of information funded
by the German Research Foundation. See http://www.
text-technology.de for further details.
140
heterogeneous linguistic resources. This applies es-
pecially to the Sekimo project (A2) which focusses
on the application domain of anaphora resolution.
We use the term ?heterogeneity? to refer to resources
that differ either in terms of form (text, audio, video)
or in terms of function (e. g. lexicons, annotated
texts). Connection between these resources can
be established with the means of XML, cf. Si-
mons (2004). Integrating resources via an abstract
interface is necessary due to different reasons: The
resources used have often been developed indepen-
dently from each other and a cascaded application
of one resource to the output of another resource is
not always possible. Furthermore, the output of dif-
ferent resources often cannot be encoded in a single
structure without driving into incompatibilites (i. e.
XML overlap). Therefore an architecture was devel-
oped which allows for the combination of the out-
put structures of several linguistic resources into a
single XML annotated document and which is de-
scribed in detail in Witt et al (2005) and St?hren-
berg et al (2006) .
2.1 Anaphoric Relations
Motivation and Background Resolving anapho-
ric relations needs a variety of different informa-
tion (e. g. POS, distance information, grammati-
cal function, semantic knowledge, see, for exam-
ple, Mitkov (2002) for an overview). Several re-
sources are applied to a corpus of 47 texts and the
output structures are combined into a single XML
document using the architecture mentioned above.
In order not only to integrate but also evaluate re-
sources for a given linguistic task formally in terms
of precision and recall, it should be possible to ei-
ther switch on or switch off a given resource. In
the application domain of anaphora resolution eval-
uation is done as follows. Each discourse entity
or referent (cf. Karttunen (1976)) is annotated as
an XML element which holds a variety of attribute
information. Each XML element is reinterpreted
as a feature vector; pairs of discourse entities be-
tween which an anaphoric relation holds form a sin-
gle feature vector with additional information rele-
vant for anaphora resolution (e. g. distance informa-
tion, identity of grammatical form, semantic relat-
edness of underlying lemmata and the like). In or-
der to evaluate different resource settings, decision
trees with varying sets of feature vectors are used
for the process of anaphora resolution. Xiaofeng et
al. (2004) or Strube and M?ller (2003) have shown
the feasibility of decision trees for the domain of
anaphora resolution; we have chosen this approach
as it makes it possible to easily switch the informa-
tion set for training and evaluation as opposed to e. g.
rewriting rule sets. Both, training and evaluation as
well as empirically based analysis of anaphora need
an annotated reference corpus (Poesio et al, 2002).
Scheme and annotation process are described in the
following section.
The Annotation Scheme for Anaphoric Rela-
tions Several annotation schemes for annotat-
ing anaphoric relations have been developed in
the last years, e. g. the UCREL anaphora an-
notation scheme (Fligelstone, 1992; Garside et
al., 1997), the SGML-based MUC annotation
scheme (Hirschmann, 1997), and the MATE/G-
NOME Scheme (Poesio, 2004), amongst others.
In order to annotate discourse relations ? either
anaphoric relations or lexical chains (cf. Sec-
tion 2.2) ? two types of information have to be spec-
ified. First, the markables, i. e. the elements that can
be part of a relation, have to be specified (cf. M?ller
and Strube (2003)). Second, the relation(s) between
markables and their respective types and subtypes
have to be defined. The markables form a basis for
the annotation process and therefore have to be an-
notated in advance. Normally, for a domain under
investigation, elements are denoted as being mark-
ables either via a specific element or via the use of
a universal attribute. In our system, discourse enti-
ties are detected automatically on the basis of POS
and parsing information. The annotation scheme
for annotating anaphoric relations is an extension
of the scheme presented by Holler et al (2004) that
has been developed for annotations in the context of
text-to-hypertext conversion in the project B1 Hy-
Tex. We adopt the distinction between coreference
and cospecification but we extend the annotation
scheme for an explicit distinction between cospec-
ification (direct anaphora) and bridging (associative
or indirect anaphora). Thus, we add the primary re-
lation type bridgingLink (denoting bridging) to the
already existing one (cospecLink). Each primary
relation type includes different secondary relation
141
Listing 1: The annotation format for anaphoric relations. Shortened and manually revised output
1 <chs:chs>
2 <chs:text>
3 <cnx:de deID="de8" deType="namedEntity" headRef="w36">
4 <cnx:token ref="w36">Maik</cnx:token></cnx:de>
5 <cnx:token ref="w37">hat</cnx:token> <cnx:token ref="w38">kein</cnx:token>
6 <cnx:token ref="w39">eigenes</cnx:token> <cnx:token ref="w40">Fahrrad</cnx:token>,
7 <cnx:token ref="w42">und</cnx:token>
8 <cnx:de deID="de10" deType="namedEntity" headRef="w43">
9 <cnx:token ref="w43">Marie</cnx:token></cnx:de>
10 <cnx:token ref="w45">f?hrt</cnx:token> <cnx:token ref="w46">nicht</cnx:token>
11 <cnx:token ref="w47">in</cnx:token>
12 <cnx:de deID="de11" deType="nom" headRef="w49">
13 <cnx:token ref="w48">den</cnx:token>
14 <cnx:token ref="w49">Urlaub</cnx:token></cnx:de>.
15 <cnx:de deID="de12" deType="nom" headRef="w53">
16 <cnx:token ref="w52">Zwei</cnx:token>
17 <cnx:token ref="w53">Kinder</cnx:token></cnx:de>,
18 <cnx:de deID="de13" deType="nom" headRef="w56">
19 <cnx:token ref="w55">eine</cnx:token>
20 <cnx:token ref="w56">Gemeinsamkeit</cnx:token></cnx:de>:
21 </chs:text>
22 <cnx:token_ref id="w36" head="w37" pos="N" syn="@NH" depV="subj" morph="MSC SG NOM" />
23 <chs:semRel>
24 <chs:bridgingLink relType="hasMember" antecedentIDRefs="de8 de10" phorIDRef="de12"/>
25 </chs:semRel>
26 </chs:chs>
types that specify the subtype of the relation, e. g.
ident or hypernym as secondary types of cospecLink
or meronym or setMember as secondary types of
bridgingLink. An example annotation of an indirect
anaphoric relation (element bridgingLink, line
30) between the discourse entities de12 (lines 18 to
21) and de8 (lines 3 to 5) and de10 (lines 9 to 11)
can be seen in Listing 1.
2.2 Lexical Chaining
Motivation and Background Based on the con-
cept of lexical cohesion (Halliday and Hasan,
1976), computational linguists (inter alia Morris and
Hirst (1991)) developed a method to compute a par-
tial text representation: lexical chains. These span
over passages or even the complete text linking lex-
ical items. The exemplary annotation in Figure 1
illustrates that lexical chaining is achieved by the
selection of vocabulary and significantly accounts
for the cohesive structure of a text passage. Items
in a lexical chain are connected via semantic re-
lations. Accordingly, lexical chains are computed
on the basis of a lexical semantic resource such as
WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998). Figure 1 also depicts
Figure 1: Chaining Example (adapted from Halliday
et al (1976))
several unsystematic relations, which should in prin-
ciple be considered. Unfortunately, common lexical
resources do not incorporate them sufficiently. Most
systems consist of the fundamental modules shown
in Table 1.
However, in order to formally evaluate the perfor-
mance of a given chainer in terms of precision and
recall, a (preferably standardized and freely avail-
able) test set would be required. To our knowledge
such a resource does not exist ? neither for English
142
Module Subtasks
chaining candidate selection preprocessing of corpora:
determine chaining window,
sentence boundaries,
tokens, POS-tagging
chunks etc.
calculation of chains / look-up: lexical semantic
meta-chains resource (e.g. WordNet),
scoring of relations,
sense disambiguation
output creation rate chain strength
(e.g. select strong chains),
build application specific
representation
Table 1: Overview of Chainer Modules
nor for German. We therefore plan to develop an
evaluation corpus (gold standard), which on the one
hand includes the annotation of lexical chains and
on the other hand reveals the rich interaction be-
tween various principles to achieve a cohesive text
structure. In order to systematically construct sound
guidelines for the annotation of this gold standard,
we conducted a case study.
Case Study Six subjects were asked to annotate
lexical chains in three short texts and in doing so
record all challenges and uncertainties they experi-
enced. The subjects were asked to read three texts
? a wikipedia entry (137 words), a newspaper
article (233 words), and an interview (306 words).
They were then given a list of all nouns occurring
in the articles (almost all chainers exclusively con-
sider nouns as chaining candidates), which they had
to rate with respect to their ?importance? in under-
standing the text. On this basis they were asked
to determine the semantic relations of every pos-
sible chaining candidate pair, thus chain the nouns
and annotate the three texts. Just like previously re-
ported case studies (Beigman Klebanov, 2005; Mor-
ris and Hirst, 2004; Morris and Hirst, 2005) aim-
ing at the annotation of lexical chains, we found
that the inter-annotator agreement was in general
relatively low. Only the annotation of very promi-
nent items in the three texts, which accounted for
approximately one fifth of the chaining candidates,
resulted in a satisfying agreement (that is: the ma-
jority of the subjects produced an identical or very
similar annotation). However, all subjects com-
plained about the task. They found it rather diffi-
cult to construct linearized or quasi-linearized struc-
tures, in short, chains. Instead, most of the subjects
built clusters and drew very complex graphs to illus-
trate the cohesive relations they found. They also
pointed out that only a small fraction of the can-
didate list contributed to their text understanding.
This clearly supports our observation that most of
the subjects first skimmed through the text to find
the most prominent items, established chains for this
selection and then worked the text over to distribute
the remaining items to these chains. We therefore as-
sume that lexical chains do not directly reflect read-
ing and understanding processes. Nevertheless, they
do in some way contribute to them. Many subjects
additionally noted that a reasonable candidate list
should also include multi-word units (e.g. techni-
cal terms) or even phrases. Furthermore, as already
reported in previous work (Morris and Hirst, 2004),
the semantic relations usually considered seem not
to suffice. Accordingly, some subjects proposed new
relations to characterize the links connecting can-
didate pairs. Given our own findings and the re-
sults reported in previous work, it is obviously de-
manding to find a clear-cut border between the con-
cepts of lexical chaining, semantic fields, and co-
reference/anaphora resolution. Definitely, the anno-
tation of co-reference/anaphora and lexical chains is
inherently analogous. In both cases an annotation
layer consisting of labelled edges between pairs of
annotation candidates is constructed. However, we
assume that the lexical chaining layer might contain
more edges between annotation candidates. As a
consequence, its structure presumably is more com-
plex and its connectivity higher. We thus plan to
conduct an extended follow-up study in order to ex-
plore these differences between the annotation of
lexical chains and co-reference/anaphora. We also
intend to take advantage of ? amongst other aspects
? the inter-annotator comparison functionality pro-
vided by Serengeti (see Section 4 for a detailed de-
scription) in order to implement a formally correct
inter-annotator agreement test.
3 Available Tools for Annotating
Linguistic Corpora
Both the anaphora resolution and the lexical chain-
ing scenario have shown the importance of an easy-
143
to-use annotation tool. Although a wide range of
annotation tools is available, one has to separate
tools for annotating multimodal corpora from tools
for annotating unimodal (i. e. text) corpora. Dip-
per et al (2004) evaluated some of the most com-
monly used tools of both categories (TASX Anno-
tator, EXMARaLDA, MMAX, PALinkA and Sys-
tematic Coder). Besides, other tools such as ELAN2
or Anvil3 are available as well, as are tool kits such
as the Annotation Graph Toolkit (AGTK)4 or the
NITE XML Toolkit.5 While multimodal annotation
demands a framework supporting the time-aligned
handling of video and audio streams and, therefore,
much effort has been spent on the design and devel-
opment of tools, unimodal annotation has often been
fulfilled by using ordinary XML editors which can
be error-prone. Nevertheless, specialized annota-
tion frameworks are available as well, e. g. MMAX
can be used for multi-level annotation projects (cf.
M?ller and Strube (2001; 2003)). However, as an-
notation projects grow in size and complexity (often
multiple annotation layers are generated), collabo-
rative annotation and the use of annotation tools is
vital.
? Ma et al (2002), for example, describe collab-
orative annotation in the context of the AGTK.
But since most of the aforementioned applica-
tions have to be installed locally on a PC, work-
ing on a corpus and managing annotations ex-
ternally can be difficult.
? Another problem worth to be mentioned is data
management. Having several annotators work-
ing on one text, unification and comparison of
the markup produced is quite difficult.
? Furthermore, annotation tools help to increase
both the quality and quantity of the annotation
process.
Recent web technologies allow the design of web-
based applications that resemble locally installed
desktop programs on the one hand and provide cen-
tral data management on the other hand. Therefore
2http://www.lat-mpi.eu/tools/elan/
3http://www.dfki.de/~kipp/anvil/
4http://agtk.sourceforge.net/
5http://www.ltg.ed.ac.uk/NITE/
distributed annotation is possible regardless of loca-
tion, provided that an internet connection is avail-
able. In this paper we propose the web-based anno-
tation application Serengeti.
4 A new Approach: Serengeti
As the Sekimo project is part of a research group
with interrelated application domains, annotation
layers from different projects have been evaluated
for their interrelationship (e. g. Bayerl et al (2003;
2006)). This led directly to the open design of
Serengeti ? an annotation tool with the fundamen-
tal idea in mind: making possible the annotation
of a single layer (or resource) and the use of the
best annotation possible and the best available re-
sources. Serengeti allows for several experts to an-
notate a single text at the same time as well as to
compare the different annotations (inter-annotator-
agreement) and merge them afterwards. Access to
the documents is available from everywhere (an in-
ternet connection and a browser is required).
4.1 Technical Overview
Serengeti is a web application developed for Mozilla
Firefox,6 thus its architecture is separated into a
client and a server side, following the principles and
tools of AJAX (Asynchronous JavaScript and XML,
cf. Garrett (2005)). While groups, documents and
annotations are managed centrally on the server side,
all user interactions are rendered locally on the client
side.7
4.2 Graphical User Interface
The Graphical User Interface (GUI) of Serengeti is
subdivided into several areas (cf. Figure 2). The
main area renders the text to be annotated, roughly
laid out in terms of paragraphs, lists, tables and non-
text sections according to the input XML data. Ad-
ditionally, predefined markables are underlined and
followed by boxes containing the markables? unique
identifiers. These boxes serve as clickable buttons
to choose markables during the annotation. At this
6Serengeti is targeted at platform independence, so we?ve
chosen Firefox, which is freely available for several operating
systems. Future versions will support other browsers as well.
7Each Serengeti installation supports more than one work-
group. Server sided data management allows the use of ver-
sioning systems like CVS or, in our case, Subversion.
144
time, adding markables, i. e. changing the input
data, is not allowed.8 This ensures that all annota-
tors use the same base layer. A section at the bottom
of the interface represents the annotation panel with
a list of all annotated relations on the left and all
editing tools on the right side. An application bar at
the top of the GUI provides functions for choosing
and managing groups, documents and annotations.
4.3 Annotation Process
After logging in and choosing a document to anno-
tate, new relations between markables can be cre-
ated. The markables that take part in the relation
are chosen by left-clicking the boxes attached to the
underlined markables in the text and, if necessary,
unchecked by clicking them once again. To encode
the type of a relation between chosen markables, an
input form at the bottom right of the page provides
various options for specifying the relation accord-
ing to the annotation scheme. The OKAY command
adds created relations to the list, which can subse-
quently be edited or deleted. In regard to their state,
relation bars in the list can be highlighted differ-
ently to simplify the post-editing (i. e. new relations,
old/saved relations, commented relations or incom-
plete relations).9 The user can save his work to the
server at any time. After the annotation process is
completed, the COMMIT command (located in the
document menu) declares the annotation as finished.
4.4 Comparing Annotations and Reaching a
Consensus
In order to achieve the best annotation results it is
necessary to provide an opportunity for the evalua-
tion of single annotations or comparing of multiple
annotations on one single document (either by dif-
ferent annotators or identical annotators at different
points in time). This allows for verification of the
quality of the annotation scheme and for valid train-
ing data for automated natural language processing
tools. For this purpose, a special user access, the
Consensus User (CU), has been developed as part of
Serengeti?s concept. Loading a document as a CU, it
8The definition of XML elements as markables and the lay-
out and relation type specification is driven via an external con-
figuration script, adjustable for each group.
9It is possible to hide relations according to their state as
well.
is possible to choose a single annotation done by any
other annotator (either work in progress or commit-
ted) as the basis for the final annotation. This is done
with the same tools as those for the annotation pro-
cess. If satisfied, the CU can declare the annotation
as ultimately closed via the COMMIT command.
Figure 3: Serengeti?s comparison window in the
lower left part of the GUI.
Furthermore, the CU can compare two annota-
tions with each other. The relations annotated by
both users are then displayed in the relation list and
juxtaposed in case they differ in at least one aspect
(e. g. different relation types as in Figure 3).10 On
this basis the CU can decide which relation to accept
and which one to reject. Again, all editing options
are at the user?s disposal.
While editing single or multiple user annotations,
the CU can save the current state of his work at any
time. Afterwards these annotations will appear in
the ANNOTATIONS MENU as well and can be se-
lected for further evaluation and comparison.11
5 Extending Serengeti
Although one might doubt that Serengeti is directly
applicable to annotating lexical chains, this can nev-
ertheless be done straightforwardly using the anno-
tation described in Section 2.1. Our starting point is
as follows: As markables we refer to entities of the
parser output (i. e. tokens) where a user can mark
a token as the initial vertex of a chain. In order
to reflect the findings of our case study on lexical
chaining we distinguish two cases: Either the an-
notator decides that a newly entered token enlarges
10At this point the assignment of relations is important.
Anaphoric relations, for example, are assigned to each other
if their anaphoric element is the same. If there is more than
one relation with identical anaphoric elements, the relations are
sorted by their relation types and their antecedent(s).
11Comparisons require conflictless annotations, i. e. saved
comparisons have to be free from juxtaposed relations.
145
Figure 2: Serengeti?s User Interface. Screenshots of Serengeti Version 0.7.1
an already marked-up chain by explicitly relating it
to one of its links or he implicitly assigns the to-
ken to that chain as a whole which is visually rep-
resented as part of Serengeti?s interface. In the first
case we just face another use case of our annota-
tion scheme, that is, a link between two tokens or
spans of a text where this link may be typed accord-
ing to some linguistic relation that holds between the
spans, e. g. hyponymy. In the second case of an im-
plicit chain assignment we proceed as follows: We
link the newly processed token to the last vertex of
the lexical chain to which the token is attached and
type this relation non-specifically as association. As
a result, we reduce this use case to the one already
mapped by our general annotation scheme. In or-
der to make this a workable solution, we will in-
tegrate a representation of lexical chains by means
of tag clouds where each chain is represented by a
subset of those lexical units which because of their
frequency are most important in representing that
chain. Following this line of extending Serengeti, we
manage to use it as an annotation tool which handles
anaphoric relations as well as lexical chains.
6 Discussion and Outlook
Serengeti can be used to create corpus data for
training and evaluation purposes. An installation
of Serengeti is available online.12 Currently, the
tool is being generalized to allow the annotation
of lexical chains and several other annotation tasks.
More specifically, we plan to incorporate any kind of
chain-like structuring of text segments and to make
the chains an object of annotation so that they can
be interrelated. This will allow to incorporate con-
stituency relations into the annotation process. Be-
yond that we will incorporate metadata handling to
document all steps of the annotation process.
References
P. S. Bayerl, H. L?ngen, D. Goecke, A. Witt, and
D. Naber. 2003. Methods for the Semantic Analy-
sis of Document Markup. In C. Roisin, E. Muson,
and C. Vanoirbeek, editors, Proceedings of the 2003
ACM symposium on Document engineering (DocEng),
pages 161?170, Grenoble. ACM Press.
12http://coli.lili.uni-bielefeld.de/
serengeti/
146
B. Beigman Klebanov. 2005. Using readers to identify
lexical cohesive structures in texts. In Proceedings of
ACL Student Research Workshop.
S. Dipper, M. G?tze, and M. Stede. 2004. Simple Anno-
tation Tools for Complex Annotation Tasks: an Evalu-
ation. In Proceedings of the LREC Workshop on XML-
based Richly Annotated Corpora, pages 54?62, Lis-
bon, Portugal.
C. Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet. An Electronic Lexi-
cal Database. The MIT Press.
S. Fligelstone. 1992. Developing a Scheme for Annotat-
ing Text to Show Anaphoric Relations. In G. Leitner,
editor, New Directions in English Language Corpora:
Methodology, Results, Software Developments, pages
153?170. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin.
J. J. Garrett, 2005. AJAX: A New Approach to Web
Applications. Adaptive Path LLC, February, 18.
Online: http://www.adaptivepath.com/
publications/essays/archives/000385.
php.
R. Garside, S. Fligelstone, and S. Botley. 1997. Dis-
course Annotation: Anaphoric Relations in Corpora.
In R. Garside, G. Leech, and A. McEnery, editors,
Corpus Annotation: Linguistic Information from Com-
puter Text Corpora, pages 66?84. Addison-Wesley
Longman, London.
D. Goecke and A. Witt. 2006. Exploiting Logical Docu-
ment Structure for Anaphora Resolution. In Proceed-
ings of the 5th International Conference., Genoa, Italy.
Michael A. K. Halliday and Ruqaiya Hasan. 1976. Co-
hesion in English. Longman, London.
L. Hirschmann. 1997. MUC-7 Coreference Task Defini-
tion (version 3.0). In L. Hirschman and N. Chinchor,
editors, Proceedings of Message Understanding Con-
ference (MUC-7).
A. Holler, J.-F. Maas, and A. Storrer. 2004. Exploiting
Coreference Annotations for Text-to-Hypertext Con-
version. In Proceeding of LREC, volume II, pages
651?654, Lisbon, Portugal.
L. Karttunen. 1976. Discourse Referents. Syntax and
Semantics: Notes from the Linguistic Underground,
7:363?385.
X. Ma, L. Haejoong, S. Bird, and K. Maeda. 2002.
Models and Tools for Collaborative Annotation. In
Proceedings of the Third International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation, Paris. European
Language Resources Association.
R. Mitkov. 2002. Anaphora Resolution. Longman, Lon-
don.
J. Morris and G. Hirst. 1991. Lexical cohesion computed
by thesaural relations as an indicator of the structure of
text. Computational linguistics, 17(1):21?48, March.
J. Morris and G. Hirst. 2004. Non-classical lexical
semantic relations. In Proceedings of HLT-NAACL
Workshop on Computational Lexical Semantics.
J. Morris and G. Hirst. 2005. The subjectivity of lexi-
cal cohesion in text. In J. C. Chanahan, C. Qu, and
J. Wiebe, editors, Computing attitude and affect in text.
Springer.
C. M?ller and M.l Strube. 2001. Annotating Anaphoric
and Bridging Relations with MMAX. In Proceedings
of the 2nd SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dia-
logue, pages 90?95, Aalborg, Denmark.
C. M?ller and M. Strube. 2003. Multi-Level Annotation
in MMAX. In Proceedings of the 4th SIGdial Work-
shop on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 198?207, Sap-
poro, Japan.
M. Poesio, T. Ishikawa, S. Schulte im Walde, and
R. Viera. 2002. Acquiring lexical knowledge for
anaphora resolution. In Proc. of the 3rd Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC).
M. Poesio. 2004. The MATE/GNOME Scheme for
Anaphoric Annotation, Revisited. In Proceedings of
SIGDIAL, Boston, April.
G. Simons, W. Lewis, S. Farrar, T. Langendoen, B. Fitzsi-
mons, and H. Gonzalez. 2004. The semantics of
markup. In Proceedings of the ACL 2004 Workshop
on RDF/RDFS and OWL in Language Technology
(NLPXML-2004), Barcelona.
M. Strube and C. M?ller. 2003. A Machine Learning
Approach to Pronoun Resolution in Spoken Dialogue.
In Proceedings of the 41st Annual Meeting on Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, volume 1, pages
168?175. ACL 03.
M. St?hrenberg, A. Witt, D. Goecke, D. Metzing, and
O. Schonefeld. 2006. Multidimensional Markup
and Heterogeneous Linguistic Resources. In D. Ahn,
E. T. K. Sang, and G. Wilcock, editors, Proceedings of
the 5th Workshop on NLP and XML (NLPXML-2006):
Multi-Dimensional Markup in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 85?88.
A. Witt, D. Goecke, F. Sasaki, and H. L?ngen.
2005. Unification of XML Documents with Con-
current Markup. Literary and Lingustic Computing,
20(1):103?116.
Y. Xiaofeng, J. Su, G. Zhou, and C. L. Tan. 2004. Im-
proving Pronoun Resolution by Incorporating Coref-
erential Information of Candidates. In Proceedings of
ACL.
147
