Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, pages 1?8,
Beijing, China, 21-22 August 2010. c?2010 Asian Federation for Natural Language Processing
A Thesaurus of Predicate-Argument Structure for Japanese Verbs
to Deal with Granularity of Verb Meanings
Koichi Takeuchi
Okayama University /
koichi@cl.cs.
okayama-u.ac.jp
Kentaro Inui
Tohoku University /
inui@ecei.
tohoku.ac.jp
Nao Takeuchi
Free Language
Analyst
Atsushi Fujita
Future University Hakodate /
fujita@fun.ac.jp
Abstract
In this paper we propose a framework
of verb semantic description in order to
organize different granularity of similar-
ity between verbs. Since verb mean-
ings highly depend on their arguments
we propose a verb thesaurus on the ba-
sis of possible shared meanings with
predicate-argument structure. Motiva-
tions of this work are to (1) construct a
practical lexicon for dealing with alter-
nations, paraphrases and entailment re-
lations between predicates, and (2) pro-
vide a basic database for statistical learn-
ing system as well as a theoretical lex-
icon study such as Generative Lexicon
and Lexical Conceptual Structure. One
of the characteristics of our description
is that we assume several granularities
of semantic classes to characterize verb
meanings. The thesaurus form allows us
to provide several granularities of shared
meanings; thus, this gives us a further re-
vision for applying more detailed analy-
ses of verb meanings.
1 Introduction
In natural language processing, to deal with
similarities/differences between verbs is essen-
tial not only for paraphrase but also textual en-
tailment and QA system which are expected
to extract more valuable facts from massively
large texts such as the Web. For example, in
the QA system, assuming that the body text
says ?He lent her a bicycle?, the answer of the
question ?He gave her a bicycle?? should be
?No?, however the answer of ?She rented the
bicycle?? should be ?Yes?. Thus construct-
ing database of verb similarities/differences en-
ables us to deal with detailed paraphrase/non-
paraphrase relations in NLP.
From the view of the current language re-
source, how the shared/different meanings of
?He lent her a bicycle? and ?He gave her a bi-
cycle? can be described? The shared mean-
ing of lend and give in the above sentences is
that they are categorized to Giving Verbs, as
in Levin?s English Verb Classes and Alterna-
tions (EVCA) (Levin, 1993), while the different
meaning will be that lend does not imply own-
ership of the theme, i.e., a bicycle. One of the
problematic issues with describing shared mean-
ing among verbs is that semantic classes such as
Giving Verbs should be dependent on the gran-
ularity of meanings we assumed. For example,
the meaning of lend and give in the above sen-
tences is not categorized into the same Frame
in FrameNet (Baker et al, 1998). The reason
for this different categorization can be consid-
ered to be that the granularity of the semantic
class of Giving Verbs is larger than that of the
Giving Frame in FrameNet1. From the view of
natural language processing, especially dealing
the with propositional meaning of verbs, all of
the above classes, i.e., the wider class of Giv-
ing Verbs containing lend and give as well as
the narrower class of Giving Frame containing
give and donate, are needed. Therefore, in this
work, in order to describe verb meanings with
several granularities of semantic classes, a the-
saurus form is adopted for our verb dictionary.
Based on the background, this paper presents
a thesaurus of predicate-argument structure for
verbs on the basis of a lexical decompo-
sitional framework such as Lexical Concep-
tual Structure (Jackendoff, 1990); thus our
1We agree with the concept of Frame and FrameEle-
ments in FrameNet but what we propose in this paper is the
necessity for granularities of Frames and FrameElements.
1
proposed thesaurus can deal with argument
structure level alternations such as causative,
transitive/intransitive, stative. Besides, tak-
ing a thesaurus form enables us to deal with
shared/differenciate meaning of verbs with con-
sistency, e.g., a verb class node of ?lend? and
?rent? can be described in the detailed layer of
the node ?give?.
We constructed this thesaurus on Japanese
verbs and the current status of the verb thesaurus
is this: we have analyzed 7,473 verb meanings
(4,425 verbs) and organized the semantic classes
in a ve-layer thesaurus with 71 semantic roles
types. Below, we describe background issues,
basic design issues, what kind of problems re-
main, limitations and perspectives of applica-
tions.
2 Existing Lexical Resources and
Drawbacks
2.1 Lexical Resources in English
From the view of previous lexical databases
In English, several well-considered lexical
databases are available, e.g., EVCA, Dorr?s
LCS (Dorr, 1997), FrameNet, WordNet (Fell-
baum, 1998), VerbNet (Kipper-Schuler, 2005)
and PropBank (Palmer et al, 2005). Be-
sides there is the research project (Pustejovsky
and Meyers, 2005) to nd general descriptional
framework of predicate argument structure by
merging several lexical databases such as Prop-
Bank, NomBank, TimeBank and PennDiscouse
Treebank.
Our approach corresponds partly to each
lexical database, (i.e., FrameNet?s Frame and
FrameElements correspond to our verb class
and semantic role labels, and the way to orga-
nize verb similarity classes with thesaurus cor-
responds with WordNet?s synset), but is not
exactly the same; namely, there is no lex-
ical database describing several granularities
of semantic classes between verbs with argu-
ments. Of course, since the above English lex-
ical databases have links with each other, it is
possible to produce a verb dictionary with sev-
eral granularities of semantic classes with argu-
ments. However, the basic categories of classify-
ing verbs would be little different due to the dif-
ferent background theory of each English lexical
database; it must be not easy to add another level
of semantic granularity with keeping consistency
for all the lexical databases; thus, thesaurus form
is needed to be a core form for describing verb
meanings2.
2.2 Lexical Resources in Japanese
In previous studies, several Japanese lexicons
were published: IPAL (IPA, 1986) focuses on
morpho-syntactic classes but IPAL is small3.
EDR (Jap, 1995) consists of a large-scale lex-
icon and corpus (See Section 3.4). EDR is
a well-considered and wide coverage dictio-
nary focusing on translation between Japanese
and English, but EDR?s semantic classes were
not designed with linguistically-motivated lex-
ical relations between verbs, e.g., alternations,
causative, transitive, and detransitive relations
between verbs. We believe these relations must
be key for dealing with paraphrase in NLP.
Recently Japanese FrameNet (Ohara et al,
2006) and Japanese WordNet (Bond et al, 2008)
are proposed. Japanese FrameNet currently
published only less than 100 verbs4. Besides
Japanese WordNet contains 87000 words and
46000 synsets, however, there are three major
difculty of dealing with paraphrase relations
between verbs: (1) there is no argument informa-
tion; (2) existing many similar synsets force us to
solve ne disambiguation between verbs when
we map a verb in a sentence to WordNet; (3) the
basic verbs of Japanese (i.e., highly ambiguous
verbs) are wrongly assigned to unrelated synsets
because they are constructed by translation from
English to Japanese.
2As Kipper (Kipper-Schuler, 2005) showed in their
examples mapping between VerbNet and WordNet verb
senses, most of the mappings are many-to-many relations;
this indicates that some two verbs grouped in a same se-
mantic type in VerbNet can be categorized into different
synsets in WordNet. Since WordNet does not have argu-
ment structure nor syntactic information, we cannot pur-
chase what is the different features for between the synsets.
3It contains 861 verbs and 136 adjectives.
4We are supplying our database to Japanese FrameNet
project.
2
3 Thesaurus of Predicate-Argument
Structure
The proposed thesaurus of predicate-argument
structure can deal with several levels of verb
classes on the basis of granularity of dened verb
meaning. In the thesaurus we incorporate LCS-
based semantic description for each verb class
that can provide several argument structure such
as construction grammar (Goldberg, 1995). This
must be high advantage to describe the different
factors from the view of not only syntactic func-
tions but also internal semantic relations. Thus
this characteristics of the proposed thesaurus can
be powerful framework for calculating similar-
ity and difference between verb senses. In the
following sections we explain the total design of
thesaurus and the details.
3.1 Design of Thesaurus
The proposed thesaurus consists of hierarchy of
verb classes we assumed. A verb class, which
is a conceptual class, has verbs with a shared
meaning. A parent verb class includes concepts
of subordinate verb class; thus a subordinate
verb class is a concretization of the parent verb
class. A verb class has a semantic description
that is a kind of semantic skeleton inspired from
lexical conceptual structure (Jackendoff, 1990;
Kageyama, 1996; Dorr, 1997). Thus a seman-
tic description in a verb class describes core se-
mantic relations between arguments and shadow
arguments of a shared meaning of the verb class.
Since verb can be polysemous, each verb sense is
designated with example sentences. Verb senses
with a shared meaning are assigned to a verb
class. Every example sentence is analyzed into
their arguments and semantic role types; and
then their arguments are linked to variables in se-
mantic description of verb class. This indicates
that one semantic description in a verb class can
provide several argument structure on the basis
of syntactic structure. This architecture is related
to construction grammar.
Here we explain this structure using verbs
such as rent, lend, give, hire, borrow, lease. We
assume that each verb sense we focus on here is
designated by example sentences, e.g., ?Mother
gives a book to her child?, ?Kazuko rents a bicy-
cle from her friend?, and ?Taro lend a car to his
friend?. As Figure 1 shows that all of the above
verb senses are involved in the verb classMoving
of One?s Possession 5. The semantic description,
which expresses core meaning of the verb class
Moving of One?s Possession is
([Agent] CAUSE) ?
BECOME [Theme] BE AT [Goal].
Where the brackets [] denote variables that can
be lled with arguments in example sentences.
Likewise parentheses () denote occasional factor.
?Agent? and ?Theme? are semantic role labels
that can be annotated to all example sentences.
Figure 1 shows that the children of the verb
class Moving of One?s Possession are the two
verb classesMoving of One?s Possession/Renting
and Moving of One?s Possession/Lending. In the
Renting class, rent, hire and borrow are there,
while in the Lending class, lend and lease exist.
Both of the semantic descriptions in the children
verb classes are more detailed ones than the par-
ent?s description.
	






	
