Proceedings of the ACL 2010 Conference Short Papers, pages 80?85,
Uppsala, Sweden, 11-16 July 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Evaluating Machine Translations using mNCD
Marcus Dobrinkat and Tero Tapiovaara and Jaakko Va?yrynen
Adaptive Informatics Research Centre
Aalto University School of Science and Technology
P.O. Box 15400, FI-00076 Aalto, Finland
{marcus.dobrinkat,jaakko.j.vayrynen,tero.tapiovaara}@tkk.fi
Kimmo Kettunen
Kymenlaakso University of Applied Sciences
P.O. Box 9, FI-48401 Kotka, Finland
kimmo.kettunen@kyamk.fi
Abstract
This paper introduces mNCD, a method
for automatic evaluation of machine trans-
lations. The measure is based on nor-
malized compression distance (NCD), a
general information theoretic measure of
string similarity, and flexible word match-
ing provided by stemming and synonyms.
The mNCD measure outperforms NCD in
system-level correlation to human judg-
ments in English.
1 Introduction
Automatic evaluation of machine translation (MT)
systems requires automated procedures to en-
sure consistency and efficient handling of large
amounts of data. In statistical MT systems, au-
tomatic evaluation of translations is essential for
parameter optimization and system development.
Human evaluation is too labor intensive, time con-
suming and expensive for daily evaluations. How-
ever, manual evaluation is important in the com-
parison of different MT systems and for the valida-
tion and development of automatic MT evaluation
measures, which try to model human assessments
of translations as closely as possible. Furthermore,
the ideal evaluation method would be language in-
dependent, fast to compute and simple.
Recently, normalized compression distance
(NCD) has been applied to the evaluation of
machine translations. NCD is a general in-
formation theoretic measure of string similar-
ity, whereas most MT evaluation measures, e.g.,
BLEU and METEOR, are specifically constructed
for the task. Parker (2008) introduced BAD-
GER, an MT evaluation measure that uses NCD
and a language independent word normalization
method. BADGER scores were directly compared
against the scores of METEOR and word error
rate (WER). The correlation between BADGER
and METEOR were low and correlations between
BADGER and WER high. Kettunen (2009) uses
the NCD directly as an MT evaluation measure.
He showed with a small corpus of three language
pairs that NCD and METEOR 0.6 correlated for
translations of 10?12 MT systems. NCD was not
compared to human assessments of translations,
but correlations of NCD and METEOR scores
were very high for all the three language pairs.
Va?yrynen et al (2010) have extended the work
by including NCD in the ACL WMT08 evaluation
framework and showing that NCD is correlated
to human judgments. The NCD measure did not
match the performance of the state-of-the-art MT
evaluation measures in English, but it presented a
viable alternative to de facto standard BLEU (Pa-
pineni et al, 2001), which is simple and effective
but has been shown to have a number of drawbacks
(Callison-Burch et al, 2006).
Some recent advances in automatic MT evalu-
ation have included non-binary matching between
compared items (Banerjee and Lavie, 2005; Agar-
wal and Lavie, 2008; Chan and Ng, 2009), which
is implicitly present in the string-based NCD mea-
sure. Our motivation is to investigate whether in-
cluding additional language dependent resources
would improve the NCD measure. We experiment
with relaxed word matching using stemming and
a lexical database to allow lexical changes. These
additional modules attempt to make the reference
sentences more similar to the evaluated transla-
tions on the string level. We report an experiment
showing that document-level NCD and aggregated
NCD scores for individual sentences produce very
similar correlations to human judgments.
80
Figure 1: An example showing the compressed
sizes of two strings separately and concatenated.
2 Normalized Compression Distance
Normalized compression distance (NCD) is a sim-
ilarity measure based on the idea that a string x is
similar to another string y when both share sub-
strings. The description of y can reference shared
substrings in the known x without repetition, in-
dicating shared information. Figure 1 shows an
example in which the compression of the concate-
nation of x and y results in a shorter output than
individual compressions of x and y.
The normalized compression distance, as de-
fined by Cilibrasi and Vitanyi (2005), is given in
Equation 1, with C(x) as length of the compres-
sion of x and C(x, y) as the length of the com-
pression of the concatenation of x and y.
NCD(x, y) =
C(x, y)?min {C(x), C(y)}
max {C(x), C(y)}
(1)
NCD computes the distance as a score closer to
one for very different strings and closer to zero for
more similar strings.
NCD is an approximation of the uncomputable
normalized information distance (NID), a general
measure for the similarity of two objects. NID
is based on the notion of Kolmogorov complex-
ity K(x), a theoretical measure for the informa-
tion content of a string x, defined as the shortest
universal Turing machine that prints x and stops
(Solomonoff, 1964). NCD approximates NID by
the use of a compressor C(x) that is an upper
bound of the Kolmogorov complexity K(x).
3 mNCD
Normalized compression distance was not con-
ceived with MT evaluation in mind, but rather it
is a general measure of string similarity. Implicit
non-binary matching with NCD is indicated by
preliminary experiments which show that NCD is
less sensitive to random changes on the character
level than, for instance, BLEU, which only counts
the exact matches between word n-grams. Thus
comparison of sentences at the character level
could account better for morphological changes.
Variation in language leads to several accept-
able translations for each source sentence, which
is why multiple reference translations are pre-
ferred in evaluation. Unfortunately, it is typical
to have only one reference translation. Paraphras-
ing techniques can produce additional translation
variants (Russo-Lassner et al, 2005; Kauchak and
Barzilay, 2006). These can be seen as new refer-
ence translations, similar to pseudo references (Ma
et al, 2007).
The proposed method, mNCD, works analo-
gously to M-BLEU and M-TER, which use the
flexible word matching modules from METEOR
to find relaxed word-to-word alignments (Agar-
wal and Lavie, 2008). The modules are able to
align words even if they do not share the same
surface form, but instead have a common stem or
are synonyms of each other. A similarized transla-
tion reference is generated by replacing words in
the reference with their aligned counterparts from
the translation hypothesis. The NCD score is com-
puted between the translations and the similarized
references to get the mNCD score.
Table 1 shows some hand-picked German?
English candidate translations along with a) the
reference translations including the 1-NCD score
to easily compare with METEOR and b) the simi-
larized references including the mNCD score. For
comparison, the corresponding METEOR scores
without implicit relaxed matching are shown.
4 Experiments
The proposed mNCD and the basic NCD measure
were evaluated by computing correlation to hu-
man judgments of translations. A high correlation
value between an MT evaluation measure and hu-
man judgments indicates that the measure is able
to evaluate translations in a more similar way to
humans.
Relaxed alignments with the METEOR mod-
ules exact, stem and synonym were created
for English for the computation of the mNCD
score. The synonym module was not available
with other target languages.
4.1 Evaluation Data
The 2008 ACL Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation (Callison-Burch et al, 2008) shared
task data includes translations from a total of 30
MT systems between English and five European
languages, as well as automatic and human trans-
81
Candidate C/ Reference R/ Similarized Reference S 1-NCD METEOR
C There is no effective means to stop a Tratsch, which was already included in the world.
R There is no good way to halt gossip that has already begun to spread. .41 .31
S There is no effective means to stop gossip that has already begun to spread. .56 .55
C Crisis, not only in America
R A Crisis Not Only in the U.S. .51 .44
S A Crisis not only in the America .72 .56
C Influence on the whole economy should not have this crisis.
R Nevertheless, the crisis should not have influenced the entire economy. .60 .37
S Nevertheless, the crisis should not have Influence the entire economy. .62 .44
C Or the lost tight meeting will be discovered at the hands of a gentlemen?
R Perhaps you see the pen you thought you lost lying on your colleague?s desk. .42 .09
S Perhaps you meeting the pen you thought you lost lying on your colleague?s desk. .40 .13
Table 1: Example German?English translations showing the effect of relaxed matching in the 1-mNCD
score (for rows S) compared with METEOR using the exact module only, since the modules stem
and synonym are already used in the similarized reference. Replaced words are emphasized.
lation evaluations for the translations. There are
several tasks, defined by the language pair and the
domain of translated text.
The human judgments include three different
categories. The RANK category has human quality
rankings of five translations for one sentence from
different MT systems. The CONST category con-
tains rankings for short phrases (constituents), and
the YES/NO category contains binary answers if a
short phrase is an acceptable translation or not.
For the translation tasks into English, the re-
laxed alignment using a stem module and the
synonym module affected 7.5% of all words,
whereas only 5.1% of the words were changed in
the tasks from English into the other languages.
The data was preprocessed in two different
ways. For NCD we kept the data as is, which we
called real casing (rc). Since the used METEOR
align module lowercases all text, we restored the
case information in mNCD by copying the correct
case from the reference translation to the similar-
ized reference, based on METEOR?s alignment.
The other way was to lowercase all data (lc).
4.2 System-level correlation
We follow the same evaluation methodology as in
Callison-Burch et al (2008), which allows us to
measure how well MT evaluation measures corre-
late with human judgments on the system level.
Spearman?s rank correlation coefficient ? was
calculated between each MT evaluation measure
and human judgment category using the simplified
equation
? = 1?
6
?
i di
n(n2 ? 1)
(2)
where for each system i, di is the difference be-
tween the rank derived from annotators? input and
the rank obtained from the measure. From the an-
notators? input, the n systems were ranked based
on the number of times each system?s output was
selected as the best translation divided by the num-
ber of times each system was part of a judgment.
We computed system-level correlations for
tasks with English, French, Spanish and German
as the target language1.
5 Results
We compare mNCD against NCD and relate their
performance to other MT evaluation measures.
5.1 Block size effect on NCD scores
Va?yrynen et al (2010) computed NCD between a
set of candidate translations and references at the
same time regardless of the sentence alignments,
analogously to document comparison. We experi-
mented with segmentation of the candidate trans-
lations into smaller blocks, which were individ-
ually evaluated with NCD and aggregated into a
single value with arithmetic mean. The resulting
system-level correlations between NCD and hu-
man judgments are shown in Figure 2 as a function
of the block size. The correlations are very simi-
lar with all block sizes, except for Spanish, where
smaller block size produces higher correlation. An
experiment with geometric mean produced similar
results. The reported results with mNCD use max-
imum block size, similar to Va?yrynen et al (2010).
1The English-Spanish news task was left out as most mea-
sures had negative correlation with human judgments.
82
2 5 10 20 50 100 500 2000 5000
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
block size in lines
sys
tem
 lev
el c
orre
latio
n w
ith 
hum
an 
judg
eme
nts
into eninto deinto frinto es
Figure 2: The block size has very little effect on
the correlation between NCD and human judg-
ments. The right side corresponds to document
comparison and the left side to aggregated NCD
scores for sentences.
5.2 mNCD against NCD
Table 2 shows the average system level correlation
of different NCD and mNCD variants for trans-
lations into English. The two compressors that
worked best in our experiments were PPMZ and
bz2. PPMZ is slower to compute but performs
slightly better compared to bz2, except for the
Method Parameters R
A
N
K
C
O
N
S
T
Y
E
S
/N
O
M
ea
n
mNCD PPMZ rc .69 .74 .80 .74
NCD PPMZ rc .60 .66 .71 .66
mNCD bz2 rc .64 .73 .73 .70
NCD bz2 rc .57 .64 .69 .64
mNCD PPMZ lc .66 .80 .79 .75
NCD PPMZ lc .56 .79 .75 .70
mNCD bz2 lc .59 .85 .74 .73
NCD bz2 lc .54 .82 .71 .69
Table 2: Mean system level correlations over
all translation tasks into English for variants of
mNCD and NCD. Higher values are emphasized.
Parameters are the compressor PPMZ or bz2 and
the preprocessing choice lowercasing (lc) or real
casing (rc).
Target Lang Corr
Method Parameters EN DE FR ES
mNCD PPMZ rc .69 .37 .82 .38
NCD PPMZ rc .60 .37 .84 .39
mNCD bz2 rc .64 .32 .75 .25
NCD bz2 rc .57 .34 .85 .42
mNCD PPMZ lc .66 .33 .79 .23
NCD PPMZ lc .56 .37 .77 .21
mNCD bz2 lc .59 .25 .78 .16
NCD bz2 lc .54 .26 .77 .15
Table 3: mNCD versus NCD system correlation
RANK results with different parameters (the same
as in Table 2) for each target language. Higher
values are emphasized. Target languages DE, FR
and ES use only the stem module.
lowercased CONST category.
Table 2 shows that real casing improves RANK
correlation slightly throughout NCD and mNCD
variants, whereas it reduces correlation in the cat-
egories CONST, YES/NO as well as the mean.
The best mNCD (PPMZ rc) improves the best
NCD (PPMZ rc) method by 15% in the RANK
category. In the CONST category the best mNCD
(bz2 lc) improves the best NCD (bz2 lc) by 3.7%.
For the total average, the best mNCD (PPMZ rc)
improves the the best NCD (bz2 lc) by 7.2%.
Table 3 shows the correlation results for the
RANK category by target language. As shown al-
ready in Table 2, mNCD clearly outperforms NCD
for English. Correlations for other languages show
mixed results and on average, mNCD gives lower
correlations than NCD.
5.3 mNCD versus other methods
Table 4 presents the results for the selected mNCD
(PPMZ rc) and NCD (bz2 rc) variants along with
the correlations for other MT evaluation methods
from the WMT?08 data, based on the results in
Callison-Burch et al (2008). The results are av-
erages over language pairs into English, sorted
by RANK, which we consider the most signifi-
cant category. Although mNCD correlation with
human evaluations improved over NCD, the rank-
ing among other measures was not affected. Lan-
guage and task specific results not shown here, re-
veal very low mNCD and NCD correlations in the
Spanish-English news task, which significantly
83
Method R
A
N
K
C
O
N
S
T
Y
E
S
/N
O
M
ea
n
DP .81 .66 .74 .73
ULCh .80 .68 .78 .75
DR .79 .53 .65 .66
meteor-ranking .78 .55 .63 .65
ULC .77 .72 .81 .76
posbleu .75 .69 .78 .74
SR .75 .66 .76 .72
posF4gram-gm .74 .60 .71 .68
meteor-baseline .74 .60 .63 .66
posF4gram-am .74 .58 .69 .67
mNCD (PPMZ rc) .69 .74 .80 .74
NCD (PPMZ rc) .60 .66 .71 .66
mbleu .50 .76 .70 .65
bleu .50 .72 .74 .65
mter .38 .74 .68 .60
svm-rank .37 .10 .23 .23
Mean .67 .62 .69 .66
Table 4: Average system-level correlations over
translation tasks into English for NCD, mNCD
and other MT evaluations measures
degrades the averages. Considering the mean of
the categories instead, mNCD?s correlation of .74
is third best together with ?posbleu?.
Table 5 shows the results from English. The ta-
ble is shorter since many of the better MT mea-
sures use language specific linguistic resources
that are not easily available for languages other
than English. mNCD performs competitively only
for French, otherwise it falls behind NCD and
other methods as already shown earlier.
6 Discussion
We have introduced a new MT evaluation mea-
sure, mNCD, which is based on normalized com-
pression distance and METEOR?s relaxed align-
ment modules. The mNCD measure outperforms
NCD in English with all tested parameter com-
binations, whereas results with other target lan-
guages are unclear. The improved correlations
with mNCD did not change the position in the
RANK category of the MT evaluation measures in
the 2008 ACL WMT shared task.
The improvement in English was expected on
the grounds of the synonym module, and indicated
also by the larger number of affected words in the
Method
Target Lang Corr
DE FR ES Mean
posbleu .75 .80 .75 .75
posF4gram-am .74 .82 .79 .74
posF4gram-gm .74 .82 .79 .74
bleu .47 .83 .80 .68
NCD (bz2 rc) .34 .85 .42 .66
svm-rank .44 .80 .80 .66
mbleu .39 .77 .83 .63
mNCD (PPMZ rc) .37 .82 .38 .63
meteor-baseline .43 .61 .84 .58
meteor-ranking .26 .70 .83 .55
mter .26 .69 .73 .52
Mean .47 .77 .72 .65
Table 5: Average system-level correlations for the
RANK category from English for NCD, mNCD
and other MT evaluation measures.
similarized references. We believe there is poten-
tial for improvement in other languages as well if
synonym lexicons are available.
We have also extended the basic NCD measure
to scale between a document comparison mea-
sure and aggregated sentence-level measure. The
rather surprising result is that NCD produces quite
similar scores with all block sizes. The different
result with Spanish may be caused by differences
in the data or problems in the calculations.
After using the same evaluation methodology as
in Callison-Burch et al (2008), we have doubts
whether it presents the most effective method ex-
ploiting all the given human evaluations in the best
way. The system-level correlation measure only
awards the winner of the ranking of five differ-
ent systems. If a system always scored second,
it would never be awarded and therefore be overly
penalized. In addition, the human knowledge that
gave the lower rankings is not exploited.
In future work with mNCD as an MT evalu-
ation measure, we are planning to evaluate syn-
onym dictionaries for other languages than En-
glish. The synonym module for English does
not distinguish between different senses of words.
Therefore, synonym lexicons found with statis-
tical methods might provide a viable alternative
for manually constructed lexicons (Kauchak and
Barzilay, 2006).
84
References
Abhaya Agarwal and Alon Lavie. 2008. METEOR,
M-BLEU and M-TER: evaluation metrics for high-
correlation with human rankings of machine trans-
lation output. In StatMT ?08: Proceedings of the
Third Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation,
pages 115?118, Morristown, NJ, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. 2005. METEOR:
An automatic metric for MT evaluation with im-
proved correlation with human judgments. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACL Workshop on Intrinsic and Ex-
trinsic Evaluation Measures for Machine Transla-
tion and/or Summarization, pages 65?72, Ann Ar-
bor, Michigan, June. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Chris Callison-Burch, Miles Osborne, and Philipp
Koehn. 2006. Re-evaluating the role of BLEU
in machine translation research. In Proceedings of
EACL-2006, pages 249?256.
Chris Callison-Burch, Cameron Fordyce, Philipp
Koehn, Christoph Monz, and Josh Schroeder. 2008.
Further meta-evalutation of machine translation.
ACL Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation.
Yee Seng Chan and Hwee Tou Ng. 2009. MaxSim:
performance and effects of translation fluency. Ma-
chine Translation, 23(2-3):157?168.
Rudi Cilibrasi and Paul Vitanyi. 2005. Clustering
by compression. IEEE Transactions on Information
Theory, 51:1523?1545.
David Kauchak and Regina Barzilay. 2006. Para-
phrasing for automatic evaluation. In Proceedings
of the main conference on Human Language Tech-
nology Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association of Computational Linguistics,
pages 455?462, Morristown, NJ, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Kimmo Kettunen. 2009. Packing it all up in search for
a language independent MT quality measure tool. In
In Proceedings of LTC-09, 4th Language and Tech-
nology Conference, pages 280?284, Poznan.
Yanjun Ma, Nicolas Stroppa, and Andy Way. 2007.
Bootstrapping word alignment via word packing. In
Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation of Computational Linguistics, pages 304?
311, Prague, Czech Republic, June. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
K. Papineni, S. Roukos, T. Ward, and W. Zhu.
2001. BLEU: a method for automatic evaluation
of machine translation. Technical Report RC22176
(W0109-022), IBM Research Division, Thomas J.
Watson Research Center.
Steven Parker. 2008. BADGER: A new machine trans-
lation metric. In Metrics for Machine Translation
Challenge 2008, Waikiki, Hawai?i, October. AMTA.
Grazia Russo-Lassner, Jimmy Lin, and Philip Resnik.
2005. A paraphrase-based approach to machine
translation evaluation. Technical Report LAMP-
TR-125/CS-TR-4754/UMIACS-TR-2005-57, Uni-
versity of Maryland, College Park.
Ray Solomonoff. 1964. Formal theory of inductive
inference. Part I. Information and Control,, 7(1):1?
22.
Jaakko J. Va?yrynen, Tero Tapiovaara, Kimmo Ket-
tunen, and Marcus Dobrinkat. 2010. Normalized
compression distance as an automatic MT evalua-
tion metric. In Proceedings of MT 25 years on. To
appear.
85
Proceedings of the Joint 5th Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation and MetricsMATR, pages 343?348,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Normalized Compression Distance Based Measures for
MetricsMATR 2010
Marcus Dobrinkat and Jaakko Va?yrynen and Tero Tapiovaara
Adaptive Informatics Research Centre
Aalto University School of Science and Technology
P.O. Box 15400, FI-00076 Aalto, Finland
{marcus.dobrinkat,jaakko.j.vayrynen,tero.tapiovaara}@tkk.fi
Kimmo Kettunen
Kymenlaakso University of Applied Sciences
P.O. Box 9, FI-48401 Kotka, Finland
Kimmo.kettunen@kyamk.fi
Abstract
We present the MT-NCD and MT-mNCD
machine translation evaluation metrics
as submission to the machine transla-
tion evaluation shared task (MetricsMATR
2010). The metrics are based on nor-
malized compression distance (NCD), a
general information theoretic measure of
string similarity, and evaluated against hu-
man judgments from the WMT08 shared
task. The experiments show that 1)
our metric improves correlation to hu-
man judgments by using flexible match-
ing, 2) segment replication is effective,
and 3) our NCD-inspired method for mul-
tiple references indicates improved results.
Generally, the proposed MT-NCD and
MT-mNCD methods correlate competi-
tively with human judgments compared to
commonly used machine translations eval-
uation metrics, for instance, BLEU.
1 Introduction
The quality of automatic machine translation
(MT) evaluation metrics plays an important role
in the development of MT systems. Human eval-
uation would no longer be necessary if automatic
MT metrics correlated perfectly with manual judg-
ments. Besides high correlation with human judg-
ments of translation quality, a good metric should
be language independent, fast to compute and sen-
sitive enough to reliably detect small improve-
ments in MT systems.
Recently there have been some experiments
with normalized compression distance (NCD) as a
method for automatic evaluation of machine trans-
lation. NCD is a general string similarity measure
that has been useful for clustering in various tasks
(Cilibrasi and Vitanyi, 2005).
Parker (2008) introduced BADGER, a machine
translation evaluation metric that uses NCD to-
gether with a language independent word normal-
ization method. Kettunen (2009) independently
applied NCD to the direct evaluation of transla-
tions. He showed with a small corpus of three lan-
guage pairs that the scores of NCD and METEOR
(v0.6) from translations of 10?12 MT systems
were highly correlated.
Va?yrynen et al (2010) have extended the work
by showing that NCD can be used to rank transla-
tions of different MT systems so that the ranking
order correlates with human rankings at the same
level as BLEU (Papineni et al, 2001). For trans-
lations into English, NCD had an overall system-
level correlation of 0.66 whereas the best method,
ULC had an overall correlation of 0.76, and BLEU
had an overall correlation of 0.65. NCD presents
a viable alternative to the de facto standard BLEU.
Both metrics are language independent, simple
and efficient to compute. However, NCD is a
general measure of similarity that has been ap-
plied in many domains. More advanced meth-
ods achieve better correlation with human judg-
ments, but typically use additional language spe-
cific linguistic resources. Dobrinkat et al (2010)
experimented with relaxed word matching, adding
language specific resources to NCD. The metric
called mNCD, which works similarly to mBLEU
(Agarwal and Lavie, 2008), showed improved cor-
relation to human judgments in English, the only
language where a METEOR synonym module was
used.
The motivation for this challenge submission is
to evaluate the MT-NCD and MT-mNCD metric
performance in an open competition with state-of-
343
the-art MT evaluation metrics. Our experiments
and submission build on NCD and mNCD. We ex-
pand NCD to handle multiple references and re-
port experimental results for replicating segments
as a preprocessing step that improves the NCD as
an MT evaluation metric.
2 NCD-based MT evaluation metrics
NCD-based MT evaluation metrics build on the
idea that a string x is similar to another string y,
when both share common substrings. When de-
scribing y, common substrings do not have to be
repeated, but can be referenced to x. This is done
when compressing the concatenation of x and y,
which results in smaller output when more infor-
mation of y is already included in x.
2.1 Normalized Compression Distance
The normalized compression distance, as defined
by Cilibrasi and Vitanyi (2005) is given in Equa-
tion 1, in which C(x) is the length of the compres-
sion of x and C(x, y) is the length of the compres-
sion of the concatenation of x and y.
NCD(x, y) =
C(x, y)?min {C(x), C(y)}
max {C(x), C(y)}
(1)
NCD computes the distance as a score closer to
one for very different strings and closer to zero for
more similar strings. Most MT evaluation met-
rics are defined as similarity measures in contrast
to NCD, which is a distance measure. For eas-
ier comparison with other MT evaluation metrics,
we define the NCD based MT evaluation similar-
ity metric MT-NCD as 1? NCD.
NCD is a practically usable form of the uncom-
putable normalized information distance (NID), a
general metric for the similarity of two objects.
NID is based on the notion of Kolmogorov com-
plexity K(x), a theoretical measure for the algo-
rithmic information content of a string x. It is de-
fined as the shortest universal Turing machine that
prints x and stops (Solomonoff, 1964). NCD ap-
proximates NID by the use of a compressor C(x)
that presents a computable approximation of the
Kolmogorov complexity K(x).
2.2 NCD with multiple references
Most ideas can be described with in different
ways, therefore using only one reference transla-
tion for the evaluation of a candidate sentence is
not ideal and the exploitation of knowledge in sev-
eral different reference translations is helpful for
automatic MT evaluation.
One simple way for handling multiple refer-
ences is to evaluate against each reference indi-
vidually and select the maximum score. Although
this works, it is clearly not optimal. We developed
the NCDm metric, which is inspired by NCD. It
considers all references simultaneously and the
quality of a translation t against multiple refer-
ences R = {r1, . . . , rm} is assessed as
NCDm(t, R) =
max{C(t|R),min
r?R
C(r|t}
max{C(t),min
r?R
C(r)}
(2)
where C(x|y) = C(x, y) ? C(y) approximates
conditional algorithmic information with the com-
pressor C. The NCDm similarity metric with a
single reference (m = 1) is equal to NCD in Equa-
tion 1. Again, we define MT-NCDm as 1?NCDm.
Figure 1 shows how both, the MT-NCDm and
the BLEU metric change with a different num-
ber of references when the translation is varied
from correct to a random sequence of words. The
scores are computed with 249 sentences from the
LDC2010E28Dev data set using the first reference
as the correct translation. A higher score with mul-
tiple references against the correct translation indi-
cates that the measure is able to take into account
information from multiple references at the same
time.
The words in the candidate translation are re-
placed with probability p with a word randomly
selected with uniform probability from a lexicon
created from all reference translations. This simu-
lates partially correct translations. The words are
changed in a simple way without deletions, inser-
tions or word order permutations. The MT-NCDm
score increases with more than one reference
translation and random changes to the sentence re-
duce the score roughly proportional to the number
of changed words. With BLEU, the score is af-
fected more by a small number of changes.
2.3 mNCD
One enhancement to the basic NCD as auto-
matic evaluation metric is mNCD (Dobrinkat et
al., 2010), which provides relaxed word matching
based on the flexible matching modules of ME-
TEOR (Agarwal and Lavie, 2008).
What mNCD does is that it changes the ref-
erence sentence to be more similar to the candi-
344
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
word change probability (p)
MT
 eva
luat
ion 
met
ric s
core
MT?NCDm with 3 referencesMT?NCDm with 2 referencesMT?NCDm with 1 referenceBLEU with 3 referencesBLEU with 2 referencesBLEU with 1 reference
MT?NCDm
BLEU
Figure 1: The MT-NCDm and BLEU scores with
a different number of multiple references against
correct translation with random word change
probability (p).
date, given that some of the words are synonyms
or share the same stem. Subsequent analysis using
any n-gram based automatic analysis should result
in a larger similarity score in the hope that this re-
flects more than just the surface similarity between
the candidate and the reference.
Given suitable Wordnet resources, mNCD
should alleviate the problem of translation vari-
ability especially in absence of multiple refer-
ence translations. Our submission uses the de-
fault METEOR exact stem synonym mod-
ules, which provide synonyms only for English.
We base our submission metric on the MT-NCD
metric and therefore define MT-mNCD as 1 ?
mNCD.
3 MT Evaluation System Description
3.1 System Parameters
The system parameters for the submission metrics
include how candidates and references are prepro-
cessed, the choice of compressor for the NCD it-
self, as well as the granularity of how large seg-
ments are evaluated by NCD and how they are
combined into a final score.
Partly due to time constraints we decided not to
introduce language specific parameters, therefore
we chose those parameter values that perform well
in overall and are simple to compute.
3.1.1 Preprocessing
Character casing For MT-NCD, we did ex-
periments without preprocessing and with lower-
casing candidates and references. On average over
all tasks for language pairs into English, lower-
casing consistently decreased the RANK correla-
tion scores but increased the CONST correlation
scores. No consistent effect could be found for the
language pairs from English. In our submission
metrics we use no preprocessing.
For MT-mNCD the used METEOR matching
module lower-cases the adapted words by default.
After adapting a synonym in a reference, we tried
to keep the casing as it was in the candidate, which
we called real-casing. We use no real-casing for
our submitted MT-mNCD metric as this did not
improve results consistently over all task into En-
glish.
Segment Replication Compression algorithms
may not work optimally with short strings, which
would deteriorate the approximation of Kol-
mogorov complexity. Our hypothesis was that
a replication of a string (?abc?) multiple times
(3 ? ?abc? = ?abcabcabc?) could help the com-
pression algorithm to produce a better estimate of
the algorithmic information. This was tested in
the MT evaluation framework, and correlation be-
tween MT-NCD and human judgments improved
when the segments were replicated two times.
Further replication did not produce improvements.
Results for the MT-NCD metric with replica-
tions one, two and three times are shown in Ta-
ble 1. The results are averages over all used lan-
guages. With two compared to one replication, the
details for each language show that RANK corre-
lation is improved for the target languages English
and French, but degrades for German and Spanish.
CONST andYES/NO correlation improve for all
languages except German. We did not use repli-
cation in our submissions.
3.1.2 Block size
The block size parameter governs the number of
joined segments that are compared with NCD as a
single string. On one extreme, with block size one,
345
R
A
N
K
C
O
N
S
T
Y
E
S
/N
O
T
O
T
A
L
MT-NCD rep 1 .61 .71 .73 .68
MT-NCD rep 2 .62 .73 .75 .70
MT-NCD rep 3 .61 .72 .74 .69
Table 1: Effect of the replication factor on
MT-NCD correlation scores for the bz2 compres-
sor with block size one as average over all lan-
guages.
each segment is evaluated separately and the seg-
ment scores are aggregated to a document score.
This is similar to how other MT metrics, for ex-
ample, BLEU, work. The other extreme is to join
all segments together, with block size equal to the
number of segments, and evaluate it as a single
string, which is similar to document comparison.
For block aggregation we experimented with arith-
metic and geometric mean and obtained very sim-
ilar results. We selected arithmetic mean for the
submission metrics.
Figure 2 shows the block size effect on the cor-
relation between MT-NCD and human judgments
for different target languages. Except for Spanish,
our experiments indicate that the block size value
has little effect. Therefore, and given how other
evaluation metrics work, we chose a block size of
one for our submission metrics. We noticed incon-
sistencies with Spanish in other settings as well
and will investigate these issues further.
3.1.3 Compressor
There are several universal compressors that can
be utilized with NCD, for instance, zlib/gzip, bz2
and PPMZ, which represent different approaches
to compression. In terms of compression rate,
PPMZ is the best of the mentioned methods, but
it is considerably slower to compute compared to
the other methods. In terms of correlation with hu-
man judgments, NCD using bz2 performs slightly
worse than using PPMZ. Given much shorter com-
pression times for bz2 with very little correlation
performance degradation, our choice for the sub-
mission is the more standard bz2 compressor.
3.1.4 Segment Interleaving
Computation of NCD between longer texts (e.g.
documents) may exceed the internal compressor
window size that is present in some compression
2 5 10 20 50 100 500 2000 5000
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
block size in lines
sys
tem
 lev
el
 
 
 
co
rre
lati
on 
wit
h h
um
an 
judg
eme
nts
into fr
into en
into es
into de
fr
en
es
de
Figure 2: Effect of the block size on the correlation
of MT-NCD to human judgments for the system
level evaluation.
algorithms (Cebrian et al, 2005). In this case,
only a part of the texts to be compared are visible
at any time to the compressor and similarities to
the text outside the window will be missed. One
solution for the MT evaluation task is to use uti-
lize the known parallel segments of candidate and
reference translations. The two segment lists can
be interleaved so that the corresponding segments
are always adjacent and the compression window
size is not exceeded for matching segments.
For our submission, we chose a block size of
one, therefore every segment is evaluated individ-
ually. As a result, segment interleaving does not
have any effect. Segment interleaving is affective
in the block size evaluation and results shown in
Figure 2.
3.2 Evaluation Experiments
We chose parameters and evaluated our metrics
using the WMT08 part of the MetricsMATR 2010
development data, which contains human judg-
ments of the 2008 ACL Workshop on Statistical
Machine Translation (Callison-Burch et al, 2008)
for translations from a total of 30 MT systems be-
tween English and five other European languages.
There are human evaluations and several auto-
matic evaluations for the translations, divided into
several tasks defined by the language pair and the
domain of the translated sentences. For each of
these tasks, the WMT08 data contains about 2 000
346
reference sentences (segments) plus their aligned
translations for 12 to 17 different translation sys-
tems, depending on the language pair.
The human judgments include three categories
which contain evaluations for at most one segment
at a time, not whole documents. In the RANK
category, humans had to rank the output of five
MT systems according to quality. The CONST
category contains rankings for short phrases (con-
stituents), and the YES/NO category contains bi-
nary answers to judge if a short phrase is an ac-
ceptable translation or not.
We report RANK, CONST and YES/NO system
level correlations to human judgments as results of
our metrics for French, Spanish and German both
from and to English. The English?Spanish news
task was left out as most metrics had negative cor-
relation with human judgments.
The evaluation methodology used in Callison-
Burch et al (2008) allows us to measure how each
MT evaluation metric correlates with human judg-
ments on the system level, in which all translations
from each MT system are aggregated into a single
score. The system rankings based on the scores
are compared to human judgments.
Spearman?s rank correlation coefficient ? was
calculated between each MT metric and human
judgment category using the simplified equation:
? = 1?
6
?
i di
n(n2 ? 1)
(3)
where for each system i, di is the difference be-
tween the rank derived from annotators? input and
the rank obtained from the metric. From the anno-
tators? input, the nMT systems were ranked based
on the number of times each system?s output was
selected as the best translation divided by the num-
ber of times each system was part of a judgment.
3.3 Results
The results for WMT08 data for our submitted
metrics are shown in Table 2 and are sorted by the
RANK category separately for language pairs from
English and into English.
For tasks into English, the correlations show
that MT-mNCD improves over the MT-NCD met-
ric in all categories. Also the flexible match-
ing seems to work better for NCD-based metrics
than for BLEU, where mBLEU only improves
the CONST correlation scores. For tasks from
English, MT-mNCD shows slightly higher cor-
relation compared to MT-NCD, except for the
YES/NO category. The standard BLEU correla-
tion score is best of the shown evaluation met-
rics. Relaxed matching using mBLEU does not
improve BLEU?s RANK correlation scores here
either, but CONST and YES/NO correlation per-
forms better relative to BLEU than MT-mNCD
compared to MT-NCD.
R
A
N
K
C
O
N
S
T
Y
E
S
/N
O
T
O
T
A
L
IN
T
O
E
N MT-mNCD .61 .74 .75 .70
MT-NCD .57 .69 .71 .66
mBLEU .50 .76 .70 .65
BLEU .50 .72 .74 .65
F
R
O
M
E
N BLEU .68 .79 .79 .75
MT-mNCD .67 .76 .74 .72
MT-NCD .65 .73 .75 .71
mBLEU .63 .81 .81 .75
Table 2: Average system-level correlations for the
WMT08 data sorted by RANK into English and
from English for our submitted metrics MT-NCD
and MT-mNCD and for BLEU and mBLEU
4 Conclusions
In our submissions, we applied MT-NCD and
MT-mNCD metrics and extended the NCD MT
evaluation metric to handle multiple references.
The reported experiment indicate a possible im-
provement for the multiple references.
We showed that a replication of segments as a
preprocessing step improves the correlation to hu-
man judgments. The string replication might alle-
viate problems in the compressor for short strings
and thus could provide better estimates of the al-
gorithmic information.
The results of our experiments show that re-
laxed matching in MT-mNCD works well with
proper synonym dictionaries, but is less effective
for tasks from English, which only use stemming.
MT-mNCD and MT-NCD are reasonably sim-
ple to compute and utilize standard and widely
used resources, such as the bz2 compression al-
gorithm and WordNet. The metrics perform com-
parable to the de facto standard BLEU. Improve-
ments with language dependent resources, in par-
ticular relaxed matching using synonym dictionar-
ies proved to be useful.
347
References
Abhaya Agarwal and Alon Lavie. 2008. METEOR,
M-BLEU and M-TER: evaluation metrics for high-
correlation with human rankings of machine trans-
lation output. In StatMT ?08: Proceedings of the
Third Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation,
pages 115?118, Morristown, NJ, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Chris Callison-Burch, Cameron Fordyce, Philipp
Koehn, Christof Monz, and Josh Schroeder. 2008.
Further meta-evaluation of machine translation. In
StatMT ?08: Proceedings of the Third Workshop
on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 70?106,
Morristown, NJ, USA. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Manuel Cebrian, Manuel Alfonseca, and Alfonso Or-
tega. 2005. Common pitfalls using the normalized
compression distance: What to watch out for in a
compressor. Communications in Information and
Systems, 5(4):367?384.
Rudi Cilibrasi and Paul Vitanyi. 2005. Clustering
by compression. IEEE Transactions on Information
Theory, 51:1523?1545.
Marcus Dobrinkat, Tero Tapiovaara, Jaakko J.
Va?yrynen, and Kimmo Kettunen. 2010. Evaluating
machine translations using mNCD. In Proceedings
of the ACL-2010 (to appear), Uppsala, Sweden.
Kimmo Kettunen. 2009. Packing it all up in search for
a language independent MT quality measure tool. In
Proceedings of LTC-09, 4th Language and Technol-
ogy Conference, pages 280?284, Poznan.
K. Papineni, S. Roukos, T. Ward, and W. Zhu.
2001. BLEU: a method for automatic evaluation
of machine translation. Technical Report RC22176
(W0109-022), IBM Research Division, Thomas J.
Watson Research Center.
Steven Parker. 2008. BADGER: A new machine trans-
lation metric. In Metrics for Machine Translation
Challenge 2008, Waikiki, Hawai?i, October. AMTA.
Ray Solomonoff. 1964. Formal theory of inductive
inference. Part I. Information and Control, 7(1):1?
22.
Jaakko J. Va?yrynen, Tero Tapiovaara, Kimmo Ket-
tunen, and Marcus Dobrinkat. 2010. Normalized
compression distance as an automatic MT evalua-
tion metric. In Proceedings of MT 25 years on. To
appear.
348
