Book Review
Interpreting Motion: Grounded Representations for Spatial Language
Inderjeet Mani* and James Pustejovsky?
(*Children?s Organization of Southeast Asia and ?Brandeis University)
Oxford University Press (Explorations in Language and Space series, edited by
Emile Van Der Zee), 2012, xiii+166 pp; hardbound, ISBN 978-0-19-960124-0, ?60.00
Reviewed by
Thora Tenbrink
Bangor University, Wales
Inderjeet Mani and James Pustejovsky present a documentation of the state of the
art with respect to the formal and computational representation of motion concepts
expressed in language (mostly English). Starting from the conceptual properties rep-
resented in the linguistic repertory of motion, they provide an overview of existing for-
malisms and annotation approaches, ultimately moving towards automatic approaches
and computational applications. The book is timely in its representation of the current
understanding of motion concepts in language, and will therefore be of great interest
in the computational and cognitive linguistics communities.
Why, one may ask, do we need a better understanding of motion? It might seem
that motion is just one of many human concepts expressed by a number of linguistic
terms, which are adequately described by their lexical entries in anybody?s dictionary.
Mani and Pustejovsky?s analysis of the linguistic representation of motion suggests a
very different idea, however. Far from representing just one marginal aspect of human
language, the conceptualization and verbalization of motion turns out to be central to
human life?and, as a consequence, central to communication. Motion combines the
two fundamental human concepts of space and time. Space without time is, for humans,
asmeaningless as timewithout space. Both are inextricably linked?and this link ismost
notably and systematically represented in language via expressions of motion. Motion
is represented whenever aspects of life are described, reflecting its deep relevance for
human thinking. Any computational approach towards interpreting natural language
representation will, sooner or later, need to deal with motion concepts. Interpreting
motion, therefore, turns out to be one of the most fundamental research issues for a
variety of purposes both in basic (or cognitive) and applied (or computational) research.
? 2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Strangely, so far, research on the human representation of these fundamental
conceptual domains is characteristically divided into two fairly distinct communities
dealing with either space or time in language and cognition. The combination of both,
adding dynamic aspects, appears to pose too many challenges, adding too many
complexities to the already puzzling diversity with respect to human representations
of space and time. With their book Interpreting Motion, Mani and Pustejovsky are at the
forefront of research that aims to bridge this gap by systematically bringing together
findings and formalisms from both directions. The effort, as such, is laudable. The
formal detail provided to explicate the representational patterns considerably adds
to the value of this book. Formalization serves computational purposes just as well
doi:10.1162/COLI r 00155
Computational Linguistics Volume 39, Number 2
as providing a more precise conceptual grasp of the identified linguistic phenomena.
Nevertheless, it is noted that more elaborate explanations and consistent informal
glossesmight have supported the general audience of the OxfordUniversity Press ?Lan-
guage and Space? series. Some readersmay bemore interested in the identified concepts
than in the abundance of formalizations, which may be felt to hamper readability.
Against the background of the current state of research, it becomes clear why
readers may, at particular points, feel slightly less than satisfied with the mechanisms
provided for dealing with motion in language. The book is unusually clear and honest
in highlighting limitations in the current understanding of crucially relevant concepts,
including existing formalization techniques. Consequently, the book is not only a valu-
able summary of the currently available tools for interpreting motion, but also a useful
starting point for further research that aims to fill various gaps identified by Mani and
Pustejovsky?s exploration of the field.
One major gap that pervades much of the book concerns the mapping of non-
linguistic formalisms such as ontologies or calculi to linguistic expressions. Such a
mapping is essential, because language reflects how humans naturally represent just
those concepts that formalisms attempt to capture. The lack of systematic mapping
mechanisms between linguistic structures and widely used formalization categories
is by no means the authors? fault, but reflects a longstanding research desideratum
well-known in the relevant research communities?with scattered attempts to provide
solutions here and there, several of which are represented in this book. Mani and
Pustejovsky contribute to this urgently needed research by laying out the available tools
in an accessible way and in many cases going several steps further ahead, suggesting
mapping solutions wherever and to the extent possible.
The book starts with an insightful and fairly detailed introduction section that
mainly serves to motivate the complexity involved in interpreting motion, highlighting
key insights taken from cognitive linguistic theory as well as earlier psycholinguistic
experimentation. Subsequent chapters outline linguistic observations supplemented by
non-linguistic calculi, ontologies, and representations, dealing with space and time sep-
arately. The main innovative contribution of the book emerges with a proposal for the
formal representation of motion in Chapter 4. Here, previous approaches and mecha-
nisms are combined to model the topological changes over time introduced by motion
verbs. The remaining two chapters provide annotation specifications and application
prospects. Extraction of motion information from natural language descriptions is pro-
posed in terms of manual annotation; computational implementations are currently
still very limited. Nevertheless, these chapters set the stage for subsequent machine
learning and other automatic approaches, adopting methodologies already successfully
established for other formalisms, to which the newly proposed motion formalism is
a successor. In general, the described actual applications concern mostly other related
work; the book describes the relevance of the current framework to such applications
and represents their goals.
Concerning the formal interpretation of motion, the aim in Mani and Pustejovsky?s
approach is to capture the spatial implications carried by lexical items in terms of their
consequences in the real world. For instance, the verb to fly implies a disconnection be-
tween the flying figure and the ground below it. Although this is an essential condition
for flying, in other cases implications can be context dependent, which is why corpus-
based investigation is essential. For instance, to establish the spatial situation conveyed
by the verb to cross it is necessary to consider what exactly is being crossed. In the case
of a field, there is constant contact with the ground, whereas in the case of a river being
crossed via a bridge, there is no such contact?in fact, contact with the river will be
456
Book Review
avoided. Spatial implications such as these are implicitly understood by humans and
need to be made available for computational approaches.
Along these lines, the presented framework scrutinizes lexical denotation in relation
to systematic patterns in the spatial domain, rather than making any claims about con-
ceptually prominent aspects of lexical items in a cognitive linguistic (or psychological)
sense. In this, the present approach is unique. For example, the linguistic ontology
proposed by Bateman et al (2010) captures the differences in meaning distinguished by
the linguistic system, pointing to conceptual patterns reflected in (or made prominent
by) language. In contrast, the framework presented in this book aims at identifying the
spatial content carried across by the use of lexical items in context.
Altogether, the goal of this book is to provide a clearer and better-defined formal
procedure for interpreting the language of motion than has been available before. As
a matter of fact, the authors basically reject all previous approaches for being too
vague in fundamental respects. I believe that there may be limits to the specifiability
of linguistic terms, however, due to their phenomenal flexibility. Cognitive linguists
generally assume that language serves to trigger associations in people?s minds, or build
them up on the spot, based on sketchy and flexible semantics along with discourse
context. As Talmy (1988, page 165) puts it, ?we take a sentence (or other portion of
discourse) to evoke in the listener a particular kind of experiential complex, here to be
termed a ?cognitive representation.?? In other words, linguistic termsmay not in the first
place describe or represent meanings as such, but rather serve as triggers for activating
concepts of human experience, which are far richer and more flexible than any lexical
entry or formalization could possibly represent. These considerations resonate with
current efforts to capture more adequately what has been characterized as ?embodied
cognition? (Anderson 2003). To the extent that human cognition operates in a non-
symbolic way, formalizations may ultimately remain inadequate in capturing human
understanding of motion.
That said, I do believe that the authors? effort in representing systematic impli-
cations that can be gained from the language of motion has led to a considerable
step forward in a much-needed direction. It reaches far beyond traditional formal
semantics approaches that basically leave the import of conceptual elements altogether
untouched. The formal representation of motion is in this book carried further than ever
before, combining decades of previous effort ingeniously towards extraction of motion
information from natural language descriptions, to the extent possible given the current
state of the art?and maybe ultimately limited by the nature of human language.
References
Anderson, Michael L. 2003. Embodied
Cognition: A field guide. Artificial
Intelligence, 149:91?130.
Bateman, John, Joana Hois, Robert J. Ross,
and Thora Tenbrink. 2010. A linguistic
ontology of space for natural language
processing. Artificial Intelligence
174:1027?1071.
Talmy, Leonard. 1988. The relation of
grammar to cognition. In Brygida
Rudzka-Ostyn, editor, Topics in Cognitive
Linguistics. Benjamins, Amsterdam,
pages 165?206.
Thora Tenbrink is a Lecturer in Cognitive Linguistics at Bangor University (Wales, UK), and a
principal investigator in two projects in the Collaborative Research Center SFB/TR 8 Spatial
Cognition (Bremen / Freiburg). Her main interest concerns the relationship between cognitive
processes and linguistic representations. She is the author of Space, Time, and the Use of Language
(Mouton de Gruyter, 2007), and has co-edited two books on issues in spatial language and spatial
representation. E-mail: t.tenbrink@bangor.ac.uk.
457

Proceedings of SIGDIAL 2010: the 11th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 99?102,
The University of Tokyo, September 24-25, 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
The Impact of Dimensionality on Natural Language Route Directions 
in Unconstrained Dialogue
Vivien Mast
University of Bremen
Bremen, Germany
viv@tzi.de
Jan Smeddinck
University of Bremen
Bremen, Germany
smeddinck 
@tzi.de
Anna Strotseva
University of Bremen
Bremen, Germany
anna.strotseva 
@uni-bremen.de
Thora Tenbrink
University of Bremen
Bremen, Germany
tenbrink 
@uni-bremen.de
Abstract
In  this paper we examine the influence  of 
dimensionality  on  natural  language  route 
directions  in  dialogue.  Specifically,  we 
show  that  giving  route  instructions  in  a 
quasi-3d  environment  leads  to  experiential 
descriptive  accounts,  as  manifested  by  a 
higher  proportion  of  location  descriptions, 
lack of chunking, use of 1st person singular 
personal pronouns, and more frequent use of 
temporal and spatial deictic terms. 2d scen-
arios  lead  to  informative  instructions,  as 
manifested by a frequent use of motion ex-
pressions,  chunking of route elements,  and 
use of mainly 2nd person singular personal 
pronouns.
1 Introduction
In order to build artificial agents that are com-
petent  in  creating  and  understanding  natural 
language route directions in situated discourse, 
it is necessary to explore how situatedness af-
fects  the  communication  of  humans  about 
routes. The current study aims at exploring in 
which  ways  dimensionality  influences  the 
choice  of  communicative  strategies  for  route 
directions in discourse. 
Previous  research  about  route  directions 
mostly deals with monologues or pretend dia-
logue (e.g.  Rehrl  et  al.,  2009;  Klippel  et  al., 
2003), and concerns two-dimensional stimuli, 
such as map-based tasks (Klippel et al, 2003; 
Goschler et al, 2008).
The study presented here examines pairs of 
participants collaborating on a route instruction 
task  in  a  naturalistic  discourse  setting  under 
two  conditions:  In  the  2d  condition,  the  in-
structor  was  shown  a  two-dimensional  map 
with the route drawn into it. In the 3d condition 
however, the instructor navigated along a pre-
set route in Google Maps Street View.
2 Route Instruction Strategies  
Route directions consist of procedures and de-
scriptions that combine to a step-by-step pre-
scription of the actions that are necessary for 
executing the given course (Michon and Denis, 
2001; Longacre, 1983). Since spatial linguistic 
expressions  reflect  the  mental  model  already 
existing on the part  of  the  instructor,  the di-
mensions in which route instructors experience 
an environment (2d or 3d) may have a system-
atic impact on the discourse strategies they use. 
In the following we analyze a range of spatial 
descriptions, focusing on aspects known to be 
crucial for spatial interaction, such as descrip-
tions of locations and motion, the use of per-
spective  expressions,  chunking  of  route  ele-
ments, and personal and spatiotemporal deixis.
2.1 Static and Dynamic Descriptions
Since route directions deal with a static envir-
onment in which a movement takes place, they 
usually include a high proportion of dynamic 
descriptions of actions (procedures in Michon 
and Denis' (2001) terms), and additional static 
information  about  the  surroundings  (descrip-
tions). In our analysis, we distinguished speak-
ers? utterances as  motion descriptions if  they 
described or requested the literal  motion of an 
entity. In contrast, an utterance was marked as 
location if it described a static spatial relation, 
for example the position of the speaker or an 
object at a certain point in time.
2.2 Perspective Use
When  describing  routes,  speakers  either  use 
the  route  perspective,  describing  route  ele-
ments or motions from the point of view of a 
99
person traveling along the route, or the survey  
perspective, where the description is based on 
cardinal  directions,  or  directions  as  they  are 
defined  by  the  map  as  a  whole  (Taylor  and 
Tversky,  1996).  Previous  research  has indic-
ated that perspective choice can be influenced 
by the specific situation, and by the coordina-
tion  between  speakers  in  natural  discourse 
(Pickering  and  Garrod,  2004;  Watson  et  al., 
2006). In the present study, we test the hypo-
thesis that navigating a route in a 3d perspect-
ive makes it more difficult for the instructor to 
use the survey perspective, leading to a prefer-
ence for the route perspective. Further we as-
sume  that  the  follower  will  adapt  to  the  in-
structor?s  perspective choice in  terms  of  lan-
guage use.
2.3 Chunking of Route Segments
In a study examining online route descriptions 
to  an imaginary  follower  based on a two-di-
mensional  map,  Klippel  et  al.  (2003)  found 
that  participants  tended  to  chunk  decision 
points without directional change together. For 
example, a speaker could say ?turn right at the 
second intersection? instead of ?Go straight on, 
and then turn right?. This occurred even when 
the route was shown as a moving dot on the 
map.  In  our  study,  we  address  the  question 
whether this also holds for instructors with a 
three-dimensional  view.  We  expected  a  fre-
quent usage of chunking in the 2d condition, in 
which the participants have access to compre-
hensive structural information, as opposed to a 
higher degree of separate references in the 3d 
condition, in which participants experience the 
environment incrementally.
3 Experiment
22 students (average age 25, 14 male and 8 fe-
male) volunteered to participate in the experi-
ment.  They formed  11  pairs  that  each  com-
pleted one test run and three permuted critical 
trials.  Instructor  and follower  were placed  in 
different  rooms  and  interacted  via  telephone 
software. 
The four predetermined routes were identic-
al for all participants, and they differed mildly 
in complexity,  ranging from 9 to 14 decision 
points. All  routes  were  located  in  San Fran-
cisco and were specifically designed such that, 
at most decision points, descriptions would be 
unambiguous with respect to perspective use. 
In  the  2d  condition  (5  pairs),  instructors 
were  given a  map  that  showed mostly street 
names  and  major  landmarks  such  as  parks, 
schools, restaurants, etc., as they appear in the 
standard  Google  Maps  map  view.  The  route 
consisted of a marked starting and end point, 
and was signaled by a thick blue line with ar-
rows indicating the direction. In the 3d condi-
tion  (6  pairs),  instructors  interacted  directly 
with Google  Street View which had a photo-
graphic quasi-3d view and allowed them to ob-
serve the surroundings as if navigating on the 
roads,  seeing a vast  amount  of details  of  the 
environment.  Street names were clearly read-
able as an overlay on top of the photographic 
imagery.  The route was indicated by fat blue 
arrows that  the  instructors could click on,  in 
order to move in the given direction.
In both conditions, the followers were asked 
to draw the route on a map that only contained 
the starting point. The task instruction was the 
same for both conditions, priming for proced-
ural  discourse yet  ambiguous  with respect  to 
perspective use:  ?Now you  have to  tell  your 
partner where you are going. Please do this by 
giving instructions via the microphone.? (trans-
lated  from German).  In  the  3d  condition  in-
structors were informed that the follower had a 
different view of the same surroundings.
Taken together this setup differs from pre-
vious studies in that it  features unconstrained 
spoken dialogue and is  set  in a realistic use-
case with a three-dimensional setting.
4 Results
The participants in the 3d condition took signi-
ficantly longer (M = 125.61 utterances per tri-
al) to complete a task than the participants in 
the 2d perspective (M = 46.40 utterances per 
trial, t(9) = 4.781, p = 0.001). 
Figure 1 shows typical examples of the in-
structors?  language  in  the  two  conditions.  In 
the 2d condition, instructors as well as follow-
ers used survey perspective, as in line 2.2 in 
Figure 1, significantly more frequently than in 
the 3d condition (see Table 1).  A Chi-square 
test  showed  the  following results  for  the  in-
structors: ?2(1) = 200.14, p < 0.0001 and ?2(1) = 
91.25, p < 0.0001 for the followers1. It is not-
able  that  the  followers  in  the  2d  condition 
showed  a  preference  for  survey  perspective 
(??(1)  = 15.38;  p  < 0.0001),  while  in  the  3d 
1 Mixed, conflated and unclear expressions were 
excluded from the analysis.
100
condition they clearly favored route perspect-
ive, which was the perspective of the instruct-
or.
3d condition:
1.1 Yes... erm ... 
now ... there is a 
crossing again
1.2 Moraga Street
1.3 to the left
1.4 into Moraga 
Street [?]
1.5 then there is a 
crossing again
1.6 the twelfth
1.7 straight on over there
1.8 So Moraga further
2d condition:
2.1 And then we go down that one up to Moraga 
Street
2.2 And there we also go right into Moraga Street
2.3 We go through that one up to Eleventh 
Avenue
Figure 1. Typical examples of instructors? lan-
guage in the two conditions.
The instructors in  the 3d condition used a 
significantly higher proportion of location de-
scriptions than the instructors in the 2d condi-
tion  (t(6.5)  = 4.500,  p  = 0.003). As  Table  2 
shows, the instructors in the 2d condition relied 
mainly on motion descriptions  (see Figure 1, 
location  descriptions  in  lines  1.1  and  1.5  as 
well as motion descriptions in lines 2.1-2.3). 
Perspective 
expressions
3D 2D
Instructor Follower Instructor Follower
Route 98.93% 
(370)
93.33% 
(112)
50.88% 
(87)
21.57% 
(11)
Survey 1.07%
(4)
 6.67% 
(8)
49.12% 
(84)
78.43% 
(40)
Totals 374 120 171 51
Table 1. Use of perspective expressions in 2d 
and 3d conditions (absolute values in paren-
theses).
Chunking of route elements did not occur at 
all  in  the  3d  condition.  In  the  2d  condition 
there were 29 intersections that were skipped 
through chunking, as shown in line 2.3 in Fig-
ure 1. This amounts to a mean of 1.9 chunked 
intersections per route.
Instructors in the 2d condition strongly pre-
ferred 2nd person singular pronouns, whereas
instructors in the 3d condition showed a prefer-
ence - though not as strong - for 1st person sin-
gular (see Figure 2). Instructors in the 3d con-
dition also used the German formal pronoun es 
?it? more frequently than those in the 2d condi-
tion. This preference is usually displayed in ut-
terances noting the presence of landmarks  in 
the  surroundings  (e.g.  ?Da  gibt  es  eine  Hal-
testelle.? ? ?There is a tram stop here.?). 
Condition Location Motion
3D 36.81% 63.19%
2D 14.31% 85.69%
Table 2. Location and motion descriptions by 
instructor (means per trial).
In  the  3d  condition,  the  participants  used 
temporal  and  spatial  deictic  terms  more  fre-
quently than in  the 2d condition (jetzt ?now? 
3d:  7.3  occurrences  per  100  utterances,  2d: 
2.73. hier ?here? 3d: 2.21, 2d: 0.14).
Figure 2. Relative frequency of personal pro-
nouns in the two conditions.
5 Discussion
Our comparison of route directions given while 
perceiving an environment either as a 2d map 
or  in  a 3d view revealed that  dimensionality 
has  systematic  consequences  for  discourse 
strategies on various levels. Location descrip-
tions, route perspective expressions, 1st person 
singular personal pronouns, impersonal es ?it?, 
as well  as  temporal  and spatial  deictic  terms 
occurred  more  frequently  in  the  instructors? 
discourse  in  the  3d condition  than in  the  2d 
condition. Also, in the 3d condition, instructors 
did not chunk route elements together. These 
findings  reflect  the  fact  that  the  instructors 
 
3D 2D
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
ich
wir
du
es
sie
er
101
consistently  chose  a  different  discourse 
strategy in this condition. Instead of producing 
procedural step-by-step instructions, they gave 
descriptions of the events happening to them 
and accounts of their surroundings, whereas in-
structors in the 2d condition gave typical route 
directions for their partner to follow.
There are three aspects that may be respons-
ible for the different discourse strategies. First, 
it can be assumed that there is a habitual pref-
erence,  due to  the  fact  that  people  providing 
route directions usually have a 2d representa-
tion available to them, or prior knowledge of 
the relevant route,  whereas someone navigat-
ing new surroundings would not normally be 
expected  to  provide  efficient  procedural  in-
structions.  Second,  the  lack  of  structural  in-
formation in the 3d condition makes it difficult 
for instructors to describe the route from a sur-
vey perspective, or to deliver precise goal-ori-
ented instructions. Third, in the 3d condition, 
progress for the instructor was slow - compar-
able to riding a bicycle along the route at mod-
erate speed - due to the technical properties of 
Google Maps Street View This severed the ef-
fect of the inherent lack of structural informa-
tion, and most probably led the participants to 
verbalize their  progress  more  frequently than 
necessary,  in  order  to  keep  the  conversation 
flowing,  instead  of  to  waiting  until  they 
reached a point where more efficient instruc-
tions would be possible. This factor is also re-
flected in  the  number  of  utterances  per  trial: 
The higher number of utterances per trial in the 
3d condition (see section 4) is at least partly a 
result of the technical setup. 
In the case of chunking, time does not seem 
to  be  the  only relevant  factor.  Klippel  et  al. 
(2003) showed that in a 2d scenario in which 
the  route  was  only gradually revealed in  the 
form of a moving dot on a map,  participants 
still made use of chunking. It remains to be in-
vestigated whether the lack of chunking in the 
present scenario occurred due to the differing 
dimensionality,  or  resulted  from  the  uncon-
strained real dialogue situation, in contrast to 
the  pretend-dialogue  used  in  Klippel  et  al. 
(2003).
Further research should differentiate the role 
of time in the choice of strategy from the im-
pact of perspective. This requires experimental 
setups that allow for the systematic variation of 
the speed of the navigation, as well as for bet-
ter control of such factors as previous know-
ledge and information density on the route. It 
would also be necessary to examine two fur-
ther  conditions  (instructor:  3d,  follower:  2d 
and instructor: 2d, follower: 3d). 
Acknowledgments
Funding by the DFG for the SFB/TR 8, project 
I5-[DiaSpace], is gratefully acknowledged. We 
thank  the  students  who  participated  in  our 
study, as well as Robert Porzel and Elena An-
donova for their helpful advice.
References 
Juliana  Goschler,  Elena  Andonova  and  Robert  J. 
Ross.  2008.  Perspective  Use  and  Perspective 
Shift in Spatial Dialogue. In: Christian Freksa et 
al. (Eds.): Spatial Cognition VI, 250-265. Berlin: 
Springer.
Alexander  Klippel,  Heike  Tappe  and  Christopher 
Habel.  2003.  Pictorial  Representations  of 
Routes: Chunking Route Segments during Com-
prehension.  In:  Christian  Freksa  et  al.  (Eds.): 
Spatial Cognition III, 11-33. Berlin: Springer.
Robert  E.  Longacre.  1983.  The Grammar of  Dis-
course.  Plenum Press, New York / London.
Pierre-Emmanuel Michon and Michel Denis. 2001. 
When and Why Are Visual Landmarks Used in 
Giving Directions? In: Daniel R. Montello (Ed.): 
COSIT 2001, 292-305.
Martin J. Pickering and Simon Garrod. 2004. To-
ward a Mechanistic Psychology of Dialogue. In 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 27:169-225.
Karl  Rehrl, Sven Leitinger, Georg Gartner and Fe-
lix  Ortag.  2009.  An Analysis  of  Direction and 
Motion  Concepts  in  Verbal  Descriptions  of 
Route  Choices.  In:  Kathleen  Stewart  Hornsby, 
Christophe Claramunt, Michel Denis and G?rard 
Ligozat (Eds.): COSIT 2009, 471-488. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin / Heidelberg.
Holly A. Taylor  and Barbara Tversky.  1996. Per-
spective  in  Spatial  Descriptions.  In  Journal  of  
Memory and Language, 35:371-391.
Matthew E. Watson, Martin J. Pickering and Holly 
P. Branigan.  2006. Why Dialogue Methods are 
Important for Investigating Spatial Language. In: 
Kenny  R.  Coventry,  John  Bateman  and  Thora 
Tenbrink (Eds.):  Spatial Language in Dialogue, 
8-22. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
102
