BioNLP 2007: Biological, translational, and clinical language processing, pages 121?128,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Study of Structured Clinical Abstracts and the Semantic Classification of
Sentences
Grace Y. Chung and Enrico Coiera
Centre for Health Informatics
University of New South Wales
Sydney NSW 2052 Australia
{graceyc, e.coiera}@unsw.edu.au
Abstract
This paper describes experiments in classi-
fying sentences of medical abstracts into a
number of semantic classes given by section
headings in structured abstracts. Using con-
ditional random fields, we obtain F -scores
ranging from 0.72 to 0.97. By using a small
set of sentences that appear under the PAR-
TICPANTS heading, we demonstrate that it is
possible to recognize sentences that describe
population characteristics of a study. We
present a detailed study of the structure of
abstracts of randomized clinical trials, and
examine how sentences labeled under PAR-
TICIPANTS could be used to summarize the
population group.
1 Introduction
Medical practitioners are increasingly apply-
ing evidence-based medicine (EBM) to support
decision-making in patient treatments. The aim
of EBM (Sackett, 1998) is to provide improved
care leading to better outcomes through locating
evidence for a clinical problem, evaluating the
quality of the evidence, and then applying to a
current problem at hand. However, the adoption of
EBM is hampered by the overwhelming amount
of information available, and insufficient time and
skills on the clinician?s part to locate and synthesize
the best evidence in the scientific literature.
MEDLINE abstracts about randomized clinical tri-
als (RCTs) play a critical role in providing the best
evidence for the latest interventions for any given
conditions. The MEDLINE database now has 16 mil-
lion bibliographic entries, many of them include the
abstract and more than 3 million of these were pub-
lished in the last 5 years (Hunter, 2006).
To alleviate the information overload, some
resources such as the Cochrane Collabo-
ration (Cochrane, 2007), Evidence-Based
Medicine (EBM, 2007), the ACP Journal
Club (ACP, 2007) and BMJ Clinical Evi-
dence (BMJCE, 2007), employ human experts
to summarize knowledge within RCTs through
extensive searches and critical assessments.
In (Sim, 2000), RCT information is entered into
electronic knowledge bases or ?trial banks?, eas-
ing the task for systematic reviewing and critical
appraisal. This project requires manual entry of
descriptions about the design and execution (sub-
jects, recruitment, treatment assignment, follow-up),
and hence, only small numbers of RCTs have been
archived thus far.
The goal of our research is to use natural language
processing to extract the most important pieces of in-
formation from RCTs for the purpose of automatic
summarization, tailored towards the medical prac-
titioner?s clinical question at hand. Ultimately, it
is our vision that data mined from full text articles
of RCTs not only aid clinicians? assessments but re-
searchers who are conducting meta-analyses.
In this paper, we examine the use of section head-
ings that are frequently given in abstracts of medical
journal articles. These section headings are topic-
independent. Effectively they define the discourse
structure for the abstract, and provide semantic la-
bels to the sentences that fall under them.
121
Other researchers have recognized the potential
utility of these heading (McKnight, 2003; Xu, 2006;
Lin, 2006). It has also been recognized that scien-
tific abstracts with such labels could be of impor-
tance to text summarization, information retrieval
and question answering (Lee, 2006; Zweigenbaum,
2003). We share similar goals to previous research;
the section headings of these structured medical ab-
stracts can be used as training data for building la-
belers that can tag unstructured abstracts with dis-
course structure. But also, there is a large number
of heading names. Sentences that occur under these
heading names form a labeled training set which
could be used to build a classifier that recognizes
similar sentences. Ultimately, we would like to build
finer-grained classifiers that exploit these semantic
labels.
In our work, we seek to demonstrate that infor-
mation about patient characteristics can now be ex-
tracted from structured and unstructured abstracts.
We are motivated by the fact that patient character-
istics is one of the fundamental factors most perti-
nent to evaluation of relevance to a clinical question.
The total number of subjects in a trial reflects on the
quality of the RCT, and additional factors such as
age, gender and other co-existing conditions, will be
crucial for assessing whether an RCT is relevant to
the medical practitioner?s immediate patient.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 1
we will describe how the RCT abstracts were ob-
tained, and we present a study of the discourse head-
ings that occur in our document corpus. Section 3
will detail our sentence classification experiments.
We first explore classification in which the abstracts
are labeled under five subheadings, one of which de-
scribes the patients or population group. We also
perform classification using a combined two-stage
scheme, bootstrapping from partially labeled data.
Finally in Section 4, we consider how well the PAR-
1. RESULTS 6. METHODS / RESULTS
2. METHODS 7. OBJECTIVE
3. CONCLUSION 8. PATIENTS / METHODS
4. BACKGROUND 9. PURPOSE
5. CONCLUSION 10. DESIGN
Table 1: The most common headings in RCT ab-
stracts.
TICIPANTS labeled sentences capture sentences con-
taining the total number of participants in a trial. In
Section 5, we will give a detailed analysis of the la-
beled sentences.
2 The Data
2.1 Corpus Creation
The current corpus is obtained by a MEDLINE search
for RCTs. We did not constrain publications by
their date. For the purpose of constraining the size
of our corpus in these preliminary experiments, it
was our intention to use RCTs pertaining to a fixed
set of clinical conditions. Hence, we conducted a
MEDLINE search for RCTs with the following key-
words: asthma, diabetes, breast cancer, prostate can-
cer, erectile dysfunction, heart failure, cardiovascu-
lar, angina. The resultant corpus contains 7535 ab-
stracts of which 4268 are structured.
2.2 Structure of Medical Abstracts
Structured abstracts were introduced in 1987 (Ad-
Hoc, 2005) to help clinical readers to quickly se-
lect appropriate articles, and allow more precise in-
formation retrieval. However, currently, the major-
ity of medical abstracts remain unstructured. Previ-
ous studies have concluded that while many scien-
tific abstracts follow consistent patterns (e.g. Intro-
duction, Problem, Method, Evaluation, Conclusion)
many still contain missing sections or have differ-
ing structures (Orasan, 2001; Swales, 1990; Meyer,
1990). Journals vary widely in their requirements
for abstract structures.
We have conducted a study of the structured ab-
stracts in our corpus. Of 4268 structured abstracts,
we have found a total of 238 unique section head-
ings. The most common ones are shown in Table 1.
To investigate the numbers of variations in the ab-
stract structure, we first manually map headings that
Class Example Heading Names
Aim AIM, AIMS, AIM OF THE STUDY..
Setting SETTING, SETTINGS, STUDY SETTING..
Participants PARTICIPANTS, PATIENTS, SUBJECTS..
Setting/ PARTICIPANTS AND SETTINGS,
Subjects SETTING/PATIENTS..
Table 2: Examples of manual mappings for heading
names into equivalence classes.
122
Structure of Abstracts % of Corpus
BACKGROUND, METHOD, RESULT, CONCLUSION 16%
AIM, METHOD, RESULT, CONCLUSION 14%
AIM, PATIENT AND METHOD, RESULT, CONCLUSION 8.5%
BACKGROUND, AIM, METHOD, RESULT, CONCLUSION 7.6%
BACKGROUND, METHOD AND RESULTS, CONCLUSION 6.6%
AIM, PARTICIPANTS, DESIGN, MEASUREMENTS, RESULT, CONCLUSION <1%
CONTEXT, DESIGN, SETTING, PARTICIPANTS, OUTCOME MEASURES, RESULT, CONCLUSION <1%
AIM, DESIGN AND SETTING, PARTICIPANTS, INTERVENTION <1%
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS, CONCLUSION
Table 3: Examples of the patterns that occur in the section headings of structured RCT abstracts.
are essentially semantically equivalent to the same
classes, resulting in 106 classes. Examples of these
mappings are shown in Table 2. After the class
mappings are applied, it turns out that there are still
400 different patterns in the combinations of section
headings in these medical abstracts, with over 90%
of these variations occurring less than 10 times. The
most common section heading patterns are shown in
Table 3. Some of the less common ones are also
shown.
In studying the structure of these medical ab-
stracts, we find that the variation in structural or-
dering is large, and many of the heading names are
unique, chosen at the discretion of the paper author.
Some of the most frequent heading names are also
compound headings such as: METHODS/RESULTS,
RESULTS/CONCLUSION, PATIENTS/RESULTS, SUB-
JECTS AND SETTINGS.
3 Sentence Classification Experiments
3.1 Extracting Participant Sentences
In this work, we seek to build a classifier using train-
ing data from the semantic labels already provided
by structured abstracts. It is our intention ultimately
to label both structured and unstructured abstracts
with the semantic labels that are of interest for the
purposes of information extraction and answering
specific questions regarding the trial. In our ap-
proach, we identify in our structured abstracts the
ones with section headings about patient character-
istics. These are collapsed under one semantic class
and used as training data for a classifier.
From our 4268 structured abstracts, all the head-
ing names are examined and are re-mapped by hand
to one of five heading names: AIM, METHOD, PAR-
TICIPANTS, RESULTS, CONCLUSION. Most head-
ing names can be mapped to these general headings
but the subset containing compound headings such
as METHOD/RESULT are discarded.
All the abstracts are segmented into sentences and
tokenized via Metamap (Aronson, 2001). Some ab-
stracts are discarded due to sentence segmentation
errors. The remainder (3657 abstracts) forms the
corpus that we will work with here. These abstracts
are randomly divided into a training set and an initial
test set, and for purposes of our experiments, they
are further subdivided into abstracts with the PAR-
TICIPANTS label and those without. The exact size
of our data sets are given in Table 4.
Although abstracts in Train Set A are generally
structured as (AIM, METHOD, RESULTS, CONCLU-
SION), they contain sentences pertaining to patient
or population group largely in the METHOD sec-
tion. In the following, we will explore three ways
for labeling sentences in the abstract including label-
ing for sentences that describe the population group.
The first employs a 5-class classifier, the second uses
a two-stage approach and the third employs an ap-
proach which uses partially labeled data.
3.2 Using Labeled Data Only
Using only abstracts from Train Set B, all sen-
tences are mapped into one of 5 classes: AIM, PAR-
TICIPANTS, METHOD, RESULTS, CONCLUSION.
Data Set Number of Number of
Abstracts Sentences
Total in Corpus 3657 45k
Total Train Set 3439 42k
Train Set A (no PARTICIPANTS) 2643 32k
Train Set B (w/ PARTICIPANTS) 796 10k
Test Set (w/ PARTICIPANTS) 62 878
Table 4: Sizes of data sets.
123
Recall Precision F -score
CRF Accuracy = 84.4%
Aim 0.98 0.91 0.95
Method 0.52 0.73 0.61
Participants 0.79 0.73 0.76
Results 0.95 0.87 0.91
Conclusion 0.91 0.97 0.94
SVM Accuracy = 80.2%
Aim 0.87 0.91 0.90
Method 0.64 0.68 0.67
Participants 0.73 0.70 0.72
Results 0.89 0.84 0.86
Conclusion 0.80 0.88 0.83
Table 5: Classification of sentences in RCT abstracts
into 5 semantic classes using CRFs and SVMs. The
recall, precision and F -score are reported on our un-
seen test set.
The PARTICIPANTS class subsume all headings
that include mention of population characteristics.
These include compound headings such as: SET-
TING/POPULATION, PATIENTS/DESIGN. Sentences
associated with these compound headings often in-
clude long sentences that describe the participant
group as well as a second aspect of the study such
as setting or design.
We build a 5-class classifier using linear-chain
conditional random fields (CRFs).1 CRFs (Sutton,
2006) are undirected graphical models that are dis-
criminatively trained to maximize the conditional
probability of a set of output variables given a set of
input variables. We simply use bag-of-words as fea-
tures because past studies (McKnight, 2003), using
n-gram-based features did not improve accuracies.2
As a baseline comparison, we have performed
classification using a Support Vector Machine
(SVM) classifier (Burges, 1998; Witten, 2005), with
a radial basis functions (RBF) kernel. To help model
the sequential ordering, a normalized integer for the
sentence number in the abstract is included as a fea-
ture.
Experimental results are shown in Table 5. CRFs
clearly outperform SVMs in this classification task.
This may in part be attributable to the explicit
sequential modeling in the CRFs compared with
1We used the SimpleTagger command line interface of the
Mallet software package (McCallum, 2002).
2In other experiments, attempts to use stemming and re-
moval of stop words also did not improve performance.
SVMs. While our training set (796 abstracts in Train
set B) is substantially smaller than that reported in
previous studies (McKnight, 2003; Lin, 2006; Xu,
2006), the F -score for AIM, RESULTS, CONCLU-
SION are comparable to previous results. By far the
largest sources of classification error are the confu-
sions between METHOD and PARTICIPANTS class.
In training we have included into the PARTICIPANTS
class all sentences that come under compound
headings, and therefore the PARTICIPANTS section
can often encompass several sentences that contain
detailed information regarding the intervention,
and the type of study, as exemplified below.
Doppler echocardiography was performed in 21 GH de-
ficient patients after 4 months placebo and 4 months GH
therapy, in a double blind cross-over study. In an open
design study, 13 patients were reinvestigated following
16 months and 9 patients following 38 months of GH
therapy. Twenty-one age and sex-matched normal con-
trol subjects were also investigated.
Nonetheless, information about the patient popula-
tion is embedded within these sentences.
3.3 Using a Two-Stage Method
An alternative approach is to adopt a two-stage hi-
erarchical strategy. First we build a classifier which
performs a 4-way classification based on the labels
AIM, METHOD, RESULTS, CONCLUSION, and a sec-
ond stage binary classifier tags all the METHOD sen-
tences into either METHOD or PARTICIPANTS. There
are two distinct advantages to this approach. (1) In
our 5-class classifier, it is clear that METHOD and
PARTICIPANTS are confusable and a dedicated clas-
sifier to perform this subtask may be more effective.
(2) The corpus of abstracts with only the 4 classes
labeled is much larger (3439 abstracts), and hence
the resultant classifier is likely to be trained more
robustly. Our first stage classifier is a CRF tagger.
It is trained on the combined training sets A and B,
whereby all sentences in the structured abstracts are
mapped to the 4-class labels. The second stage bi-
nary classifier is an SVM classifier. The SVM clas-
sifier has been augmented with additional features of
the semantic labels tagged via Metamap tagger. It is
trained on the subset of Train Set A (3499 sentences)
that is labeled as either METHOD or PARTICIPANTS.
Classification results for the unseen test set are re-
ported in Table 6. The 4-class classifier yields F -
scores between 0.92 and 0.96. We report results for
124
(1) 4-class Accuracy = 92.7%
Recall Precision F -score
Aim 0.98 0.94 0.96
Method 0.89 0.95 0.92
Results 0.95 0.89 0.92
Conclusion 0.91 0.97 0.94
(2) 2-class Accuracy = 80.1%
Method 0.73 0.83 0.78
Participants 0.87 0.78 0.81
(3) 5-class Accuracy = 86.0%
Aim 0.96 0.92 0.96
Method 0.66 0.79 0.71
Participants 0.77 0.72 0.75
Results 0.94 0.89 0.92
Conclusion 0.91 0.97 0.94
Table 6: (1) Classification using CRFs into 4 ma-
jor semantic classes with combined Train Set A and
B as training data. (2) Binary SVM classification
of a subset of test set sentences. (3) Classification
into 5 classes as described in Section 3.3. All results
(recall, precision and F -score) are reported on the
unseen test set.
the binary SVM classifier on the subset of test set
sentences (253 sentences) that are either METHOD
or PARTICIPANTS in Table 6.
The two stage method here has yielded some
gains in performance for each class except for PAR-
TICIPANTS. The gains are likely to have been due to
increased training data particularly for the classes,
AIM, RESULTS and CONCLUSION.
3.4 Augmenting with Partially Labeled Data
We investigate a second method for leveraging the
data available in Train Set A. We hypothesize that
many sentences within the METHOD section of Train
Set A do in fact describe patient information and
could be used as training data. We propose a boot-
strapping method whereby some of the sentences in
Train Set A are tagged by a binary SVM classifier
and used as training data in the 5-class CRF classi-
fier. The following describes each step:
1. A binary SVM classifier is trained on the sub-
set of sentences in Train Set B labeled with
METHOD and PARTICIPANTS.
2. The trained SVM classifier is used to label all
the sentences in Train Set A that are originally
labeled with the METHOD class.
Recall Precision F -score
5-class Accuracy = 87.6%
Aim 0.99 0.95 0.97
Method 0.67 0.77 0.72
Participants 0.90 0.77 0.83
Results 0.91 0.92 0.92
Conclusion 0.90 0.97 0.93
Table 7: Classification into 5 classes as described
in Section 3.4. All results (recall, precision and F -
score) are reported on the unseen test set.
3. All the sentences in Train Set A are now labeled
in terms of the 5 classes, and a score is avail-
able from the SVM output is associated with
those sentences labeled as either METHOD or
PARTICIPANTS. The abstracts that contain sen-
tences scoring above a pre-determined thresh-
old score are then pooled with sentences in
Train Set B into a single training corpus. We
tuned the threshold value by testing on a de-
velopment set held out from Train Set B. As a
result, 1217 sentences from Train Set A is com-
bined with Train Set B.
4. The final training corpus is used to train a CRF
tagger to label sentences into one of 5 classes.
The results of classification on the unseen test set
are reported in Table 7. Overall accuracy for classifi-
cation improves to 87.6% primarily because there is
a marked improvement is observed for the F -scores
of the PARTICIPANTS class. Our best results here
are comparable to those previously reported on sim-
ilar tasks on the class, AIM, RESULTS and CON-
CLUSION (Xu, 2006; Lin, 2006). The F -score for
METHOD is lower because introducing a PARTICI-
PANTS label has increased confusability.
4 Extraction of Number of Patients
We have demonstrated that for a structured abstract
it is possible to predict sentences that are associ-
ated with population characteristics. However, our
ultimate objective is to extract these kinds of sen-
tences from unstructured abstracts, and even to ex-
tract more fine-grained information. In this section,
we will examine whether labeling sentences into one
of 5 classes can aid us in the extraction of the total
number of patients from an RCT.
125
Abstracts w/ % tagged as
Total Subjects PARTICIPANTS
Structured 46 87%
Unstructured 103 72%
Table 8: Extraction of the total number of subjects
in a trial in a human annotated test set, as described
in Section 4.2
4.1 Annotation
In a concurrent annotation effort to label RCT ab-
stracts, human annotators manually tagged a sepa-
rate test set of 204 abstracts with the total number
of participants in each study. Of the 204 abstracts,
148 are unstructured and 56 are structured. None of
these 204 abstracts are part of the training set, de-
scribed in this paper.
4.2 Experiments
The abstracts from this annotated test set are pro-
cessed by the classifier described in Section 3.4. For
all the abstracts which mention the total number of
participants in the RCT, we compute the frequency
for which this is included in the sentences labeled as
PARTICIPANTS. Results are depicted in Table 8.
Upon subsequent examination of the test set, it is
found that only 82% (46/56) of the structured ab-
stracts and 70% (103/148) of unstructured abstracts
contain information about total number of partici-
pants in the trial. As seen in Table 8, in 87% of the
46 structured abstracts, and in 72% of the 103 un-
structured abstracts, the total number of participants
are mentioned in the labeled PARTICIPANTS sen-
tences. The extraction of the total number of partici-
pants is significantly worse in unstructured abstracts
which do not adhere to the strict discourse structures
given by the headings of structured abstracts. In
13% (13/103) of the unstructured abstracts, the total
number of participants appears in the first sentence,
which is usually tagged as the AIM. It is evident that
in the absence of structure, patient information can
occur in any sentence in the abstract, or for that mat-
ter, it may appear only in the body of the paper. Our
method of training first on structured abstracts may
be a strong limitation to extraction of information
from unstructured abstracts.
Even for the structured abstracts in the test set, 9%
(4/46) of the set of abstracts containing population
number actually mention the number in the AIM or
RESULTS section, rather than the METHOD or PAR-
TICIPANTS. Only 12 abstracts contain explicit head-
ings referring to participants, where the total number
of subjects in the trial is mentioned under the corre-
sponding heading.
In this task, we only consider that total number of
subjects enrolled in a study, and have yet to account
for additional population numbers such as the drop
out rate, the follow-up rate, or the number of sub-
jects in each arm of a study. These are often reported
in an abstract without mentioning the total number
of patients to begin with. The classifier will tag sen-
tences that describe these as PARTICIPANT sentences
nonetheless.
5 Analysis and Discussion
We will further analyze the potential for using sen-
tences tagged as PARTICIPANTS as summaries of
population characteristics for a trial. Table 9 gives
some examples of sentences tagged by the classifier.
Sentences that appear under PARTICIPANTS in
structured abstracts are often concise descriptions of
the population group with details about age, gender,
and conditions, as seen in Example 1. Otherwise,
they can also be extensive descriptions, providing
selection criteria and some detail about method, as
in Example 2.
Examples 3 and 4 show sentences from the test set
of Section 4. Example 3 has been labeled as a PAR-
TICIPANTS sentence by the classifier. It describes
patient characteristics, giving the population num-
ber for each arm of the trial but does not reveal the
total number of subjects. Example 3 appears under
the heading METHODS AND RESULTS in the original
abstract. Example 4 is from an unstructured abstract,
where information about the intervention and popu-
lation and study design are interleaved in the same
sentences but tagged by the classifier as PARTICI-
PANTS. Many sentences tagged as PARTICIPANTS
also do not give explicit information about popula-
tion numbers but only provide descriptors for patient
characteristics.
It is also plausible that our task has been made
more challenging compared with previous reported
studies because our corpus has not been filtered for
publication date. Hence, the numbers of publica-
126
1. Male smokers aged 50?69 years who had angina pectoris in the Rose chest pain questionnaire at baseline (n = 1795).
PMID: 9659191
2. The study included 809 patients under 70 years of age with stable angina pectoris. The mean age of the patients was 59 +/-
7 years and 31% were women. Exclusion criteria were myocardial infarction within the previous 3 years and contraindications
to beta-blockers and calcium antagonists. The patients were followed between 6 and 75 months (median 3.4 years and a total
of 2887 patient years). PMID: 8682134
3. Subjects with Canadian Cardiovascular Society (CCS) class 3/4 angina and reversible perfusion defects were randomized
to SCS (34) or PMR (34). PMID: 16554313
4. Sixty healthy women, half of whom had been using OCs for at least the previous 6 months, participated in the study. Approx-
imately two thirds were smokers and were randomized to be tested after either a 12 hr nicotine deprivation or administration
of nicotine gum. One third were nonsmokers. PMID: 11495215
Table 9: Examples of sentences labeled under PARTICIPANTS class, forming summaries of the population
characteristics of a trial. Examples 1 and 2 are typical sentences under the PARTICIPANTS heading in the
train set. Examples 3 and 4 are from the annotated test set. See Section 5 for more detailed explanation.
tions and structural characteristics of our abstracts
may be broader than previous reports which filter for
abstracts to a narrow time frame (Xu, 2006).
6 Related Work
In recent years, there has been a growth in research
in information extraction and NLP in the medical
domain particularly in the RCT literature. This is
due in part to the emergence of lexical and seman-
tic resources such as the Unified Medical Language
System (UMLS) (Lindberg, 1993), and software
such as MetaMap (Aronson, 2001), which trans-
forms text into UMLS concepts, and SemRep (Rind-
flesch, 2003), which identifies semantic proposi-
tions.
There are a number of previous attempts to per-
form text categorization on sentences in MEDLINE
abstracts into generic discourse level section head-
ings. They all share the goal of assigning structure
to unstructured abstracts for the purpose of sum-
marization or question answering. All previous at-
tempts have mapped the given headings to four or
five generic classes, and performed text categoriza-
tion on large sets of RCTs without any disease or
condition-specific filtering. Studies have shown that
results deteriorate when classifying sentences in un-
structured abstracts (McKnight, 2003; Lin, 2006).
In (McKnight, 2003), McKnight and Srinivisan used
an SVM for tagging sentences into 4 classes. Using
a corpus of 7k abstracts, they obtain F -scores from
0.82 to 0.89. Later papers in (Xu, 2006; Lin, 2006)
have found that Hidden Markov Models (HMMs)
based approaches more effectively model the se-
quential ordering of sentences in abstracts. In (Xu,
2006), several machine learning methods, decision
tree, maximum entropy and naive Bayes, are evalu-
ated with an HMM-based algorithm. 3.8k abstracts
from 2004 and 2005 were used as training data, and
experiments yielded average precision of 0.94 and
recall of 0.93.
One driving model for information extraction in
RCTs is the PICO framework (Richardson, 1995).
This is a task-based model for EBM formulated to
assist EBM practitioners to articulate well-formed
questions in order to find useful answers in clinical
scenarios. PICO elements are Patient/Population,
Intervention, Comparison and Outcome. This model
has been adopted by researchers (Demner-Fushman,
2005; Niu, 2004) as a guideline for elements that can
be automatically extracted from RCTs and patient
records. However, doubts have been raised about
the utility of PICO as a generic knowledge repre-
sentation for computational approaches to answer-
ing clinical questions (Huang, 2006).
In experiments reported in (Demner-Fushman,
2005), the PICO framework was used as a basis
for extracting population, problem, intervention and
comparison for the purpose of evaluating relevance
of an abstract to a particular clinical question. In this
work, the population statements were located via a
set of hand-written rules that were based on extract-
ing an actual numeric value for the population.
7 Conclusions
In this study, we investigated the use of conditional
random fields for classifying sentences in medical
abstracts. Our results particularly in terms of F -
scores for generic section headings such as AIM, RE-
127
SULTS and CONCLUSION were comparable to previ-
ous studies, even with smaller training sets. We in-
vestigated the use of text classification by leveraging
the subset of abstracts with explicitly labeled PAR-
TICIPANTS sentences combining the use of CRFs
and SVMs, and exploiting partially labeled data.
One main objective here is to label sentences that
describe population characteristics in structured and
unstructured abstracts. We found that unstructured
abstracts differ substantially from structured ones,
and alternative approaches will be necessary for
extracting information from unstructured abstracts.
Furthermore, critical details that are needed by a
physician when evaluating a study such as exclusion
criteria, drop out rate, follow up rate, etc, may only
be listed in the full text of the study. Future work
will address extracting information beyond the ab-
stract.
8 Acknowledgment
The authors would like to acknowledge the anony-
mous reviewers and the executive committee for
their comments and suggestions, and Marianne
Byrne, Brenda Anyango Omune and Wei Shin Yu
for annotation of the abstracts. This project is
funded by the Australian Research Council, grant
number DP0666600.
References
ACP Journal Club. Available from: http://www.acpjp.org
Ad Hoc working group for Critical Appraisal of the Medical
Literature 1987. A proposal for more informative abstracts
of clinical articles. Annals of Int. Medicine 106:595?604.
A. R. Aronson. 2001. Effective mapping of biomedical text
to the UMLS Metathesaurus: The MetaMap program. Ann.
Symp. of AMIA pp 17?21.
Clinical Evidence. BMJ Publishing Group. Available from:
http://www.clinicalevidence.com
C. Burges. 1998. A Tutorial on Support Vector Machines for
Pattern Recognition Journal Data Mining and Knowledge
Discovery, 2(2), June.
The Cochrane Collaboration. Available from:
http://www.cochrane.org
D. Demner-Fushman and J. Lin. 2005. Knowledge extraction
for clinical question answering: Preliminary results. AAAI
Workshop on Question Answering in Restricted Domains.
Evidence Based Medicine. Available from:
http://ebm.bmjjournals.com
X. Huang et al 2006. Evaluation of PICO as a Knowledge
Representation for Clinical Questions. Ann. Symp. of AMIA
pp359?363.
L. Hunter and K. Bretonnel Cohen. 2006. Biomedical lan-
guage processing: what?s beyond PubMed? Molecular Cell,
21:589-594.
J. Lin et al 2006. Generative Content Models for Structural
Analysis of Medical Abstracts. Workshop on Biomedical
Natural Language Processing BioNLP New York.
D. A. Lindberg et al 1993. The Unified Medical Language
System. Methods of Information in Medicine, 32(4):281?
291.
A. McCallum. 2002. MALLET: A Machine Learning for Lan-
guage Toolkit. http://mallet.cs.umass.edu.
L. McKnight and P. Srinivasan 2003. Categorization of Sen-
tence Types in Medical Abstracts. Ann. Symp. of AMIA
pp440?444.
M. Lee et al 2006. Beyond Information Retrieval?Medical
Question Answering. Ann. Symp. of AMIA.
Y. Niu and G. Hirst. 2005. Analysis of semantic classes in
medical text for question answering. Workshop on Question
Answering in Restricted Domains, Barcelona.
C. Orasan. 2001. Patterns in Scientific Abstracts. 2001 Corpus
Linguistics Conference.
W. S. Richardson et al 1995. The well-built clinical ques-
tion: a key to evidence-based decisions. ACP J Club, Nov-
Dec;123(3):A12-3.
T. Rindflesch and M. Fiszman. 2003. The interaction of domain
knowledge and linguistic structure in natural language pro-
cessing: Interpreting hypernymic propositions in biomedical
text. J. of Biomedical Informatics, 36(6):462?477, Dec.
D. L. Sackett et al. 1998. Evidence Based Medicine: How to
Practice and Teach EBM. Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh.
F. Salager-Meyer. 1990. Discourse Movements in Medical En-
glish Abstracts and their linguistic exponents: A genre anal-
ysis study. INTERFACE: J. of Applied Linguistics, 4(2):107?
124.
I. Sim et al 2000. Electronic Trial Banks: A Complementary
Method for Reporting Randomized Trials. Med Decis Mak-
ing, Oct-Dec;20(4):440-50.
C. Sutton and A McCallum. 2006. An introduction to condi-
tional random fields for relational learning. In Lise Getoor
and Ben Taskar, editors, Introduction to Statistical Rela-
tional Learning. MIT Press. To appear.
J. Swales. 1990. Genre Analysis: English in Academic and
Research Settings. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
University.
I. H. Witten and E. Frank. 2005. Data Mining: Practical ma-
chine learning tools and techniques, 2nd Ed, Morgan Kauf-
mann, San Francisco.
R. Xu et al 2006. Combining Text Classification and Hidden
Markov Modeling Techniques for Structuring Randomized
Clinical Trial Abstracts. Ann. Symp. of AMIA.
P. Zweigenbaum. 2003. Question answering in biomedicine.
Workshop on Natural Language Processing for Question An-
swering, Budapest.
128
