53
54
55
56
Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 111?114,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
The MetaMorpho translation system 
Attila Nov?k, L?szl? Tihanyi and G?bor Pr?sz?ky 
MorphoLogic 
Orb?nhegyi ?t 5, Budapest 1126, Hungary 
{novak,tihanyi,proszeky}@morphologic.hu 
 
 
 
Abstract 
In this article, we present MetaMorpho, a rule 
based machine translation system that was 
used to create MorphoLogic?s submission to 
the WMT08 shared Hungarian to English 
translation task. The architecture of Meta-
Morpho does not fit easily into traditional 
categories of rule based systems: the building 
blocks of its grammar are pairs of rules that 
describe source and target language structures 
in a parallel fashion and translated structures 
are created while parsing the input.  
1 Introduction 
Three rule-based approaches to MT are tradition-
ally distinguished: direct, interlingua and transfer. 
The direct method uses a primitive one-stage proc-
ess in which words in the source language are re-
placed with words in the target language and then 
some rearrangement is done. The main idea behind 
the interlingua method is that the analysis of any 
source language should result in a language-
independent representation. The target language is 
then generated from that language-neutral repre-
sentation. The transfer method first parses the sen-
tence of the source language. It then applies rules 
that map the lexical and grammatical segments of 
the source sentence to a representation in the target 
language. 
The MetaMorpho machine translation system de-
veloped at MorphoLogic (Pr?sz?ky and Tihanyi, 
2002), cannot be directly classified in either of the 
above categories, although it has the most in com-
mon with the transfer type architecture.  
2 Translation via immediate transfer 
In the MetaMorpho system, both productive 
rules of grammar and lexical entries are stored in 
the form of patterns, which are like context-free 
rules enriched with features. Patterns may contain 
more-or-less underspecified slots, ranging from 
general productive rules of grammar through more-
or-less idiomatic phrases to fully lexicalized items. 
The majority of the patterns (a couple of hundreds 
of thousands in the case of our English grammar) 
represent partially lexicalized items. 
The grammar operates with pairs of patterns 
that consist of one source pattern used during bot-
tom-up parsing and one or more target patterns that 
are applied during top-down generation of the 
translation. While traditional transfer and interlin-
gua based systems consist of separate parsing and 
generating rules, in a MetaMorpho grammar, each 
parsing rule has its associated generating counter-
part. The translation of the parsed structures is al-
ready determined during parsing the source 
language input. The actual generation of the target 
language representations does not involve any ad-
ditional transfer operations: target language struc-
tures corresponding to substructures of the source 
language parse tree are combined and the leaves of 
the resulting tree are interpreted by a morphologi-
cal generator. We call this solution ?immediate 
transfer? as it uses no separate transfer steps or 
target transformations. 
The idea behind this architecture has much in 
common with the way semantic compositionality 
was formalized by Bach (1976) in the from of his 
rule-to-rule hypothesis, stating that to every rule of 
syntax that combines constituents into a phrase 
pertains a corresponding rule of semantics that 
111
combines the meanings of the constituents. In the 
case of phrases with compositional meaning, the 
pair of rules of syntax and semantics are of a gen-
eral nature, while in the case of idioms, the pair of 
rules is specific and arbitrary. The architecture im-
plemented in the MetaMorpho system is based on 
essentially the same idea, except that the represen-
tation built during analysis of the input sentence is 
not expressed in a formal language of some seman-
tic representation but directly in the human target 
language of the translation system. 
3 System architecture  
The analysis of the input is performed in three 
stages. First the text to be translated is segmented 
into sentences, and each sentence is broken up into 
a sequence of tokens. This token sequence is the 
actual input of the parser. Morphosyntactic annota-
tion of the input word forms is performed by a 
morphological analyzer: it assigns morphosyntactic 
attribute vectors to word forms. We use the Humor 
morphological system (Pr?sz?ky and Kis, 1999; 
Pr?sz?ky and Nov?k, 2005) that performs an item-
and-arrangement style morphological analysis. 
Morphological synthesis of the target language 
word forms is performed by the same morphologi-
cal engine.  
The system also accepts unknown elements: 
they are treated as strings to be inflected at the tar-
get side. The (potentially ambiguous) output of the 
morphological analyzer is fed into the syntactic 
parser called Moose (Pr?sz?ky, Tihanyi and Ugray, 
2004), which analyzes this input sequence using 
the source language patterns and if it is recognized 
as a correct sentence, comes up with one or more 
root symbols on the source side.  
Every terminal and non-terminal symbol in the 
syntactic tree under construction has a set of fea-
tures. The number of features is normally up to a 
few dozen, depending on the category. These fea-
tures can either take their values from a finite set of 
symbolic items (e.g., values of case can be INS, 
ACC, DAT, etc.), or represent a string (e.g., 
lex="approach", the lexical form of a token). 
The formalism does not contain embedded feature 
structures. It is important to note that no structural 
or semantic information is amassed in the features 
of symbols: the interpretation of the input is con-
tained in the syntactic tree itself, and not in the fea-
tures of the node on the topmost level. Features are 
used to express constraints on the applicability of 
patterns and to store morphosyntactic valence and 
lexical information concerning the parsed input. 
More specific patterns (e.g. approach to) can 
override more general ones (e.g. approach), in that 
case subtrees containing symbols that were created 
by the general pattern are deleted. Every symbol 
that is created and is not eliminated by an overrid-
ing pattern is retained even if it does not form part 
of a correct sentence's syntactic tree. Each pattern 
can explicitly override other rules: if the overriding 
rule covers a specific range of the input, it blocks 
the overridden ones over the same range. This 
method can be used to eliminate spurious ambigui-
ties early during analysis. 
When the whole input is processed and no ap-
plicable patterns remain, translation is generated in 
a top-down fashion by combining the target struc-
tures corresponding to the source patterns consti-
tuting the source language parse tree.  
A source language pattern may have more than 
one associated target pattern. The selection of the 
target structure to apply relies on constraints on the 
actual values of features in the source pattern: the 
first target pattern whose conditions are satisfied is 
used for target structure generation. To handle 
complicated word-order changes, the target struc-
ture may need rearrangement of its elements within 
the scope of a single node and its children. There is 
another technique that can be used to handle word 
order differences between the source and the target 
language. A pointer to a subtree can be stored in a 
feature when applying a rule at parse time, and 
because this feature?s value can percolate up the 
parse-tree and down the target tree, just like any 
other feature, a phrase swallowed somewhere in 
the source side can be expanded at a different loca-
tion in the target tree. This technique can be used 
to handle both systematic word order differences 
(such as the different but fixed order of constitu-
ents in possessive constructions: possession of pos-
sessor in English versus possessor possession + 
possessive suffix in Hungarian) and accidental ones 
(such as the fixed order of subject verb and object 
in English, versus the ?free? order of these con-
stituents in Hungarian1). 
Unlike in classical transfer-based systems, 
however, these rearrangement operations are al-
                                                          
1 In fact the order is determined by various factors other than 
grammatical function. 
112
ready determined during parsing the source lan-
guage input. During generation, the already deter-
mined rearranged structures are simply spelled out. 
The morphosyntactic feature vectors on the termi-
nal level of the generated tree are interpreted by 
the morphological generator that synthesizes the 
corresponding target language word forms.  
The morphological generator is not a simple in-
verse of the corresponding analyzer. It accepts 
many alternative equivalent morphological de-
scriptions of each word form it can generate beside 
the one that the corresponding analyzer outputs.  
4 The rule database 
The rules used by the parser explicitly contain 
all the features of the daughter nodes to check, all 
the features to percolate to the mother node, all the 
features to set in the corresponding target struc-
tures and those to be checked on the source lan-
guage structure to decide on the applicability of a 
target structure. The fact that all this redundant 
information is present in the run-time rule database 
makes the operation of the parser efficient in terms 
of speed. However, it would be very difficult for 
humans to create and maintain the rule database in 
this redundant format.  
There is a high level version of the language: 
although it is not really different in terms of its 
syntax from the low-level one, it does not require 
default values and default correspondences to be 
explicitly listed. The rule database is maintained 
using this high level formalism. There is a rule 
converter for each language pair that extends the 
high-level rules with default information and may 
also create transformed rules (such as the passive 
version of verbal subcategorization frames) creat-
ing the rule database used by the parser.  
Rule conversion is also necessary because in 
order to be able to parse a free word order lan-
guage like Hungarian with a parser that uses con-
text free rules, you need to use run time rules that 
essentially differ in the way they operate from 
what would be suggested by the rules they are de-
rived from in the high level database. In Hungar-
ian, arguments of a predicate may appear in many 
different orders in actual sentences and they also 
freely mix with sentence level adjuncts. This 
means that a verbal argument structure of the high 
level rule database with its normal context free rule 
interpretation would only cover a fraction of its 
real world realizations. Rule conversion effectively 
handles this problem by converting rules describ-
ing lexical items with argument structures ex-
pressed using a context free rule formalism into 
run time rules that do not actually combine con-
stituents, but only check the saturation of valency 
frames. Constituents are combined by other more 
generic rules that take care of saturating the argu-
ment slots. This means that while the high level 
and the run time rules have a similar syntax, the 
semantics of some high level rules may be very 
different from similar rules in the low level rule 
database. 
5 Handling sentences with no full parse 
The system must not break down if the input 
sentence happens not to have a full parse (this in-
evitably happens in the case of real life texts). In 
that case, it reverts to using a heuristic process that 
constructs an output by combining the output of a 
selected set of partial structures covering the whole 
sentence stored during parsing the input. In the 
MetaMorpho terminology, this is called a ?mosaic 
translation?. Mosaic translations are usually subop-
timal, because in the absence of a full parse some 
structural information such as agreement is usually 
lost. There is much to improve on the current algo-
rithm used to create mosaic translations: e.g. it 
does not currently utilize a statistical model of the 
target language, which has a negative effect on the 
fluency of the output. Augmenting the system with 
such a component would probably improve its per-
formance considerably. 
6 Motivation for the MetaMorpho archi-
tecture 
An obvious drawback of the architecture de-
scribed above compared to the interlingua and 
transfer based systems is that the grammar compo-
nents of the system cannot be simply reused to 
build translation systems to new target languages 
without a major revision of the grammar. While in 
a classical transfer based system, the source lan-
guage grammar may cover phenomena that the 
transfer component does not cover, in the Meta-
Morpho architecture, this is not possible. In a 
transfer based system, there is a relatively cheaper 
way to handle coverage issues partially by aug-
menting only the source grammar (and postponing 
113
creation of the corresponding transfer rules). This 
is not an option in the MetaMorpho architecture. 
The main motivation for this system architec-
ture was that it makes it possible to integrate ma-
chine translation and translation memories in a 
natural way and to make the system easily extensi-
ble by the user. There is a grammar writer?s work-
bench component of MetaMorpho called Rule 
Builder. This makes it possible for users to add 
new, lexical or even syntactic patterns to the 
grammar in a controlled manner without the need 
to recompile the rest, using an SQL database for 
user added entries. The technology used in Rule-
Builder can also be applied to create a special 
combination of the MetaMorpho machine transla-
tion tool and translation memories (Hod?sz, 
Gr?bler and Kis 2004).  
Moreover, existing bilingual lexical databases 
(dictionaries of idioms and collocations) are rela-
tively easy to convert to the high level rule format 
of the system. The bulk of the grammar of the sys-
tem was created based on such resources. Another 
rationale for developing language pair specific 
grammars directly is that this way distinctions in 
the grammar of the source language not relevant 
for the translation to the target language at hand 
need not be addressed.  
7 Performance in the translation task 
During development of the system and its grammar 
components, regression testing has been performed 
using a test set unknown to the developers measur-
ing case insensitive BLEU with three human refer-
ence translations. Our usual test set for the system 
translating from Hungarian to English contains 274 
sentences of newswire text. We had never used 
single reference BLEU before, because, although 
creating multiple translations is expensive, single 
reference BLEU is quite unreliable usually produc-
ing very low scores especially if the target lan-
guage is morphologically rich, like Hungarian. 
The current version of the MetaMorpho system 
translating from Hungarian to English has a BLEU 
score of 22.14 on our usual newswire test set with 
three references. Obtaining a BLEU score of 7.8 on 
the WMT08 shared Hungarian to English transla-
tion task test set was rather surprising, so we 
checked single reference BLEU on our usual test 
set: the scores are 13.02, 14.15 and 16.83 with the 
three reference translations respectively.  
In the end, we decided to submit our results to the 
WMT08 shared translation task in spite of the low 
score. But we think, that these figures cast doubts 
on the quality of the texts and reference transla-
tions in the test set, especially in cases where both 
the English and the Hungarian text were translated 
from a third language, so we think that the scores 
on the WMT08 test set should be evaluated only 
relative to other systems? performance on the same 
data and the same language pair. 
References  
Emmon Bach. 1976. An extension of classical transfor-
mational grammar. In Saenz (ed.) Problems of Lin-
guistic Metatheory: Proceedings of the 1976 
Conference, 183?224. East Lansing, MI: Michigan 
State University. 
G?bor Hod?sz, Tam?s Gr?bler and Bal?zs Kis. 2004. 
Translation memory as a robust example-based trans-
lation system. In Hutchins (ed.), 82?89.  
John Hutchins (ed.) Broadening horizons of machine 
translation and its applications. Proceedings of the 
9th EAMT Workshop, 26?27 April 2004. La Val-
letta: Foundation for International Studies. 
G?bor Pr?sz?ky and Bal?zs Kis. 1999. Agglutinative 
and other (highly) inflectional languages. In Robert 
Dale & Kenneth W. Church (eds.) Proceedings of the 
37th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, 261?268. Morristown, NJ: Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics. 
G?bor Pr?sz?ky and Attila Nov?k. 2005. Computational 
Morphologies for Small Uralic Languages. In: A. 
Arppe, L. Carlson, K. Lind?n, J. Piitulainen, M. 
Suominen, M. Vainio, H. Westerlund, A. Yli-Jyr? 
(eds.): Inquiries into Words, Constraints and Con-
texts Festschrift in the Honour of Kimmo Kosken-
niemi on his 60th Birthday, 116?125. Gummerus 
Printing, Saarij?rvi/CSLI Publications, Stanford. 
G?bor Pr?sz?ky and L?szl? Tihanyi. 2002 MetaMor-
pho: A Pattern-Based Machine Translation System. 
In: Proceedings of the 24th 'Translating and the 
Computer' Conference, 19?24. ASLIB, London, 
United Kingdom. 
G?bor Pr?sz?ky, L?szl? Tihanyi and G?bor Ugray. 
2004. Moose: A robust high-performance parser and 
generator. In Hutchins (ed.), 138?142. 
114
