Proceedings of SSST-4, Fourth Workshop on Syntax and Structure in Statistical Translation, pages 61?65,
COLING 2010, Beijing, August 2010.
Arabic morpho-syntactic feature disambiguation in            
a translation context 
Ines Turki Khemakhem, Salma Jamoussi, Abdelmajid Ben Hamadou 
MIRACL Laboratory, ISIM Sfax, P?le Technologique
ines_turki@yahoo.fr, salma.jammoussi@isimsf.rnu.tn, 
abdelmajid.benhamadou@isimsf.rnu.tn 
 
Abstract 
Morphological analysis and disambigua-
tion are crucial stages in a variety of nat-
ural language processing applications 
such as machine translation, especially 
when languages with complex morphol-
ogy are concerned such as Arabic. Arab-
ic is a highly flexional language, in that, 
the same root can lead to various forms 
according to its context. In this paper, we 
present a system which disambiguates 
the output of a morphological analyzer 
for Arabic. The Arabic morphological 
analyzer used consists of a set of all 
possible morphological analyses for each 
word, with the unique correct syntactic 
feature. We want to choose the correct 
features using the features generated by 
the morphological analyzer for the 
French language in the other side. To ob-
tain this data, we used the results of the 
alignment of word trained with GIZA++ 
(Och and Ney, 2003). 
1 Introduction 
Arabic is characterized by a rich morphology. 
Due to the fact that the Arabic script usually 
does not encode short vowels, the degree of 
morphological ambiguity is very high. In addi-
tion to being inflected for gender, number, 
words can be attached to various clitics for con-
junction "?" (and), the definite article "??" (the), 
prepositions (e.g. "?" (by/with), "?" (for), "?" 
(as)), object pronouns (e.g. "??" (their/them)). 
The morphological analysis of a word consists 
of determining morphological information about 
each word, such as part-of-speech (i.e., noun, 
verb, particle, etc), voice, gender, number, in-
formation about the clitics, etc. Morphological 
analysis and disambiguation are crucial pre-
processing steps for a variety of natural language 
processing applications, from search and infor-
mation extraction to machine translation. For 
languages with complex morphology these are 
nontrivial processes. 
Arabic words are often ambiguous in their 
morphological analysis. This is due to Arabic?s 
rich system of affixation and clitics and the 
omission of disambiguating short vowels. The 
problem is that many words have different 
meanings depending on their diacritization. This 
leads to ambiguity when processing data for nat-
ural language processing applications such as 
machine translation. This propriety has an im-
portant implication for statistical modeling of the 
Arabic language. 
In this paper, we present a novel morphology 
preprocessing technique for Arabic. We exploit 
the Arabic morphology-French alignment to 
choose a correct morpho-syntactic feature pro-
duced by a morphological analyzer. 
This paper is organized as follows: section 2 
gives a brief description of some related works 
to the introduction of morphological disambigu-
ation. Section 3 presents the used morphological 
analyzer Morph2 for Arabic texts, able to recog-
nize word composition and to provide more spe-
cific morphological information about it. We 
present in section 4 some problems in context 
morpho-syntactic feature choice; in the remaind-
er of this section we discuss the complexity of 
Arabic morphology and the challenge of mor-
phological disambiguation. Section 5 gives a 
short overview of the data and tools used for our 
Arabic word Morpho-syntactic feature disam-
biguation and shows the experimental details of 
our system. Finally, section 6 presents some 
conclusions. 
61
2 Related work 
Morphological analysis and disambiguation are 
crucial pre-processing steps for a variety of 
natural language processing applications. 
Previous research has focused on 
disambiguating the output of a morphological 
analyzer. Hajic (2000) is the first to use a 
dictionary as a source of possible morphological 
analyses (and hence tags) for an inflected word 
form. He convincingly shows that for five 
Eastern European languages with complex 
inflection plus English, using a morphological 
analyzer improves performance of a tagger. He 
concludes that for highly inflectional languages 
?the use of an independent morphological 
dictionary is the preferred choice more annotated 
data?. He redefines the tagging task as a choice 
among the tags proposed by the dictionary, using 
a log-linear model trained on specific ambiguity 
classes for individual morphological features. 
Hajic (2000) demonstrates convincingly that 
morphological disambiguation can be aided by a 
morphological analyzer, which, given a word 
without any context, gives us the set of all 
possible morphological tags.  
The only work on Arabic tagging that uses a 
corpus for training and evaluation, (Diab et al, 
2004), does not use a morphological analyzer. 
Diab et al (2004) perform tokenization, POS 
tagging and base phrase chunking using a SVM 
based learner.  
The Morphological Analysis and 
Disambiguation of Arabic (MADA) system is 
described in (Habash and Rambow, 2005). The 
basic approach used in MADA is inspired by the 
work of Hajic (2000) for tagging 
morphologically rich languages, which was 
extended to Arabic. Habash and Rambow (2005) 
use SVM-classifiers for individual 
morphological features and a simple combining 
scheme for choosing among competing analyses 
proposed by the dictionary. 
3 Arabic word  segmenter 
Arabic is a morphologically complex language. 
Compared with French, an Arabic word can 
sometimes correspond to a whole French sen-
tence (Example : the Arabic word "???????????" cor-
responds in French to the sentence "Est-ce que 
vous vous souvenez de nous", in English: "Do 
you remember us").  
The aim of a morphological analysis step is to 
recognize word composition and to provide spe-
cific morphological information about it. For 
Example : the word "??????" (in French: con-
na?ssent, in English: they know) is the result of 
the concatenation of the prefix "?" indicating the 
present and suffix "??" indicating the plural 
masculine of the verb "???" (in French: con-
na?tre, in English: to know). The morphological 
analyzer determines for each word the list of all 
its possible morphological features.  
In Arabic language, some conjugated verbs or 
inflected nouns can have the same orthographic 
form due to absence of vowels (Example : non-
voweled Arabic word "???" can be a verb in the 
past "??????" (He dismissed), or a masculine noun 
"??????" (chapter / season), or a concatenation of 
the coordinating conjunction "  ?? " (then) with the 
verb "??": imperative of the verb (bind)). 
In this work, In order to handle the morpho-
logical ambiguities, we decide to use MORPH2 
(Belguith et al, 2006), an Arabic morphological 
analyzer developed at the Miracl laboratory1. 
MORPH2 is based on a knowledge-based com-
putational method. It accepts as input an Arabic 
text, a sentence or a word. Its morphological dis-
ambiguation and analysis method is based on 
five steps: 
? A tokenization process is applied in a 
first step. It consists of two sub-steps. 
First, the text is divided into sentences, 
using the system Star (Belguith et al, 
2005), an Arabic text tokenizer based on 
contextual exploration of punctuation 
marks and conjunctions of coordination. 
The second sub-step detects the different 
words in each sentence. 
? A morphological preprocessing step 
which aims to extract clitics agglutinated 
to the word. A filtering process is then 
applied to check out if the remaining 
word is a particle, a number, a date, or a 
proper noun. 
? An affixal analysis is then applied to de-
termine all possible affixes and roots. It 
aims to identify basic elements belonging 
                                                 
1 http://www.miracl.rnu.tn 
62
to the constitution of a word (the root and 
affixes i.e. prefix, infix and suffix). 
? The morphological analysis step consists 
of determining for each word, all its 
possible morpho-syntactic features (i.e, 
part of speech, gender, number, time, 
person, etc.). Morpho-syntactic features 
detection is made up on three stages. The 
first stage identifies the part-of-speech of 
the word (i.e. verb "???", noun "???", par-
ticle "????" and proper noun "??? ???"). The 
second stage extracts for each part-of-
speech a list of its morpho-syntactic fea-
tures. A filtering of these feature lists is 
made in the third stage. 
? Vocalization and validation step : each 
handled word is fully vocalized accord-
ing to its morpho-syntactic features de-
termined in the previous step.  
 
In our method, each Arabic word, from Arab-
ic data, is replaced by its segmented form, where 
stem, clitic and affix are featured with their 
morphological classes (e.g. proclitic, prefix, 
stem, suffix and enclitic). For example: the word 
"????????" (in French: "et nous les avons connu", 
in English: "and we have known them") is the 
result of the concatenation of the proclitic "??" 
(then): coordinating conjunction, the suffix "??" 
for the present masculine plural, enclitic "??" (for 
the masculine plural possession pronoun), and 
the rest of the word "???" indicating the stem. 
So, the word "????????" will be replaced by: 
 
"enclitic   ??_ suffix_  ?? Stem_  ??? proclitic ?_ " 
4 Problems in context Morpho-
syntactic feature choice 
As mentioned in section 1, ambiguities in Arabic 
word are mainly caused by the absence of the 
short vowels. Thus, a word can have different 
meanings. There are also the usual homographs 
of uninflected words with/without the same pro-
nunciation, which have different meanings and 
usually different POS?s. For example: the word 
"???", in English: "gold" and "???", in English: 
"go". In Arabic there are four categories of 
words: noun, proper noun, verbs and particles. 
The absence of short vowels can cause ambigui-
ties within the same category or across different 
categories. For example: the word "???" corres-
ponds to many categories (table 1). 
meanings of a word "???" Categories 
after Particule 
remoteness Noun 
remove Verb 
go away Verb 
 
Table 1. Different meanings of a word "???" 
 
Arabic uses a diverse system of prefixes, suf-
fixes, and pronouns that are attached to the 
words (Soudi, 2007). 
In fact, in Arabic language, the word: "???" 
can be a verb in the past (He filed), or a mascu-
line noun (state), or a concatenation of the coor-
dinating conjunction "?" (and) with the verb 
"??": imperative of the verb (filed). For this rea-
son, correct morphological analysis is required 
to resolve structural ambiguities among Arabic 
sentence. 
5 Word Morpho-syntactic feature dis-
ambiguation 
5.1 Training corpus 
The training corpus used in this work is an 
Arabic-French bitext aligned at the sentence 
level. Each Arabic word, from Arabic data, is 
replaced by its segmented form. In the other 
side, the French corpus is part-of-speech (POS) 
tagged by using treetagger tool (Schmid, 1994) 
for annotating text with part-of-speech and 
lemma information. 
5.2 Alignment model 
The aligned model was trained with GIZA++ 
(Och and Ney, 2003), which implements the 
most typical IBM and HMM alignment models. 
The alignment model used consists of IBM-1, 
HMM, IBM-3 and IBM-4. 
5.3 Using treetagger for Arabic Word 
Morpho-syntactic feature disambigua-
tion 
To pre-process the Arabic data, we use the 
MORPH2 morphological analyzer (Belguith et 
al., 2006).  A sample output of the morphologi-
cal analyzer is shown in Figure 1.  
 
63
 
Figure 1. Possible analyses for the word "???" 
 
The obtained output consists of a set of all 
possible morphological analyses for each word, 
with the unique correct analysis. One needs to 
select the right meaning by looking at the con-
text. Given the highly inflection nature of Arab-
ic, resolving ambiguities is syntactically harder 
within the same category. We want to choose the 
correct output using the features generated by 
TreeTagger applied to the French corpus.  
To obtain this correct feature, we needed to 
match data in the segmented Arabic corpus to 
the lexeme and feature representation output by 
TreeTagger. The matching included the results 
of the alignment of word between the segmented 
Arabic corpus and the part-of-speech tagged 
French corpus. 
Example : the word "????????" (in French: "et 
nous les avons connu", in English: "and we have 
known them") is segmented by: 
"?_ proclitic ???_ stem ??_ suffix ??_ "enclitic 
 
The part-of-speech tagged of the French sen-
tence is: 
 
"et_KON nous_PRO:PER les_PRO:PER 
avons_VER:pres connu_VER:pper" 
 
The result of the alignment between these two 
sentences is: 
 
(a) ?_     proclitic ???_      stem ??_   suffix ??_ enclitic 
 
 
 
 
(b) Et nous les avons Connu 
 KON PRO:PER PRO:PER VER:pres VER:pper 
 
Figure 2. (a) Output of morphological analysis 
MORPH2: segmented Arabic sentence, (b) 
French translation and its alignment with seg-
mented morphological analysis 
 
The stem "???" is aligned with the word: 
"connu" : the past participle of the verb "con-
na?tre" (in English : "known"). We can deduce 
that the part of speech of the stem "???" is a 
verb.  
Morpho-syntactic features provided by Tree-
Tagger are verb, proper noun, noun, adjective, 
adverb, conjunction, pronoun, preposition, etc. 
The morpho-syntactic feature of Arabic words 
aligned with French words tagged by adjective 
or noun will be replaced by the morpho-
syntactic feature : noun: "???". While, the mor-
pho-syntactic feature : adverb, conjunction, or 
prepostion will be replaced by the Arabic mor-
pho-syntactic feature : particle : "????".  
We can attest that the use of morpho-syntactic 
features provided by the part-of-speech tagged 
corpus in the other side can remove disambigua-
tion of morpho-syntactic feature of the Arabic 
word provided by a morphological analyser, es-
pecially for agglutinative and inflectional lan-
guages. 
5.4 Experimental results 
In our experiments, on the entire corpus, the 
MORPH2 morphological analyzer makes 1152 
errors (27%). Table 2 shows the results obtained 
with the morphological analyzer MORPH2, 
BASELINE, and the results obtained with the 
Arabic morphology-French alignment, treetag-
ger-to-morph2, where Arabic morphology-
French alignment is used to choose a correct 
64
morpho-syntactic feature produced by a morpho-
logical analyzer  MORPH2. 
 
System Accuracy (%) 
BASELINE 73% 
treetagger-to-
morph2 
88% 
 
Table 2. Results of treetagger-to-morph2 com-
pared against BASELINE on the task of POS 
tagging of Arabic text 
 
Thus one can observe that, for Arabic, the 
treetagger-to-morph2 outperforms the BASE-
LINE tagger with a significant absolute differ-
ence of 15% in tagging accuracy. 
The performance of treetagger-to-morph2 is 
better than the baseline BASELINE. The errors 
encountered result from confusing nouns with 
verbs, particles or vice versa. This is to be 
caused by the presence of homographs of Arabic 
words, which have different meanings and dif-
ferent POS?s. 
6 Conclusion 
Morphological disambiguation of Arabic is a 
difficult task which involves, in theory, thou-
sands of possible tags. 
In this paper, we present a system which dis-
ambiguates the output of a morphological ana-
lyzer for Arabic. Arabic is a morphologically 
rich language, and Morphological analysis and 
disambiguation are crucial stages in a variety of 
natural language processing applications.  
We first applied an Arabic word segmentation 
step, to improve the alignments models. So we 
use the Arabic morphological analyzer 
MORPH2. Then, we proposed to use TreeTag-
ger tool, able to annotate text with part-of-
speech and lemma information, where each 
word from French corpus is agglutinated to its 
part-of-speech (POS). The sentence alignment 
between Arabic and French corpus was trained 
with GIZA++. The core idea is to avoid morpho-
syntactic ambiguity of the Arabic words ob-
tained in the MORPH2 output by using the part 
of speech of corresponding aligned French word. 
We showed that imposing Arabic-French align-
ment dependent constraints on possible se-
quences of analyses improves the morphological 
disambiguation.  
Future work will focus on taking advantage of 
our efficient technique. We are very interested to 
use Word Morpho-syntactic feature disambigua-
tion to build up an efficient French-Arabic trans-
lation system.  
References 
Belguith L., and Cha?ben N. 2006. Analyse et d?-
sambigu?sation morphologiques de textes    arabes    
non voyell?s, Actes de la 13?me confrence sur le 
Traitement Automatique des Langues Naturelles, 
Leuven Belgique, 493-501. 
Belguith L., Baccour L. and Mourad G. 2005. Seg-
mentation des textes arabes bas?e sur l'analyse 
contextuelle des signes de ponctuations et de cer-
taines particules. Actes de la 12?me Conf?rence 
annuelle sur le Traitement Automatique des 
Langues Naturelles, 451-456. 
Diab M., Hacioglu K., and Jurafsky D. 2004. Auto-
matic tagging of Arabic text: From raw text to 
base phrase chunks. In 5th Meeting of the North 
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics/Human Language Technologies 
Conference (HLT-NAACL04), Boston, MA. 
Habash N. and Rambow O.. 2005. Arabic tokeniza-
tion, part-of-speech tagging and morphological 
disambiguation in one fell swoop. In Proceedings 
of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics (ACL?05), Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, June. Association for Computational 
Linguistics. 573?580 
Hajic J. 2000. Morphological tagging: Data vs. dic-
tionaries. In 1st Meeting of the North American 
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (NAACL?00), Seattle, WA. 
Och F. J., and Ney H. 2003. A Systematic compari-
son of various statistical alignment models, Com-
putational Linguistics, 29(1): 19-51. 
Och F. J., Ney H. 2004. The alignment template ap-
proach to statistical machine translation, Computa-
tional Linguistics, 30(4): 417-449. 
Schmid H. 1994. Probabilistic Part-of-speech Tag-
ging Using Decision Trees. In Proceedings of In-
ternational Conference on New Methods in Lan-
guage Processing, Manchester. 44-49. 
Soudi A., Bosch A. and Neumann G. Arabic Compu-
tational Morphology: Knowledge-based and Em-
pirical Methods. Springer, 2007. 
65
Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Hybrid Approaches to Translation, pages 74?81,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8, 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
 Integrating morpho-syntactic features in English-Arabic statistical 
machine translation 
 
 
Ines Turki Khemakhem 
MIRACL Laboratory,  
ISIM Sfax,  
p?le Technologique,  
Route de Tunis Km 10, B.P. 
242 Sfax 3021, Tunisie 
Ines_turki@yahoo.fr 
Salma Jamoussi 
MIRACL Laboratory,  
ISIM Sfax,  
p?le Technologique,  
Route de Tunis Km 10, B.P. 
242 Sfax 3021, Tunisie 
Salma.jammoussi@isimsf.rnu.tn 
Abdelmajid Ben Hama-
dou 
MIRACL Laboratory,  
ISIM Sfax,  
p?le Technologique,  
Route de Tunis Km 10, B.P. 
242 Sfax 3021, Tunisie 
abdelmajid.benh- 
-amadou@isimsf.rnu.tn 
  
 
Abstract 
This paper presents a hybrid approach to the 
enhancement of English to Arabic statistical 
machine translation quality. Machine Transla-
tion has been defined as the process that utiliz-
es computer software to translate text from one 
natural language to another. Arabic, as a mor-
phologically rich language, is a highly flex-
ional language, in that the same root can lead 
to various forms according to its context. Sta-
tistical machine translation (SMT) engines of-
ten show poor syntax processing especially 
when the language used is morphologically 
rich such as Arabic. In this paper, to overcome 
these shortcomings, we describe our hybrid 
approach which integrates knowledge of the 
Arabic language into statistical machine trans-
lation. In this framework, we propose the use 
of a featured language model SFLM (Sma?li et 
al., 2004) to be able to integrate syntactic and 
grammatical knowledge about each word. In 
this paper, we first discuss some challenges in 
translating from English to Arabic and we ex-
plore various techniques to improve perfor-
mance on this task. We apply a morphological 
segmentation step for Arabic words and we 
present our hybrid approach by identifying 
morpho-syntactic class of each segmented 
word to build up our statistical feature lan-
guage model. We propose the scheme for re-
combining the segmented Arabic word, and 
describe their effect on translation. 
1 Introduction 
Arabic is characterized by complex morphology 
and rich vocabulary. It is a derivational, flexional 
language. In addition, Arabic is an agglutinative 
language. In fact, most Arabic words are made 
up by the concatenation of certain morphemes 
together.  An Arabic corpus will therefore have 
more surface forms than an English corpus of the 
same size. 
On the other hand, many Arabic words are hom-
ographic: they have the same orthographic form, 
but they have not the same meaning. This prop-
erty can reduce the size of the translation vo-
cabulary and has an important implication for 
statistical modeling of the Arabic language. 
These factors affect the performance of English-
Arabic Statistical Machine Translation (SMT). 
To overcome these weaknesses of SMT, we pro-
pose a hybrid approach that seeks to integrate the 
linguistic information and enrich the lexical and 
syntactic resources in the statistical machine 
translation. 
Arabic language translation has been widely 
studied recently. Most of the time, the rich mor-
phology of Arabic language is seen as a serious 
problem that must be resolved to build up an ef-
ficient translation system. It has been proven that 
pre-processing Arabic data and integrating its 
morpho-syntactic features is useful to improve 
machine translation results. The use of similar 
techniques for English-to-Arabic SMT requires 
recombination of the target side into valid sur-
face forms, which is not a trivial task. 
In this paper, we describe an initial set of exper-
iments on English-to-Arabic machine translation: 
we apply a morphological segmentation step for 
Arabic words and we present our hybrid ap-
proach by identifying morpho-syntactic class of 
each segmented word to build up our statistical 
feature language model. We propose the scheme 
for recombining the segmented Arabic, and de-
scribe their effect on translation. 
74
This paper is organized as follows: section 2 
gives a brief description of some related works 
using hybrid approach to Machine Translation to 
introduce morpho-syntactic features in a machine 
translation process. Section 3 describes the base-
line system. Then, section 4 presents the used 
morphological analyzer MORPH2 for Arabic 
texts, able to recognize word composition and to 
provide more specific morphological information 
about it. Next, we give information about Arabic 
syntax and morphology in section 5; in the re-
mainder of this section, we discuss the complexi-
ty of the Arabic morphology and the challenge of 
recombining the translated and segmented Ara-
bic words in to their surface forms. The Statisti-
cal Feature Language Model (SFLM) is ex-
plained in section 6, when used it aims to inte-
grate morpho-syntactic knowledge about word in 
the language model. We propose in section 7 a 
scheme for recombining the translated and seg-
mented Arabic words in to their surface forms. 
Section 8 gives a short overview of the data and 
tools used to build up our SMT system and 
shows the experimental details of our system 
using SFLM and the morphological analyzer 
MORPH2. Section 9 discusses the obtained re-
sults and, finally, section 10 presents some con-
clusions. 
2 Related work 
Arabic language translation has been widely 
studied recently. Most of the time, the rich mor-
phology of Arabic language is seen as a serious 
problem that must be resolved to build up an ef-
ficient translation system. Research into machine 
translation hybridization has increased over the 
last few years particulary with the statistical ap-
proach for machine translation. Habash et al 
(Habash et al, 2006) boost generation-heavy 
machine translation (GHMT) with statistical ma-
chine translation components. They use hybridi-
zation approach from the opposite direction by 
incorporating SMT components into rule-based 
systems. In (Sawaf, 2010), authors described a 
novel approach on how to deal with Arabic noisy 
and dialectal data. They normalize the input text 
to a commun form to be able to process it. 
In recent years, the overall quality of machine 
translation output has been improved greatly. 
Still, SMT engines often show poor results in 
their syntactic forms. Hybrid approach try to 
overcome these typical errors by integrating 
knowledge of Arabic language. It has been prov-
en that pre-processing Arabic data and integrat-
ing its features such as morphological infor-
mation and syntactic structure is useful to im-
prove machine translation results. 
In the next, we review this body of research. Our 
own research differs in that how to integrate in-
formation into SMT components systems. 
Most of the related work is on Arabic-to-English 
SMT. In prior work (Lee, 2004) (Habash and 
Sadat, 2006), it has been shown that morphologi-
cal segmentation of the Arabic source benefits 
the performance of Arabic-to-English SMT. In 
(Lee, 2004), the author uses a trigram language 
model to segment Arabic words. He then pro-
ceeds to deleting or merging some of the seg-
mented morphemes in order to make the seg-
mented Arabic source align better with the Eng-
lish target. Habash and Sadat (Habash and Sadat, 
2006) compared the use of the BAMA (Buck-
walter, 2002. ) and MADA (Habash and Ram-
bow, 2005) toolkits to segment the Arabic source 
as well as simple pattern matching to do morpho-
logical analysis for Arabic-English SMT, and 
were able to improve translation for tasks with 
out-of-domain training corpora. Sadat and Ha-
bash (Sadat and Habash. 2006) also showed that 
it was possible to combine the use of several var-
iations of morphological analysis both while de-
coding (combining multiple phrase tables) and 
rescoring the combined outputs of distinct sys-
tems.  
Introducing morphological analyzers in Arabic 
machine translation process is very present in the 
literature. The recent work (Besacier et al, 2008) 
conducted in depth a study of the influence of 
Arabic segmenters on the translation quality of 
an Arabic to English phrase-based system using 
the Moses decoder. In this work, authors demon-
strate that the use of the morphology information 
in the SMT has a great impact in improving re-
sults. They believe that simultaneously using 
multiple segmentations is a promising way to 
improve machine translation of Arabic. 
Arabic is an inflected language with several 
homonyms words, consequently linguistic fea-
tures are very useful to reduce statistical machine 
translation errors due to this phenomena. Some 
research works have been conducted in this area 
(Bilmes and Kirchhoff, 2003) (Schwenk and D?-
chelotte, 2007). The factored language model 
(FLM) approach of Bilmes and Kirchhoff 
(Bilmes and Kirchhoff, 2003) is a more linguisti-
75
cally-informed modeling approach than the n-
gram one. FLM are an extension of standard lan-
guage model where the prediction is based upon 
a set of features (and not only on previous occur-
rences of the predicted word). FLM addresses the 
problems of data-sparsity in morphologically 
complex languages by representing words as 
bundles of features, thus one can easily capture 
dependencies between subword parts of adjacent 
words. Some other works have been proposed to 
integrate linguistic information such as part-of-
speech, morphology and shallow syntax in con-
ventional phrase-based statistical translation 
(Koehn and Hoang. 2007). These translation 
models allow integrating multiple levels of in-
formation into the translation process instead of 
incorporating linguistic markers in either prepro-
cessing or postprocessing steps. For example, in 
morphologically rich languages it may be prefer-
able to translate lemma, part-of-speech and mor-
phological information separately and combine 
the information on the target side to generate the 
output surface words. In this model the transla-
tion process is broken up into three steps. Trans-
late input lemmas into output lemmas in a first 
step. Then, translate morphological and POS fac-
tors in a second step. Finally, generate surface 
forms given the lemma and the linguistic factors. 
These factored translation models have been 
used to improve the word level translation accu-
racy by incorporating the factors in phrase-based 
translation. In (Schwenk and D?chelotte. 2007), 
authors focus on incorporating morpho-syntactic 
features in the translation model for the English-
Spanish machine translation process. In this 
work, authors propose the use of augmented 
units in the translation model instead of simple 
words. These units are composed by surface 
word forms combined with their morpho-
syntactic categories. This method allows lexical 
disambiguation of words using their roles and 
their grammatical contexts. 
Previous works on English-to-Arabic SMT using 
factored models were proposed in (Sarikaya and 
Deng. 2007) and (Badr et al, 2008). The first 
uses shallow segmentation, and does not make 
use of contextual information. In this work au-
thors use Joint Morphological-Lexical Language 
Models to rerank the output. The second work 
shows that morphological decomposition of the 
Arabic text is beneficial, especially for smaller-
size corpora, and investigates different recombi-
nation techniques. In this work, authors propose 
the use of factored translation models for English 
to Arabic translation. The factors on the English 
side are POS tags and the surface word. On the 
Arabic side, they use the surface word, the stem 
and the POS tag concatenated to the segmented 
clitics. 
In (Kholy and Habash. 2010), authors empha-
sized on the sparsity problem of English-Arabic 
translation. They considered the tokenization and 
normalization of Arabic data to improve English-
to-Arabic SMT. 
3 Phrase-Based Machine Translation 
Statistical machine translation methods have 
evolved from using the simple word based mod-
els (Brown et al, 1993) to phrase based models 
(Marcu and Wong, 2002; Och and Ney. 2003). 
The SMT has been formulated as a noisy channel 
model in which the target language sentence, s is 
seen as distorted by the channel into the foreign 
language t. In that, we try to find the sentence t 
which maximizes the  P(t|s) probability: 
 
argmaxtP(t|s) = argmaxtP(s|t)P(t)   (1) 
 
Where P(t) is the language model and P(s|t) is the 
translation model. We can get the language mod-
el from a monolingual corpus (in the target lan-
guage). The translation model is obtained by us-
ing an aligned bilingual corpus. 
The translation model is combined together with 
the following six additional feature models: the 
target language model, the word and the phrase 
bonus and the source-to-target and target-to-
source lexicon model and the reordering model. 
These models are optimized by the decoder1. In 
our case, we use the open source Moses decoder 
described in (Koehn et al, 2007). 
4 Segmentation for Arabic translation 
Arabic is a morphologically complex language. 
Compared with English, an Arabic word can 
sometimes correspond to a whole English sen-
tence (Example: the Arabic word "???????????" corre-
sponds in English to: "Do you remember us"). 
The aim of a morphological analysis step is to 
recognize word composition and to provide spe-
cific morphological information about it. For 
                                                 
1 http://www.statmt.org/moses/ 
76
Example: the word "??????" (in English: they 
know) is the result of the concatenation of the 
prefix "?" indicating the present and suffix "??" 
indicating the plural masculine of the verb ???" " 
(in English: to know). The morphological ana-
lyzer determines for each word the list of all its 
possible morphological features. 
In Arabic language, some conjugated verbs or 
inflected nouns can have the same orthographic 
form due to absence of vowels (Example: non-
voweled Arabic word "???" can be a verb in the 
past "???????" (He dismissed), or a masculine noun 
"  ??????" (chapter / season), or a concatenation of 
the coordinating conjunction " ???" (then)?with the 
verb "??": imperative of the verb (bind)). 
In order to handle the morphological ambigui-
ties, we decide to use MORPH2, an Arabic mor-
phological analyzer developed at the Miracl la-
boratory2. MORPH2 is based on a knowledge-
based computational method. It accepts as input 
an Arabic text, a sentence or a word. Its morpho-
logical disambiguation and analysis method is 
based on five steps: 
? A tokenization process is applied in a first 
step. It consists of two sub-steps. First, the 
text is divided into sentences, using the 
system Star (Belguith et al, 2005), an Ar-
abic text tokenizer based on contextual 
exploration of punctuation marks and con-
junctions of coordination. The second sub-
step detects the different words in each 
sentence. 
? A morphological preprocessing step which 
aims to extract clitics agglutinated to the 
word. A filtering process is then applied to 
check out if the remaining word is a parti-
cle, a number, a date, or a proper noun. 
? An affixal analysis is then applied to de-
termine all possible affixes and roots. It 
aims to identify basic elements belonging 
to the constitution of a word (the root and 
affixes i.e. prefix, infix and suffix). 
? The morphological analysis step consists 
of determining for each word, all its pos-
sible morpho-syntactic features (i.e, part 
of speech, gender, number, time, person, 
etc.). Morpho-syntactic features detection 
is made up on three stages. The first stage 
identifies the part-of-speech of the word 
                                                 
2 http://www.miracl.rnu.tn 
(i.e. verb "???", noun "???", particle "????" 
and proper noun "???? ???"). The second 
stage extracts for each part-of-speech a list 
of its morpho-syntactic features. A filter-
ing of these feature lists is made in the 
third stage. 
? Vocalization and validation step: each 
handled word is fully vocalized according 
to its morpho-syntactic features deter-
mined in the previous step. 
5  Challenges on English-Arabic SMT 
In this section, we briefly explore the challenges 
that prevent the construction of successful SMT. 
The divergence of Arabic and English puts a 
rocky barrier in building a prosperous machine 
translation system. Morphological and syntactic 
preprocessing is important in order to converge 
the two languages. 
Arabic is a highly agglutinative language with a 
rich set of suffixes. Inflectional and derivational 
productions introduce a big growth in the num-
ber of possible word forms. In Arabic, articles, 
prepositions, pronouns, etc. can be affixed to ad-
jectives, nouns, verbs and particles to which they 
are related. The richness in morphology intro-
duces many challenges to the translation problem 
both to and from Arabic.  
In general, ambiguities in Arabic word are main-
ly caused by the absence of the short vowels. 
Thus, a word can have different meanings. There 
are also the usual homographs of uninflected 
words with/without the same pronunciation, 
which have different meanings and usually dif-
Iosoe ?326?h.?))s?o[DPpOo? so?Z)sG?"???", can 
correspond in English to: "gold" or to: "go". In 
Arabic there are four categories of words: noun, 
proper noun, verbs and particles. The absence of 
short vowels can cause ambiguities within the 
same category or cross different categories. For 
example: the word "???" corresponds to many 
categories (table 1). 
 
meanings of a word "???" Categories 
after Particule 
remoteness Noun 
remove Verb 
go away Verb 
 
Table 1: Different meanings of the word "???" 
 
77
In table 1, there exist four different analyses for 
the word "???". This ambiguity can be resolved 
only in the phrase context. 
Due to the Arabic is an agglutinative language, 
the morphological decomposition is required. So 
as mentioned above, both training and decoding 
use segmented Arabic. The final output of the 
decoder must therefore be recombined into a sur-
face form. This proves to be a non-trivial chal-
lenge for a reason that Arabic uses diverse sys-
tems of prefixes, suffixes, and pronouns that are 
attached to the words (Soudi et al, 2007). For 
example, the Arabic sentence "???????????" can 
be recombined as presented in table 2. 
 
Table 2: Ambiguity in recombining sentence 
6 Statistical Feature Language Model  
One of the problems of statistical language mod-
els is to consider that the word is depending only 
on its previous history (words or classes). But in 
fact, in natural language the appearance of a 
word depends not only on its history but also on 
some others features. The word "???" (write) and 
"???" (books) are two different words, but we 
FDe? ? psoG,F ?  soP? ,I?Zo?G)e? ?Ne)Z?  so,s?IoD
tures and their contexts.  
In order to settle such problem we are trying to 
introduce knowledge about the word features by 
using a featured statistical language model: Sta-
tistical Feature Language Model (Sma?li et al, 
2004). 
Arabic is an inflected natural language, linguis-
tic features are very useful to reduce translation 
errors due to homonyms. By employing SFLM, 
each word is considered as an array of m fea-
tures: 
 
 wi
1..m =
(
 
 
f1
i
f2
i
.
.
fm
i )
 
 
            (2)                                             
 
Each fj
i is a linguistic characteristic of wi. These 
characteristics or features could be the surface 
word, its syntactic class, its gender, its number, 
its semantic class, ... 
(Sma?li et al, 2004) substitute in the classical n-
gram language model, the words by their feature 
arrays which contain surface words and their 
linguistic characteristics. Thus, a SFLM model 
is built up by analogy with the classical n-gram 
model given by: 
 
P(w1, w2, ? ,wL) =
? P(wi|wi?1
L
i=1 ?wi?n+1)          (3) 
 
To define SFLM model it is enough to replace 
each word wi by its feature array  (f1
i , f2
i , ? , fm
i )t 
as follows: 
 
P(w1
1..m, w2
1..m, ? ,wL
1..m) =
? P(
(
 
 
f1
i
f2
i
.
.
fm
i )
 
 
|
(
 
 
f1
i?1
f2
i?1
.
.
fm
i?1)
 
 L
i=1 ?
(
 
 
f1
i?n+1
f2
i?n+1
.
.
fm
i?n+1)
 
 
)           (4)                                    
 
Where (f1
i , f2
i , ? , fm
i )t is the feature array corre-
sponding to the ith word. This model is very sim-
ple to implement with classical language model-
ing toolkits like CMU (Clarkson and Rosenfeld, 
1997) and SLRIM (Stolcke, 2002). In fact, we 
replace each word in the Arabic training and test 
corpora by its feature array. Thus the following 
notation is adopted: 
 
 wi
1?m = f1
i_f2
i , ? , _fm
i               (5)                                                  
 
The feature array f1
i__f2
i , ? , __fm
i  will be treated 
like only one string. In our experiments, we de-
cided to employ a SFLM with two features. We 
choose to consider the word itself as first feature 
and its syntactic class (category) as second one. 
In this case, a word wi is represented like the 
concatenation of the two strings wi and C(wi) as 
follows: 
wi_C(wi )                  (6) 
where  ?(?? )  represents the morpho-syntactic 
class of ??. 
7 Arabic recombination 
As mentioned in Section 1, Arabic is character-
ized by a rich morphology. In addition to being 
inflected for gender and number, words can be 
attached to various clitics for conjunction "?" 
(and), the definite article ??"" ?( so(i? psop)h, ,)eh?
(o.e?"?. " (by/with), "?" (for), "?" (as)) and object 
pronouns (e.g. "??" (their/them)).  
Recombined  sentence meanings 
?????????? Before exposure 
????????? Accepted the offer 
78
We apply decomposition before aligning the 
training data, by splitting off each clitic and affix 
agglutinated to the word separately, such that 
any given word is split into at most five parts: 
 
Proclitic + prefix+ stem +suffix + enclitic. 
Then, the stem is associated with its morpho-
syntactic feature. For example the word 
"?????????" (in English: "do you  know them" is 
replaced by: 
 
??????????_??????????? 
 
So in both training and decoding processes, seg-
mented Arabic words are used. The final output 
of the decoder will be also a list of segmented 
words. Therefore this output must be recombined 
into a surface form to be able to evaluate the 
translation result by using the right surface 
words. 
This proves to be a non-trivial challenge for a 
reason of order ambiguity:  a segmented word 
can be recombined into two grammatically cor-
rect forms. Clitics can correspond to enclitic or 
proclitic.  For example: in the segmented words:  
" ???????? ????????? ?? " the clitic "?" can be recom-
bined with the previous word ("?": enclitic). So 
the segmented words " ???? ?? ?? ????????? ?? " can b 
erecombined to " ???? ???????????? ", in English: "I 
gave this book".  
The clitic "?" can be recombined also with the 
following word ("?": proclitic), in this case, the 
segmented words " "???????????  can be recombined 
to " ???????????  ????", in English: "I also gave the 
book". 
Those two sentences have the same segmented 
form, but they have different meanings. By in-
troducing morphological features (e.g. proclitic, 
prefix, stem, suffix and enclitic) for each seg-
ment, we may remove this ambiguity:  
Therefore we apply reconstruction of the Arabic 
segmented words by agglutinating the morpho-
logical segments in the following order:  
 
?_?proclitic??_?prefix??_???_???????suffix??_??
enclitic 
8 Experiments 
8.1 Used data 
In this paper, we consider the translation task of 
texts from English into Arabic. We used 
IWSLT2010 data as a parallel corpus. For 
training the translation models, the train part of 
the IWSLT10 data was used which contains 
19972 sentence pairs. For testing, we used a 
subset data made up of 469 sentences (there were 
1 Arabic reference translation for each Arabic 
sentence). All BLEU scores presented in this 
paper are case-sensitive and include 
punctuations. For the Arabic language model we 
use trigrams to build up the baseline system and 
a 7-grams to build up our translation system. In 
fact, we use a 7-gram language model because in 
our system, each word in the training Arabic 
corpus is replaced by its list of morphological 
segments: proclitic, prefix, stem, suffix and 
enclitic. 
8.2 Baseline system 
The English-Arabic baseline system is built upon 
the open-source MT toolkit Moses (Koehn et al, 
2007). Phrase pairs are extracted from word 
alignments generated by GIZA++ (Och and Ney. 
2003). The phrase-based translation model pro-
vides direct and inverted frequency-based and 
lexical-based probabilities for each phrase pair. 
To train the trigram language models, SRILM 
(Stolcke, 2002) was used. The performances re-
ported in this paper were measured using the 
BLEU score (Papineni et al, 2002). 
8.3 Experimental results 
? Arabic word  segmenter: 
In our method, each Arabic word, from the target 
training data, is replaced by its segmented form. 
For example: the word "????????" (in English: "and 
we have known them") is the result of the con-
catenation of the proclitic "???" (then): coordinat-
ing conjunction, the suffix "??" for the present 
masculine plural, enclitic "??" (for the masculine 
plural posession pronoun), and the rest of the 
word "???" indicating the stem. So, the word 
"????????" will be replaced by: 
 
"????????????????" 
? SFLM for introducing Morpho-syntactic 
features: 
For introducing morpho-syntactic features into 
the English-Arabic translation system, we use 
part of speech tagging provided by MORPH2. 
We believe that using these features can improve 
79
our language modeling when used with the 
SFLM model. 
In our proposed method, each Arabic word, from 
the target Arabic training data, is replaced by the 
reduced word (obtained by removing its clitics 
and its affixes), combined with its syntactic class 
(category), where clitic and affix are featured 
with their morphological classes (e.g. proclitic, 
prefix, suffix and enclitic). 
For example : the word "???????" (in English: "he 
will notify them") is the result of the concatena-
tion of the proclitic "?" indicating the future,  the 
prefix "?" for the present, enclitic "??" (for the 
masculine plural posession pronoun),  and the 
rest of the word "???" such as its syntactic class is 
verb: "???". So, the word "???????" will be re-
placed by: 
 "_? proclitic?_? prefix?_???_??????"enclitic 
In this notation, its morpho-syntactic feature (as 
verb "???", noun "???", particle "????" and proper 
noun "???????"). The language model is then gen-
erated using the so obtained target Arabic train-
ing data, by the standard SRILM toolkit. The so 
obtained Arabic corpus in then used for training 
(without any change on the English side).  
? Arabic post-processing 
As mentioned above, both training and decoding 
phases use Arabic segmented words. The final 
output of the decoder will be also composed of 
segmented words. Therefore these words must be 
recombined into their surface forms. Therefore 
we apply reconstruction of the Arabic segmented 
words just by agglutinating the morphological 
segments in the following order:  
Proclitic + prefix+ stem +suffix + enclitic. 
The English-Arabic translation performance of 
this new system is reported in table3, and com-
pared to the baseline system. 
 
 Bleu  
Baseline 12.58% 
SMT hybrid 13.16% 
 
Table 3: Comparison of the English-Arabic transla-
tion systems 
 
Table 3 shows a significant improvement of the 
BLEU score when we use segmentation and in-
troduce morpho-syntactic features into the Eng-
lish-Arabic translation system by using SFLM. 
The BLEU score increases from 12.58% to 
13.16%. 
These results attest that the use of morpho-
syntactic features within SMT system can en-
hance translation performances, especially for 
agglutinative and inflectional languages, such as 
Arabic. Also, using the word category concate-
nated to the word, can avoid the problem of 
homographics and can improve language model-
ing efficacity.  
9 Conclusion 
English-to-Arabic machine translation has been a 
challenging research issue for many researchers 
in the field of Arabic Natural Language Pro-
cessing. In this study, we have evaluated the ef-
fectiveness of morphological decomposition of 
the Arabic text and SFLM language modeling 
method to integrate morpho-syntactic features in 
English to Arabic machine translation. We also 
presented our method for recombining the seg-
mented Arabic target. Our results suggest that 
morphological decomposition of the Arabic text 
is beneficial and that using morpho-syntactic fea-
tures is a promising way to improve English to 
Arabic machine translation. The use of recombi-
nation of the target side technique is beneficial to 
overcome ambiguity in recombining Arabic text. 
References  
Badr I., Zbib R. and Glass J. 2008. Segmentation for 
English-to-Arabic statistical machine translation. 
Proceedings of the 46th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics on Human 
Language Technologies, Columbus, Ohio, 153-
156.  
Belguith L., Baccour L. and Mourad G. 2005. Seg-
mentation des textes arabes bas?e sur l'analyse con-
textuelle des signes de ponctuations et de certaines 
particules". Actes de la 12?me Conf?rence annuelle 
sur le Traitement Automatique des Langues Natu-
relles, 451-456. 
Besacier L., Ben-Youcef A. and Blanchon H. 2008. 
The LIG Arabic / English Speech Translation Sys-
tem. IWSLT08. Hawai. USA, 58-62. 
Bilmes J. and Kirchhoff K. 2003. Factored language 
models and generalized parallel backoff". In Pro-
ceeding of Human Language Technology Confer-
ence, Edmonton, Canada. 4?6.  
Brown P., Della Pietra V., Della Pietra S., and Mercer 
R. 1993. The mathematics of statistical machine 
80
translation: parameter estimation, Computational 
Linguistics, 19(1): 263?311. 
Buckwalter T. 2002. Buckwalter Arabic morphologi-
cal analyzer version 1.0. Linguistic Data Consorti-
um, University of Pennsylvania. 
Carpuat M, Marton Y, and Habash N. 2010. Improv-
ing arabic-to-english statistical machine translation 
by reordering post-verbal subjects for alignment. In 
Proceedings of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics (ACL 2010) Conference Short Papers, 
Uppsala, Sweden, 178?183. 
Clarkson P. and Rosenfeld R. 1997, Statistical lan-
guage modeling using the CMU-Cambridge 
toolkit. In Proceedings of the European Conference 
on Speech Communication and Technology, 
Rhodes, Greece, 2707-2710. 
David Chiang, Yuval Marton, and Philip Resnik. 
2008. Online large-margin training of syntactic and 
structural translation features. In Proceedings of the 
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
eXDeo?3s)Fohh,eei?(01/3??i??233, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA.  
Habash N. and Rambow O. 2005. Arabic Tokeniza-
tion, Part-of-Speech Tagging and Morphological 
Disambiguation in One Fell Swoop. In Proc. of the 
43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (ACL), Ann Arbor, MI, 
573?580. 
Habash N. and Sadat F. 2006. Arabic Preprocessing 
Schemes for Statistical Machine Translation. In 
Proc. of the Human Language Technology Confer-
ence of the NAACL, Companion Volume: Short 
Papers, New York City, NY, 49?52.  
Habash N., Dorr B., and Monz C. 2006. Challenges in 
Building an Arabic-English GHMT System with 
SMT Components. In Proceedings of the 11th an-
nual conference of the European Association for 
Machine Translation (EAMT-2006), Norway, 56-
65. 
Kholy A. and Habash N. 2010. Techniques for arabic 
morphological detokenization and orthographic 
denormalization. In Proceedings of the seventh In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and 
Evaluation (LREC), Valletta, Malta. 
Koehn P. and Hoang H. 2007. Factored translation 
models. In Proceedings of the 2007 Joint Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language 
Processing and Computational Natural Language 
Learning, Prague, 868?876.  
Koehn P., Hoang H., Birch A., Callison-Burch C., 
Federico M., Bertoldi N., Cowa B., Shen W., Mo-
ran C., Zens R., Dyer C., Bojar O., Constantin A., 
and Herbst E., 2007. Moses: Open source toolkit 
for statistical machine translation, in Proceedings 
of the ACL-2007 Demoand Poster Sessions, Pra-
gue, Czeck Republic, 177?180. 
Lee Y. S. 2004. Morphological Analysis for Statisti-
cal Machine Translation. In Proceedings of HLT-
NAACL: Short Papers on XX, Boston, Massachu-
setts, 57-60. 
Marcu D. and Wong W. 2002. A Phrase-Based, Joint 
Probability Model for Statistical Machine Transla-
tion. Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical 
Methods in Natural Language Processing 
(EMNLP-2002), Philadelphia, PA, 133-139. 
Och F. J., and Ney H., 2003. A Systematic compari-
son of various statistical alignment models, Com-
putational Linguistics, 29(1): 19-51. 
Papineni K. A., Roukos S., Ward T., and Zhu W.J., 
2002. Bleu: a method for automatic evaluation of 
machine translation. The Proc. of the 40th Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, Philadelphia, 311?318. 
Sadat F. and Habash N. 2006. Combination of Arabic 
preprocessing schemes for statistical machine 
translation". In Proceedings of the 21st Internation-
al Conference on Computational Linguistics and 
the 44th annual meeting of the ACL (Coling 
$&/?(i?6\Geo\i?$Xh sDO,Di??8. 
Sarikaya R. and Deng Y. 2007. Joint Morphological-
Lexical Language Modeling for Machine Transla-
tion. In Proc. of NAACL HLT, Rochester, NY, 
145-148. 
Sawaf H. 2010. Arabic Dialect Handling in Hybrid 
Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the Con-
ference of the Association for Machine Translation 
in the Americas (AMTA 2010), Denver, Colorado. 
 Schwenk H., D?chelotte D. 2007. Bonneau-Maynard 
H. and Allauzen A., "Mod?les statistiques enrichis 
par la syntaxe pour la traduction automatique". 
TALN 2007, Toulouse-France. 253-262. 
Sma?li K., Jamoussi S., Langlois D. and Haton J. P. 
2004. Statistical feature language model. INTER-
SPEECH, Korea, 1357-1360. 
Soudi A., Bosch A. and Neumann G. 2007, Arabic 
Computational Morphology: Knowledge-based and 
Empirical Methods. In Arabic Computational Mor-
phology,  Springer, 3-14. 
Stolcke A., 2002. SRILM an Extensible Language 
Modeling Toolkit. The Proc. of the Intl. Conf. on 
Spoken Language Processing, Denver, CO, USA, 
901?904. 
81
