Proceedings of the Third Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 90?98,
Suntec, Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
 
Syntactic annotation of spoken utterances: 
A case study on the Czech Academic Corpus 
 
 
Barbora Hladk? and Zde?ka Ure?ov? 
 
Charles University in Prague 
Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics  
{hladka, uresova}@ufal.mff.cuni.cz 
 
Abstract 
Corpus annotation plays an important 
role in linguistic analysis and computa-
tional processing of both written and 
spoken language. Syntactic annotation 
of spoken texts becomes clearly a topic 
of considerable interest nowadays, 
driven by the desire to improve auto-
matic speech recognition systems by 
incorporating syntax in the language 
models, or to build language under-
standing applications. Syntactic anno-
tation of both written and spoken texts 
in the Czech Academic Corpus was 
created thirty years ago when no other 
(even annotated) corpus of spoken texts 
has existed. We will discuss how much 
relevant and inspiring this annotation is 
to the current frameworks of spoken 
text annotation. 
1 Motivation 
The purpose of annotating corpora is to cre-
ate an objective evidence of the real usage 
of the language. In general, it is easier to anno-
tate written text ? speech must be recorded and 
transcribed to process it whilst texts are avail-
able ?immediately?; moreover, written texts 
usually obey standard grammar rules of the 
language in questions, while a true transcript of 
spoken utterances often does not. 
The theoretical linguistic research considers 
the language to be a system of layers 
(e.g. the Government and Binding theory 
(Chomsky, 1993), the Functional-Generative 
Description of the language (Sgall, Haji?ov?, 
Panevov? 1986)). In order to be a valuable 
source of linguistic knowledge, the corpus an-
notation should respect this point of view. 
The morphological and syntactic layers 
of annotation represent a standard in today?s 
text corpora, e.g. the Penn Treebank, 
the family of the Prague Dependency Tree-
banks, the Tiger corpus for German, etc. Some 
corpora contain a semantic annotation, such as 
the Penn Treebank enriched by PropBank and 
Nombank, the Prague Dependency Treebank in 
its highest layer, the Penn Chinese or the 
the Korean Treebanks. The Penn Discourse 
Treebank contains discourse annotation. 
It is desirable that syntactic (and higher) an-
notation of spoken texts respects the written-
text style as much as possible, for obvious rea-
sons: data ?compatibility?, reuse of tools etc. 
A number of questions arise immediately: 
How much experience and knowledge ac-
quired during the written text annotation can 
we apply to the spoken texts? Are the annota-
tion instructions applicable to transcriptions in 
a straightforward way or some modifications 
of them must be done? Can transcriptions be 
annotated ?as they are? or some transformation 
of their inner structure into a written text struc-
ture must precede the annotation? The Czech 
Academic Corpus will help us to find out the 
answers. 
2 Introduction 
The first attempts to syntactically annotate 
spoken texts date back to the 1970s and 1980s 
when the Czech Academic Corpus ? CAC 
(Kr?l?k, Uhl??ov?, 2007) and the Swedish Tal-
banken (Nilsson, Hall, Nivre, 2005) appeared. 
Talbanken was annotated with partial phrase 
structures and grammatical functions, CAC 
with dependency-based structures and analyti-
cal functions. Thus both corpora can be re-
garded as belonging to the pioneers in corpus 
linguistics, together with the paper-only ?Quirk 
corpus? (Svartvik, Quirk, 1980; computerized 
later as the London-Lund Corpus).1  
                                                 
1
 When these annotation projects began in the 1960s, 
there were only two computerized manually annotated 
corpora available: the Brown Corpus of American Eng-
90
 During the last twenty years the work on 
creating new treebanks has increased consid-
erably and so CAC and Talbanken have been 
put in a different light, namely with regard to 
their internal formats and annotation schemes. 
Given that, transformation of them became 
necessary: while the Talbanken?s transforma-
tion concerned only the internal format, trans-
formation of CAC concerned both internal for-
mat and annotation scheme. 
Later, more annotated corpora of spoken 
texts have appeared, like the British Compo-
nent of the International Corpus of English 
(ICE-GB, Greenbaum, 1996), the Fisher Cor-
pus for English (Cieri et al, 2004), the Childes 
database 2 , the Switchboard part of the Penn 
Treebank (Godfrey et al, 1992), Corpus 
Gesproken Nederlands (Hoekstra et al, 2001) 
and the Verbmobil corpora.3 The syntactic an-
notation in these corpora is mostly automatic 
using tools trained on written corpora or on a 
small, manually annotated part of spoken cor-
pora. 
The aim of our contribution is to answer 
the question whether it is possible to annotate 
speech transcriptions syntactically according to 
the guidelines originally designed for text cor-
pora. We will show the problems that arise in 
extending an explicit scheme of syntactic an-
notation of written Czech into the domain of 
spontaneous speech (as found in the CAC).  
Our paper is organized as follows. In Sec-
tion 3, we give a brief description of the past 
and present of the Czech Academic Corpus. 
The compatibility of the original CAC syntac-
tic annotation with a present-day approach 
adopted by the Prague Dependency Treebank 
project is evaluated in Section 4. Section 5 is 
the core of our paper. We discuss phenomena 
typical for spoken texts making impossible to 
annotate them according to the guidelines for 
written texts. We explore a trade-off between 
leaving the original annotation aside and anno-
tating from scratch, and an upgrade of the 
original annotation. In addition, we briefly 
compare the approach adopted for Czech and 
those adopted for other languages. 
                                                                       
lish and the LOB Corpus of British English. Both contain 
written texts annotated for part of speech. Their size is 1 
mil. tokens. 
2
 http://childes.psy.cmu.edu/grasp/ 
3
 http://verbmobil.dfki.de/ 
3 The Czech Academic Corpus: past 
and present (1971-2008) 
The idea of the Czech Academic Corpus 
(CAC) came to life between 1971 and 1985 
thanks to the Department of Mathematical 
Linguistics within the Institute of Czech Lan-
guage. The discussion on the concept of aca-
demic grammar of Czech, i.e. on the concept 
of CAC annotation, finally led to the tradi-
tional, systematic, and well elaborated concept 
of morphology and dependency syntax (?mi-
lauer, 1972). By the mid 1980s, a total of 
540,000 words of CAC were morphologically 
and syntactically manually annotated.  
The documents originally selected for the 
CAC are articles taken from a range of media. 
The sources included newspapers and maga-
zines, and transcripts of spoken language from 
radio and TV programs, covering administra-
tive, journalistic and scientific fields. 
The original CAC was on par with it peers at 
the time (such as the Brown corpus) in size, 
coverage, and annotation; it surpassed them in 
that it contained (some) syntactic annotation. 
CAC was used in the first experiments of sta-
tistical morphological tagging of Czech (Haji?, 
Hladk?, 1997). 
After the Prague Dependency Treebank 
(PDT) has been built (Haji? et al, 2006), a 
conversion from the CAC to the PDT format 
has started. The PDT uses three layers of anno-
tation: morphological, syntactic and ?tecto-
grammatical? (or semantic) layers (henceforth 
m-layer, a-layer and t-layer, respectively).  
The main goal was to make the CAC and the 
PDT compatible at the m-layer and the a-layer, 
and thus to enable integration of the CAC into 
the PDT. The second version of the CAC pre-
sents such a complete conversion of the inter-
nal format and the annotation schemes. The 
overall statistics on the CAC 2.0 are presented 
in Table 1. 
Annotation transformation is visualized in 
Figure 1. In the areas corresponding to the cor-
pora, the morphological annotation is symbol-
ized by the horizontal lines and syntactical an-
notation by the vertical lines.  
Conversion of the originally simple textual 
comma-separated values format into the Pra-
gue Markup Language (Pajas, ?t?p?nek, 2005) 
was more or less straightforward. 
Morphological analysis of Czech in the 
CAC and in the PDT is almost the same, ex-
cept that the morphological tagset of CAC is 
91
 slightly more detailed. Semi-automatic conver-
sion of the original morphological annotation 
into the Czech positional morphological tagset 
was executed in compliance with the morpho-
logical annotation of PDT (Hana et al, 2005). 
Figure 1 shows that morphological annotation 
conversion of both written and spoken texts 
was done. 
The only major problem in this conversion 
was that digit-only tokens and punctuation 
were omitted from the original CAC since they 
were deemed linguistically ?uninteresting?, 
which is certainly true from the point of view 
of the original CAC?s purpose to give quantita-
tive lexical support to a new Czech dictionary. 
Since the sources of the CAC documents were 
no longer available, missing tokens had to in-
serted and revised manually. 
Syntactic conversion of CAC was more de-
manding than the morphological one. In a pilot 
study, (Ribarov et al, 2006) attempt to answer 
a question whether an automatic transforma-
tion of the CAC annotation into the PDT for-
mat (and subsequent manual corrections) is 
more effective than to leave the CAC annota-
tion aside and process the CAC?s texts by a 
statistical parser instead (again, with subse-
quent manual correction). In the end, the latter 
variant was selected (with regrets). No distinc-
tion in strategy of written and spoken texts an-
notation transformation was made. However, 
spoken texts were eventually excluded from 
the CAC 2.0 (Figure 1). Reasons for this are 
explained in detail in the following two sec-
tions. 
4 Syntax in the CAC and the PDT 
4.1 Syntactic annotation in the CAC 
The syntactic analysis of Czech in the CAC 
and in the PDT is very much alike, but there 
are phenomena in which the CAC syntactic 
annotation scenario differs from the PDT, even 
though both corpora are based on the same 
linguistic theory (?milauer, 1969), i.e. on the 
dependency grammar notion common to the 
?Prague school? of linguists since the 1930s.  
However, the syntactic annotation differs 
between the two corpora. The CAC works with 
a single syntactic layer, whereas the PDT 
works with two independent (although inter-
linked) syntactic layers: an analytical (syntac-
tic) one and a tectogrammatical one (a-layer 
and t-layer, respectively). In this paper, we are 
referring to the a-layer of the PDT in our com-
parisons unless specifically noted for those 
elements of the tectogrammatical annotation 
that do have some counterpart in the CAC. 
 
 
Figure 1 Overall scheme of the CAC conver-
sion 
 
Style form4 #docs #sntncs 
(K) 
#tokens 
(K) 
Journalism w 52 10 189 
Journalism s 8 1 29 
Scientific w 68 12 245 
Scientific s 32 4 116 
administrative w 16 3 59 
administrative s 4 2 14 
Total w 135 25 493 
Total s 44 7 159 
Total w&s 180 32 652 
Table 1 Size of the CAC 2.0 parts 
The CAC annotation scheme makes a sub-
stantial distinction between two things: surface 
syntactic relations within a single clause as 
well as syntactic relations between clauses in a 
complex sentence. These two types of syntac-
tic information are captured by two types of 
syntactic tags. 
(a) Word-level (intra-clausal) syntactic tag is 
a 6-position tag assigned to every non-
auxilliary (?autosemantic?) word within a 
single clause, representing the intra-
clausal dependency relations.  
(b) Clause-level (intra-sentential) syntactic 
tag is a 8-position tag assigned to the first 
token of each clause in a complex sen-
tence, representing the status (and possi-
ble dependency) of the given clause 
within the given (complex) sentence. 
                                                 
4
 Either written (w) or spoken (s) texts. 
written  
spoken  
written  
C
A
C 
P
D
T 
2.
0 
written  
spoken  
C
A
C 
2.
0 
theory  theory  
guidelines  guidelines  
92
 The CAC thus annotates not only depend-
ency relations within a single clause but also 
dependency relations within a complex sen-
tence. 
A description of the 6-position and the 8-
position tags is given in Tables 2 and 3, respec-
tively. (Ribarov et al, 2006) gives a detailed 
description. 
4.2 Syntactic annotation in the PDT 
The PDT a-layer annotates two main things: 
a dependency structure of the sentence and 
types of these dependencies.  
Representation of a structure of the sentence 
is rendered in a form of a dependency tree, the 
nodes of which correspond to the tokens 
(words and punctuation) that form the sen-
tence. The type of dependency (subject, object, 
adverbial, complement, attribute, etc.) is repre-
sented by a node attribute called an ?analytical 
function? (afun for short; the most frequent 
values of this attribute are listed in Table 4).  
4.3 CAC vs. PDT 
Comparing the CAC and the PDT syntactic 
annotation scenarios, we can see that the anno-
tation of the major syntactic relations within a 
sentence is very similar, from similar adapta-
tions of the theoretical background down to the 
high-level corpus markup conventions. For 
example, in both corpora the predicate is the 
clausal head and the subject is its dependent, 
unlike the descriptions we can find in the tradi-
tional Czech syntactic theory (?milauer, 1969). 
Another (technical) similarity can be found in 
the way the dependency types are encoded. In 
both corpora, the dependency type label is 
stored at the dependent. No confusion arises 
since the link from a dependent to its governor 
is unique. 
However, the list of differences is actually 
quite long. Some are minor and technical: for 
example, in the PDT an ?overarching? root of 
the sentence tree (marked AuxS) is always 
added, so that all other nodes appear as if they 
depend on it. Some differences are more pro-
found and are described below. 
We are not going to list all the differences in 
individual syntactic labels - they can be found 
easily by confronting Tables 2 and 4, but we 
would like to draw the readers? attention to the 
main dissimilarities between the CAC?s and 
the PDT?s syntactic annotation scenarios. 
 
Punctuation 
The first difference can be observed at first 
glance: in CAC no punctuation marks can be 
found (as mentioned in Section 3). While some 
might question whether punctuation should 
ever be part of syntax, in computational ap-
proaches punctuation is certainly seen as a 
very important part of written-language syntax 
and is thus taken into account in annotation 
(for important considerations about punctua-
tion in spoken corpora, see Section 5). 
Digits 
CAC leaves out digital tokens, even though 
they are often a valid part of the syntactic 
structure and can plausibly get various syntac-
tic labels as we can see in the PDT annotation, 
where nothing is left out of the syntactic tree 
structure. 
Prepositions and function words 
The next most significant difference is in the 
treatment of prepositions (or function words in 
general, see also the next paragraphs on con-
junctions and other auxiliaries). Whereas CAC 
neither labels them nor even includes them in 
the dependency tree, PDT at the a-layer, re-
flecting the surface shape of the sentence, 
makes them the head of the autosemantic 
nodes they ?govern? (and labels them with the 
AuxP analytical function tag). The CAC way 
of annotation (rather, non-annotation) of 
prepositions is, in a sense, closer to the annota-
tion scenario of the underlying syntactic layer 
(the t-layer) of the PDT, It is also reflected in 
the adverbial types of labels (column 2 in Ta-
ble 2) ? these would all be labeled only as Adv 
at the (surface-syntactic) a-layer of the PDT, 
but at the (deep) t-layer, they get a label from a 
mix of approx. 70 functional, syntactic and 
semantic labels. Unfortunately, only seven 
such labels are used in the CAC, resulting in 
loss of information in some cases (adverbials 
of aim, accompaniment, attitude, beneficiary, 
etc.); the same is true for certain subtypes of 
time and location adverbials, since they are not 
distinguished in terms of direction, location 
designation (on/under/above/next to and many 
other), duration, start time vs. end time, etc. 
Conjunctions 
Further, subordinating as well as coordinat-
ing conjunctions get only a sentential syntactic 
tag in the CAC (if any), i.e. they are labeled by 
93
 the 9-position tag but not by the word-level, 
intra-clausal syntactic tag. In PDT, subordinat-
ing and coordinating conjunctions get assigned 
the analytical function value AuxC and Co-
ord, respectively, and they are always in-
cluded in the syntactic tree. For subordinating 
conjunctions, the CAC approach is again in 
some ways similar to the annotation scenario 
of the tectogrammatical layer of PDT ? de-
pendencies between clauses are annotated but 
the set of labels is much smaller than that of t- 
layer of the PDT, again resulting in a loss of 
information. For coordination and apposition, 
the difference is structural; while CAC marks 
an a coordination element with a specific label 
(value ?1? in the column 6 of a word-level tag 
and the same value in column 8 of the clause-
level tag, see Tables 2 and 3), PDT makes a 
node corresponding to the coordination (appo-
sition) a virtual head of the members of the 
coordination or apposition (whether phrasal or 
clausal). CAC thus cannot annotate hierarchy 
in coordination and apposition without another 
loss of information, while PDT can. 
Reflexive particles 
In CAC, reflexive particles se/si are often left 
unannotated, while PDT uses detailed labels 
for all occurrences. Lexicalized reflexives 
(AuxT in the PDT), particles (AuxO) and re-
flexive passivization (AuxR) and also certain 
(yet rare) adverbial usages (Adv) are not anno-
tated in the CAC at all. The only case where 
CAC annotates them is in situations where 
they can be considered objects (accusative or 
dative case of the personless reflexive pronoun 
sebe). 
Analytic verb forms 
In CAC, no syntactic relation is indicated for 
auxiliary verbs, loosing the reference to the 
verb they belong to; in the PDT, they are put as 
dependents onto their verb, and labeled AuxV 
to describe their function. 
Special adverbs and particles 
In PDT, there are also syntactic labels for 
certain type of ?special? adverbials and parti-
cles, such as rad?ji [better], z?ejm? [probably], 
tak? [also], p?ece [surely], jedin? [only]. In 
CAC, dependencies and syntactic tags for 
these tokens are missing. 
Other differences in both syntactic scenarios 
will be described in the next section since they 
are related to spoken language annotation.  
5 CAC syntactic annotation of spoken 
utterances  
Current Czech syntactic theory is based al-
most entirely on written Czech but spoken lan-
guage often differs strikingly from the written 
one (M?llerov?, 1994). 
In the CAC guidelines, only the following 
word-level markup specifically aimed at the 
spoken utterance structure is described: 
? non-identical reduplication of a word 
(value ?7? in column 6), 
? identical reduplication of a word (value 
?8? in column 6), 
? ellipsis (value ?9? or ?0? in column 6). 
Let?s take this spoken utterance from CAC: 
CZ: A to jsou tro?ku, jedna je, jedna m? sv?tlou 
budovu a druh? m? tmavou budovu, ony jsou um?s-
t?ny v jednom, v jednom are?le, ale ta, to centrum, 
pat?ilo t?, bylo to v bloku Univerzity vl?msk?, a j? 
jsem se ptala na univerzit?, na, v Univerzit? svo-
bodn?, ?e, no a to p?eci oni nev?d?, to nanejv??, to 
prost? jedin?, kdy? je to Univerzita vl?msk?, tak o 
tom oni p?ece nemohou nic v?d?t, a nic. 
(Lit.: And they are a bit, one is, one has a light 
building and the second has a dark building, they 
are placed in one, in one campus, but the, the cen-
ter, it belonged to the, it was in a bloc of the Flem-
ish University, and I asked  at the University, in, at 
the Free University, that, well, and that surely they 
don?t know, it at most, it simply only, if it is the 
Flemish University, so they surely cannot know 
anything, and nothing.) 
Words jsou [are] and ta [the] represent a non-
identical reduplication of a word; that is why 
they have been assigned the value ?7? (as de-
scribed above), while je [is], jednom [one], to 
[the] and nic [nothing] represent an identical 
reduplication of a word, i.e. they get the value 
?8? (?identical reduplication of a word?). The 
description does not quite correspond to what a 
closer look at the data reveals: ?7? is used to 
mark a reparandum (part of the sentence that 
was corrected by the speaker later), while ?8? is 
used to mark the part that replaces the reparan-
dum (cf. also the ?EDITED? nonterminal and 
the symbols ?[?, ?+? and ?\? in the Penn Tree-
bank Switchboard annotation (Godfrey et al, 
1992). Ellipsis (the value ?9?) was assigned to 
the words tro?ku [a bit] and t? [to the].  
94
 However, our sample sentence contains 
more phenomena typical for spoken language 
than CAC attempts to annotate, for example:  
- unfinished sentences (fragments), with 
apparent ellipsis: A to je tro?ku? [And 
they are a bit?], 
-  false beginnings (restarts): jedna je, 
jedna m? [one is, one has], 
- repetition of words in the middle 
of sentence:  jsou um?st?ny v jednom, 
jednom are?le [they are placed in one, in 
one campus], 
- redundant and ungrammatically used 
words: ony jsou um?st?ny v jednom?, 
univerzit?, na,v Univerzit? svobodn?,? 
[, they are placed in one? at the Univer-
sity, in, at the Free University, ], 
- redundant deictic words: ?ale ta, to cen-
trum? [?but the, the center?], 
- intonation fillers:  no [well], 
- question tags: na Univerzit? svobodn?, 
?e [at the Free University, that], 
- redundant conectors: kdy? je to Uni-
verzita vl?msk?, tak to o tom [if it is the 
Flemish University, so they surely can-
not know anything], 
- broken coherence of utterance, ?teared? 
syntactic scheme of proposition: ale ta, 
to centrum, bylo to v bloku [but the, the 
center, it belonged to the, it was in a 
bloc], 
- syntactic errors, anacoluthon:  p?eci 
nemohu nic v?d?t, a nic. [surely (I) can-
not know anything, and nothing]. 
The CAC syntactic scenario does not cover 
these phenomena in the guidelines (and tag 
tables), and even if some of them would easily 
fall in the reparandum/repair category (such as 
the phrase jedna je, jedna m? [one is, one 
has]), which is seemingly included, it does not 
annotate them as such. Moreover, these are just 
some of the spoken language phenomena, 
taken from just one random utterance; a thor-
ough look at the spoken part of the CAC re-
veals that most of the well-known spoken lan-
guage phenomena, e.g. grammatically incoher-
ent utterances, grammatical additions spoken 
as an afterthought, redundant co-references or 
phrase-connecting errors (Shriver, 1994, Fitz-
gerald, 2009), are present in the texts but left 
unnoticed.  
In comparison, however, the PDT covers 
none of these typical spoken structures in the 
text annotation guidelines (the main reason 
being that it does not contain spoken material 
in the first place). Thus, at the surface-
syntactic layer (the a-layer) of the PDT, there 
are only limited means for capturing such spo-
ken phenomena.  
For example, words playing the role of fill-
ers could get the analytical function AuxO de-
signed mostly for a redundant (deictic or emo-
tive) constituent.  
Many phenomena typical for spoken lan-
guage would get, according to the PDT guide-
lines, the analytical function ExD (Ex-
Dependent), which just ?warns? of such type 
of incomplete utterance structure where a gov-
erning word is missing, i.e. it is such ellipsis 
where the dependent is present but its govern-
ing element is not. 
In Figure 2, we present an attempt to anno-
tate the above spoken utterance using the stan-
dard PDT guidelines. The ?problematic? 
nodes, for which we had to adopt some arbi-
trary annotation decisions due to the lack of 
proper means in the PDT annotation guide-
lines, are shown as dark squares. For compari-
son, we have used dashed line for those de-
pendency edges that were annotated in the 
CAC by one of the spoken-language specific 
tags (values ?7?, ?8?, ?9? in the column 6 of the 
original annotation, see above at the beginning 
of Sect. 5), 
Most of the square-marked nodes do corre-
spond well to the PDT labels for special cases 
which are used for some of the peripheral lan-
guage phenomena (ExD, Apos and its mem-
bers, several AuxX for extra commas, AuxY 
for particles etc.).  
It can also be observed that the dashed lines 
(CAC spoken annotation labels) correspond to 
some of the nodes with problematic markup in 
the PDT, but they are used only in clear cases 
and therefore they are found much more spar-
ingly in the corpus. 
6 Conclusion 
Courage of the original CAC project?s team 
deserves to be reminded. Having the experi-
ence with the present spoken data processing, 
we do appreciate the initial attempts with the 
syntactic annotation of spoken texts. 
95
 Given the main principles of the a-layer of 
PDT annotation (no addition/deletion of to-
kens, no word-order changes, no word correc-
tions), one would have to introduce arbitrary, 
linguistically irrelevant rules for spoken mate-
rial annotation with a doubtful use even if ap-
plied consistently to the corpus. Avoiding that, 
transcriptions currently present in the CAC 
could not be syntactically annotated using 
the annotation guidelines of the PDT. 
However, in the future, we plan to complete 
the annotation of the spoken language tran-
scriptions, using the scheme of the so-called 
?speech reconstruction? project (Mikulov? et 
al., 2008), running now within the framework 
of the PDT (for both Czech and English)5. This 
project will enable to use the text-based guide-
lines for syntactic annotation of spoken mate-
rial by introducing a separate layer 
of annotation, which allows for ?editing? of the 
original transcript and transforming it thus into 
a grammatical, comprehensible text. The ?ed-
ited? layer is in addition to the original tran-
script and contains explicit links between them 
at the word granularity, allowing in turn for 
observations of the relation between the origi-
nal transcript and its syntactic annotation 
(made ?through? the edited text) without any 
loss. The scheme picks up the threads of the 
speech reconstruction approach developed for 
English by Erin Fitzgerald (Fitzgerald, Jelinek, 
2008). Just for a comparison see our sample 
sentence (analyzed in Sect. 5) transformed into 
a reconstructed sentence (The bold marking 
means changes, and parentheses indicate ele-
ments left out in the reconstructed sentence.).  
CZ: A (to) jsou tro?ku rozd?ln?,(jedna je,) jedna 
m? sv?tlou budovu a druh? m? tmavou budovu.(, 
ony) Jsou um?st?ny (v jednom,) v jednom are?le, 
ale (ta,) to centrum (, pat?ilo t?,) bylo (to) v bloku 
Univerzity vl?msk?(,) a j? jsem se ptala na (univer-
zit?, na, v) Univerzit? svobodn?.(, ?e, no a to p?eci 
oni nev?d?, to nanejv??, to prost? jedin?,) Kdy? je 
to Univerzita vl?msk?, tak o tom oni p?ece nemo-
hou nic v?d?t (, a nic). 
(Lit.: And they are a bit different, one has a light 
building and the second has a dark building. They 
are placed in one campus, but the center (, it be-
longed to the, it) was in a bloc of the Flemish Uni-
versity, and I asked at the (University, in, at the) 
Free University.(, that, well, and that surely they 
don?t know, it at most, it simply only,) If it is the 
Flemish University, so they surely cannot know 
anything(, and nothing).) 
                                                 
5
 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdtsl 
 
Figure 2. A syntactic annotation attempt 
(PDT-guidelines based) at the sample CAC 
sentence. The dashed edges are the only ones 
containing some spoken-language specific 
CAC annotation, the others correspond as 
close as possible to the PDT annotation sce-
nario. Square-shaped nodes mark the problem-
atic parts (phenomena with no explicit support 
in the PDT guidelines). 
96
  
 
Governor Dependency 
relation 
Dependency 
subtypes Direction Offset 
Other 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
Tag Desc.  Tag Desc.  Tag Desc. 
1 Subject + Right 1-6 Coordination 
types 
2 Predicate - Left 
 
7,8 Repetitions  
(for the 
spoken part) 
3 Attribute   9, 0 Ellipses 
4 Object     
5 Adverbial     
6 Clause core     
7 Trans. type     
8 Independent 
clause member 
    
9 Parenthesis 
 
Values 
specific 
to the 
dependency 
relation 
(see  
column 1) 
  
 
Distance between 
words (two digit 
string: for ex. 01 
denotes 
neighboring 
word) 
  
Table 2 Main word-level syntactic tags in the Czech Academic Corpus 
 
Governing clause/word Clause ID Clause Type Subordination 
(dep.) type Gov. noun Gov. 
clause 
Clausal relation 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
 Tag Desc. Tag Desc.   Tag Desc. 
1 
 
Simple    1 Coordination 
2 Main   2 Parenthesis 
1 Subject 3 Direct Speech 
2 Predicate 5 Parenthesis in 
direct speech 
3 Attribute 6 Introductory 
clause 
4 Object 8 Parenthesis, in-
troductory clause 
5 Local ! Structural error 
Two-digit id 
(unique 
within a 
sentence: for 
ex. 91 de-
notes the  
first sentence 
3 Sub-
ordinated 
... ?. 
One-digit 
relative posi-
tion of a noun 
modified by 
the clause 
Attributive 
clauses only 
Two-digit 
id of the 
governing 
clause 
... etc. 
Table 3 Clause-level syntactic tags in the Czech Academic Corpus 
 
Analytic function Description 
Pred Predicate  
Sb Subject 
Obj Object 
Adv Adverbial 
Atr Attribute 
Pnom Nominal predicate, or nom. part of predicate with copula to be 
AuxV Auxiliary verb to be 
Coord Coordination node 
Apos Apposition (main node) 
AuxT Reflexive tantum 
AuxR Reflexive,neither Obj nor AuxT (passive reflexive) 
AuxP Primary preposition, parts of a secondary preposition 
AuxC Conjunction (subordinate) 
AuxO Redundant or emotional item, ?coreferential? pronoun 
ExD A technical value for a node depending on a deleted item (ellipsis with dependents) 
Aux.., Atv(V),.. Other auxiliary tags, verbal complements, other special syntactic tags 
Table 4 Dependency relation tags in the Prague Dependency Treebank 
 
97
 Acknowledgement 
We gratefully acknowledge the support of 
the Czech Ministry of Education through the 
grant No. MSM-0021620838 and ME 838 and 
the Grant Agency of Charles University in 
Prague through the grant No. GAUK 
52408/2008. 
We wish to thank Jan Haji?, whose com-
ments stimulated us to make our paper better. 
We are grateful to Petr Pajas for Figure 2 pre-
senting a wide dependency tree. 
References  
Christopher Cieri, David Miller, Kevin Walker. 
2004. The Fisher Corpus: a Resource for the 
Next Generations of Speech-to-Text. In Pro-
ceedings of the 4th LREC, Lisbon, Portugal, pp. 
69-71. 
John J. Godfrey, Edward C. Holliman, Jane 
McDaniel. 1992. SWITCHBOARD: Telephone 
speech corpus for research and development, 
IEEE ICASSP, pp. 517-520.  
Erin Fitzgerald. 2009. Reconstructing spontaneous 
speech. PhD thesis, Baltimore, Maryland. 
Erin Fitzgerald, Frederick Jelinek. 2008. Linguistic 
resources for reconstructing spontaneous speech 
text. In LREC Proceedings, Marrakesh, Mo-
rocco, pp. 1?8. 
Sidney Greenbaum (ed.). 1996. Comparing English 
Worldwide: The International Corpus of English. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Jan Haji?, Barbora Hladk?. 1997. Tagging of inflec-
tive languages: a comparison. In Proceedings of 
ANLP'97, Washington, DC, pp. 136--143. 
Jan Haji? et al 2006. The Prague Dependency 
Treebank 2.0, (Linguistic Data Consortium, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA), Cat. No. LDC2006T01. 
Ji?? Hana, Daniel Zeman, Jan Haji?, Hana Hanov?, 
Barbora Hladk?, Emil Je??bek. 2005. Manual for 
Morphological Annotation. TR-2005-27, ?stav 
form?ln? a aplikovan? lingvistiky, MFF UK. 
Heleen Hoekstra, Michael Moortgat, Ineke Schuur-
man, Ton van der Wouden 2001. Syntactic An-
notation for the Spoken Dutch Corpus Project. In 
Daelemans, W.; Simaan, K.; Veenstra. J.; Zavrel, 
J. (eds.): Computational Linguistics in the Neth-
erlands 2000. Amsterdam/New York, Rodopi, 
pp. 73-87.  
Noam Chomsky. 1993. Lectures on Government 
and Binding: The Pisa Lectures. Holland: Foris 
Publications, 1981. Reprint. 7th Edition. Berlin 
and New York: Mouton de Gruyter. 
Jan Kr?l?k, Ludmila Uhl??ov?. 2007. The Czech 
Academic Corpus (CAC), its history and pres-
ence, In Journal of quantitative linguistics. 14 
(2-3): 265-285. 
Marie Mikulov?. 2008. Rekonstrukce standard-
izovan?ho textu z mluven? ?e?i v Pra?sk?m z?vis-
lostn?m korpusu mluven? ?e?tiny. Manu?l pro 
anot?tory. TR-2008-38, Institute of Formal and 
Applied Linguistics, MFF UK. 
Olga M?llerov?. 1994. Mluven? text a jeho syntak-
tick? v?stavba. Academia, Praha.  
Jens Nilsson, Johan Hall, Joakim Nivre. 2005. 
MAMBA meets TIGER: Reconstructing a Tree-
bank from Antiquity. In Proceedings of 
NODALIDA 2005 Special Session on Treebanks 
for Spoken and Discourse, Copenhagen Studies 
in Language 32, Joensuu, Finland, pp. 119-132 
Petr Pajas, Jan ?t?p?nek. 2005. A Generic XML-
based Format for Structured Linguistic Annota-
tion and its Application to the Prague Depend-
ency Treebank 2.0. TR-2005-29, Institute of 
Formal and Applied Linguistics, MFF UK.  
Kiril Ribarov, Alevtina B?mov?, Barbora Hladk?. 
2006. When a statistically oriented parser was 
more efficient than a linguist: A case of treebank 
conversion, In Prague Bulletin of Mathematical 
Linguistics, 1 (86):21-38.  
Petr Sgall, Eva Haji?ov?, Jarmila Panevov?. 1986. 
The meaning of the sentence in its semantic and 
pragmatic aspects, ed. by J. Mey. Reidel, 
Dordrecht; Academia, Praha.  
Elisabeth Shriberg. 1994. Preliminaries to a Theory 
of Speech Disfluencies. PhD thesis, University of 
California, Berkeley. 
Jan Svartvik and Randolph Quirk. 1980. A Corpus 
of English Conversation. Lund. 
Vladim?r ?milauer. 1972. Nauka o ?esk?m jazyku. 
Praha. 
Vladim?r ?milauer. 1969. Novo?esk? skladba. 
St?tn? pedagogick? nakladatelstv?. Praha. 
 
98
Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2013), pages 58?63,
Atlanta, Georgia, 13-14 June 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
An Analysis of Annotation of Verb-Noun Idiomatic Combinations
in a Parallel Dependency Corpus?
Zdenka Uresova and Jana Sindlerova and Eva Fucikova and Jan Hajic
Charles University in Prague
Faculty of Mathematics and Physics
Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics?
{uresova,sindlerova,fucikova,hajic}@ufal.mff.cuni.cz
Abstract
While working on valency lexicons for Czech
and English, it was necessary to define treat-
ment of multiword entities (MWEs) with the
verb as the central lexical unit. Morphologi-
cal, syntactic and semantic properties of such
MWEs had to be formally specified in order to
create lexicon entries and use them in treebank
annotation. Such a formal specification has
also been used for automated quality control
of the annotation vs. the lexicon entries. We
present a corpus-based study, concentrating on
multilayer specification of verbal MWEs, their
properties in Czech and English, and a com-
parison between the two languages using the
parallel Czech-English Dependency Treebank
(PCEDT). This comparison revealed interest-
ing differences in the use of verbal MWEs in
translation (discovering that such MWEs are
actually rarely translated as MWEs, at least
between Czech and English) as well as some
inconsistencies in their annotation. Adding
MWE-based checks should thus result in bet-
ter quality control of future treebank/lexicon
annotation. Since Czech and English are typo-
logically different languages, we believe that
our findings will also contribute to a better
understanding of verbal MWEs and possibly
their more unified treatment across languages.
? This work has been supported by the Grant No.
GPP406/13/03351P of the Grant Agency of the Czech Repub-
lic. The data used have been provided by the LINDAT/Clarin
infrastructural project LM2010013 supported by the MSMT CR
(http://lindat.cz).
? Authors? full address: Institute of Formal and Applied
Linguistics, Charles University in Prague, Faculty of Mathe-
matics and Physics, Malostranske nam. 25, 11800 Prague 1,
Czech Republic
1 Introduction: Valency and MWEs
Valency is a linguistic phenomenon which plays a
crucial role in the majority of today?s linguistic the-
ories and may be considered a base for both lexi-
cographical and grammatical work. After valency
was first introduced into linguistics by L. Tesni?re
(1959), the study of valency was taken up by many
scholars, with a wealth of material now available;
cf. (?gel et al, 2006). In the theoretical framework
of Functional Generative Description (Sgall et al,
1986), the following researchers have substantially
contributed to valency research: J. Panevov? (1977;
1998); P. Sgall (1998), M. Lopatkov? (2010), V. Ket-
tnerov? (2012), Z. Ure?ov? (2011a; 2011b).
In general, valency is understood as a specific
ability of certain lexical units - primarily of verbs
- to open ?slots? to be filled in by other lexical units.
By filling up these slots the core of the sentence
structure is built. Valency is mostly approached syn-
tactically, semantically or by combining these two
perspectives. Valency terminology is not consistent
(cf. valency, subcategorization, argument structure,
etc.), however, valency as a verbal feature seems to
be language universal (Goldberg, 1995).
MWEs are expressions which consist of more
than a single word while having non-compositional
meaning. They can be defined (Sag et al, 2002) as
?idiosyncratic interpretations that cross word bound-
aries.? As the MWE Workshop itself attests, MWEs
form a complex issue, both theoretically and practi-
cally in various NLP tasks. Here, we will concen-
trate on certain types of verbal MWEs only.
Verbal MWEs can be divided into several groups
58
(cf. Sect. 1.3.2 in (Baldwin and Kim, 2010)):
? verb-particle constructions (VPCs), such as
take off, play around, or cut short,
? prepositional verbs (PVs), such as refer to, look
for, or come across,
? light-verb constructions (LVCs or verb-
complement pairs or support verb construc-
tions, see e.g. (Calzolari et al, 2002)), such as
give a kiss, have a drink, or make an offer,
? verb-noun idiomatic combinations (VNICs or
VP idioms), such as the (in)famous kick the
bucket, spill the beans, or make a face.
While (Baldwin and Kim, 2010) define VNICs as
being ?composed of a verb and noun in direct object
position,?1 we found that their syntax can be more
diverse and thus we will include also constructions
like be at odds or make a mountain out of a mole-
hill into this class. Our goal is to look mainly at
the surface syntactic representation of MWEs, there-
fore, we will follow the above described typology
even though the exact classification might be more
complex.
2 Verbal Valency and MWEs in
Dependency Treebanks
In the Prague Dependency Treebank family of
projects (PDT(s)) annotated using the Tectogram-
matical Repesentation of deep syntax and seman-
tics (B?hmov? et al, 2005), valency information is
stored in valency lexicons. Each verb token in PDTs
is marked by an ID (i.e., linked to) of the appropri-
ate valency frame in the valency lexicon. For Czech,
both the PDT (Hajic? et al, 2012a) and the Czech part
of the PCEDT 2.0 (Hajic? et al, 2012b)2 use PDT-
Vallex3; for English (the English part of PCEDT,
i.e. the texts from the Wall Street Journal portion of
the Penn Treebank (WSJ/PTB), cf. (Marcus et al,
1993)) we use EngVallex,4 which follows the same
1(Baldwin and Kim, 2010), Sect. 1.3.2.4
2Also available from LDC, Catalog No. LDC2012T08.
3
http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/lindat/PDT-Vallex
4
http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/lindat/EngVallex; since it was cre-
ated for the WSJ/PTB annotation, the starting point was Prop-
Bank (Palmer et al, 2005) to which it is also linked.
principles, including entry structure, labeling of ar-
guments etc.
Here is an example of a valency lexicon entry (for
the base sense of to give, simplified):
give ACT(sb) PAT(dobj) ADDR(dobj2)
The verb lemma (give) is associated with its ar-
guments, labeled by functors: ACT for actor (deep
subject), PAT for Patient (deep object), and ADDR
for addressee.5
In the valency lexicon entries, two more argument
labels can be used: effect (EFF) and origin (ORIG).
In addition, if a free modifier (e.g. adverbial, prepo-
sitional phrase, etc.) is so tightly associated to be
deemed obligatory for the given verb sense, it is
also explicitly put into the list of arguments. The
P(CE)DT use about 35 free modifications (such as
LOC, DIR1, TWHEN, TTILL, CAUS, AIM, ...), most
of which can be marked as obligatory with certain
verbs (verb senses).
At each valency slot, requirements on surface syn-
tactic structure and inflectional properties of the ar-
guments may be given. This is much more complex
in inflective languages but it is used in English too,
often as a ?code? assigned to a verb sense, e.g. in
OALDCE (Crowther, 1998).
For details of surface-syntactic structural and
morphological requirements related to Czech va-
lency and subcategorization in Czech, see e.g. Ure-
?ov? (2011a; 2011b).
For the annotation of (general) MWEs (Bejc?ek
and Stran??k, 2010) in the P(CE)DT, the following
principle have been chosen: each MWE is repre-
sented by a single node in the deep dependency
tree. This accords with our principles that ?deep?
representation should abstract from (the peculiari-
ties and idiosyncrasies of) surface syntax and rep-
resent ?meaning.?6 The syntactic (and related mor-
phological) representation of MWEs is annotated at
a ?lower?, purely syntactic dependency layer (here,
each word token is represented by its own node).
5We say that a verb has (zero or more) valency slots; the
verb give as presented here has three.
6Under this assumption, each node in such a dependency
tree should ideally represent a single unit of meaning, and
the ?meaning? of the tree - typically representing a sentence
- should be derived compositionally from the meanings of the
individual nodes and their (labeled, dependency) relations (i.e.
functors, as they are called in the PDT-style treebanks).
59
Subsequently, the two representations are linked.
However, here arises a problem with modifiable
MWEs (such as lose his/my/their/... head): if the
whole MWE is represented as a single node, the
modifier relation to the MWE would be ambiguous
if put simply as the dependent of the MWE (i.e.,
which part of the MWE does it modify?). There-
fore, a rather technical, but unambiguous solution
was adopted: the verb as the head of the verbal
MWE is represented by a node, and the ?rest? of
the MWE gets its own appropriately marked node
(technically dependent on the verb node). Such a re-
lation is labeled with the DPHR functor (?Dependent
part of a PHRase?). The modifier of the MWE can
thus be unambiguously attached as either the depen-
dent node of the verb (if it modifies the whole MWE,
such as a temporal adverbial in hit the books on Sun-
day), or to the DPHR node (if it modifies only that
part of the MWE, such as in hit the history books).7
We believe that this solution which allows the flex-
ibility of considering also modifiable verbal VNICs
to be annotated formally in the same way as fully
fixed VNICs is original in the PDT family of tree-
banks, since we have not seen it neither in the Penn
Treebank nor in other treebanks, including depen-
dency ones.
Since DPHR is technically a dependent node, it
can then be formally included as a slot in the va-
lency dictionary, adding the surface syntactic and/or
morphological representation in the form of an en-
coded surface dependency representation, such as in
the following example of an English VNIC:
make DPHR(mountain.Obj.sg[a],
out[of,molehill.Adv.sg[a])
In Czech, the formal means are extended, e.g. for
the required case (1 - nominative, 6- locative):8
be?hat DPHR(mr?z.S1,po[z?da.P6])
7One can argue that in very complex MWEs, this simple
split into two nodes might not be enough; in the treebanks we
have explored no such multiple dependent modifiers exist.
8The repertoire of possible syntactic and morphological con-
straints, which can be used for the description of possible forms
of the fixed part of the idiomatic expression, covers all aspects
of Czech word formation: case, number, grammatical gender,
possessive gender and number, degree of comparison, nega-
tion, short/long form of certain adjectives, analytical depen-
dency function etc.
make
PRED
complex v
a mountain out of a molehill   
DPHR
dphr n.denot
.
.
making
Pred
a
AuxA
mountain
Obj
out
AuxP
of
AuxP
a
AuxA
molehill
Adv
 
 
  
 
 
 
Figure 1: Verbal MWE: tectogrammatical (left) and syn-
tactic (right) annotation of a VNIC
In Fig. 1, the phrase making a mountain out of a
mole is syntactically annotated in the following way:
? mountain is annotated as the syntactic direct
object of making,
? out of a molehill is annotated as a prepositional
phrase (with the preposition as the head)
On the tectogrammatical layer of annotation, the
verb is the head and the defining part of the MWE
gets a separate node (marked by DPHR).
In the corpus-based analysis of verbal MWEs in
the valency lexicons and the treebanks presented
here, we concentrate mainly on VNICs (see Sect. 1)
and briefly mention LVCs, since the boundary be-
tween them is often a bit grayish. In the P(CE)DT
treebanks, LVCs are always represented as two
nodes: the (light) verb node and the noun com-
plement node. Formally, the representing structure
is the same for both mentioned groups of MWEs,
but it differs in the labels of the verb arguments:
CPHR (Compound PHRase) for LVCs vs. DPHR for
VNICs. Whereas lexical units marked as DPHRs are
mostly limited to a fixed number of words and there-
fore are listed in the lexicon, lexical units marked
as CPHRs are often not limited in their number and
therefore it does not make sense to list them all in
the lexicon.
60
A possible solution to the problem of automatic
identification of (general) MWEs in texts using the
annotation found in the PDT, which is related to the
topic described in this paper but goes beyond its
scope, can be found in (Bejcek et al, 2013).
3 Corpus Analysis
To compare annotation and use of VNICs in Czech
and English, we have used the PCEDT. The PCEDT
contains alignment information, thus it was easy to
extract all cases where a VNIC was annotated (i.e.
where the DPHR functor occurs).9
We found a total of 92890 occurrences of aligned
(non-auxiliary) verbs. Czech VNICs were aligned
with English counterparts not annotated as a VNIC
in 570 cases, and there were 278 occurrences of En-
glish VNICs aligned with Czech non-VNICs, and
only 88 occurrences of VNICs annotated on both
sides were aligned.10 These figures are surpris-
ingly small (less than 1.5% of verbs are marked
as VNICs), however, (a) it is only the VNIC type
(e.g., phrasal verbs would account for far more), and
(b) the annotator guidelines asked for ?conservative-
ness? in creating new VNIC-type verb senses.11
Ideally (for NLP), VNICs would be translated as
VNICs. However, as stated above, this occurred
only in a 88 cases only (a few examples are shown
below).
(1) (wsj0062) toc?it[turn] se[oneself-acc.]
z?dy[back-Noun-sg-instr.]:
thumb(ing) its nose
(2) (wsj0989) podr?ez?vat[saw down]
si[oneself-dat.] pod[under]
sebou[oneself-instr.]
ve?tev[branch-Noun-sg-acc.]:
bit(ing) the hand that feeds them
9The alignment is automatic, the Czech and English tec-
togrammatical annotation (including verb sense/frame assign-
ment) is manual.
10The total number of Czech VNICs in the PCEDT (1300) is
higher than the sum of extracted alignments (570+88=658). The
difference is due to many of the Czech VNICs being aligned to
a node which does not correspond to a verb, or which is not
linked to an English node, or where the alignment is wrong.
11By ?conservative? approach we mean that splitting of verb
senses into new ones has been discouraged in the annotation
guidelines.
Manual inspection of these alignments revealed
(except for a few gray-area cases) no errors. We have
thus concentrated on the asymmetric cases by man-
ually exploring 200 such cases on each side. The
results are summarized in Tab. 1.
Direction / VNIC VNIC
Annotated as in En, in Cz, Examples
(by type) not Cz not En
Correctly annotated (as non-VNIC)
LVC 26 4 l?mat[break]
rekordy:
set records
non-MWE 138 124 pr?eru?it
[interrupt]:
cut short
Annotation Error (should have been VNIC)
LVC 7 17 dr?et[hold]
krok[step]:
keep abreast
non-MWE 28 52 zlomit (mu)
srdce: break
sb?s heart
other error 1 3
Table 1: Breakdown of VNICs linked to non-VNICs
3.1 English VNICs Linked to Non-VNIC Czech
The first column of counts in Tab. 1 refers to cases
where the verb in the English original has been an-
notated as VNIC, but the Czech translation has been
marked as a non-VNIC. We have counted cases,
where we believe that the annotation is correct, even
if it is not annotated as a VNIC (164 in total) and
cases which should have been in fact annotated as a
VNIC (35 cases). Within these two groups, we sep-
arately counted cases where the translation has not
been annotated as a VNIC, but at least as a LVC,
another MWE type (total of 33 such cases). The
proportion of errors (approx. 18%) is higher than
the 5.5% rate reported for semantic relation annota-
tion (?te?p?nek, 2006). Typically, the error would be
corrected by adding a separate idiomatic verb sense
into the valency lexicon and adjusting the annotation
(verb sense and the DPHR label) accordingly.
61
3.2 Czech VNICs Linked to Non-VNIC English
The second column of counts in Tab. 1 shows the
same breakdown as described in the previous sec-
tion, but in the opposite direction: Czech VNICs
which in the English original have been annotated
differently. The first difference is in the number
of erroneously annotated tokens, which is visibly
higher (approx. twice as high) than in the opposite
direction both for LVCs (17) and for constructions
which have not been marked as MWEs at all (52).
This suggests that the authors of the English va-
lency lexicon and the annotators of the English deep
structure have been even more ?conservative? than
their Czech colleagues by not creating many VNIC-
typed verb senses.12 Second, there are only 4 cases
of VNICs translated into and correctly annotated as
LVCs, compared to the English ? Czech direction
(26 cases).
4 Conclusions
We have described the treatment of (an enriched set
of) verb-noun idiomatic combinations (and briefly
other types of MWEs) in the PDT style treebanks
and in the associated valency lexicons. We have
explored the PCEDT to find interesting correspon-
dences between the annotation and lexicon entries
in the English and Czech annotation schemes.
We have found that VNICs, as one of the
types of MWEs, are translated in different ways.
A translation of a VNIC as a VNIC is rare,
even if we take into account the annotation errors
(88+7+17+28+52=192 cases of the 936 extracted).
By far the most common case of translating a VNIC
in both directions is the usage of a completely non-
MWE phrase. There is also a substantial amount
of errors in each direction, higher in cases where
the Czech translation was annotated as a VNIC and
the English original was not. While the low overall
number of VNICs found in the parallel corpus can be
explained by not considering standard phrasal verbs
for this study and by the required conservatism in
marking a phrase as a true VNIC, we can only specu-
late why only a small proportion of VNICs are trans-
lated as VNICs in(to) the other language: manual
12None of the annotators of the English side of the parallel
treebank was a fully native English speaker, which might also
explain this ?conservatism.?
inspection of several cases suggested (but without
a statistically significant conclusions) that this does
not seem to be caused by the specific nature or genre
of the Wall Street Journal texts, but rather by the fact
that the two languages explored, Czech and English,
went generally through different developments un-
der different circumstances and contexts throughout
the years they evolved separately.
While this paper describes only an initial analy-
sis of multiword expressions (of the verb-noun id-
iomatic combination type) in parallel treebanks, we
plan to apply the same classification and checks as
described here to the whole corpus (perhaps auto-
matically to a certain extent), to discover (presum-
ably) even more discrepancies and also more corre-
spondence types. These will again be classified and
corrections in the data will be made. Eventually, we
will be able to get a more reliable material for a thor-
ough study of the use of MWEs in translation, with
the aim of improving identification and analysis of
MWEs (e.g., by enriching the approach taken by and
described in (Bejcek et al, 2013)). We would also
like to improve machine translation results by iden-
tifying relevant features of MWEs (including but not
limited to VNICs) and using the associated informa-
tion stored in the valency lexicons in order to learn
translation correspondences involving MWEs.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the four reviewers,
especially reviewer #4, for helpful comments which
hopefully have lead to a clearer version of this pa-
per. Also, we would like to thank to all the anno-
tators and technical support staff who made our re-
search possible by creating the treebanks and lexi-
cons which we can now build upon.
References
Vilmos ?gel, Ludwig M. Eichinger, Hans-Werner Eroms,
Peter Hellwig, Hans J?rgen Heringer, Henning Lobin,
and Guta Rau. 2006. Dependenz und Valenz. Walter
de Gruyter, Berlin & New York.
Timothy Baldwin and Su Nam Kim. 2010. Multiword
expressions. In Nitin Indurkhya and Fred J. Damerau,
editors, Handbook of Natural Language Processing,
Second Edition. CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group,
Boca Raton, FL. ISBN 978-1420085921.
62
Eduard Bejc?ek and Pavel Stran??k. 2010. Annotation
of multiword expressions in the prague dependency
treebank. Language Resources and Evaluation, 44(1-
2):7?21.
Eduard Bejcek, Pavel Pecina, and Pavel Stranak. 2013.
Syntactic Identification of Occurrences of Multiword
Expressions in Text using a Lexicon with Dependency
Structures. In Workshop on Multiword Expressions
(NAACL 2013, this volume), New Jersey. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Alena B?hmov?, Silvie Cinkov?, and Eva Hajic?ov?.
2005. A Manual for Tectogrammatical Layer An-
notation of the Prague Dependency Treebank (En-
glish translation). Technical report, ?FAL MFF UK,
Prague, Czech Republic.
Nicoletta Calzolari, Charles J. Fillmore, Ralph Grishman,
Nancy Ide, Alessandro Lenci, Catherine Macleod, and
Antonio Zampolli. 2002. Towards best practice for
multiword expressions in computational lexicons. In
LREC.
Jonathan Crowther. 1998. Oxford Advanced Learner?s
Dictionary. Cornelsen & Oxford, 5th edition.
A.E. Goldberg. 1995. Constructions: A Construction
Grammar Approach to Argument Structure. Univer-
sity of Chicago Press.
Jan Hajic?, Eduard Bejc?ek, Jarmila Panevov?, Jir??
M?rovsk?, Johanka Spoustov?, Jan ?te?p?nek, Pavel
Stran??k, Pavel ?id?k, Pavl?na Vimmrov?, Eva
?t?astn?, Magda ?evc??kov?, Lenka Smejkalov?, Petr
Homola, Jan Popelka, Mark?ta Lopatkov?, Lucie
Hrabalov?, Natalia Klyueva, and Zdene?k ?abokrt-
sk?. 2012a. Prague Dependency Treebank 2.5.
https://ufal-point.mff.cuni.cz/xmlui/handle/11858/00-
097C-0000-0006-DB11-8.
Jan Hajic?, Eva Hajic?ov?, Jarmila Panevov?, Petr Sgall,
Ondr?ej Bojar, Silvie Cinkov?, Eva Fuc??kov?, Marie
Mikulov?, Petr Pajas, Jan Popelka, Jir?? Semeck?, Jana
?indlerov?, Jan ?te?p?nek, Josef Toman, Zden?ka Ure-
?ov?, and Zdene?k ?abokrtsk?. 2012b. Announcing
Prague Czech-English Dependency Treebank 2.0. In
Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012),
pages 3153?3160, I?stanbul, Turkey. ELRA, European
Language Resources Association.
V?clava Kettnerov?. 2012. Lexik?lne?-s?mantick? kon-
verze ve valenc?n?m slovn?ku. Ph.D. thesis, Charles
University, Prague, Czech Republic.
Mark?ta Lopatkov?. 2010. Valency Lexicon of Czech
Verbs: Towards Formal Description of Valency and
Its Modeling in an Electronic Language Resource.
Prague.
Mitchell P. Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a Large Annotated
Corpus of English: The Penn Treebank. COMPUTA-
TIONAL LINGUISTICS, 19(2):313?330.
Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
2005. The Proposition Bank: An Annotated Cor-
pus of Semantic Roles. Computational Linguistics,
31(1):71?106.
Jarmila Panevov?. 1998. Je?te? k teorii valence. Slovo a
slovesnost, 59(1):1?14.
Jarmila Panevov?. 1977. Verbal Frames Revisited. The
Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Linguistics, (28):55?
72.
Ivan A. Sag, Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann
Copestake, and Dan Flickinger. 2002. Multiword Ex-
pressions: A Pain in the Neck for NLP. In Proc. of
the 3rd International Conference on Intelligent Text
Processing and Computational Linguistics (CICLing
2002), pages 1?15.
Petr Sgall, Eva Hajic?ov?, and Jarmila Panevov?. 1986.
The Meaning of the Sentence in Its Semantic and
Pragmatic Aspects. Dordrecht, Reidel, and Prague,
Academia.
Petr Sgall. 1998. Teorie valence a jej? form?ln? zpracov-
?n?. Slovo a slovesnost, 59(1):15?29.
Jan ?te?p?nek. 2006. Post-annotation Checking of Prague
Dependency Treebank 2.0 Data. In Lecture Notes
in Artificial Intelligence, Text, Speech and Dialogue.
9th International Conference, TSD 2006, Brno, Czech
Republic, September 11?15, 2006, volume 4188 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 277?284,
Berlin / Heidelberg. Springer.
Lucien Tesni?re. 1959. ?l?ments de syntaxe structurale.
Editions Klincksieck, Paris.
Zden?ka Ure?ov?. 2011a. Valence sloves v Pra?sk?m
z?vislostn?m korpusu. Studies in Computational and
Theoretical Linguistics. ?stav form?ln? a aplikovan?
lingvistiky, Prague.
Zden?ka Ure?ov?. 2011b. Valenc?n? slovn?k Pra?sk?ho
z?vislostn?ho korpusu (PDT-Vallex). Studies in Com-
putational and Theoretical Linguistics. ?stav form?ln?
a aplikovan? lingvistiky, Prague.
63
