Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Computational Linguistics (Coling 2010), pages 447?455,
Beijing, August 2010
A Novel Reordering Model Based on Multi-layer Phrase for Sta-
tistical Machine Translation 
Yanqing He1,     Yu Zhou2,     Chengqing Zong2,     Huilin Wang1
1Institute of Scientific and Technical 
Information of China 
{heyq,wanghl}@istic.ac.cn
2Institute of Automation, Chinese  
Academy of Sciences 
{yzhou,cqzong}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract
Phrase reordering is of great importance 
for statistical machine translation. Ac-
cording to the movement of phrase trans-
lation, the pattern of phrase reordering 
can be divided into three classes: mono-
tone, BTG (Bracket Transduction 
Grammar) and hierarchy. It is a good 
way to use different styles of reordering 
models to reorder different phrases ac-
cording to the characteristics of both the 
reordering models and phrases itself.  In 
this paper a novel reordering model 
based on multi-layer phrase (PRML) is 
proposed, where the source sentence is 
segmented into different layers of phras-
es on which different reordering models 
are applied to get the final translation.  
This model has some advantages: differ-
ent styles of phrase reordering models 
are easily incorporated together; when a 
complicated reordering model is em-
ployed, it can be limited in a smaller 
scope and replaced with an easier reor-
dering model in larger scope. So this 
model better trade-offs the translation 
speed and performance simultaneously.  
1 Introduction 
In statistical machine translation (SMT), phrase 
reordering is a complicated problem. According 
to the type of phrases, the existing phrase reor-
dering models are divided into two categories: 
contiguous phrase-based reordering models and 
non-contiguous phrase-based reordering models.  
Contiguous phrase-based reordering models 
are designed to reorder contiguous phrases. In 
such type of reordering models, a contiguous 
phrase is reordered as a unit and the movements 
of phrase don?t involve insertions inside the oth-
er phrases. Some of these models are content-
independent, such as distortion models (Och and 
Ney, 2004; Koehn et al, 2003) which penalize 
translation according to jump distance of phrases, 
and flat reordering model (Wu, 1995; Zens et al, 
2004)which assigns constant probabilities for 
monotone order and non-monotone order. These 
reordering models are simple and the contents of 
phrases have not been considered. So it?s hard to 
obtain a satisfactory translation performance. 
Some lexicalized reordering models (Och et al, 
2004; Tillmann 2004, Kumar and Byrne, 2005, 
Koehn et al, 2005) learn local orientations (mo-
notone or non-monotone) with probabilities for 
each bilingual phrase from training data. These 
models are phrase-dependent, so improvements 
over content-independent reordering models are 
obtained. However, many parameters need to be 
estimated.  
Non-contiguous phrase-based reordering 
models are proposed to process non-contiguous 
phrases and the movements of phrase involve 
insertion operations. This type of reordering 
models mainly includes all kinds of syntax-
based models where more structural information 
is employed to obtain a more flexible phrase 
movement. Linguistically syntactic approaches 
(Yamada and Knight, 2001; Galley et al, 2004, 
2006; Marcu et al, 2006; Liu et al, 2006; Shie-
ber et al, 1990; Eisner, 2003; Quirk et al, 2005; 
Ding and Palmer, 2005) employ linguistically 
syntactic information to enhance their reordering 
capability and use non-contiguous phrases to 
447
obtain some generalization. The formally syn-
tax-based models use synchronous context-free 
grammar (SCFG) but induce a grammar from a 
parallel text without relying on any linguistic 
annotations or assumptions (Chiang, 2005; 
Xiong et al, 2006). A hierarchical phrase-based 
translation model (HPTM) reorganizes phrases 
into hierarchical ones by reducing sub-phrases to 
variables (Chiang 2005). Xiong et al (2006) is 
an enhanced bracket transduction grammar with 
a maximum entropy-based reordering model 
(MEBTG). Compared with contiguous phrase-
based reordering model, Syntax-based models 
need to shoulder a great deal of rules and have 
high computational cost of time and space. The 
type of reordering models has a weaker ability of 
processing long sentences and large-scale data, 
which heavily restrict their application. 
The above methods have provided various 
phrases reordering strategies. According to the 
movement of phrase translation, the pattern of 
phrase reordering can be divided into three 
classes: monotone, BTG (Bracket Transduction 
Grammar) (Wu, 1995) and hierarchy.  In fact for 
most sentences, there may be some phrases 
which have simple reordering patterns, such as 
monotone or BTG style. It is not necessary to 
reorder them with a complicated mechanism, e.g. 
hierarchy. It is a good idea that different reorder-
ing models are employed to reorder different 
phrases according to the characteristics of both 
the reordering models and the phrases itself. 
This paper thus gives a novel reordering model 
based on multi-layer phrase (PRML), where the 
source sentence is segmented into different lay-
ers of phrases on which different reordering 
models are applied to get the final translation. 
Our model has the advantages as follow: (1) 
PRML segments source sentence into multiple-
layer phrases by using punctuation and syntactic 
information and the design of segmentation al-
gorithm corresponds to each reordering model. 
Different reordering models are chosen for each 
layer of phrases. (2) In our model different reor-
dering models can be easily integrated together 
to obtain a combination of multiple phrase reor-
dering models.  (3) Our model can incorporate 
some complicated reordering models. We limit 
them in relatively smaller scopes and replace 
them with easier reordering models in larger 
scopes. In such way our model better trade-offs 
the translation speed and performance simulta-
neously. (4) Our segmentation strategy doesn?t 
impair translation quality by controlling phrase 
translation tables to determine the scope of each 
reordering model in each source sentence.  The 
poor phrase translations generated by the former 
reordering model, still have chances of being 
revised by the latter reordering model.  
Our work is similar to the phrase-level system 
combination (Mellebeek et al, 2006). We share 
one important characteristic: we decompose in-
put sentence into chunks and recompose the 
translated chunks in output. The differences are 
that, we segment the input sentence into multi-
layer phrases and we reorder their translations 
with a multi-layer decoder.  
The remainder of the paper is organized as 
follows: Section 2 gives our reordering model 
PRML. Section 3 presents the details of the sen-
tence segmentation algorithm and the decoding 
algorithm. Section 4 shows the experimental re-
sults. Finally, the concluding remarks are given 
in Section 5. 
2 The Model 
We use an example to demonstrate our motiva-
tion. Figure 1 shows a Chinese and English sen-
tence pair with word alignment. Each solid line 
denotes the corresponding relation between a 
Chinese word and an English word. Figure 2 
shows our reordering mechanism. For the source 
sentence, the phrases in rectangle with round 
corner in row 2 obviously have a monotone 
translation order. For such kinds of phrase a mo-
notone reordering model is enough to arrange 
their translations.  Any two neighbor consecutive 
phrases in the ellipses in row 3 have a straight 
orders or inverted order. So BTG reordering 
model is appropriate to predict the order of this 
type of phrases. Inside the phrases in the ellipses 
in row 3 there are possibly more complicated 
hierarchical structures. For the phrase ??? ??
? ??, a rule ? 1 1X towards the road to X&o ?? ??? ?
has the ascendancy over the monotone and BTG 
style of reordering model.  Hierarchy style of 
reordering models, such as HPTM reordering 
model, can translate non-contiguous phrases and 
has the advantage of capturing the translation of 
such kind of phrases. 
The whole frame of our model PRML is 
shown in Figure 3. PRML is composed of a 
448
segmentation sentence module and a decoder 
which consists of three different styles of phrase 
reordering models. The source sentence is seg-
mented into 3 layers of phrases: the original 
whole sentence, sub-sentences and chunks. The 
original whole sentence is considered as the 
first-layer phrase and is segmented into sub-
sentences to get the second-layer phrase. By fur-
ther segmenting these sub-sentences, the chunks 
are obtained as the third-layer phrase. The whole 
translation process includes three steps: 1) In 
order to capture the most complicated structure 
of phrases inside chunks, HPTM reordering 
model are chosen to translate the chunks. So the 
translations of chunks are obtained. 2) Combine 
the bilingual chunks generated by step 1 with 
those bilingual phases generated by the MEBTG 
training model as the final phrase table and 
translate the sub-sentences with MEBTG reor-
dering model, the translations of sub-sentences 
are obtained. 3) Combine the bilingual sub-
sentences generated by step 2 with those bilin-
gual phases generated by the Monotone training 
model as the final phrase table and translate the 
original whole sentences with monotone reorder- 
Figure 1.  An example of Chinese-English sentence pair with their word alignment 
Figure 2.  Diagram of Translation Using PRML.  
Figure 3. Frame of PRML 
449
Figure 4. General frame of our model 
ing model, the translations of  the original whole 
sentences are obtained. 
We also give a general frame of our model in 
Figure 4. In the segmentation module, an input 
source sentence is segmented into G layers of 
contiguous source strings, Layer 1, Layer 2, ?, 
Layer G. The phrases of lower-order layer are 
re-segmented into the phrases of higher-order 
layer. The phrases of the same layer can be 
combined into the whole source sentence. The 
decoding process starts from the phrases of the 
highest-order layer. For each layer of phrases a 
reordering model is chosen to generate the trans-
lations of phrases according to their characteris-
tics. The generated translations of phrases in the 
higher-order layer are fed as a new added trans-
lation source into the next lower-order reorder-
ing model. After the translations of the phrase in 
Layer 2 are obtained, they are fed into the Reor-
dering model 1 as well as the source sentence 
(the phrase in Layer 1) to get the target transla-
tion.  
Due to the complexity of the language, there 
may be some sentences whose structures don?t 
conform to the pattern of the reordering models 
we choose. So in our segmentation module, if 
the sentence doesn?t satisfy the segmentation 
conditions of current layer, it will be fed into the 
segmentation algorithm of the next layer. Even 
in the worst condition when the sentence isn?t 
segmented into any phrase by segmentation 
module, it will be translated as the whole sen-
tence to get the final translation by the highest-
order reordering model.  
Our model tries to grasp firstly the simple 
reordering modes in source sentence by the low-
er layer of phrase segmentations and controls 
more complicated reordering modes inside the 
higher layers of phrases. Then we choose some 
complicated reordering models to translate those 
phrases. Thus search space and computational 
complexity are both reduced. After obtaining the 
translation of higher layer?s phrases, it is enough 
for simple reordering models to reorder them.  
Due to phrase segmentation some phrases may 
be translated poorly by the higher layer of reor-
dering models, but they still have chances of be-
ing revised by the lower layer of reordering 
model because in lower layer of reordering mod-
el the input phrases have not these hard segmen-
tation boundary and our model uses phrase trans-
lation tables to determine the scope of each reor-
dering model.  
 There are two key issues in our model. The 
first one is how to segment the source sentence 
into different layers of phrases. The second one 
is how to choose a reordering model for different 
layer of phrases. In any case the design of seg-
menting sentence module should consider the 
characteristic of the reordering model of phrases. 
3 Implementation 
The segmentation module consists of the sub-
sentence segmentation and chunk segmentation. 
The decoder combines three reordering models, 
HPTM, MEBTG, and a monotone reordering 
model. 
3.1 Segmentation module
We define the sub-sentence as the word se-
quence which can be translated in monotone or-
der. The following six punctua-
tions: ? ? ?  ?  ?  ? in Chinese, 
and . ! ? , : ; in English are chosen as the seg-
mentation anchor candidates.   Except Chinese 
comma, all the other five punctuations can ex-
450
press one semantic end and another semantic 
beginning.  In most of the time, it has high error 
risk to segment the source sentence by commas. 
So we get help from syntactic information of 
Chinese dependency tree to guarantee the mono-
tone order of Chinese sub-sentences.  
The whole process of sub-sentence 
segmentation includes training and segmenting. 
Training: 1) The word alignment of training 
parallel corpus is obtained; 2) The parallel 
sentence pairs in training corpus are segmented 
into sub-sentences candidates. For a Chinese-
English sentence pair with their word alignment 
in training data, all bilingual punctuations are 
found firstly, six punctuations respectively 
???????? in Chinese and ?? ! . , : ;? in 
English. The punctuation identification number 
(id) sets in Chinese and English are respectively 
extracted.  For a correct punctuation id pair (id_c,
id_e), the phrase before id_e in English sentence 
should be the translation of the phrase before 
id_c in Chinese sentence, namely the number of 
the links 1 between the two phrases should be 
equal. In order to guarantees the property we 
calculate a bilingual alignment ratio for each 
Chinese-English punctuation id pair according to 
the following equation. For the punctuation id 
pair (id_c, id_e), bilingual alignment ratio 
consists of two value, Chinese-English 
alignment ratio (CER) and English-Chinese 
alignment ratio (ECR).
1 _
1
1 _
1
( )
( )
ij
i id c
j J
ij
j id e
i I
A
CER
A
G
G
d d
d d
d d
d d
 
?
?
1 _
1
1 _
1
( )
( )
ij
j id e
i I
ij
i id c
j J
A
ECR
A
G
G
d d
d d
d d
d d
 
?
?
where ( )ijAG is an indicator function whose value 
is 1 when the word id pair ( , )i j is in the word 
alignment and is 0 otherwise.  I and J are the 
length of the Chinese English sentence pair. 
CER of a correct punctuation id pair will be 
equal to 1.0. So does ECR.  In view of the error 
rate of word alignment, the punctuation id pairs 
will be looked as the segmentation anchor if 
both CER and ECR are falling into the threshold 
range (minvalue, maxvalue). Then all the 
punctuation id pairs are judged according to the 
same method and those punctuation id pairs 
1 Here a link between a Chinese word and an English word 
means the word alignment between them.
satisfying the requirement segment the sentence 
pair into sub-sentence pairs. 3) The first word of 
Chinese sub-sentence in each bilingual sub-
sentence pair is collected.  We filter these words 
whose frequency is larger than predefined 
threshold to get segmentation anchor word set 
(SAWS).
Segmenting: 1) The test sentence in Chinese is 
segmented into segments by the six Chinese 
punctuation ???????? in the sentence. 2)
If the first word of a segment is in SAWS the 
punctuation at the end of the segment is chosen 
as the segmentation punctuation. 3) If a segment 
satisfies the property of ?dependency integrity? 
the punctuation at the end of the segment is also 
chosen as the segmentation punctuation. Here 
?dependency integrity? is defined in a 
dependency tree. Figure 5 gives the part output  
Figure 5. The part dependency parser output 
of a Chinese sentence. 
of ?lexical dependency parser?2  for a Chinese 
sentence. There are five columns of data for each 
word which are respectively the word id, the 
word itself, its speech of part, the id of its head 
word and their dependency type. In the sentence 
the Chinese word sequence ??? ?? ?? ?
? (US congressional representatives say that)? 
has such a property: Each word in the sequence 
has a dependency relation with the word which 
is still in the sequence except one word which 
has a dependency relation with the root, e.g. id 4. 
We define the property as ?dependency integri-
ty?. Our reason is: a sub-sentence with the prop-
erty of ?dependency integrity? has relatively in-
dependent semantic meaning and a large possi-
bility of monotone translation order. 4) The un-
ion of the segmentation punctuations in step 2) 
and 3) are the final sub-sentence segmentation 
tags.
2 http://www.seas.upenn.edu/
~strctlrn/MSTParser/MSTParser.html
ID              word          POS        head id  dependency type 
1 ?? NR 3 NMOD 
2 ?? NN 3 NMOD 
3 ?? NN 4 SUB 
4 ?? VV 0 ROOT 
5 ? PU 4 P 
6 ??? NN 7 VMOD 
7 ?? VV 9 VMOD 
8 ? PU 9 P 
? ?            ? ?            ? ?            ? ?                  ? ? 
451
After sub-sentence segmentation, chunks 
segmentation is carried out in each sub-sentence. 
We define the chunks as the word sequence 
which can be translated in monotone order or 
inverted order. Here the knowledge of the 
?phrase structure parser? 3  and the ?lexicalized 
dependency parser? are integrated to segment 
the sub-sentence into chunks. In a Chinese 
phrase structure parser tree the nouns phrase (NP) 
and preposition phrase (PP) are relatively inde-
pendent in semantic expressing and relatively 
flexible in translation. So in the chunk segmenta-
tion, only the NP structure and PP structure in 
the Chinese structure parsing tree are found as 
phrase structure chunk. The process of chunk 
segmentation is described as follows: 1) the test 
sub-sentence is parsed to get the phrase structure 
tree and dependency parsing tree; 2) We traverse 
the phrase structure tree to extract sub-tree of 
?NP? and ?PP? to obtain the phrase structure 
chunks. 3) We mark off the word sequences with 
?dependency integrity? in the dependency tree. 4)
Both the two kinds of chunks are recombined to 
obtain the final result of chunk segmentation. 
3.2 Decoding
Our decoder is composed of three styles of reor-
dering models: HPTM, MEBTG and a monotone 
reordering model. 
According to Chiang (2005), given the 
chunk chunkc , a CKY parser finds ch u n ke

, the Eng-
lish yield of the best derivation hptmD

that has 
Chinese yield chunkc :
( )
( )
( argmax Pr( ))
hptm chunk
chunk chunk hptm
chunk hptm
C D C
e e D
e D
 
 
 

Here the chunks not the whole source sentence 
are fed into HPTM decoder to get the L-best 
translations and feature scores of the chunks. We 
combine all the chunks, their L-best translations 
and the feature scores into a phrase table, namely 
chunk phrase table. We only choose 4 translation 
scores (two translation probability based on fre-
quency and two lexical weights based on word 
alignment) because the language model score, 
phrase penalty score and word penalty score will 
be re-calculated in the lower layer of reordering 
3 http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/lex-parser.shtml
model and need not be kept here. Meantime we 
change the log values of the scores into probabil-
ity value. In the chunk phrase table each phrase 
pair has a Chinese phrase, an English phrase and 
four translations feature scores. In each phrase 
pair the Chinese phrase is one of our chunks, the 
English phrase is one translation of L-best of the 
chunk. 
 In MEBTG (Xiong et al, 2006), three rules 
are used to derive the translation of each sub-
sentence: lexical rule, straight rule and inverted 
rule. Given a source sub-sentence sub sentC  , it 
finds the final sub-sentence translation sub sentE 

from the best derivation m eb tgD

:
( )
( )
( arg max Pr( ))
mebtg sub sent
sub sent sub sent mebtg
mebtg
C D C
E E D
E D

 
 
 
 
 
Generally chunk segmentation will make some 
HPTM rules useless and reduce the translation 
performance. So in MEBTG we also use base 
phrase pair table which contains the contiguous 
phrase translation pairs consistent with word 
alignment.  We merge the chunk phrase table 
and base phrase table together and feed them 
into MEBTG to translate each sub-sentence. 
Thus the K-Best translation and feature scores of 
each sub-sentence are obtained and then are re-
combined into a new phrase table, namely sub-
sentence phrase table, by using the same method 
with chunk phrase table. 
 Having obtained the translation of each sub-
sentence we generate the final translation of the 
whole source sentence by a monotone reordering 
model. Our monotone reordering model employs 
a log-linear direct translation model. Three 
phrase tables: chunk phrase table, sub-sentence 
phrase table and base phrase table are merged 
together and fed into the monotone decoder. 
Thus the decoder will automatically choose 
those phrases it need. In each phrase table each 
source phrase only has four translation probabili-
ties for its candidate translation. So it?s easy to 
merge them together. In such way all kinds of 
phrase pairs will automatically compete accord-
ing to their translation probabilities. So our 
PRML model can automatically decide which 
reordering model is employed in each phrase 
scope of the whole source sentence. It?s worth 
noting that the inputs of the three reordering 
452
model have no segmentation tag. Because any 
segmentation for the input before decoding will 
influence the use of some rules or phrase pairs 
and may cause some rules or phrase pairs losses. 
It would be better to employ different phrase 
table to limit reordering models and let each de-
coder automatically decide reordering model for 
each segments of the input. Thus by controlling 
the phrase tables we apply different reordering 
models on different phrases. For each reordering 
model we perform the maximum BLEU training 
(Venugopal et al 2005) on a development set. 
For HPTM the training is same as Chiang 2007. 
For MEBTG we use chunk phrase table and base 
table to obtain translation parameters. For mono-
tone reordering model all the three phrase tables 
are merged to get translation weights. 
4  Experiments 
This section gives the experiments with Chinese-
to-English translation task in news domain. Our 
evaluation metric is case-insensitive BLEU-4 
(Papineni et al 2002). We use NIST MT 2005, 
NIST MT 2006 and NIST MT 2008 as our test 
data. Our training data is filtered from the LDC 
corpus4. Table 1 gives the statistics of our data.  
4.1 Evaluating translation Performance  
We compare our PRML against two baselines: 
MEBTG system developed in house according 
to Xiong (2006, 2008) and HPTM system5 in 
PYTHON based on HPTM reordering model 
(Chiang 2007). In MEBTG phrases of up to 10 
words in length on the Chinese side are extracted 
and reordering examples are obtained without 
limiting the length of each example.  Only the 
last word of each reordering example is used as 
lexical feature in training the reordering model 
by the maximum entropy based classifier6. We 
also set a swapping window size as 8 and the 
beam threshold as 10.  It is worth noting that our 
MEBTG system uses cube-pruning algorithm 
(Chiang 2005) from bottom to up to generate the  
4 LDC corpus lists: LDC2000T46,  LDC2000T50, 
LDC2002E18, LDC2002E27, LDC2002L27, LDC2002T01, 
LDC2003E07, LDC2003E14, LDC2003T17, LDC2004E12, 
LDC2004T07, LDC2004T08, LDC2005T01, LDC2005T06, 
LDC2005T10, LDC2005T34, LDC2006T04, LDC2007T09 
5 We are extremely thankful to David Chiang who original-
ly implement the PYTHON decoder and share with us. 
6 http://maxent.sourceforge.net/
Set Language Sentence Vocabulary A. S. L
Train
data
Chinese 297,069 6,263 11.9
English 297,069 8,069 13.6
NIST
05 
Chinese 1,082 5669 28.2
English 4,328 7575 32.7
NIST
06 
Chinese 1,664 6686 23.5
English 6,656 9388 28.9
NIST
08 
Chinese 1,357 6,628 24.5
English 5,428 9,594 30.8
Table 1. The statistics of training data and test 
data, A. S. L is average sentence length. 
N-best list not the lazy algorithm of (Huang and 
Chiang, 2005). We also limit the length of the 
HPTM initial rules no more than 10 words and 
the number of non-terminals within two. In the 
decoding for the rules the beam pruning parame-
ter is 30 and threshold pruning parameter is 1.0. 
For hypotheses the two pruning parameters are 
respectively 30 and 10. In our PRML minva-
lue=0.8, maxvalue=1.25, which are obtained by 
minimum error rate training on the development 
set. The predefined value for filtering SAWS is
set as 100.
The translation performance of the three reor-
dering model is shown in Table 2. We can find 
that PRML has a better performance than 
MEBTG with a relatively 2.09% BLEU score in 
NIST05, 5.60% BLEU score in NIST06 and  
5.0% BLEU score in NIST08. This indicates that 
the chunk phrase table increases the reordering 
ability of MEBTG. Compared with HPTM, 
PRML has a comparable translation performance 
in NIST08. In NIST05 and NIST06 our model 
has a slightly better performance than HPTM. 
Because PRML limit hierarchical structure reor-
dering model in chunks while HPTM use them 
in the whole sentence scope (or in a length 
scope), HPTM has a more complicated reorder-
ing mechanism than PRML. The experiment re-
sult shows even though we use easier reordering 
moels in larger scope, e.g. MEBTG and monoto- 
Model Nist05 Nist06 Nist08 
HPTM 0.3183 0.1956 0.1525 
MEBTG 0.3049 0.1890 0.1419 
PRML 0.3205 0.1996 0.1495 
Table 2. The translation performance  
453
ne reordering model, we have a comparatively 
translation performance as HPTM.  
4.2 Evaluating translation speed  
Table 3 shows the average decoding time on test 
data for the three phrase reordering models on a 
double processor of a dual 2.0 Xeon machine. 
Time denotes mean time of per-sentence, in 
seconds. It is seen that PRML is the slower than 
MEBTG but reduce decoding time with a rela-
tively 54.85% seconds in NIST05, 75.67% 
seconds in NIST06 and 65.28% seconds in 
NIST08. For PRML, 93.65% average decoding 
time in NIST05 is spent in HPTM, 4.89% time 
in MEBTG and 1.46% time in monotone reor-
dering decoder.  
Model Nist05 Nist06 Nist08 
HPTM 932.96 1235.21 675 
MEBTG 43.46 27.16 10.24 
PRML 421.20 300.52 234.33 
Table 3. The average decoding time 
4.3 Evaluating the performance of each 
layer of phrase table
In order to evaluate the performance of each 
reordering model, we run the monotone decoder 
with different phrase table in NIST05. Table 4 
list the size of each phrase table. From the re-
sults in Table 5 it is seen that the performance of 
using three phrase tables is the best.  Compared 
with the base phrase table, the   translation per-
formances are improved with relatively 10.86% 
BLEU score by adding chunk phrase table and 
11% BLEU score by adding sub-sentence table. 
The result of row 4 has a comparable to the one 
in row 5. It indicates the sub-sentence phrase 
table has contained the information of HPTM 
reordering model. The case of row 4 to row 2 is 
the same. 
Phrase table Phrase pair 
Base 732732 
Chunk 86401 
Sub-sentence 24710 
Table 4.  The size of each phrase table. 
Phrase table Reordering model BLEU
Base Monotone 0.2871
Base +chunk monotone+HPTM 0.3180
Base +sub-
sentence table
monotone+HPTM 
+MEBTG
0.3187
Base +chunk 
+subsentence
monotone+HPTM 
+MEBTG
0.3205
Table 5.  The performance of phrase table 
5  Conclusions 
In this paper, we propose a novel reordering 
model based on multi-layer phrases (PRML), 
where the source sentence is segmented into dif-
ferent layers of phrases and different reordering 
models are applied to get the final translation. 
Our model easily incorporates different styles of 
phrase reordering models together, including 
monotone, BTG, and hierarchy or other more 
complicated reordering models. When a compli-
cated reordering model is used, our model can 
limit it in a smaller scope and replace it with an 
easier reordering model in larger scope. In such 
way our model better trade-offs the translation 
speed and performance simultaneously.  
In the next step, we will use more features to 
segment the sentences such as syntactical fea-
tures or adding a dictionary to supervise the 
segmentation. And also we will try to incorpo-
rate other systems into our model to improve the 
translation performance. 
6 Acknowledgements 
The research work has been partially funded by 
the Natural Science Foundation of China under 
Grant No. 6097 5053, and 60736014, the Na-
tional Key Technology R&D Program under 
Grant No. 2006BAH03B02, the Hi-Tech Re-
search and Development Program (?863? Pro-
gram) of China under Grant No. 
2006AA010108-4, and also supported by the 
China-Singapore Institute of Digital Media 
(CSIDM) project under grant No. CSIDM-
200804, and Research Project ?Language and 
Knowledge Technology? of Institute of Scientif-
ic and Technical Information of China 
(2009DP01-6). 
454
References 
David Chiang. 2005. A hierarchical phrase-based 
model for statistical machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of ACL 2005, pages 263?270. 
David Chiang, 2007. Hierarchical Phrase-based 
Translation. Computational Linguistics,33(2):201-
228. 
Yuan Ding and Martha Palmer. 2005. Machine trans-
lation using probabilistic synchronous dependency 
insertion grammars. In proceeding of 43th Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, 541-548 
Jason Eisner. 2003. Learning non-isomorphic tree 
mappings for machine translation. In proceedings 
of the 41th Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (companion volume). 
Michel Galley, Mark Hopkins, Kevin Knight and 
Daniel Marcu. 2004. What?s in a translation rule?
In proceedings of HLTNAACL- 2004. 
Michel Galley, Jonathan Graehl, Kevin Knight, Da-
niel Marcu, Steve DeNeefe, Wei Wang, Ignacio 
Thayer. 2006. Scalable Inference and Training of 
Context-Rich Syntactic Translation Models. In 
Proceedings of the joint conference of the Interna-
tional Committee on Computational Linguistics 
and the Association for Computational Linguistics. 
Sydney, Australia. 
Liang Huang and David Chiang. 2005. Better k-best 
parsing. In Proceedings of the Ninth International 
Workshop on Parsing Technology, Vancouver, 
October, pages 53?64. 
Papineni, Kishore, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and 
Wei-Jing Zhu, 2002. BLEU: a method for auto-
matic evaluation of machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the ACL. 
page 311-318, Philadelphia, PA. 
Philipp Koehn, Franz J. Och and Daniel Marcu. 2003. 
Statistical phrase-based translation. In proceed-
ings of HLT-NAACL-03, 127-133 
Philipp Koehn, Amittai Axelrod, Alexandra Birch 
Mayne, Chris Callison-Burch, Miles Osborne and 
David Talbot. 2005. Edinburgh System Descrip-
tion for the 2005 IWSLT Speech Translation Eval-
uation. In International Workshop on Spoken Lan-
guage Translation. 
Shankar Kumar and William Byrne. 2005. Local 
phrase reordering models for statistical machine 
translation. In Proceedings of HLT-EMNLP. 
Yang Liu, Qun Liu and Shouxun Lin. 2006. Tree-to-
String Alignment Template for Statistical Machine 
Translation. In proceedings of ACL-06, 609-616. 
Daniel Marcu and William Wong. 2002. A phrase-
based, joint probability model for statistical ma-
chine translation. In proceedings of EMNLP-02, 
133-139. 
Daniel Marcu, Wei Wang, Abdessamad Echihabi, 
and Kevin Knight. 2006. SPMT: Statistical Ma-
chine Translation with Syntactified Target Lan-
guage Phrases. In Proceedings of EMNLP-2006, 
44-52, Sydney, Australia 
Bart Mellebeek, Karolina Owczarzak, Josef Van Ge-
nabith, Andy Way. 2006. Multi-Engine Machine 
Translation By Recursive Sentence Decomposition.
In Proceedings of AMTA 2006 
Franz J. Och and Hermann Ney. 2004. The alignment 
template approach to statistical machine transla-
tion. Computational Linguistics, 30(4):417-449 
Franz Josef Och, Ignacio Thayer, Daniel Marcu, Ke-
vin Knight, Dragos Stefan Munteanu, Quamrul Ti-
pu, Michel Galley, andMark Hopkins. 2004. Arab-
ic and Chinese MT at USC/ISI. Presentation given 
at NIST Machine Translation Evaluation Work-
shop.
Chris Quirk, Arul Menezes and Colin Cherry. 2005. 
Dependency treelet translation: Syntactically in-
formed phrasal SMT. In proceedings of the 43th 
Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, 271-279 
S. Shieber and Y. Schabes. 1990. Synchronous tree 
adjoining grammars. In proceedings of COLING-
90. 
Christoph Tillmann. 2004. A block orientation model 
for statistical machine translation. In HLT-
NAACL, Boston, MA, USA. 
Ashish Venugopal, Stephan Vogel and Alex Waibel. 
2003. Effective Phrase Translation Extraction 
from Alignment Models, in Proceedings of the 41st 
ACL,  319-326. 
Dekai Wu. 1995. Stochastic inversion transduction 
grammars, with application to segmentation, 
bracketing, and alignment of parallel corpora. In 
proceeding of IJCAL 1995, 1328-1334,Montreal, 
August.  
Deyi Xiong, Qun Liu, and Shouxun Lin. 2006. Max-
imum Entropy Based phrase reordering model for 
statistical machine translation. In proceedings of 
COLING-ACL, Sydney, Australia. 
Deyi Xiong, Min Zhang, Ai Ti Aw, Haitao Mi, Qun 
Liu and Shouxun Lin. Refinements in BTG-based 
Statistical Machine Translation. In Proceedings of 
IJCNLP 2008. 
Kenji Yamada and Kevin Knight. 2001. A syntax-
based statistical translation model. In proceedings 
of the 39th Meeting of the ACL, 523-530. 
R. Zens, H. Ney, T. Watanabe, and E. Sumita. 2004. 
Reordering Constraints for Phrase-Based Statis-
tical MachineTranslation. In Proceedings of CoL-
ing 2004, Geneva, Switzerland, pp. 205-211. 
455
