Architecture and Design Considerations in NESPOLE!:
a Speech Translation System for E-commerce Applications
Alon Lavie,
Chad Langley,
Alex Waibel
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
alavie@cs.cmu.edu
Fabio Pianesi,
Gianni Lazzari,
Paolo Coletti
ITC-irst
Trento, Italy
Loredana Taddei,
Franco Balducci
AETHRA
Ancona, Italy
1. INTRODUCTION
NESPOLE! 1 is a speech-to-speech machine translation research
project funded jointly by the European Commission and the US
NSF. The main goal of the NESPOLE! project is to advance the
state-of-the-art of speech-to-speech translation in a real-world set-
ting of common users involved in e-commerce applications. The
project is a collaboration between three European research labs
(IRST in Trento Italy, ISL at University of Karlsruhe in Germany,
CLIPS at UJF in Grenoble France), a US research group (ISL at
Carnegie Mellon in Pittsburgh) and two industrial partners (APT
- the Trentino provincial tourism bureau, and Aethra - an Italian
tele-communications commercial company). The speech-to-speech
translation approach taken by the project builds upon previous work
that the research partners conducted within the context of the C-
STAR consortium (see http://www.c-star.org). The pro-
totype system developed in NESPOLE! is intended to provide ef-
fective multi-lingual speech-to-speech communication between all
pairs of four languages (Italian, German, French and English) within
broad, but yet restricted domains. The first showcase currently un-
der development is in the domain of tourism and travel information.
The NESPOLE! speech translation system is designed to be an
integral part of advanced e-commerce technology of the next gener-
ation. We envision a technological scenario in which multi-modal
(speech, video and gesture) interaction plays a significant role, in
addition to the passive browsing of pre-designed web pages as is
common in e-commerce today. The interaction between client and
provider will need to support online communication with agents
(both real and artificial) on the provider side. The language barrier
then becomes a significant obstacle for such online communica-
tion between the two parties, when they do not speak a common
language. Within the tourism and travel domain, one can imagine
a scenario in which users (the clients) are planning a recreational
trip and are searching for specific detailed information about the
1NESPOLE! - NEgotiating through SPOken Lan-
guage in E-commerce. See the project website at
http://nespole.itc.it/
.
regions they wish to visit. Initial general information is obtained
from a web site of a tourism information provider. When more
detailed or special information is required, the customer has the
option of opening an online video-conferencing connection with a
human agent of the tourism information provider. Speech transla-
tion is integrated within the video-conference connection; the two
parties each speak in their native language and hear the synthesized
translation of the speech of the other participant. Text translation
(in the form of subtitles) can also be provided. Some multi-modal
communication between the parties is also available. The provider
agent can send web pages to the display of the customer, and both
sides can annotate and refer to pictures and diagrams presented on
a shared whiteboard application.
In this paper we describe the design considerations behind the ar-
chitecture that we have developed for the NESPOLE! speech trans-
lation system in the scenario described above. In order to make the
developed prototype as realistic as possible for use by a common
user, we assume only minimal hardware and software is available
on the customer side. This does include a PC-type video camera,
commercially available internet video-conferencing software (such
as Microsoft Netmeeting), standard audio and video hardware and
a standard web browser. However, no speech recognition and/or
translation software is assumed to reside locally on the PC of the
customer. This implies a server-type architecture in which speech
recognition and translation are accomplished via interaction with
a dedicated server. The extent to which this server is centralized
or distributed is one of the major design considerations taken into
account in our system.
2. NESPOLE! INTERLINGUA-BASED
TRANSLATION APPROACH
Our translation approach builds upon previous work that we have
conducted within the context of the C-STAR consortium. We use
an interlingua-based approach with a relatively shallow task-oriented
interlingua representation [2] [1], that was initially designed for the
C-STAR consortium and has been significantly extended for the
NESPOLE! project. Interlingual machine translation is convenient
when more than two languages are involved because it does not re-
quire each language to be connected by a set of transfer rules to
each other language in each direction [3]. Adding a new language
that has all-ways translation with existing languages requires only
writing one analyzer that maps utterances into the interlingua and
one generator that maps interlingua representations into sentences.
The interlingua approach also allows each partner group to imple-
ment an analyzer and generator for its home language only. A fur-
Figure 1: General Architecture of NESPOLE! System
ther advantage is that it supports a paraphrase generation back into
the language of the speaker. This provides the user with some con-
trol in case the analysis of an utterance failed to produce a correct
interlingua. The following are three examples of utterances tagged
with their corresponding interlingua representation:
Thank you very much
c:thank
And we?ll see you on February twelfth.
a:closing (time=(february, md12))
On the twelfth we have a single and a double
available.
a:give-information+availability+room
(room-type=(single & double),time=(md12))
3. NESPOLE! SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
DESIGN
Several main considerations were taken into account in the de-
sign of the NESPOLE! Human Language Technology (HLT) server
architecture: (1) The desire to cleanly separate the actual HLT
system from the communication channel between the two parties,
which makes use of the speech translation capabilities provided by
the HLT system; (2) The desire to allow each research site to in-
dependently develop its language specific analysis and generation
modules, and to allow each site to easily integrate new and im-
proved components into the global NESPOLE! HLT system; and
(3) The desire of the research partners to build to whatever ex-
tent possible upon software components previously developed in
the context of the C-STAR consortium. We will discuss the ex-
tent to which the designed architecture achieves these goals after
presenting an overview of the architecture itself.
Figure 1 shows the general architecture of the current NESPOLE!
system. Communication between the client and agent is facilitated
by a dedicated module - the Mediator. This module is designed to
control the video-conferencing connection between the client and
the agent, and to integrate the speech translation services into the
communication. The mediator handles audio and video data as-
sociated with the video-conferencing application and binary data
associated with a shared whiteboard application. Standard H.323
data formats are used for these three types of data transfer. Speech-
to-speech translation of the utterances captured by the mediator is
accomplished through communication with the NESPOLE! global
HLT server. This is accomplished via socket connections with
language-specific HLT servers. The communication between the
mediator and each HLT server consists mainly of linear PCM au-
dio packets (some text and control messages are also supported and
are described later in this section).
Communication with Mediator
Speech
Recognizer
Module
Parser/Analysis
IF
text
Analysis Chain
Speech
Synthsizer
Generation
Module
IF
text
.
Generation
Chain
Communication with CommSwitch
audio audio
Language X HLT Server
Figure 2: Architecture of NESPOLE! Language-specific HLT Servers
The global NESPOLE! HLT server comprises four separate lang-
uage-specific servers. Additional language-specific HLT servers
can easily be integrated in the future. The internal architecture
of each language-specific HLT server is shown in figure 2. Each
language-specific HLT server consists of an analysis chain and a
generation chain. The analysis chain receives an audio stream cor-
responding to a single utterance and performs speech recognition
followed by parsing and analysis of the input utterance into the in-
terlingua representation (IF). The interlingua is then transmitted to
a central HLT communication switch (the CS), that forwards it to
the HLT servers for the other languagesas appropriate. IF messages
received from the central communication switch are processed by
the generation chain. A generation module first generates text in
the target language from the IF. The text utterance is then sent to
a speech synthesis module that produces an audio stream for the
utterance. The audio is then communicated externally to the me-
diator, in order to be integrated back into the video-conferencing
stream between the two parties.
The mediator can, in principle, support multiple one-to-one com-
munication sessions between client and agent. However, the de-
sign supports multiple mediators, which, for example, could each
be dedicated to a different provider application. Communication
with the mediator is initiated by the client by an explicit action
via the web browser. This opens a communication channel to the
mediator, which contacts the agent station, establishes the video-
conferencing connection between client and agent, and starts the
whiteboard application. The specific pair of languages for a dia-
logue is determined in advance from the web page from which the
client initiates the communication. The mediator then establishes a
socket communication channel with the two appropriate language
specific HLT servers. Communication between the two language
specific HLT servers, in the form of IF messages, is facilitated by
the NESPOLE! global communication switch (the CS). The lan-
guage specific HLT servers may in fact be physically distributed
over the internet. Each language specific HLT server is set to ser-
vice analysis requests coming from the mediator side, and genera-
tion requests arriving from the CS.
Some further functionality beyond that described above is also
supported. As described earlier, the ability to produce a textual
paraphrase of an input utterance and to display it back to the orig-
inal speaker provides useful user control in the case of translation
failures. This is supported in our system in the following way. In
addition to the translated audio, each HLT server also forwards the
generated text in the output language to the mediator, which then
displays the text on a dedicated application window on the PC of
the target user. Additionally, at the end of the processing of an in-
put utterance by the analysis chain of an HLT server, the resulting
IF is passed internally to the generation chain, which produces a
text generation from the IF. The result is a textual paraphrase of the
input utterance in the source language. This text is then sent back
to the mediator, which forwards it to the party from which the ut-
terance originated. The paraphrase is then displayed to the original
speaker in the dedicated application window. If the paraphrase is
wrong, it is likely that the produced IF was incorrect, and thus the
translation would also be wrong. The user may then use a button
on the application interface to signal that the last displayed para-
phrase was wrong. This action triggers a message that is forwarded
by the mediator to the other party, indicating that the last displayed
translation should be ignored. Further functionality is planned to
support synchronization between multi-modal events on the white-
board and their corresponding speech actions. As these are in very
preliminary stages of planning we do not describe them here.
4. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
We believe that the architectural design described above has sev-
eral strengths and advantages. The clean separation of the HLT
server dedicated to the speech translation services from the exter-
nal communication modules between the two parties allows the re-
search partners to develop the HLT modules with a large degree
of independence. Furthermore, this separation will allow us in the
future to explore other types of mediators for different types of ap-
plications. One such application being proposed for development
within the C-STAR consortium is a speech-to-speech translation
service over mobile phones. The HLT server architecture described
here would be able to generally support such alternative external
communication modalities as well.
The physical distribution of the individual language specific HLT
servers allows each site to independently develop, integrate and
test its own analysis and generation modules. The organization of
each language specific HLT server as an independent module al-
lows each of the research sites to develop its unique approaches to
analysis and generation, while adhering to a simple communication
protocol between the HLT servers and externally with the mediator.
This allowed the research partners to ?jump-start? the project with
analysis and generation modules previously developed for the C-
STAR consortium, and incrementally develop these modules over
time. Furthermore, the global NESPOLE! communication switch
(the CS) supports testing of analysis and generation among the four
languages in isolation from the external parts of the system. Cur-
rently, requests for analysis of a textual utterance can be transmitted
to the HLT servers via the CS, with the resulting IF sent (via the CS)
to all HLT servers for generation. This gives us great flexibility in
developing and testing our translation system. The functionality of
the CS was originally developed for our previous C-STAR project,
and was reused with little modification.
Support for additional languages is also very easy to incorpo-
rate into the system by adding new language-specific HLT servers.
Any new language specific HLT server needs only to adhere to the
communication protocols with both the global NESPOLE! commu-
nication switch (the CS) and the external mediator. The C-STAR
consortium plans to use the general architecture described here for
its next phase of collaboration, with support for at least three asian
languages (Japanese, Korean and Chinese) in addition to the lan-
guages currently covered by the NESPOLE! project.
The first prototype of the NESPOLE! speech translation system
is currently in advanced stages of full integration. A showcase
demonstration of the prototype system to the European Commis-
sion is currently scheduled for late April 2001.
5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The research work reported here was supported in part by the
National Science Foundation under Grant number 9982227. Any
opinions, findings and conclusions or recomendations expressed in
this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Science Foundation (NSF).
6. REFERENCES
[1] L. Levin, D. Gates, A. Lavie, F. Pianesi, D. Wallace,
T. Watanabe, and M. Woszczyna. Evaluation of a Practical
Interlingua for Task-Oriented Dialogue. In Workshop on
Applied Interlinguas: Practical Applications of Interlingual
Approaches to NLP, Seattle, 2000.
[2] L. Levin, D. Gates, A. Lavie, and A. Waibel. An Interlingua
Based on Domain Actions for Machine Translation of
Task-Oriented Dialogues. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Spoken Language Processing (ICSLP?98),
pages Vol. 4, 1155?1158, Sydney, Australia, 1998.
[3] S. Nirenburg, J. Carbonell, M. Tomita, and K. Goodman.
Machine Translation: A Knowledge-Based Approach. Morgan
Kaufmann, San Mateo, California, 1992.
