Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 257?265,
Uppsala, Sweden, 11-16 July 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Recommendation in Internet Forums and Blogs
Jia Wang
Southwestern Univ.
of Finance &
Economics China
wj96@sina.cn
Qing Li
Southwestern Univ.
of Finance &
Economics China
liq t@swufe.edu.cn
Yuanzhu Peter Chen
Memorial Univ. of
Newfoundland
Canada
yzchen@mun.ca
Zhangxi Lin
Texas Tech Univ.
USA
zhangxi.lin
@ttu.edu
Abstract
The variety of engaging interactions
among users in social medial distinguishes
it from traditional Web media. Such a fea-
ture should be utilized while attempting to
provide intelligent services to social me-
dia participants. In this article, we present
a framework to recommend relevant infor-
mation in Internet forums and blogs using
user comments, one of the most represen-
tative of user behaviors in online discus-
sion. When incorporating user comments,
we consider structural, semantic, and au-
thority information carried by them. One
of the most important observation from
this work is that semantic contents of user
comments can play a fairly different role
in a different form of social media. When
designing a recommendation system for
this purpose, such a difference must be
considered with caution.
1 Introduction
In the past twenty years, the Web has evolved
from a framework of information dissemination to
a social interaction facilitator for its users. From
the initial dominance of static pages or sites, with
addition of dynamic content generation and pro-
vision of client-side computation and event han-
dling, Web applications have become a preva-
lent framework for distributed GUI applications.
Such technological advancement has fertilized vi-
brant creation, sharing, and collaboration among
the users (Ahn et al, 2007). As a result, the role
of Computer Science is not as much of designing
or implementing certain data communication tech-
niques, but more of enabling a variety of creative
uses of the Web.
In a more general context, Web is one of the
most important carriers for ?social media?, e.g. In-
ternet forums, blogs, wikis, podcasts, instant mes-
saging, and social networking. Various engaging
interactions among users in social media differ-
entiate it from traditional Web sites. Such char-
acteristics should be utilized in attempt to pro-
vide intelligent services to social media users.
One form of such interactions of particular inter-
est here is user comments. In self-publication, or
customer-generated media, a user can publish an
article or post news to share with others. Other
users can read and comment on the posting and
these comments can, in turn, be read and com-
mented on. Digg (www.digg.com), Yahoo!Buzz
(buzz.yahoo.com) and various kinds of blogs are
commercial examples of self-publication. There-
fore, reader responses to earlier discussion provide
a valuable source of information for effective rec-
ommendation.
Currently, self-publishing media are becoming
increasingly popular. For instance, at this point of
writing, Technorati is indexing over 133 million
blogs, and about 900,000 new blogs are created
worldwide daily1. With such a large scale, infor-
mation in the blogosphere follows a Long Tail Dis-
tribution (Agarwal et al, 2010). That is, in aggre-
gate, the not-so-well-known blogs can have more
valuable information than the popular ones. This
gives us an incentive to develop a recommender
to provide a set of relevant articles, which are ex-
pected to be of interest to the current reader. The
user experience with the system can be immensely
enhanced with the recommended articles. In this
work, we focus on recommendation in Internet fo-
rums and blogs with discussion threads.
Here, a fundamental challenge is to account for
topic divergence, i.e. the change of gist during
the process of discussion. In a discussion thread,
the original posting is typically followed by other
readers? opinions, in the form of comments. Inten-
1http://technorati.com/
257
tion and concerns of active users may change as
the discussion goes on. Therefore, recommenda-
tion, if it were only based on the original posting,
can not benefit the potentially evolving interests of
the users. Apparently, there is a need to consider
topic evolution in adaptive content-based recom-
mendation and this requires novel techniques in
order to capture topic evolution precisely and to
prevent drastic topic shifting which returns com-
pletely irrelevant articles to users.
In this work, we present a framework to recom-
mend relevant information in Internet forums and
blogs using user comments, one of the most rep-
resentative recordings of user behaviors in these
forms of social media.
It has the following contributions.
? The relevant information is recommended
based on a balanced perspective of both the
authors and readers.
? We model the relationship among comments
and that relative to the original posting us-
ing graphs in order to evaluate their combined
impact. In addition, the weight of a comment
is further enhanced with its content and with
the authority of its poster.
2 Related Work
In a broader context, a related problem is content-
based information recommendation (or filtering).
Most information recommender systems select ar-
ticles based on the contents of the original post-
ings. For instance, Chiang and Chen (Chiang and
Chen, 2004) study a few classifiers for agent-based
news recommendations. The relevant news selec-
tions of these work are determined by the textual
similarity between the recommended news and the
original news posting. A number of later proposals
incorporate additional metadata, such as user be-
haviors and timestamps. For example, Claypool et
al. (Claypool et al, 1999) combine the news con-
tent with numerical user ratings. Del Corso, Gull??,
and Romani (Del Corso et al, 2005) use times-
tamps to favor more recent news. Cantador, Bel-
login, and Castells (Cantador et al, 2008) utilize
domain ontology. Lee and Park (Lee and Park,
2007) consider matching between news article at-
tributes and user preferences. Anh et al (Ahn
et al, 2007) and Lai, Liang, and Ku (Lai et al,
2003) construct explicit user profiles, respectively.
Lavrenko et al (Lavrenko et al, 2000) propose
the e-Analyst system which combines news stories
with trends in financial time series. Some go even
further by ignoring the news contents and only us-
ing browsing behaviors of the readers with similar
interests (Das et al, 2007).
Another related problem is topic detection and
tracking (TDT), i.e. automated categorization of
news stories by their themes. TDT consists
of breaking the stream of news into individual
news stories, monitoring the stories for events
that have not been seen before, and categorizing
them (Lavrenko and Croft, 2001). A topic is mod-
eled with a language profile deduced by the news.
Most existing TDT schemes calculate the similar-
ity between a piece of news and a topic profile to
determine its topic relevance (Lavrenko and Croft,
2001) (Yang et al, 1999). Qiu (Qiu et al, 2009)
apply TDT techniques to group news for collabo-
rative news recommendation. Some work on TDT
takes one step further in that they update the topic
profiles as part of the learning process during its
operation (Allan et al, 2002) (Leek et al, 2002).
Most recent researches on information recom-
mendation in social media focus on the blogo-
sphere. Various types of user interactions in the
blogosphere have been observed. A prominent
feature of the blogosphere is the collective wis-
dom (Agarwal et al, 2010). That is, the knowledge
in the blogosphere is enriched by such engaging
interactions among bloggers and readers as post-
ing, commenting and tagging. Prior to this work,
the linking structure and user tagging mechanisms
in the blogosphere are the most widely adopted
ones to model such collective wisdom. For ex-
ample, Esmaili et al (Esmaili et al, 2006) fo-
cus on the linking structure among blogs. Hayes,
Avesani, and Bojars (Hayes et al, 2007) explore
measures based on blog authorship and reader tag-
ging to improve recommendation. Li and Chen
further integrate trust, social relation and semantic
analysis (Li and Chen, 2009). These approaches
attempt to capture accurate similarities between
postings without using reader comments. Due
to the interactions between bloggers and readers,
blog recommendation should not limit its input to
only blog postings themselves but also incorporate
feedbacks from the readers.
The rest of this article is organized as follows.
We first describe the design of our recommenda-
tion framework in Section 3. We then evaluate
the performance of such a recommender using two
258
  
 
		

 








 