Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010: Tutorial Abstracts, pages 9?14,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Integer Linear Programming in NLP - Constrained Conditional Models
Ming-Wei Chang, Nicholas Rizzolo, Dan Roth
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
 
Making decisions in natural language processing problems often involves assigning 
values to sets of interdependent variables where the expressive dependency structure 
can influence, or even dictate, what assignments are possible. Structured learning 
problems such as semantic role labeling provide one such example, but the setting is 
broader and includes a range of problems such as name entity and relation recognition 
and co-reference resolution. The setting is also appropriate for cases that may require a 
solution to make use of multiple (possible pre-designed or pre-learned components) as 
in summarization, textual entailment and question answering. In all these cases, it is 
natural to formulate the decision problem as a constrained optimization problem, with an 
objective function that is composed of learned models, subject to domain or problem 
specific constraints. 
Constrained Conditional Models (aka Integer Linear Programming formulation of NLP 
problems) is a learning and inference framework that augments the learning of 
conditional (probabilistic or discriminative) models with declarative constraints (written, 
for example, using a first-order representation) as a way to support decisions in an 
expressive output space while maintaining modularity and tractability of training and 
inference. In most applications of this framework in NLP, following [Roth & Yih, 
CoNLL?04], Integer Linear Programming (ILP) was used as the inference framework, 
although other algorithms can be used for that purpose.  
This framework, with and without Integer Linear Programming as its inference engine, 
has recently attracted much attention within the NLP community, with multiple papers in 
all the recent major conferences, and a related workshop in NAACL?09. Formulating 
problems as constrained optimization problems over the output of learned models has 
several advantages. It allows one to focus on the modeling of problems by providing the 
opportunity to incorporate problem specific global constraints using a first order 
language ? thus frees the developer from (much of the) low level feature engineering ? 
and it guarantees exact inference. It provides also the freedom of decoupling the stage 
of model generation (learning) from that of the constrained inference stage, often 
resulting in simplifying the learning stage as well as the engineering problem of building 
an NLP system, while improving the quality of the solutions.
These advantages and the availability of off-the-shelf solvers have led to a large variety 
of natural language processing tasks being formulated within framework, including 
semantic role labeling, syntactic parsing, coreference resolution, summarization, 
transliteration and joint information extraction. 
The goal of this tutorial is to introduce the framework of Constrained Conditional Models 
(CCMs) to the broader ACL community, motivate it as a generic framework for learning 
and inference in global NLP decision problems, present some of the key theoretical and 
9
practical issues involved in using CCMs and survey some of the existing applications of 
it as a way to promote further development of the framework and additional 
applications. The tutorial will thus be useful for many of the senior and junior 
researchers that have interest in global decision problems in NLP, providing a concise 
overview of recent perspectives and research results. 
Tutorial Outline 
After shortly motivating and introducing the general framework, the main part of the 
tutorial is a methodological presentation of some of the key computational issues 
studied within CCMs that we will present by looking at case studies published in the 
NLP literature. In the last part of the tutorial, we will discuss engineering issues that 
arise in using CCMs and present some tool that facilitate developing CCM models.  
1. Motivation and Task Definition [30 min] 
We will motivate the framework of Constrained Conditional Models and exemplify it 
using the example of Semantic Role Labeling.  
2. Examples of Existing Applications [30 min] 
We will present in details several applications that made use of CCMs ? including 
coreference resolution, sentence compression and information extraction and use these 
to explain several of the key advantages the framework offers. We will discuss in this 
context several ways in which constraints can be introduced to an application.
3. Training Paradigms [30 min] 
The objective function used by CCMs can be decomposed and learned in several ways, 
ranging from a complete joint training of the model along with the constraints to a 
complete decoupling between the learning and the inference stage. We will present the 
advantages and disadvantages offered by different training paradigms and provide 
theoretical and experimental understanding. In this part we will also discuss comparison 
to other approaches studied in the literature. 
4. Inference methods and Constraints [30 min] 
We will present and discuss several possibilities for modeling inference in CCMs, from 
Integer Linear Programming to search techniques. We will also discuss the use of hard 
constraints and soft constraints and present ways for modeling constraints.  
5. Introducing background knowledge via CCMs [30 min]  
We will look at ways in which Constrained Conditional Models (CCMs)can be used to 
augment probabilistic models with declarative constraints in order to support decisions 
10
in an expressive output space, and how declarative constraints can be used to aid 
supervised and semi-supervised training. 
 
6. Developing CCMs Applications [30 min] 
We present a modeling language that facilitates developing applications within the CCM 
framework and present some ?templates? for possible applications.  
Tutorial Instructors  
Ming-Wei Chang
Computer Science Department, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, IL, 61801
Email: mchang21@uiuc.edu
Ming-Wei Chang is a Phd candidate in University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
He has done work on Machine Learning in Natural Language Processing and 
Information Extraction and has published a number of papers in several international 
conferences including "Learning and Inference with Constraints" (AAAI?08), "Guiding 
Semi-Supervision with Constraint-Driven Learning" (ACL?07) and ?Unsupervised 
Constraint Driven Learning For Transliteration Discovery. (NAACL?09). He co-presented 
a tutorial on CCMs in EACL?09.  
 
Nicholas Rizzolo
Computer Science Department, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, IL, 61801
Email: ratinov2@uiuc.edu
Nicholas Rizollo is a Phd candidate in University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
He has done work on Machine Learning in Natural Language Processing and is the 
principal developer of Learning Based Java (LBJ) a modeling language for Constrained 
Conditional Models. He has published a number of papers on these topics, including 
"Learning and Inference with Constraints" (AAAI?08) and  ?Modeling Discriminative 
Global Inference? (ICSC?07) 
Dan Roth
Computer Science Department, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, IL, 61801
Phone: +(217) 244-7068; Email: danr@cs.uiuc.edu
11
Dan Roth is a Professor in the Department of Computer Science at the University of 
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and the Beckman Institute of Advanced Science and 
Technology (UIUC) and a Willett Faculty Scholar of the College of Engineering. He has 
published broadly in machine learning, natural language processing, knowledge 
representation and reasoning and received several best paper and research awards. He 
has developed several machine learning based natural language processing systems 
including an award winning semantic parser, and has presented invited talks in several 
international conferences, and several tutorials on machine learning for NLP. Dan Roth 
has written the first paper on Constrained Conditional Models along with his student 
Scott Yih, presented in CoNLL?04, and since then has worked on learning and inference 
issue within this framework as well as on applying it for several NLP problems, including 
Semantic Role Labeling, Information Extraction and Transliteration. He has presented 
several invited talks that have addresses aspect of this model.   
 
Bibliography        
 
    Dan Roth and Wen-tau Yih. A Linear Programming Formulation for Global Inference 
in Natural Language Tasks. In Proceedings of the Eighth Conference on Computational 
Natural Language Learning (CoNLL-2004), pages 1-8, 2004. 
    Vasin Punyakanok, Dan Roth, Wen-tau Yih, and Dav Zimak. Semantic Role Labeling 
Via Integer Linear Programming Inference. In Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING-2004), pages 1346-1352, 2004.)  
    Tomacz Marciniak and Michael Strube. Beyond the Pipeline: Discrete Optimization in 
NLP. In Proceedings of the Ninth Conference on Computational Natural Language 
Learning (CoNLL-2005), pages 136-145, 2005.  
      Tzong-Han Tsai, Chia-Wei Wu, Yu-Chun Lin, and Wen-Lian Hsu. Exploiting Full 
Parsing Information to Label Semantic Roles Using an Ensemble of ME and SVM via 
Integer Linear Programming. In Proceedings of the Ninth Conference on Computational 
Natural Language Learning: Shared Task (CoNLL-2005) Shared Task, pages 233-236, 
2005. 
      Vasin Punyakanok, Dan Roth and Wen-tau Yih. The Necessity of Syntactic Parsing 
for Semantic Role Labeling. In Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-2005), pages 1117-1123, 2005. 
      Vasin Punyakanok, Dan Roth, Wen-tau Yih and Dav Zimak. Learning and Inference 
over Constrained Output. In Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-2005), pages 1124-1129, 2005. 
12
      Dan Roth and Wen-tau Yih. Integer Linear Programming Inference for Conditional 
Random Fields. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning 
(ICML-2005), pages 737-744, 2005. 
      Regina Barzilay and Mirella Lapata. Aggregation via Set Partitioning for Natural 
Language Generation. In Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference 
of the North American Chapter of the Association of Computational Linguistics (HLT-
NAACL-2006), pages 359-366, 2006. 
    James Clarke and Mirella Lapata. Constraint-Based Sentence Compression: An 
Integer Programming Approach. In Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 Main 
Conference Poster Sessions (ACL-2006), pages 144-151, 2006. 
    Sebastian Riedel and James Clarke. Incremental Integer Linear Programming for 
Non-projective Dependency Parsing. In Proceedings of the 2006 Conference on 
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-2006), pages 129-137, 
2006. 
    Philip Bramsen, Pawan Deshpande, Yoong Keok Lee, and Regina Barzilay. Inducing 
Temporal Graphs. In Proceedings of the 2006 Conference on Empirical Methods in 
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-2006), 189-198, 2006. 
    Yejin Choi, Eric Breck, and Claire Cardie. Joint Extraction of Entities and Relations for 
Opinion Recognition. In Proceedings of the 2006 Conference on Empirical Methods in 
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-2006), 431-439, 2006. 
      Manfred Klenner. Grammatical Role Labeling with Integer Linear Programming. In 
Proceedings of the 11th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics, Conference Companion (EACL-2006), pages 187-190, 2006. 
    Pascal Denis and Jason Baldridge. Joint Determination of Anaphoricity and 
Coreference Resolution using Integer Programming. In Proceedings of the Annual 
Meeting of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics 
- Human Language Technology Conference (NAACL-HLT-2007), pages 236-243, 2007. 
    James Clarke and Mirella Lapata. Modelling Compression with Discourse 
Constraints. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural 
Language Processing and on Computational Natural Language Learning (EMNLP-
CoNLL-2007), pages 1-11, 2007. 
    Manfred Klenner. Enforcing Consistency on Coreference Sets. In Recent Advances in 
Natural Language Processing (RANLP), pages 323-328, 2007 
     
    Dan Roth and Wen-tau Yih. Global Inference for Entity and Relation Identification via 
a Linear Programming Formulation. Introduction to Statistical Relational Learning, 2007.  
     
13
    K. Ganchev, Jo?o Gra?a and B. Taskar. Expectation Maximization and Posterior 
Constraints, Neural Information Processing Systems Conference (NIPS), Vancouver, 
BC, December 2007. 
    James Clarke and Mirella Lapata. Global Inference for Sentence Compression: An 
Integer Linear Programming Approach. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research (JAIR), 
31, pages 399-429, 2008. 
    Vasin Punyakanok, Dan Roth and Wen-tau Yih. The Importance of Syntactic Parsing 
and Inference in Semantic Role Labeling. Computational Linguistics 34(2), pages 
257-287, 2008. 
    Jenny Rose Finkel and Christopher D. Manning. Enforcing Transitivity in Coreference 
Resolution. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics - Human Language Technology Conference, Short Papers (ACL-HLT-2008), 
pages 45-48, 2008.  
    K. Ganchev, Jo?o Gra?a and B. Taskar. Better Alignments = Better Translations?, 
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), Columbus, Ohio, June 2008.  
    Hal Daum?. Cross-Task Knowledge-Constrained Self Training In Proceedings of the 
2008 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing 
(EMNLP-2008). 
     
    Dan Goldwasser and Dan Roth. Transliteration as Constrained Optimization. In 
Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language 
Processing (EMNLP-2008), pages 353-362, 2008. 
     
     
14
