Coling 2010: Demonstration Volume, pages 21?24,
Beijing, August 2010
COMUNICA - A Question Answering System for Brazilian
Portuguese
Rodrigo Wilkens?, Aline Villavicencio?, Daniel Muller?, Leandro Wives?,
Fabio da Silva?, Stanley Loh?
?Institute of Informatics, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul (Brazil),
?Conexum (Brazil), ?DFL (Brazil), ?IntextMining (Brazil)
{rwilkens,avillavicencio,wives}@inf.ufrgs.br, conexum@conexum.com.br, fabio@dfl.psi.br, sloh@terra.com.br
Abstract
COMUNICA is a voice QA system for
Brazilian Portuguese with search ca-
pabilities for consulting both struc-
tured and unstructured datasets.
One of the goals of this work is to help
address digital inclusion by providing
an alternative way to accessing writ-
ten information, which users can em-
ploy regardless of available computa-
tional resources or computational lit-
eracy.
1 Introduction
A crucial social problem in many countries
is functional illiteracy, and in Latin Amer-
ica, according to UNESCO, the process of
literacy is only effectively achieved for people
who completed at least four years of school-
ing. Among those who have not completed
this cycle of education, there has been high
rates of return to illiteracy. According to this
definition, in 2002 Brazil had a total of 32.1
million functionally illiterate citizens, repre-
senting 26% of the population aged 15 or
older1. This may have a significant effect
on digital inclusion, preventing a consider-
able part of the population from accessing
massive amounts of information such as that
available on the Web, or benefitting from
advances in technology. Although these fig-
ures do not include digital iliteracy, or lack
of computational resources, they can give an
idea of the magnitude of the problem.
In this context, voice question answering
systems (QA) have the potential to make
written information more easily accessible to
1IBGE: http://www.ibge.gov.br/ibgeteen/
pesquisas/educacao.html
wider audiences as they allow users to ask
questions in their own native language and
especially if this includes spoken language,
sometimes without the need even for a com-
puter (e.g. using the phone). This paper de-
scribes COMUNICA, a voice QA system for
Brazilian Portuguese with search capabilities
for consulting both structured and unstruc-
tured datasets. The domain chosen to eval-
uate the system is that of municipal infor-
mation from the FAMURS database.2 One
of the goals of this work is to help address
digital inclusion by providing a way to over-
come (a) difficulties in accessing written in-
formation (for visually challenged users), (b)
lack of computational resources (for users in
remote or computerless areas) and (c) com-
putational illiteracy.
2 QA systems
In recent years, QA has received consider-
able attention, as can be seen by the initia-
tives devoted to the task, such as the TREC3
and CLEF4. The task of a QA system is
to automatically answer a question in nat-
ural language, searching for information in a
given data source (e.g. a database, or cor-
pora from a given domain). This is a chal-
lenging task as question types can range from
lists to facts and definitions, while answers
may come from small data sets such as doc-
ument collections, to the World Wide Web.
Moreover, the difficulty of the task is also
influenced by whether the questions are re-
stricted to a particular domain (e.g. sports,
genes) or not, which additional sources of in-
2http://www.famurs.com.br
3http://trec.nist.gov
4http://www.clef-campaign.org
21
formation are available for a given language
(e.g. ontologies of domain-specific knowl-
edge, general ontologies), their coverage, and
which tools can be used to help the task (e.g.
named entity recognisers, parsers, word sense
disambiguation tools). Furthermore, there is
no concensus as to the amount of resources
and tools that are needed in order to build a
working QA system with reasonable perfor-
mance.
For a resource rich language like English,
there is a consistent body of work exempli-
fied by systems such as JAVELIN (Nyberg et
al., 2002) and QuALiM (Kaisser, 2005). For
other languages, like Portuguese, and partic-
ularly the Brazilian variety, QA systems are
not as numerous. Over the years, there was
an increase in the number of participating
systems and data sources in the CLEF evalu-
ation. For instance, in 2004 there were 2 par-
ticipating systems, and in 2006 it had 4 sys-
tems and the best performance was obtained
by Priberam (Amaral et al, 2005) with 67%
accuracy (Magnini et al, 2006). Figure 1
summarizes the performance of the QA sys-
tems for Portuguese for QA@CLEF over the
years.
3 COMUNICA Architecture
The Comunica system is composed of five
modules: a manager module and four pro-
cessing modules, as shown in figure 2. The
manager is responsible for the integration
and communication with the speech recog-
nition, text processing, database access, and
speech synthesis modules.
Figure 2: Architecture of the system.
3.1 Speech Recognition
For continuous speech recognition of the
users? requests we use an automated phone
service. This module uses two research
fronts signal analysis (Fourier transform and
Wavelets). The coefficients obtained are
sequenced on three fronts for continuous
speech recognition: HMMs (Becerikli and
Oysal, 2007) TDDNN and NESTOR (Nasuto
et al, 2009). To train the models, a corpus
of FAMURS callcentre telephone interactions
has been recorded. The recognition focuses
on the vocabulary employed in the domain,
in this case municipal information related to
taxes from FAMURS. In order to do that,
it uses 2 ontologies to validate the candidate
words in the input: (a) a general purpose
and (b) a domain ontology. The recognised
transcribed input is passed to the manager
for further processing.
3.2 Text Processing
The manager sends the transcribed input
to be processed by the natural language
processing module. The natural language
queries are processed using shallow and deep
tools and accessing both a general and a do-
main specific ontologies (illustrated in Figure
3). This module needs to determine which
type of query the user performed and what
is the likely type of answer, based on mostly
lexical and syntactic information. This pro-
cess is divided into 3 mains steps: parsing,
concept identification and pattern selection.
In the first step, the input is parsed using
the PALAVRAS parser (Bick, 2002), and
the output provides information about the
particular pronoun (wh-word), subject and
other verbal complements in the sentence.
For concept identification, the system uses
the domain ontology, which contains the rel-
evant concepts to be used in next steps. The
ontologies also provide additional informa-
tion about nouns (such as hyperonymy and
synonymy) for determining which instances
of the concepts were present in the input.
For example, ?Gramado? is an instance of
22
Figure 1: Performance of QA systems for Portuguese QA-CLEF.
the concept ?city?. Both absolute and rela-
tive dates and periods (e.g. last quarter, first
week) need to be treated.
Finally, based on this information this
module selects from a set of pre-defined ques-
tion patterns linking concepts of the domain
ontology with SQL commands, the one which
contains the largest number of concepts in
common with the input, and sends it to the
manager in an XML format. If there is no
complete frame, this module identifies which
concepts are missing and returns this in the
XML output.
Figure 3: The domain ontology
3.3 Database Access
The search module is divided in two sub-
modules: one for searching information in a
structured database and the other for search-
ing in an unstructured knowledge base. It
receives as entry an XML file, containing
the original input in natural language and
the concepts identified in the question. The
structured search module receives the input
tagged with concepts of the ontology and an
identified search pattern, and selects a struc-
tured SQL query. These queries are prede-
fined according to the search patterns and
the structure of the database. For example,
in the case of the FAMURS domain, there
are concepts related to time period, cities
and taxes. When these 3 concepts are found
in the input, a special pattern is selected
which defines the kind of information that
must be retrieved from the database. An
SQL command is then executed in the struc-
tured database. All possible patterns are
mapped to a specific SQL command. These
commands have slots that are filled with in-
stances of the concepts identified in the sen-
tence. For example, names of cities are in-
stances of the concept ?city?. The retrieved
values are used for producing the answer in
natural language, using some predefined an-
swer patterns.
Otherwise, the system uses the ADS
Digital Company Virtual Assistant (VA)
(Duizith et al, 2004) to search the unstruc-
tured data (e.g. Frequently Asked Ques-
23
tions), using the lexical information to lo-
cate the answer associated to the most simi-
lar question. This answer is written in natu-
ral language and will be returned to the main
module of the system. If no similar question
is found according to a predefined degree of
similarity, the VA returns a standard answer.
3.4 Speech Synthesis
The text output to the user is synthesized,
resulting in an audio file that is transmitted
through the server.
3.5 Manager
The manager is responsible for the integra-
tion and communication of the modules. It
processes requests, interpreting the actions
to be taken and dispatching the requests to
specific modules. To start the interaction the
manager activates the speech recogniser, and
if no problem is detected with the input, it
is passed to to the text processing module.
In the case of missing information, the man-
ager informs the user that more information
is needed. Othwerise, the query is passed to
the database module. The database module
then returns the result of the query to the
manager, which sends this information to the
interface component.
All the components are SOA compliant
and designed as Web services. This allows
us to use a common and simple way of com-
munication among components, allowing a
certain degree of independence. Then com-
ponents can be implemented using different
technologies and may be distributed among
different servers, if needed.
4 System Demonstration
This is an ongoing project, and a working
version of the system will be demonstrated
through some text example interactions from
the FAMURS domain as the speech recog-
nizer and synthesizer are currently under de-
velopment. However, users will be able to
interact with the other modules, and experi-
ence the benefits of natural language inter-
action for accessing database information.
Acknowledgments
This research was partly supported by CNPq
(Projects 479824/2009-6 and 309569/2009-
5), FINEP and SEBRAE (COMUNICA
project FI- NEP/SEBRAE 1194/07).
References
Amaral, Carlos, Helena Figueira, Andre? F. T. Mar-
tins, Afonso Mendes, Pedro Mendes, and Cla?udia
Pinto. 2005. Priberam?s question answering sys-
tem for portuguese. In Peters, Carol, Fredric C.
Gey, Julio Gonzalo, Henning Mu?ller, Gareth J. F.
Jones, Michael Kluck, Bernardo Magnini, and
Maarten de Rijke, editors, CLEF, pages 410?419.
Springer.
Becerikli, Yasar and Yusuf Oysal. 2007. Modeling
and prediction with a class of time delay dynamic
neural networks. Applied Soft Computing, 7:1164?
1169.
Bick, Eckhard. 2002. The Parsing System Palavras -
Automatic Grammatical Analysis of Portuguese in
a Constraint Grammar Famework. Ph.D. thesis,
Aarhus University.
Duizith, Jose? Luiz, Lizandro Kirst da Silva, Daniel
Brahm, Gustavo Tagliassuchi, and Stanley Loh.
2004. A virtual assistant for websites. Revista
Eletronica de Sistemas de Informac?a?o, 3.
Kaisser, Michael. 2005. Qualim at trec 2005: Web-
question answering with framenet. In Proceedings
of the 2005 Edition of the Text REtrieval Confer-
ence, TREC 2005.
Magnini, Bernardo, Danilo Giampiccolo, Pamela
Forner, Christelle Ayache, Valentin Jijkoun, Petya
Osenova, Anselmo Pen?as, Paulo Rocha, Bogdan
Sacaleanu, and Richard F. E. Sutcliffe. 2006.
Overview of the clef 2006 multilingual question
answering track. In Peters, Carol, Paul Clough,
Fredric C. Gey, Jussi Karlgren, Bernardo Magnini,
Douglas W. Oard, Maarten de Rijke, and Maxi-
milian Stempfhuber, editors, CLEF, volume 4730
of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 223?
256. Springer.
Nasuto, S.J., J.M. Bishop, and K. DeMeyerc. 2009.
Communicating neurons: A connectionist spik-
ing neuron implementation of stochastic diffusion
search. Neurocomputing, (72):704?712.
Nyberg, Eric, Teruko Mitamura, Jaime G. Carbonell,
James P. Callan, Kevyn Collins-Thompson,
Krzysztof Czuba, Michael Duggan, Laurie Hiyaku-
moto, N. Hu, Yifen Huang, Jeongwoo Ko, Lu-
cian Vlad Lita, S. Murtagh, Vasco Pedro, and
David Svoboda. 2002. The javelin question-
answering system at trec 2002. In TREC.
24
Proceedings of the EACL 2012 Workshop on Computational Models of Language Acquisition and Loss, pages 23?25,
Avignon, France, April 24 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
An annotated English child language database
Aline Villavicencio??, Beracah Yankama?, Rodrigo Wilkens?,
Marco A. P. Idiart?, Robert Berwick?
?Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul (Brazil)
?MIT (USA)
alinev@gmail.com, beracah@mit.edu, rswilkens@gmail.com, marco.idiart@gmail.com, berwick@csail.mit.edu
1 Introduction
The use of large-scale naturalistic data has been
opening up new investigative possibilities for lan-
guage acquisition studies, providing a basis for
empirical predictions and for evaluations of alter-
native acquisition hypotheses. One widely used
resource is CHILDES (MacWhinney, 1995) with
transcriptions for over 25 languages of interac-
tions involving children, with the English corpora
available in raw, part-of-speech tagged, lemma-
tized and parsed formats (Sagae et al, 2010; But-
tery and Korhonen, 2005). With a recent increase
in the availability of lexical and psycholinguistic
resources and robust natural language processing
tools, it is now possible to further enrich child-
language corpora with additional sources of infor-
mation.
In this paper we describe the English CHILDES
Verb Database (ECVD), which extends the orig-
inal lexical and syntactic annotation of verbs
in CHILDES with information about frequency,
grammatical relations, semantic classes, and other
psycholinguistic and statistical information. In
addition, these corpora are organized in a search-
able database that allows the retrieval of data ac-
cording to complex queries that combine different
sources of information. This database is also mod-
ular and can be straightforwardly extended with
additional annotation levels. In what follows, we
discuss the tools and resources used for the anno-
tation (?2), and conclude with a discussion of the
implications of this initial work along with direc-
tions for future research (?3).
2 Linguistic and Statistical
Properties
The English CHILDES Verb Database con-
tains information about the English corpora in
CHILDES parsed using three different pipelines:
(1) MEGRASP; (2) RASP; and (3) the CHILDES
Treebank. In the first, made available as part of
the CHILDES distribution1, the corpora are POS
1http://childes.psy.cmu.edu/
tagged (in %mor), and parsed using MEGRASP
(Sagae et al, 2010) which provides information
about dependency parses and grammatical rela-
tions (in %gra):2
*MOT: I said (.) Adam you could have a banana
and offer Robin and Ursula one (.)would you
?
%mor: pro|I v|say&PAST n:prop|Adam pro|you
aux|could v|have det|a n|banana ...
%gra: 1|2|SUBJ 2|6|CJCT 3|2|OBJ 4|6|SUBJ
5|6|AUX 6|9|COORD 7|8|DET 8|6|OBJ ...
In the second pipeline, the RASP system
(Briscoe et al, 2006) is used for tokenisation,
tagging, lemmatization and parsing of the input
sentences, outputting syntactic trees (in %ST)
and grammatical relations (%GR).3 In both
examples each GR denotes a relation, along with
its head and dependent:
*MOT: oh no # he didn?t say anything about win-
dow .
%ST: (T Oh:1 no:2 ,:3 (S he:4 (VP do+ed:5
not+:6 say:7 anything:8 (PP about:9 (N1
window:10)))) .:11)
%GR: (|ncsubj| |say:7 VV0| |he:4 PPHS1| )
(|aux| |say:7 VV0| |do+ed:5 VDD|)
(|ncmod| |say:7 VV0| |not+:6 XX|)
(|iobj| |say:7 VV0| |about:9 II|) (|dobj|
|say:7 VV0| |anything:8 PN1|) (|dobj|
|about:9 II| |window:10 NN1|)
The third focuses on the Adam corpus from
the Brown data set (Brown, 1973) and uses
the Charniak parser with Penn Treebank style
part of speech tags and output, followed by
hand-curation, as described by Pearl and Sprouse
(2012):
(S1 (SBARQ (WHNP (WP who)) (SQ (VP (COP is)
(NP (NN that)))) (. ?)))
2In an evaluation MEGRASP produced correct depen-
dency relations for 96% of the relations in the gold stan-
dard, with the dependency relations being labelled with the
correct GR 94% of the time.
3The data was kindly provided by P. Buttery and A.
Korhonen and generated as described in (Buttery and Ko-
rhonen, 2005).
23
The use of annotations from multiple parsers
enables the combination of the complementary
strengths of each in terms of coverage and ac-
curacy, similar to inter-annotator agreement ap-
proaches. These differences are also useful for op-
timizing search patterns in terms of the source
which produces the best accuracy for a particu-
lar case. Information about corpora sizes and the
annotated portions for each of the parsers is dis-
played in table 1.
Information Sentences
Total Raw 4.84 million
MEGRASP & RASP Raw 2.5 million
MEGRASP Parsed 109,629
RASP Parsed 2.21 million
CHILDES Treebank 26,280
MEGRASP & RASP Parsed 98,456
Table 1: Parsed Sentences
The verbs in each sentence are also annotated
with information about shared patterns of mean-
ing and syntactic behavior from 190 fine-grained
subclasses that cover 3,100 verb types (Levin,
1993). This annotation allows searches defined
in terms of verb classes, and include all sentences
that contain verbs that belong to a given class.
For instance, searching for verbs of running would
return sentences containing not only run but also
related verbs like slide, roll and stroll.
Additional annotation of properties linked to
language use and recognition include extrinsic fac-
tors such as word frequency and intrinsic factors
such as the length of a word in terms of sylla-
bles; age of acquisition; imageability; and familiar-
ity. Some of this annotation is obtained from the
MRC Psycholinguistic Database (Coltheart, 1981)
which contains 150,837 entries with information
about 26 properties, although not all properties
are available for every word (e.g. IMAG is only
available for 9,240 words).
For enabling complex search functionalities
that potentially combine information from several
sources, the annotated sentences were organized
in a database, and Tables 2 and 3 list some of the
available annotations. Given the focus on verbs,
for search efficiency each sentence is indexed ac-
cording to the verbs it contains. In addition, verbs
and nouns are further annotated with information
shown in table 3 whenever it is available in the
existing resources.
These levels of annotation allow for complex
searches involving for example, a combination of
information about a verb?s lemma, target gram-
matical relations, and occurrence of Levin?s classes
in the corpora.
Not all sentences have been successfully ana-
lyzed, and the comments field contains informa-
Fields
Sentence ID
Corpus
Speaker
File
Raw sentence
MOR and POST tags
MEGRASP dep. and GRs
RASP syntactic tree
RASP dep. and GRs
Comments
Table 2: Information about Sentences
Fields
Word ID
Sentence ID
Levin?s classes
Age of acquisition
Familiarity
Concreteness
Frequency
Imageability
Number of syllables
Table 3: Information about Words
tion about the missing annotations and cases of
near perfect matches that arise from the parsers
using different heuristics for e.g. non-words, meta-
characters and punctuation. These required more
complex matching procedures for identifying the
corresponding cases in the annotations of the
parsers.
3 Conclusions and future work
This paper describes the construction of the En-
glish CHILDES Verb Database. It combines in-
formation from different parsing systems to capi-
talize on their complementary recall and precision
strengths and ensure the accuracy of the searches.
It also includes information about Levin?s classes
for verbs, and some psycholinguistic information
for some of the words, like age of acquisition,
familiarity and imageability. The result is a
large-scale integrated resource that allows com-
plex searches involving different annotation lev-
els. This database can be used to inform analysis,
for instance, about the complexity of the language
employed with and by a child as her age increases,
that can shed some light on discussions about the
poverty of the stimulus. This is an ongoing project
to make the annotated data available to the re-
search community in a user-friendly interface that
allows complex patterns to be specified in a simple
way.
Acknowledgements
This research was partly supported by CNPq
Projects 551964/2011-1, 202007/2010-3,
24
305256/2008-4 and 309569/2009-5.
References
E. Briscoe, J. Carroll, and R. Watson. 2006. The
second release of the rasp system. In Proceedings
of the COLING/ACL 2006 Interactive Presentation
Sessions, Sydney, Australia.
R. Brown. 1973. A first language: The early
stages. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mas-
sachusetts.
P. Buttery and A. Korhonen. 2005. Large-scale anal-
ysis of verb subcategorization differences between
child directed speech and adult speech. In Proceed-
ings of the Interdisciplinary Workshop on the Iden-
tification and Representation of Verb Features and
Verb Classes.
M. Coltheart. 1981. The MRC psycholinguistic
database. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology, 33A:497?505.
B. Levin. 1993. English verb classes and alterna-
tions - a preliminary investigation. The University
of Chicago Press.
B. MacWhinney. 1995. The CHILDES project: tools
for analyzing talk. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, second edition.
L. Pearl and J. Sprouse, 2012. Experimental Syntax
and Islands Effects, chapter Computational Models
of Acquisition for Islands. Cambridge University
Press.
K. Sagae, E. Davis, A. Lavie, B. MacWhinney, and
S. Wintner. 2010. Morphosyntactic annotation of
CHILDES transcripts. Journal of Child Language,
37(03):705?729.
25
Proceedings of the EACL 2012 Workshop on Computational Models of Language Acquisition and Loss, pages 26?28,
Avignon, France, April 24 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
Searching the Annotated Portuguese Childes Corpora
Rodrigo Wilkens
Institute of Informatics
Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul
Brazil
rswilkens@inf.ufrgs.br
1 Introduction
Annotated corpora of child language data are
valuable resources for language acquisition stud-
ies, for instance, providing the basis for devel-
opmental comparisons and evaluation of different
hypotheses. For computational investigations an-
notated corpora can serve as an approximation to
the linguistic environment to which a child is ex-
posed, as discussed by Wintner (2010).
Recently there has been a growing number
of initiatives for annotating children?s data for a
number of languages, with for instance, part-of-
speech (PoS) and syntactic information (Sagae et
al., 2010; Buttery and Korhonen, 2007; Yang,
2010) and some of these are available as part of
CHILDES (MacWhinney, 2000). For resource
rich languages like English these annotations can
be further extended with detailed information,
for instance, from WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998)
about synonymy, from the MRC Psycholinguistic
Database (Coltheart, 1981) about age of acquisi-
tion, imagery, concreteness and familiarity among
others. However, for many other languages one of
the challenges is in annotating corpora in a con-
text where resources and tools are less abundant
and many are still under development.
In this paper we describe one such initiative, for
annotating the raw Portuguese corpora available
in the CHILDES database with (psycho)linguistic
and distributional information (?2) . It also de-
scribes a modular searching environment for these
corpora that allows complex and flexible searches
that combine different levels of annotation, and
that can be easily extended (?3). We finish with
some conclusions and future work.
2 Resource Description
The Portuguese, CHILDES contains 3 corpora:
? Batore?o (Batoreo, 2000) with 60 narratives,
30 from adults and 30 from children, about
two stories
? Porto Alegre (Guimara?es, 1994; Guimara?es,
1995) with data from 5 to 9 year old children,
collected both cross-sectionally and longitu-
dinally and
? Floriano?polis with the longitudinal data for
one Brazilian child: 5530 utterances in broad
phonetic transcription.
The total number of sentences and words per
age in these corpora is shown in Table 1
Table 1: Frequency of words and sentences per age in
the Portuguese corpora
Age words sentences
0 0 0
1 7k 2k
2 8k 1k
3 0 0
4 1k 61
5 38k 1k
6 47k 1k
7 56k 1k
8 56k 1k
In order to annotate the transcribed sentences
in the CHILDES Portuguese corpora we used the
PALAVRAS parser1 (Bick, 2000). It is a statisti-
cal robust Portuguese parser, which always return
1Tagset avaliable at http://beta.visl.sdu.dk/visl/pt/info/symbolset-
manual.html.
26
at least one analysis even for incomplete or un-
grammatical sentences. This parser has a high ac-
curacy: 99% for part-of-speech and 96-97%. The
parser also has a named entity recognizer (Bick,
2003) and provides some semantic information
for nouns, verbs and adjectives (e.g. organization,
date, place, etc). The annotations process con-
sisted of the following steps:
1. automatic pre-processing for dealing with in-
complete words and removing transcription
notes;
2. tagging and parsing with PALAVRAS
parser;
3. annotation of verbs and nouns with psy-
cholinguistic information like age of acqui-
sition and concreteness from (Cameirao and
Vicente, 2010).
For enabling age related analysis, the sen-
tences were subsequently divided according to the
child?s age reported in each corpus, and annotated
with frequency information collected considering
separately each type of annotation per age.
3 System Description
In order to allow complex searches that combine
information from different levels of annotation
for each age, the sentences were organized in a
database, structured as in Tables 2 and 3, respec-
tively presenting the structure of words and sen-
tences).
Table 2: Information about Words
Word
age of acquisition
part-of-speech
corpus frequency
frequency by age
adult frequency
Table 3: Information about Sentences
Sentence
children gender
PoS tags
dependency tree
semantic tags
Using a web environment, a user can choose
any combination of fields in the database to per-
form a query. It is possible to examine, for in-
stance, the usage of a particular word and its evo-
lution according to grammatical class per age.
The environment provides two modes for
queries: an expert mode, where database queries
can be dynamically specified selecting the rele-
vant fields, and a guided mode which contains
predefined query components and a set of filters
that users can combine in the queries. The results
are available both as a file containing the relevant
annotated sentences for further processing, or in
a graphical form. The latter shows a chart of fre-
quency per age, which can be displayed in terms
of absolute or relative values.
The guided mode provides an iterative way for
query construction where the user selects a rele-
vant field (e.g. age of acquisition) at a time and
adds it to the query until all desired fields have
been added, when the resulting query is saved.
The user can repeat this process to create com-
bined queries and at the end of the process can
chose the form for outputting the result (graphic
or file).
4 Conclusion
This paper describes the (psycho)linguistic and
distributional annotation of the Portuguese cor-
pora in CHILDES, and presents an environment
for searching them. This environment allows
complex searches combining multiple levels of
annotation to be created even by non-expert users.
Therefore this initiative not only produced an in-
tegrated and rich annotation schema so far lack-
ing for these corpora, but also provided a modular
environment for structuring and searching them
through a more user friendly interface. As next
steps we foresee the extension of the annotation
using other resources. We also plan to add cor-
pora for other languages to the environment, such
as English and Spanish.
Acknowledgements
This research was partly supported by CNPq
Projects 551964/2011-1 and 478222/2011-4.
References
Batore?o, H. 2000. Expressa?o do Espac?o no Por-
tugue?s Europeu. Contributo Psicolingu??stico para
27
o Estudo da Linguagem e Cognic?a?o. PhD Disser-
tation, Fundac?a?o Calouste Gulbenkian e Fundac?a?o
para a Cie?ncia e a Tecnologia, Ministe?rio da Cie?ncia
e da Tecnologia, Lisboa
Bick, E. 2000. The Parsing System Palavras. Au-
tomatic Grammatical Analysis of Portuguese in a
Constraint Grammar Framework. [S.l.]: University
of Arhus.
Bick, E. 2003. Multi-level NER for Portuguese in a
CG framework. Proceedings of the Computational
Processing of the Portuguese Language.
Briscoe, E., Carroll, J., and Watson, R. 2006. The sec-
ond release of the rasp system. COLING/ACL 2006
Interactive Presentation Sessions, Sydney, Aus-
tralia.
Buttery, P., Korhonen, A. 2007. I will shoot your
shopping down and you can shoot all my tins?
Automatic Lexical Acquisition from the CHILDES
Database. Proceedings of the Workshop on Cogni-
tive Aspects of Computational Language Acquisi-
tion. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Cameirao, M.L. and Vicente, S.G. 2010. Age-of-
acquisition norms for a set of 1,749 portuguese
words. Behavior research methods 42, Springer.
Coltheart, M. 1981. The MRC psycholinguistic
database. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology, 33A:497?505.
Fellbaum, C. 1998. WordNet An Electronic Lexical
Database.. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA ; Lon-
don.
Guimara?es, A. M. 1994. Desenvolvimento da lin-
guagem da crianc?a na fase deletramento. Cadernos
de Estudos Lingu??sticos, 26, 103-110
Guimara?es, A. M. 1994. The use of the CHILDES
database for Brazilian Portuguese. I. H. Faria &
M. J. Freitas (Eds.), Studies on the acquisition of
Portuguese. Lisbon: Colibri
MacWhinney, B. 2000. The CHILDES project: tools
for analyzing talk. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
second edition.
Sagae, K., Davis, E., Lavie, A., MacWhinney, B. and
Wintner, S. 2010. Morphosyntactic annotation of
CHILDES transcripts. Journal of Child Language.
Wintner, S. 2010. Computational Models of Lan-
guage Acquisition. CICLing?10.
Charles, Yang 2010. Three factors in language varia-
tion. Lingua.
28
Proceedings of the EACL 2012 Workshop on Computational Models of Language Acquisition and Loss, pages 38?42,
Avignon, France, April 24 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
I say have you say tem:
profiling verbs in children data in English and Portuguese
Rodrigo Wilkens
Institute of Informatics
Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul
Brazil
rswilkens@inf.ufrgs.br
Aline Villavicencio
Institute of Informatics
Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul
Brazil
avillavicencio@inf.ufrgs.br
Abstract
In this paper we present a profile of verb us-
age across ages in child-produced sentences
in English and Portuguese. We examine
in particular lexical and syntactic character-
istics of verbs and find common trends in
these languages as children?s ages increase,
such as the prominence of general and poly-
semic verbs, as well as divergences such as
the proportion of subject dropping. We also
find a correlation between the age of acqui-
sition and the number of complements of a
verb for English.
1 Introduction
In this paper we report on a large scale investiga-
tion of some linguistic and distributional patterns
of verbs in child-produced sentences for two lan-
guages, Portuguese and English. We compare the
characteristics that emerge for two languages that,
in spite of similarities in terms of verb usages also
have important differences, in particular in allow-
ing subject pro-drop, and examine to what degree
these are reflected in the data. This is particularly
relevant given the sparseness (and in some cases
lack) of the Portuguese data, in particular for cer-
tain ages, which may not provide as clear indica-
tions as the English data, but existing analysis for
the latter can also benefit the former and be used
to help assess results obtained for similar trends
found in it.
As such our work is related to that of Buttery
and Korhonen (2007) who perform a large scale
investigation of the subcategorization frames in
the English corpora in CHILDES (MacWhin-
ney, 2000), a database containing transcriptions
of child-directed and child-produced sentences,
comparing preferences in child and adult lan-
guage to provide support for child language ac-
quisition studies. These preferences are found us-
ing large amounts of automatically annotated data
that would be otherwise too costly and time con-
suming to manually annotate.
At present, CHILDES contains data for more
than 25 languages including English and Por-
tuguese. For English, the corpora are currently
available with annotations in raw, part-of-speech-
tagged, lemmatized and parsed formats (Sagae et
al., 2010) (Buttery and Korhonen, 2005) (Buttery
and Korhonen, 2007). Although there are similar
initiatives for other languages, like Spanish and
Hebrew (Sagae et al, 2010), for Portuguese, there
is a lack of such annotations on a large scale. In
this work we address this issue and automatically
annotate the Portuguese corpora with linguistic
and distributional information using a robust sta-
tistical parser, providing the possibility of deeper
analysis of language acquisition data.
Crosslinguistic investigations of child-
produced language have also highlighted the
important role of very general and frequent verbs,
light verbs like go, put and give which are among
the first to be acquired for languages like English
and Italian as discussed by Goldberg (1999). In
this paper we compare patterns found in child
verb usage in English and Portuguese, in one of
the first large scale investigations of syntactically
annotated child-produced Portuguese data. Using
this level of annotation we are able to examine
patterns in verb usage in particular in terms of
subjects and complements. Thus, this work is
also related to the that of Valian (1991) who found
a subject pro-drop rate of around 70% for 2 to 3
year old children in Italian, a pro-drop language,
38
and even a significant number of subject omission
for English, which is not a pro-drop language.
This investigation aims at producing a large-
coverage profile of child verb usage that can in-
form computational models of language acquisi-
tion, by both reporting on preferences in child lan-
guage as a whole and on a developmental level.
This paper is structured as follows: in section 2
we report on the resources used for this investiga-
tion, and the results are discussed in section 3. We
finish with some conclusions and future work.
2 Resources
For examining child-produced data we use the
English and Portuguese corpora from CHILDES
(MacWhinney, 2000). The English corpora in
CHILDES have been parsed using at least three
different pipelines: MOR, POST and MEGRASP
(available as part of the CHILDES distribution,
the corpora are POS tagged using the MOR and
POST programs (Parisse and Normand, 2000)).
In addition we use a version annotated with the
RASP system (Briscoe et al, 2006), that tok-
enizes, tags, lemmatizes and parses the input sen-
tences, outputting syntactic trees and then adding
grammatical relations (GR) as described by (But-
tery and Korhonen, 2005). This corpus contains
16,649 types and 76,386,369 tokens in 3,031,217
sentences distributed by age as shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Frequency of words and sentences by age
in years in CHILDES for English and Portuguese
Age English Portuguese
Words (k) Sent (k) Words (k) Sent (k)
0 4,944 130 0 0
1 12,124 604 7 2
2 19,481 1,367 8 1
3 17,962 468 0 0
4 16,725 249 1 61
5 3,266 121 38 1
6 782 19 47 1
7 1,088 63 56 1
8 12 5 56 1
The Portuguese, CHILDES contains 3 corpora:
(1) Batore?o, with 60 narratives, 30 from adults
and 30 from children, about two stories; (2)
Porto Alegre with data from 5 to 9 year old chil-
dren, collected both cross-sectionally and longitu-
dinally; and (3) Floriano?polis with the longitudi-
nal data for one Brazilian child: 5530 utterances
in broad phonetic transcription.
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 800.05
0.10.15
0.20.25
0.3
 
 
noun (en) verb (pt) preposition (pt) noun (pt)
(a) Portuguese
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 800.05
0.10.15
0.20.25
0.3
 
 
verb (en) preposition (en) noun (en) verb (pt) preposition (pt) noun (pt)
(b) English
Figure 1: Verbs in relation to other frequent Parts-
of-speech in English (1b) and Portuguese (1a)
The combined size of the Portuguese corpora
in sentences and words is in Table 1. These were
annotated with the PALAVRAS parser, a robust
parser, which has a reported accuracy of 99%
for part-of-speech tagging, 96-97% for syntactic
trees, and 91.8% for multiword expressions (Bick,
2000)1. The childes annotation were first normal-
ized to deal with incomplete words and remove
transcription annotations, and then automatically
lemmatized, POS tagged, parsed and assigned se-
mantic tags for nouns, verbs and adjectives.
3 Verbs in children data
To characterize verb usage in each of these lan-
guages we examined the distribution of verbs
across the ages in terms of their relative frequen-
cies, the number of syntactic complements with
which they occur, and looking at possible links
between these and age of acquisition, as reported
by Gilhooly and Logie (1980).
Figure 1 focuses on the relative distributions of
verbs in relation to other frequent parts-of-speech:
prepositions and nouns. For both languages verbs
account for around 20% of the words used, and
this proportion remains constant as age increases,
with the exception of the discontinuity for years 3
1The PALAVRAS parser was evaluated using European
and Brazilian Portuguese newspaper corpora (CETENFolha
and CETEMPblico) composed of 9,368 sentences.
39
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 80
0.050.1
0.150.2
0.25
 
 
have say ir ser estar ter ver
(a) Portuguese
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 80
0.050.1
0.150.2
 
 
be get go have say ir ser estar ter ver
(b) English
Figure 2: 5 most frequent verbs in Portuguese (2a)
and in English (2b)
to 5 due to the lack of data for children with these
ages in the Portuguese corpora in CHILDES.
Table 2: Verb types and tokens for English and
Portuguese
Language Types Tokens
English 34,693 17,830,777
Portuguese 62,048 888,234
Table 2 shows the number of verb types and to-
kens in these two languages. Among these verbs,
the top 5 most frequent verbs2 for each language
are: be, get, go, have and say for English and ir
(go) ser (be) estar (be), ter (have) and ver (see)
for Portuguese. These correspond to very general
and polysemous verbs, and their relative propor-
tions in the two languages remain high throughout
the ages for children, figure 2. The frequencies
for English are consistent with those reported by
Goldberg (1999) and the Portuguese data is com-
patible with the crosslinguistic trends for related
languages.
In terms of the syntactic characteristics of verbs
in child-produced data, we examine separately
2The reported frequency for each verb is for the lemma-
tized form, including all its inflected forms.
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 80.20.3
0.40.5
0.60.7
0.80.9
 
 
subj+verb (pt) only verb (pt)
(a) Portuguese
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 800.2
0.40.6
0.81
 
 
subj+verb (pt) only verb (pt)
(b) English
Figure 3: Percentage of sentences of verb with
and without subject in Portuguese (3a) and in En-
glish (3b)
the occurrence of subjects and other comple-
ments in these languages, using the syntactic an-
notation provided by the RASP and PALAVRAS
parsers. In the RASP annotation (Briscoe, 2006)
we search for 3 types of complements in English:
a direct object (dobj), the second NP comple-
ment in a double object construction (obj2) and
an indirect PP object (iobj). For Portuguese, we
search the PALAVRAS annotation for the follow-
ing types of objects: a direct (accusative) object
(ACC), a dative object (DAT), an indirect prepo-
sitional object (PIV) and an object complement
(OC).3
For subjects figure 3 shows the occurrences of
overt (subj verb) and omitted subjects (only verb)
in sentences in relation to the total number of
verbs (verb) for the two languages. These are a
source of divergence between them as in the En-
glish data most of the verb usages consistently
have an overt subject, and only around 10-20%
omit the subject, but these tend to occur less as the
age increases, with a peak for 2 year old children.
In Portuguese, on the other hand, initially most of
the verb usages omit the subject, and only later
3http://beta.visl.sdu.dk/visl/pt/info/symbolset-
manual.html
40
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 800.2
0.40.6
0.81
 
 
0NP (pt) 1NP (pt) 2NP (pt) 3NP(pt)
(a) Portuguese
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 800.2
0.40.6
0.81
 
 
0NP (en) 1NP (en) 2NP (en) 3NP(en)
(b) English
Figure 4: Percentage of occurrence of objects in
Portuguese (4a) and in English (4b)
this trend is reversed, but still maintaining a high
proportion of subject dropping, around 40% of
verb usages, and around 60% including an overt
subject. The precise age for this change cannot
be assessed from this data, due to the lack of sen-
tences for 3-5 year old children in the Portuguese
data. This difference between the two languages
can be explained as a result of Portuguese being
a (subject) pro-drop language and children being
consistently exposed to subject dropping in their
linguistic environment. Although English is not a
pro-drop language, children, especially at an early
age, still produce sentences without overt sub-
jects, as much discussed in the literature (Valian,
1991) and more recently (Yang, 2010). Children
learning pro-drop languages seem to adopt it from
an early age and use it with a frequency much
closer to adult usage (Valian, 1991).
In relation to other verb complements, we ex-
amine the changes in the distribution of verbs
and their subcategorization frames in the corpus
across children?s ages. Figure 4 shows the distri-
bution per age for verbs with one, two and three
complements for both languages. As expected in
general verbs with fewer complements are more
frequently used and as the number of comple-
ments increases, the frequency decreases, for all
ages and for both languages. Moreover, as age in-
creases, there is a slight but constant increase in
the presence of verbs with 2 and 3 complements
in the corpus, with a small decrease in those with
only 1, which nonetheless still account for the ma-
jority of the cases. These patterns are more clearly
visible for English, as more data is available than
for Portuguese for all ages.
To further investigate this we analyzed whether
a relation between the number of complements of
a verb and its age of acquisition could be found.
For English we used the age of acquisition (AoA)
scores from Gilhooly and Logie (1980) which is
available for 22 of the verbs in the English data,
but from these two verbs were removed from the
set, as they did not occur in all the ages. For Por-
tuguese, the scores from Marques et al (2007)
are available for only four verbs in the CHILDES
corpora, and were therefore not considered in this
analysis. Using the total frequency for a verb in
the corpus, we calculated the relative frequencies
for each number of complements (0, 1, 2 and 3)
per age. For each verb and each age the number of
complements with maximum frequency was used
as the basis for checking if a correlation with the
AoA scores for the verb could be found. In terms
of the number of complements per age these verbs
can be divided into 3 groups, apart from 2 of the
verbs (lock and burn) that do not have any clear
pattern:
0-obj: for verbs that are used predominantly with-
out complements throughout the ages, think,
speak, swim, lie, turn, fly, try;
1-obj: for verbs that appear consistently with 1
complement for all ages, drive, chop, hate,
find, win, tear;
0-to-1: for verbs initially used mostly without com-
plements but then consistently with 1 com-
plement, hurt, guess, throw, kick, hide.
In terms of the age of acquisition, verbs in the
0-obj group tend to have lower scores than those
in the second group, with a 0.72 Spearman?s rank
correlation coefficient indicating a high correla-
tion between AoA and predominant number of
complements of a verb. As the third group had
both patterns, it was not considered in the anal-
ysis. These results suggest that the number of
syntactic objects tends to increase with the age
of acquisition. This may be partly explained by
41
a potential increase in complexity as the num-
ber of obligatory arguments for a verb increase
(Boynton-Hauerwas, 1998). However, more in-
vestigation is needed to confirm this trend.
4 Conclusions
In this paper we presented a wide-coverage pro-
file of verbs in child-produced data, for English
and Portuguese. We examined the distribution
of some lexical and syntactic characteristics of
verbs in these languages. Common trends, such
as the prominent role of very general and poly-
semic verbs among the most frequently used and
a preference for smaller number of complements
were found throughout the ages in both languages.
Divergences between them such as the proportion
of subject dropping in each language were also
found: a lower proportion for English which de-
creases with age and a higher proportion for Por-
tuguese which remains relatively high. These re-
sults are compatible with those reported by e.g.
Goldberg (1999) and Valian (1991), respectively.
Furthermore, for English we found a high cor-
relation between a lower age of acquisition of a
verb and a lower predominant number of com-
plements. Given the size of the Portuguese data,
for some of these analyses further investigation
is needed with more data to confirm the trends
found.
For future work we intend to extend these anal-
yses for other parts-of-speech, particularly nouns,
also looking at other semantic and pragmatic fac-
tors, such as polysemy, concreteness and famil-
iarity. In addition, we plan to examine intrinsic
(e.g. length of words; imageability; and famil-
iarity) and and extrinsic factors (e.g. frequency),
and their effect in groups with typical develop-
ment and with specific linguistic impairments.
References
Bick, E. 2000. The Parsing System Palavras. Au-
tomatic Grammatical Analysis of Portuguese in a
Constraint Grammar Framework. [S.l.]: University
of Arhus.
Bick, E. 2003. Multi-level NER for Portuguese in a
CG framework. Proceedings of the Computational
Processing of the Portuguese Language.
Boynton-Hauerwas, L. S. 1998. The role of general
all purpose verbs in language acquisition: A com-
parison of children with specific language impair-
ments and their language-matched peers. North-
western University
Briscoe, E., Carroll, J., and Watson, R. 2006. The sec-
ond release of the rasp system. COLING/ACL 2006
Interactive Presentation Sessions, Sydney, Aus-
tralia.
Briscoe, T. 2006. An introduction to tag sequence
grammars and the RASP system parser. Technical
report in University of Cambridge, Computer Lab-
oratory.
Buttery, P., Korhonen, A. 2005. Large Scale Anal-
ysis of Verb Subcategorization differences between
Child Directed Speech and Adult Speech. Interdis-
ciplinary Workshop on the Identification and Rep-
resentation of Verb Features and Verb Classes.
Buttery, P., Korhonen, A. 2007. I will shoot your
shopping down and you can shoot all my tins?
Automatic Lexical Acquisition from the CHILDES
Database. Proceedings of the Workshop on Cogni-
tive Aspects of Computational Language Acquisi-
tion. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Gilhooly, K.J. and Logie, R.H. 1980. Age of acqui-
sition, imagery, concreteness, familiarity and am-
biguity measures for 1944 words. Behaviour Re-
search Methods and Instrumentation.
Goldberg, Adele E. . The Emergence of Language,
chapter Emergence of the semantics of argument
structure constructions, pages 197?212. Carnegie
Mellon Symposia on Cognition Series.
Hsu, A. S., Chater, N. 2010. Aspects of the Theory of
Syntax. MIT Press.
MacWhinney, B. 2000. The CHILDES project: tools
for analyzing talk. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
second edition.
Marques, J. F., Fonseca, F. L., Morais, A. S., Pinto,
I. A. 2007. Estimated age of acquisition norms
for 834 Portuguese nouns and their relation with
other psycholinguistic variables. Behavior Re-
search Methods.
Parisse, C. and Normand, M. T. Le. 2000. Automatic
disambiguation of the morphosyntax in spoken lan-
guage corpora. Behavior Research Methods, In-
struments, and Computers.
Pavio, A., Yuille, J.C., and Madigan, S.A. 1968. Con-
creteness, imagery and meaningfulness values for
925 words. Journal of Experimental Psychology
Monograph Supplement.
Sagae, K., Davis, E., Lavie, A., MacWhinney, B. and
Wintner, S. 2010. Morphosyntactic annotation of
CHILDES transcripts. Journal of Child Language.
Toglia, M.P. and Battig, W.R. 1978. Handbook of
Semantic Word Norms. New York: Erlbaum.
Valian, V. 1991. Syntactic subjects in the early speech
of American and Italian Children. Journal of Cog-
nition.
Yang, Charles 2010. Three factors in language varia-
tion. Lingua.
42
