Finding Common Ground: Towards a Surface Realisation Shared Task
Anja Belz
Natural Language Technology Group
Computing, Mathematical and Information Sciences
University of Brighton, Brighton BN2 4GJ, UK
a.s.belz@brighton.ac.uk
Mike White
Department of Linguistics
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH, USA
mwhite@ling.osu.edu
Josef van Genabith and Deirdre Hogan
National Centre for Language Technology
School of Computing
Dublin City University
Dublin 9, Ireland
{dhogan,josef}@computing.dcu.ie
Amanda Stent
AT&T Labs Research, Inc.,
180 Park Avenue
Florham Park, NJ 07932, USA
stent@research.att.com
Abstract
In many areas of NLP reuse of utility tools
such as parsers and POS taggers is now
common, but this is still rare in NLG. The
subfield of surface realisation has perhaps
come closest, but at present we still lack
a basis on which different surface realis-
ers could be compared, chiefly because of
the wide variety of different input repre-
sentations used by different realisers. This
paper outlines an idea for a shared task in
surface realisation, where inputs are pro-
vided in a common-ground representation
formalism which participants map to the
types of input required by their system.
These inputs are derived from existing an-
notated corpora developed for language
analysis (parsing etc.). Outputs (realisa-
tions) are evaluated by automatic compari-
son against the human-authored text in the
corpora as well as by human assessors.
1 Background
When reading a paper reporting a new NLP sys-
tem, it is common these days to find that the
authors have taken an NLP utility tool off the
shelf and reused it. Researchers frequently reuse
parsers, POS-taggers, named entity recognisers,
coreference resolvers, and many other tools. Not
only is there a real choice between a range of dif-
ferent systems performing the same task, there are
also evaluation methodologies to help determine
what the state of the art is.
Natural Language Generation (NLG) has not
so far developed generic tools and methods for
comparing them to the same extent as Natural
Language Analysis (NLA) has. The subfield of
NLG that has perhaps come closest to developing
generic tools is surface realisation. Wide-coverage
surface realisers such as PENMAN/NIGEL (Mann
and Mathiesen, 1983), FUF/SURGE (Elhadad and
Robin, 1996) and REALPRO (Lavoie and Ram-
bow, 1997) were intended to be more or less off-
the-shelf plug-and-play modules. But they tended
to require a significant amount of work to adapt
and integrate, and required highly specific inputs
incorporating up to several hundred features that
needed to be set.
With the advent of statistical techniques in NLG
surface realisers appeared for which it was far sim-
pler to supply inputs, as information not provided
in the inputs could be added on the basis of like-
lihood. An early example, the Japan-Gloss sys-
tem (Knight et al, 1995) replaced PENMAN?s de-
fault settings with statistical decisions. The Halo-
gen/Nitrogen developers (Langkilde and Knight,
1998a) allowed inputs to be arbitrarily underspec-
ified, and any decision not made before the realiser
was decided simply by highest likelihood accord-
ing to a language model, automatically trainable
from raw corpora.
The Halogen/Nitrogen work sparked an interest
in statistical NLG which led to a range of surface
realisation methods that used corpus frequencies
in one way or another (Varges and Mellish, 2001;
White, 2004; Velldal et al, 2004; Paiva and Evans,
2005). Some surface realisation work looked at
directly applying statistical models during a lin-
guistically informed generation process to prune
the search space (White, 2004; Carroll and Oepen,
2005).
While statistical techniques have led to realisers
that are more (re)usable, we currently still have
no way of determining what the state of the art
is. A significant subset of statistical realisation
work (Langkilde, 2002; Callaway, 2003; Nakan-
ishi et al, 2005; Zhong and Stent, 2005; Cahill and
van Genabith, 2006; White and Rajkumar, 2009)
has recently produced results for regenerating the
Penn Treebank. The basic approach in all this
work is to remove information from the Penn Tree-
bank parses (the word strings themselves as well
as some of the parse information), and then con-
vert and use these underspecified representations
as inputs to the surface realiser whose task it is to
reproduce the original treebank sentence. Results
are typically evaluated using BLEU, and, roughly
speaking, BLEU scores go down as more informa-
tion is removed.
While publications of work along these lines do
refer to each other and (tentatively) compare BLEU
scores, the results are not in fact directly compara-
ble, because of the differences in the input repre-
sentations automatically derived from Penn Tree-
bank annotations. In particular, the extent to which
they are underspecified varies from one system to
the next.
The idea we would like to put forward with
this short paper is to develop a shared task in sur-
face realisation based on common inputs and an-
notated corpora of paired inputs and outputs de-
rived from various resources from NLA that build
on the Penn Treebank. Inputs are provided in a
common-ground representation formalism which
participants map to the types of input required by
their system. These inputs are automatically de-
rived from the Penn Treebank and the various lay-
ers of annotation (syntactic, semantic, discourse)
that have been developed for the documents in it.
Outputs (realisations) are evaluated by automatic
comparison against the human-authored text in the
corpora as well as by by human assessors.
In the short term, such a shared task would
make existing and new approaches directly com-
parable by evaluation on the benchmark data asso-
ciated with the shared task. In the long term, the
common-ground input representation may lead to
a standardised level of representation that can act
as a link between surface realisers and preceding
modules, and can make it possible to use alterna-
tive surface realisers as drop-in replacements for
each other.
2 Towards Common Inputs
One hugely challenging aspect in developing a
Surface Realisation task is developing a common
input representation that all, or at least a major-
ity of, surface realisation researchers are happy to
work with. While many different formalisms have
been used for input representations to surface re-
alisers, one cannot simply use e.g. van Genabith
et al?s automatically generated LFG f-structures,
White et als CCG logical forms, Nivre?s depen-
dencies, Miyao et al?s HPSG predicate-argument
structures or Copestake?s MRSs etc., as each of
them would introduce a bias in favour of one type
of system.
One possible solution is to develop a meta-
representation which contains, perhaps on multi-
ple layers of representation, all the information
needed to map to any of a given set of realiser in-
put representations, a common-ground representa-
tion that acts as a kind of interlingua for translating
between different input representations.
An important issue in deriving input repre-
sentations from semantically, syntactically and
discourse-annotated corpora is deciding what in-
formation not to include. A concern is that mak-
ing such decisions by committee may be difficult.
One way to make it easier might be to define sev-
eral versions of the task, where each version uses
inputs of different levels of specificity.
Basing a common input representation on what
can feasibly be obtained from non-NLG resources
would put everyone on reasonably common foot-
ing. If, moreover, the common input representa-
tions can be automatically derived from annota-
tions in existing resources, then data can be pro-
duced in sufficient quantities to make it feasible
for participants to automatically learn mappings
from the system-neutral input to their own input.
The above could be achieved by doing some-
thing along the lines of the CoNLL?08 shared task
on Joint Parsing of Syntactic and Semantic De-
pendencies, for which the organisers combined the
Penn Treebank, Propbank, Nombank and the BBN
Named Entity corpus into a dependency represen-
tation. Brief descriptions of these resources and
more details on this idea are provided in Section 4
below.
3 Evaluation
As many NLG researchers have argued, there is
usually not a single right answer in NLG, but var-
ious answers, some better than others, and NLG
tasks should take this into account. If a surface
realisation task is focused on single-best realiza-
tions, then it will not encourage research on pro-
ducing all possible good realizations, or multiple
acceptable realizations in a ranked list, etc. It
may not be the best approach to encourage sys-
tems that try to make a single, safe choice; in-
stead, perhaps one should encourage approaches
that can tell when multiple choices would be ok,
and if some would be better than others.
In the long term we need to develop task defi-
nitions, data resources and evaluation methodolo-
gies that properly take into account the one-to-
many nature of NLG, but in the short term it may be
more realistic to reuse existing non-NLG resources
(which do not provide alternative realisations) and
to adapt existing evaluation methodologies includ-
ing intrinsic assessment of Fluency, Clarity and
Appropriateness by trained evaluators, and auto-
matic intrinsic methods such as BLEU and NIST.
One simple way of adapting the latter, for exam-
ple, could be to calculate scores for the n best re-
alisations produced by a realiser and then to com-
pute a weighted average where scores for reali-
sations are weighted in inverse proportion to the
ranks given to the realisations by the realiser.
4 Data
There is a wide variety of different annotated re-
sources that could be of use in a shared task in sur-
face realisation. Many of these include documents
originally included in the Penn Treebank, and thus
make it possible in principle to combine the var-
ious levels of annotation into a single common-
ground representation. The following is a (non-
exhaustive) list of such resources:
1. Penn Treebank-3 (Marcus et al, 1999): one
million words of hand-parsed 1989 Wall
Street Journal material annotated in Treebank
II style. The Treebank bracketing style al-
lows extraction of simple predicate/argument
structure. In addition to Treebank-1 mate-
rial, Treebank-3 contains documents from the
Switchboard and Brown corpora.
2. Propbank (Palmer et al, 2005): This is a se-
mantic annotation of the Wall Street Journal
section of Penn Treebank-2. More specifi-
cally, each verb occurring in the Treebank has
been treated as a semantic predicate and the
surrounding text has been annotated for ar-
guments and adjuncts of the predicate. The
verbs have also been tagged with coarse
grained senses and with inflectional informa-
tion.
3. NomBank 1.0 (Meyers et al, 2004): Nom-
Bank is an annotation project at New York
University that provides argument structure
for common nouns in the Penn Treebank.
NomBank marks the sets of arguments that
occur with nouns in PropBank I, just as the
latter records such information for verbs.
4. BBN Pronoun Coreference and Entity Type
Corpus (Weischedel and Brunstein, 2005):
supplements the Wall Street Journal corpus,
adding annotation of pronoun coreference,
and a variety of entity and numeric types.
5. FrameNet (Johnson et al, 2002): 150,000
sentences annotated for semantic roles and
possible syntactic realisations. The annotated
sentences come from a variety of sources, in-
cluding some PropBank texts.
6. OntoNotes 2.0 (Weischedel et al, 2008):
OntoNotes 1.0 contains 674k words of Chi-
nese and 500k words of English newswire
and broadcast news data. OntoNotes follows
the Penn Treebank for syntax and PropBank
for predicate-argument structure. Its seman-
tic representation will include word sense
disambiguation for nouns and verbs, with
each word sense connected to an ontology,
and coreference. The current goal is to anno-
tate over a million words each of English and
Chinese, and half a million words of Arabic
over five years.
There are other resources which may be use-
ful. Zettelmoyer and Collins (2009) have man-
ually converted the original SQL meaning an-
notations of the ATIS corpus (et al, 1994)?
some 4,637 sentences?into lambda-calculus ex-
pressions which were used for training and testing
their semantic parser. This resource might make a
good out-of-domain test set for generation systems
trained on WSJ data.
FrameNet, used for semantic parsing, see for
example Gildea and Jurafsky (2002), identifies a
sentence?s frame elements and assigns semantic
roles to the frame elements. FrameNet data (Baker
and Sato, 2003) was used for training and test sets
in one of the SensEval-3 shared tasks in 2004 (Au-
tomatic Labeling of Semantic Roles). There has
been some work combining FrameNet with other
lexical resources. For example, Shi and Mihal-
cea (2005) integrated FrameNet with VerbNet and
WordNet for the purpose of enabling more robust
semantic parsing.
The Semlink project (http://verbs.colorado.
edu/semlink/) aims to integrate Propbank,
FrameNet, WordNet and VerbNet.
Other relevant work includes Moldovan and
Rus (Moldovan and Rus, 2001; Rus, 2002) who
developed a technique for parsing into logical
forms and used this to transform WordNet concept
definitions into logical forms. The same method
(with additional manual correction) was used to
produce the test set for another SensEval-3 shared
task (Identification of Logic Forms in English).
4.1 CoNLL 2008 Shared Task Data
Perhaps the most immediately promising resource
is is the CoNLL shared task data from 2008 (Sur-
deanu et al, 2008) which has syntactic depen-
dency annotations, named-entity boundaries and
the semantic dependencies model roles of both
verbal and nominal predicates. The data consist
of excerpts from Penn Treebank-3, BBN Pronoun
Coreference and Entity Type Corpus, PropBank I
and NomBank 1.0. In CoNLL ?08, the data was
used to train and test systems for the task of pro-
ducing a joint semantic and syntactic dependency
analysis of English sentences (the 2009 CoNLL
Shared Task extended this to multi-lingual data).
It seems feasible that we could reuse the CoNLL
data for a prototype Surface Realisation task,
adapting it and inversing the direction of the task,
i.e. mapping from syntactic-semantic dependency
representations to word strings.
5 Developing the Task
The first step in developing a Surface Realisa-
tion task could be to get together a working
group of surface realisation researchers to develop
a common-ground input representation automati-
cally derivable from a set of existing resources.
As part of this task a prototype corpus exempli-
fying inputs/outputs and annotations could be de-
veloped. At the end of this stage it would be use-
ful to write a white paper and circulate it and the
prototype corpus among the NLG (and wider NLP)
community for feedback and input.
After a further stage of development, it may be
feasible to run a prototype surface realisation task
at Generation Challenges 2011, combined with a
session for discussion and roadmapping. Depend-
ing on the outcome of all of this, a full-blown task
might be feasible by 2012. Some of this work will
need funding to be feasible, and the authors of this
paper are in the process of applying for financial
support for these plans.
6 Concluding Remarks
In this paper we have provided an overview of ex-
isting resources that could potentially be used for
a surface realisation task, and have outlined ideas
for how such a task might work. The core idea
is to develop a common-ground input representa-
tion which participants map to the types of input
required by their system. These inputs are derived
from existing annotated corpora developed for lan-
guage analysis. Outputs (realisations) are evalu-
ated by automatic comparison against the human-
authored text in the corpora as well as by by hu-
man assessors. Evaluation methods are adapted to
take account of the one-to-many nature of the re-
alisation mapping.
The ideas outlined in this paper began as a pro-
longed email exchange, interspersed with discus-
sions at conferences, among the authors. This pa-
per summarises our ideas as they have evolved so
far, to enable feedback and input from other re-
searchers interested in this type of task.
References
Colin F. Baker and Hiroaki Sato. 2003. The framenet
data and software. In Proceedings of ACL?03.
A. Cahill and J. van Genabith. 2006. Robust PCFG-
based generation using automatically acquired LFG
approximations. In Proc. ACL?06, pages 1033?44.
Charles Callaway. 2003. Evaluating coverage for large
symbolic NLG grammars. In Proceedings of the
18th International Joint Conference on Artificial In-
telligence (IJCAI 2003), pages 811?817.
J. Carroll and S. Oepen. 2005. High efficiency
realization for a wide-coverage unification gram-
mar. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing (IJC-
NLP?05), volume 3651, pages 165?176. Springer
Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence.
M. Elhadad and J. Robin. 1996. An overview of
SURGE: A reusable comprehensive syntactic real-
ization component. Technical Report 96-03, Dept
of Mathematics and Computer Science, Ben Gurion
University, Beer Sheva, Israel.
Deborah Dahl et al 1994. Expanding the scope of the
ATIS task: the ATIS-3 corpus. In Proceedings of the
ARPA HLT Workshop.
Daniel Gildea and Daniel Jurafsky. 2002. Automatic
labeling of semantic roles. Computational Linguis-
tics, 28(3):245?288.
C. Johnson, C. Fillmore, M. Petruck, C. Baker,
M. Ellsworth, J. Ruppenhoper, and E.Wood. 2002.
Framenet theory and practice. Technical report.
K. Knight, I. Chander, M. Haines, V. Hatzivassiloglou,
E. Hovy, M. Iida, S. Luk, R. Whitney, and K. Ya-
mada. 1995. Filling knowledge gaps in a broad-
coverage MT system. In Proceedings of the Four-
teenth International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (IJCAI ?95), pages 1390?1397.
I. Langkilde and K. Knight. 1998a. Generation
that exploits corpus-based statistical knowledge. In
Proc. COLING-ACL. http://www.isi.edu/licensed-
sw/halogen/nitro98.ps.
I. Langkilde. 2002. An empirical verification of cover-
age and correctness for a general-purpose sentence
generator. In Proc. 2nd International Natural Lan-
guage Generation Conference (INLG ?02).
B. Lavoie and O. Rambow. 1997. A fast and portable
realizer for text generation systems. In Proceedings
of the 5th Conference on Applied Natural Language
Processing (ANLP?97), pages 265?268.
W. Mann and C. Mathiesen. 1983. NIGEL: A sys-
temic grammar for text generation. Technical Re-
port ISI/RR-85-105, Information Sciences Institute.
Mitchell P. Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz, and Ann Taylor. 1999. Treebank-
3. Technical report, Linguistic Data Consortium,
Philadelphia.
Adam Meyers, Ruth Reeves, and Catherine Macleod.
2004. Np-external arguments a study of argument
sharing in english. In MWE ?04: Proceedings of
the Workshop on Multiword Expressions, pages 96?
103, Morristown, NJ, USA. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Dan I. Moldovan and Vasile Rus. 2001. Logic form
transformation of wordnet and its applicability to
question answering. In Proceedings of ACL?01.
Hiroko Nakanishi, Yusuke Miyao, and Jun?ichi Tsujii.
2005. Probabilistic models for disambiguation of an
hpsg-based chart generator. In Proceedings of the
9th International Workshop on Parsing Technology
(Parsing?05), pages 93?102. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
D. S. Paiva and R. Evans. 2005. Empirically-based
control of natural language generation. In Proceed-
ings ACL?05.
M. Palmer, P. Kingsbury, and D. Gildea. 2005. The
proposition bank: An annotated corpus of semantic
roles. Computational Linguistics, 31(1):71?106.
Vasile Rus. 2002. Logic Form For WordNet Glosses
and Application to Question Answering. Ph.D. the-
sis.
Lei Shi and Rada Mihalcea. 2005. Putting pieces to-
gether: Combining framenet, verbnet and wordnet
for robust semantic parsing. In Proceedings of CI-
CLing?05.
Mihai Surdeanu, Richard Johansson, Adam Meyers,
Llu??s Ma`rquez, and Joakim Nivre. 2008. The
CoNLL-2008 shared task on joint parsing of syn-
tactic and semantic dependencies. In CoNLL ?08:
Proceedings of the Twelfth Conference on Computa-
tional Natural Language Learning, pages 159?177.
S. Varges and C. Mellish. 2001. Instance-based natu-
ral language generation. In Proceedings of the 2nd
Meeting of the North American Chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics (NAACL ?01),
pages 1?8.
E. Velldal, S. Oepen, and D. Flickinger. 2004. Para-
phrasing treebanks for stochastic realization rank-
ing. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Tree-
banks and Linguistic Theories (TLT ?04), Tuebin-
gen, Germany.
Ralph Weischedel and Ada Brunstein. 2005. Bbn pro-
noun coreference and entity type corpus. Technical
report, Linguistic Data Consortium.
Ralph Weischedel et al 2008. Ontonotes release 2.0.
Technical report, Linguistic Data Consortium.
Michael White and Rajakrishnan Rajkumar. 2009.
Perceptron reranking for ccg realisation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empririal Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP?09),
pages 410?419.
M. White. 2004. Reining in CCG chart realization. In
A. Belz, R. Evans, and P. Piwek, editors, Proceed-
ings INLG?04, volume 3123 of LNAI, pages 182?
191. Springer.
Luke Zettlemoyer and Michael Collins. 2009. Learn-
ing context-dependent mappings from sentences to
logical forms. In Proceedings of ACL-IJCNLP?09.
H. Zhong and A. Stent. 2005. Building surface
realizers automatically from corpora. In A. Belz
and S. Varges, editors, Proceedings of UCNLG?05,
pages 49?54.
