Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Young Investigators Workshop on Computational Approaches to Languages of the Americas,
pages 54?61, Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Opinion Identification in Spanish Texts
Aiala Ros? Dina Wonsever
Grupo de Procesamiento de Lenguaje Natural,
Facultad de Ingenier?a, UDELAR
Grupo de Procesamiento de Lenguaje Natural,
Facultad de Ingenier?a, UDELAR
J. Herrera y Reissig 565 J. Herrera y Reissig 565
Montevideo, 11300, Uruguay Montevideo, 11300, Uruguay
Modyco, UMR 7114, 
Universit? Paris Ouest Nanterre La D?fense, 
CNRS France
wonsever@fing.edu.uy
200, avenue de la R?publique, Batiment A, 
Bureau 420, 92 001 Nanterre Cedex 
aialar@fing.edu.uy
Jean-Luc Minel
Modyco, UMR 7114, 
Universit? Paris Ouest Nanterre La D?fense, CNRS France
200, avenue de la R?publique, Batiment A, 
Bureau 420, 92 001 Nanterre Cedex 
jean-luc.minel@u-paris10.fr
Abstract
We present our work on the identification of opin-
ions and its components: the source, the topic and 
the message. We describe a rule-based system for 
which we achieved a recall of 74% and a precision 
of  94%.  Experimentation  with  machine-learning 
techniques for the same task is currently underway.
1 Introduction
For some tasks in language processing such as In-
formation  Extraction  or  Q&A Systems,  it  is  im-
portant to know the opinions expressed by differ-
ent sources and their polarity, positive or negative, 
with  respect  to  different  topics.  There  are  even 
commercial applications that provide this kind of 
service (http://www.jodange.com). 
We here present a system for identifying opin-
ions in Spanish texts. We define opinion as the re-
port of someone's statement about any subject ( El  
investigador de la Polit?cnica afirma que el prin-
cipal  problema de este sistema es conseguir que  
sea f?cil de usar / The researcher at the Polit?c-
nica asserts that the main problem with this system 
is making it easy to use), or as any mention of dis-
course participants? beliefs  (El  PRI acepta parti-
cipar en el debate / The PRI agrees to participate  
in the debate).
As a first step, we study the impact of elements 
that typically introduce such expressions in written 
text. These elements are mainly verbs of commu-
nication (decir, declarar / say, state) but other verb 
classes  (belief,  agreement,  appreciation)  are  also 
considered. In other cases, the opinions will be ex-
pressed through nouns  (opini?n/opinion,  declara-
ci?n/statement) or  segments  introduced by  seg?n 
(according to) or similar expressions. To complete 
the  opinion,  we  identify  its  characteristic  argu-
ments: the source, the topic and the message. 
In addition to recognizing an opinion, we try to 
determine its semantic orientation. To this end, we 
consider certain subjective elements and operators 
(reverse,  intensifier,  enhancing,  neutralizing,  etc.) 
which affect them. In this article, we present only 
results  on   the  semantic  orientation  of  opinion 
verbs,  opinion  nouns  and  topic  introducers 
(sobre/about, con respecto a/with respect to, etc.). 
There  are  many  studies  that  address  these  is-
sues: Pang and Lee (2008), for instance, discuss in 
54
detail  various  concepts  in  the  area  of  "Opinion 
Mining" or "Sentiment  Analysis" and present the 
main  proposals,  resources  and  applications.  For 
our work,  which focuses on the identification of 
source, topic and message, we have mainly drawn 
on the following: the scheme for annotating opin-
ions  and  emotions  proposed  by  Wiebe,  Wilson, 
and  Cardie  (2005);  the  work  on  opinion-holder 
(source)  propositional  opinion  identification 
presented in (Bethard et  al.,  2004);  a  system for 
source  identification  using  statistical  methods 
(Choi  et  al,  2005);  a  method  for  opinion-holder 
and topic extraction from Kim and Hovy (2006); 
the study on the identification of source and target 
presented  in  (Ruppenhofer  et  al.,  2008);  and  a 
work on topic  annotation  (Stoyanov  and Cardie, 
2008). 
For  our  semantic  orientation  study,  we  have 
taken  some  concepts  from  Turney  and  Littman 
(2003) and  analyzed  some work on subjectivity 
operators  (Polanyi  and  Zaenen,  2004;  Moilanen 
and Pulman, 2007; Choi and Cardie, 2008). 
In what follows, we briefly present the model 
that  has  been  defined  to  represent  opinions  and 
two methods for their automatic recognition. First, 
we describe a rule-based system that incorporates 
lexical resources. This system, whose evaluation is 
detailed below, achieves a recall of 74% and a pre-
cision of 97%. During the evaluation process we 
produced an annotated corpus of 13,000 words, by 
manually correcting the system output. The second 
system, currently under development, involves the 
application of machine-learning techniques to the 
annotated corpus.  
2 Opinion components
An opinion is composed of a predicative element 
and its characteristic arguments. The set of opinion 
predicates includes verbs, nouns and prepositions 
(or prepositional locutions). Verbs belong to vari-
ous semantic classes: communication (decir / say,  
declarar  /  state), assessment  (criticar  /  criticize,  
felicitar  /  compliment), belief  (creer /  believe,  
opinar / think) and acceptance  (aceptar / accept,  
rechazar / reject). 
These classes  are  similar  to  those proposed in 
(Asher et al, 2008), the main difference being that 
they include  the  class  Sentiment  but  we  do  not. 
Nouns  are  generally  derived  from the  aforemen-
tioned  verbs  (opini?n  /  opinion,  declaraci?n  /  
statement, apoyo / support). Some prepositions and 
prepositional  locutions  are  seg?n,  de  acuerdo a,  
para / according to. 
The relevant arguments that we identified for the 
opinion  predicates  are,  as  already  mentioned, 
source,  topic  and  message.  To  establish  this 
scheme we analysed  syntactico-semantic schemes 
proposed  in  ADESSE2 for  selected  verb  classes 
(Garc?a-Miguel et al, 2005) and some of the Span-
ish  FrameNet  frames3 (Subirats-R?ggeberg  and 
Petruck.,  2003),  mainly the  opinion frame whose 
frame  elements  include  cognizer  (source),  topic 
and  opinion  (message)  and  the  communication 
frame for which some elements are communicator 
(source), topic and message. 
Our definition deviates from much of the literat-
ure on this subject because we limit our work to 
opinions introduced by an opinion predicate, as ex-
plained  above,  while  many  of  the  cited  works 
identify all kinds of subjective expressions, mainly 
adjectives  with  positive  or  negative  polarity,  as 
with the  expressive subjective elements described 
in (Wiebe et al, 2005). 
As in our work we focus on finding the source, 
the message and the topic for each opinion, we ig-
nore  all  the  text  fragments  in  which  there  is  no 
evidence that the author is quoting or referring to 
other participants? opinions. These text fragments 
constitute the message, as defined above, stated by 
the text author. So, once our system has identified 
other  participants?  opinions,  the  remaining  text 
should be attributed to the text author. 
Identifying  subjective  elements  is  necessary in 
order to determine the semantic orientation of the 
opinion. We think the treatment of these elements 
within the author?s message is similar to the treat-
ment that must be applied within the message at-
tributed to any other source.  Such a treatment  is 
not addressed in this work, since the semantic ori-
entation study presented here is restricted to opin-
ion predicates and topic introducers. 
In some respects our work is related to that of 
(Bethard et al, 2004). For opinions introduced by 
opinion  verbs,  they  identify  the  source  (opinion 
holder)  and  the  message  (propositional  opinion), 
restricting  the  study  to  messages  that  constitute 
subordinate  clauses.  However,  we  seek  also  to 
identify the explicit references to the topic and we 
consider not only verbs but also some nouns and 
prepositions such as  seg?n / according to. A fur-
55
ther difference is that they distinguish propositions 
containing an opinion from those transmitting facts 
or predictions, whereas we do not make this dis-
tinction. 
In our recognition of  the topic we consider only 
explicit references to the opinion subject. We look 
for  topic-introducing  elements,  such  as  sobre  /  
about, con respecto a / regarding, en contra de /  
against, without  trying  to  deduce the  topic  from 
the study of the message itself.
For this general scheme, there are different in-
stances in which the arguments can take different 
forms.  Thus,  for  some opinion verbs such as  re-
chazar /  reject, the message is usually empty. For 
other verbs the topic will be a noun phrase, such as 
aceptar  la  propuesta  / to  accept  the  proposal, 
while for others it will be a prepositional phrase, 
for example, hablar de literatura / to speak about  
literature.
2.1 Some opinion examples 
In  a  standard  reported  speech  utterance  (1),  the 
opinion  predicate  is  a  communication  verb.  The 
source is the subject of the verb and the message is 
contained  in  the  subordinate  clause.  Normally, 
there is not a segment expressing the topic. 
(1) [El investigador de la Polit?cnica]f [afirma]p 
[que el principal problema de este sistema es con-
seguir que sea f?cil de usar]m.
(1) [The researcher at the Polit?cnica]f [said] p 
[that the main problem with this system is making 
it easy to use] m.  
In (2),  there is  a verb that  introduces referred 
speech in which a verbal act is mentioned, but the 
words uttered (message) are not reproduced (Mal-
donado, 1999). 
(2) [El abogado de Fernando Botero]s [habl?]p 
[sobre el tema]t con Semana. 
(2) [The lawyer of Fernando Botero]s [spoke]p 
[about the subject]t with Semana. 
However, we also found cases in which repor-
ted speech includes an explicit mention of the topic 
(3) and cases in which referred speech includes the 
uttered words (4). In both examples all the defined 
arguments are present in the text. 
(3) [Sobre la partitura]t [Ros Marb?]s 
[afirma]p [que es "enormemente teatral. Se define 
a los personajes desde la propia m?sica, ...."]m.
(3) [Concerning the score]t [Ros Marb?]s [said]p 
[it is "very theatrical. The characters are defined 
from the music itself,  ....]m.
 
(4) En una carta escrita por Dal? en Neuilly en 
abril de 1951, [el artista]s [habla]p [sobre su divina 
inspiraci?n]t: ["Yo quer?a que ..."]m. 
(4) In a letter written by Dal? at Neuilly in April 
1951, [the artist]s [talks]p [about his divine 
 inspiration]t : ["I wanted to ..."]m.
As noted earlier, the opinion predicate can be a 
noun or a preposition such as seg?n / according to. 
In (5),  the source is the noun complement,  intro-
duced by  de /  of. In  (6),  the  source is  the  noun 
phrase within the prepositional phrase headed by 
seg?n / according to. 
(5) No tenemos por qu? criticar las 
[declaraciones]p de [Elizardo S?nchez]s. 
(5) We need not criticize [Elizardo 
 Sanchez?]f [statements] p . 
(6)  [Este  sistema  se  utiliza  en  Estados  Unidos 
desde 1982]m, [seg?n]p [Roque Pifarr?]f.
(6) [This system has been used in the 
United  States  since  1982]m,  [according  to]p 
[Roque Pifarr?]s.
 
Note that in (5) there is another opinion predic-
ate,  the verb  criticize, occurring in a non-factive 
context. The factivity of events is not addressed in 
this work, but it can be expected to affect opinion 
recognition.
3    The rule-based system
We developed a rule-based system for the identi-
fication of the opinion elements. The system takes 
as input a pre-processed text using the POS-tagger 
Freeling (Atserias et al, 2006) and Clatex (Won-
sever et al 2006), a system that segments texts into 
propositions.  Several  rule  modules  are  then  ap-
plied,  introducing  XML annotations  showing the 
identified opinions and their elements. 
The  following  example  illustrates  the  system 
output: 
56
<opinion><menssage>Hasta el momento el virus 
H1N1 tiene una predominancia mayor que la de 
los dem?s virus en esos estudios</message>,
<predicate>precis?</predicate><source>la 
ministra</source></opinion>. 
<opinion><message>So far, the H1N1 virus has a 
higher prevalence than other viruses in these stud-
ies</message>, <predicate>said</predicate> 
<source>Minister</source></opinion>.
 
The  rules  are  based  on  the  contextual  rules 
formalism defined by Wonsever and Minel (2004), 
including  some  further  extensions.  This  type  of 
rule allows the specification of contexts, exclusion 
zones, optionality, negation, and elimination of ex-
isting labels,  among others.  In addition, for each 
rule it is possible to check various conditions on its 
components, for example, membership in a list of 
words.  For applying  the rules we used a system 
implemented in Prolog.
The hand-written rules were derived from cor-
pus analysis.  They are grouped into modules ac-
cording to the element they recognize: opinion pre-
dicate (verbs, nouns and prepositions), source, top-
ic and message. There is also a final module that 
builds the entire opinion and some auxiliary mod-
ules: the complex noun phrase identifying module 
(El director del Hospital Maciel, Daniel Parada / 
The  director  of  the  Hospital  Maciel,  Daniel  
Parada) and the subjective elements and operators 
identifying module. Table 1 shows the number of 
rules contained in each module. In the next section 
we describe the source rules module.
module # rules
opinion predicate 27
source 42
topic 22
message 8
opinion 37
auxiliary 7
TOTAL 143
Table 1: Number of rules in each module
3.1 Source rules
In  order  to  show the  rules  features,  we  will  de-
scribe  the  source  module.  Table  2  shows  some 
(simplified) rules for source identification.  
 
fue1a no(prep), <np>, (zone,3), verOp
fue1b punt, verOp, (zone,3), <np>
fue1c punt, verOp, (zone,3), prep, np, <np>
fue2 verOpPart,  "por", <np> 
fue3a nOp,  "de", <np>
fue3b <np>, verSup, op(det), nOp
fue3c nOp, verSupPart, "por", <np>
fue4a "seg?n", op(verOp), <np>
fue4b endS,  "para", <np>
fue4c "de acuerdo a", <np>
fue4d "de acuerdo con", <np>
fue4e "a juicio de", <np>
Table  2  Simplified  rules  for  source  recognition. 
Notation used: np - nominal phrase; < > - element 
labeled by the rule; zone,x - exclusion zone up to x 
words; verOpFin - finite opinion verb; verOpPart - 
opinion verb, participle;  nOp - opinion noun; ver-
Sup - support verb; endS - end of sentence; det - 
determiner; op - optionality operator 
These rules assign the source tag to text segments 
that match the rule body (indicated by <> in the 
table).  The  elements  that  precede  the  body  and 
those that follow it are the left and right contexts, 
respectively.  In addition to assigning the tag, the 
rules assign values to some attributes: 
- code of the rule that assigned the label 
- syntactic structure (subject before verb / sub-
ject after verb / noun complement introduced by 
de)
- semantic orientation value (-, +, 0)
The three rules fue1 identify sources that are the 
subject of an opinion verb. We allow up to 3 words 
between the subject and the verb; these words can-
not be verb, np, punctuation or conjunction (<El 
senador> este martes dijo ... / <the senator> said  
Tuesday ...). For rule fue1c we also allow a prepos-
itional phrase (prep + np) between the source and 
the  verb  (..., dijo  ayer  a  la  prensa  <el  
senador> / ..., said yesterday to the reporters the  
senator). As mentioned, we show simplified rules; 
the actual rules include other restrictions such as 
checking for subject-verb agreement. 
Rule fue2 is applied when the opinion verb is in 
participle form and the source is an agent comple-
ment (las palabras expresadas por el senador / the  
words uttered by the senator). 
57
The three rules fue3 concern noun phrases. The 
source is usually introduced by  de  (las opiniones 
del senador / the senator?s opinions) but it is also 
common to find nouns in a support verb construc-
tion (el senador emiti?  una declaraci?n / the sen-
ator issued a statement). 
Finally, the five rules fue4 identify sources in-
troduced by seg?n, para, de acuerdo a, de acuerdo 
con, a juicio de / according to. When the source 
introducer is  seg?n,  we can find an opinion verb 
between seg?n and the source (seg?n el senador /  
seg?n dijo el senador / according to the senator), 
For the preposition  para / for,  preceding punctu-
ation is required because of its high ambiguity. 
3.2 Lexical Resources 
Some of the rules, especially those for opinion pre-
dicate  identification,  rely  heavily  on  lexical  re-
sources: lists of opinion verbs and nouns, person 
indicators  (se?or, doctor, senador / Mr., Dr., sen-
ator), institution  indicators  (instituci?n,  hospital,  
diario  /  institution,  hospital,  journal), support 
verbs (plantear, emitir / make, deliver), topic intro-
ducers (sobre, con respecto a / about, with respect  
to), positive subjective elements (bueno, excelente,  
diversi?n / good, excellent, fun), negative subject-
ive elements (malo, negativo, pesimista / bad, neg-
ative,  pessimist), and operators  (muy,  extremada-
mente, a penas / very, extremely, just). 
In particular, the list of opinion verbs and nouns 
was  manually  created  from  corpora  containing 
Spanish texts: Corin (Grassi et al, 2001), Corpus 
del  Espa?ol  (Davies,  2002)  and  a  digital  media 
corpus created for this study. Only those verbs and 
nouns that are frequently used in opinion contexts 
were included in the list, so as to minimize ambi-
guity. At the time of evaluation, the list comprised 
86 verbs and 42 nouns. 
3.2.1 The opinion verbs and nouns list 
For each verb or noun, we register its lemma and 
other  information  related  to  its  syntactic  and se-
mantic properties. 
For verbs, we record the following information: 
? semantic orientation [-, 0, +] 
? semantic role of the subject [source, topic] 
? prepositions that introduce the subject. 
? subordinate clause admitted (message) 
For example, for the verb  decir  /  say, the cor-
responding values are (0, source, [ ], yes) for the 
verb apoyar / support: (+, source, [a, np], no), for 
the verb molestar / annoy: (-, topic, [ ], no). 
For nouns, the information of interest is: 
? semantic orientation [-, 0, +] 
? semantic  role  of  the  complement  intro-
duced by de [source, topic, ambiguous] 
For example, for the noun anuncio / announce-
ment, the corresponding values are (0, ambiguous). 
Note that this noun is ambiguous because the com-
plement introduced by de can be either the source 
(el anuncio del senador / the senator?s announce-
ment)  or the topic  (el anuncio de la extensi?n del  
plazo /  the announcement about the deadline ex-
tension).  For the noun  comentario / comment the 
values are (0,source) and for  apoyo / support  the 
values are (+, source).
The information associated to  opinion predic-
ates is taken into account when applying the rules. 
For example,  the second attribute of  the opinion 
noun is checked when rule fue3a is applied: if the 
attribute value is "source", the rule matches all np 
satisfying the remaining rule conditions, whereas if 
the  attribute  value  is  "ambiguous",  the  rule  re-
quires that the np contain a person or institution in-
dicator.  The  rule  does  not  apply  if  the  attribute 
value is "topic". 
Some  of  the  message  rules  (not  shown here) 
check that the final opinion verb attribute has the 
value "yes", indicating that it accepts a subordinate 
clause (dijo que ... / he said that ...). These rules la-
bel  the proposition following the verb as a mes-
sage. The proposition has already been segmented 
by Clatex.
The  attribute  that  indicates  which  is  the  verb 
subject role is important in differentiating the rules 
shown in the table (fue1 to fue4), which only re-
cognize verbs for which the subject role is source, 
from a set  of  additional  rules  (not  shown in the 
table) that look for the source in the dative case, 
when the subject role is topic (la propuesta gust? 
a los senadores / senators liked the proposal). 
3.3 Semantic orientation
For each element recognized, the rules assign a se-
mantic orientation value. For the opinion predicate, 
source and topic this value comes from the lexical 
resources. For the message, this value is calculated 
from  its  subjective  elements  and  operators.  We 
58
consider that the final opinion semantic orientation 
can be calculated from the orientation values of its 
elements.  We hypothesize  that  when the  opinion 
predicate  or  the  topic  introducer  are  not  neutral 
(they have a positive or negative semantic orienta-
tion) the complete opinion takes on the same value 
and  there  is  no  need  to  analyze  the  message.  If 
these two elements are neutral the opinion semant-
ic orientation must be obtained from the message. 
To determine the message semantic orientation 
we carried out some experiments that are still on-
going. Semantic orientation values for opinion pre-
dicates  are  stated  in  the  verb  and  noun  lists,  as 
mentioned. The semantic orientation for topic in-
troducers  is  also  stated  in  the  corresponding  list 
(sobre / about is neutral,  en contra de / against is 
negative,  etc.).  The  number  of  elements  of  this 
type is very limited.  We did not study the source 
semantic orientation, in future work we will ana-
lyze  expressions  like  Los  optimistas  sostienen 
que ... / Optimists say that ....
4 System evaluation 
To evaluate the system we worked with a digit-
al  media  corpus;  the  texts  were  taken  from  the 
same publications as those used to create the deriv-
ation corpus. The corpus contains 38 texts with an 
average of 300 words each, making a total size of 
approximately 13,000 words. 
We applied the system to the entire corpus and 
performed a manual review of the output in order 
to  evaluate  the  identification  of  the  defined  ele-
ments and also the complete opinion identification. 
We also made a partial semantic orientation evalu-
ation, taking into account only opinion predicates 
and topic introducers' values and their effect on the 
complete opinion value. 
In addition to assessing the rules performance, 
during the review stage the annotated corpus was 
manually corrected in order to obtain an opinion 
annotated  corpus  suitable  for  machine-learning. 
Table 3 shows the evaluation results. Rows repres-
ent: 
- total: total number of elements in the text,
- corr-c:  number  of  completely  recognized 
items, 
-  corr-p:  number  of  partially  recognized  ele-
ments, 
- non-rec: number of unrecognized elements, 
- incorr: number of marked segments which do 
not correspond to the item, 
- PR: precision, 
- REC-c: recall calculated using corr-c, 
- REC-p: recall calculated using corr-p, 
- F: F-measure.   
pred sour top mess opinion
total 281 212 74 243 302
corr-c 256 133 33 140 128
corr-p 0 20 13 64 104
no rec 25 57 28 39 70
incorr 23 11 2 10 14
PR 92 % 93 % 96 % 95 % 94 %
REC-c 91 % 63 % 45 % 58 % 42 %
REC-p 91 % 72 % 62 % 84 % 77 %
F 91.5 % 81 % 75 % 89 % 85 %
Table 3: System evaluation results. 
Most opinion predicates present  in the corpus 
are included in  our opinion verbs  and nouns list 
(91%). 
Several sources and topics were partially recog-
nized because the  rules  do not  incorporate  some 
complements (prepositional complements or subor-
dinate clause) to the noun phrase.
Message is partially recognized when a pseudo-
direct  discourse  is  used (Parada agreg? que "la 
empresa reconoci? que hubo un c?lculo entre hor-
as estimadas y horas reales y eso fue lo que pas?.  
Nosotros,  primero  empezamos  a  controlar  a  
nuestro personal ..."). This style is usually present 
in journalistic texts (Maldonado, 1999).
4.1 Semantic orientation evaluation
We recognized 25 non neutral opinion predicates 
in the corpus:  12 positive verbs and 14 negative 
verbs. One verb (especular / speculate) was incor-
rectly assigned a negative value, its means in this 
particular context is neutral. 
We just found 3 non-neutral topic introducers, 
the 3 are negative.    
The opinion predicates or topic introducers' se-
mantic  orientation  values  were  assigned  to  the 
opinions containing them. This method for calcu-
lating opinion semantic orientation was correct in 
59
all cases (except for the verb especular that was in-
correctly analyzed). 
5 Machine-learning system 
The evaluation system resulted in the generation of 
an annotated corpus, processed by the rule-based 
system and then manually reviewed and corrected. 
This corpus of about 13,000 words allows us to un-
dertake  some  experiments  applying   machine-
learning techniques. 
We are currently experimenting with Condition-
al  Random  Fields,  using  the  CRF++  tool 
(http://crfpp.sourceforge.net/). We are now determ-
ining the attributes to be considered for the training 
phase and defining the most appropriate templates 
for the kind of learning we need. While carrying 
out these prior tasks, we will extend the corpus us-
ing  the  same  semi-automatic  procedure  as  that 
already implemented.
6 Linguistic resources 
Many of the linguistic resources needed to achieve 
our objectives have already been mentioned. Some 
of them were created especially in the context of 
this work and are available as a contribution to the 
development of Spanish text processing: 
? opinion verbs and nouns lists with syntact-
ic and semantic attributes, 
? person and institution indicators lists, 
? topic introducers list, 
? subjective  elements  lists,  created  from 
available resources for  Spanish (Redondo 
et al 2007) and English (General Inquirer: 
www.wjh.harvard.edu),  the  latter  translated 
into Spanish, 
? subjective operators list. 
We also used some resources that are available 
for Spanish, including: 
? Freeling (POS-tagger), 
? Clatex (propositions analyzer). 
Freeling also provides a dependency parser that 
was not used here because the tests we carried out 
scored poorly in sentences containing opinions. 
Resources such as a semantic role tagger or an 
anaphora resolution tool could no doubt improve 
our  system,  but  as  far  as  we  know they are  not 
available for Spanish.
As we did for the General Inquirer dictionary, 
we can apply machine translation to other English 
resources:  subjective  dictionaries  and  annotated 
corpora (Brooke et al, 2009, Banea et al, 2009). 
Tools for  subjectivity analysis  in English can be 
applied to a translated Spanish raw corpus (Banea 
et al, 2009).
7 Conclusions 
We  have  implemented  a  rule-based  system  for 
opinion  identification  in  Spanish  texts.  We  have 
also created some resources for  Spanish:  opinion 
verbs and nouns lists, subjective elements lists and 
an opinion annotated corpus.  We think these  re-
sources are an important contribution to the devel-
opment of Spanish text processing. 
In our present work, we are experimenting with 
machine-learning techniques for recognizing opin-
ion elements.  The results  will  be  compared  with 
those obtained by the rule-based system. We hope 
to  improve  our  results  by  combining  rule-based 
and machine-learning modules.
References 
N. Asher, F. Benamara and Y. Mathieu. 2008. Distilling 
Opinion  in  Discourse:  A  Preliminary  Study.  COL-
ING ? Posters. 
J.  Atserias,  B.  Casas,  E.  Comelles,  M.  Gonz?lez,  L. 
Padr? and M. Padr?. 2006.  FreeLing 1.3: Syntactic  
and  semantic  services  in  an  open-source  NLP lib-
rary. In Proceedings of the fifth international confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC) 
ELRA.
Carmen Banea,  Rada Mihalcea,  Janyce  Wiebe,  Samer 
Hassan. 2008. Multilingual Subjectivity Analysis Us-
ing Machine Translation.  Conference  on Empirical 
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP). 
J. Brooke, M. Tofiloski and M. Taboada. 2009. Cross-
Linguistic  Sentiment  Analysis:  From  English  to  
Spanish. RANLP 2009, Recent Advances in Natural 
Language Processing. Borovets, Bulgaria. 
Steven Bethard, Hong Yu, Ashley Thornton, Vasileios 
Hatzivassiloglou, and Dan Jurafsky. 2004. Automatic  
extraction of opinion propositions and their holders. 
In AAAI Spring Symposium on Exploring Attitude 
and Affect in Text: Theories and Applications. 
Yejin  Choi,  Claire  Cardie,  Ellen Riloff  and Siddharth 
Patwardhan.  2005.  Identifying  sources  of  opinions 
with  conditional  random fields  and extraction  pat-
terns.  In  Proceedings of the Conference on Human 
Language  Technology  and  Empirical  Methods  in 
Natural  Language  Processing  (Vancouver,  British 
Columbia,  Canada).  Human  Language  Technology 
60
Conference. Association for Computational Linguist-
ics.
Yejin  Choi  and  Claire  Cardie.  2008.  Learning  with 
Compositional Semantics as Structural Inference for  
Subsentencial Sentiment Analysis. EMNLP. 
Mark Davies. 2002. Corpus del espa?ol (100 millones  
de palabras, siglo XIII - siglo XX). Disponible actual-
mente en http://www.corpusdelespanol.org.
J.  Garc?a-Miguel,  L.  Costas  and  S.  Mart?nez.  2005. 
Di?tesis  verbales  y  esquemas  construccionales.  
Verbos,  clases  sem?nticas  y  esquemas  sint?ctico-
sem?nticos en el proyecto ADESSE. Entre sem?ntica 
l?xica, teor?a del l?xico y sintaxis, 373-384.
Mariela Grassi,  Marisa  Malcuori,  Javier  Couto,  Juan 
Jos?  Prada  and  Dina  Wonsever. 2001. Corpus  in-
formatizado: textos del espa?ol del Uruguay (COR-
IN), SLPLT-2 - Second International  Workshop on 
Spanish Language Processing and Language Techno-
logies - Ja?n, Espa?a.
Soo-Min Kim and Eduard Hovy. 2006. Extracting opin-
ions, opinion holders, and topics expressed in online 
news media text. In Proceedings of the Workshop on 
Sentiment  and  Subjectivity  in  Text  (Sydney,  Aus-
tralia, July 22 - 22, 2006). ACL Workshops. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, Morristown, NJ, 
1-8.  
Concepci?n Maldonado. 1999. Discurso directo y dis-
curso indirecto.  In Ignacio Bosque and  Violeta De-
monte, Gram?tica descriptiva de la lengua espa?ola 
(Entre la oraci?n y el discurso. Morfolog?a), 3549-
3596. 
K. Moilanen and S. Pulman. 2007. Sentiment Composi-
tion. In RANLP.
Bo  Pang and Lillian  Lee.  2008.  Opinion Mining and 
Sentiment  Analysis.  Foundations  and  Trends  in  In-
formation Retrieval 2(1-2), pp. 1?135.
L.  Polanyi  and A.  Zaenen.  2004.  Contextual  Valence  
Shifters. In AAAI spring Symposium on Attitude.
J. Redondo, I. Fraga, I. Padr?n and M. Comesa?a. 2007. 
The Spanish Adaptation of ANEW (Affective Norms  
for  English  Words).  Behavior  Research  Methods, 
39(3):600-605, Agosto.
Josef Ruppenhofer, Swapna Somasundaran and Janyce 
Wiebe.  2008.  Finding  the  Sources  and  Targets  of  
Subjective Expressions. The Sixth International Con-
ference  on  Language  Resources  and  Evaluation 
(LREC 2008). 
Veselin Stoyanov and Claire Cardie. 2008.  Annotating 
Topics of Opinions. Proceedings of the Sixth Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC 2008), Marrakech, Morocco.
Carlos Subirats-R?ggeberg and Miriam R. L.  Petruck. 
2003.  Surprise: Spanish FrameNet!  In  E. Hajicova, 
A. Kotesovcova & Jiri Mirovsky (eds.), Proceedings 
of CIL 17. CD-ROM. Prague: Matfyzpress.
P. Turney and M. Littman. 2003. Measuring Praise and 
Criticism:  Inference  of  Semantic  Orientation  from 
Association. In  ACM  Transactions  on  Information 
Systems, 21:315--346.
Janyce Wiebe, Theresa Wilson and Claire Cardie. 2005. 
Annotating expressions of opinions and emotions in  
language.  In  Language  Resources  and  Evaluation 
(formerly  Computers  and  the  Humanities), 39(2-
3):165210.
Dina Wonsever and Jean-Luc Minel. 2004. Contextual 
Rules for Text Analysis. En Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science.
Dina Wonsever, Serrana Caviglia, Javier Couto and Ai-
ala Ros? and. 2006.  Un sistema para la segmenta-
ci?n en proposiciones de textos en espa?ol. In Letras 
de hoje 144 (41).
61
Proceedings of the ACL-2012 Workshop on Extra-Propositional Aspects of Meaning in Computational Linguistics (ExProM-2012),
pages 37?46, Jeju, Republic of Korea, 13 July 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
Improving Speculative Language Detection using Linguistic Knowledge
Guillermo Moncecchi
Facultad de Ingenier??a
Universidad de la Repu?blica
Montevideo, Uruguay
Jean-Luc Minel
Laboratoire MoDyCo
Universite? Paris Ouest
Nanterre La De?fense, France
Dina Wonsever
Facultad de Ingenier??a
Universidad de la Repu?blica
Montevideo, Uruguay
Abstract
In this paper we present an iterative method-
ology to improve classifier performance by in-
corporating linguistic knowledge, and propose
a way to incorporate domain rules into the
learning process. We applied the methodol-
ogy to the tasks of hedge cue recognition and
scope detection and obtained competitive re-
sults on a publicly available corpus.
1 Introduction
A common task in Natural Language Processing
(NLP) is to extract or infer factual information from
textual data. In the field of natural sciences this task
turns out to be of particular importance, because
science aims to discover or describe facts from the
world around us. Extracting these facts from the
huge and constantly growing body of research ar-
ticles in areas such as, for example, molecular biol-
ogy, becomes increasingly necessary, and has been
the subject of intense research in the last decade
(Ananiadou et al, 2006). The fields of information
extraction and text mining have paid particular atten-
tion to this issue, seeking to automatically populate
structured databases with data extracted or inferred
from text. In both cases, the problem of speculative
language detection is a challenging one, because it
may correspond to a subjective attitude of the writer
towards the truth value of certain facts, and that in-
formation should not be lost when the fact is ex-
tracted or inferred.
When researchers express facts and relations in
their research articles, they often use speculative lan-
guage to convey their attitude to the truth of what
is said. Hedging, a term first introduced by Lakoff
(1973) to describe ?words whose job is to make
things fuzzier or less fuzzy? is ?the expression of ten-
tativeness and possibility in language use? (Hyland,
1995), and is extensively used in scientific writing.
Hyland (1996a) reports one hedge in every 50 words
of a corpus of research articles; Light et al (2004)
mention that 11% of the sentences in MEDLINE
contain speculative language. Vincze et al (2008)
report that 18% of the sentences in the scientific ab-
stracts section of the Bioscope corpus correspond to
speculations.
Early work on speculative language detection
tried to classify a sentence either as speculative
or non-speculative (see, for example, Medlock and
Briscoe (2007)). This approach does not take into
account the fact that hedging usually affects propo-
sitions or claims (Hyland, 1995) and that sentences
often include more than one of them. When the Bio-
scope corpus (Vincze et al, 2008) was developed
the notions of hedge cue (corresponding to what was
previously called just ?hedges? in the literature) and
scope (the propositions affected by the hedge cues)
were introduced. In this context, speculative lan-
guage recognition can be seen as a two-phase pro-
cess: first, the existence of a hedge cue in a sentence
is detected, and second, the scope of the induced
hedge is determined. This approach was first used
by Morante et al (2008) and subsequently in many
of the studies presented in the CoNLL-2010 Confer-
ence Shared Task (Farkas et al, 2010a), and is the
one used in this paper.
For example, the sentence
(1) This finding {suggests suggests that the BZLF1
37
promoter {may may be regulated by the degree
of squamous differentiation}may}suggests.
contains the word ?may? that acts as a hedge cue
(i.e. attenuating the affirmation); this hedge only
affects the propositions included in the subordinate
clause that contains it.
Each of these phases can be modelled (albeit with
some differences, described in the following sec-
tions) as a sequential classification task, using a sim-
ilar approach to that commonly used for named en-
tity recognition or semantic labelling: every word
in the sentence is assigned a class, identifying spans
of text (as, for example, scopes) with, for example, a
special class for the first and last element of the span.
Correctly learning these classes is the computational
task to be solved.
In this paper we present a methodology and ma-
chine learning system implementing it that, based
on previous work on speculation detection, studies
how to improve recognition by analysing learning
errors and incorporating advice from domain experts
in order to solve the errors without hurting overall
performance. The methodology proposes the use of
domain knowledge rules that suggest a class for an
instance, and shows how to incorporate them into
the learning process. In our particular task domain
knowledge is linguistic knowledge, as hedging and
scopes issues are general linguistic devices. In this
paper we are going both terms interchangeably.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2
we review previous theoretical work on speculative
language and the main computational approaches to
the task of detecting speculative sentences. Section
3 briefly describes the corpus used for training and
evaluation. In Section 4 we present the specific com-
putational task to which our methodology was ap-
plied. In Section 5 we present the learning method-
ology we propose to use, and describe the system
we implemented, including lexical, syntactic and se-
mantic attributes we experimented with. We present
and discuss the results obtained in Section 6. Finally,
in Section 7 we analyse the approach presented here
and discuss its advantages and problems, suggesting
future lines of research.
2 Related work
The grammatical phenomenon of modality, defined
as ?a category of linguistic meaning having to do
with the expression of possibility and necessity?
(von Fintel, 2006) has been extensively studied in
the linguistic literature. Modality can be expressed
using different linguistic devices: in English, for ex-
ample, modal auxiliaries (such as ?could? or ?must?),
adverbs (?perhaps?), adjectives (?possible?), or other
lexical verbs (?suggest?,?indicate?), are used to ex-
press the different ways of modality. Other lan-
guages express modality in different forms, for ex-
ample using the subjunctive mood. Palmer (2001)
considers modality as the grammaticalization of
speakers? attitudes and opinions, and epistemic
modality, in particular, applies to ?any modal sys-
tem that indicates the degree of commitment by the
speaker to what he says?.
Although hedging is a concept that is closely
related to epistemic modality, they are different:
modality is a grammatical category, whereas hedg-
ing is a pragmatic position (Morante and Sporleder,
2012). This phenomenon has been theoretically
studied in different domains and particularly in sci-
entific writing (Hyland, 1995; Hyland, 1996b; Hy-
land, 1996a).
From a computational point of view, speculative
language detection is an emerging area of research,
and it is only in the last five years that a relatively
large body of work has been produced. In the re-
mainder of this section, we survey the main ap-
proaches to hedge recognition, particularly in En-
glish and in research discourse.
Medlock and Briscoe (2007) applied a weakly su-
pervised learning algorithm to classify sentences as
speculative or non-speculative, using a corpus they
built and made publicly available. Morante and
Daelemans (2009) not only tried to detect hedge
cues but also to identify their scope, using a met-
alearning approach based on three supervised learn-
ing methods. They achieved an F1 of 84.77 for
hedge identification, and 78.54 for scope detection
(using gold-standard hedge signals) in the Abstracts
sections of the Bioscope corpus.
Task 2 of the CoNLL-2010 Conference Shared
Task (Farkas et al, 2010b) proposed solving the
problem of in-sentence hedge cue phrase identi-
38
fication and scope detection in two different do-
mains (biological publications and Wikipedia arti-
cles), based on manually annotated corpora. The
evaluation criterion was in terms of precision, recall
and F-measure, accepting a scope as correctly clas-
sified if the hedge cue and scope boundaries were
both correctly identified.
The best result on hedge cue identification (Tang
et al, 2010) obtained an F-score of 81.3 using a su-
pervised sequential learning algorithm to learn BIO
classes from lexical and shallow parsing informa-
tion, also including certain linguistic rules. For
scope detection, Morante et al (2010) obtained an
F-score of 57.3, using also a sequence classification
approach for detecting boundaries (tagged in FOL
format, where the first token of the span is marked
with an F, while the last one is marked with an
L). The attributes used included lexical information,
dependency parsing information, and some features
based on the information in the parse tree.
The approximation of Velldal et al (2010) for
scope detection was somewhat different: they de-
veloped a set of handcrafted rules, based on depen-
dency parsing and lexical features. With this ap-
proach, they achieved an F-score of 55.3, the third
best for the task. Similarly, Kilicoglu and Bergler
(2010) used a pure rule-based approach based on
constituent parse trees in addition to syntactic de-
pendency relations, and achieved the fourth best F-
score for scope detection, and the highest precision
of the whole task (62.5). In a recent paper, Vell-
dal et al (2012) reported a better F-score of 59.4 on
the same corpus for scope detection using a hybrid
approach that combined a set of rules on syntactic
features and n-gram features of surface forms and
lexical information and a machine learning system
that selected subtrees in constituent structures.
3 Corpus
The system presented in this paper uses the Bio-
scope corpus (Vincze et al, 2008) as a learning
source and for evaluation purposes. The Bioscope
corpus is a freely available corpus of medical free
texts, biological full papers and biological abstracts,
annotated at a token level with negative and specu-
lative keywords, and at sentence level with their lin-
guistic scope.
Clinical Full Abstract
#Documents 954 9 1273
#Sentences 6383 2670 11871
%Hedge Sentences 13.4 19.4 17.7
#Hedge cues 1189 714 2769
Table 1: Bioscope corpus statistics about hedging
Table 1, extracted from Vincze et al (2008), gives
some statistics related to hedge cues and sentences
for the three sub corpora included in Bioscope.
For the present study, we usee only the Abstract
sub corpus for training and evaluation. We randomly
separated 20% of the corpus, leaving it for evalu-
ation purposes. We further sub-divided the remain-
ing training corpus, separating another 20% that was
used as a held out corpus. All the models presented
here were trained on the resulting training corpus
and their performance evaluated on the held out cor-
pus. The final results were computed on the previ-
ously unseen evaluation corpus.
4 Task description
From a computational point of view, both hedge
cue identification and scope detection can be seen
as a sequence classification problem: given a sen-
tence, classify each token as part of a hedge cue (or
scope) or not. In almost every classification prob-
lem, two main approaches can be taken (although
many variations and combinations exist in the lit-
erature): build the classifier as a set of handcrafted
rules, which, from certain attributes of the instances,
decide which category it belongs to, or learn the
classifier from previously annotated examples, in a
supervised learning approach.
The rules approach is particularly suitable when
domain experts are available to write the rules, and
when features directly represent linguistic informa-
tion (for example, POS-tags) or other types of do-
main information. It is usually a time-consuming
task, but it probably grasps the subtleties of the lin-
guistic phenomena studied better, making it possible
to take them into account when building the classi-
fier. The supervised learning approach needs tagged
data; in recent years the availability of tagged text
39
has grown, and this type of method has become the
state-of-the-art solution for many NLP problems.
In our particular problem, we have both tagged
data and expert knowledge (represented by the body
of work on modality and hedging), so it seems rea-
sonable to see how we can combine the two methods
to achieve better classification performance.
4.1 Identifying hedge cues
The best results so far for this task used a token
classification approach or sequential labelling tech-
niques, as Farkas et al (2010b) note. In both cases,
every token in the sentence is assigned a class la-
bel indicating whether or not that word is acting as a
hedge cue. To allow for multiple-token hedge cues,
we identify the first token of the span with the class
B and every other token in the span with I, keeping
the O class for every token not included in the span,
as the following example shows:
(2) The/O findings/O indicate/B that/I MNDA/O
expression/O is/O . . . [ 401.8]
After token labelling, hedge cue identification can
be seen as the problem of assigning the correct class
to each token of an unlabelled sentence. Hedge cue
identification is a sequential classification task: we
want to assign classes to an entire ordered sequence
of tokens and try to maximize the probability of as-
signing the correct classes to every token in the se-
quence, considering the sequence as a whole, not
just as a set of isolated tokens.
4.2 Determining the scope of hedge cues
The second sub-task involves marking the part of the
sentence affected by the previously identified hedge
cue. Scopes are also spans of text (typically longer
than multi-word hedge cues), so we could use the
same reduction to a token classification task. Be-
ing longer, FOL classes are usually used for clas-
sification, identifying the first token of the scope
as F, the last token as L and any other token in
the sentence as O. Scope detection poses an addi-
tional problem: hedge cues cannot be nested, but
scopes (as we have already seen) usually are. In
example 1, the scope of ?may? is nested within the
scope of ?suggests?. To overcome this, Morante
and Daelemans (2009) propose to generate a dif-
ferent learning example for each cue in the sen-
tence. In this setting, each example becomes a pair
?labelled sentence, hedge cue position?. So, for ex-
ample 1, the scope learning instances would be:
(3) ?This/O finding/O suggests/F that/O the/O
BZLF1/O promoter/O may/O be/O
regulated/O by/O the/O degree/O of/O
squamous/O differentiation/L./O, 3?
(4) ?This/O finding/O suggests/O that/O the/F
BZLF1/O promoter/O may/O be/O
regulated/O by/O the/O degree/O of/O
squamous/O differentiation/L./O, 8?
Learning on these instances, and using a similar
approach to the one used in the previous task, we
should be able to identify scopes for previously un-
seen examples. Of course, the two tasks are not in-
dependent: the success of the second one depends
on the success of the first. Accordingly, evaluation
of the second task can be done using gold standard
hedge cues or with the hedge cues learned in the first
task.
5 Methodology and System Description
To approach both sequential learning tasks, we fol-
low a learning methodology (depicted in Figure 1),
that starts with an initial guess of attributes for su-
pervised learning and a learning method, and tries
to improve its performance by incorporating domain
knowledge. We consider that expressing this knowl-
edge through rules (instead of learning features) is a
better way for a domain expert to suggest new use-
ful information or to generalize certain relations be-
tween attributes and classification results when the
learning method cannot achieve this because of in-
sufficient training data. These rules, of course, have
to be converted to attributes to incorporate them into
the learning process. These attributes are what we
call knowledge rules and their generation will be de-
scribed in the Analysis section.
5.1 Preprocessing
Before learning, we propose to add every possible
item of external information to the corpus so as to
integrate different sources of knowledge (either the
result of external analysis or in the form of seman-
tic resources). After this step, all the information
is consolidated into a single structure, facilitating
40
subsequent analysis. In our case, we incorporate
POS-tagging information, resulting from the appli-
cation of the GENIA tagger (Tsuruoka et al, 2005),
and deep syntax information obtained with the ap-
plication of the Stanford Parser (Klein and Manning,
2003), leading to a syntax-oriented representation of
the training data. For a detailed description of the
enriching process, the reader is referred to Moncec-
chi et al (2010).
5.2 Initial Classifier
The first step for improving performance is, of
course, to select an initial set of learning features,
and learn from training data to obtain the first clas-
sifier, in a traditional supervised learning scenario.
The sequential classification method will depend on
the addressed task. After learning, the classifier is
applied on the held out corpus to evaluate its per-
formance (usually in terms of Precision, Recall and
F1-measure), yielding performance results and a list
of errors for analysis. This information is the source
for subsequent linguistic analysis. As such, it seems
important to provide ways to easily analyse instance
attributes and learning errors. For our tasks, we
have developed visualization tools to inspect the tree
representation of the corpus data, the learning at-
tributes, and the original and predicted classes.
5.3 Analysis
From the classifier results on the held-out corpus,
an analysis phase starts, which tries to incorporate
linguistic knowledge to improve performance.
One typical form of introducing new information
is through learning features: for example, we can
add a new attribute indicating if the current instance
(in our case, a sentence token) belongs to a list of
common hedge cues.
However, linguistic or domain knowledge can
also naturally be stated as rules that suggest the class
or list of classes that should be assigned to instances,
based on certain conditions on features, linguistic
knowledge or data observation. For example, based
on corpus annotation guidelines, a rule could state
that the scope of a verb hedge cue should be the verb
phrase that includes the cue, as in the expression
(5) This finding {suggests suggests that the BZLF1
promoter may be regulated by the degree of
squamous differentiation}suggests.
We assume that these rules take the form ?if a con-
dition C holds then classify instance X with class Y?.
In the previous example, assuming a FOL format
for scope identification, the token ?suggest? should
be assigned class F and the token ?differentiation?
should be assigned class L, assigning class O to ev-
ery other token in the sentence.
The general problem with these rules is that as
we do not know in fact if they always apply, we do
not want to directly modify the classification results,
but to incorporate them as attributes for the learning
task. To do this, we propose to use a similar ap-
proach to the one used by Rosa? (2011), i.e. to incor-
porate these rules as a new attribute, valued with the
class predictions of the rule, trying to ?help? the clas-
sifier to detect those cases where the rule should fire,
without ignoring the remaining attributes. In the pre-
vious example, this attribute would be (when the rule
condition holds) valued F or L if the token corre-
sponds to the first or last word of the enclosing verb
phrase, respectively. We have called these attributes
knowledge rules to reflect the fact that they suggest
a classification result based on domain knowledge.
This configuration allows us to incorporate
heuristic rules without caring too much about their
potential precision or recall ability: we expect the
classification method to do this for us, detecting cor-
relations between the rule result (and the rest of the
attributes) and the predicted class.
There are some cases where we do actually want
to overwrite classifier results: this is the case when
we know the classifier has made an error, because
the results are not well-formed. For example, we
have included a rule that modifies the assigned
classes when the classifier has not exactly found one
F token and one L token, as we know for sure that
something has gone wrong. In this case, we decided
to assign the scope based on a series of postprocess-
ing rules: for example, assign the scope of the en-
closing clause in the syntax tree as hedge scope, in
the case of verb hedge cues.
For sequential classification tasks, there is an ad-
ditional issue: sometimes the knowledge rule indi-
cates the beginning of the sequence, and its end can
be determined using the remaining attributes. For
example, suppose the classifier suggests the class
41
Hedge PPOS GPPOS Lemma PScope GPScope Scope
O VP S This O O O
O VP S finding O O O
O VP S suggest O O O
O VP S that O O O
O VP S the O F F
O VP S BZLF1 O O O
O VP S promoter O O O
B VP S may F O O
O VP S be O O O
O VP S regulate O O O
O VP S by O O O
O VP S the O O O
O VP S degree O O O
O VP S of O O O
O VP S squamous O O O
O VP S differentiation L L O
O VP S . O O O
Table 2: Evaluation instance where the scope ending
could not be identified
scope in the learning instance shown in table 2 (us-
ing as attributes the scopes of the parent and grand-
parent constituents for the hedge cue in the syntax
tree). If we could associate the F class suggested
by the classifier with the grand parent scope rule,
we would not be concerned about the prediction for
the last token, because we would knew it would al-
ways correspond to the last token of the grand par-
ent clause. To achieve this, we modified the class we
want to learn, introducing a new class, say X, instead
of F, to indicate that, in those cases, the L token must
not be learned, but calculated in the postprocessing
step, in terms of other attributes? values (in this ex-
ample, using the hedge cue grandparent constituent
limits). This change also affects the classes of train-
ing data instances (in the example, every training
instance where the scope coincides with the grand
parent scope attribute will have its F-classified to-
ken class changed to X).
In the previous example, if the classifier assigns
class X to the ?the? token, the postprocessing step
will change the class assigned to the ?differentiation?
token to L, no matter which class the classifier had
predicted, changing also the X class to the original
F, yielding a correctly identified scope.
After adding the new attributes and changing the
relevant class values in the training set, the process
starts over again. If performance on the held out cor-
pus improves, these attributes are added to the best
configuration so far, and used as the starting point
for a new analysis. When no further improvement
can be achieved, the process ends, yielding the best
Figure 1: Methodology overview
classifier as a result.
We applied the proposed methodology to the tasks
of hedge cue detection and scope resolution. We
were mainly interested in evaluating whether sys-
tematically applying the methodology would indeed
improve classifier performance. The following sec-
tions show how we tackled each task, and how we
managed to incorporate expert knowledge and im-
prove classification.
5.4 Hedge Cue Identification
To identify hedge cues we started with a sequen-
tial classifier based on Conditional Random Fields
(Lafferty et al, 2001), the state-of-the-art classifi-
cation method used for sequence supervised learn-
ing in many NLP tasks. The baseline configuration
we started with included a size-2 window of surface
forms to the left and right of the current token, pairs
and triples of previous/current surface forms. This
led to a highly precise classifier (an F-measure of
95.5 on the held out corpus). After a grid search
on different configurations of surface forms, lemmas
and POS tags, we found (somewhat surprisingly)
that the best precision/recall tradeoff was obtained
just using a window of size 2 of unigrams of sur-
face forms, lemmas and tokens with a slightly worse
precision than the baseline classifier, but compen-
42
Configuration P R F1
Baseline 95.5 74.0 83.4
Conf1 94.7 80.3 86.9
Conf2 91.3 84.0 87.5
Table 3: Classification performance on the held out cor-
pus for hedge cue detection. Conf1 corresponds to win-
dows of Word, Lemma and POS attributes and Conf2 in-
corporates hedge cue candidates and cooccuring words
sated by an improvement of about six points in re-
call, achieving an F-score of 86.9.
In the analysis step of the methodology we found
that most errors came from False Negatives, i.e.
words incorrectly not marked as hedges. We also
found that those words actually occurred in the train-
ing corpus as hedge cues, so we decided to add new
rule attributes indicating membership to certain se-
mantic classes. After checking the literature, we
added three attributes:
? Hyland words membership: this feature was set
to Y if the word was part of the list of words
identified by Hyland (2005)
? Hedge cue candidates: this feature was set to
Y if the word appeared as a hedge cue in the
training corpus
? Words co-occurring with hedge cue candidates:
this feature was set to Y if the word cooccured
with a hedge cue candidate in the training cor-
pus. This feature is based on the observation
that 43% of the hedges in a corpus of scientific
articles occur in the same sentence as at least
another device (Hyland, 1995).
After adding these attributes and tuning the win-
dow sizes, performance improved to an F-score of
87.5 in the held-out corpus
5.5 Scope identification
To learn scope boundaries, we started with a similar
configuration of a CRF classifier, using a window of
size 2 of surface forms, lemmas and POS-tags, and
the hedge cue identification attribute (either obtained
from the training corpus when using gold standard
hedge cues or learned in the previous step), achiev-
ing a performance of 63.7 in terms of F-measure.
When we incorporated information in the form of a
knowledge rule that suggested the scope of the con-
stituent of the parsing tree headed by the parent node
of the first word of the hedge cue, and an attribute
containing the parent POS-tag, performance rapidly
improved about two points measured in terms of F-
score.
After several iterations, and analyzing classifica-
tion errors, we included several knowledge rules, at-
tributes and postprocessing rules that dramatically
improved performance on the held-out corpus:
? We included attributes for the scope of the next
three ancestors of the first word of the hedge
cue in the parsing tree, and their respective
POS-tags, in a similar way as with the parent.
We also included a trigram with the ancestors
POS from the word upward in the tree.
? For parent and grandparent scopes, we incor-
porated X and Y classes instead of F, and mod-
ified postprocessing to use the last token of the
corresponding scope when one of these classes
was learned.
? We modified the ancestors scopes to reflect
some corpus annotation guidelines or other cri-
teria induced after data examination. For ex-
ample, we decided not to include adverbial
phrases or prepositional phrases at the begin-
ning of scopes, when they corresponded to a
clause, as in
(6) In addition,{unwanted and potentially
hazardous specificities may be
elicited. . .}
? We added postprocessing rules to cope with
cases where (probably due to insufficient train-
ing data), the classifier missclasified certain in-
stances. For example, we forced classification
to use the next enclosing clause (instead of verb
phrase), when the hedge cue was a verb conju-
gated in passive voice, as in
(7) {GATA3 , a member of the GATA family
that is abundantly expressed in the
T-lymphocyte lineage , is thought to
participate in ...}.
43
Configuration Gold-P P R F1
Baseline 66.4 68.6 59.6 63.8
Conf1 68.7 71.3 61.8 66.2
Conf2 73.3 75.6 65.4 70.1
Conf3 80.9 82.1 71.3 76.3
Conf4 88.2 82.0 76.3 79.1
Table 4: Classification performance on the held out cor-
pus. The baseline used a window of Word, Lemma,
POS attributes and hedge cue tag; Conf1 included parent
scopes, Conf2 added grandparents information; Conf3
added postprocessing rules. Finally, Conf4 used adjusted
scopes and incorporated new postprocessing rules
? We excluded references at the end of sentences
from all the calculated scopes.
? We forced classification to the next S,VP or NP
ancestor constituent in the syntax tree (depend-
ing on the hedge cue POS), when full scopes
could not be determined by the statistical clas-
sifier (missing either L or F, or learning more
than one of them in the same sentence).
Table 4 summarizes the results of scope identifi-
cation in the held out corpus. The first results were
obtained using gold-standard hedge cues, while the
second ones used the hedge cues learned in the pre-
vious step (for hedge cue identification, we used the
best configuration we found). In the gold-standard
results, Precision, Recall and the F-measure are
the same because every False Positive (incorrectly
marked scope) implied a False Negative (the missed
right scope).
6 Evaluation
To determine classifier performance, we evaluated
the classifiers found after improvement on the eval-
uation corpus. We also evaluated the less efficient
classifiers to see whether applying the iterative im-
provement had overfitted the classifier to the corpus.
To evaluate scope detection, we used the best con-
figuration found in the evaluation corpus for hedge
cue identification. Tables 5 and 6 show the results
for the hedge cue recognition and scope resolution,
respectively. In both tasks, classifier performance
Configuration P R F1
Baseline 97.9 78.0 86.8
Conf1 95.9 84.9 90.1
Conf2 94.1 88.6 91.3
Table 5: Classification performance on the evaluation
corpus for hedge cue detection
Configuration Gold-P P R F1
Baseline 74.0 71.9 68.1 70.0
Conf1 76.5 74.4 70.2 72.3
Conf2 80.0 77.2 72.9 75.0
Conf3 83.1 80.0 75.2 77.3
Conf4 84.7 80.1 75.8 77.9
Table 6: Classification performance on the evaluation
corpus for scope detection
improved in a similar way to the results obtained on
the held out corpus.
Finally, to compare our results with state-of-the-
art methods (even though that was not the main
objective of the study), we used the corpus of de
CoNLL 2010 Shared Task to train and evaluate our
classifiers, using the best configurations found in the
evaluation corpus, and obtained competitive results
in both subtasks of Task 2. Our classifier for hedge
cue detection achieved an F-measure of 79.9, bet-
ter than the third position in the Shared Task for
hedge identification. Scope detection results (us-
ing learned hedge cues) achieved an F-measure of
54.7, performing better than the fifth result in the
corresponding task, and five points below the best
results obtained so far in the corpus (Velldal et al,
Hedge cue iden-
tification
Scope detection
Best results 81.7/81.0/81.3 59.6/55.2/57.3
Our results 83.2/76.8/79.9 56.7/52.8/54.7
Table 7: Classification performance compared with
best results in CoNLL Shared Task. Figures represent
Precision/Recall/F1-measure
44
2012). Table 7 summarizes these results in terms of
Precision/Recall/F1-measure.
7 Conclusions and Future Research
In this paper we have presented an iterative method-
ology to improve classifier performance by incor-
porating linguistic knowledge, and proposed a way
to incorporate domain rules to the learning process.
We applied the methodology to the task of hedge
cue recognition and scope finding, improving per-
formance by incorporating information of training
corpus occurrences and co-occurrences for the first
task, and syntax constituents information for the sec-
ond. In both tasks, results were competitive with
the best results obtained so far on a publicly avail-
able corpus. This methodology could be easily used
for other sequential (or even traditional) classifica-
tion tasks.
Two directions are planned for future research:
first, to improve the classifier results by incorporat-
ing more knowledge rules such as those described by
Velldal et al (2012) or semantic resources, specially
for the scope detection task. Second, to improve the
methodology, for example by adding some way to
select the most common errors in the held out cor-
pus and write rules based on their examination.
References
S. Ananiadou, D. Kell, and J. Tsuj. 2006. Text min-
ing and its potential applications in systems biology.
Trends in Biotechnology, 24(12):571?579, December.
Richa?rd Farkas, Veronika Vincze, Gyo?rgy Mo?ra, Ja?nos
Csirik, and Gyo?rgy Szarvas. 2010a. The CoNLL-
2010 shared task: Learning to detect hedges and their
scope in natural language text. In Proceedings of
the Fourteenth Conference on Computational Natural
Language Learning, pages 1?12, Uppsala, Sweden,
July. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Richa?rd Farkas, Veronika Vincze, Gyo?rgy Szarvas,
Gyo?rgy Mo?ra, and Ja?nos Csirik, editors. 2010b. Pro-
ceedings of the Fourteenth Conference on Computa-
tional Natural Language Learning. Association for
Computational Linguistics, Uppsala, Sweden, July.
Ken Hyland. 1995. The author in the text: Hedging sci-
entific writing. Hongkong Papers in Linguistics and
Language Teaching, 18:33?42.
Ken Hyland. 1996a. Talking to the academy: Forms of
hedging in science research articles. Written Commu-
nication, 13(2):251?281.
Ken Hyland. 1996b. Writing without conviction? Hedg-
ing in science research articles. Applied Linguistics,
17(4):433?454, December.
Ken Hyland. 2005. Metadiscourse: Exploring Interac-
tion in Writing. Continuum Discourse. Continuum.
Halil Kilicoglu and Sabine Bergler. 2010. A high-
precision approach to detecting hedges and their
scopes. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth Conference
on Computational Natural Language Learning, pages
70?77, Uppsala, Sweden, July. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning. 2003. Accu-
rate unlexicalized parsing. In ACL ?03: Proceedings
of the 41st Annual Meeting on Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 423?430, Morristown, NJ,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
John Lafferty, Andrew McCallum, and Fernando Pereira.
2001. Conditional random fields: Probabilistic mod-
els for segmenting and labeling sequence data. In Pro-
ceedings of ICML-01, pages 282?289.
George Lakoff. 1973. Hedges: A study in meaning crite-
ria and the logic of fuzzy concepts. Journal of Philo-
sophical Logic, 2(4):458?508, October.
Marc Light, Xin Y. Qiu, and Padmini Srinivasan. 2004.
The language of bioscience: Facts, speculations, and
statements in between. In Lynette Hirschman and
James Pustejovsky, editors, HLT-NAACL 2004 Work-
shop: BioLINK 2004, Linking Biological Literature,
Ontologies and Databases, pages 17?24, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA, May. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Ben Medlock and Ted Briscoe. 2007. Weakly supervised
learning for hedge classification in scientific literature.
In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation of Computational Linguistics.
Guillermo Moncecchi, Jean-Luc Minel, and Dina Won-
sever. 2010. Enriching the bioscope corpus with lex-
ical and syntactic information. In Workshop in Natu-
ral Language Processing and Web-based Tecnhologies
2010, pages 137?146, November.
Roser Morante and Walter Daelemans. 2009. Learn-
ing the scope of hedge cues in biomedical texts. In
Proceedings of the BioNLP 2009 Workshop, pages 28?
36, Boulder, Colorado, June. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Roser Morante and Caroline Sporleder. 2012. Modal-
ity and negation: An introduction to the special issue.
Computational Linguistics, pages 1?72, February.
Roser Morante, Anthony Liekens, and Walter Daele-
mans. 2008. Learning the scope of negation in
biomedical texts. In EMNLP ?08: Proceedings of
the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 715?724, Morristown, NJ,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
45
Roser Morante, Vincent Van Asch, and Walter Daele-
mans. 2010. Memory-based resolution of in-sentence
scopes of hedge cues. In Proceedings of the Four-
teenth Conference on Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning, pages 40?47, Uppsala, Sweden, July.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
R. F. Palmer. 2001. Mood and Modality. Cambridge
Textbooks in Linguistics. Cambridge University Press,
New York.
Aiala Rosa?. 2011. Identificacio?n de opiniones de difer-
entes fuentes en textos en espan?ol. Ph.D. thesis, Uni-
versidad de la Repu?blica (Uruguay), Universite? Paris
Ouest (France), September.
Buzhou Tang, Xiaolong Wang, Xuan Wang, Bo Yuan,
and Shixi Fan. 2010. A cascade method for detect-
ing hedges and their scope in natural language text.
In Proceedings of the Fourteenth Conference on Com-
putational Natural Language Learning, pages 13?17,
Uppsala, Sweden, July. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Yoshimasa Tsuruoka, Yuka Tateishi, Jin-Dong Kim,
Tomoko Ohta, John McNaught, Sophia Ananiadou,
and Jun?ichi Tsujii. 2005. Developing a robust Part-
of-Speech tagger for biomedical text. In Panayiotis
Bozanis and Elias N. Houstis, editors, Advances in In-
formatics, volume 3746, chapter 36, pages 382?392.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Erik Velldal, Lilja ?vrelid, and Stephan Oepen. 2010.
Resolving speculation: Maxent cue classification and
dependency-based scope rules. In Proceedings of
the Fourteenth Conference on Computational Natural
Language Learning, pages 48?55, Uppsala, Sweden,
July. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Erik Velldal, Lilja ?vrelid, Jonathon Read, and Stephan
Oepen. 2012. Speculation and negation: Rules,
rankers, and the role of syntax. Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 1?64, February.
Veronika Vincze, Gyorgy Szarvas, Richard Farkas, Gy-
orgy Mora, and Janos Csirik. 2008. The bioscope cor-
pus: biomedical texts annotated for uncertainty, nega-
tion and their scopes. BMC Bioinformatics, 9(Suppl
11):S9+.
Kail von Fintel, 2006. Modality and Language. MacMil-
lan Reference USA.
46
