Proceedings of SIGDIAL 2010: the 11th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 87?90,
The University of Tokyo, September 24-25, 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Dialogue Management Based on Entities and Constraints  
 
 Yushi Xu  Stephanie Seneff 
Spoken Language Systems Group 
MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 
 United States 
 {yushixu, seneff}@csail.mit.edu 
 
  
 
Abstract 
This paper introduces a new dialogue man-
agement framework for goal-directed conver-
sations. A declarative specification defines the 
domain-specific elements and guides the di-
alogue manager, which communicates with the 
knowledge sources to complete the specified 
goal. The user is viewed as another knowledge 
source. The dialogue manager finds the next 
action by a mixture of rule-based reasoning 
and a simple statistical model. Implementation 
in the flight-reservation domain demonstrates 
that the framework enables the developer to 
easily build a conversational dialogue system.  
1 Introduction 
Conversational systems can be classified into 
two distinct classes: goal-directed and casual 
chatting. For goal-directed systems, the system is 
usually more ?knowledgeable? than the user, and  
it attempts to satisfy user-specified goals. The 
system?s conversational strategies seek the most 
efficient path to reach closure and end the con-
versation (Smith, Hipp, & Biermann, 1995).  
    An essential commonality among different 
goal-directed applications is that, at the end of a 
successful conversation, the system presents the 
user with a ?goal? entity, be it a flight itinerary, a 
route path, or a shopping order. Different con-
versations result from different properties of the 
goal entities and different constraints set by the 
knowledge sources. The properties define the 
necessary and/or relevant information, such as 
flight numbers in the flight itinerary.  Constraints 
specify the means to obtain such information. 
For examples fields ?source?, ?destination? and 
?date? are required to search for a flight. Once 
the properties and constraints are known, dialo-
gue rules can easily map to dialogue actions. 
    This paper introduces a dialogue management 
framework for goal-directed conversation based 
on entity and knowledge source specification. 
The user is viewed as a collaborator with the di-
alogue manager, instead of a problem-raiser. The 
dialogue manager follows a set of definitions and 
constraints, and eventually realizes the goal enti-
ty. It also incorporates a simple statistical engine 
to handle certain decisions. 
2 Related Work 
In recent years, statistical methods have gained 
popularity in dialogue system research.  Partially 
Observable Markov decision processes have 
been the focus of a number of papers (Levin, 
Pieraccini, & Eckert, 1997; Scheffler & Young, 
2001; Frampton & Lemon, 2006; Williams & 
Young, 2007). These approaches turn the dialo-
gue interaction strategy into an optimization 
problem. The dialogue manager selects actions 
prescribed by the policy that maximizes the re-
ward function (Lemon & Pietquin, 2007). This 
machine learning formulation of the problem 
automates system development, thus freeing the 
developers from hand-coded rules. 
   Other researchers have continued research on 
rule-based frameworks, in part because they are 
easier to control and maintain. One common ap-
proach is to allow developers to specify the tasks, 
either using a conditioned sequential script (Zue, 
et al, 2000; Seneff, 2002), or using a task hie-
rarchy (Hochberg, Kambhatla, & Roukos, 2002). 
In (Bohus & Rudnicky, 2003)?s work, a tree of 
dialogue agents, each of which handles different 
dialogue actions, is specified to control the di-
alogue progress. The knowledge has also been 
specified either by first order logic (B?hler & 
Minker, 2005) or ontology information (Milward 
& Beveridge, 2004). 
3 Dialogue Manager 
Figure 1 illustrates the architecture of the pro-
posed dialogue management framework. Com-
87
munication with the dialogue manager (DM) is 
via ?E-forms? (Electronic forms), which consist 
of language-independent key-value pairs. The 
language understanding and language generation 
components mediate between the DM and vari-
ous knowledge sources (KS), including the user, 
to interpret the output from the KS and generate 
input that the KS can understand. Each KS han-
dles one or more sub-domains. For example, a 
date/time KS can resolve a date expression such 
as ?next Tuesday? to a unique date; a flight data-
base can provide flight information. The KSes 
are provided by the developer. They can be local 
(a library) or external (a separate executable).  
Within this architecture, the user is viewed as 
a special KS, who understands and speaks a nat-
ural language, so that the whole architecture is 
completely DM-centered, as shown in Figure 1. 
An external language understanding system 
parses the original input into an E-form, and an 
external language generation component con-
verts the output E-form into the desired natural 
language. Each particular communication with 
the user is analogous to other communications 
with the various KSes.  The user is always 
ranked the lowest in the priority list of the KSes, 
i.e., only when other knowledge sources cannot 
provide the desired information does the DM try 
to ask the user.  
 
Figure 1. System Framework. 
For example, in the flight reservation system, 
suppose the DM first tries to determine the 
source airport. If there exists a KS that contains 
this user?s home airport information, the DM will 
adopt it. If no other KS can provide the informa-
tion, the DM asks the user for the departure city. 
3.1 Entity-Based Specification  
Our framework uses an entity-based declarative 
domain specification. Instead of providing the 
action sequence in the domain, the developer 
provides the desired form of the goal entity, and 
the relationships among all relevant entities.  
    The specification is decomposed into two parts. 
The first part is the declaration of the knowledge 
sources. Each KS may contain one or more sub-
domains, and an associated ?nation? defines the 
language processing parameters. 
    The second part is the entity type definition. 
For a particular domain, there is one goal entity 
type, and an arbitrary number of other entity 
types, e.g., two entity types are defined in the 
flight reservation system: ?itinerary? and ?flight.?  
The definition of an entity type consists of a set 
of members, including their names, types and 
knowledge domain. A logical expression states 
the conditions under which the entity can be re-
garded as completed; e.g., a completed itinerary 
must contain one or more flights. The entity de-
finition can also include optional elements such 
as comparative/superlative modifiers or custo-
mized command-action and task-action map-
pings, described in more detail later. 
The entity-based specification has an advan-
tage over an action-based specification in two 
aspects. First, it is easier to define all the entities 
in a dialogue domain than to list all the possible 
actions, so the specification is more compact and 
readable. Secondly, the completion condition and 
the KS?s constraints capture the underlying mo-
tivation of the dialogue actions. 
 
Figure 2. The Main Loop of the DM. 
3.2 Dialogue Execution  
Similar to the Information-State-Update (Larsson 
& Traum, 2000) idea, the DM maintains an in-
ternal state space with all up-to-date information 
about the entities. It also keeps a task list tree 
with a root task ?complete goal.? In task execu-
tion, subtasks (child node) and/or subsequent 
(right sibling node) tasks are issued. Each time 
the left-most leaf task is executed, and when a 
task is completed, the DM checks all tasks and 
removes those that have been rendered obsolete.  
    Ten basic tasks are pre-defined in the DM, 
including complete_entity, inquire_ks, and some 
other tasks related to entity manipulation. A 
complete_entity task evaluates the completion 
 
Dialogue 
Manager 
Language 
Generation 
Language 
Understanding 
External KS Local KS User 
Domain Specification 
 E-form in 
Extract 
Information 
Issue New 
Tasks 
Retrieve Left-
Most Task 
Execute Task 
Remove 
Obsolete Tasks 
Pause? 
E-form out 
User Command? 
Y 
N 
Y 
N 
88
conditions and issues appropriate tasks if they 
are unmet. An inquire_ks task handles communi-
cation with the KSes, and issues subtasks if the 
query does not satisfy the constraints.  A default 
action associated with each task can be replaced 
by customized task-action mappings if needed. 
Figure 2 shows the main loop of the DM. The 
process loops until a ?pause? is signaled, which 
indicates to await the user?s spoken response. An 
example will be given in Section 4. 
3.3 Statistical Inference  
To cope with situations that rules cannot handle 
easily, the framework incorporates a simple sta-
tistical engine using a Space Vector Model.  It is 
designed only to support inference on specific 
small problems, for example, to decide when to 
ask the user for confirmation of a task. Models 
are built for each of the inference problems. The 
output label of a new data point is computed by 
weighting the labels of all existing data by their 
inverse distances to the new data point.   
    Equations (1) to (3) show the detailed math of 
the computation, where x is the new data point 
and dj is the j-th existing data point. ? is a fading 
coefficient which ranges from 0 and 1. ?, a cor-
rection weight, has a higher value for data points 
resulting from manual correction. ?(?)  is 1 when 
the two inputs are equal and 0 otherwise. sim(x, 
d) defines the similarity between the new data 
point and the existing data point. Function dis(?) 
indicates the distance for a particular dimension, 
which is specified by the developer. The weight 
for each dimension wi is proportional to the 
count of distinct values of the particular dimen-
sion c(Di) and the mutual information between 
the dimension and the output label.  = argmax ,  ? ,