Using Topic Sentiment Sentences to Recognize Sentiment      
Polarity in Chinese Reviews
Jiang Yang
School of Literature
Communication University of China
yangjiang@cuc.edu.cn
Min Hou
Broadcast Media Language Branch
Communication University of China
houminxx@263.net
Abstract
An approach to recognizing sentiment 
polarity in Chinese reviews based on 
topic sentiment sentences is presented.
Considering the features of Chinese re-
views, we firstly identify the topic of a 
review using an n-gram matching ap-
proach. To extract candidate topic senti-
ment sentences, we compute the seman-
tic similarity between a given sentence 
and the ascertained topic and meanwhile 
determine whether the sentence is sub-
jective. A certain number of these sen-
tences are then selected as representa-
tives according to their semantic simi-
larity value with relation to the topic. 
The average value of the representative 
topic sentiment sentences is calculated 
and taken as the sentiment polarity of a 
review. Experiment results show that the 
proposed method is feasible and can 
achieve relatively high precision.
1 Introduction
Sentiment analysis, also known as ?opinion min-
ing?, is the problem of analyzing the sentiment, 
opinion or any other subjectivity of written texts. 
With its potential applications to opinion search 
engine, public opinion analysis, product promo-
tion, etc., sentiment analysis has been receiving 
increasing interest in recent years.
What sentiment analysis processes are texts 
with subjectivity which mainly describe the 
writers? (or on behalf of a group or an organiza-
tion) private thoughts, attitudes or opinions on 
phenomena, persons, affairs and so on. Although 
various kinds of writings such as narration and 
exposition are possible to contain subjectivity, 
argumentation is the focus of sentiment analysis 
on which researchers put much strength at 
present. As a kind of argumentation and a typi-
cal and common subjective text, a review com-
ments on some specific phenomenon, person or 
affair. Reviews, especially news reviews, have a 
certain degree of influence on public opinion in 
virtue of mass media. Domain-specific reviews 
like automobile, hotel, movie reviews have po-
tential commercial value respectively. Therefore, 
recognizing sentiment polarity (SP thereafter) in 
reviews becomes necessary and practical.
Language is a hierarchical symbol system, 
which allows sentiment analysis to be conducted 
on different language levels. In general, most 
current studies concerning sentiment analysis are 
about determining the SP of words, phrases or 
sentences. Only a fraction of them addressed 
discourse level sentiment analysis. This paper, 
aiming at recognizing the overall SP of Chinese 
reviews, proposes a topic-sentiment-sentence 
based approach to carry out a discourse level 
sentiment analysis.
The remainder of this paper is organized as 
follows. Related works are presented in section 2. 
Section 3 is problem analysis and method de-
scription. Section 4 describes topic identification 
and topic sentiment sentence extraction. Section 
5 is about recognizing SP in Chinese reviews 
using the extracted topic sentiment sentences. 
Section 6 is the experiment results and section 7 
is the conclusion.
2 Related Works
The SP determination can be generally 
conducted on three language levels: the word 
level, the sentence level and the discourse level. 
The two main popular approaches, especially in 
real-world applications, have been based on 
machine learning techniques and based on 
semantic analysis techniques. Research aiming 
at recognizing the overall SP of discourse is 
represented by Turney (2002), Pang et al (2002) 
and Yi et al (2003). Turney proposed an 
unsupervised learning algorithm to classify the 
sentiment orientation of reviews. The mutual 
information difference between the given word 
or phrase and the words ?poor? and ?excellent? 
was calculated respectively to measure its 
semantic orientation; then the average semantic 
orientation of all the words in a given text was 
regarded as the overall semantic orientation. 
Pang et al employed such classification models 
as Na?ve Bayesian model, Maximum Entropy 
model and Support Vector Machine model to 
classify the semantic orientation of movie 
reviews, in which the features of models selected 
included unigrams, bigrams, parts of speech, 
word position, feature frequency and feature 
presence. Yi et al firstly analyzed the 
grammatical structure of sentences using NLP 
techniques. The semantic orientation of a 
sentence then is determined by referring to a 
sentiment lexicon and a sentiment pattern 
database. They applied the approach to 
classifying the overall SP of document.
Other related works are concerning the senti-
ment analysis of sentences and words which un-
derlie recognizing the overall SP of a whole text. 
Wiebe et al (2000, 2004) proved that the subjec-
tivity of a sentence could be judged according to 
the adjectives in it. Kim & Hovy (2004) and 
Weibe & Riloff (2005) explored the classifica-
tion of subjective and objective sentences. Yu et 
al. (2003) put forward an approach to extract 
opinionated sentences in order to serve an auto-
matic question answering system. The extracted 
sentences were classified and the SP of each was 
determined. Hu & Liu (2004) took advantage of 
WordNet to obtain sentiment words and their 
orientations. The polarity of a sentence thus is 
judged according to the dominant semantic 
orientation of sentiment words.
For Chinese, Wang et al (2005) proposed a 
hybrid approach to recognize the semantic orien-
tations of sentences in reviews based on heuris-
tic rules and Bayesian classification technique. 
Wang et al (2007) applied a Multi-redundant-
labeled CRFs method on sentence sentiment 
analysis. Experiments showed it solved ordinal 
regression problems effectively and obtained 
global optimal result over multiple cascaded 
subtasks. Meng et al (2008) designed a recogni-
tion system of text valence based on key word 
template in which they proposed template 
matching arithmetic and text valence value 
arithmetic for the calculation of the valence of 
Chinese texts. Zheng et al (2009) conducted a 
research on sentiment analysis to Chinese travel-
er reviews by SVM algorithm.
3 Problem Analysis and Method De-
scription
3.1 Discourse Structure of Chinese Texts
The overall SP of a Chinese text is the sum of 
the SP of all its component parts. However, the 
importance of each component part in a given 
text varies. This is because no matter which 
writing style a text belongs to, it has a particular 
discourse structure which determines the impor-
tance of the component parts.
Discourse structure is the organization and 
constitution law of language units (greater than 
sentence) within a discourse. It formally indi-
cates the hierarchy of discourse contents, seman-
tically guarantees the integrity of discourse con-
tents and logically reflects the coherence of dis-
course contents. In a word, discourse structure is 
the unity of discourse form, discourse meaning 
and discourse logic. A discourse consists of sev-
eral semantic parts. The central meaning of a 
discourse is the aggregation of the central mean-
ing of its semantic parts in a certain logic way. A 
semantic part is the set of paragraphs. It may be 
composed of as small as only a paragraph or as 
large as even a whole chapter. The basis for par-
titioning semantic parts depends on the writing 
styles, i.e., narration, description, argumentation 
and exposition. For argumentation, a typical ar-
gumentation may be divided into 4 parts as in-
troduction, viewpoint presentation, demonstra-
tion and conclusion. Recognizing semantic parts 
has great significance in understanding the cen-
tral idea of a text.
3.2 Features of Chinese Reviews
Chinese reviews are a kind of argumentation. 
According to what is reviewed, they can be ca-
tegorized into finance reviews (e.g., stock re-
view), literature reviews (e.g., book review), 
product reviews (e.g., automobile review), cur-
rent affairs reviews (e.g., news review), etc. 
Generally speaking, Chinese reviews bear the 
following features.
Firstly, the topic of a Chinese review is expli-
cit. A Chinese review always comments on some 
specific phenomenon, person or affair. The ob-
ject it deals with is very explicit.
Secondly, a Chinese review has generally on-
ly one topic. Thus, in a Chinese review, the re-
viewer always explicitly expresses his/her opi-
nion towards the topic. The sentiment of the dis-
cussed topic is rather explicit. Some Chinese 
reviews may discuss subtopics and correspond-
ing opinions on each subtopic may be shown. 
But it will not change or influence the reviewer?s 
basic sentiment on the topic.
Thirdly, the topic of a Chinese review is 
closely related to its title. Chinese Reviews often 
use concise expressions in titles to show clearly 
the topics or the themes. Therefore, the topic of 
a review can generally be found in its title.
Fourthly, Chinese reviews have fixed expres-
sion patterns. A typical Chinese review consists 
of 4 semantic parts as is mentioned above. The 
reviewer?s sentiment expressions towards the 
topic generally appears in the ?viewpoint presen-
tation? and ?conclusion? part.
To prove the correctness of our knowledge of 
Chinese reviews, we conducted a survey on 560 
Chinese reviews which were collected from 
newspapers and the Internet. The manually ex-
amined results, which are showed as follows, 
verify the above mentioned 4 features of Chi-
nese reviews.
Table 1 A Survey on Features of Chinese Reviews
Features Percent
Explicit Topic 100
One Topic 100
Title Reflects Topic 99.64
Discourse
Structure
I-D-C1 40.17
I-V-D-C 33.9
I-V-D 18.75
others 7.18
1
?I? stands for introduction, ?D? for demonstration, ?C? for 
conclusion and ?V? for viewpoint presentation.
3.3 Topic Sentiment Sentence
According to the above analysis, the SP of a 
Chinese review is manifested by a certain ex-
pression pattern through several semantic parts, 
and its overall SP is generally expressed in the 
?viewpoint presentation? and ?conclusion? part. 
Thus a straightforward idea to obtain the SP of a 
Chinese review is to: (1) partition the review 
into several semantic parts; (2) distinguish the
viewpoint presentation part and the conclusion 
part; (3) analyze only the sentiment of the view-
point presentation part and the conclusion part 
and take the result as the overall SP of the re-
view. Intuitively, this seemingly simple method 
can achieve very good result.
However, to perform an automatic discourse 
structure analysis itself is actually a hard task 
and will lose precision during the processing; to 
distinguish different semantic parts by means of 
language cues without a discourse structure 
analysis can only solve some instead of all prob-
lems. Therefore, we introduce the concept of 
topic sentiment sentence. 
A topic sentiment sentence is defined as a sen-
tence bearing both the topic concept and senti-
ment towards that topic. The topic sentiment 
sentences in a Chinese review are the intersec-
tion of the topic sentences and sentiment sen-
tences in it. Topic sentiment sentences are repre-
sentative for sentiment analysis because, firstly, 
they are homogeneous in topic. And more im-
portantly, the sentiment bearing in these sen-
tences refer to the same topic. This makes sen-
timent in each sentence computable. Earlier 
works like Turney (2002) or Pang et al(2002) 
don?t take into account the topic and the senti-
ment relating to that topic together as a whole, 
thus makes the result less reliable in that the sen-
timent words and phrases processed are not ho-
mogeneous in topic. Secondly, the degree of se-
mantic similarity between topic sentiment sen-
tences and the topic of the review reflects a po-
tential relatedness between the topic sentiment 
sentences and their corresponding semantic parts. 
The more a topic sentiment sentence is similar in 
meaning to the topic, the more likely it appears 
in the viewpoint presentation part or conclusion 
part. This is just the reason we avoid an analysis 
of discourse structure of a review. We also try to 
avoid an automatic partition of semantic parts of 
a review since the topic sentiment sentences 
themselves potentially point out the correspond-
ing semantic parts they belong to. Thirdly, the 
distribution of the topic sentiment sentences, 
including density and extensity, reflects more or 
less the writer?s intensity of attitude toward what 
is being discussed and can help with detailed 
sentiment analysis.
To summarize, with topic sentiment sentences, 
we can compute the SP of a Chinese review in a 
more simple and effective way without an auto-
matic discourse structure analysis. Moreover, we 
can obtain a ?shallow? structure since topic sen-
timent sentences potentially reflect the discourse 
structure of Chinese reviews. 
3.4 Method
We thus propose a new method to recognize the 
sentiment polarity of Chinese reviews using top-
ic sentiment sentences. It is described as follows. 
(1) Identify the topic of a review using an n-
gram matching approach. (2) Extract candidate 
topic sentiment sentences, compute the semantic 
similarity between a given sentence and the as-
certained topic and meanwhile determine wheth-
er the sentence is subjective. (3) A certain num-
ber of these sentences are selected as representa-
tives according to their semantic similarity value 
with relation to the topic. The average value of 
the representative topic sentiment sentences is 
calculated and taken as the sentiment polarity of 
a review. 
Experiment results show that the proposed 
method is feasible and can achieve relatively 
high precision.
4 Topic Identification and Topic Sen-
timent Sentence Extraction
4.1 Topic Identification of Chinese Reviews
The topic of a Chinese review is presented as a 
set of strings T={Wn1, Wn2, ?, Wni}, in which 
Wni refers to a word or several continuous words
and n indicates the number of words in a Wni.
The evaluation of whether any candidate Wni
belongs to T depends on its position and fre-
quency. Wni?s position reflects its distribution 
degree D(Wni): the more extensive Wni distri-
butes in a review, the more likely it relates to the 
topic. Wni?s frequency reflects its importance 
degree I(Wni): the more times Wni appears in a 
review, the more likely it relates to the topic. 
Thus the degree of Wni belongs to T is defined 
as membership degree C(Wni) and is measured 
by the formula:
C(Wn
i
)= ?? D(Wn
i
) +?? I(Wn
i
)    (1)
In (1), D(Wni) is determined by the number of 
paragraphs in which D(Wni) appears and the 
total number of paragraphs of a text,  I(Wni) is 
the binary logarithm of the frequency of Wni in a 
text, ? and ? are the weighted coefficients to ad-
just the weights of D(Wni) and I(Wni).
In order to quickly obtain T, an n-gram 
matching based approach is applied according to 
the following algorithm.
(1) Strings separated by punctuations in the 
title and the main text are segmented and then 
stored respectively in queue Tq and Bq.
(2) For n=1 to m (1?m? the maximum 
length of Tq), take out a Wni from Tq successive-
ly and search it in Bq. If there is a Wni in Bq,
then insert it into the index table G={Wni, posi-
tion, frequency}. When n=1, which means there 
is only one word in Wni, Wni should be a con-
tent word.
(3) Calculate the value of C(Wni) for every 
Wni and add Wni to T if its C(Wni) is greater 
than the threshold Lc. In this paper, we choose 
?=0.25, ?=1, and Lc=0.8 according to our expe-
rience and experiment results.
4.2 The Extraction of Topic Sentiment Sen-
tences
Topic sentiment sentences are essential in the 
analysis of the SP of reviews. Sentiment analysis 
based on topic sentiment sentences excludes un-
related sentiment and makes ?homogeneous? 
sentiment computable. Topic sentiment sen-
tences are extracted by 2 steps.
(1) Extract topic sentences from a review.
Given a definite T, to extract topic sentences is 
actually the computing of semantic similarity of 
candidate sentences and the topic T. Factors that 
influence the similarity degree are the amount of 
identical words and strings, the length of iden-
tical words and strings, the position of a candi-
date sentence, semantic similarity of non-
identical words. 
The amount of identical words and strings.
The more identical words or strings a candidate 
sentence has with T, the more likely they are 
similar in topic. 
The length of identical words and strings.
The longer an identical string (counted by word) 
shared by a candidate sentence and T, the more 
likely they are similar in topic. 
The position of a candidate sentence. We 
hold that sentences in a paragraph are not in the 
same importance. As is the general common 
knowledge, the beginning and ending sentence 
in a paragraph are often more important than 
other sentences and thus receive more weights. 
We use HowNet, a Chinese ontology, to com-
pute the semantic similarity and assign each 
candidate sentence a value of similarity. If the 
similarity value of a sentence is greater than the 
threshold Ls, it is taken as a topic sentence.
(2) Extract sentiment sentences from topic 
sentences. We use a precompiled sentiment lex-
icon to roughly judge whether a sentence ex-
presses sentiment or not. 
Through the above procedures, the topic sen-
timent sentences in a Chinese review, each with 
a value indicating the distance in similarity with 
the topic, are extracted and arranged into order 
by value. We call them the set of candidate topic 
sentiment sentences.
5 Recognizing the Sentiment Polarity 
Based on Topic Sentiment Sentences
Based on section 3.3, in Chinese reviews, the 
higher similarity degree a topic sentiment sen-
tence gets, the more likely it is a key sentence 
expressing the writers? basic sentiment orienta-
tion. But meanwhile, to avoid excessively rely-
ing on too few candidate topic sentiment sen-
tences, more sentences are required to be ana-
lyzed to assure precision. Therefore, the number 
of sentences selected from the set of candidate 
topic sentiment sentences for final sentiment 
analysis is quite a question worth careful consid-
eration. 
Different Chinese reviews have different 
numbers of topic sentiment sentences. How 
many topic sentiment sentences a review has is 
determined by various factors. We find out, after 
an investigation of 560 Chinese reviews, that 
generally a Chinese review has not more than 7 
topic sentiment sentences and the average num-
ber of that is about 4. Besides, long reviews tend 
to have rather more topic sentiment sentence. 
Thus we define that for any review the number 
of topic sentiment sentences which are needed to 
be analyzed as: 
N(tss) ??                                                (2)
? LQ WKH DERYH IRUPXOD LV DQ DGMXVWDEOHSDUa-
meter which is determined by the ratio of the 
length of the analyzing review and the average 
length of a set of reference reviews.
N(tss) topic sentiment sentences with most 
weights are drawn from the set of candidate top-
ic sentiment sentences and then are computed by 
a sentence-level sentiment analyzer. The average 
score of them is taken as O(r), i.e. the overall SP 
of a review.
?
 
 
)(
1
)(
)(
1
)(
tssN
i
i
tssSP
tssN
rO
          (3)
We use a semantic approach in the sentence-
level sentiment analyzer. For each sentence, a 
Chinese dependency parser is used to distinguish 
the dependency relations between language units, 
especially the probable relations between the 
topic words and the sentiment expressions, and 
the relations between the sentiment expressions 
and their modifiers. Making use of the syntactic 
information, the sentiment of a sentence is de-
termined mainly by the sentiment expressions in 
it according to a precompiled sentiment lexicon. 
Meanwhile, the following factors are considered.
Negatives. Negatives inverse the sentiment of 
a sentence.
Connectors. Some connectors strengthen the 
original sentiment while others inverse the origi-
nal sentiment.
Intensifiers. Intensifiers make the original 
sentiment more forcefully.
Discourse makers. In linguistics, a discourse 
marker is a word or phrase that is relatively syn-
tax-independent and does not change the mean-
ing of the sentence. However, discourse marker 
itself has certain semantic orientation: some of 
them are positive, some are negative and others 
are neutral. Thus discourse marker help recog-
nize the SP in a sentence.
Punctuations. We pay special attention to 
question mark and exclamatory mark, especially 
when there is a negative in a question sentence.
6 Experiments and Results
6.1 Data
The data used in the experiment are Chinese cur-
rent affairs reviews. They are originally col-
lected from the web-
site http://opinion.people.com.cn/ and then 
cleansed and stored as text. 400 texts are ran-
domly selected from the reviews set. 3 annota-
tors are trained and then instructed to annotate 
the topic sentiment sentences and judge the SP 
the 400 reviews individually. The following ta-
ble shows the general information of the annota-
tion result.
Table 2 General Information of the Annotation 
Results
Annotator
Pos.
texts
Neg.
texts
Other
texts
1 87 302 11
2 93 298 9
3 88 288 14
Finally we get 370 texts (86 positive and 284 
negative) totally agreed by the 3 annotators. We
use them as the test reviews.
6.2 Resources
In order to perform an SP analysis, the following 
resources are required to use.
Sentiment Lexicon. We manually build up 
the sentiment lexicon. The words and phrases in 
the lexicon are mainly from three dictionaries: 
Positive Word Dictionary, Negative Word Dic-
tionary and A Student?s Positive and Negative 
Word Dictionary. We also get some words from 
HowNet Sentiment Dictionary and NTUSD. For 
each word or phrase, we give its part of speech, 
positive value and negative value. The positive 
and negative values of words and phrases are 
manually assigned by annotators according to 
human intuition. 
Other lexicons. We collect as many negatives, 
connectors, intensifiers and discourse markers as 
we can and make them into different lexicons.
HowNet. As a Chinese ontology, HowNet is 
used to compute the semantic similarity of 
words.
LTP. LTP (Language Technology Platform 
developed by HIT) is a package of tools to 
process Chinese text, with a Chinese dependen-
cy parser in it. We use the dependency parser to 
perform a syntactic analysis of sentences.
CUCSeg. CUCSeg is a Chinese pos tagger. 
We use it to segment Chinese words.
6.3 Results of the Extraction of Topic Sen-
timent Sentences Experiment
The extraction of topic sentiment sentences is a 
vital task in this research. Annotators judge in 
the test reviews which sentences are topic senti-
ment sentences firstly and method described in 
4.2 is applied and the result of which is eva-
luated. We adopt the commonly used precision, 
recall and F-measure to measure the result. It 
shows as follows.
Table 3 Result of the Extraction of topic Senti-
ment Sentences
Threshold Precision Recall F1
Ls=0.64 89.9 82.3 86.1
Ls=0.55 86.1 90.6 88.3
Ls=0.37 77.8 98.4 88.1
The above result shows we get a rather high 
precision and recall when Ls=0.55.
6.4 Results of Recognizing the SP of Chi-
nese Reviews Experiment
We use precision to measure the result. Compar-
ison is made among Turney?s method (2002),
Pang?s SVM method (2002) and our method.
Table 4 Result of the SP of Chinese reviews
Method Precision
Turney?s 74.39
Pang?s SVM 82.9
Ours 86.8
  
Compared to reports in earlier works, our ap-
proach achieves a relatively high precision. 
We reexamine the 49 texts which are judged 
wrong, together with the 4 extracted representa-
tive topic sentiment sentences of each text. Error 
analysis shows that about 35% of errors are 
made by the topic identification step, about 49% 
of errors are made by the sentence-level senti-
ment analysis, about 4% of errors are made due 
to the faultiness of the sentiment lexicon. And 
the causes of other errors are to be explored.
7 Conclusion
We have presented a topic sentiment sentence-
based approach to explore the overall sentiment 
polarity of Chinese reviews. Considering the 
features of Chinese reviews, we identify the top-
ic of a review using an n-gram approach. To ex-
tract topic sentiment sentences, we compute the 
semantic similarity of a candidate sentence and 
the ascertained topic and meanwhile determine 
whether the sentence is subjective. A certain 
number of these sentences are selected as repre-
sentatives according to their semantic similarity 
value with relation to the topic. The average val-
ue of the representative topic sentiment sen-
tences is calculated and taken as the sentiment 
polarity of a review.
Error analysis indicates that to enhance the 
identification of topic, to build up a better sen-
tence-level sentiment analyzer and to compile a 
better sentiment lexicon will help improve the 
final result.
Acknowledgements
We thank Prof. Ting Liu at Harbin Institute of Tech-
nology for sharing the LTP package and Mr. Zhen-
dong Dong for sharing the HowNet. We highly ap-
preciate that Hanbing Zhao, Nan Li and Yifu Xue 
have done a lot of heavy and tedious annotation work 
for this research.
References
Hu, M. and Liu, Bing. 2004. Mining and summariz-
ing customer reviews. In Proceedings of the 10th 
ACM SIGKDD.168- 177.
Kim, S., Hovy E. 2004. Determining the Sentiment of 
Opinions. In Proceedings of COLING-04: the 20th 
International Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics.
Lun-Wei Ku and Hsin-Hsi Chen 2007. Mining Opi-
nions from the Web: Beyond Relevance Retrieval. 
Journal of American Society for Information 
Science and Technology, Special Issue on Mining 
Web Resources for Enhancing Information Re-
trieval, 58(12): 1838-1850.
Meng, F., L. Cai, B. Chen, and P. Wu. 2008. Re-
search on the recognition of text valence. Journal 
of Chinese Computer Systems, 28(2007): 1-4.
Pang Bo, Lillian Lee, and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan. 
2002. Thumbs up? Sentiment classification using 
machine learning techniques. In Proceedings of 
EMNLP, pages 79-86.
Turney, P. 2002. Thumbs Up or Thumbs Down? Se-
mantic Orientation Applied to Unsupervised Clas-
sification of Reviews. In Proceedings of the 40th 
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics. 417-424.
Wang, Gen and Jun Zhao. 2007. Sentence Sentiment 
Analysis Based on Multi-redundant-labeled CRFs. 
Journal of Chinese Information Processing, 21(5):
51-56.
Wang, C., Lu, J., Zhang, G. 2005. A semantic classi-
fication approach for online Product reviews. In 
Proceedings of the 2005 IEEE/WIC/ACM Interna-
tional Conference on web intelligence (Wl?5). 
Wang, G. and Zhao, J. 2007. Sentence Sentiment 
Analysis Based on Multi-redundant-labeled CRFs. 
Journal of Chinese Information Processing. 5, 51-
56.
Wang,C. J. Lu and G. Zhang. 2005. A semantic clas-
sification approach for online product reviews, In 
Proceedings of the 2005 IEEE/WIC/ACM Interna-
tional Conference on Web Intelligence. 276-279.
Wiebe J. 2000. Learning subjective adjectives from 
corpora. In Proceeding of the 17th National Confe-
rence on Artificial intelligence. Menlo Park, Calif. 
AAAI Press, 735-740.
Wiebe J., Riloff E.2005. Creating Subjective and Ob-
jective Sentence Classifiers from Unannotated 
Text. In: Proceedings of CICLING.
Wiebe J., Wilson T., BrueeR., Bell M. and Martin 
M.2004. Learning subjective language, Computa-
tional Linguistics, 30(3):277-308.
Yi J., Nasukawa T., Bunescu R., Niblack 
W.2003.Sentiment analyzer: Extracting sentiments 
about a given topic using natural language 
processing techniques. In Proceeding of the Third 
IEEE International Conference on Data Mining. 
Yu, H. and Hatzivassiloglou Vasileios.2003. Towards 
answering opinion questions. In Proceeding of 
EMNLP. 2003.
Zheng, W. and Q. Ye. 2005. Sentiment classification 
of Chinese traveler reviews by support vector ma-
chine algorithm. In The Third International Sym-
posium on Intelligent Information Technology 
Application, 335-338.
