Proceedings of the Third Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 44?47,
Suntec, Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Annotating Subordinators in the Turkish Discourse Bank
Deniz Zeyreka,0, U?mit Turanb, Cem Bozsahina, Ruket C?ak?c?a,
Ay?s??g?? Sevdik-C?all?a, Is??n Demirs?ahina, Berfin Aktas?a, I?hsan Yalc??nkayaa, Hale O?gela
a Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey
b Anadolu University, Eskis?ehir, Turkey
Abstract
In this paper we explain how we anno-
tated subordinators in the Turkish Dis-
course Bank (TDB), an effort that started
in 2007 and is still continuing. We in-
troduce the project and describe some of
the issues that were important in anno-
tating three subordinators, namely kars??n,
rag?men and halde, all of which encode the
coherence relation Contrast-Concession.
We also describe the annotation tool.
1 Introduction
The Turkish Discourse Bank (TDB) is a project
initiated by the joint effort of a group of re-
searchers in Turkey. The project builds on an ex-
isting corpus, namely the METU Turkish Corpus
(MTC) (Say et al, 2002), and extends it to a dis-
course level resource by following the principles
of the PDTB (Prasad et al, 2007) in annotating
discourse connectives and their arguments. The 2-
million-word MTC contains 520 continuous texts
from various genres written between 1991-2000.
From a semantic perspective, we take discourse
connectives as predicates that take as their argu-
ments tensed or untensed clauses with abstract ob-
ject interpretations. Abstract objects are proposi-
tions, facts, events, situations, etc. (Asher, 1993).
Connectives themselves may be realized explicitly
or implicitly (Halliday, 1985; Prasad et al, 2007).
Explicit connectives are simple or complex lexi-
cal items that encode a discourse relation, while
implicit connectives can be inferred from related
text spans that have coherence relations. The TDB
project aims to annotate explicit connectives only.
In Turkish, discourse connectives are identified
with three syntactic categories (Zeyrek and Web-
ber, 2008): (a) Coordinating conjunctions (b) Sub-
ordinators (c) Discourse adverbials (or anaphoric
0Corresponding author: dezeyrek@metu.edu.tr
connectives). All these discourse connectives have
two and only two arguments, which are conve-
niently labeled as ARG1 and ARG2.1 ARG2 is
always the argument that syntactically hosts the
connective.
The ARG1/ARG2 organization of discourse
connectives is consistent with the following ob-
servations in discourse: Sentences in discourse
are coherently related, and therefore when ex-
plicit discourse connectives are used, if they are
really discourse connectives, they are bound to
set up a relation between a consequent clause and
its antecedent. (Note that the ARG2 designation
does not imply that ARG2 is consequent or an-
tecedent.) In certain cases presupposition needs a
mediator, viz. the discourse connective. Noncon-
nectival discourse relations are certainly possible,
but connective-engendered discourse relations are
claimed to be more specific about their semantics,
e.g. they bring about presuppositional meaning
(van der Sandt, 1992; Webber et al, 1999).
In this regard, the ARG1/ARG2 classification is
unlike syntactic subcategorization, which is a lex-
ical property of functors (e.g. verbs) which are
not necessarily presuppositional and hence they
can differ in arbitrary ways (ditransitive, transitive,
unergative, unaccusative etc.).
2 The Data
The MTC is preprocessed to obtain the raw texts
keeping the title, author, publishing date and the
text type information at the beginning of each file.
Stand-off annotation is done on the textual render-
ing of the MTC.
To enable the data to be viewable universally
without losing any character information, the file
format (originally xcs) was converted to text, and
the character encoding (originally Turkish-ISO-
1Whether or not discourse connectives in any language
take more than two arguments is an open question that needs
to be established in further research.
44
Text type File Count % S1 % S2 % S3 % S4 %
Novel 123 15.63% 31 15.74% 30 15.23% 31 15.82% 31 15.74%
Short story 114 14.49% 28 14.21% 29 14.72% 28 14.29% 29 14.72%
Research
/Monograph 49 6.23% 13 6.60% 12 6.09% 12 6.12% 12 6.09%
Article 38 4.83% 9 4.57% 10 5.08% 9 4.59% 10 5.08%
Travel 19 2.41% 5 2.54% 5 2.54% 4 2.04% 5 2.54%
Interview 7 0.89% 2 1.02% 2 1.02% 2 1.02% 1 0.51%
Memoir 18 2.29% 4 2.03% 5 2.54% 5 2.55% 4 2.03%
News 419 53.24% 105 53.30% 104 52.79% 105 53.57% 105 53.30%
TOTAL 787 197 197 196 197
Table 1: File count and percentage information according to text type for the preprocessed MTC and its
subcorpora. (S:Subcorpus)
8859-9) was converted to the UTF-8. Finally, the
processed MTC data were divided into four sub-
corpora by keeping the text type distribution, file
count and word count as equal as possible in each
subcorpus. The text type distribution, file count
and word percentage information in each subcor-
pus are given in Table 1. In the project, we plan to
annotate subcorpus 1.
3 Subordinating Conjunctions in
Turkish: A Brief Overview
Subordinators have two subtypes. Converbs are
suffixes attached directly to verb roots. For exam-
ple, the suffix -(y)ArAk ?by (means of)? requires
as its ARG2 a nominalized adverbial clause as in
(1). Complex subordinators, e.g. rag?men ?despite,
although?, kars??n ?although?, halde ?despite, along
with?, ic?in causal ?since?, purposive ?so as to?, etc.
mostly take case-marked nominalized clauses as
their ARG2.
(1) Hu?ku?met ... uyum paketini onaylayarak ...
Erdog?an?n o?nu?ndeki engellerden birini kald?rd?.
By approving the adaptation package ..., the
government alleviated one of the obstacles for
Erdog?an ...
In this paper, we will not deal with converbs.
We will also not deal with connectives taking as
their ARG2 a finite clause because none of these
subtypes have been annotated yet. We will focus
on three postpositions taking a nominalized clause
as ARG2, namely rag?men, kars??n and halde, all of
which encode the Contrast-Concession relation.
In the PDTB, such clauses were not annotated as
arguments. However, in Turkish, they are so com-
mon as arguments of subordinators that we would
have missed an important property of Turkish dis-
course if we did not annotate them. In the rest
of the paper, we provide examples taken from the
MTC. We underline the connective, show ARG2
in bold letters and render ARG1 in italics.
3.1 The minimality principle
As in the PDTB, the minimality principle is in-
voked, according to which clauses, parts of clauses
or sentences that are minimally necessary and suf-
ficient for the discourse relation engendered by
the connective are annotated as ARG1 or ARG2
(Prasad et al, 2007). Any other text span that
is perceived to be important for the interpretation
of the discourse relation can be selected as sup-
plementary information in addition to ARG1 or
ARG2.
3.2 Morphological properties of the
arguments and their relative ordering
In Turkish, subordinate clauses are essentially
nominalizations, which may be formed by -DIK
or -mA suffixes (the factive nominal and the action
nominal, respectively (Kornfilt, 1997)).
Two of the connectives, i.e. rag?men and kars??n
expect action nominals, the person agreement suf-
fix, and the dative suffix -(y)A on their ARG2. On
the other hand, the connective halde expects a fac-
tive nominal and the person agreement suffix. In
the examples below, we show these suffixes with
glosses on the English translations.
The arguments of subordinators are necessarily
adjacent and mostly exhibit the ARG2-ARG1 or-
der because Turkish is a left-branching language
and subordinate clauses are on the left in canonical
order. ARG2 can be postposed for backgrounding
purposes or to express new and unexpected infor-
mation, as in (2).
(2) ... ayn? annesine oldu]ugu gibi ona da, kimseye
ba/uglanmayanlar kolayca bag?lan?yordu; u?stelik o
o?yle bir bag??ml?l?k talep etmedig?i halde.
... just as it happened to her mother, people who
can?t easily commit themselves to anyone would
45
easily commit themselves to her, although she
would not ask-FACTN-AGR for such a commit-
ment.
3.3 Issues in annotating the arguments
One of the challenges we have faced so far is the
question of how to annotate connectives which are
themselves a converb suffix (e.g. -(y)ArAk, as in
(1)) or postpositions that choose a case-marked
ARG2 as in (2). In both cases, we decided to an-
notate ARG2 by selecting the clause without sepa-
rating the suffixes. In this way, we would not inter-
fere with the annotators? intuitions since we would
not be demanding them to have conscious knowl-
edge of the morphological constraints on the ar-
guments. This style of annotation was welcomed
by the annotators. When all the annotations are
completed, we plan to separate the suffixes with a
morphological parser to provide a full view of the
morphology of the arguments.
Another issue was how to annotate shared sub-
jects in subordinate clauses. Turkish allows sub-
ject pro-drop and in complex sentences, the shared
subject is shown by the person agreement suffix
on the verb of the consequent clause. To capture
this fact, we chose to exclude shared subjects from
the annotation of the arguments. This style of
annotation conforms to the minimality principle.
As illustrated in (3), the subject, Neriman, which
appears in its canonical clause-initial position in
ARG2 is not selected because the verb of the sub-
sequent clause carries the person agreement suffix.
(3) Neriman yatak odas?nda sigara ic?ilmesini is-
temedig?i halde s?imdilik sigaraya ses c??karm?yor.
Although Neriman does not want-FACTN-AGR
people to smoke in her bedroom, (she) doesn?t
say-AGR anything for the moment.2
If the subject is not shared, it is included in the
annotation, even if it causes discontinuity. As it
is illustrated in (4), ARG2 intervenes in ARG1 by
separating it from its subject.
(4) Rukiye, kendisinden u?c? yas? ufak olmas?na
rag?men, erkek kardes?ini kendi og?lu san?yordu, ...
Rukiye, although (he) is-ACTN-AGR-DAT three
years younger than herself, thought-AGR that her
brother was her son...
2The pronoun is in parentheses to reflect pro-drop. The
following abbreviations are used on the translations to show
the morphological characteristics of the clauses: ACTN: Ac-
tion nominal, FACTN: Factive nominal, AGR: Person agree-
ment suffix, DAT: Dative case, ABL: Ablative case. NOM:
Nominative case.
Example (5) shows that two nominalized
clauses can be selected as the arguments of the
subordinator kars??n leaving out the shared sub-
ject. In this example, the subject is shown between
square brackets for clarity. Note that, ARG1 is
also a nominalized clause since it is embedded un-
der the attribution verb so?yle - ?say?.3
(5) ... [herkes yarat?lan toplumsal deg?erden verdig?i
emek oran?nda pay alacak bic?imindeki sosyalist
iktisat ilkesinin] asl?nda c?ok es?itlikc?i gibi
go?zu?kmesine kars??n es?itsizlig?i engelleye-
meyeceg?ini, ... so?yler
... says that ... despite (it) looks-ACTN-AGR-
DAT quite egalitarian, [the socialist principle,
stating that everyone gets a share proportional to
his labor] will not prevent-ACTN-AGR inequality
...
Finally, in annotating adjuncts, we follow the
same principle we followed in annotating shared
subjects. For instance in (6), the adjunct yemekte
?at dinner? is not annotated since it is shared by the
arguments of the connective rag?men.
(6) Gu?l de yemekte kilo ald?rmas?na rag?men S?am
tatl?lar?ndan c?ok hos?land?g??n? ifade etti.
At dinner, Gu?l-NOM, also said that although
(theyi) are-ACTN-AGR-DAT fattening, (he)
likes Damascus deserts-ABLi very much.
4 The Annotation Process
Before the annotation procedure started, a set of
annotation guidelines were prepared. The guide-
lines include the basic principles, such as what
discourse connectives are, where in the discourse
one can find ARG1 and ARG2, how to annotate
shared subjects, adjuncts, etc. Rather than being
strict rules, the guidelines are aimed at being gen-
eral principles guiding the annotators in their de-
cision of selecting the text span that is minimally
sufficient for interpreting the discourse relation en-
coded by the connective.
The annotation cycle consisted of 1) annotat-
ing a connective by at least three different people
2) measuring the agreement among them with the
inter-anotator agreement tool 3) resolving the dis-
agreements with an anonymous decision.
4.1 The annotation tool
We have an XML-based infrastructure for annota-
tion. It aims to produce searchable and trackable
data. Stand-off annotation has well-known advan-
tages such as the ability to see layers separately, or
3In the PDTB, attribution is not taken as a discourse re-
lation but it is annotated. Attribution is not annotated in the
TDB.
46
Overall Annotator1 Annotator2 Annotator3
Conn. ARG1 ARG2 Overall ARG1 ARG2 Overall ARG1 ARG2 Overall ARG1 ARG2 Overall
rag?men 0.37 0.343 0.444 0.476 0.493 0.538 0.810 0.889 0.83 0.591 0.550 0.660
kars??n 0.394 0.546 0.364 0.771 0.781 0.724 0.677 0.833 0.71 0.677 0.62 0.676
halde 0.749 0.826 0.758 0.957 1 0.978 0.772 0.826 0.758 - - -
Table 2: Textspan inclusion agreement among three annotators for three subordinators with minimum success prob. >0.05.
The first column shows the overall agreement among the three annotators. Other columns show the agreement of one annotator
with the agreed/gold standard annotations. For halde, 2 annotators performed a common annotation (given as Annotator1) and
a third annotator annotated it separately (given as Annotator2).
to distribute annotation without data due to licens-
ing constraints. To this list we can add the em-
pirical necessity that, the crossing links in a single
layer of same kind of annotation might not be easy
to do inline. They can be done inline using SGML
OCCURS checks, but they are easier to annotate
in stand-off mode.
The tool has a regular expression mode in which
the annotator can use his/her knowledge of Turk-
ish word structure to collect similarly inflected
words without morphological analysis. For exam-
ple, -ArAk$, in which the uppercase forms repre-
sent metaphonemes, will bring words ending with
the allomorphs of the converb suffix due to vowel
harmony: erek, arak etc.
5 Conclusion
The TDB project is a first attempt in creating an
annotated resource for written Turkish discourse.
The annotation process is still continuing. In this
paper, the emphasis was on a small number of con-
nectives, namely three postpositions, which form a
subclass of subordinators. The paper described the
role of certain morpho-syntactic facts in interpret-
ing the coherence relation between two clauses,
and how these facts were reflected in the annota-
tions.
Three subjects separately annotated each of the
subordinators on the annotation tool, and inter-
rater reliability was calculated. The statistics were
obtained from Cochran?s Q test to the ARG1 and
ARG2 spans. The annotation data were encoded
with 1 if the character is in the span and 0 if it
is not. The encoded data were put to the Q test.
All the results were above the minimum success
probability (>0.05), showing that the annotations
were consistent (see Table 2). We will run another
Cochran experiment in which we will test whether
the annotators agree on ARG1/ARG2 boundaries,
rather than just word inclusion in the text spans as
above.
Given the distribution of agreements, Cochran
provides the number of subjects who must agree
so that a text span can be reliably considered an
ARG1 or ARG2. This we believe is important to
report with the final product (to be made public
soon), so that its gold standard can be assessed by
the community.
Acknowledgments
We thank TUBITAK for financial support. We
also thank our two anonymous reviewers for their
insightful comments.
References
Nicholas Asher. 1993. Reference to Abstract objects
in Discourse. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Michael A. K. Halliday. 1985. An Introduction to
Functional Linguistics. Edward Arnold Publishers
Ltd.
Jaklin Kornfilt. 1997. Turkish. Routledge, London.
Rashmi Prasad, Eleni Miltsakaki, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan
Lee, Aravind Joshi, Livio Robaldo, and Bonnie
Webber. 2007. The penn discourse treebank 2.0.
annotation manual. Technical report, Institute for
Research in Cognitive Science, University of Penn-
sylvania, March.
Bilge Say, Deniz Zeyrek, Kemal Oflazer, and Umut
O?zge. 2002. Development of a corpus and a tree-
bank for present-day written turkish. In Proceedings
of the Eleventh International Conference of Turkish
Linguistics.
Rob van der Sandt. 1992. Presuppositon projection as
anaphora resolution. Journal of Semantics, 9:333?
377.
Bonnie Webber, Alistair Knott, Matthew Stone, and
Aravind Joshi. 1999. Discourse relations: A struc-
tural and presuppositional account using lexicalised
tag. In Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 41?48, College Park, Maryland, USA.
Deniz Zeyrek and Bonnie Webber. 2008. A discourse
resource for turkish: Annotating discourse connec-
tives in the metu turkish corpus. In The 6th Work-
shop on Asian Language Resources, The Third In-
ternational Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (IJNLP), Hyderabad,India, January.
47
Proceedings of the Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL 2010, pages 282?289,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
The Annotation Scheme of the Turkish Discourse Bank and An  Evaluation of Inconsistent Annotations  Deniz Zeyrek, I??n Demir?ahin, Ay????? Sevdik-?all?, Hale ?gel Balaban,  ?hsan Yal??nkaya Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey and   ?mit Deniz Turan Anadolu University, Eski?ehir, Turkey  Corresponding author: dezeyrek@metu.edu.tr  Abstract  In this paper, we report on the annotation procedures we developed for annotating the Turkish Discourse Bank (TDB), an effort that extends the Penn Discourse Tree Bank (PDTB) annotation style by using it for annotating Turkish discourse. After a brief introduction to the TDB, we describe the annotation cycle and the annotation scheme we developed, defining which parts of the scheme are an extension of the PDTB and which parts are different. We provide inter-coder reliability calculations on the first and second arguments of some connectives and discuss the most important sources of disagreement among annotators.   1 A brief introduction to the Turkish Discourse Bank 1.1 The Data The Turkish Discourse Bank (TDB) project aims to annotate the 500,000-word-subcorpus of the two-million-word METU Turkish Corpus (MTC) (Say et al 2002). The subcorpus includes a wide range of texts, e.g. fiction, interviews, memoirs, news articles, etc. reflecting the distribution of the genres in the MTC (Zeyrek et al 2009). The main objective of the project is to annotate discourse connectives with their two arguments, modifiers and supplementary text spans. Following the Penn Discourse Tree Bank (PDTB), we take discourse connectives as discourse-level predicates taking two (and only 
two) arguments, called Arg1 and Arg2, which may span one or more clauses and sentences that are adjacent or nonadjacent to the connective (Prasad et al 2007, Webber, 2004). Discourse relations can certainly be expressed without connectives but we have chosen to annotate discourse relations encoded by connectives since they are more specific about their semantics.  Discourse connectives are identifiable from three syntactic classes, namely, coordinating conjunctions, subordinating conjunctions, and discourse adverbials. As in the PDTB, we take elements belonging to these syntactic classes as discourse connectives when they semantically relate syntactic entitities such as clauses, sentences, sequences of sentences, and nominalizations having an abstract object interpretation i.e., eventualities, possibilities, situations, facts, and propositions (as in Asher, 1993, cf. Webber, et al 2005). Major departures from the PDTB are, attribution is not annotated, only overt connectives are being annotated, and the nominal arguments of connectives are being annotated where they denote an abstract object. Annotation of implicit connectives is further work.  1.2 The annotation cycle Before the annotation process started, the annotators studied the guidelines, which defined some general principles and illustrated difficult cases. The guidelines were written in a way to allow the annotators enough freedom to reflect their intuitions on the annotations. The annotators were also told to observe the minimality principle (MP) of the PDTB guidelines, which expects them to mark as argument parts of a clause or sentence that are 
282
minimally sufficient and necessary for the discourse relation encoded by the connective. The annotation cycle includes three steps. First, the annotators go through the whole subcorpus to annotate a given connective at a time. Any disagreements are discussed and resolved by the project team. In the second step, the definitions in the annotation guidelines are revised with the new issues that emerged in annotating the connective. Finally, the agreed annotations are checked to ensure they obeyed the annotation guidelines fully. The annotations were created by a tool designed by Akta? (2008).  The connectives are being annotated for the categories given in the next section by three annotators, who have been in the project since the annotation effort started. The three-step annotation process and the number of annotators we use slow down the task considerably but given the complexity of discourse annotation and the need for annotation efforts in Turkish, we were compelled to target maximum reliability achieved by three annotators.  The inter-coder reliability has recently stabilized and to speed the annotation effort, two annotators have started to carry out their task as a pair, while the other annotator works independently. This annotation style involves two annotators working side-by-side at one computer, continuously collaborating on one connective type at a time to code all its tokens in the subcorpus. One of the annotators carries out the task on the annotation tool, while the other observes her continuously for any defects and problems and suggests alternative solutions. This style of annotation, created by our group independently of pair programming, corresponds to the practice explained in Williams, et al(2000) and Williams and Kessler (2000). It is quite a beneficial and reliable method that also speeds up the process (Demir?ahin, et alms). 1 We give the preliminary results of this procedure in section 2.1.4.  1.3 An outline of Turkish connectives and the annotation scheme We annotate discourse connectives belonging to the syntactic classes listed below, leaving out converbs that may function as discourse connectives.                                                    1 Except for ve ?and?, the statistics reported in this paper reflect the agreement among 3 independent annotators. 
? Coordinating conjunctions (ve ?and?, ya da ?or?, ama ?but?) ? Complex subordinators (i?in ?for?, ra?men ?although, despite?), converbs/simplex subordinators (-Ince ?when,? ?ken ?while, now that?)2 ? Anophoric connectives (bundan ba?ka ?in addition to/separate from these?, bunun sonucunda ?as a result of this,? bunun i?in ?due to/for this reason?, buna ra?men ?despite this?) and discourse adverbials (oysa ?however?, ?te yandan ?on the other hand?, then ?sonradan?) In Turkish, coordinators are typically s(entence)-medial, they may also be found s-initially, or s-finally. Coordinators show an affinity with the second clause, as evidenced by punctuation and their ability to move to the end of the second clause. Subordinators take as their second argument a nonfinite clause that contains a genitive marked subject that agrees with the subordinate verb in terms of person and number.  The subordinate clause may also be assigned case by the postposition that functions as the connective. The subordinator and its host clause are always adjacent and the subordinate clause may appear s-initially or s-finally. Anaphoric connectives are characterized by an anaphoric element in the phrase and hence they have the ability to access the inference in the prior discourse (Webber, et al2003). Furthermore, they may take as their first argument text spans that are nonadjacent to the sentence containing the connective (Zeyrek and Webber, 2008).3  As example (1) illustrates, discourse adverbials can be used with connectives from other syntactic classes, e.g. a coordinating conjunction, fakat ?but? may be used with sonradan ?then?, and in accessing its first argument, the discourse adverbial may cross one or more clauses. In the examples, Arg1 is italicized, Arg2 set in bold, and the connective head is underlined.                                                   2 The capital letters are used to capture the cases where a vowel agrees with the vowel harmony rules of the language. The vowel rendered by the capital letter I may be resolved as any of the high vowels in the language, i.e., i, ?, ?, u.  3In the PDTB, expressions like after that are coded as ?alternative lexicalization? while coding implicit connectives, i.e., as a ?nonconnective expression? (Prasad et al 2007:22).  In Turkish, such phrasal expressions are abundant. They are two-part expressions with one part referring to the relation, the other anaphorically to Arg1 as in English. We decided to take these expressions as connectives because otherwise, we would be missing an important fact about Turkish. Therefore they are being annotated as connectives in the TDB project.  
283
(1) a. Bunlar? a??klad???m?z vakit y?neticiler evvela ?a??rd?lar  When (we) explained these, the administrators were first surprised. b. B?yle bir ?eyi asla beklemiyorlard?.     (They) were never expecting such a thing. c. Fakat sonradan kendilerini toparlad?lar.  But then they gained their composure.  Largely following the annotation style of the PDTB, we determined the categories that form the annotation of a relation as follows:  Conn: This is the connective head of an explicit connective. Arg2: This tag refers to the argument that forms a syntactic unit with the connective.  Arg1: This tag is for the other argument that the connective relates semantically to Arg2. Sup1/Sup2: This attribute specifies either the material that makes the semantic contribution of the argument more specific (as in the PDTB), or the clause/sentence where an anaphoric element expressed in the argument is resolved. The Sup tag is not specifically used for anaphor resolution in the PDTB.  Mod: This tag specifies the following features: (a) the adverbs that are used along with connective heads, e.g. tam aksine ?just to the contrary?, (b) the focus particle dE used together with the connective head (e.g., ve de ?and-focus particle ?and?), (c) adverbs showing the determinacy of the relation, e.g. belki  ?perhaps?, sadece ?only? etc., (d) polarity of postpositional phrases (e.g. i?in de?il ?not for?). In the PDTB, the Mod category is utilized only for adverbs used together with connective heads. The other categories are used to capture aspects of attribution and verbs of attribution.   Shared: This attribute identifies the subjects, objects, or any temporal adverbs shared by the arguments of the discourse relation. This category was required for Turkish, which is a pro-drop and free word-order language. In Turkish, subjects, objects or adverbs can appear s-initially, s-medially or s-finally. Subjects and objects are dropped if they are salient in the discourse. This category allows us to capture the variable position of subjects, objects and adverbs shared by the arguments of a discourse relation.  The PDTB does not have this feature.    In what follows, we will report on the inter-coder reliability statistics on Arg1 and Arg2 of a set of connectives for which we obtained low inter-coder reliability results and discuss the most common inconsistencies. The remaining 
categories mentioned above are under use but inter-coder reliability statistics have not been calculated for them.  2 A quantitative and qualitative evaluation of the inconsistent annotations in the TDB  So far, 60 types of discourse connectives amounting to 6873 relations have been annotated in the TDB project.  We computed the reliability of the coders? agreement for Arg1 and Arg2 of these connectives by means of the Kappa statistic (Carletta, 1996). A value of K agreement coefficient (henceforth K values) between 0.80 and 1.00 shows a good agreement, and a value between 0.60 and 0.80 indicates some agreement (Poesio, 2000). The K values we obtained for Arg1 and Arg2 of most connectives annotated so far range between 0.80 and 1.00 but for the connectives that are in focus in this paper, the K values for Arg1 are less than 0.80 (see Appendix B). It is these connectives that we now turn to.  These connectives are listed below again, along with the K values obtained for their Arg1 and Arg2. Before calculating the K values, all annotated text spans were re-processed in order to express the annotations in (pseudo) categories. During re-processing, for each annotator the annotated text span boundary characters (i.e., the beginning and end characters) were coded as 1 and the remaining text was coded as 0, so that an agreement table could be constructed (Artstein, and Poesio, 2008; Di Eugenio and Glass, 2004).  It is on the basis of this table which we measured inter-coder reliability.    Connective K value  Arg1 Arg2 yandan ?on the other hand? 0.523 0.645 ayr?ca ?in addition, separately? 0.545 0.760 ra?men ?despite, despite this? 0.688 0.742 fakat ?but? 0.719 0.855 tersine ?on the contrary? 0.741 1.000 dolay?s?yla ?as a result? 0.759 0.930 oysa ?however? 0.767 0.913 ama?la ?for this purpose? 0.785 0.876 Table 1. Eight connectives with K values less than 0.80 (total number of annotations: 554)  
284
For comparison, we provide the K values for two discontinuous connectives in Table 2:  Connective K value  Arg1 Arg2 ne .. ne ?neither nor? 0.820 0.930 hem .. hem ?both .. and? 1.000 0.982 Table 2. Two discontinous connectives with K values higher than 0.80 (total number of annotations: 126)  As seen in Table 2, inter-coder agreement in discontinuous connectives is high. We argue that discontinuous connectives are maximally different from anaphoric connectives (and discourse adverbials) since they unambiguously draw the boundaries of their arguments.  As a result, the inter-coder reliability tests yield good agreements, with K values > 0.80. Anaphoric connectives relate their second argument with another argument adjacent or nonadjacent to the connective, in a way much similar to how definite NPs find their antecedents in the previous discourse. Depending on the relation encoded by the connective, the previous discourse is likely to contain clauses that elaborate and expand a generalization, refute an assertion, list the components of a statement, explain the cause of an eventuality, etc. It may not be an easy task to decide whether one should take all or part of these clauses as Arg1; therefore inconsistencies are expected in drawing the Arg1?s boundaries. Arg2, on the other hand, is relatively easier to determine since it is syntactically related to the connective and hence its domain is determined. Example (2), which shows a relation encoded by the connective tersine ?on the contrary?, presents one of the most common cases of inconsistency in determining the Arg1 span.  (2) a. Eyleme de?il, karaktere a??rl?k veren modern romanda biliyoruz ki roman ki?ilerinin psikolojisi, i? d?nyas?, bilinci ve bilin?alt? yazar?n dikkatle ??zmeye ?al??t??? ilgin? sorunlar? i?erir.  (We) know that in the modern novel, which emphasizes character rather than action, the novel contains the interesting problems that the writer wants to solve and the characters? psychology, their inner world, consciousness, and the subconscious.   
b. Bundan ?t?r? ?nemli bir y?n?n? olu?turur roman?n.  For this reason, (it) constitutes an  important aspect of the novel. c. Ama gene biliyoruz ki halk edebiyat? ?r?nlerinde ?nemli olan ki?inin i? d?nyas? de?il,  But we also know that in folk literature what is important is not the person?s inner world, d. tersine, eylemidir.  on the contrary, (it) is his action.   Two annotators selected as Arg1 the italicized part in (2c) while the third one selected as Arg1 the clauses in (2a), and (2c). In fact, a careful analysis of the discourse connective tersine ?on the contrary? reveals that in all tokens in the corpus, the speaker introduces an assertion, then refutes some aspect of it with an overt negation and then rectifies it in Arg2.  (Turan and Zeyrek, 2010). The third annotator?s selection of Arg1 is compatible with this observation, while the other annotators? selection of Arg1 appears to be guided by the MP.   2.1 Common Sources of Disagreement An examination of the 8 connectives for which K values were below 0.80 for Arg1 or Arg2 showed that there were 6 main sources for the inconsistencies. These were (a) no overlapping annotations for Arg1, (b) partially overlapping annotations for Arg1 or (c) Arg2, (d) lack of adequate definitions in the guidelines, (e) annotators? errors in following the linguistic definitions in the guidelines, (f) other inconsistencies, e.g., errors in selecting spaces, leaving characters out, etc. (Appendix A). 4 Among these, partially overlapping Arg1 annotations is the major source of discrepancy observed in 63.98% of the inconsistent cases, followed by partially overlapping Arg2 annotations observed in 10.17% of the cases, and no overlapping annotations in 9.74% of the cases. While errors grouped under the ?other? category is 9.74%, annotators? errors in following the linguistic definitions in the guidelines is negligible (2.97%). The percentage of lacking definitions in the guidelines is also low (3.39%), showing that the coverage is good in the updated guidelines. Let us now turn to the                                                  4 There were also missing annotations but since we did not calculate inter-coder statistics for them, they are not mentioned in this work.  
285
common sources of disagreement among annotators.  2.1.1 Interpretations of the minimality principle  A frequent reason for inconsistent annotations was lack of agreement in determining the exact boundaries of argument spans, which is ultimately related to how the MP is interpreted. For example, in (3), the connective fakat ?but? may be taken as linking clauses (3a) and (3b).  Yet, the scope of the predicative morpheme (i.e. ?t?r in (3c)) that determines finiteness is shared by the verbs of (3b) and (3c), i.e. this morpheme takes into its scope two consecutive clauses. While two annotators coded only clause (3b) as Arg2, the third annotator tended to interpret Arg2 as the clauses within the scope of the shared predicative morpheme (-t?r), coding (3b) and (3c) as Arg2. It appears that the disagreement in example (3) stems from different interpretations of the MP coupled with a structural property of Turkish.   (3) a. Onlara sunulan kurbanlar, ba?lang??ta insanlard?  At the beginning, it was humans that were sacrified for them.  b. Fakat bu ?det sonralar? hafifletilerek, insan yerine hayvanlar kurban edilme?e ba?lanm??,  But later on, loosening this tradition, (they) started to sacrifice animals instead of humans,  c. sonunda da bu hayvanlar? temsil eden baz? ?eylerin (?) k???t hayvan fig?rlerinin  (?) yahut da bir ta??n suya at?lmas?n?n yeterli olaca??na inan?lm??t?r.  finally, it was believed that it would be sufficient to throw a stone or paper animal figures to the water, as well as other objects that represent these animals.  The text given in (4) further illustrates a case where the annotators disagreed on the final boundary of Arg2. One annotator selected as Arg2 the span ?this is .. noted? (4b), while the other annotators selected the span ?this is?. a lost place? ((4b)-(4c)); i.e., they included as Arg2 not only the clause adjacent to the connective, but they also selected the clause that followed where the cataphor is resolved. Faced with such inconsistencies, we decided to annotate the material that is needed for pronoun resolution as supplementary text. In this case, the clause in (4c) is marked as Sup2.   
(4) a. ? ikincisindeki ayr?nt? bollu?u Recaizade Ekrem?in ger?ek?ili?ine atfedilmi?tir.   .. the richness of details in the second (novel) was attributed to Recaizade Ekrem?s realism. b. Oysa as?l dikkat ?ekmesi gereken ?udur:  However, this is what should be noted: c. Araba Sevdas?n?n ?aml?ca?s? yitik bir ?aml?ca?d?r.  The ?aml?ca described in Araba Sevdas? is a lost place.  The inconsistencies that derive from different interpretations of the minimality requirement is particularly interesting from a theoretical perspective. It appears that this principle may be interpreted as syntactic minimality as illustrated in example (3), and as a factor that goes against basic insights of discourse interpretation such as anaphor/cataphor resolution as in example (4). In the former case, the MP pulls the annotators in one direction, and the need to reflect their understanding of the discourse in the annotations pulls them in the opposite direction, especially when there is morphological/syntactic evidence for them to choose more than one clause. In the latter case, the annotators seem to feel they would lose the anaphoric/coreference chains in the discourse if they left out the text span where the anaphor was resolved.  After using the Sup label for anaphor resolution/coreference chains, disagreements of the latter sort diminished considerably but this was a methodological approach with a bias towards the MP rather than the desired solution of the role of anaphoric/coreference chains in argument spans. We aim to tackle this issue in further research.   A parenthetical or evaluative clause in the argument span also led to inconsistencies in determining argument boundaries. For example, the annotators gave conflicting decisions as to whether or not they should select parenthetical clauses, especially when they are s-medial, as in (5): (5)  Kemal, bir yandan askeri bir sava? verirken ?te yandan yerli i?birlik?ilerle ?ki bunlar?n ba??nda da bas?n- sava?mak zorunda kalm??t?r.  Kemal, while on the one hand fighting a military war, on the other hand (he) had to fight with local accomplices ?which mainly included the media.  
286
Disagreements that arise from parenthetical clauses have diminished after we added a new principle to the guidelines, asking annotators to select the parenthetical together with the argument if it contributed to the meaning of the argument.    2.1.2 Ambiguity  Another reason for inconsistent annotations was ambiguity in meaning. Consider example (1) once again, where the contrast relation can be interpreted in three ways: it is not clear whether the contrast is between to be surprised in (1a) and to regain composure in (1c) or whether it is between not expecting such a thing in (1b) and to regain composure in (1c). Alternatively, the contrast can be interpreted between (1a) and (1b) on the one hand, and between (1a) and (1c) on the other. We observed that some of the disagreements concerning the span of Arg 1 stemmed from such cases.   2.1.3 Type of discourse relation  Yet another type of inconsistency appears to be associated with the type of discourse relation. Sanders and Noordman (2000) and Pitler, et. al. (2008) state that causal (contingency) relations are among the most salient coherence relations. They suggest that the connectives that signal comparison and contingency are mostly unambiguous. Being cognitively salient, causal and contingency relations are more tightly organized than the additive list relation. This is because in causal relations, one target sentence is more important than the other; while in a list relation there is more than one sentence contributing to the discourse. Sanders and Noordman (2000:53) argue that causal relations are more strongly connecting than additive relations. This salience in discourse relations can be universal.  In fact, we found that the inter-coder agreement of the causal connective ??nk? ?because? was high (0.888 for Arg1 and 0.941 for Arg2). However, for the connective ayr?ca ?in addition to?, which encodes the list relation, the inter-coder K value was 0.545 for Arg1, 0.765 for Arg 2. An example of the list reading interpretation of this connective is illustrated in (6) below.  (6) a. Baban?n ya?am? art?k derli toplu olmu?tu.   The father?s life now became orderly.   b. Evde kavgalar da azalm??t?.  The fights at home have diminished 
c. Ayr?ca yeni bir ?evrede de bulunuyorlard?.  Besides, (they) are now in a new neighborhood.   In the extract given in (6), the topic under discussion seems to be the list of the family?s diminishing problems: Father?s having an orderly life, reduced fights at home, etc.  While two annotators preferred to select (6b) as Arg 1, the third one preferred to select (6a) and (6b) together.  The connective ayr?ca, marking a weaker relation between its two arguments, is among the connectives that yielded such instances of disagreement.   2.1.4 Nominalized arguments  In this section, we will report on some preliminary results about a common inconsistency that occurred while annotating the connective ve ?and,? namely the problem of teasing apart nominalized arguments that have an abstract object interpretation and those that do not. We also explain the pair annotation process. In Turkish, a nominalizing process realized by various inflectional suffixes forms nonfinite clauses. The clauses formed by some of these suffixes are abstract enough to be easily specified as an argument of a discourse relation, e.g. ?mAk. On the other hand, some of the suffixes (e.g. ?mA, -I?) are very productive in deriving ordinary nouns referring to actual instances or things. It is these cases where disagreement among the annotators increases. Example (7) illustrates the use of ?mAk, where the clauses it forms were easily determined as arguments with abstract object interpretations.   (7)  18. y?zy?l?n yapt???,  17. Y?zy?l?n yaratt?klar?n? ?o?altmak ve yaymakt?r.  What the 18th century did was to increase and to extend what the 17th century created.  Example (8) shows a difficult case where the annotators were inconsistent in deciding whether the connective?s arguments have abstract object interpretations or not. This is because the morphological form of the words geli?me (improve-mA) ?improvement? and yap?la?ma (construct-mA) ?(re)construction? are very much the same as the words bekleme (wait-mA) ?waiting? and arama (search-mA) ?search, searching? shown in (9). The final decision was to annotate (9) only.  
287
(8)  Deprem b?lgesinde yeniden [geli?me] ve [yap?la?man?n] planlanmas? gibi ciddi bir sorun bulunmaktad?r.  There is the important issue of planning the [improvement] and [re-construction] of the areas affected by the earthquake.   (9)  Art?k onu beklemenin ve araman?n bo?una oldu?unu anlam??t?r.  He has already figured out that it was futile to wait for her and to search her.   We noticed such inconsistencies in annotating 1/3 of the files for and. When we shifted to the pair annotation procedure, we obtained high agreement on Arg1 and Arg2 annotations of and because we observed that when done in pairs, resolving any disagreements between the annotations was faster since the members of the pair discussed difficult cases between them and sometimes determined a preferred annotation before presenting the results to the group. Table 3 shows the results for and annotations. A repeated measures test shows that the increase in K values is significant (p< 0.01).  Annotators K value  Arg1 Arg2 3 annotators 0.692 0.791 A pair of annotators and an independent annotator 0.945 0.964 Table 3 K values for ve ?and? of 3 independent annotators, and a pair and an independent annotator 3 Summary  In this paper we presented common sources of disagreement we observed in annotating the arguments of discourse connectives in the TDB, a project of discourse-level annotation on written Turkish. We defined our annotation scheme and annotation cycle. We achieved high agreement on argument annotations of discontinuous connectives but agreement on some other connectives was low, particularly for Arg1. Since these connectives belong to different syntactic classes, the inconsistencies cannot be easily explained by the properties of the syntactic class of connectives. We discussed various potential factors affecting inter-coder agreement, including the minimality principle coupled with language specific properties, the structure of discourse (as in the case of our example in tersine), cognitive salience of discourse relations, 
and ambiguity.? We discussed inconsistencies resulting form the difficulty of distinguishing the non-abstract object interpretation of a nominalized clause from its abstract object interpretation. We argued that once inter-coder reliability stabilizes, it is beneficial to shift to the procedure where a pair of annotators works together to annotate a specific connective while the third works independently.     Acknowledgments We acknowledge the grant form The Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey and thank our anonymous referees for comments.  References Berfin Akta?. 2008. Computational Aspects of Discourse Annotation. Unpublished MS Thesis, Cognitive Science Program, Middle East Technical University  Ron, Artstein and Massimo Poesio (2008). Inter-coder agreement for computational linguistics. Computational Linguistics, 34(4). pp. 555-596. Nicholas Asher. 1993. Reference to Abstract Objects in Discourse. Kluwer Academic Publishers. I??n Demir?ahin, ?hsan Yal??nkaya, Deniz Zeyrek (ms). Pair Annotation: Adaption of Pair Programming to Corpus Annotation.  Barbara Di Eugenio, & Michael Glass (2004). The Kappa statistic: a second look. Computational Linguistics, 30(1). pp. 95-101. Eleni Miltsakaki, Rashmi Prasad, Aravind Joshi, Bonnie Webber. 2004. Annotating Discourse Connectives and Their Arguments. In Proceedings of the HLT/NAACL Workshop on Frontiers in Corpus Annotation. Boston, MA. 2004. Emily Pitler, Mridhula Raghupathy, Hena Mehta, Ani Nenkova, Alan Lee, and Aravind Joshi. 2008. Easily Identifiable Discourse Relations Proceedings of COLING, 2008. Poster paper.  Massimo Poesio. 2000. Annotating a Corpus to Develop and Evaluate Discourse Entity Realization Algorithms: Issues and Preliminary Results. Proceedings of LREC-2000. Athens, May 2000. Rashmi Prasad, Eleni Miltsakaki, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, Aravind Joshi, Livio Robaldo and Bonnie Webber. 2007. The Penn Discourse Tree Bank 2.0 Annotation Manual. December 17, 2007.  Ted J. M. Sanders and Leo G. M. Noordman.  2000. The Role of Coherence Relations and Their Linguistic Markers in Text Processing. Discourse Processes 29(1):  37?60. 
288
Bilge Say, Deniz Zeyrek, Kemal Oflazer, and Umut ?zge. 2002. Development of a Corpus and a Treebank for Present-day Written Turkish. In Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference of Turkish Linguistics.  ?mit Deniz Turan and Deniz Zeyrek. 2010. Context, Contrast, and the Structure of Discourse in Turkish. ms. Bonnie Webber, Aravind Joshi, Eleni Miltsakaki, Rashmi Prasad, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, and Kate Forbes. 2005. A Short Introduction to the Penn Discourse Treebank. Copenhagen Working Papers in Language and Speech Processing. Bonnie Webber. D-LTAG: Extending Lexicalized TAG to Discourse. Cognitive Science, 28(5). September 2004. Bonnie Webber, Aravind Joshi, Matthew Stone, and Alistair Knott. 2003. Anaphora and Discourse Structure. Computational Linguistics 29(4). pp. 545-587. 2003 Laurie Williams, Robert R. Kessler, Ward Cunningham, Ron Jeffries. 2000. Strengthening the Case for Pair Programming. IEEE Software, July/August 2000, pp. 19-25. Laurie Williams and Kessler, Robert R. 2000. All I Really Need to Know about Pair Programming I Learned In Kindergarten, Communications of the ACM, Vol. 43, No., 5, pp. 108-114, May 2000. Deniz Zeyrek and Bonnie Webber. 2008. A Discourse Resource for Turkish: Annotating Discourse Connectives in the METU Turkish Corpus. The 6th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, The Third International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (IJNLP), Hyderabad, India, January 2008. Deniz Zeyrek, ?mit Turan, Cem Boz?ahin, Ruket ?ak?c?, Ay????? Sevdik-?all?, I??n Demir?ahin, Berfin Akta?, ?hsan Yal??nkaya, Hale ?gel. 2009. Annotating Subordinators in the Turkish Discourse Bank.ACL-IJCNLP, In Proceedings of LAW III Annotation Workshop III. Singapore, August 6-7, 2009, pp. 44-48. Appendix A. Sources of disagreement in 8 connectives (Turkish equivalents of ?but?, ?however?, ?for this reason?, ?despite?, ?on the other hand?, ?for this reason?, ?on the contrary?, ?in addition?)  Source of disagreement No. % Partial Arg1 overlap 151 63.98 Partial Arg2 overlap 24 10.17 No overlap of Arg1 23 9.74 Other 23 9.75 Lack of guidelines 8 3.39 Guidelines not followed 7 2.97 Total 236 100 
Appendix B. K values of connective types annotated in the TDB project5     K Value Connective (type) English equivalent  Arg1 Arg2 ne ..ne neither .. nor 1.000 0.982 veya or 0.942 0.980 dolay? since 0.892 0.957 ??nk? because 0.888 0.941 ?rne?in for  example 0.870 0.898 ya da or 0.843 0.974 yoksa otherwise 0.837 0.938 ama but 0.832 0.901 kar??n despite, despite this 0.824 0.893 hem .. hem both .. and 0.820 0.930 dahas? moreover 0.785 0.908 ama?la for the purpose of 0.785 0.876 i?in for, for this reason 0.776 0.915 oysa however 0.767 0.913 dolay?-s?yla for this reason 0.759 0.930 tersine on the contrary 0.741 1.000 fakat but 0.719 0.855 amac?yla for the purpose of 0.700 0.912 ve and 0.692 0.791 ra?men despite, despite this 0.688 0.742 ayr?ca in addition; separately 0.545 0.760 yandan on the one hand 0.523 0.645                                                        5 The results about the connective types for which 10 or more relations have been annotated by three annotators are included in the appendices. 
289
