A Multi-stage Clustering Framework for Chinese Personal 
Name Disambiguation 
    Huizhen Wang, Haibo Ding, Yingchao Shi, Ji Ma,  Xiao Zhou, Jingbo Zhu 
Natural Language Processing Laboratory, 
Northeatern University 
 Shenyang, Liaoning, China 
{wanghuizhen|zhujingbo@mail.neu.edu.cn 
{dinghb|shiyc|maji}@mail.neu.edu.cn 
 
Abstract 
This paper presents our systems for the 
participation of Chinese Personal Name 
Disambiguation task in the CIPS-
SIGHAN 2010. We submitted two dif-
ferent systems for this task, and both of 
them all achieve the best performance. 
This paper introduces the multi-stage 
clustering framework and some key 
techniques used in our systems, and 
demonstrates experimental results on 
evaluation data. Finally, we further dis-
cuss some interesting issues found dur-
ing the development of the system. 
1 Introduction 
Personal name disambiguation (PND) is very 
important for web search and potentially other 
natural language applications such as question 
answering. CIPS-SIGHAN bakeoffs provide a 
platform to evaluate the effectiveness of various 
methods on Chinese PND task.  
Different from English PND, word segmenta-
tion techniques are needed for Chinese PND 
tasks. In practice, person names are highly am-
biguous because different people may have the 
same name, and the same name can be written 
in different ways. It?s an n-to-n mapping of per-
son names to the specific people. There are two 
main challenges on Chinese PND: the first one 
is how to correctly recognize personal names in 
the text, and the other is how to distinguish dif-
ferent persons who have the same name. For 
address these challenges, we designed a rule-
based combination technique to improve NER 
performance and propose a multi-stage cluster-
ing framework for Chinese PND. We partici-
pated in the bakeoff of the Chinese PND task, 
on the test set and the diagnosis test set, our two 
systems are ranked at the 1st and 2nd position. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. 
In Section 2, we first give the key features and 
techniques used in our two systems. In Section 
3, experimental results on the evaluation test 
data demonstrated that our methods are effec-
tive to disambiguate the personal name, and 
discussions on some issues we found during the 
development of the system are given. In Section 
4, we conclude our work. 
2 System Description 
In this section, we describe the framework of 
our systems in more detail, involving data pre-
processing, discard-class document identifica-
tion, feature definition, clustering algorithms, 
and sub-system combination. 
2.1 Data Preprocessing 
There are around 100-300 news articles per per-
sonal name in the evaluation corpus. Each arti-
cle is stored in the form of XML and encoded in 
UTF-8. At first, each news article should be 
preprocessed as follows: 
 Use a publicly available Chinese encoding 
Converter tool to convert each news article 
from UTF-8 coding into GB1; 
 Remove all XML tags; 
 Process Chinese word segmentation, part-
of-speech (POS) tagging and name entity 
recognition (NER); 
The performance of word segmentation and 
NER tools generally affect the effectiveness of 
our Chinese PND systems. During system de-
                                                 
1
 http://www.mandarintools.com/ 
veloping process, we found that the publicly 
available NER systems obtain unsatisfactory 
performance on evaluation data. To address this 
challenge, we propose a new rule-based combi-
nation technique to improve NER performance. 
In our combination framework, two different 
NER systems are utilized, including a CRF-
based NER system and our laboratory?s NER 
system (Yao et al,2002). The latter was imple-
mented based on the maximum matching prin-
ciple and some linguistic post-preprocessing 
rules. Since both two NER systems adopt dif-
ferent technical frameworks, it is possible to 
achieve a better performance by means of sys-
tem combination techniques.  
The basic idea of our combination method is 
to first simply combine the results produced by 
both NER systems, and further utilize some 
heuristic post-processing rules to refine NE 
identification results. To achieve this goal, we 
first investigate error types caused by both NER 
systems, and design some post-preprocessing 
rules to correct errors or select the appropriate 
NER results from disagreements. Notice that 
such rules are learned from sample data (i.e., 
training set), not from test set. Experimental 
results demonstrate satisfactory NER perform-
ance by introducing these heuristic refinement 
rules as follows:  
 Conjunction Rules. Two NEs separated 
by a conjunction (such as ???,???,???, 
??? ) belong to the same type, e.g., ???
/adj.?/???/person?. Such a conjunc-
tion rule can help NER systems make a 
consistent prediction on both NEs, e.g., ??
?/person? and ???/person?.  
 Professional Title Rules. Professional title 
words such as ???? are strong indicators 
of person names, e.g., ???/???. Such a 
rule can be written in the form of ?profes-
sional_title+person_name?.  
 Suffix Rules. If an identified person name 
is followed by a suffix of another type of 
named entities such as location, it is not a 
true person name, for example, ?????
???/person ?/?/???. Since ??? is 
a suffix of a location name. ??????
??/person ?/location-suffix? should be 
revised to be a new location name, namely 
?????????/location?. 
 Foreign Person Name Rules. Two identi-
fied person names connected by a dot are 
merged into a single foreign person name, 
e.g., ??/./???? => ??.???? 
 Chinese Surname Rules. Surnames are 
very important for Chinese person name 
identification. However, some common 
surnames can be single words depending 
upon the context, for example, the Chinese 
word ??? can be either a surname or a 
quantifier. To tackle this problem, some 
post-processing rules for ??, ?, ?, ?, 
?? are designed in our system. 
 Query-Dependent Rules. Given a query 
person name A, if the string AB occurring 
in the current document has been identified 
as a single person name many times in 
other documents, our system would tend to 
segment AB as a single person name rather 
than as A/B. For example, if ????? was 
identified as a true person name more than 
one time in other documents, in such a case, 
???/??/?/??/?=> ???/???
/person??/? 
Incorporating these above post-processing 
rules, our NER system based on heuristic post-
processing rules shows 98.89% precision of 
NER on training set.  
2.2 Discard-Class Document Identification 
Seen from evaluation data, there are a lot of 
documents belonging to a specific class, re-
ferred to as discard-class. In the discard-class, 
the query person name occurring in the docu-
ment is not a true person name. For example, a 
query word ???? is a famous ocean name not 
a person name in the sentence ???????
???????????????. In such a 
case, the corresponding document is considered 
as discard-class. Along this line, actually the 
discard-class document identification is very 
simple task. If a document does not contain a 
true person name that is the same as the query 
or contains the query, it is a discard-class 
document.  
2.3 Feature Definition 
To identify different types of person name and 
for the PND purpose, some effective binary fea-
tures are defined to construct the document rep-
resentation as feature vectors as follows: 
 Personal attributes: involving profes-
sional title, affiliation, location, co-
occurrence person name and organization 
related to the given query.   
 NE-type Features: collecting all NEs oc-
curring in the context of the given query. 
There are two kinds of NE-type features 
used in our systems, local features and 
global features. The global features are de-
fined with respect to the whole document 
while the local features are extracted only 
from the two or three adjacent sentences 
for the given query.  
 BOW-type features: constructing the con-
text feature vector based on bag-of-word 
model. Similarly, there are local and global 
BOW-type features with respect to the con-
text considered.  
2.4 A Multi-stage Clustering Framework  
Seen from the training set, 36% of person 
names indicate journalists, 10% are sportsmen, 
and the remaining are common person names. 
Based on such observations, it is necessary to 
utilize different methodology to PND on differ-
ent types of person names, for example, because 
the most effective information to distinguish 
different journalists are the reports? location and 
colleagues, instead of the whole document con-
tent. To achieve a satisfactory PND perform-
ance, in our system we design three different 
modules for analyzing journalist, sportsman and 
common person name, respectively.  
2.4.1 PND on the Journalist Class 
In our system, some regular expressions are 
designed to determine whether a person name is 
a journalist or not. For example: 
 ??? /ni */ns */t */t ?? |? /n (/w .* 
[?/w */ni ?/w ]* query name/nh .*)/w 
 (/w .*query name/nh .*)/w 
 [*/nh]* query name/nh [*/nh] 
 ? ? | ? ? /n [*/nh]* query name/nh 
[*/nh]* 
To disambiguate on the journalist class, our 
system utilizes a rule-based clustering technique 
distinguish different journalists. For each 
document containing the query person name as 
journalists, we first extract the organization and 
the location occurring in the local context of the 
query. Two such documents can be put into the 
same cluster if they contain the same organiza-
tion or location names, otherwise not. In our 
system, a location dictionary containing prov-
ince-city information extracted from Wikipedia 
is used to identify location name. For example: 
??? (?? ?? ?? ?? ?), ??(??
? ?? ??? ?? ???). Based on this 
dictionary, it is very easy to map a city to its 
corresponding province.  
2.4.2 PND on the Sportsman Class 
Like done in PND on the journalist class, we 
also use rule-based clustering techniques for 
disambiguating sportsman class. The major dif-
ference is to utilize topic features for PND on 
the sportsman class. If the topic of the given 
document is sports, this document can be con-
sidered as sportsman class. The key is to how to 
automatically identify the topic of the document 
containing the query. To address this challenge, 
we adopt a domain knowledge based technique 
for document topic identification. The basic 
idea is to utilize a domain knowledge dictionary 
NEUKD developed by our lab, which contains 
more than 600,000 domain associated terms and 
the corresponding domain features. Some do-
main associated terms defined in NEUKD are 
shown in Table 1.  
 
Domain associated term Domain feature concept 
???(football team) Football, Sports 
???? 
(cycling team) Traffic, Sports, cycling 
???? 
(Chinese chess) Sports, Chinese chess 
??(white side) Sports, the game of go 
????? 
(Chicago bulls) Sports, basketball 
 
Table 1: Six examples defined in the NEUKD 
 
In the domain knowledge based topic identi-
fication algorithm, all domain associated terms 
occurring in the given document are first 
mapped into domain features such as football, 
basketball or cycling. The most frequent do-
main feature is considered as the most likely 
topic. See Zhu and Chen (2005) for details. 
Two documents with the same topic can be 
grouped into the same cluster.  
 
 
Table 2: Examples of PND on Sportsman Class 
 
2.4.3 Multi-Stage Clustering Framework 
We proposed a multi-stage clustering frame-
work for PND on common person name class, 
as shown In Figure 1.  
In the multi-stage clustering framework, the 
first-stage is to adopt strict rule-based hard clus-
tering algorithm using the feature set of per-
sonal attributes. The second-stage is to imple-
ment constrained hierarchical agglomerative 
clustering using NE-type local features. The 
third-stage is to design hierarchical agglomera-
tive clustering using BOW-type global features. 
By combining those above techniques, we sub-
mitted the first system named NEU_1. 
2.4.4 The second system 
Besides, we also submitted another PND system 
named NEU_2 by using the single-link hierar-
chical agglomerative clustering algorithm in 
which the distance of two clusters is the cosine 
similarity of their most similar members (Ma-
saki et al, 2009, Duda et al, 2004). The differ-
ence between our two submission systems 
NEU_1 and NEU_2 is the feature weighting 
method. The motivation of feature weighting 
method used in NEU_2 is to assume that words 
surrounding the query person name in the given 
document are more important features than 
those far away from it, and person name and 
location names occurring in the context are 
more discriminative features than common 
words for PND purpose. Along this line, in the 
feature weighting scheme used in NEU_2, for 
each feature extracted from the sentence con-
taining the query person name, the weight of a 
word-type feature with the POS of ?ns?, ?ni? 
or ?nh ? is assigned  as 3, Otherwise 1.5; For 
the features extracted from other sentences, the 
weight of a word with the POS of ?ns?or ?nh ? 
is set to be 2, the ones of ?ni? POS is set to 1.5, 
otherwise 1.0. 
 
Algorithm 1: Multi-stage Clustering Framework 
Input: a person name pn, and its related document 
set D={d1, d2, ?, dm} in which each document di 
contains the person name pn; 
Output: clustering results C={C1,C2, ?,Cn}, where 
CCi =?i
 and ?=? ji CC  
For each di?D do 
 Si = {s|pn?s, s?di}; 
ORGi={t|t?s, s?Si, POS(t)= ni}; 
PERi={t|t?s, s?Si, POS(t)=nh} ; 
Ldi = {t|t?s, s?Si }; //local feature set 
Gdi = {t|t?di}; //global feature set 
Ci = {di} ; 
End for 
Stage 1: Strict rules-based clustering 
 Begin 
 For each Ci ? C do 
If ??? ji ORGORG or 
2?? ji PERPER  
Then Ci = Ci ?Cj;  
ORGi = ORGi?ORGj ; 
PERi = PERi?PERj ; 
Remove Cj from C ; 
End for 
End  
Stage 2: Constrained hierarchical agglomerative 
clustering algorithm using local features 
Begin  
         Set each c ?C as an initial cluster; 
 do  
),(maxarg],[
,
ji
CCC
ji CCsimCC
ji ?
=  
),cos(max
),(max),(
,
,
yxjyix
jyix
ddCdCd
yxCdCdji
LL
ddsimCCsim
??
??
=
=
 
Ci = Ci ?Cj; 
Remove Cj from C ; 
        until  sim(Ci,Cj) < ?. 
End 
Stage 3: Constrained hierarchical agglomerative 
clustering algorithm using global features, i.e., util-
ize the same algorithm used in stage 2 by consider-
ing the global feature set G for cosine-based similar-
ity calculation instead of the local feature set L. 
 
Figure 1: Multi-stage Clustering Framework 
Person name Document no. sports 
?? 081 ?? 
?? 094 ?? 
?? 098 ?? 
?? 100 ?? 
2.5 Final Result Generation 
As discussed above, there are many modules for 
PND on Chinese person name. In our NEU_1, 
the final results are produced by combining 
outputs of discard-class document clustering, 
journalist-class clustering, sportsman-class 
clustering and multi-stage clustering modules. 
In NEU-2 system, the outputs of discard-class 
document clustering, journalist-class clustering, 
sportsman-class clustering and single-link 
clustering modules are combined to generate 
the final results.  
3 Evaluation 
3.1 Experimental Settings 
 Training data: containing about 30 Chinese 
person names, and a set of about 100-300 
news articles are provided for each person 
name.  
 Test data: similar to the training data, and 
containing 26 unseen Chinese personal 
names, provided by the SIGHAN organizer.  
 Performance evaluation metrics (Artiles et 
al., 2009): B_Cubed and P_IP metrics. 
3.2 Results 
Table 3 shows the performance of our two 
submission systems NEU_1 and NEU_2 on the 
test set of Sighan2010 Chinese personal name 
disambiguation task. 
  
B_Cubed P_IP System 
No. P R F P IP F 
NEU_1 95.76 88.37 91.47 96.99 92.58 94.56 
NEU_2 95.08 88.62 91.15 96.73 92.73 94.46 
 
Table 3: Results on the test data 
 
NEU-1 system was implemented by the 
multi-stage clustering framework that uses sin-
gle-link clustering method. In this framework, 
there are two threshold parameters ? and ?. 
Both threshold parameters are tuned from train-
ing data sets.  
After the formal evaluation, the organizer 
provided a diagnosis test designed to explore 
the relationship between Chinese word segmen-
tation and personal name disambiguation. In the 
diagnosis test, the personal name disambigua-
tion task was simplified and limited to the 
documents in which the personal name is 
tagged correctly. The performance of our two 
systems on the diagnosis test set of Sighan2010 
Chinese personal name disambiguation task are 
shown in Table 4. 
 
B_Cubed P_IP System 
no. P R F  P IP F  
NEU_1 95.6 89.74 92.14 96.83 93.62 95.03 
NEU_2 94.53 89.99 91.66 96.41 93.8 94.9 
 
Table 4: Results of the diagnosis test on test 
data 
 
As shown in the Table 3 and Table 4, NEU-1 
system achieves the highest precision and F 
values on the test data and the diagnosis test 
data. 
3.3 Discussion 
We propose a multi-stage clustering framework 
for Chinese personal name disambiguation. The 
evaluation results demonstrate that the features 
and key techniques our systems adopt are effec-
tive. Our systems achieve the best performance 
in this competition. However, our recall values 
are not unsatisfactory. In such a case, there is 
still much room for improvement. Observed 
from experimental results, some interesting is-
sues are worth being discussed and addressed in 
our future work as follows: 
(1) For PND on some personal names, the 
document topic information seems not effective. 
For example, the personal name "?? (Guo 
Hua)" in training set represent one shooter and 
one billiards player. The PND system based on 
traditional clustering method can not effectively 
work in such a case due to the same sports topic. 
To solve this problem, one solution is to suffi-
ciently combine the personal attributes and 
document topic information for PND on this 
person name. 
(2) For the journalist-class personal names, 
global BOW-type features are not effective in 
this case as different persons can report on the 
same or similar events. For example, there are 
four different journalists named ????(Zhu 
Jianjun)? in the training set, involving different 
locations such as Beijing, Zhengzhou, Xining or 
Guangzhou. We can distinguish them in terms 
of the location they are working in.  
(3) We found that some documents in the 
training set only contain lists of news title and 
the news reporter. In this case, we can not dis-
criminate the persons with respect to the loca-
tion of entire news. It?s worth studying some 
effective solution to address this challenge in 
our future work.  
(4) Seen from the experimental results, some 
personal names such as ???(Li gang)? are 
wrong identified because this person is associ-
ated with multiple professional titles and affili-
ates. In this case, the use of exact matching 
methods can not yield satisfactory results. For 
example, the query name ???(Li gang)? in 
the documents 274 and 275 is the president of  
???????????(China International 
Culture Association)? while in the documents 
202, 225 and 228, he is the director of ????
???????(Bureau of External Cultural 
Relations of Chinese Ministry of Culture)?. To 
group both cases into the same cluster, it?s 
worth mining the relations and underlying se-
mantic relations between entities to achieve this 
goal.  
 
4 Conclusion 
This paper presents our two Chinese personal 
name disambiguation systems in which various 
constrained hierarchical agglomerative cluster-
ing algorithms using local or global features are 
adopted. The bakeoff results show that our sys-
tems achieve the best performance. In the future, 
we will pay more attention on the personal at-
tribute extraction and unsupervised learning 
approaches for Chinese personal name disam-
biguation.  
5 Acknowledgements 
This work was supported in part by the National 
Science Foundation of China (60873091) and 
the Fundamental Research Funds for the Cen-
tral Universities. 
 
References 
Artiles, Javier, Julio Gonzalo and Satoshi Sekine. 
2009. ?WePS 2 Evaluation Campaign: overview of 
the Web People Search Clustering Task,? In 2nd 
Web People Search Evaluation Workshop (WePS 
2009), 18th WWW Conference. 
Duda, Richard O., Peter E.Hart, and David G.Stork. 
2004. Pattern Classification. China Machine Press. 
Masaki, Ikeda, Shingo Ono, Issei Sato, Minoru Yo-
shida, and Hiroshi Nakagawa. 2009. Person Name 
Disambiguation on the Web by TwoStage Clustering. 
In 2nd Web People Search Evaluation Workshop 
(WePS 2009), 18th WWW Conference. 
Yao, Tianshun, Zhu Jingbo , Zhang Li, Yang Ying. 
Nov. 2002. Natural Language Processing , Second 
Edition, Tsinghua press. 
Zhu, Jingbo and Wenliang Chen. 2005. Some Stud-
ies on Chinese Domain Knowledge Dictionary and 
Its Application to Text Classification. In Proc. of 
SIGHAN4. 
 
 
 
