Text Summarizer in Use: Lessons Learned 
from Real World Deployment and Evaluation 
Mary Ellen Okurowski 
Harold Wilson 
Joaquin Urbina 
Department ofDefense 
9800 Savage Rd. 
Fort Meade, MD. 20755 
Tony Taylor 
SRA Corp. 
4939 Elkridge Landing 
Suite #195 
Linthicum, MD. 21090 
Ruth Colvin Clark 
Clark Training & Consulting 
17801 CR 23 
Dolores, Colorado 81323 
Frank Krapcho 
Kathpol Technologies Inc. 
6835 Deerpath Suite #102 
Elkridge, MD. 21705 
1.0 Introduction 
Much of the historical and current 
summarization literature has been technology- 
centered with the questions posed and 
answered having implications for technology 
development. Though commercial 
summarization products have appeared in the 
market place and developers continue to 
explore new summarization areas, few papers 
have been user-centered, examining 
summarization technology in-use. In this 
~aaper, we show how applied work and the 
knowledge gleaned about technology in-use 
"can temper theoretical considerations and 
? motivate as well as direct development likely 
to result in higher eturn on investment. 
2.0 Background 
The importance of understanding the 
function a summary serves for users is widely 
acknowledged, and seminal works defining 
summary types by functions (Paice, 1990; 
Sparck-Jones, 1993) are frequently cited by 
developers. Task orientation defines extrinsic 
technology assessments, and the research 
literature on how to assess performance for 
machine generated summaries in an 
experimental task scenario has grown 
( Brandow et al, 1994; Morris et al, 1999; 
Jing et al, 1998; Merlino and Maybury, 
1999; Wasson, 1998; Tombros et al, 1998; 
Firmin and Chrzanowski, 1999; and Mani et 
al., 1999). An increasing number of research 
papers on summarization systems now also 
describe some type of extrinsic evaluative 
task (e.g. Salton et al, 1999; Strzalkowski et 
al., 1998). A number of factors (i.e. 
characteristics of summaries, documents, 
users, and tasks) have surfaced which have 
implications for technology use. More " 
research assessing technology (or any aspect 
of it) in-use on a user's own data even in a 
development mode along the lines of 
McKeown et al (1998) is needed. While 
experimentation designs involving subjects 
performing short term controlled tasks may 
yield results of statistical ?significance, 
generalizability to the user community is 
limited. 
In addition, the level of user support 
text. summarization systems hould provide 
also continues to be speculative. More 
interest lies in new areas of inquiry like 
visualization and browsing techniques (e.g., 
Boguraev et al, 1998), multi-document 
summarization ( e.g., McKeown and Radev, 
1995), multi-media summarization (e.g., 
Merlino and Maybury, 1999), summarization 
49 
of documents with graphics (e.g., Futrelle, 
1998) and multi-lingual summarization (e.g., 
Cowie, 1998). But systematic user studies on 
interface support, applicability of proposed 
summarization features, or on the real-world 
use of demonstration a d prototype systems or 
even commercial systems have not 
materialized. 
3.0 Overview 
This paper presents a user study of a 
summarization system and provides insights 
on a number of technical issues relevant to the 
summarization R&D community that arise in, 
the context of use, concerning technology 
performance and user support. We describe 
initial stages in the insertion of the SRA 
summarizer in which (1) a large scale beta 
test was conducted, and (2) analysis of tool 
usage data, user surveys and observations, and 
user requirements is leading to system 
enhancements and more effective 
summarization technology insertion. In our 
user study, we begin with a brief description 
of the task and technology (3.1). We then 
describe the beta test methodology (3.2) and 
:analysis of tool usage data (3.3). We focus on 
what  we learned in our user-centered 
. approach about how technology performance 
in a task and user support affect user 
? acceptance (3.4) and what significant 
technology-related modifications resulted 
and what studies are in progress to  measure 
tool efficacy, summarization effectiveness, 
and the impact of training on tool use (3.5). 
Though work to enhance the text 
summarization system is underway, we focus 
in this paper on user-centered issues. Our 
work is predicated on the belief that there is 
no substitute for user generated ata to guide 
tool enhancement. 
3.1 Task and Technology 
The task is indicative. Our users rely 
on machine generated summaries (single 
document, either generic or query-based, with 
user adjustment of compression rates) to 
judge relevance of full documents to their 
information eed. As an information analyst," 
our typical user routinely scans summaries to 
stay current with fields of interest and 
enhance domain knowledge. This scanning 
task is one of many jobs an analyst performs 
to support report writing for customers in 
other Government agencies. Our goal is to 
generate summaries that accelerate 
eliminating or selecting documents without 
misleading or causing a user to access the 
original text unnecessarily. 
The system in this user study is a 
version of the SRA sentence xtraction system 
described in Aone et al (1997, 1998, 1999). 
Users retrieve documents from a database of 
multiple text collections of reports and press. 
Documents are generally written in a 
journalistic style and average 2,000 characters 
in length. The number of documents in a batch 
may vary from a few to hundreds. Batches of 
retrieved texts may be routinely routed to our 
summary server or uploaded by the user. The 
system is web-.based and provides the 
capability to tailor summary output by 
creating multiple summary set-ups. User 
options include: number of sentences 
viewed, summary type applied and sorting, 
other information viewed (e.g. title, date), 
and high frequency document terms and 
named entities viewed. Users can save, print 
or view full text originals with summaries 
appended. Viewed originals highlight 
extracted sentences. 
All system use is voluntary. Our users 
are customers and, if dissatisfied, may elect to 
scan data without our technology. 
3.2 Beta Test Methodology 
In the fall of 1998, 90+ users were 
recruited primarily through an IR system news 
group and provided access to the SRA system 
summarizer to replace their full text review 
process of scanning concatenated files. 
Procedural (how-to) training was optional, but 
50 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
approximately 70 users opted to receive a one- 
on-one hands-on demonstration (about forty- 
five minutes in length) on texts that the new 
user had retrieved. The beta testing took place 
over a six month period. With no stipulation 
on the length of participation, many users 
simply tried out the system a limited number 
of times. Initial feedback gave us a clear 
picture of the likelihood of continued use. Our 
relatively low retention rate highlighted the 
fact that the experimental conditions in 
previous summary experiments may be 
misleading and masked factors that do not 
surface until users use a system in a daily 
work in a real-world setting. 
3.3 Analysis of Tool Usage Data 
Usage data were collected for all 
system users and analyzed through web logs." 
These logs were a record of what users did on 
their actual work data. For each user, our logs 
provided a rich source of information: number 
of summary batches, number of documents in 
each, whether documents were viewed, and 
set up features--summary type, summary lines 
viewed, number of indicator (high frequency 
signature terms) lines viewed, number of 
entity (persons, places, organizations-) lines 
viewed, query terms). Table 1 below 
illustrates the type of representative data 
collected, questions of interest, and findings. 
Table 1: Questions of Interest, Tool Usage Data, Findings 
Questions Data Finding 
Were documents number of sum- Users routinely accessed our system to read 
summarized? mary events machine generated summaries. 
Did users actually number of current Most users did not appear to fully exploit he flex- 
tailor the system? set-ups ibility of the system. The beta test population had 
a median of only two set-up types active. 
type of summary Did the users select 
generic or query- 
based summaries? 
Is there a difference 
among summary 
t3~pes for the num- 
ber of sentences 
viewed? 
Do users choose to 
use indicators and 
entities when tailor- 
ing browsing capa- 
bility? 
number of sen- 
tences viewed by 
summary types 
(generic, query- 
based, lead) 
indicator/entity 
preferences for 
non-default set-ups 
(on or off) 
Usage data indicated that about half the popula- 
tion selected generic and the other half query- 
based summaries. (Note: The default set-up was 
the generic summarization.) 
The hypothesis of equal median number of sen- 
tences available for viewing sentences was tested. 
The number of sentences viewed with generic 
summary type (3) is significantly different from 
either query-based (5) or lead (6). 
Users tended to retain indicator and entity prefer- 
ences when tailoring capabilities. (But users gen- 
erallymodified a default set-up in which both 
preferences have a line viewed.) 
II 
II 
II 
51 
Table 1: Questions of Interest, Tool Usage Data, Findings 
Questions Data Finding 
tool 
i 
i 
Does training make 
a difference on sys- 
tem use or user pro- 
file type? Users 
were categorized 
(advanced, interme- 
diate, novice) on 
the basis of usage 
features with Harti- 
gan's K-Means 
clustering algo- 
rithm. 
training and 
use data 
A chi-squared test for independence between 
training and use reflected a significant relation- 
ship (p value close to 0) i.e., training did impact 
the user's decision to use the system. However, 
training did not make a difference across the three 
user profile types. A Fisher Exact test on a 3x2 
contingency table revealed that the relative num- 
bers of trained and untrained users at the three 
user profile types were the same (p-value= 
0.1916) i.e., training and type are independent. 
t 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
As we began to analyze the data, we 
realized that we had only a record of use, but 
were not sure of what motivated the use 
patterns. Therefore, the team supplemented 
tool usage data with an or/-line survey and 
one-on-one observations tohelp us understand 
and analyze the user behavior. These 
additional data points motivated much of our 
work described in 3.5. Throughout the six 
month cycle we also collected and categorized 
user requirements. 
3.4 Insights on Text Summarization 
? 3.4.1 Technology Performance 
Insight 1: For user acceptance, technology 
? performance must go beyond a good 
suthmary. It requires an understanding of the 
users" work practices. 
We learned that many factors in the 
task environment affect technology 
performance and user acceptance. 
Underpinning much work in summarization is 
the view that summaries are time savers. Mani 
et al (1999) report that summaries at a low 
compression rate reduced decision making 
time by 40% (categorization) and 50% (ad- 
hoc) with relevance asessments almost as 
accurate as the full text. Although evaluators 
acknowledge the role of data presentation ( 
e.g., Firmin and Chrzanowski, 1999; Merlino 
and Maybury, 1999), most studies use 
summary system output as the metric for 
evaluation. The question routinely posed 
seems to be "Do summaries ave the user 
time without loss in accuracy?" However, we 
confirmed observations on the integration of 
summarization and retrieval technologies of 
McKeown et al (1998) and learned that 
users are not likely to consider using 
summaries as a time saver unless the 
summaries are efficiently accessed. For our 
users a tight coupling of retrieval and 
summarization is pre-requisite. Batches 
automatically routed to the summary server 
available for user review were preferred over 
those requiring the user to upload files for 
summarization. Users pointed out that the 
uploading took more time then they were 
willing to spend. 
User needs and their work practices 
often constrain how technology is applied. 
For example, McKeown et al (1998) focused 
on the needs of physicians who want to 
examine only data for patients with similar 
characteristics to their own patients, and 
Wasson (1998) focused on the needs of news 
information customers who want to retrieve 
documents likely to be on-topic. We too 
62 
II 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
l 
I 
I 
I 
I! 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
discovered that the user needs affect their 
interest in summarization technology, but 
from a more general perspective. Text 
REtrieval Conferences (e.g., Harman, 1996) 
have baselined system performance in terms 
of two types of tasks--routing or ad-h.oc. In 
our environment the ad-hoc users were less 
likely .to want a summary. They simply 
wanted an answer to a question and did not 
want to review summaries. If too many 
documents were retrieved, they would simply 
craft a more effective query. 
Measuring the efficiency gains with a 
real population was quite problematic for 
technology in-use. We faced a number of 
challenges. Note that in experimental 
conditions, subjects perform, on full and 
reduced versions. One challenge was to 
baseline non-intrusively the current (non- 
summary) full text review process. A second 
was to measure both accuracy and efficiency 
gains for users performing on the job. These 
challenges were further exacerbated by the 
fact that users in an indicative task primarily 
use a summary to eliminate most documents. 
They have developed effective skimming and 
scanning techniques and are already quite 
efficient at this task. 
. In short, our experience showed that 
technologists deploying single document 
summarization capability are likely be 
constrained by the following factors: 
? ? the ease of technology use 
? the type of user information eed 
? how effective the user performs the task 
without he technology. 
3.4.2 User Support 
Insight 2: Users require more than just a good 
summary. They require the right level of 
technology support, 
Although the bulk of the research work 
still continues to focus on summarization 
algorithms, we now appreciate the importance 
of user support o text summarization use. 
The SRA software was quite robust and fast. 
53 
The task of judging relevance with a summary 
(even a machine generated one) instead of the 
full text version does not require a user to  
acquire a fundamentally different work 
practice. Yet our system was not apparently 
sufficiently supporting tool navigation. One of 
the reasons was that our on-line help was not 
developed from a user perspective and was 
rarely accessed. Another was that browse and 
view features did not maximize performance. 
For example, the interface mployed a scroll 
bar for viewing summaries rather than more 
effective Next Or Previous buttons. Users 
frequently asked the same questions, but we 
were answering them individually. 
Terminology clear to the technologists was 
not understood by users. We also noticed that 
though there were requirements for 
improvement of summarization quality, many 
requirements were associated with these user 
support issues. 
One of the more unexpected findings 
was the under-utilization f tailoring features. 
The system offered the user many ways to 
tailor summaries to their individual needs, yet 
most users simply relied on default set-ups. 
Observations revealed little understanding of 
the configurable features and how these 
features corresponded to user needs to say 
nothing of how the algorithm worked. Some 
users did not understand the difference 
between the two summary types or sorting 
effects with query-based summary selection. 
Non-traditional summary types--indicators 
and named entities--did not appear to help 
render a relevance judgment. We came to 
understand that just because technologists sees 
the value to these features does not mean that 
a user will or that the features, in fact, have 
utility. 
3.5 Technology-related Modifications 
3.5.1 User-centered Changes to Technology 
Work Practices 
On technology performance, we 
learned that 
? seamless integration with an IR system 
was preferred 
? users with static queries were more likely 
customers for a summary service 
? gains in efficiency are hard to measure for 
a task already efficiently performed in a 
real-world situations. 
In response, we have established a summary 
service in which retrieval results are directly 
routed to our summary server and await the 
user. We plan to integrate the summarization 
tool into the IR system. (Uploading batches 
and then submission to the server is still an 
option.) We also abandoned the naive idea 
that data overload equates to summarization 
requirements and realized that the technology 
does not apply to all users. We have more 
effectively selected users by profiling 
characteristics of active ,users (e.g. daily 
document viewing work practice, document 
volume, static query use, etc.) and have 
prioritized deployment o that population 
which could most benefit from it. 
In order to demonstrate tool 
~summarization efficiency, we needed to 
:baseline full-text review. We considered, but 
. rejected a number of options--user self-report 
and timing, observations, and even the 
? creation of a viewing tool to monitor and 
document full text review. Instead, we 
ba, selined full text scanning through 
information retrieval ogs for a subgroup of 
users by tracking per document viewing time 
for a month period. These users submit the 
same queries daily and view their documents 
through the IR system browser. For the 
heaviest system users, 75% of the documents 
were viewed in under 20 seconds per 
document, but note that users vary widely 
with a tendency to spend a much longer 
browse time on a relatively small number of 
documents. We then identified a subgroup of 
these users and attempted to deploy the 
summarizer to this baseline group to compare 
54 
scanning time required over a similar time 
frame. We are currently analyzing these data. 
System in a work environment is 
considered a good indicator of tool utility, but 
we wanted some gauge of summary quality 
and also anticipated user concerns about an 
emerging technology like automatic text 
summarization. We compromised and 
selected a method to measure the 
effectiveness of our summaries that serves a 
dual purpose--our users gain confidence in the 
utility of the summaries and we can collect 
and measure the effectiveness of the generic 
summaries for some of our users on their data. 
We initially piloted and now have 
incorporated a data collection procedure into 
our software. In our on-line training, we 
guide users to explore tool capabilities 
through a series of experiments or tasks. In the 
first of these tasks, a user is asked to submit a 
batch for summarization, then for each of five 
to seven user-selected summaries to record 
answers to the question: 
"Is this document likely to be relevant o 
me?"(based on the summary) 
~.yes  no 
Then, the  user was directed to open the 
original documents for each of the summaries 
and record answers to the question: 
"Is the document relevant to me?"  
(after eading the original text) 
yes no 
In a prototype collection effort, we 
asked users to review the first ten documents, 
but in follow-on interviews the users 
recommended review of fewer documents. We 
understand the limits this places on 
interpreting our data. Also, the on-line training 
is optional so we are not able to collect these 
data for all our users uniformly. 
Most of the users tested exhibited both 
high recall and precision, with six users 
judging relevance correctly for all documents 
(in Table 2 below). The False Negative error 
was high for only one user, while the majority 
of - the users exhibited no False Negative 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Table 2: Relevance Classes by User 
User 
5 0 
4 0 
I 
2 
3 
4 
5 
1 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
True False True False 
Positive Positive Negative Negative 
5 0 0 0 
4 
7 
1 
5 0 
4 0 
0 
4 
5 
0 
2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 0 
0 1 
0 0 
0 1 
0 2 
~0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 0 2 2 
0 1 6 0 
I 1 4 
errors, a worse error to commit han wasting 
time viewing irrelevant data, False Positive. 
Across all the users, 79% of all relevant 
documents and 81% of the irrelevant 
documents were accurately categorized by 
examination of the summary. 
3.5.2 User-centered Changes in 
Support 
On user support, we learned that 
User 
our system did not effectively support user 
tool navigation 
? our users did not fully exploit system 
tailorable features 
In response, we addressed user support needs 
from three different angles, each of which we 
discuss below: incorporation of Electronic 
Performance Support Systems, design and 
implementation f procedural on-line training 
and guided discovery training, and user 
analysis of summary quality. 
Electronic Performance Support 
Systems (EPSS) is a widely acknowledged 
strategy for on the job performance support. 
Defined as "an optimized body of co- 
ordinated on-line methods and resources that 
enable and maintain a person's or an 
organization's performance," EPSS 
interventions range from simple help systems 
to intelligent wizard-types of support. 
(Villachica and Stone, 1999; Gery 1991). We 
elected to incorporate EPSS rather than 
cl~issroom instruction. Based on an analysis of 
tool usage data, user requirements, and user 
observations, experts in interface design and 
technology performance support prototyped 
an EPSS enhanced interface. Active system 
users reviewed these changes before 
implementation. The on-line perfomance 
support available at all times includes ystem 
feature procedures, a term glossary, FAQ, and 
a new interface design. 
With incorporation of the EPSS, we 
also addressed the under-utilization of the 
configurable features. Although simple 
technologies with few options such as 
traditional telephones do not require 
conceptual system understanding for effective 
use, more complex systems with multiple 
options are often underutilized when 
supported with procedural training alone. We 
decided to incorporate both procedural 
training in a "Getting Started" tutorial and 
conceptual training in "The Lab." In "Getting 
Started", users learn basic system actions (e.g., 
creating set-ups, submitting batches for 
summarization, viewing summaries). "The 
Labi', on the other hand, supports guided 
discovery training in which users explore the 
system through a series of experiments in 
which they use their own data against various 
tool options and record their observations. 
Given our own experience with under- 
utilization and research reporting difficulties 
with unguided exploratory learning (Hsu et 
55 
al., 1993; Tuovinen and Sweller, 1999), we 
built on the work of de Mul and Van 
Oostendorf (1996) and Van Oostendorf and de 
Mul (1999) and their finding that task-oriented 
exploratory support leads to more effective 
learning of computer systems. We created a 
series of experiments hat the user conducts to 
discover how the summarization technology 
can best meet their needs. For example, users 
are directed to change summary length and to 
determine for themselves how the variation. 
affects their ability to judge relevance using 
their data. 
In February, we conducted a study of. 
two groups, one with the EPSS and "Getting 
Starting" Tutorial and a second with the same 
level of support and additionally "The Lab". 
Earlier work by Kieras and Bovair (1984) 
compared straight procedural training with 
conceptual training and showed that the 
conceptually trained users made more efficient 
use of system features. The goal of our study 
was to determine just what level of training 
support the summarization technology 
requires for effective use. Through surveys, 
we planned to collect attitudes toward the tool 
and training and through web logs, tool usage 
data and option trials. We also planned to 
assess the users' understanding of the features 
and benefits of the tool. We are currently 
analyzing these data. 
In addition to the EPSS and the on-line 
training, we developed a method for taking 
into account user assessment of our summary 
quality in a systematic way. User feedback on 
summarization quality during the beta test 
was far too general and uneven. We recruited 
two users to join our technology team and 
become informed rather than the typical naive 
users. They designed an analysis tool through 
which they database problematic machine 
generated summaries and assign them to error- 
type categories. Though we expected users to 
address issues like summary coherence, they 
have identified categories like the following: 
? sentence identification errors 
? formatting errors 
? sentence xtraction due to the "rare" word 
phenomena 
? sentence xtraction in "long" documents 
? failure to identify abstracts when available 
We expect hat this approach can complement 
a technology-driven one by helping us 
prioritize changes we need based on 
methodical data collection and analysis. 
4.0 Summary 
Our experience with text summarization 
technology in-use has been quite sobering. In 
this paper, we have shown how beta testing an 
emerging technology has helped us to 
understand that for technology to enhance job 
performance many factors besides the 
algorithm need to be addressed. 
5.0 References 
Aone, C., Gorlinsky, J. and Okurowski, M.E. 
1997. Trainable, scalable summarization 
using robust NLP. In Intelligent Scalable 
Text Summarization. Madrid, Spain: 
Association of Computational Linguistics, 
pages 66-73. 
Aone, C., Gorlinsky, J. and Okurowski, M.E. 
1998. Trainable scalable summarization 
using robust NLP and machine learning. In 
Coling-A CL 98. Montreal, Quebec, 
Canada, pages 62-66. 
Aone, C., Gorlinsky, J., Larsen, B. and 
Okurowski, M.E. 1999. A trainable 
summarizer with knowledge acquired 
from robust NLP techniques. In Mani, I. 
and Maybury, M. (eds.), Advances in 
Automatic Text Summarization. pages 71- 
80, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press. 
Boguraev, B., Kennedy, C., Bellamey, R., 
Brawer, S., Wong, Y.Y. and Swartz, J. 
1998. Dynamic presentation of document 
content for rapid on-line skimming. 
Intelligent Text Summarization. (Papers 
56 
from the 1998 AAAI Spring Symposium 
Technical Report SS-98-06), pages 109- 
118. 
Brandow, R., Mitze, K. and Rau, L. 1994. 
Automatic condensation of electronic 
publications by sentence selection. 
Information Processing and Management, 
31(5):675-685. 
Cowie, J., Mahesh, K., Nirenburg, S. and. 
Zajac, R., 1998. MINDS--Multi-lingual 
INteractive document summarization. 
Intelligent Text Summarization. (Papers, 
from the 1998 AAAI Spring Symposium 
Technical Report SS-98-06), pages 122- 
123. 
de Mul, S. and van Oostendorp, H. 1996. 
Learning user interfaces by exploration. 
Acta Psychologica, 91:325-344: 
Firmin, T. and Chrzanowski, M. 1999. An 
evaluation of automatic text 
summarization. I  Mani, I. and Maybury, 
M.(eds.), Advances in Automatic Text 
Summarization. pages 325-336, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press. 
Futrelle, R. 1998. Summarization of 
documents that include graphics. 
Intelligent Text Summarization. (Papers 
.from the 1998 AAAI Spring Symposium 
Technical Report SS-98-06), pages 92- 
101. 
Ger;y, G. 1991. Electronic performance 
support systems: How and why to remake 
the workplace through the stratgic 
application of technology. Tolland, MA: 
Gery Performance Press. 
Harman, D.K. 1996. The Fourth Text 
REtrieval Conference (TREC-4). National 
Institute of Standards and Technology 
Special Publication, pages 500-236. 
Hsu, J-F., Chapelle, C. and Thompson, A., 
1993. Exploratory learning environments: 
What are they and do students explore? 
Journal Educational Computing Research, 
9(1): 1-15. 
Jing, H., McKeown, K., Barzilay, R. and 
Elhadad, M. 1998. Summarization 
evaluation methods: Experiments and 
methods. Intelligent Text Summarization. 
(Papers from the 1998 AAAI Spring 
Symposium Technical Report SS-98-06), 
pages 51-59. 
Kieras, D.E. and Bovair, S. 1984. The role of 
a mental model in learning to operate a 
device. Cognitive Science, (8), 1-17. 
Mani, I., House, D., Klein, G., Hirschman, L., 
Firmin, T. and Sundheim, B. 1999. The 
TIPSTER SUMMAC Text Summarization 
Evaluation. In Proceedings of EACL99 
Ninth Conference of the European 
Chapter of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics. pages 77-83. 
McKeown, K. and Radev, D. 1995. 
Generating summaries of multiple news 
articles. In Proceedings of the 18th Annual 
International SIGIR Conference on 
Research and Development i  Information 
Retrieval. pages 74-78. 
McKeown, K. Jordan, D. arid 
Hatzivassiloglou, V. 1998. Generating 
patient specific summaries on online 
literature. Intelligent Text Summarization. 
(Papers from the 1998' AAAI Spring 
Symposium Technical Report SS-98-06), 
pages 34-43. 
Merlino, A. and Maybury, M. 1999. An 
empirical study of the optimal presentation 
of multi-media summaries of broadcast 
news. In Mani, I. and Maybury, M. (eds.), 
Advances in Automatic Text 
57 
Summarization. pages 391-401, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press. 
Morris, A., Kasper, G., and Adams, D. 1999. 
The effects and limitations of automated 
text condensing on reading comprehension 
performance. In Mani, I. and Maybury, 
M. (eds.), Advances in Automatic Text 
Summarization. pages 305-323, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press. 
Paice, C.D., 1990. Constructing literature 
abstracts by computer: Techniques and 
prospects. Information Processing and~ 
Management, 26(1): 171-186. 
Sparck-Jones, K. 1993. What might be in a 
summary? In Information Retrieval 93: 
Von der Modellierung zur Anwendung, 
pages 9-26. 
Salton, G., Singhal, A., Mitra, M. and 
Buckely, C. 1999. Automatic text 
structuring and summarization. I  Mani, I. 
and Maybury, M. (eds.), Advances in 
Automatic Text Summarization. pages 342- 
: 355, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT 
Press. 
Strzalkowski, T., Wang, J. and Wise, B., 
1998. A robust practical text 
summarization. Intelligent Text 
,Summarization. (Papers from the 1998 
AAAI Spring Symposium Technical 
Report SS-98-06), pages 26-33. 
Tombros, A., and Sanderson, M. 1998. 
Advantages of query-based summaries in 
information retrieval. In Proceedings of 
the 21st ACM S1GIR Conference 
(SIGIR98). pages 2-10. 
Tuovinen, J. and Sweller, J. 1999. A 
comparison of cognitive load associated 
with discovery learning and worked 
58 
examples. Journal of 
Psychology, 9(2):334-341. 
Educational 
Van Oostendorp, H. and de Mul, S. 1999. 
Learning by exploring: Thinking aloud 
while exploring an information system. 
Instruction Science, 27:269-284. 
Villachica, S.W. and Stone, D. 1999. 
Performance support systems. In 
Stolovitch, H.D. and Keeps, K.J., (eds.), 
Handbook of Human Performance 
Technology. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass 
' Pfeiffer. 
Wasson, M. 1998. Using leading text for news 
summaries: Evaluation results and 
implications for commercial 
summarization. In Coling-A CL 98. 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada. pages 1364- 
1368. 
