Proceedings of the Third Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 44?47,
Suntec, Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Annotating Subordinators in the Turkish Discourse Bank
Deniz Zeyreka,0, U?mit Turanb, Cem Bozsahina, Ruket C?ak?c?a,
Ay?s??g?? Sevdik-C?all?a, Is??n Demirs?ahina, Berfin Aktas?a, I?hsan Yalc??nkayaa, Hale O?gela
a Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey
b Anadolu University, Eskis?ehir, Turkey
Abstract
In this paper we explain how we anno-
tated subordinators in the Turkish Dis-
course Bank (TDB), an effort that started
in 2007 and is still continuing. We in-
troduce the project and describe some of
the issues that were important in anno-
tating three subordinators, namely kars??n,
rag?men and halde, all of which encode the
coherence relation Contrast-Concession.
We also describe the annotation tool.
1 Introduction
The Turkish Discourse Bank (TDB) is a project
initiated by the joint effort of a group of re-
searchers in Turkey. The project builds on an ex-
isting corpus, namely the METU Turkish Corpus
(MTC) (Say et al, 2002), and extends it to a dis-
course level resource by following the principles
of the PDTB (Prasad et al, 2007) in annotating
discourse connectives and their arguments. The 2-
million-word MTC contains 520 continuous texts
from various genres written between 1991-2000.
From a semantic perspective, we take discourse
connectives as predicates that take as their argu-
ments tensed or untensed clauses with abstract ob-
ject interpretations. Abstract objects are proposi-
tions, facts, events, situations, etc. (Asher, 1993).
Connectives themselves may be realized explicitly
or implicitly (Halliday, 1985; Prasad et al, 2007).
Explicit connectives are simple or complex lexi-
cal items that encode a discourse relation, while
implicit connectives can be inferred from related
text spans that have coherence relations. The TDB
project aims to annotate explicit connectives only.
In Turkish, discourse connectives are identified
with three syntactic categories (Zeyrek and Web-
ber, 2008): (a) Coordinating conjunctions (b) Sub-
ordinators (c) Discourse adverbials (or anaphoric
0Corresponding author: dezeyrek@metu.edu.tr
connectives). All these discourse connectives have
two and only two arguments, which are conve-
niently labeled as ARG1 and ARG2.1 ARG2 is
always the argument that syntactically hosts the
connective.
The ARG1/ARG2 organization of discourse
connectives is consistent with the following ob-
servations in discourse: Sentences in discourse
are coherently related, and therefore when ex-
plicit discourse connectives are used, if they are
really discourse connectives, they are bound to
set up a relation between a consequent clause and
its antecedent. (Note that the ARG2 designation
does not imply that ARG2 is consequent or an-
tecedent.) In certain cases presupposition needs a
mediator, viz. the discourse connective. Noncon-
nectival discourse relations are certainly possible,
but connective-engendered discourse relations are
claimed to be more specific about their semantics,
e.g. they bring about presuppositional meaning
(van der Sandt, 1992; Webber et al, 1999).
In this regard, the ARG1/ARG2 classification is
unlike syntactic subcategorization, which is a lex-
ical property of functors (e.g. verbs) which are
not necessarily presuppositional and hence they
can differ in arbitrary ways (ditransitive, transitive,
unergative, unaccusative etc.).
2 The Data
The MTC is preprocessed to obtain the raw texts
keeping the title, author, publishing date and the
text type information at the beginning of each file.
Stand-off annotation is done on the textual render-
ing of the MTC.
To enable the data to be viewable universally
without losing any character information, the file
format (originally xcs) was converted to text, and
the character encoding (originally Turkish-ISO-
1Whether or not discourse connectives in any language
take more than two arguments is an open question that needs
to be established in further research.
44
Text type File Count % S1 % S2 % S3 % S4 %
Novel 123 15.63% 31 15.74% 30 15.23% 31 15.82% 31 15.74%
Short story 114 14.49% 28 14.21% 29 14.72% 28 14.29% 29 14.72%
Research
/Monograph 49 6.23% 13 6.60% 12 6.09% 12 6.12% 12 6.09%
Article 38 4.83% 9 4.57% 10 5.08% 9 4.59% 10 5.08%
Travel 19 2.41% 5 2.54% 5 2.54% 4 2.04% 5 2.54%
Interview 7 0.89% 2 1.02% 2 1.02% 2 1.02% 1 0.51%
Memoir 18 2.29% 4 2.03% 5 2.54% 5 2.55% 4 2.03%
News 419 53.24% 105 53.30% 104 52.79% 105 53.57% 105 53.30%
TOTAL 787 197 197 196 197
Table 1: File count and percentage information according to text type for the preprocessed MTC and its
subcorpora. (S:Subcorpus)
8859-9) was converted to the UTF-8. Finally, the
processed MTC data were divided into four sub-
corpora by keeping the text type distribution, file
count and word count as equal as possible in each
subcorpus. The text type distribution, file count
and word percentage information in each subcor-
pus are given in Table 1. In the project, we plan to
annotate subcorpus 1.
3 Subordinating Conjunctions in
Turkish: A Brief Overview
Subordinators have two subtypes. Converbs are
suffixes attached directly to verb roots. For exam-
ple, the suffix -(y)ArAk ?by (means of)? requires
as its ARG2 a nominalized adverbial clause as in
(1). Complex subordinators, e.g. rag?men ?despite,
although?, kars??n ?although?, halde ?despite, along
with?, ic?in causal ?since?, purposive ?so as to?, etc.
mostly take case-marked nominalized clauses as
their ARG2.
(1) Hu?ku?met ... uyum paketini onaylayarak ...
Erdog?an?n o?nu?ndeki engellerden birini kald?rd?.
By approving the adaptation package ..., the
government alleviated one of the obstacles for
Erdog?an ...
In this paper, we will not deal with converbs.
We will also not deal with connectives taking as
their ARG2 a finite clause because none of these
subtypes have been annotated yet. We will focus
on three postpositions taking a nominalized clause
as ARG2, namely rag?men, kars??n and halde, all of
which encode the Contrast-Concession relation.
In the PDTB, such clauses were not annotated as
arguments. However, in Turkish, they are so com-
mon as arguments of subordinators that we would
have missed an important property of Turkish dis-
course if we did not annotate them. In the rest
of the paper, we provide examples taken from the
MTC. We underline the connective, show ARG2
in bold letters and render ARG1 in italics.
3.1 The minimality principle
As in the PDTB, the minimality principle is in-
voked, according to which clauses, parts of clauses
or sentences that are minimally necessary and suf-
ficient for the discourse relation engendered by
the connective are annotated as ARG1 or ARG2
(Prasad et al, 2007). Any other text span that
is perceived to be important for the interpretation
of the discourse relation can be selected as sup-
plementary information in addition to ARG1 or
ARG2.
3.2 Morphological properties of the
arguments and their relative ordering
In Turkish, subordinate clauses are essentially
nominalizations, which may be formed by -DIK
or -mA suffixes (the factive nominal and the action
nominal, respectively (Kornfilt, 1997)).
Two of the connectives, i.e. rag?men and kars??n
expect action nominals, the person agreement suf-
fix, and the dative suffix -(y)A on their ARG2. On
the other hand, the connective halde expects a fac-
tive nominal and the person agreement suffix. In
the examples below, we show these suffixes with
glosses on the English translations.
The arguments of subordinators are necessarily
adjacent and mostly exhibit the ARG2-ARG1 or-
der because Turkish is a left-branching language
and subordinate clauses are on the left in canonical
order. ARG2 can be postposed for backgrounding
purposes or to express new and unexpected infor-
mation, as in (2).
(2) ... ayn? annesine oldu]ugu gibi ona da, kimseye
ba/uglanmayanlar kolayca bag?lan?yordu; u?stelik o
o?yle bir bag??ml?l?k talep etmedig?i halde.
... just as it happened to her mother, people who
can?t easily commit themselves to anyone would
45
easily commit themselves to her, although she
would not ask-FACTN-AGR for such a commit-
ment.
3.3 Issues in annotating the arguments
One of the challenges we have faced so far is the
question of how to annotate connectives which are
themselves a converb suffix (e.g. -(y)ArAk, as in
(1)) or postpositions that choose a case-marked
ARG2 as in (2). In both cases, we decided to an-
notate ARG2 by selecting the clause without sepa-
rating the suffixes. In this way, we would not inter-
fere with the annotators? intuitions since we would
not be demanding them to have conscious knowl-
edge of the morphological constraints on the ar-
guments. This style of annotation was welcomed
by the annotators. When all the annotations are
completed, we plan to separate the suffixes with a
morphological parser to provide a full view of the
morphology of the arguments.
Another issue was how to annotate shared sub-
jects in subordinate clauses. Turkish allows sub-
ject pro-drop and in complex sentences, the shared
subject is shown by the person agreement suffix
on the verb of the consequent clause. To capture
this fact, we chose to exclude shared subjects from
the annotation of the arguments. This style of
annotation conforms to the minimality principle.
As illustrated in (3), the subject, Neriman, which
appears in its canonical clause-initial position in
ARG2 is not selected because the verb of the sub-
sequent clause carries the person agreement suffix.
(3) Neriman yatak odas?nda sigara ic?ilmesini is-
temedig?i halde s?imdilik sigaraya ses c??karm?yor.
Although Neriman does not want-FACTN-AGR
people to smoke in her bedroom, (she) doesn?t
say-AGR anything for the moment.2
If the subject is not shared, it is included in the
annotation, even if it causes discontinuity. As it
is illustrated in (4), ARG2 intervenes in ARG1 by
separating it from its subject.
(4) Rukiye, kendisinden u?c? yas? ufak olmas?na
rag?men, erkek kardes?ini kendi og?lu san?yordu, ...
Rukiye, although (he) is-ACTN-AGR-DAT three
years younger than herself, thought-AGR that her
brother was her son...
2The pronoun is in parentheses to reflect pro-drop. The
following abbreviations are used on the translations to show
the morphological characteristics of the clauses: ACTN: Ac-
tion nominal, FACTN: Factive nominal, AGR: Person agree-
ment suffix, DAT: Dative case, ABL: Ablative case. NOM:
Nominative case.
Example (5) shows that two nominalized
clauses can be selected as the arguments of the
subordinator kars??n leaving out the shared sub-
ject. In this example, the subject is shown between
square brackets for clarity. Note that, ARG1 is
also a nominalized clause since it is embedded un-
der the attribution verb so?yle - ?say?.3
(5) ... [herkes yarat?lan toplumsal deg?erden verdig?i
emek oran?nda pay alacak bic?imindeki sosyalist
iktisat ilkesinin] asl?nda c?ok es?itlikc?i gibi
go?zu?kmesine kars??n es?itsizlig?i engelleye-
meyeceg?ini, ... so?yler
... says that ... despite (it) looks-ACTN-AGR-
DAT quite egalitarian, [the socialist principle,
stating that everyone gets a share proportional to
his labor] will not prevent-ACTN-AGR inequality
...
Finally, in annotating adjuncts, we follow the
same principle we followed in annotating shared
subjects. For instance in (6), the adjunct yemekte
?at dinner? is not annotated since it is shared by the
arguments of the connective rag?men.
(6) Gu?l de yemekte kilo ald?rmas?na rag?men S?am
tatl?lar?ndan c?ok hos?land?g??n? ifade etti.
At dinner, Gu?l-NOM, also said that although
(theyi) are-ACTN-AGR-DAT fattening, (he)
likes Damascus deserts-ABLi very much.
4 The Annotation Process
Before the annotation procedure started, a set of
annotation guidelines were prepared. The guide-
lines include the basic principles, such as what
discourse connectives are, where in the discourse
one can find ARG1 and ARG2, how to annotate
shared subjects, adjuncts, etc. Rather than being
strict rules, the guidelines are aimed at being gen-
eral principles guiding the annotators in their de-
cision of selecting the text span that is minimally
sufficient for interpreting the discourse relation en-
coded by the connective.
The annotation cycle consisted of 1) annotat-
ing a connective by at least three different people
2) measuring the agreement among them with the
inter-anotator agreement tool 3) resolving the dis-
agreements with an anonymous decision.
4.1 The annotation tool
We have an XML-based infrastructure for annota-
tion. It aims to produce searchable and trackable
data. Stand-off annotation has well-known advan-
tages such as the ability to see layers separately, or
3In the PDTB, attribution is not taken as a discourse re-
lation but it is annotated. Attribution is not annotated in the
TDB.
46
Overall Annotator1 Annotator2 Annotator3
Conn. ARG1 ARG2 Overall ARG1 ARG2 Overall ARG1 ARG2 Overall ARG1 ARG2 Overall
rag?men 0.37 0.343 0.444 0.476 0.493 0.538 0.810 0.889 0.83 0.591 0.550 0.660
kars??n 0.394 0.546 0.364 0.771 0.781 0.724 0.677 0.833 0.71 0.677 0.62 0.676
halde 0.749 0.826 0.758 0.957 1 0.978 0.772 0.826 0.758 - - -
Table 2: Textspan inclusion agreement among three annotators for three subordinators with minimum success prob. >0.05.
The first column shows the overall agreement among the three annotators. Other columns show the agreement of one annotator
with the agreed/gold standard annotations. For halde, 2 annotators performed a common annotation (given as Annotator1) and
a third annotator annotated it separately (given as Annotator2).
to distribute annotation without data due to licens-
ing constraints. To this list we can add the em-
pirical necessity that, the crossing links in a single
layer of same kind of annotation might not be easy
to do inline. They can be done inline using SGML
OCCURS checks, but they are easier to annotate
in stand-off mode.
The tool has a regular expression mode in which
the annotator can use his/her knowledge of Turk-
ish word structure to collect similarly inflected
words without morphological analysis. For exam-
ple, -ArAk$, in which the uppercase forms repre-
sent metaphonemes, will bring words ending with
the allomorphs of the converb suffix due to vowel
harmony: erek, arak etc.
5 Conclusion
The TDB project is a first attempt in creating an
annotated resource for written Turkish discourse.
The annotation process is still continuing. In this
paper, the emphasis was on a small number of con-
nectives, namely three postpositions, which form a
subclass of subordinators. The paper described the
role of certain morpho-syntactic facts in interpret-
ing the coherence relation between two clauses,
and how these facts were reflected in the annota-
tions.
Three subjects separately annotated each of the
subordinators on the annotation tool, and inter-
rater reliability was calculated. The statistics were
obtained from Cochran?s Q test to the ARG1 and
ARG2 spans. The annotation data were encoded
with 1 if the character is in the span and 0 if it
is not. The encoded data were put to the Q test.
All the results were above the minimum success
probability (>0.05), showing that the annotations
were consistent (see Table 2). We will run another
Cochran experiment in which we will test whether
the annotators agree on ARG1/ARG2 boundaries,
rather than just word inclusion in the text spans as
above.
Given the distribution of agreements, Cochran
provides the number of subjects who must agree
so that a text span can be reliably considered an
ARG1 or ARG2. This we believe is important to
report with the final product (to be made public
soon), so that its gold standard can be assessed by
the community.
Acknowledgments
We thank TUBITAK for financial support. We
also thank our two anonymous reviewers for their
insightful comments.
References
Nicholas Asher. 1993. Reference to Abstract objects
in Discourse. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Michael A. K. Halliday. 1985. An Introduction to
Functional Linguistics. Edward Arnold Publishers
Ltd.
Jaklin Kornfilt. 1997. Turkish. Routledge, London.
Rashmi Prasad, Eleni Miltsakaki, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan
Lee, Aravind Joshi, Livio Robaldo, and Bonnie
Webber. 2007. The penn discourse treebank 2.0.
annotation manual. Technical report, Institute for
Research in Cognitive Science, University of Penn-
sylvania, March.
Bilge Say, Deniz Zeyrek, Kemal Oflazer, and Umut
O?zge. 2002. Development of a corpus and a tree-
bank for present-day written turkish. In Proceedings
of the Eleventh International Conference of Turkish
Linguistics.
Rob van der Sandt. 1992. Presuppositon projection as
anaphora resolution. Journal of Semantics, 9:333?
377.
Bonnie Webber, Alistair Knott, Matthew Stone, and
Aravind Joshi. 1999. Discourse relations: A struc-
tural and presuppositional account using lexicalised
tag. In Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 41?48, College Park, Maryland, USA.
Deniz Zeyrek and Bonnie Webber. 2008. A discourse
resource for turkish: Annotating discourse connec-
tives in the metu turkish corpus. In The 6th Work-
shop on Asian Language Resources, The Third In-
ternational Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (IJNLP), Hyderabad,India, January.
47
Proceedings of the Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL 2010, pages 202?206,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Discourse Relation Configurations in Turkish
and an Annotation Environment
Berfin Aktas?? and Cem Bozsahin? ? and Deniz Zeyrek? ?
? Informatics Institute, ? Computer Eng. and ? Foreign Language Education Dept.
Middle East Technical University, Ankara Turkey 06531
berfinaktas@gmail.com {bozsahin,dezeyrek}@metu.edu.tr
Abstract
In this paper, we describe an annotation
environment developed for the marking of
discourse structures in Turkish, and the
kinds of discourse relation configurations
that led to its design.
1 Introduction
The property that distinguishes a discourse from a
set of arbitrary sentences is defined as coherence
(Halliday and Hasan, 1976). Coherence is estab-
lished by the relations between the units of dis-
course.
Systematic analysis of coherence requires an
annotated corpus in which coherence relations are
encoded. Turkish Discourse Bank Project (TDB)
aims to produce a large-scale discourse level an-
notation resource for Turkish (Zeyrek and Weber,
2008). The TDB follows the annotation scheme of
the PDTB (Miltsakaki et al 2004). The lexicalized
approach adopted in the TDB assumes that dis-
course relations are set up by lexical items called
discourse connectives. Connectives are consid-
ered as discourse level predicates which take ex-
actly two arguments. The arguments are ab-
stract objects like propositions, facts, events, etc.
(Asher, 1993). They can be linked either by ex-
plicitly realized connectives or by implicit ones
recognized by an inferential process. We anno-
tate explicit connectives; implicit connectives are
future work. We use the naming convention of the
PDTB. Conn stands for the connective, Arg1 and
Arg2 for the first and the second argument, respec-
tively. Conn, Arg1 and Arg2 are assumed to be
required components of discourse relations. Sup-
plementary materials which are relevant to but not
necessary for the interpretation are also annotated.
Our main data is METU Turkish Corpus(MTC)
(Say et al 2002). MTC is a written source of Turk-
ish with approximately 2 million words. The orig-
inal MTC files include informative tags, such as
the author of the text, the paragraph boundaries in
the text, etc. We removed these tags to obtain raw
text files and set the character encoding of the files
to ?UTF-8?. These conversions are useful for pro-
gramming purposes such as visualizing the data in
different platforms and the use of third-party li-
braries.
We developed an annotation environment to
mark up the discourse relations, which we call
DATT (Discourse Annotation Tool for Turkish).
DATT produces XML files as annotation data
which are generated by the implementation of a
stand-off annotation methodology. We present in
?2 the data from Turkish discourse, which forced
us to use stand-off annotation instead of in-line
markup. The key aspect is potential crossing of
the markup links. However, stand-off annotation
is also advantageous for separate licensing. We
present the design of data structure and the func-
tionality of the tool in ?3. We report some prelim-
inary results in the conclusion.
2 Dependency analysis of discourse
relations
The TDB has no a priori assumption on how the
predicates and arguments are placed. We need to
take into account potential cases to be able to han-
dle overlappings and crossings among relations.
We use the terminology proposed by Lee et al
(2006), and follow their convention for naming the
variations of structures we came across.
We looked at the connective tokens placed close
to each other, and made an initial investigation to
reveal how these predicates and their arguments
are located in the text. Preliminary analysis of the
data indicates that the components of two relations
are placed in 7 different ways, two of which are
special to Turkish (?2.5; ?2.6). This section is de-
voted to the descriptions of observed patterns with
202
representative examples.1
In the examples the connective (Conn) is
underlined, Arg1 is in italics and Arg2 is in bold-
face. A connective?s relative order with respect
to its own arguments is not shown in the graphi-
cal templates. It is made explicit in the subsequent
examples.
2.1 Independent relations
The predicate-argument structure of the connec-
tives are independent from each other (i.e., there
is no overlap between the arguments of different
connectives.) The template is (1). An example is
provided in (2).
(1)
(2) Ak?nt?ya kap?l?p umulmad?k bir geceyi
b?l?s?t? benimle ve bu kadarla kals?n
istedi belki. Eda a??s?ndan olay?n yorumu
bu kadar yal?n olmal?. Ama eg?er b?yleyse
benim i?in yorumlanmas? olanaks?z bir
d?s?ten bas?ka kalan yok geriye s?imdi.
She was drifted with a current and shared an
unexpected night with me and perhaps she
wanted to keep it this much only. From
the perspective of Eda, the interpretation of
the incident should be that simple. But, if this
is the case, now there is nothing left be-
hind for me but a dream impossible to in-
terpret.
In (2), the relation set up by Ama is fully preceded
by the relation set up by ve. There is no overlap
between the argument spans of the connectives ve
and Ama.
2.2 Full embedding
The text span of a relation constitutes an argument
of another connective (3). An example is provided
in (4).
(3)
(4)a. [..] madem yanl?s? bir yerde oldug?umuzu
d?s??n?yoruz da dog?ru denen yere asla
varamayacag??m?z? biliyoruz , senin gibi
biri nas?l b?yle bir soru sorar ,[..]
1All data in this paper are taken from MTC, unless stated
otherwise. More examples can be found in Aktas? (2008).
b. [..] madem yanl?s? bir yerde oldug?umuzu
d?s??n?yoruz da dog?ru denen yere asla
varamayacag??m?z? biliyoruz , senin gibi biri
nas?l b?yle bir soru sorar,[..]
[..] if we think that we are in a wrong place,
and we know that we will never never reach
the right place; how come a person like you
ask such a question? [..]
In (4), the span of the relation headed by da con-
stitutes the Arg2 of the connective madem.
2.3 Shared argument
Two different connectives can share the same ar-
gument (5).
(5)
In some situations, different connectives can share
both of their arguments as in the case of (6):
(6) Dedektif roman? i?inden ??k?lmaz gibi g?r?-
nen esrarl? bir cinayetin ??z?m?n? sundug?u
i?in, her s?eyden ?nce mant?g?a g?veni ve
inanc? dile getiren bir anlat? t?r?d?r ve
bundan ?t?r? de burjuva rasyonellig?inin
edebiyattaki ?z? haline gelmis?tir.
Unraveling the solution to a seemingly intri-
cate murder mystery, the detective novel is a
narrative genre which primarily gives voice
to the faith and trust in reason and being so,
it has become the epitome of bourgeois ra-
tionality in the literature.
2.4 Properly contained argument
The argument span of one connective encapsu-
lates the argument of another connective plus more
text (7).
(7)
An example is provided in (8), where Arg2 of ve
properly contains Arg1 of Tersine.
(8)a. Kap?dan girdi ve s?yler misin, hi? etkilen-
medin mi yazd?klar?ndan?, dedi. Tersine,
?ok etkilendim.
b. Kap?dan girdi ve s?yler misin, hi? etkilen-
medin mi yazd?klar?ndan?, dedi. Tersine,
?ok etkilendim.
203
S/he entered through the door and said ?Tell
me, are you not touched at all by what s/he
wrote??. On the contrary, I am very much
affected.
2.5 Properly contained relation
The argument span of one connective covers the
predicate-argument structure of another connec-
tive and more text (9), as exemplified in (10).
(9)
(10)a. Burada bizce bir ifade bozuklug?u veya ?e-
viri yanl?s?? bahis konusu olabilir, ??nk? el-
biseler sanki giyildig?i s?rece ve y?pran-
mam?s?ken y?kanamaz, fakat daha sonra
y?kanabilirmis? gibi bir anlam tas??mak-
tad?r.
b. Burada bizce bir ifade bozuklug?u veya ?e-
viri yanl?s?? bahis konusu olabilir, ??nk?
elbiseler sanki giyildig?i s?rece ve y?pran-
mam?s?ken y?kanamaz, fakat daha sonra
y?kanabilirmis? gibi bir anlam tas??maktad?r.
Here a mistake of expression or mistransla-
tion might be the case, because the meaning
is as if the clothes cannot be washed as long
as they are used and not worn out, but can
be washed later.
In (10), the second argument of ??nk? covers the
whole relation headed by fakat and the text ?gibi
bir anlam tas??maktad?r?, which is not part of it.
2.6 Nested relations
A relation is nested inside the span of another re-
lation (11).
(11)
In (12), the relation headed by da is properly
nested between the connective ve and its first ar-
gument.
(12) B?y?k bir masada g?nlerce, gecelerce otu-
rup konus?acag??z - konus?may? unuttum diy-
orum da g?l?yorlar bana - ve biriniz
kalk?p s?iir okuyacak.
We will sit and talk around a big table for
days and nights - I say I have forgotten how
to speak and they laugh at me - and one of
you will stand up and recite poetry.
2.7 Pure crossing
The dependency structure of a relation interleaves
with the arguments, or the connective of another
relation (13), as exemplified in (14).
(13)
(14)a. (Constructed) Kitab? okumaya bas?lad?m :
Okullar ?oktan a??lm?s?t?. Ard?ndan kap?n?n
?ald?g??n? duydum ama yerimden kalk-
madan okumaya devam ettim: Ama bu
okula hen?z ?g?retmen atanmam?s?t?.
b. Kitab? okumaya bas?lad?m Okullar ?oktan
a??lm?s?t?. Ard?ndan kap?n?n ?ald?g??n? duy-
dum ama yerimden kalkmadan okumaya de-
vam ettim: Ama bu okula hen?z ?g?retmen
atanmam?s?t?.
I started to read the book. The schools had
long been opened. Then, I heard the door
bell ring but I continued reading without
getting up: But a teacher had not been ap-
pointed to this school yet.
3 The tool
DATT is an XML-based infrastructure for text an-
notation. It aims to produce searchable and track-
able data. An initial investigation of connective
and argument locations revealed that there is ar-
gument sharing of various sorts, and nested and
crossing relations in Turkish discourse. The ex-
istence of such constructions lead us to use a
stand-off annotation rather than an in-line method.
These dependencies are violations of tree struc-
ture required by XML. Using the OCCURS fea-
ture of SGML for this purpose would lead to a less
portable markup tool.
3.1 Data representation
In stand-off markup, annotations are stored sepa-
rate from data. Since the base file is not modified
during annotation, it is guaranteed that all the an-
notators are dealing with the same version of the
data. The text spans of dependency constructions
are represented in terms of character offsets from
204
the beginning of the text file. This is a highly error-
prone way of storing annotation data. If there is a
shift in the character indexes in the original text
file, previously annotated data will be meaning-
less. To compensate for this, we keep the text
spans of annotations for recovery purposes.
Annotation files are well-formed XML files.
One can easily add new features to the annota-
tions. XML facilities available as online sources
such as the libraries for search and post-processing
reduce the implementation effort of adding new
features.
3.2 Search functionality
In the TDB, the annotation process is organized
according to connective types and their tokens.
The connective to be annotated is identified, and
all the relations which are set up by the instances
of that connective are marked. Therefore it is im-
portant to be able to find all the instances of a spe-
cific connective in the entire data source. DATT
has a search functionality which walks through all
resource files and shows the annotator which files
have the token. We used ?Apache Lucene Search
Library? for this functionality.
Two distinguishing characteristics of Turkish,
the vowel harmony and voicing, motivated us to
enhance the search facilities by adding support for
allomorphy. In Turkish, suffixes may have many
different forms. The ability to search on these
forms is crucial if connectives are attached to the
inflected forms of words, which is very frequently
the case. For instance, the ?-d?k?(the factive nom-
inal) suffix has eight allomorphs (i.e. -d?k, -dik,
-duk, -d?k, -t?k, -tik, -tuk, -t?k) depending on the
phonological environment.
In Turkish discourse, the meaning of a connec-
tive may change according to the inflectional cate-
gory of the word that precedes it. For example, the
word just before the connective?i?in? can be in-
flected with ?-d?k? and ?-mak?(the infinitive) suf-
fixes. With ?-d?k? the connective bears the mean-
ing of causal ?since?, while in the other case, the
connective has the meaning of ?so as to?(Zeyrek,
Webber, 2008). Because of this semantic differ-
ence, it will be important for the annotator to clus-
ter the instances of a connective token preceded by
all the forms of a certain inflectional suffix in one
search. DATT provides this opportunity with the
allomorph search support.
In Turkish, connectives can be inflected. For ex-
ample, the connective ?dolay?s?yla? (due to that)
is the inflected form of ?dolay??(due to). The sup-
port for regular expression search is also added to
DATT to retrieve the inflected forms of the same
connective.
3.3 The user interface
The user interface of DATT is expected to allow
the marking of dependency hierarchies mentioned
in Section 2 in a user-friendly way. the TDB an-
notation requires at least three components, which
are Arg1, Conn and Arg2. In DATT, in order to
guide the annotator, we enforce the labeling of
these mandatory components, while marking of
the supplementary material is optional.
Another feature of DATT is the ability to mark
discontiguous text spans as a unique relation,
which is attested in Turkish discourse (15). Its
connective-argument structure is shown below.
The Arg1 of the connective -erek is interleaved
with the second argument Arg2.
(15) Y?r? lan, dedi Katana, Ramiz?i kolundan
?ekerek, Miskoye korkuyo!
?Hey you, move? said Katana, while drag-
ging Ramiz by the arm, ?Miskoye is freaked
out.?
Conn Arg1 Arg2
-erek Y?r? ... Kat$ 5, Mis$ korkuyo Ram$ ... ?ekerek
4 Conclusion
We adopt a lexical approach to discourse annota-
tion. Connectives are words, and they take two
text spans as arguments. An exploration of these
structures shows that there is argument-sharing
and overlap among relations. We are considering
automatic detection of relation types for an ap-
praisal of discourse relation distribution. For the
time being, DATT has search support for allomor-
phy and regular expressions as an aid to finding
the connectives.
Approximately 60 connective types and 100 to-
kens have been determined so far in the annotation
process, using 3 annotators. 7,000 relation tokens
headed by the connectives have been annotated us-
ing DATT, spanning approximately 300,000-word
text. Work for agreement statistics is under way.
We hope that machine learning techniques can dis-
cover more structure in the data once we have rea-
sonable confidence with annotation.
5We use the notation ?abc$? to refer to the word that be-
gins with the string ?abc?.
205
References
Berfin Aktas?. 2008. Computational Aspects of Dis-
course Annotation. Informatics Institute, METU.
Unpublished master thesis.
Nicholas Asher. 1993. Reference to Abstract Objects
in Discourse. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
M. A. K. Halliday and Ruqaiya Hasan. 1976. Cohe-
sion in English. London: Longman.
Alan Lee and Rashmi Prasad and Aravind Joshi and
Nikhil Dinesh and Bonnie Webber. 2006. Com-
plexity of dependencies in discourse. In Proceed-
ings of the 5th International Workshop on Treebanks
and Linguistic Theories.
Eleni Miltsakaki and Rashmi Prasad and Aravind Joshi
and Bonnie Webber. 2004. The Penn Discourse
TreeBank. LREC, Lisbon, Portugal.
Bilge Say and Deniz Zeyrek and Kemal Oflazer and
Umut Ozge. 2002. Development of a Corpus and
a Treebank for Present-day Written Turkish. 11th
International Conference on Turkish Linguistics.
Deniz Zeyrek and Bonnie Webber. 2008. A Discourse
Resource for Turkish: Annotating Discourse Con-
nectives in the METU Corpus. In Proceedings of
IJCNLP.
206
