Proceedings of SIGDIAL 2009: the 10th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group in Discourse and Dialogue, pages 160?169,
Queen Mary University of London, September 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Speeding Up the Design of Dialogue Applications by Using Database 
Contents and Structure Information 
L. F. D?Haro, R. Cordoba, J. M. Lucas, R. Barra-Chicote, R. San-Segundo 
Speech Technology Group 
Dept. of Electronic Engineering 
Universidad Polit?cnica de Madrid, Spain 
{lfdharo, cordoba, juanmak, barra, lapiz}@die.upm.es 
 
Abstract 
Nowadays, most commercial and research 
dialogue applications for call centers are 
created using sophisticated and fully-
feature development platforms. Surpris-
ingly, most of them lack of some kind of 
acceleration strategy based on an automatic 
analysis of the contents or structure of the 
backend database. This paper describes our 
efforts to incorporate this kind of informa-
tion which continues the work done in 
(D?Haro et al 2006). Our main proposed 
strategies are: the generation of automatic 
state proposals for defining the dialogue 
flow network, the automatic selection of 
slots to be requested using mixed-initiative, 
the semi-automatic generation of SQL 
statements, and the quick generation of the 
data model of the application and the con-
nection with the database fields. Subjective 
and objective evaluations demonstrate the 
advantages of using the accelerations and 
their high acceptance, both in our current 
proposals and in previous work. 
1 Introduction 
Currently, the growing demand of automatic dia-
logue services for different domains, user profiles, 
and languages has led to the development of a 
large number of sophisticated commercial and re-
search platforms that provide all the necessary 
components for designing, executing, deploying 
and maintaining such services with minimum ef-
fort and with innovative functions that make them 
interesting for developers and final users. 
In their effort for accelerating the design, most 
commercial platforms provide several high-level 
tools to build multimodal and multilingual dia-
logue applications using widespread standards 
such as VoiceXML, CCXML, J2EE, RCP, SRGS, 
etc. In addition, they include state-of-the-art mod-
ules such as speech recognizers, high quality 
speech synthesizers, language identification capa-
bilities, etc., that guarantees user satisfaction and 
interaction. In addition, they present a very user-
friendly graphical interface that makes easy the 
development of very complex dialogues, besides 
the incorporation of predefined libraries for typical 
dialogues states such as requesting card or social 
security numbers, etc., and additional assistants for 
debugging, logging and simulate the service. 
In contrast to commercial platforms, research or 
academic platforms (e.g. CSLU-RAD 1 , Dialog-
Designer2, Olympus3, Trindi-kit 4, etc.) do not nec-
essary incorporate all the above-mentioned fea-
tures; especially because they are limited to the 
number of standards that they are able to handle 
and to the integration level with other platforms, as 
well as the number of capabilities that they can 
offer to the users and programmers. However, they 
allow more complex dialogue interactions, most of 
them are freely available as open source, and using 
third party modules it is possible to extend their 
functionalities. 
Surprisingly, these platforms do not include any 
kind of acceleration strategies based on the con-
tents or in the structure of the backend database 
that, as we will show, can provide important in-
formation for the design. Next, we will describe 
some examples of applications or dialogue systems 
that use data mining techniques or heuristic infor-
                                                 
1 http://cslu.cse.ogi.edu/toolkit/  
2 http://spokendialogue.dk/  
3 http://www.ravenclaw-olympus.org/  
4 http://www.ling.gu.se/projekt/trindi/trindikit/ 
160
mation extracted from the database contents in or-
der to create automatic dialogue services. 
In (Polifroni and Walker, 2006), different data 
mining techniques are used to automate the selec-
tion of content data to be used in system initiative 
queries and to provide summarized answers. At 
runtime, the system automatically selects the at-
tributes to constrain the prompt queries that narrow 
down best the interaction flow with the final users. 
In (Chung, 2004), the database is used together 
with a simulation system in order to generate thou-
sands of unique dialogues that can be used to train 
the speech recognizer and the understanding mod-
ule, as well as to diagnose the system behaviour 
against problematic user?s interactions or answers. 
In (Pargellis et al 2004), a complete platform to 
build voice services where the database contents 
change constantly is described. At runtime, the 
system retrieves information that the user is inter-
ested in according to his personal profile. In addi-
tion, the system is able to create automatically dy-
namic speech grammars and prompts, as well as 
the dialogue flow for presenting information to the 
user, or for solving some interaction errors through 
predefined dialogue templates. 
Finally, (Feng et al 2003) proposes a very dif-
ferent approach, not using a database but mining 
the content of corporate websites for automatically 
creating spoken and text-based dialogue applica-
tions for custom care. Although the dialogue flow 
is predefined, it is interesting to see that important 
knowledge, for the different modules of the dia-
logue system, can also be extracted and used from 
a well-designed content. 
In this work, we have solved some of the limita-
tions of current platforms by incorporating suc-
cessfully heuristic information into the different 
assistants of the platform and allowing them to 
collaborate between each other in several ways, as 
they collect the information already provided in the 
first stages of the design to improve and accelerate 
the design in the last stages. This way, the platform 
assistants classify which fields of the database 
could be relevant for the design, generate different 
kinds of automatic proposals according to the de-
sign step, reduce the information displayed to the 
designer, and accelerate different typical proce-
dures required to define the application. 
The paper is organized as follows: section 2 
provides an overview of the overall architecture of 
the platform, including a brief description of the 
main assistants and layers that makes it up. Section 
3 describes previous accelerations in the platform 
related with the current work; Sections 4, 5, and 6 
describe in detail the new strategies and the assis-
tants that include them. Section 7 describes the 
subjective and objective evaluations, and section 8 
outlines some conclusions and future work. 
2 Platform Architecture 
The Application Generation Platform (AGP), cre-
ated during the European project GEMINI, is an 
open and modular architecture made up of differ-
ent assistants and tools that simplifies the genera-
tion of multimodal and multilingual dialogue ap-
plications with a high adaptability to different 
kinds of services (see Figure 4 in Appendix A). 
The platform consists of three main layers inte-
grated into a common graphical user interface 
(GUI) that guides the designer step-by-step and 
lets him go back and forth.  
In the first layer, called Framework Layer, the 
designer specifies global aspects related to the ap-
plication and the data. This layer includes the Data 
Model Assistant (DMA), where the database struc-
ture is created, and the Data Connector Model As-
sistant (DCMA), where the application specific 
database access functions are created.  
The next layer, called Retrieval layer, includes 
the State Flow Model Assistant (SFMA) and the 
Retrieval Model Assistant (RMA). The former is 
used to create the dialogue flow at an abstract 
level, by specifying the high-level states of the dia-
logue, plus the slots to ask to the user and the tran-
sitions among states. Then, the later is used to in-
clude all the actions (e.g., variables, loops, if-
conditions, math or string operations, conditions 
for making transitions between states, calls to dia-
logs to provide/obtain information to/from the 
user) to be done in each state defined previously.  
Finally, the third layer, called Dialogs Layer, 
contains the assistants that complete the general 
flow specifying for each dialogue the details that 
are modality and language dependent. For instance, 
the prompts and grammars for each language and 
modality, the definition of user profiles, the ap-
pearance and contents of the Web pages, the error 
treatment for speech recognition errors or Internet 
access, the presentation of information on screen or 
using speech, etc., are defined. Furthermore, the 
161
VoiceXML and xHTML scripts used by the real-
time system are automatically generated. 
3 Previous Acceleration Strategies 
In (D?Haro et al 2006) and (D?Haro et al 2004), 
we described several acceleration strategies based 
on using the data model structure and applied them 
successfully to different assistants of the platform, 
with a special emphasis in the assistant for defining 
the actions to be done in each dialogue (i.e. RMA). 
The data model information was used to:  
a.) Create configurable and generic dialogue 
proposals for obtaining (called DGet) and for 
showing (called DSay) information from/to the 
user. In this case, the assistant creates a DGet or 
DSay dialogue for each class and attribute defined. 
b.) Automatically propose the actions required 
for completing the information for each state of the 
dialogue flow; basically, the assistant proposes the 
dialogues to ask information to the user, the data-
base access functions, and the dialogues to show 
information to the user. Figure 1 shows an example 
of the proposals for a banking application. In this 
example, the designer is editing a dialogue where 
given a currency name the system provides its spe-
cific information (buy and sell price, general in-
formation, etc.). Using the proposal window, all 
the designer would need to do is to select the cor-
responding DGet in the window 
(DGet_CurrencyName_IN_CLASS_Currency), 
then the database access function GetCurrencyBy-
Name, and finally the DSays that provide the de-
sired attributes from the currency. In order to pro-
vide these proposals, we use the information of the 
relationships between slots and arguments of the 
database functions and the attributes and classes in 
the data model (section 5 and 6). When there is no 
relationship specified, we apply relaxed filters such 
as matching in types, similarity in names, or same 
number of arguments and slots in the state. 
c.) Automate the process of passing information 
among actions/dialogues by proposing the vari-
ables that best match the connections or allowing 
the creation of new variables when no match ex-
ists. This is a critical aspect of dialogue applica-
tions design. Several actions and states have to be 
?connected? as they use the information from the 
preceding dialogues. In general, most current de-
sign platforms allow the same kind of functional-
ity, offering the user a selectable list of all the 
available variables in the dialogue. In other cases, 
especially considering the connections with data-
base access functions, some platforms only allow 
the designer to define the matching by modifying 
by hand the script code. In this acceleration, we 
have tried to provide a better solution by automat-
ing the connection through automatic proposals. 
The assistant detects the input/output variables re-
quired in each action and offers the most suitable 
already defined variable of a compatible type; if 
there are more than one variable to show, the assis-
tant sorts them according to the name similarity 
between variable and dialogue. If there is no com-
patible variable already defined in the system or 
the name proposed is not desired, the assistant al-
lows the creation of a new local/global variable. 
Additionally, the assistant includes a window 
where all this matching can be edited. 
Other accelerations included in this assistant 
were the quick creation of mixed-initiative dia-
logues, dialogues with over-answering (that do not 
exist in any current dialogue platform) and the 
quick definition of dialogue variables. 
 
 
Figure 1. Example of automatic dialogues and 
database access function proposals 
In the present work, the new accelerations addi-
tionally exploit the database contents and have 
been incorporated into the assistant to define the 
data model structure (section 4), into the assistant 
for defining the database access functions (section 
162
5), and into the assistant to define the states of the 
dialogue flow (section 6). The next sections de-
scribe in detail these assistants and accelerations. 
4 Strategies Applied to the Data Model 
Assistant (DMA) 
This assistant helps in the creation of the data 
model structure of the service through a visual rep-
resentation of all possible fields to be requested 
and presented to the user, which consists of object 
oriented classes and attributes. The goal with these 
classes and attributes is to provide information to 
the next assistants in the platform about which 
fields in the database are relevant for the service 
and the relationships between tables and fields. 
 
 
Figure 2. Example of class and attributes 
Each class, see Figure 2, can be characterized by 
a list of attributes, a description, and optionally a 
list of base classes (inheriting their attributes). The 
attributes may be: a) of atomic types (e.g., string, 
Boolean, float, date, etc., e.g., AvailableBalance), 
b) complex objects, obtained by embedding or re-
ferring to an existing class (e.g., AccountHolder), 
or c) lists of either atomic type items or complex 
objects (e.g., LastTransactionList). 
The main acceleration strategies, previously in-
cluded in this assistant, are: a) re-utilization of li-
braries with models created beforehand, which can 
be copied totally or partially, or used to create a 
new class by mixing them, b) automatic creation of 
a class when it is referenced as an attribute inside 
another one, and c) definition of classes inheriting 
the attributes of a base class. Since this is one of 
the first assistants of the platform, a significant 
effort was done to accelerate the creation of the 
database structure and to include information about 
the relationships between the class attributes and 
the fields and tables in the database. To start with, 
the system generates and analyzes automatically 
heuristic information from the database contents. 
Then, with this information, the system proposes 
full custom classes and attributes that the designer 
can use when creating the data structure. 
4.1 Extraction of heuristic information 
The process is done using an open SQL query to 
retrieve information of every table, field and record 
in the database. This information includes the 
name and number of the tables and fields, and the 
number of records for every table. In addition, the 
following features for each field are also gener-
ated: a) field type, b) average length, c) number of 
empty records, d) language dependent fields, and 
e) the proportion of records that are different. This 
information is shared among the assistants in order 
to simplify the design or to improve the presenta-
tion of information in the posterior assistants. For 
instance, they are used for: (a) to accelerate the 
creation of the data model structure (section 4.2), 
(b) and (e) to unify slots as mixed initiative or not 
(see section 6.1), (c) to sort by relevance the attrib-
utes displayed by the wizard when creating the da-
tabase structure (section 4.2), and (d) to not gener-
ate states for these fields in the SFMA since the 
dialogue flow in this assistant is language inde-
pendent (section 6.1). 
An important issue we found when retrieving 
the field type was that sometimes the metadata in-
formation provided by the SQL function was in-
correct due to: a) the driver for accessing the data-
base was only able to return a limited number of 
types, e.g. Boolean or dates were mapped as inte-
ger or string types respectively, b) the designer of 
the database defined the field using a generic type 
such as string or float when the visual inspection of 
the records showed that they actually corresponded 
to dates or integers, c) there were problems to map 
special types such as hyperlinks, binary, etc. into 
the types supported by our platform. 
In order to solve these problems, we imple-
mented a post-processing step based on using regu-
lar expressions to detect the following types: inte-
gers, floats, dates, strings, Boolean, mixed or 
empty fields. In general, the process is to analyze 
all non-empty records in a given field and to select 
as field type the one with more than the 90% of 
occurrences. Exceptions to this rule are: a) a nu-
meric field is considered integer if all its records 
are classified as such, if not it is classified as float, 
163
b) the empty type is assigned to fields with more 
than 95% of empty records. 
In order to analyse the performance of the post-
processing step, an objective evaluation was car-
ried out. In this evaluation, twenty-one databases, 
most of them available online, were retrieved and 
visually inspected field by field. In total, there 
were 109 tables (an average of 5 tables per data-
base), 767 fields and 610.506 records, which were 
classified by a human evaluator. 
In our results, the average recognition was 
89.6%, obtaining the best rates for dates, strings, 
and numeric quantities, which are the most com-
mon types in most databases. Analyzing in detail 
the misrecognitions, 0.9% of floats were incor-
rectly detected as integers due to values such as 
2.0, 30.0, etc. which were automatically returned 
by the database driver without the decimal part. 
Another source of errors was detecting some nu-
meric quantities due to special symbols such as 
dashes, percentages, or the euro symbol, which 
were incorrectly interpreted as a string type (3.3% 
and 1.6%). The major problems occurred for dis-
tinguishing between the String type and what we 
called Mixed type (i.e. fields containing: URLs, 
emails, long strings, etc.) since they are, in prac-
tice, the same. However, we wanted to separate 
them since for a speech recognizer they may be 
handled using different strategies (e.g. spelling, 
general grammars, etc.). The importance of these 
results is that they mean a reduction in the number 
of times the designer will need to change the pro-
posed type for a given attribute when creating the 
classes (section 4.2). 
4.2 Semi-automatic classes proposals 
After collecting all the heuristics, the assistant pro-
vides a wizard window that allows the designer to 
create the attributes for a new class from the tables 
and fields of the database or from already existing 
classes in the model. The information of the se-
lected field and table is saved in the definition of 
the class attribute allowing future assistants in the 
platform to access this information easily (section 
5.1 and 6.1). The heuristic information is used to 
set automatically the field types in the wizard, al-
though it can be edited by the designer. Besides, 
the wizard also proposes automatic alternative 
names for the new class and attributes when it de-
tects duplicated names with already defined ones. 
Finally, if the number of tables in the database is 
too high the designer can select those that will be 
really needed during the design, this way reducing 
the information displayed on the screen. In addi-
tion, it is also possible to customize the name of 
the tables in the database in order to make them 
more intuitive to the dialogue designer. 
5 Strategies Applied to the Data Connec-
tor Model Assistant (DCMA) 
This assistant allows the definition of the proto-
types (i.e. only the input and output parameters) of 
the database access functions used in the runtime 
system. The advantage of using prototypes is that 
their actual implementation is not required during 
the design of the dialogue flow. 
The main acceleration strategy, previously in-
cluded in this assistant, was the possibility of relat-
ing the input/output arguments to the attributes and 
classes of the data model. This information is used 
by the retrieval model assistant to create dialogue 
proposals and to automatically propose database 
access functions for a given dialogue in the design 
(section 3). In this work, we have introduced a new 
acceleration by incorporating a wizard window that 
allows the creation and debugging of the SQL 
statements used at run-time. 
5.1 Semi-automatic generation of SQL que-
ries 
The main motivation behind this wizard window 
was to simplify the process of creating the function 
prototypes (API), reducing the necessity of learn-
ing a new programming language (SQL), and to 
simplify the process of adding the query into the 
real-time modules and scripts. The new wizard 
semi-automatically creates the SQL statements for 
the given prototype and provides a pre-view of the 
results that the system would retrieve in the real-
time system (see Figure 5 in Appendix A). This 
new acceleration is interesting since currently few 
development platforms include such kind of wizard 
forcing the designer to use third party software. 
Besides, current wizards only provide debugging 
tools, nice GUI features or support for many DB 
standards, but no automatic query proposals. 
In order to automatically create the SQL state-
ment, the assistant uses the input arguments (de-
fined in the function prototype) as constraints for 
the WHERE clause, and the information of the 
164
output arguments as returned fields for the SE-
LECT clause. The assistant allows the inclusion of 
new input or output arguments if the function pro-
totype is not complete or if the designer wants to 
test new combinations of arguments. 
Finally, the wizard allows the designer to pre-
view the records that the proposed SQL statement 
will retrieve at real-time. In order to debug the 
query, the designer specifies, using a pop-up win-
dow, the values for the input arguments of the 
function to test the query (as acceleration, the wiz-
ard automatically proposes real values retrieved 
from the database). 
6 Strategies Applied to the State Flow 
Model Assistant (SFMA) 
This assistant is used to define the dialogue flow at 
an abstract level, i.e. specifying only the high-level 
states of the dialogue, the slots to be asked to the 
user, and the transitions between states, but not the 
specific details of each state. The flow is specified 
using a state transition network representation that 
is common in this kind of platforms and dialogue 
modelling. The GUI allows the definition of new 
states using wizard-driven steps and a drag-and-
drop interface. An important acceleration strategy 
from the previous version is the possibility of 
specifying the slots through attributes offered 
automatically from the data model. The new accel-
erations are the automatic proposal of the slots to 
be requested using system or mixed initiative dia-
logues (section 6.1) and the automatic generation 
of proposals of states for defining the dialogue 
flow (section 6.2). 
6.1 Automatic unification of slots for mixed 
initiative 
The idea of this acceleration is to allow the system 
to propose automatically when two or more slots 
must be requested one by one (using directed 
forms) or at the same time (using mixed initiative 
forms) according to the VoiceXML standard.  
This functionality is only available when the 
slots to be analyzed have been defined from a table 
and field in the backend database. In this case, the 
assistant uses the heuristics obtained for the given 
fields and applies a set of customizable rules used 
to decide which slots can be unified and which 
ones cannot. Some examples of the rules applied to 
not propose the unification are: a) one of the slots 
is defined as a string with an average length greater 
than 20 characters, an average number of words 
per record greater than 3, and the other slot is an 
integer/float number greater than 5 characters. In 
this case, the rule avoids the recognition of long 
strings, e.g. an address or name, plus the recogni-
tion of long numeric quantities, e.g. phone or ac-
count numbers, b) when two slots are defined as 
strings and the sum of the average length of both is 
greater than 20 characters; in this case, the system 
tries to avoid the recognition of very long sen-
tences. c) there are two numeric slots with a pro-
portion of different values close to one, and the 
total number of records of both fields is high (con-
figurable value), then the system determines that 
these slots have a large vocabulary and a high 
probability of misrecognition. So, in all these 
cases, the system decides that it is better to ask one 
slot at a time (system initiative). In case there are 
more than two slots, the system checks different 
combinations of the slots in order to find those that 
can be requested at the same time and leaving the 
other one to be requested alone. 
6.2 Automatic states 
In this strategy, the assistant creates automatically 
dialogue states that include the slots to be re-
quested to the user. Using the information of the 
database structure and the database access func-
tions, the wizard allows the designer to access to 
the following state proposals: 
Empty states and already created states: The 
first one allows the creation of a new empty state, 
with no defined slots inside, that the designer can 
define completely afterwards. This way, we allow 
a top-down design. The second one allows the de-
signer to re-use already defined states. 
From attributes with database dependency: 
This kind of states is created from any attribute 
defined in the database model (DMA) that refers to 
a database field only if the attribute has been used 
as an input argument of any database access func-
tion. The proposed states contain only one slot and 
its name corresponds to the name of the attribute in 
the data model. However, the designer can select 
several states to create states with multiple slots. 
From the database access functions: In this 
case, the system analyzes all the defined database 
functions containing input arguments defined as 
atomic types. Then, the system uses the name of 
the function as proposal for the name of the state, 
165
and the input arguments as slots for that state. The 
assistant allows the designer to select several of 
these proposals in order to create more complex 
states. For instance, in case there is a database ac-
cess function called convertCurrencies, which re-
ceives three input arguments (i.e. fromCurrency, 
toCurrency, and Amount), the system automati-
cally creates a new state proposal called convert-
Currencies that includes these three slots. Apply-
ing similar rules to the ones described in section 
6.1 the system would propose to request the first 
two at the same time (mixed-initiative) and the 
Amount separately (directed forms). 
From classes defined in the data model struc-
ture: In this case, the assistant creates a template 
that the designer can drag and drop into the work-
space (see Figure 6 in Appendix A). Then, a pop-
up window allows the designer to select the attrib-
utes to be used as slots. The assistant expands 
complex attributes (with inheritance and objects) 
allowing only the selection of atomic attributes.  
7 Evaluation 
With the objective of evaluating the performance 
of each of the acceleration strategies and assistants 
described above, we carried out a subjective and 
objective evaluation with 9 developers with differ-
ent experience levels and profiles (4 novices, 3 
intermediates, and 2 experts) on designing dia-
logue services. They were requested to fulfil dif-
ferent typical tasks covering each of the proposed 
accelerations and assistants to evaluate. Further 
details can be obtained in (D?Haro, 2009). 
For the subjective evaluation, the participants 
were asked to answer a questionnaire that consists 
of four questions per assistant and seventeen for 
the overall platform, with a range between 1 and 
10. This subjective evaluation confirms the de-
signer-friendliness of the assistants, as well as their 
usability, since all the assistants obtained a global 
score higher than 8.0, which is a nice result. In de-
tail, the DMA and DCMA obtained an 8.3, the 
SFMA a 9.0, the RMA an 8.6, and Diagen a 4.5. 
Regarding the acceleration strategies, see Figure 
3a, the evaluators scored the automatic states with 
9.3, the SQL generation and the unification of slots 
for mixed initiative with 9.0, and the class propos-
als with 8.9. Regarding the RMA and the accelera-
tions related with the information extracted from 
the database (see section 3), the passing of argu-
ments between actions and the proposal of dia-
logue actions obtained a 9.8 and 8.6 respectively. 
For the objective evaluation, we collected the 
metrics proposed in (Jung et al 2008): elapsed 
time, number of clicks, number of keystrokes, and 
number of corrections using the keyboard (key-
stroke errors). We compared our assistants with a 
built-in editor called Diagen, created during the 
GEMINI project and improved later on by 
(Hamerich, 2008), which features fewer accelera-
tions but generates the same information specified 
by our assistants. As accelerations, Diagen only 
provides default templates that the designer has to 
complete and a guided procedure using different 
pop-up windows to fulfil the templates. The results 
confirm that the design time can be reduced, in 
average for all the assistants and tasks, in more 
than 45%, the number of keystrokes in 81%, and 
the number of clicks in 40%. Especially relevant is 
the high reduction (85%) obtained in the RMA 
considering that it is the main task in the design. 
8 Conclusions and Future Work 
In this paper, we have described the main accelera-
tions incorporated into a complete platform for 
designing multimodal and multilingual dialogue 
applications. The proposed accelerations strategies 
are based on using information extracted from the 
contents of the backend database. The proposed 
accelerations include the creation of automatic 
state proposals, the unification of slots to be re-
quested using mixed-initiative dialogues, and the 
semi-automatic creation and debugging of SQL 
statements for accessing the database, among oth-
ers. Subjective and objective evaluations confirm 
that the proposed strategies are useful and contrib-
ute to simplify and accelerate the design. 
As future work, we propose the extraction of 
new heuristic information, the creation of new 
rules for unifying slots for mixed-initiative dia-
logues. Considering the negative values in Figure 
3b, we propose to improve the GUI for defining 
the connections among states in the SFMA, and to 
improve the DCMA by offering new automated 
methods for creating the prototypes. 
9 Acknowledgements 
This work has been supported by ROBONAUTA 
(DPI2007-66846-c02-02) and SD-TEAM 
(TIN2008-06856-C05-03).  
166
  
Figure 3. Average result for the: a) subjective evaluation for the accelerations, b) objective results 
References 
Chung, G. 2004. Developing a Flexible Spoken Dialog 
System Using Simulation. ACL 2004. 
D?Haro. L. F. 2009. Speed Up Strategies for the Crea-
tion of Multimodal and Multilingual Dialogue Sys-
tems. PhD Thesis. Univ. Polit?cnica de Madrid. 
D?Haro, L. F., Cordoba, R., et al 2008. Language 
Model Adaptation for a Speech to Sign Language 
Translation System Using Web Frequencies and a 
MAP framework. Interspeech 2008, pp. 2119-2202. 
D?Haro, L. F., Cordoba, R., et al 2006. An advanced 
platform to speed up the design of multilingual dia-
logue applications for multiple modalities Speech 
Communication Vol. 48, Issue 8, pp. 863-887. 
D?Haro, L. F., Cordoba, R., et al 2004. Strategies to 
reduce design time in multimodal/multilingual dialog 
applications. ICSLP 2004, pp IV-3057?3060. 
Feng, J., Bangalore, S., Rahim, M. 2003. WEBTALK: 
Mining Websites for Automatically Building Dialog 
Systems. ASRU 2003, pp. 168-173. 
Hamerich, S. 2008. From GEMINI to DiaGen: Improv-
ing Development of Speech Dialogues for Embedded 
Systems. 9th SIGDIAL, pp. 92-95. 
Jung, S., Lee, C., et. al. 2008. DialogStudio : A Work-
bench for Data-driven Spoken Dialogue System De-
velopment and Management. Speech Communica-
tions, 50 (8-9), pp. 683-697. 
Pargellis, A. N., Kuo, H. J., Lee, C. 2004. An automatic 
dialogue generation platform for personalized dia-
logue applications. Speech Communication Vol. 42, 
pp. 329-351. 
Polifroni, J. and Walker, M. 2006. Learning Database 
Content for Spoken Dialogue System Design. LREC 
2006, pp. 143-148. 
San-Segundo et al 2008. Speech to sign language trans-
lation system for Spanish. Speech Communication 
Vol. 50, pp.1009?1020. 
167
Appendix A. Additional Figures 
 
Figure 4. Platform architecture. In yellow colour the assistants with the new accelerations described in 
this paper. In pink colour assistants with previous accelerations (section 3) 
 
 
Figure 5. Wizard for creating and debugging the SQL statements for accessing the backend database. 
In the example, the proposed query allows the selection of all account numbers for a given customer 
(using his/her authentication code) and type of account (i.e. passbook saving accounts) 
168
 Figure 6. Workspace for creating the state transition network and pop up window with state proposals. 
In the example, the designer creates the state Transaction from the Class_Transaction template (cre-
ated in the DMA, see Figure 2) and selects as slots the TransactionAmount, CreditAccountNumber and 
DebitAccountNumber (not shown) 
169
