An Abstract Schema for Representing Semantic Roles and
Modelling the Syntax-Semantics Interface
Voula Gotsoulia
University of Essex
vghotsoulia@yahoo.co.uk
Abstract
This paper presents a novel approach to semantic role annotation implementing an entailment-
based view of the concept of semantic role. I propose to represent arguments of predicates with
grammatically relevant primitive properties entailed by the semantics of predicates. Such meaning
components generalise over a range of semantic relations which humans tend to express systemati-
cally through language. In a preliminary study, I show that we can model linguistic knowledge at a
general, principled syntax-semantics interface by incorporating a layer of skeletal, entailment-based
representation of word meaning in large-scale corpus annotation.
1 Introduction
Large-scale lexical semantic resources that provide relational information about words have recently re-
ceived much focus in the field of Natural Language Processing (NLP). In particular, data-driven models
for lexical semantics require the creation of broad-coverage, hand-annotated corpora with predicate-
argument information, i.e. rich information about words expressing a semantic relation having argument
slots filled by the interpretations of their grammatical complements. Corpora combining semantic and
syntactic annotations constitute the backbone for the development of probabilistic models that automat-
ically identify the semantic relationships, or semantic roles, conveyed by sentential constituents (Gildea
and Jurafsky, 2002). That is, given an input sentence and a target predicator the system labels constituents
with general roles like Agent, Patient, Theme, etc., or more specific roles, as in (1).
(1) [Cognizer I] admired [Evaluee him] [Degree greatly] [Reason for his bravery and his cheerfulness].1
The task of automatic semantic role labelling (or shallow semantic parsing) is a first step towards text
understanding and has found use in a variety of NLP applications including information extraction (Sur-
deanu et al, 2003), machine translation (Boas, 2002), question answering (Narayanan and Harabagiu,
2004), summarisation (Melli et al, 2005), recognition of textual entailment relations (Burchardt and
Frank, 2006), etc.
Corpora with semantic role labels additionally lend themselves to extraction of linguistic knowledge
at the syntax-semantics interface. The range of semantic and syntactic combinatorial properties (va-
lences) of each word in each of its senses is documented in terms of annotated corpus attestations. For
instance, the valence pattern for the use of admire in (1) is shown in (2).
(2) Cognizer: Noun Phrase (NP), Subject
Evaluee: Noun Phrase (NP), Object
Degree: Adverbial Dependent
Reason: Prepositional Dependent
1This annotated example is from the FrameNet lexicon (discussed in the next section). In all examples throughout the paper,
predicators are marked in italics.
115
This data enables the quantitative study of various linguistic phenomena and the investigation of the
relationship between the distinct linguistic layers comprised by predicate-argument analysis. Further-
more, the formulation of generalisations over predicate-specific annotations can capture how predicates
relate in terms of both semantic and syntactic features. Such syntax-semantics mappings (so-called link-
ing generalisations) encode regularities concerning the associations of semantic roles with grammatical
functions and are essential for a linguistic knowledge base for NLP applications.
This paper addresses the problem of generalising over the valences of individual predicators and pro-
poses an abstract semantic basis for the representation of participant roles. The definition of semantic
notions at an appropriate level of abstraction is the prerequisite for the formulation of a general, princi-
pled syntax-semantics interface. This is in accordance with a somewhat intuitive conception of semantic
roles as classificatory notions encoding semantic similarities across different types of events or situations
in the world. In effect, all conceptions of semantic roles as opposed to predicate-specific roles, such
as admirer-admired, posit some sort of semantic classification of arguments across predicators while
indicating an acknowledgment that the syntax-semantics interface (referred to with the term linking) is
not completely arbitrary. Put differently, semantic roles constitute a level of representation suitable for
capturing semantic generalisations which humans tend to express systematically through language.
The structure of the paper is organised as follows. Section 2 looks at conceptions of semantic roles
in state-of-the-art approaches to semantic annotation indicating problems or complications related to the
question of whether or how these roles can support generalisations across predicates. Section 3 calls
attention to the theoretical underpinnings of the notion of semantic role and introduces an annotation
schema which departs from the traditional view of semantic roles as atomic, undecomposable categories.
Following the insight of Dowty?s (1991) theory of Proto-Roles, I will propose analytical representations
of verbal arguments based on semantically well-founded, grammatically relevant meaning components
entailed by the semantics of predicates (Proto-Role entailments). Finally, section 4 presents a study in
which lexical entailments are marked in a corpus in accordance with the proposed schema. General
syntax-semantics mappings are extracted from the annotated data and are formalised in abstract classes
which readily encode generalisations concerning linking to syntactic form.
2 Corpora with Semantic Roles and Related Work
Semantically annotated corpora currently available for English implement two distinct approaches to the
prickly notion of semantic role. The Proposition Bank (PropBank) (Kingsbury et al, 2002) is a one
million word corpus in which predicate-argument relations are hand-annotated for every occurrence of
every verb in the Wall Street Journal part of the Penn Treebank (Marcus et al, 1994). Verb senses are
distinguished informally on the basis of semantic as well as syntactic criteria. The semantic arguments
of a verb are numbered sequentially. PropBank uses a common set of role labels (Arg0 up to Arg5) for
all predicators, but these labels are defined on a per-verb basis, i.e. they have verb-specific meanings.
Example PropBank annotations:
(3) a. [Arg0 John] broke [Arg1 the window] [Arg2 with a rock].
b. [Arg0 John] broke [Arg1 the window] [Arg3 into a million pieces].
c. [Arg1 The window] broke [Arg3 into a million pieces].
(4) [Arg0 Blue-chip consumer stocks] provided [Arg1 a lift] [Arg2 to the industrial average].
(5) In addition, [Arg0 the bank] has an option to buy [Arg1 a 30% stake in BIP] [Arg2 from Societe
Generale] [ArgM?TMP after Jan.1, 1990] [Arg3 at 1,015 francs a share].2
As illustrated in (3), argument labels are consistent across alternate syntactic patterns of a given pred-
icator in a given sense. However, PropBank refrains from formalising the semantics of the role labels
and does not ensure their coherence across verbs. This is particularly clear with higher numbered labels,
2ArgM-TMP indicates a temporal adjunct modifier.
116
which correspond to distinct types of participants: Arg2 marks an Instrument for break (3), a Benefactive
for provide (4), and a Source for buy (5). Lower-numbered labels denote various roles as well, but they
are less arbitrary across verbs: Arg0 corresponds to traditional Agents, Experiencers, certain types of
Theme, etc. which surface as subjects of transitive verbs and a class of intransitives called unergatives;
Arg1, on the other hand, is assigned to objects of transitive verbs and subjects of unaccusatives and is the
equivalent of traditional Patients, Themes, etc.
While the PropBank corpus enables empirical insight into a variety of linguistic phenomena (e.g.
variations in the grammatical expression of arguments) providing useful frequency information for the
uses of predicators, it does not lend itself to extraction of a principled linguistic knowledge base with
semantic generalisations across predicates. Inasmuch as no consistent mapping is ensured between a
label and a semantic role, the argument labels result seriously overloaded across verbs. This explains why
role recognition models have particularly poor performance in assigning the labels Arg2-Arg5. In fact, an
attempt is currently made to map PropBank argument labels to semantically coherent roles specified by
VerbNet (Kipper et al, 2000) (i.e. a broad-coverage verb lexicon based on Levin?s (1993) classification
of English verbs according to shared meaning and behaviour). Even though VerbNet specifies a small list
of abstract roles (23 in total) which are intended to support generalisations, these roles are not defined as
global primitives, but are meaningful only within verb classes. Because mappings of labels to semantic
roles with class-specific interpretations would lead to very sparse data, argument labels are subdivided
into groupings of VerbNet roles. The latter are created manually on the basis of analysis of argument
use.3 The subdivided (more coherent) PropBank labels perform better for semantic role labelling (Loper
et al, 2007).
A different paradigm for semantic role annotation is put forth by FrameNet. The Berkeley FrameNet
project (Baker et al, 1998) is creating an online lexical database containing semantic descriptions of
words based on Fillmore?s (1985) theory of frame semantics. The basic unit of analysis is the semantic
frame, i.e. a schematic representation of a stereotypical scene or situation. Each frame is associated
with a set of predicates (including verbs, nouns, and adjectives) and a set of semantic roles (called Frame
Elements, FEs) encoding the participants and props in the designated scene. FrameNet includes manually
annotated example sentences from the British National Corpus incorporating additional layers of phrase
structure and grammatical function annotation. It also includes two small corpora of full-text annotation
intended to facilitate statistical analysis of frame-semantic structures. Currently it contains more than 960
frames covering more than 11,600 lexical items exemplified in more than 150,000 annotated sentences.
The Judgment frame evoked by admire in (1) is shown in Table 3.
Frame: JUDGMENT
Definition A Cognizer makes a judgment about an Evaluee. The judgment may
be positive (e.g. respect) or negative (e.g. condemn) and this infor-
mation is recorded in the semantic types Positive and Negative on the
Lexical Units of this frame. There may be a specific Reason for the
Cognizer?s judgment, or there may be a capacity or Role in which the
Evaluee is judged.
FEs Cognizer: [The boss] appreciates you for your diligence.
Evaluee: The boss appreciates [you] for your diligence.
Expressor: She viewed him with an appreciative [gaze].
Reason: I admire you [for your intellect].
Predicates accolade.n, accuse.v, admiration.n, admire.v, admiring.a, applaud.v,
appreciate.v, appreciation.n, appreciative.a, approbation.n, approv-
ing.a, blame.n, blame.v, boo.v, ...
Table 1: The Judgment frame
3This endeavour is part of the SemLink project which aims at developing computationally explicit connections between
lexical semantic resources (PropBank, VerbNet, FrameNet, WordNet). The idea is to combine the advantages of these resources
and overcome their limitations by bridging the complementary lexical information they offer. In a related vein, the LIRICS
(i.e. Linguistic Infrastructure for Interoperable Resources and Systems) project has recently evaluated several approaches for
semantic role annotation (PropBank, VerbNet, FrameNet, among others) aiming to propose ISO ratified standards for semantic
representation that will enable the exchange and reuse of (multilingual) language resources (Petukhova and Bunt, 2008).
117
FrameNet avoids the difficulties of attempting to pin down a small set of general roles. Instead Frame
Elements are defined locally, i.e. in terms of frames. Frames are situated in semantic space by means
of directed (asymmetric) relations. Each frame-to-frame relation associates a less dependent or more
general frame (Super frame) with a more dependent or less general one (Sub frame). The hierarchical
organisation of frames along with FE identities or analogs across frames are intended to enable the for-
mulation of generalisations concerning the combinatorial properties (valences) of predicates. In practice,
however, the frame hierarchy turns out to be somewhat complicated. Inheritance (i.e. the strongest se-
mantic relation and the most plausible to propagate valence information across frames) is conditioned on
complex sets of semantic components underlying frame definitions, ranging from FE membership and
relations to other frames to relationships among FEs and Semantic Types on frames and FEs.4 This kind
of frame dependence based on fine-grained semantic or ontological distinctions is doomed to miss argu-
ment structure commonalities in predicates evoking frames that are related at a more abstract, essentially
structural semantic level. Section 4 includes a concrete example of the complications in generalising
valence information across FrameNet frames.
Researchers working in the FrameNet paradigm have proposed different approaches for abstract-
ing over the properties of individual predicators and increasing the size of training data for semantic
role labelling systems. Gildea and Jurafsky (2002) attempt to generalise the behaviour of semantically
related predicates experimenting with a small set of abstract semantic roles mapped to FrameNet roles.
Frank (2004) discusses the potential of applying various generalisation ?filters? to corpus-induced syntax-
semantics mappings for abstraction of a general linguistic knowledge base. The generalisations proposed
by Frank are intended to apply within frames but not across frames. Baldewein et al (2004) have trained
semantic role classifiers re-using training instances of roles that are similar to the target role. As sim-
ilarity measures, they use the FrameNet hierarchy, peripheral roles of FrameNet and clusters of roles
constructed automatically. Matsubayashi et al (2009) also explore various machine learning features for
generalising semantic roles in FrameNet, namely role hierarchy, human-understandable descriptors of
Frame Elements, Semantic Types of filler phrases, and mappings of FrameNet roles to roles of VerbNet.
The experimental result of the role classification using these generalisation features shows significant
improvements in the system. This is due to the fact that role generalisations can form a remedy for the
severe problem of sparse data which is inherent in lexical semantic corpus annotation. Data sparseness,
i.e. the insufficient coverage of the range of predicate senses and constructions within sensible sizes of
manually annotated data, is a bottleneck both for acquisition of linguistic knowledge for the semantic
lexicon and for automated techniques for semantic role assignment.
3 An Abstract Semantic Basis for the Representation of Participant Roles
From the presentation of different annotation projects it becomes evident that semantic role annotation
is a complicated task whose product is deeply influenced by its initial design philosophy and underlying
criteria.5 Among these criteria the notion of semantic role itself is central. PropBank uses general
role labels that lack semantic coherence. VerbNet and FrameNet, on the other hand, specify coherent
roles at a more fine-grained level (i.e. roles with class-specific or frame-specific interpretations). In this
section, I consider the linguistic contours of the concept of semantic role proposing an annotation schema
based upon theoretically well-founded role concepts which meet the requirements of both generality and
coherence. This schema is intended at enabling the formulation of a general syntax-semantics interface
suitable for modelling the relations of predicates in terms of combinatorial features.
Espousing and extending Dowty?s (1991) Proto-Role hypothesis, I propose to associate arguments of
predicates with properties entailed by the semantics of predicates.6 Mappings of entailments to syntactic
4Semantic Types encode information that is not representable in terms of frames and FE hierarchies, e.g. basic typing
of fillers of FEs referring to some (external) ontological classification, descriptions of aspects of semantic variation between
lexical units such as the Positive and Negative types in the Judgment frame above, etc.
5This point is discussed in detail by Ellsworth et al, 2004.
6The term entailment is used in the standard logical sense according to which one formula entails another if in every possible
118
constituents can be many-to-one. That is, an argument can be marked with one or more properties
necessarily entailed by the meaning of the predicator.7 Prepositional complements are also marked with
verbal entailments to which prepositions may contribute more specific content. In this paper, I will make
no attempt to formalise the content added by prepositions; prepositional semantics is represented solely
in terms of the common entailment basis it shares with verbal meaning.
Each Proto-Role entailment indicates a grammatically pervasive concept, i.e. a property having direct
effect on the grammatical behaviour of predicates. It is defined in terms of an abstract semantic relation
underlying the lexical meaning of the predicate. Five such relations are identified in terms of which
entailment-based representations are specified: Notion, Causation, Motion, Possession, Conditioning.
Note that contrary to mere ontological labels, entailment-based representations encode structural char-
acterisations of the semantics of arguments. Consider, for instance, the sentence in (1), repeated here as
(6):
(6) [Cognizer I] admired [Evaluee him] [Reason for his bravery and his cheerfulness].
A structural representation of the meaning of this construction will explicitly encode the relationships
between each of the arguments of admire, i.e. between the NP I and the NP him, between the NP him
and the PP for his bravery and his cheerfulness, and between the NP I and the PP for his bravery and
his cheerfulness. By contrast, the FrameNet roles shown above do not model the fact that the semantic
content of an Evaluee requires a Cognizer, or that a Reason requires both a Cognizer and an Evaluee.
The view that the semantic properties underlying lexical meaning are relational in nature (i.e. they are
not to be conceived entirely independently of one another) has been advocated by several researchers,
among others Wechsler (1995), Pinker (1989), Jackendoff (1990), and Davis (2001), on whose work I
build.
In the rest of this section, I define a set of recurring entailments which underlie the semantics of a
range of verbs displaying various syntactic patterns. Note that this set can be extended on the basis of
additional primitive meaning components of the sort described above, covering the semantics of broad
verb classes.
(7) [Conceiver The other two] pondered [Conceived over this morsel] as they tramped along behind
him.8
(8) [Conceiver,Intentional They] tested [Conceived the software] [Conceived bsoa for similar errors].
(9) [Conceiver,Intentional The government] had reneged [Conceived on promises to give them land].
(10) [Conceiver He] likes stereotyping [Conceived people] [Conceived bsoa by appearance].
(11) [Conceiver The jury] has found out [Conceived the truth] [Conceived bsoa about the suspect].
(12) [Conceiver The court] categorised [Conceived,Entity the issue] [Conceived,Property as a collateral
question].
situation (in every model) in which the first is true, the second is also true. For linguistic predicates, in particular, an entailment
(or lexical entailment) is an analytic implication following from the meaning of the predicate in question.
7The presence of ?necessarily? in this sentence is somewhat redundant, in that its meaning is incorporated by the notion
of entailment. I insist, however, on emphasising it to indicate that semantic properties that are accidentally associated with
the meaning of a particular use of a verb will not be annotated. Dowty points out that entailments of the predicate must be
distinguished from what follows from any one sentence as a whole (e.g. entailments that may arise from NP meanings) (Dowty,
1991:572, footnote 16). For example, in the sentence Mary slapped John, assuming that John is a human entity, it follows
from the meaning of the sentence that John will perceive something as a result of the action of slapping. But this ?entailment?
is not intrinsically tied to the meaning of slap, because the sentences Mary slapped the table or Mary slapped the corpse are
also felicitous. That is, sentience of the direct object is not an essential component of the semantics of slap, in the way it is
for a verb like awaken. The sentences Mary awakened the table and Mary awakened the corpse are clearly anomalous. True
entailments of predicators (which are the ones that will be annotated) must be detectable in every possible environment in
which the predicator is used.
8The examples used to illustrate the proposed schema are from the British National Corpus. Some of them are slightly
modified for reasons of conciseness.
119
(13) [Conceiver Opposition members] accuse [Conceived,Entity the council] [Conceived,Property of acting
purely ideologically].
The predicates in (7)-(13) are represented in terms of a Notion relation. That is, they involve a
Conceiver who is entailed to have a notion or perception of a Conceived participant (while the reverse
entailment does not necessarily go through).9 In situation types in which a Conceiver is entailed to
have a notion of more than one participant, Conceived arguments are distinguished on the basis of their
salience in the overall semantics of the predicate. For instance, test (8) intuitively lexicalises a dyadic re-
lation between a Conceiver (tester) and a Conceived (tested) entity. A sought entity denoted by a for-PP
is represented as part of a secondary Notion relation situated at the background of the primary (testing)
relation. Conceived entities that are peripheral to the essential relation lexicalised by the predicate are as-
sociated with a more specific property termed Conceived background state of affairs (Conceived bsoa).
These arguments receive less focus in the meaning of the predicate, in a sense that they are not absolutely
necessary to understand the predicate?s meaning. The representation of test (8), stereotype (10), and find
out (11) in terms of two Notion relations, one of which is treated as more salient, reifies the concept
of relative significance of Proto-Role properties in the verbal semantics. This concept is related to the
weighting of entailments in the overall semantics of a verb, which plays a critical role in determining the
syntactic patterns in which the verb appears (i.e. the grammatical realisations of its arguments).10
The verbs in (8) and (9) involve an additional entailment of Intentionality. This is used to mark
entities characterised by conscious choice, decision, or control over the course of inherently intentional
actions. Intentional participants necessarily have a notion/perception of some event participant(s). The
annotations in (12) and (13) include the Entity and Property tags which are intended to distinguish
Conceived arguments in terms of a predicative relation assigned in the Conceiver?s mental model. The
Property label corresponds to a representation of the form P(x) denoting a property P which is predicated
of some object x.
The entailments of Notion are not applicable in the semantics of the predicates in (14)-(15) below.
These verbs refer to situations with affected participants and are described in terms of an abstract relation
of Causation. In the denoted events, a Causer is entailed to affect some entity (the Causee) either phys-
ically or mentally. Causally affected participants sometimes undergo radical changes in their (physical
or mental) state, which are identified in terms of a readily observable transition from a source to a final
(result) state, as shown in (15).
(14) [Causer Diet] influences [Causee disease].
(15) [Causer The sun] has changed [Causee,Change of state her hair color] [Source state from red]
[End state to blue].
Verbs as in (16)-(17) are represented in terms of a Motion relation involving a Moving entity (i.e.
an object entailed to change location) and Stationary reference frame. Locations at the start, end, or
intermediate points of the stationary frame are tagged with the labels Path source, Path goal, and Path,
respectively.
(16) [Moving The car] passed [Stationary the railway station].
(17) [Moving The river] flowed silently [Path through the forest].
Finally, verbs such as own, possess, acquire, lack, etc. are treated in terms of a Possession relation
involving a Possessor and an entity entailed to be Possessed (18).
9The Notion relation, as defined by Wechsler (1995), essentially reconstructs the entailment of sentience, which was pro-
posed by Dowty (1991).
10Arguments identified as conceived bsoas have many of the syntactic properties of so-called semantic adjuncts. However,
I refrain from invoking an argument versus adjunct division, in that it is known to involve serious theoretical pitfalls. Instead
I classify conceived participants on the basis of the concept of importance of entailments, which lies exactly at the syntax-
semantics interface. This concept is defined in terms of the lexicalised event rather than the real-world event that traditional
analyses of adjuncthood appeal to.
120
(18) [Possessor This house] lacks [Possessed a guest room].
Verbs of caused Motion (19) or caused Possession (20) are represented in terms of both Causation and
Motion/Possession, i.e. as meaning ?cause to move? (set to motion) or ?cause to possess?. This analysis
posits a main (causal) event and a caused sub-event. The entailments associated with the latter are marked
in square brackets.
(19) [Causer Lucie] threw [Causee,[Moving] him] [[Path source] from the parapet of a bridge] [[Path goal]
into deep water].
(20) [Causer He] handed [[Possessed] the letter] [[Possessor] to Weir], who nodded.
Proto-Role entailments are defined in terms of inherently asymmetric semantic relations involving
fixed role positions. Each of these relations (with the exception of Motion) can be thought of as instance
of a more general relation entailing that properties of an entity ? are dependent on an entity ?. For
example, a conceived entity in a Notion relation depends on the existence of a conceiver (it is taken to be
within the scope of the conceiver?s beliefs). An affected or possessed object in a causation or possession
relation depends on the existence of some causer or possessor, respectively. I refer to this relation as
Conditioning relation and associate it with appropriate Proto-Role properties capturing the semantics of
a broad range of verbs for which none of the entailments specified so far seems to hold. These verbs
conform to the basic transitivity pattern that motivated Dowty?s Proto-Role hypothesis. Below are some
characteristic examples:
(21) [Condition This game] demands [Conditioned great skill].
(22) [Condition Code 1425] bans [Conditioned large trucks in tunnels].
(23) [Condition The adjective ?beautiful?] denotes [Conditioned a quality which can be found in many
different objects].
(24) [Condition Diversity] characterises [Conditioned the sociolinguistics domain].
A Conditioning relation encodes the asymmetries in such predicators in terms of the underlying
entailment that the properties of a participant ? impose a condition on properties of a participant ?.
In each of the sentences above we can conclude something about the object participant (e.g. that it is
necessary, illegal, or linguistically expressed) on the basis of the subject referent (i.e. the characteristics
of the game, the regulations specified by the code, the usage of the adjective ?beautiful?). By contrast,
no property of the subject referent is necessarily conditioned on the object: the semantics of ban, for
example, does not allow us to characterise code 1425 as fair/unfair, severe/lax, complete/incomplete,
new/old, etc. on the basis of the object NP ?large trucks in tunnels?; similarly, we cannot infer the precise
meaning of the word ?beautiful? or whether it is a verb or a noun or an adjective on the basis of the
content of the NP ?a quality which can be found in many different objects?. A more precise definition
of the Conditioning relation could state that the intrinsic (i.e. invariable) properties of a participant ?
determine or condition some non-intrinsic (i.e. variable or event-dependent) property of a participant ?
while the converse entailment does not go through. In (24), for example, the sociolinguistics domain
is associated with a property of being diverse whereas the intrinsic properties of the domain have no
significance for the definition of ?diversity? or what this notion may characterise.
4 Formulation of a General Syntax-Semantics Interface
A preliminary study has been carried out mapping state-of-the-art semantic role annotations to lexical
entailment representations. In particular, a portion of the FrameNet corpora has been annotated with
Proto-Role properties by a single annotator. The study focuses on a set of English verbs selected from
250 random FrameNet frames. For each verb in these frames, collections of example annotated sentences
as well as sentences from the FrameNet full-text annotation corpora (where available) were extracted.
More than 900 lexical units were considered in ?20K sentences. Proto-Role entailments were annotated
121
on top of FrameNet?s syntactic annotations in accordance with the schema sketched out above. The
annotations were produced semi-automatically following a three-stage procedure: (i) mapping Frame
Elements (FEs) to entailments at a frame level (ii) automatically adding this information to the data
in a new annotation layer, (iii) manually correcting the novel annotations by examining the argument
structures of individual predicators for finer semantic distinctions.
From the newly annotated data mappings of entailments to grammatical categories were acquired.
The syntactic realisations of Proto-Role properties were found to readily generalise over combinatorial
features of verbs pertaining to various FrameNet frames. Valence information can be formally rendered
in entailment-based classes called Lexicalisation Types (L-Types) abstracting away from the semantics
of predicators. L-Types are defined on the basis of grammatically relevant meaning components and
encode linking generalisations cutting across FrameNet frames.
For instance, predicates such as believe and desire (evoking the frames Religious Belief and Desir-
ing, respectively) involve arguments that are equivalent in terms of entailments, as illustrated in (25)-(26)
below. Hence they are categorised in the Notion L-Type shown in Table 2. Table 2 includes the corre-
spondences between combinations of entailments and FrameNet Frame Elements.
Notion L-Type Religious belief Desiring
Conceiver Believer Experiencer
Conceived, (Entity) Element Focal participant
Conceived bsoa, Property Role Role of focal participant
Table 2: Mappings between Notion L-Type and FrameNet frames
(25) If [Conceiver he] believes [Conceived,Entity in Jesus] [Conceived bsoa,Property as his Saviour], he
can be baptised.
(26) [Conceiver He] wanted [Conceived,Entity Smith] [Conceived bsoa,Property as the new producer].
In a similar fashion, operate, research, and ratify can be grouped together in a L-Type based on the
underlying property of Intentionality. Examples (27)-(28) show that these verbs share common valence
patterns despite the differences in the definition of the frames they evoke (Using, Research and Rati-
fication): Role and Purpose are core Frame Elements in the Using frame, while Purpose is peripheral
in Research and Ratification. Research and Ratification have no Role FE (but this kind of argument is
clearly present in the constructions exemplified in (28b-c).
Intentionality L-Type Using Research Ratification
Conceiver, Intentional Agent Researcher Ratifier
Conceived, (Entity) Instrument Question Proposal
Conceived bsoa, Property Role
Conceived bsoa, Intention Purpose Purpose Purpose
Table 3: Mappings between Intentionality L-Type and FrameNet frames
(27) a. [Conceiver,Intentional We] operate [Conceived a menu] [Conceived bsoa,Intention to get the best
out of rations].
b. [Conceiver,Intentional We] research [Conceived this fungus] [Conceived bsoa,Intention to fight
aliments in tobacco and tomato fields].
c. [Conceiver,Intentional They] had to ratify [Conceived the amendments] [Conceived bsoa,Intention
to be readmitted to the Union].
(28) a. There has been a long debate as to whether [Conceived,Entity the Severn Mill] was operated
[Conceived bsoa,Property as a tide mill].
b. [Conceived,Entity Thin films] are being researched [Conceived bsoa,Property as a potential medium
for integrated optical circuits].
122
c. [Conceived,Entity Such agreements] may be ratified [Conceived bsoa,Property as being in the
public interest].
In the same Intentionality L-Type we also categorise verbs such as carry out and visit evoking the
frames Intentionally act and Visiting. It is important to note that despite the argument structure sim-
ilarities of these predicators, it is not possible to establish an identity link between the Act FE of the
Intentionally act frame and the Entity FE of Visiting in terms of the frame hierarchy, because the FEs
are associated with different Semantic Types in the corresponding frame definitions, i.e. Act is of type
State of affairs whereas Entity is of type Physical object. The examples (29)-(30) illustrate the common
use of these verbs in the transitive construction. The (a) sentences show the FE annotation while the (b)
sentences show the annotated entailments.
(29) a. [Agent They] had carried out [Act 113 uranium conversion experiments].
b. [Conceiver,Intentional They] had carried out [Conceived 113 uranium conversion experiments].
(30) a. [Agent You] have to visit [Entity your parents] every once in a while.
b. [Conceiver,Intentional You] have to visit [Conceived your parents] every once in a while.
Predicates grouped together in L-Types have some but not necessarily all their grammatical prop-
erties in common. This is in accordance with the fact that L-Types are essentially semantically-driven
modelling recurring, abstract features in the semantics of predicators while disregarding ephemeral prop-
erties as well as lexical idiosyncrasies.11 In addition to the set of entailments discussed in the previous
section, L-Types may also incorporate more fine-grained properties that are clearly relevant to linking.
For instance, verbs lexicalising a Desiring situation were found with prepositional complements intro-
duced by for, after, to, towards, of, or over (e.g. long for, hanker after, aspire to, pine over, etc.), but
not on, upon, at, or about (like other Notion verbs, such as ponder, muse, think, etc.). Inasmuch as a
Desiring relation is identified as a recurring concept systematically associated with a particular gram-
matical relation (e.g. a for-PP), it can be represented in a separate L-Type inheriting from the Notion
L-Type presented previously.12 An initial classification like the one exemplified above captures general
conditions which determine possible associations between the semantics of predicators and grammati-
cal relations realising their arguments (e.g. the fact that a conceived entity can only surface in subject
position in a passive sentence). It can be extended and refined on the basis of more specific semantic re-
lations. Moreover, L-Types can be organised in hierarchical structures. They can form the upper portion
of a principled hierarchy of classes encoding successively broader levels of generalisations concerning
argument linking.
This study indicated that a small number of Lexicalisation Types abstracts over a wide range of
FrameNet frames.13 More precisely, in the annotated dataset 48 L-Types were identified based on various
combinations of entailments: 9 Notion Types, 7 Intentionality Types, 10 Causation Types, 7 Commu-
nication (Caused Notion) Types, 7 Motion (including Caused Motion) Types, 7 Possession (including
Caused Possession) Types, and 1 Conditioning Type. These Types readily abstract over associations of
semantic properties and grammatical functions attested in over 200 FrameNet frames.14 In the FrameNet
paradigm, L-Types can be modelled as non-lexicalised frames specifying syntactic mapping constraints.
11L-Types crucially differ from verb classes in VerbNet, which are based on a rigorous commitment to syntax. This commit-
ment yields fine-grained distinctions that very often split semantically coherent classes. In fact, L-Types abstract over VerbNet
classes encoding broader levels of linking generalisations.
12For-PPs are indeed associated with a desiderative sense with a wide range of verbs in various argument positions: ?He
desperately hunted for a new job ?. ?They searched the ground for traces?. ?John ran for cover when it started to rain?.
13Note that inasmuch as L-Types abstract over both VerbNet classes and FrameNet frames, they can also be useful for
combining the two resources.
14About 30 frames contained predicates for which none of our entailments seemed to hold. Most of these verbs (e.g. re-
semble, adjoin, concern, fit, suit, etc.) involve what Dowty (1991) called perspective-dependent semantic roles traditionally
described with labels such as Figure and Ground. The lexicalisation patterns of these verbs have been shown to depend on prag-
matic or discourse factors rather than intrinsic semantic properties. Such predicates display great variability in their argument
realisation options and are outside the scope of this study.
123
Mappings between FrameNet frames and L-Types can be stated by means of a separate relation in ad-
dition to the frame relations currently specified by FrameNet. A relation generalising the combinatorial
properties of lexical items across frames would simplify the picture of the frame hierarchy, in that it
would essentially decouple purely lexical semantic information (encoded by existing frame-to-frame re-
lations) from information pertaining exactly to the interface of syntax and semantics. In future work, our
intention is to test whether the proposed semantic role schema and the attested L-Types can be useful for
dealing with the sparse data problem and increasing the performance of semantic role labelling systems.
References
[1] Baker, Collin F., Charles J. Fillmore, and John B. Lowe. 1998. The Berkeley FrameNet project. In Proceedings of the COLING-ACL.
Montreal, Canada.
[2] Baldewein, Ulrike, Katrin Erk, Sebastian Pado?, and Detlef Prescher. 2004. Semantic Role Labeling with Similarity-Based Generalisation
Using EM-Based Clustering. In Proceedings of Senseval-3, pp. 64-68. Barcelona, Spain.
[3] Boas, Hans C. 2002. Bilingual FrameNet Dictionaries for Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the Third International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation. Las Palmas, Spain. Vol. IV: pp. 1364-1371.
[4] Burchardt, Aljoscha and Anette Frank. 2006. Approximating Textual Entailment with LFG and FrameNet Frames. In Proceedings of the
second PASCAL Recognizing Textual Entailment Workshop. Venice, Italy, pp. 92-97.
[5] Davis, Anthony. 2001. Linking by types in the hierarchical lexicon. CSLI Publications.
[6] Dowty, David. 1991. Thematic Proto-Roles and Argument Selection. Language 67.3, pp. 547-619.
[7] Ellsworth Michael, Katrin Erk, Paul Kingsbury, and Sebastian Pado?. 2004. PropBank, SALSA, and FrameNet: How Design Determines
Product. In Proceedings of the LREC 2004 Workshop on Building Lexical Resources from Semantically Annotated Corpora. Lisbon.
[8] Fillmore, Charles J. 1985. Frames and the semantics of understanding. Quaderni di Semantica 6.2, pp. 222-254.
[9] Frank, Anette. 2004. Generalizations over corpus-induced frame assignment rules. In Charles Fillmore, Manfred Pinkal, Collin Baker and
Katrin Erk (eds.): Proceedings of the LREC 2004 Workshop on Building Lexical Resources from Semantically Annotated Corpora. Lisbon,
Portugal, pp. 31-38.
[10] Gildea, Daniel and Daniel Jurafsky. 2002. Automatic labeling of semantic roles. Computational Linguistics 28 (3), pp. 245-288.
[11] Jackendoff, Ray. 1990. Semantic Structures. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.
[12] Kingsbury, Paul and Martha Palmer. 2002. From Treebank to PropBank. In Proceedings of the LREC, Las Palmas, Canary Islands, Spain.
[13] Kipper, Karin, Hoa Trang Dang, and Martha Palmer. 2000. Class-based construction of a verb lexicon. In Proceedings of the Seventh
National Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-2000), Austin,TX, July-August.
[14] Levin, Beth. 1993. English verb classes and alternations: A preliminary investigation. University of Chicago Press.
[15] Loper, Edward, Szu-ting Yi and Martha Palmer. 2007. Combining Lexical Resources: Mapping Between PropBank and VerbNet. Pro-
ceedings of the 7th International Workshop on Computational Semantics. Tilburg, the Netherlands.
[16] Marcus, Mitchell, Grace Kim, Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz, Robert MacIntyre, Ann Bies, Mark Ferguson, Karen Katz, and Britta Schas-
berger. 1994. The Penn Treebank: Annotating predicate argument structure. In Proceedings AR-PAHLT Workshop.
[17] Matsubayashi, Yuichiroh, Naoaki Okazaki, and Jun?ichi Tsujii. 2009. A Comparative Study on Generalization of Semantic Roles in
FrameNet. In Proceedings of the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and the 4th IJCNLP of the AFNLP, pp.19-27. Suntec, Singapore.
[18] Melli, Gabor, Yang Wang, Yudong Liu, Mehdi M. Kashani, Zhongmin Shi, Baohua Gu, Anoop Sarkar, and Fred
Popowich. 2005. Description of SQUASH, the SFU question answering summary handler for the DUC-2005 Summariza-
tion Task. In Proceedings of the HLT/EMNLP Document Understanding Workshop (DUC). Vancouver, Canada, available at
http://duc.nist.gov/pubs/2005papers/simonfraseru.sarkar.pdf.
[19] Narayanan, Srini and Sanda Harabagiu. 2004. Question Answering Based on Semantic Structures. In Proceedings of the 20th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING), pp. 693 - 701. Geneva, Switzerland.
[20] Petukhova, Volha and Harry Bunt. 2008. ?LIRICS semantic role annotation: design and evaluation of a set of data categories.? In Pro-
ceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2008), Marrakech, Morocco, May 28-30.
[21] Pinker, Steven. 1989. Learnability and Cognition. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.
[22] Surdeanu, Mihai, Sanda Harabagiu, John Williams, and Paul Aarseth. 2003. Using Predicate Arguments Structures for Information
Extraction. In Proceedings of the 41st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 815. Sapporo, Japan.
[23] Wechsler, Stephen. 1995. The semantic basis of argument structure. Stanford, CA. CSLI Publications.
124
