A Mathematical Model of Historical
Semantics and the Grouping of Word
Meanings into Concepts
Martin C. Cooper?
University of Toulouse III
A statistical analysis of polysemy in sixteen English and French dictionaries has revealed
that, in each dictionary, the number of senses per word has a near-exponential distribution.
A probabilistic model of historical semantics is presented which explains this distribution. This
mathematical model also provides a means of estimating the average number of distinct concepts
per word, which was found to be considerably less than the average number of senses listed per
word. The grouping of word senses into concepts is based on whether they could inspire the same
new senses (by metaphor, metonymy, etc.), that is, their potential future rather than their history.
1. Introduction
Ambiguity is ubiquitous in natural language. It is most dramatic when it concerns the
parsing of a sentence in examples such as
The High Court judges rape and murder suspects.
I heard a giant swallow after seeing a horse fly.
La petite brise la glace.
(?The girl breaks the mirror.?/?The little breeze chills her.?) (from Fuchs
1996)
However, the most common form of ambiguity concerns the meanings of individual
words, as in the following examples:
The minister decided to leave the party.
(?church minister?/?government minister?, ?drinks party?/?political party?)
He?s a curious individual. (?odd?/?nosey?)
Je suis un imbe?cile. (?I?m following an idiot.?/?I am an idiot.?)
? IRIT, Universite? de Toulouse III, 118 route de Narbonne, 31062 Toulouse, France. E-mail: cooper@irit.fr.
Submission received: 12th September 2003; Revised submission received: 29th April 2004; Accepted for
publication: 7th December 2004
? 2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 2
The last example involves homographs (different words which happen to be spelled
the same). However, it should be noted that only a small percentage of word sense
ambiguity is due to homography. (We obtained an estimate of approximately 2% by
random sampling of English and French dictionaries [12, 21, 22, 24].) Many words have
gained multiple senses by metonymy or by figurative or metaphorical uses. The result-
ing senses are sufficiently different to be considered by lexicographers as distinct con-
cepts (e.g., political party/drinks party). In information retrieval systems with natural
language interfaces (Mandala, Tokunaga, and Tanaka 1999; Stevenson and Wilks 1999)
or in models of human language processing via networks of semantic links (Fellbaum
1998; Hayes 1999; Vossen 2001), a fundamental question is what should correspond to a
basic semantic concept. Is it a word, a word sense, or a group of word senses?
This article presents a stochastic model of the evolution of language which allows
us to answer this question. Applying the model to statistics obtained from a large
number of monolingual and bilingual dictionaries provides convincing evidence that
neither words nor individual word senses (as identified by lexicographers) correspond
to concepts, but rather groups of word senses. Our model demonstrates that each word
represents, on average, about 1.3 distinct concepts. This can be compared with the
average 2.0 distinct senses per word listed in the dictionaries. This model also allows us
to propose a novel and formal definition of the word concept. There are clear applications
in artificial intelligence (Mandala, Tokunaga, and Tanaka 1999; Stevenson and Wilks
1999), cognitive science (Cruse 1995), lexicography, and historical linguistics (Algeo
1998; Antilla 1989; Schendl 2001; Geeraerts 1997).
2. The Genesis of Word Senses
Word origin and the evolution of spelling, pronunciation, and meaning have long been
studied by etymologists. Etymology tells us that many words in everyday use have a
history that can be traced back thousands of years (Onions 1966; Picoche 1992). This
can be contrasted with the hundreds of new entries which lexicographers add to each
new edition of a dictionary. These new entries are not only neologisms, but also new
senses for existing words. The history of the variations in spelling and pronunciation of
particular words are not of direct concern here. We are interested in how ?word, sense?
pairs enter (or leave) a language. For each such semantic change, we can try to identify
the originator, the reason, and the mechanism by which it occurs.
2.1 Origins of Semantic Change
Picoche (1992) states that the majority of words in French have a scholarly origin and
were introduced by clerics, jurists, intellectuals, and scientists directly from Latin and
Greek. However, it is clear that many words are of popular origin (e.g., bike, trainers, and
OK in English or ve?lo, baskets, and OK in French) and have become accepted terms as the
result of common use.
The principal reason why new ?word, sense? pairs are introduced is to adapt lan-
guage to new communicative requirements (Schendl 2001). Discoveries and inventions
can give rise to neologisms (e.g., kangaroo, quark, Internet) or new senses for existing
words (e.g., the ?armoured vehicle? sense of tank which coexists with the earlier ?large
container? sense). Another driving force in historical semantics is the human tendency
toward efficiency of communication, by, for example, shortening words or expres-
sions (e.g., clipping of omnibus to bus), ignoring unnecessary semantic distinctions, and
inventing new words to replace long expressions. Other reasons for semantic change
228
Cooper A Mathematical Model of Historical Semantics
have more to do with human psychology than with practical necessity. Taboo leads
to the introduction of slang words or euphemisms, such as to terminate for ?to kill? or
senior for ?old?. Litotes is a special case in which a word is replaced by the negation
of its opposite (e.g., not bad for ?good?). New words may be employed to make an
old product sound more modern, exotic, or appetizing (e.g., the old-fashioned British
word chips is often replaced by french fries or frites on menus). The human tendency
to emphasize or exaggerate leads to the replacement of severe by horrific or very by
awfully (Schendl 2001).
2.2 Mechanisms of Semantic Change
We can divide the mechanisms for neologism into three categories (Algeo 1998; Antilla
1989; Chalker and Weiner 1994; Gramley 2001; Schendl 2001; Stockwell and Minkova
2001):
1. Word-creation from no previous etymon. This is rare but is the most likely
explanation for echoic words such as vroom, cuckoo, oh! (Bloomfield 1933).
2. Borrowing from another language. This includes loan words (e.g., strudel
from German, pizza from Italian) and loan translations in which each
element of a word is translated (e.g., spring roll from Chinese, dreamtime
from the Australian aboriginal alcheringa (Gramley 2001), and chien-chaud,
which is the French Quebec version of hot dog).
3. Word formation from existing etyma (words or word components). This
includes
(a) compounding (e.g., bookcase, bushfire),
(b) blending (e.g., brunch, motel),
(c) affixation (e.g., overcook, international, likeness, privatize),
(d) shortening (e.g., petrol(eum), radar, telly, AIDS),
(e) eponyms (e.g., kleenex, sandwich, jersey, casanova),
(f) internal derivations (Gramley 2001) (e.g., extend/extent or sing/song),
(g) reduplication (Stockwell and Minkova 2001) (e.g., fifty-fifty,
dum-dum),
(h) morphological reanalysis (Schendl 2001) (e.g., the nonexistent verb
to edit was formed from the noun editor; the word cheeseburger was
derived from hamburger even though this word comes from the
proper name Hamburg).
Mechanisms 1 and 3(f)?(h) are rare compared to 2 and 3(a)?(e) (Algeo 1998). Clearly,
the above mechanisms are not exclusive. Borrowing and word formation are obviously
both at play in examples such as blitz, which is a clipping of the German word blitzkreig,
and the French word tennisman, which is a compound of two English words.
Word creation, borrowing, and word formation generally produce a new word with
a single sense, except when by coincidence the word being created, borrowed, or formed
already exists with a different sense. In the rest of the article, we consider homographs
produced by such coincidences to be different words. In most dictionaries, homographs
have distinct entries. For example, the term bug, meaning ?error in a computer program,?
was borrowed into French as bogue (by assimilation with the already existing word with
the unrelated meaning ?husk?), but these two meanings of bogue are listed in French
dictionaries as two distinct words.
229
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 2
Nevertheless, we should mention three cases in which a neologism is often not
recognized as a genuinely new word: ellipsis (Antilla 1989) (e.g., daily (newspaper)), zero
derivation (Nevalainen 1999) (also known as conversion [Gramley 2001; Schendl 2001])
(e.g., to cheat > a cheat), and borrowing of an already-existing word with a related sense
(e.g., to control was borrowed into French as contro?ler, thus giving an extra sense to this
French word meaning ?to verify?).
The following is a list of mechanisms which can create a new sense for an already-
existing word (adapted from Algeo [1998]):
1. referential shift (e.g., to print now also refers to laser printers).
2. generalization (e.g., chap used to mean ?a customer?) or abstraction (e.g.,
zest denoted orange or lemon peel used for flavoring before being used in
the abstract sense of ?gusto?).
3. specialization (e.g., in Old English fowl meant any kind of bird and meat
any kind of food [Onions 1966; Schendl 2001]) or concretion.
4. metaphor (e.g., kite, meaning ?bird of prey,? applied to a toy).
5. metonymy (literally, ?name change?), that is, naming something by any of
its parts, accompaniments, or indexes (e.g., the crown for the sovereign, the
City for the people who work there, tin for the container made of that
metal, cognac for the drink originating from that region) (Traugott and
Dasher 2002).
6. clang association or folk etymology (e.g., belfry meant ?a movable tower
used in attacking walled positions,? but the first syllable was associated
with bell, and now the basic meaning is ?bell tower? [Antilla 1989]).
7. embellishment of language by using words which are more acceptable,
attractive, or flattering than existing terms (hyperbole, litotes,
euphemisms, etc., as discussed above).
We use the general term association to cover all these cases.
3. The Near-Exponential Rule
In order to study the relative importance of neologism, obsolescence, and the creation of
new meanings for existing words, we counted the number of senses listed per word in
several different monolingual dictionaries. We observed the following general empirical
rule satisfied to within a fairly high degree of accuracy by all the dictionaries studied
[9, 12, 19, 20, 21, 23, 24, 28, 31, 32]:
Near-Exponential Rule: The number of senses per word in a monolingual dictionary has an approximately
exponential distribution.
One way of testing this rule is by plotting log(Ns) against s, where Ns is the number
of words in the dictionary with exactly s senses. If the near-exponential rule is satisfied,
then the resulting plot should be very close to a straight line with a negative slope. This
is indeed the case for the dictionaries tested, with varying values of the slope depending
on the dictionary. Figures 1 and 2 show the plot of Ns, on a logarithmic scale, against s
230
Cooper A Mathematical Model of Historical Semantics
Figure 1
Plot of Ns (number of words with s senses) against s for various monolingual English
dictionaries.
Figure 2
Plot of Ns (number of words with s senses) against s for various monolingual French dictionaries.
231
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 2
Figure 3
Plot of Ns (number of entries with s senses) for four different dictionaries, each showing a
nonexponential distribution.
for four English [19, 24, 28, 31] and five French [9, 12, 20, 21, 23] dictionaries. Only those
points (s, Ns) for which Ns > 12 are plotted in the figures.
For each dictionary, the values of Ns were obtained by sampling a random set of
pages of the dictionary. Sampling was performed independently for each dictionary,
meaning that the random sample of words was different in each case. We excluded
entries corresponding to proper names, foreign words, spelling variants, derived words
(such as past participles), regional words, abbreviations, and expressions. We allowed
hyphens within words but not spaces. Thus cat-o?-nine-tails counted as a word, but
tower block and phrasal verbs such as give up did not. Only words forming part of
British English or French spoken in metropolitan France were considered. All words
were treated equally irrespective of their relative frequencies. Thus the words get and
floccinaucinihilipilification were given the same importance. The size of each dictionary
that was sampled is given in the reference section. The dictionaries sampled vary in size
from 20,000 to 80,000 words.
To ensure that the near-exponential rule was not simply an artifact of our choice of
experimental procedure or of lexicographical practice, we performed the same analysis
on a dictionary of abbreviations and acronyms [7], a dictionary of scientific terms [1], a
bilingual dictionary of slang words [17], and a dictionary of French synonyms [10]. The
resulting curves, shown in Figure 3, are far from straight lines.
We performed similar counts for bilingual dictionaries. Figures 4 and 5 show the
number of words NTt with t translations plotted against t for several pairs of languages.
The NTt scale is again logarithmic. Although the near-exponential rule could also be
said to hold for certain bilingual dictionaries, the curvature of the log NTt against t
curve varies considerably depending on the distance between the two languages. For
pairs of languages with strong etymological connections (such as French and Spanish),
the average curvature is positive (Figure 4), but for pairs of distant languages (such
as Japanese and English) the average curvature is negative (Figure 5). A theoretical
explanation of this phenomenon is outside the scope of the present article, but it is
232
Cooper A Mathematical Model of Historical Semantics
Figure 4
Number NTt of words in French with t translations in English, Spanish, Italian, and Portuguese.
Figure 5
Number NTt of words in language A with t translations in language B, for distant languages A
and B.
probably due to the greater differences in the segmentation of semantic space by distant
languages (see Resnik and Yarowsky [2000] for some illustrative examples). It will be
treated in detail in a follow-up article.
4. Words, Senses, and Concepts
In the following section we present a mathematical model which explains the near-
exponential distribution of word senses observed in English and French dictionaries.
Not only do the curves of Figures 1 and 2 share the property of being close to straight
lines (i.e., having curvature close to zero), but in each case, the curvature that they
do exhibit is positive rather than negative. Although barely discernible for some of
the curves, this positive curvature cannot be ignored. We fitted a straight line to the
curves and then used a chi-square test to judge the closeness of fit of this straight line
to the data. For each curve the chi-square test demonstrated a significant discrepancy
233
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 2
between the model and the data. For example, the significance level was 15 standard
deviations for the Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English (LCDE) [24]. In order to
find a satisfactory model to explain this slight but consistently positive curvature, we
study in more detail the process by which words gain new senses.
The word panel provides a good example of a word whose number of meanings
has grown since its introduction into English from Old French in the 13th century. Its
original meaning was a piece of cloth placed under a saddle. Over the centuries it gained
many meanings, by extension of this original sense, which can be grouped together in
the following concept:
(C1) an often rectangular-shaped part of a surface (of a wall, fence, cloth, etc.),
possibly decorated or with controls fastened to it.
Concept (C1) covers four of the meanings of panel listed in the LDCE. However,
during the 14th century panel also gained the following meaning: piece of parchment
(attached to a writ) on which names of jurors were written (hence by metonymy) list of
jurymen: jury (Onions 1966). Four of the meanings of panel listed in the LDCE can be
considered to be covered by the following general concept:
(C2) a group of people (or the list of their names) brought together to answer
questions, make judgements, etc.
If panel were to gain new meanings, such as
1. a side of a tower block
2. a school disciplinary committee
then these would be by association with the two concepts listed above, (C1) and (C2),
respectively. Note that neither of these potential new meanings would constitute a truly
new concept, since they can be considered to be covered by the existing concepts (C1)
and (C2).
If, on the other hand, panel were to gain the following new meanings
3. a wall which divides a large room into smaller units but which does not
reach the ceiling
4. a combined table and bench that can be used, for example, by a panel of
experts
by association with concepts (C1) and (C2), respectively, then these new meanings
could be considered as corresponding to new concepts. These meanings are sufficiently
different from the existing meanings listed in the LCDE that they themselves could give
rise to further new meanings by metonymy, metaphor, etc., which would simply not be
possible by direct association with the existing meanings. For example, the following
meanings could theoretically be derived from the meanings 3 and 4, respectively, above
(but not directly from concepts (C1) and (C2), respectively):
5. any division of something into smaller units
6. a combined desk and bench for a single person
234
Cooper A Mathematical Model of Historical Semantics
We continue with another example, this time from French. The word toilette has
eight meanings listed in Le petit Robert [21], which we can translate and paraphrase as
follows:
1. a small piece of cloth (from toile = ?piece of cloth?) and, in particular, one
that was used in the past to wrap up objects
2. a membrane used by butchers to wrap up certain pieces of meat
3. clothes, jewelry, comb, etc. (objects necessary to prepare one?s appearance
before going out, which used to be laid out on a small cloth)
4. the action of combing, making up, dressing
5. a woman?s style of dressing
6. the cleaning of one?s body before dressing
7. a washroom, toilet
8. the cleaning, preparation of an object, text, etc.
We can group these meanings into three concepts:
(D1) a small piece of material (meanings 1, 2)
(D2) the objects used for, the action of or the style of dressing, making-up,
cleaning of a person or an object (meanings 3, 4, 5, 6, 8)
(D3) a washroom, toilet (meaning 7)
We have grouped meanings together in this way because we consider it likely that
new meanings for toilette which could enter the French language by association with
an existing meaning would be very similar for those meanings grouped into the same
concept, but very different for those corresponding to different concepts.
This discussion leads us naturally to the following technical definition of concept:
Definition
Two meanings of a given word correspond to the same concept if and only if they could
inspire the same new meanings by association.
We suggest grouping together different senses of a word, not only according to their
parts of speech or to their etymology (i.e., the history) of word senses, but also according
to their potential future: whether or not they could inspire the same new meanings by
association. This can be compared with the biological definition of species in terms of
the ability to breed together to produce viable offspring rather than in terms of history
or physical characteristics.
5. A Mathematical Model of Word Sense Genesis
This section describes a stochastic model of the creation of word senses. This model
not only explains the near-exponential rule but also provides a deeper insight into the
process of naming. Let LD be a language as defined by the set of ?word, sense? pairs in a
235
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 2
dictionary D. We consider the evolution of the language LD over time. We must always
bear in mind that LD is, of course, only an approximate representation of the semantics
of the corresponding natural language. For example, the compiler of a dictionary may
choose to include archaic words as a historical record or to exclude whole categories of
words such as slang or technical terms.
Consider the evolution of LD as a stochastic process in which each step is either
(a) the elimination of a word sense (by obsolescence), (b) the introduction of a new
word (by creation, borrowing, word-formation, or any other mechanism), or (c) the
addition of a new sense for an existing word (by association with an existing sense).
Let t be the probability of a step of type (a), u the probability of a step of type (b), and
v the probability of a step of type (c). Note that t + u + v = 1. The parameters of our
model t, u, v are unknowns which will be estimated from the observed values of Ns (the
number of words with s senses).
We make the following simplifying assumptions:
1. New-word single-sense assumption: When a neologism enters the
language LD, it has a single sense.
2. Independence of obsolescence and number of senses: The probability
that a ?word, sense? pair leaves the language LD by obsolescence is
independent of the number of senses this word has in LD.
The new-word single-sense assumption is an essential part of our model. To test
it we require two editions of the same dictionary. The 1994 edition of the Dictionnaire
de l?acade?mie franc?aise indicates which words are new compared to the 1935 edition.
Less than 17% of these words are polysemic. Furthermore, this corresponds, according
to our model and to within-sample error, to the proportion of originally monosemic
words entering the language that can be expected to acquire new senses during the
period between the publication of the two editions. Assumption 2 above is not as
important as assumption 1, since later we restrict ourselves to a no-obsolescence
model.
As discussed in the previous section, the set of s senses of an ambiguous word
may correspond to a number c of essentially distinct concepts, where c is some number
between one and s. For example, the plumbing and anatomy senses of joint correspond
to the same concept, since they could inspire the same new senses by association. The
?cigarette containing cannabis? sense of joint clearly corresponds to a different concept,
since it could inspire a very different set of new senses by association. Associations
inspired by distinct concepts are assumed to occur independently. We assume that a
word with s senses in LD represents on average 1 + ?(s ? 1) concepts. We call ? the
concept creation factor (since, in a no-obsolescence model, ? is simply the probability
that a new sense for a word w can be considered a new concept compared to the existing
senses for w). We can now state a third assumption:
3. Associations are with concepts: The probability that a concept gives rise
to a new sense for a word w by association is proportional to the number
of concepts represented by w in LD, which is assumed to be on average
1 + ?(s ? 1), where s is the number of senses of w and ? is a constant.
The concept creation factor ? is another unknown which will be estimated from the
values of Ns.
236
Cooper A Mathematical Model of Historical Semantics
Table 1
Number Ns of words with s senses in samples from the 1933 and the 1993 edition of the Shorter
Oxford English Dictionary.
N1 N2 N3 N4 N5 N6 N7 N8 N9
1933 427 186 104 49 24 15 22 6 8
1993 403 176 86 44 32 16 14 7 1
We make a fourth hypothesis in order to render the problem mathematically
tractable:
4. Stationary-state hypothesis: LD considered as a stochastic process is in a
stationary state, in the sense that the probability P(s) that an arbitrary
word of LD has exactly s senses does not change as LD evolves.
To test the validity of the stationary-state hypothesis, we compared the 1933 and
1993 editions of the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary (SOED) [32, 28]. In the space of
60 years, the number of words in the SOED increased by 24%. Nevertheless the values
of P(s) (s = 1, 2, . . . , 9) remained almost constant. A chi-square test revealed that the
differences in the values of P(s) (s = 1, 2, . . .) could be accounted for by sampling error.
The corresponding values of Ns are given in Table 1.
The results of further experiments carried out to test the validity of the assumptions
on which our model is based are given in a later section, so as not to clutter up the
presentation of the model in this section.
Let m be the expected number of senses per word in LD. Since
m =
?
?
s=1
s P(s) (1)
and the values of P(s) are constant by the stationary-state hypothesis, m is also a
constant.
The expected net increase in the number of word senses in LD during one step of
the process is ?t + (1 ? t) = 1 ? 2t, since the probability that a word sense is lost by
obsolescence is t and the probability that a word sense is gained is 1 ? t. If r denotes the
expected net increase in the number of words in LD during one step of the process, then
we must have 1?2tr = m, since m is a constant. Thus
r = (1 ? 2t)/m (2)
Note that the number of words in LD would be constant if and only if t = 0.5.
Let pout(s) represent the probability that the next change in the language LD is that
a word with s senses loses one of its senses by obsolescence. Let pin(s) represent the
probability that the next change in LD is that a word with s senses gains a new sense.
Note that
??
s=1 pout(s) = t and
??
s=1 pin(s) = v, by the definitions of t and v.
By the stationary-state hypothesis, the expected net increase in Ns (the number
of words in LD with exactly s senses) during one step must be proportional to P(s).
Denote the expected net increase in Ns by ?s = dP(s), for some constant d. We then have
237
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 2
??
s=1 ?s = d, since
??
s=1 P(s) = 1. But
??
s=1 ?s = r, since the total expected increase in
the number of words is r. Thus ?s = rP(s) = (1 ? 2t)P(s)/m (by equation (2)).
We can also express ?s, the expected net increase in Ns, in terms of the probabilities
pin(s) and pout(s), which gives the following equation:
(1 ? 2t)P(s)/m = ?pin(s) ? pout(s) + pin(s ? 1) + pout(s + 1) (3)
since Ns is decremented when a word with s senses gains or loses a sense and Ns is
incremented when a word with s ? 1 senses gains a sense or a word with s + 1 senses
loses a sense.
From the assumption of the independence of obsolescence and number of senses,
it follows directly that pout(s) is proportional to sP(s). Let pout(s) = KsP(s), for some
constant K. Then, since
??
s=1 pout(s) = t, we have t =
??
s=1 KsP(s) = Km by equation
(1). Thus K = t/m and
pout(s) =
tsP(s)
m
Under the assumption that associations are with concepts, pin(s) is proportional to both
1 + ?(s ? 1) and P(s). Suppose that pin(s) = K? P(s)(1+ ?(s ? 1)). Since
??
s=1 pin(s) =
v,
??
s=1 P(s) = 1, and
??
s=1 sP(s) = m, we have v =
??
s=1 K
?P(s)(1+ ?(s ? 1)) =
K?(1 ? ?) + K??m. Thus K? = v/(1 ? ?+ ?m), and hence, for s = 1, 2, . . .
pin(s) =
v(1 + ?(s ? 1))P(s)
1 ? ?+ ?m
Note that the creation of a new word with a single sense is a special case. By definition
of u as the probability that the next step of the process is the creation of a new word,
pin(0) = u
Summing equation (3), for s = 1, 2, . . ., gives
1 ? 2t
m = ?pout(1) + pin(0) =
?tP(1)
m + u
Thus
u =
1 ? 2t + tP(1)
m (4)
and, since by definition v = 1 ? t ? u,
v = 1 ? t ? 1 ? 2t + tP(1)m
Plugging in the formulas for pin(s), pout(s), and v, our basic equation (3) becomes, after
simplification, for s > 1:
t(s + 1)(1 ? ?+ ?m)P(s+ 1) ? {(m ? mt ? 1 + 2t ? tP(1))(1 ? ?+ ?s)
+(1 ? 2t + ts)(1 ? ?+ ?m)}P(s)+
(m ? mt ? 1 + 2t ? tP(1))(1 ? 2?+ ?s)P(s ? 1) = 0 (5)
238
Cooper A Mathematical Model of Historical Semantics
As observed in the previous section, empirical evidence indicates that P(s) is a
near-exponential function. In fact, if P(s) were an exponential function, then since
??
s=1 P(s) = 1 and
??
s=1 sP(s) = m, we can easily deduce that P(s) would be equal to
m?1(1 ? m?1)s?1. The proof of the following result is simple but rather tedious and
hence is omitted:
Proposition
The solution P(s) to the set of equations (5) is the exponential function P(s) =
m?1(1 ? m?1)s?1 if and only if
? = tm ? 2tm + 2t
Since the relationship between ?, t, and m given by the above proposition did not
seem to have any theoretical foundation, and since the observed values of P(s) did not,
in fact, follow a perfectly exponential distribution, we decided to estimate the values
of the parameters m, ?, and t which would best explain the actual near-exponential
distributions. We first set m =
??
s=1 sPobs(s), where Pobs(s) are the observed values of
P(s) calculated from the values of Ns. Then we calculated the values of ? and t which
minimized the sum of the squares of the errors in equation (5). For six out of the ten
dictionaries tested, the best-fit value occurred when t = 0. The average of the best-fit
values of t was 0.04. These results led us to examine different editions of the same
dictionaries in order to obtain an alternative estimate of t. We discovered that while
hundreds or even thousands of words were added between two different editions of
the same dictionary [32, 28], very few words were removed due to obsolescence. For
example, the number of words in the Dictionnaire de l?Acade?mie Franc?aise [9] increased
by 28% in 59 years, whereas the total number of word senses marked as obsolete in the
latest edition is less than 1%. Our conclusion is that the English and French languages, as
defined by dictionaries, are in a state of continual expansion, with an almost negligible
loss of word senses by obsolescence.
We therefore study in more detail the special case in which t = 0. The following
result follows immediately from equation (4) by setting t = 0:
Proposition
When t = 0, the probability that the next addition to LD is the creation of a new word is
u = 1/m.
Theorem
When assumptions 1, 2, 3 and 4 hold and furthermore LD is subject to no obsolescence,
then the probability that an arbitrary word in LD has s senses is given by
P(1) = 1 + ?m ? ?m + ?m ? ?
P(s) = 1 + ?m ? ?m + ?m ? ?
s
?
i=2
(m ? 1)(1 ? 2?+ ?i)
m + m?i ? ?i (s > 1) (6)
Proof
When t = 0, equation (5) becomes, for s > 1
P(s)(m+ m?s ? ?s) = P(s ? 1)(m ? 1)(1 ? 2?+ ?s) (7)
239
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 2
Summing equation (7) for s = 2, 3, . . . , gives
(1 ? P(1))m + (m ? P(1))(m?? ?) = (m ? 1)(1 ? ?) + m(m ? 1)?
since
??
s=1 P(s) = 1,
??
s=2 P(s) = 1 ? P(1),
??
s=1 sP(s) = m, and
??
s=2 sP(s) =
m ? P(1). Solving for P(1) gives
P(1) = 1 + ?m ? ?m + ?m ? ?
The closed-form solution for P(s) in the statement of the theorem then follows by an
easy induction using equation (7). 
6. Applying the Model to Experimental Data
We make the no-obsolescence assumption throughout this section, that is, that t = 0.
Knowing that u = 1/m allows us to estimate that, in French, approximately 60% of new
word senses correspond to the creation of a new word and approximately 40% to the
introduction of a new sense for an existing word. In English the split is approximately
50-50. There are, however, quite large variations (between 55% and 65% in French)
depending on the dictionary consulted. Variations are inevitable, since different lexi-
cographers have different interpretations of what constitutes distinct senses of a word.
We conjecture that similar percentages exist for all natural languages, although there
will be variations among languages depending, among other things, on the ease with
which new words can be created.
The curves in Figure 1 are approximately straight lines, but all have a slight positive
curvature. This curvature can be explained by the fact that ? > 0. Note that, under the
assumption t = 0, the concept creation factor ? is simply the probability that a new sense
for an existing word is sufficiently different from previous senses for it to correspond
to a new concept (capable of inspiring associations different from those that could be
inspired by the existing senses). When ? = t = 0, it follows from the results proved in
the previous section that P(s) is an exponential function. For ? > 0, however, the plot of
log Ns against s does indeed have a positive curvature.
In order to evaluate visually the influence of the value of ? on the predicted values
of Ns, we generated the values of Ns using equation (6) for various values of ?. The
results are plotted in Figure 6 (with the average number m of meanings per word set to
be the same as that for the LDCE [24] in order to provide a concrete comparison). The
observed values of Ns (for the LDCE) coincide so closely with those predicted by our
model with ? = 0.31 that the curves of observed and predicted values would be barely
distinguishable if drawn in the same figure.
For each dictionary we studied, we calculated the value of ? which provided the
best fit, in a least squares sense, between the observed values of Ns and those calculated
from the values of P(s) given by equation (6). These best-fit values of ? are given in
the second column of Table 2 for each dictionary we examined. The values of ? vary
between 0.22 and 0.41 for the English dictionaries and between 0.28 and 0.47 for the
French dictionaries. Our conclusion is that, although nearly half of the words in a
dictionary are ambiguous in the sense that they require more than one definition, only
approximately one-third of this ambiguity corresponds to ambiguity in the underlying
concept (as defined in section 4).
240
Cooper A Mathematical Model of Historical Semantics
Figure 6
Plots of the predicted values of Ns for ? = 0, ? = 0.31, and ? = 1.0.
The value of the concept creation factor ? found for different dictionaries depends
on the number of divisions into different senses the lexicographer chooses to list for
each word. We can nevertheless calculate the average number of concepts per word
in a dictionary. This number should be more independent of lexicographic choices.
Table 2 also lists c, the average number of concepts per word, which is given by
c = 1 + ?(m ? 1), for each of the dictionaries studied. The average number of concepts
per word is not the same, even for dictionaries of the same language. Variations are to
be expected as a result of different lexicographical choices of which words and senses
to include in the dictionary. We can note, in particular, that technical terms do not have
the same distribution of number of senses per word as everyday words. Furthermore,
many derived words do not have their own entries but are simply listed at the end of
the entry for the root word. For example, in the LDCE [24], solidly and solidness have no
senses listed and were hence ignored in our study, even though solid has 15 senses in
the same dictionary.
Table 2
Average number m of meanings listed per word, concept-creation factor ?, and average number
c of concepts per word for various dictionaries.
Dictionary m ? c
Larousse (English) [19] 1.67 0.41 1.27
Shorter Oxford English Dictionary (English) [32] 2.26 0.22 1.28
New Shorter Oxford English Dictionary (English) [28] 2.26 0.24 1.30
Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English (English) [24] 2.04 0.31 1.32
Oxford Illustrated (English) [31] 2.46 0.22 1.32
Le Robert Junior (French) [23] 1.34 0.47 1.16
Acade?mie Franc?aise (French) [9] 1.64 0.29 1.19
Hachette (French) [12] 1.53 0.38 1.20
Le Petit Robert (French) [21] 1.83 0.28 1.23
Le Grand Robert (French) [20] 1.79 0.46 1.36
241
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 2
Despite these interdictionary variations, we can nevertheless conclude that the
average number of concepts per word (as defined in section 4) is approximately 1.3
for English dictionaries and a little less for French dictionaries.
7. Further Experiments to Validate the Model
As with any scientific theory, if our theory is correct, we should be able to put it to the
test by means of experiment. Playing the devil?s advocate, we invented several exper-
iments which, if unsuccessful, would demonstrate the invalidity of our mathematical
model.
First, we performed a chi-square test to compare the observed values of Ns and
the values of Ns predicted by our model (as calculated from equation (6)). For nine
out of the ten dictionaries tested, the ?2 value was less than ?20.10 (the value which
should be exceeded in only 10% of random trials). In the one remaining case, ?2 was
only marginally greater than ?20.10. These results are consistent with the hypothesis
that the difference between the observed and predicted values of Ns is due to ran-
dom sampling and that Es = Nobss ? N
pred
s (for s = 1, 2, . . .) is an independent normally
distributed random variable with mean zero (Hoel 1984). It is interesting to note that
the difference between the observed values of Ns and those predicted by our model
with ? = 0 (corresponding to the hypothesis that associations are with words) or ? = 1
(corresponding to the hypothesis that associations are with senses) are both statistically
highly significant (at levels of 15 and 28 standard deviations, respectively, in the case of
the LCDE [24]).
In order to test the validity of the stationary-state hypothesis, we simulated the
generation of a dictionary using the stochastic process model described in section 5.
We used a random number generator to decide whether the next step should be the
creation of a new word or the creation of a new sense for an existing word. Figure 7 is a
graphical summary of one such simulation, for the particular values m = 0.6, t = 0, and
? = 0.3. The values of P(1), P(2), P(3), P(4), and P(5) are plotted against the number of
words generated. After the generation of only 1,000 senses (which corresponds to less
Figure 7
Values of P(1), P(2), P(3), P(4), and P(5) against the number of words generated in the simulation
of the evolution of a dictionary.
242
Cooper A Mathematical Model of Historical Semantics
than 600 words), the values of P(1), P(2), P(3), P(4), and P(5) are practically constant. We
can deduce that a steady state has been attained long before the simulation generates a
dictionary of size comparable to those studied (several tens of thousands of senses).
We conclude that the stationary-state hypothesis is, in fact, for dictionaries of any
reasonable size, simply a mathematical consequence of our other assumptions.
To check the validity of our assumption that the average number of concepts corre-
sponding to a word with s senses is 1 + ?(s ? 1), we tested a more general linear model
b + ?(s ? 1) for a constant b. The best-fit values of b for each dictionary were all found
to be between 0.98 and 1.08, thus confirming our assumption b = 1.
Our conclusion that there is only a negligible loss of word senses from dictionaries
through obsolescence contrasts with the fact that 22% of the words in the Oxford English
Dictionary (OED) [30] are marked as obsolete. Nevalainen (1999) points out that many of
these obsolete words were abortive attempts by pre-17th-century writers to introduce
new words which simply never caught on. Garner (1982) attributes 1,700 neologisms to
Shakespeare alone. Before the publication of the first monolingual English dictionaries
in the early 17th century, both vocabulary and spelling were more a matter of personal
taste than convention. Standardization occurred only after the publication of Samuel
Johnson?s dictionary [8] in the 18th century. We should mention in passing that the very
exhaustiveness of the OED makes it completely unsuitable (in the present context) as
an accurate representation of the English language, since 90% of the senses listed are
unknown to the majority of educated native English speakers (Winchester 2003). Thus
our model cannot be expected to provide a faithful prediction of the evolution of the
OED, since we assume that the set of word senses in a dictionary is an approximation
of those available to people who create new senses for existing words. Instead of
attempting to list all English words ever used, most dictionaries aim simply to list a
set of words that an educated person might reasonably encounter during his or her
lifetime, which is more in keeping with the assumptions of our model. Not surprisingly,
therefore, fitting our model to values of Ns obtained from the OED gave incoherent
values of the parameters (? = 1.51 when, by assumption, we should have 0 ? ? ? 1).
We obtained a similar anomalous best-fit value ? = 1.16 for Webster?s Third International
Dictionary [34], no doubt because this dictionary is again so exhaustive.
It is worth going back to the counts of the number of senses per entry in specialized
dictionaries [1, 7, 10, 17], plotted in Figure 3, to explain why these do not fit our model.
The number of translations of a French word w in English slang [17] is related to the
number of synonyms of w [10], since they both concern the onomasiological question
of the different ways the same concept can be expressed in a language. This is the
converse of the semasiological question of the development of different meanings of
a given word, which is the problem our model addresses.
The number of meanings of abbreviations and acronyms [7] is closely related to
the question of the distribution of homographs in a language, since abbreviations
and acronyms almost invariably obtain new meanings by coincidence rather than by
association with existing meanings. For example, the ?temperature? and ?temporary?
meanings of the abbreviation temp were clearly not derived by some direct semantic
association between the notions of temperature and temporary (as would be required by
our model).
The distribution of the number of meanings of scientific and technical terms [1] can,
on the other hand, be partly explained by our model. The reason that the distribution
of these types of terms is so far from satisfying the near-exponential rule is simply that
75% of the terms listed in scientific and technical dictionaries are composed of at least
two words. When we count only single-word entries (as we did for all dictionaries in
243
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 2
Table 3
Average number m of meanings per word, concept-creation factor ?, and average number c of
concepts per word for three monolingual Basque dictionaries.
Dictionary m ? c
Basque School [14] 1.35 0.48 1.17
Basque Learner?s [16] 1.36 0.50 1.18
Basque Modern [15] 1.38 0.55 1.21
Figures 1 and 2), we obtain a distribution which can be explained by our model. We
found that, although the average number of senses listed per word for the scientific
and technical dictionary we examined [1] was much less than for English dictionaries
of everyday language [19, 24, 28, 31, 32] (1.35 compared to 2.0), the number of concepts
per word was approximately the same at 1.32.
In order to test the universality of the near-exponential rule, we also studied three
monolingual Basque dictionaries [14, 15, 16]. Basque is a well-known language isolate.
The curves of log Ns against s were again nearly straight lines with a slight positive
curvature, and the values of Ns predicted by our model provided a very good fit to the
observed values of Ns. The corresponding values of m, ?, and c are given in Table 3. The
number of concepts per word was approximately 1.2 for all three dictionaries.
Our model assumes that no ambiguity arises in deciding what constitutes a word.
However, such ambiguity is clearly present in fusional languages. In this article, we
have chosen the pragmatically simple definition that the words of a language can be ap-
proximated by those sequences of characters without spaces whose meanings are listed
in a given dictionary. Applying this definition to a German monolingual dictionary [13],
we observed the usual near-exponential distribution in Ns. The best-fit values of the
parameters of our model were m = 1.20, ? = 0.80, and c = 1.16. The average number
of meanings per word m and the average number of concepts per word c are low, no
doubt because many specialized terms which are expressed by a sequence of words in
other languages count, according to our definition, as a single word in German. Further
research is required to test our model on other languages with complex morphology.
Finally, we were surprised that the number of concepts per word was almost
identical for the five English dictionaries tested (see Table 2). However, we found that
this was not always the case, since further trials on six other English dictionaries gave a
larger range of values, shown in Table 4, varying from 1.23 to 1.55.
Table 4
Average number m of meanings per word, concept-creation factor ?, and average number c of
concepts per word for six English dictionaries.
Dictionary m ? c
Oxford Advanced Learner?s [29] 1.56 0.41 1.23
Collins Concise [4] 2.22 0.24 1.29
Collins Learner?s [3] 1.74 0.39 1.29
Nelson [26] 1.72 0.43 1.31
Collins School [5] 1.64 0.56 1.36
Johnson [8] 1.55 1.00 1.55
244
Cooper A Mathematical Model of Historical Semantics
8. Relevance to Computational Linguistics
One application of our model is a simple method for testing whether an attempt to
group word senses into distinct concepts (as defined in section 4) has been successful.
The number NWi of words representing i concepts should demonstrate a distribution
with ? close to one, whereas the number NCj of concepts covering j dictionary meanings
should demonstrate a distribution with ? close to zero (i.e., an exponential distribution,
as illustrated in Figure 6). Such a grouping of word senses into concepts is clearly useful
not only in computer models of natural languages, but also in lexicography and histor-
ical linguistics. In lexicography, different rules have been proposed for identifying pol-
ysemy, based on etymology, statistical analysis of colocations in corpora, the existence
of zeugma (such as *there is a pen on the table and one outside for the sheep), the existence
of different synonyms (such as present?now, present?gift), antonyms (right?wrong, right?
left), or paronyms (race?racing, race?racist), and the existence of ambiguous questions
(such as the canine/male ambiguity of the word dog brought out by the question ?Is it a
dog??) (Robins 1987; Ayto 1983; Cruse 1986). In the context of computational linguistics,
Mihalcea and Moldovan (2001) relaxed these rules in order to find a more coarse-
grained representation in WordNet, by grouping meanings based on similar synsets
together with the existence of a common hypernym, antonym, or pertainym. The pos-
sible translations of a word w into several foreign languages is another useful practical
tool for the grouping of the meanings of w into concepts (Resnik and Yarowsky 2000).
We have introduced an equivalence relation between word meanings: S1 ? S2 if the
senses S1, S2 of a word w could give rise to the same new senses for w by metaphor,
metonymy, etc. The grouping of meanings into the corresponding equivalence classes
could be an essential part of an automatic system for the interpretation of nonstandard
uses of words. Words are often used with a meaning which is not explicitly listed in a
dictionary. Metaphor and metonymy are obvious examples, but we can also mention
meanings which are too specialized or too new to be listed in a general-purpose dictio-
nary (such as the Internet meanings of the words provider, home, and portal, for example).
Analysis of the plot of log Ns against s provides a method for identifying the criteria
used in the compilation of a dictionary. A large positive curvature is characteristic
of a dictionary whose aim is exhaustiveness. The OED [30] and Webster?s [34] are
examples, and perhaps to a lesser extent Johnson?s dictionary [8]. A small positive
curvature indicates a general-purpose dictionary whose aim is to list those words and
meanings that an educated person can reasonably be expected to encounter during his
or her lifetime. Machine-readable dictionaries play an important role in many natural-
language-processing systems, and the choice of dictionary is a critical one. In many
applications, an exhaustive dictionary is inappropriate. Finding the best-fit value of the
concept creation factor ? has allowed us to identify such dictionaries. Our model could
also be used to estimate performance characteristics of systems which use machine-
readable dictionaries, since we have given a formula for the expected number of words
with s senses. For example, this might help us judge which is the best data structure to
use to store a dictionary.
An important aspect of the present work is the apparently universal nature of the
near-exponential rule (with a slightly positive curvature when plotted on a logarithmic
scale) for the number of words Ns with s dictionary meanings. This provides an insight
into language in general rather than any one language in particular. Our mathematical
model of historical semantics provides a very plausible explanation for this general
rule. Various mathematical models of the evolution of networks have been proposed
in recent years which explain other statistical phenomena in linguistics, such as the
245
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 2
small-worlds property of semantic nets (Gaume et al 2002). It is worth pointing out
that Price?s (1976) classical model for the number of journal articles with s citations is
mathematically identical to our predicted value of Ns if we set ? = 1. Since our model is
a strict generalization of Price?s model, it may find applications, both within and beyond
the frontiers of linguistics, as a more general model for the prediction of network growth
(Newman 2003).
9. Conclusion
Empirical evidence indicates that the number of senses per word in a dictionary has
an approximately exponential distribution. We have shown that a stochastic model of
historical semantics not only can explain this near-exponential phenomenon but can
also use the distance from an exponential distribution to estimate the average number
of distinct concepts per word as well as the concept creation factor (the percentage of
new senses for existing words which can be considered genuinely new concepts).
Further research is required to determine whether refinements to the mathematical
model presented in this article can produce a more accurate model by, for example,
distinguishing among different parts of speech, distinguishing between everyday and
technical terms, or introducing the extra parameter word-frequency. The introduction to
the OED states that prepositions generally have more senses than verbs and adjectives,
which in turn have more senses than nouns. Pagel (2000) emphasizes the fact that the
evolution of language is not identical for all words. Fundamental vocabulary, including
body parts, seasons, and cosmological terms, are more stable than less basic words
(Swadesh 1952). Zipf (1949) was the first to notice a correlation between word frequency
and number of senses listed in a dictionary, in the form of a hyperbolic distribution. This
can be summarized by saying that a word with frequency rank r has on average twice
as many meanings as a word with frequency rank 10r. A sophisticated stochastic model
along the lines of the one presented in this article but taking into account frequency
would require information on the relative frequency of each different sense of each
word. Unfortunately this is beyond the scope of this preliminary article, whose aim is
simply to show that a simple stochastic model (based on grouping senses into distinct
concepts liable to give rise to different new senses) can explain a universal property of
monolingual dictionaries.
A more intriguing avenue of future research is the investigation of the possibility of
using statistical analysis of dictionaries to model synonymy rather than (or as well as)
polysemy. Indeed, it is an open question whether a similar approach to that followed in
this work can be used to group together senses of different words which correspond to
the same concept.
References
Academic Press Dictionary of Science and
Technology, ed. C. Morris, Academic Press,
London, 1992 (c. 100,000 entries).
Basque-English Dictionary, G. Aulestia,
University of Nevada Press, Reno and Las
Vegas, 1989 (c. 30,000 words).
Collins Cobuild Learner?s Dictionary, Harper
Collins, London, 1996 (c. 24,000 words).
Collins Concise Dictionary of the English
Language, 2nd edition, Collins, London,
1988 (c. 37,000 words).
Collins School Dictionary, Collins, Glasgow,
1989 (c. 17,000 words).
Diciona?rio de France?s Portugue?s, Ol??vio da
Costa Carvalho, Porto Editora, Porto, 1997
(c. 53,000 words).
Dictionary of Abbreviations and Acronyms, 2nd
edition, Tec & Doc?Lavoisier, Paris, 1992
(c. 50,000 entries).
A Dictionary of the English Language, Samuel
Johnson, facsimile edition, Times Books,
London, 1979 (original edition published
1755) (c. 40,000 words).
246
Cooper A Mathematical Model of Historical Semantics
Dictionnaire de l?Acade?mie Franc?aise A-Enz,
Editions Julliard, Paris, 1994 (c. 56,000
words in the complete dictionary).
Dictionnaire des synonymes de la langue
franc?aise, R. Bailly, Librairie Larousse,
Paris, 1971 (c. 2,600 words).
Dictionnaire ge?ne?ral Franc?ais-Italien, Larousse,
Paris, 1994 (c. 34,000 words).
Dictionnaire universel de poche, Hachette,
Paris, 2000 (c. 32,000 words).
Duden Deutsches Universalwo?rterbuch,
Dudenverlag, Mannheim, 1996
(c. 122,000 words).
Europa Hiztegia?Eskola berrirakoa, Adorez 6,
Bilbao, 1993 (c. 24,000 words).
Euskal Hiztegi Modernoa, Elhuyar Kultur
Elkarten/Elkar SL, San Sebastian, 1994
(c. 38,000 words).
Euskara Ikaslearen Hiztegia, Ibon Sarasola,
Vox, Barcelona, 1999 (c. 26,000 words).
Harrap?s English-French Slang Dictionary,
Harrap, London, 1984 (c. 10,000 words).
Larousse Dictionnaire Franc?ais-Espagnol,
Larousse, Paris, 1989 (c. 47,000 words).
Larousse English Dictionary, Larousse-Bordas,
Paris, 1997 (c. 29,000 words).
Le Grand Robert de la langue franc?aise,
2nd edition, Dictionnaires Le Robert, Paris
(9 volumes), 1992 (c. 80,000 words).
Le Petit Robert, Dictionnaires Le Robert, Paris,
2000 (c. 46,000 words).
Le Robert & Collins English-French Dictionary,
HarperCollins, Glasgow, 1978 (c. 31,000
words).
Le Robert Junior, Dictionnaires Le Robert,
Paris, 1999 (c. 20,000 words).
Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English,
Longman, Harlow, UK, 1978 (c. 38,000
words).
Mounged de poche franc?ais-arabe, 10th edition,
Dar El-Machreq, Beirut, 1983 (c. 15,000
words).
Nelson Contemporary English Dictionary,
ed. W. T. Cunningham, Nelson,
Walton-on-Thames, Surrey, UK, 1977
(c. 20,000 words).
New Crown Japanese-English Dictionary,
Sanseido, Tokyo, 1968 (c. 55,000 words).
New Shorter Oxford English Dictionary,
Clarendon Oxford, 1993 (c. 78,000 words).
Oxford Advanced Learner?s Encyclopedic
Dictionary, Oxford University Press,
Oxford, 1992 (c. 33,000 words).
Oxford English Dictionary, 2nd edition,
Clarendon, Oxford, 1989 (c. 290,000
words).
Oxford Illustrated Dictionary, 2nd edition,
Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1975
(c. 50,000 words).
Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, Clarendon,
Oxford, 1933 (c. 63,000 words).
Turkish-English Dictionary, H. C. Hony, 2nd
edition, Oxford University Press, Oxford,
1957 (c. 16,000 words).
Webster?s Third International Dictionary,
Encyclopaedia Britannica, Chicago, 1986
(c. 156,000 words).
Algeo, John. 1998. Vocabulary. In Suzanne
Romaine, editor, The Cambridge History
of the English Language, Vol. 4.,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
pages 57?91.
Antilla, Raimo. 1989. Historical and
Comparative Linguistics, 2nd ed., volume 6
of Current Issues in Linguistic Theory.
Benjamins, Amsterdam/Philadelphia.
Ayto, John R. 1983. On specifying meaning:
Semantic analysis and dictionary
definitions. In Reinhard R. K. Hartmann,
editor, Lexicography: Principles and
Practice. Academic Press, London,
pages 89?98.
Bloomfield, Leonard. 1933. Language. Henry
Holt, New York.
Chalker, Sylvia and Edmund Weiner. 1994.
The Oxford Dictionary of English Grammar.
BCA, London.
Cruse, D. Alan. 1986. Lexical Semantics,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Cruse, D. Alan. 1995. Polysemy and related
phenomena from a cognitive linguistic
viewpoint. In P. Saint-Dizier and E. Viegas,
editors, Computational Lexical Semantics.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
pages 33?49.
Fellbaum, Christiane. 1998. WordNet, An
Electronic Lexical Database. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Fuchs, Catherine. 1996. Les ambigu??te?s du
franc?ais. Collection l?Essentiel Franc?ais.
Ophrys, Paris.
Garner, Bryan A. 1982. Shakespeare?s latinate
neologisms. Shakespeare Studies, 15:
149?170.
Gaume, Bruno, Karine Duvignau, Oliver.
Gasquet, and Marie-Dominique Gineste.
2002. Forms of meaning, meaning of
forms. Journal of Experimental and
Theoretical Artificial Intelligence, 14(1):
61?74.
Geeraerts, Dirk. 1997. Diachronic Prototype
Semantics: A Contribution to Historical
Lexicology. Clarendon, Oxford.
Gramley, Stephan. 2001. The Vocabulary of
World English. Arnold, London.
Hayes, Brian. 1999. The web of words.
American Scientist (March?April):
108?112.
247
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 2
Hoel, Paul G. 1984. Introduction to
Mathematical Statistics, 5th ed. Wiley,
New York.
Mandala, Rila, Takenobu Tokunaga, and
Hozumi Tanaka. 1999. Combining
hand-made and automatically constructed
thesauri for information retrieval.
In Proceedings of the International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
Stockholm, pages 920?925.
Mihalcea, Rada and Dan I. Moldovan. 2001.
EZ.WordNet: Principles for automatic
generation of a coarse grained WordNet.
In Proceedings of the FLAIRS Conference,
pages 454?458.
Nevalainen, Terttu. 1999. Early Modern
English lexis and semantics. In Roger Lass,
editor, The Cambridge History of the English
Language, Vol. 3, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, pages 332?458.
Newman, Mark E. J. 2003. The structure and
function of complex networks. SIAM
Review 45:169?256.
Onions, C. T., editor. 1966, The Oxford
Dictionary of English Etymology. Oxford
University Press, Oxford.
Pagel, Mark. 2000. The history, rate and
pattern of world linguistic evolution. In
Chris Knight, Michael Studdert-Kennedy,
and James R. Hurford editors, The
Evolutionary Emergence of Language.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
pages 391?416.
Picoche, Jacqueline. 1992. Dictionnaire
etymologique du Franc?ais. Dictionnaires Le
Robert, Paris.
Price, Derek de S. 1976. A general theory of
bibliometric and other cumulative
advantage processes. Journal of the
American Society Information Science, 27:
292?306.
Resnik, Philip and David Yarowsky. 2000.
Distinguishing systems and distinguishing
senses: New evaluation methods for word
sense disambiguation. Natural Language
Engineering 5(3):113?133.
Robins, Robert H. 1987. Polysemy and the
lexicographer. In Robert Burchfield, editor,
Studies in Lexicography. Oxford University
Press, Oxford, pages 52?75.
Schendl, Herbert. 2001. Historical Linguistics.
Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Stevenson, Mark and Yorick Wilks. 1999.
Combining weak knowledge sources for
sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of the
International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, Stockholm, pages 884?889.
Stockwell, Robert and Donka Minkova.
2001. English Words: History and
Structure. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Swadesh, Morris. 1952. Lexico-statistic
dating of prehistoric ethnic contacts.
Proceedings of the American Philosophical
Society, 96:452?463.
Traugott, Elizabeth Cross and Richard B.
Dasher. 2002. Regularity in Semantic Change.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Vossen, Piek. 2001. Condensed meaning in
EuroWordNet. In Pierrette Bouillon
and Federica Busa, editors, The Language of
Word Meaning. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, pages 363?383.
Winchester, Simon. 2003. The Meaning of
Everything: The Story of the Oxford English
Dictionary. Oxford University Press,
Oxford.
Zipf, Goerge K. 1972. Human Behaviour and
the Principle of Least Effort: An Introduction
to Human Ecology. Hafner, New York
(facsimile of 1949 edition,
Addison-Wesley).
248
