A large-scale inheritance-based morphological lexicon for Russian 
R. Evans 
ITRI 
University of Brighton 
roger.evans@itri.bton.ac.uk  
C. Tiberius, D. Brown, G.G. Corbett  
Surrey Morphology Group 
University of Surrey 
{c.tiberius,d.brown,g.corbett}
@surrey.ac.uk 
 
Abstract 
In this paper we describe the mapping of 
Zaliznjak?s (1977) morphological classes 
into the lexical representation language 
DATR (Evans and Gazdar 1996).  On the 
basis of the resulting DATR theory a set of 
fully inflected forms together with their as-
sociated morphosyntax can automatically 
be generated from the electronic version of 
Zaliznjak?s dictionary (Ilola and Mustajoki  
1989). From this data we plan to develop a 
wide-coverage morphosyntactic lemma-
tizer and tagger for Russian. 
 
1 Introduction 
Our goal is to undertake a detailed corpus analysis 
of Russian texts, focusing on the relationship be-
tween morphological ambiguity (syncretism) in 
nouns and adjectives and the comparative fre-
quency of the relevant grammatical categories. For 
this purpose, we will use two corpora, the Uppsala 
corpus (L?nngren 1993, Maier 1994) and a corpus 
of Russian newspaper texts from the late 1990?s, 
for which we require detailed morphosyntactic an-
notation. However, suitably annotated versions of 
these corpora are not yet freely available and cor-
pus analysis tools for Russian in general are 
scarce.1 
We have chosen, therefore, to develop our own 
lemmatization and tagging technology, based on 
the electronic version of Zaliznjak?s (1977) dic-
                                                          
1 For an indication of what is available see: http://talrusse.free.fr. 
For natural language processing of Slavic languages in general see for example 
work on the MULTEXT-EAST project by Dimitrova, Erjavec, Ide, Kaalep, 
Petkevi? and Tufis (1998) and work within the INTEX system by Vitas (2001). 
tionary (Ilola and Mustajoki  1989), combined with 
a more detailed and validated hand-crafted analysis 
of 1500 most frequent noun lexemes (Brown, Cor-
bett, and Fraser 1995; Brown, Hippisley, Corbett 
and Fraser 1995). In this paper we describe the 
first step in this process: mapping the basic Zalizn-
jak data into a hierarchical lexical database imple-
mented in DATR.  
1.1 The Zaliznjak dictionary 
Zaliznjak (1977) is a reverse dictionary in book 
form, dealing primarily with Russian inflectional 
morphology.  For each of the almost 100,000 lexi-
cal entries, indexes refer the reader to declension 
types and conjugations, together with stress pat-
terns. Other symbols indicate subregularities and 
irregularities. As the dictionary uses such indica-
tors, it gives explicit information about every in-
flectional form and stress. Ilola and Mustajoki 
(1989: 1-5) describe how the material was adapted 
for computer use.  
Zaliznjak's dictionary has been the starting point 
for a number of applications. Anciaux (1991) made 
use of it in the creation of a spell-checker for Rus-
sian, and Pavlova, Pavlov, Sproat, Shih and van 
Santen (1997) used the electronic version to create 
language-specific tables to fit into the modular ar-
chitecture of the Bell Laboratories Text-to-Speech 
system. Brown, Corbett and Fraser (1995) and 
Brown, Hippisley, Corbett and Fraser (1995) cre-
ated a DATR lexicon of the 1500 most frequent 
noun lexemes from Zasorina (1977). The derived 
forms from this inheritance-based lexicon were all 
checked manually against Zaliznjak. The forms are 
represented in a phonological transcription, to-
gether with stress information (Brown, Corbett, 
Fraser, Hippisley and Timberlake 1996).  An up-
dated version of this lexicon was used in Brown 
(1998) to compare different morphological theo-
ries.  
1.2 Outline 
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 de-
scribes the general principles of the mapping and 
examples. In Section 3, we discuss the technical 
framework of our approach and the issues and 
problems that arise. In Section 4 we discuss the 
current status of the mapping and principal areas 
for further development including our approach to 
lemmatization and tagging. Section 5 concludes 
the paper. 
2 Mapping Zaliznjak into DATR 
2.1 The overall approach 
In book form, Zaliznjak?s dictionary has two 
parts. The first is a set of tables identifying mor-
phosyntactic classes and defining the realization 
of morphological features with them. The sec-
ond is a listing of lexical entries, each followed 
by an index referring to a table in the first part 
which gives the paradigm for this particular 
type. For example, the word ?????? 'lamp 
shade' is a masculine noun of type 1A and as 
such follows the inflectional pattern of ?????  
?factory? which is given as the example para-
digm for masculine nouns of type 1A. 
 
1A  
? ????? 
nom ????? 
gen ?????? 
dat ?????? 
acc  ????? 
instr ??????? 
Sg 
loc ?????? 
nom ?????? 
gen ??????? 
dat ??????? 
acc ?????? 
instr ???????? 
Pl 
loc ??????? 
 
Table 1. Zaliznjak?s paradigm for masculine inanimate 
nouns of type 1A. 
 
The electronic form contains just the set of lexi-
cal entries (101401 lines, 98729 lexical entries). 
Thus our mapping process has two distinct compo-
nents: 
 
1. manual construction of a DATR representation 
of the morphosyntactic class and realization in-
formation from the printed paradigm tables; 
 
2. automatic construction of the individual lexical 
entries from the electronic dictionary data. 
 
In practice we also introduce a third component, 
interfacing between the morphosyntactic classes 
and the automatic entries. As we discuss below, 
this gives us increased flexibility in the way we 
interpret the Zaliznjak data.  
The information in Zaliznjak's dictionary in-
cludes a fair number of subregular and idiosyn-
cratic cases. The target representation, DATR, is 
specifically designed to support such situations, 
providing concise representation of hierarchically 
organized lexicons containing generalizations and 
exceptions. We have already a formal theoretical 
model of Russian morphology (Corbett and Fraser 
1993; Brown, Corbett, Fraser, Hippisley and Tim-
berlake 1996; Brown 1998) which underlies our 
approach. In addition, as we have a frequency 
based resource to check against (Brown, Corbett 
and Fraser 1995; Brown, Hippisley, Corbett and 
Fraser 1995), we are in a good position to check 
the accuracy of our automatic creation of lexical 
entries for the high frequency, least regular cases. 
The same framework can also be used to capture 
generalisations across languages (cf. Cahill and 
Gazdar 1999; Tiberius 2001), but this is not our 
current goal. 
2.2 The hand-crafted realization         
component 
Zaliznjak does not use the traditional division of 
words into declension types in his dictionary, but 
divides nouns into types according to the last 
grapheme of the stem. (Ilola and Mustajoki 
1989:9) For example, he distinguishes eight types 
for masculine nouns numbered 1 to 8. These mor-
phological types are then further divided according 
to stress. The masculine noun types can occur with 
six different stress patterns indicated by subcatego-
ries A to F. Thus the most basic masculine noun 
classes might be named M 1A, M 3C, etc.  
Special characters are used to further character-
ize the different morphological types. For instance, 
types with an * indicate the presence of a fleeting 
vowel such as in ?????? 'father-in-law (husband?s 
father)' which has the instrumental ???????.  Ani-
macy is indicated in combination with gender, so 
that a class such as MO 1*A is masculine, animate, 
type 1, stress pattern A with a fleeting vowel. 
This information for each lexical entry is used to 
refer to a table at the beginning of the dictionary 
which gives an example of the inflectional forms. 
These tables form the basis of a hand-crafted 
DATR theory in which each type is represented by 
a node in the DATR inheritance hierarchy.  This 
results in a hierarchical structure of noun classes,  
part of which is shown here: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Extract of the DATR hierarchy 
 
In each node, definitions of morphosyntactic reali-
zations specific to that noun class are given. In-
formation that is shared between (or default for) 
classes is inherited from the parent node. A small 
fragment of the theory is provided here:2 
 
NOMINAL: 
   <mor> == "<stem>" "<mor suffix>". 
                                                          
2 The DATR code is slightly simplified for expository purposes.  Note that the 
code is written to reflect Zaliznjak?s system.  The main goal has not been ele-
gance and economy of representation. For theoretically-driven inheritance 
representations of Russian morphology using DATR see Corbett and Fraser 
(1993), Fraser and Corbett (1995),  and Brown (1998). 
 
NOUN: 
    <> == NOMINAL 
    <mor suffix pl dat> == ?? 
    <mor suffix pl instr> == ??? 
    <mor suffix pl loc> == ??. 
 
NOUN_M: 
    <> == NOUN 
    <syn gender> == masculine 
    <syn animacy> == inanimate. 
 
NOUN_M_1A: 
 <> == NOUN_M  
 <mor suffix sg nom> == Null 
 <mor suffix sg gen> == ? 
 <mor suffix sg dat> == ? 
 <mor suffix sg acc> ==  
"<mor suffix sg nom>" 
 <mor suffix sg instr> == ?? 
 <mor suffix sg loc> == ? 
 <mor suffix pl nom> == ? 
 <mor suffix pl gen> == ?? 
 <mor suffix pl acc> ==  
"<mor suffix pl nom>". 
 
Here, NOMINAL defines the morphotactics of Rus-
sian nominals (nouns and adjectives), comprising a 
stem followed by a suffix that realizes the morpho-
logical features. NOUN inherits this definition and 
defines three plural suffixes that are generally 
shared between nouns, NOUN_M adds specific syn-
tactic features and finally NOUN_M_1A fills out the 
rest of the possible suffixes. Notice that <stem> 
is not defined in this theory ? it will be determined 
on a per-lexical entry basis from the automatically 
generated entries described below. Notice also the 
syncretic definitions for suffixes associated with 
sg acc and pl acc in terms of their nominative 
counterparts for inanimate nouns ? for a more de-
tailed discussion of the techniques used for repre-
senting such a syncretism, see Corbett and Fraser 
(1993:131) and Brown (1998:154-155). 
Classes of feminine and neuter nouns are han-
dled similarly; for feminine nouns, eight types and 
nine different stress patterns are identified, 
whereas for neuter nouns eight types and six stress 
patterns are distinguished. In addition, most of 
these types are found with both animate and in-
animate nouns, and in the DATR theory, two noun 
classes are distinguished for each type occurring 
with both animate and inanimate nouns. In total 
NOMINAL 
NOUN 
NOUN_M NOUN_MO NOUN_F .  .  . 
 NOUN_M_1A 
about 100 different noun classes are distinguished 
per gender in the DATR theory. 
In order to make use of this theory, a lexical en-
try needs to inherit from the node representing its 
noun class and provide the specific morphotactic 
elements associated with the class. So for example, 
a possible definition for ?????? 'lamp shade' 
might be: 
 
??????: 
<> == NOUN_M_1A 
<stem> == ??????. 
 
From this definition, plus the preceding example 
fragment, the standard inference rules of DATR 
allow all the relevant inflectional forms to be de-
rived: 
 
??????: 
<mor sg nom> = ?????? 
 <mor sg gen> = ?????? ? 
 <mor sg dat> = ?????? ? 
 <mor sg acc> = ?????? 
 <mor sg instr> = ?????? ?? 
 <mor sg loc> = ?????? ? 
 <mor pl nom> = ?????? ? 
 <mor pl gen> = ?????? ?? 
<mor pl dat> = ?????? ?? 
    <mor pl acc> = ?????? ? 
<mor pl instr> = ?????? ??? 
<mor pl loc> = ?????? ??. 
 
Note that stress is not currently indicated in the 
derived forms. Our research involves the morpho-
syntactic analysis of written text which generally 
does not mark stress. However, as the distinctions 
related to stress that are made in Zaliznjak (1977) 
have been kept in the DATR theory, the stress pat-
terns can easily be used in our analysis of syncre-
tism and frequency. 
2.3 Automatic generation of lexical en-
tries 
In its electronic form, Zaliznjak represents each 
lexical entry as a text string of the sort given here 
for the word ?????? 'lamp shade': 
 
??????    0101 ????<?? ? 1? 
 
Here, the first item is the (uppercase) citation form 
of the word, the second is a line identifier (line 01 
of 01 lines), the third is the word annotated with 
stress information, the fourth is gender/animacy 
information and the fifth morphological type. 
However, inevitably, many of the entries are 
more complex than this in various ways: 
 
1. Entries can spread over several lines, 
requiring textual concatenation of just the 
parts following the line identifier informa-
tion to build the complete entry. 
2. Where inflectional class does not corre-
spond to gender/animacy, it may be speci-
fied separately between angle brackets. For 
example, ??????? ?? <?? 3*?> 
?grandfather? is a masculine noun which 
declines as a feminine noun of type 3*A. 
 
3. Alternative values for stress patterns and 
sometimes classes may be present between 
square brackets. 
4. Additional annotations indicate second 
locative, second genitive, pluralia tantum, 
irregular forms, etc. 
5. Additional comments may be present en-
closed in parentheses. 
6. Other punctuation (commas etc.) may or 
may not be present. 
In order to deliver lexical entry information in the 
form required by the hand-crafted theory, this data 
needs to be parsed and interpreted into the kind of 
format we saw above. A standard approach to this 
task is to use regular expression search and substi-
tute commands to incrementally rewrite the data 
strings into a more uniform format and ultimately 
into the required input. However, DATR itself also 
provides powerful string-rewriting functionality, 
particularly suited for dealing with awkward ex-
ceptional cases, but less efficient for more routine 
rewriting.  
The approach we have taken strikes a balance 
between these two technologies. Initially we use 
regular expression rewriting to achieve a basic 
parse of the input data: joining multiple lines to-
gether, removing duplicate spaces, isolating vari-
ous bracketed expressions, parsing the remaining 
fields and finally mapping into a DATR definition 
for each entry. However this DATR definition is 
very surface-oriented ? little more than a basic 
segmentation of the input data. This process can be 
carried out completely automatically with a fairly 
high accuracy. But in order to link such entries to 
the core morphological classes, further interpreta-
tion of the data fields identified is necessary, and 
this is achieved dynamically in DATR. 
For example, a typical simple lexical entry is the 
lexeme ???????????? ?female aristocrat?. Its 
entry in Zaliznjak is: 
 
   ???????????? 0101 ????????<???? ?? 3*? 
 
In the first phase of processing, this is mapped via 
regular expression search and substitute into a 
DATR node definition as follows: 
 
Z-????????????: 
    <> == ZALNODE 
    <index> == 30 
    <src txt> == ' ... ' 
    <src cit> == '????????????' 
    <src str> == '????????<????' 
    <src gen> == '??' 
    <src cls> == '3*?'. 
 
This node is an instance of the predefined node 
ZALNODE with index number 30 (meaning simply 
that it was the 30th node to be processed in this 
batch). The <src txt> feature (omitted due to 
lack of space) is the whole original source string, 
and the other features provide the key components 
of the entry (cit ? citation, str ? stressed, gen ? 
gender/animacy, cls ? class). 
This is the ?surface level? representation of the 
lexical entry. The DATR node ZALNODE inter-
prets this information to define implicitly a ?deep? 
representation as required by the morphological 
classes, roughly equivalent to this: 
 
Z-????????????: 
    <> == NOUN_FO_3*A 
    <root_begin> == ?????????? 
    <root_end> == ?. 
 
Here, the gender/animacy and class information 
have been combined (and transliterated to Latin 
script) to determine the declension class for this 
form. The stem forms for this class have been de-
termined from the citation form (the morphotactic 
specification for NOUN_FO_3*A indicates what 
components are required ? different from the sim-
pler NOUN_M_1A case above, to allow for the pos-
sible insertion of a fleeting vowel). 
ZALNODE does not actually create a new node 
definition for the deep representation. Rather, ap-
propriate values for deep features are calculated 
dynamically when the declension class code re-
quests them, by rewriting and transforming the 
values provided by the surface form definitions. 
The overall effect is that, just as we saw previ-
ously, the declension class definitions can use this 
information to provide the syntax and all the in-
flected forms for this word: 
 
Z-????????????: 
   <syn gender> = feminine 
   <syn animacy> = animate 
   <mor sg nom> = ?????????? ? ? 
   <mor sg gen> = ?????????? ? ? 
   <mor sg dat> = ?????????? ? ? 
   <mor sg acc> = ?????????? ? ? 
   <mor sg instr> = ?????????? ? ?? 
   <mor sg loc> = ?????????? ? ? 
   <mor pl nom> = ?????????? ? ? 
   <mor pl gen> = ?????????? ? ? 
   <mor pl dat> = ?????????? ? ?? 
   <mor pl acc> = ?????????? ? ? 
   <mor pl instr> = ?????????? ? ??? 
   <mor pl loc> = ?????????? ? ??. 
 
For most of these forms the inflection follows the 
value of <root_begin> and <root_end>. 
Notice, however, that in the genitive and accusa-
tive plural forms, a fleeting vowel, ? in this case, is 
inserted between these two components.  
An example of a more complex lexical entry is 
?????? 'soldier' which is a masculine animate 
noun of type 5*A. This noun has a fleeting vowel 
which appears in the nominative singular ?????? 
(phonologically armejec). The writing system also 
indicates the presence of the phoneme /j/ by the 
use of ? in the other case and number combina-
tions. To deal with this allomorphy, the DATR 
node ZALNODE introduces two values for 
<root_begin> in the ?deep? representation of 
this lexical entry, one which is used in the nomina-
tive singular, i.e. ????, and one which is used for 
all other cases, i.e. ?????. The ?deep? representa-
tion for ?????? looks roughly like this: 
 
Z-??????: 
    <> == NOUN_MO_5*A 
    <root_begin 1> == ???? 
<root_begin> == ????? 
    <root_end> == ?. 
3 The technical framework 
The key technical challenge of this exercise was 
actually rather mundane: we needed to find an en-
vironment or set of environments that would allow 
us to do all the processing required (manual edit-
ing, regular expression search and substitute, 
DATR compilation and dumping) with data that 
included both Latin and Cyrillic script. In addition, 
we wanted the resources we created to be maxi-
mally reusable in other contexts, so a solution in 
line with agreed standards was highly desirable. 
To achieve these goals, we adopted Unicode as 
the standard representation for all our data, and 
identified or adapted tools to work with data in that 
form. Furthermore we used the simplest encoding 
of Unicode in data files, the ?ucs2? encoding, 
which stores each 16 bit Unicode character simply 
as two bytes of data. This is not as compact as 
other encodings (such as ?utf8?) but is supported 
by a wider range of applications, in particular Mi-
crosoft Wordpad. 
3.1 A Unicode version of Zaliznjak 
It is a fairly straightforward task to convert the  
transliteration used in the electronic form of Zal-
iznjak to Unicode Cyrillic, using Microsoft Word 
macros. Disambiguation of the hard and soft signs 
is required for the first field, (the index word field), 
as the + character is used for both symbols. How-
ever, the third field differentiates the hard and soft 
sign and, as the number of lexical items written 
with a hard sign is not great, it is a trivial task to 
check these. The resulting files are then saved as 
plain text (ie ?ucs2?) Unicode files. 
3.2 DATR and Unicode 
The DATR compiler used for this project was the 
Sussex/Brighton DATR compiler, which is written 
in Prolog. The DATR compiler inherits its charac-
ter-level processing from the underlying Prolog 
compiler, so in order to process Unicode DATR it 
was simply necessary to run it in a Prolog system 
capable of handling Unicode, and modify it 
slightly to detect when it was given a Unicode file 
as input. This was achieved using Poplog Prolog,3 
plus a customized version of Sussex/Brighton 
DATR (soon to be released as version 2.10). This 
version also includes new support for batch mode 
processing of DATR theories and a number of 
compiler enhancements for compiling larger 
DATR theories. 
3.3  Editing and search and substitute in 
Unicode 
Unicode files stored in ?ucs2? encoding can be 
conveniently viewed and edited using Microsoft 
Word or Wordpad, the latter being more straight-
forward for the simple text-editing requirements of 
most of the data files involved here. The automatic 
rewriting of Zaliznjak entries required a more so-
phisticated regular expression engine, which we 
obtained by adapting the Poplog editor?s regular 
expression functionality to work with Unicode. 
These functions are particularly powerful in allow-
ing multi-line regular expression matching, so that 
one can match patterns spanning several lines 
(such as Zaliznjak data continuation lines) and re-
write them to a single line. Limited manual editing 
of Unicode using the Poplog editor is also possi-
ble: it can manipulate arbitrary Unicode data, but 
its ability to display non-Latin data is platform de-
pendent, and on our platform (Windows 2000) all 
the Cyrillic characters were displayed as ???. 
4 Current status and future work 
The system described in this paper is still very 
much work-in-progress. The core technologies and 
                                                          
3 See http://www.cs.bham.ac.uk/research/poplog/freepoplog.html. Unicode 
support is only available in version 15.53, although currently it is completely 
undocumented. 
structures of the approach have been developed 
and validated as a viable approach. Population and 
validation of the data is an on-going process, the 
current state of which can be summarized as fol-
lows: 
 
1. The hand-crafted DATR theory for Zalizn-
jak?s morphological classes has been com-
pleted for the noun classes, with adjective 
classes next to be done. Other classes are 
lower priority for the present project. 
2. Automatic compilation of all 98729 
Zanliznjak entries into ?surface? DATR 
nodes is complete but not validated. 
3. Processing of a sample set containing 2062 
entries has been undertaken with the 
following (not fully validated) results: 
 
No. of Zaliznjak entries 2062 100% 
No. of DATR nodes  2000 97% 
Nodes identified as nouns 1192 60% 
Nouns  successfully classi-
fied 
1066 89% 
 
Principal areas for further development include: 
 
1. Completion and validation of noun entries 
2. Extension to adjectives (and possibly 
verbs) 
3. Integration of data from the manually vali-
dated lexicon of 1500 most frequent 
nouns, to improve accuracy, particular for 
irregular forms. 
4. Development of a lemmatizer and tagger 
for Russian using this data. 
 
The last point here deserves further expansion. As 
we discussed in the introduction, the DATR encod-
ing of Zaliznjak is in part the first step towards 
lemmatization and tagging technology for Russian. 
We distinguish lemmatization, that is identifying 
all possible lemmas (plus morphosyntactic fea-
tures) for a word, which can be carried out on the 
word in isolation, from tagging, that is, identifying 
the most likely lemma (plus features) for a word in 
context. The primary aim of the project of which 
this work is a part is to explore ambiguity in lem-
matization and its relationship to frequency. For 
this a high quality lemmatizer is essential.  
In principle, once we have a complete set of in-
flected forms, we could automatically compile it 
into a lemmatizer. However such a lemmatizer 
would be extremely cumbersome to produce and 
use, contain much redundancy and be quite inca-
pable of coping with unknown forms. The ap-
proach we intend to take will exploit the hand-
crafted components of the framework to the full, 
using them to construct recognisers for suffixes 
(and for verbs, prefixes) and identify potential 
roots, and then using the full lexicon to filter and 
validate the resulting candidate analyses (we ex-
pect the recognition process to overgenerate solu-
tions). This will be more compact, probably faster, 
and able to cope with unknown root forms. 
Beyond such a lemmatizer, we are currently in-
vestigating how to combine inheritance-based lexi-
cal representation with traditional part-of-speech 
tagging technology, and hope to apply this work to 
the Zaliznjak data, to deliver a high quality de-
tailed morphosyntactic tagger for Russian texts. 
On the more technological front, current plans 
include: 
 
1. Consolidating Unicode support in DATR 
(extending to the Sicstus Prolog version, 
supporting other file encodings). 
2. Packaging key technologies for wider use. 
3. Delivering the whole Zaliznjak lexicon as 
an XML-based DATR database. 
 
5 Conclusions 
Zaliznjak?s dictionary, both in its book form and 
electronic version, has proved an invaluable tool. 
In this paper we have shown how the classes from 
Zaliznjak can be mapped into a DATR representa-
tion. This representation is a structured lexicon 
from which we can derive all of the associated 
forms for the entries in Zaliznjak. As well as con-
stituting a valuable computation resource for Rus-
sian in its own right, our next step will be to use 
this lexical database as the foundation for high 
quality lemmatization and morphosyntactic tag-
ging software for Russian text. 
Acknowledgements 
The research reported here is supported by the 
Economic and Social Research Council  (UK) un-
der grant RES-000-23-0082 'Paradigms in Use'. 
Their support is gratefully acknowledged.  
Availability 
At the time of writing, the Zaliznjak data files are 
still work in progress, and the tool adaptations (to 
DATR, Poplog etc.) are still custom extensions. 
However, it is our intention to make these re-
sources publically available, as far as is consistent 
with existing licences etc., in the near future. 
References 
Anciaux, Michele. 1991. Word-form Recognition and 
Generation: A Computational Approach to Russian 
Morphology. PhD dissertation, University of 
Washington. 
Brown, Dunstan, Greville Corbett and Norman Fraser. 
1995. rusnoms.dtr ? a fragment for the nominal sys-
tem of Russian. Available from the DATR archive 
http://www.datr.org   
Brown, Dunstan, Andrew Hippisley, Greville Corbett 
and Norman Fraser. 1995. rusnlex.dtr - lexicon of 
frequent Russian noun. Available from the DATR ar-
chive http://www.datr.org 
Brown, Dunstan, Greville Corbett, Norman Fraser, An-
drew Hippisley and Alan Timberlake. 1996. Russian 
noun stress and network morphology. Linguistics  34. 
53-107. 
Brown, Dunstan. 1998. From the General to the Excep-
tional: A Network Morphology Account of Russian 
Nominal Inflection. PhD thesis, University of Surrey. 
Cahill, Lynne and Gerald Gazdar. 1999. The 
POLYLEX architecture: multilingual lexicons for re-
lated languages. Traitement Automatique des Lan-
guages, 40(2):5-23. 
Corbett, Greville G. and Norman M. Fraser. 1993. Net-
work morphology: A DATR account of Russian 
nominal inflection. Journal of Linguistics 29. 113-42. 
Dimitrova, Ludmila, Toma? Erjavec, Nancy Ide, Heiki 
Jaan Kaalep, Vladimir Petkevi?, Dan Tufis. 1998. 
Multext-East: Parallel and Comparable Corpora and 
Lexicons for Six Central and Eastern European Lan-
guages. In Proceedings of COLING-ACL '98. 315-
319. 
Evans, Roger and Gerald Gazdar. 1996. DATR: A Lan-
guage for Lexical Knowledge Representation. Com-
putational Linguistics  22. 167-216. 
Fraser, Norman M. and Greville G. Corbett.  1995. Gen-
der, animacy and declensional class assignment: a 
unified account for Russian. In G. Booij and J. van 
Marle (eds.) Yearbook of Morphology 1994. 
Dordrecht: Kluwer. 123-150.  
Ilola, Eeva & Mustajoki, Arto. 1989. Report on Russian 
Morphology as it appears in Zaliznyak's Grammatical 
Dictionary. Helsinki: Helsinki University Press. 
L?nngren, Lennart (ed.) 1993. ?astotnyj slovar? sovre-
mennogo russkogo jazyka. Uppsala: Uppsala Univer-
sity. (=Studia Slavica Upsaliensia 32). 
Maier, I. 1994. Review of L?nngren (ed.) ?astotnyj 
slovar? sovremennogo russkogo jazyka. Rusistika Se-
godnja 1. 130-136. 
Pavlova, E., Y. Pavlov, R. Sproat, C. Shih and J. van 
Santen. 1997. Bell Laboratories Russian Text-to-
Speech System. In G. Kokkinakis, N. Fakotakis, E. 
Dermatas (eds.) Eurospeech ?97 Proceedings. Vol-
ume 5. 2451 ? 2454. 
Tiberius, Carole. 2001. Architectures for Multilingual 
Lexical Representation. PhD Thesis, ITRI, Univer-
sity of Brighton. 
Vitas, Dusko. 2001. Intex and Slavonic Morphology. In 
Proceedings of the 4th Intex workshop. Bordeaux. 
Available online at: http://grelis.univ-
fcomte.fr/intex/downloads/Dusko Vi-
tas.pdf 
Zaliznjak, A. A. 1977. Grammati?eskij slovar' russkogo 
jazyka. Moscow: Russkij jazyk. 
Zasorina, L. N. 1977. ?astotnyj slovar' russkogo jazyka.  
Moscow: Russkij jazyk. 
 
 
Inflectional Syncretism and Corpora 
D.Brown, C. Tiberius, G.G. Corbett 
Surrey Morphology Group 
University of Surrey 
Guildford, Surrey, UK 
GU2 7XH 
{d.brown,c.tiberius,g.corbett}@surrey.ac.uk  
 
Abstract 
This paper describes a novel undertaking: 
comparing the relationship between 
grammatical ambiguity (syncretism) in nouns, 
as represented in a default inheritance 
hierarchy, with textual frequency distributions. 
In order to do this we consider a language with 
a reasonable number of grammatical 
distinctions and where syncretism occurs in 
different morphological classes. We  
investigated this relationship for Russian 
nouns. Our results suggest that there is an 
intricate relationship between textual 
frequency and inflectional syncretism. 
 
1 Introduction 
The treatment of syncretism, where a single form 
has more than one function, poses a particular 
challenge for theories of morphology. There are 
different ways of analyzing syncretism. One way is 
underspecification, where the form in question is 
treated as not realizing the syncretized functions. 
Another way is referrals (Zwicky 1985; Stump 
2001: 212-41), where the form is associated with a 
basic function, and other cells in the paradigm 
refer to the cell with this basic function.  Referrals 
are therefore asymmetrical in their nature, whereas 
underspecification is not. There is evidence that 
both types of analysis are required (Stump 2001: 
212-41) and Evans, Brown & Corbett  (2001: 216) 
argue that a kind of underspecified referral is 
required for analyzing syncretisms in Slovene and 
Dalabon. Therefore we cannot dispense with one at 
the expense of the other. It is therefore worthwhile 
examining whether the theoretical asymmetry of 
referrals can be observed in language use. 
We consider the relationship between the 
frequency distributions of noun syncretism in texts 
and a formal implemented model of Russian 
inflection, created for other purposes. In particular 
we determine whether the asymmetry of referrals 
is reflected in the frequency distributions (i.e. does 
the referred-to cell in the paradigm typically occur 
more frequently than the cell which refers to it). 
Russian is an ideal candidate for testing this 
relationship, as it is a language with substantial 
paradigms and extensive syncretism of different 
types. 
We used a manually compiled dataset (Corbett, 
Hippisley, Brown and Marriott 2001) of the most 
frequent nouns derived from the Uppsala corpus 
(L?nngren 1993; Maier 1994) containing 5440 
noun lexemes, accounting for 243,000 word forms 
from the entire one million word corpus. On the 
basis of this dataset, we tested a set of hypotheses 
and established a model describing the relationship 
between paradigm structure and textual use in 
Russian nouns. 
We cross-validate our results by testing the 
model on a pilot version of the Russian Standard 
Corpus (Sharoff 2004) which has been fully 
lemmatized and tagged. 
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 
outlines the problem. We describe what we mean 
by syncretism and frequency and define a set of 
hypotheses. In Section 3, we test our hypotheses on 
the two corpora. Section 4 concludes the paper. 
2 Morphological Theory and Frequency 
2.1 Syncretism 
Grammatical paradigms define the relationship 
between functions and forms. A reasonable 
assumption would be that functions and forms 
would match up one-to-one. Contrary to these 
expectations, however, languages often fail to meet 
this apparent ideal of one form for every function. 
In Russian nouns, for instance, there is a smaller 
number of forms. 
    
    
 
     
     
    
   
 
 
 
         Functions          Forms  
Figure 1: More functions than forms 
 
Russian nouns have two number values (singular 
and plural) and six cases (nominative, accusative, 
genitive, dative, instrumental, and locative) which 
can be combined yielding 12 combinations of case 
and number. Despite the 12 combinations of case 
and number, a typical noun does not have more 
than 10 forms (Figure 1) in Russian1, but the class 
in question will determine where the distinctions 
between functions are collapsed. For example, the 
form ??????? (komnate) ?room? is ambiguous 
between dative singular and locative singular, the 
form ????? (kosti) ?bone? is three-way ambiguous; 
it can function as a dative singular, a locative 
singular and a genitive singular. 
Similarly, in English we expect that a verb will 
have forms for the present tense, the past tense and 
the passive participle. Given an ambiguous form, 
such as hit (as in ?Mary hit the nail with a hammer? 
as opposed to ?Mary was hit by a meteorite?) we 
assume that there are two or more separate 
functions associated with it. This is because other 
verbs have different forms, such as the verb eat (as 
in ?John often ate chocolate? as opposed to ?The 
chocolate was eaten by John?). 
Formally syncretism can be treated as 
underspecification, where the multiple functions of 
the form have equal importance, or it can be seen 
in terms of referral (Zwicky 1985; Stump 2001: 
212-41), where the form is associated with a basic 
function, and other cells in the paradigm refer to 
the cell with this basic function. 
Underspecification implies equal status for the 
functions in question, whereas the referral-based 
approach attributes greater importance to one 
function. 
One measure of the relative importance of 
grammatical functions is textual frequency. We 
can make two different predictions about how the 
formal distinction between underspecification and 
referrals is reflected in textual frequency: 
Prediction 1) both functions are of equal 
importance (underspecification) and therefore the 
frequency of use is distributed equally between 
functions; or Prediction 2) one function is more 
important than another (referral) and therefore the 
frequency of use is not distributed equally between 
functions. 
In this paper we test these predictions for 
Russian nouns. As the basis for our predictions, we 
start from a formal theoretical model of Russian 
morphology developed within the Network 
Morphology framework. 
                                                     
1 We exclude from consideration here the question of 
the second locative and the second genitive. 
2.2 Inheritance Hierarchy 
In this model four noun classes are distinguished 
for Russian as is shown in Table 1.2 
 
 I IV II III 
 
 
Sing 
???o? 
zavod 
?factory' 
???? 
delo 
'thing' 
?o????? 
komnata 
'room' 
?????  
kost? 
'bone' 
Nom ???o?  
zavod 
???? 
delo 
?o????? 
komnata 
????? 
kost? 
Acc ???o? 
zavod 
???? 
delo 
?o????? 
komnatu 
????? 
kost? 
Gen ???o?? 
zavoda 
???? 
dela 
?o????? 
komnaty 
?o??? 
kosti 
Dat ???o?? 
zavodu 
???? 
delu 
?o????e 
komnate 
?o??? 
kosti 
Instr ???o??? 
zavodom 
????? 
delom 
?o?????? 
komnatoj 
?o???? 
kost?ju 
Loc ???o?? 
zavode 
???? 
dele 
?o????e 
komnate 
?o??? 
kosti 
     
Plur     
Nom ???o?? 
zavody 
???? 
dela 
?o????? 
komnaty 
?o??? 
kosti 
Acc ???o?? 
zavody 
???? 
dela 
?o????? 
komnaty 
?o??? 
kosti 
Gen ???o??? 
zavodov 
??? 
del 
?o???? 
komnat 
?????? 
kostej 
Dat ???o??? 
zavodam 
????? 
delam 
?o?????? 
komnatam 
?????? 
kostjam 
Instr ???o???? 
zavodami 
?????? 
delami 
?o??????? 
komnatami 
??????? 
kostjami 
Loc ???o??? 
zavodax 
????? 
delax 
?o?????? 
komnatax 
?????? 
kostjax 
Table 1: Forms for major noun classes in 
Russian 
We see that Class III nouns such as ????? 'bone' 
have the highest ambiguity, three forms are used 
for six functions, one for the nominative and 
accusative, one for the genitive, the dative and the 
locative, and one for the instrumental. Class II 
nouns such as ?o????? have syncretism in the 
dative and locative singular. Russian also has 
syncretism related to animacy. In the singular in 
Russian, masculine animate nouns, which belong 
to Class I, form their accusative on the basis of the 
genitive form. For classes IV and III, which are 
associated with neuter and feminine genders 
respectively, there is always nominative-accusative 
syncretism. Class II, of course, has a separate form 
for the accusative. In the plural, the situation is 
more straightforward: any animate noun forms its 
accusative on the basis of the genitive, and any 
inanimate noun forms its accusative on the basis of 
the nominative. In the above table only examples 
of inanimate nouns are given. 
Counts based on both corpora show that, about 
38%3 of token occurrences in the singular in 
                                                     
2 We use the following abbreviations: NOM ? 
nominative, ACC ? accusative, GEN ? genitive, DAT ? 
dative, INSTR ? instrumental, LOC ? locative. Forms 
are given in Cyrillic and in transliteration. 
3 This figure is obtained by summing the counts for 
Russian are morphologically ambiguous 
(syncretic). Hence, in an apparently 
morphologically well-equipped language such as 
Russian, a great deal still depends on syntactic 
context. 
Our default inheritance analysis of Russian treats 
syncretisms within paradigms as asymmetrical, in 
that a particular form is considered to have one 
function as basic. If this paradigmatic asymmetry 
is reflected in frequency distributions, then 
Prediction 2 would be the correct one. As the 
syncretisms within paradigms differ from class to 
class, we also have to take into account the 
hierarchical structure of morphological classes. 
Figure 2 represents the hierarchical structure of our 
model of Russian noun morphology using the 
Network Morphology framework (Corbett and 
Fraser 1993), with example lexemes at the bottom 
of the hierarchy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Inheritance structure for Russian 
nouns 
 Two points should be stressed. First, the 
original analysis was carried out with the goal of 
contributing to morphological theory, a goal which 
was achieved (see comments in Stump 2001:275-
6). Second, in order to demonstrate that the 
analysis was valid, a substantial fragment of 
Russian, sufficient to include all instances of 
                                                                                   
paradigm cells which share the same form and dividing 
this by the overall number of singular tokens. In other 
words we use the sum of the token occurrences of the 
following ambiguous forms: i) all dative and locative 
singular occurrences of Class II nouns; ii) all 
nominative and accusative singular occurrences of Class 
IV nouns, Class III nouns and Class I nouns which are 
inanimate; iii) all accusative and genitive singular 
occurrences of Class I nouns which are animate; iv) all 
genitive, dative and locative singular nouns from Class 
III. It is likely that one can disambiguate most 
morphological syncretisms in Russian readily from the 
syntactic context, but our purpose is to demonstrate how 
often a morphologically well endowed language such as 
Russian still leaves much work to syntax.  
irregularity was implemented in the lexical 
knowledge representation language DATR (Evans 
and Gazdar 1996) and is available at the DATR 
archive from the DATR webpages 
(http://www.datr.org). The morphological model is 
structured as a hierarchy in which information is 
pushed as far up the hierarchy as it can go 
capturing as many generalisations as possible. 
Thus at the top of the hierarchy in Figure 2  we 
find a information associated with all nouns (such 
as the inflections for the dative, instrumental and 
locative plural) and that information is propagated 
to others by inheritance, and at the bottom we find 
information which is unique to particular instances. 
Node N_I (representing Class I) and node N_IV 
(representing Class IV) both inherit from node N_0 
(representing Class O), sharing the inflections for 
the genitive, dative, instrumental and locative 
singular. DATR is a default inheritance formalism, 
which means that information specified under a 
particular class node takes precedence over that 
what is inherited, overriding the inherited 
information. This means that, for example, the 
value for locative singular which is stem+? in three 
of the four inflectional classes can be stated under 
the noun node and its value only needs to be 
overridden for Class III by stem+i. 
We will use this model and link frequency 
information to the different components of the 
noun hierarchy, i.e nouns at the top, the different 
noun classes and the lexemes belonging to these 
noun classes at the bottom.  
 
2.3 Research Questions 
To check our predictions, we defined a set of 
hypotheses which we tested on two sets of corpus 
data. 
 
The hierarchical organisation of paradigms. 
Our inheritance model of Russian morphology 
involves a hierarchical organisation above the level 
of traditional word classes. A major question is 
whether this hierarchical organisation of paradigms 
is reflected by differences in frequency of use. 
Thus we will investigate the frequency of use of 
grammatical functions for each point on the 
hierarchy in Figure 2, and in particular we shall 
look at the frequency of use of those functions 
which are syncretic (grammatically ambiguous) at 
various points on that hierarchy. This research 
question will be studied by testing the following 
null hypothesis:  
 
H0-1: Nodes at the same point in the 
hierarchy show no difference in frequency 
NOUN 
N_0 N_II N_III 
N_I N_IV ???????/komnata 
?????/zavod ????/delo 
?????/kost? 
distribution for any elements of their 
paradigms.  
 
However, related research by Corbett et al
(2001) who investigate the relationship between 
irregularity types and frequency suggests that we 
will find significant differences between nodes in 
the hierarchy. We therefore predict that the null 
hypothesis is false. There should be differences in 
frequency distributions for paradigms between 
nodes at the same point on the hierarchy.  For 
example, for nominals there should be differences 
between nouns and adjectives. Within nouns, there 
should be differences between N_O (class N_I and 
class N_IV combined), class N_II and class N_III. 
This leads us on to a more specific hypothesis that 
specifies the nature of these differences. 
 
H1-1: If two or more functions f1... fz 
share the same form in one class, but not in 
another, then the combined relative 
frequency of those functions is higher for 
the classes where they are differentiated. 
 
Syncretism and asymmetry of use 
Do syncretisms occur where one function is 
more important than the other(s), but not where 
equal in status (as defined in terms of frequency of 
use)? Here we formulate the following null 
hypothesis: 
 
H0-2: Where two or more functions 
share the same form, there is no difference 
in the relative frequency of those 
functions. 
 
Again, we expect the null hypothesis to be false. 
 
The context of syncretism 
Which category is the most important factor for 
syncretism? According to Haspelmath (2001: 241) 
the frequency of a category determines the 
prevalence of syncretism within that category. 
Frequent grammatical categories, such as singular 
number, are more differentiated and thus show less 
syncretism than less frequent categories. This 
research question will be tested by the following 
null hypothesis.  
 
H0-3: The frequency of a category has 
no influence on the prevalence of 
syncretism within that category.  
 
Following Haspelmath (2001), we predict that 
the null hypothesis is false. Based on our findings 
in Corbett et al(2001) we would predict that 
syncretism behaves in a similar way to various 
types of irregularity. That is, examples of 
syncretisms are found in the singular and plural in 
Russian, and the most important factor influencing 
syncretism will be the relative frequency 
distribution of the number subparadigm in which 
the syncretism is found, rather than the relative 
frequency distribution of the syncretic cells in 
question. Note that this hypothesis interacts with 
hypothesis H1-1. If there were no evidence for that 
hypothesis, but there were evidence that H0-3 is 
false, then this would suggest that the number 
subparadigm is the most important factor.  
 
3 Corpus Study and Results 
To test the above hypotheses we looked at two 
separate sets of corpus data so as to cross-validate 
our results.  
3.1 Corpus data 
The first dataset consists of nouns from the 
Uppsala corpus. The Uppsala corpus is a set of 
sub-corpora of various genres, containing 
approximately one million words (L?nngren 1993, 
Maier 1994).  The dataset was manually 
constructed  by Andrew Hippisley4 to investigate 
the relationship between number availability and 
number use. It is in the form of a spreadsheet and 
contains frequency information, case and  number 
features, as well as semantic information, i.e. 
animacy category for 5440 lexemes, accounting for 
around 243,000 word forms from the entire one 
million word Uppsala corpus. The lexemes 
recorded in the dataset are those represented by  
word forms occurring in total at least five times. 
Lexemes occurring less than five times were 
excluded to avoid large standard errors in the 
estimates which occur when observed numbers in 
each category are small (Corbett, Hippisley, Bown 
and Marriott 2001:208). 
The lexemes in the original dataset were 
transliterated. We have converted them into 
Unicode Cyrillic using the simplest encoding of 
unicode in data files, the ?ucs2? encoding. In 
addition, we have included class information 
according to the Network Morphology analysis 
(Figure 2). 
The second dataset consists of the nouns of a 
pilot version of the Russian Standard Corpus 
which is fully lemmatized and tagged. Based on 
this information a spreadsheet was created similar 
to the one we have for the Uppsala corpus. For 
consistency, we only took those nouns into account 
                                                     
4 The dataset is available at 
http://www.surrey.ac.uk/LIS/SMG, along 
with a readme file. 
which occur more than five times. This results in 
3350 lexemes, making up 126,598 word forms of 
the 500 000 word corpus. 
 
3.2 Results 
We tested the hypotheses given in Section 2.3. 
We repeat the hypotheses here with the cross-
validated results. 
 
Hierarchical organisation of paradigms 
H0-1: Nodes at the same point in the 
hierarchy show no difference in frequency 
distribution for any elements of their 
paradigms.  
 
As expected, hypothesis H0-1is false. There are 
differences in the frequency distributions, both in 
relative and absolute terms, of grammatical 
functions for classes represented as nodes at the 
same point in the hierarchy in Figure 2. For 
instance, there are differences in frequency of the 
singular and plural between noun classes at the 
same level in the hierarchy (See Table 2 in the 
Appendix). Class III has the lowest number of 
plurals in absolute terms (3421 in corpus 1 and 954 
in corpus 2), and also in relative5 terms (15.6% in 
corpus 1 and 14.5% in corpus 2). This contrasts 
with Class O which has the highest number of 
plurals in absolute terms (42677 in corpus 1 and 
12241 in corpus 2), and also in relative terms 
(30.3% in corpus 1 and 23.9% in corpus 2).  
We now turn to the dependent hypothesis H1-1 
 
Hierarchical organisation of paradigms(cont.) 
H1-1: If two or more functions f1... fz 
share the same form in one class, but not in 
another, then the combined relative 
frequency of those functions is higher for 
the classes where they are differentiated. 
 
In order to test this, we looked at the frequency 
distributions of the genitive singular, dative 
singular and locative singular for the different 
inflectional classes and calculated the proportion of 
the singular paradigm which they account for (See 
Appendix). As Class III has syncretism of all three 
of these functions, Class II has syncretism of two 
of them (dative singular and locative singular), and 
Class O differentiates all three, if the hypothesis 
were correct, then Class O should have the highest 
combined relative frequency for these functions, 
thereby accounting for a greater proportion of its 
singular paradigm. However, there is no evidence 
to support hypothesis H1-1, because the combined 
                                                     
5 Relative frequency with respect to the class. 
relative frequency differs for the classes across the 
two corpora. In corpus 1 Class O shows the highest 
relative frequency, Class II the next, and Class III 
the least high relative frequency (which would 
support the hypothesis). In contrast, in corpus 2 
Class III shows the highest relative frequency for 
the three functions. 
The next hypothesis concerns the relationship 
between syncretism and the importance of the 
functions involved. If the hypothesis is false, then 
this is support for prediction 2 that syncretisms  
occur where one function is more frequent than 
another. 
 
Assymmetry of use 
H0-2: Where two or more functions share the 
same form, there is no difference in the relative 
frequency of those functions. 
 
Again, we looked at the frequency distributions 
of the genitive, dative and locative singular. In 
Table 1, we saw that the lexemes belonging to 
Class N_I and Class N_IV (which are grouped 
together under a Class N_O in Figure 2) have the 
same forms, but they unambiguously distinguish 
all three cases. Class N_II has ambiguity between 
dative singular and locative singular, and Class 
N_III completely fails to differentiate the three 
combinations. In the default inheritance 
representation of Russian nominal morphology, the 
default specification of locative singular at NOUN 
is stem + e, as this is used across three inflectional 
classes. In classes II and III, where the dative 
singular has the same ending as the locative 
singular, the dative singular will take over its 
ending from the locative singular, and in Class III 
where the locative singular has the same ending as 
the genitive singular, the locative singular will take 
over its ending from the genitive singular. 
Hence, where there is syncretism, we can claim 
that a form is primarily associated with a particular 
function, but may be used by another function. In 
the case of Class III, composition of the referrals 
means that the dative singular takes over the 
locative singular, and this in turn takes over the 
genitive singular, giving the form stem + i for all 
three functions. According to prediction 2, we 
expect that this asymmetry, where one cell refers 
to another for its form, is reflected in the frequency 
of use of the particular functions in question. This 
is true for Class III, which has all three functions 
syncretic. But it is also true for nouns as a whole, 
including the Class O which has different forms for 
each function. In Figure 3 we see a decrease in 
frequency of use from genitive singular, through 
locative singular to dative singular. 
 
 0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
40000
45000
50000
GenSg LocSg DatSg  
Figure 3: Frequency related to the NOUN node 
 
Hence, if there is a relationship between 
syncretism and frequency, this asymmetry may be 
a necessary, but not a sufficient, condition. 
The final hypothesis we tested concerned the 
frequency of the category which provides a context 
for syncretism. 
 
H0-3: The frequency of a category has 
no influence on the prevalence of 
syncretism within that category.  
 
Class III which has the greatest amount of 
ambiguity in the singular has the lowest absolute 
frequency of singulars. This means that the 
hypothesis H0-3 is false. 
 
A note on animacy 
Animacy is a distinction which is orthogonal to the 
individual morphological classes in Figure 2. We 
were not in a position to cross-validate the results 
for nominative-accusative syncretism in inanimate 
nouns, as only corpus 2 has disambiguated the 
nominative and accusative for inanimates. The 
results for corpus 2 suggest (Table 4), however, 
that there is no directional effect for inanimates. 
We were in a position to check the animates, for 
which the genitive-accusative syncretism had been 
disambiguated in both corpora. 
In the DATR representation there is a 
referral of the accusative singular for masculines of 
Class I to the genitive singular, and there is a 
referral of the accusative plural to the genitive 
plural for all animate nouns. Our corpus study 
showed that the null hypothesis H0-2 is also false 
when we look at animates in the plural: for 
animates the accusative plural is less frequent than 
the genitive plural in both corpora (Table 5), 
which, given the referral of the accusative plural to 
genitive plural, is the same effect we have seen for 
genitive singular, locative singular and dative 
singular in Figure 3 (the referred-to element of the 
paradigm is more frequent). Recall that, in the 
singular, only masculine nouns have genitive-
accusative syncretism for animates. Our results 
proved to be very interesting for the singular. For 
animate nouns as a whole (i.e. across all the 
morphological classes), the two corpora did not 
match: while genitive singular was more frequent 
in corpus 1, there was little difference between 
genitive singular and accusative singular for all 
animates in corpus 2 (Table 5). However, if the 
comparison is restricted to precisely the class 
which may have the genitive-accusative 
syncretism, namely Class I, the two corpora match 
in that they both show genitive singular as more 
frequent (Table 6).  
4 Conclusion 
We wished to see whether there is a relationship 
between syncretism and its representation in a 
model based on a default inheritance hierarchy.  
We investigated this relationship for Russian 
nouns. Our results showed that there is a difference 
in the frequency distributions for particular 
functions at the different nodes in the hierarchy. It 
is also true that there is a relationship with 
syncretism when one compares classes at the same 
point in the hierarchy. Class III compared with 
classes II and O had the lowest absolute frequency 
for both singulars and plurals, and the most 
syncretism in the singular. This could suggest that 
low absolute frequency is a necessary condition for 
syncretism.  
We have also found evidence that the frequency 
of use of a particular function reflects 
directionality in the formal model, in that the 
function which is referred to for its form (the 
function with which a form is pimarily associated) 
has higher textual frequency. This may be a 
necessary condition, but it is not a sufficient one. 
Our results show that there is an intricate 
relationship between syncretism and frequency, 
one which should be investigated further. 
5 Acknowledgements 
The research reported here is supported by the 
Economic and Social Research Council (UK) 
under grant RES-000-23-0082 ?Paradigms in Use?. 
Their support is gratefully acknowledged. We 
would like to thank Anja Belz, Kees van Deemter, 
Roger Evans, Gerald Gazdar and Adam Kilgarriff 
for useful discussion on aspects of this paper, and 
the anonymous referees for helpful suggestions for 
its improvement. All errors are, of course, our 
responsibility. 
References  
Greville G. Corbett and Norman M. Fraser. 1993. 
Network morphology: A DATR account of 
Russian nominal inflection. Journal of 
Linguistics 29: 113-42. 
Greville G. Corbett, Andrew Hippisley, Dunstan 
Brown and Paul Marriott. 2001. Frequency, 
regularity and the paradigm: a perspective from 
Russian on a complex relation.  In J. Bybee and 
P. Hopper, editors, Frequency and the 
Emergence of Linguistic Structure, pages 201-
226.  John Benjamins, Amsterdam. 
Nicholas Evans, Dunstan Brown and Greville G. 
Corbett. 2001. Dalabon pronominal prefixes and 
the typology of syncretism: a Network 
Morphology analysis.  In G. Booij and J. van 
Marle, editors, Yearbook of Morphology 2000, 
pages 187-231. Dordrecht: Kluwer. 
Roger Evans and Gerald Gazdar. 1996. DATR: A 
Language for Lexical Knowledge 
Representation. Computational Linguistics 22: 
167-216. 
Norman M. Fraser and Greville G. Corbett.  1995. 
Gender, animacy and declensional class 
assignment: a unified account for Russian. In G. 
Booij and J. van Marle, editors, Yearbook of 
Morphology 1994, pages 123-150. Kluwer, 
Dordrecht. 
Martin Haspelmath. 2001. Understanding 
Morphology. Edward Arnold, London. 
Lennart L?nngren. 1993. ?astotnyj slovar? 
sovremennogo russkogo jazyka. Uppsala 
University, Uppsala. 
Ingrid Maier. 1994. Review of L?nngren  
?astotnyj slovar? sovremennogo russkogo 
jazyka. Rusistika Segodnja 1: 130-136. 
Serge Sharoff. 2004. Methods and tools for 
development of the Russian Reference Corpus. 
In D. Archer, A. Wilson, P. Rayson, editors, 
Corpus Linguistics Around the World. 
Amsterdam: Rodopi. 
Gregory T. Stump. 2001. Inflectional Morphology. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Arnold Zwicky. 1985. How to describe inflection. 
In M. Niepokuj, M. Van Clay, V. Nikiforidou 
and D. Feder, editors, Proceedings of the 
eleventh annual meeting of the Berkeley 
Linguistics Society, pages 372-386. Berkeley 
Linguistics Society, Berkeley. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix  
 
Number of Tokens in 
Corpus 1 Corpus 2 
 
SG PL SG PL 
Class O 98173 42677 38877 12241
Class II 48843 17688 21047 5700
Class III 18522 3421 5619 954
Table 2: Absolute and Relative Frequency 
 
 Corpus 1 Corpus 2 
Class O 48.1% 34.7% 
Class II 46.4% 32.9% 
Class III 42.0% 36.1% 
Table 3: Combined Relative Frequency for Gen-
Dat-Loc Animate/Inanimate Singular 
 Number of Tokens in Corpus 2 
 NomSg AccSg NomPl AccPl 
Class O 6873 7804 2050 1987
Class II 3695 5223 1006 1174
ClassIII 1231 1105 202 230
Table 4: Frequency distributions for Inanimate 
Nouns in Corpus 2 
Number of Tokens in  
Corpus 1 Corpus 2 
GenSg 2966 1569
AccSg 1595 1606
GenPl 3484 1131
AccPl 1003 536
Table 5: Frequency distribtions for Animate 
Nouns 
Number of Tokens in  
Corpus 1 Corpus 2 
GenSg 2260 1033
AccSg 1107 981
Table 6: Frequency distributions for Class I 
Animate Nouns 
