Proceedings of the Workshop on Language in Social Media (LSM 2011), pages 39?47,
Portland, Oregon, 23 June 2011. c?2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
Detecting Forum Authority Claims in Online Discussions
Alex Marin, Bin Zhang, Mari Ostendorf
Department of Electrical Engineering
University of Washington
{amarin, binz}@uw.edu, mo@ee.washington.edu
Abstract
This paper explores the problem of detecting
sentence-level forum authority claims in on-
line discussions. Using a maximum entropy
model, we explore a variety of strategies for
extracting lexical features in a sparse train-
ing scenario, comparing knowledge- and data-
driven methods (and combinations). The aug-
mentation of lexical features with parse con-
text is also investigated. We find that cer-
tain markup features perform remarkably well
alone, but are outperformed by data-driven
selection of lexical features augmented with
parse context.
1 Introduction
In multi-party discussions, language is used to es-
tablish identity, status, authority and connections
with others in addition to communicating informa-
tion and opinions. Automatically extracting this
type of social information in language from discus-
sions is useful for understanding group interactions
and relationships.
The aspect of social communication most ex-
plored so far is the detection of participant role,
particularly in spoken genres such as broadcast
news, broadcast conversations, and meetings. Sev-
eral studies have explored different types of fea-
tures (lexical, prosodic, and turn-taking) in a vari-
ety of statistical modeling frameworks (Barzilay et
al., 2000; Maskey and Hirschberg, 2006; Liu, 2006;
Liu and Liu, 2007; Vinciarelli, 2007; Laskowski et
al., 2008; Hutchinson et al, 2010). Typically, these
studies assume that a speaker inhabits a role for the
duration of the discussion, so multiple turns con-
tribute to the decision. Participant status is similar
although the language of others is often more rele-
vant than that of the participant in question.
Communication of other types of social informa-
tion can be more localized. For example, an at-
tempt to establish authority frequently occurs within
a single sentence or turn when entering a discus-
sion, though authority bids may involve multiple
turns when the participant is challenged. Simi-
larly, discussion participants may align with or dis-
tance themselves from other participants with a sin-
gle statement, or someone could agree with one per-
son at a particular point in the conversation and dis-
agree with them at a different point. Such localized
phenomena are also important for understanding the
broader context of that participant?s influence or role
in the conversation (Bunderson, 2003).
In this paper, we focus on a particular type of au-
thority claim, namely forum claims, as defined in
a companion paper (Bender et al, 2011). Forum
claims are based on policy, norms, or contextual
rules of behavior in the interaction. In our experi-
ments, we explore the phenomenon using Wikipedia
discussion (?talk?) pages, which are discussions as-
sociated with a Wikipedia article in which changes
to the article are debated by the editors in a series of
discussion threads. Examples of such forum claims
are:
? I do think my understanding of Wikipedia and
policy is better than yours.
? So it has all those things going for it, and
I do think it complies with [[WP:V]] and
39
[[WP:WTA]].
? Folks, please be specific and accurate when you
[[WP:CITE?cite your sources]].
We treat each discussion thread as a unique ?conver-
sation?. Each contiguous change to a conversation
is treated as a unique ?post? or turn. The dataset and
annotation scheme are described in more detail in
the companion paper.
Related previous work on a similar task focused
on detecting attempts to establish topic expertise in
Wikipedia discussions (Marin et al, 2010). Their
work used a different annotation process than that
which we build on here. In particular, the anno-
tation was performed at the discussion participant
level, with evidence marked at the turn level with-
out distinguishing the different types of claims as in
(Bender et al, 2011).
Treating the problem of detecting forum claims as
a sentence-level classification problem is similar to
other natural language processing tasks, such as sen-
timent classification. Early work in sentiment analy-
sis used unigram features (Pang and Lee, 2004; Pang
and Lee, 2005). However, error analyses suggested
that highly accurate sentiment classification requires
deeper understanding of the text, or at least higher
order n-gram features. Kim and Hovy (2006) used
unigrams, bigrams, and trigrams for extracting the
polarity of online reviews. Gilbert et al (2009) em-
ployed weighted n-grams together with additional
features to classify blog comments based on agree-
ment polarity. We conjecture that authority claim
detection will also benefit from moving beyond uni-
gram features.
The focus of the paper is on two questions in fea-
ture extraction:
? Can we exploit domain knowledge to address
overtraining issues in sparse data conditions?
? Is parse context more effective than n-gram
context?
Our experiments compare the performance obtained
using multiple methods for incorporating linguistic-
or data-driven knowledge and context into the fea-
ture space, relative to the baseline n-gram features.
Section 2 describes the general classification archi-
tecture. Section 3 describes the various features im-
plemented. Experimental results are presented in
section 4. We conclude with some analysis in sec-
tion 5 and remarks on future work in section 6.
2 System Description
We implement a classification system that assigns
a binary label to each sentence in a conversation,
indicating whether or not a forum authority claim
is being made in that sentence. To obtain higher-
level decisions, we apply a simple rule that any post
which contains at least one sentence-level forum au-
thority claim should be labeled positive. We use
the sentence-level system to obtain turn-level (post-
level) decisions instead of training directly on the
higher-level data units because the forum claims are
relatively infrequent events. Thus, we believe that
the classification using localized features will yield
better results; when using higher-level classifica-
tion units, the positive phenomena would be over-
whelmed by the negative features in the rest of the
sample, leading to poorer performance.
Given a potentially large class imbalance due to
the sparsity of the positive-labeled samples, tuning
on accuracy scores would lead to very low recall.
Thus, we tune and evaluate on F-score, defined as
the harmonic mean of precision (the percent of de-
tected claims that are correct) and recall (the percent
of true claims that are detected).
The classifier used is a maximum entropy clas-
sifier (MaxEnt), implemented using the MALLET
package (McCallum, 2002), an open-source java im-
plementation. MaxEnt models the conditional prob-
ability distribution p(c|x) of a forum claim c given
the feature vector x in a log-linear form. Model pa-
rameters ?(c)i are estimated using gradient descent
on the training data log likelihood with L2 regular-
ization.
Since our task is a two-class problem, and the ob-
jective is the F-score, we use a classification deci-
sion with decision threshold ?, i.e.
c? =
{
true if p(true|x) > ?,
false otherwise.
where ? is tuned on the development set, and the
optimal value is usually found to be much smaller
than 0.5.
40
3 Features
Past work on various NLP tasks has shown that
lexical features can be quite effective in categoriz-
ing linguistic phenomena. However, using a large
number of features when the number of labeled
training samples is small often leads to overtrain-
ing, due to the curse of dimensionality when deal-
ing with high-dimensional feature spaces (Hastie et
al., 2009). Thus, we investigate two task-dependent
methods for generating lexical feature lists: a com-
bined data- and knowledge-driven method using re-
lated Wikipedia content, and a knowledge-driven
method requiring manual feature list generation.
We conjecture that using unigram features alone
is often insufficient to capture the more complex
phenomena associated with the forum claim detec-
tion task. Empirically, we find that even the word
features most strongly correlated with the class vari-
able are frequent in both classes. In particular, due
to the class imbalance, such features are often more
prevalent in the negative class samples than the pos-
itive class samples. We believe that additional infor-
mation about the context in which such words ap-
pear in the data could be relevant for further increas-
ing their discriminative power.
One method often used in the literature to cap-
ture the context in which a particular word appears
is to define the context as its neighboring words, e.g.
by using higher-order n-grams (such as bigrams or
trigrams) or phrase patterns. However, this method
also suffers from the curse of dimensionality prob-
lem, as seen from the feature set size increase for our
training set when moving beyond unigrams (listed in
table 1.)
Features Counts
Unigrams 13,899
Bigrams 109,449
Trigrams 211,580
Table 1: N-gram feature statistics
To understand the meaning of a sentence, features
based only on surface word forms may not be suf-
ficient. We propose an alternate method that aug-
ments each word with information from the struc-
ture of a parse tree for each sentence in which that
word appears.
Additionally, we use a small set of other (non-
lexical) features, motivated by anecdotal examples
from Wikipedia discussions.
3.1 Generating Word Feature Lists
We propose two knowledge-assisted methods for se-
lecting lexical features, as described below, both of
which are combined with data-driven selection of
the most discriminative features based on mutual in-
formation.
3.1.1 Leveraging ?Parallel? Data
The Wikipedia data naturally has ?parallel? data
in that each talk page is associated with an article,
and there are additional pages that describe forum
policies and norms of behavior. By comparing arti-
cle and talk pages, one can extract words that tend to
be associated with editor discussions (words which
have high TF-IDF in a discussion but low TF-IDF in
the associated article). By comparing to the poli-
cies pages, one can identify words that are likely
to be used in policy-related forum claims (words
with high average TF-IDF in the corpus of policy
and norms of behavior pages.) To select a single
reduced set of words, we pick only the words with
sufficiently high TF-IDF in the discussion pages. In
practice, to avoid tuning additional parameters, we
selected the settings which yielded the largest list
(with approximately 520 words) and let the feature
selection process trim down the list. Some words
identified by the feature selection process include:
? words shared with the knowledge-driven list
(discussed below): wikipedia, policy, sources,
guidelines, reliable, rules, please
? relevant words not appearing in the knowledge-
driven list: categories, pages, article, wiki,
editing
? other words: was, not, who, is, see
3.1.2 Knowledge-Driven Word List
The knowledge-driven method uses lists of words
picked by trained linguists who developed the guide-
lines for the process of annotating our dataset. Six
lists were developed, containing keywords and short
phrases related to:
41
? behavior in discussion forums (reliable, re-
spectful, balanced, unacceptable)
? politeness (please, would you, could you,
would you mind)
? positioning and expressing neutrality (point of
view, neutral, opinion, bias, good faith)
? accepted practices in discussion forums (prac-
tice, custom, conflict, consensus)
? sourcing information (source, citing, rules, pol-
icy, original research)
? Wikipedia-specific keywords (wikipedia, ad-
ministrator, registered, unregistered)
In all our experiments, the various word lists were
concatenated and used as a single set of 75 words.
Phrases were treated as single keywords for pur-
poses of feature extraction, i.e. a single feature was
extracted for each phrase. If another word on the list
were a substring of a given phrase, and the phrase
were found to appear in the text of a given sample,
both the single word and the phrase were kept in that
sample.
3.2 Adding Higher-Level Linguistic Context
As an alternative to using n-grams as lexical context,
we propose using syntactic context, represented by
information about the parse tree of each sentence in
the data. Given the low amount of available training
data, learning n-gram features we believe is likely to
overtrain, due to the combinatorial explosion in the
feature space. On the other hand, adding parse tree
context information to each feature results in a much
smaller increase in feature space, due to the smaller
number of non-terminal tokens as compared to the
vocabulary size. To extract such features, the data
was run through a version of the Berkeley parser
(Petrov et al, 2006) trained on the Wall Street Jour-
nal portion of the Penn Treebank.
For each sentence, the one-best parse was used to
extract the list of non-terminals above each word in
the sequence. The list was then filtered to a shorter
subset of non-terminal tags. The words augmented
with non-terminal parse tree tags were treated as in-
dividual features and used in the usual way. We used
a context of at most three non-terminal tags (i.e. the
POS tag and two additional levels if present.)
For simplicity, multi-word phrases from the
knowledge-driven word list were either removed en-
tirely, or split with each word augmented indepen-
dently. Using this method resulted in the feature
counts shown in table 2. In particular, we see that
splitting phrases instead of removing them results
in almost twice as many parse-augmented word fea-
tures, in great part due to function words appearing
in a variety of unrelated contexts.
Features Counts
All unigrams 38,384
Data-driven list 5,935
Knowledge-driven list, no phrases 504
Knowledge-driven list, split phrases 908
Table 2: Parse feature statistics
3.3 Other Features
We use a number of additional features not directly
related to lexical cues. We extract the following sen-
tence complexity features:
? the length of the sentence
? the average length of the 20% longest words in
the sentence
Additionally, we use a number of other features mo-
tivated by our analysis of the data. These features
are:
? the number of words containing only upper-
case letters in that sentence
? the number of (external) URLs in the sentence
? the number of links to Wikipedia pages con-
taining norms of forum behavior or policies
? the number of other Wikipedia-internal links
4 Experiments
4.1 Dataset and Procedure
We use data from the Authority and Alignment in
Wikipedia Discussions (AAWD) corpus described
in our companion paper (Bender et al, 2011). The
dataset contains English Wikipedia discussions an-
notated with authority claims by four annotators.
Not all the discussions are annotated by multiple an-
notators. Thereby in the train/dev/eval split, we se-
lect most of the discussions that are multiply anno-
tated for the dev and eval sets. The statistics of each
set are shown in table 3.
42
Train Dev Eval
# files 226 56 55
# sentences 17512 4990 4200
Table 3: Data statistics
A number of experiments were conducted to as-
sess the performance of the various feature types
proposed. We evaluate the effect of individual fea-
tures when used in a MaxEnt classifier, as well as
combined features.
We tune the number of features selected by the
mutual information between a feature and the class
labels, which is a common approach applied in text
categorization (Yang and Pedersen, 1997). Fea-
ture selection and parameter tuning of the decision
threshold ? are performed independently for each
condition. We include the number of features se-
lected in each case alongside the results. The per-
formance of the various systems described in this
paper is evaluated using F-score. The numbers cor-
responding to the overall best performance obtained
on the dev and eval sets are highlighted in boldface
in the appropriate table.
4.2 N-gram Features
First, we examine the performance of lexical fea-
tures extracted at different n-gram lengths. We used
maximum n-gram sizes 1, 2, and 3, and the counts
of n-grams were used as features for MaxEnt. The
results are summarized in table 4.
Maximum # selected Dev Eval
n-gram length features
1 50 0.321 0.270
2 50 0.331 0.300
3 20 0.333 0.290
Table 4: N-gram feature results
4.3 ?Smart? Word Features
The second set of experiments compares the perfor-
mance of various methods of selecting unigram lex-
ical features. We compare using the full vocabulary
with the two selection methods, outlined in section
3.1. The combination of the two simpler selection
methods was also examined, under the assumption
that the parallel-data-driven features may be more
complete, but also more likely to overtrain, since
they were derived directly from the data. The results
are summarized in table 5.
Feature # selected Dev Eval
features
All words 50 0.321 0.270
Parallel corpus words 10 0.281 0.231
Hand-picked words 50 0.340 0.272
Parallel corpus + 100 0.303 0.259
hand-picked words
Table 5: Smart word feature results
4.4 Parse-Augmented Features
A third set of experiments examines the effect of
adding parsing-related context to the features. We
use the same set of features as in section 3.2. For the
knowledge-driven features, we present both versions
of the parse features, the one in which phrases were
split into their constituent words before augmenta-
tion with parse features, and the one from which
phrases were removed altogether. The results are
summarized in table 6.
Word list to # selected Dev Eval
derive features from features
All words 50 0.352 0.445
Parallel corpus words 20 0.336 0.433
Hand-picked words 50 0.314 0.306
(no phrases)
Hand-picked words 50 0.328 0.310
(split phrases)
Parallel corpus +
hand-picked words 50 0.367 0.457
(no phrases)
Parallel corpus +
hand-picked words 50 0.359 0.450
(split phrases)
Table 6: Parse-augmented feature results
We perform a small empirical analysis of features
in the model with parse-augmented features for all
words. Table 7 contains some of the most com-
mon features, their counts for each class, and model
43
weight (if selected.) As expected, the feature with
the highest relative frequency in the positive class
gets the highest model weight. Other features with
high absolute frequency in the positive class also get
some positive weight. All other features are dis-
carded during model training.
Feature # # Weight
false true
Wikipedia NNP NP PP 60 10 1.035
Wikipedia NNP NP S 57 12 1.121
Wikipedia NNP NP NP 26 16 1.209
Wikipedia NNP NP VP 13 3 -
Wikipedia JJ NP NP 6 0 -
Wikipedia NNP NP FRAG 1 3 2.115
Table 7: Parse feature examples
4.5 Other Features
A fourth set of experiments shows the effect of
Wikipedia-specific markup features described in
Section 4.5. The results for the Wikipedia policy
page feature are listed in table 8. The other features
were found to not be useful, resulting in F-scores of
less than 0.1.
Feature Dev Eval
Wikipedia policy page 0.341 0.622
Table 8: Other feature results
4.6 Combined Features
The previous sets of experiments reveal that the fea-
ture of links to Wikipedia policy page is the most
discriminative individual feature. Therefore, in the
next set of experiments, we combine other features
with the Wikipedia policy page feature to train Max-
Ent models. We did not include any of the other fea-
tures whose results were summarized in section 4.5,
due to their very low individual performance. The
results are shown in table 9.
4.7 Turn-level Classification
We propagate the sentence-level classification out-
put to the turn-level if that turn has at least one sen-
tence classified as forum claim. For simplicity, in-
stead of running experiments on all the feature con-
Features other than # selected
Wikipedia policy features Dev Eval
page markup
N-gram features
unigram 20 0.448 0.550
unigram + bigram 50 0.447 0.551
unigram + bigram 100 0.446 0.596
+ trigram
Smart word features
Parallel corpus words 20 0.427 0.483
Hand-picked words 50 0.468 0.596
Parallel corpus + 100 0.451 0.569
hand-picked
Parse-augmented features
All words 50 0.398 0.610
Parallel corpus words 100 0.381 0.623
Hand-picked words 20 0.392 0.632
(no phrases)
Hand-picked words 100 0.392 0.558
(split phrases)
Parallel corpus +
hand-picked words 50 0.400 0.596
(no phrases)
Parallel corpus +
hand-picked words 50 0.398 0.607
(split phrases)
Table 9: Combined feature results
figurations, we use only the one that provides the
highest dev set F-score, which is the MaxEnt clas-
sifier with Wikipedia policy page markup and hand-
picked keyword features combined. The resulting
F-score is 0.57 for the development set and 0.66 for
the evaluation set.
5 Discussion
5.1 Data Variability
One of the most notable observations in the exper-
iments above is the high degree of data variabil-
ity. A simple rule-based classifier that uses only the
Wikipedia policy page markup feature gives the best
results on the evaluation set, but it is not nearly as
effective on the development set. Simply put, the
markup is a reliable cue when it is available, but it
is not always present. Table 10 demonstrates this
44
through the precision and recall results of the dev
and eval sets. The variability also extends to the util-
ity of parse features.
Dev Eval
Precision 0.703 0.862
Recall 0.225 0.487
Table 10: Precision and recall of the rule-based system
To better understand this issue, we reran the best
case configurations on the dev and eval sets with
the role of the dev and eval sets reversed, i.e. us-
ing the eval set for feature selection. For the best
case configuration on the dev set (Wikipedia policy
page markup and hand-picked keywords), 50 and 20
features are selected when tuned on dev and eval
sets, respectively, and the latter feature set is a sub-
set of the former one. For the best case configuration
on the eval set (Wikipedia policy page markup and
parse-augmented features derived from hand-picked
words without phrases), the same 20 features are se-
lected when tuned on dev or eval sets. For each
configuration, the combined feature set from the
two different selection experiments was then used
to train a new model, which was evaluated on the
combined dev and eval test sets. The precision/recall
trade-off is illustrated in figure 1, which can be com-
pared to a precision of 0.78 and recall of 0.32 using
the rule-based system on the two test sets combined.
While this is a ?cheating experiment? in that the test
data was used in feature selection, it gives a bet-
ter idea of the potential gain from parse-augmented
lexical features for this task. From the figure, both
best-case configurations outperform the rule-based
system, and an operating point with more balanced
precision and recall can be chosen. Furthermore, the
system with parse-augmented features is able to op-
erate at a high recall while still maintaining reason-
able precision, which is desirable in some applica-
tions.
5.2 Feature Analysis
The variability of data in this task poses challenges
for learning features that improve over a simple
knowledge-driven baseline. However, the results in
section 4 provide some insights.
First, unigram features alone provide poor perfor-
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0Precision
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Rec
all
policy markup & hand-picked wordspolicy markup & hand-pickedwords+parse w/o phrasespolicy markup only
Figure 1: Precision-recall curve
mance. Adding bigrams improves the performance
on both the development and the evaluation sets,
while further adding trigrams degrades the eval set
performance. This indicates that there are some dis-
criminative high-order n-grams, but also too many
noisy n-grams to extract the discriminative n-grams
effectively with a small amount of training data.
The smarter word features do not perform as well
as n-gram features when used alone (i.e. as uni-
grams), but they provide an improvement over n-
grams when used with parse features. With parse
features, the parallel corpus words are more effec-
tive than the hand-picked words, but the best per-
formance is achieved with the combination. When
combined with the Wikipedia policy page markup
features, the hand-picked words are the most useful,
with the best eval set results obained with the parse-
augmented version.
Overall, the best performance seems to be
obtained by using the combined feature set of
Wikipedia policy page markup and hand-picked
keyword features with parse augmentation. How-
ever, the test set variability discussed in section 5.1
suggests that it would be useful to assess the findings
on additional data.
5.3 Further Challenges
By definition, a forum authority claim is composed
of a mention ofWikipedia norms and policies to sup-
45
port a previously-mentioned opinion proposed by
the participant. While the detection of mentions of
Wikipedia norms is relatively easy, we conjecture
that part of the difficulty of this task lies in identify-
ing whether a mention of Wikipedia norms is for the
purpose of supporting an opinion, or just a mention
as part of the general conversation. For example, the
Wikipedia policy neutral point of view (NPOV) is a
frequently used term in talk pages. It can be used
as support for the participant?s suggested modifica-
tion, or it can be just a mention of the policy without
the purpose of supporting any opinion. For example,
the sentence This section should be deleted because
it violates NPOV is a forum claim, because the term
NPOV is used to support the participant?s request.
However, the sentence Thank you for removing the
NPOV tag is not a forum claim, as the participant
is not presenting any opinion. For these reasons, the
wordNPOV alone does not provide enough informa-
tion for reliable decisions; contextual information,
such as n-grams and parse-augmented features, must
be explored. On the other hand, a direct reference to
a Wikipedia policy page is much less ambiguous, as
it is almost always used in the context of strengthen-
ing an opinion or claim.
Another factor that makes the task challenging is
the sparsity of the data. It is time-consuming to pro-
duce high quality annotations for forum claims, as
many claims are subtle and therefore difficult to de-
tect, even by human annotators. Given the limited
amount of data, many features have low occurrences
and cannot be learned properly. The data sparsity
is an even bigger problem when the feature space
is increased, for example by using contextual fea-
tures such as n-grams and parse-augmented words.
On the other hand, while it may be easier to capture
the mention of Wikipedia policies using a limited
set of keywords or phrases, it is difficult to model
the behavior of presenting an opinion when the data
is sparse, as the following forum claim examples
show:
? I think we can all agree that this issue bears
mentioning, however the blurb as it stands is
decidedly not NPOV, nor does it fit the format-
ting guidelines for a Wikipedia article.
? As a reminder, the threshold for inclusion in
Wikipedia is whether material is attributable to
a reliable published source, not whether it is
true.
? If you think that some editor is violating NPOV,
you can pursue dispute resolution, but it?s no
justification for moving or removing valid in-
formation.
? If you?d like to talk the position that quotes from
people?s opinions do not belong here, fine, but
it is extremely POV to insist only on eliminat-
ing editorials that you disagree with, while not
challenging quotes from your own POV.
The examples above require deeper understanding
of the sentences to identify the embedding of opin-
ions. Modeling such phenomena using word-based
contextual features when the training data is sparse
is particularly hard. Even with parse-augmented fea-
tures that do not increase the feature dimensionality
as fast as n-grams, a certain amount of data is needed
to obtain reliable statistics. Clustering of the features
into a lower dimensional space would provide one
possible solution to this issue, but how the cluster-
ing can be done robustly remains an open question.
6 Conclusions
We have presented systems to detect forum authority
claims, which are claims of credibility using forum
norms, in Wikipedia talk pages. The Wikipedia pol-
icy page markup feature was found to be the most ef-
fective individual feature for this task. We have also
developed approaches to further improve the perfor-
mance by knowledge-driven selection of lexical fea-
tures and adding context in the form of parse infor-
mation.
Future work includes extending the contextual
features, such as parse-augmented word features, to
other types of linguistic information, and automat-
ically learning the types of contexts that might be
most useful for each word. Feature clustering meth-
ods will also be investigated, in order to reduce fea-
ture space dimensionality and deal with data spar-
sity. To improve the effectiveness of the parse fea-
tures, domain adaptation of the parser or use of a
parser trained on data closer matched to our target
domain could be investigated. We will also plan to
extend this work to other types of authority claims in
46
Wikipedia and to other multi-party discussion gen-
res.
Acknowledgments
This research was funded by the Office of the Di-
rector of National Intelligence (ODNI), Intelligence
Advanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA). All
statements of fact, opinion or conclusions contained
herein are those of the authors and should not be
construed as representing the official views or poli-
cies of IARPA, the ODNI or the U.S. Government.
References
R. Barzilay, M. Collins, J. Hirschberg, and S. Whittaker.
2000. The rules behind roles: Identifying speaker role
in radio broadcasts. In Proceedings of AAAI, pages
679?684.
E. M. Bender, J. Morgan, M. Oxley, M. Zachry,
B. Hutchinson, A. Marin, B. Zhang, and M. Osten-
dorf. 2011. Annotating social acts: Authority claims
and alignment moves in wikipedia talk pages. In Pro-
ceedings of ACL ? Workshop on Language in Social
Media.
J. S. Bunderson. 2003. Recognizing and utilizing exper-
tise in work groups: A status characteristics perspec-
tive. Administrative Science Quarterly, 48(4):557?
591.
E. Gilbert, T. Bergstrom, and K. Karahalios. 2009. Blogs
Are Echo Chambers: Blogs Are Echo Chambers. In
Proceedings of HICSS, pages 1?10.
T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, and J. Friedman. 2009. The
Elements of Statistical Learning: Data Mining, Infer-
ence, and Prediction, Second Edition. Springer Series
in Statistics. Springer, September.
B. Hutchinson, B. Zhang, and M. Ostendorf. 2010. Un-
supervised broadcast conversation speaker role label-
ing. In Proceedings of ICASSP, pages 5322?5325.
S. M. Kim and E. Hovy. 2006. Automatic identification
of pro and con reasons in online reviews. In Proceed-
ings of COLING-ACL, pages 483?490.
K. Laskowski, M. Ostendorf, and T. Schultz. 2008.
Modeling vocal interaction for text-independent par-
ticipant characterization in multi-party conversation.
In ISCA/ACL SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Di-
alogue, pages 194?201.
F. Liu and Y. Liu. 2007. Soundbite identification using
reference and automatic transcripts of broadcast news
speech. In Proceedings of ASRU, pages 653?658.
Y. Liu. 2006. Initial study on automatic identification of
speaker role in broadcast news speech. In Proceedings
of HLT, pages 81?84.
A. Marin, M. Ostendorf, B. Zhang, J. T. Morgan, M. Ox-
ley, M. Zachry, and E. M. Bender. 2010. Detecting
authority bids in online discussions. In Proceedings of
SLT, pages 49?54.
S. Maskey and J. Hirschberg. 2006. Soundbite detection
in broadcast news domain. In Proceedings of Inter-
speech, pages 1543?1546.
A. K. McCallum. 2002. MALLET: A machine learning
for language toolkit. http://mallet.cs.umass.edu.
B. Pang and L. Lee. 2004. A Sentimental Education:
Sentiment Analysis Using Subjectivity Summarization
Based on Minimum Cuts. In Proceedings of ACL,
pages 271?278.
B. Pang and L. Lee. 2005. Seeing stars: exploiting class
relationships for sentiment categorization with respect
to rating scales. In Proceedings of ACL, pages 115?
124.
S. Petrov, L. Barrett, R. Thibaux, and D. Klein. 2006.
Learning accurate, compact, and interpretable tree an-
notation. In Proceedings of COLING-ACL, pages
433?440.
A. Vinciarelli. 2007. Speakers role recognition in mul-
tiparty audio recordings using social network analy-
sis and duration distribution modeling. IEEE Transac-
tions on Multimedia, 9(6):1215?1226.
Y. Yang and J. O. Pedersen. 1997. A Comparative Study
on Feature Selection in Text Categorization. In Pro-
ceedings of ICML, pages 412?420.
47
Proceedings of the Workshop on Language in Social Media (LSM 2011), pages 48?57,
Portland, Oregon, 23 June 2011. c?2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
Annotating Social Acts: Authority Claims and Alignment Moves
in Wikipedia Talk Pages
Emily M. Bender?, Jonathan T. Morgan?, Meghan Oxley?, Mark Zachry?,
Brian Hutchinson?, Alex Marin?, Bin Zhang?, Mari Ostendorf?
?Department of Linguistics, ?Department of Human Centered Design and Engineering
?Department of Electrical Engineering
University of Washington
{ebender,jmo25,what,zachry}@uw.edu, {brianhutchinson,iskander,binz,mo}@ee.washington.edu
Abstract
We present the AAWD corpus, a collection
of 365 discussions drawn from Wikipedia talk
pages and annotated with labels capturing two
kinds of social acts: alignment moves and au-
thority claims. We describe these social acts
and our annotation process, and analyze the
resulting data set for interactions between par-
ticipant status and social acts and between the
social acts themselves.
1 Introduction
This paper presents a new annotated resource: the
Authority and Alignment in Wikipedia Discussions
(AAWD) corpus (available from http://ssli.
ee.washington.edu/projects/SCIL.html).
The AAWD corpus contains discussions from
English-language Wikipedia talk pages extracted
from the 2008 Wikipedia data dump and annotated
for two types of social acts: authority claims and
positive/negative alignment moves. In brief, an
authority claim is a statement made by a discussion
participant aimed at bolstering their credibility in
the discussion. An alignment move is a statement
by a participant which explicitly positions them as
agreeing or disagreeing with another participant or
participants regarding a particular topic.
These annotations are intended to make acces-
sible for automated processing two interesting and
characteristic aspects of interaction in online discus-
sion forums. As a dataset for computational and
sociolinguistic analysis, the discussion pages within
Wikipedia are valuable for several reasons. First, the
interaction among the participants is nearly entirely
captured within the dataset, and all of the ?identity-
work? (Bucholtz and Hall, 2010) done by Wikipedia
discussion participants needs to be done directly in
the text of their comments. Furthermore, the discus-
sions tend to be task-driven, focused on the shared
goal of improving the associated article. This leads
the data to be a particularly rich source of linguistic
expressions of authority and alignment.
Our annotations represent a kind of information
which is rather different from that involved in NLP
tasks such as POS tagging, morphological analysis,
parsing and semantic role labeling. Such tasks in-
volve recognizing information that is implicit in the
linguistic signal but nonetheless part of its struc-
ture. Tasks such as named-entity recognition and
word sense disambiguation are also close to the lin-
guistic structure of the signal. Authority claims and
alignment moves, on the other hand, are examples
of communicative moves aimed at social position-
ing of a discussant within a group of participants,
which may be specialized dialog acts but are referred
to here as ?social acts.? We distinguish social acts
from ?social events? as described in (Agarwal and
Rambow, 2010): social events correspond to types
of interactions among people, whereas a social act
is associated with a fine-grained social goal and re-
flected in the specific choices of words and ortho-
graphic or prosodic cues at the level of a turn.
The primary value of this new data set is in facil-
itating computational modeling of a new task type,
i.e. the identification of fine-grained social acts in
linguistic interaction. While there has been some
prior work on detecting agreements and disagree-
48
ments in multiparty discussions (Hillard et al, 2003;
Galley et al, 2004), which is related to detecting
positive/negative alignment moves, most previous
work on authority bids has involved descriptive stud-
ies, e.g. (Galegher et al, 1998). Computational
modeling of these phenomena and automatic detec-
tion will help with understanding effective argumen-
tation strategies in online discussions and automatic
identification of divisive or controversial discussions
and online trolls. We believe that these tasks also
provide an interesting arena in which to study lin-
guistic feature engineering and feature selection. As
with tasks such as sentiment analysis, a simple ?bag-
of-words? model with word or even n-gram-based
features is not sufficiently powerful to detect many
instances of these social acts, where combinations of
positive and negative words must be interpreted in
context, e.g. absolutely is positive alone but ampli-
fies a negative in absolutely not, and yeah in yeah,
I want to correct something John said of course
doesn?t necessarily indicate agreement. The typical
scenario where hand-annotated training data is lim-
ited presents a challenge for learning phrase patterns
that discriminate social acts.
In the remainder of this paper, we further describe
the social acts and annotation schemata (Section 2),
provide details of the AAWD corpus (Section 3),
and analyze the distribution of the social acts (Sec-
tion 4). This analysis describes the distribution of
the social acts and tests hypotheses about their inter-
actions with each other and with user status.
2 Annotation Schemata
2.1 Authority Claims
The ability to persuade others to believe in one?s
statements or the soundness of one?s judgments is
a necessary component of human social interac-
tion. In order to establish the necessary credibil-
ity to secure the belief or assent of others, commu-
nicators will often couch their statements in some
broadly-recognized basis for authority. These ?ar-
guments from authority? have been recognized as
an important component of informal logic by many
language philosophers (Liu, 1997), including John
Locke (1959 [1690]). In recent decades the self-
presentation of authority has been studied in a va-
riety of spoken and written contexts by scholars
from disciplines such as communication, rhetoric,
health studies, sociolinguistics, linguistic pragmat-
ics and political science in order to understand the
strategies that communicators operating in differ-
ent genres and media employ to establish them-
selves as credible discursive participants. Studies
of online product reviews (Mackiewicz, 2010), on-
line political deliberation (Jensen, 2003), scientific
publications (Thompson, 1993), online forum posts
(Galegher et al, 1998; Richardson, 2003) and radio
talk-shows (Thornborrow, 2001) have revealed that
considerations of genre, medium and social context
all shape the ways interactants attempt to claim the
authority to be listened to and taken seriously.
From the perspective of discourse analysis, au-
thority claims provide an interesting lens through
which to view a text, as the overall frequency of
claims can reflect the nature or purpose of the dis-
course (e.g. task-oriented collaboration vs. undi-
rected conversation) and the distribution of claim
types can reveal features of the social context in
which they are made, such as shared norms, prac-
tices and community values. For example, since cer-
tain bases for authority may be seen as more credi-
ble than others in certain contexts (such as citation
of peer-reviewed publications in academic scholar-
ship, or references to personal experience in online
support groups), the prevalence and distribution of
different types of claims in a written text or a con-
versation transcript can illuminate the shared values
of speakers and audiences in a given genre (Galegher
et al, 1998). Although the linguistic construction of
authority claims can vary greatly according to the
genre of the communication, within a single genre
there is often great regularity in the ways claims
are made, such as the common I?m a long-time
listener introduction used by radio talk-show call-
in guests. Even across genres, recognizable types
emerge: references to personal credentials (such as
education or profession) are found to be important
in newsgroup messages (Richardson, 2003), product
reviews (Mackiewicz, 2010) and online scientific ar-
ticle comments (Shanahan, 2010).
Our taxonomy of authority claims was itera-
tively developed based on our empirical analysis
of conversational interaction in two different gen-
res: political talk shows and Wikipedia discus-
sion pages (Oxley et al, 2010), with reference to
49
the literature cited above. Our codebook (avail-
able from http://ssli.ee.washington.edu/
projects/SCIL.html) includes detailed defini-
tions as well as positive and negative examples for
each claim type.
We classify authority claims into the following
types (examples are drawn from our data):
Credentials: Credentials claims involve refer-
ence to education, training, or a history of work in
an area. (Ex: Speaking as a native born Midwest-
erner who is also a professional writer. . . )
Experiential: Experiential claims are based on
an individual?s involvement in or witnessing of an
event. (Ex: If I recall correctly, God is mentioned in
civil ceremonies in Snohomish County, Washington,
the only place I?ve witnessed one.)
Institutional: Institutional claims are based on
an individual?s position within an organization struc-
ture that governs the current discussion forum or has
power to affect the topic or direction of the discus-
sion. (Not attested in our corpus.)
Forum: Forum claims are based on policy,
norms, or contextual rules of behavior in the in-
teraction. (Ex: Do any of these meet wikipedia?s
[[WP:RS | Reliable Sources ]] criteria?)
External: External claims are based on an out-
side authority or source of expertise, such as a book,
magazine article, website, written law, press release,
or court decision. (Ex: The treaty of international
law which states that wars have to begin with a
declaration is the Hague Convention relative to the
Opening of Hostilities from 1907.)
Social Expectations: Social Expectations claims
are based on the intentions or expectations (what
they think, feel or believe) of groups or communities
that exist beyond the current conversational context.
(Ex: I think in the minds of most people, including
the government, the word ?war? and a formal dec-
laration of war have come apart.)
2.2 Alignment Moves
In multiparty discourse, relationships among par-
ticipants manifest themselves in social moves that
participants make to demonstrate alignment with or
against other participants. Expressing alignment
with another participant functions as a means of
enhancing solidarity with that participant while ex-
pressing alignment against another participant main-
tains social distance between conversational partic-
ipants, particularly in situations where participants
may be previously unacquainted with each other
(Svennevig, 1999). Changes in the alignment of par-
ticipants toward one another or ?shifts in footing?
may reflect changes in interpersonal relationships or
may be more transitory, demonstrating minor con-
cessions and critiques embedded within larger, more
stable patterns of participant agreement and dis-
agreement (Goffman, 1981; Wine, 2008).
As Wikipedia editors negotiate about article con-
tent, they make statements that support or oppose
propositions suggested by other editors and thereby
publicly align either with or against other editors in
the discussion. Although ways of expressing agree-
ment and disagreement vary according to power re-
lations between participants, participant goals, and
conversational context (Rees-Miller, 2000), pre-
vious research has suggested that expressions of
agreement and disagreement in written language are
more explicit than oral expressions of agreement and
disagreement (Mulkay, 1985; Mulkay, 1986) and
that statements of agreement are particularly explicit
in online discussions (Baym, 1996).
We classify alignment moves into positive and
negative types, according to whether the participant
is agreeing or disagreeing with the target:
Positive alignment moves express agreement
with the opinions of another participant. Positive
alignment is annotated in cases of explicit agree-
ment, praise/thanking, positive reference to another
participant?s point (e.g. As Joe pointed out. . . ), or
where other clear indicators of positive alignment
are present.
Negative alignment moves express disagreement
with the opinions of another participant. Negative
alignment is annotated in cases of explicit disagree-
ment, doubting, sarcastic praise, criticism/insult,
dismissing, or where other clear indicators of neg-
ative alignment (such as typographical cues) are
present.
Based on our experience using the types of au-
thority claims to diagnose and correct sources of
inter-annotator disagreement (see ?3.3 below), we
developed subtypes of positive and negative align-
ment. While these do not have the same theoretical
grounding as the types of authority claims, they did
serve the same purpose of improving our annotation
50
over time.
We annotate a target for each alignment move,
which may be one or more specific other parties in
the conversation, the group as the whole, or some-
one outside the conversation. In addition, we in-
clude a category labeled ?unclear? for cases where
there is an alignment move, but the annotators are
not able to discern its target. Again, the codebook
includes example subtypes as part of detailed defini-
tions as well as positive and negative examples for
each alignment type.
3 The Corpus
3.1 Source Data
Wikipedia talk pages (also called discussion pages)
are editable pages on which editors can take part in
threaded, asynchronous discussions about the con-
tent of other pages. All editors potentially interested
in a given article can join the conversation on that
article?s talk page. Sometimes these conversations
take the form of a deliberative exchange or even a
heated argument as editors advocate different ideas
about such things as the content or form of an ar-
ticle. Each edit to the talk pages is recorded as a
unique revision in the system and thus becomes part
of the permanent record of system activity.
Wikipedia constitutes a particularly valuable nat-
ural laboratory for studies such as this one, for
several reasons. First, the interaction among the
participants is almost entirely captured within the
Wikipedia database: while some Wikipedians might
interact with each other in person or in other online
fora (such as IRC or mailing lists), this is the excep-
tion rather than the rule. Furthermore, while partici-
pants often maintain persistent identities (usernames
for registered users; IP addresses for unregistered
ones) there are no cues to social identities available
to the participants beyond what is captured in the
digital record. Therefore all of the effort that partic-
ipants put into constructing their online identities is
in the record for analysis. Second, the discussions
on Wikipedia talk pages tend to be goal-oriented, as
the discussion topic is the Wikipedia article that the
participants are collaboratively editing. This goal-
orientation motivates participants to explicitly align
with each other in the course of discussions and but-
tress their arguments with authority claims. Finally,
the Wikipedia dataset contains rich metadata, such
as the date and time of each edit (identified by re-
vision id) to every article or talk page; the editor
responsible for the edit (identified by username or
IP address, depending on registration status); and
markup such as hyperlinks and formatting used in
the textual content of each edit. These metadata al-
low for sophisticated data analysis at the editor level
(e.g. how many edits made by one editor in a given
span of time) and the page level (e.g. how many ed-
itors have participated in a talk page discussion).
The Wikimedia Foundation frequently releases
the database dump of the Wikipedia pages in the
form of XML (available at http://download.
wikimedia.org). The database dumps are cate-
gorized into languages, and for each language, there
are XML files corresponding to different levels of
detail in terms of the information they contain. To
get the information on all revisions, we used the
largest database dump, which contains all Wikipedia
pages and complete edit history. The XML file was
parsed and a database created locally with all the
revision information for both main pages and talk
pages. We then constructed queries to retrieve the
main pages and corresponding talk pages based on
a list of topics for which extensive discussions are
likely to occur.
Our data is drawn from a set of 365 discussions
from 47 talk pages. The discussions were selected
to contain at least 5 turns and at least 4 human par-
ticipants.1 The earliest edit in our data set is from
January 29, 2002 and the latest is from January 6,
2008. A total of 1,509 editors collectively make
6,066 turns in this data. Of the 365 discussions,
185 were annotated for both alignment moves and
authority claims. An additional 26 were annotated
for alignment only and an additional 154 were an-
notated for authority only. The numbers of editors
and turns in these sets are shown in Table 1.
3.2 Annotation Units
A Wikipedia talk page is in itself a wiki-style docu-
ment. Thus, each modification to a talk page by an
editor can modify multiple sections of the page. We
define a ?turn? as a contiguous body of text on the
1Wikipedia discussions may also include contributions by
automated ?bots?.
51
Annotated for
authority alignment both
pages 47 36 36
discussions 339 211 185
editors 1,417 988 896
turns 5,636 3,390 2,960
Table 1: Pages, discussions, editors and turns in anno-
tated data
corresponding page that was modified as part of a
single revision. Thus, a single revision may result in
multiple turns being added. Each turn may include
one or more paragraphs of text, either existing but
modified, or new additions. We annotated authority
claims at the paragraph level and alignment moves at
the turn level. The larger unit is used for alignment
moves because the phenomenon as defined can span
a larger section of text.
The annotation tool (a modified version of LDC?s
XTrans (Glenn et al, 2009)) allowed annotators to
indicate the presence and type of claims or moves in
each annotation unit, in addition to selecting spans
of text corresponding to each social act. For align-
ment moves, within a turn, alignment of the same
type (positive or negative) with the same target was
annotated as a single alignment move, even across
multiple sentences. Where the type or target dif-
fered, we annotated up to three separate alignment
moves per annotation unit. For authority claims, we
also annotated up to three claims per annotation unit,
with each claim identified by a single span of text.
Claims in separate sentences of an annotation unit
counted as separate even if they were of the same
type. Figure 1 gives an example from our codebook
of a turn with multiple alignment moves.
3.3 Annotation Process
Each discussion thread was annotated independently
by two or more annotators. Inter-annotator agree-
ment was calculated at weekly intervals to assess
annotation progress and identify areas of disagree-
ment. Adjudicators also performed ?spot checks? of
annotated data weekly and provided feedback when
there were disagreements among annotators or when
codes seemed to be inconsistently or erroneously ap-
plied. The codebooks for authority claims and align-
ment moves were also iteratively refined with the ad-
dition of positive and negative examples and specific
linguistic cues commonly associated with particular
move or claim types based on spot-check results and
annotator feedback.
Two strategies that proved useful in maintaining
consistency in the frequency and reliability of cod-
ing across annotators were the computation of av-
erage agreement and comparison of overall counts
of each codable unit on a weekly basis. Comput-
ing average agreement allowed adjudicators to iden-
tify particular categories that were proving espe-
cially difficult to code consistently, and to better fo-
cus their efforts on re-training annotators and up-
dating the relevant sections of the annotation guide-
lines. Comparing counts of the number of times two
annotators had coded a particular category over the
same number of discussions also proved useful for
identifying potential problems with under- or over-
coding of a category by a particular annotator.
3.4 Reconciliation
The manual annotation process was completed in-
dependently by each annotator, resulting in multiple
sets of labels. To create a single copy of the data that
can be used in learning experiments, an algorithm
was designed to merge the annotations into a single,
?master? version. The algorithm balances annota-
tion consistency and simplicity of the merging pro-
cess. We treat the annotations for each unit in a file
as a set with respect to type: Multiple labels of the
same type are treated as a single label for purposes
of reconciliation, with only one label of each type
allowed for each annotation unit.
We mark each social act which had been identi-
fied by at least two annotators as having ?high con-
fidence.? If a social act was identified by only one
annotator in that annotation unit, it is marked as hav-
ing ?low confidence.? This procedure yields two sets
of social act types found in each annotation unit, one
consisting of the high confidence labels, and another
of the low confidence labels. The labels from each
set are kept distinct, i.e. for each label in the high
confidence set, the corresponding label in the low
confidence set has the suffix ? single? appended to
the high confidence label.
Aggregated social act labels are propagated to
the sentence level by using a dynamic program-
ming algorithm to match sentences (determined by
automatic segmentation) with the keyword spans
52
speaker turn transcript alignment1 alignment2 alignment3
S1 3 <k1>S2, I think you?re right</k1>. <k2>S3?s idea
is way off base </k2>, but <k1> you seem to have a
good solution</k1>. <k3>But I disagree with your
name for the section</k3> ? Iraq War is used in the
United States media and should be used here as well.
positive:S2:
:explicit
agreement
negative:S3:
:explicit
disagreement
negative:S2:
:explicit
disagreement
Figure 1: Example from alignment codebook
based on overlap. A sentence could have multi-
ple positive labels if one or more annotators la-
beled it for different types in the high or low con-
fidence set. Sentences in turns with a marked
social act but not aligned to text spans are la-
beled as ?unused? due to the ambiguity associated
with a limit on the number of social acts anno-
tated per unit. All sentences in an annotation unit
for which no annotator found any positive labels
are labeled with the negative class. The data dis-
tributed at http://ssli.ee.washington.edu/
projects/SCIL.html include both the underly-
ing per-annotator files as well as the files output by
the reconciliation process.
3.5 Annotation Quality
In complicated annotation tasks, such as those con-
ducted in this work, establishing reliable ground
truth is a fundamental challenge. The most popular
approach to measuring annotation quality is via the
surrogate of annotation consistency. This assumes
that when annotators working independently arrive
at the same decisions they have correctly carried out
the task specified by the annotation guidelines. Sev-
eral quantitative measures of annotator consistency
have been proposed and debated over the years (Art-
stein and Poesio, 2008). We use the well-known
Cohen?s kappa coefficient ?, which accounts for un-
even class priors, so one may obtain a low agreement
score even when a high percentage of tokens have
the same label. We also report the percentage of in-
stances on which the annotators agreed, A, which
includes agreement on the absence of a particular
label. When a set of instances have been labeled by
more than two annotators, we compute the average
of pairwise agreement.
Scores for authority claim and alignment move
agreement are presented in Tables 2 and 3.2 For
2Institutional claims are exceedingly rare in our data, ap-
pearing in only three labels. This is not sufficient for proper ?
Claim Type N ? A
forum 451 0.52 0.92
external 715 0.63 0.91
experiential 185 0.33 0.96
social expectations 78 0.13 0.98
credentials 6 0.57 0.99
Overall 1157 0.59 0.86
Table 2: Agreement summary for authority claims. N
denotes the number of turns of the given type that at least
one annotator marked.
Move Type N ? A
explicit agreement 379 0.62 0.94
praise/thanking 117 0.60 0.98
positive reference 86 0.20 0.98
explicit disagreement 453 0.29 0.92
doubting 198 0.23 0.96
sarcastic praise 38 0.30 0.99
criticism/insult 556 0.32 0.91
dismissing 396 0.16 0.91
All positive 509 0.66 0.94
All negative 1092 0.45 0.85
Overall 1378 0.50 0.80
Table 3: Agreement summary for alignment moves. N
denotes the number of turns of the given type that at least
one annotator marked.
authority, the most common types of claims, forum
and external, are also two of the most reliably identi-
fied. For alignment, the positive type has much bet-
ter agreement scores than the negative type. Inter-
estingly, it appears that the fine distinctions between
the types of negative alignment move are a large fac-
tor in the low agreement scores. When all of the
negative categories are merged, agreement is higher,
although still less than for positive alignment moves.
Our ? values generally fall within the range that
Landis and Koch (1977) deem ?moderate agree-
ment?, but below the .8 cut-off tentatively suggested
computation, and so we do not include them in Table 3.
53
by Artstein and Poesio (2008).3 One possible rea-
son is that the negative class is not as discrete as it
might be in other tasks: both alignment moves and
authority claims can be more or less subtle or ex-
plicit. We have designed our annotation guidelines
to emphasize the more explicit variants of each, but
the same guidelines can sometimes lead annotators
to pick up more subtle examples that other annota-
tors might not feel meet the strict definitions in the
guidelines. Thus we expect our ?high-confidence?
labels to correspond to the more blatant examples
and the ?low-confidence? labels, while sometimes
being genuine noise, to pick out more subtle exam-
ples.
4 Analysis
While the main goal of this paper is to document
the AAWD corpus, we also performed several sta-
tistical analyses of authority and alignment, in or-
der to demonstrate the relevance of these social acts
as markers of user identity and social dynamics
within our corpus. In this section we present the
overall distribution of authority claims and align-
ment moves, compare the prevalence of authority
claims across user types, and show how a partici-
pant?s claim-making behavior may affect how others
subsequently align with them. In doing so, we con-
sider only high-confidence labels from files which
were annotated by at least two annotators. This sub-
set includes 186 discussions annotated for alignment
moves and 200 discussions annotated for authority
claims. Of those, 149 discussions were annotated
for both types of social acts.
4.1 Distribution of Social Acts
We find that 25% of the turns in our alignment data
contain alignment moves and 21% of the turns in our
authority data contain authority claims. In addition,
35% and 32% of the editors in each set make align-
ment moves and authority claims, respectively. The
breakdown by alignment move and authority claim
type is given in Table 4. Note that any given turn
might contain both positive and negative alignment
moves or multiple types of authority claims.
3Artstein and Poesio also note that it may not make sense to
have only one threshold for the field.
N %
Alignment data
total turns 2,890 100
turns w/positive alignment 330 11.4
turns w/negative alignment 467 16.2
turns w/any alignment 710 24.6
total editors 905 100
editors w/alignment moves 315 34.8
Authority data
total turns 3,361 100
turns w/external claim 459 13.7
turns w/forum claim 260 7.7
turns w/experiential claim 77 2.3
turns w/soc. exp. claim 21 0.6
turns w/credentials claim 3 0.1
turns w/institutional claim 0 0
turns w/any claim 703 20.9
total editors 930 100
editors w/authority claims 297 31.9
Table 4: Summary of high-confidence alignment moves
and authority claims
4.2 Authority Claim Types by User Status
Wikipedia distinguishes three different statuses: un-
registered users (able to perform most editing activ-
ities, identified only by IP address), registered users
(able to perform more editing activities, edits at-
tributed to a consistent user name) and administra-
tors (registered users with additional ?sysop? privi-
leges). Participants of different statuses tend to do
different kinds of work on Wikipedia, with admin-
istrators in particular being more likely to take on
moderator work (Burke and Kraut, 2008), such as
mediating and diffusing disputes among editors. Be-
cause conflict mediation requires a different kind of
credibility than collaborative writing work, and be-
cause unregistered users are likely to be newer and
therefore less likely to be incorporating references
to Wikipedia-specific rules and norms into their pro-
jected identities (and, therefore, their conversation),
we hypothesized that editors of different statuses
would use different kinds of authority claims.
Indeed, this is borne out. While no user group
was significantly more or less likely than any other
to include authority claims overall in their posts
(chi square test for independence, n=3164, df=2,
?2=2.367, p=.306) users of different statuses did use
significantly different proportions of each type of
claim (chi square test for independence, n=973, df=8
54
Participant # % % % claim-
type users forum external bearing
turns
admin 44 47.1 45.1 19.6
reg 192 29.1 63.6 22.3
unreg 55 18.3 70.6 19.8
all 291 29.8 62.5 21.6
Table 5: Percentage of authority claims of forum and
external types, and percentage of total turns which con-
tained claims, across user statuses
?2=38.301, p<.001). As illustrated in Table 5, ad-
ministrators are more likely than the other groups to
make forum claims and less likely to make exter-
nal claims, unregistered users make more external
claims and fewer forum claims, and registered users
exhibit a claim distribution that more closely reflects
the overall distribution of claim types.
4.3 Authority Claim Prevalence by V-Index
Given the few visible markers of status on Wikipedia
and the fact that editors are constantly interact-
ing with new collaborators, Wikipedians perform
authority by adopting insider language and norms
of interaction. Supporting arguments with specific
references is one such norm. Thus we hypothe-
sized that as editors become more integrated into
Wikipedia, they will make more authority claims.
In order to test this hypothesis, we developed ?v-
index? as a proxy measure of degree of integration or
?veteran status? within the community. Inspired by
Ball?s (2005) ?h-index? of scholarly productivity, v-
index balances frequency of interaction with length
of interaction. Specifically, an editor?s v-index at the
time of a particular revision is the greatest v such
that the editor has made at least v edits within the
past v months (28-day periods).
We measured the v-index for each revision in
our dataset, using all edits to Wikipedia in order
to calculate v (not just edits to the discussions we
have annotated). The v-index values for edits within
our dataset range from 1 to 46.4 We measured the
proportion of turns with authority claims (of any
type) for each v-index. The proportion of turns
with authority claims is in fact positively correlated
4The data becomes very sparse for v-indices above 29, with
every v-index in this range represented by < 10 turns, so the
v-indices of 30-46 were not included in this analysis.
Initial turn Alignment in next 10 turns
no auth. claim 0.52
any auth. claim 0.63
Table 6: Average prevalence of alignment moves targeted
at participant in 10 following turns
with v-index, confirming our hypothesis (one-sided
Pearson?s correlation coefficient, n=29 v-indices,
r=0.371, p=0.024).
4.4 Interaction of Social Phenomena
Thus far, we have been addressing our social acts
independently, but of course no social act occurs in
a vacuum. Alignment moves and authority claims
are only two types of social acts; many other types
of social acts are present (and could be annotated) in
this same data set. Even with only these two types
(and their subtypes), however, we find interactions.
We hypothesized that authority claims would be
likely to provoke alignment moves. That is, al-
though participants may make alignment moves
whenever someone else has expressed an opinion or
taken action (e.g. edited the article attached to the
discussion), we hypothesized that by making an au-
thority claim, a participant becomes more likely to
become a focal point in the debate. To test this,
we calculated, for every turn, the number of align-
ment moves targeted at the author of that turn within
the next 10 turns. We then divided the turns into
those that contained authority claims and those that
did not. Making an authority claim in a given turn
made the participant significantly more likely to be
the target of an alignment move within the subse-
quent 10 turns compared to turns that did not contain
any claims (t=-2.086, df=772, p=.037; Table 6))
Furthermore, we find that different types of au-
thority claims elicit different numbers of subsequent
alignment moves. Specifically, turns that contain ei-
ther external claims or forum claims (the two most
prevalent claim types in our sample) interact dif-
ferently with alignment. External claims elicited
more alignment overall (t=3.189, df=411, p=.002)
and more negative alignment moves than did forum
claims (t=3.839, df=415, p<.001). However, ex-
ternal claims did not elicit significantly more pos-
itive alignment moves than forum claims (t=0.695,
df=309, p=.488). This is illustrated in Table 7.
55
Initial turn Alignment in next 10 turns
positive negative overall
external claim 0.26 0.49 0.74
forum claim 0.22 0.20 0.42
Table 7: Average prevalence of alignment moves targeted
at participant in 10 following turns
5 Conclusion
We have presented the Authority and Alignment
in Wikipedia Discussions (AAWD) corpus, a col-
lection of 365 discussions drawn from Wikipedia
talk pages and annotated for two broad types of so-
cial acts: authority claims and alignment moves.
These annotations make explicit important discur-
sive strategies that discussion participants use to
construct their identities in this online forum. That
?identity work? is being done with these social acts
is confirmed by the correlations we find between
proportions of turns with authority claims and ex-
ternal variables such as user status and v-index, on
the one hand, and the interaction between authority
claims and alignment moves on the other.
As an example of a social medium, Wikipedia is
characterized by its task-orientation and by the fact
that all of the interactants? ?identity work? with re-
spect to their identity in the medium is captured in
the database. This, in turn, causes the data set to be
rich in the type of social acts we are investigating.
The dataset was used for research in automatic de-
tection of forum claims, as presented in a compan-
ion paper (Marin et al, 2011). That work focused
on using lexical features, filtered through word lists
obtained from domain experts and through data-
driven methods, and extended with parse tree infor-
mation. Automatic detection of other types of au-
thority claims and of alignment moves is left for fu-
ture research.
We believe that, as social acts, authority claims
and alignment moves are broadly recognized com-
munication behaviors that play an important role in
human interaction across a variety of contexts. How-
ever, because Wikipedia discussions are shaped by
a set of well-defined, local communication norms
which are closely tied to the task of distributed,
collaborative writing, we expect authority claims
and alignment moves will manifest differently in
other genres. Future work could explore the range
of variation among the linguistic cues associated
with authority and alignment categories across gen-
res, cultures and communication media, as well
as the possible role of additional categories or so-
cial acts not discussed here. We believe that the
communicative ecology of Wikipedia discussions,
combined with the rich metadata of the Wikipedia
database, presents a highly valuable natural labora-
tory in which to explore social scientific analyses of
communication behaviors as well as a resource for
the development of NLP systems which can auto-
matically identify these social acts, in Wikipedia and
beyond.
Acknowledgments
This research was funded by the Office of the Di-
rector of National Intelligence (ODNI), Intelligence
Advanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA). All
statements of fact, opinion or conclusions contained
herein are those of the authors and should not be
construed as representing the official views or poli-
cies of IARPA, the ODNI or the U.S. Government.
The original Wikipedia discussion page data for
this study was made available from a research
project supported by NSF award IIS-0811210. We
thank Travis Kriplean for his initial assistance with
scripts to process this data dump.
We also gratefully acknowledge the contribution
of the annotators: Wendy Kempsell, Kelley Kilan-
ski, Robert Sykes and Lisa Tittle.
References
Apoorv Agarwal and Owen Rambow. 2010. Automatic
detection and classification of social events. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1024?
1034, Cambridge, MA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Ron Artstein and Massimo Poesio. 2008. Inter-coder
agreement for computational linguistics. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 34(4):555?596.
Philip Ball. 2005. Index aims for fair ranking of scien-
tists. Nature, 436:900?900.
Nancy Baym. 1996. Agreements and disagreements in
a computer-mediated discussion. Research on Lan-
guage and Social Interaction, 29:315?345.
Mary Bucholtz and Kira Hall. 2010. Locating identity
in language. In C. Llamas and D. Watt, editors, Lan-
56
guage and Identities. Edinburgh University Press, Ed-
inburgh.
Moira Burke and Robert Kraut. 2008. Mopping up:
Modeling wikipedia promotion decisions. In Proceed-
ings of the 2008 ACM Conference on Computer Sup-
ported Cooperative Work, pages 27?36. Association of
Computing Machinery.
Jolene Galegher, Lee Sproull, and Sara Kiesler. 1998.
Legitimacy, authority, and community in electronic
support groups. Written Communication, 15(4):493?
530.
Michel Galley, Kathleen McKeown, Julia Hirschberg,
and Elizabeth Shriberg. 2004. Identifying agree-
ment and disagreement in conversational speech: Use
of Bayesian networks to model pragmatic dependen-
cies. In Proceedings of the 42nd Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics (ACL?04), Main
Volume, pages 669?676, Barcelona, Spain.
Meghan Lammie Glenn, Stephanie M. Strassel, and Hae-
joong Lee. 2009. XTrans: A speech annotation and
transcription tool. In INTERSPEECH-2009, pages
2855?2858.
Erving Goffman. 1981. Forms of Talk. University of
Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia.
Dustin Hillard, Mari Ostendorf, and Elizabeth Shriberg.
2003. Detection of agreement vs. disagreement in
meetings: training with unlabeled data. In Proceed-
ings of the 2003 Human Language Technology Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics (HLT/NAACL),
pages 34?36.
Jakob L. Jensen. 2003. Public spheres on the inter-
net: Anarchic or government sponsored; a compari-
son. Scandinavian Political Studies, 26:349?374.
J. Richard Landis and Gary G. Koch. 1977. Measure-
ment of observer agreement for categorical data. Bio-
metrics, 33:159?174.
Yameng Liu. 1997. Authority, presumption and inven-
tion. Philosophy and Rhetoric, 30(4):413?427.
John Locke. 1959 [1690]. An Essay Concerning Human
Understanding. Dover Publications, New York.
Jo Mackiewicz. 2010. Assertions of expertise in online
product reviews. Journal of Business and Technical
Communication, 24(1):3?28.
Alex Marin, Bin Zhang, and Mari Ostendorf. 2011. De-
tecting forum authority claims in online discussions.
Proceedings of the Workshop on Language in Social
Media (LSM 2011).
Michael Mulkay. 1985. Agreement and disagreement in
conversations and letters. Text, 5(3):201?227.
Michael Mulkay. 1986. Conversations and texts. Human
Studies, 9(2-3):303?321.
Meghan Oxley, Jonathan T. Morgan, Mark Zachry, and
Brian Hutchinson. 2010. ?What I know is...?: Estab-
lishing credibility on Wikipedia talk pages. In Pro-
ceedings of the 6th International Symposium on Wikis
and Open Collaboration, Gdansk, Poland. Association
for Computing Machinery.
Janie Rees-Miller. 2000. Power, severity, and context in
disagreeement. Journal of Pragmatics, 32(8):1087?
1111.
Kay Richardson. 2003. Health risks on the internet: Es-
tablishing credibility on line. Health, Risk and Society,
5(2):171?184.
Marie-Claire Shanahan. 2010. Changing the meaning
of peer-to-peer? Exploring online comment spaces as
sites of negotiated expertise. Journal of Science Com-
munication, 9(1):1?13.
Jan Svennevig. 1999. Getting Acquainted in Conversa-
tion: A Study of Initial Interactions. John Benjamins
Publishing Company, Amsterdam.
Dorothea K. Thompson. 1993. Arguing for experimental
?facts? in science. Written Communication, 10:106.
Joanna Thornborrow. 2001. Authenticating talk: Build-
ing public identities in audience participation broad-
casting. Discourse Studies, 3(4):459?479.
Linda Wine. 2008. Towards a deeper understanding of
framing, footing, and alignment. Teachers College,
Columbia University Working Papers in TESOL and
Applied Linguistics, 8(3):1?3.
57
