Classifying Arabic Verbs Using Sibling Classes
Jaouad Mousser
University Of Konstanz
Department of Linguistics
Jaouad.Mousser@uni-konstanz.de
Abstract
In the effort of building a verb lexicon classifying the most used verbs in Arabic and providing in-
formation about their syntax and semantics (Mousser, 2010), the problem of classes over-generation
arises because of the overt morphology of Arabic, which codes not only agreement and inflection
relations but also semantic information related to thematic arity or other semantic information like
?intensity?, ?pretension?, etc. The hierarchical structure of verb classes and the inheritance relation
between their subparts expels derived verbs from the main class, although they share most of its
properties. In this article we present a way to adapt the verb class approach to a language with a
productive (verb) morphology by introducing sibling classes.
1 Introduction
Class based approach to lexical semantics such as presented in Levin (1993) provides a straightforward
way of describing a large number of verbs in a compact and generalized way. The main assumption is
the correlation between the syntactic behaviour of verbs as reflected in diathesis alternations and their se-
mantic properties. Verbs which participate in the same set of diathesis alternations are assumed to share
the same meaning facets. Verbs like abate, acidify, dry, crystallize, etc. share a meaning component
and are grouped into a class (change-of-state), since they participate in the causative/incoative alterna-
tion, the middle alternation, the instrument subject alternation and the resultative alternation (Levin,
1993). Class based lexica have turned out to be usefull lexical resources such as the English VerbNet
(Kipper Schuler, 2005), which provides information about thematic roles, syntactic and semantic struc-
ture of 5879 English verbs. Trying to use the same approach to classify verbs of a morphologically
rich language like Arabic, the researcher is faced with difficulties because many alternations require
morphological operations to express meaning aspects, especially those related to thematic roles.
(1) Causative/Incoative Alternation in Arabic
a. nas?s?afa saliymun a?lmala?bisa.
dry-CAUS-PRF Salim-SUBJ-NOM DEF-cloth-PL-OBJ-ACC.
?Salim dried the clothes.?
b. nas?afati a?lmala?bisu.
dry-PRF-PL DEF-cloth-PL-SUBJ-NOM
?The colthes dried.?
In example (1) the causative/incoative alternation is realized through an overt morphological change on
the head of the sentence (reduplication of the second root consonant in (1a)), in such a way that the verb
changes to a new entry, which according to the hierarchical organisation of the class and especially to the
inheritance relation between its subparts, cannot longer be kept into the original class. Transporting the
new verb entry into a new class risks to loose its connection to the original class, which is an undesired
effect, since it does not necessarily reflect the natural organisation of the lexicon of Arabic.
355
2 Arabic VerbNet and Class Structure
Arabic VerbNet1 is a large coverage verb lexicon exploiting Levin?s classes (Levin, 1993) and the basic
development procedure of Kipper Schuler (2005). The current version has 202 classes populating 4707
verbs and 834 frames. Every class is a hierarchical structure providing syntactic and semantic informa-
tion about verbs and percolating them to subclasses. In the top level of each class there are verb entries
represented as tuples. Each tuple contains the verb itself, its root form, the deverbal form and the par-
ticiple. At the same level thematic roles and their restrictions are encoded. The important information
about the class resides in the frames reflecting alternations where the verbs can appear. Every frame
is represented as an example sentence, a syntactic structure and a semantic structure containing seman-
tic predicates and their arguments and temporal information in a way similar to Moens and Steedman
(1988). Every class can have subclasses for cases where members deviate from the prototypical verb in
some non central points. A subclass recursively reflects the same structure as the main class and can
(therefore) itself have subclasses. A subclass inherits all properties of the main class and is placed in
such a way that the members in the top level are closed for the information it adds. This fact hinders
putting derived verbs participating in alternations into the main class or in one of the subclasses.
3 Sibling Classes
Introducing sibling classes is a way to resolve the problem arising from the discrepancy between two
derivationally related morphological verb forms which participate in the same set of alternations and
therefore share the same semantic meaning. Tables 1 and 2 show two sibling classes and their alternations
sets. The incoative alternation introduces a morphological change in the verbs. This fact blocks the
derived verbs from entering in any inheritance relation to the base verbs according to the hierarchical
structure of the class they belong to. Consequently, a sibling class (Table 2) is created to populate the
verbs resulting from alternations requiring morphological changes.
4 Automatic Extension of Arabic VerbNet via Sibling Classes
4.1 Morphological Verb Analyser
In order to generate derived verb forms a Java based morphological analyser was implemented as part
of a system in order to generating sibling classes automatically (Sibling class generator SCG). This
provides an analyse of the morphological composition of the input verbs. The program is based on
regular expressions and identifies the following features:
? Verb root: This corresponds to an abstract form of 2?4 consonants carrying a basic semantic
meaning of the verb. Thus, ktb is the abstract root of the verb kataba ?to write? but also of other
derivationally related words such as Iinkataba ?INC-write?, takaAtaba, ?RECIP-write? ?to corre-
spond?.
? Verb pattern: This corresponds to the verb pattern in the classical Arabic grammar and is repre-
sented by a canonical verb form faEala2 where the letters f, E and l correspond respectively to the
first, the second and the third root consonant of the input verb. Thus, the pattern of a verb such as
Iinokataba will be IinofaEala, where f, E and l correspond to k, t, b which are the root consonants
of the verb.
Table 3 shows the produced morphological analysis of the verbs kataba ?to write?, Iinokataba ?INC-
write? and takaAtaba ?to correspond?. The extracted features are then used in combination with semantic
information of verb classes to generate morpho-semantic derivational forms of verbs and later semanti-
cally derived verb classes (sibling classes) as explained in the next sections.
4.2 Identifying Expandable Verb Classes
The input of SCG are the basic verb classes produced in the first stadium of the lexicon building
(Mousser, 2010). In order to define which classes are good candidates to be expanded according to
1http://ling.uni-konstanz.de/pages/home/mousser/files/Arabic_VerbNet.php
2Pattern are transliterated using Buckwalter?s style. All other Arabic examples are transliterated using Lagally
356
Table 1: The change of state class in Arabic. The causative use.
Class: Change of State
Members: ?as. rana ?modernize?, h
?
as. h
?
as. a ?privatize?, ?awolama ?globalize?, ?arraba ?arabize?, etc.
Roles and Restrictions: Agent [+int control] Patient Instrument
Descriptions Examples Syntax Semantics
Basic Intransitive nas?s?afa saliym mala?bisahu. (Salim
dried his clothes)
V Agent Patient cause(Agent, E), state(result(E), End-
state, Patient)
NP-PP nas?s?afa saliym malaa?bisahu bia?lbuh
?
aa?-
r. (Salim dried his clothes with the
vapour)
V Agent Patient {bi}
Instrument
cause(Agent, E), state(result(E), End-
state, Patient), use(during(E), Agent,
Instrument)
Instrument
Subject
nas?s?afa a?lbuh
?
aa?ru a?lmala?bisa. (The
vapour dried the clothes.)
V Instrument Patient use(during(E), ?Agent, Instrument),
state(result(E), Endstate, Patient)
Subclass
Table 2: The change of state sibling class in Arabic. The incoative use.
Sibling Class: Change of State
Members: ta?as. rana ?INC-modernize?, tah
?
as. h
?
as. a ?INC-privatize?, ta?awolama ?INC-globalize?,
ta?arraba ?INC-arabize?, etc.
Roles and Restrictions: Agent [+int control] Patient Instrument
Descriptions Examples Syntax Semantics
V NP.patient nas?afati a?lmala?bisahu. (The clothes
dried)
V Patient state(result(E), Endstate, Patient)
PP nas?afati a?lmala?bisahu bia?lbuh
?
aa?r.
(The clothes dried with the vapour.)
V Patient Instrument use(during(E), ?Agent, Instrument),
state(result(E), Endstate, Patient)
Subclass
causativity criteria, thematic role information and semantic predicates of class frames are detected.
Classes of verbs with the thematic role agent and compositional semantics containing the causative pred-
icate CAUSE are selected as in the case of change-of-state classes. Additionally, inherently uncausative
verb classes involving a change of state are identified according to whether they possess a patient theme
occupying the subject position and accordingly whether their compositional semantics include the change
of state predicate STATE.
4.3 Generating Sibling Classes
Generating sibling classes requires generating the appropriate morphological verb forms, new lists of
thematic roles and new frames with new syntactic descriptions and new predicate semantics reflecting
the derived meaning of the verbs (See Tables 1 and 2).
4.3.1 Generating New Verb Forms
Verbs of the new sibling classes are generated from morphological forms of the base verbs using the
following information:
a. The semantic morphological operation required for the input class (causativization, reciprocaliza-
tion or decausativization).
b. The morphological properties of the input verbs such as root, pattern and segmental material.
c. Rewrite rules defining for each input verb pattern the appropriate derivative form to express the
target semantic meaning.
The generation of derived verbs reveals itself to be the reverse of the morphological analysis, as it consists
of replacing the consonants f, E and l of the relevant output pattern with the root consonants of the input
verb. Thus, the change-of-state verb fah. h. ama ?to carbonize? with the root fh. m and the pattern faEa?la
will produce the derived verb tafah. h. ama ?INC-carbonize? according to the decausativization rule 2 in
the Table 4 and by replacing the output pattern consonants f, E and l respectively with the root consonants
f , h. and m.
357
Table 3: Morphological information
Verb Root Pattern Segments
kataba ktb faEala a a a
Iinokataba ktb IinofaEala Iino a a a
takaAtaba ktb taFaAEala ta aA a a
Table 4: Rewrite rules for decausativization
Input pattern Output pattern
faEala =? IinofaEala
faEa?la =? tafaEa?la
faAEala =? tafaAEala
faEolana =? tafaEolana
fawoEala =? tafawoEala
4.3.2 Generating New Lists of Thematic Roles
Building sibling classes is not only a morphological process but also a semantic one with repercussions
on the thematic arity of the concerned class. Thus, the simple reciprocal alternation found with social
interaction and communication verbs adds a new theme role actor which can be used interchangeably
with the two symmetrical themes actor1 and actor2. Other operations delete thematic roles in the new
class. Thus decausativization deletes the thematic role agent from the list of roles.
4.3.3 Generating New Argument Structures
Adapting thematic structures of the new sibling classes has an influence on their argument structures.
Thus, adding a new thematic role while causativizing a verb class is reflected in the syntactic level by
adding a new argument with its appropriate restrictions. For instance, the introduction of the theme actor
in the simple reciprocal alternation of interaction verbs imposes an additional restriction [+dual/+plural]
on the subject at the syntactic level, whereas the object is omitted from the argument structure of the
concerned frame. Additionally, the mapping between thematic roles and grammatical arguments is the
subject of change. Thus, change-of-state verbs and other causative verbs are reflexivized by assigning
a agent role to the patient in the causative reading. At the syntactic level this operation is reflected by
omitting the subject and promoting the object to the subject position.
4.3.4 Generating New Semantic Descriptions
For sibling classes to reflect the meaning variations introduced by the new morphological material, the
semantic description of input classes has to be modified by adding or omitting appropriate semantic
predicates. Thus, causativization introduces the predicate CAUSE to the semantic description of the
class, whereas decausativization is reflected by omitting the same predicate and its argument which
corresponds mostly to the agent of the concerned frame. In the case of a simple reciprocal alternation the
presence of one (plural) actor is reflected by introducing two presupposed (implicit) actor roles: actor i
and actor j in the main semantic description of the verb as shown in (2) in contrast to explicit actor roles
in (3).
(2) Implicit symmetrical actor roles
social interaction(during(E), Actori, Actorj)
(3) Explicit symmetrical actor roles
social interaction(during(E), Actor1, Actor2)
4.3.5 Generating New Frames
We generate new frames (alternations) on the basis of frames of the base (input) classes. Since operations
like decausativization affect only the thematic arity of the class, alternations which are not related to
causativity are reproduced in the new classes. For instance, the frame for the instrumental alternation
of the causative verb class is reproduced by adapting the thematic structure to the incoative use. Thus,
358
the frame alternation of (4a) will produce the frame alternation (4b), since the instrumental alternation in
Arabic can be found with causative verbs as well as with uncausative verbs.
(4)
a. nas?s?afa saliymun a?lmala?bisa. bia?lbuh
?
aa?ri
dry-CAUS-PRF Salim-SUBJ-NOM DEF-cloth-PL-OBJ-ACC with-DEF-vapor.
?Salim dried the clothes with the vapor.?
b. nas?ifati a?lmala?bisu. bia?lbuh
?
aa?ri
dry-PRF DEF-cloth-PL-SUBJ-NOM with-DEF-vapor.
?The clothes was dried with the vapor.?
5 Results and Discussion
We run SCG on the current version of Arabic VerbNet. The program was able to identify 89 expandable
classes with 3005 verbs and 368 frames, 60 of them populate causative and 29 uncausative verbs. For
each class one sibling class was generated with a total of 3360 verbs and 368 frames. The high number
of generated verbs is due to the fact that some verbs have more than one way to express the causative or
the inchoative. After checking the quality of the produced classes, we count 71% accuracy in identifying
the patterns of the verbs and 82% in generating their derived forms. After manually adjusting the new
sibling classes (deleting unsuitable verb forms and adding the correct ones, adding frame examples, etc.),
we noted that Arabic VerbNet counts now 291 classes populating 7937 verbs and 1202 frames, which
represents an expansion rate of 44%. Noteworthy, not all verbs formed by the root-pattern system exist
synchronically. We observed that inside the same sibling class one verb can be widely found in different
Arabic corpora whereas another verb of the same sibling class is not attested in the same corpora. For
instance, the verb nabah. a ?to bark? of the class animal sounds has a causative form anbah. a ?cause to
bark?, but for the most members of the same class the causative form are not attested to be used in the
?real world?. However, they are potential lexicon entries and native Arabic speakers will most likely
recognize their meaning without being exposed to them before. Additionally, given the fact that human
lexica are brittle and incomplete, the scope of Levin?s class approach (Levin, 1993) can be expanded to
explain the derivational behaviour of verbs: Verbs which belong to the same class and share the same
syntactic and semantic properties are likely to share the same derivational behaviour, especially when
this behaviour is related to the general semantic properties of the class.
6 Conclusion
We presented a way to classify verbs of a language with a productive (verb) morphology like Arabic. Ad-
ditionally to the traditional classes with a rigid hierarchical structure and a top-down inheritance relation,
sibling classes were introduced to classify those verbs which engage in morohological operations during
diathesis alternations. Sibling classes are autonomous classes which maintain relations to the class they
are issued from consequently reflecting the natural connection between parents element in the lexicon.
References
Kipper Schuler, K. (2005). VerbNet: A Broad-Coverage, Comprehensive Verb Lexicon. Ph. D. thesis,
University of Pennsylvania.
Korhonen, A. and T. Briscoe (2004). Extended lexical-semantic classification of english verbs. In The
HLT/NACCL wokshop on computational lexical semantics.
Levin, B. (1993). English Verb Classes and Alternations. A Preliminary Investigation. Chicago and
London: The University of Chicago Press.
Moens, M. and M. Steedman (1988). Temporal ontology and temporal reference. Computational Lin-
guistics 14, 15?28.
Mousser, J. (2010). A large coverage verb taxonomy for arabic. In Proceedings of the Seventh conference
on International Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC?10), Valetta, Malta.
359
