Proceedings of NAACL HLT 2007, Companion Volume, pages 125?128,
Rochester, NY, April 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Subtree Mining for Relation Extraction from Wikipedia
Dat P.T. Nguyen
University of Tokyo
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku
Tokyo 113-8656, Japan
nptdat@mi.ci.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Yutaka Matsuo
National Institute of Advanced
Industrial Science and Technology
Sotokanda 1-18-13
Tokyo 101-0021, Japan
y.matsuo@aist.go.jp
Mitsuru Ishizuka
University of Tokyo
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku
Tokyo 113-8656, Japan
ishizuka@i.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Abstract
In this study, we address the problem of extract-
ing relations between entities from Wikipedia?s
English articles. Our proposed method first an-
chors the appearance of entities in Wikipedia?s
articles using neither Named Entity Recognizer
(NER) nor coreference resolution tool. It then
classifies the relationships between entity pairs
using SVM with features extracted from the
web structure and subtrees mined from the
syntactic structure of text. We evaluate our
method on manually annotated data from ac-
tual Wikipedia articles.
1 Introduction
Wikipedia (www.wikipedia.org) has emerged as the
world?s largest online encyclopedia. Because the ency-
clopedia is managed by the Wikipedia Foundation, and
because numerous collaborators in the world continu-
ously develop and edit its articles, its contents are be-
lieved to be quite reliable despite its openness.
This study is intended to deal with the problem of
extracting binary relations between entity pairs from
Wikipedia?s English version. A binary relation is defined
as a triple (ep, rel, es) in which ep and es are entities and
rel indicates a directed relationship of ep and es. Current
experiment limits entities and relations to a reasonable
size in that an entity is classifiable as person, organiza-
tion, location, artifact, year, month or date; and a rela-
tion can be founder, chairman, CEO, COO, president,
director, vice chairman, spouse, birth date, birth place,
foundation, product and location.
To our knowledge, only one recent work has at-
tempted relation extraction on Wikipedia: (Culotta et al,
2006) presents a probabilistic model to integrate extrac-
tion and mining tasks performed on biographical text of
Wikipedia. Some other works (Brin, 1998; Agichtein and
Gravano, 2000; Ravichandran and Hovy, 2002) rely on
the abundance of web data to obtain easy patterns and
learn such patterns based mostly on lexical information.
Rather than analyzing dependency path between entity
pair proposed in (Bunescu and Mooney, 2006; Cui et al,
2005), our method analyzes a subtree derived from the
dependency structure. Such subtree contains more evi-
dence of the entities? inter-relation than the path in some
cases. We propose a new feature obtained from the sub-
tree by using a subtree-mining technique.
In addition, we also make use of the characteristics of
Wikipedia to allocate the mentions of entities and further
identify their types to help the relation extraction process.
2 Wikipedia?s Article Characteristics
Due to the encyclopedic style, each Wikipedia article
mainly provides information for a specific entity and fur-
ther mentions other entities related to it. Culotta et al
(2006) defines the entities as principal entity and sec-
ondary entity respectively. We predict only relationships
between the principal entity and each mentioned sec-
ondary entity that contains a link to its descriptive article.
We put some assumptions in this study: a relation-
ship can be expressed completely in one sentence. Fur-
thermore, a relationship between an entity pair might be
expressed with the implication of the principal entity in
some cases. Thus, for an article, only sentences contain-
ing at least a secondary entity are necessarily analyzed.
An interesting characteristic of Wikipedia is the cate-
gory hierarchy that is used to classify articles according to
their content. Additionally, those articles for famous en-
tities provide summary sections on their right side, which
are created by human editors. Finally, the first sentence
of an article often defines the principal entity.
3 Proposed Method
Figure 1 delineates our framework for relation extrac-
tion. First, Wikipedia articles are processed to remove
HTML tags and to extract hyperlinks that point to other
Wikipedia articles. Raw text is submitted to a pipeline
including a Sentence Splitter, a Tokenizer and a Phrase
Chunker supplied by the OpenNLP 1 tool set. The in-
stances of the principal entity and secondary entities are
then anchored in the articles. The Secondary Entity De-
tector simply labels the appropriate surface texts of the
hyperlinks to other Wikipedia articles, which are proper
1http://opennlp.sourceforge.net/
125
Figure 1: System framework
nouns as secondary entities. The Principal Entity Detec-
tor will be explained in the following subsection.
After the entities are anchored, sentences that include
at least one mention of secondary entities will be selected
by a Sentence Detector. Each mention of the secondary
entities is considered as a relation candidate between the
underlying entity and the principal entity. Secondary en-
tities are always explicit, although the principal entity is
sometimes implicit in sentences containing no mention.
Keywords that provide clues for each relation label will
be identified by a Keyword Extractor. Parallely, an Entity
Classifier module classifies the entities into types. The
Relation Extractor extracts subtree feature from a pair of
the principal entity and a mention of secondary entity. It
then incorporates subtree feature together with entity type
feature into a feature vector and classifies relations of the
entity pair using SVM-based classifiers.
3.1 Principal Entity Detector
This module detects all referring expressions of the prin-
cipal entity in an article. All occurrences of identified
expressions are labeled as mentions of the principal en-
tity. We adopt (Morton, 2000) to classify the expressions
into three types: (1) personal pronoun (2) proper noun
(3) common nouns. Based on chunking information, we
propose a simple technique to identify a set of referring
expressions of the principal entity, denoted as F:
(i) Start with F = {}.
(ii) Select the first two chunks for F: the proper chunk
(nounphase with at least one proper noun) of the article
title and the first proper chunk in the first sentence of the
article, if any. If F is still empty, stop.
(iii) For each remaining proper chunk p in the article, if
p is derived from any expressions selected in (ii), then
F ? p. Proper chunk p1 is derived from proper chunk p2
if all its proper nouns appear in p2.
(iv) In the article, select c as the most frequent subjective
pronouns, find c? as its equivalent objective pronoun and
add them to F.
(v) For each chunk p with the pattern [DT N1 . . . Nk]
where DT is a determiner and Nk?s are a common nouns,
if p appears more frequently than all the selected pro-
nouns in (iv), then F ? p.
Table 1: Sample extracted referring expressions
Article Referring expressions Step
[NP Bill/NNP Gates/NNP ] (ii)
[NP William/NNP H./NNP Gates/NNP ] (ii)
Bill Gates [NP Gates/NNP ] (iii)
[NP The/DT Gates/NNP ] (iii)
[NP he/PRP ] (iv)
[NP him/PRP ] (iv)
[NP Microsoft/NNP ] (ii)
[NP The/DT Microsoft/NNP Corporation/NNP ] (ii)
Microsoft [NP that/DT Microsoft/NNP ] (iii)
[NP It/PRP ] (iv)
[NP the/DT company/NN ] (v)
[NP Microsoft/NNP Windows/NNP ] (ii)
Microsoft [NP Microsoft/NNP ] (iii)
Windows [NP Windows/NNP ] (iii)
[NP the/DT Windows/NNP ] (iii)
[NP it/PRP ] (iv)
Table 2: List of relations and their keywords
Relation Keywords
CEO CEO, chief, executive, officer
Chairmans chairman
COO coo, chief, operating, officer
Director director
Founder found, founder, founded, establish, form, foundation, open
President president
Vice
chairman
vice, chairman
Birth date born, bear, birth, birthday
Birth
place
born, bear
Foundation found, establish, form, founded, open, create, formed, estab-
lished, foundation, founding, cofounder, founder
Location headquartered, based, locate, headquarter, base, location, situate,
located
Product product, include, release, produce, service, operate, provide,
market, manage, development, focus, manufacture, provider,
launch, make, sell, introduce, producer, supplier, possess, re-
tailer, design, involve, production, offering, serve, sale, supply
Spouse marry, wife, married, husband, marriage
Table 1 shows some extracted referring expressions.
The third column indicates in which step the expressions
are selected. Supported by the nature of Wikipedia, our
technique provides better results than those of the coref-
erence tool in LingPipe library 2 and OpenNLP tool set.
3.2 Entity Classifier
Entity type is very useful for relation extraction. For in-
stance, the relation label between a person and an orga-
nization should be founder, chairman, etc., but cannot
be spouse, product, etc. We first identify year, month
and date entities by directly examining their surface text.
Types of other entities are identified by classifying their
corresponding articles. We develop one SVM-based clas-
sifier for each remaining type using the following fea-
tures: category feature (categories collected when trac-
ing from the article upto k level of its category structure),
pronoun feature (the most frequent subjective pronoun
in the article) and singular noun feature (singular nouns
of the first sentence of the article).
3.3 Keyword Extractor
Our hypothesis in this research is that there exist some
keywords that provide clues for the relationship between
2http://www.alias-i.com/lingpipe/index.html
126
Figure 2: Dependency trees in (a) & (b); core trees with respect to CEO relationship in (c) & (d); new representation
of the core trees in (e) & (f); common subtree in (g). The red phrase EP denotes the principal entity; the blue phrase
ES denotes the secondary entity.
a pair. For example, to express the founder relation, a
sentence should contain one keyword such as: found,
founder, founded, co-founders, or establish, etc. We iden-
tify such keywords by using a semi-automatic method.
First, we automatically extract some true relations from
summary sections of Wikipedia articles. Then, we map
entities in such relations to those in sentences to build
sample sentences for each relationship . Tf-idf model is
exploited to measure the relevance of words to each re-
lationship for those on the dependency path between the
entity pair. Finally, we choose the keywords manually
from lists of candidates ranked by relevance score with
respect to each relation. Table 2 shows our result selected
from ranked lists of total 35,820 keyword candidates us-
ing only one hour of human labor.
3.4 Subtree Feature from Dependency Path
In this subsection, we will describe how to obtain effi-
cient features for extracting relation using subtree min-
ing. We extend the idea of Bunescu et al (Bunescu and
Mooney, 2006) suggesting the analysis of dependency
path between the entities for extracting relation, in that
paths between the secondary entity and the keywords of r
will be added to the dependency path between the entities
to create a tree. The expanded tree is defined as core tree
of r because it attempts to capture the clues for r. Steps to
extract the core treeC of a relationship r from a sentence
s are described as follows:
(i)] Initialize the core tree C as blank.
(ii) Derive the dependency tree D from s.
(iii) Label the group of nodes corresponding to words of
secondary entity by an ES node in D.
(iv) If the principal entity appears in s, apply (iii) to re-
place principal entity with EP. Then extract P0 as shortest
path from ES to EP in D and add P0 ?C.
(v) For each keyword w of r, extract Pw as the shortest
path from ES to node of w and add Pw ?C.
Figures 2c & 2d present exemplary core trees of CEO
relationship derived from the dependency trees in Figures
2a & 2b. To analyze both words and relations of a core
tree uniformly, we transform it into a uniform graph for-
mat (Figures 2e & 2f) in which core tree words and rela-
tions are also represented as graph nodes.
We define a basic element of a relationship r as a key
pattern that commonly appears in various core trees of r.
As an example, the core trees in Figures 2e & 2f share
a common pattern in Figure 2g. Intuitively, this subtree
shares the core trees of sentences that express the idea of
?joined the company as CEO? or ?joined the company
and do something as CEO?.
We denote T = (V , E) as a directed tree, in which
V is a set of nodes and E is a set of directed edges.
Node y is an ancestor of node x, denoted by x ? y,
if (x,y) ? E or ?i1, ..., ik (k ? N and k ? 1) such that
(x, i1),(i1, i2), ...,(ik?1, ik),(ik,y) ? E. We define that a
tree S = (VS, ES) is a subtree of T if and only if: (i)VS ?V ,
and (ii) ?(x,y) ? ES, we have x? y in T .
We use a subtree as a feature for relation extraction.
From a set of training sentences with respect to a relation-
ship r, we derive the core trees. A frequent tree-mining
algorithm (Zaki, 2002) is used to generate subtrees from
that set of core trees to form the feature space. Each
mined subtree corresponds to a value of the feature.
4 Experiments and Evaluations
In this experiment, 5,975 articles are selected, in which
45 articles are for testing and 5,930 articles for train-
ing. We apply the framework in Figure 1 on the train-
ing articles to extract keywords and select relation candi-
dates. Subsequently, 3,833 positive instances (each con-
tains at least one relation) and 805 negative instances (the
ones containing no relation) from the candidates are an-
notated to train the Relation Extractor. Among 39,467
127
Table 3: Compare our proposed system and baselines
Precision(%) Recall(%) F1(%)
B0 8.70 22.26 12.51
B1 9.88 25.31 14.21
DepTree 29.07 53.86 37.76
Table 4: Result of Entity Classifier with various levels (k
value) of exploited category structure
Depth k(%) Accuracy(%)
1 64.0
2 69.5
3 81.0
4 81.5
5 79.5
6 77.5
7 77.0
8 78.0
9 75.0
10 74.5
entities collected from all principal and secondary enti-
ties, we randomly select 3,300 entities and manually an-
notate their types for the Entity Classifier. Finally, we use
3,100 entities for training and 200 entities for testing.
We develop two baseline systems to evaluate our
method, which use bag-of-words model. The second sys-
tem (B1 in Table 3) works like the Keyword Extractor
on training instances in that it calculates tf-idf scores for
words on the dependency path between the entities with
respect to each relation. During testing, it accumulates
tf-idf scores of words on the path and chooses the relation
label that gives the highest score for the entity pair. The
only difference between the two baseline systems is that
the first one (B0 in Table 3) focuses on all the words be-
tween the entities in sentence text, not dependency path.
In our experiments, dependency graphs are obtained
by Minipar parser (Lin, 1998), classifiers are trained by
SVM Light (Joachims, 1999) with 2nd- order polynomial
kernel, subtrees are mined by FREQT 3 tree miner.
On the basis of preliminary experiments, we report the
performance of our system compared with those of base-
line systems in Table 3. The result shows that our pro-
posed method gives a substantial improvement over the
baselines. Although the recall is quite adequate, preci-
sion is low. Data analysis reveals that although the mined
subtrees capture key features for relationships, they also
generate many irrelevant features which degrade the per-
formance. It is necessary to carry out feature selection
step for subtree feature. One more reason of the poor
precision is that our system suffers from the error accu-
mulation in a long pipeline of entity detection, entity clas-
sification, dependency parsing and relation classification.
Table 4 shows the effectiveness of different values of k
parameter in Entity Classifier. The classifier works best
when we trace four levels on category system. An inter-
esting fact is that Wikipedia can be used as an external
3http://chasen.org/t?aku/software/freqt/
knowledge source for Named Entity Recognition.
5 Conclusions and Future Works
We have presented a method to extract relations between
entities from Wikipedia articles by incorporating infor-
mation from the Wikipedia structure and by the analysis
of Wikipedia text. The key features of our method in-
clude: (1) an algorithm to build the core syntactic tree
that reflects the relation between a given entity pair more
accurately; (2) the use of a tree-mining algorithm to iden-
tify the basic elements of syntactic structure of sentences
for relationships; (3) method to make use of the nature of
Wikipedia for entity allocation and entity classification.
References
E. Agichtein and L. Gravano. 2000. Snowball: Ex-
tracting relations from large plain-text collections. In
the 5th ACM International Conference on Digital Li-
braries.
S. Brin. 1998. Extracting patterns and relations from
the world wide web. In Proceedings of the 1998 Inter-
national Workshop on the Web and Databases, pages
172?183.
R.C. Bunescu and R.J. Mooney. 2006. Extracting rela-
tions from text: From word sequences to dependency
paths. In Anne Kao and Steve Poteet, editors, Text
Mining and Natural Language Processing.
H. Cui, R. Sun, K. Li, M.-Y. Kan, and T.-S. Chua.
2005. Question answering passage retrieval using de-
pendency relations. In Proceedings of SIGIR.
A. Culotta, A. McCallum, and J. Betz. 2006. Integrating
probabilistic extraction models and data mining to dis-
cover relations and patterns in text. In Proceedings of
the HLT-NAACL-2006.
T. Joachims. 1999. Making large-scale svm learning
practical. In B. Scho?lkopf, C. Burges, and A. Smola,
editors, Advances in Kernel Methods - Support Vector
Learning. MIT-Press.
D. Lin. 1998. Dependency-based evaluation of minipar.
In Proceedings of the Workshop on the Evaluation of
Parsing Systems, 1st International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation.
T. Morton. 2000. Coreference for nlp applications. In
Proceedings of the ACL-2000.
D. Ravichandran and E. Hovy. 2002. Learning surface
text patterns for a question answering system. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACL-2002, pages 41?47.
M.J. Zaki. 2002. Efficiently mining frequent trees in a
forest. In Proceedings of 8th ACM SIGKDD.
128
