Extracting aspects of determiner meaning
from dialogue in a virtual world environment
Hilke Reckman, Jeff Orkin, and Deb Roy
MIT Media Lab
{reckman,jorkin,dkroy}@media.mit.edu
Abstract
We use data from a virtual world game for automated learning of words and grammatical con-
structions and their meanings. The language data are an integral part of the social interaction in the
game and consist of chat dialogue, which is only constrained by the cultural context, as set by the
nature of the provided virtual environment. Building on previous work, where we extracted a vocab-
ulary for concrete objects in the game by making use of the non-linguistic context, we now target
NP/DP grammar, in particular determiners. We assume that we have captured the meanings of a set
of determiners if we can predict which determiner will be used in a particular context. To this end we
train a classifier that predicts the choice of a determiner on the basis of features from the linguistic
and non-linguistic context.
1 Introduction
Determiners are among those words whose meanings are hardest to define in a dictionary. In NLP,
determiners are often considered ?stop words? that are not relevant for understanding the content of a
document and should be removed before any interesting processing is done. On the other hand, it has
been shown that children are sensitive to determiner choice already at a very early age, using these
function words in figuring out what content nouns are intended to refer to. Meanings of determiners have
been argued to include important pragmatic and discourse-related functions.
We have a corpus of dialogue that is grounded in a virtual environment. This means that in our data
there is a relation between what people are saying and what they are doing, providing cues as to what
they mean by the words and constructions they use. We have chosen to use a virtual world environment
to collect data in, rather than a real world environment, because relatively rich virtual worlds are by now
available that are able to provide an interesting level of grounding, whereas making sense of real world
scenes using computer vision is still very challenging. In addition, this choice allows us to conveniently
collect data online1.
Although there exists a rich body of computational linguistics research on learning from corpus data,
these corpora usually consist of text only. Only recently corpora that include non-linguistic context have
started to be collected and used for grounded learning of semantics (Chen et al, 2010; Frank et al,
2009; Fleischman and Roy, 2005; Gorniak and Roy, 2005). This kind of work offers new and insightful
perspectives on learning meanings of natural language words and constructions, based on the idea that
our own knowledge of natural language meanings is grounded in action and perception (Roy, 2005), and
that language is a complex adaptive system which evolves in a community through grounded interaction
(e.g. Steels, 2003). So far the language in virtually grounded datasets has often been restricted to either
descriptions or directives, so utterances can be paired fairly directly with the actions they describe. The
interaction in our data is much freer. That means that it is more representative for the data that human
learners get, and that our methods can be applied to a wider variety of data, possibly also to datasets
1Von Ahn and Dabbish (2004) were among the first to realize the potential of collecting human knowledge data online, in a
game setup, collecting a large image-labeling corpus.
245
that have not been collected specifically for this purpose. A related project is KomParse (Klu?wer et al,
2010). Piantadosi et al (2008) developed a Bayesian model that learns compositional semantic meanings
of different kinds of words, including quantifiers, but from completely artificial data.
Our research focuses on learning from data, rather than through interaction, though the latter may be
possible in a later stage of the project. An example of a virtual world project where language is learned
through interaction is ?Wubble World? (Hewlett et al, 2007). In the Give Challenge (Byron et al, 2009)
a virtual world setup is used to evaluate natural language generation systems.
In previous work we have extracted words and multi-word expressions that refer to a range of objects
that are prominent in our virtual environment (Reckman et al, 2010). Now we investigate if aspects
of determiner meaning can be learned from this dataset. The extracted knowledge of nouns makes
the learning of determiners possible. We study what factors contribute to the choice of the determiner
and how they relate to each other, by training a decision tree classifier using these factors as features.
The decision tree provides insight in which features are actually used, in which order, and to which
effect. The accuracy of the resulting classifier on a test set should give us an impression of how well
we understand the use of the different determiners. Although one may argue that this study is about use
rather than about meaning, we take it that meaning can only be learned through use, and it is meaning
that we are ultimately interested in. One of the overarching questions we are concerned with is what
knowledge about language and how it works is needed to extract knowledge about constructions and their
meanings from grounded data. Practically, a computational understanding of determiners will contribute
to determining the reference of referential expressions, particularly in situated dialogue, and to generating
felicitous referential expressions (cf. Belz et al, 2010).
We first introduce our dataset. Then we discuss the automated extraction of determiners. Subse-
quently, we motivate the features we use, present our classifier experiments, and discuss the results.
2 Data: The Restaurant Game
Orkin and Roy (2007) showed in The Restaurant Game project that current computer game technology
allows for simulating a restaurant at a high level-of-detail, and exploiting the game-play experiences
of thousands of players to capture a wider coverage of knowledge than what could be handcrafted by
a team of researchers. The restaurant theme was inspired by the idea of Schank and Abelson (1977),
who argued that the understanding of language requires the representation of common ground for ev-
eryday scenarios. The goal is automating characters with learned behavior and dialogue. The ongoing
Restaurant Game project has provided a rich dataset for linguistic and AI research. In an online two-
player game humans are anonymously paired to play the roles of customers and waitresses in a virtual
restaurant (http://theRestaurantGame.net). Players can chat with open-ended typed text, move around
the 3D environment, and manipulate 47 types of interactive objects through a point-and-click interface
(see figure 1). Every object provides the same interaction options: pick up, put down, give, inspect, sit
on, eat, and touch, but objects respond to these actions in different ways. The chef and bartender are
hard-coded to produce food items based on keywords in chat text. A game takes about 10-15 minutes to
play. Everything players say and do is logged in time-coded text files on our servers. Although player
interactions vary greatly, we have demonstrated that enough people do engage in common behavior that
it is possible for an automatic system to learn statistical models of typical behavior and language that
correlate highly with human judgment of typicality (Orkin and Roy, 2007).
Over 10.000 games have been collected. The dialogue is grounded in two (partially overlapping)
ways. Not only is there a simulated physical environment with objects that can be manipulated in various
ways, but also social patterns of recurring events provide an anchor for making sense of the dialogue.
Previous research results include a first implementation of a planner that drives AI characters playing the
game (Orkin and Roy, 2009).
The intuition is that a human student of English starting from scratch (but with some common sense
knowledge about restaurants), could learn quite a bit of English from studying the Restaurant Game
episodes; possibly enough to play the game. We try to computationally simulate such a learning process.
246
Figure 1: Screen-shots from The Restaurant Game, from left to right: third-person perspective, waitress?s
perspective with dialogue, menu for interacting with objects.
3 Extracting nouns
Previously, we extracted a vocabulary of referring expressions for a set of concrete objects, based on
which words and phrases have the highest relative frequency in the contexts in which the objects are
used (see figure 2). We extracted words and phrases that can refer to the food and drink items on the
restaurant?s menu, the menu, and the bill, and some other items. These expressions represent the core
nominal phrases in the game. We will use these expressions as a starting point to extract determiners
and nominal modifiers. We restrict ourselves to the ordered food and drink items, the menu and the bill,
expecting that these show a somewhat uniform and interesting behavior, as they are the objects that can
appear and disappear during the course of a game.
food type referring expressions
SOUP
?soup?
?vegetable soup?
?soup du jour?
?soup de jour?
SALAD ?salad?
?cobb salad?
SPAGHETTI ?spaghetti??spaghetti marinara?
FILET ?steak? ?filet??filet mignon?
SALMON ?salmon??grilled salmon?
LOBSTER ?lobster?
?lobster thermador?
CHEESECAKE
?cheesecake?
?cheese? ?cake?
?cherry cheesecake?
?cheese cake?
PIE ?pie??berry pie?
TART ?tart?
?nectarine tart?
drink type referring expressions
WATER ?water?
TEA ?tea?
COFFEE ?coffee?
BEER ?beer?
REDWINE ?red? ?wine?
?red wine?
WHITEWINE ?white?
?white wine?
item type referring expressions
MENU ?menu?
BILL ?bill?
?check?
Figure 2: Extracted referring expressions for relevant items.
The referring expressions for these object types have been extracted in an unsupervised manner
making use of the relative frequency of words and phrases in the context of the objects being used.
Words, bigrams and trigrams were validated against each other with the use of one threshold. For more
detail see (Reckman et al, 2010).
4 Extracting determiners
Extracting determiners totally unsupervised is a non-trivial task. Attempts to use the existing fully un-
supervised grammar induction algorithm ADIOS (Solan et al, 2005) did not give us the results we were
hoping for. Instead, we decided to make use of the knowledge of nouns that we already have and target
247
determiners directly, rather than having to induce a full grammar. In future work we will look into using
alternative grammar induction systems, for a wider range of learning tasks.
We first narrowed down our search space by collecting words that are positively associated with
the position directly to the left of the nominal expression above a high recall, low precision threshold
(phi=0.01)2. This should favor determiners and other nominal modifiers over, for example, verbs.
We expect determiners to appear with a wider range of different nouns than adjectival modifiers do.
Especially in this restricted domain, adjectives are more likely to be restricted to specific object types.
We consider pre-nominal terms that are general enough to appear with more than 5 different objects (out
of 17) to be determiner candidates. We also check that our candidates can be preceded by an utterance
boundary.
The word the is most strongly associated with the relevant position, combines with most different
nouns, and can occur as only element between a boundary and a noun. We therefore assume that at
least the is a determiner. We order the other candidates according to their similarity to the, measured
as the cosine distance in a vector-space, with their two words to the left and to the right as dimensions.
We accept words as determiners in order of similarity to the, starting with the most similar word, after
checking that they are in complementary distribution with all of the already accepted words, i.e. that the
word does not occur adjacent to any of those. This gives us the following determiners: the, my, your,
some, a, another, our, one, ur, two, 2.3
We can then identify adjectival modifiers by looking at what occurs between determiners and nouns.
By checking what else these modifiers can be preceded by (that is also in complementary distribution
with known determiners), we can do another round of determiner search, and that lets us add any to
our list. As nouns can also be immediately preceded by an utterance boundary, we establish that the
determiner position is not obligatorily filled.
Of course this is not a complete set of determiners, but they appear to be the most prominent ones in
the game. Real quantifiers are relatively rare and that is to be expected, given the setting. Perhaps more
surprisingly, this and that are not associated with the left-of-noun position. It turns out that they are not
used very frequently as determiners in the game, and much more as pronouns. In future work we will
extract pronouns, by looking for single words that have a distribution that is similar to the distribution of
full noun phrases with a determiner.
In the process of extracting determiners, we also extract adjectives and modifiers such as glass of.
With little extra effort we can build a vocabulary of these as well, including information as to which
nouns they are associated with. Their meanings, however, are in most cases not sufficiently grounded in
the game to be understood. We may in a more advanced stage of the project be able to figure out that the
adjective free makes the item less likely to appear on the bill, but the meaning of hot will always remain
unclear, as temperature is not modeled in the game. Finding words associated with the position to the left
of specific nouns can also help us further improve our vocabulary of referring expressions, for example
by identifying veg and veggie as alternatives for vegetable in vegetable soup4.
We took a shortcut by directly targeting the position left of the noun. This involves language-specific
knowledge about English. To make this method applicable to different languages and only use very
general knowledge at the start, we would first have to find out what the position of the determiner is.
This may be to the right of the noun or affixed to it. Not all languages have articles, but we can expect
determiners like my, your, another etc. to occur either adjacent to5, or morphologically expressed on the
noun6. In previous work we have shown how a construction for coordination can be extracted (Reckman
2The phi-score is a chi-square based association metric. Manning and Schu?tze (2000) argue that such metrics are suitable
to quantify collocational effects. We also used it in extracting the referring expressions.
3For the experiments we replace ur by your, and 2 by two. We assume this could in principle be done automatically, although
especially in the latter case this is not trivial.
4We do already have a list of spelling variants for all the terms, but veg and veggie were too different from the canonical
form to get through the edit-distance filter
5Obviously we do not catch floating quantifiers this way. We might catch their non-floating counterparts and then discover
that they occur in other positions as well.
6Several unsupervised morphological analyzers have been developed, which should in principle be run in an early stage of
learning. For English however, the only interesting morphology at play here is plural formation.
248
et al, 2010). Coordination, to our knowledge, occurs in all languages and this is probably a feature of
general human cognition, so it makes sense to assume it exists in a language and look for it in the data. It
can then be used as a probe on structure. Categories that are grammatically intimately connected to nouns
are more likely to be repeated in a coordination involving two nouns. If we look at our English data, for
example, we see that a lot more material tends to occur between and and the second noun-conjunct, than
between the first noun-conjunct and and, which suggests that things that are grammatically close to the
noun occur to the left of it.
5 Features
In this section we motivate the features we will use. To capture the full meaning of determiners, we
would probably have to model the mental states of the players. However, what we aim at here is a
preliminary understanding of determiners as a step towards the understanding of full sentences, and the
resolution of NP reference and co-reference, which would be prerequisites for any serious modeling of
mental states. So we are interested in what can be learned from directly observable features. The features
are theoretically motivated, and reflect the nature of the referent, whether the referent has been mentioned
before, whether the referent is present, and who the speaker and addressee are.
The first feature is object type. There are 17 different objects that we take into account: BEER,
BILL, CHEESECAKE, COFFEE, FILET, LOBSTER, MENU, PIE, REDWINE, SALAD, SALMON, SOUP,
SPAGHETTI, TART, TEA, WATER, and WHITEWINE. We expect this feature to matter, because in a
restaurant situation one usually orders ?the spaghetti?, but ?a beer?. This may be to some extent dependent
on what is on the menu, but not completely. Regardless of what is on the menu, ordering ?the Heineken?
seems to be more unusual than ordering ?the Merlot?. This may mean that our data is not entirely
representative of the general case, because of our restaurant setting. However, it cannot be excluded that
similar effects play a role in other settings, too. There is of course the effect of mass versus count nouns,
too, but this may be a bit masked, because of unit expressions like glass of. We chose to not include
these unit expressions as a feature, because the decision to use such modifiers can be considered part of
the decision on which determiner to use. So using the modifier as a feature, would be giving away part
of the solution to the determiner-choice problem.
The second feature captures the notion of discourse-old versus discourse-new. We distinguish be-
tween cases where an object of a particular type is mentioned for the first time, and where it has already
been mentioned before. In the latter case, we take it that the discourse referent has already been intro-
duced. The expected effect is that first mentions tend to be indefinite.7 This is only an approximation,
because sometimes a second object of the same type is introduced and we do not resolve the reference
of our instances.
The third and fourth features incorporate present versus future presence of the object, plus the posi-
tion of the utterance with respect to the central action involving the object. We keep track of the previous
and following action in which the object is involved. Actions of interest are restricted to the appearance
of the object and and its central action: ?eating? for food and drink items, ?looking at? for the menu, and
?paying? for the bill. Being involved in such an action also implies presence. Other intervening actions
are ignored. The features are ?preceding action? and ?following action?, and the values are ?appearance?,
?main action?, and ?none?. We expect indefinites before appearance, when the object is not yet present.
Note that these features rely entirely on non-linguistic context.
The fifth and sixth features identify speaker and addressee. The speaker can be the customer or the
waitress. For the addressee the relevant distinction is whether the staff (chef and bartender) are addressed
or not. We expect a tendency of the waitress using your when talking to the customer, and of the customer
using my more often. We expect more indefinites or absence of a determiner when the staff is spoken to.
These features are central to dialogue, and may reveal differences between the roles.
7This is a typical feature for languages that have articles, and may be expressed through other means in other languages.
249
6 Experiments
We use the decision tree classifier from the Natural Language ToolKit for Python (Loper and Bird, 2002)
and train and test it through 10-fold cross-validation on 74304 noun phrases from 5000 games, 23776 of
which actually have determiners. The noun phrases used all contain nouns that can refer to the selected
objects, though we cannot guarantee that they were intended to do so in all cases. In fact, we have seen
examples where this is clearly not the case, and for example filet, which normally refers to the FILET
object, is used in the context of salmon. This means that there is a level of noise in our data.
The instances where the determiner is absent are very dominant, and this part of the data is necessarily
noisy, because of rare determiners that we?ve missed8, and possibly rather heterogeneous, as there are
many reasons why people may choose to not type a determiner in chat. Therefore we focus on the
experiments where we have excluded these cases, as the results are more interesting. We will refer to
the data that excludes instances with no determiner as the restricted dataset. When instances with no
determiner are included, we will talk about the full dataset.
6.1 Baselines
In the experiments we compare the results of using the features to two different baselines. The simplest
baseline is to always choose the most frequent determiner. For the instances that have overt determiners,
the most frequent one is the. Always choosing the gives us a mean accuracy of 0.364. If we include
the instances with no overt determiners, that gives us a much higher baseline of 0.680, when the no
determiner option is always chosen. We call this the simple baseline.
The second baseline is the result of using only the object feature, and forms the basis of our experi-
ments. We call this the object-only baseline. On the restricted dataset the resulting classifier assigns the
determiner a to the objects BEER, COFFEE, PIE, REDWINE, SALAD, TEA, WATER, and WHITEWINE,
and the determiner the to BILL, CHEESECAKE, FILET, LOBSTER, MENU, SALMON, SOUP, SPAGHETTI,
and TART. This yields a mean accuracy of 0.520, which is a considerable improvement over the sim-
ple baseline that is relevant for this part of the data. If we look at the confusion matrix in figure 3 that
summarizes the results of all 10 object-only runs we see that the objects? preferences for definite versus
indefinite determiners are also visible in the way instances with determiners other than the and a are
misclassified. Instances with definite determiners are more often classified as the, and indefinites as a.
a another any my one our some the two your
a <4984> . . . . . . 2912 . .
another 608 <.> . . . . . 76 . .
any 56 . <.> . . . . 24 . .
my 238 . . <.> . . . 742 . .
one 354 . . . <.> . . 241 . .
our 28 . . . . <.> . 178 . .
some 1109 . . . . . <.> 438 . .
the 1270 . . . . . . <7383> . .
two 191 . . . . . . 58 <.> .
your 805 . . . . . . 2075 . <.>
Figure 3: Confusion matrix for the object-only baseline.
On the full dataset, the classifier assigns the to instances of BILL and MENU and no determiner
to everything else, reflecting the count/mass distinction, and resulting in a mean accuracy of 0.707.
This is also a statistically significant improvement over its baseline, but much less spectacular. The
definite/indefinite distinction that we saw with the restricted dataset, does not really emerge here.
8It is also hard to reliably recognize misspelled determiners as determiners tend to be very short words.
250
6.2 Adding the other features
In the core experiments of this paper we always use the object feature as a basis and measure the effect of
adding the other features, separately and in combination. All differences reported are significant, unless
stated otherwise. The table in figure 5 at the end of the section summarizes the results.
If we add the feature of whether the item has been mentioned before or not, we get more indefi-
nites, as was to be expected. On the restricted dataset, the MENU, PIE, and TART objects get a if not
mentioned previously, and the otherwise. The mean accuracy is 0.527, which is a statistically significant
improvement over the object-only baseline (the improvement is consistent over all 10 runs), but it seems
rather small, nevertheless. (Using the discourse feature without the object feature gives a score of 0.377.)
Adding information as to whether the customer has seen the menu does not make any difference. On the
full dataset the discourse feature matters only for MENU, which gets a if not previously mentioned. The
mean accuracy is 0.709.
If, instead, we add the action features we get a somewhat more substantial improvement for the
restricted dataset; a mean accuracy of 0.561. We also get a wider range of determiners: your tends to be
chosen after appearing and before eating, another after eating, and a between no action and appearing.
The order in which the following and preceding action features are applied by the classifier differs per
object. (The action features without the object feature give a mean accuracy score of 0.427.) For the full
dataset the mean accuracy is 0.714, again a consistent, but marginal improvement. However, a, the and
your are the only determiners used, in addition to the no determiner option.
Adding the speaker and addressee features to the object feature base gives the classifier a better grip
on your. More indefinites are used when the staff is addressed, your when the customer is spoken to.
However, my is still not picked up. The speaker and addressee features are used in both orders. The mean
accuracy is 0.540, which is better than with the discourse feature, but worse than with the action features.
(The speaker and addressee features without the object feature give a mean accuracy score of 0.424.) In
the case of the full dataset, the new features are barely used, and there is no consistent improvement over
the different runs. The mean accuracy is 0.711.
If we combine the action features and speaker/addressee features on top of the object feature basis,
we see a substantial improvement again for the restricted dataset. The mean accuracy is 0.592. Finally,
we get some cases of my being correctly classified, and also your is correctly classified significantly
more often than in the previous experiments. The object feature always comes first in the decision tree.
For the other features, all relative orders are attested. Adding the ?previously-mentioned? feature to
this combination (see also figure 4) improves this result a little bit more, to a mean accuracy of 0.594,
although we can expect the information contained in it to have a large overlap with the information in
other features, for example, items mentioned for the first time will typically not have appeared yet.
a another any my one our some the two your
a <5732> 163 1 11 20 . 70 1773 1 125
another 175 <350> . 2 . . 48 70 . 39
any 44 4 <.> . . . 2 29 . 1
my 154 19 . <9> . . 20 765 . 13
one 437 20 . 2 <16> . 4 70 . 46
our 29 1 . . . <.> 1 161 . 14
some 881 48 . 6 3 . <114> 421 . 74
the 1332 74 . 33 8 . 34 <6131> . 1040
two 191 10 . 2 . . 1 45 <.> .
your 218 88 . . . . 20 781 . <1773>
(row = reference; col = test)
Figure 4: Confusion matrix for the object, action, speaker/addressee and discourse features combined.
251
6.3 Linguistic context and dialogue acts
It will be part of future research to distinguish the different dialogue acts that the nominal phrases that
we studied can be part of. Identifying the ?task? that an expression is part of may have a similar effect.
Tasks of the type ?customer gets seated?, ?waitress serves food?, ?customer eats meal?, etc. are annotated
for supervised learning, and may consist of several actions and utterances (Orkin et al, 2010).
To give an indication that the dialogue act that an expression is part of may be informative as to the
correct choice of the determiner, we have done an extra experiment, where we have used the word before
and the word after the DP as features. This gives a tremendous amount of feature values, which are not
very insightful, due to the lack of generalization, and are a near guarantee for over-fitting. However,
it does yield an improvement over using the object-only baseline. Moreover, the preceding word and
following word features are now applied before the object feature. The mean accuracy in this experiment
was 0.562, which is comparable to the experiment with object and action features. At the same time we
get a wider range of determiners than we have had before, including some correctly classified instances
of our. On the full dataset we even get a higher accuracy score than in any of the other experiments:
0.769, also with a much wider range of determiners. We suspect that this local linguistic context gives
quite good cues as to whether the expression is part of a proper sentence or not, and that in the former
case an overt determiner is much more likely9. The results of all experiments are summarized in figure 5.
restricted full
simple baseline 0.364 0.680
object-only baseline 0.520 0.707
object + discourse 0.527 0.709
object + action 0.561 0.714
object + speaker 0.540 0.711
object + action + speaker 0.592 0.721
object + action + speaker + discourse 0.594 0.721
object + surrounding words 0.562 0.769
Figure 5: Summary of the testing results.
7 Discussion
Maybe the most surprising outcome is that the object type turns out to be the main factor in choosing
the determiner in this virtual restaurant setting. It would beinteresting to see this reproduced on the
data of two new games that are currently being developed, with novel scenarios, locations and objects.
At the same time, it is a strength of our approach, that we can simulate a specific setting and capture
its ideosyncrasies, learning domain-specific aspects of language, and hopefully eventually learn what
generalizes across different scenarios.
For the restricted dataset we see that, consistently, indefinites are mostly misclassified as a, and
definites mostly as the. If we evaluate only for definiteness, we get a mean accuracy of 0.800 for the case
with all features combined. We could distinguish these two classes of determiners on the basis of the
similarity of each determiner to the two dominant types. It is, however, the object feature that seems to
be mainly responsible for the gain in definiteness accuracy with respect to the simple baseline.
It is unsurprising that we haven?t learned much about one and two, except that they pattern with
indefinites, as we haven?t included features that have to do with the number of objects. There actually
are more numerals that appear in the game, but did not make it into our list of determiners, because
they did not occur with enough different objects. In the general case, we are doubtful that numerals are
sufficiently grounded in this game for their exact meanings to be learned. It may however be possible to
learn a one-two-many kind of distinction. This would also involve looking into plural morphology, and
remains for future research.
9We have observed that in several games people tend to just sum up food items, without embedding them in a sentence.
252
We also haven?t learned anything about our, except that it patterns with definites. It is not quite clear
what kind of features would be relevant to our in this setting.
For the possessive pronouns your and my we have learned that one tends to be linked to the waitress
as a speaker (and the customer as addressee) and the other to the customer. It will be challenging to reach
an understanding that goes deeper than this10. The range of interactions in the game may be too limited
to learn the meanings of all determiners in their full generality.
While we have treated a and another as different determiners, we have included cases of some more
under some. It may be worthwhile to include some more (and perhaps any more and one more as well) as
a separate determiner. However, our best classifier so far still cannot distinguish between a and another
very well.
The experiments with linguistic context suggest that dialogue act may make for an additional, pow-
erful, albeit indirect, feature. The fact that it helps to know when the main action involving the object
took place, rather than just its appearance, may also be taken to point in the same direction, as people
tend to say different kinds of things about an object before and after the main action.
Using a classifier seems to be a reasonable way of testing how well we understand determiners, as
long as our features provide insight. Although there is still a lot of room for improvement, there is likely
to be a ceiling effect at some point, because sometimes more than one option is felicitous. We also have
to keep in mind that chat is likely to be more variable than normal written or spoken language.
8 Conclusion
We have carried out an exploratory series of experiments, to see if meanings of determiners, a very
abstract linguistic category, could be learned from virtually grounded dialogue data. We have trained a
classifier on a set of theoretically motivated features, and used the testing phase to evaluate how well
these features predict the choice of the determiner.
Altogether, the results are encouraging. If we exclude instances with no determiner we reach an
accuracy of 0.594 over a baseline of 0.364. The features that identify the dialogue participants and
surrounding actions, including appearance, play an important role in this result, even though the object
type remains the main factor. A clear dichotomy between definite and indefinite determiners emerges.
The results for the complete dataset are a bit messier, and need more work.
In future work we will identify utterance types, or dialogue acts, that also rely on surrounding actions
and on the speaker and addressee. We will also look into resolving reference and co-reference.
Acknowledgments
This research was funded by a Rubicon grant from the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research
(NWO), project nr. 446-09-011.
References
Belz, A., E. Kow, J. Viethen, and A. Gatt (2010). Generating referring expressions in context: The
GREC task evaluation challenges. In Empirical Methods in Natural Language Generation, pp. 294?
327. Springer.
Byron, D., A. Koller, K. Striegnitz, J. Cassell, R. Dale, J. Moore, and J. Oberlander (2009). Report on
the First NLG Challenge on Generating Instructions in Virtual Environments (GIVE). In Proceedings
of the 12th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation, pp. 165?173. ACL.
Chen, D., J. Kim, and R. Mooney (2010). Training aMultilingual Sportscaster: Using Perceptual Context
to Learn Language. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 37, 397?435.
10For their personal pronoun counterparts you and I we might stand a better chance.
253
Fleischman, M. and D. Roy (2005). Why verbs are harder to learn than nouns: Initial insights from a
computational model of intention recognition in situated word learning. In 27th Annual Meeting of
the Cognitive Science Society, Stresa, Italy.
Frank, M., N. Goodman, and J. Tenenbaum (2009). Using speakers? referential intentions to model early
cross-situational word learning. Psychological Science 20(5), 578.
Gorniak, P. and D. Roy (2005). Probabilistic grounding of situated speech using plan recognition and
reference resolution. In Proceedings of the 7th international conference on Multimodal interfaces, pp.
143. ACM.
Hewlett, D., S. Hoversten, W. Kerr, P. Cohen, and Y. Chang (2007). Wubble world. In Proceedings of
the 3rd Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Entertainment.
Klu?wer, T., P. Adolphs, F. Xu, H. Uszkoreit, and X. Cheng (2010). Talking NPCs in a virtual game
world. In Proceedings of the ACL 2010 System Demonstrations, pp. 36?41. ACL.
Loper, E. and S. Bird (2002). NLTK: The natural language toolkit. In Proceedings of the ACL-02
Workshop on Effective tools and methodologies for teaching natural language processing and compu-
tational linguistics-Volume 1, pp. 70. ACL.
Manning, C. and H. Schu?tze (2000). Foundations of statistical natural language processing. MIT Press.
Orkin, J. and D. Roy (2007). The restaurant game: Learning social behavior and language from thousands
of players online. Journal of Game Development 3(1), 39?60.
Orkin, J. and D. Roy (2009). Automatic learning and generation of social behavior from collective
human gameplay. In Proceedings of The 8th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and
Multiagent Systems-Volume 1, pp. 385?392. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and
Multiagent Systems.
Orkin, J., T. Smith, H. Reckman, and D. Roy (2010). Semi-Automatic Task Recognition for Interactive
Narratives with EAT & RUN. In Proceedings of the 3rd Intelligent Narrative Technologies Workshop
at the 5th International Conference on Foundations of Digital Games (FDG).
Piantadosi, S., N. Goodman, B. Ellis, and J. Tenenbaum (2008). A Bayesian model of the acquisition of
compositional semantics. In Proceedings of the Thirtieth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society. Citeseer.
Reckman, H., J. Orkin, and D. Roy (2010). Learning meanings of words and constructions, grounded in
a virtual game. In Proceedings of the 10th Conference on Natural Language Processing (KONVENS).
Roy, D. (2005). Semiotic schemas: A framework for grounding language in action and perception.
Artificial Intelligence 167(1-2), 170?205.
Schank, R. and R. Abelson (1977). Scripts, plans, goals and understanding: An inquiry into human
knowledge structures. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Hillsdale, NJ.
Solan, Z., D. Horn, E. Ruppin, and S. Edelman (2005). Unsupervised learning of natural languages.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 102(33), 11629.
Steels, L. (2003). Evolving grounded communication for robots. Trends in cognitive sciences 7(7),
308?312.
Von Ahn, L. and L. Dabbish (2004). Labeling images with a computer game. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems, pp. 319?326. ACM.
254
