Japanese-Spanish Thesaurus Construction 
 Using English as a Pivot 
Jessica  Ram?rez, Masayuki Asahara, Yuji Matsumoto 
Graduate  School of Information Science 
Nara Institute of Science and Technology  
Ikoma, Nara, 630-0192 Japan 
{jessic-r,masayu-a,matsu}@is.naist.jp 
 
 
Abstract 
We present the results of research with the 
goal of automatically creating a multilin-
gual thesaurus based on the freely available 
resources of Wikipedia and WordNet. Our 
goal is to increase resources for natural 
language processing tasks such as machine 
translation targeting the Japanese-Spanish 
language pair. Given the scarcity of re-
sources, we use existing English resources 
as a pivot for creating a trilingual Japanese-
Spanish-English thesaurus. Our approach 
consists of extracting the translation tuples 
from Wikipedia, disambiguating them by 
mapping them to WordNet word senses. 
We present results comparing two methods 
of disambiguation, the first using VSM on 
Wikipedia article texts and WordNet defi-
nitions, and the second using categorical 
information extracted from Wikipedia, We 
find that mixing the two methods produces 
favorable results. Using the proposed 
method, we have constructed a multilingual 
Spanish-Japanese-English thesaurus con-
sisting of 25,375 entries. The same method 
can be applied to any pair of languages that 
are linked to English in Wikipedia. 
1 Introduction 
 
Aligned data resources are indispensable compo-
nents of many Natural Language Processing (NLP) 
applications; however lack of annotated data is the 
main obstacle for achieving high performance NLP 
systems. Current success has been moderate. This 
is because for some languages there are few re-
sources that are usable for NLP. 
Manual construction of resources is expensive 
and time consuming. For this reason NLP re-
searchers have proposed semi-automatic or auto-
matic methods for constructing resources such as 
dictionaries, thesauri, and ontologies, in order to 
facilitate NLP tasks such as word sense disam-
biguation, machine translation and other tasks. 
Hoglan Jin and Kam-Fai Wong (2002) automati-
cally construct a Chinese dictionary from different 
Chinese corpora, and Ahmad Khurshid et al 
(2004) automatically develop a thesaurus for a 
specific domain by using text that is related to an 
image collection to aid in image retrieval. 
With the proliferation of the Internet and the 
immense amount of data available on it, a number 
of researchers have proposed using the World 
Wide Web as a large-scale corpus (Rigau et al, 
2002). However due to the amount of redundant 
and ambiguous information on the web, we must 
find methods of extracting only the information 
that is useful for a given task. 
1.1 Goals 
This research deals with the problem of developing 
a multilingual Japanese-English-Spanish thesaurus 
that will be useful to future Japanese-Spanish NLP 
research projects. 
A thesaurus generally means a list of words 
grouped by concepts; the resource that we create is 
similar because we group the words according to 
semantic relations. However, our resource is also 
473
composed of three languages ? Spanish, English, 
and Japanese. Thus we call the resource we created 
a multilingual thesaurus. 
Our long term goal is the construction of a Japa-
nese-Spanish MT system. This thesaurus will be 
used for word alignments and building comparable 
corpus. 
We construct our multilingual thesaurus by fol-
lowing these steps:   
? Extract the translation tuples from Wikipedia  
article titles 
? Align the word senses of these tuples with 
those of English WordNet (disambigua-
tion) 
? Construct a parallel thesaurus of Spanish-
English-Japanese from these tuples 
1.2 Method summary 
We extract the translation tuples using Wikipedia?s 
hyperlinks to articles in different languages and 
align these tuples to WordNet by measuring cosine 
vector similarity measures between Wikipedia arti-
cle texts and WordNet glosses. We also use heuris-
tics comparing the Wikipedia categories of a word 
with its hypernyms in WordNet. 
  A fundamental step in the construction of a the-
saurus is part of speech (POS) identification of 
words and word sense disambiguation (WSD) of 
polysemous entries. 
For POS identification, we cannot use Wikipedia, 
because it does not contain POS information. So 
we use another well-structured resource, WordNet, 
to provide us with the correct POS for a word.  
These two resources, Wikipedia and WordNet, 
contain polysemous entries. We also introduce 
WSD method to align these entries.  
We focus on the multilingual application of 
Wikipedia to help transfer information across lan-
guages. This paper is restricted mainly to nouns, 
noun phrases, and to a lesser degree, named enti-
ties, because we only use Wikipedia article titles. 
2 Resources 
2.1 Wikipedia 
Wikipedia is an online multilingual encyclopedia 
with articles on a wide range of topics, in which 
the texts are aligned across different languages.  
Wikipedia has some features that make it suitable 
for research such as: 
Each article has a title, with a unique ID. ?Redi-
rect pages? handle synonyms, and ?disambiguation 
pages? are used when a word has several senses. 
?Category pages? contain a list of words that share 
the same semantic category. For example the cate-
gory page for ?Birds? contains links to articles like 
?parrot?, ?penguin?, etc. Categories are assigned 
manually by users and therefore not all pages have 
a category label. 
Some articles belong to multiple categories. For 
example, the article ?Dominican Republic? be-
longs to three categories: ?Dominican Republic?, 
?Island countries? and ?Spanish-speaking coun-
tries?. Thus, the article Dominican Republic ap-
pears in three different category pages. 
The information in redirect pages, disambigua-
tion pages and Category pages combines to form a 
kind of Wikipedia taxonomy, where entries are 
identified by semantic category and word sense. 
2.2 WordNet 
 
WordNet (C. Fellbaum, 1998) ?is considered to be 
one of the most important resources in computa-
tional linguistics and is a lexical database, in 
which concepts have been grouped into sets of 
synonyms (words with different spellings, but the 
same meaning), called synsets, recording different 
semantic relations between words?. 
WordNet can be considered to be a kind of ma-
chine-readable dictionary. The main difference 
between WordNet and conventional dictionaries is 
that WordNet groups the concepts into synsets, and 
each concept has a small definition sentence call a 
?gloss? with one or more sample sentences for 
each synset. 
When we look for a word in WordNet it presents 
a finite number of synsets, each one representing a 
concept or idea.  
The entries in WordNet have been classified ac-
cording to the syntactic category such as: nouns, 
verbs, adjectives and adverbs, etc. These syntactic 
categories are known as part of speech (POS). 
3 Related Work 
Compared to well-established resources such as 
WordNet, there are currently comparatively fewer 
researchers using Wikipedia as a data resource in 
474
NLP. There are, however, works showing promis-
ing results. 
The work most closely related to this paper is 
(M. Ruiz et al, 2005), which attempts to create an 
ontology by associating the English Wikipedia 
links with English WordNet. They use the ?Sim-
ple English Wikipedia? and WordNet version 1.7 
to measure similarity between concepts. They 
compared the WordNet glosses and Wikipedia by 
using the Vector Space Model, and presented re-
sults using the cosine similarity. 
 Our approach differs in that we disambiguate 
the Wikipedia category tree using WordNet hyper-
/hyponym tree. We compare our approach to M. 
Ruiz et al, (2005) using it as the baseline in sec-
tion 7. 
Oi Yee Kwong (1998) integrates different re-
sources to construct a thesaurus by using WordNet 
as a pivot to fill gaps between thesaurus and a dic-
tionary.  
Strube and Ponzetto (2006) present some ex-
periments using Wikipedia for the computing se-
mantic relatedness of words (a measure of degree 
to which two concepts are related in a taxonomy 
measured using all semantic relations), and com-
pare the results with WordNet. They also integrate 
Google hits, in addition to Wikipedia and WordNet 
based measures. 
4 General Description 
First we extract from Wikipedia all the aligned 
links i.e. Wikipedia article titles.  We map these on 
to WordNet to determine if a word has more than 
one sense (polysemous) and extract the ambiguous 
articles. We use two methods to disambiguate by 
assigning the WordNet sense to the polysemous 
words, we use two methods: 
 Measure the cosine similarity between each 
Wikipedia article?s content and the WordNet 
glosses.  
 Compare the Wikipedia category to which the 
article belongs with the corresponding word in 
WordNet?s ontology  
Finally, we substitute the target word into Japa-
nese and Spanish. 
 
5 Extracting links from Wikipedia 
 
The goal is the acquisition of Japanese-Spanish-
English tuples of Wikipedia?s article titles. Each 
Wikipedia article provides links to corresponding 
articles in different languages. 
Every article page in Wikipedia has on the left 
hand side some boxes labeled: ?navigation?, 
?search?, ?toolbox? and finally ?in other languages?. 
This has a list of all the languages available for that 
article, although the articles in each language do 
not all have exactly the same contents. In most 
cases English articles are longer or have more in-
formation than their counterparts in other lan-
guages, because the majority of Wikipedia collabo-
rators are native English speakers. 
 
Pre-processing procedure: 
 
Before starting with the above phases, we first 
eliminate the irrelevant information from Wikipe-
dia articles, to make processing easy and faster.The 
steps applied are as follows: 
1. Extract the Wikipedia web articles 
2. Remove from the pages all irrelevant informa-
tion, such as images, menus, and special 
markup such as: ?()?, ?&quot;?, ?*?, etc... 
3. Verify if a link is a redirected article and ex-
tract the original article 
4. Remove all stopwords and function words that 
do not give information about a specific topic 
such as ?the?, ?between?, ?on?, etc. 
 
Methodology 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  The article ?bird? in English, Spanish and 
Japanese 
 
Take all articles titles that are nouns or named enti-
ties and look in the articles? contents for the box 
475
called ?In other languages?. Verify that it has at 
least one link. If the box exists, it links to the same 
article in other languages. Extract the titles in these 
other languages and align them with the original 
article title. 
For instance, Figure 1. shows the English article 
titled ?bird? translated into Spanish as ?ave?, and 
into Japanese as ?chourui? (??). When we click 
Spanish or Japanese ?in other languages? box, we 
obtain an article about the same topic in the other 
language. This gives us the translation as its title, 
and we proceed to extract it. 
 
6 Aligning Wikipedia entries to WordNet 
senses 
 
The goal of aligning English Wikipedia entries to 
WordNet 2.1 senses is to disambiguate the 
polysemous words in Wikipedia by means of com-
parison with each sense of a given word existing in 
WordNet. 
A gloss in WordNet contains both an association 
of POS and word sense. For example, the entry 
?bark#n#1? is different than ?bark#v#1? because 
their POSes are different. In this example, ?n? de-
notes noun and ?v? denotes verb. So when we 
align a Wikipedia article to a WordNet gloss, we 
obtain both POS and word sense information. 
 
Methodology 
 
We assign WordNet senses to Wikipedia?s polyse-
mous articles. Firstly, after extracting all links and 
their corresponding translations in Spanish and 
Japanese, we look up the English words in Word-
Net and count the number of senses that each word 
has. If the word has more than one sense, the word 
is polysemous. 
We use two methods to disambiguate the am-
biguous articles, the first uses cosine similarity and 
the second uses Wikipedia?s category tree and 
WordNet?s ontology tree. 
6.1 Disambiguation using Vector Space Model 
We use a Vector Space Model (VSM) on Wikipe-
dia and WordNet to disambiguate the POS and-
word sense of Wikipedia article titles. This gives 
us a correspondence to a WordNet gloss. 
 
 
Where V1 represents the Wikipedia article?s word 
vector and V2  represents the WordNet gloss? word 
vector. 
In order to transfer the POS and word sense in-
formation, we have to measure similarity metric 
between a Wikipedia article and a WordNet gloss.  
 
Background 
 
VSM is an algebraic model, in which we convert a 
Wikipedia article into a vector and compares it to a 
WordNet gloss (that has also been converted into a 
vector) using the cosine similarity measure. It takes 
the set of words in some Wikipedia article and 
compares them with the set of words of WordNet 
gloss. Wikipedia articles which have more words 
in common are considered similar documents. 
  In Figure 2 shows the vector of the word ?bank?, 
we want to compare the similitude between the 
Wikipedia article ?bank-1? with the English 
WordNet ?bank-1? and ?bank-2?.  
 
 
   
 
Figure 2. Vector Space Model with the word ?bank? 
 
VSM Algorithm: 
 
1. Encode the Wikipedia article as a vector, 
where each dimension represents a word 
in the text of the article 
2. Encode the WordNet gloss of each sense 
as a vector in the same manner 
bank -1(a) 
bank -1(b) 
bank -2(a) 
bank -2(b) 
(a) Wikipedia 
(b) WordNet 
?
||.||cos 21
21
VV
VV ?
=?
476
3. Compute the similarity between the 
Wikipedia vector and WordNet senses? 
vectors for a given word using the cosine 
measure 
4. Link the Wikipedia article to the Word-
Net gloss with the highest similarity 
 
6.2   Disambiguation by mapping the WordNet 
ontological tree to Wikipedia categories 
 
This method consists of mapping the Wikipedia 
Category tree to the WordNet ontological tree, by 
comparing hypernyms and hyponyms. The main 
assumption is that there should be overlap between 
the hypernyms and hyponyms of Wikipedia arti-
cles and their correct WordNet senses. We will 
refer to this method as MCAT (?Map CATego-
ries?) throughout the rest of this paper. 
Wikipedia has in the bottom of each page a box 
containing the category or categories to which the 
page belongs, as we can see in Figure 3. Each cate-
gory links to the corresponding category page to 
which the title is affiliated. This means that the 
?category page? contains a list of all articles that 
share a common category. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Relation between WordNet ontological tree 
and Wikipedia categories  
 
Methodology 
 
1. We extract ambiguous Wikipedia article 
titles (links) and the corresponding cate-
gory pages 
2. Extract the category pages, containing all 
pages which belong to that category, its 
subcategories, and other category pages 
that have a branch in the tree and categories 
to which it belongs. 
3. If the page has a category: 
3.1 Construct an n-dimensional vector con-
taining the links and their categories 
3.2 Construct an n-dimensional vector of the 
category pages, where every dimension 
represents a link which belongs to that 
category 
4. For each category that an article belongs 
to: 
4.1 
 Map the categoryto the WordNet hy-
pernym-/hyponym tree by looking in 
each place that the given word ap-
pears and verify if any of its branches 
exist in the category page vector. 
4.2 
 If a relation cannot be found then con-
tinue with other categories 
4.3 
 If there is no correspondence at all 
then take the category pages vector 
and look to see if any of the links has 
relation with the WordNet tree 
5. If there is at least one correspondence then 
assign this sense 
    
 
6.3 Constructing the multilingual thesaurus 
 
After we have obtained the English words with its 
corresponding English WordNet sense aligned in 
the three languages, we construct a thesaurus from 
these alignments. 
The thesaurus contains a unique ID for every tu-
ple of word and POS that it will have information 
about the syntactic category. 
 It also contains the sense of the word (obtain in 
the disambiguation process) and finally a small 
definition, which have the meaning of the word in 
the three languages. 
 We assign a unique ID to every tuple of words 
 For Spanish and Japanese we assign for de-
fault sense 1 to the first occurrence of the 
word if there exists more than 1 occurrence 
we continue incrementing 
 Extract a small definition from the corre-
sponding Wikipedia articles 
animal 
  bird 
life form 
WordNet tree                Wikipedia article 
Categories: Birds  
477
The definition of title word in Wikipedia tends to 
be in the first sentence of the article.  
Wikipedia articles often include sentences defin-
ing the meaning of the article?s title. We mine 
Wikipedia for these sentences include them in our 
thesaurus. There is a large body of research dedi-
cate to identifying definition sentences (Wilks et 
al., 1997), However, we currently rely on very 
simple patterns to this (e.g. ?X is a/are Y?,  ?X es 
un/a Y?, ?X ?/? Y ?????). Incorporating 
more sophisticated methods remains an area of 
future work.  
7 Experiments 
7.1 Extracting links from Wikipedia 
 
We use the articles titles from Wikipedia which are 
mostly nouns (including named entities) in Spanish, 
English and Japanese; (es.wikipedia.org, 
en.wikipedia.org, and ja.wikipedia.org), specifi-
cally ?the latest all titles? and ?the latest pages ar-
ticles? files retrieved in April of 2006, and English 
WordNet version 2.1. 
Our Wikipedia data contains a total of 377,621 
articles in Japanese; 2,749,310 in English; and 
194,708 in Spanish. We got a total of 25,379 words 
aligned in the three languages. 
 
7.2 Aligning Wikipedia  entries to WordNet 
senses 
In WordNet there are 117,097 words and 141,274 
senses. In Wikipedia (English) there are 2,749,310 
article titles. 78,247 word types exist in WordNet. 
There are 14,614 polysemous word types that will 
align with one of the 141,274 senses in WordNet. 
We conduct our experiments using 12,906 am-
biguous articles from Wikipedia. 
Table 1 shows the results obtained for WSD. 
The first column is the baseline (M. Ruiz et al, 
2005) using the whole article; the second column is 
the baseline using only the first part of the article.  
   The third column (MCAT) shows the results of 
the second disambiguation method (disambigua-
tion by mapping the WordNet ontological tree to 
Wikipedia categories). Finally the last column 
shows the results of combined method of taking 
the MCAT results when available and falling back 
to MCAT otherwise. The first row shows the sense 
assignments, the second row shows the incorrect 
sense assignment, and the last row shows the num-
ber of word used for testing. 
 
7.2.1 Disambiguation using VSM 
 
In the experiment using VSM, we used human 
evaluation over a sample of 507 words to verify if 
a given Wikipedia article corresponds to a given 
WordNet gloss. We took a the stratified sample of 
our data selecting the first 5 out of every 66 entries 
as ordered alphabetically for a total of 507 entries.  
   We evaluate the effectiveness of using whole 
articles in Wikipedia versus only a part (the first 
part up to the first subtitle), we found that the best 
score was obtained when using the whole articles 
81.5% (410 words) of them are correctly assigned 
and 18.5% (97 words) incorrect.  
 
Discussion 
 
In this experiment because we used VSM the result 
was strongly affected by the length of the glosses 
in WordNet, especially in the case of related defi-
nitions because the longer the gloss the greater the 
probability of it having more words in common.  
An example of related definitions in English 
WordNet is the word ?apple?. It has two senses as 
follows: 
 apple#n#1: fruit with red or yellow or green 
skin and sweet to tart crisp whitish flesh. 
 apple#n#2: native Eurasian tree widely culti-
vated in many varieties for its firm rounded 
edible fruits. 
The Wikipedia article ?apple? refers to both 
senses, and so selection of either WordNet sense is 
correct. It is very difficult for the algorithm to dis-
tinguish between them. 
 
7.2.2 Disambiguation by mapping the WordNet 
ontological tree to Wikipedia categories 
 
Our 12,906 articles taken from Wikipedia belong 
to a total of 18,810 associated categories. Thus, 
clearly some articles have more than one category; 
however some articles also do not have any cate-
gory. 
In WordNet there are 107,943 hypernym relations. 
 
 
478
 Baseline Our methods  
VSM VSM (using first 
part of the article) 
MCAT VSM+ MCAT 
Correct sense identification 410  
(81.5%) 
403  
(79.48%) 
380 
(95%) 
426 
 (84.02%) 
Incorrect sense identification 97  
(18.5%) 
104 
 (20.52%) 
20  
(5%) 
81  
(15.98%) 
Total ambiguous words 507 
 (100%) 
400 
(100%) 
507  
(100%) 
 
Table 1. Results of disambiguation 
 
 
Results: 
 
We successfully aligned 2,239 Wikipedia article 
titles with a WordNet sense. 400 of the 507 arti-
cles in our test data have Wikipedia category 
pages allowing us apply MCAT. Our human 
evaluation found that 95% (380 words) were cor-
rectly disambiguated. This outperformed disam-
biguation using VSM, demonstrating the utility of 
the taxonomic information in Wikipedia and 
WordNet. However, because not all words in 
Wikipedia have categories, and there are very few 
named entities in WordNet, the number of disam-
biguated words that can be obtained with MCAT 
(2,239) is less than when using VSM, (12,906). 
Using only MCAT reduces the size of the Japa-
nese-Spanish thesaurus. We had the intuition that 
by combining both disambiguation methods we 
can achieve a better balance between coverage 
and accuracy. VSM+MCAT use the MCAT WSD 
results when available falling back to VSM results 
otherwise. 
 We got an accuracy of 84.02% (426 of 507 to-
tal words) with VSM+MCAT, outperforming the 
baselines. 
 
Evaluating the coverage over Comparable cor-
pus 
 
 Corpus construction 
 
We construct comparable corpus by extracting 
from Wikipedia articles content information as 
follows: 
Choose the articles whose content belongs to the 
thesaurus. We only took the first part of the article 
until a subtitle and split into sentences. 
 
 Evaluation of  coverage 
 
We evaluate the coverage of the thesaurus over an 
automated comparable corpus automatically ex-
tracted from Wikipedia. The comparable corpus 
consists of a total of 6,165 sentences collected 
from 12,900 articles of Wikipedia. 
 We obtained 34,525 types of words; we map 
them with 15,764 from the Japanese-English-
Spanish thesaurus. We found 10,798 types of 
words that have a coincidence that it is equivalent 
to 31.27%. 
We found this result acceptable for find informa-
tion inside Wikipedia. 
 
 
8 Conclusion and future work 
 
This paper focused on the creation of a Japanese-
Spanish-English thesaurus and ontological rela-
tions. We demonstrated the feasibility of using 
Wikipedia?s features for aligning several lan-
guages.We present the results of three sub-tasks: 
The first sub-task used pattern matching to 
align the links between Spanish, Japanese, and 
English articles? titles. 
The second sub-task used two methods to dis-
ambiguate the English article titles by assigning 
the WordNet senses to each English word; the 
first method compares the disambiguation using 
cosine similarity. The second method uses 
Wikipedia categories. We established that using 
Wikipedia categories and the WordNet ontology 
gives promising results, however the number of 
words that can be disambiguated with this method 
479
is small compared to the VSM method. However, 
we showed that combining the two methods 
achieved a favorable balance of coverage and ac-
curacy. 
Finally, the third sub-task involved translating 
English thesaurus entries into Spanish and Japa-
nese to construct a multilingual aligned thesaurus. 
So far most of research on Wikipedia focuses 
on using only a single language. The main contri-
bution of this paper is that by using a huge multi-
lingual data resource (in our case Wikipedia) 
combined with a structured monolingual resource 
such as WordNet, we have shown that it is possi-
ble to extend a monolingual resource to other lan-
guages. Our results show that the method is quite 
consistent and effective for this task. 
The same experiment can be repeated using 
Wikipedia and WordNet on languages others than 
Japanese and Spanish offering useful results espe-
cially for minority languages. 
In addition, the use of Wikipedia and WordNet 
in combination achieves better results than those 
that could be achieved using either resource inde-
pendently. 
We plan to extent the coverage of the thesaurus 
to other syntactic categories such as verbs, adverb, 
and adjectives. We also evaluate our thesaurus in 
real world tasks such as the construction of com-
parable corpora for use in MT.  
Acknowledgments 
We would like to thanks to Eric Nichols for his 
helpful comments.  
References 
K. Ahmad, M. Tariq, B. Vrusias and C. Handy. 2003. 
Corpus-Based Thesaurus Construction for Image 
Retrieval in Specialist Domains. In Proceedings of 
ECIR 2003. pp. 502-510. 
R. Bunescu and M. Pa?ca. 2006. Using encyclopedic 
knowledge for named entity disambiguation. In Pro-
ceedings of EACL-06, pp. 9-16. 
 
C. Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic Lexical 
Database. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT press. pp. 25-43. 
 
J. Honglan and Kam-Fai-Won. 2002. A Chinese dic-
tionary construction algorithm for information re-
trieval. ACM Transactions on Asian Language In-
formation Processing. pp. 281-296. 
 
C. Manning and H. Sch?tze. 2000. Foundations of 
Statistical Natural Language Processing. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: MIT press. pp. 230-259. 
 
K. Oi Yee, 1998. Bridging the Gap between Dictionary 
and Thesaurus. COLING-ACL.  pp. 1487-1489. 
 
R. Rada, H. Mili, E. Bicknell and M. Blettner. 1989. 
Development and application of a metric semantic 
nets. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cy-
bernetics, 19(1):17-30. 
 
M. Ruiz, E. Alfonseca and P. Castells. 2005. Auto-
matic assignment of Wikipedia encyclopedic entries 
to WordNet synsets. In Proceedings of AWIC-05. 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science 3528. pp. 380-
386, Springer, 2005. 
 
M. Strube and S. P. Ponzetto. 2006. WikiRelate! Com-
puting semantic relatedness using Wikipedia. 21st  
National Conference on Artificial Intelligence. 
 
L. Urdang. 1991. The Oxford Thesaurus. Clarendon 
press. Oxford. 
 
480
