Proceedings of the Workshop on Multiword Expressions: from Parsing and Generation to the Real World (MWE 2011), pages 74?82,
Portland, Oregon, USA, 23 June 2011. c?2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
Identifying and Analyzing
Brazilian Portuguese Complex Predicates
Magali Sanches Duran? Carlos Ramisch? ? Sandra Maria Alu??sio? Aline Villavicencio?
? Center of Computational Linguistics (NILC), ICMC, University of Sa?o Paulo, Brazil
? Institute of Informatics, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil
? GETALP ? LIG, University of Grenoble, France
magali.duran@uol.com.br ceramisch@inf.ufrgs.br
sandra@icmc.usp.br avillavicencio@inf.ufrgs.br
Abstract
Semantic Role Labeling annotation task de-
pends on the correct identification of pred-
icates, before identifying arguments and as-
signing them role labels. However, most pred-
icates are not constituted only by a verb: they
constitute Complex Predicates (CPs) not yet
available in a computational lexicon. In order
to create a dictionary of CPs, this study em-
ploys a corpus-based methodology. Searches
are guided by POS tags instead of a limited list
of verbs or nouns, in contrast to similar stud-
ies. Results include (but are not limited to)
light and support verb constructions. These
CPs are classified into idiomatic and less id-
iomatic. This paper presents an in-depth anal-
ysis of this phenomenon, as well as an original
resource containing a set of 773 annotated ex-
pressions. Both constitute an original and rich
contribution for NLP tools in Brazilian Por-
tuguese that perform tasks involving seman-
tics.
1 Introduction
Semantic Role Labeling (SRL), independently of
the approach adopted, comprehends two steps be-
fore the assignment of role labels: (a) the delimita-
tion of argument takers and (b) the delimitation of
arguments. If the argument taker is not correctly
identified, the argument identification will propa-
gate the error and SRL will fail. Argument tak-
ers are predicates, frequently represented only by a
verb and occasionally by Complex Predicates (CPs),
that is, ?predicates which are multi-headed: they are
composed of more than one grammatical element?
(Alsina et al, 1997, p. 1), like give a try, take care,
take a shower. In SRL, the verbal phrases (VPs)
identified by a parser are usually used to automat-
ically identify argument takers, but do no suffice.
A lexicon of CPs, as well as the knowledge about
verbal chains composition, would complete a fully
automatic identification of argument takers. Con-
sequently, the possibility of disagreement between
SRL annotators would rely only on the assignment
of role labels to arguments. This paper reports the
investigation of such multi-word units, in order to
meet the needs arisen from an SRL annotation task
in a corpus of Brazilian Portuguese1.
To stress the importance of these CPs for SRL,
consider the sentence John takes care of his business
in three alternatives of annotation:
The first annotation shows care of his business as
a unique argument, masking the fact that this seg-
ment is constituted of a predicative noun, care, and
its internal argument, of his business. The second
annotation shows care and of his business as argu-
ments of take, which is incorrect because of his busi-
ness is clearly an argument of care. The third an-
notation is the best for SRL purposes: as a unique
predicate ? take care, take shares its external argu-
1CPs constituted by verbal chains (e.g. have been working)
are not focused here.
74
ment with care and care shares its internal argument
with take.
The goal of this paper is twofold: first, we briefly
describe our computer-aided corpus-based method
used to build a comprehensive machine-readable
dictionary of such expressions. Second and most
important, we analyze these expressions and their
behavior in order to shed some light on the most ad-
equate lexical representation for further integration
of our resource into an SRL annotation task. The re-
sult is a database of 773 annotated CPs, that can be
used to inform SRL and other NLP applications.
In this study we classify CPs into two groups: id-
iomatic CPs and less idiomatic CPs. Idiomatic CPs
are those whose sense may not be inferred from their
parts. Examples in Portuguese are fazer questa?o
(make a point), ir embora (go away), dar o fora (get
out), tomar conta (take care), dar para tra?s (give
up), dar de ombros (shrug), passar mal (get sick).
On the other hand, we use ?less idiomatic CPs? to
refer to those CPs that vary in a continuum of differ-
ent levels of compositionality, from fully composi-
tional to semi-compositional sense, that is, at least
one of their lexical components may be litterally
understood and/or translated. Examples of less id-
iomatic CPs in Portuguese are: dar instruc?a?o (give
instructions), fazer menc?a?o (make mention), tomar
banho (take a shower), tirar foto (take a photo), en-
trar em depressa?o (get depressed), ficar triste (be-
come sad).
Less idiomatic CPs headed by a predicative noun
have been called in the literature ?light verb con-
structions? (LVC) or ?support verb constructions?
(SVC). Although both terms have been employed as
synonyms, ?light verb? is, in fact, a semantic con-
cept and ?support verb? is a syntactic concept. The
term ?light verb? is attributed to Jespersen (1965)
and the term ?support verb? was already used by
Gross in 1981. A light verb is the use of a poly-
semous verb in a non prototypical sense or ?with a
subset of their [its] full semantic features?, North
(2005). On the other hand, a support verb is the
verb that combines with a noun to enable it to fully
predicate, given that some nouns and adjectives may
evoke internal arguments, but need to be associated
with a verb to evoke the external argument, that is,
the subject. As the function of support verb is almost
always performed by a light verb, attributes of LVCs
and SVCs have been merged, making them near syn-
onyms. Against this tendency, this study will show
cases of SVCs without light verbs (trazer preju??zo =
damage, lit. bring damage) and cases of LVCs with-
out support verbs (dar certo = work well, lit. give
correct).
To the best of our knowledge, to date, there is no
similar study regarding these complex predicates in
Brazilian Portuguese, focusing on the development
of a lexical resource for NLP tasks, such as SRL.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows:
in ?2 we discuss related work, in ?3 we present the
corpus and the details about our methodology, in ?4
we present and discuss the resulting lists of candi-
dates, in ?5 we envisage further work and draw our
conclusions.
2 Related Work
Part of the CPs focused on here are represented by
LVCs and SVCs. These CPs have been studied in
several languages from different points of view: di-
acronic (Ranchhod, 1999; Marchello-Nizia, 1996),
language contrastive (Danlos and Samvelian, 1992;
Athayde, 2001), descriptive (Butt, 2003; Langer,
2004; Langer, 2005) and for NLP purposes (Salkoff,
1990; Stevenson et al, 2004; Barreiro and Cabral,
2009; Hwang et al, 2010). Closer to our study,
Hendrickx et al (2010) annotated a Treebank of 1M
tokens of European Portuguese with almost 2,000
CPs, which include LVCs and verbal chains. This
lexicon is relevant for many NLP applications, no-
tably for automatic translation, since in any task in-
volving language generation they confer fluency and
naturalness to the output of the system.
Work focusing on the automatic extraction of
LVCs or SVCs often take as starting point a list of re-
current light verbs (Hendrickx et al, 2010) or a list
of nominalizations (Teufel and Grefenstette, 1995;
Dras, 1995; Hwang et al, 2010). These approaches
are not adopted here because our goal is precisely
to identify which are the verbs, the nouns and other
lexical elements that take part in CPs.
Similar motivation to study LVCs/SVCs (for
SRL) is found within the scope of Framenet (Atkins
et al, 2003) and Propbank (Hwang et al, 2010).
These projects have taken different decisions on how
to annotate such constructions. Framenet annotates
75
the head of the construction (noun or adjective) as
argument taker (or frame evoker) and the light verb
separately; Propbank, on its turn, first annotates sep-
arately light verbs and the predicative nouns (as
ARG-PRX) and then merges them, annotating the
whole construction as an argument taker.
We found studies regarding Portuguese
LVCs/SVCs in both European (Athayde, 2001;
Rio-Torto, 2006; Barreiro and Cabral, 2009; Duarte
et al, 2010) and Brazilian Portuguese (Neves,
1996; Conejo, 2008; Silva, 2009; Abreu, 2011). In
addition to the variations due to dialectal aspects, a
brief comparison between these papers enabled us
to verify differences in combination patterns of both
variants. In addition, Brazilian Portuguese studies
do not aim at providing data for NLP applications,
whereas in European Portuguese there are at least
two studies focusing on NLP applications: Barreiro
and Cabral (2009), for automatic translation and
Hendrickx et al (2010) for corpus annotation.
3 Corpus, Extraction Tool and Methods
We employ a corpus-based methodology in order to
create a dictionary of CPs. After a first step in which
we use a computer software to automatically extract
candidate n-grams from a corpus, the candidate lists
have been analyzed by a linguist to distinguish CPs
from fully compositional word sequences.
For the automatic extraction, the PLN-BR-FULL2
corpus was used, consisting of news texts from
Folha de Sa?o Paulo from 1994 to 2005, with
29,014,089 tokens. The corpus was first prepro-
cessed for sentence splitting, case homogeniza-
tion, lemmatization and POS tagging using the
PALAVRAS parser (Bick, 2000).
Differently from the studies referred to in Sec-
tion 2, we did not presume any closed list of light
verbs or nouns as starting point to our searches. The
search criteria we used contain seven POS patterns
observed in examples collected during previous cor-
pus annotation tasks3:
1. V + N + PRP: abrir ma?o de (give up, lit. open
hand of );
2www.nilc.icmc.usp.br/plnbr
3V = VERB, N = NOUN, PRP = PREPOSITION, DET =
DETERMINER, ADV = ADVERB, ADJ = ADJECTIVE.
2. V + PRP + N: deixar de lado (ignore, lit. leave
at side);
3. V + DET + N + PRP: virar as costas para
(ignore, lit. turn the back to);
4. V + DET + ADV: dar o fora (get out, lit. give
the out);
5. V + ADV: ir atra?s (follow, lit. go behind);
6. V + PRP + ADV: dar para tra?s (give up, lit.
give to back);
7. V + ADJ: dar duro (work hard, lit. give hard).
This strategy is suitable to extract occurrences
from active sentences, both affirmative and negative.
Cases which present intervening material between
the verb and the other element of the CP are not cap-
tured, but this is not a serious problem considering
the size of our corpus, although it influences the fre-
quencies used in candidate selection. In order to fa-
cilitate human analysis of candidate lists, we used
the mwetoolkit4: a tool that has been developed
specifically to extract MWEs from corpora, which
encompasses candidate extraction through pattern
matching, candidate filtering (e.g. through associa-
tion measures) and evaluation tools (Ramisch et al,
2010). After generating separate lists of candidates
for each pattern, we filtered out all those occurring
less than 10 times in the corpus. The entries re-
sulting of automatic identification were classified by
their frequency and their annotation is discussed in
the following section.
4 Discussion
Each pattern of POS tags returned a large number
of candidates. Our expectation was to identify CPs
among the most frequent candidates. First we an-
notated ?interesting? candidates and then, in a deep
analysis, we judged their idiomaticity. In the Table
1, we show the total number of candidates extracted
before applying any threshold, the number of an-
alyzed candidates using a threshold of 10 and the
number of CPs by pattern divided into two columns:
idiomatic and less idiomatic CPs. Additionally, each
CP was annotated with one or more single-verb
4www.sf.net/projects/mwetoolkit
76
Pattern Extracted Analyzed Less idiomatic Idiomatic
V + N + PRP 69,264 2,140 327 8
V + PRP + N 74,086 1,238 77 8
V + DET + N + PRP 178,956 3,187 131 4
V + DET + ADV 1,537 32 0 0
V + ADV 51,552 3,626 19 41
V + PREP + ADV 5,916 182 0 2
V + ADJ 25,703 2,140 145 11
Total 407,014 12,545 699 74
Table 1: Statistics for the Patterns.
paraphrases. Sometimes it is not a simple task to
decide whether a candidate constitutes a CP, spe-
cially when the verb is a very polysemous one and
is often used as support verb. For example, fazer
exame em/de algue?m/alguma coisa (lit. make exam
in/of something/somebody) is a CP corresponding to
examinar (exam). But fazer exame in another use is
not a CP and means to submit oneself to someone
else?s exam or to perform a test to pass examina-
tions (take an exam). In the following sections, we
comment the results of our analysis of each of the
patterns.
4.1 VERB + NOUN + PREPOSITION
The pattern V + N is very productive, as every com-
plement of a transitive verb not introduced by prepo-
sition takes this form. For this reason, we restricted
the pattern, adding a preposition after the noun with
the aim of capturing only nouns that have their own
complements.
We identified 335 complex predicates, including
both idiomatic and less idiomatic ones. For exam-
ple, bater papo (shoot the breeze, lit. hit chat) or
bater boca (have an argument, lit. hit mouth) are
idiomatic, as their sense is not compositional. On
the other side, tomar conscie?ncia (become aware, lit.
take conscience) and tirar proveito (take advantage)
are less idiomatic, because their sense is more com-
positional. The candidates selected with the pattern
V + N + PRP presented 29 different verbs, as shown
in Figure 15.
Sometimes, causative verbs, like causar (cause)
5We provide one possible (most frequent sense) English
translation for each Portuguese verb.
and provocar (provoke) give origin to constructions
paraphrasable by a single verb. In spite of taking
them into consideration, we cannot call them LVCs,
as they are used in their full sense. Examples:
? provocar alterac?a?o (provoke alteration)= al-
terar (alter);
? causar tumulto (cause riot) = tumultuar (riot).
Some of the candidates returned by this pattern
take a deverbal noun, that is, a noun created from
the verb, as stated by most works on LVCs and
SVCs; but the opposite may also occur: some con-
structions present denominal verbs as paraphrases,
like ter simpatia por (have sympathy for) = simpati-
zar com (sympathize with) and fazer visita (lit. make
visit) = visitar (visit). These results oppose the idea
about LVCs resulting only from the combination of a
deverbal noun and a light verb. In addition, we have
identified idiomatic LVCs that are not paraphrasable
by verbs of the same word root, like fazer jus a (lit.
make right to) = merecer (deserve).
Moreover, we have found some constructions
that have no correspondent paraphrases, like fazer
sucesso (lit. make success) and abrir excec?a?o (lit.
open exception). These findings evidence that, the
most used test to identify LVCs and SVC ? the ex-
istence of a paraphrase formed by a single verb, has
several exceptions.
We have also observed that, when the CP has a
paraphrase by a single verb, the prepositions that in-
troduce the arguments may change or even be sup-
pressed, like in:
? Dar apoio a algue?m = apoiar algue?m (give sup-
port to somebody = support somebody);
77
atear (set (on fire))botar (put)
levar (carry)tornar-se (become)
tra?ar (trace)achar (find)
chamar (call)colocar (put)
ganhar (receive/win)lan?ar (throw)
pegar (take/grab)tirar (remove)
trazer (bring)bater (beat)
ficar (stay)p?r (put)
sentir (feel)firmar (firm)
pedir (ask)abrir (open)
causar (cause)fechar (close)
prestar (provide)provocar (provoke)
tomar (take)ser (be)
dar (give)ter (have)
fazer (make/do)
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Idiomatic Non idiomatic
Figure 1: Distribution of verbs involved in CPs, consid-
ering the pattern V + N + PRP.
? Dar cabo de algue?m ou de alguma coisa =
acabar com algue?m ou com alguma coisa (give
end of somebody or of something = end with
somebody or with something).
Finally, some constructions are polysemic, like:
? Dar satisfac?a?o a algue?m (lit. give satisfaction
to somebody) = make somebody happy or pro-
vide explanations to somebody;
? Chamar atenc?a?o de algue?m (lit. call the at-
tention of somebody) = attract the attention of
somebody or reprehend somebody.
4.2 VERB + PREPOSITION + NOUN
The results of this pattern have too much noise, as
many transitive verbs share with this CP class the
same POS tags sequence. We found constructions
with 12 verbs, as shown in Figure 2. We classi-
fied seven of these constructions as idiomatic CPs:
dar de ombro (shrug), deixar de lado (ignore), po?r
de lado (put aside), estar de olho (be alert), ficar
de olho (stay alert), sair de fe?rias (go out on vaca-
tion). The later example is very interesting, as sair
de fe?rias is synonym of entrar em fe?rias (enter on
vacation), that is, two antonym verbs are used to ex-
press the same idea, with the same syntactic frame.
In the remaining constructions, the more frequent
ater (sonfansiter )ntonb)npf
nupter lnfvscter uptyf
ctser vt))funer lnf
)noter cteeyfc-n(ter teesonf
m?er mhpfpner -tonf
cd)dcter mhpfngpeter ngpnef
/ w k/ kw z/ zw ?/ ?w 0/
1asd2tpsc 3dgrsasd2tpsc
Figure 2: Distribution of verbs involved in CPs, consid-
ering the pattern V + PRP + N.
ateere (esonfieio)be (fsieio)rrn
pruie (aieeln)tvie ()icrn
)teare (yebofnuipre (-r yte)mn
ubeie ()seonamivie (aippn
i-ebe (t?ronhre (-r yte)mn
)re (miurndigre (vicr/wtn
k zk ?k 0k 1k 2k 3k
4wbtvi)ba 5to bwbtvi)ba
Figure 3: Distribution of verbs involved in CPs, consid-
ering the pattern V + DET + N + PRP.
verbs are used to give an aspectual meaning to the
noun: cair em, entrar em, colocar em, po?r em (fall
in, enter in, put in) have inchoative meaning, that is,
indicate an action starting, while chegar a (arrive at)
has a resultative meaning.
4.3 VERB + DETERMINER + NOUN +
PREPOSITION
This pattern gave us results very similar to the pat-
tern V + N + PRP, evidencing that it is possible
to have determiners as intervening material between
the verb and the noun in less idiomatic CPs. The
verbs involved in the candidates validated for this
pattern are presented in Figure 3.
The verbs ser (be) and ter (have) are special cases.
Some ter expressions are paraphrasable by an ex-
pression with ser + ADJ, for example:
? Ter a responsabilidade por = ser responsa?vel
por (have the responsibility for = be responsi-
ble for);
? Ter a fama de = ser famoso por (have the fame
of = be famous for);
78
? Ter a garantia de = ser garantido por (have the
guarantee of = be guaranteed for).
Some ter expressions may be paraphrased by a
single verb:
? Ter a esperanc?a de = esperar (have the hope of
= hope);
? Ter a intenc?a?o de = tencionar (have the inten-
tion of = intend);
? Ter a durac?a?o de = durar (have the duration of
= last).
Most of the ser expressions may be paraphrased
by a single verb, as in ser uma homenagem para =
homenagear (be a homage to = pay homage to). The
verb ser, in these cases, seems to mean ?to consti-
tute?. These remarks indicate that the patterns ser +
DET + N and ter + DET + N deserve further anal-
ysis, given that they are less compositional than they
are usually assumed in Portuguese.
4.4 VERB + DETERMINER + ADVERB
We have not identified any CP following this pattern.
It was inspired by the complex predicate dar o fora
(escape, lit. give the out). Probably this is typical in
spoken language and has no similar occurrences in
our newspaper corpus.
4.5 VERB + ADVERB
This pattern is the only one that returned more id-
iomatic than less idiomatic CPs, for instance:
? Vir abaixo = desmoronar (lit. come down =
crumble);
? Cair bem = ser adequado (lit. fall well = be
suitable);
? Pegar mal = na?o ser socialmente adequado (lit.
pick up bad = be inadequate);
? Estar de pe?6 = estar em vigor (lit. be on foot =
be in effect);
? Ir atra?s (de algue?m) = perseguir (lit. go behind
(somebody) = pursue);
6The POS tagger classifies de pe? as ADV.
? Partir para cima (de algue?m) = agredir (lit.
leave upwards = attack);
? Dar-se bem = ter sucesso (lit. give oneself well
= succeed);
? Dar-se mal = fracassar (lit. give oneself bad =
fail).
In addition, some CPs identified through this pat-
tern present a pragmatic meaning: olhar la? (look
there), ver la? (see there), saber la? (know there), ver
so? (see only), olhar so? (look only), provided they are
employed in restricted situations. The adverbials in
these expressions are expletives, not contributing to
the meaning, exception made for saber la?, (lit. know
there) which is only used in present tense and in first
and third persons. When somebody says ?Eu sei la??
the meaning is ?I don?t know?.
4.6 VERB + PREPOSITION + ADVERB
This is not a productive pattern, but revealed two
verbal expressions: deixar para la? (put aside) and
achar por bem (decide).
4.7 VERB + ADJECTIVE
Here we identified three interesting clusters:
1. Verbs of double object, that is, an object
and an attribute assigned to the object. These
verbs are: achar (find), considerar (con-
sider), deixar (let/leave), julgar (judge), man-
ter (keep), tornar (make) as in: Ele acha voce?
inteligente (lit. He finds you intelligent = He
considers you intelligent). For SRL annotation,
we will consider them as full verbs with two in-
ternal arguments. The adjective, in these cases,
will be labeled as an argument. However, con-
structions with the verbs fazer and tornar fol-
lowed by adjectives may give origin to some
deadjectival verbs, like possibilitar = tornar
poss??vel (possibilitate = make possible). Other
examples of the same type are: celebrizar
(make famous), esclarecer (make clear), evi-
denciar (make evident), inviabilizar (make un-
feasible), popularizar (make popular), respon-
sabilizar (hold responsible), viabilizar (make
feasible).
79
2. Expressions involving predicative adjectives,
in which the verb performs a functional role, in
the same way as support verbs do in relation to
nouns. In contrast to predicative nouns, pred-
icative adjectives do not select their ?support?
verbs: they combine with any verb of a restrict
set of verbs called copula. Examples of copula
verbs are: acabar (finish), andar (walk), con-
tinuar (continue), estar (be), ficar (stay), pare-
cer (seem), permanecer (remain), sair (go out),
ser (be), tornar-se (become), viver (live). Some
of these verbs add an aspect to the predica-
tive adjective: durative (andar, continuar, es-
tar, permanecer, viver) and resultative (acabar,
ficar, tornar-se, sair).
? The resultative aspect may be expressed
by an infix, substituting the combina-
tion of V + ADJ by a full verb: ficar
triste = entristecer (become sad) or by
the verbalization of the adjective in reflex-
ive form: ficar tranquilo = tranquilizar-se
(calm down); estar inclu??do = incluir-se
(be included).
? In most cases, adjectives preceded by cop-
ula verbs are formed by past participles
and inherit the argument structure of the
verb: estar arrependido de = arrepender-
se de (lit. be regretful of = regret).
3. Idiomatic CPs, like dar duro (lit. give hard =
make an effort), dar errado (lit. give wrong =
go wrong), fazer bonito (lit. make beautiful =
do well), fazer feio (make ugly = fail), pegar
leve (lit. pick up light = go easy), sair errado
(lit. go out wrong = go wrong), dar certo (lit.
give correct = work well).
4.8 Summary
We identified a total of 699 less idiomatic CPs
and observed the following recurrent pairs of para-
phrases:
? V = V + DEVERBAL N, e.g. tratar = dar trata-
mento (treat = give treatment);
? DENOMINAL V = V + N, e.g. amedrontar =
dar medo (frighten = give fear);
atear (set (on fire))botar (put)
lorrer (run)varantir (vuarantee)
cayer (be-caye)soar (sounm)
tornar?se (belohe)tradar (trale)
tratar (treat)lceirar (shegg)
fagar (shegg)ihavinar (spea/)
partir (ihavine)saber (geaye)
torler (/now)yager (wrinv)
yirar (be wortc)yogtar (turn)
vancar (vo bal/)gandar (releiye-win)
tirar (tcrow)traker (rehoye)
passar (brinv)alcar (pass-spenm)
sevuir (foggow)yer (see)
sentir (feeg)lair (fagg)
yir (lohe)bater (beat)
sair (vo out)firhar (firh)
pemir (as/)lcahar (lagg)
lcevar (arriye)ogcar (goo/)
lausar (lause)felcar (lgose)
geyar (geaye-get)ir (vo)
abrir (open)meizar (geaye-get)
pevar (ta/e-vrab)prestar (proyime)
proyolar (proyo/e)p?r (put)
tohar (ta/e)estar (be)
logolar (put)tornar (turn)
entrar (enter)ser (be)
mar (viye)filar (sta0)
ter (caye)faker (mo-ha/e)
1 21 31 41 51 611 621 631
7miohatil 8on imiohatil
Figure 4: Distribution of verbs involved in CPs, consid-
ering the total number of CPs (i.e. all patterns).
? DEADJECTIVAL V = V + ADJ, e.g. res-
ponsabilizar = tornar responsa?vel (lit. respon-
sibilize = hold responsible).
This will help our further surveys, as we may
search for denominal and deadjectival verbs (which
may be automatically recognized through infix and
suffix rules) to manually identify corresponding
CPs. Moreover, the large set of verbs involved in the
analyzed CPs, summarized in Figure 4, shows that
any study based on a closed set of light verbs will
be limited, as it cannot capture common exceptions
and non-prototypical constructions.
5 Conclusions and Future Work
This study revealed a large number of CPs and pro-
vided us insights into how to capture them with more
precision. Our approach proved to be very useful to
identify verbal MWEs, notably with POS tag pat-
80
terns that have not been explored by other studies
(patterns not used to identify LVCs/SVCs). How-
ever, due to the onus of manual annotation, we as-
sume an arbitrary threshold of 10 occurrences that
removes potentially interesting candidates. Our hy-
pothesis is that, in a machine-readable dictionary,
as well as in traditional lexicography, rare entries
are more useful than common ones, and we would
like to explore two alternatives to address this is-
sue. First, it would be straightforward to apply more
sophisticated filtering techniques like lexical asso-
ciation measures to our candidates. Second, we
strongly believe that our patterns are sensitive to
corpus genre, because the CPs identified are typical
of colloquial register. Therefore, the same patterns
should be applied on a corpus of spoken Brazilian
Portuguese, as well as other written genres like web-
crawled corpora. Due to its size and availability, the
latter would also allow us to obtain better frequency
estimators.
We underline, however, that we should not un-
derestimate the value of our original corpus, as it
contains a large amount of unexplored material. We
observed that only the context can tell us whether
a given verb is being used as a full verb or as a
light and/or support verb7. As a consequence, it
is not possible to build a comprehensive lexicon of
light and support verbs, because there are full verbs
that function as light and/or support verbs in spe-
cific constructions, like correr (run) in correr risco
(run risk). As we discarded a considerable number
of infrequent lexical items, it is possible that other
unusual verbs participate in similar CPs which have
not been identified by our study.
For the moment, it is difficult to assess a quan-
titative measure for the quality and usefulness of
our resource, as no similar work exists for Por-
tuguese. Moreover, the lexical resource presented
here is not complete. Productive patterns, the ones
involving nouns, must be further explored to enlarge
the aimed lexicon. A standard resource for English
like DANTE8, for example, contains 497 support
verb constructions involving a fixed set of 5 support
verbs, and was evaluated extrinsically with regard
to its contribution in complementing the FrameNet
7A verb is not light or support in the lexicon, it is light and/or
support depending on the combinations in which it participates.
8www.webdante.com
data (Atkins, 2010). Likewise, we intend to evalu-
ate our resource in the context of SRL annotation, to
measure its contribution in automatic argument taker
identification. The selected CPs will be employed in
an SRL project and, as soon as we receive feedback
from this experience, we will be able to report how
many CPs have been annotated as argument takers,
which will represent an improvement in relation to
the present heuristic based only on parsed VPs.
Our final goal is to build a broad-coverage lexicon
of CPs in Brazilian Portuguese that may contribute
to different NLP applications, in addition to SRL.
We believe that computer-assisted language learning
systems and other Portuguese as second language
learning material may take great profit from it. Anal-
ysis systems like automatic textual entailment may
use the relationship between CPs and paraphrases to
infer equivalences between propositions. Computa-
tional language generation systems may also want
to choose the most natural verbal construction to use
when generating texts in Portuguese. Finally, we be-
lieve that, in the future, it will be possible to enhance
our resource by adding more languages and by link-
ing the entries in each language, thus developing a
valuable resource for automatic machine translation.
Acknowledgements
We thank the Brazilian research foundation FAPESP
for financial support.
References
De?bora Ta??s Batista Abreu. 2011. A sema?ntica
de construc?o?es com verbos-suporte e o paradigma
Framenet. Master?s thesis, Sa?o Leopoldo, RS, Brazil.
1997. Complex Predicates. CSLI Publications, Stanford,
CA, USA.
Maria Francisca Athayde. 2001. Construc?o?es com
verbo-suporte (funktionsverbgefu?ge) do portugue?s e
do alema?o. Number 1 in Cadernos do CIEG Centro
Interuniversita?rio de Estudos German??sticos. Universi-
dade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
Sue Atkins, Charles Fillmore, and Christopher R. John-
son. 2003. Lexicographic relevance: Selecting infor-
mation from corpus evidence. International Journal
of Lexicography, 16(3):251?280.
Sue Atkins, 2010. The DANTE Database: Its Contribu-
tion to English Lexical Research, and in Particular to
Complementing the FrameNet Data. Menha Publish-
ers, Kampala, Uganda.
81
Anabela Barreiro and Lu??s Miguel Cabral. 2009. ReE-
screve: a translator-friendly multi-purpose paraphras-
ing software tool. In Proceedings of the Workshop Be-
yond Translation Memories: New Tools for Transla-
tors, The Twelfth Machine Translation Summit, pages
1?8, Ottawa, Canada, Aug.
Eckhard Bick. 2000. The parsing system Palavras.
Aarhus University Press.
Miriam Butt. 2003. The light verb jungle. In Proceed-
ings of the Workshop on Multi-Verb Constructions,
pages 243?246, Trondheim, Norway.
Ca?ssia Rita Conejo. 2008. O verbo-suporte fazer na
l??ngua portuguesa: um exerc??cio de ana?lise de base
funcionalista. Master?s thesis, Maringa?, PR, Brazil.
Laurence Danlos and Pollet Samvelian. 1992. Transla-
tion of the predicative element of a sentence: category
switching, aspect and diathesis. In Proceedings of the
Fourth International Conference on Theoretical and
Methodological Issues in Machine Translation (TMI),
pages 21?34, Montre?al, Canada.
Mark Dras. 1995. Automatic identification of support
verbs: A step towards a definition of semantic weight.
In Proceedings of the Eighth Australian Joint Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence, pages 451?458, Can-
berra, Australia. World Scientific Press.
Ine?s Duarte, Anabela Gonc?alves, Matilde Miguel,
Ama?lia Mendes, Iris Hendrickx, Fa?tima Oliveira,
Lu??s Filipe Cunha, Fa?tima Silva, and Purificac?a?o Sil-
vano. 2010. Light verbs features in European Por-
tuguese. In Proceedings of the Interdisciplinary Work-
shop on Verbs: The Identification and Representation
of Verb Features (Verb 2010), Pisa, Italy, Nov.
Iris Hendrickx, Ama?lia Mendes, S??lvia Pereira, Anabela
Gonc?alves, and Ine?s Duarte. 2010. Complex predi-
cates annotation in a corpus of Portuguese. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACL 2010 Fourth Linguistic Annota-
tion Workshop, pages 100?108, Uppsala, Sweden.
Jena D. Hwang, Archna Bhatia, Claire Bonial, Aous
Mansouri, Ashwini Vaidya, Yuping Zhou, Nianwen
Xue, and Martha Palmer. 2010. Propbank annota-
tion of multilingual light verb constructions. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACL 2010 Fourth Linguistic Annota-
tion Workshop, pages 82?90, Uppsala, Sweden.
Otto Jespersen. 1965. A Modern English Grammar on
Historical Principles. George Allen and Unwin Ltd.,
London, UK.
Stefan Langer. 2004. A linguistic test battery for sup-
port verb constructions. Special issue of Linguisticae
Investigationes, 27(2):171?184.
Stefan Langer, 2005. Semantik im Lexikon, chapter
A formal specification of support verb constructions,
pages 179?202. Gunter Naar Verlag, Tu?bingen, Ger-
many.
Christiane Marchello-Nizia. 1996. A diachronic survey
of support verbs: the case of old French. Langages,
30(121):91?98.
Maria Helena Moura Neves, 1996. Grama?tica do por-
tugue?s falado VI: Desenvolvimentos, chapter Estudo
das construc?o?es com verbos-suporte em portugue?s,
pages 201?231. Unicamp FAPESP, Campinas, SP,
Brazil.
Ryan North. 2005. Computational measures of the ac-
ceptability of light verb constructions. Master?s thesis,
Toronto, Canada.
Carlos Ramisch, Aline Villavicencio, and Christian
Boitet. 2010. Multiword expressions in the wild? the
mwetoolkit comes in handy. In Proc. of the 23rd COL-
ING (COLING 2010) ? Demonstrations, pages 57?
60, Beijing, China, Aug. The Coling 2010 Organizing
Committee.
Elisabete Ranchhod, 1999. Lindley Cintra. Home-
nagem ao Homem, ao Mestre e ao Cidada?o, chap-
ter Construc?o?es com Nomes Predicativos na Cro?nica
Geral de Espanha de 1344, pages 667?682. Cosmos,
Lisbon, Portugal.
Grac?a Rio-Torto. 2006. O Le?xico: sema?ntica e
grama?tica das unidades lexicais. In Estudos sobre
le?xico e grama?tica, pages 11?34, Coimbra, Portugal.
CIEG/FLUL.
Morris Salkoff. 1990. Automatic translation of sup-
port verb constructions. In Proc. of the 13th COLING
(COLING 1990), pages 243?246, Helsinki, Finland,
Aug. ACL.
Hilda Monetto Flores Silva. 2009. Verbos-suporte ou
expresso?es cristalizadas? Soletras, 9(17):175?182.
Suzanne Stevenson, Afsaneh Fazly, and Ryan North.
2004. Statistical measures of the semi-productivity of
light verb constructions. In , Proc. of the ACL Work-
shop on MWEs: Integrating Processing (MWE 2004),
pages 1?8, Barcelona, Spain, Jul. ACL.
Simone Teufel and Gregory Grefenstette. 1995. Corpus-
based method for automatic identification of support
verbs for nominalizations. In Proc. of the 7th Conf.
of the EACL (EACL 1995), pages 98?103, Dublin, Ire-
land, Mar.
82
Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2013), pages 93?100,
Atlanta, Georgia, 13-14 June 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Identifying Pronominal Verbs: Towards Automatic
Disambiguation of the Clitic se in Portuguese
Magali Sanches Duran?, Carolina Evaristo Scarton?,
Sandra Maria Alu??sio?, Carlos Ramisch?
? University of Sa?o Paulo (Brazil)
? Joseph Fourier University (France)
magali.duran@uol.com.br, carol.scarton@gmail.com
sandra@icmc.usp.br, carlosramisch@gmail.com
Abstract
A challenging topic in Portuguese language
processing is the multifunctional and ambigu-
ous use of the clitic pronoun se, which impacts
NLP tasks such as syntactic parsing, semantic
role labeling and machine translation. Aiming
to give a step forward towards the automatic
disambiguation of se, our study focuses on the
identification of pronominal verbs, which cor-
respond to one of the six uses of se as a clitic
pronoun, when se is considered a CONSTITU-
TIVE PARTICLE of the verb lemma to which
it is bound, as a multiword unit. Our strategy
to identify such verbs is to analyze the results
of a corpus search and to rule out all the other
possible uses of se. This process evidenced
the features needed in a computational lexicon
to automatically perform the disambiguation
task. The availability of the resulting lexicon
of pronominal verbs on the web enables their
inclusion in broader lexical resources, such as
the Portuguese versions of Wordnet, Propbank
and VerbNet. Moreover, it will allow the revi-
sion of parsers and dictionaries already in use.
1 Introduction
In Portuguese, the word se is multifunctional. POS
taggers have succeeded in distinguishing between se
as a conjunction (meaning if or whether) and se as
a pronoun (see Martins et al (1999) for more details
on the complexity of such task). As a clitic1 pro-
1A clitic is a bound form, phonologically unstressed, at-
tached to a word from an open class (noun, verb, adjective, ad-
verbial). It belongs to closed classes, that is, classes that have
grammatical rather than lexical meaning (pronouns, auxiliary
verbs, determiners, conjunctions, prepositions, numerals).
noun, however, se has six uses:
1. marker of SUBJECT INDETERMINATION:
Ja? se falou muito nesse assunto.
*Has-SE already spoken a lot about this matter.
One has already spoken a lot about this matter.
2. marker of pronominal PASSIVE voice (syn-
thetic passive voice):
Sugeriram-se muitas alternativas.
*Have-SE suggested many alternatives.
Many alternatives have been suggested.
3. REFLEXIVE pronoun (-self pronouns):
Voce? deveria se olhar no espelho.
*You should look-SE on the mirror.
You should look at yourself on the mirror.
4. RECIPROCAL pronoun (each other):
Eles se cumprimentaram com um aperto de ma?o.
*They greeted-SE with a handshake.
They greeted each other with a handshake.
5. marker of causative-INCHOATIVE alternation2:
Esse esporte popularizou-se no Brasil.
*This sport popularED-SE in Brazil.
This sport became popular in Brazil.
6. CONSTITUTIVE PARTICLE of the verb lexical
item (pronominal verb):
Eles se queixaram de dor no joelho.
*They complained-SE about knee pain.
They complained about knee pain.
2Causative-inchoative alternation: a same verb can be used
two different ways, one transitive, in which the subject position
is occupied by the argument which causes the action or process
described by the verb (causative use), and one intransitive, in
which the subject position is occupied by the argument affected
by the action or process (inchoative use).
93
Clitic se uses Syntactic
function
Semantic
function
SUBJECT INDE-
TERMINATION
NO YES3
PASSIVE
YES YES3
REFLEXIVE
YES YES
RECIPROCAL
YES YES
INCHOATIVE
YES NO
CONSTITUTIVE
PARTICLE
NO NO
Table 1: Uses of the clitic se from the point of view of
syntax and semantics.
The identification of these uses is very important
for Portuguese language processing, notably for syn-
tactic parsing, semantic role labeling (SRL) and ma-
chine translation. Table 1 shows which of these six
uses support syntactic and/or semantic functions.
Since superficial syntactic features seem not suffi-
cient to disambiguate the uses of the pronoun se, we
propose the use of a computational lexicon to con-
tribute to this task. To give a step forward to solve
this problem, we decided to survey the verbs un-
dergoing se as an integral part of their lexical form
(item 6), called herein pronominal verbs, but also
known as inherent reflexive verbs (Rosa?rio Ribeiro,
2011). Grammars usually mention this kind of verbs
and give two classical examples: queixar-se (to com-
plain) and arrepender-se (to repent). For the best of
our knowledge, a comprehensive list of these multi-
word verbs is not available in electronic format for
NLP uses, and not even in a paper-based format,
such as a printed dictionary.
An example of the relevance of pronominal verbs
is that, in spite of not being argumental, that is, not
being eligible for a semantic role label, the use of se
as a CONSTITUTIVE PARTICLE should integrate the
verb that evokes the argumental structure, as may be
seen in Figure 1.
The identification of pronominal verbs is not a
trivial task because a pronominal verb has a nega-
3In these cases, the clitic may support the semantic role label
of the suppressed external argument (agent).
Figure 1: Sentence The broadcasters refused to apologize
includes pronominal verbs negar-se (refuse) and retratar-
se (apologize) that evoke frames in SRL.
tive definition: if se does not match the restrictions
imposed by the other five uses, so it is a CONSTI-
TUTIVE PARTICLE of the verb, that is, it composes a
multiword. Therefore, the identification of pronom-
inal verbs requires linguistic knowledge to distin-
guish se as a CONSTITUTIVE PARTICLE from the
other uses of the the pronoun se (SUBJECT INDE-
TERMINATION, PASSIVE, REFLEXIVE, RECIPRO-
CAL and INCHOATIVE.)
There are several theoretical linguistic studies
about the clitic pronoun se in Portuguese. Some of
these studies present an overview of the se pronoun
uses, but none of them prioritized the identification
of pronominal verbs. The study we report in this pa-
per is intended to fill this gap.
2 Related Work
From a linguistic perspective, the clitic pronoun
se has been the subject of studies focusing on:
SUBJECT INDETERMINATION and PASSIVE uses
(Morais Nunes, 1990; Cyrino, 2007; Pereira-Santos,
2010); REFLEXIVE use (Godoy, 2012), and IN-
CHOATIVE use (Fonseca, 2010; Nunes-Ribeiro,
2010; Rosa?rio Ribeiro, 2011). Despite none of these
works concerning specifically pronominal verbs,
they provided us an important theoretical basis for
the analysis undertaken herein.
The problem of the multifunctional use of clitic
pronouns is not restricted to Portuguese. Romance
languages, Hebrew, Russian, Bulgarian and oth-
ers also have similar constructions. There are
94
crosslinguistic studies regarding this matter reported
in Siloni (2001) and Slavcheva (2006), showing
that there are partial coincidence of verbs taking
clitic pronouns to produce alternations and reflexive
voice.
From an NLP perspective, the problem of the
ambiguity of the clitic pronoun se was studied by
Martins et al (1999) to solve a problem of catego-
rization, that is, to decide which part-of-speech tag
should be assigned to se. However, we have not
found studies regarding pronominal verbs aiming at
Portuguese automatic language processing.
Even though in Portuguese all the uses of the clitic
pronoun se share the same realization at the surface
form level, the use as a CONSTITUTIVE PARTICLE of
pronominal verbs is the only one in which the verb
and the clitic form a multiword lexical unit on its
own. In the other uses, the clitic keeps a separate
syntactic and/or semantic function, as presented in
Table 1.
The particle se is an integral part of pronominal
verbs in the same way as the particles of English
phrasal verbs. As future work, we would like to in-
vestigate possible semantic contributions of the se
particle to the meaning of pronominal verbs, as done
by Cook and Stevenson (2006), for example, who try
to automatically classify the uses of the particle up in
verb-particle constructions. Like in the present pa-
per, they estimate a set of linguistic features which
are in turn used to train a Support Vector Machine
(SVM) classifier citecook:2006:mwe.
3 Methodology
For the automatic identification of multiword
verb+se occurrences, we performed corpus searches
on the PLN-BR-FULL corpus (Muniz et al, 2007),
which consists of news texts extracted from a ma-
jor Brazilian newspaper, Folha de Sa?o Paulo, from
1994 to 2005, with 29,014,089 tokens. The cor-
pus was first preprocessed for sentence splitting,
case homogenization, lemmatization, morphologi-
cal analysis and POS tagging using the PALAVRAS
parser (Bick, 2000). Then, we executed the corpus
searches using the mwetoolkit (Ramisch et al,
2010). The tool allowed us to define two multilevel
word patterns, for proclitic and enclitic cases, based
on surface forms, morphology and POS. The pat-
terns covered all the verbs in third person singular
(POS=V*, morphology=3S) followed/preceded by
the clitic pronoun se (surface form=se, POS=PERS).
The patterns returned a set of se occurrences, that
is, for each verb, a set of sentences in the corpus in
which this verb is followed/preceded by the clitic se.
In our analysis, we looked at all the verbs tak-
ing an enclitic se, that is, where the clitic se is at-
tached after the verb. We could as well have in-
cluded the occurrences of verbs with a proclitic se
(clitic attached before the verb). However, we sus-
pected that this would increase the number of occur-
rences (sentences) to analyze without a proportional
increase in verb lemmas. Indeed, our search for pro-
clitic se occurrences returned 40% more verb lem-
mas and 264% more sentences than for the enclitic
se (59,874 sentences), thus confirming our hypothe-
sis. Moreover, as we could see at a first glance, pro-
clitic se results included se conjunctions erroneously
tagged as pronouns (when the parser fails the cate-
gorial disambiguation). This error does not occur
when the pronoun is enclitic because Portuguese or-
thographic rules require a hyphen between the verb
and the clitic when se is enclitic, but never when it
is proclitic.
We decided to look at sentences as opposed to
looking only at candidate verb lemmas, because we
did not trust that our intuition as native speakers
would be sufficient to identify all the uses of the
clitic se for a given verb, specially as some verbs
allow more than one of the six uses we listed herein.
For performing the annotation, we used a table
with the verb lemmas in the lines and a column for
each one of the six uses of se as a clitic pronoun.
Working with two screens (one for the table and the
other for the sentences), we read the sentences and,
once a new use was verified, we ticked the appro-
priate column. This annotation setup accelerated the
analyses, as we only stopped the reading when we
identified a new use. The annotation was performed
manually by a linguist, expert in semantics of Por-
tuguese verbs, and also an author of this paper.
After having summarized the results obtained
from corpus analysis, we realized that some cliti-
cized verb uses that we know as native speakers did
not appear in the corpus (mainly reflexive and recip-
rocal uses). In these cases, we added a comment on
our table which indicates the need to look for the use
95
in another corpus aiming to confirm it.
For example, the most frequent cliticized verb,
tratar-se has no occurrence with the meaning of to
take medical treatment. We checked this meaning in
another corpus and found one example: O senador
se tratou com tecido embriona?rio. . . (*The senator
treated himself with embryonic tissue. . . ), proving
that our intuition may help us to improve the results
with specific corpus searches. A comparative multi-
corpus extension of the present study is planned as
future work.
The strategy we adopted to analyze the sentences
in order to identify pronominal verbs was to make a
series of questions to rule out the other possible se
uses.
Question 1 Does the se particle function as a
marker of PASSIVE voice or SUBJECT INDETERMI-
NATION?
In order to answer this question, it is important to
know that both uses involve the suppression of the
external argument of the verb. The difference is that,
in the pronominal PASSIVE voice, the remaining NP
(noun phrase) is shifted to the subject position (and
the verb must then be inflected according to such
subject), whereas in SUBJECT INDETERMINATION,
the remaining argument, always a PP (prepositional
phrase), remains as an indirect object. For example:
? Pronominal PASSIVE voice:
Fizeram-se va?rias tentativas.
*Made-SE several trials.
Several trials were made.
? SUBJECT INDETERMINATION:
Reclamou-se de falta de hygiene.
*Complained-SE about the lack of hygiene.
One has complained about the lack of hygiene.
Question 2 Is it possible to substitute se for a si
mesmo (-self )?
If so, it is a case of REFLEXIVE use. A clue for
this is that it is always possible to substitute se for
another personal pronoun, creating a non-reflexive
use keeping the same subject. For example:
? Ele perguntou-se se aquilo era certo.
He asked himself whether that was correct.
? Ele perguntou-me se aquilo era certo.
He asked me whether that was correct.
Question 3 Is it possible to substitute se for um ao
outro (each other)?
If so, it is a case of RECIPROCAL use. A clue for
this interpretation is that, in this case, the verb is al-
ways in plural form as the subject refers to more than
one person. RECIPROCAL uses were not included in
the corpus searches, as we only looked for cliticized
verbs in third person singular. However, aiming to
gather data for future work, we have ticked the table
every time we annotated sentences of a verb that ad-
mits reciprocal use. The reciprocal use of such verbs
have been later verified in other corpora.
? Eles se beijaram.
They kissed each other.
Question 4 Has the verb, without se, a transi-
tive use? If so, are the senses related to causative-
inchoative alternation? In other words, is the mean-
ing of the transitive use to cause X become Y?
If so, it is a case of INCHOATIVE use, for example:
? A porta abriu-se.
The door opened.
Compare with the basic transitive use:
? Ele abriu a porta.
He opened the door.
It is important to mention that verbs which allow
causative-inchoative alternation in Portuguese may
not have an equivalent in English that allows this al-
ternation, and vice-versa. For example, the inchoa-
tive use of the verb tornar corresponds to the verb
to become and the causative use corresponds to the
verb to make:
? Esse fato tornou-se conhecido em todo o
mundo.
This fact became known all around the world.
? A imprensa tornou o fato conhecido em todo o
mundo.
The press made the fact known all around the world.
If the verb being analyzed failed the four tests, the
clitic se has neither semantic nor syntactic function
and is considered a CONSTITUTIVE PARTICLE of the
verb, for example:
96
? Ele vangloriou-se de seus talentos.
He boasted of his talents.
Therefore, we made the identification of pronom-
inal verbs based on the negation of the other possi-
bilities.
4 Discussion
The corpus search resulted in 22,618 sentences of
cliticized verbs, corresponding to 1,333 verb lem-
mas. Some verbs allow only one of the uses of
the clitic se (unambiguous cliticized verbs), whereas
others allow more than one use (ambiguous cliti-
cized verbs), as shown in Table 2. Therefore, a
lexicon can only disambiguate part of the cliticized
verbs (others need additional features to be disam-
biguated).
The analysis of the verbs? distribution reveals that
10% of them (133) account for 73% of the sentences.
Moreover, among the remaining 90% verb lemmas,
there are 477 hapax legomena, that is, verbs that oc-
cur only once. Such distribution indicates that com-
putational models which focus on very frequently
cliticized verbs might significantly improve NLP ap-
plications.
Contrary to our expectations, very frequently
cliticized verbs did not necessarily present high pol-
ysemy. For example, the most frequent verb of our
corpus is tratar, with 2,130 occurrences. Although
tratar-se has more than one possible use, only one
appeared in the corpus, as a marker of SUBJECT IN-
DETERMINATION, for example:
? Trata-se de uma nova tende?ncia.
It is the case of a new tendency.
Despite being very frequent, when we search for
translations of tratar-se de in bilingual (parallel)
Portuguese-English corpora and dictionaries avail-
able on the web,4,5,6 we observed that there are sev-
eral solutions to convey this idea in English (deter-
mining a subject, as English does not allow subject
omission). Six examples extracted from the Com-
para corpus illustrate this fact:
4http://www.linguateca.pt/COMPARA/
5http://www.linguee.com.br/
portugues-ingles
6http://pt.bab.la/dicionario/
portugues-ingles
se uses Unamb. Amb. Total
SUBJECT INDE-
TERMINATION
17 6 23
PASSIVE
467 630 1097
REFLEXIVE
25 333 358
INCHOATIVE
190 64 254
RECIPROCAL
0 33 33
CONSTITUTIVE
PARTICLE
83 104 187
Total 782 1170 1952
Table 2: Proportion of unambiguous (Unamb.) and am-
biguous (Amb.) verbs that allow each se use.
? Trata-se de recriar o pro?prio passado.
It?s a question of re-creating your own past.
? Mas o assunto era curioso, trata-se do casa-
mento, e a viu?va interessa-me.
But the subject was a curious one; it was about her
marriage, and the widow interests me.
? Na?o ha? mais du?vidas, trata-se realmente de um
louco.
There?s no longer any doubt; we?re truly dealing
with a maniac.
? Trata-se realmente de uma emerge?ncia, Sr.
Hoffman.
This really is a matter of some urgency, Mr Hoff-
man.
? Trata-se de um regime repousante e civilizado.
It is a restful, civilized re?gime.
? Trata-se de um simples caso de confusa?o de
identidades, dizem voce?s.
(??) Simple case of mistaken identity.
In what concerns specifically pronominal verbs,
our analysis of the data showed they are of three
kinds:
1. Verbs that are used exclusively in pronominal
form, as abster-se (to abstain). This does not
mean that the pronominal form is unambigu-
ous, as we found some pronominal verbs that
present more than one sense, as for example the
verb referir-se, which means to refer or to con-
cern, depending on the subject?s animacy status
[+ human] or [? human], respectively;
97
2. Verbs that have a non-pronominal and a pro-
nominal form, but both forms are not related,
e.g.: realizar (to make or to carry on, which
allows the passive alternation realizar-se); and
the pronominal form realizar-se (to feel ful-
filled);
3. Verbs that have pronominal form, but accept
clitic drop in some varieties of Portuguese
without change of meaning, as esquecer-se and
esquecer (both mean to forget)
We did not study the clitic drop (3), but we un-
covered several pronominal verbs of the second kind
above (2). The ambiguity among the uses of se in-
creases with such cases. The verb desculpar (to
forgive), for example, allows the REFLEXIVE use
desculpar-se (to forgive oneself ), but also consti-
tutes a pronominal verb: desculpar-se (to apolo-
gize). The verb encontrar (to find) allows the RE-
FLEXIVE use (to find oneself, from a psychological
point of view) and the PASSIVE use (to be found).
The same verb also constitutes a pronominal verb
which means to meet (1) or functions as a copula
verb, as to be (2):
1. Ele encontrou-se com o irma?o.
He met his brother.
2. Ele encontra-se doente.
He is ill.
In most sentences of cliticized verbs? occurrences,
it is easy to observe that, as a rule of thumb:7
? SUBJECT INDETERMINATION uses of se do not
present an NP before the verb, present a PP af-
ter the verb and the verb is always inflected in
the third person singular;
? PASSIVE uses of se present an NP after the verb
and no NP before the verb;
? INCHOATIVE uses of se present an NP before
the verb and almost always neither a PP nor a
NP after the verb;
? CONSTITUTIVE PARTICLE uses of se present
an NP before the verb and a PP after the verb;
7Syntactic clues do not help to identify REFLEXIVE verbs.
The distinction depends on the semantic level, as the reflexive
use requires a [+ animate] subject to play simultaneously the
roles of agent and patient.
? RECIPROCAL uses of se only occur with verbs
taking a plural inflection.
Problems arise when a sentence follows none of
these rules. For example, subjects in PASSIVE use
of se usually come on the right of the verb. Thus,
when the subject appears before the verb, it looks, at
a first glance, to be an active sentence. For example:
? O IDH baseia-se em dados sobre renda, esco-
laridade e expectativa de vida.
*The HDI bases-SE on income, education and life
expectancy data.
The HDI is based on income, education and life ex-
pectancy data.
These cases usually occur with stative passives
(see Rosa?rio Ribeiro (2011, p. 196)) or with ditran-
sitive action verbs8 when a [? animate] NP takes
the place usually occupied by a [+ animate] NP. Se-
mantic features, again, help to disambiguate and to
reveal a non-canonical passive.
The opposite also occurs, that is, the subject, usu-
ally placed on the left of the verb in active voice,
appears on the right, giving to the sentence a false
passive appearance:
? Desesperaram-se todos os passageiros.
*Fell-SE into despair all the passengers.
All the passengers fell into despair.
Sometimes the meaning distinctions of a verb are
very subtle, making the matter more complex. In
the following sections, we comment two examples
of difficult disambiguation.
4.1 Distinguishing Pronominal PASSIVE Voice
from Pronominal Verbs
The verb seguir (to follow) conveys the idea of obey-
ing when it has a [+ human] subject in the active
voice (an agent). The passive voice may be con-
structed using se, like in (2). Additionally, this verb
has a pronominal active use, seguir-se, which means
to occur after, as shown in (3):
1. Active voice:
? [Eles]Agent seguem [uma se?rie de conven-
c?o?es]Theme - thing followed.
They follow a series of conventions.
8Ditransitive verbs take two internal arguments: an NP as
direct object and a PP as indirect object.
98
2. PASSIVE voice:
? Segue-se [uma se?rie de conven-
c?o?es]Theme - thing followed.
A series of conventions are followed.
3. Pronominal verb ? active voice:
? [A queda]Theme - thing occurring after seguiu-
se [a` divulgac?a?o dos dados de desemprego
em o pa??s]Theme - thing occurring before.
The drop followed the announcement of unem-
ployment figures in the country.
The preposition a introducing one of the argu-
ments in (3) distinguishes the two meanings, as the
PASSIVE voice presents an NP and not a PP imme-
diately after or before the verb.
4.2 Distinguishing REFLEXIVE, INCHOATIVE
and PASSIVE Uses
The verb transformar, when cliticized, may be in-
terpreted as a PASSIVE (to be transformed), as a RE-
FLEXIVE (to transform oneself ) or as an INCHOA-
TIVE use (to become transformed). The PASSIVE
voice is identified by the subject position, after the
verb (1). The difference between the REFLEXIVE (2)
and INCHOATIVE (3) uses, on its turn, is a semantic
feature: only a [+ human] subject may act to be-
come something (REFLEXIVE use):
1. PASSIVE:
Transformou-se o encontro em uma
grande festa.
The meeting was transformed into a big party.
2. REFLEXIVE:
? A mulher jovem transformou-se em uma
pessoa sofisticada.
The young woman transformed herself into a
sophisticated person.
3. INCHOATIVE:
? O encontro transformou-se em uma gran-
de festa.
The meeting transformed into a big party.
5 Conclusions and Future Work
The lexicon gathered through this research will par-
tially enable disambiguating the uses of the clitic
pronoun se, as there are several verbs that allow only
one of the se clitic uses. For the other verbs, whose
polysemy entails more than one possible use of se, it
is necessary to add further information on each verb
sense.
The analysis we reported here evidenced the need
for enriching Portuguese computational lexicons,
encompassing (a) the semantic role labels assigned
by each verb sense, (b) the selectional restrictions
a verb imposes to its arguments, and (c) the alter-
nations a verb (dis)allows. The semantic predicate
decomposition used by Levin (1993) has proved to
be worthy to formalize the use of se in reflexive con-
structions (Godoy, 2012) and we think it should be
adopted to describe other uses of the pronoun se.
Another alternative is to construct a detailed com-
putational verb lexicon along the lines suggested
by Gardent et al (2005), based on Maurice Gross?
lexicon-grammar.
The data generated by this study can also be used
to automatically learn classifiers for ambiguous uses
of the clitic se. On the one hand, the annotation
of uses can be semi-automatically projected on the
sentences extracted from the corpus. On the other
hand, the findings of this work in terms of syntac-
tic and semantic characteristics can be used to pro-
pose features for the classifier, trying to reproduce
those that can be automatically obtained (e.g., sub-
categorization frame) and to simulate those that can-
not be easily automated (e.g., whether the subject
is animate). For these future experiments, we in-
tend to compare different learning models, based on
SVM and on sequence models like conditional ran-
dom fields (Vincze, 2012).
As languages are different in what concerns al-
lowed alternations, the use of clitic se in Portuguese
becomes even more complex when approached from
a bilingual point of view. Depending on how differ-
ent the languages compared are, the classification of
se adopted here may be of little use. For example,
several verbs classified as reflexive in Portuguese,
like vestir-se (to dress), barbear-se (to shave) and
demitir-se (to resign) are not translated into a re-
flexive form in English (*to dress oneself, *to shave
oneself and *to dismiss oneself ). Similarly, typical
inchoative verb uses in Portuguese need to be trans-
lated into a periphrasis in English, like surpreender-
se (to be surprised at), orgulhar-se (to be proud of )
and irritar-se (to get angry). Such evidences lead
99
us to conclude that it would be useful to count on
a bilingual description not only of pronominal, but
also of the other se uses.
The results of this work are available at www.
nilc.icmc.usp.br/portlex.
Acknowledgments
This study was funded by FAPESP (process
2011/22337-1) and by the CAMELEON project
(CAPES-COFECUB 707-11).
References
Eckhard Bick. 2000. The parsing system Palavras.
Aarhus University Press. 411 p.
Paul Cook and Suzanne Stevenson. 2006. Classifying
particle semantics in English verb-particle construc-
tions. In Proceedings of MWE 2006, pages 45?53,
Sydney, Australia.
Sonia Maria Lazzarino Cyrino. 2007. Construc?o?es com
SE e promoc?a?o de argumento no portugue?s brasileiro:
Uma investigac?a?o diacro?nica. Revista da ABRALIN,
6:85?116.
Paula Fonseca. 2010. Os verbos pseudo-reflexos em
Portugue?s Europeu. Master?s thesis, Universidade do
Porto.
Claire Gardent, Bruno Guillaume, Guy Perrier, and In-
grid Falk. 2005. Maurice gross? grammar lexicon and
natural language processing. In Proceedings of the
2nd Language and Technology Conference, Poznan?,
Poland.
Luisa Andrade Gomes Godoy. 2012. A reflexivizac?a?o no
PB e a decomposic?a?o sema?ntica de predicados. Ph.D.
thesis, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais.
Beth Levin. 1993. English Verb Classes and Alterna-
tions: a preliminary investigation. The University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, USA.
Ronaldo Teixeira Martins, Gisele Montilha, Lucia He-
lena Machado Rino, and Maria da Grac?a Volpe Nunes.
1999. Dos modelos de resoluc?a?o da ambiguidade cat-
egorial: o problema do SE. In Proceedings of IV
Encontro para o Processamento Computacional da
L??ngua Portuguesa Escrita e Falada (PROPOR 1999),
pages 115?128, E?vora, Portugal, September.
Jairo Morais Nunes. 1990. O famigerado SE: uma
ana?lise sincro?nica e diacro?nica das construc?o?es com
SE apassivador e indeterminador. Master?s thesis,
Universidade Estadual de Campinas.
Marcelo Muniz, Fernando V. Paulovich, Rosane
Minghim, Kleber Infante, Fernando Muniz, Renata
Vieira, and Sandra Alu??sio. 2007. Taming the tiger
topic: an XCES compliant corpus portal to generate
subcorpus based on automatic text topic identification.
In Proceedings of The Corpus Linguistics Conference
(CL 2007), Birmingham, UK.
Pablo Nunes-Ribeiro. 2010. A alterna?ncia causativa
no Portugue?s do Brasil: a distribuic?a?o do cl??tico SE.
Master?s thesis, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande
do Sul.
Jose? Ricardo Pereira-Santos. 2010. Alterna?ncia pas-
siva com verbos transitivos indiretos do portugue?s do
Brasil. Master?s thesis, Universidade de Bras??lia.
Carlos Ramisch, Aline Villavicencio, and Christian
Boitet. 2010. Multiword expressions in the wild?
the mwetoolkit comes in handy. In Proceedings of
the 23rd COLING (COLING 2010) - Demonstrations,
pages 57?60, Beijing, China.
S??lvia Isabel do Rosa?rio Ribeiro. 2011. Estruturas
com ?se? Anafo?rico, Impessoal e Decausativo em Por-
tugue?s. Ph.D. thesis, Faculdade de Letras da Universi-
dade de Coimbra.
Tal Siloni. 2001. Reciprocal verbs. In Online Proceed-
ings of IATL 17, Jerusalem, Israel.
Milena Slavcheva. 2006. Semantic descriptors: The
case of reflexive verbs. In Proceedings of LREC 2006,
pages 1009?1014, Genoa, Italy.
Veronika Vincze. 2012. Light verb constructions in the
szegedparalellFX English?Hungarian parallel corpus.
In Proceedings of LREC 2012, Istanbul, Turkey.
100
Felix Bildhauer & Roland Sch?fer (eds.), Proceedings of the 9th Web as Corpus Workshop (WaC-9) @ EACL 2014, pages 22?28,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26 2014. c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
Some issues on the normalization of a corpus of products reviews in 
Portuguese 
 
Magali S. Duran 
NILC-ICMC 
University of S?o Paulo 
Brazil 
 magali.duran@gmail.com 
Lucas V. Avan?o 
NILC-ICMC 
University of S?o Paulo 
Brazil  
avanco89@gmail.com 
Sandra M. Alu?sio 
NILC-ICMC 
University of S?o Paulo 
Brazil 
sandra@icmc.usp.br 
 
Thiago A. S. Pardo 
NILC-ICMC 
University of S?o Paulo 
Brazil 
taspardo@icmc.usp.br 
Maria G. V. Nunes 
NILC-ICMC 
University of S?o Paulo 
Brazil 
gracan@icmc.usp.br 
 
Abstract 
This paper describes the analysis of different 
kinds of noises in a corpus of products 
reviews in Brazilian Portuguese. Case 
folding, punctuation, spelling and the use of 
internet slang are the major kinds of noise we 
face. After noting the effect of these noises 
on the POS tagging task, we propose some 
procedures to minimize them. 
1. Introduction 
 
Corpus normalization has become a common 
challenge for everyone interested in processing a 
web corpus. Some normalization tasks are 
language and genre independent, like boilerplate 
removal and deduplication of texts. Others, like 
orthographic errors correction and internet slang 
handling, are not.  
Two approaches to web corpus normalization 
have been discussed in Web as a Corpus (WAC)  
literature. One of them is to tackle the task as a 
translation problem, being the web texts the 
source language and the normalized texts the 
target language (Aw et al., 2006; Contractor et 
al., 2010; Schlippe et al., 2013). Such approach 
requires a parallel corpus of original and 
normalized texts of reasonable size for training a 
system with acceptable accuracy. The other 
approach is to tackle the problem as a number of 
sub problems to be solved in sequence 
(Ringlstetter et al., 2006; Bildhauer & Sch?fer, 
2013; Sch?fer et al., 2013). 
The discussion we engage herein adopts the 
second approach and is motivated by the  
demand of preprocessing a Brazilian Portuguese 
web corpus constituted of products reviews for 
the specific purpose of building an opinion 
mining classifier and summarizer. Our project 
also includes the task of adding a layer of 
semantic role labeling to the corpus. The roles 
will be assigned to nodes of the syntactic trees 
and, therefore, SRL subsumes the existence of 
layers of morphosyntactic and syntactic 
annotations. The annotated corpus will be used 
as training corpus for a SRL classifier. The aim 
of SRL classifier, on its turn, is to provide deep 
semantic information that may be used as 
features by the opinion miner. If the text is not 
normalized, the POS tagger does not perform 
well and compromise the parsing result, which, 
as consequence, may generate defective trees, 
compromising the assignment of role labels to 
their nodes. 
In fact, mining opinions from a web corpus is 
a non-trivial NLP task which often requires some 
language processing, such as POS tagging and 
parsing. Most of taggers and parsers are made to 
handle error-free texts; therefore they may 
jeopardize the application results when they face 
major noises. What constitutes a major noise and 
which noise may be removed or corrected in 
such a corpus is the challenge we are facing in 
this project. 
22
 2. Related Work 
 
Depending on the point of view, there are 
several studies that face problems similar to 
those faced by us. The general issue is: how to 
convert a non-standard text into a standard one? 
By non-standard text we mean a text produced 
by people that have low literacy level or by 
foreign language learners or by speech-to-text 
converters, machine translators or even by  
digitization process. Also included in this class 
are the texts produced in special and informal 
environments such as the web. Each one of these 
non-standard texts has its own characteristics. 
They may differ in what concerns spelling, non-
canonical use of case, hyphen, apostrophe, 
punctuation, etc. Such characteristics are seen as 
?noise? by NLP tools trained in well written texts 
that represent what is commonly known as 
standard language. Furthermore, with the 
widespread use of web as corpus, other types of 
noise need to be eliminated, as for example 
duplication of texts and boilerplates.  
The procedures that aim to adapt texts to 
render them more similar to standard texts are 
called normalization. Some normalization 
procedures like deduplication and boilerplate 
removal are less likely to cause destruction of 
relevant material. The problem arises when the 
noise category contains some forms that are 
ambiguous to other forms of the standard 
language. For example, the words ?Oi? and 
?Claro? are the names of two Brazilian mobile 
network operators, but they are also common 
words (?oi? = hi; ?claro? = clear). Cases like 
these led Lita et al. (2003) to consider case 
normalization as a problem of word sense 
disambiguation. Proper nouns which are derived 
from common nouns (hence, distinguished only 
by case) are one of the challenges for case 
normalization reported by Manning et al. (2008). 
Similar problem is reported by Bildhauer and 
Sch?fer (2013) regarding dehyphenation, that is, 
the removal of hyphens used in typeset texts and 
commonly found in digitized texts. In German, 
there are many hyphenated words and the 
challenge is to remove noisy hyphens without 
affecting the correct ones. There are situations, 
however, in which both the corrected and the 
original text are desired. For example, social 
media corpora are plain of noises that express 
emotions, a rich material for sentiment analysis. 
For these cases, the non-destructive strategy 
proposed by Bildhauer and Sch?fer (2013), 
keeping the corrected form as an additional 
annotation layer, may be the best solution.  
 
3. Corpus of Products Reviews 
 
To build the corpus of products reviews, we 
have crawled  a products reviews database of one 
of the most traditional online services in Brazil, 
called Buscap?, where customers post their 
comments about several products. The comments 
are written in a free format within a template 
with three sections: Pros, Cons, and Opinion. We 
gathered 85,910 reviews, totaling 4,088,718 
tokens and 90,513 types. After removing stop 
words, numbers and punctuation, the frequency 
list totaled 63,917 types. 
Customers have different levels of literacy 
and some reviews are very well written whereas 
others present several types of errors. In addition, 
some reviewers adopt a standard language style, 
whereas others incorporate features that are 
typical of the internet informality, like abusive 
use of abbreviations, missing or inadequate 
punctuation; a high percentage of named entities 
(many of which are misspelled); a high 
percentage of foreign words; the use of internet 
slang; non-conventional use of uppercase; 
spelling errors and missing of diacritic signals. 
A previous work (Hartmann et al. 2014) 
investigated the nature and the distribution of the 
34,774 words of the corpus Buscap? not 
recognized by Unitex, a Brazilian Portuguese 
lexicon (Muniz et. al. 2005). The words for 
which only the diacritic signals were missing 
(3,652 or 10.2%) have been automatically 
corrected. Then, all the remaining words with 
more than 2 occurrences (5775) were classified 
in a double-blind annotation task, which obtained 
0,752 of inter-annotator agreement (Kappa 
statistics, Carletta, 1996). The results obtained 
are shown in Table 1.  
 
Table 1. Non-Recognized Words with more 
than 2 occurrences in the corpus 
Common Portuguese misspelled words 44% 
Acronyms 5% 
Proper Nouns 24% 
Abbreviations 2% 
Internet Slang 4% 
Foreign words used in Portuguese 8% 
Units of Measurement 0% 
Other problems  13% 
Total 100% 
23
The study reported herein aims to investigate 
how some of these problems occur in the corpus 
and to what extent they may affect POS tagging. 
Future improvements remain to be done in the 
specific tools that individually tackle these 
problems.  
 
4. Methodology  
 
As the same corpus is to be used for different 
subtasks ? semantic role labeling, opinion 
detection, classification and summarization ? the 
challenge is to normalize the corpus but also 
keep some original occurrences that may be 
relevant for such tasks. Maintaining two or more 
versions of the corpus is also being considered. 
To enable a semi-automatic qualitative and 
quantitative investigation, a random 10-reviews 
sample (1226 tokens) of the original corpus was 
selected and POS tagged by the MXPOST tagger 
which was trained on MAC-Morpho, a 1.2 
million tokens corpus of Brazilian Portuguese 
newspaper articles (Alu?sio et al., 2003).  
It is worthwhile to say that the sampling did 
not follow statistical principles. In fact, we 
randomly selected 10 texts (1226 tokens from a 
corpus of 4,088,718 tokens), which we 
considered a reasonable portion of text to 
undertake the manual tasks required by the first 
diagnosis experiments. Our aim was to explore 
tendencies and not to have a precise statistical 
description of the percentage of types of errors in 
the corpus. Therefore, the probabilities of each 
type of error may not reflect those of the entire 
corpus.  
We manually corrected the POS tagged 
version to evaluate how many tags were 
correctly assigned. The precision of MXPOST in 
our sample is 88.74%, while its better precision, 
of 96.98%, has been obtained in its training 
corpus. As one may see, there was a decrease of 
8.49% in performance, which is expected in such 
change of text genre. 
In the sequence, we created four manually 
corrected versions of the sample, regarding each 
of the following normalization categories: 
spelling (including foreign words and named 
entities); case use; punctuation; and use of 
internet slang. This step produced four golden 
corpus samples which were used for separate 
evaluations. The calculation of the difference 
between the original corpus sample and each of 
the golden ones led us to the following 
conclusions.  
The manual corrections of the sample were 
made by a linguist who followed some rules  
established in accordance with the project goals 
and the MXPOST annotation guidelines1. As a 
result, only the punctuation correction allowed 
some subjective decisions; the other kinds of 
correction were very objective. 
 
5. Results of diagnosing experiments 
 
Regarding to spelling, 2 foreign words, 3 
named entities and 19 common words were 
detected as misspelled. A total of 24 (1.96%) 
words have been corrected. There are 35 words 
(2.90%) for which the case have been changed (6 
upper to lower and 29 in the reverse direction). 
Punctuation has showed to be a relevant 
issue: 48 interventions (deletions, insertions or 
substitutions) have been made to turn the texts 
correct, representing 3.92% of the sample. 
Regarding internet slang, only 3 occurrences 
(0.24%) were detected in the sample, what 
contradicted our expectation that such lexicon 
would have a huge impact in our corpus. 
However due to the size of our sample, this may 
have occurred by chance.  
The precision of the POS tagged sample has 
been compared with the ones of the POS tagged 
versions of golden samples. The results showed 
us the impact of the above four normalization 
categories on the tagger performance.  
We have verified that there was improvement 
after the correction of each category, reducing 
the POS tagger errors as shown in Table 2. When 
we combine all the categories of correction 
before tagging the sample, the cumulative result 
is an error reduction of 19.56%.  
 
Table 2. Improvement of the tagger precision 
in the sample 
Case Correction + 15.94% 
Punctuation Correction + 4.34% 
Spelling + 2.90% 
Internet Slang Convertion + 1.45% 
Cumulative Error Reduction 19.56% 
 
These first experiments revealed that case 
correction has major relevance in the process of 
normalizing our corpus of products reviews. It is 
important to note that case information is largely 
                                                          
1
 Available at 
http://www.nilc.icmc.usp.br/lacioweb/manuais.htm 
24
used as feature by Named Entities Recognizers 
(NER), POS taggers and parsers. 
To evaluate whether the case use distribution 
is different from that of a corpus of well written 
texts, we compared the statistics of case use in 
our corpus with those of a newspaper corpus 
(http://www.linguateca.pt/CETENFolha/), as 
shown in Table 3. 
 
Table 3. Percentage of case use in newspaper 
and products reviews corpus genres 
CORPUS Newspaper 
 
Products 
Reviews 
Uppercase words 6.41% 5.30% 
Initial uppercase 
words 
20.86% 7.30% 
Lowercase words 70.79% 85.37% 
 
The differences observed led us to conclude 
that the tendency observed in our sample (proper 
names and acronyms written in lower case) is 
probably a problem for the whole corpus.  
To confirm such conclusion, we searched in 
the corpus the 1,339 proper nouns identified in 
our previous annotation task. They occurred 
40,009 times with the case distribution shown in 
Table 4. 
 
Table 4. Case distribution of Proper Nouns 
Initial uppercase words 15,148 38% 
Uppercase words 7,392 18% 
Lower case words 17,469 44% 
Total 40,009 100% 
 
The main result of these experiments is the 
evidence that the four kind of errors investigated 
do affect POS tagging. In the next section we 
will detail the procedures envisaged to provide 
normalization for each one of the four categories 
of errors.  
 
6. Towards automatic normalization 
procedures 
 
After diagnosing the needs of text 
normalization of our corpus, we started to test 
automatic procedures to meet them. The 
processing of a new genre always poses a 
question: should we normalize the new genre to 
make it similar to the input expected by available 
automatic tools or should we adapt the existing 
tools to process the new genre? This is not a 
question of choice, indeed. We argue that both 
movements are needed. Furthermore, the 
processing of a new genre is an opportunity not 
only to make genre-adaptation, but also to 
improve general purpose features of NLP tools. 
 
6.1 Case normalization: truecasing 
 
In NLP the problem of case normalization is 
usually called ?truecasing? (Lita et al, 2003, 
Manning et al., 2008). The challenge is to decide 
when uppercase should be changed into lower 
case and when lower case should be changed into 
upper case. In brief, truecasing is the process of 
correcting case use in badly-cased or non-cased 
text. 
The problem is particularly relevant in two 
scenarios; speech recognition and informal web 
texts. 
We prioritized the case normalization for two 
reasons: first, badly-cased text seems to be a 
generalized problem in the genre of products 
reviews and, second, it is important to make case 
normalization before using a spell checker. This 
is crucial to ?protect? Named Entities from 
spelling corrections because when non-
recognized lowercase words are checked by 
spellers, there is the risk of wrong correction. 
Indeed, the more extensive is the speller lexicon, 
the greater is the risk of miscorrection. 
The genre under inspection presents a 
widespread misuse of case. By one side, lower 
case is used in place of uppercase in the initial 
letter of proper names. On the other side, upper 
case is used to emphasize any kind of word.  
Our first tentative to tackle the problem of 
capitalization was to submit the samples to a 
Named Entity Recognizer. We chose Rembrandt2 
(Cardoso, 2012), a Portuguese NER that 
enhances both lexical knowledge extracted from 
Wikipedia and statistical knowledge.  
The procedure was: 1) to submit the sample 
to Rembrandt; 2) to capitalize the recognized 
entities written in lower case; 3) to change all the 
words capitalized, except the named entities, to 
lower case. Then we tagged the sample with 
MXPOST to evaluate the effect on POS tagging 
accuracy.  
The number of errors of POS tagging 
increased (149) when compared to the one of the 
sample without preprocessing (138). The 
                                                          
2
 The Portuguese named entity recognition is made by 
system Rembrandt (http://xldb.di.fc.ul.pt/Rembrandt/) 
25
explanation for this is that among the words not 
recognized as named entities there were 
capitalized named entities which were lost by 
this strategy. 
Next we tried a new version of this same 
experiment: we only changed into lower case the 
words not recognized as named entities that were 
simultaneously recognized by Unitex. The results 
were slightly better (143 errors) compared to the 
first version of the experiment, but still worse 
than those of the sample without preprocessing.  
Our expectation was to automatically 
capitalize the recognized entities written in lower 
case. In both experiments, however, no word was 
changed from lower to upper case because all the 
entities recognized by the NER were already 
capitalized.  
The sample contains 57 tokens of named 
entities (corresponding to proper nouns and 
acronyms) from which 24 were written in lower 
case. The NER recognized 22 of the 57 or 18 of 
the 38 types of named entities (a performance of 
47.4%). Unfortunately the NER is strongly based 
on the presence of capitalized initial letters and 
was of no aid in the procedure we tested. 
We argue that a finite list of known proper 
nouns and acronyms, although useful for 
improving evaluation figures, is of limited use 
for an application such as an opinion miner. In 
real scenarios this constitutes an open class and 
new entities shall be recognized as well.  
We observed that many of the named entities 
found in the reviews relate to the product being 
reviewed and to the company that produces it. 
Then we realized an advantage of the source 
from which we have crawled the reviews: the 
customers are only allowed to review products 
that have been previously registered in the site 
database. The register of the name of the product 
is kept in our corpus as metadata for each review. 
This situation gave us the opportunity to 
experiment another strategy: to identify named 
entities of each review in its respective metadata 
file. We first gathered all the words annotated as 
Proper Nouns and Acronyms in our previous 
annotation task3. Then we search for the matches. 
The result is promising: from 1,334 proper nouns 
and from 271 acronyms, respectively 676 
                                                          
3
 Confusion matrix of our double annotated data show 
that annotators diverged in what concerns Proper Nouns and 
Acronyms. For our purposes, however, all of them are 
named entities and need to be capitalized, so that this kind 
of disagreement did not affect the use we have made of the 
annotated words. 
(50.67%) and 44 (16.23%) were found in the 
metadata. Adding both types of named entities, 
we have a match of 44.85% (720 of 1605). This 
is pretty good mainly because the named entities 
recognized are precisely the names of products 
for which opinions will be mined. 
However, we still need to solve the 
recognition of the other named entities in order 
to support the truecasing strategies.  
Following Lita et al. (2003) and Beaufays and 
Strope (2013), we are considering using a 
language model. Lita et al. developed a truecaser 
for news articles, a genre more ?stable? than 
products reviews. Beaufays and Strope, on their 
turn, developed a truecaser to tackle texts 
generated from speech recognition. Language 
modeling may be a good approach to our 
problem because many named entities of 
products domain do not sound as Portuguese 
words. For example, they frequently have the 
consonants k, y and w, which are only used in 
proper names in Portuguese. Other approaches to 
truecasing reported in the literature include finite 
state transducers automatically built from 
language models and maximum entropy models 
(Batista et al. 2008). 
 
6.2 Punctuation problems 
 
Many reviews have no punctuation at all. 
This prevents processing the text by most of NLP 
tools which processes sentences. Some 
grammatical rules may be used to correct the use 
of comma, but the problem is more complex in 
what concerns full stop. We are now training a 
machine learning based program with a corpus of 
well written texts by using features related to n-
grams. We aim at building a sentence 
segmentation tool which does not depend on the 
presence of punctuation or case folding, since 
these are major noises in the corpus.  
 
6.3 Spelling correction 
 
The common Portuguese words in the corpus 
which were not recognized by Unitex have been 
spell checked. Manual analysis is being 
undertaken to determine whether the word has 
been accurately corrected or not. Early results 
evidenced opportunity to extend Unitex and to 
improve our spellers with more phonetic rules in 
order to suggest more adequate alternatives. As 
we have already mentioned, product reviewers 
have several levels of literacy and those of lower 
level frequently swap the consonant letters that 
26
conveys the same phonetic value. For example, 
in Portuguese the letters ?s?, ?c?, ?xc? ?ss? and 
??? can have the same sound: /s/. Therefore, it is 
a common mistake to employ one instead of the 
other. These rules shall be incorporated in spell 
checker. In addition, there are many words which 
were correctly spelled, but were not part of 
Unitex or of the speller?s dictionary or both. 
Both lexicons will be extended with the missing 
words. 
In the same way, the foreign words of current use 
in Brazilian Portuguese shall be incorporated in 
the spell checkers in order to improve their 
suggestions of correction. As a matter of fact, 
foreign words are frequently misspelled. For 
example, ?touchscreen? appeared as 10 different 
spelling forms in our corpus with more than 2 
occurrences (?toch escreen?, ?touch screem?, 
?touch sreen?, ?touche?, ?touch scream?, 
?touchscream?, ?touchscreem?, ?touch-screen?, 
?touchsren?, ?touch screen"). 
 
6.4 Internet slang normalization 
 
Internet slang is a class that combines: 1) 
words written in a different way and 
abbreviations of recurrent expressions, for which 
there is an equivalent in the standard language 
(in this case the procedure is to substitute one for 
another); 2) repeated letters and punctuation (e.g. 
!!!!!!!!!!!!, and ameiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii, in which the 
word "amei" = ?love? is being emphasized), 
which may be normalized by eliminating 
repetitions; and 3) sequences of letters related to 
emotion expression, like emoticons (e.g. ?:)?, 
?:=(?), laughing (e.g. rsrsrsrs, heheheh, 
kkkkkkkk), which for some purposes shall be 
eliminated and for others shall not. The 
procedures relating to internet slang will be 
implemented carefully  to allow the user to 
activate each one of the three procedures 
separately, depending on his/her interest in 
preserving emotion expression or not.  
  
7. Final Remarks 
 
This preliminary investigation about the 
needs of text normalization for the genre of 
products reviews led us to deep understand our 
challenges and to envisage some solutions.  
We have opened some avenues for future 
works and established an agenda for the next 
steps towards corpus normalization.  
 
Acknowledgments  
This research work is being carried on as part of 
an academic agreement between University of 
S?o Paulo and Samsung Eletr?nica da Amaz?nia 
Ltda.  
References  
Alu?sio, S. M.; Pelizzoni, J. M.; Marchi, A. R.; 
Oliveira, L. H.; Manenti, R.; Marquivaf?vel, V. 
(2003). An account of the challenge of tagging a 
reference corpus of Brazilian Portuguese. In: 
Proceedings of PROPOR?2003. Springer Verlag, 
2003, pp. 110-117. 
Aw, A.; Zhang, M.; Xiao, J.; Su, J. (2006).  A Phrase-
based Statistical Model for SMS Text 
Normalization. In: Proceedings of the COLING-
2006 .ACL, Sydney, 2006, pp. 33?40. 
Batista, F.; Caseiro, D. A.;  Mamede, N. J.; Trancoso, 
I. (2008). Recovering Capitalization and 
Punctuation Marks for Automatic Speech 
Recognition: Case Study for the Portuguese 
Broadcast News, Speech Communication, vol. 50, 
n. 10, pages 847-862, doi: 
10.1016/j.specom.2008.05.008, October 2008 
Beaufays, F.; Strope, B. (2013) Language Model 
Capitalization. In:  2013 IEEE International 
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal 
Processing (ICASSP), p. 6749 ? 6752. 
Bildhauer, F.; Sch?fer, R. (2013) Token-level noise in 
large Web corpora and non-destructive 
normalization for linguistic applications. In: 
Proceedings of Corpus Analysis with Noise in the 
Signal (CANS 2013) . 
Cardoso, N. (2012). Rembrandt - a named-entity 
recognition framework. In: Proceedings of the 
Eight International Conference on Language 
Resources and Evaluation (LREC'12). May, 23-25, 
Istanbul, Turkey. 
Carletta, J.: Assessing Agreement on Classification 
Tasks: The Kappa Statistic. Computational 
Linguistics, vol. 22, n. 2, pp. 249--254. (1996) 
Contractor, D.; Tanveer A.; Faruquie; L.; 
Subramaniam, V. (2010). Unsupervised cleansing 
of noisy text. Coling 2010: Poster Volume, pages 
189?196, Beijing, August 2010. 
Hartmann, N. S.; Avan?o. L.; Balage, P. P.; Duran, 
M. S.; Nunes, M. G. V.; Pardo, T.; Alu?sio, S. 
(2014). A Large Opinion Corpus in Portuguese - 
Tackling Out-Of-Vocabulary Words. In: 
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference 
27
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 
2014). Forthcoming. 
Lita, L., Ittycheriah, A., Roukos, S. & Kambhatla,N. 
(2003), Truecasing, In: Proceedings of the 41st 
Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics, Japan. 
Manning, C. D., Raghavan, P., & Sch?tze, H. (2008). 
Introduction to information retrieval (Vol. 1). 
Cambridge: Cambridge university press. 
Muniz, M.C.M.; Nunes, M.G.V.; Laporte. E. (2005) 
"UNITEX-PB, a set of flexible language resources 
for Brazilian Portuguese", Proceedings of the 
Workshop on Technology of Information and 
Human Language (TIL), S?o Leopoldo (Brazil): 
Unisinos. 
Ringlstetter, C.; Schulz, K. U. and Mihov, S. (2006). 
Orthographic Errors in Web Pages: Toward 
Cleaner Web Corpora. In: Computational 
Linguistics Volume 32, Number 3, p. 295-340.  
Sch?fer, R.; Barbaresi, A.; Bildhauer, F. (2013) The 
Good, the Bad, and the Hazy: Design Decisions in 
Web Corpus Construction. In:  Proceedings of the 
8th Web as Corpus Workshop (WAC-8). 
Schlippe, T.; Zhu, C.; Gebhardt J.;, Schultz, T.(2013). 
Text Normalization based on Statistical Machine 
Translation and Internet User Support. In: 
Proceedings of The 38th International Conference 
on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing  
(ICASSP-2013) p. 8406 ? 841. 
 
 
28
