Proceedings of the Third Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 182?185,
Suntec, Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Building a Large Syntactically-Annotated Corpus of Vietnamese 
 
 
Phuong-Thai Nguyen 
College of Technology, VNU 
thainp@vnu.edu.vn 
Xuan-Luong Vu 
Vietnam Lexicography Cen-
tre 
vuluong@vietlex.vn 
Thi-Minh-Huyen Nguyen 
University of Natural 
Sciences, VNU 
huyenntm@vnu.edu.vn 
Van-Hiep Nguyen 
University of Social Sciences and 
Humanities, VNU 
hiepnv@vnu.edu.vn 
Hong-Phuong Le 
LORIA/INRIA Lorraine 
lehong@loria.fr 
 
 
Abstract 
Treebank is an important resource for 
both research and application of natural 
language processing. For Vietnamese, we 
still lack such kind of corpora. This paper 
presents up-to-date results of a project for 
Vietnamese treebank construction. Since 
Vietnamese is an isolating language and 
has no word delimiter, there are many 
ambiguities in sentence analysis. We sys-
tematically applied a lot of linguistic 
techniques to handle such ambiguities. 
Annotators are supported by automatic-
labeling tools and a tree-editor tool. Raw 
texts are extracted from Tuoi Tre 
(Youth), an online Vietnamese daily 
newspaper. The current annotation 
agreement is around 90 percent.  
1 Introduction 
Treebanks are used for training syntactic parsers, 
part-of-speech taggers, and word segmenters. 
These systems then can be used for applications 
such as information extraction, machine transla-
tion, question answering, and text summariza-
tion. Treebanks are also useful for linguistic stu-
dies, for example the extraction of syntactic pat-
terns or the investigation of linguistic phenome-
na. Recently, treebanks and other large corpora 
have become more important since the develop-
ment of powerful machine learning methods. 
As mentioned above, Vietnamese is an isolat-
ing language. There is no word delimiter in Viet-
namese. The smallest unit in the construction of 
words is syllables. Words can be single or com-
pound. Vietnamese script is invented based on 
Latin alphabet in which the expansion includes 
accent characters and stressed accents.  
Since Vietnamese word order is quite fixed, 
we choose to use constituency representation of 
syntactic structures. For languages with freer 
word order such as Japanese or Czech, depen-
dency representation is more suitable. We apply 
annotation scheme proposed by Marcus et al 
(1993). This approach has been successfully ap-
plied to a number of languages such as English, 
Chinese, Arabic, etc. 
For Vietnamese, there are three annotation le-
vels including word segmentation, POS tagging, 
and syntactic labeling. Word segmentation iden-
tifies word boundary in sentences. POS tagging 
assigns correct POS tags to words. Syntactic 
labeling recognizes both phrase-structure tags 
and functional tags. Our main target is to build a 
corpus of 10,000 syntactically-annotated sen-
tences (trees) and an additional POS tagged data 
set of 10,000 sentences. Treebank construction is 
a very complicated task including major phases: 
investigation, guideline preparation, building 
tools, raw text collection, and annotation. This is 
a repeated process involving especially three 
phases: annotation, guideline revision, and tool 
upgrade. Raw texts are collected from a newspa-
per source, the Youth online daily newspaper, 
with a number of topics including social and pol-
itics. We completed about 9,500 trees and 10,000 
POS tagged sentences. 
In order to deal with ambiguities occurring at 
various levels of annotation, we systematically 
applied linguistic analysis techniques such as 
deletion, insertion, substitution, questioning, 
transformation, etc. Notions for analysis tech-
niques are described in guideline. These tech-
niques are originated in literatures or proposed 
182
by our group. They are described with examples, 
arguments, and alternatives. For automatic labe-
ling tools, we used advanced machine learning 
methods such as CRFs for POS tagging or 
LPCFGs for syntactic parsing. These tools 
helped us speed up labeling process. Besides, 
tree editor was also very helpful. 
Our treebank project is a branch project of a 
national project which aims to develop basic re-
sources and tools for Vietnamese language and 
speech processing. This national project is called 
VLSP 1 . In addition to treebank, other text-
processing resources and tools include: Vietnam-
ese machine readable dictionary, English-
Vietnamese parallel corpus, word segmenter, 
POS tagger, chunker, and parser. Treebank and 
tools are closely related. Tools are trained using 
treebank data, and then they can be used in tree-
bank construction. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follow: 
First, we present issues in Vietnamese word 
segmentation problem. Second, POS tagging and 
syntactic parsing are described. Third, tools and 
annotation process are represented. Fourth, we 
present annotation agreement evaluation. And 
last, some conclusion is drawn.   
2 Word Segmentation 
There are many approaches to word definition, 
for example based on morphology, based on syn-
tax, based on semantics, or linguistic compari-
son. We consider words as syntactic atoms 
(Sciullo and Williams, 1987) according to the 
sense that it is impossible to analyze word struc-
ture using syntactic rules, or that words are the 
smallest unit which is syntactically independent. 
We choose this criterion partly because the first 
application of word segmentation is for syntactic 
analysis (build trees).  
According to application view, machine trans-
lation researchers may argue that Vietnamese 
words and foreign words should match each oth-
er. The problem is that there are so many possi-
ble foreign languages which are different in vo-
cabulary. Dictionary editors may want to extract 
phrases from text which need to be explained in 
meaning. For this application, syntactic parsers 
can be used as tool for editors. Parsers can ex-
tract candidates for phrase/word entry. 
The following word types are considered in 
word segmentation phase: single words, com-
pound words, repeated words, idioms, proper 
                                               
1 Vietnamese Language and Speech Processing 
names, date/time, number expressions, foreign 
words, abbreviations. 
Word segmentation ambiguity is the major 
problem annotators have to deal with. Suppose 
that three words ?nh? c?a?, ?s?c ??p?, and ?hi?u 
s?ch? are being considered. Annotators need to 
identify these combinations as words in: 
a. Nh? c?a b? b?n qu?  
b. C? ?y gi? g?n s?c ??p.  
c. Ngo?i hi?u s?ch c? b?n cu?n n?y  
And not words in: 
a. ? nh? c?a ng? ch?ng ??ng g? c?.  
b. B?c n?y m?u s?c ??p h?n.  
c. Ngo?i c?a hi?u s?ch b?o b?y la li?t.  
We used dictionaries as a reference. In prac-
tice, we consider dictionary words as candidate 
for word segmentation and make decision using 
context. 
3 POS Tagging and Syntactic Annota-
tion Guidelines 
3.1 POS Tag Set 
For European languages, word classes closely 
relate to morphological aspects such as gender, 
number, case, etc. For Vietnamese, words are 
often classified based on their combination abili-
ty, their syntactic functions, and their general 
meaning. We choose first two criteria, combina-
tion ability and syntactic function, for POS tag 
set design. Therefore our POS tag set will not 
contain morphological information (number, as-
pect, tense, etc.), sub-categorization information 
(transitive/intransitive verbs, verbs followed by 
clauses, etc.), and semantic information.  
3.2 Syntactic Tag Set  
Our tag set contains three tag types: constituency 
tags, functional tags, and null-element tags. We 
use the tag H to label phrase head. If a phrase has 
more than one head, connected by coordination 
conjunctions or commas, then all heads are la-
beled with H tag. Other treebanks often does not 
use head tag. Therefore researchers on syntactic 
parsing (Collins, 1999) used heuristic rules to 
determine CFG rules? head. Machine learning 
methods also can be used (Chiang and Bikel, 
2002). Null elements are often used for adjective 
clauses, ellipsis, passive voice, and topic. 
3.3 Sentence and Phrase Analysis Tech-
niques 
Annotation of real text requires various tech-
niques to be applied. Ambiguity may occur in 
many steps of analysis such as determining 
183
phrase?s head, discriminating between possible 
complements, discriminating between adjuncts 
and other sentence elements, etc. Sentence analy-
sis techniques include deletion, substitution, in-
sertion, transformation, questioning. These tech-
niques exploit contextual information, word 
combination, word order, and functional words 
to disambiguation between possible structures.  
3.4 Linguistics Issues 
The problem of treebank construction can be 
considered as an application of linguistic theories 
though treebanks can also be used for linguistic 
studies. However, there are still disagreements 
among linguists as to solutions for many linguis-
tic issues. For example, that the classifier noun is 
noun phrase?s head or pre-modifier is controver-
sial. Another example, Vietnamese sentence 
structure is subject-predicate or topic-comment is 
also controversial. Our treebank relies more on 
subject-predicate structure. Moreover, we choose 
linguistic solutions most appropriate to our de-
sign.  
4 Tools 
We designed a tool for supporting annotators in 
most all phases of the annotation process. Main 
functions of our editor are as follows: 
- Edit and view trees in both text mode and 
graphical mode 
- View log files, highlight modifications 
- Search by words or syntactic patterns 
- Predict errors (edit, spell, or syntax) 
- Compute annotation agreement and high-
light differences 
- Compute several kinds of statistics  
For encoding the treebank, we have developed 
an exchange format named vnSynAF, a syntactic 
annotation framework which is conformed to the 
standard framework SynAF of ISO. The frame-
work SynAF is built on top of an XML-based 
annotation scheme which is recommended by 
ISO for the encoding of treebanks2. Our tool also 
supports bracketing representation (or Lisp style) 
of Penn English Treebank. These formats can be 
converted into each other.   
For the task of word segmentation, we used 
vnTokenizer, a highly accurate segmenter which 
uses a hybrid approach to automatically tokenize 
Vietnamese text. The approach combines both 
finite-state automata technique, regular expres-
                                               
2 ISO/CD/24615, Language Resource Management- 
Syntactic Annotation Framework (SynAF) TC37/SC 4 
N421, 22th Aug 2007, http://tc37sc4.org/documents 
sion parsing, and the maximal-matching strategy 
which is augmented by statistical methods to re-
solve ambiguities of segmentation (Phuong et al, 
2008). 
We used JVnTagger, a POS tagger based on 
Conditional Random Fields (Lafferty et al, 
2001) and Maximum Entropy (Berger et al, 
1996). This tagger is also developed under sup-
ported of VLSP project. Training data size is 
10,000 sentences. Experiments with 5-fold cross 
validation showed that F1 scores for CRFs and 
Maxent are 90.40% and 91.03% respectively.   
A syntactic parser based on Lexicalized Prob-
abilistic Context-free Grammars (LPCFGs) is 
another tool we used. Another group in VLSP 
customized Bikel?s parser3 for parsing Vietnam-
ese text. This parser is a well designed and easy 
to adapt to new languages. The group imple-
mented a Vietnamese language package which 
handles treebank, training, finding head of CFG 
rules, and word features. This parser can output 
text with constituent tags only or both constituent 
tags and functional tags. 
5 Annotation Process and Agreement 
There are three annotation levels: word segmen-
tation, POS tagging, and syntactic labeling. Since 
the word segmentation tool had been available 
before the start of our project, it was used for the 
first annotation level (word segmentation) im-
mediately. As to the other annotation levels (POS 
tagging and syntactic parsing), first several thou-
sand sentences were labeled manually. After that 
a POS tagger and a parser are trained bimonthly, 
then the annotation task becomes semi-
automatic. According to our annotation process, 
each sentence is annotated and revised by at least 
two annotators. The first annotator labels raw 
sentences or revises automatically-analyzed sen-
tences. Then the second annotator revises the 
output of the first annotator. In addition, we also 
check corpus by syntactic phenomena, for exam-
ple direction words, questions, etc. This process 
is supported by tool. So there are many sentences 
which are revised more than twice.  
Table 2 shows a number of important corpus 
statistics such as sentence count, word count, and 
syllable count for two data sets. We completed 
the POS tagged data set and will complete the 
syntactically-labeled data set soon. The average 
sentence length is about 21.6 words.  
 
                                               
3 http://www.cis.upenn.edu/~dbikel/software.html 
184
Data set Sentences Words Syllables 
POS tagged 10,368 210,393 255,237 
Syntactically 
labeled 
9,633 208,406 251,696 
Table 1. Corpus statistics 
Annotation agreement measures how similar 
two texts annotated independently by different 
annotators are. Since this problem is similar to 
parsing evaluation, we use parseval measure. 
First, syntactic constituents in the form (i, j, la-
bel) are extracted from syntactic trees. Then tree 
comparison problem is transformed into consti-
tuent comparison. We can compute three kinds 
of measurement: constituent and function simi-
larity, constituent similarity, and bracket simi-
larity. By using this method, we can evaluate 
both overall agreement and constituency agree-
ment.      
Annotation agreement A between two annota-
tors can be computed as follows: 
21
2
CC
C
A
?
?
?  
where C1 is the number of constituents in the 
first annotator?s data set, C2 is the number of 
constituents in the second annotator?s data set, 
and C is the number of identical constituents. 
Table 3 shows an example of constituent extrac-
tion from trees. From Table 3, we can compute: 
C1=6; C2=7; C=6; A=12/13=0.92 . 
 
1st annotator 2nd annotator 
(S (NP (Np H?ng)) 
     (VP (V ng?m)  
            (NP (N m?a))  
            (PP (E trong)  
                   (NP (N c?ng 
vi?n)))) 
     (. .)) 
(S (NP (Np H?ng)) 
     (VP (V ng?m)  
            (NP (NP (N m?a))  
                   (PP (E trong)  
                          (NP (N 
c?ng vi?n))))) 
    (. .)) 
(1,6,S); (1,1,NP); (2,5,VP); 
(3,3,NP); (4,5, PP); (5,5,NP) 
(1,6,S); (1,1,NP); (2,5,VP); 
(3,3,NP); (3,5,NP); (4,5, 
PP); (5,5,NP) 
Table 2. Constituent extraction from trees 
 
We carried out an experiment involving 3 an-
notators. They annotated 100 sentences and the 
result is shown in Table 4.  
 
Test A1-A2 A2-A3 A3-A1 
Full tags 90.32% 91.26% 90.71% 
Constituent 
tags 
92.40% 93.57% 91.92% 
No tags 95.24% 96.33% 95.48% 
Table 3. Annotation agreement 
 
6 Conclusions 
In this paper, we presented our most up-to-date 
results on Vietnamese treebank construction. 
This project is coming to final stage. We contin-
ue to annotate more text, revise data by syntactic 
phenomenon and feedback from users. We also 
use statistical techniques to analyze treebank data 
to find out errors and fix them. We intend to pub-
lish these data on LDC this year.  
 
Acknowledgments 
This paper is supported by a national project 
named Building Basic Resources and Tools for 
Vietnamese Language and Speech Processing, 
KC01.01/06-10.  
Reference 
Di?p Quang Ban. 2005. Ng? ph?p ti?ng Vi?t (2 t?p). 
NXB Gi?o d?c. 
Cao Xu?n H?o. 2006. Ti?ng Vi?t s? th?o ng? ph?p 
ch?c n?ng. NXB Khoa h?c X? h?i. 
Nguy?n Minh Thuy?t v? Nguy?n V?n Hi?p. 1999. 
Th?nh ph?n c?u ti?ng Vi?t. NXB ?HQG H? N?i. 
?y ban Khoa h?c X? h?i Vi?t Nam. 1983. Ng? ph?p 
ti?ng Vi?t. NXB Khoa h?c X? h?i. 
Adam Berger, Stephen D. Pietra, and Vincent D. Pie-
tra. 1996. A maximum entropy approach to natural 
language processing. Computational Linguistics, 
(22-1). 
David Chiang and Daniel M. Bikel. 2002. Recovering 
Latent Information in Treebanks. COLING. 
Michael Collins. 1999. Head-Driven Statistical Mod-
els for Natural Language Parsing. PhD thesis, Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania. 
John Lafferty, Andrew McCallum, and Fernando Pe-
reira. 2001. Conditional random fields: Probabilis-
tic models for segmenting and labeling sequence 
data. ICML. 
Mitchell P. Marcus et al Building a Large Annotated 
Corpus of English: The Penn Treebank. 
1993. Computational Linguistics. 
L. H. Phuong, N. T. M. Huyen, R. Azim, H. T. Vinh. 
A hybrid approach to word segmentation of Viet-
namese texts. Proceedings of the 2nd International 
Conference on Language and Automata Theory 
and Applications, Springer LNCS 5196, Tarragona, 
Spain, 2008. 
Anna M.D. Sciullo and Edwin Williams. 1987. On the 
definition of word. The MIT Press.  
Fei Xia et al Developing Guidelines and Ensuring 
Consistency for Chinese Text Annotation. 2000. 
COLING.  
185
Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 63?69,
Suntec, Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Finite-State Description of Vietnamese Reduplication
Le Hong Phuong
LORIA, France
lehong@loria.fr
Nguyen Thi Minh Huyen
Hanoi Univ. of Science, Vietnam
huyenntm@vnu.edu.vn
Azim Roussanaly
LORIA, France
azim@loria.fr
Abstract
We present for the first time a compu-
tational model for the reduplication of
the Vietnamese language. Reduplication
is a popular phenomenon of Vietnamese
in which reduplicative words are created
by the combination of multiple syllables
whose phonics are similar. We first give
a systematical study of Vietnamese redu-
plicative words, bringing into focus clear
principles for the formation of a large class
of bi-syllabic reduplicative words. We then
make use of optimal finite-state devices,
in particular minimal sequential string-to
string transducers to build a computational
model for very efficient recognition and
production of those words. Finally, sev-
eral nice applications of this computa-
tional model are discussed.
1 Introduction
Finite-state technology has been applied success-
fully for describing the morphological processes
of many natural languages since the pioneer-
ing works of (Kaplan and Kay, 1994; Kosken-
niemi, 1983). It is shown that while finite-state
approaches to most natural languages have gen-
erally been very successful, they are less suitable
for non-concatenative phenomena found in some
languages, for example the non-concatenative
word formation processes in Semitic languages
(Cohen-Sygal and Wintner, 2006). A popular non-
concatenative process is reduplication ? the pro-
cess in which a morpheme or part of it is dupli-
cated.
Reduplication is a common linguistic phe-
nomenon in many Asian languages, for exam-
ple Japanese, Mandarin Chinese, Cantonese, Thai,
Malay, Indonesian, Chamorro, Hebrew, Bangla,
and especially Vietnamese.
We are concerned with the reduplication of
Vietnamese. It is noted that Vietnamese is a mono-
syllabic language and its word forms never change,
contrary to occidental languages that make use of
morphological variations. Consequently, redupli-
cation is one popular and important word forma-
tion method which is extensively used to enrich the
lexicon. This follows that the Vietnamese lexicon
consists of a large number of reduplicative words.
This paper presents for the first time a compu-
tational model for recognition and production of a
large class of Vietnamese reduplicative words. We
show that Vietnamese reduplication can be sim-
ulated efficiently by finite-state devices. We first
introduce the Vietnamese lexicon and the struc-
ture of Vietnamese syllables. We next give a com-
plete study about the reduplication phenomenon
of Vietnamese language, bringing into focus for-
mation principles of reduplicative words. We then
propose optimal finite-state sequential transducers
recognizing and producing a substantial class of
these words. Finally, we present several nice ap-
plications of this computational model before con-
cluding and discussing the future work.
2 Vietnamese Lexicon
In this section, we first present some general char-
acteristics of the Vietnamese language. We then
give some statistics of the Vietnamese lexicon and
introduce the structure of Vietnamese syllables.
The following basic characteristics of Viet-
namese are adopted from (?o?n, 2003; ?o?n et
al. , 2003; H?u et al , 1998; Nguy?n et al , 2006).
2.1 Language Type
Vietnamese is classified in the Viet-Muong group
of the Mon-Khmer branch, that belongs to the
Austro-Asiatic language family. Vietnamese is
also known to have a similarity with languages
in the Tai family. The Vietnamese vocabulary fea-
tures a large amount of Sino-Vietnamese words.
63
Moreover, by being in contact with the French lan-
guage, Vietnamese was enriched not only in vo-
cabulary but also in syntax by the calque of French
grammar.
Vietnamese is an isolating language, which is
characterized by the following properties:
? it is a monosyllabic language;
? its word forms never change, contrary to oc-
cidental languages that make use of morpho-
logical variations (plural form, conjugation,
etc.);
? hence, all grammatical relations are mani-
fested by word order and function words.
2.2 Vocabulary
Vietnamese has a special unit called ?ti?ng? that
corresponds at the same time to a syllable with re-
spect to phonology, a morpheme with respect to
morpho-syntax, and a word with respect to sen-
tence constituent creation. For convenience, we
call these ?ti?ng? syllables. The Vietnamese vo-
cabulary contains
? simple words, which are monosyllabic;
? reduplicative words composed by phonetic
reduplication;
? compound words composed by semantic co-
ordination and by semantic subodination;
? complex words phonetically transcribed from
foreign languages.
The Vietnamese lexicon edited recently by the
Vietnam Lexicography Center (Vietlex1) contains
40, 181 words and idioms, which are widely used
in contemporary spoken language, newspapers
and literature. These words are made up of 7, 729
syllables. Table 1 shows some interesting statistics
of the word length measured in syllables. 6, 303
syllables (about 81.55% of syllables) are words by
themselves. Two-syllable words are the most fre-
quent, consisting of nearly 71% of the vocabulary.
2.3 Syllables
In this paragraph, we introduce phonetic attributes
of Vietnamese syllables. In addition of the mono-
syllabic characteristic, Vietnamese is a tonal lan-
guage in that each syllable has a certain pitch char-
acteristic. The meaning of a syllable varies with its
1http://www.vietlex.com/
Length # %
1 6, 303 15.69
2 28, 416 70.72
3 2, 259 5.62
4 2, 784 6.93
? 5 419 1.04
Total 40, 181 100
Table 1: Length of words measured in syllables
No. Tones Notation
1. low falling ?
2. creaky rising ?
3. creaky falling ?
4. mid level a
5. dipping ?
6. high rising ?
Table 2: Vietnamese tones
tone. This phonetic mechanism can also be found
in other languages such that Chinese or Thai.
There are six tones in Vietnamese as specified
in Table 2. The letter a denotes any non-accent syl-
lable. These six tones can be roughly classified
into two groups corresponding to low and high
pitches in pronunciation. The first half of the ta-
ble contains three low tones and the second half
contains three high tones. In addition, the differ-
ence in the tone of two syllables are distinguished
by flat property of tones. The 1st and 4th tones in
Table 2 are flat (b?ng), the other tones are non-flat
(tr?c).
The structure of a Vietnamese syllable is given
in Table 3. Each syllable can be divided into three
parts: onset, rhyme and tone. The onset is usually
a consonant, however it may be empty. The rhyme
contains a vowel (nucleus) with or without glide
/w/, and an optional consonant (coda). It is no-
ticed that the initial consonant of a syllable does
not carry information of the tone, the Vietnamese
tone has an effect only on the rhyme part of the
syllable (Tran et al, 2006). This result reinforces
the fact that a tone is always marked by the nucleus
composant of the rhyme which is a vowel. Readers
who are interested in detail the phonetic composi-
tion of Vietnamese syllables may refer to (Tran et
al., 2006; Vu et al, 2005).
3 Reduplication in Vietnamese
Reduplication is one of the methods for creating
multi-syllable words in Vietnamese. A reduplica-
64
Tone
Onset Rhyme
Glide Nucleus Coda
Table 3: Phonetic structure of Vietnamese sylla-
bles
tive word is characterized by a phenomenon called
phonetic interchange, in which one or several pho-
netic elements of a syllable are repeated following
a certain number of specific rules.
From the point of view of sense, the redupli-
cation in Vietnamese usually indicates a diminu-
tive of adjectives, which can also be found in He-
brew, or a pluralization in Malay, in Thai and in
Indonesian, or an intensivity as the use of par-
tial reduplication in Japanese, Thai, Cantonese and
Chamorro (an Austronesian language spoken on
Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands). In this
aspect, Vietnamese reduplication serves similar
functions as those of reduplication in several Asian
languages, as reported in an investigation of Asian
language reduplication within the NEDO project
(Tokunaga et al , 2008a; Tokunaga et al , 2008b).
The Vietnamese reduplication creates an ex-
pressional sense connecting closely to the pho-
netic material of Vietnamese, a language of rich
melody. Consequently, there are many Vietnamese
reduplicative words which are difficult to inter-
pret to foreigners, though in general, native Viet-
namese speakers always use and understand them
correctly (Di?p, 1999).
Vietnamese reduplicative words can be classi-
fied into three classes basing on the number of
syllables they contain: two-syllable (or bi-syllabic)
reduplicative words, three-syllable (or tri-syllabic)
reduplicative words and four-syllable reduplicative
words. The bi-syllabic class is the most important
class because of two reasons: (1) bi-syllabic redu-
plicative words make up more than 98% amount of
reduplicative words, that is, almost reduplicative
words has two syllables; and (2) bi-syllabic redu-
plicative words embody principle characteristics
of the reduplication phenomenon in both phone as-
pect and sense formation aspect. For these reasons,
in this paper, we address only bi-syllabic redu-
plicative words and call them reduplicative words
for short, if there is no confusion.
As presented in the previous section, a syllable
has a strict structure containing three parts: the on-
set, the rhyme and the tone. Basing on the phonetic
interchange of a syllable, we distinguish two types
of reduplication:
? full reduplication, where the whole syllable is
repeated;
? partial reduplication, where either the onset
is repeated or the rhyme and the tone are re-
peated.
In this work, we constraint ourselves by focus-
ing only on the construction of an efficient com-
putational model applied for reduplicative words
which have clear and well-defined formation prin-
ciples. These words can be classified into three
types investigated in detail in the following sub-
sections. In given examples, the base syllables (or
root syllable, or root for short) are the ones which
are underlined. The reduplication that has unde-
fined or incomplete formation rules will be tackled
in future works.
3.1 Full Reduplication
In this type of reduplication, the root is identically
repeated; there is only a slight difference on stress
in pronunciation. For example, hao hao (a little
similar), l?m l?m (intentional), ??ng ??ng (acci-
dentally dertermined), l? l? (silently). In the Viet-
namese lexicon there are 274 reduplicative words
of this type.
In principle, there appears to be many redu-
plicative words of this type whose their roots may
be whatever syllables bearing whatever tone, for
instance ?? ??, h? h?, s?ng s?ng, ch?m ch?m.
However, in consequence of the difference of
stress between the root and the reduplicant, the
tone of the reduplicant is changed in order to be
in harmony with the root, for the sake of more
readability and audibility (?easier to read, easier
to hear?). This consequence leads to the formation
of reduplicative words of the second type which
we call reduplication with tone according.
3.2 Reduplication with Tone According
As presented above, the difference between tone of
the root and the reduplicant is a consequence of the
difference between their stress which is expressed
by their tones. This creates reduplicative words of
the second type; for example, ?o ?? (reddish), h?
h? (in the bloom of youth), s?ng s?ng (statly, high
and majestic), ch?m ch?m (rather slow). The tone
properties (low or high pitch, flat or non-flat) are
now put into use.
65
Reduplicant Root #
a ? 72
a ? 128
? ? 27
? ? 80
Sum 307
Table 4: Statistic of the second type reduplication
The prosodic influence is responsible for the
creation of the reduplicant from its root. As a re-
sult, the combination of tones between two sylla-
bles is realized in the following principle: non-flat
tones of the roots are matched against a corre-
sponding flat tones of their reduplicants. That is,
the non-flat root has to select for it the flat redupli-
cant belonging to the same pitch, i.e., in the same
row. In this type of reduplicative words, the root is
stressed in pronunciation.
A detailed statistic about these reduplicative
words with respect to the combination of tones
is given in Table 4. There are 307 reduplicative
words of the second type.
3.3 Reduplication with Final Consonant
According
In this type of reduplication, there is not only the
difference between tones of the root and the redu-
plicant but also the difference between their final
consonants (hence their penultimates). Some ex-
amples of this type of reduplication which we call
the third reduplication type are:
? c?m c?p (clatter, shiver), l?m l?p (pop pop),
x?m x?p (a little full), thi?m thi?p (fall
asleep), n?m n?p (be in a state of suspense)
? gi?n gi?t (sourish), ng?n ng?t (burn vio-
lently), ph?n ph?t (light red), hun h?t (pro-
found), san s?t (be very close to, adjoining)
? v?ng v?c (very clear), nh?ng nh?c (a little
ache), r?ng r?c (brightly), ph?ng ph?c (very
silent), ch?nh ch?ch (a little oblique), anh ?ch
(feeling bloated).
The practical observation shows that the modifica-
tion of final consonant from the root to the dupli-
cate also has a clear rule: the noisy phone of the
root is transformed to a nasal phone of the redu-
plicant as shown in Table 5.
Example At root At reduplicant
Noisy phone Nasal phone
?m ?p -p -m
ph?n ph?t -t -n
v?ng v?c -c -ng
anh ?ch -ch -nh
Table 5: Transformation rules of final consonants
Root Reduplicant #
-p -m 52
-t -n 96
-c -ng 56
-ch -nh 28
Sum 232
Table 6: Statistic of the third type reduplication
The transformation of final consonant occurs
only with the roots having as final consonant p,
t, or c. The principle of tone combination is the
same as that of the second reduplication type.
A detailed statistic about these reduplicative
words is given in the Table 6. There are 232 redu-
plicative words of the third type.
Briefly, the total number of reduplicative words
of all the three types of reduplication is 813, mak-
ing up about 813/28, 416 ? 2.86% of the number
of two-syllable words.
4 Implementation
We report in this section the construction of a com-
putational model for recognition and production
of the three types of reduplication presented in
the previous section. We have implemented finite-
state sequential transducers (FSTs) which are able
to recognize and produce corresponding types of
reduplicative words. These devices operate on the
same input and output alphabets, say?, containing
all Vietnamese characters.
FSTs are formal devices for encoding regular re-
lations. A regular relation is a mapping between
two regular languages. In our cases, these lan-
guages are sets of Vietnamese root and reduplicant
syllables.
We adapted nice and efficient algorithms devel-
oped by (Daciuk et al, 2000) to incrementally con-
struct minimal transducers from a source of data.
These algorithms are originally designed to build
optimal deterministic finite-state automata on-the-
fly but they can also be used to construct optimal
66
sequential transducers. We could consider simply
that the alphabet of the automata would be ???;
output strings of ?? are associated with the fi-
nal states of the lexicon and they are only out-
puted once corresponding valid inputs from ? are
recognized. Interested readers are invited to refer
to (Daciuk et al, 2000) for further detail of the al-
gorithms for building optimal automata on-the-fly.
4.1 First Type Transducer
In the first type reduplication, the root and the
reduplicant is completely identical in writing; they
are only distinguished by a stress in pronunciation.
We can simply construct a deterministic finite-
state transducer (FST) f1 that produces redupli-
cants from their roots in which the output string la-
beled on each arc is the same as its input character;
that is f1(x) = x where x is a syllable in the first
type duplication. As an illustration, the following
minimal FST recognizes and generates three first
type reduplicative words lu?n lu?n (always), l? l?
(silently), kh?n kh?n (raucous).
q0
q1
q2
q3
q4
q5
q6
k:k
h:h ?:?
n:n
l:l
?:?
u:u
?:?
The minimal FST f1 recognizing all 274 redu-
plicative words of the first type consists of 90
states in which 16 states are final ones. It has 330
transitions, the maximum number of outtransitions
from a state is 28.
4.2 Second Type Transducer
In the second type reduplication, the root has an
non-flat tone while its reduplicant has the corre-
sponding flat tone. A root determines for it the
unique reduplicant. Hence we can construct a se-
quential FST f2 which is able to generate redupli-
cants from roots.
For instance, consider two reduplicative words
of the second type lem l?m (glib) and lem l?m
(voluble). They can be recognized by the minimal
sequential FST f2 such that f2(l?m) = lem and
f2(l?m) = lem as depicted in the following figure:
q0 q1 q2 q3l:l
?:e
?:e
m:m
Similarly, the minimal FST f2 which gener-
ates three reduplicative words gi?ng gi?ng (a little
similar), ??ng ??ng (interminable) and ??m ??m
(fixedly) is as follows:
q0 q1
q2
q3 q4
q5q6 q7
g:g i:i ?:? n:n
g:g
?:?
?:?
?:?
m:m
The minimal FST f2 recognizing all 307 redu-
plicative words of the second type consists of 93
states in which 11 states are final ones. It has 371
transitions, the maximum number of outtransitions
from a state is 22.
4.3 Third Type Transducer
The roots and reduplicants in the third type redu-
plication are not only combined by principles of
flat and non-flat tones, they are also distinguised
by last consonants. We know that in the case the
root ends with c, its reduplicant is one character
longer than it. The other three transformations of
last consonants do not change the length of the
reduplicants with respect to that of the roots.
Hence the FST f3 which recognizes the third
type reduplication is required to modify the tones
of the reduplicants with respect to those of the
roots on the one hand, and to transform last conso-
nants of the roots on the other hand. For example,
the minimal FST f3 recognizing four reduplicative
words bi?ng bi?c (bluish green), bi?n bi?t (leave
behind no traces whatsoever), b?nh b?ch (a series
of thudding blows) and b?m b?p (pop pop) is given
in the figure below:
q0 q1
q2
q3
q4
q5q6
q7
q8
b:b i:i
?:? c:ng
?:? t:n?:?
c:n h:h?:?
p:m
The minimal FST f3 recognizing all 232 redu-
plicative words of the third type consists of 59
67
states in which 2 states are final ones. It has 262
transitions, the maximum number of outtransitions
from a state is 19.
Once all the three transducers have been con-
structed, we can unify them by making use of
the standard union operation on transducers to
obtain a sequential FST which is able to recog-
nize all the three class of reduplication presented
above (Mohri, 1996; Mohri, 1997).
4.4 A Software Package
We have developed a Java software package named
vnReduplicator which implements the above-
mentioned computational model of Vietnamese
reduplication. The core component of this pack-
age is a minimal FST which can recognize a sub-
stantial amount of reduplicative bi-syllabic words
found in the Vietnamese language.
The first application of this core model which
we have developed is a reduplication scanner for
Vietnamese. We use the minimal FST of the core
model to build a tool for fast detection of redu-
plication. The tool scans a given input text and
produces a list of all the recognized reduplicative
words. The detection process is very fast since the
underlying transducer operates in optimal time in
the sense that the time to recognize a syllable cor-
responds to the time required to follow a single
path in the deterministic finite-state machine, and
the length of the path is the length of the syllable
measured in characters.
As an example, given the following input text
?Anh ?i bi?n bi?t. C? v?n ch? anh h?n 20 n?m
??ng ??ng.?2,
the scanner marks two reduplicative words as
shown in the italic face.
We are currently investigating another useful
application of the core model for a partial spell
checking of Vietnamese text. It is observed that
people may make typhographical errors in writing
like ??ng ??ng instead of the correct word ??ng
??ng. In such cases, the computational model can
be exploited to detect the potential errors and sug-
gest corrections.
The reduplication model could also help im-
prove the accuracy of Vietnamese lexical rec-
ognizers in particular and the accuracy of Viet-
namese word segmentation systems in general.
2He has left behind no traces whatsoever. She has been
waiting for him for 20 years.
The reduplication scanner will be integrated to vn-
Tokenizer3 - an open source and highly accurate
tokenizer for Vietnamese texts (Le et al, 2008).
The software and related resources will be dis-
tributed under the GNU General Public Lisence4
and it will be soon available online5.
5 Conclusion and Future Work
We have presented for the first time a compu-
tational model for the reduplication of the Viet-
namese language. We show that a large class of
reduplicative words can be modeled effectively by
sequential finite-state string-to-string transducers.
The analysis of the various patterns of redu-
plication of the Vietnamese language has twofold
contributions. On the one hand, it gives useful
information on identification of spelling variants
in Vietnamese texts. On the other hand, it gives
an explicit formalization of precedence relation-
ships in the phonology, and as a result helps or-
dering and modeling phonological processes be-
fore transfer of the presentation to the articulatory
interface.
It is argued that the relation between morphol-
ogy and phonology is an intimate one, both syn-
chronically and diachronically. As mentioned ear-
lier, Vietnamese reduplication is always accompa-
nied by a modification of phone and tone for a
symmetric and harmonic posture. We thus believe
that the compact finite-state description of a large
class of reduplication would help connect mor-
phosyntactic attributes to individual phonological
components of a set of Vietnamese word forms
and contribute to the improvement of Vietnamese
automatic speech recognition systems.
As mentioned earlier, the current work does not
handle partial reduplication in which either the on-
set is repeated or the rhyme and the tone of sylla-
bles are repeated, for example b?ng b?nh (bob),
ch?m ch?m (open slightly one?s lips), l?m c?m
(doting), l?ng t?ng (perplexed, embarrassed). Par-
tial reduplication is a topic which has been well
studied for a long time by Vietnamese linguists
community. It has been shown that partial redu-
plicative words also have certain principle forma-
tion rules (Di?p, 1999; UBKHXH, 1983). Hence,
partial reduplicative words could also be gener-
ated and recognized by an appropriate finite-state
3http://www.loria.fr/?lehong/tools/vnTokenizer.php
4http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html
5http://www.loria.fr/?lehong/projects.php
68
model which encodes precisely their formation
rules. This is an interesting topic of our future
work in constructing a rather complete computa-
tional model for Vietnamese bi-syllabic reduplica-
tion.
Furthermore, in addition to the bi-syllabic redu-
plication forms, there exists also three or four syl-
lable reduplication forms, for example c?n c?n con
(very little), t?o t?o teo (very small), or v?i v?i
v?ng v?ng (hurry), ??ng ?? ??ng ??nh (deliber-
ate). These reduplication forms involve the copy-
ing operation of morphological structures which
is a non-regular operation. Non-regular operations
are problematic in that they cannot be cast in terms
of composition ? the regular operation of ma-
jor importance in finite-state devices, while finite-
state devices cannot handle unbounded copying.
However, the question of the possibility for an el-
egant account to reduce these specific kinds of
reduplication to purely regular mechanisms would
be of interest for further research to extend and im-
prove the core reduplication components for Viet-
namese. Unknown reduplicative word guessing is
another interesting and useful topic since the lexi-
con can never cover all reduplicative words.
Acknowledgement
We gratefully acknowledge helpful comments and
valuable suggestions from three anonymous re-
viewers for improving the paper.
References
Yael Cohen-Sygal and Shuly Wintner. 2006. Finite-
State Registered Automata for Non-Concatenative
Morphology. Computational Linguistics, Vol. 32,
No. 1, Pages 49?82.
Jan Daciuk, Stoyan Mihov, Bruce W. Watson and
Richard E. Watson. 2000 Incremental Construction
of Minimal Acyclic Finite-State Automata. Compu-
tational Linguistics, Vol. 26, No. 1, 2000.
Le H. Phuong, Nguyen T. M. Huyen, Roussanaly A.,
Ho T. Vinh. 2008 A hybrid approach to word seg-
mentation of Vietnamese texts. Proceedings of the
2nd International Conference on Language and Au-
tomata Theory and Applications, Tarragona, Spain.
Springer LNCS 5196, 2008.
Di?p Quang Ban and Ho?ng V?n Thung. 1999 Ng?
ph?p Ti?ng Vi?t (Vietnamese Grammar). NXB Gi?o
d?c, H? N?i, Vi?t Nam.
?o?n Thi?n Thu?t. 2003 Ng? ?m ti?ng Vi?t (Viet-
namese Phonetics). NXB ??i h?c Qu?c gia H? N?i,
H? N?i, Vi?t Nam.
?o?n Thi?n Thu?t (Editor-in-chief) and Nguy?n Kh?nh
H? and Ph?m Nh? Qu?nh. 2003 A Concise Viet-
namese Grammar (For Non-native Speakers)). Th?
Gi?i Publishers, H? N?i, Vi?t Nam.
H?u ??t and Tr?n Tr? D?i and ??o Thanh Lan. 1998
C? s? ti?ng Vi?t (Basis of Vietnamese). NXB Gi?o
d?c, H? N?i, Vi?t Nam.
Ronald Kaplan andMartin Kay. 1994. RegularModels
of Phonological Rule Systems. Computational Lin-
guistics, Vol. 20, No. 3, Pages 331?378.
Koskenniemi Kimmo. 1983 Two-Level Morphology:
A General Computational Model for Word-Form
Recognition and Production. The Department of
General Linguistics, University of Helsinki.
Mehryar Mohri. 1996 On Some Applications of Finite-
State Automata Theory to Natural Language Pro-
cessing. Natural Language Engineering, Vol. 2, No.
1, Pages 61?80.
MehryarMohri. 1997 Finite-State Transducers in Lan-
guage and Speech Processing. Computational Lin-
guistics, Vol. 23.
Nguy?n Th? Minh Huy?n, Laurent Romary, Mathias
Rossignol and V? Xu?n L??ng. 2006. A Lexicon
for Vietnamese LanguageProcessing. Language Re-
sources and Evaluation, Vol. 40, No. 3?4.
Tokunaga T., Kaplan D., Huang C-R., Hsieh S-K, Cal-
zolari N., Monachini M., Soria C., Shirai K., Sorn-
lertlamvanich V., Charoenporn T., Xia Y., 2008.
Adapting international standard for Asian language
technologies. Proceedings of The 6th International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC 2008)
Tokunaga T. et al 2008. Developing International
Standards of Language Resources for Semantic Web
Applications Research Report of the International
Joint Research Program (NEDOGrant) for FY 2007,
http://www.tech.nedo.go.jp/PDF/100013569.pdf
Tran D. D. and Castelli E. and Serignat J. F. and Trinh
V. L. and Le X. H. 2006. Linear F0 Contour Model
for Vietnamese Tones and Vietnamese Syllable Syn-
thesis with TD-PSOLA. Proceedings of TAL2006,
La Rochelle, France.
Thang Tat Vu, Dung Tien Nguyen, Mai Chi Luong and
John-Paul Hosom. 2006. Vietnamese Large Vocab-
ulary Continuous Speech Recognition. Proceedings
of Eurospeech 2005, Lisboa.
?y ban Khoa h?c X? h?i Vi?t Nam. 1983. Ng? ph?p
ti?ng Vi?t (Vietnamese Grammar). Nh? xu?t b?n
Khoa h?c X? h?i ? H? N?i, Vi?t Nam.
69
