PRIS at Chinese Language Processing  
--Chinese Personal Name Disambiguation 
 
Jiayue Zhang, Yichao Cai, Si Li, Weiran Xu, Jun Guo  
School of Information and Communication Engineering 
Beijing Universit of Posts and Telecommunications 
jyz0706@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract 
The more Chinese language materials come 
out, the more we have to focus on the ?same 
personal name? problem. In our personal 
name disambiguation system, the hierarchical 
agglomerative clustering is applied, and 
named entity is used as feature for document 
similarity calculation. We propose a two-stage 
strategy in which the first stage involves word 
segmentation and named entity recognition 
(NER) for feature extraction, and the second 
stage focuses on clustering.  
1 Introduction 
World Wide Web (WWW) search engines have 
become widely used in recent years to retrieve 
information about real-world entities such as 
people. Web person search is one of the most 
frequent search types on the web search engine. 
As the sheer amount of web information ex-
pands at an ever more rapid pace, the named-
entity ambiguity problem becomes more and 
more serious in many fields, such as information 
integration, cross-document co-reference, and 
question answering. It is crucial to develop me-
thodologies that can efficiently disambiguate the 
ambiguous names form any given set of data. 
There have been two recent Web People Search 
(WePS) evaluation campaigns [1] on personal 
name disambiguation using data from English 
language web pages. Previous researches on 
name disambiguation mainly employ clustering 
algorithms which disambiguates ambiguous 
names in a given document collection through 
clustering them into different reference entities. 
However, Chinese personal name disambigua-
tion is potentially more challenging due to the 
need for word segmentation, which could intro-
duce errors that can in large part be avoided in 
the English task. 
There are four tasks in Chinese Language 
Processing of the CIPS-SIGHAN Joint Confe-
rence, and we participate in the Chinese Personal 
Name Disambiguation task. To accomplish this 
task, we focused on solving two main problems 
which are word segmentation and duplicate 
names distinguishment. To distinguish duplicate 
names, the system adopts named entity recogni-
tion and clustering strategy. For word segmenta-
tion and NER, we applied a sharing platform 
named LTP designed by Harbin Institute of 
Technology [2].This tagger identifies and labels 
names of locations, organizations, people, time, 
date, numbers and proper nouns in the input text.  
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 in-
troduces our feature extractions along with their 
corresponding similarity matrix learning. In Sec-
tion 3, we analyze the performance of our sys-
tem. Finally, we draw some conclusions.  
2 Methodology  
Our approach follows a common architecture for 
named-entity disambiguation: the detection of 
ambiguous objects, feature extractions and their 
corresponding similarity matrix learning, and 
clustering. The framework of overall processing 
is shown in Figure 1.  
 
Word Segmentation
Named Entity Recognition
 Building VSM 
HAC
Submitted Results
Corpus
LTP
TF-IDF
K-L 
divergence
weight
similarity
 
 
Figure 1. System Framework 
 
2.1 The detection of ambiguous objects 
 
Since it is common for a single document to 
contain one or more mentions of the ambiguous 
personal name, that is to say, the personal name 
may appear several times in one document, there 
is a need to define the object to be disambi-
guated. Here, we adopt the policy of ?one person 
per document? (all mentions of the ambiguous 
personal name in one document are assumed to 
refer to the same personal entity in reality) as in 
[3] [4] [5]. Therefore, an object is defined as a 
single entity with the ambiguous personal name 
in a given document. This definition of the ob-
ject (document-level object) might be not com-
prehensive, because the mentions of the ambi-
guous personal name in a document may refer to 
multiple entities, but we found that this is a rare 
case (most of those cases occur in genealogy 
web pages). On the other hand, the document-
level object can include much information de-
rived from that document, so that it can be 
represented by features [6]. 
For a given ambiguous personal name, word 
segmentation is applied first. Then we try to ex-
tract all mentions of the ambiguous personal 
name. Take the given personal name ???? for 
example, first, the exact match of the name is 
extracted. Secondly, mentions that are super-
strings of the given name like ?????is also 
extracted . Finally , mentions that contain cha-
racter sequences but not a personal name like 
???????? is ignored.  
Given this definition of an object, we define a 
target entity as an entity that includes a mention 
of the ambiguous personal name. 
 
2.2 Feature extraction and similarity ma-
trix learning 
 
Most of the previous work ([3] [4] [5]) used to-
ken information in the given documents. In this 
paper, we follow and extend their work especial-
ly for a web corpus. Furthermore, compared to a 
token, a phrase contains more information for 
named-entity disambiguation. Therefore, we ex-
plore both token and phrase-based information 
in this paper. Finally, there are two kinds of fea-
ture vectors developed in our system, token-
based and phrase-based. The token-based feature 
vector is composed of tokens, and the phrase-
based feature is composed of phrases. The two 
feature vectors are combined into a unified fea-
ture vector in which tf-idf strategy is used for 
similarity calculation.  
 
2.2.1 Named Entity Features 
 
From the results and papers of various teams 
participating WePS, NEs have been shown to be 
effective features in person name disambigua-
tion, so we used NEs as features in this study. 
Through observation, we found that two differ-
ent individuals can be identified by their corres-
ponding NEs, especially by location, organiza-
tion name and some proper nouns. Hence, in our 
study, we only extracted person, location, organ-
ization name and proper noun as feature from 
the output of LTP, while time, date and numbers 
are discarded. However, location and organiza-
tion name have many proper nouns related 
weakly to a certain person. Therefore, terms 
having high-document-frequency in training data 
sets are removed from test data. 
 
2.2.2 Similarity matrix learning 
 
After NE extraction, we applied the vector space 
model to the calculation of similarities between 
features. In the model, tf-idf is used as the 
weight of the feature, which is defined in Eq. (1).  
iij
ij
ij n
N
MaxFreq
freqwIDFTF log)(: ???
     (1) 
Here, wij is the weight of term (or phrase) ti in 
document dj, freqij is the frequency of ti in dj, 
MaxFreqij is the frequency of the term (or phrase) 
whose frequency is the most in dj, N is the num-
ber of documents under one given name, and ni 
is the number of documents which has term (or 
phrase) ti. 
In this study, the similarities based 
on features described above were calculated us-
ing K-L divergence defined as Eq. (2). 
??
i
KL iQ
iPiPQPD )(
)(log)()||(
        (2) 
P and Q denote the vector of a document respec-
tively. K-L divergence between two vectors 
shows the distance of two related documents. 
The smaller the value of K-L divergence of two 
vectors becomes, the closer the two documents 
are. In order to prevent the zero denominator, we 
applied Dirichlet smoothing, i.e. , the zero ele-
ment in the vector will be replaced by 0.00001.  
 
2.3 Clustering 
 
Clustering is the key part for our personal name 
disambiguation system. This task is viewed as an 
unsupervised hard clustering problem. First, we 
view the problem as unsupervised, using the dis-
tributed training data for parameter validation, to 
optimally tune the parameters in the clustering 
algorithm. Secondly, we observed that the ma-
jority of the input documents reference a single 
individual. Hence, we view the problem as hard 
clustering, assigning input document to exactly 
one individual, so that the produced clusters do 
not overlap. 
In our system, hierarchical agglomerative clus-
tering (HAC) is used as a clustering method. It 
builds up a hierarchy of groups by continuously 
merging the two most similar groups. Each of 
these groups starts as a single item, in this case 
an individual document. In each iteration this 
method calculates the distances between every 
pair of groups, and the closest ones are merged 
together to form a new group. The vector of the 
new group is the average of the original pair.  
This is repeated until there is only one group. 
This process is shown in Fig. 2.  
We used a threshold for selecting cluster. So it is 
not necessary to determine the number of clus-
ters beforehand. W  view the whole group as a 
binary tree, every node which is not a leaf has 
two children, left child and right child, and has a 
record of the distance between the two children. 
We traverse the tree from the root, if the distance 
between the pair of children which form the 
cluster is larger than the threshold, then move 
down to check the distance of its left child, then 
right child. The process will continue until the 
distance between two children is less than the 
threshold. When the process comes to an end, all 
the leaves under the node will be considered to 
be in the same cluster. The selecting process will 
continue until all the leaves are assigned to a 
cluster. The threshold is tuned using the distr i-
buted training data. 
The whole process mainly consists of two 
phases, the first phase is clustering all the single 
items into one group, and the second is selecting 
cluster down along the tree from the root. This 
strategy has a major disadvantage which is the 
new node is the average of its children. Hence, 
with the merger of nodes going on, the distance 
between different groups becomes smaller and 
smaller, which makes the boundaries between 
different clusters blur. This is probably the main 
reason that leads to the unsatisfactory results. 
 
 
Figure 2 visualization of hierarchical clustering  
3 Performance 
Since there is no correct answer of test data 
received, we present the performance of our sys-
tem of training data. There are two results gotten 
from the distributed evaluation in Table 1: one is 
evaluated with B-Cubed, and the other with P_IP. 
Both scores indicate that personal name disam-
biguation needs more effort. 
 
Table 1 The performance of training data 
 prici-
sion 
recall F_sco
re 
B-
Cubed 
71.83 62.88 56.98 
 purity In-
verse 
purity 
F_sco
re 
P_IP 76.43 67.71 62.76 
 
4 Conclusion 
In this report, we describe a system for the Chi-
nese Personal Name Disambiguation task, apply-
ing a two-stage clustering model. Because this is 
our first time attending this kind of task, there 
are many aspects not having been taken into ac-
count. Therefore, improving system performance 
becomes motivation for us to work on it conti-
nuously. In future work, we?ll focus on improv-
ing the clustering algorithm and proper feature 
extraction. 
  
References 
J. Artiles, J. Gonzalo and S. Sekine. WePS 2 Evalua-
tion Campaign: overview of the Web People 
Search Clustering Task. In 2nd Web People Search  
Evaluation Workshop (WePS 2009). In18th  
WWW Conference, 2009.  
http://ir.hit.edu.cn/ 
A. Bagga and B. Baldwin. 1998. Ent ity?based Cross?
document Co?referencing Using the Vector Space 
Model. In 17th COLING. 
C. H. Gooi and J. Allan. 2004.  Cross -Document Co-
reference on a Large Scale Corpus.NAACL 
T. Pedersen, A. Purandare and A. Kulkarn i. 2005. 
Name Discrimination by Clustering Similar Con-
texts. In  Proc. of the Sixth International Confe-
rence on Intelligent Text  Processing and Computa-
tional Linguistics, page 226-237. Mexico City, 
Mexico. 
Y. Chen and J. H. Martin. CU-COMSEM: Exploring  
Rich Features for Unsupervised Web Personal 
Name Disambiguation. In WWW Conference, 
2007. 
M. Ikeda, S. Ono, I. Sato, M. Yoshida and H. Naka-
gawa. Person Name Disambiguation on the Web 
by TwoStage Clustering. In 18th WWW Confe-
rence, 2009. 
E. Elmacioglu, Y. F. Tan, S.Yan, M. Y. Kan and D. 
W. Lee. Web People Name Disambiguation by 
Simple Clustering with Rich Features. In WWW 
Conference, 2007. 
 
