Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Speech and Language Processing for Assistive Technologies, pages 101?109,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 30, 2011. c?2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
Arabic Text to Arabic Sign Language Translation System for the Deaf and
Hearing-Impaired Community
Abdulaziz Almohimeed
University of Southampton
United Kingdom
aia07r@ecs.soton.ac.uk
Mike Wald
University of Southampton
United Kingdom
mw@ecs.soton.ac.uk
R. I. Damper
University of Southampton
United Kingdom
rid@ecs.soton.ac.uk
Abstract
This paper describes a machine translation
system that offers many deaf and hearing-
impaired people the chance to access pub-
lished information in Arabic by translating
text into their first language, Arabic Sign Lan-
guage (ArSL). The system was created under
the close guidance of a team that included
three deaf native signers and one ArSL in-
terpreter. We discuss problems inherent in
the design and development of such transla-
tion systems and review previous ArSL ma-
chine translation systems, which all too often
demonstrate a lack of collaboration between
engineers and the deaf community. We de-
scribe and explain in detail both the adapted
translation approach chosen for the proposed
system and the ArSL corpus that we collected
for this purpose. The corpus has 203 signed
sentences (with 710 distinct signs) with con-
tent restricted to the domain of instructional
language as typically used in deaf education.
Evaluation shows that the system produces
translated sign sentences outputs with an av-
erage word error rate of 46.7% and an average
position error rate of 29.4% using leave-one-
out cross validation. The most frequent source
of errors is missing signs in the corpus; this
could be addressed in future by collecting
more corpus material.
1 Introduction
Machine translation (MT) has developed rapidly
since 1947, when Warren Weaver first suggested
the use of computers to translate natural languages
(Augarten, 1984). Presently, this technology offers
a potential chance for ArSL signers to benefit by,
for instance, giving them access to texts published in
Arabic. ArSL and general sign language (SL) have
inherent ambiguity problems that should be taken
into account while designing any ArSL translation
system. Therefore, ArSL translation must be done
through close collaboration with the deaf commu-
nity and signing experts. This paper describes a
full prototype MT system that translates Arabic
texts into deaf and hearing-impaired peoples? first
language, Arabic Sign Language (ArSL). It is the
result of extended collaboration between engineers
and a team consisting of three deaf native signers
and one ArSL interpreter.
Most existing systems have wrongly assumed
that ArSL is dependent on the Arabic language
(Mohandes, 2006; Alnafjan, 2008; Halawani, 2008;
Al-Khalifa, 2010). These systems make word-to-
sign translations without regard to ArSL?s unique
linguistic characteristics, such as its own grammar,
structure, and idioms, as well as regional variations
(Abdel-Fateh, 2004) or translate into finger-spelling
signs that only exist in Arabic, not in ArSL.
This paper begins by providing a brief back-
ground of ArSL. It then addresses the problems and
misconceptions plaguing previous ArSL systems.
Thereafter, it describes related works built on the
assumption of one of the two misconceptions men-
tioned above. The rest of the paper will present an
example-based machine translation (EBMT) system
that translates published Arabic texts to make them
accessible to deaf and hearing-impaired people who
use ArSL.
101
2 Background
SL is composed of basic elements of gesture and
location previously called ?cheremes? but modern
usage has changed to the even more problematic
?optical phoneme? (Ojala, 2011). These involve
three components: hand shape (also called hand
configuration), position of the hand in relation to
the signer?s body, and the movement of direction
of the hand. These three components are called
manual features (MFs). In addition, SL may involve
non-manual features (NMFs) that involve other parts
of the body, including facial expression, shoulder
movements, and head tilts in concurrence with MFs.
Unlike written language, where a text expresses
ideas in a linear sequence, SL employs the space
around the signer for communication, and the signer
may use a combination of MFs and NMFs. These
are called multi-channel signs. The relationship
between multi-channel signs may be parallel, or they
may overlap during SL performance. MFs are basic
components of any sign, whereas NMFs play an
important role in composing signs in conjunction
with MFs. NMFs can be classified into three types in
terms of their roles. The first is essential: If an NMF
is absent, the sign will have a completely different
meaning.
An example of an essential NMF in ArSL is the
sign sentence: ?Theft is forbidden?, where as shown
in Figure 1(a), closed eyes in the sign for ?theft? are
essential. If the signer does not close his or her eyes,
the ?theft? sign will mean ?lemon?. The second type
of NMF is a qualifier or emotion. In spoken lan-
guage, inflections, or changes in pitch, can express
emotions, such as happiness and sadness; likewise,
in SL, NMFs are used to express emotion as in
Figure 1(b). The third type of NMF actually plays no
role in the sign. In some cases, NMFs remain from
a previous sign and are meaningless. Native signers
naturally discard any meaningless NMFs based on
their knowledge of SL.
3 Problem Definition
ArSL translation is a particularly difficult MT prob-
lem for four main reasons, which we now describe.
The first of the four reasons is the lack of linguis-
tic studies on ArSL, especially in regard to grammar
and structure, which leads to a major misunderstand-
(a) Essential NMF
(b) Emotion NMF
Figure 1: (a) The sign for ?theft?, in which the signer
uses the right hand while closing his eyes. (b) His facial
expressions show the emotion of the sign.
ing of natural language and misleads researchers
into failing to build usable ArSL translation sys-
tems. These misunderstandings about ArSL can be
summed up by the following:
? SL is assumed to be a universal language that
allows the deaf anywhere in the world to com-
municate, but in reality, many different SLs
exist (e.g., British SL, Irish SL, and ArSL).
? ArSL is assumed to be dependent on the Arabic
language but it is an independent language that
has its own grammar, structure, and idioms,
just like any other natural language.
? ArSL is not finger spelling of the Arabic alpha-
bet, although finger spelling is used for names
and places that do not exist in ArSL or for
other entities for which no sign exists (e.g.,
neologisms).
The related work section will describe an
ArSL translation system that was built based
on one of these misunderstandings.
102
The second factor that should be taken into ac-
count while building an ArSL translation system is
the size of the translation corpus, since few linguistic
studies of ArSL?s grammar and structure have been
conducted. The data-driven approach adopted here
relies on the corpus, and the translation accuracy is
correlated with its size. Also, ArSL does not have a
written system, so there are no existing ArSL doc-
uments that could be used to build a translation
corpus, which must be essentially visual (albeit with
annotation). Hence, the ArSL corpus must be built
from scratch, limiting its size and ability to deliver
an accurate translation of signed sentences.
The third problem is representing output sign
sentences. Unlike spoken languages, which use
sounds to produce utterances, SL employs 3D space
to present signs. The signs are continuous, so some
means are required to produce novel but fluent signs.
One can either use an avatar or, as here, concatenate
video clips at the expense of fluency.
The last problem is finding a way to evaluate
SL output. Although this can be a problem for an
MT system, it is a particular challenge here as SL
uses multi-channel representations (Almohimeed et
al., 2009).
4 Related Works
As mentioned above, we deem it necessary for
engineers to collaborate with the deaf community
and/or expert signers to understand some fundamen-
tal issues in SL translation. The English to Irish Sign
Language (ISL) translation system developed by
Morrissey (2008) is an example of an EBMT system
created through strong collaboration between the
local deaf community and engineers. Her system is
based on previous work by Veale and Way (1997),
and Way and Gough (2003; 2005) in which they
use tags for sub-sentence segmentation. These tags
represent the syntactic structure. Their work was
designed for large tagged corpora.
However, as previously stated, existing research
in the field of ArSL translation shows a poor or weak
relationship between the Arab deaf community and
engineers. For example, the system built by Mohan-
des (2006) wrongly assumes that ArSL depends on
the Arabic language and shares the same structure
and grammar. Rather than using a data-driven or
rule-based approach, it uses so-called ?direct trans-
lation? in which words are transliterated into ArSL
on a one-to-one basis.
5 Translation System
The lack of linguistic studies on ArSL, especially
on its grammar and structure, is an additional rea-
son to favour the example-based (EMBT) approach
over a rule-based methodology. Further, the sta-
tistical approach is unlikely to work well given
the inevitable size limitation of the ArSL corpus,
imposed by difficulties of collecting large volumes
of video signing data from scratch. On the other
hand, EBMT relies only on example-guided sug-
gestions and can still produce reasonable translation
output even with existing small-size corpora. We
have adopted a chunk-based EBMT system, which
produces output sign sentences by comparing the
Arabic text input to matching text fragments, or
?chunks?. As Figure 2 shows, the system has two
phases. Phase 1 is run only once; it pre-compiles
the chunks and their associated signs. Phase 2 is
the actual translation system that converts Arabic
input into ArSL output. The following sections will
describe each component in Figure 2.
5.1 Google Tashkeel Component
In Arabic, short vowels usually have diacritical
marks added to distinguish between similar words in
terms of meaning and pronunciation. For example,
the word I.

J

? means books, whereas I.

J? means
write. Most Arabic documents are written without
the use of diacritics. The reason for this is that
Arabic speakers can naturally infer these diacritics
from context. The morphological analyser used in
this system can accept Arabic input without diacrit-
ics, but it might produce many different analysed
outputs by making different assumptions about the
missing diacritics. In the end, the system needs to
select one of these analysed outputs, but it might
not be equivalent to the input meaning. To solve
this problem, we use Google Tashkeel (http:
//tashkeel.googlelabs.com/) as a com-
ponent in the translation system; this software tool
adds missing diacritics to Arabic text, as shown
in Figure 3. (In Arabic, tashkeel means ?to add
shape?.) Using this component, we can guarantee
103
Phase 2 Phase 1
Sign Clips
Arabic Text AnnotatedArSLCorpus
Google Tashkeel
Morphological Analyser
RootExtractor TranslationExamplesCorpus
Search
Alignment
Recombination Dictionary
Translation Unit
Figure 2: Main components of the ArSL chunks-based
EBMT system. Phase 1 is the pre-compilation phase, and
Phase 2 is the translation phase.
that the morphological analyser described immedi-
ately below will produce only one analysed output.
5.2 Morphological Analyser
The Arabic language is based on root-pattern
schemes. Using one root, several patterns, and
numerous affixes, the language can generate tens or
hundreds of words (Al Sughaiyer and Al Kharashi,
2004). A root is defined as a single morpheme
Phhase 21	
ees
Sign Clp isCAra
Sbicgbn ClTp TiesCAerTa
Figure 3: An example of an input and output text using
Google Tashkeel. The input is a sentence without dia-
critics; the output shows the same sentence after adding
diacritics. English translation: You should read the
explanation.
that provides the basic meaning of a word. In
Arabic, the root is also the original form of the
word, prior to any transformation process (George,
1990). In English, the root is the part of the word
that remains after the removal of affixes. The root is
also sometimes called the stem (Al Khuli, 1982). A
morpheme is defined as the smallest meaningful unit
of a language. A stem is a single morpheme or set
of concatenated morphemes that is ready to accept
affixes (Al Khuli, 1982). An affix is a morpheme
that can be added before (a prefix) or after (a suffix) a
root or stem. In English, removing a prefix is usually
harmful because it can reverse a word?s meaning
(e.g., the word disadvantage). However, in Arabic,
this action does not reverse the meaning of the word
(Al Sughaiyer and Al Kharashi, 2004). One of the
major differences between Arabic (and the Semitic
language family in general) and English (and similar
languages) is that Arabic is ?derivational? (Al Sug-
haiyer and Al Kharashi, 2004), or non-catenative,
whereas English is concatenative.
Figure 4 illustrates the Arabic derivational sys-
tem. The three words in the top layer (I.

J?, 	Q.
	
g,
I. ?
	
X) are roots that provide the basic meaning of a
word. Roman letters such as ktb are used to demon-
strate the pronunciation of Arabic words. After that,
in the second layer, ?xAxx? (where the small letter
x is a variable and the capital letter A is a constant)
is added to the roots, generating new words (I.

KA?,
	QK. A
	
g, I. ?@
	
X) called stems. Then, the affix ?ALxxxx?
is added to stems to generate words (I.

KA??@, 	QK. A
	
m?'@,
I. ?@
	
Y?@).
Morphology is defined as the grammatical study
of the internal structure of a language, which in-
cludes the roots, stems, affixes, and patterns. A
morphological analyser is an important tool for
predicting the syntactic and semantic categories of
unknown words that are not in the dictionary. The
primary functions of the morphological analyser
are the segmentation of a word into a sequence of
morphemes and the identification of the morpho-
syntactic relations between the morphemes (Sem-
mar et al, 2005).
Due to the limitation of the ArSL corpus size, the
syntactic and semantic information of unmatched
chunks needs to be used to improve the translation
system selection, thereby increasing the system?s
104
Figure 4: An example of the Arabic derivational system. The first stage shows some examples of roots. An Arabic
root generally contains between 2 and 4 letters. The second stage shows the generated stems from roots after adding
the pattern to the roots. The last stage shows the generated words after the prefixes are added to the stems.
accuracy. To analyse this information, Buckwal-
ter?s morphological analyser was used (Buckwalter,
2004). In addition, we implemented a root extrac-
tor based on a tri-literal root extraction algorithm
(Momani and Faraj, 2007). In this work, sentences
without diacritics are passed to the morphological
analyser, which therefore produces multiple anal-
yses (distinguished by different assumptions about
the missing diacritics) from which the ?best? one
must be chosen. This is not an easy decision
for a computer system to make. The approach
we have implemented uses the Google Tashkeel
output in conjunction with the Levenshtein distance
(Levenshtein, 1966) to select among the multiple
analyses delivered by Buckwalter?s morphological
analyser. Figure 5 gives an example showing how
the morphological and root extractor analyses the
syntactic, semantic and root information.
5.3 Corpus
An annotated ArSL corpus is essential for this sys-
tem, as for all data-driven systems. Therefore, we
collected and annotated a new ArSL corpus with the
help of three native ArSL signers and one expert
interpreter. Full details are given in Almohimeed
et al (2010). This corpus?s domain is restricted to
the kind of instructional language used in schools
Phaseh 21	
2
a1

111	2a121