The Week at a Glance - 
Cross-language Cross-document 
Information Extraction and Translation 
Jim Cowie, Yevgeny Ludovik, Hugo Molina-Salgado, and Sergei Nirenburg 
Coml)uting Research Laboratory 
New Mexico State University 
Las Cruces, New Mexico 
{\]cowie, eugene, hsalgado, sergei} @crl.nmsu.edu 
Abstract  
Work oll tile production of texts in English 
describing instances of a particular event type 
from multiple news sources will be described. A
system has been developed which extracts 
events , such as meetings, fi-om texts hi English, 
P, ussian, Spanish, and Japanese. The extraction 
is currently carried out using only ontological 
information. Tile results of a set of such 
extractions were combined to produce a table of 
event instances, date stamped, with links back to 
the original documents. The original documents 
can then be summarized and translated by the 
system on demand. 
By using techniques flom information retrieval, 
information extraction, summarization, and 
machine translation, in a multi-lingual 
cnvironl-nent, new documents can be produced 
which provide "at a ghmce" access to news ell 
events fron3 multiple sources. 
The paper concludes with a discussion of the 
key resources which need to be developed to 
enhance tile accuracy and coverage of the 
techniques used in our experiment. 
1 Introduct ion 
Multi-lingual inlormation extraction (MUC6), 
:mmmarization (AAAI 98), and cross-hmguage 
iiHormation retrieval (tlarntan, 1995) have over 
tile past three or four years become emerging 
technologies which are being driven in part by 
tile developn\]ent of tile WWW, iuld also by the 
general availability of machine readable texts in 
many languages. It appeared to the authors that 
an interesting application could be built which 
demonstrated an integrated use of these 
technologies in combination with a variety of 
machine translation techniques. 
The system we describe here has as its central 
component a multi-lingual information 
extraction engine, which uses an ontology as its 
main controlling element. 
Extraction based summarization produces 
summaries, either in tabular form, or by 
generating sentences using structured 
information derived flom texts. Sumnmries of 
this type are fl)cused on whatever events, the 
underlying extraction system handles. The 
summaries are inli)rmative in nature. Thai is 
they provide specific facts which may allow a 
user to gain sufficient in|ormation without 
reference to tile original documents. The 
potential applications are: producing personal 
profiles, assuming a series of documents on an 
individual are awfilable over time; tracking 
complex events, assuming a script is available 
which describes the event in terms of simpler 
events; and monitoring re, single event types in 
a data stream. This is tile application we foctls 
on in this paper. 
The method is partictdarly pronlising lor texts 
in multiple hmguages its tile structured 
information produced by infl)rmation extraction 
is relatively easy to translate. The principle 
drawback is that an information extraction 
system of this kind needs st.oh expensive 
resources its ontology (one for all languages) and 
otological lexicons (one per language). The 
development of tile system itself is not 
expensive, il we can get these resources. 
1007 
The extraction method described here is based 
on tile Mikrokosmos ontology (Mahesh, 1995), 
and uses the concepts in the ontology both to 
define an extraction template and to control the 
extraction process. At present the only 
infornlation used fl'om tile Mikrokosnlos 
lexicons, which supply language specific 
semantic and syntactic subcategorization 
information, is the mapping flom a citation form 
to an ontological concept. 
The complete system is composed of many pre- 
existing components and has been tested using 
two weeks of news from English, Spanish, 
Russian, and Japanese newspapers. We first give 
an overview of the steps used to generate an 
event based cross-document summary. 
2 Overv iew of  Processing 
The system uses a set of pre-existing modules. 
These are: automatic language/codeset 
recognition for a text (Ludovik et al, 1999), 
sentence based summarization (biased towards 
domain keywords) (Cowie et al., 1998), part of 
speech tagging, noun phrase recognition, proper 
name recognition and classification (Cowie et al 
1993; Cow}e, 1996), ontology based extraction, 
translation of the final filled template to English, 
and output generation. Additional document and 
template filters have been added at tile fi'ont and 
back ends of the system to reduce the amount of 
text to be processed and to remove templates 
which are only sparsely filled. 
For example, when a text is gathered in Spanish 
by the web spider it will be checked to see if 
any of the person names of interest occur in the 
document using a list of names in Spanish. If 
this is the case the document is then part-of- 
speech tagged and noun phrases and proper 
names are recognized. In the present system 
proper names are handled using a table lookup 
process, rather than a more complex (and 
accurate) pattern based method. The ontology 
based extraction fills out tile slots to produce a 
completed template. This is then translated by 
looking tip words in the lexicon and by 
transliterating, or translating, proper names. The 
completed template is then stored with 
references to the original document. 
A set of templates are then used to produce one 
of a variety of reports either for all events or for 
a single event type. These can be sorted on the 
different slots in tile template. A table is then 
produced using HTML containing links to each 
original docunaent, o document summarization 
and translation tools, and the slot fillers from 
each template. 
In tile rest of this paper we focus ol l  the 
configurable xtraction method, tile preliminary 
tests caMed out on the system, and we close 
with a discussion oll tile improvements to 
resources and tools needed to make this a robust 
and useful technology. 
3 Extraction 
The three events used in the present system are 
"election", "travel", and "meeting". For each of 
these a template was defined containing slots 
whose content would seem likely to occtu in 
newspaper articles. Each of these slots was then 
mapped to one or more ontology concepts to 
produce a "control template". The three events 
are currently defined as follows: 
ELECTION 
{"ELECT", "ELECT"} 
{ "PERSON-ELECTED", "NAME- 
HUMAN"} 
{"PLACE", "NAME-PLACE"} 
{"DATE", "TIME"} 
{ "POSITION-ELECTED TO","SOCIAL- 
ROLE"} 
TRAVEL 
{ "TRAVEL", "TRAVEL-EVENT"} 
{ "PERSON-TRAVELLING", "NAME- 
HUMAN"} 
{"ROLE", "SOCIAL-ROLE"} 
{"TO-PLACE", "NAME-PI.ACE" } 
{"DATE", "TIME"} 
MEETING 
"MEETING", "MEETING"} 
"PERSON 1", "NAME-HUMAN" } 
"PERSON 1", "NAME-HUMAN"} 
"PERSON3", "NAME-HUMAN" } 
"ROLE 1", "SOCIAL-ROLE"} 
"ROLE2", "SOCIAL-ROLE"};' 
"ROLEY', "SOCIAI,-ROLE"} 
"PLACE". "NAME-PLACE"} 
"DATE", "TIME"} 
The left hand label defines the nalne/,ole of the 
slot, tile right hand defines one. or more, 
ontological concepts which should be found for 
any phrase in the text which is a potential filler 
for tile slot. The method of tOtal)late definition is 
completely generic, and should allow a user with 
1008 
a reasonable knowledge of tile ontology to 
rapidly configure an extraction system for new 
simple event types. 
To perform an extraction, after the phrase 
recognition step, each headword in a sentence is 
looked up in tile lexicon and its associated 
concepts found. Each lexicon entry is then 
matched with the concepts in tile control 
template slots. A lnatch may also be found using 
ancestors of the concept found in tile lexicon 
entry. Thus for the lexicon entry "Bishop", in 
English, the attached concept is "RELIGIOUS- 
ROLE", which is a kind of "SOCIAL-ROLE". 
Tile combination of lexical entries which has the 
highest match, and which contains the key 
concept for the event is chosen and a completed 
extraction template is produced. 
Lexical subcategorization patterns, which will 
also help increase the accuracy of this selection 
process, have not been used yet. 
The ontological lexicons for Japanese and 
Russian were created by joining a bi-lingual 
Source language to English lexicon with an 
English to ontology lexicon. This process adds a 
significant amount of artificial ambiguity to the 
final source language to ontology lexicon. 
Using correctly created lexicons for each 
language and syntactic knowledge for each 
lexical entry would allow the extraction process 
to operate more accurately. 
Lexical E.try Example 
elect elect V LG 
-np\[PROPEI{TY-NAME agent\] 
-V 
-np\[PROPERTY-NAME beneficiary\] 
-pp_adjunct\[ PROPERTY-NAME inverse-social- 
role-relation CONSTRAINT social-object PREP 
tel 
Ontology Entry Example 
(MAKE-FRAME ELECT (IS-A (VALUE 
(COMMON VOTE))) 
(1)EFINITION 
(VALUE (COMMON "to select for an office 
by voting"))) 
(BENEFICIAR.Y (SEM (COMMON 
HUMAN))) 
(INSTRUMENT (SEM (COMMON 
BALLOT-BOX)))) 
Two Examples of Extraction 
The following examples are both produced by 
tile extraction method operating on bracketed 
texts produced by part-of speech tagging and 
phrase recognition. 
On Thursday  Apr i l  16, C l in ton  began 
h is  two day  s ta te  v i s i t  in 
Sant iago ,  Ch i le  to meet  w i th  
Ch i lean  Pres ident ,  Eduardo  Frei, 
and  then onto  the Sur@nit of the 
Amer icas .  
S lo t=MEETING ; F i l l e r  = meet  
S lo t -PERSON1 ; F i l l e r  = C l in ton  
S lo t=PERSON2;  F i l l e r  = Eduardo  Fre i  
S lo t=ROLE1 : EMPTY 
S lo t :ROLE2;F i l l e r=Ch i lean  Pres ident  
S lo t=PLACE ; F i l l e r  = Sant iago  
S lo t -DATE ;F i l l e r=Thursday  Apr i l  16 
1-Ipe,'3Ja,I~eHT BopHc EJlblkHH Bc'rpeTHolc>~ c 
I-\[petBla~eH'l'OM CIIIA KYlFIHTOtfOM 19 HO~t6p~4 
1987 I'. U MocKue. 
SI,OT = MEETING ; filler = ~c'rpe'rxa~c~i 
SLOT = PERSON1 ; filler = IBopm' g~bl l ,  IJn 
SI,OT = PERSON2 => EMPTY 
SI.OT = ROLE1 ; l\]ller = FIpeaHy~eH'r 
SLOT = ROLE2 ; filler = l - Ipe~eH'rOM 
SLOT = PLACE ; filler = MocKt~e 
SI,OT = DATE ; filler = 19 no~.ldp~.11987 
4 Testing 
Two weeks of news stories were gathered from 
two newspapers in each of our four languages: 
English, Spanish, Russian, and Japanese. We 
then filtered this docmnent collection and kept 
only those doculnents which mentioned specific 
surnames, for eighteen different people. This 
entailed generating lists of these names in all 
four languages, including moq)hological 
variants for Russhm. This was intended to focus 
the extraction process to specific domains 
(business and politics principally). The 
extraction process was then run on the remaining 
set of documents and the resulting templates 
translated and used to generate the final tables of 
events. 
Many of the entries are inaccurate. One of the 
principal causes is the lack of syntactic 
information to constrain the extraction process. 
Simple improvements could be made by adding 
constraints based on appositions, prepositions, 
1009 
particles and morphology. However, a 
significant number of entries do contain useful 
information and the ability to scan, in one 
language, the output from eight sources in four 
languages i  obviously a useful one. 
5 Prob lems 
There are many problems associated with a 
system of this degree of complexity. Many are 
related to the quality and coverage of the 
resources available for processing. Techniques, 
for example, for proper name recognition and 
classification are well known. However, good 
quality name recognition software is only freely 
available at the present for English. Using 
general web resources it is often difficult to 
discover document creation dates, an important 
piece of information in a system of this type. 
Co-reference resolution is not handled in tiffs 
system at present. This is normally achieved in 
current information extraction systems by 
allowing merging of templates fiom adjacent 
sentences. 
The availability of large scale onomastica (bi- 
lingual lists of proper names) is also crucial to 
the translation of extracted information. Work is 
currently underway to develop these resources 
for a variety of languages. 
The problem of reference in general is a more 
interesting one. There are currently two Boris 
Berezovsky(s) appearing in the news. One is a 
pianist, the other the Russian politician. The 
question is, "How is it possible to let our end 
user appreciate which person a reference is 
being made to?". Perhaps some document 
classification system needs to be added to allow 
the automatic detection of document topics, 
which could be used to provide additional 
information in the interface, either for display or 
for filtering. 
Conclusion 
The current system demonstrates the feasibility 
of a knowledge based approach to information 
extraction. It appears that it is possible to 
generate meaningful documents flom multi- 
language sources, although the initial amount of 
elTort required to get reasonable coverage and 
robust perlk)mmnce is significant, particularly in 
the area of resource development. 
Acknowledgements 
We would like to acknowledge the contributions 
of many colleagues at CRL. We would also like 
to thank MITRE and Kyoto University lbr 
allowing us to use their English and Japanese 
part of speech taggers. 
References 
Cowie, J., L. Guthrie~ T. Wakao, W. Jim J. 
Pustejovsky and S. Waterman (1993) The 
Diderot Infornaation Extraction System. In 
Proceedings of the Filwt Cop!\['erence of the 
Pacific Association for Computational 
Linguistics, (PA CLING 93). Vancouver, 
Canada. 
Cowie, J. (1996) CRL's approach to MET 
(Multilingual Named Entity Recognition). In 
Proceedings of the Tipster Text II 24 Month 
Workshop. Morgan Kaufinan. 
Cowie, J., E. Ludovik and H. Molina-Salgado 
(1998) hnproving Robust Domain 
Independent Summarization. In Proceedings 
of Natural Language Processing and 
Industrial Applications. Moncton, Canada. 
Harman, D.K., ed. (1995) NIST Special 
Publication: The Fourth Text Retrieval 
Conference (TREC-4), Systems Laboratory, 
NIST. 
Ludovik, Y., R. Zacharski and J. Cowie (1999) 
Language Recognition for Mono- and Multi- 
lingual Documents. In Proceedings of 
VEXTAL'99, Venice, Italy, pp. 209-214. 
Mahesh, K. and S. Nirenburg. (1995) A Situated 
Ontology for Practical NLP. In Proceedings q/'the 
Workshop on Basic Ontological Issues in 
Knowledge Sharing, International Joint Conference 
on Artificial Intelligence. Montreal, Canada. 
MUC6 (1995) Proceedings of the Sixth Message 
Under~'tanding Conference (MUC6) Morgan 
Kaufman. San Mateo, Calilbrnia. 
1010 
