Proceedings of the Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 140?147,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Web-based Annotation of Anaphoric Relations and Lexical Chains
Maik St?hrenberg and Daniela Goecke and Nils Diewald and Alexander Mehler
Bielefeld University
Germany
{maik.stuehrenberg|daniela.goecke|nils.diewald|alexander.mehler}@uni-bielefeld.de
Irene Cramer
Dortmund University
Germany
irene.cramer@uni-dortmund.de
Abstract
Annotating large text corpora is a time-
consuming effort. Although single-user an-
notation tools are available, web-based an-
notation applications allow for distributed
annotation and file access from different lo-
cations. In this paper we present the web-
based annotation application Serengeti for
annotating anaphoric relations which will be
extended for the annotation of lexical chains.
1 Introduction
The relevance of corpus work for different tasks in
the fields of linguistics is widely accepted. This
holds especially for the area of (semi-)automatic
text and discourse analysis which demands reference
corpora in which instances of various levels of dis-
course structure have been annotated. Such anno-
tation tasks are typically carried out by a combina-
tion of automatic and manual techniques. Manual
annotation of large text corpora is a time consum-
ing effort. Therefore, annotation tools are an indis-
pensable means to overcome the limits of manual
annotations. In spite of their limited level of au-
tomatization, such tools nevertheless help to semi-
automatically support the annotation process and to
secure consistency of manual annotations. This pa-
per describes such an annotation tool which focuses
on a certain type of discourse structures. More
specifically, we deal with anaphoric relations and
lexical cohesion. Our starting point is the obser-
vation that these two resources of textual cohesion
(Halliday and Hasan, 1976) homogeneously induce
chain-like discourse structures: one the one hand we
have reference chains started by some antecedence
and continued by some anaphora linked to the same
antecedence. On the other hand, lexical cohesion
generates so called lexical chains of semantically
related tokens. Based on this observation we de-
scribe the annotation tool Serengeti which reflects
this structural homogeneity on the level of its struc-
tural representation model as well as by its proce-
dural annotation model. Serengeti includes an an-
notation scheme which is extended in order to sup-
port the annotation of reference chains and lexical
chains. The paper is organized as follows: Section
2.1 describes the application scenario of anaphoric
relations and the scheme we use to annotate them.
Section 2.2 deals with the second application sce-
nario: lexical chains. As our starting point was the
former scenario, its extension to the latter one will be
motivated by a separate case study of lexical chain-
ing. Section 3 refers to related work, while Section
4 describes our annotation tool in detail. Finally, the
application of Serengeti to annotating lexical chains
is described in Section 5.
2 Annotating Large Text Corpora
The main focus of the joint work presented in this
paper1 is text technological information modelling
and analysis of various types of discourse. Within
our research group we deal with the integration of
1The work presented in this paper is a joint ef-
fort of the projects A2, A4 and B1 of the Research
Group Text-technological modelling of information funded
by the German Research Foundation. See http://www.
text-technology.de for further details.
140
heterogeneous linguistic resources. This applies es-
pecially to the Sekimo project (A2) which focusses
on the application domain of anaphora resolution.
We use the term ?heterogeneity? to refer to resources
that differ either in terms of form (text, audio, video)
or in terms of function (e. g. lexicons, annotated
texts). Connection between these resources can
be established with the means of XML, cf. Si-
mons (2004). Integrating resources via an abstract
interface is necessary due to different reasons: The
resources used have often been developed indepen-
dently from each other and a cascaded application
of one resource to the output of another resource is
not always possible. Furthermore, the output of dif-
ferent resources often cannot be encoded in a single
structure without driving into incompatibilites (i. e.
XML overlap). Therefore an architecture was devel-
oped which allows for the combination of the out-
put structures of several linguistic resources into a
single XML annotated document and which is de-
scribed in detail in Witt et al (2005) and St?hren-
berg et al (2006) .
2.1 Anaphoric Relations
Motivation and Background Resolving anapho-
ric relations needs a variety of different informa-
tion (e. g. POS, distance information, grammati-
cal function, semantic knowledge, see, for exam-
ple, Mitkov (2002) for an overview). Several re-
sources are applied to a corpus of 47 texts and the
output structures are combined into a single XML
document using the architecture mentioned above.
In order not only to integrate but also evaluate re-
sources for a given linguistic task formally in terms
of precision and recall, it should be possible to ei-
ther switch on or switch off a given resource. In
the application domain of anaphora resolution eval-
uation is done as follows. Each discourse entity
or referent (cf. Karttunen (1976)) is annotated as
an XML element which holds a variety of attribute
information. Each XML element is reinterpreted
as a feature vector; pairs of discourse entities be-
tween which an anaphoric relation holds form a sin-
gle feature vector with additional information rele-
vant for anaphora resolution (e. g. distance informa-
tion, identity of grammatical form, semantic relat-
edness of underlying lemmata and the like). In or-
der to evaluate different resource settings, decision
trees with varying sets of feature vectors are used
for the process of anaphora resolution. Xiaofeng et
al. (2004) or Strube and M?ller (2003) have shown
the feasibility of decision trees for the domain of
anaphora resolution; we have chosen this approach
as it makes it possible to easily switch the informa-
tion set for training and evaluation as opposed to e. g.
rewriting rule sets. Both, training and evaluation as
well as empirically based analysis of anaphora need
an annotated reference corpus (Poesio et al, 2002).
Scheme and annotation process are described in the
following section.
The Annotation Scheme for Anaphoric Rela-
tions Several annotation schemes for annotat-
ing anaphoric relations have been developed in
the last years, e. g. the UCREL anaphora an-
notation scheme (Fligelstone, 1992; Garside et
al., 1997), the SGML-based MUC annotation
scheme (Hirschmann, 1997), and the MATE/G-
NOME Scheme (Poesio, 2004), amongst others.
In order to annotate discourse relations ? either
anaphoric relations or lexical chains (cf. Sec-
tion 2.2) ? two types of information have to be spec-
ified. First, the markables, i. e. the elements that can
be part of a relation, have to be specified (cf. M?ller
and Strube (2003)). Second, the relation(s) between
markables and their respective types and subtypes
have to be defined. The markables form a basis for
the annotation process and therefore have to be an-
notated in advance. Normally, for a domain under
investigation, elements are denoted as being mark-
ables either via a specific element or via the use of
a universal attribute. In our system, discourse enti-
ties are detected automatically on the basis of POS
and parsing information. The annotation scheme
for annotating anaphoric relations is an extension
of the scheme presented by Holler et al (2004) that
has been developed for annotations in the context of
text-to-hypertext conversion in the project B1 Hy-
Tex. We adopt the distinction between coreference
and cospecification but we extend the annotation
scheme for an explicit distinction between cospec-
ification (direct anaphora) and bridging (associative
or indirect anaphora). Thus, we add the primary re-
lation type bridgingLink (denoting bridging) to the
already existing one (cospecLink). Each primary
relation type includes different secondary relation
141
Listing 1: The annotation format for anaphoric relations. Shortened and manually revised output
1 <chs:chs>
2 <chs:text>
3 <cnx:de deID="de8" deType="namedEntity" headRef="w36">
4 <cnx:token ref="w36">Maik</cnx:token></cnx:de>
5 <cnx:token ref="w37">hat</cnx:token> <cnx:token ref="w38">kein</cnx:token>
6 <cnx:token ref="w39">eigenes</cnx:token> <cnx:token ref="w40">Fahrrad</cnx:token>,
7 <cnx:token ref="w42">und</cnx:token>
8 <cnx:de deID="de10" deType="namedEntity" headRef="w43">
9 <cnx:token ref="w43">Marie</cnx:token></cnx:de>
10 <cnx:token ref="w45">f?hrt</cnx:token> <cnx:token ref="w46">nicht</cnx:token>
11 <cnx:token ref="w47">in</cnx:token>
12 <cnx:de deID="de11" deType="nom" headRef="w49">
13 <cnx:token ref="w48">den</cnx:token>
14 <cnx:token ref="w49">Urlaub</cnx:token></cnx:de>.
15 <cnx:de deID="de12" deType="nom" headRef="w53">
16 <cnx:token ref="w52">Zwei</cnx:token>
17 <cnx:token ref="w53">Kinder</cnx:token></cnx:de>,
18 <cnx:de deID="de13" deType="nom" headRef="w56">
19 <cnx:token ref="w55">eine</cnx:token>
20 <cnx:token ref="w56">Gemeinsamkeit</cnx:token></cnx:de>:
21 </chs:text>
22 <cnx:token_ref id="w36" head="w37" pos="N" syn="@NH" depV="subj" morph="MSC SG NOM" />
23 <chs:semRel>
24 <chs:bridgingLink relType="hasMember" antecedentIDRefs="de8 de10" phorIDRef="de12"/>
25 </chs:semRel>
26 </chs:chs>
types that specify the subtype of the relation, e. g.
ident or hypernym as secondary types of cospecLink
or meronym or setMember as secondary types of
bridgingLink. An example annotation of an indirect
anaphoric relation (element bridgingLink, line
30) between the discourse entities de12 (lines 18 to
21) and de8 (lines 3 to 5) and de10 (lines 9 to 11)
can be seen in Listing 1.
2.2 Lexical Chaining
Motivation and Background Based on the con-
cept of lexical cohesion (Halliday and Hasan,
1976), computational linguists (inter alia Morris and
Hirst (1991)) developed a method to compute a par-
tial text representation: lexical chains. These span
over passages or even the complete text linking lex-
ical items. The exemplary annotation in Figure 1
illustrates that lexical chaining is achieved by the
selection of vocabulary and significantly accounts
for the cohesive structure of a text passage. Items
in a lexical chain are connected via semantic re-
lations. Accordingly, lexical chains are computed
on the basis of a lexical semantic resource such as
WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998). Figure 1 also depicts
Figure 1: Chaining Example (adapted from Halliday
et al (1976))
several unsystematic relations, which should in prin-
ciple be considered. Unfortunately, common lexical
resources do not incorporate them sufficiently. Most
systems consist of the fundamental modules shown
in Table 1.
However, in order to formally evaluate the perfor-
mance of a given chainer in terms of precision and
recall, a (preferably standardized and freely avail-
able) test set would be required. To our knowledge
such a resource does not exist ? neither for English
142
Module Subtasks
chaining candidate selection preprocessing of corpora:
determine chaining window,
sentence boundaries,
tokens, POS-tagging
chunks etc.
calculation of chains / look-up: lexical semantic
meta-chains resource (e.g. WordNet),
scoring of relations,
sense disambiguation
output creation rate chain strength
(e.g. select strong chains),
build application specific
representation
Table 1: Overview of Chainer Modules
nor for German. We therefore plan to develop an
evaluation corpus (gold standard), which on the one
hand includes the annotation of lexical chains and
on the other hand reveals the rich interaction be-
tween various principles to achieve a cohesive text
structure. In order to systematically construct sound
guidelines for the annotation of this gold standard,
we conducted a case study.
Case Study Six subjects were asked to annotate
lexical chains in three short texts and in doing so
record all challenges and uncertainties they experi-
enced. The subjects were asked to read three texts
? a wikipedia entry (137 words), a newspaper
article (233 words), and an interview (306 words).
They were then given a list of all nouns occurring
in the articles (almost all chainers exclusively con-
sider nouns as chaining candidates), which they had
to rate with respect to their ?importance? in under-
standing the text. On this basis they were asked
to determine the semantic relations of every pos-
sible chaining candidate pair, thus chain the nouns
and annotate the three texts. Just like previously re-
ported case studies (Beigman Klebanov, 2005; Mor-
ris and Hirst, 2004; Morris and Hirst, 2005) aim-
ing at the annotation of lexical chains, we found
that the inter-annotator agreement was in general
relatively low. Only the annotation of very promi-
nent items in the three texts, which accounted for
approximately one fifth of the chaining candidates,
resulted in a satisfying agreement (that is: the ma-
jority of the subjects produced an identical or very
similar annotation). However, all subjects com-
plained about the task. They found it rather diffi-
cult to construct linearized or quasi-linearized struc-
tures, in short, chains. Instead, most of the subjects
built clusters and drew very complex graphs to illus-
trate the cohesive relations they found. They also
pointed out that only a small fraction of the can-
didate list contributed to their text understanding.
This clearly supports our observation that most of
the subjects first skimmed through the text to find
the most prominent items, established chains for this
selection and then worked the text over to distribute
the remaining items to these chains. We therefore as-
sume that lexical chains do not directly reflect read-
ing and understanding processes. Nevertheless, they
do in some way contribute to them. Many subjects
additionally noted that a reasonable candidate list
should also include multi-word units (e.g. techni-
cal terms) or even phrases. Furthermore, as already
reported in previous work (Morris and Hirst, 2004),
the semantic relations usually considered seem not
to suffice. Accordingly, some subjects proposed new
relations to characterize the links connecting can-
didate pairs. Given our own findings and the re-
sults reported in previous work, it is obviously de-
manding to find a clear-cut border between the con-
cepts of lexical chaining, semantic fields, and co-
reference/anaphora resolution. Definitely, the anno-
tation of co-reference/anaphora and lexical chains is
inherently analogous. In both cases an annotation
layer consisting of labelled edges between pairs of
annotation candidates is constructed. However, we
assume that the lexical chaining layer might contain
more edges between annotation candidates. As a
consequence, its structure presumably is more com-
plex and its connectivity higher. We thus plan to
conduct an extended follow-up study in order to ex-
plore these differences between the annotation of
lexical chains and co-reference/anaphora. We also
intend to take advantage of ? amongst other aspects
? the inter-annotator comparison functionality pro-
vided by Serengeti (see Section 4 for a detailed de-
scription) in order to implement a formally correct
inter-annotator agreement test.
3 Available Tools for Annotating
Linguistic Corpora
Both the anaphora resolution and the lexical chain-
ing scenario have shown the importance of an easy-
143
to-use annotation tool. Although a wide range of
annotation tools is available, one has to separate
tools for annotating multimodal corpora from tools
for annotating unimodal (i. e. text) corpora. Dip-
per et al (2004) evaluated some of the most com-
monly used tools of both categories (TASX Anno-
tator, EXMARaLDA, MMAX, PALinkA and Sys-
tematic Coder). Besides, other tools such as ELAN2
or Anvil3 are available as well, as are tool kits such
as the Annotation Graph Toolkit (AGTK)4 or the
NITE XML Toolkit.5 While multimodal annotation
demands a framework supporting the time-aligned
handling of video and audio streams and, therefore,
much effort has been spent on the design and devel-
opment of tools, unimodal annotation has often been
fulfilled by using ordinary XML editors which can
be error-prone. Nevertheless, specialized annota-
tion frameworks are available as well, e. g. MMAX
can be used for multi-level annotation projects (cf.
M?ller and Strube (2001; 2003)). However, as an-
notation projects grow in size and complexity (often
multiple annotation layers are generated), collabo-
rative annotation and the use of annotation tools is
vital.
? Ma et al (2002), for example, describe collab-
orative annotation in the context of the AGTK.
But since most of the aforementioned applica-
tions have to be installed locally on a PC, work-
ing on a corpus and managing annotations ex-
ternally can be difficult.
? Another problem worth to be mentioned is data
management. Having several annotators work-
ing on one text, unification and comparison of
the markup produced is quite difficult.
? Furthermore, annotation tools help to increase
both the quality and quantity of the annotation
process.
Recent web technologies allow the design of web-
based applications that resemble locally installed
desktop programs on the one hand and provide cen-
tral data management on the other hand. Therefore
2http://www.lat-mpi.eu/tools/elan/
3http://www.dfki.de/~kipp/anvil/
4http://agtk.sourceforge.net/
5http://www.ltg.ed.ac.uk/NITE/
distributed annotation is possible regardless of loca-
tion, provided that an internet connection is avail-
able. In this paper we propose the web-based anno-
tation application Serengeti.
4 A new Approach: Serengeti
As the Sekimo project is part of a research group
with interrelated application domains, annotation
layers from different projects have been evaluated
for their interrelationship (e. g. Bayerl et al (2003;
2006)). This led directly to the open design of
Serengeti ? an annotation tool with the fundamen-
tal idea in mind: making possible the annotation
of a single layer (or resource) and the use of the
best annotation possible and the best available re-
sources. Serengeti allows for several experts to an-
notate a single text at the same time as well as to
compare the different annotations (inter-annotator-
agreement) and merge them afterwards. Access to
the documents is available from everywhere (an in-
ternet connection and a browser is required).
4.1 Technical Overview
Serengeti is a web application developed for Mozilla
Firefox,6 thus its architecture is separated into a
client and a server side, following the principles and
tools of AJAX (Asynchronous JavaScript and XML,
cf. Garrett (2005)). While groups, documents and
annotations are managed centrally on the server side,
all user interactions are rendered locally on the client
side.7
4.2 Graphical User Interface
The Graphical User Interface (GUI) of Serengeti is
subdivided into several areas (cf. Figure 2). The
main area renders the text to be annotated, roughly
laid out in terms of paragraphs, lists, tables and non-
text sections according to the input XML data. Ad-
ditionally, predefined markables are underlined and
followed by boxes containing the markables? unique
identifiers. These boxes serve as clickable buttons
to choose markables during the annotation. At this
6Serengeti is targeted at platform independence, so we?ve
chosen Firefox, which is freely available for several operating
systems. Future versions will support other browsers as well.
7Each Serengeti installation supports more than one work-
group. Server sided data management allows the use of ver-
sioning systems like CVS or, in our case, Subversion.
144
time, adding markables, i. e. changing the input
data, is not allowed.8 This ensures that all annota-
tors use the same base layer. A section at the bottom
of the interface represents the annotation panel with
a list of all annotated relations on the left and all
editing tools on the right side. An application bar at
the top of the GUI provides functions for choosing
and managing groups, documents and annotations.
4.3 Annotation Process
After logging in and choosing a document to anno-
tate, new relations between markables can be cre-
ated. The markables that take part in the relation
are chosen by left-clicking the boxes attached to the
underlined markables in the text and, if necessary,
unchecked by clicking them once again. To encode
the type of a relation between chosen markables, an
input form at the bottom right of the page provides
various options for specifying the relation accord-
ing to the annotation scheme. The OKAY command
adds created relations to the list, which can subse-
quently be edited or deleted. In regard to their state,
relation bars in the list can be highlighted differ-
ently to simplify the post-editing (i. e. new relations,
old/saved relations, commented relations or incom-
plete relations).9 The user can save his work to the
server at any time. After the annotation process is
completed, the COMMIT command (located in the
document menu) declares the annotation as finished.
4.4 Comparing Annotations and Reaching a
Consensus
In order to achieve the best annotation results it is
necessary to provide an opportunity for the evalua-
tion of single annotations or comparing of multiple
annotations on one single document (either by dif-
ferent annotators or identical annotators at different
points in time). This allows for verification of the
quality of the annotation scheme and for valid train-
ing data for automated natural language processing
tools. For this purpose, a special user access, the
Consensus User (CU), has been developed as part of
Serengeti?s concept. Loading a document as a CU, it
8The definition of XML elements as markables and the lay-
out and relation type specification is driven via an external con-
figuration script, adjustable for each group.
9It is possible to hide relations according to their state as
well.
is possible to choose a single annotation done by any
other annotator (either work in progress or commit-
ted) as the basis for the final annotation. This is done
with the same tools as those for the annotation pro-
cess. If satisfied, the CU can declare the annotation
as ultimately closed via the COMMIT command.
Figure 3: Serengeti?s comparison window in the
lower left part of the GUI.
Furthermore, the CU can compare two annota-
tions with each other. The relations annotated by
both users are then displayed in the relation list and
juxtaposed in case they differ in at least one aspect
(e. g. different relation types as in Figure 3).10 On
this basis the CU can decide which relation to accept
and which one to reject. Again, all editing options
are at the user?s disposal.
While editing single or multiple user annotations,
the CU can save the current state of his work at any
time. Afterwards these annotations will appear in
the ANNOTATIONS MENU as well and can be se-
lected for further evaluation and comparison.11
5 Extending Serengeti
Although one might doubt that Serengeti is directly
applicable to annotating lexical chains, this can nev-
ertheless be done straightforwardly using the anno-
tation described in Section 2.1. Our starting point is
as follows: As markables we refer to entities of the
parser output (i. e. tokens) where a user can mark
a token as the initial vertex of a chain. In order
to reflect the findings of our case study on lexical
chaining we distinguish two cases: Either the an-
notator decides that a newly entered token enlarges
10At this point the assignment of relations is important.
Anaphoric relations, for example, are assigned to each other
if their anaphoric element is the same. If there is more than
one relation with identical anaphoric elements, the relations are
sorted by their relation types and their antecedent(s).
11Comparisons require conflictless annotations, i. e. saved
comparisons have to be free from juxtaposed relations.
145
Figure 2: Serengeti?s User Interface. Screenshots of Serengeti Version 0.7.1
an already marked-up chain by explicitly relating it
to one of its links or he implicitly assigns the to-
ken to that chain as a whole which is visually rep-
resented as part of Serengeti?s interface. In the first
case we just face another use case of our annota-
tion scheme, that is, a link between two tokens or
spans of a text where this link may be typed accord-
ing to some linguistic relation that holds between the
spans, e. g. hyponymy. In the second case of an im-
plicit chain assignment we proceed as follows: We
link the newly processed token to the last vertex of
the lexical chain to which the token is attached and
type this relation non-specifically as association. As
a result, we reduce this use case to the one already
mapped by our general annotation scheme. In or-
der to make this a workable solution, we will in-
tegrate a representation of lexical chains by means
of tag clouds where each chain is represented by a
subset of those lexical units which because of their
frequency are most important in representing that
chain. Following this line of extending Serengeti, we
manage to use it as an annotation tool which handles
anaphoric relations as well as lexical chains.
6 Discussion and Outlook
Serengeti can be used to create corpus data for
training and evaluation purposes. An installation
of Serengeti is available online.12 Currently, the
tool is being generalized to allow the annotation
of lexical chains and several other annotation tasks.
More specifically, we plan to incorporate any kind of
chain-like structuring of text segments and to make
the chains an object of annotation so that they can
be interrelated. This will allow to incorporate con-
stituency relations into the annotation process. Be-
yond that we will incorporate metadata handling to
document all steps of the annotation process.
References
P. S. Bayerl, H. L?ngen, D. Goecke, A. Witt, and
D. Naber. 2003. Methods for the Semantic Analy-
sis of Document Markup. In C. Roisin, E. Muson,
and C. Vanoirbeek, editors, Proceedings of the 2003
ACM symposium on Document engineering (DocEng),
pages 161?170, Grenoble. ACM Press.
12http://coli.lili.uni-bielefeld.de/
serengeti/
146
B. Beigman Klebanov. 2005. Using readers to identify
lexical cohesive structures in texts. In Proceedings of
ACL Student Research Workshop.
S. Dipper, M. G?tze, and M. Stede. 2004. Simple Anno-
tation Tools for Complex Annotation Tasks: an Evalu-
ation. In Proceedings of the LREC Workshop on XML-
based Richly Annotated Corpora, pages 54?62, Lis-
bon, Portugal.
C. Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet. An Electronic Lexi-
cal Database. The MIT Press.
S. Fligelstone. 1992. Developing a Scheme for Annotat-
ing Text to Show Anaphoric Relations. In G. Leitner,
editor, New Directions in English Language Corpora:
Methodology, Results, Software Developments, pages
153?170. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin.
J. J. Garrett, 2005. AJAX: A New Approach to Web
Applications. Adaptive Path LLC, February, 18.
Online: http://www.adaptivepath.com/
publications/essays/archives/000385.
php.
R. Garside, S. Fligelstone, and S. Botley. 1997. Dis-
course Annotation: Anaphoric Relations in Corpora.
In R. Garside, G. Leech, and A. McEnery, editors,
Corpus Annotation: Linguistic Information from Com-
puter Text Corpora, pages 66?84. Addison-Wesley
Longman, London.
D. Goecke and A. Witt. 2006. Exploiting Logical Docu-
ment Structure for Anaphora Resolution. In Proceed-
ings of the 5th International Conference., Genoa, Italy.
Michael A. K. Halliday and Ruqaiya Hasan. 1976. Co-
hesion in English. Longman, London.
L. Hirschmann. 1997. MUC-7 Coreference Task Defini-
tion (version 3.0). In L. Hirschman and N. Chinchor,
editors, Proceedings of Message Understanding Con-
ference (MUC-7).
A. Holler, J.-F. Maas, and A. Storrer. 2004. Exploiting
Coreference Annotations for Text-to-Hypertext Con-
version. In Proceeding of LREC, volume II, pages
651?654, Lisbon, Portugal.
L. Karttunen. 1976. Discourse Referents. Syntax and
Semantics: Notes from the Linguistic Underground,
7:363?385.
X. Ma, L. Haejoong, S. Bird, and K. Maeda. 2002.
Models and Tools for Collaborative Annotation. In
Proceedings of the Third International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation, Paris. European
Language Resources Association.
R. Mitkov. 2002. Anaphora Resolution. Longman, Lon-
don.
J. Morris and G. Hirst. 1991. Lexical cohesion computed
by thesaural relations as an indicator of the structure of
text. Computational linguistics, 17(1):21?48, March.
J. Morris and G. Hirst. 2004. Non-classical lexical
semantic relations. In Proceedings of HLT-NAACL
Workshop on Computational Lexical Semantics.
J. Morris and G. Hirst. 2005. The subjectivity of lexi-
cal cohesion in text. In J. C. Chanahan, C. Qu, and
J. Wiebe, editors, Computing attitude and affect in text.
Springer.
C. M?ller and M.l Strube. 2001. Annotating Anaphoric
and Bridging Relations with MMAX. In Proceedings
of the 2nd SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dia-
logue, pages 90?95, Aalborg, Denmark.
C. M?ller and M. Strube. 2003. Multi-Level Annotation
in MMAX. In Proceedings of the 4th SIGdial Work-
shop on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 198?207, Sap-
poro, Japan.
M. Poesio, T. Ishikawa, S. Schulte im Walde, and
R. Viera. 2002. Acquiring lexical knowledge for
anaphora resolution. In Proc. of the 3rd Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC).
M. Poesio. 2004. The MATE/GNOME Scheme for
Anaphoric Annotation, Revisited. In Proceedings of
SIGDIAL, Boston, April.
G. Simons, W. Lewis, S. Farrar, T. Langendoen, B. Fitzsi-
mons, and H. Gonzalez. 2004. The semantics of
markup. In Proceedings of the ACL 2004 Workshop
on RDF/RDFS and OWL in Language Technology
(NLPXML-2004), Barcelona.
M. Strube and C. M?ller. 2003. A Machine Learning
Approach to Pronoun Resolution in Spoken Dialogue.
In Proceedings of the 41st Annual Meeting on Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, volume 1, pages
168?175. ACL 03.
M. St?hrenberg, A. Witt, D. Goecke, D. Metzing, and
O. Schonefeld. 2006. Multidimensional Markup
and Heterogeneous Linguistic Resources. In D. Ahn,
E. T. K. Sang, and G. Wilcock, editors, Proceedings of
the 5th Workshop on NLP and XML (NLPXML-2006):
Multi-Dimensional Markup in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 85?88.
A. Witt, D. Goecke, F. Sasaki, and H. L?ngen.
2005. Unification of XML Documents with Con-
current Markup. Literary and Lingustic Computing,
20(1):103?116.
Y. Xiaofeng, J. Su, G. Zhou, and C. L. Tan. 2004. Im-
proving Pronoun Resolution by Incorporating Coref-
erential Information of Candidates. In Proceedings of
ACL.
147
How Well Do Semantic
Relatedness Measures Perform?
A Meta-Study
Irene Cramer
Dortmund University of Technology (Germany)
email: irene.cramer@udo.edu
Abstract
Various semantic relatedness, similarity, and distance measures have been
proposed in the past decade and many NLP-applications strongly rely on
these semantic measures. Researchers compete for better algorithms and
normally only few percentage points seem to suffice in order to prove a
new measure outperforms an older one. In this paper we present a meta-
study comparing various semantic measures and their correlation with
human judgments. We show that the results are rather inconsistent and
ask for detailed analyses as well as clarification. We argue that the defini-
tion of a shared task might bring us considerably closer to understanding
the concept of semantic relatedness.
59
60 Cramer
1 Introduction
Various applications in Natural Language Processing, such as Question Answering
(Novischi and Moldovan, 2006), Topic Detection (Carthy, 2004), and Text Summa-
rization (Barzilay and Elhadad, 1997), rely on semantic relatedness (similarity or dis-
tance)1 measures either based on word nets and/or corpus statistics as a resource. In
the HyTex project, funded by the German Research Foundation, we develop strategies
for the text-to-hypertext conversion using text-grammatical features. One strand of
research in this project consists of topic-based linking methods using lexical chain-
ing as a resource (Cramer and Finthammer, 2008). Lexical chaining is a well-known
method to calculate partial text representations; it relies on semantic relatedness val-
ues as basic input. We therefore implemented2 eight semantic relatedness measures
? (Hirst and St-Onge, 1998; Jiang and Conrath, 1997; Leacock and Chodorow, 1998;
Lin, 1998; Resnik, 1995; Wu and Palmer, 1994) ? based on GermaNet3 Lemnitzer
and Kunze (2002) and three based on Google co-occurrence counts (Cilibrasi and Vi-
tanyi, 2007). In order to evaluate the performance of these measures we conducted
two human judgment experiments and computed the correlation between the human
judgment and the values of the eleven semantic measures. We also compared our
results with those reported in the literature and found that the correlations between
human judgments and semantic measures are extremely scattered. In this paper we
compare the correlation of our own human judgment experiments and the results of
three similar studies. In our opinion this comparison points to the necessity of a thor-
ough analysis of the methods used in these experiments. We argue that this analysis
should aim at answering the following questions:
? How does the setting of the human judgment experiment influence the results?
? How does the selection of the word-pairs influence the results?
? Which aspects of semantic relatedness are included in human judgments? Thus,
what do these experiments actually measure?
? Are the semantic relatedness measures proposed in the literature able to capture
all of these aspects?
In this paper we intend to open the above mentioned analysis and therefore assembled
a set of aspects which we consider to be important in order to answer these questions.
Consequently, the remainder of this paper is structured as follows: In Section 2 we
1The notions of semantic relatedness, similarity, and distance measure are controversially discussed in
the literature, e.g. Budanitsky and Hirst (2006). However, semantic similarity and relatedness seem to be
the predominant terms in this context. Budanitsky and Hirst (2006) define them as follows: word-pairs are
considered to be semantically similar if a synonymy or hypernymy relation holds. In contrast, word-pairs
are considered to be semantically related if a systematic relation, such as synonymy, antonymy, hypernymy,
holonymy, or an unsystematic relation holds. Thus relatedness is the more general (broader) concept since
it includes intuitive associations as well as linguistically formalized relations between words (or concepts).
The focus of this paper is on relatedness.
2Since GermaNet ? e.g. in terms of internal structure ? slightly differs from Princeton WordNet we
could not simply use the measure implementations of the latter and therefore had to reimplement and adapt
them for GermaNet.
3GermaNet is the German counterpart of WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998).
How Well Do Semantic Relatedness Measures Perform? A Meta-Study 61
present our own human judgment experiments. In Section 3 we describe three simi-
lar studies, two conducted with English data and one with German. In Section 4 we
compare the results of the four studies and discuss (with respect to the experimental
setting and goals) potential differences and possible causes for the observed inconsis-
tency of the results. Finally, we summarize our work and outline some ideas for future
research.
2 Our Human Judgement Experiments
In order to evaluate the quality of a semantic measure, a set of pre-classified (i.e.
judged with respect to their semantic relatedness by subjects) word-pairs is neces-
sary. In previous work for English data, most researchers used the word-pair list by
Rubenstein and Goodenough (1965) as well as the list by Miller and Charles (1991)
as an evaluation resource. For German there are ? to our knowledge ? two research
groups, which compiled lists of word-pairs with respective human judgment:
? Gurevych et al constructed three lists (a translation of Rubenstein and Good-
enough?s list (Gurevych, 2005), a manually generated set of word-pairs, and a
semi-automatically generated one (Zesch and Gurevych, 2006)).
? While investigating lexical chaining for German corpora, we additionally com-
piled a total of six lists, each of which consists of 100 word-pairs with respective
human judgments.
The goal of our experiments was to cover a wide range of relatedness types, i.e. sys-
tematic and unsystematic relations, and relatedness levels, i.e. various degrees of re-
lation strength. However, we only included nouns in the construction of our sets
of word-pairs, since we consider cross-part-of-speech (cross-POS) relations to be an
additional challenge4, which we intend to address in a continuative experiment. Fur-
thermore, in order to identify a potential bias of the lists and the impact of this bias on
the results, we applied two different methods for the compilation of word-pairs.
For our first human judgment experiment (Cramer and Finthammer, 2008) we col-
lected nouns (analytically)5 of diverse semantic classes, e.g. abstract nouns, such as
das Wissen (Engl. knowledge), and concrete nouns, such as das B?geleisen (Engl.
flat-iron). By this means, we constructed a list of approximately 300 word-pairs. We
picked approximately 75 and randomized them. For the remaining 25 word-pairs, we
selected five words and constructedword-pairs such as Sonne-Wind (Engl. sun-wind),
Sonne-W?rme (Engl. sun-warmth), Sonne-Wetter (Engl. sun-weather) etc. We ar-
ranged these 25 pairs into sequences in order to focus our subjects? attention on small
semantic relatedness distinctions.
4Since in most word nets cross-POS relations are very sparse, researchers currently investigate relation
types able to connect the noun, verb, and adjective sub-graphs (e.g. Marrafa and Mendes (2006) or Lem-
nitzer et al (2008)). However, these new relations are not yet integrated on a large scale and therefore
should not (or even cannot) be used in semantic relatedness measures. Furthermore, calculating seman-
tic relatedness between words with different POS might introduce additional challenges potentially as yet
unidentified, which calls for a careful exploration.
5In this paper and in most comparable studies, the term analytical means that the word-pairs are hand-
picked. Obviously, the disadvantage of this approach is its sensibility to idiosyncrasies, which might ex-
tremely bias the outcome of the experiments.
62 Cramer
For the five remaining lists (WP2-WP6), we applied a different method: firstly,
we again analytically collected word-pairs which are part of collocations, i.e. the
two nouns Rat and Tat (mit Rat und Tat helfen, Engl. to help with words and
deeds) or Qual and Wahl (die Qual der Wahl haben, Engl. to be spoilt for choice).
Secondly, we assembled word-pairs which feature association relations, i.e. Afrika
(Engl. Africa) and Tiger (Engl. tiger) or Weihnachten (Engl. Christmas) and Zimt
(Engl. cinnamon). Thirdly, we automatically constructed a list of random word-pairs
using the Wacky corpus (Baroni and Bernardini, 2006) as a resource and manually
excluded ad-hoc-constructions. Finally, out of these three resources we compiled five
sets of 100 randomized word-pairs with no more than 20% of the collocation and
association word-pairs.
We asked subjects to rate the word-pairs on a 5-level scale (0 = not related to 4
= strongly related). The subjects were instructed to base the rating on their intuition
about any kind of conceivable relation between the two words. WP1 was rated by 35
subjects and WP2 to WP6 were each rated by 15 subjects. We then calculated the
average judgment per word-pair and ranked the word-pairs accordingly.
The correlation between the human judgments and the eleven semantic measures
is shown in Table 1. The difference between the correlation coefficients of WP1 and
WP2-WP6 suggests that the method of construction might have an impact on the re-
sults of the experiments. The manual compilation of word-pairs seems to lead to
better correlation coefficients and might therefore cause an overestimation of the per-
formance of the semantic measures. Furthermore, with respect to the list construction
methods, the two resources and respective measures, namely GermaNet (TreePath?
Lin) and Google (GoogleQ?GooglePMI), seem to respond differently: whereas the
correlation coefficients of the eight GermaNet based measures drop to a greater or
lesser extend (Table 1: r for WP1 and r for WP2-WP6), the correlation coefficients of
the three Google based measures approximately level off.
Table 1: Our Correlation Coefficients: Correlation between AverageHuman Judgment
and Semantic Measure Values
r Tree Graph Wu- Leac.- Hirst- Resnik Jiang- Lin Google Google Google
Path Path Palm. Chod. St-O. Conr. Norm. Quot. PMI
WP1 0.41 0.42 0.36 0.48 0.47 0.44 0.45 0.48 0.27 0.37 0.37
WP2 0.09 0.31 0.33 0.16 0.26 0.37 0.18 0.36 0.24 0.29 0.27
WP3 0.03 0.22 0.24 0.11 0.28 0.19 0.15 0.26 0.46 0.45 0.40
WP4 0.07 0.39 0.11 0.11 0.31 0.11 0.25 0.16 0.34 0.38 0.34
WP5 0.27 0.39 0.26 0.32 0.38 0.31 0.41 0.34 0.19 0.32 0.28
WP6 0.09 0.27 0.15 0.17 0.39 0.24 0.29 0.25 0.26 0.38 0.43
mean 0.16 0.33 0.24 0.23 0.35 0.28 0.29 0.31 0.29 0.36 0.35
In any case, since the correlation coefficients are rather low, there is much room for
improvement. However, as all measures scatter in the same range ? independently
of the precise algorithm or resource used, as it seems ? we argue that the reason for
this critical performance might be one of the following two aspects (most probably a
combination of both):
How Well Do Semantic Relatedness Measures Perform? A Meta-Study 63
? Word nets (and/or corpora) do not cover the (all) types of semantic information
required.
? Human judgment experiments are (without clear and standardized specification
of the experimental setup) an inappropriate way to evaluate semantic measures.
Both aspects are discussed in Section 4. However, we first should have a look at three
similar studies, two for English and one for German.
3 Three Similar Studies
As mentioned above various researchers rely on human judgment experiments as an
evaluation resource for semantic relatedness measures. In this section, three such
studies are summarized in order to identify differences with respect to the methods
adopted and results obtained.6
3.1 Budanitsky and Hirst
Budanitsky and Hirst (2006) specify the purpose of their paper Evaluating WordNet-
based Measures of Lexical Semantic Relatedness as a comparison of the performance
of various relatedness measures. Accordingly, they sketch a number of measures
and identify three evaluation methods: firstly, the theoretical examination (of e.g. the
mathematical properties of the respective measure); secondly, the comparison with
human judgments; thirdly, the evaluation of a measure with respect to a given NLP-
application. They regard the second and third method as being the most appropriate
ones and therefore focus on them in their empirical work presented in the paper. As
a basis for the second evaluation method, i.e. the comparison between semantic mea-
sure and human judgments, they use two word-pair lists: the first compiled by Ruben-
stein and Goodenough (1965) and containing 65 word-pairs7, the second compiled
by Miller and Charles (1991) and containing 30 word-pairs. In order to evaluate the
performance of five different measures (and potentially in order to find a ranking),
Budanitsky and Hirst (2006) compute the semantic relatedness values for the word-
pairs and compare them with the human judgments. They thus find the correlation
coefficients summarized in Table 2.
Budanitsky and Hirst (2006) regard this evaluation method, i.e. comparingmeasure
values and human judgments, as the ideal approach. However, in examining the results
of this comparison, they identify several limitations; i.e. they point out that the amount
of data available (65 word-pairs) might be inadequate for real NLP-applications. They
additionally emphasize that the development of a large-scale data set would be time-
consuming and expensive. Moreover, they argue that the experiments by Rubenstein
and Goodenough (1965) as well as Miller and Charles (1991) focus on relations be-
tween words rather than relations between word-senses (concepts), which would be
6There are many more relevant studies; however, they all point to the same issue, namely, the incompat-
ibility of the results.
7Rubenstein and Goodenough (1965) investigated the relationship between ?similarity of context? and
?similarity of meaning?. They asked 51 subjects to rate on a scale of 0 to 4 the similarity of meaning for
the 65 word-pairs. Miller and Charles (1991) selected 30 out of the 65 original word-pairs (according to
their relatedness strength) and asked 38 subjects to rate this list. They used the same experimental setup as
Rubenstein and Goodenough (1965).
64 Cramer
Table 2: Correlation Coefficients by Budantisky and Hirst
r Leac.- Hirst- Resnik Jiang- Lin
Chod. StO. Conr.
M&C 0.816 0.744 0.774 0.850 0.82
R&G 0.838 0.786 0.779 0.781 0.819
mean 0.83 0.77 0.78 0.82 0.82
? especially when taking potential NLP-applications into account ? more appropri-
ate. They note that it might however be difficult to trigger a specific concept without
biasing the subjects.
3.2 Boyd-Graber, Fellbaum, Osherson, and Schapire
In contrast to the above mentioned experiments by Budanitsky and Hirst (2006), the
research reported in Adding Dense, Weighted Connections to WordNet aims at the
development of a new, conceptually different layer of relations to be included into
a word net. Boyd-Graber et al (2006) are motivated in their work by three widely
acknowledged shortcomings of word nets:
? The lack of cross-POS links connecting the sub-graphs containing nouns, verbs,
or adjectives, respectively.
? The low density of relations in the sub-graphs, i.e. potentially missing types of
relations such as ?actor? or ?instrument?.
? The absence of weights assigned to the relations, i.e. representing the degrees
of semantic distance of different subordinates of the same superordinate.
In order to address these shortcomings, Boyd-Graber et al ask subjects to assign
values of ?evocation? representing the relations between 1,000 synsets. They ask 20
subjects to rate evocation in 120,000 pairs of synsets (these pairs form a random se-
lection of all possible pairs of the above mentioned 1,000 core synsets considered in
the experiment). The subjects are given a manual explaining a couple of details about
the task and are trained on a sample of 1,000 (two sets of 500) randomly selected
pairs. Although the research objective of the work presented in this paper is to con-
struct a new relations layer for Princeton WordNet rather than to evaluate semantic
relatedness measures, Boyd-Graber et al compare the results of their human judg-
ment experiment with the relatedness values of four different semantic measures. The
correlation coefficients of this comparison are summarized in Table 3.
Boyd-Graber et al arrive at the conclusion that ? given the obvious lack of cor-
relation (see Table 3) ? evocation constitutes an empirically supported semantic re-
lation type which is still not captured by the semantic measures (at least not by those
considered in this experiment).
3.3 Gurevych et al
Similar to the study by Budanitsky and Hirst (2006), Gurevych (2005) gives insight
into a human judgment experiment conducted in order to compare the performance
How Well Do Semantic Relatedness Measures Perform? A Meta-Study 65
Table 3: Correlation Coefficients by Boyd-Graber et al
r Lesk Path LC LSA
all 0.008
verbs 0.046
nouns 0.013 0.013
closest 0.131
Table 4: Correlation Coefficients by Gurevych (with Lesk1 = Lesk (DWDS); Lesk2
= Lesk (radial); Lesk3 = Lesk (hypernym); Resn. = Resnik)
r Google Lesk1 Lesk2 Lesk3 Resn.
R&G 0.57 0.53 0.55 0.60 0.72
German
of her own semantic relatedness measure8 with established ones. For this purpose
(Gurevych, 2005) translates the word-pair list by Rubenstein and Goodenough (1965)
and asks 24 native speakers of German to rate the word-pairs with respect to their se-
mantic relatedness on a 5-level scale; she thus replicates the study by Rubenstein and
Goodenough (1965) for German. Gurevych (2005) finally compares the human judg-
ments with several semantic measures. The correlation coefficients of this comparison
are summarized in Table 4.
Gurevych (2005) comments on (among others) the following four issues: firstly, she
emphasizes the difference between semantic similarity and relatedness; she argues that
most word-pair lists were constructed in order to measure semantic similarity rather
than relatedness and that these lists might therefore be inappropriate for the task at
hand. Secondly, Gurevych (2005) observes that, in contrast to the concept of seman-
tic similarity, semantic relatedness is not well defined. Thirdly, as the experiments
are based on words rather than concepts, the results attained thus far might exhibit
additional noise. Finally, she notes that the amount of data is too limited in size and
that analytically created word-pair lists are inherently biased. Accordingly, Zesch and
Gurevych (2006) propose a corpus based method for automatically constructing test
data and list a number of advantages of this approach: i.e. lexical-semantic cohesion
in texts accounts for various relation types, domain-specific and technical terms can
easily be included, and, in contrast to manually constructed, corpus based lists are
probably more objective.
4 Meta-Level Evaluation
Table 5 shows the minimum, maximum, and mean correlations reported in the three
studies as well as our own results. The table illustrates the broad statistical spread:
the mean correlation coefficients range between 0.8 and 0.04 for English and between
0.61 and 0.29 for German. Admittedly, the experimental setup and the goals of the
8Her measure is able to manage limitations of some of the previously published measures.
66 Cramer
Table 5: Comparison of the Correlation Coefficients of the Different Experiments
(with B&G: Budanitsky and Hirst / B-G et al: Boyd-Graber et al / G et al: Gurevych
et al / C&F, C: our results)
B&H B-G et al G et al C&F, C
max 0.83 0.131 0.72 0.36
min 0.77 0.008 0.53 0.16
mean 0.80 0.04 0.61 0.29
stdv 0.03 0.05 0.08 0.06
four studies differ in several aspects9. However, the principle idea? i.e. using human
judgments as a baseline or evaluation resource ? is the same.
We argue that ? given the statistical spread shown in Table 5 ? as long as the
reasons for this discrepancy have not been determined and the methods have not been
harmonized as far as possible, the results of these experiments should not be used as
a basis for e.g. the evaluation or comparison of semantic measures. As mentioned in
Section 1 we suspect that (no fewer than) the following aspects influence the results
of the human judgment experiments and thus the correlation between humans and
semantic measures:
? Research objective: The goals of the studies differ with respect to several as-
pects. Firstly, some studies, e.g. Budanitsky and Hirst (2006), aim at comparing
the performance of different semantic (relatedness) measures, whereas Boyd-
Graber et al (2006) intend to construct a new relations layer (potentially able
to substitute or complement established relatedness measures). Secondly, in
some cases, e.g. Cramer and Finthammer (2008), relations between words are
considered, whereas e.g. Boyd-Graber et al (2006) examine relations between
concepts. Thirdly, it seems to be unclear which types of relations are actually
searched for (relatedness, similarity, evocation, distance) and in what aspects
these correspond or differ. Interestingly, in computational linguistics and psy-
cholinguistics there is an additional strand of research investigating the so-called
?association relation?, e.g. Schulte im Walde and Melinger (2005) and Roth and
Schulte im Walde (2008), which is not yet considered or integrated in the re-
search on semantic relatedness measures. We argue that such an integration
might be fruitful for both research strands.
? Setting of the human judgment experiment: In all studies summarized above,
the subjects are students (mostly of linguistics, computer sciences, and compu-
tational linguistics). In most cases, they are given a short manual explaining the
task, which certainly differs in many aspects, e.g. due to the above mentioned
fact that the relation type searched for is a still unsettled issue. Furthermore, no
training phase is included in most of the studies except the one by Boyd-Graber
9It seems unfeasible to determine all possible differences of the studies because, among other things, the
papers do not specify the experimental setup in detail. We therefore assume that the definition of a shared
task might bring us considerably closer to understanding the questions raised in this paper.
How Well Do Semantic Relatedness Measures Perform? A Meta-Study 67
et al (2006), who are therefore able to identify potential training effects. Again
only Boyd-Graber et al (2006) account for the handling of idiosyncrasies.
? Construction of experimental data: In Boyd-Graber et al (2006) the concept-
pairs were randomly selected, whereas the word-pairs used by Budanitsky and
Hirst (2006) were constructed analytically. In the studies by Gurevych (2005),
Zesch and Gurevych (2006), and Cramer and Finthammer (2008), some were
analytically constructed and some randomly (semi-automatically) selected. In
addition, the data sets vary with respect to their size: Budanitsky and Hirst
(2006), Gurevych (2005), and Cramer and Finthammer (2008) only use small
sets of word-pairs (concept-pairs), i.e. a few hundred pairs, whereas Boyd-
Graber et al (2006) investigate a huge amount of data; their experiment there-
fore certainly constitutes the most representative one. All studies also indicate
the (mean/median) inter-subject correlation10 which varies from 0.48 (concept-
pair based) in Zesch and Gurevych (2006) and 0.72 (concept-pair based) in
Boyd-Graber et al (2006) to 0.85 (word-pair based) in Budanitsky and Hirst
(2006).
We think that this comparison of the various experiments points to two aspects which
probably cause the large statistical spread shown in Table 5: the selection of the word-
pairs (concept-pairs) and the type of relation (relatedness, similarity, evocation, dis-
tance). We assume that it should be possible to condense the comparison into one
(more or less simple) rule: the narrower the relation concept (similarity < relatedness
< evocation) and the narrower the data considered (lexical semantic selection rule <
any kind of selection rule < random selection) the better the correlation between hu-
man judgment and semantic measure11. In any case, it seems essential to determine
which relation types the subjects (knowingly or unknowingly) bear in mind when they
judge word-pairswith respect to semantic relatedness. In order to achieve this goal and
be able to integrate all relevant relations into the resources used for calculating seman-
tic relatedness, the human judgments collected in the above-mentioned studies should
be dissected into components (i.e. components for which systematic/unsystematic lex-
ical semantic relations account etc.); such a decomposition certainly also helps render
more precisely the definition of semantic relatedness.
Furthermore, it is ? in our opinion ? an unsettled issue whether the three types
of semantic relation at hand, thus the relations
1. represented in a word net or corpus (both computed via semantic measure),
2. existing between any given word-pair in a text (which is mostly relevant for
NLP-applications),
3. and the one assigned by subjects in a human judgment experiment
10The inter-subject correlation depends on various parameters, e.g. the complexity of the task, the sub-
jects (and their background, age, etc.) as well as the experimental setup (task definition, training phase,
etc.).
11... and obviously the easier the task!
68 Cramer
correspond at all. In principle, word nets, corpus statistics, and human judgments
should be related to (theoretically even represent) the (at least partially) shared knowl-
edge of humans about the underlying ?lexical semantic system?, whereas relations be-
tween words in a concrete text represent an instantiation of a system. From this point
of view, at least the human judgments should correspond to the semantics encoded in
a word net (or corpus statistics). Instead of using human judgments as an evaluation
resource (for e.g. word net based semantic measures), they might as well be directly
integrated into the word net as a (preferably dense) layer of (potentially cognitively
relevant, weighted but unlabeled) semantic relations, which is best adopted in Boyd-
Graber et al (2006), as summarized in Section 3. This approach has several advan-
tages: firstly, the calculation of a semantic relatedness value is ? given such a layer
? trivial, since it merely consists in a look-up procedure. Secondly, NLP-applications
using word nets as a resource would certainly benefit from the thus enhanced density
of relations, i.e. cross-POS relations. Thirdly, an elaborate and standardized experi-
mental setup for human judgment experiments could be used for the construction of
such a layer in different languages (and domains) and would also guarantee the mod-
eling quality. Finally, such a new word net layer would hopefully resolve the above
mentioned open issue of the diverging correlation coefficients.
Alternatively, since it is completely unclear if the evocation relation can really act
as a substitute for classical semantic relatedness measures in NLP-applications, cur-
rent word nets should be enhanced by systematically augmenting existing relation
types and integrating new ones. On that condition and given that a common evalua-
tion framework exists, it should be possible to determine which semantic relatedness
measure performs best under what conditions.
Last but not least, in order to determine the relation between an underlying seman-
tic system (represented by a semantic measure or as mentioned above the evocation
layer) and the instantiation of this system in a concrete text, a study similar to the one
reported in Zesch and Gurevych (2006) should be conducted. Such a study proba-
bly also shows if the evocation relation is able to substitute (or at least complement)
semantic relatedness measures typically used in NLP-applications.
5 Conclusions and Future Work
We have presented our own human judgment experiments for German and compared
them with three similar studies. This comparison illustrates that the results of these
studies are incompatible. We therefore argue that the experimental setup should be
clarified and, if possible, harmonized. We also think that the notion of association
should be considered carefully, since it is an established concept for measuring related
phenomena in several psycholinguistic and computational linguistic communities.
We now plan to continue our work on three levels. Firstly, we intend to conduct a
study similar to the one reported by Boyd-Graber et al (2006) with a small amount
of German data. We hope that this will provide us with insight into some of the open
issues mentioned in Section 1 and Section 4. Secondly, we plan to investigate if the
evocation relation is able to substitute the semantic relatedness measures typically
used in lexical chaining and similar NLP-applications. Thirdly, we intend to run ex-
periments using the database of noun associations in German constructed by Melinger
and Weber (2006) as a resource for the evaluation of semantic relatedness measures.
How Well Do Semantic Relatedness Measures Perform? A Meta-Study 69
Acknowledgements The author would like to thankMichael Bei?wenger, Christiane
Fellbaum, Sabine Schulte im Walde, Angelika Storrer, Tonio Wandmacher, Torsten
Zesch, and the anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments. This research was
funded by the DFG Research Group 437 (HyTex).
References
Baroni, M. and S. Bernardini (Eds.) (2006). Wacky! Working papers on the Web as
Corpus. GEDIT, Bologna.
Barzilay, R. and M. Elhadad (1997). Using lexical chains for text summarization. In
Proceedings of the Intelligent Scalable Text Summarization Workshop, pp. 10?17.
Boyd-Graber, J., C. Fellbaum, D. Osherson, and R. Schapire (2006). Adding dense,
weighted, connections to wordnet. In Proceedings of the 3rd Global WordNet Meet-
ing, pp. 29?35.
Budanitsky, A. and G. Hirst (2006). Evaluating wordnet-based measures of semantic
relatedness. Computational Linguistics 32 (1), 13?47.
Carthy, J. (2004). Lexical chains versus keywords for topic tracking. In Compu-
tational Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pp. 507?510. Springer.
Cilibrasi, R. and P. M. B. Vitanyi (2007). The google similarity distance. IEEE
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 19(3), 370?383.
Cramer, I. and M. Finthammer (2008). An evaluation procedure for word net based
lexical chaining: Methods and issues. In Proceedings of the 4th Global WordNet
Meeting, pp. 120?147.
Fellbaum, C. (1998). WordNet. An Electronic Lexical Database. The MIT Press.
Gurevych, I. (2005). Using the structure of a conceptual network in computing se-
mantic relatedness. In Proceedings of the IJCNLP 2005, pp. 767?778.
Hirst, G. and D. St-Onge (1998). Lexical chains as representation of context for the
detection and correction malapropisms. In C. Fellbaum (Ed.), WordNet: An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database, pp. 305?332. The MIT Press.
Jiang, J. J. and D. W. Conrath (1997). Semantic similarity based on corpus statistics
and lexical taxonomy. In Proceedings of ROCLING X, pp. 19?33.
Leacock, C. and M. Chodorow (1998). Combining local context and wordnet simi-
larity for word sense identification. In C. Fellbaum (Ed.), WordNet: An Electronic
Lexical Database, pp. 265?284. The MIT Press.
Lemnitzer, L. and C. Kunze (2002). Germanet - representation, visualization, appli-
cation. In Proceedings of the 4th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference,
pp. 1485?1491.
70 Cramer
Lemnitzer, L., H. Wunsch, and P. Gupta (2008). Enriching germanet with verb-noun
relations - a case study of lexical acquisition. In Proceedings of the 6th Interna-
tional Language Resources and Evaluation.
Lin, D. (1998). An information-theoretic definition of similarity. In Proceedings of
the 15th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 296?304.
Marrafa, P. and S. Mendes (2006). Modeling adjectives in computational relational
lexica. In Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 poster session, pp. 555?562.
Melinger, A. and A. Weber (2006). A database of noun associations in german. On-
line available database: http://www.coli.uni-saarland.de/projects/nag.
Miller, G. A. and W. G. Charles (1991). Contextual correlates of semantic similiarity.
Language and Cognitive Processes 6(1), 1?28.
Novischi, A. and D. Moldovan (2006). Question answering with lexical chains prop-
agating verb arguments. In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on
Computational Linguistics and 44th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pp. 897?904.
Resnik, P. (1995). Using information content to evaluate semantic similarity in a
taxonomy. In Proceedings of the IJCAI 1995, pp. 448?453.
Roth, M. and S. Schulte im Walde (2008). Corpus co-occurrence, dictionary and
wikipedia entries as resources for semantic relatedness information. In Proceed-
ings of the 6th Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation.
Rubenstein, H. and J. B. Goodenough (1965). Contextual correlates of synonymy.
Communications of the ACM 8(10), 627?633.
Schulte im Walde, S. and A. Melinger (2005). Identifying semantic relations and
functional properties of human verb associations. In Proceedings of Human Lan-
guage Technology Conference and Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pp. 612?619.
Wu, Z. and M. Palmer (1994). Verb semantics and lexical selection. In Proceedings
of the 32nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp.
133?138.
Zesch, T. and I. Gurevych (2006). Automatically creating datasets for measures of
semantic relatedness. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Linguistic Distances at
COLING/ACL 2006, pp. 16?24.
