Proceedings of HLT/EMNLP 2005 Demonstration Abstracts, pages 2?3,
Vancouver, October 2005.
Bridging the Gap between Technology and Users: Leveraging Machine 
Translation in a Visual Data Triage Tool 
Thomas Hoeft Nick Cramer M. L. Gregory Elizabeth Hetzler
Pacific Northwest  
National Laboratory 
Pacific Northwest  
National Laboratory 
Pacific Northwest  
National Laboratory 
Pacific Northwest  
National Laboratory 
902 Battelle Blvd. 902 Battelle Blvd. 902 Battelle Blvd. 902 Battelle Blvd. 
Richland, WA 99354 Richland, WA 99354 Richland, WA 99354 Richland, WA 99354 
{thomas.hoeft;nick.cramer;michelle.gregory;beth.hetzler}@pnl.gov 
 
  
1 Introduction 
While one of the oldest pursuits in computational 
linguistics (see Bar-Hillel, 1951), machine transla-
tion (MT) remains an unsolved problem. While 
current research has progressed a great deal, tech-
nology transfer to end users is limited. In this 
demo, we present a visualization tool for manipu-
lating foreign language data. Using software de-
veloped for the exploration and understanding of 
large amounts of text data, IN-SPIRE (Hetzler & 
Turner 2004), we have developed a novel approach 
to mining and triaging large amounts of foreign 
language texts. By clustering documents in their 
native language and only using translations in the 
data triage phase, our system avoids the major pit-
falls that plague modern machine translation. More 
generally, the visualization environment we have 
developed allows users to take advantage of cur-
rent NLP technologies, including MT. We will 
demonstrate use of this tool to triage a corpus of 
foreign text. 
2 IN-SPIRE 
IN-SPIRE (Hetzler et al, 2004) is a visual ana-
lytics tool developed by Pacific Northwest Na-
tional Laboratory to facilitate the collection and 
rapid understanding of large textual corpora. IN-
SPIRE generates a compiled document set from 
mathematical signatures for each document in a 
set. Document signatures are clustered according 
to common themes to enable information retrieval 
and visualizations.  Information is presented to the 
user using several visual metaphors to expose dif-
ferent facets of the textual data. The central visual 
metaphor is a galaxy view of the corpus that allows 
users to intuitively interact with thousands of 
documents, examining them by theme. 
 Context vectors for documents such as LSA 
(Deerwester  et al, 1990) provide a powerful foun-
dation for information retrieval and natural lan-
guage processing techniques.  IN-SPIRE leverages 
such representations for clustering, projection and 
queries-by-example (QBE). In addition to standard 
Boolean word queries, QBE is a process in which a 
user document query is converted into a mathe-
matical signature and compared to the multi-
dimensional mathematical representation of the 
document corpus.  A spherical distance threshold 
adjustable by the end user controls a query result 
set.  Using IN-SPIRE?s group functionality, sub-
sets of the corpus are identified for more detailed 
analyses.  Information analysts can isolate mean-
ingful document subsets into groups for hypothesis 
testing and the identification of trends.  Depending 
on the corpus, one or more clusters may be less 
interesting to users. Removal of these documents, 
called ?outliers?, enables the investigator to more 
clearly understand the relationships between re-
maining documents.  These tools expose various 
facets of document text and document inter-
relationships. 
3 Foreign Language Triage Capabilities  
Information analysts need to sift through large 
datasets quickly and efficiently to identify relevant 
information for knowledge discovery. The need to 
sift through foreign language data complicates the 
task immensely. The addition of foreign language 
capabilities to IN-SPIRE addresses this need.  We 
have integrated third party translators for over 40 
languages and  third party software for language 
identification. Datasets compiled with language 
detection allow IN-SPIRE to automatically select 
the most appropriate translator for each document.  
To triage a foreign language dataset, the sys-
tem clusters the documents in their native language 
2
(with no pre-translation required). A user can then 
view the cluster labels, or peak terms, in the native 
language, or have them translated via Systran 
(Senellart et al, 2003) or CyberTrans (not publicly 
available). The user can then explore the clusters to 
get a general sense of the thematic coverage of the 
dataset. They identify clusters relevant to their in-
terests and the tool reclusters to show more subtle 
themes differentiating the remaining documents. If 
they search for particular words, the clusters and 
translated labels help them distinguish the various 
contexts in which those words appear. Finding a 
cluster of document of interest, a particular docu-
ment or set of documents can be viewed and trans-
lated on demand. This avoids the need to translate 
the entire document set, so that only the documents 
of interest are translated. The native text is dis-
played alongside the translation at all stages.   
4 Evaluation 
Since this is a prototype visualization tool we 
have yet to conduct formal user evaluations. We 
have begun field testing this tool with users who 
report successful data triage in foreign languages 
with which they are not familiar. We have also 
begun evaluations involving parallel corpora.  Us-
ing Arabic English Parallel News Text (LDC 
2004), which contains over 8,000 human translated 
documents from various Arabic new sources, we 
processed the English version in IN-SPIRE to view 
the document clusters and their labels. We also 
processed the Arabic version in Arabic according 
to the description above. The two screenshots be-
low demonstrate that the documents clustered in 
similar manners (note that cluster labels have been 
translated in the Arabic data). 
 
    
Figure 1: Galaxy view of the Arabic and English 
clusters and labels  
 
To demonstrate that our clustering algorithm on 
the native language is an efficient and reliable 
method for data triage on foreign language data, 
we also pre-translated the data with CyberTrans 
and clustered on the output. Figure 3, demonstrates 
that similar clusters arise out of this methodology. 
However, the processing time was increase
 
d 15-
ld with no clear advantage for data triage. 
 
fo
 
Figure 3: Galaxy view of the pre-translated Ara-
bic to English clusters and labels 
lue from 
existing machine translation capabilities.  
nslation. American Documenta-
n 2 (4),  pp.229-237. 
 
omputer Graphics and Applications, 24(5):22-26. 
f the Society for Information 
cience, 41(6):391-407. 
.edu/Catalog/catalogEntry.jsp?cata
gId=LDC2004T18 
chnology. MT Summit 
IX. New Orleans, Louisianna.  
 
Initial user reports and comparisons with a par-
allel corpus demonstrate that our visualization en-
vironment enables users to search through and 
cluster massive amounts of data without native 
speaker competence or dependence on a machine 
translation system. Users can identify clusters of 
potential interest with this tool and translate (by 
human or machine) only those documents of rele-
vance. We have demonstrated that this visualiza-
tion tool allows users to derive high va
References  
Bar-Hillel, Yehoshua, 1951. The present state of re-
search on mechanical tra
tio
  
Hetzler, Elizabeth and Alan Turner. 2004. ?Analysis 
Experiences Using Information Visualization,? IEEE
C
 
Deerwester, S., S.T. Dumais, T.K. Landauer, G.W. 
Furnas, R.A. Harshman. 1990. Indexing by Latent Se-
mantic Analysis. Journal o
S
 
Linquistic Data Consortium. 2004. 
http://www.ldc.upenn
lo
 
Senellart, Jean; Jin Yang, and Anabel Rebollo. 2003. 
SYSTRAN Intuitive Coding Te
3
