Concepts across categories
Hilke Reckman and Crit Cremers
Leiden University Centre for Linguistics (LUCL)
Leiden, Netherlands
{h. g. b. reckman,c. l. j. m. cremers }@let. leidenuniv. nl
Abstract
Verbs or adjectives and their nominalizations and certain adverb adjective pairs
can be argued to introduce the same concept. This can be shown through inference
patterns, which can be explained if we assume Davidsonian eventualities underlying
all predicates. We make a contribution to the underlying state discussion by inves-
tigating the advantages and disadvantages of Davidsonian versus Kimian states for
statives such as copular predicates. Findings are implemented in our parser Delilah.
1 Introduction
Several computational semantics systems have by now implemented a form of
event analysis for verbs [1,3]. There has been much debate on whether it is
desirable to assume underlying states, parallel to underlying events. Katz [9]
argues against an underlying state analysis, even for stative verbs, whereas
Parsons [12] is ready to accept an underlying state analysis, even for simple
nouns. It is clear that states are more problematic than events.
We discuss some cases where words of different categories can be argued
to introduce the same concept: verbs and their nominalizations and adjec-
tives and their corresponding abstract nouns. We show that underlying states
give us the same advantages as underlying events, with respect to recognizing
concepts across categories for the purpose of inference, as they reify the pred-
icates. We then discuss an alternative representation for copular expressions,
based on the conviction that the states in these expressions are ontologically
different from eventualities, and show that it has unfavorable consequences for
inference. We end with a short note on related adjective-adverb pairs.
The present research was carried out in the context of the Narrator project,
which aims at the development of a system for storage and retrieval of personal
illness relating narratives [13,14]. In this project we use and further develop
a semantic parser/generator for Dutch, Delilah [5,4]. Delilah is driven by a
Combinatory Categorial Grammar and has a semantic output in first order
logic with neo-Davidsonian event structures.
2 Verbs and their nominalizations
In this section we use nominalizations of verbs to illustrate our main consider-
ations. Sentence (1a) uses the noun operatie ?operation, surgery? and (1b) uses
the verb opereren ?operate?. The intuition is that (1a) and (1b) are equivalent.
They can be inferred from each other.
(1) a. Marie
Mary
onderging
underwent
een
an
operatie.
operation
?Mary went though/ had surgery.?
b. Marie
Mary
werd
was
geopereerd.
operated
?Mary was operated on.?
The same goes for (2a) and (2b), containing negation.
(2) a. Marie
Mary
onderging
underwent
geen
no
operatie.
operation
?Mary went though/ had surgery.?
b. Marie
Mary
werd
was
niet
not
geopereerd.
operated
?Mary was not operated on.?
Since the narratives in Narrator are about experiences of patients (in the
prototype being currently developed, on breast cancer), this kind of informa-
tion is rather relevant and should preferably not be missed or misinterpreted.
If one of the search criteria is, for example, that the narrative should tell about
a patient who had surgery, then each of these sentences above, if occurring in
a narrative, provides the relevant information to determine wether it meets
this search criterion or not. And of each pair, both variants provide the same
information.
Opereren en operatie introduce the same concept. Also the relation be-
tween opereren/operatie and Marie is the same in both (1a) and (1b). Ar-
guably it can also be inferred in both cases that there is yet someone else
involved who is not mentioned, a filler for the agent-slot of opereren/operatie.
A form of neo-Davidsonian event analysis can be used to give both sen-
tences the same semantic representation. The basic event representation for
both (1a) and (1b) is illustrated below. The representation is based on Parsons
[11]. (The ?concept of? relation is comparable to Jurafsky and Martin?s ?is-a?
[8].). The verb form is taken to name the concept. The verb can be consid-
ered as basic in a situation like this, because underived nouns do not usually
introduce events. As it does not lie within the scope of this paper to discuss
what is the best way to represent time/tense, we keep the representations very
simple in that respect.
(3) ?e.event(e) & concept of(e, operate) & agent of(e, x) & theme of(e,
Mary) & at-time(e, past)
For (1b) this kind of representation is quite standard, and event repre-
sentations for event-denoting nominalizations have also been suggested before
[11,7]. The verb ondergaan in (1a) plays a special role. It places the event in
time (makes it extensional) and it lets its subject be the theme of the surgery
event.
3 Adjectives and nouns
In the previous section we have looked at nominalizations of verbs, and seen
that event semantics helps us getting the right entailments. Now we will look
at adjectives and their nominalizations. The pair below is at least close to
equivalent. Who has an illness, is ill. Who is ill, has at least one illness.
(4) a. Marie
Mary
had
had
een
an
ziekte.
illness
?Mary had an illness.?
b. Marie
Mary
was
was
ziek.
ill
?Mary was ill.?
One could try to treat ?have an illness? as a kind of collocation and this
way have (4a) interpreted as ill(Mary). This, however leaves no space in the
representation for the determiner, which may vary in form and accordingly in
interpretation.
For the pair boos/boosheid, it is more difficult to come up with two equiva-
lent sentences, for lack of a suitable ?support verb?. Still we can observe that
(5a) entails (5b).
(5) a. Jan
Jan
probeerde
tried
zijn
his
boosheid
anger
te
to
verbergen.
hide
?Jan tried to hide his anger.?
b. Jan
Jan
was
was
boos.
angry
?Jan was angry?
For Katz, however, stative nominalizations denote either a fact or an ex-
tent/degree, but never a state. So (5a) could mean that Jan tried to hide (the
fact) that he was angry, or how angry he was, but not the state of his being
angry. At least the factive reading seems very intuitive here. It is not clear
whether there is also a stative reading. In some other contexts, though, a
factive reading is not possible. In (6a) boosheid is combined with a durational
predicate. (A fact does not have a duration; once a fact, always a fact.) An
extent or degree reading doesn?t seem to make a lot of sense either.
(6) a. Hun
their
boosheid
anger
duurt
lasts
nooit
never
lang.
long
?Their anger never lasts long.?
b. Ze
they
zijn
are
nooit
never
lang
long
boos.
angry
?They never are angry for a long time?
Besides, even if zijn boosheid in (5a) does only have a factive reading, how
should we represent the content of this fact in such a way that (5b) follows from
it and that we faithfully represent the quantifier? (His anger is deninite.) We
can?t choose a representation like angry(Jan), because of the quantifier. But
if we represent it as a noun (with a possessive kind of relation to Jan), while
still using a traditional representation for (5b), then we lose the entailment.
So even when embedded in a fact, reification of the predicate still yields better
representations.
These considerations lead us to the following type of representation for
sentences like (4b) and (5b).
(7) ?e.state(e) & concept of(e, ill/anger) & theme of(e, Marie/Jan) & at-
time(e, past)
Interestingly, for the adjective-noun pairs it is not always that clear and
systematic which is the basic form. For the verb - noun pairs above the verb
was always basic and the noun was its nominalization. There are also verbs
derived from nouns, but they follow a different pattern. Adjective - noun pairs
behave less systematically. In the pair verdrietig ?sad? - verdriet ?sadness?, the
adjective seems to be the derived form in Dutch, whereas in English the noun
has a nominalizing suffix. And for boos ?angry? - boosheid ?anger? it is the
other way around.
4 An alternative representation
We have seen that adjectives and their ?nominalizations? display the same
kind of inference patterns as verbs and their nominalizations, and that reifi-
cation of the predicate, through postulating an eventuality argument, makes
these patterns follow naturally. This reification seems to be the crucial point,
though. And since independent evidence for a Davidsonian analysis for sta-
tives is kind of shaky, we should investigate whether we really need the full
structure. Maienborn [10] proposes a representation for statives which does
involve reification of the predicate, but is different from the Davidsonian event
structure representation. In this section we discuss this alternative.
4.1 Kimian states
Maienborn argues for a distinction between Davidsonian states (D-states) and
Kimian states (K-states). Examples of verbs introducing D-states are stand,
sit and sleep. Examples of verbs introducing K-states are know, hate, resemble
and copular expressions. In the latter it is the copula that introduces the K-
state.
D-states introduce a normal Davidsonian argument, just like other eventu-
alities. For the K-states Maienborn shows that, like D-states, they are avail-
able to anaphoric reference and time modification, and therefore they need
a referential argument. This referential argument, she argues though, is of a
different ontological kind than Davidsonian eventuality arguments. It is of a
more abstract nature, similar to facts and propositions. The main argument
is their deviant combinatorial behavior. K-state verbs can not serve as the
infinitival complement of a verb of perception (see also examples (12b) and
(14a) later in this section), they cannot combine with most adverbials, such as
manner adverbs and instrumentals, and neither do they combine with locative
modifiers, all of this in contrast with D-states and other eventualities. This
brings her to the following (tentative) definition of K-states.
(8) Kimian states:
K-states are abstract objects for the exemplification of a property P
at a holder x at a time t.
Here are some of Maienborn?s (German) examples: (9a), with a D-state,
is represented as (9b), and (10a), with a K-state, is represented as (10b). The
representations are in a flat DRT notation.
(9) a. Carol
Carol
schla?ft.
sleeps
?Carol is sleeping.?
b. [se , v | sleep(s), theme(s, v), carol(v)]
(10) a. Carol
Carol
ist
is
mu?de.
tired
?Carol is tired.?
b. [sz , v | s ? [tired(v)], carol(v)]
The embedded box in (10b) contains the property that is the K-state, and
the discourse referent s reifies this property.
4.2 Some modifications
Engelberg [6] proposes a few modifications to this view on K-states. He argues
the K-state should not be introduced by the copula, but rather by the post-
copula predicate (e.g. an adjective), because attributively used adjectives also
show the relevant behavior, without being accompanied by a copula.
Also, he shows that it is problematic to put individuals introduced by an
NP under the copula in the box that is introduced by ??? and presents the
?content? of the state. Because in that case the state in (11a) (being related
to Opus) would be a different one then the state in (11b) (being related to
George). And while the states in (11b) and (11d) are the same, if Opus is
the tuba player of the Deathto?ngue, since the subject is in the outer box and
therefore extensionalized over, this is not the case for the states in (11a) and
(11c).
(11) a. George is related to Opus.
b. Opus is related to George.
c. George is related to the tuba player of the Deathto?ngue
d. The tuba player of the Deathto?ngue is related to George.
Identity relations between states get more coherent and intuitive if the
content of the box embedded under ??? is restricted to only the core predicate
(e.g. related(x, y)).
Now if Engelberg is right that K-states are not more fine grained than
events and D-states, and the content of the embedded K-state box is in all
cases only a core predicate, one can wonder what the advantage of the Kimian
style representation still is. For facts and propositions this kind of represen-
tation is useful, exactly because the content of a proposition is more than a
single predicate; it is a full-fledged proposition, and it makes sense to assign
a referential argument to the proposition as a whole. Individuals introduced
by NPs in embedded propositions are not extensionalized over. If George said
that he is related to Opus and if Opus is the tuba player of the Deathto?ngue,
it is not entailed that George said that he is related to the tuba player of the
Deathto?ngue. The main remaining difference between the D-state and K-state
representations seems to be that the K-state predicate directly predicates over
its argument(s), whereas in D-states this relation is mediated through theta
roles. It is not clear why this should be the case.
4.3 Entailments between K-state and D-state verbs
Representing K-states in a different format than D-states, also causes another
complication in the domain of inference. German liegen ?to lie? is a D-state
verb, hence the grammaticality of (12a). Sein ?to be? and also sich befinden
?to be located? are K-state verbs, as shown by the ungrammaticality of (12b).
(12) a. Ich
I
sah
saw
das
the
Buch
book
auf
on
dem
the
Tisch
table
liegen.
lie
?I saw the book lie on the table.?
b. *Ich
I
sah
saw
das
the
Buch
book
sich
refl
auf
on
dem
the
Tisch
table
befinden.
be-located
?I saw the book be located on the table?
But (13a) entails (13b). 1 (Not all German speakers seem to like the version
with the copula, but with befinden (13b) is certainly good.) If these two
predicates introduce two very different types of states that require different
styles of representation, this entailment is problematic.
(13) a. Das
the
Buch
book
liegt
lies
auf
on
dem
the
Tisch.
table
?The book is lying on the table.?
b. Das
the
Buch
book
befindet
located
sich/ist
refl/ is
auf
on
dem
the
Tisch.
table
?The book is (located) on the table?
It is of course conceivable that the verb liegen actually introduces two
substates, one of which is Kimian. Intuitively positional location verbs (with
their complements) such as liegen refer two different pieces of information.
One of these is the location of the subject (expressed by the complement)
and the other one is in what kind of position the subject is (upright or lying
flat...). The locational information will have to be the K-state that gets us
the entailment. That means that the positional information has to constitute
the D-state that saves the construction in (12a).
So far the problem seems fixable, be it at the cost of losing the clear-cut
distinction between D-state verbs and K-state verbs. (The positional location
verbs stand, sit and lie are actually quite a substantial group within the D-
state verb class). But it gets worse. The verb to sleep is a D-state verb and
to be asleep, being a copula construction, behaves like a K-state expression,
as is illustrated below.
(14) a. *Ik
I
zag
saw
Carol
Carol
diep
deep(ly)
in
in
slaap
sleep
zijn.
be
?I saw Carol be fast asleep.?
b. Ik
I
zag
saw
Carol
Carol
slapen.
sleep
?I saw Carol sleep.?
1 These examples can be reproduced in Dutch, but there the copula version of (13b) is
somewhat marginal.
But we can observe that (15a) entails (15b).
(15) a. Carol
Carol
was
was
diep
deep(ly)
in
in
slaap.
sleep
?Carol was fast asleep.?
b. Carol
Carol
sliep.
slept
?Carol was sleeping?
Here it is not plausible that (15a) contains a D-state as well as a K-state,
because the presence of this D-state should save (14a). 2
Although the distinction between two groups of statives with different
behavior is very convincing, we conclude that in a semantic representation for
inference purposes, it does not seem to be a good idea to treat to sleep and
to be asleep as fundamentally different kinds of entities. We therefore stick to
Davidsonian style representations for all states. The differences between the
two classes that Maienborn shows are of course real. But as they mainly seem
relevant for selectional restrictions, they can probably best be captured as
part of the feature structure of the predicates, in a computational system like
ours. In Delilah the decision of whether two constituents can combine to form
a new one depends on the unifiability of their graphs of features. Here one can
include a feature that says for example that a predicate is ?abstract?. Verbs of
perception, all kinds of adverbials and locative modifiers can then be specified
for combining only with concrete predicates. The semantic representation
then only needs to contain information that is relevant for inference.
5 Adjectives and adverbs
Adjectives and adverbs are closely related categories [2]. (The main group of
adverbs that also occur as adjectives are the manner adverbs.) If we assume
2 An anonymous reviewer proposed the representation (1a) for ?Carol was asleep?. Made
consistent with the view that a K-state is the exemplification of a property that would be
(1b). (Where the property is ?being the theme of a sleep event?)
(1) a. [s | s ? [s?, v | [sleep(s?), theme(s?, v), carol(v)]]
b. [sz , v | s ? [s?e | [sleep(s?), theme(s?, v)], carol(v)]
With a D-state embedded in a K-state, this looks like an interesting compromise. The main
problem with it, is that Maienborn introduces K-states next to D-states in order to derive
the different combinatory properties of K-states and D-states from their different ontological
status. Now if a K-states embeds a D-state, with the same ontological status as any other
D-state, one would expect the embedded D-state to also have the same properties as other
D-states, such as being able to have a location. This would make the positing of K-states
loose its main advantage.
underlying states for adjectives, we should do so for their adverbial counter-
parts as well. (This is one of the reasons Katz [9] does not want underlying
states for adjectives.) This is not necessarily problematic, because the Ger-
man dabei -construction which Maienborn uses as a diagnostic for whether a
predicate has a referential argument, also seems to work for adverbs. In (16)
the da in dabei refers to schnell. This means that schnell should introduce a
referential argument.
(16) Erstaunlich
amazing
ist,
is
wie
how
schnell
fast
und
and
dabei
thereat
zuverla?ssig
reliably
der
the
neue
new
Mozilla
Mozilla
Firebird
Firebird
Seiten
web sites
darstellt.
displays
?Amazing is, how quickly and reliably the new Mozilla Firebird dis-
plays web sites.?
This suggests that our representation for these kinds of adverbs can be similar
to the one that we have proposed for adjectives.
6 Conclusions and further research
We have shown that a nice side effect of (neo-)Davidsonian event representa-
tions, is that entailment relations between verbs and their nominalizations and
between adjectives and their corresponding nouns follow naturally, without
any extra machinery. We have defended the use of a Davidsonian represen-
tation for adjectives, by showing that assuming states of different ontological
sorts obscures certain inferential relations. Our point of view is that semantic
representations should only contain information that is needed for inference.
Information that is relevant for selectional restrictions should be accommo-
dated elsewhere, where it does not interfere with inference.
In our parser Delilah we have implemented event structures for verbs and
nominalizations of verbs. We will proceed with implementing the proposed
structures for adjectives along the same lines. We believe that in general
semantic parsers that aim at producing structures that support inference can
benefit from such an approach. Further research will have to show how much
we need to further refine our event structures, for example by systematically
including subevents.
Acknowledgements
This research was funded by Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research
(NWO). Our participation in the workshop was funded by LUF (Leids Uni-
versiteits Fonds) and LUCL.
We also thank the reviewers for their comments.
References
[1] Bos, J., S. Clark, M. Steedman, J. R. Curran and J. Hockenmaier, Wide-
coverage semantic representations from a ccg parser, Proceedings of COLING-
04 (2004).
[2] Broekhuis, H., Adjectives and adjective phrases, Working Paper 2, University of
Tilburg (1999).
[3] Copestake, A., D. Flickinger, I. A. Sag and C. Pollard, Minimal recursion
semantics: An introduction (1999).
[4] Cremers, C., Formalizing the syntax (1999).
[5] Cremers, C., (?n) betekenis berekend, Nederlandse Taalkunde 7 (2002), pp. 375?
395.
[6] Engelberg, S., Kimian states and the grammar of predicative adjectives,
Theoretical Linguistics 31 (2005), pp. 331?347.
[7] Higginbotham, J., On events in linguistic semantics, in: J. Higginbotham,
F. Pianesi and A. Varzi, editors, Speaking of Events, Oxford University Press.,
Oxford, New York, 2000 pp. 49?79.
[8] Jurafsky, D. and J. H. Martin, ?Speech and Language Processing: An
Introduction to Natural Language Processing,? Computational Linguistics and
Speech Recognition, Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2000.
[9] Katz, G., Anti neo-davidsonianism: Against a davidsonian semantics for state
sentences, in: C. Tenny and J. Pustejovsky, editors, Events as Grammatical
Objects, CSLI Publications, Stanford, CA, 2000 pp. 393?416.
[10] Maienborn, C., On the limits of the davidsonian approach: The case of copula
sentences, Theoretical Linguistics 31 (2005), pp. 275?316.
[11] Parsons, T., ?Events in the semantics of English: a study in subatomic
semantics,? MIT press, Massachusetts, 1990.
[12] Parsons, T., Underlying states and time travel., in: J. Higginbotham, F. Pianesi
and A. Varzi, editors, Speaking of Events, Oxford University Press, Oxford, New
York, 2000 pp. 81?93.
[13] Toussaint, P. and L. Wolf, Design of the narrator system: processing, storing
and retrieving medical narrative data, Proceedings of ISoLA-2004 (2004).
[14] Wolf, L., E. Hoenkamp, R. Overberg, H. Reckman and P. Toussaint, Design of
the narrator system: processing, storing and retrieving medical narrative data,
Society for Design and Process Science (Submitted).
