Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 214?223,
Avignon, France, April 23 - 27 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
DualSum: a Topic-Model based approach for update summarization
Jean-Yves Delort
Google Research
Brandschenkestrasse 110
8002 Zurich, Switzerland
jydelort@google.com
Enrique Alfonseca
Google Research
Brandschenkestrasse 110
8002 Zurich, Switzerland
ealfonseca@google.com
Abstract
Update summarization is a new challenge
in multi-document summarization focusing
on summarizing a set of recent documents
relatively to another set of earlier docu-
ments. We present an unsupervised proba-
bilistic approach to model novelty in a doc-
ument collection and apply it to the genera-
tion of update summaries. The new model,
called DUALSUM, results in the second or
third position in terms of the ROUGE met-
rics when tuned for previous TAC competi-
tions and tested on TAC-2011, being statis-
tically indistinguishable from the winning
system. A manual evaluation of the gen-
erated summaries shows state-of-the art re-
sults for DUALSUM with respect to focus,
coherence and overall responsiveness.
1 Introduction
Update summarization is the problem of extract-
ing and synthesizing novel information in a col-
lection of documents with respect to a set of doc-
uments assumed to be known by the reader. This
problem has received much attention in recent
years, as can be observed in the number of partic-
ipants to the special track on update summariza-
tion organized by DUC and TAC since 2007. The
problem is usually formalized as follows: Given
two collections A and B, where the documents in
A chronologically precede the documents in B,
generate a summary of B under the assumption
that the user of the summary has already read the
documents in A.
Extractive techniques are the most common
approaches in multi-document summarization.
Summaries generated by such techniques consist
of sentences extracted from the document collec-
tion. Extracts can have coherence and cohesion
problems, but they generally offer a good trade-
off between linguistic quality and informative-
ness.
While numerous extractive summarization
techniques have been proposed for multi-
document summarization (Erkan and Radev,
2004; Radev et al 2004; Shen and Li, 2010; Li et
al., 2011), few techniques have been specifically
designed for update summarization. Most exist-
ing approaches handle it as a redundancy removal
problem, with the goal of producing a summary of
collection B that is as dissimilar as possible from
either collection A or from a summary of collec-
tionA. A problem with this approach is that it can
easily classify as redundant sentences in which
novel information is mixed with existing informa-
tion (from collection A). Furthermore, while this
approach can identify sentences that contain novel
information, it cannot model explicitly what the
novel information is.
Recently, Bayesian models have successfully
been applied to multi-document summarization
showing state-of-the-art results in summarization
competitions (Haghighi and Vanderwende, 2009;
Jin et al 2010). These approaches offer clear and
rigorous probabilistic interpretations that many
other techniques lack. Furthermore, they have the
advantage of operating in unsupervised settings,
which can be used in real-world scenarios, across
domains and languages. To our best knowledge,
previous work has not used this approach for up-
date summarization.
In this article, we propose a novel nonpara-
metric Bayesian approach for update summariza-
tion. Our approach, which is a variation of Latent
214
Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) (Blei et al 2003),
aims to learn to distinguish between common in-
formation and novel information. We have eval-
uated this approach on the ROUGE scores and
demonstrate that it produces comparable results
to the top system in TAC-2011. Furthermore, our
approach improves over that system when evalu-
ated manually in terms of linguistic quality and
overall responsiveness.
2 Related work
2.1 Bayesian approaches in Summarization
Most Bayesian approaches to summarization are
based on topic models. These generative mod-
els represent documents as mixtures of latent top-
ics, where a topic is a probability distribution over
words. In TOPICSUM (Haghighi and Vander-
wende, 2009), each word is generated by a sin-
gle topic which can be a corpus-wide background
distribution over common words, a distribution
of document-specific words or a distribution of
the core content of a given cluster. BAYESSUM
(Daume? and Marcu, 2006) and the Special Words
and Background model (Chemudugunta et al
2006) are very similar to TOPICSUM.
A commonality of all these models is the use of
collection and document-specific distributions in
order to distinguish between the general and spe-
cific topics in documents. In the context of sum-
marization, this distinction helps to identify the
important pieces of information in a collection.
Models that use more structure in the repre-
sentation of documents have also been proposed
for generating more coherent and less redun-
dant summaries, such as HIERSUM (Haghighi
and Vanderwende, 2009) and TTM (Celikyilmaz
and Hakkani-Tur, 2011). For instance, HIERSUM
models the intuitions that first sentences in docu-
ments should contain more general information,
and that adjacent sentences are likely to share
specic content vocabulary. However, HIERSUM,
which builds upon TOPICSUM, does not show
a statistically signicant improvement in ROUGE
over TOPICSUM.
A number of techniques have been proposed to
rank sentences of a collection given a word distri-
bution (Carbonell and Goldstein, 1998; Goldstein
et al 1999). The Kullback-Leibler divergence
(KL) is a widely used measure in summarization.
Given a target distribution T that we want a sum-
mary S to approximate, KL is commonly used as
the scoring function to select the subset of sen-
tences S? that minimizes the KL divergence with
T :
S? = argmin
S
KL(T, S) =
?
w?V
pT (w) log
pT (w)
pS(w)
where w is a word from the vocabulary V. This
strategy is called KLSum. Usually, a smoothing
factor ? is applied on the candidate distribution S
in order to avoid the divergence to be undefined1.
This objective function selects the most repre-
sentative sentences of the collection, and at the
same time it also diversifies the generated sum-
mary by penalizing redundancy. Since the prob-
lem of finding the subset of sentences from a
collection that minimizes the KL divergence is
NP-complete, a greedy algorithm is often used in
practice2. Some variations of this objective func-
tion can be considered, such as penalizing sen-
tences that contain document-specific topics (Ma-
son and Charniak, 2011) or rewarding sentences
appearing closer to the beginning of the docu-
ment.
Wang et al(2009) propose a Bayesian ap-
proach for summarization that does not use KL
for reranking. In their model, Bayesian Sentence-
based Topic Models, every sentence in a docu-
ment is assumed to be associated to a unique la-
tent topic. Once the model parameters have been
calculated, a summary is generated by choosing
the sentence with the highest probability for each
topic.
While hierarchical topic modeling approaches
have shown remarkable effectiveness in learning
the latent topics of document collections, they are
not designed to capture the novel information in
a collection with respect to another one, which is
the primary focus of update summarization.
2.2 Update Summarization
The goal of update summarization is to generate
an update summary of a collection B of recent
documents assuming that the users already read
earlier documents from a collection A. We refer
1In our experiments we set ? = 0.01.
2In our experiments, we follow the same approach as in
(Haghighi and Vanderwende, 2009) by greedily adding sen-
tences to a summary so long as they decrease KL divergence.
215
to collection A as the base collection and to col-
lection B as the update collection.
Update summarization is related to novelty de-
tection which can be defined as the problem of
determining whether a document contains new in-
formation given an existing collection (Soboroff
and Harman, 2005). Thus, while the goal of nov-
elty detection is to determine whether some infor-
mation is new, the goal of update summarization
is to extract and synthesize the novel information.
Update summarization is also related to con-
trastive summarization, i.e. the problem of jointly
generating summaries for two entities in order to
highlight their differences (Lerman and McDon-
ald, 2009). The primary difference here is that
update summarization aims to extract novel or up-
dated information in the update collection with re-
spect to the base collection.
The most common approach for update sum-
marization is to apply a normal multi-document
summarizer, with some added functionality to re-
move sentences that are redundant with respect
to collection A. This can be achieved using sim-
ple filtering rules (Fisher and Roark, 2008), Max-
imal Marginal Relevance (Boudin et al 2008), or
more complex graph-based algorithms (Shen and
Li, 2010; Wenjie et al 2008). The goal here is
to boost sentences in B that bring out completely
novel information. One problem with this ap-
proach is that it is likely to discard as redundant
sentences in B containing novel information if it
is mixed with known information from collection
A.
Another approach is to introduce specific fea-
tures intended to capture the novelty in collection
B. For example, comparing collections A and B,
FastSum derives features for the collection B such
as number of named entities in the sentence that
already occurred in the old cluster or the number
of new content words in the sentence not already
mentioned in the old cluster that are subsequently
used to train a Support Vector Machine classifier
(Schilder et al 2008). A limitation with this ap-
proach is there are no large training sets available
and, the more features it has, the more it is af-
fected by the sparsity of the training data.
3 DualSum
3.1 Model Formulation
The input for DUALSUM is a set of pairs of collec-
tions of documents C = {(Ai,Bi)}i=1...m, where
Ai is a base document collection and Bi is an up-
date document collection. We use c to refer to a
collection pair (Ac,Bc).
In DUALSUM, documents are modeled as a bag
of words that are assumed to be sampled from a
mixture of latent topics. Each word is associated
with a latent variable that specifies which topic
distribution is used to generate it. Words in a doc-
ument are assumed to be conditionally indepen-
dent given the hidden topic.
As in previous Bayesian works for summariza-
tion (Daume? and Marcu, 2006; Chemudugunta
et al 2006; Haghighi and Vanderwende, 2009),
DUALSUM not only learns collection-specific dis-
tributions, but also a general background distri-
bution over common words, ?G and a document-
specific distribution ?cd for each document d in
collection pair c, which is useful to separate the
specific aspects from the general aspects of c. The
main novelty is that DUALSUM introduces spe-
cific machinery for identifying novelty.
To capture the differences between the base and
the update collection for each pair c, DUALSUM
learns two topics for every collection pair. The
joint topic, ?Ac captures the common information
between the two collections in the pair, i.e. the
main event that both collections are discussing.
The update topic, ?Bc focuses on the specific as-
pects that are specific of the documents inside the
update collection.
In the generative model,
? For a document d in a collection Ac, words
can be originated from one of three differ-
ent topics: ?G, ?cd and ?Ac , the last one of
which captures the main topic described in
the collection pair.
? For a document d in a collection Bc, words
can be originated from one of four different
topics: ?G, ?cd, ?Ac and ?Bc . The last one
will capture the most important updates to
the main topic.
To make this representation easier, we can also
state that both collections are generated from the
four topics, but we constrain the topic probability
216
1. Sample ?G ? Dir(?G)
2. For each collection pair c = (Ac,Bc):
? Sample ?Ac ? Dir(?A)
? Sample ?Bc ? Dir(?B)
? For each document d of type ucd ? {A,B}:
- Sample ?cd ? Dir(?D)
- If (ucd = A) sample ?cd ? Dir(?A)
- If (ucd = B) sample ?cd ? Dir(?B)
- For each word w in document d:
(a) Sample a topic z ? Mult(?cd), z ?
{G, cd,Ac,Bc}
(b) Sample a word w ?Mult(?z)
Figure 1: Generative model in DUALSUM.
w
z
?D
?
?B
?B
?D ?G
?G
?B
u
?A
?A
?A
Figure 2: Graphical model representation of DUAL-
SUM.
for ?Bc to be always zero when generating a base
document.
We denote ucd ? {A,B} the type of a docu-
ment d in pair c. This is an observed, Boolean
variable stating whether the document d belongs
to the base or the update collection inside the pair
c.
The generation process of documents in DU-
ALSUM is described in Figure 1, and the plate
diagram corresponding to this generative story
is shown in Figure 2. DUALSUM is an LDA-
like model, where topic distributions are multi-
nomial distributions over words and topics that
are sampled from Dirichlet distributions. We use
? = (?G, ?D, ?A, ?B) as symmetric priors for the
Dirichlet distributions generating the word distri-
butions. In our experiments, we set ?G = 0.1 and
?D = ?A = ?B = 0.001. A greater value is as-
signed to ?G in order to reflect the intuition that
there should be more words in the background
than in the other distributions, so the mass is ex-
pected to be shared on a larger number of words.
Unlike for the word distributions, mixing prob-
abilities are drawn from a Dirichlet distribution
with asymmetric priors. The prior knowledge
about the origin of words in the base and up-
date collections is again encoded at the level the
hyper-parameters. For example, if we set ?A =
(5, 3, 2, 0), this would reflect the intuition that,
on average, in the base collections, 50% of the
words originate from the background distribution,
30% from the document-specific distribution, and
20% from the joint topic. Similarly, if we set
?B = (5, 2, 2, 1), the prior reflects the assumption
that, on average, in the update collections, 50% of
the words originate from the background distri-
bution, 20% from the document-specific distribu-
tion, 20% from the joint topic, and 10% from the
novel, update topic3. The priors we have actually
used are reported in Section 4.
3.2 Learning and inference
In order to find the optimal model parameters, the
following equation needs to be computed:
p(z, ?, ?|w,u) =
p(z, ?, ?,w,u)
p(w,u)
Omitting hyper-parameters for notational sim-
plicity, the joint distribution over the observed
variables is:
p(w,u) = p(?G)?
?
c
p(?Ac)p(?Bc)?
?
d
p(ucd)p(?
cd)
?
?
p(?cd|ucd)d?
cd ?
?
n
?
cdn
p(wcdn|zcdn)p(zcdn|?
cd)
where ? denotes the 4-dimensional simplex4.
Since this equation is intractable, we need to per-
form approximate inference in order to estimate
the model parameters. A number of Bayesian sta-
tistical inference techniques can be used to ad-
dress this problem.
3To highlight the difference between asymmetric and
symmetric priors we put the indices in superscript and sub-
script respectively.
4Remember that, for base documents, words cannot
be generated by the update topic, so ? denotes the 3-
dimensional simplex for base documents.
217
Variational approaches (Blei et al 2003) and
collapsed Gibbs sampling (Griffiths and Steyvers,
2004) are common techniques for approximate in-
ference in Bayesian models. They offer different
advantages: the variational approach is arguably
faster computationally, but the Gibbs sampling
approach is in principal more accurate since it
asymptotically approaches the correct distribution
(Porteous et al 2008). In this section, we pro-
vide details on a collapsed Gibbs sampling strat-
egy to infer the model parameters of DUALSUM
for a given dataset.
Collapsed Gibbs sampling is a particular case
of Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) that in-
volves repeatedly sampling a topic assignment for
each word in the corpus. A single iteration of the
Gibbs sampler is completed after sampling a new
topic for each word based on the previous assign-
ment. In a collapsed Gibbs sampler, the model
parameters are integrated out (or collapsed), al-
lowing to only sample z. Let us call wcdn the n-th
word in document d in collection c, and zcdn its
topic assignment. For Gibbs sampling, we need
to calculate p(zcdn|w,u, z?cdn) where z?cdn de-
notes the random vector of topic assignments ex-
cept the assignment zcdn.
p(zcdn = j|w,u, z?cdn, ?A, ?B, ?) ?
n(wcdn)?cdn,j + ?j
?V
v=1 n
(v)
?cdn,j + V ?j
n(cd)?cdn,j + ?
ucd
j
?
k?K(n
(cd)
?cdn,k + ?
ucd
k )
where K = {G, cd,Ac,Bc}, n
(v)
?cdn,j denotes the
number of times word v is assigned to topic j
excluding current assignment of word wcdn and
n(cd)?cdn,k denotes the number of words in document
d of collection c that are assigned to topic j ex-
cluding current assignment of word wcdn.
After each sampling iteration, the model pa-
rameters can be estimated using the following for-
mulas5.
?kw =
n(w)k + ?k
?V
v=1 n
(v)
k + V ?k
?cdk =
n(cd)k + ?k?
n(cd). + V ?k
5The interested reader is invited to consult (Wang, 2011)
for more details on using Gibbs sampling for LDA-like mod-
els
where k ? K, n(v)k denotes the number of times
word v is assigned to topic k, and n(cd)k denotes
the number of words in document d of collection
c that are assigned to topic k.
By the strong law of large numbers, the average
of sample parameters should converge towards
the true expected value of the model parameter.
Therefore, good estimates of the model parame-
ters can be obtained averaging over the sampled
values. As suggested by Gamerman and Lopes
(2006), we have set a lag (20 iterations) between
samples in order to reduce auto-correlation be-
tween samples. Our sampler also discards the first
100 iterations as burn-in period in order to avoid
averaging from samples that are still strongly in-
fluenced by the initial assignment.
4 Experiments in Update
Summarization
The Bayesian graphical model described in the
previous section can be run over a set of news
collections to learn the background distribution,
a joint distribution for each collection, an update
distribution for each collection and the document-
specific distributions. Once this is done, one of
the learned collections can be used to generate the
summary that best approximates this collection,
using the greedy algorithm described by Haghighi
and Vanderwende (2009). Still, there are some pa-
rameters that can be defined and which affects the
results obtained:
? DUALSUM?s choice of hyper-parameters af-
fects how the topics are learned.
? The documents can be represented with n-
grams of different lengths.
? It is possible to generate a summary that ap-
proximates the joint distribution, the update-
only distribution, or a combination of both.
This section describes how these parameters
have been tuned.
4.1 Parameter tuning
We use the TAC 2008 and 2009 update task
datasets as training set for tuning the hyper-
parameters for the model, namely the pseudo-
counts for the two Dirichlet priors that affects the
topic mix assignment for each document. By per-
forming a grid search over a large set of pos-
sible hyper-parameters, these have been fixed to
218
?A = (90, 190, 50, 0) and ?B = (90, 170, 45, 25)
as the values that produced the best ROUGE-2
score on those two datasets.
Regarding the base collection, this can be inter-
preted as setting as prior knowledge that roughly
27% of the words in the original dataset originate
from the background distribution, 58% from the
document-specific distributions, and 15% from
the topic of the original collection. We remind
the reader that the last value in ?A is set to zero
because, due to the problem definition, the origi-
nal collection must have no words generated from
the update topic, which reflects the most recent
developments that are still not present in the base
collections A.
Regarding the update set, 27% of the words are
assumed to originate again from the background
distribution, 51% from the document-specific dis-
tributions, 14% from an topic in common with
the original collection, and 8% from the update-
specific topic. One interesting fact to note from
these settings is that most of the words belong to
topics that are specific to single documents (58%
and 51% respectively for both sets A and B) and
to the background distribution, whereas the joint
and update topics generate a much smaller, lim-
ited set of words. This helps these two distribu-
tions to be more focused.
The other settings mentioned at the beginning
of this section have been tuned using the TAC-
2010 dataset, which we reserved as our develop-
ment set. Once the different document-specific
and collection-specific distributions have been ob-
tained, we have to choose the target distribu-
tion T to with which the possible summaries will
be compared using the KL metric. Usually, the
human-generated update summaries not only in-
clude the terms that are very specific about the last
developments, but they also include a little back-
ground regarding the developing event. There-
fore, we try, for KLSum, a simple mixture be-
tween the joint topic (?A) and the update topic
(?B).
Figure 3 shows the ROUGE-2 results obtained
as we vary the mixture weight between the joint
?A distribution and the update-specific ?B distri-
bution. As can be seen at the left of the curve, us-
ing only the update-specific model, which disre-
gards the generic words about the topic described,
produces much lower results. The results improve
as the relative weight of the joined topic model
Figure 3: Variation in ROUGE-2 score in the TAC-
2010 dataset as we change the mixture weight for the
joined topic model between 0 and 1.
Figure 4: Effect of the mixture weight in ROUGE-2
scores (TAC-2010 dataset). Results are reported us-
ing bigrams (above, blue), unigrams (middle, red) and
trigrams (below, yellow).
increases until it plateaus at a maximum around
roughly the interval [0.6, 0.8], and from that point
performance slowly degrades as at the right part
of the curve the update model is given very little
importance in generating the summary. Based on
these results, from this point onwards, the mixture
weight has been set to 0.7. Note that using only
the joint distribution (setting the mixture weight
to 1.0) also produces reasonable results, hinting
that it successfully incorporates the most impor-
tant n-grams from across the base and the update
collections at the same time.
A second parameter is the size of the n-grams
for representing the documents. The original
implementations of SUMBASIC (Nenkova and
Vanderwende, 2005) and TOPICSUM (Haghighi
and Vanderwende, 2009) were defined over sin-
219
gle words (unigrams). Still, Haghighi and Van-
derwende (2009) report some improvements in
the ROUGE-2 score when representing words as
a bag of bigrams, and Darling (2010) mention
similar improvements when running SUMBASIC
with bigrams. Figure 4 shows the effect on the
ROUGE-2 curve when we switch to using uni-
grams and trigrams. As stated in previous work,
using bigrams has better results than using uni-
grams. Using trigrams was worse than either of
them. This is probably because trigrams are too
specific and the document collections are small,
so the models are more likely to suffer from data
sparseness.
4.2 Baselines
DUALSUM is a modification of TOPICSUM de-
signed specifically for the case of update sum-
marization, by modifying TOPICSUM?s graphical
model in a way that captures the dependency be-
tween the joint and the update collections. Still, it
is important to discover whether the new graphi-
cal model actually improves over simpler applica-
tions of TOPICSUM to this task. The three base-
lines that we have considered are:
? Running TOPICSUM on the set of collections
containing only the update documents. We
call this run TOPICSUMB.
? Running TOPICSUM on the set of collections
containing both the base and the update doc-
uments. Contrary to the previous run, the
topic model for each collection in this run
will contain information relevant to the base
events. We call this run TOPICSUMA?B.
? Running TOPICSUM twice, once on the set
of collections containing the update docu-
ments, and the second time on the set of
collections containing the base documents.
Then, for each collection, the obtained base
and update models are combined in a mix-
ture model using a mixture weight between
zero and one. The weight has been tuned us-
ing TAC-2010 as development set. We call
this run TOPICSUMA+TOPICSUMB.
4.3 Automatic evaluation
DUALSUM and the three baselines6 have been
6Using the settings obtained in the previous section, hav-
ing been optimized on the datasets from previous TAC com-
petitions.
automatically evaluated using the TAC-2011
dataset. Table 1 shows the ROUGE results ob-
tained. Because of the non-deterministic nature
of Gibbs sampling, the results reported here are
the average of five runs for all the baselines and
for DUALSUM. DUALSUM outperforms two of
the baselines in all three ROUGE metrics, and it
also outperforms TOPICSUMB on two of the three
metrics.
The top three systems in TAC-2011 have been
included for comparison. The results between
these three systems, and between them and DU-
ALSUM, are all indistinguishable at 95% confi-
dence. Note that the best baseline, TOPICSUMB,
is quite competitive, with results that are indis-
tinguishable to the top participants in this year?s
evaluation. Note as well that, because we have
five different runs for our algorithms, whereas
we just have one output for the TAC participants,
the confidence intervals in the second case were
slightly bigger when checking for statistical sig-
nificance, so it is slightly harder for these systems
to assert that they outperform the baselines with
95% confidence. These results would have made
DUALSUM the second best system for ROUGE-
1 and ROUGE-SU4, and the third best system in
terms of ROUGE-2.
The supplementary materials contain a detailed
example of the the topic model obtained for the
background in the TAC-2011 dataset, and the base
and update models for collection D1110. As
expected, the top unigrams and bigrams are all
closed-class words and auxiliary verbs. Because
trigrams are longer, background trigrams actu-
ally include some content words (e.g. university
or director). Regarding the models for ?A and
?B, the base distribution contains words related
to the original event of an earthquake in Sichuan
province (China), and the update distribution fo-
cuses more on the official (updated) death toll
numbers. It can be noted here that the tokenizer
we used is very simple (splitting tokens separated
with white-spaces or punctuation) so that num-
bers such as 7.9 (the magnitude of the earthquake)
and 12,000 or 14,000 are divided into two tokens.
We thought this might be a for the bigram-based
system to produce better results, but we ran the
summarizers with a numbers-aware tokenizer and
the statistical differences between versions still
hold.
220
Method R-1 R-2 R-SU4
TOPICSUMB 0.3442 0.0868 0.1194
TOPICSUMA?B 0.3385 0.0809 0.1159
TOPICSUMA+TOPICSUMB 0.3328 0.0770 0.1125
DUALSUM 0.3575??? 0.0924?? 0.1285???
TAC-2011 best system (Peer 43) 0.3559?? 0.0958?? 0.1308???
TAC-2011 2nd system (Peer 25) 0.3582?? 0.0926? 0.1276??
TAC-2011 3rd system (Peer 17) 0.3558?? 0.0886 0.1279??
Table 1: Results on the TAC-2011 dataset. ?, ? and ? indicate that a result is significantly better than TOPICSUMB,
TOPICSUMA?B and TOPICSUMA+TOPICSUMB, respectively (p < 0.05).
4.4 Manual evaluation
While the ROUGE metrics provides an arguable
estimate of the informativeness of a generated
summary, it does not account for other important
aspects such as the readability or the overall re-
sponsiveness. To evaluate such aspects, a manual
evaluation is required. A fairly standard approach
for manual evaluation is through pairwise com-
parison (Haghighi and Vanderwende, 2009; Ce-
likyilmaz and Hakkani-Tur, 2011).
In this approach, raters are presented with pairs
of summaries generated by two systems and they
are asked to say which one is best with respect
to some aspects. We followed a similar approach
to compare DualSum with Peer 43 - the best sys-
tem with respect to ROUGE-2, on the TAC 2011
dataset. For each collection, raters were presented
with three summaries: a reference summary ran-
domly chosen from the model summaries, and the
summaries generated by Peer 43 and DualSum.
They were asked to read the summaries and say
which one of the two generated summaries is best
with respect to: 1) Overall responsiveness: which
summary is best overall (both in terms of content
and fluency), 2) Focus: which summary contains
less irrelevant details, 3) Coherence: which sum-
mary is more coherent and 4) Non-redundancy:
which summary repeats less the same informa-
tion. For each aspect, the rater could also reply
that both summary were of the same quality.
For each of the 44 collections in TAC-2011, 3
ratings were collected from raters7. Results are
reported in Table 2. DualSum outperforms Peer
43 in three aspects, including Overall Responsive-
ness, which aggregates all the other scores and
can be considered the most important one. Re-
7In total 132 raters participated to the task via our own
crowdsourcing platform, not mentioned yet for blind review.
Best system
Aspect Peer 43 Same DualSum
Overall Responsiveness 39 25 68
Focus 41 22 69
Coherence 39 30 63
Non-redundancy 40 53 39
Table 2: Results of the side-by-side manual evaluation.
garding Non-redundancy, DualSum and Peer 43
obtain similar results but the majority of raters
found no difference between the two systems.
Fleiss ? has been used to measure the inter-rater
agreement. For each aspect, we observe ? ? 0.2
which corresponds to a slight agreement; but if we
focus on tasks where the 3 ratings reflect a prefer-
ence for either of the two systems, then ? ? 0.5,
which indicates moderate agreement.
4.5 Efficiency and applicability
The running time for summarizing the TAC col-
lections with DualSum, averaged over a hundred
runs, is 4.97 minutes, using one core (2.3 GHz).
Memory consumption was 143 MB.
It is important to note as well that, while TOP-
ICSUM incorporates an additional layer to model
topic distributions at the sentence level, we noted
early in our experiments that this did not improve
the performance (as evaluated with ROUGE) and
consequently relaxed that assumption in Dual-
Sum. This resulted in a simplification of the
model and a reduction of the sampling time.
While five minutes is fast enough to be able
to experiment and tune parameters with the TAC
collections, it would be quite slow for a real-
time summarization system able to generate sum-
maries on request. As can be seen from the plate
diagram in Figure 2, all the collections are gen-
erated independently from each other. The only
exception, for which it is necessary to have all
221
the collections available at the same time dur-
ing Gibbs sampling, is the background distribu-
tion, which is estimated from all the collections
simultaneously, roughly representing 27% of the
words, that should appear distributed across all
documents.
The good news is that this background distri-
bution will contain closed-class words in the lan-
guage, which are domain-independent (see sup-
plementary material for examples). Therefore,
we can generate this distribution from one of
the TAC datasets only once, and then it can be
reused. Fixing the background distribution to a
pre-computed value requires a very simple mod-
ification of the Gibbs sampling implementation,
which just needs to adjust at each iteration the
collection and document-specific models, and the
topic assignment for the words.
Using this modified implementation, it is now
possible to summarize a single collection inde-
pendently. The summarization of a single col-
lection of the size of the TAC collections is re-
duced on average to only three seconds on the
same hardware settings, allowing the use of this
summarizer in an on-line application.
5 Conclusions
The main contribution of this paper is DUALSUM,
a new topic model that is specifically designed to
identify and extract novelty from pairs of collec-
tions.
It is inspired by TOPICSUM (Haghighi and
Vanderwende, 2009), with two main changes:
Firstly, while TOPICSUM can only learn the main
topic of a collection, DUALSUM focuses on the
differences between two collections. Secondly,
while TOPICSUM incorporates an additional layer
to model topic distributions at the sentence level,
we have found that relaxing this assumption and
modeling the topic distribution at document level
does not decrease the ROUGE scores and reduces
the sampling time.
The generated summaries, tested on the TAC-
2011 collection, would have resulted on the sec-
ond and third position in the last summarization
competition according to the different ROUGE
scores. This would make DUALSUM statistically
indistinguishable from the top system with 0.95
confidence.
We also propose and evaluate the applicability
of an alternative implementation of Gibbs sam-
pling to on-line settings. By fixing the back-
ground distribution we are able to summarize a
distribution in only three seconds, which seems
reasonable for some on-line applications.
As future work, we plan to explore the use of
DUALSUM to generate more general contrastive
summaries, by identifying differences between
collections whose differences are not of temporal
nature.
Acknowledgments
The research leading to these results has received
funding from the European Union?s Seventh
Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under
grant agreement number 257790. We would also
like to thank Yasemin Altun and the anonymous
reviewers for their useful comments on the draft
of this paper.
References
David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jordan.
2003. Latent dirichlet alcation. J. Mach. Learn.
Res., 3:993?1022, March.
Florian Boudin, Marc El-Be`ze, and Juan-Manuel
Torres-Moreno. 2008. A scalable MMR approach
to sentence scoring for multi-document update sum-
marization. In Coling 2008: Companion volume:
Posters, pages 23?26, Manchester, UK, August.
Coling 2008 Organizing Committee.
J. Carbonell and J. Goldstein. 1998. The use of mmr,
diversity-based reranking for reordering documents
and producing summaries. In Proceedings of the
21st annual international ACM SIGIR conference
on Research and development in information re-
trieval, pages 335?336. ACM.
Asli Celikyilmaz and Dilek Hakkani-Tur. 2011. Dis-
covery of topically coherent sentences for extrac-
tive summarization. In Proceedings of the 49th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages
491?499, Portland, Oregon, USA, June. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Chaitanya Chemudugunta, Padhraic Smyth, and Mark
Steyvers. 2006. Modeling general and specific as-
pects of documents with a probabilistic topic model.
In NIPS, pages 241?248.
W.M. Darling. 2010. Multi-document summarization
from first principles. In Proceedings of the third
Text Analysis Conference, TAC-2010. NIST.
Hal Daume?, III and Daniel Marcu. 2006. Bayesian
query-focused summarization. In Proceedings of
the 21st International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics and the 44th annual meeting
222
of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
ACL-2006, pages 305?312, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Gu?nes Erkan and Dragomir R. Radev. 2004. Lexrank:
graph-based lexical centrality as salience in text
summarization. J. Artif. Int. Res., 22:457?479, De-
cember.
S. Fisher and B. Roark. 2008. Query-focused super-
vised sentence ranking for update summaries. In
Proceedings of the first Text Analysis Conference,
TAC-2008.
Dani Gamerman and Hedibert F. Lopes. 2006.
Markov Chain Monte Carlo: Stochastic Simulation
for Bayesian Inference. Chapman and Hall/CRC.
Jade Goldstein, Mark Kantrowitz, Vibhu Mittal, and
Jaime Carbonell. 1999. Summarizing text docu-
ments: sentence selection and evaluation metrics.
In Proceedings of the 22nd annual international
ACM SIGIR conference on Research and develop-
ment in information retrieval, SIGIR ?99, pages
121?128, New York, NY, USA. ACM.
T. L. Griffiths and M. Steyvers. 2004. Finding scien-
tific topics. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 101(Suppl. 1):5228?5235, April.
A. Haghighi and L. Vanderwende. 2009. Exploring
content models for multi-document summarization.
In Proceedings of Human Language Technologies:
The 2009 Annual Conference of the North Ameri-
can Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 362?370. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Feng Jin, Minlie Huang, and Xiaoyan Zhu. 2010. The
thu summarization systems at tac 2010. In Proceed-
ings of the third Text Analysis Conference, TAC-
2010.
Kevin Lerman and Ryan McDonald. 2009. Con-
trastive summarization: an experiment with con-
sumer reviews. In Proceedings of Human Lan-
guage Technologies: The 2009 Annual Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, Companion Volume:
Short Papers, NAACL-Short ?09, pages 113?116,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Xuan Li, Liang Du, and Yi-Dong Shen. 2011. Graph-
based marginal ranking for update summarization.
In Proceedings of the Eleventh SIAM International
Conference on Data Mining. SIAM / Omnipress.
Rebecca Mason and Eugene Charniak. 2011. Ex-
tractive multi-document summaries should explic-
itly not contain document-specific content. In Pro-
ceedings of the Workshop on Automatic Summariza-
tion for Different Genres, Media, and Languages,
WASDGML ?11, pages 49?54, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
A. Nenkova and L. Vanderwende. 2005. The im-
pact of frequency on summarization. Microsoft Re-
search, Redmond, Washington, Tech. Rep. MSR-TR-
2005-101.
Ian Porteous, David Newman, Alexander Ihler, Arthur
Asuncion, Padhraic Smyth, and Max Welling.
2008. Fast collapsed Gibbs sampling for latent
Dirichlet alcation. In KDD ?08: Proceeding of
the 14th ACM SIGKDD international conference on
Knowledge discovery and data mining, pages 569?
577, New York, NY, USA, August. ACM.
Dragomir R. Radev, Hongyan Jing, Malgorzata Stys?,
and Daniel Tam. 2004. Centroid-based summariza-
tion of multiple documents. Inf. Process. Manage.,
40:919?938, November.
Frank Schilder, Ravikumar Kondadadi, Jochen L. Lei-
dner, and Jack G. Conrad. 2008. Thomson reuters
at tac 2008: Aggressive filtering with fastsum for
update and opinion summarization. In Proceedings
of the first Text Analysis Conference, TAC-2008.
Chao Shen and Tao Li. 2010. Multi-document sum-
marization via the minimum dominating set. In
Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference
on Computational Linguistics, COLING ?10, pages
984?992, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Ian Soboroff and Donna Harman. 2005. Novelty de-
tection: the trec experience. In Proceedings of the
conference on Human Language Technology and
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, HLT ?05, pages 105?112, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Dingding Wang, Shenghuo Zhu, Tao Li, and Yihong
Gong. 2009. Multi-document summarization us-
ing sentence-based topic models. In Proceedings
of the ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Conference Short Papers,
ACLShort ?09, pages 297?300, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yi Wang. 2011. Distributed gibbs sampling of latent
dirichlet alcation: The gritty details.
Li Wenjie, Wei Furu, Lu Qin, and He Yanxiang. 2008.
Pnr2: ranking sentences with positive and nega-
tive reinforcement for query-oriented update sum-
marization. In Proceedings of the 22nd Interna-
tional Conference on Computational Linguistics -
Volume 1, COLING ?08, pages 489?496, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
223
Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 54?59,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 8-14 July 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
Pattern Learning for Relation Extraction with a Hierarchical Topic Model
Enrique Alfonseca Katja Filippova Jean-Yves Delort
Google Research
Brandschenkestrasse 110
8002 Zurich, Switzerland
{ealfonseca,katjaf,jydelort}@google.com
Guillermo Garrido?
NLP & IR Group, UNED
Juan del Rosal, 16.
28040 Madrid, Spain
ggarrido@lsi.uned.es
Abstract
We describe the use of a hierarchical topic
model for automatically identifying syntactic
and lexical patterns that explicitly state on-
tological relations. We leverage distant su-
pervision using relations from the knowledge
base FreeBase, but do not require any man-
ual heuristic nor manual seed list selections.
Results show that the learned patterns can be
used to extract new relations with good preci-
sion.
1 Introduction
The detection of relations between entities for the
automatic population of knowledge bases is very
useful for solving tasks such as Entity Disambigua-
tion, Information Retrieval and Question Answer-
ing. The availability of high-coverage, general-
purpose knowledge bases enable the automatic iden-
tification and disambiguation of entities in text
and its applications (Bunescu and Pasca, 2006;
Cucerzan, 2007; McNamee and Dang, 2009; Kwok
et al, 2001; Pasca et al, 2006; Weld et al, 2008;
Pereira et al, 2009; Kasneci et al, 2009).
Most early works in this area were designed
for supervised Information Extraction competitions
such as MUC (Sundheim and Chinchor, 1993) and
ACE (ACE, 2004; Doddington et al, 2004; Li et
al., 2011), which rely on the availability of anno-
tated data. Open Information Extraction (Sekine,
2006; Banko et al, 2007; Bollegala et al, 2010)
started as an effort to approach relation extraction in
?Work done during an internship at Google Zurich.
a completely unsupervised way, by learning regular-
ities and patterns from the web. Two example sys-
tems implementing this paradigm are TEXTRUN-
NER (Yates et al, 2007) and REVERB (Fader et al,
2011). These systems do not need any manual data
or rules, but the relational facts they extract are not
immediately disambiguated to entities and relations
from a knowledge base.
A different family of unsupervised methods for
relation extraction is unsupervised semantic pars-
ing, which aims at clustering entity mentions and
relation surface forms, thus generating a semantic
representation of the texts on which inference may
be used. Some techniques that have been used are
Markov Random Fields (Poon and Domingos, 2009)
and Bayesian generative models (Titov and Klemen-
tiev, 2011). These are quite powerful approaches
but have very high computational requirements (cf.
(Yao et al, 2011)).
A good trade-off between fully supervised and
fully unsupervised approaches is distant supervi-
sion, a semi-supervised procedure consisting of find-
ing sentences that contain two entities whose rela-
tion we know, and using those sentences as train-
ing examples for a supervised classifier (Hoffmann
et al, 2010; Wu and Weld, 2010; Hoffmann et al,
2011; Wang et al, 2011; Yao et al, 2011). A usual
problem is that two related entities may co-occur in
one sentence for many unrelated reasons. For ex-
ample, Barack Obama is the president of the United
States, but not every sentence including the two en-
tities supports and states this relation. Much of the
previous work uses heuristics, e.g. extracting sen-
tences only from encyclopedic entries (Mintz et al,
54
2009; Hoffmann et al, 2011; Wang et al, 2011), or
syntactic restrictions on the sentences and the entity
mentions (Wu and Weld, 2010). These are usually
defined manually and may need to be adapted to dif-
ferent languages and domains. Manually selected
seeds can also be used (Ravichandran and Hovy,
2002; Kozareva and Hovy, 2010).
The main contribution of this work is presenting
a variant of distance supervision for relation extrac-
tion where we do not use heuristics in the selection
of the training data. Instead, we use topic models to
discriminate between the patterns that are expressing
the relation and those that are ambiguous and can be
applied across relations. In this way, high-precision
extraction patterns can be learned without the need
of any manual intervention.
2 Unsupervised relational pattern learning
Similar to other distant supervision methods, our ap-
proach takes as input an existing knowledge base
containing entities and relations, and a textual cor-
pus. In this work it is not necessary for the corpus
to be related to the knowledge base. In what follows
we assume that all the relations studied are binary
and hold between exactly two entities in the knowl-
edge base. We also assume a dependency parser is
available, and that the entities have been automat-
ically disambiguated using the knowledge base as
sense inventory.
One of the most important problems to solve in
distant supervision approaches is to be able to dis-
tinguish which of the textual examples that include
two related entities, ei and ej , are supporting the re-
lation. This section describes a fully unsupervised
solution to this problem, computing the probability
that a pattern supports a given relation, which will
allow us to determine the most likely relation ex-
pressed in any sentence. Specifically, if a sentence
contains two entities, ei and ej , connected through a
pattern w, our model computes the probability that
the pattern is expressing any relation ?P (r|w)? for
any relation r defined in the knowledge base. Note
that we refer to patterns with the symbol w, as they
are the words in our topic models.
Preprocessing As a first step, the textual corpus
is processed and the data is transformed in the fol-
lowing way: (a) the input corpus is parsed and en-
Author-book
(Mark Twain, Adventures of Huckleberry
Finn)
ARG1
poss
,,
ARG2
ARG1
nn
,,
novels
nn
,,
ARG2
ARG1
nsubj
--
released ARG2dobj
qq
ARG2 ARG1
conj
rr
ARG1
nsubj
,,
wrote ARG2dobj
rr
ARG1
poss
,,
ARG2
...
(Jhumpa Lahiri, The Namesake)
ARG1
nn
--
ARG2
ARG2 by
prep
qq
ARG1
nn
uu
ARG1
nn
,,
novel
appos
--
ARG2
ARG2 by
prep
qq
ARG1
nn
uu
ARG2 by
prep
qq
ARG1
nn
uu
ARG1
poss
--
ARG1
...
(...)
Person-parent
(Liza Minneli, Judy Garland)
...
(Achilles, Peleus)
...
(...)
Person-death place
(Napoleon Bonaparte, Saint
Helena)
...
(Johann Christian Bach, Lon-
don)
...
(...)
Person-birth place
(Charles Darwin, Shrewsbury)
...
(Anthony Daniels, Salisbury)
...
(...)
Figure 1: Example of a generated set of document collec-
tions from a news corpus for relation extraction. Larger
boxes are document collections (relations), and inner
boxes are documents (entity pairs). Document contain
dependency patterns, which are words in the topic model.
tities are disambiguated; (b) for each relation r in
the knowledge base, a new (initially empty) docu-
ment collection Cr is created; (c) for each entity pair
(ei, ej) which are related in the knowledge base, a
new (initially empty) document Dij is created; (d)
for each sentence in the input corpus containing one
mention of ei and one mention of ej , a new term is
added to Dij consisting of the context in which the
two entities were seen in the document. This context
may be a complex structure, such as the dependency
path joining the two entities, but it is considered for
our purposes as a single term; (e) for each relation r
relating ei with ej , document Dij is added to collec-
tion Cr. Note that if the two entities are related in
different ways at the same time, an identical copy of
the document Dij will be added to the collection for
all those relations.
Figure 1 shows a set of document collections gen-
55
Figure 2: Plate diagram of the generative model used.
erated for three relations using this procedure. Each
relation r has associated a different document col-
lection, which contains one document associated to
each entity pair from the knowledge base which is
in relation r. The words in each document can be,
for example, all the dependency paths that have been
observed in the input textual corpus between the two
related entities. Each document will contain some
very generic paths (e.g. the two entities consecutive
in the text) and some more specific paths.
Generative model Once these collections are
built, we use the generative model from Figure 2
to learn the probability that a dependency path is
conveying some relation between the entities it con-
nects. This model is very similar to the one used
by Haghighi and Vanderwende (2009) in the con-
text of text summarization. w (the observed vari-
able) represents a pattern between two entities. The
topic model ?G captures general patterns that appear
for all relations. ?D captures patterns that are spe-
cific about a certain entity pair, but which are not
generalizable across all pairs with the same relation.
Finally ?A contains the patterns that are observed
across most pairs related with the same relation. ?A
is the topic model of interest for us.
We use Gibbs sampling to estimate the different
models from the source data. The topic assignments
(for each pattern) that are the output of this process
are used to estimate P (r|w): when we observe pat-
tern w, the probability that it conveys relation r.
3 Experiments and results
Settings We use Freebase as our knowledge base.
It can be freely downloaded1. text corpus used con-
tains 33 million English news articles that we down-
loaded between January 2004 and December 2011.
A random sample of 3M of them is used for building
the document collections on which to train the topic
models, and the remaining 30M is used for testing.
The corpus is preprocessed by identifying Freebase
entity mentions, using an approach similar to (Milne
and Witten, 2008), and parsing it with an inductive
dependency parser (Nivre, 2006).
From the three million training documents, a set
of document collections (one per relation) has been
generated, by considering the sentences that contain
two entities which are related in FreeBase through
any binary relation and restricting to high-frequency
200 relations. Two ways of extracting patterns have
been used: (a) Syntactic, taking the dependency
path between the two entities, and (b) Intertext,
taking the text between the two. In both cases, a
topic model has been trained to learn the probabil-
ity of a relation given a pattern w: p(r|w). For ?
we use symmetric Dirichlet priors ?G = 0.1 and
?D = ?A = 0.001, following the intuition that for
the background the probability mass across patterns
should be more evenly distributed. ? is set as (15,
15, 1), indicating in the prior that we expect more
patterns to belong to the background and entity-pair-
specific distributions due to the very noisy nature of
the input data. These values have not been tuned.
As a baseline, using the same training corpus, we
have calculated p(r|w) using the maximum likeli-
hood estimate: the number of times that a pattern w
has been seen connecting two entities for which r
holds divided by the total frequency of the pattern.
Extractions evaluation The patterns have been
applied to the 30 million documents left for testing.
For each pair of entities disambiguated as FreeBase
entities, if they are connected through a known pat-
tern, they are assigned argmaxr p(r|w). We have
randomly sampled 4,000 such extractions and sent
them to raters. An extraction is to be judged cor-
rect if both it is correct in real life and the sentence
from which it was extracted really supports it. We
1http://wiki.freebase.com/wiki/Data dumps
56
Figure 3: Evaluation of the extractions. X-axis has the threshold for p(r|w), and Y-axis has the precision of the extractions as a percentage.
have collected three ratings per example and taken
the majority decision. There was disagreement for
9.4% of the items on whether the sentence supports
the relation, and for 20% of the items on whether the
relation holds in the real world.
The results for different thresholds of p(r|w) are
shown in Figure 3. As can be seen, the MLE base-
lines (in red with syntactic patterns and green with
intertext) perform consistently worse than the mod-
els learned using the topic models (in pink and blue).
The difference in precision, aggregated across all re-
lations, is statistically significant at 95% confidence
for most of the thresholds.
Extractions aggregation We can take advantage
of redundancy on the web to calculate a support met-
ric for the extractions. In this experiment, for every
extracted relation (r, e1, e2), for every occurrence
of a pattern wi connecting e1 and e2, we add up
p(r|wi). Extractions that are obtained many times
and from high-precision patterns will rank higher.
Table 1 describes the results of this aggregation.
We have considered the top four highest-frequency
relations for people. After aggregating all the ex-
tracted relations and ranking them by support, we
have divided the evaluation set into two parts: (a)
for relations that were not already in FreeBase, we
evaluate the precision; (b) for extractions that were
already in FreeBase, we take the top-confidence sen-
tence identified and evaluate whether the sentence
is providing support to the relation. For each of
these, both syntactic patterns and intermediate-text
patterns have been evaluated.
The results are very interesting: using syntax,
Death place appears easy to extract new relations
and to find support. The patterns obtained are quite
unambiguous, e.g.
ARG1
subj
**
died at
prep
vv
home
pobj
ww
in
prep
uu
ARG2
pobj
ww
Relation Unknown relations Known relations
Correct relation P@50 Sentence support P@50
Syntax Intertext Syntax Intertext
Parent 0.58 0.38 1.00 1.00
Death place 0.90 0.68 0.98 0.94
Birth place 0.38 0.56 0.54 0.98
Nationality 0.86 0.78 0.34 0.40
Table 1: Evaluation on aggregated extractions.
On the other hand, birth place and nationality have
very different results for new relation acquisition
vs. finding sentence support for new relations. The
reason is that these relations are very correlated to
other relations that we did not have in our training
set. In the case of birth place, many relations re-
fer to having an official position in the city, such as
mayor; and for nationality, many of the patterns ex-
tract presidents or ministers. Not having mayor or
president in our initial collection (see Figure 1), the
support for these patterns is incorrectly learned. In
the case of nationality, however, even though the ex-
tracted sentences do not support the relation (P@50
= 0.34 for intertext), the new relations extracted are
mostly correct (P@50 = 0.86) as most presidents and
ministers in the real world have the nationality of the
country where they govern.
4 Conclusions
We have described a new distant supervision model
with which to learn patterns for relation extraction
with no manual intervention. Results are promising,
we could obtain new relations that are not in Free-
Base with a high precision for some relation types. It
is also useful to extract support sentences for known
relations. More work is needed in understanding
which relations are compatible or overlapping and
which ones can partially imply each other (such as
president-country or born in-mayor).
57
References
ACE. 2004. The automatic content extraction projects.
http://projects.ldc.upenn.edu/ace.
Michele Banko, Michael J. Cafarella, Stephen Soderland,
Matt Broadhead, and Oren Etzioni. 2007. Open infor-
mation extraction from the web. In IJCAI?07.
D.T. Bollegala, Y. Matsuo, and M. Ishizuka. 2010. Rela-
tional duality: Unsupervised extraction of semantic re-
lations between entities on the web. In Proceedings of
the 19th international conference on World wide web,
pages 151?160. ACM.
R. Bunescu and M. Pasca. 2006. Using encyclopedic
knowledge for named entity disambiguation. In Pro-
ceedings of EACL, volume 6, pages 9?16.
S. Cucerzan. 2007. Large-scale named entity disam-
biguation based on wikipedia data. In Proceedings of
EMNLP-CoNLL, volume 2007, pages 708?716.
G. Doddington, A. Mitchell, M. Przybocki, L. Ramshaw,
S. Strassel, and R. Weischedel. 2004. The automatic
content extraction (ace) program?tasks, data, and eval-
uation. In Proceedings of LREC, volume 4, pages
837?840. Citeseer.
A. Fader, S. Soderland, and O. Etzioni. 2011. Identify-
ing relations for open information extraction. In Pro-
ceedings of Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing.
A. Haghighi and L. Vanderwende. 2009. Exploring con-
tent models for multi-document summarization. In
Proceedings of Human Language Technologies: The
2009 Annual Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 362?370. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
R. Hoffmann, C. Zhang, and D.S. Weld. 2010. Learning
5000 relational extractors. In Proceedings of the 48th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 286?295. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
R. Hoffmann, C. Zhang, X. Ling, L. Zettlemoyer, and
D.S. Weld. 2011. Knowledge-based weak supervision
for information extraction of overlapping relations. In
Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies-Volume 1, pages 541?550. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
G. Kasneci, M. Ramanath, F. Suchanek, and G. Weikum.
2009. The yago-naga approach to knowledge discov-
ery. ACM SIGMOD Record, 37(4):41?47.
Z. Kozareva and E. Hovy. 2010. Learning arguments
and supertypes of semantic relations using recursive
patterns. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 1482?1491. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
C. Kwok, O. Etzioni, and D.S. Weld. 2001. Scaling
question answering to the web. ACM Transactions on
Information Systems (TOIS), 19(3):242?262.
D. Li, S. Somasundaran, and A. Chakraborty. 2011. A
combination of topic models with max-margin learn-
ing for relation detection.
P. McNamee and H.T. Dang. 2009. Overview of the tac
2009 knowledge base population track. In Text Analy-
sis Conference (TAC).
D. Milne and I.H. Witten. 2008. Learning to link with
wikipedia. In Proceeding of the 17th ACM conference
on Information and knowledge management, pages
509?518. ACM.
M. Mintz, S. Bills, R. Snow, and D. Jurafsky. 2009. Dis-
tant supervision for relation extraction without labeled
data. In Proceedings of the Joint Conference of the
47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and the 4th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Process-
ing of the AFNLP: Volume 2-Volume 2, pages 1003?
1011. Association for Computational Linguistics.
J. Nivre. 2006. Inductive dependency parsing. In
Text, Speech and Language Technology, volume 34.
Springer Verlag.
M. Pasca, D. Lin, J. Bigham, A. Lifchits, and A. Jain.
2006. Organizing and searching the world wide web
of facts-step one: the one-million fact extraction chal-
lenge. In Proceedings of the National Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, page 1400. Menlo Park, CA;
Cambridge, MA; London; AAAI Press; MIT Press;
1999.
F. Pereira, A. Rajaraman, S. Sarawagi, W. Tunstall-
Pedoe, G. Weikum, and A. Halevy. 2009. An-
swering web questions using structured data: dream
or reality? Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment,
2(2):1646?1646.
H. Poon and P. Domingos. 2009. Unsupervised seman-
tic parsing. In Proceedings of the 2009 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing: Volume 1-Volume 1, pages 1?10. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
D. Ravichandran and E. Hovy. 2002. Learning surface
text patterns for a question answering system. In Pro-
ceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting on Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 41?47. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
S. Sekine. 2006. On-demand information extraction. In
Proceedings of the COLING/ACL on Main conference
poster sessions, pages 731?738. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Beth M. Sundheim and Nancy A. Chinchor. 1993. Sur-
vey of the message understanding conferences. In
HLT?93.
58
I. Titov and A. Klementiev. 2011. A bayesian model for
unsupervised semantic parsing. In The 49th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
C. Wang, J. Fan, A. Kalyanpur, and D. Gondek. 2011.
Relation extraction with relation topics. In Proceed-
ings of Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing.
Daniel S. Weld, Fei Wu, Eytan Adar, Saleema Amershi,
James Fogarty, Raphael Hoffmann, Kayur Patel, and
Michael Skinner. 2008. Intelligence in wikipedia. In
Proceedings of the 23rd national conference on Artifi-
cial intelligence, pages 1609?1614. AAAI Press.
F. Wu and D.S. Weld. 2010. Open information extraction
using wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 118?127. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
L. Yao, A. Haghighi, S. Riedel, and A. McCallum. 2011.
Structured relation discovery using generative models.
In Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing (EMNLP).
A. Yates, M. Cafarella, M. Banko, O. Etzioni, M. Broad-
head, and S. Soderland. 2007. Textrunner: Open in-
formation extraction on the web. In Proceedings of
Human Language Technologies: The Annual Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Demonstrations, pages
25?26. Association for Computational Linguistics.
59
