The Szeged Corpus: a POS tagged and syntactically annotated Hungarian 
natural language corpus 
D?ra CSENDES 
University of Szeged Department of 
Informatics 
?rp?d t?r 2. 
Szeged, Hungary, H-6720 
dcsendes@inf.u-szeged.hu 
J?nos CSIRIK 
University of Szeged Department of 
Informatics 
?rp?d t?r 2. 
Szeged, Hungary, H-6720 
csirik@inf.u-szeged.hu 
Tibor GYIM?THY 
University of Szeged Department of Informatics 
?rp?d t?r 2. 
Szeged, Hungary, H-6720 
gyimothy@inf.u-szeged.hu 
 
Abstract 
The Szeged Corpus is a manually annotated 
natural language corpus currently comprising 1.2 
million word entries, 145 thousand different word 
forms, and an additional 225 thousand punctuation 
marks. With this, it is the largest manually 
processed Hungarian textual database that serves 
as a reference material for research in natural 
language processing as well as a learning database 
for machine learning algorithms and other software 
applications. Language processing of the corpus 
texts so far included morpho-syntactic analysis, 
POS tagging and shallow syntactic parsing. 
Semantic information was also added to a pre-
selected section of the corpus to support automated 
information extraction. 
The present state of the Szeged Corpus (Alexin 
et al, 2003) is the result of three national projects 
and the cooperation of the University of Szeged, 
Department of Informatics, MorphoLogic Ltd. 
Budapest, and the Research Institute for 
Linguistics at the Hungarian Academy of Sciences. 
Corpus texts have gone through different phases of 
natural language processing (NLP) and analysis. 
Extensive and accurate manual annotation of the 
texts, incorporating over 124 person-months of 
manual work, is a great value of the corpus.  
1 Texts of the Szeged Corpus 
When selecting texts for the Szeged Corpus, the 
main criteria was that they should be thematically 
representative of different text types. The first 
version of the corpus, therefore, contains texts 
from five genres, roughly 200 thousand words 
each. Due to its relative variability, it serves as a 
good reference material for natural language 
research applications, and proves to be large 
enough to guarantee the robustness of machine 
learning methods. Genres of Szeged Corpus 1.0 
include: 
? fiction (two Hungarian novels and the 
Hungarian translation of Orwell's 1984) 
? compositions of 14-16-year-old students 
? newspaper articles (excerpts from three 
daily and one weekly paper) 
? computer-related texts (excerpts from a 
Windows 20001 manual book and some 
issues of the ComputerWorld, 
Sz?m?t?stechnika magazine) 
? law (excerpts from legal texts on economic 
enterprises and authors' rights). 
 
Size 
 
 
Text type Number  
of words 
Number  
of punct. 
marks 
Number 
of ambig. 
words 
Ratio of 
ambig. 
words 
Fiction 187191 47968 100968 53.94% 
Composi-
tions 
223058 47208 127821 57.30% 
Newspaper 187334 32948 91375 48.78% 
Computer 181980 31906 82698 45.44% 
Law 222186 38715 106581 47.97% 
Short 
business 
news 
188345 25817 82813 43,7% 
Total 1190094 224562 592256 49.52% 
Table 1. Data about Szeged Corpus 2.0 
During further developments, the first version of 
the corpus was extended with a 200 thousand-
word-long sample of short business news2. The 
                                                     
1
 Kis, Bal?zs: Windows 2000, Szak kiad?, 2000 
2
 Short business news originate from the archive of 
the Hungarian News Agency (http://www.mti.hu/). 
newly added section served as an experimental 
database for learning semantic frame mapping to 
be later integrated in an IE technology. Table 1. 
shows data referring to Szeged Corpus 2.0. 
2 Annotation of the Szeged Corpus 
Morpho-syntactic analysis and POS tagging of 
the corpus texts included two steps. Initially, words 
were morpho-syntactically analysed with the help 
of the Humor3 automatic pre-processor. The 
program determined the possible morpho-syntactic 
labels of the lexicon entries, thereby creating the 
ambiguous version of the corpus. After the pre-
processing, the entire corpus was manually 
disambiguated (POS tagged) by linguists. For the 
tagging of the Szeged Corpus, the Hungarian 
version of the internationally acknowledged MSD 
(Morpho-Syntactic Description) scheme (Erjavec, 
Monachini, 1997) was selected. Due to the fact that 
the MSD encoding scheme is extremely detailed 
and refined (one label can store information on up 
to 17 positions), there is a large number of 
ambiguous cases, i.e. one word is likely to have 
more than one possible labels. Experiences show 
that by applying the MSD encoding scheme, 
roughly every second word of the corpus is 
ambiguous. Disambiguation, therefore, required 
accurate and detailed work cumulating up to 64 
person-months of manual annotation. Currently all 
possible labels as well as the selected ones are 
stored in the corpus. 
A unique feature of the corpus is that parallel to 
POS tagging, users? rules have been defined for 
each ambiguous word in a pre-selected (202 600-
word-long) section of the corpus. The aim of 
applying users? rules was to mark the relevant 
context (relevant set of words) that determines the 
selection of a certain POS tag. Users? rules apply 
before1, before2, ... after1, after2, ... 
predicates for marking the relevant context of a 
word4. The manually defined rules can then be 
generalised to regular disambiguation rules 
applicable to unknown texts as well. Out of the 
selected 202 600 words 114 951 were ambiguous. 
Annotators defined users? rules for these cases 
among which 26 912 different ones were found. 
The major advantage of the defined rules lies in 
their accuracy and specificity, wherefore they are 
an interesting and valuable source of additional 
linguistic information that can e.g. support the 
more precise training of machine learning 
algorithms. 
                                                     
3
 The Humor morpho-syntactic analyser is a product 
of the MorphoLogic Ltd. Budapest. 
4
 The predicate after2 e.g., denotes the second 
word to the right of the focus word. 
After the completion of POS tagging, a project5 
was initiated to encompass shallow syntactic 
parsing of the Szeged Corpus. The linguistic 
information identified by shallow syntactic parsing 
proves to be rich enough to support a number of 
large-scale NLP applications including information 
extraction (IE), text summarisation, machine 
translation, phrase identification in information 
retrieval, named entity identification, and a variety 
of text-mining operations. In order to achieve their 
goal, researchers of the University of Szeged, 
Department of Informatics, the MorphoLogic Ltd. 
Budapest, and the Research Institute for 
Linguistics at the Hungarian Academy of Sciences 
had to conduct some research concerning the 
syntax of Hungarian sentences, NP annotation 
schemes, and rules covering the recognition of 
phrases. Results showed that in Hungarian, 
nominal structures typically bear the most 
significant meaning (semantic content) within a 
sentence, therefore NP annotation seemed to be the 
most reasonable step forward.  
Shallow parsing was carried out on the entire 
Szeged Corpus 2.0 (1.2 million words). Automated 
pre-parsing was completed with the help of the 
CLaRK6 program, in which regular syntactic rules 
have been defined by linguistic experts for the 
recognition of NPs. Due to the fact that the CLaRK 
parser did not fully cover the occurring NP 
structures (its coverage was around 70%), manual 
validation and correction could not be avoided. In 
total, 250 thousand highest level NPs were found, 
and the deepest NP structure contained 9 NPs 
imbedded into each other. The majority of the 
hierarchic NP structures were between 1 to 3 NPs 
deep. Manual validation and correction lasted 60 
person-months.  
As a continuation of shallow parsing, the clause 
structure (CPs) of the corpus sentences was also 
marked. Labelling clauses followed the same 
approach as earlier phases of NLP: it comprised an 
automatic pre-annotation followed by manual 
correction and supplementation. 
3 Use of the Szeged Corpus for training and 
testing machine learning algorithms 
Due to the accurate and exhaustive manual 
annotation, the resulting corpus (both first and 
second versions) could serve as an adequate 
                                                     
5
 National Research and Development Programmes 
(NKFP) 2/017/2001 project funded by the Hungarian 
Ministry of Education, titled Information Extraction 
from Short Business News. 
6
 The CLaRK system was developed by Kiril Simov 
at the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences in the framework 
of the BulTreeBank project. 
database for the training and testing of machine 
learning algorithms. The applicability of these 
algorithms in Hungarian NLP was extensively 
studied in the past couple of years (Horv?th et al, 
1999), (H?cza et al, 2003). Researchers of the 
University of Szeged experimented with different 
kind of POS tagging methods and compared their 
results based on accuracy. Brill?s transformation-
based learning method (Brill, 1995) worked with 
96.52% per word accuracy when trained and tested 
on the corpus. The HMM-based TnT tagger 
(Brants, 2000) performed 96.18%, while the 
RGLearn rule-based tagger (H?cza et al, 2003) 
produced 94.54% accuracy. Researchers also 
experimented with the combination of the different 
learning methods in order to increase accuracy. 
The best accuracy result, delivered by combining 
the above three methods, was 96.95%. Overall 
results showed that despite the agglutinating nature 
of Hungarian language and the structural 
differences between Hungarian and other Indo-
European languages, all of the mentioned methods 
can be used effectively for learning POS tagging. 
The applicability of machine learning methods 
for learning NP recognition rules was also 
investigated. The C 4.5 (Quinlan, 1993) and the 
RGLearn rule-based algorithms were selected for 
the learning process. NP recognition rules have 
been retrieved from the annotated corpus and were 
combined with manually defined expert rules. The 
main task of the NP recognition parser is to 
provide the best possible coverage of NP structures 
 
Categories of 
recognition 
Precision Recall Accuracy 
Complete NPs 81.28% 87.43% 84.32% 
Boundaries (first and 
last element) of NPs 88.31% 92.08% 90.54% 
NPs (depth<=2) 86.02% 89.72% 88.37% 
NPs (depth>2) 74.71% 78.19% 76.61% 
Average 82.58% 86.85% 84.96% 
Table 3. Test results of the RGLearn parser 
The mentioned algorithms ? although still under 
development ? already perform between 80-90% 
accuracy (see Table 3.). Their performance 
strongly depends on the type of the processed text: 
phrase structures are recognised with better 
accuracy in news or technical type of texts than in 
student?s compositions (where sentences are often 
grammatically inaccurate) or legal texts (where 
sentences are typically extremely long, and 
fragmented). 
As a continuation of the work, an automated 
method was developed to perform IE from short 
business news. The 200 thousand word long, short 
business news section of the corpus was used as 
the training database for the IE tool. In the 
preparatory phase, the selected section of the 
corpus was enriched with semantic information. 
Possible semantic roles, such as SELLER, 
BUYER, PRODUCT, PRICE, DATE etc., were 
associated with each word, and were stored in a 
semantic dictionary. The most typical events of 
business life were represented by so-called 
semantic frames describing the relations of the 
different semantic roles. Possible frames were 
defined manually by linguists and allowed 
mapping between the lexical representation and the 
semantic role of a word. Semantic mapping rules 
were acquired by machine learning algorithms that 
used the manually annotated semantic roles as their 
learning source. The recognition of semantic 
frames was also supported by the series of NLP 
methods described earlier (i.e. POS tagging and 
shallow parsing).  
During the developed information extraction 
process, the trained mapping tool takes a morpho-
syntactically and syntactically annotated piece of 
text and performs two operations. First, it 
processes the morpho-syntactically disambiguated 
and shallow parsed text and assigns semantic roles 
to the words. The second operation determines 
relationships between the roles, i.e. maps semantic 
frames onto the existing structures. Semantic 
mapping is realised by simple pattern-matching 
methods using the frames previously defined by 
experts. Based on the results of the described 
operations, the mapping tool builds a semantic 
representation of the input text, already containing 
the required information. Results produced by this 
method were tested against the manually annotated 
corpus and showed that it identifies semantic roles 
with 94-99% accuracy and maps frames with up to 
80% accuracy. 
4 Current and future works 
Current works aim at a more detailed syntactic 
analysis of the Szeged Corpus. With this, 
developers intend to lay the foundation of a 
Hungarian treebank, which is planned to be 
enriched with detailed semantic information as 
well in the future. The development of a suitable 
technique for the recognition and annotation of 
named entities (e.g., multi-word proper nouns) and 
special tokens (e.g., time expressions, dates, 
measures, bank account numbers, web- and e-mail 
addresses, etc.) is also planned in the near future. 
Further works aim at building firstly domain 
specific, later general ontologies and at developing 
automated methods that allow for extensive 
semantic analysis and processing of Hungarian 
sentences. 
5 Related work 
Corpus-based methods play an important role in 
empirical linguistics as well as in the application of 
machine learning algorithms. Annotated reference 
corpora, such as the Brown Corpus (Kucera, 
Francis, 1967), the Penn Treebank (Marcus et al, 
1993), and the BNC (Leech et al, 2001.), have 
helped both the development of English 
computational linguistics tools and English corpus 
linguistics. Manual POS tagging and syntactic 
annotation are costly but allow one to build and 
improve sizable linguistic resources and also to 
train and evaluate automated analysers.  
. The NEGRA (Skut at al., 1997) POS tagged 
and syntactically annotated corpus of 355 thousand 
tokens was the first initiative in corpus linguistics 
for German. The more recent TIGER Treebank 
project (Brants et al, 2002) aims at building the 
largest and most extensively annotated treebank for 
German. Currently, it comprises 700 thousand 
tokens of newspaper text that were automatically 
analysed and manually checked. Considerable 
results were achieved for Czech in the framework 
of the Prague Dependency Treebank project 
(Hajic, 1998), and for Bulgarian in the 
BulTreeBank project (Simov et al, 2003) as well. 
The Szeged Corpus project is comparable both 
in size and in depth of analysis to the corpus and 
treebank initiatives mentioned above7. As the first 
such like initiative for Hungarian language, it is a 
valuable source for linguistic research and a 
suitable training and testing basis for machine 
applications and automated induction of linguistic 
knowledge. 
References  
Alexin Z., Csirik J., Gyim?thy T., Bibok K., 
Hatvani Cs., Pr?sz?ky G., Tihanyi L.: Manually 
Annotated Hungarian Corpus in Proc. of the 
Research Note Sessions of the 10th Conference 
of the European Chapter of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics (EACL?03), pp. 53-
56, Budapest, Hungary (2003) 
Brants, T.: TnT - A Statistical Part-of-Speech 
Tagger, in Proc. of the Sixth Conference on 
Applied Natural Language Processing (ANLP), 
Seattle, WA (2000) 
Brants, S., Dipper, S., Hansen, S., Lezius, W. and 
Smith, G.: The TIGER Treebank in Proc. of the 
Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic 
Theories, Sozopol, Bulgaria (2002) 
Brill, E.: Transformation-based error-driven 
learning and natural language processing: A 
                                                     
7
 The different versions of the Szeged Corpus are 
available at http://www.inf.u-szeged.hu/hlt. 
case study in part-of-speech tagging, 
Computational Linguistics, vol. 21 (4), pp. 543-
565, (1995) 
Erjavec, T., Monachini, M.: Specification and 
Notation for Lexicon Encoding, Copernicus 
Project 106 ?MULTEX-EAST?, Work Package 
1 ? Task 1.1, Deliverable D1.1F (1997) 
Hajic, J.: Building a Syntactically Annotated 
Corpus: The Prague Dependency Treebank in 
Issues of Valency and Meaning, pp. 106-132, 
Charles University Press, Prague (1998) 
Horv?th T., Alexin Z., Gyim?thy T., Wrobel S.: 
Application of Different Learning Methods to 
Hungarian Part-of-Speech Tagging in Proc. of 
the 9th International Workshop on Inductive 
Logic Programming (ILP99), pp. 128-139, Bled, 
Slovenia and in the LNAI series vol 1634, 
Springer Verlag (1999) 
H?cza A., Alexin Z., Csendes D., Csirik J., 
Gyim?thy T.: Application of ILP methods in 
different natural language processing phases for 
information extraction from Hungarian texts in 
Proc. of the Kalm?r Workshop on Logic and 
Computer Science, pp. 107-116, Szeged, 
Hungary (2003) 
Kucera H., and Francis, W. N.: Brown Corpus 
Manual Providence, Rhode Island, Brown 
University Press (1979) 
Leech, G., P. Rayson and A. Wilson: Word 
Frequencies in Written and Spoken English: 
based on the British National Corpus, Longman, 
London (2001) 
Marcus, M., Santorini, B., Marcinkiewicz, M.: 
Building a large annotated corpus of English: 
the Penn Treebank in Computational 
Linguistics, vol. 19 (1993) 
Quinlan, J. R.: C 4.5: Programs for Machine 
Learning, Morgan Kaufmann Publisher (1993) 
Simov, K., Simov, A., Kouylekov, M., Ivanova, 
K., Grigorov, I., Ganev, H.: Development of 
Corpora within the CLaRK System: The 
BulTreeBank Project Experience in Proc. of the 
Demo Sessions of the 10th Conference of the 
European Chapter of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics (EACL'03), pp. 243-
246, Budapest, Hungary (2003) 
Skut, W., Brants, T., Krenn, B., Uszkoreit, H.: A 
linguistically interpreted corpus of German 
newspaper text in Proc. of the Conference on 
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-98), 
pp. 705-711, Granade, Spain (1997) 
