Book Reviews
discourse.cpp
O.S. le Si (edited by Aure?lie Herbelot)
University of Cambridge
Berlin: Peer Press, 2011, 55 pp; paperbound, ISBN 978-3-00-33516-7, e9.00, or free
on-line at peerpress.de/discoursecpp.pdf
Reviewed by
Lori Emerson
University of Colorado at Boulder
discourse.cpp is a short collection of computer-generated poetry edited by computational
linguist Aure?lie Herbelot. The poetry was produced by a program, named O.S. le Si,
that was derived from Herbelot?s research on context-based ontology extraction from
text (Herbelot and Copestake 2006; Herbelot 2009). In this case, Herbelot provided
200,000 pages fromWikipedia for the program to parse and output lists of items whose
context is similar to words such as gender, love, family, and illness. For example, Herbelot
explains that content in the opening piece titled ?The Creation? was ?selected out of a
list of 10,000 entries. Each entry was produced by automatically looking for taxonomic
relationships in Wikipedia?; and, for the piece titled ?Gender,? she chose the ?twenty-
five best contexts for man and woman in original order. No further changes? (page 47).
The collection is, then, as we are told on the back cover, ?about things that people say
about things. It was written by a computer.?
? 2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
Poets?or, for the sake of those still attached to the notion of an author who
intentionally delivers well-crafted, expressive writing, ?so-called poets??have been
experimentingwith producingwritingwith the aid of digital computer algorithms since
Max Bense and Theo Lutz first experimented with computer-generated writing in 1959
(Funkhouser 2007). The best-known English-language example is the 1984 collection
of poems The Policeman?s Beard is Half-Constructed by the artificial intelligence program
Racter (a collection which, it was later discovered, was heavily edited by Racter creators
William Chamberlain and Thomas Etter). discourse.cpp is yet another experiment in
testing the capabilities of the computer and computer programmer to create not somuch
carefully and intentionally crafted, rhythmically or musically pleasing verse as broadly
revealing poetry?poetry that is not meant to be close-read (most often to discover un-
derlying authorial intent) but rather read as a collection of a kind of linguistic evidence.
In this case, the collection provides evidence of trends in on-line human language usage
which in turn, not surprisingly, provides evidence of certain prevailing cultural norms;
for example, we can see quite clearly English-speaking, western culture?s continued
attachment to heteronormative gender roles in ?Gender? (page 18):
Woman Man
man love ? ?win title
? marry man ? love woman
? give birth ? claim be
One of the questions this collection raises is this, however: If the craft of poetry
writing becomes more about programming and editing, and if the reader or critic does
Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 4
not have access to the code or to all of the editorial decisions that created this collection,
how, then, do we judge whether the computer-generated writing is successful or not?
There?s no doubt that the piece ?Gender? is provocative and revealing, but is it a ?good?
poem? Perhaps the collection teaches us that, with the ever-increasing intertwinement
of human and digital computer that results in the displacement of the human as sole
reader?writer now that the computer is also a reader?writer alongside (and often in
collaboration with) the human, these sorts of judgments of ?good? and ?bad? are no
longer appropriate. Once the human is no longer the sole creator and no longer in
control of the final artistic or literary artifact, then we are left to judge only the process
in place of judging the product; with regard to discourse.cpp, it is a process we do not
have direct access to.
Furthermore, as Herbelot rightly points out in the Editor?s Foreword, to a large
extent this experimentation with the computer as reader?writer also comes out of early
20th century, avant-garde writing that similarly sought to undermine, if not displace,
the individual intending author. Dadaist Tristan Tzara, for instance, infamously wrote
?TO MAKE A DADAIST POEM? in 1920 (see Tzara 1924) in which he advocates
writing poetry by cutting out words from a newspaper article, randomly choosing
these words from a bag, and then appropriating these randomly chosen words to
create a poem by ?an infinitely original author of charming sensibility.? Tzara was,
of course, being typically Dadaist in his tongue-in-cheek attitude; but he was also, I
believe, serious in his belief that the combination of appropriation and chance-based
methods of producing text could produce original writing that simultaneously un-
dermined the egotism of the author. Insofar as discourse.cpp comes out of a lineage
of experimental writing invested in chance-generated writing and, later, in exploiting
computer technology as the latest means by which to produce such writing, it also
comes out of a certain tradition of disingenuousness that comes along with this lineage.
No matter how much Tzara and later authors of computer-generated writing sought
to remove the human-as-author, there was and still is no getting around the fact that
humans are deeply involved in the creation process?whether as cutters-and-pasters,
programmers, or editors. The collection, then, is a much more complex amalgam than
even Herbelot seems willing to acknowledge, as discourse.cpp is evidence of the evenly
distributed reading and writing that took place between Herbelot and the program
itself.
References
Funkhouser, Christopher. 2007. Prehistoric
Digital Poetry. University of Alabama
Press, Tuscaloosa.
Herbelot, Aure?lie. 2009. Finding word
substitutions using a distributional
similarity baseline and immediate context
overlap. Proceedings of the Student Session of
the 12th Conference of the European Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics,
9 pages, Athens.
Herbelot, Aure?lie and Ann Copestake. 2006.
Acquiring ontological relationships from
Wikipedia using RMRS. Proceedings of the
Workshop on Web Content Mining with
Human Language Technologies, 10 pages,
Athens, Georgia.
Racter. 1984. The Policeman?s Beard is
Half-Constructed: Computer Prose and Poetry.
Warner Software / Warner Books,
New York.
Tzara, Tristan. 1924. TO MAKE A DADAIST
POEM. Reprinted in Seven Dada Manifestos
and Lampisteries, translated by Barbara
Wright. Oneworld Classics, Richmond,
UK, 2011.
924
Book Reviews
Lori Emerson is an Assistant Professor in the Department of English at the University of
Colorado at Boulder. She writes on digital literature, experimental American and Canadian
poetry from the 20th and 21st century, history of computing, and media theory. In addition
to directing the Archeological Media Lab, she is currently working on several book projects,
including a monograph, Reading Writing Interfaces: From the Bookbound to the Digital, and The
Johns Hopkins Guide to Digital Media and Textuality, co-edited withMarie-Laure Ryan and Benjamin
Robertson (Johns Hopkins University Press, forthcoming Fall 2013). Emerson?s e-mail address is
Lori.Emerson@colorado.edu.
925

