Book Reviews
Quantitative Syntax Analysis
Reinhard Ko?hler
(Trier University)
Berlin and Boston: De Gruyter Mouton (Quantitative Linguistics series, edited by
Reinhard Ko?hler, Gabriel Altmann, and Peter Grzybek, volume 65), 2012, x+224 pp,
hardbound, ISBN 978-3-11-027219-2, e99.95, $140.00
Reviewed by
Chunshan Xu? and Haitao Liu
?
?Anhui University of Architecture,
?
Zhejiang University
Quantitative linguistics (QL) is a discipline of linguistics, that, using real texts, studies
languages with quantitative mathematical approaches, aiming to precisely describe
and explain, with a system of mathematical laws, the operation and development of
language systems. Later in this review, we will address the relationship between QL
and computational linguistics. Quantitative Syntax Analysis is a recent work on QL by
Reinhard Ko?hler that not only provides a comprehensive introduction to the work of QL
on the syntactic level, but also sketches the theoretical grounds, the research paradigm,
and the ultimate goals of quantitative linguistics in general.
? 2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
In the first chapter, Ko?hler points to the vital role of syntax in language: Syntax
enables language users to code structures instead of ideas as wholes. A text embodies a
complex cognitive formation and meets several basic requirements in human communi-
cation, which implies that language is not autonomous, but a dynamic communicative
system used by human beings. Hence, the ultimate understanding and explanation
of syntax (and the whole language system) depends on usage-based investigation of
the cognitive basis and the functional requirements of language, which is somewhat
neglected in many mainstream syntactic studies. Even in those cases where explanatory
power is acknowledged as the ultimate goal of linguistic investigation, the necessary
knowledge is still required as to what a scientific linguistic theory is and how such
a theory may be built. So far, it is rare for quantitative means to be used in syntactic
study. One reason is that many syntacticians are too addicted to the enshrined tradi-
tional paradigms that have been proven to be somewhat inadequate when it comes to
processing real texts. And that is why in computational linguistics, ?devout executors
of the belief in strictly formal methods as opposed to statistical ones do not have any
chance to succeed? (page 4).
The second chapter, entitled ?The Quantitative Analysis of Language and Text,?
begins with an explanation of the difference between quantitative linguistics and the
formal branches of linguistics that have once been widely used in computational
linguistics: QL is concerned with the quantitative properties important for under-
standing the development and the operation of linguistic system, whereas the formal
branches of linguistics use only qualitative mathematical means and formal logics to
model structural properties of language, overlooking, in most cases, the aspects of
systems that exceed structure, viz., functions, dynamics, and processes. Ko?hler points
out that the successes of modern natural sciences (the exact, testable statements, the
precise predictions, and the copious applications) all derive from their instruments and
their advanced models. This implies that these instruments and models, of which the
Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 3
quantitative parts of mathematics (probability theory and statistics, function theory,
differential equations) are indispensable ingredients, are worth integrating into lin-
guistics, which is the aim of QL.
Chapter 3, entitled ?Empirical Analysis and Mathematical Modeling,? reviews
the important works of quantitative syntactic analysis. In the first section, Ko?hler
gives a long list of the important syntactic units and properties defined within the
frameworks of both phrase structure syntax and dependency syntax; this reflects the
fact that researchers in both fields have been engaged in some fruitful quantitative
studies. In Section 3.2, he defines quantitation of syntactic concepts as counting the
objects under study, because syntactic analysis investigates only discrete objects. Sec-
tion 3.4 is a detailed review of the important works on various syntactic phenom-
ena within the frameworks of both phrase structure syntax and dependency syntax,
including sentence length, probabilistic grammars and probabilistic parsing, Markov
chains, Frumkina?s law on the syntactic level, distribution of dependency distance, and
distribution of dependency types, and so on. These quantitative models, which have
been empirically corroborated with real texts, or sometimes treebanks and dictionaries
(of various languages), can be linguistically, cognitively, or functionally interpreted?
a rare achievement in the past statistical investigations of language. Apart from the
models concerning probabilistic grammars and Markov chains, which have already
been widely used in computational linguistics, there are some other works that may
also have practical applications in various fields. For example, the mathematical model
of sentence length, which describes the probability of neighboring length classes as
a function of the probability of the first of the two given classes, may contribute to
practical applications such as text classification and the measurement of text compre-
hensibility, and so forth. The frequency studies of word and syntactic constructions
have obtained many results useful for language teaching, the construction of parsing
algorithms, and estimation of effort of (automatic) rule learning, and more. The syntactic
studies on Frumkina?s law, which is concerned with the number of text blocks with x
occurrences of a given syntactic element or category, may benefit certain types of com-
putational text processing if specific constructions or categories can be differentiated
and found automatically by their particular distributions. One advantage of QL is that
all its findings are mathematically formulated and linguistically interpreted, which at
least makes it possible to be used in constructing models necessary for computational
linguistics.
In Chapter 4, Ko?hler introduces his efforts to build a real ?linguistic theory,? for
he believes that ?there is not yet any elaborated linguistic theory in the sense of the
philosophy of science? (page 21). Building such a theory begins with ?plausible hy-
potheses,? which may become laws when sufficiently attested and may then be further
integrated into a coherent system. This is the process of setting up a scientific theory, as
succinctly summarized in the title of this chapter: ?Hypotheses, Laws, and Theories.?
The first section of this chapter shows the first step toward a scientific linguistic
theory, the process in which ?plausible hypotheses? are deduced, interpreted, and
empirically attested before finally becoming laws. In Section 2, Ko?hler introduces the
foundation of his synergetic linguistics, which views language as a dynamic, self-
organizing, and self-regulating system where the so-called enslaving principle and order
parameters are the crucial elements. On this basis, the author builds a synergetic syn-
tactic model in Section 4.2.7 with certain modeling principles. Within the framework of
phrase-structure syntax, eight properties of syntactic constructions and four inventories
are chosen to build this model, which are linked together by laws resulting from the
verified hypotheses and subject to the regulation of some order parameters.
696
Book Reviews
Quantitative linguistics, which is an unfamiliar field of study for many linguists,
depends heavily on real texts and mathematical tools. Therefore we believe it is worth-
while to briefly clarify the differences and the relations between QL and corpus lin-
guistics, on one hand, and between QL and computational linguistics, on the other
hand. In comparison with quantitative linguistics, corpus linguistics is in fact more of a
research methodology rather than an independent linguistic discipline, reflecting a shift
of focus from competence to performance, from introspection to empirical study. This
makes both the common ground and the difference between corpus linguistics and QL,
which aims to quantitatively and mathematically explore, on the basis of real texts and
treebanks, the fundamental laws governing the structure and evolution of language,
and integrate them into a systematic theory capable of explanation and prediction.
Computational linguistics (CL) is an interdisciplinary field investigating the struc-
ture of natural languages from a formal, mathematical, and computational point of
view. Compared with QL, CL seems to be more interested in research that can have
direct applications in such fields as language understanding, language generation,
machine translation, and so forth, than in the explanation of language structure, op-
eration, and evolution. Traditionally, the mathematical models used in CL are derived
from the linguistic theories via the process of formalization. Due to the limitations of
the qualitative mathematical models, however, the statistical models, most of which
so far fail linguistic interpretations, have recently become dominant in the field of
computational linguistics. That is perhaps why Shuly Wintner (2009, page 641), in a
?Last Words? article in this journal, called for ?the return of linguistics to computational
linguistics,? implying that the advances in the field of CL may ultimately lie in the
advances in the understanding of language itself.
Wintner?s appeal does reflect the present situation of computational linguistics: a
discipline in which many works are heavily oriented towards engineering and weakly
grounded in linguistics. The formal linguistic models seem now outshone by the purely
statistical paradigms, as the result of their inadequacy in processing real-world lan-
guages. Of course, this means no renouncement of the value of the traditional formal
models. But it is obvious that considerable updating and enrichment are necessary for
these formal models if they are to play significant roles in the future. In this regard,
QL, which has a solid linguistic foundation, may help by providing quantitative cues
(which are linguistically interpretable) to improve the performance in NLP, as has been
illustrated in the case of probabilistic grammar that ingeniously integrates quantitative,
statistical devices into qualitative linguistic models. QL has provided some useful mod-
els for CL. And it is reasonable to believe that it will continue to do so in the future,
though some of its achievements seem now not ready to be directly used in CL.
But perhaps QL can do more than that. Though QL has not yet drawn much atten-
tion from computational linguistics, it is potentially a proper answer to Wintner?s call
for the return of linguistics to computational linguistics. CL aims to replicate in comput-
ers the patterns of human language behavior, whereas QL endeavors to mathematically
and quantitatively reveal the laws and the principles that govern human language
behavior?this is a relation between theory and practice. The success of a scientific
discipline is usually based on precise models that are well-grounded in profound under-
standing of the object of study. Computational linguistics is no exception. Two features
of QL are hence noteworthy. One is that it aims to explain, within a certain linguistic
framework, the operation and the evolution of language by uncovering the systematic
cognitive and functional regulations that underlie human languages. The other is that
it tries to mathematically model, with systematic and precise quantitative laws, these
regulations and the resulting mechanism of language. In view of these two features, we
697
Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 3
believe that the success of QL will somehow and somewhat boost the studies in the field
of CL and that the communication between QL and CL is and will be not only possible
but also mutually beneficial. This is why we hold that it is worthwhile to recommend
this book to researchers in the field of computational linguistics, a book presenting a
panorama of QL in general and discoveries on the syntactic level in particular.
References
Wintner, Shuly. 2009. What science
underlies natural language
engineering? Computational Linguistics,
35(4):641?644.
Chunshan Xu is an assistant professor at Anhui University of Architecture, China. His research
interests include syntactic parsing, syntactic complexity, and quantitative syntactic study. Xu?s
e-mail address is adinxu@yahoo.com.cn. Haitao Liu is a Qiushi distinguished professor of linguis-
tics and applied linguistics at Zhejiang University, China. His current research interests include
computational and quantitative linguistics, dependency syntax, and linguistic complex networks.
Liu?s address is School of International Studies, Zhejiang University ? CHN-310058, Hangzhou,
China; e-mail: lhtzju@gmail.com.
698
