2012 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 191?199,
Montre?al, Canada, June 3-8, 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Dependency Treebank of Classical Chinese Poems 
 
 
John Lee and Yin Hei Kong 
The Halliday Centre for Intelligent Applications of Language Studies  
Department of Chinese, Translation and Linguistics 
City University of Hong Kong 
{jsylee,yhkong}@cityu.edu.hk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
As interest grows in the use of linguistically 
annotated corpora in research and teaching of 
foreign languages and literature, treebanks of 
various historical texts have been developed.  
We introduce the first large-scale dependency 
treebank for Classical Chinese literature.  De-
rived from the Stanford dependency types, it 
consists of over 32K characters drawn from a 
collection of poems written in the 8th century 
CE.  We report on the design of new depend-
ency relations, discuss aspects of the annota-
tion process and evaluation, and illustrate its 
use in a study of parallelism in Classical Chi-
nese poetry. 
1 Introduction 
Recent efforts in creating linguistically annotated 
text corpora have overwhelmingly focused on 
modern languages.  Among the earliest and most 
well-known are the part-of-speech (POS) tagged 
Brown Corpus (Francis & Ku?era, 1982), and the 
syntactically analyzed Penn Treebank (Marcus et 
al., 1993). However, the first digital corpus, which 
emerged soon after the invention of computers, had 
as its subject matter a collection of 13th-century 
texts --- in 1949, Roberto Busa initiated the POS 
tagging of the complete works of Thomas Aquinas, 
written in Latin. 
In the past decade, Humanities scholars have 
begun to use digital corpora for the study of an-
cient languages and historical texts. They come in 
a variety of languages and genres, from Old Eng-
lish (Taylor et al, 2003) to Early New High Ger-
man (Demske et al, 2004) and Medieval Portu-
guese (Rocio et al 2000); and from poetry 
(Pintzuk & Leendert, 2001) to religious texts such 
as the New Testament (Haug & J?hndal, 2008) and 
the Quran (Dukes & Buckwalter, 2010).  They are 
increasingly being leveraged in teaching (Crane et 
al., 2009) and in research (Lancaster, 2010). 
This paper describes the first large-scale de-
pendency treebank for Classical Chinese.  The 
treebank consists of poems from the Tang Dynasty 
(618 ? 907 CE), considered one of the crowning 
achievements in traditional Chinese literature.  The 
first half of the paper reviews related work (section 
2), then describes the design of the treebank (sec-
tion 3), its text and evaluation (section 4).  The 
second half shows the research potentials of this 
treebank with a study on parallelism in (section 5).  
2 Previous Work  
Existing linguistic resources for Chinese is pre-
dominantly for the modern language.  This section 
first describes the major Modern Chinese treebanks 
on which we based our work (section 2.1), then 
summarizes previous research in word segmenta-
tion and POS tagging, two pre-requisites for build-
ing a Classical Chinese treebank (section 2.2). 
2.1 Modern Chinese 
Most treebanks have been annotated under one of 
two grammatical theories, the phrase structure 
grammar, which is adopted by the Penn Treebank 
(Marcus et al, 1993), or dependency grammar, 
adopted by the Prague Dependency Treebank 
191
(Hajic, 1998).  The most widely used treebank for 
Modern Chinese, the Penn Chinese Treebank (Xue 
et al, 2005), belongs to the former kind. 
Rather than encoding constituency information, 
dependency grammars give information about 
grammatical relations between words.  Modern 
Chinese has been analyzed in this framework, for 
example at Stanford University (Chang et al, 
2009).  The dependency relations follow the design 
principles of those initially applied to English (de 
Marneffe and Manning, 2008), with a few added 
relations to accommodate Chinese-specific fea-
tures, such as the ?ba?-construction.  Their POS 
tagset is borrowed from that of the Penn Chinese 
Treebank. 
2.2 Classical Chinese 
Like its modern counterpart, two pre-requisites for 
constructing a Classical Chinese treebank are word 
segmentation and part-of-speech tagging. In this 
section, we first summarize existing POS tagging 
frameworks, then describe the only current tree-
bank of Classical Chinese.  
Word boundaries and parts-of-speech tags have 
been added to the Academia Sinica Ancient Chi-
nese Corpus (Wei et al, 1997) and the Sheffield 
Corpus of Chinese (Hu et al, 2005). Since there is 
not yet a scholarly consensus on word segmenta-
tion in Chinese (Feng 1998), it is not surprising 
that there are wide-ranging levels of granularity of 
the POS tagsets.  They range from 21 tags in 
(Huang et al, 2002), 26 in the Peking University 
corpus (Yu et al, 2002), 46 in the Academia Sini-
ca Balanced Corpus (Chen et al, 1996), to 111 in 
the Sheffield Corpus of Chinese (Hu et al, 2005).   
This treebank uses a system of nested POS tags 
(Lee, 2012), which accommodates different poli-
cies for word segmentation and maximize interop-
erability between corpora. 
The only previous syntactic treebank for Classi-
cal Chinese is a constituent-based one (Huang et 
al., 2002), composed of 1000 sentences from pre-
Tsin Classical Chinese. No word segmentation was 
performed for this treebank. 
3 Treebank design  
Although Classical Chinese is not mutually intelli-
gible with Modern Chinese, the two share consid-
erable similarities in vocabulary and grammar.  
Given the seminal work already achieved for Mod-
ern Chinese, our principle is to borrow from exist-
ing annotation framework as much as possible. For 
example, our POS tagset is based on that of the 
Penn Chinese Treebank, after a slight revision of 
its 33 tags (Lee, 2012). This approach not only 
gives users a familiar point of reference, and also 
makes the treebank interoperable with existing 
Modern Chinese resources.  Interoperability allows 
the potential of bootstrapping with Modern Chi-
nese data, as well as contrastive studies for the two 
languages. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Dependency trees of two adjacent 5-character 
lines (forming a parallel couplet)1.  The POS tags are 
based on (Xue et al, 2005); the dependency relations on 
(Chang et al, 2009).  The two lines are perfectly paral-
lel both in terms of POS and dependencies. 
 
A dependency framework is chosen for two rea-
sons.  First, words in Classical Chinese poems, our 
target text (section 4), tend to have relatively free 
word order.  Dependency grammars can handle 
this phenomenon well.  Second, our treebank is 
expected to be used pedagogically, and we expect 
explicit grammatical relations between words to be 
helpful to students.  These relations also encode 
                                                          
1 From Wang Wei ?????????????????
???? 
? ? ? ? ? 
?far? ?hear? ?phoenix? ?call? ?make noise? 
[I] hear from afar the call of the phoenix making noise. 
? ? ? ? ? 
?faint? ?sense? ?dragon? ?carriage? ?come? 
[I] faintly sense the dragon-decorated carriage coming. 
192
semantic information, which lend themselves to 
meaning extraction applications. 
Our set of dependency relations is based on 
those developed at Stanford University for Modern 
Chinese (see section 2.2).  Our approach is to map 
their 44 dependency relations, as much as possible, 
to Classical Chinese.  Modern Chinese, a non-
inflectional language, does not mark many linguis-
tic features, including person, gender, and number, 
etc.  It uses a small number of function words to 
encode other features, such as tense, voice, and 
case. Many of these function words do not exist in 
Classical Chinese.  In particular, prepositions are 
rare 2 ; instead, nouns expressing time, locations, 
instruments, indirect recipients, etc., modify the 
verb directly. This phenomenon prompted the in-
troduction of two new relations ?locative modifi-
ers? (section 3.1) and ?oblique objects? (section 
3.2); and the re-instatement of two relations, ?noun 
phrases as adverbial modifiers? (section 3.3) and 
?indirect objects?, from the Stanford dependencies 
(de Marneffe and Manning, 2008) that are exclud-
ed from the Modern Chinese variant (Chang et al, 
2009) .  An overview is provided in Table 1. 
 
Table 1.  Comparison of our set of dependency relations 
with the Stanford dependencies for English (de Marnef-
fe and Manning, 2008) and for Modern Chinese (Chang 
et al, 2009). All other relations from Stanford Modern 
Chinese are retained and are not listed here.   
3.1 Locative modifiers 
To indicate time, English usually requires a prepo-
sition (e.g., ?on Monday?), but sometimes does not 
                                                          
2 Classical Chinese has a category of verbs called ?coverbs? 
which function like prepositions, but are less frequently used. 
(Pulleyblank, 1995). 
(e.g., ?today?).  For the latter case, the bare noun 
phrase is considered a ?temporal modifier? in a 
tmod relation with the verb in (de Marneffe and 
Manning, 2008). 
Similarly, to indicate locations, a preposition is 
normally required in English (e.g., ?on the hill?).  
However, in Classical Chinese, the preposition is 
frequently omitted, with the bare locative noun 
phrase modifying the verb directly.  To mark these 
nouns, we created the ?locative modifier? relation 
(lmod). Consider sentence (1) in Table 2.  Alt-
hough the word ?hill? occupies the position nor-
mally reserved for the subject, it actually indicates 
a location, and is therefore assigned the lmod rela-
tion.  In sentence (2), the locative noun ?alley? is 
placed after the verb. 
3.2 Oblique objects 
Oblique objects are a well-known category in the 
analysis of ancient Indo-European languages, for 
example Latin and ancient Greek.  In the PROIEL 
treebank (Haug and J?hndal, 2008), for example, 
the ?oblique? (obl) relation marks arguments of 
the verb which are not subjects or non-accusative 
?objects?.  These are most commonly nouns in the 
dative or ablative case, as well as prepositional 
phrases.  It is believed that oblique objects exist in 
Classical Chinese, but have been replaced by prep-
ositional phrases in Modern Chinese (Li and Li, 
1986). 
The obl relation is imported to our treebank to 
mark nouns that directly modify a verb to express 
means, instrument, and respect, similar to the func-
tions of datives and ablatives. They typically come 
after the verb.  In sentence (6) in Table 2, the noun 
?cup? is used in an instrumental sense to modify 
?drunk? in an obl relation. 
3.3 Noun phrase as adverbial modifier  
A temporal modifier such as ?today? is an example 
where a noun phrase serves as an adverbial modifi-
er in English.  This usage is more general and ex-
tends to other categories such as floating reflexives 
(e.g., it is itself adequate), and other PP-like NPs 
(e.g., two times a day).  These noun phrases are 
marked with the relation npadvmod in (de Marn-
effe and Manning, 2008).   
Dependency Stanford 
English 
Stanford 
Modern 
Chinese 
This 
paper 
Direct object (dobj) ? ? ? 
Indirect object (iobj) ?  ? 
Locative modifier (lmod)   ? 
Noun phrase as adverbial 
modifier (npadvmod) 
?  ? 
Oblique objects (obl)   ? 
Concessive, temporal, 
conditional, and causal 
modifier (conc, temp, 
cond, caus) 
  ? 
193
 
Table 2. Example sentences  illustrating the use of the 
dependency relations lmod (locative modifier), iobj 
(indirect object), npadvmod (noun phrase as adverbial 
modifier), and obl (oblique object)3. 
 
In Modern Chinese, this usage is less frequent4, 
perhaps leading to its exclusion in (Chang et al, 
2009).  In contrast, in Classical Chinese, nouns 
function much more frequently in this capacity, 
expressing metaphoric meaning, reasons, moods, 
                                                          
3 The verses are from Wang Wei ????????, ???
????; Meng Haoran ?????????, ?????
??, ????????,????????????.  
4 Mostly restricted to temporal and location modifiers. 
repetitions, etc., and typically preceding the verb 
(Li and Li, 1986).  Sentences (4) and (5) in Table 2 
provide examples of this kind, with the noun ?self? 
as a reflexive, and the noun ?year? indicating repe-
tition. 
3.4 Indirect objects  
The double object construction contains two ob-
jects in a verb phrase.  The direct object is the 
thing or person that is being transferred or moved 
(e.g., ?he gave me a book?); the indirect object is 
the recipient (?he gave me a book?).  In inflected 
languages, the noun representing the indirect ob-
ject may be marked by case. Since Classical Chi-
nese does not have this linguistic device, the 
indirect object is unmarked; we distinguish it with 
the ?indirect object? label (iobj). 
The iobj label exists in Stanford English de-
pendencies (de Marneffe and Manning, 2008), but 
was not included in the Modern Chinese version 
(Chang et al, 2009), likely due to its infrequent 
appearance in Modern Chinese. It is re-instated in 
our Classical Chinese treebank.  Sentence (3) in 
Table 2 provides an example, with ?word? as the 
direct object and ?person? as the indirect. 
3.5 Absence of copular verbs  
In a copular construction such as ?A is B?, A is 
considered the ?topic? (top) of the copular verb 
?is? (Chang et al, 2009).  The copular, however, is 
rarely used in Classical Chinese (Pulleyblank, 
1995). In some cases, it is replaced by an adverb 
that functions as a copular verb. If so, that adverb 
is POS-tagged as such (VC) in our treebank, and 
the dependency tree structure is otherwise normal.  
In other cases, the copular is absent altogether.  
Rather than inserting implicit nodes as in (Haug 
and J?hndal, 2008), we expand the usage of the 
top relation.  It usually connects the subject (?A?) 
to the copular, but would in this case connect it 
with the noun predicate (?B?) instead.  In the ex-
ample sentence below, the relation top(?capable?, 
?general?) would be assigned. 
 
Locative modifier 
? ? ? ?? 
?thousand? ?hill? ?make sound? ?bird? 
(1) Birds are singing on a thousand hills. 
lmod(?make sound?, ?hill?) 
? ? ? ? ? 
?five? ?horse? ?scare? ?end? ?alley? 
(2) Five horses are scared at the end of the alley. 
lmod(?scare?, ?alley?) 
Indirect Objects 
? ? ? ? ? 
?send? ?word? ?edge? ?region? ?person? 
(3) [I] send a word to the person at the frontier. 
iobj(?send?, ?person?) 
Noun phrase as adverbial modifier 
? ? ? ?? 
?scene? ?thing? ?self? ?natural, unrestrained? 
(4) The scenes are being natural and unrestrained in 
themselves. 
npadvmod(?natural?, ?self?) 
? ? ? ? ? 
?year? ?year? ?Liang? ?Fu? ?song? 
(5) [He sings] the Liangfu Song year after year. 
npadvmod(?song?, ?year?) 
Oblique objects 
? ? ? ? ? 
?together? ?drunk? ?chrysan-
themus? 
?flower? ?cup? 
(6) [We] get drunk together with the chrysanthemus 
cup. 
obl(?drunk?, ?cup?) 
?? ? ? ? 
?general? ?weapon? ?warehouse? ?capable? 
The general [is] a capable manager of the arsenal5. 
194
3.6 Discourse relations  
Two clauses may be connected by a discourse rela-
tion, such as causal or temporal.  In English, these 
relations may be explicitly realized, most common-
ly by discourse connectives, such as ?because? or 
?when?.  Even in the absence of these connectives, 
however, two adjacent clauses can still hold an 
implicit discourse relation. A detailed study, which 
resulted in the Penn Discourse Treebank (Prasad et 
al., 2008), found that explicit relations outnumber 
implicit ones in English, but the latter is nonethe-
less quite common and can be annotated with high 
inter-annotator agreement.  
 
 
Table 3.  Example sentences illustrating the use of dis-
course labels for discourse relations6. 
 
In many ancient languages, explicit realization 
of discourse relations is less frequent.  In Latin and 
Ancient Greek, for instance, these connectives are 
often replaced by a participial clause.  The partici-
ple is marked only by the genitive or ablative case, 
leaving the reader to decide from context how it 
relates to the main clause.  As a non-inflectional 
language, Classical Chinese cannot use this device, 
and instead typically constructs a complex sen-
tence with a series of verbs without any marking 
(Pulleyblank, 1995). For example, sentence (2) in 
                                                                                           
5 From Meng Haoran ?????????? 
6 From top to bottom, Meng Haoran ???????,???
????, and Du Fu  ??????? 
Table 3 literally says ?not capable, good ruler for-
sake?; the onus is put on the reader to interpret the 
first two characters to form a clause that provides 
the reason for the rest of the line. 
This condensed style of expression often erects a 
barrier for understanding.  Although the focus of 
the treebank is on syntax rather than discourse, we 
decided to annotate these relations. Implicit con-
nectives are more difficult to achieve inter-
annotator agreement (Prasad et al, 2008); since 
they are mostly implicit in Classical Chinese, we 
adopted a coarse-grained classification system, 
rather than the hierarchical system of sense tags in 
the Penn Discourse Treebank.  More precisely, it 
contains only the four categories posited by 
(Wang, 2003) --- causal, concessive, temporal, and 
conditional.  Table 3 gives some examples. 
When it is impossible to determine the discourse 
relation between two lines, the default ?dependent? 
(dep) label is assigned.  This label is originally 
used when ?the system is unable to determine a 
more precise dependency relation between two 
words? (de Marneffe and Manning, 2008). 
4 Data  
Among the various literary genres, poetry enjoys 
perhaps the most elevated status in the Classical 
Chinese tradition. The Tang Dynasty is considered 
the golden age of shi, one of the five subgenres of 
Chinese poetry7.  The Complete Shi Poetry of the 
Tang (Peng, 1960), originally compiled in 1705, 
consists of nearly 50,000 poems by more than two 
thousand poets. This book is treasured by scholars 
and the public alike.  Even today, Chinese people 
informally compose couplets (see section 5), in the 
style of shi poetry, to celebrate special occasions 
such as birthdays.  Indeed, NLP techniques have 
been applied to generate them automatically (Jiang 
and Zhou, 2008). 
4.1 Material  
This treebank contains the complete works, a total 
of over 32,000 characters in 521 poems, by two 
Chinese poets in the 8th century CE, Wang Wei and 
Meng Haoran.  Wang, also known as the Poet-
Buddha (shifo ??), is considered one of the three 
most prominent Tang poets.   Meng is often asso-
                                                          
7 The other four genres are ci, fu, qu, and sao. 
Temporal relation 
? ? ? ? ? 
?be? ?child? ?remember? ?gather? ?sand? 
(1) [When I] was a child, [I] remember [playing] a 
game with sand. 
dep-temp(?remember?, ?be?) 
Causal relation 
? ? ? ? ? 
?not? ?capable? ?good? ?ruler? ?forsake? 
(2) The good ruler does not appoint me [as an official], 
[because] I am not capable. 
dep-caus(?forsake?, ?capable?) 
Concessive relation 
? ? ? ? ? 
?country? ?broken? ?mountain? ?river? ?exist? 
(3) [Although] the country is broken, the mountains 
and the rivers still stay. 
dep-conc(?exist?, ?broken?)  
195
ciated with Wang due to the similarity of his po-
ems in style and content. 
Aside from the dependency relations, word 
boundaries and POS tags, the treebank contains a 
number of metadata.  For each character, the tone 
is noted as either level (ping?) or oblique (ze ?).  
Each poem is also recorded for its title, author, and 
genre, which may be ?recent-style? (jintishi ???
) or ?ancient-style? (gutishi ???).    
This choice of our text stems from three motiva-
tions.  Classical Chinese is typically written in a 
compressed style, especially so with poetry, where 
the word order is relatively flexible, and grammati-
cal exceptions are frequent.  These characteristics 
pose a formidable challenge for students of Classi-
cal Chinese, for whom Tang poetry often forms 
part of the introductory material.  It is hoped that 
this treebank will serve a pedagogical purpose.  
Second, this challenging text makes it more likely 
that the resulting dependency framework can suc-
cessfully handle other Classical Chinese texts.  
Third, Tang poetry is an active area of research in 
Chinese philology, and we aspire to contribute to 
their endeavor. 
4.2 Inter-annotator agreement  
Two annotators, both university graduates with a 
degree in Chinese, created this treebank.  To meas-
ure inter-annotator agreement, we set apart a subset 
of about 1050 characters, on which both of them 
independently perform three tasks: POS tagging, 
head selection, and dependency labeling. 
Their agreement rate is 95.1%, 92.3%, and 
91.2% for the three respective tasks. For POS tag-
ging, the three main error categories are the confu-
sion between adverbs (AD) and verbs with an 
adverbial force, between measure words (M) and 
nouns (NN), and between adjectives (JJ) and 
nouns.  The interested reader is referred to (Lee, 
2012) for a detailed analysis.   
These differences in POS tags trickle down to 
head selection and dependency labeling. In fact, all 
words which received different POS tags also re-
ceived different dependency relations.  To illus-
trate with a disagreement between adverb and verb, 
consider the following sentence. The word ? 
kong ?afraid? may be considered as an adverb, ex-
pressing the psychological state for the verb ?at-
tract?; or, alternatively, as a verb in its own right.  
Depending on the decision, it bears either the rela-
tion advmod or root. 
 
? ? ? ? ? 
?afraid? ?attract? ?burden? ?fame? ?affect? 
[I am] afraid [I] will attract and be burdened by fame8. 
 
Some differences are genuine alternative annota-
tions, resulting from a mixture of polysemy and 
flexible word order.  Consider the sentence ???
? dan shi yi he, consisting of four characters 
meaning, in order, ?bowl / blanket?, ?food?, a copu-
lar or a particle, and ?what?.  If the meaning ?bowl? 
and copular is taken, it means ?What food is con-
tained in that bowl?? In this case, the relation clf 
is required for ? dan, and ? yi is the root word. 
Alternatively, if the meaning ?blanket? and particle 
is taken, it is interpreted as ?What food is placed on 
the blanket??  Here, dan takes on the relation nn, 
and the root word would be ? he instead. 
 
5 Application: Parallel Couplets  
We now demonstrate one use of this treebank by 
analyzing a well-known but understudied feature 
of Classical Chinese poetry: the parallel couplets. 
5.1 Introduction 
Parallelism in poetry refers to the correspondence 
of one line with another; the two lines may bear 
similar or opposite meaning, and have comparable 
grammatical constructions.  This phenomenon is 
perhaps most well known in classical Hebrew po-
etry, but it is also one of the defining features of 
Chinese poetry; ?it pervades their poetry universal-
ly, forms its chief characteristic feature, and is the 
source of a great deal of its artificial beauty?, ob-
served Sir John Francis Davis, author of one of the 
earliest commentaries on Chinese poetry published 
in the West (Davis 1969).   
The lines in a Chinese poem almost always con-
tain the same number of characters, most common-
ly either five or seven characters.  This exact 
equality of the number of characters makes it espe-
cially suited for expressing parallelism, which be-
came a common feature ever since ?recent-style? 
poetry (section 4.1) was developed during the Tang 
                                                          
8 From Wang Wei ??????????? 
196
Dynasty.  Unlike those in ?ancient-style?, poems of 
this style are tonally regulated and assume a high 
degree of parallelism within a couplet, i.e., two 
adjacent lines.  See Figure 1 for an example. 
5.2 Methodology 
The couplet in Figure 1 is undisputedly symmetric, 
both in terms of POS tags and dependency labels.  
The definition for parallelism is, however, quite 
loose; in general, the corresponding characters 
must ?agree? in part-of-speech and have related 
meaning.  These are unavoidably subjective no-
tions. 
While a vast amount of Tang poems have been 
digitized, they have not been POS-tagged or syn-
tactically analyzed in any significant amount.  It is 
not surprising, therefore, that no large-scale, em-
pirical study on how, and how often, the characters 
?agree?.  There have been a study on 1,000 cou-
plets (Cao, 1998), and another on a small subset of 
the poems of Du Mu (Huang, 2006), but neither 
clarify the criteria for parallelism. We undertake a 
descriptive, rather than prescriptive, approach, us-
ing only the treebank data as the basis. 
Character-level parallelism.   Even given the 
POS tags, this study is not straightforward. The 
naive metric of requiring exactly matched POS 
tags yields a parallel rate of only 74% in the corpus 
as a whole.  This figure can be misleading, because 
it would vary according to the granularity of the 
POS tagset: the more fine-grained it is, the less 
agreement there would be.  As a metric for paral-
lelism, it has high precision but lower recall, and 
would only be appropriate for certain applications 
such as couplet generation (Jiang and Zhou, 2008). 
 
Equivalence POS tags and dependency links 
Noun modifier CD, OD, JJ, DT 
Verbs BA, <verb>, and P (head of pobj 
or plmod)  
Adverbials AD, CS, <verb> (head of mmod), 
<noun> (head of npadvmod) 
Adjectival <noun> (head of nn or assmod), 
<verb> (head of vmod), JJ (head 
of amod) 
Nouns <noun>, <verb> (head of csubj 
or csubjpass), M (except clf) 
 
Table 4. Equivalence sets of POS tags for the purpose of 
parallelism detection.  <noun> includes NN, NT, NR, 
PN; <verb> includes VA, VC, VE, VV. 
By examining portions of the regulated verse 
where parallelism is expected, we derived five 
?equivalence sets? of POS tags, shown in Table 4. 
Two tags in the same set are considered parallel, 
even though they do not match.  In many sets, a tag 
needs to be qualified with its dependency relations, 
since it is considered parallel to other members in 
the set only when it plays certain syntactic roles.   
When applying these equivalence sets as well as 
exact matching, the parallel rate increases to 87%. 
The algorithm is of course not perfect9.  It can-
not detect, for example, parallelism involving the 
use of a polysemous character with a ?out-of-
context? meaning (jieyi ??).  For instance, the 
character ? zhe, the fourth character in the second 
line in the couplet10 ????????????,? 
means ?person?. On the surface, it does not match 
its counterpart, ? yan, the fourth character in the 
first line, since yan is a sentence particle and zhe is 
a noun. However, the poet apparently viewed them 
as parallel, because zhe can also function as a sen-
tence particle in other contexts. 
Phrase-level parallelism. The character-level 
metric, however, still rejects some couplets that 
would be deemed parallel by scholars.  Most of 
these couplets are parallel not at the character lev-
el, but at the phrase level. 
A line in a ?recent-style? poem is almost always 
segmented into two syntactic units (Cai, 1998). A 
pentasyllabic (5-character) line is composed of a 
disyllabic unit (the first two characters) followed 
by a trisyllabic unit (the last three characters)11.  
Consider two corresponding disyllabic units, ?? 
bao qin ?hold? ?violin?, and ?? sui diao ?look 
down? ?fish?.  They are tagged as bao/VV qin/NN 
and sui/AD diao/VV, respectively.  There is a 
complete mismatch at the character level: bao is a 
verb but sui is an adverb; qin is a noun but diao is 
a verb.  Taken as a whole, however, both units are 
verb phrases describing an activity (?to hold a vio-
lin? and ?to fish while looking down?), and so the 
poet likely considered them to be parallel at the 
unit, or phrase, level. 
                                                          
9 The quality of these equivalence sets were evaluated on 548 
characters.  The human expert agrees with the decision of the 
algorithm 96.4% of the time at the character level, and 94% of 
the time at the phrase level. 
10 From Meng Haoran ???????????????? 
11 Equivalently, the seven characters in the heptasyllabic regu-
lated verse are segmented in a 4+3 fashion. 
197
The dependencies provide a convenient way to 
gauge the level of parallelism at the phrase level.  
One can extract the head word in the correspond-
ing units in the couplet (bao/VV and diao/VV in the 
example above), then compare their POS tags, us-
ing the algorithm for character-level parallelism 
describe above. 
5.3 Results 
The results are shown in Table 5.  All couplets 
from an ?ancient-style? poem are considered ?par-
allelism optional?.  A couplet from a ?recent-style? 
poem with eight or more lines12 is either ?parallel-
ism not expected?, if it is the first or last couplet in 
the poem; or ?parallelism expected?, if it is in the 
middle of the poem.  We first determine whether a 
character is parallel to its counterpart in the couplet 
at the character level; if not, then we back off to 
the phrase level. 
In the ?parallelism expected? category, the cou-
plets of Wang are highly parallel, at both the char-
acter (91%) and phrase levels (95%).  This is 
hardly surprising, given that his poems are highly 
regarded.  It is notable, however, that the propor-
tion is still relatively high (57% at the character 
level) even among those couplets for which paral-
lelism is not expected, suggesting that the poet 
placed a high view on parallelism.  He also em-
ployed much parallelism (64% at the character lev-
el) in ?ancient-style? poems, perhaps to aim at a 
higher artistic effect. 
Among the couplets of Wang which are not par-
allel at the phrase level, the most frequent combi-
nation is a verb phrase matching a noun phrase.  
The verb, as the second character, is modified by 
an adverb; the noun, also as the second character, 
is modified by an adjective.  This implies that the 
?AD VV? vs. ?JJ NN? combination may be con-
sidered to be parallel by poets at the time. 
The trends for Meng are similar, with a signifi-
cantly higher score for couplets expected to be par-
allel than those that are not (82% vs. 53% at the 
character level).  Compared to Wang, however, 
both percentages are lower. One wonders if this 
has any correlation with Meng being commonly 
considered a less accomplished poet.  Since the 
?rules? for parallelism have never been codified, 
                                                          
12 These are known as the ?regulated verse? (lushi ??) and 
are subject to definite patterns of parallelism.  Those with 
fewer lines are left out, since their patterns are less regular. 
Meng may also have simply espoused a more 
coarse-grained view of parts-of-speech.  This hy-
pothesis would be consistent with the fact that, at 
the phrase level, the proportion of parallelism for 
Meng is much closer to that for Wang. This sug-
gests that Meng was content with parallelism at the 
phrase level and emphasized less on matching 
character to character. 
  
 
Table 5. The proportion of characters that are parallel to 
their counterparts in the couplet (see section 5.2). The 
couplets are classified into three types, depending on the 
genre of poetry and their position in the poem (see sec-
tion 5.3). 
6 Conclusion  
We have presented the first large-scale dependency 
treebank of Classical Chinese literature, which en-
codes works by two poets in the Tang Dynasty.  
We have described how the dependency grammar 
framework has been derived from existing tree-
banks for Modern Chinese, and shown a high level 
of inter-annotator agreement.  Finally, we have 
illustrated the utility of the treebank with a study 
on parallelism in Classical Chinese poetry. 
Future work will focus on parsing Classical 
Chinese poems of other poets, and on enriching the 
corpus with semantic information, which would 
facilitate not only deeper study of parallelism but 
also other topics such as imagery and metaphorical 
coherence (Zhu and Cui, 2010). 
 
Acknowledgments 
 
We thank Tin Ho Chan and Cheuk Ho Wan for 
their assistance in annotating this treebank.  This 
work was supported by a Strategic Research Grant 
(#7002549) from City University of Hong Kong. 
Couplet type Metric Wang Meng 
Parallelism 
expected 
Char-level only 91% 82% 
+ Phrase-level 95% 91% 
Parallelism 
not expected 
Char-level only 57% 53% 
+ Phrase-level 71% 71% 
Parallelism 
optional 
Char-level only 64% 65% 
+ Phrase-level 78% 81% 
198
References  
Zong-Qi Cai.  2008.  How to Read Chinese Poetry.  
Columbia University Press, New York. 
Fengfu Cao ???. 1998. A Linguistic Study of the 
Parallel Couplets in Tang Poetry. Technical Report, 
Linguistics Graduate Institute, National Tsing Hua 
University, Taiwan.  
Pi-Chuan Chang, Huihsin Tseng, Dan Jurafsky, and 
Christopher Manning. 2009.  Discriminative Reor-
dering with Chinese Grammatical Relations Features.  
Proc. 3rd Workshop on Syntax and Structure in Sta-
tistical Translation.Psychological Association. 
Gregory Crane, Brent Seales, and Melissa Terras. 2009. 
Cyberinfrastructure for Classical Philology. Digital 
Humanities Quarterly 3(1). 
John F. Davis. 1969. The Poetry of the Chinese.  Para-
gon Book, New York. 
Ulrike Demske, Nicola Frank, Stefanie Laufer and Hen-
drik Stiemer, 2004. Syntactic Interpretation of an 
Early New High German Corpus.  Proc. Workshop 
on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories (TLT). 
Kais Dukes and Tim Buckwalter, 2010.  A Dependency 
Treebank of the Quran using Traditional Arabic 
Grammar.  Proc. 7th International Conference on In-
formatics and Systems (INFOS), Cairo, Egypt. 
Shengli Feng. 1998.  Prosodic Structure and Com-
pound Words in Classical Chinese.  In New Ap-
proaches to Chinese Word Formation, Jerome Pack-
ard (ed.), Mouton de Gruyter. 
W. Nelson Francis and Henry Ku?era. 1982.  Fre-
quency Analysis of English Usage: Lexicon and 
Grammar.  Houghton Mifflin. 
J. Hajic.  1998. Building a syntactically annotated cor-
pus: The Prague Dependency Treebank.  Issues of 
Valency and Meaning, Charles University Press. 
Dag Haug and Marius J?hndal. 2008.  Creating a Paral-
lel Treebank of the Old Indo-European Bible Trans-
lations.  Proc. Language Resources and Evaluation 
Conference (LREC). 
X. Hu, N. Williamson, and J. McLaughlin. 2005.  Shef-
field Corpus of Chinese for Diachronic Linguistic 
Study.  Literary and Linguistic Computing 20(3). 
Li-min Huang. 2006.  The Study of Classical Poems of 
Tu-mu.  Master?s Thesis, National Sun Yat-sen Uni-
versity, Taiwan. 
Liang Huang, Yinan Peng, Huan Wang, and Zhengyu 
Wu. 2002.  PCFG Parsing for Restricted Classical 
Chinese Texts.  Proc. 1st SIGHAN Workshop on 
Chinese Language Processing. 
Long Jiang and Ming Zhou.  2008. Generating Chinese 
Couplets using a Statistical MT Approach.  Proc. 
COLING. 
Lewis Lancaster. 2010. Pattern Recognition and Analy-
sis in the Chinese Buddhist Canon: A Study of  
?Original Enlightenment?. Pacific World 3(60). 
Zuonan Li ??? and Renhou Li ???. 1986. A 
comparison of Classical Chinese and Modern Chi-
nese ???????? (in Chinese). Nei Menggu 
Renmin Chubanshe, China. 
Marie-Catherine de Marneffe and Christopher D. Man-
ning. 2008. Stanford typed dependencies manual. 
California: Stanford University. 
Dingqiu Peng. 1960. Quan Tang Shi ???. Zhonghua 
Shuju, Beijing.  
Susan Pintzuk and Plug Leendert. 2001.  York-Helsinki 
Parsed Corpus of Old English Poetry. http://www-
users.york.ac.uk/~lang18/pcorpus.html 
Rashmi Prasad, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, Eleni Miltsa-
kaki, Livio Robaldo, Aravind Joshi, and Bonnie 
Webber.  2008. The Penn Discourse Treebank 2.0.  
Proc. LREC. 
Edwin Pulleyblank. 1995.  Outline of Classical Chinese 
Grammar.  UBC Press, Vancouver, Canada. 
Vitor Rocio, M?rio Amado Alves, J. Gabriel Lopes, 
Maria Francisca Xavier, and Gra?a Vicente. 2000.  
Automated Creation of a Medieval Portuguese Partial 
Treebank. In Anne Abeill? (ed.), Treebanks: Building 
and Using Parsed Corpora (Dordrecht: Kluwer Aca-
demic Publishers), pp. 211-227. 
Ann Taylor, Anthony Warner, Susan Pintzuk and Frank 
Beths. 2003. York-Toronto-Helsinki Parsed Corpus 
of Old English Prose. University of York. 
Pei-chuan Wei, P. M. Thompson, Cheng-hui Liu, Chu-
Ren Huang, and Chaofen Sun. 1997.  Historical Cor-
pora for Synchronic and Diachronic Linguistics Stud-
ies. Computational Linguistics and Chinese 
Language Processing 2(1):131?145. 
Li Wang ??. 2004. A sketch of the history of Chinese 
language ???? (in Chinese). Zhonghua Shuju, 
Beijing. 
Jiaolu Xu. ???. 1992. Classical Chinese ????
(in Chinese). Higher Education Press, Beijing. 
Nianwen Xue, Fei Xia, Fu-Dong Chiou, and Martha 
Palmer, 2005.  The Penn Chinese TreeBank: Phrase 
Structure Annotation of a Large Corpus. Natural 
Language Engineering 11:pp.207?238. 
John Lee.  2012.  A Classical Chinese Corpus with 
Nested Part-of-Speech Tags.  Proc. EACL Workshop 
on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, So-
cial Sciences, and Humanities (LaTeCH). 
Chunshen Zhu and Ying Cui, 2010.  Imagery Focaliza-
tion and the Evocation of a Poetic World.  Chinese 
Translators Journal. 
  
199
Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Teaching Natural Language Processing, pages 56?60,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Treebanking for Data-driven Research in the Classroom 
 
 
John Lee, Ying Cheuk Hui, Yin Hei Kong 
Halliday Centre for Intelligent Applications of Language Studies  
Department of Chinese, Translation and Linguistics 
City University of Hong Kong 
{jsylee,yingchui,yhkong}@cityu.edu.hk 
 
  
 
Abstract 
Data-driven research in linguistics typically 
involves the processes of data annotation, data 
visualization and identification of relevant pat-
terns.  We describe our experience in incorpo-
rating these processes at an undergraduate 
course on language information technology.  
Students collectively annotated the syntactic 
structures of a set of Classical Chinese poems; 
the resulting treebank was put on a platform 
for corpus search and visualization; finally, us-
ing this platform, students investigated re-
search questions about the text of the treebank. 
1 Introduction  
Treebanks are now increasingly used as peda-
gogical tools (Crane et al, 2012), chiefly in two 
ways.  On the one hand, in linguistics courses, 
students may use existing treebanks to perform 
quantitative analysis on syntactic patterns.  On 
the other, in language courses, students may an-
notate syntactic structures to reinforce grammati-
cal concepts, creating new treebanks.  In this pa-
per, we describe our experience in integrating 
these two processes into a research project in an 
undergraduate course, and discuss its benefits 
and challenges.    
The project formed part of a course entitled 
?Language Information Technology?.  With no 
previous training, students collectively annotated 
the dependency structures of a portion of the 
Three Hundred Tang Poems, a popular antholo-
gy of Classical Chinese poems.  The instructor 
edited the annotations, compiled them into a de-
pendency treebank, and made it available for 
search and visualization on a web-based inter-
face.  Then, in a research assignment, students 
tackled questions on Chinese poetry with this 
treebank, which they had created with their own 
hands.  
Combining the creation of a treebank with its 
use in a research assignment has many benefits.  
With respect to pedagogy, the assignment 
demonstrates to students the practical rationale 
for treebanks; the treebanking exercise familiar-
ized students with the data and annotation 
scheme, helping them perform better on the as-
signment. With respect to longer-term effects, 
students perceive their own, tangible contribution 
to a field of scholarly research, in the form of 
linguistic annotations that are reusable by other 
scholars. The hands-on practice of a novel re-
search methodology --- data-driven study in lin-
guistics and literature --- should encourage them 
to apply it in their future fields of study. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows.  
Section 2 outlines previous use of treebanks in 
the classroom.  Section 3 describes how our 
course was structured.  Section 4 explains how 
students created the treebank, which formed the 
basis of the research assignment discussed in 
section 5.  Section 6 presents the lessons learned 
and concludes. 
2 Previous Work 
Many current systems support the use of linguis-
tic corpora for teaching and learning.  One of 
many examples, the Visual Interactive Syntax 
Learning (VISL) system allows students to 
search, view, construct and label parse trees 
(Bick, 2005).  The GATE system similarly facili-
tates corpus annotation, but it can also perform a 
variety of NLP tasks including POS tagging and 
parsing (Bontcheva et al, 2002). 
These systems facilitate pedagogical use of 
treebanks in two main ways.  First, students vis-
ualize parse trees and search for linguistic struc-
tures on existing treebanks.  These functions 
56
support empirical and quantitative analysis of 
linguistic phenomena.  Second, students also use 
their editing environment to create new depend-
ency annotations on text, as exercises in learning 
a new language.  The resulting treebank can then 
be made available for all scholars. 
The latter type of usage has been implemented 
in Classics courses at six American universities.  
Students made dependency annotations on a Lat-
in or Greek text, which the instructor then recon-
ciled.  The results contributed to the Latin and 
Ancient Greek Dependency Treebanks that are 
being compiled at the Perseus Project.  In a study 
on 13 students, who had received limited train-
ing, the inter-annotator accuracy averaged 54.5% 
(Bamman & Crane, 2010). 
Treebanking itself has also been taught in a 
course (Volk et al, 2005).  Another notable case 
where students collectively created new linguis-
tic resources has been reported at a graduate 
course in multilingual grammar engineering 
(Bender, 2007).  Each student developed a 
grammar for automatic parsing of a new lan-
guage.  Over time, students? work was found to 
be effective in bringing feedback to the core 
grammar, and to facilitate empirical research on 
cross-linguistic comparisons. 
A significant novelty in our course design is 
that, after students create new annotations for a 
treebank, they share the data with the rest of the 
class, and apply the freshly compiled treebank 
for linguistic research.  We now describe how 
these two processes were implemented. 
3 Course Structure 
The project described in this paper was integrat-
ed into ?Language Information Technology?, an 
undergraduate course offered at the Department 
of Chinese, Translation and Linguistics at City 
University of Hong Kong.  In the past semester, 
44 students were enrolled.  All majored in the 
Chinese language.  As can be expected in a hu-
manities department, the students had no tech-
nical background or experience in natural lan-
guage processing.  While some had previously 
taken linguistics courses, none was familiar with 
dependency grammar or its annotation scheme. 
The course lasted for 13 weeks; weekly meet-
ings consisted of a one-hour lecture and a two-
hour tutorial or practicum.  Roughly one half of 
this course was devoted to the treebanking pro-
ject. In the first week, part-of-speech (POS) tag-
ging was introduced, with English as the exam-
ple language.  During the practicum, students 
reviewed POS concepts with exercises and Stan-
ford?s online tagger1.  In the second, dependency 
trees were introduced, again using examples in 
English.  Lectures in the third and fourth weeks 
turned the attention to Chinese POS and depend-
ency trees, using respectively the schemes de-
fined at the Penn Chinese Treebank (Xue et al, 
2005) and Stanford (Chang et al, 2009).  During 
the practicums, adaptations to these schemes for 
Classical Chinese (Lee, 2012; Lee & Kong, 
2012) were presented.  In the fifth week, the web 
interface for searching and visualizing treebanks, 
which would later be used for a research assign-
ment (see section 5), was demonstrated.  Also, 
students were assigned individual texts for POS 
tagging and dependency labeling (see section 4). 
The practicum was devoted to discussions on 
difficulties in annotation.   
The annotations were due two weeks later.  
After editing by the instructor, the treebank was 
posted on the aforementioned web interface, and 
the assignment was released.  Overall, each stu-
dent received 15 hours of class time in prepara-
tion for the treebanking project. 
4 Treebank Annotation  
The first task of the students, described in this 
section, is to annotate dependency structures of a 
set of Classical Chinese texts.  The newly created 
treebank would then be used in a second task, to 
be discussed in the next section. 
4.1 Choice of Material  
Among the various literary genres, poetry enjoys 
perhaps the most elevated status in the Classical 
Chinese tradition. 320 poems from the Tang 
Dynasty, considered the golden age for poetry, 
have been grouped together in an anthology re-
ferred to as the Three Hundred Tang Poems. 
This anthology is perhaps the most well-known 
in the canon of Classical Chinese literature, and 
is featured without exception in the Chinese cur-
riculum in secondary schools. 
For the treebanking project, this corpus is ide-
al because it is both non-toy and not prohibitive-
ly difficult.  As well-known literary heritage, this 
corpus lends interesting and significant questions 
to the research assignment (section 5).  Moreo-
ver, unlike many other Chinese Classics, these 
poems are relatively simple to analyze, with each 
line containing not more than 7 characters. All 
students can be expected to have previous expo-
                                                 
1 http://nlp.stanford.edu:8080/parser/ 
57
sure to some of the poems.  Finally, since the text 
is of such central importance, the resulting tree-
bank is likely to be relevant to other scholars.  It 
is especially motivating for students that their 
efforts would have an impact long after they re-
ceive their grades for the course. 
4.2 Annotation Set-up and Results  
Each of the 44 students was assigned four differ-
ent poems from the Three Hundred Tang Poems 
for annotation, with a total of 144 characters. 
The instructor manually corrected the student 
annotations.  Using the corrected version as gold 
standard, the students achieved 68.1% labeled 
attachment score (LAS)2.  The quality of indi-
vidual students? annotations varied widely, from 
the lowest LAS at less than 10%, to the top stu-
dent who scored more than 95%.  Students were 
allowed to discuss their annotations with the in-
structor, but the correct annotations were never 
disclosed to them. 
Part-of-speech tagging. The students achieved 
93.9% accuracy for POS tagging, which com-
pares reasonably with the agreement rate of 
95.1% among two annotators reported on similar 
texts in (Lee, 2012). The tags with the highest 
error rates are shown in Table 1.  The most fre-
quent pairs of confusion are among the tags VA 
(predicative adjectives), AD (adverbs), and JJ 
(attributive adjectives). 
The lack of morphology in Classical Chinese 
likely contributed to the confusion between AD 
and JJ. Consider the phrase ?/AD xian ?relaxed? 
?/VV zuo ?sit?, the first two characters from the 
line ????? ?while sitting relaxedly, [we] 
gossip about Emperor Xuan?.  Here, the word 
xian ?relaxed? is an adverb describing the manner 
of zuo ?sit?; however, the same form can also 
serves as an adjective, perhaps leading a student 
to tag it as JJ. 
Even more frequent is the confusion between 
JJ and VA.  A typical example is the phrase ?
/NN zhu ?candle? ?/NN ying ?shadow? ?/VA 
shen ?becomes dark?, the last three characters in 
the line ???????  ?the shadow of the 
candle on the mica screen becomes dark?.  De-
spite hints from the word order, the student mis-
takenly considered shen ?becomes dark? as an 
attributive, rather than predicative, adjective.   
                                                 
2 As a comparison, two heavily trained annotators 
achieved 91.2% agreement on similar texts (Lee and 
Kong, 2012), and performance of automatic parsers 
can reach LAS at 75.6% (Lee and Wong, 2012). 
Tag Error rate Tag Error rate 
AD 20.1% M 13.8% 
P 20.0% LC 9.4% 
VA 19.1% CD 6.6% 
VC 16.1% JJ 4.4% 
PN 11.9%   
 
Table 1.  POS tags with the highest error rates. 
 
Head selection.  Among those characters 
whose POS tags are correctly labeled, head se-
lection is correct 81.8% of the time.  As shown in 
Table 2, among the various POS, students most 
frequently had difficulty selecting heads for 
verbs.  While there was a wide range of different 
kinds of mistakes, the most common one is to 
mistakenly take a noun as head, using the de-
pendency label vmod (verb modifier). 
Series of adverbs (AD) also turned out to be 
problematic; a third of the errors with AD fell 
into this case.  Consider the two adverbs bu and 
fu in the phrase ?/AD bu ?not? ?/AD fu ?again? 
?/VV fan ?return?, the last three characters in 
the line ?????? ?once the crane leaves, it 
will not return?.   By convention in the Stanford 
framework (Chang et al, 2009), the head of the 
first adverb, bu, is the verb fan and not its adverb 
neighbor to the right, fu.  This sort of error may 
be considered technical mistakes, rather than 
genuine misunderstanding of syntactic structure.   
 
Tag Error rate Tag Error rate 
VV 28.9% PN 9.6% 
AD 10.0% CD 7.1% 
NR 9.8% JJ 4.6% 
 
Table 2.  POS tags with the highest head selection 
error rates.  The top three tags, CC, AS and SP, were 
omitted due to small sample size (only 3 each). 
 
Dependency labels.  When a wrong head is se-
lected, the label was almost always also wrong. 
Among those words with the correct head, the 
accuracy in dependency labeling was 88.6%. Ta-
ble 3 lists the labels with the lowest accuracy.  
Three kinds of common mistakes emerged. 
The top error involves the indirect object 
(iobj).  All four occurrences in the corpus were 
misconstrued as direct objects. 
The second kind of error was due to unaware-
ness of an implicit copula verb.  When a copula 
58
exists or is implied, the label between the subject 
and predicate should be topic (top) rather than 
(nsubj); and the label between the subject and a 
noun should be attributive (attr) rather than direct 
object (dobj). Almost all mistakes with the labels 
top and attr fell into this category. 
Third, as another technical mistake, students 
often failed to use the label preposition object 
(pobj), and substituted it with the more common 
direct object (dobj) instead. 
 
Label Error rate Label Error rate 
iobj 100.0% npadvmod 28.6% 
attr 55.0% nsubj 15.1% 
top 50.0% dobj 12.6% 
pobj 35.0% vmod 6.4% 
 
Table 3.  Dependency labels with the highest error 
rates. 
5 Research Assignment 
Combining the effort of the whole class, 176 of 
the 320 poems in the Three Hundred Tang Po-
ems, comprising about 5000 characters, had been 
compiled in a treebank.  
As a demonstration of the value of their anno-
tations, a research assignment, with eight ques-
tions on various linguistic aspects of the poems, 
was designed.  Before the release of the assign-
ment, two preparatory steps were needed: the 
instructor edited the students? annotations into a 
gold version, and imported the gold version onto 
a web-based interface that allows searching for 
occurrences of specific dependency relations.  
The user may specify the relevant child and/or 
head word, or only their POS, and optionally also 
the dependency label. 
Most questions in the assignment required 
searching for particular dependency relations and 
observing the word usage therein.  For example, 
students were to find compound nouns where the 
head noun is modified by the characters ?spring? 
or ?autumn?, two seasons that appear frequently 
in formulaic expressions to convey atmosphere 
(e.g., ?wind in the spring?, ?moon in the au-
tumn?).  They were then to recognize the head 
nouns attested to be modified by both (?grass?, 
?sun? and ?light?).  As another example, students 
were to identify all sentences where the usual 
SVO order had undergone word inversion, and 
comment on those words that were intentionally 
given the emphasis.  Other questions addressed 
pivot constructions and onomatopoeia words.  
Average student performance on these questions 
ranges between 70% and 90%. 
Perhaps the most challenging question was on 
the phenomenon of parallelism.  Classical Chi-
nese poems are read in pairs of two lines, or cou-
plets.  The two lines in a couplet are expected to 
have similar syntactic structures, yet the nature 
and extent of this ?similarity? remained an open 
question.  Taking 16 couplets from the treebank 
as samples, students were to explain any dis-
symmetry in the pairs of dependency trees, and 
point out the most frequent differences.  About 
50% of the students offered ideas similar to the 
conclusions of a larger-scale study (Lee & Kong, 
in submission), i.e., that certain sets of POS tags 
may be considered acceptable as parallel (e.g., 
numbers and adjectives), and that low-level syn-
tactic structures need not be identical.  
6 Discussions and Conclusions 
We have described an undergraduate course on 
language information technology where students 
collectively created a treebank, then applied it in 
a research assignment.  
This course design is demanding for the in-
structor, who must correct a substantial amount 
of annotations, under time pressure to produce a 
gold version for use in the assignment.  Moreo-
ver, assignment questions may need to be adjust-
ed, since the annotation results are not available 
beforehand.  It is also demanding for students, 
who must master the dependency annotation 
scheme quickly. 
The rewards of this design, however, are man-
ifold for students, instructor and scholarship.  
First, annotation errors indicate areas where stu-
dents? grasp of grammar is weak, and thus in-
formative for language teachers.   Second, some 
annotations reveal alternative syntactic interpre-
tations, never thought of by the instructor, and 
can contribute to studies on syntactic ambigui-
ties.  Third, the resulting treebank can serve as a 
linguistic resource for all scholars. 
Most significantly, the research assignment 
lets students reap the rewards of the new 
knowledge they had labored to create, providing 
a convincing demonstration of the practical value 
of treebanking.  In future versions of the course, 
we hope to continue building this ?cycle of con-
tributing and learning? (Crane et al, 2012), 
where students learn to contribute new 
knowledge, and share it with others so they can 
collectively discover yet more knowledge. 
59
 
Acknowledgments 
 
This work was partially supported by a grant 
from the Early Career Scheme of the General 
Research Fund (#9041849) from the Research 
Grants Council of Hong Kong, and by a Teach-
ing Development Grant (#6000349) from City 
University of Hong Kong. 
References  
David Bamman and Gregory Crane. 2010.  Corpus 
Linguistics, Treebanks and the Reinvention of Phi-
lology. In Informatik 2010, pages 542-551. 
Emily Bender.  2007.  Combining Research and Ped-
agogy in the Development of a Crosslinguistic 
Grammar Resource.  Proc. GEAF Workshop. 
Kalina Bontcheva, Hamish Cunningham, Valentin 
Tablan, Diana Maynard, and Oana Hamza.  2002.  
Using GATE as an Environment for Teaching 
NLP.  Proc. Workshop on Effective Tools and 
Methodologies for Teaching Natural Language 
Processing and Computational Linguistics. 
Eckhard Bick. 2005. Grammar for Fun: IT-based 
Grammar Learning with VISL. In: Henriksen, Pe-
ter Juel (ed.), CALL for the Nordic Languages. 
pp.49-64. 
Pi-Chuan Chang, Huihsin Tseng, Dan Jurafsky, and 
Christopher Manning. 2009. Discriminative Reor-
dering with Chinese Grammatical Relations Fea-
tures. Proc. 3rd Workshop on Syntax and Structure 
in Statistical Translation. 
Gregory Crane, Bridget Almas, Alison Babeu, Lisa 
Cerrato, Matthew Harrington, David Bamman, and 
Harry Diakoff.  2012.  Student Researchers, Citi-
zen Scholars and the Trillion Word Library.  Proc. 
12th ACM/IEEE-CS Joint Conference on Digital 
Libraries (JCDL). 
John Lee. 2012.  A Classical Chinese Corpus with 
Nested Part-of-Speech Tags.  Proc. Workshop on 
Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, So-
cial Sciences, and Humanities (LaTeCH). 
John Lee and Yin Hei Kong. 2012.  A Dependency 
Treebank of Classical Chinese Poems.  Proc. Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (NAACL). 
John Lee and Tak-sum Wong, 2012.  Glimpses of 
Ancient China from Classical Chinese Poems. 
Proc. 24th International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics (COLING). 
Martin Volk, Sofia Gustafson-Capkov?, David Hag-
strand, and Heli Uibo. 2005. Teaching Treebank-
ing. In: Nordisk Sprogteknologi. Nordic Language 
Technology. ?rbog for Nordisk Sprogteknologisk 
Forskningsprogram 2000-2004. Museum Tuscu-
lanums Forlag. Copenhagen. 2005. 
Nianwen Xue, Fei Xia, Fu-Dong Chiou, and Martha 
Palmer, 2005. The Penn Chinese TreeBank: Phrase 
Structure Annotation of a Large Corpus. Natural 
Language Engineering 11:pp.207?238.  
 
60
