2012 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 112?119,
Montre?al, Canada, June 3-8, 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
Hello, Who is Calling?: Can Words Reveal the Social Nature of
Conversations?
Anthony Stark, Izhak Shafran and Jeffrey Kaye
Center for Spoken Language Understanding, OHSU, Portland USA.
{starkan,shafrani,kaye}@ohsu.edu
Abstract
This study aims to infer the social nature
of conversations from their content automat-
ically. To place this work in context, our moti-
vation stems from the need to understand how
social disengagement affects cognitive decline
or depression among older adults. For this
purpose, we collected a comprehensive and
naturalistic corpus comprising of all the in-
coming and outgoing telephone calls from 10
subjects over the duration of a year. As a
first step, we learned a binary classifier to fil-
ter out business related conversation, achiev-
ing an accuracy of about 85%. This clas-
sification task provides a convenient tool to
probe the nature of telephone conversations.
We evaluated the utility of openings and clos-
ing in differentiating personal calls, and find
that empirical results on a large corpus do
not support the hypotheses by Schegloff and
Sacks that personal conversations are marked
by unique closing structures. For classifying
different types of social relationships such as
family vs other, we investigated features re-
lated to language use (entropy), hand-crafted
dictionary (LIWC) and topics learned using
unsupervised latent Dirichlet models (LDA).
Our results show that the posteriors over top-
ics from LDA provide consistently higher ac-
curacy (60-81%) compared to LIWC or lan-
guage use features in distinguishing different
types of conversations.
1 Introduction
In recent years, there has been a growing interest
in analyzing text in informal interactions such as
in Internet chat, newsgroups and twitter. The em-
phasis of most such research has been in estimating
network structure (Kwak et al, 2010) and detecting
trending topics (Ritter et al, 2010), sentiments (Pak
and Paroubek, 2010) and first stories (Petrovic? et al,
2010). The focus has been on aggregating informa-
tion from large number of users to analyze popula-
tion level statistics.
The study reported in this paper, in contrast, fo-
cuses on understanding the social interactions of an
individual over long periods of time. Our motiva-
tion stems from the need to understand the factors of
social engagement that ameliorate the rate of cogni-
tive decline and depression in older adults. Since the
early work of Glass (1997) and colleagues, several
studies on large cohorts over extended duration have
confirmed that older adults with few social relation-
ships are at an increased risk of suffering depression
and dementia. The limited information available in
currently used coarse measures, often based on self-
reports, have hindered epidemiologists from probing
the nature of this association further.
While social engagement is typically multi-
faceted, older adults, who are often less mobile, rely
on telephone conversations to maintain their social
relationships. This is reflected in a recent survey
by Pew Research Center which reported that among
adults 65 years and older, nine in ten talk with family
or friends every day and more than 95% use land-
line telephones for all or most of their calls (Tay-
lor et al, June 29 2009). Conveniently for us, tele-
phone conversations present several advantages for
analysis. Unlike many other forms of communica-
tion, the interaction is restricted solely to an audio
112
channel, without recourse to gestures or facial ex-
pressions. While we do not discount the importance
of multi-modal communication, having a communi-
cation channel restricted to a unimodal format does
significantly simplify both collection and analysis.
Furthermore, the use of a handset affords the oppor-
tunity to capture naturalistic speech samples at rela-
tively high signal-to-noise ratio. Lastly, automatic
speech recognition (ASR) systems can now tran-
scribe telephone conversations with sufficient accu-
racy for useful automated analysis.
Given the above premise, we focus our attention
on studying social interactions of older adults over
land-line telephones. To facilitate such a study, we
collected telephone conversations from several older
adults for approximately one year. Note that our
corpus is unlike the publicly available Switchboard
and Fisher corpora, which contain conversations be-
tween unfamiliar speakers discussing a topic from a
pre-determined list such as music, crime, air pollu-
tion (Godfrey et al, 1992). In contrast, the conversa-
tions in our corpus are completely natural, covering
a wide range of topics, conversational partners and
types of interactions. Our corpus is also compre-
hensive in that it includes all the outgoing/incoming
calls from subjects? homes during the observation
period.
As a step toward understanding social networks
and associated relationships, our first task was to
classify social and non-social (business) conversa-
tions. While reverse listing was useful to a certain
extent, we were unable to find listing on up to 50%
of the calls in our corpus due to lack of caller ID in-
formation on many calls as well as unlisted numbers.
Moreover, we cannot preclude the possibility that a
social conversation may occur on a business num-
ber (e.g., a friend or a relative working in a business
establishment) and vice versa. Using the subset of
calls for which we have reliable listing, we learned
a supervised classifier and then employed the classi-
fier to label the remaining calls for further analysis.
The focus of this study was not so much on learn-
ing a binary classifier, but using the resulting classi-
fier as a tool to probe the nature of telephone con-
versations as well as to test whether the scores ob-
tained from it can serve as a proxy for degree of
social familiarity. The classifier also affords us an
opportunity to re-examine hypotheses proposed by
Schegloff and Sacks (1974; 1968; 1973) about the
structure of openings and closing in business and
personal conversations. Within social conversation,
we investigated the accuracy of identifying conver-
sations with close friends and relatives from others.
The rest of this paper is arranged as follows. After
describing the corpus and ASR system in Sections 2
and 3, we probe the nature of telephone conversa-
tions in Section 4. We present direct binary classifi-
cation experiments in Section 5 and lastly, we close
with a few remarks in Section 6.
2 Corpus: Everyday Telephone
Conversations Spanning a Year
Our corpus consists of 12,067 digitized land-line
telephone conversations. Recordings were taken
from 10 volunteers, 79 years or older, over a pe-
riod of approximately 12 months. Subjects were all
native English speakers recruited from the USA. In
addition to the conversations, our corpus includes
a rich set of meta-data, such as call direction (in-
coming vs outgoing), time of call, duration and
DTMF/caller ID when available. At the end of the
data collection, for each subject, twenty telephone
numbers were identified corresponding to top ten
most frequent calls and top ten longest calls. Sub-
jects were asked to identify their relationship with
the speakers at these numbers as immediate family,
near relatives, close friends, casual friends, strangers
and business.
For this initial study, we discard conversations
with less than 30 automatically transcribed words.
This was done primarily to get rid of spurious and/or
noisy recordings related to device failure as well
as incorrectly dialed telephone numbers. Moreover,
short conversations are less likely to provide enough
social context to be useful.
Of the 8,558 available conversations, 2,728 were
identified as residential conversations and 1,095
were identified as business conversations using re-
verse listings from multiple sources; e.g. phone
directory lookup, exit interviews, internet lookup.
This left 4,395 unlabeled records, for which the re-
verse listing was either inconclusive or for which the
phone number information was missing and/or im-
properly recorded.
113
3 Automatic Speech Recognition
Conversations in our corpus were automatically
transcribed using an ASR system. Our ASR sys-
tem is structured after IBM?s conversation telephony
system which gave the top performance in the most
recent evaluation of speech recognition technology
for telephony by National Institute of Standards and
Technology (Soltau et al, 2005). The acoustic mod-
els were trained on about 2000 hours of telephone
speech from Switchboard and Fisher corpora (God-
frey et al, 1992). The system has a vocabulary of
47K and uses a trigram language model with about
10M n-grams, estimated from a mix of transcripts
and web-harvested data. Decoding is performed
in three stages using speaker-independent models,
vocal-tract normalized models and speaker-adapted
models. The three sets of models are similar in
complexity with 4000 clustered pentaphone states
and 150K Gaussians with diagonal covariances. Our
system does not include discriminative training and
performs at a word error rate of about 24% on NIST
RT Dev04 which is comparable to state of the art
performance for such systems. The privacy require-
ments in place for our corpus prohibit human lis-
tening ? precluding the transcriptions needed report-
ing recognition accuracy. However, while our cor-
pus differs from Switchboard, we expect the perfor-
mance of the 2000 hour recognizer to be relatively
close to results on NIST benchmark.
4 Nature of Telephone Conversations
4.1 Classification Experiments
As mentioned earlier, we first learned a baseline bi-
nary classifier to filter out business calls from res-
idential calls. Apart from using this as a tool to
probe the characteristics of social calls, it also helps
us to classify unlabeled calls and thus avoid discard
half the corpus from subsequent analysis of social
network and relationships. Recall, the labels for
the calls were obtained using reverse lookup from
multiple sources. We assume that the majority of
our training set reflect the true nature of the con-
versations and expect to employ the classifier sub-
sequently for correcting the errors arising when per-
sonal conversations occur on business lines and vice
versa.
We learned a baseline SVM classifier using a bal-
anced training set. From the labeled records we cre-
ated a balanced verification set containing 164,115
words over 328 conversations. The remainder was
used to create a balanced training set consisting of
866,696 words over 1,862 conversations. The SVM
was trained on 20-fold cross validation and evalu-
ated on the verification set. After experimenting
with different kernels, we found an RBF kernel to
be most effective, achieving an accuracy of 87.50%
on the verification data.
4.2 Can the Scores of the Binary Classifier
Differentiate Types of Social Relationship?
Since the SVM score has utility in measuring a con-
versation on the social-business axis, we now exam-
ine its usefulness in differentiating social ties. To
test this, we computed SVM score statistics for all
conversations with family and friends. For compar-
ison, we also computed the statistics for all conver-
sations automatically tagged as residential as well as
all conversations in the data. Table 1 shows the av-
erage family score is unambiguously higher than the
average residential conversation (independent sam-
ple t-test, p < 0.001). This is an interesting re-
sult since distinction of family conversations (from
general social calls) never factored into the SVM.
Rather, it appears to arise naturally as an extrap-
olation from the more general residential/business
discriminator. The friend sub-population exhibited
statistics much closer to the general residential pop-
ulation and its differences were not significant to any
degree. The overlap between scores for conversa-
tions with family and friends overlap significantly.
Notably, the conversations with family have a sig-
nificantly higher mean and a tighter variance than
with other social ties.
Table 1: SVM scores for phone number sub-categories.
Category # Calls Mean score STD
Family 1162 1.12 0.50
Friends 532 0.95 0.51
Residential 2728 0.93 0.63
Business 1095 -1.16 0.70
Global 8558 0.46 0.96
114
4.3 How Informative are Openings and
Closings in Differentiating Telephone
Conversations?
Schegloff and Sacks assert openings (beginnings)
and closings (ends) of telephone conversations have
certain identifiable structures (Sacks et al, 1974).
For example, the structure of openings facilitate es-
tablishing identity of the conversants and the pur-
pose of their call (Schegloff, 1968). Closings in
personal conversations are likely to include a pre-
closing signal that allows either party to mention
any unmentioned mentionables before conversation
ends (Schegloff and Sacks, 1973).
Given the above assertions, we expect openings
and closings to be informative about the type of con-
versations. Using our classifier, we compare the ac-
curacy of predicting the type from openings, clos-
ings and random segments of the conversations. For
different lengths of the three types of segments, the
observed performance of the classifier is plotted in
Figure 1. The results for the random segment were
computed by averaging over 100 trials. Several im-
portant results are immediately apparent. Openings
possess much higher utility than closings. This is
consistent with general intuition that the opening ex-
change is expected to clarify the nature and topic
of the call. Closings were found to be only as in-
formative as random segments from the conversa-
tions. This is contrary to what one might expect
from Schegloff and Sack?s assertion that pre-closing
differ significantly in personal telephone calls (Sche-
gloff and Sacks, 1973). Less intuitive is the fact that
increasing the length of the opening segment does
not improve performance. Surprisingly, a 30-word
segment from the opening appears to be sufficient to
achieve high classification accuracy (87.20%).
4.4 Data Sparsity or Inherent Ambiguity: Why
are Short Conversations difficult to
Classify?
Sparsity often has a deleterious effect on classifica-
tion performance. In our experiments, we noticed
that shorter conversations suffer from poor classifi-
cation. However, the results from the above section
appear to contradict this assertion, as a 30-word win-
dow can give very good performance. This seems to
suggest short conversations suffer poor recognition
30 50 100 250 500 10000
5
10
15
20
25
30
Number of words sampled
Re
s/bi
z cl
ass
ifica
tion
 err
ror 
(%)
 
 Word sample from startWord sample from endWord sample randomly taken
Figure 1: Comparison of classification accuracy in pre-
dicting the type of conversation from openings, closings
and random segments. Error bars are one standard devia-
tion.
due to properties beyond the obvious sparsity effect.
To test this, we investigated the differences in short
and long conversations in greater detail. We sepa-
rate calls into quintile groups based on word counts.
However, we now calculate all features from a 30-
word opening ? eliminating effects directly related
to size. The results in Table 2 show that the abil-
Table 2: Accuracy in predicting the type of conversation
when they are truncated to 30-words of openings based
on conversation length quintiles. The column, Res / Biz,
split gives the label distributions for the quintiles.
Orig. Word Counts Split Accuracy
Quintile #Words Res. / Biz.
0-20 30-87 62.12 / 37.88 78.6
20-40 88-167 48.48 / 51.52 82.8
40-60 168-295 39.39 / 60.61 91.4
60-80 296-740 40.91 / 59.09 87.8
80-100 741+ 59.38 / 40.62 93.4
ity to predict the type of conversation does not de-
grade when long conversations are truncated. Mean-
while, the accuracy of classification drops for (orig-
inally) short conversations. There is a surprisingly
small performance loss due to the artificial trunca-
tion. These observations suggest that the long and
short conversations are inherently different in na-
ture, at least in their openings.
We should point out that spurious recordings
in our corpus are concentrated in the low word
count group ? undoubtedly dropping their accura-
cies. However, the trend of improving accuracy per-
sists well into the high word count ranges where spu-
115
rious records are rare. Given this fact, it appears that
individuals in our corpus are more careful in enun-
ciating the reasons for calling if an extended phone
conversation is anticipated.
4.5 Can Openings Help Predict Relative
Lengths of Conversations?
From the results presented so far, we know that
openings are good predictors of the type of conver-
sations yet to unfold. We also know that there are in-
herent language differences between short and long
conversations. So, it is natural to ask whether open-
ings can predict relative lengths of conversations.
To test this hypothesis, we bin conversations into
5 groups or ranks based on their percentile lengths
(word counts) ? very short, short, moderate, long
and very long durations, as in Table 2. Using in-
dependent features from the 30-word opening, we
attempt to predict the relative rank of two conver-
sations by learning a rank SVM (Joachims, 2006).
We found the ranker to give 27% error rate, signifi-
cantly lower (independent sample t-test, d.f. ? 1M,
p<0.01) than the random chance of 40%. Chance
baseline was determined using Monte Carlo simula-
tion (1M random rankings) in conjunction with the
rank SVM evaluation (Joachims, 2006).
Features from very short conversations may con-
tain both openings and closings, i.e., both a hello and
a goodbye, making them easier to rank. To avoid this
confounding factor, we also compute performance
after discarding the shortest grouping of conversa-
tions (< 88 words) to ensure closings are avoided in
the 30-word window. The resulting classifier over
short, medium, long, very long conversations ranked
30% of the pairs erroneously, somewhat better than
chance at 37%. Though the performance gain over
the random ranker has shrunk considerably, there is
still some utility in using the opening of a conversa-
tion to determine its ultimate duration. However, it
is clear predicting duration via conversation opening
is a much more difficult task overall.
5 Supervised Classification of Types of
Social Relationships
While the scores of the binary classifier provided
statistically significant differences between calls to
different types of social relationships, they are not
particularly useful in classifying the calls with high
accuracy. In this section, we investigate the perfor-
mance of classifiers to differentiate the following bi-
nary classes.
? Residential vs business
? Family vs all other
? Family vs other residential
? Familiar vs non-familiar
Familiar denotes calls to those numbers with whom
subject has conversed more than 5 times. Recall
that the numbers corresponding to family members
were identified by the subjects in a post-collection
interview. We learned binary classifier for the four
cases, a few of which were reported in our early
work (Stark et al, 2011). We investigated a vari-
ety of features in these tasks. A breakdown of the
corpus is give in Table 3. Not all categories are mu-
tually exclusive. For example the majority of family
conversations also fall into the familiar and residen-
tial categories.
Table 3: Number of conversations per category.
Category Instances
Biz. 1095
Residential 2728
Family 1111
Res. non-family 1462
Familiar 3010
All 8558
5.1 Lexical Statistics
Speakers who share close social ties are likely to
engage in conversations on a wide variety of top-
ics and this is likely to reflect in the entropy of their
language use. We capture this aspect of language
use by computing language entropy over the uni-
gram word distribution for each conversation, i.e;
H(d) = ?
?
w p(w|d) log p(w|d), where p(w|d) is
the probability of word w given conversation d. We
also included two other lexical statistics namely the
speaking rate and the word count (in log domain).
Table 4 lists the utility of these language proper-
ties for differentiating the four binary classes men-
tioned earlier, where the p-value is computed using
two tailed independent sample t-test.
116
Table 4: T-statistics for different context groups. Labels:
a) Log-word count, b) speaking rate, c) language entropy.
Asterisk denotes significance at p<0.0001. Sample sizes
(n) may be found in Table 3.
Task d.f. a) b) c)
Res. v. biz. 7646 1.9 10.1? -1.9
Family v. other 8556 16.3? 9.0? 13.4?
Family v. other res. 2571 12.9? 5.1? 11.3?
Familiar v. other 8556 10.4? 6.4? 9.3?
For the most part, the significance tests conform
with preconceived ideas of language use over the
telephone. It is shown that people talk longer,
more rapidly and have wider range of language use
when conversing with a familiar contact and/or fam-
ily member. Surprisingly, only the speaking rate
showed significant differences among the residen-
tial/business categories, with business conversations
being conducted at a slower pace at least for the el-
derly demographic in our corpus.
5.2 Linguistic inquiry and Word Count
We investigated a hand-crafted dictionary of salient
words, called Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count
(LIWC), employed in social psychology stud-
ies (Pennebaker et al, 2003). This dictionary group
words into 64 categories such as pronouns, activ-
ity words, positive emotion and health. The cate-
gories have significant overlap and a given word can
map to zero or more categories. The clear benefit
of LIWC is that the word categories have very clear
and pre-labeled meanings. They suffer from the ob-
vious drawback that the words are labeled in isola-
tion without taking their context into account. The
tags are not chosen under any mathematical criteria
and so there are no guarantees the resultant feature
will be useful or optimal for classifying utterances.
Table 5 lists the LIWC categories significant (p<
0.001) to the different classes. The listed terms are
sorted according to their t-statistic, with early and
later terms more indicative of first and second class
labels respectively.
5.3 Latent Dirichlet alocation
Unsupervised clustering and feature selection can
make use of data for which we have no labels. For
example, in the case of business and residential la-
bels, unlabeled data amounts to about 50% of our
corpus. Motivated by this consideration, we exam-
ined unsupervised clustering using Latent Dirichlet
Allocation (LDA) (Blei et al, 2003).
LDA models a conversation as a bag of words.
The model generates a conversation by: (a) sam-
pling a topic distribution ? for the conversation using
a per-conversation Dirichlet topic distribution with a
hyper-parameter ?, (b) sampling a topic z for each
word in the conversation using a multinomial distri-
bution using the topic mixture ?, and (c) sampling
the word from a per-topic multinomial word distri-
bution with a hyper-parameter ? (Blei et al, 2003).
The number of topics are assumed to be given. The
per-conversation topic distribution and the per-topic
word distribution can be automatically estimated to
maximize the likelihood of training data. The spar-
sity of these two distributions can be controlled by
tweaking ? and ?; lower values increase sparsity.
For our experiments, we estimated a maximum
likelihood 30-topic LDA model from the corpus.
Experimentally, we found best cross-validation re-
sults were obtained when ? and ? were set to 0.01
and 0.1 respectively.
When peering into the topics learned by the LDA
method, it did appear that topics were approximately
separated into contextual categories. Most interest-
ing, when the number of clusters are reduced to two,
the LDA model managed to segment residential and
business conversations with relatively high accuracy
(80%). This suggests the LDA model was able to
approximately learn these classes in an unsupervised
manner.
Table 6 lists words strongly associated with the
two topics and clearly the unsupervised cluster-
ing appears to have automatically differentiated the
business-oriented calls from the rest. On closer ex-
amination, we found that most of the probability
was distributed in a limited number of words in the
business-oriented topic. On the contrary, the proba-
bility was more widely distributed among words in
the other cluster, reflecting the diversity of content
in personal calls.
5.4 Classifying Types of Social Relationships
Though t-tests are useful for ruling out insignificant
relationships, they are insufficient for quantifying
the degree of separability ? and thus, ultimately their
117
Table 5: LIWC categories found to be significant in classifying relationships, ranked according to their t-statistic.
Relationship Categories
Res. v. biz. I, Past, Self, Motion, Other, Insight, Eating, Pronoun, Down, Physcal, Excl, Space, Cogmech, Home,
Sleep, Tentat, Assent, / Article, Optim, Fillers, Senses, Hear, We, Feel, Inhib, Incl, You, School, Money,
Occup, Job, Number
Family v. all Other, Past, Assent, Sleep, Insight, I, Pronoun, Cogmech, Tentat, Motion, Self / Affect, Optim, Certain,
Future, School, Comm, Job, We, Preps, Incl, Occup, You, Number
Family v. res. Other, Past, Sleep, Pronoun, Tentat, Cogmech, Insight, Humans / Comm, We, Incl, You, Preps, Number
Familiar v. other Other, Assent, Past, I, Leisure, Self, Insight / Fillers, Certain, Social, Posemo, We, Future, Affect, Incl,
Comm, Achieve, School, You, Optim, Job, Occup
Table 6: Per-topic word distribution learned using unsu-
pervised clustering with LDA. Words are sorted accord-
ing to their posterior topic distribution. Words with iden-
tical distributions are sorted alphabetically.
Topic 1 Topic 2
Invalid, helpline, eligibility,
transactions, promo-
tional, representative,
mastercard, touchtone,
activation, nominating,
receiver, voicemail, digit,
representatives, Chrysler,
ballots, staggering, refills,
resented, classics, metro,
represented, administer,
transfers, reselling, recom-
mendations, explanation,
floral, exclusive, submit.
Adorable, aeroplanes,
Arlene, Astoria, baked,
biscuits, bitches, blisters,
bluegrass, bracelet, brains,
bushes, calorie, casinos,
Charlene, cheeses, chit,
Chris, clam, clientele,
cock, cookie, copying,
crab, Davenport, debating,
dementia, dictionary, dime,
Disneyland, eek, Eileen,
fascinated, follies, fry,
gained.
utility in discrimination. To directly test discrimi-
nation performance, we use support vector machine
classifiers. Before performing classification, we pro-
duce balanced datasets that have equal numbers of
conversations for each category. Our primary moti-
vation for artificially balancing the label distribution
in each experiment is to provide a consistent base-
line over which each classifier may be compared.
We learn SVM classifiers with an RBF kernel us-
ing 85% of data for development. SVM parameters
are tuned with 20-fold cross-validation on the dev-
set. The accuracies of the classifiers, measured on a
held out set, are reported in Table 7.
We tested four feature vectors: 1) unigram fre-
quencies, 2) surface language features (log word
count, speaking rate, entropy), 3) the 64 dimension
LIWC frequency vector and 4) a 30-dimension vec-
tor of LDA topic posterior log-probabilities.
Table 7: SVM performance for the language features. La-
bels: a) unigram vector, b) lexical statistics, c) LIWC and
d) LDA topic posterior log-probabilities
Task 1-grams L.Stats LIWC LDA
Res. v. biz. 84.95 67.61 78.70 81.03
Family v. all 78.03 61.16 72.77 74.75
Family v. res. 76.13 62.92 71.06 72.37
Familiarity 69.17 60.92 64.20 69.56
Overall, the plain unigram frequency vector pro-
vided the best discrimination performance. How-
ever, this comes at significant training costs as
the unigram feature vector has a dimensionality
of approximately 20,000. While the surface fea-
tures did possess a degree of classification utility,
there are clearly outclassed by the content-based
features. Furthermore, their integration into the
content-features yielded only insignificant improve-
ments to accuracy. Finally, it is of interest to note
that the 30-topic LDA feature trained with ML cri-
terion outperformed the 64-topic LIWC vector in all
cases.
6 Conclusions
This paper studies a unique corpus of conversational
telephone speech, a comprehensive and naturalis-
tic sample of all the incoming and outgoing tele-
phone calls from 10 older adults over the duration
of one year. Through empirical experiments we
show that the business calls can be separated from
social calls with accuracies as high as 85% using
standard techniques. Subgroups such as family can
also be differentiated automatically with accuracies
above 74%. When compared to language use (en-
tropy) and hand-crafted dictionaries (LIWC), poste-
118
riors over topics computed using a latent Dirichlet
model provide superior performance.
For the elderly demographic, openings of conver-
sations were found to be more informative in clas-
sifying conversation than closings or random seg-
ments, when using automated transcripts. The high
accuracy in classifying business from personal con-
versations suggests potential applications in design-
ing context user interface for smartphones to offer
icons related to work email, work calendar or Face-
book apps. In future work, we plan to examine
subject specific language use, turn taking and af-
fect to further improve the classification of social
calls (Shafran et al, 2003).
7 Acknowledgements
This research was supported in part by NIH Grants
5K25AG033723-02 and P30 AG024978-05 and
NSF Awards 1027834, 0958585 and 0905095. Any
opinions, findings, conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this publication are those of the authors
and do not reflect the views of the NIH or NSF. We
thank Brian Kingsbury and IBM for making their
ASR software tools available to us. We are also
grateful to Nicole Larimer, Maider Lehr and Kather-
ine Wild for their contributions to data collection.
References
David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jordan.
2003. Latent dirichlet alocation. J. Mach. Learn.
Res., 3:993?1022, March.
T A Glass, C F Mendes de Leon, T E Seeman, and L F
Berkman. 1997. Beyond single indicators of social
networks: a lisrel analysis of social ties among the el-
derly. Soc Sci Med, 44(10):1503?1517.
J. Godfrey, E. Holliman, and J. McDaniel. 1992.
SWITCHBOARD: Telephone speech corpus for re-
search and development. In IEEE International Con-
ference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing,
pages 517?520.
T. Joachims. 2006. Training linear svms in linear
time. In ACM Conference on Knowledge Discovery
and Data Mining.
Haewoon Kwak, Changhyun Lee, Hosung Park, and Sue
Moon. 2010. What is twitter, a social network or
a news media? In Proceedings of the 19th inter-
national conference on World wide web, WWW ?10,
pages 591?600, New York, NY, USA. ACM.
Alexander Pak and Patrick Paroubek. 2010. Twit-
ter as a corpus for sentiment analysis and opinion
mining. In Nicoletta Calzolari (Conference Chair),
Khalid Choukri, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mariani,
Jan Odijk, Stelios Piperidis, Mike Rosner, and Daniel
Tapias, editors, Proceedings of the Seventh Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Evalu-
ation (LREC?10), Valletta, Malta, may. European Lan-
guage Resources Association (ELRA).
J. W. Pennebaker, M. R. Mehl, and K. G. Niederhoffer.
2003. Psychological aspects of natural language use:
Our words, our selves. Annual Review of Psychology,
54(1):547?577.
Sas?a Petrovic?, Miles Osborne, and Victor Lavrenko.
2010. Streaming first story detection with applica-
tion to twitter. In Human Language Technologies: The
2010 Annual Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
HLT ?10, pages 181?189, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Alan Ritter, Colin Cherry, and Bill Dolan. 2010. Unsu-
pervised modeling of twitter conversations. In Human
Language Technologies: The 2010 Annual Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, HLT ?10, pages 172?180,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Harvey Sacks, Emanuel A. Schegloff, and Gail Jeffer-
son. 1974. A simplest systematics for the organization
of turn-taking for conversation language. Language,
50(4(1)):696?735.
Emanuel A. Schegloff and Harvey Sacks. 1973. Opening
up closings. Semiotica, 8:289?327.
Emanuel A. Schegloff. 1968. Sequencing in con-
versational openings. American Anthropologist,
70(6):1075?1095.
Izhak Shafran, Michael Riley, and Mehryar Mohri. 2003.
Voice signatures. In Proc. IEEE Automatic Speech
Recognition and Understanding Workshop.
H. Soltau, B. Kingsbury, L. Mangu, D. Povey, G. Saon,
and G. Zweig. 2005. The IBM 2004 conversational
telephony system for rich transcription. In IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal
Processing, volume 1, pages 205?208.
Anthony Stark, Izhak Shafran, and Jeffrey Kaye. 2011.
Supervised and unsupervised feature selection for in-
ferring social nature of telephone conversations from
their content. In Proc. IEEE Automatic Speech Recog-
nition and Understanding Workshop.
Paul Taylor, Rich Morin, Kim Parker, D?Vera Cohn,
and Wendy Wang. June 29, 2009. Grow-
ing old in America: Expectations vs. reality.
http://pewsocialtrends.org/files/2010/10/Getting-Old-
in-America.pdf.
119
Proceedings of the 2014 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing (BioNLP 2014), pages 38?44,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, June 26-27 2014.
c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
Detecting Health Related Discussions in Everyday Telephone
Conversations for Studying Medical Events in the Lives of Older Adults
Golnar Sheikhshab, Izhak Shafran, Jeffrey Kaye
Oregon Health & Science University
sheikhsh,shafrani,kaye@ohsu.edu
Abstract
We apply semi-supervised topic modeling
techniques to detect health-related discus-
sions in everyday telephone conversations,
which has applications in large-scale epi-
demiological studies and for clinical in-
terventions for older adults. The privacy
requirements associated with utilizing ev-
eryday telephone conversations preclude
manual annotations; hence, we explore
semi-supervised methods in this task. We
adopt a semi-supervised version of Latent
Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) to guide the
learning process. Within this framework,
we investigate a strategy to discard irrel-
evant words in the topic distribution and
demonstrate that this strategy improves
the average F-score on the in-domain task
and an out-of-domain task (Fisher corpus).
Our results show that the increase in dis-
cussion of health related conversations is
statistically associated with actual medi-
cal events obtained through weekly self-
reports.
1 Introduction
There has been considerable interest in under-
standing, promoting, and monitoring healthy
lifestyles among older adults while minimizing the
frequency of clinical visits. Longitudinal studies
on large cohorts are necessary, for example, to un-
derstand the association between social networks,
depression, dementia, and general health. In this
context, detecting discussions of health are impor-
tant as indicators of under-reported health events
in daily lives as well as for studying healthy so-
cial support networks. The detection of medical
events such as higher levels of pain or discom-
fort may also be useful in providing timely clin-
ical intervention for managing chronic illness and
thus promoting healthy independent living among
older adults.
Motivated by this larger goal, we develop and
investigate techniques for identifying conversa-
tions containing any health related discussion. We
are interested in detecting discussions about med-
ication with doctors, as well as conversations with
others, where among all different topics being dis-
cussed, subjects may also be complaining about
pain or changes in health status.
The privacy concerns of recording and analyz-
ing everyday telephone conversation prevents us
from manually transcribing and annotating con-
versations. So, we automatically transcribe the
conversations using an automatic speech recog-
nition system and look-up the telephone number
corresponding to each conversation as a heuristic
means of deriving labels. This technique is suit-
able for labeling a small subset of the conversa-
tions that are only sufficient for developing semi-
supervised algorithms and for evaluating the meth-
ods for analysis.
Before delving into our approach, we discuss
a few relevant and related studies in Section 2
and describe our unique naturalistic corpus in Sec-
tion 3. Given the restrictive nature of our labeled
in-domain data set, we are interested in a clas-
sifier that generalizes to the unlabeled data. We
evaluate the generalizability of the classifiers us-
ing an out-of-domain corpus. We adopt a semi-
supervised topic modeling approach to address
our task, and develop an iterative feature selec-
tion method to improve our classifier, as described
in Section 4. We evaluate the efficacy of our ap-
proach empirically, on the in-domain as well as an
out-of-domain corpus, and report results in Sec-
tion 5.
2 Related Work
The task of identifying conversations where health
is mentioned differs from many other tasks in topic
38
modeling because in this task we are interested in
one particular topic. A similar study is the work of
Prier and colleagues (Prier et al., 2011). They use
a set of predefined seed words as queries to gather
tweets related to tobacco or marijuana usage, and
then use LDA to discover related subtopics. Thus,
their method is sensitive to the seed words chosen.
One way to reduce the sensitivity to the manu-
ally specified seed words is to expand the set us-
ing WordNet. Researchers have investigated this
approach in sentiment analysis (Kim and Hovy,
2004; Yu and Hatzivassiloglou, 2003). However,
when expanding the seed word set using WordNet,
we need to be careful to avoid antonyms and words
that have high degree of linkage with many words
in the vocabulary. Furthermore, we can not ap-
ply such an approach for languages with poor re-
sources, where manually curated knowledge is un-
available. The other drawback of this approach is
that we can not use characteristics of the end task,
in our case health-related conversation retrieval,
to select the words. As an alternative method,
Han and colleagues developed an interactive sys-
tem where users selected the most relevant words
from a set, proposed by an automated system (Han
et al., 2009).
Another idea for expanding the seed words is
using the statistical information. Among statis-
tical methods, the simplest approach is to com-
pute pairwise co-occurrence with the seed words.
Li and Yamanishi ranked the words co-occurring
with the seed words according to information the-
oretic costs, and used the highest ranked words as
the expanded set (Li and Yamanishi, 2003). This
idea can be more effective when the co-occurrence
is performed over subsets instead, as in Hisamitsu
and Niwa?s work (Hisamitsu and Niwa, 2001).
However, it is computationally expensive to search
over subsets of words. Depending on the language
and task, heuristics might be applicable. An ex-
ample of this kind of approach is Zagibalov and
Carroll?s work on sentiment analysis in Chinese
(Zagibalov and Carroll, 2008).
Alternatively, we can treat the task of identify-
ing words associated with seed words as a cluster-
ing problem with the intuition that the seed words
are in the same cluster. An effective strategy to
cluster words into topics, is Latent Dirichlet Allo-
cation (LDA) (Blei et al., 2003) . However, LDA
is an unsupervised algorithm and the clustered top-
ics are not guaranteed to include the topic of inter-
est. The Seeded LDA, a variant of LDA, attempts
to address this problem by incorporating the seed
words as priors over the topics (Jagarlamudi et
al., 2012). However, the estimation procedure is
more complicated. Alternatively, in Topic LDA
(TLDA), a clever extension to LDA, Andrzejewski
and Zhu address this problem by fixing the mem-
bership of the words to valid topics (Andrzejewski
and Zhu, 2009). When the focus is on detecting
just one topic, as in our task, we can expand the
seed words more selectively using the small set of
labeled data and that is the approach adopted in
this paper.
3 Data
One interesting aspect of our study is the unique-
ness of our corpus, which is both naturalistic and
exhaustive. We recorded about 41,000 land-line
everyday telephone conversations from 56 volun-
teers, 65 years or older, over a period of approxi-
mately 6 to 12 months. Since these everyday tele-
phone conversations are private conversations, and
might include private information such as names,
telephone numbers, or banking information, we
assured the subjects that no one would listen to the
recorded conversations. Thus, we couldn?t manu-
ally transcribe the conversations; instead, we used
an Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) system
that we describe here.
Automatic Speech Recognition System Con-
versations in our corpus were automatically tran-
scribed using an ASR system, which is structured
after IBM?s conversation telephony system (Soltau
et al., 2005). The acoustic models were trained
on about 2000 hours of telephone speech from
Switchboard and Fisher corpora (Godfrey et al.,
1992). The system has a vocabulary of 47K
and uses a trigram language model with about
10M n-grams, estimated from a mix of transcripts
and web-harvested data. Decoding is performed
in three stages using speaker-independent mod-
els, vocal-tract normalized models and speaker-
adapted models. The three sets of models are sim-
ilar in complexity with 4000 clustered pentaphone
states and 150K Gaussians with diagonal covari-
ances. Our system does not include discriminative
training and performs at a word error rate of about
24% on NIST RT Dev04 which is comparable to
state of the art performance for such systems. We
are unable to measure the performance of this rec-
ognizer on our corpus due to the stringent privacy
39
requirements mentioned earlier. Since both cor-
pora are conversational telephone speech and the
training data contains large number of conversa-
tions (2000 hours), we expect the performance of
our recognizer to be relatively close to results on
NIST benchmark.
Heuristically labeling a small subset of conver-
sations For training and evaluation purposes, we
need a labeled set of conversations; that is, a set
of conversations where we know whether or not
they contain health-related discussions. Since the
privacy concerns do not allow for manually label-
ing the conversations, we used reverse look-up ser-
vice in www.whitepages.com. We sent the
phone number corresponding to each conversation
(when available) to this website to obtain informa-
tion about the other end of the conversation. Based
of the information we got back from this web-
site, we labeled a small subset of the conversations
which fell into unambiguous business categories.
For example, we labeled the calls to ?hospital? and
?pharmacy? as health-related, and those to ?car re-
pair? and ?real estate? as non-health-related.
The limitations of the labeled set The labeled
set we obtained is small and restricted in type of
conversations. Since phone numbers are not avail-
able for many of the conversations we recorded,
and also because www.whitepages.com does
not return unambiguous information for many of
available phone numbers, we managed to label
only 681 conversations ? 275 health-related and
406 non-health-related. This labeled set has an-
other limitation: it contains conversations to busi-
ness numbers only. In reality however, we are in-
terested in the much larger set of conversations
between friends, relatives, and other members of
subjects? social support network. Thus, the gener-
alizability of the classifier we train is very impor-
tant.
Fisher Corpus To explicitly test the generaliz-
ability of our classifier, we use a second evaluation
set from Fisher corpus (Cieri et al., 2004). Fisher
corpus contains telephone conversations with pre-
assigned topics. There are 40 topics and only
one of them, illness, is health-related. We identi-
fied 338 conversations on illness, and sampled 702
conversations from the other 39 non-health topics.
Since we do not train on Fisher corpus, we call
it the out-of-domain task to apply our method on
Fisher corpus; as opposed to the in-domain task
which is to apply our method on the everyday tele-
phone conversations.
Extra information on subjects? health In the
everyday telephone conversations corpus, we also
have access to the subjects? weekly self-reports
on their medical status during the week indicating
medical events such as injury or going to emer-
gency room. We will use these pieces of infor-
mation to relate the health-related conversations to
actual medical events in the subjects? lives.
4 Method
4.1 Overview
As we explained in Section 3, we can label a small
set of conversations in the everyday telephone con-
versations corpus as health-related vs. non-health
related. Using this labeled set we can train a sup-
port vector machine (SVM) to classify the con-
versations. In absence of feature selection, the
conversations are represented by a vector of tf-idf
scores for every word in the vocabulary where tf-
idf is a score for measuring the importance of a
word in one document of a corpus. As we see in
Section 5, such a classifier doesn?t generalize to
the out-of-domain Fisher task (i.e. when we test
the classifier on Fisher data set, we do not get good
precision and recalls). Generalizability is impor-
tant in our case, especially because the data we use
for training is limited in number and the nature of
conversations.
One way to improve generalization is to per-
form feature selection. That is, instead of using
tf-idf scores for the whole vocabulary, we would
like to rely only on features relevant to detecting
the health topic. We propose a new way for feature
selection for retrieving documents containing in-
formation about a specific topic when there is only
a limited set of labeled documents available. The
idea is to pick a few words highly related to the
topic of interest as seed words and to use TLDA
(Andrzejewski and Zhu, 2009) to force those seed
words into one (for example, the first) topic. In our
task, the topic of interest is health. So, we choose
doctor, medicine, and pain ? often used while dis-
cussing health ? as our seed words. Topics in LDA
based methods such as TLDA are usually repre-
sented using the n most probable words; where n
is an arbitrary number. So, the first candidate sets
for expanding our seed words are the sets of 50
most probable words in the topic of health in dif-
40
ferent runs of TLDA. As our experiments reveal,
these candidate sets contain many words that are
unrelated to health . To solve this problem, we use
the small labeled set of conversations to filter out
the unrelated words.
Figure 1 shows the proposed iterative algo-
rithm. The algorithm starts with initializing the
seed words to doctor, medicine, and pain. Then,
in each iteration, TLDA performs semi-supervised
topic modeling and returns the 50 most probable
candidate words in the health topic. We select a
subset of these candidate words which, if added
to the seed words, would maximize the average of
precision and recall on the train set for a simple
classifier. This simple classifier marks a conver-
sion as health related if, and only if, it contains at
least one of the seed words. The algorithm termi-
nates when the subset selection is unable to add
a new word contributing to the average of preci-
sion and recall. The tf-idf vector for the expanded
set represents the conversations in the classifica-
tion process.
It is worth mentioning that we train TLDA using
all 41000 unlabeled conversations, and chose the
number of topics, K, to be 20.
5 Experiments
In all of our experiments, we trained SVM
classifiers, with different features, to detect the
conversations on health using the popular lib-
SVM (Chang and Lin, 2011) implementation. We
chose the parameters of the SVM using a 30-fold
cross-validated (CV) grid search over the training
data. We also used a 4-fold cross validation over
the labeled set of conversations to maximize the
use of the relatively small labeled set. That is, we
trained the feature selection algorithm on 3-folds
and tested the resulting SVM tested on the fourth.
In in-domain task we always report the average
performance across the folds.
Table 1 shows the results of our experiments
using different input features. We report on re-
call, precision and F-measure in in-domain and
out-of-domain (Fisher) task as well as on average
F-measure of the two. The justification for consid-
ering the average F-measure is that we want our
algorithm to work well on both in-domain corpus
and Fisher corpus since we need to make sure that
our classifier is generalizable (i.e. it works well on
Fisher) and it works well on the private and natu-
ral telephone conversations (i.e. the ones similar
Figure 1: Expanding the set of seed words: in each
iteration, the current seed words are forced into
the topic of health to guide TLDA towards finding
more health related words. The candidate set con-
sists of the 50 most probable words of the topic of
health in TLDA. We investigate the gain of adding
each word of the candidate set to the seed words by
temporarily adding it to the seed words and look-
ing at the average of precision and recall on the
training set for a classifier that classifies a conver-
sation as health-related if and only if it contains at
least one of the seed words. We select the words
that maximize this objective and add them to the
seed words until no other words contributes to the
average precision and recall.
to the in-domain corpus)
When using the full vocabulary, the in-domain
performance (the performance on the everyday
telephone conversations data) is relatively good
with 75.1% recall and 83.5% precision. But the
out-of-domain recall (recall on the Fisher data set)
is considerably low at 2.8%. Ideally, we want
a classifier that performs well in both domains.
Rows 2 to 5 can be seen as steps to get to such
a classifier.
The second row shows the performance of the
other extreme end of feature selection: the fea-
tures include the manually chosen words doctor,
medicine, and pain only. While this leads to very
good out-of-domain performance, the in-domain
recall has dropped considerably. We trained
TLDA 30 times, and selected the 50 most probable
words in the health topic. The third row in Table 1
shows the average performance of SVM when us-
ing the tf-idf of these sets of words as the feature
vector on in-domain and out-of-domain tasks. Us-
ing the 50 most probable words in health topic sig-
nificantly improves average F-score (71%) across
41
Recall Precision F-measure
Feature Words In-Domain Fisher In-Domain Fisher In-Domain Fisher Average
Full vocabulary
(no feature selection) 75.2 2.8 83.5 91.1 79.1 5.4 42.3
Initial words
(doctor, medicine, pain ) 45.1 69.2 94.8 94.5 61.1 79.9 70.5
50 most probable words in health
(average over 30 runs) 58.4 57.4 86.3 97.5 69.7 72.3 71.0
Words selected by our method
(average over 30 runs) 56.1 66.5 91.0 95.5 69.4 78.4 73.9
Union of all selected words
(across 30 runs) 67.7 69.4 87.8 95.1 76.5 80.2 78.3
Table 1: Performance of SVM classifiers using different feature selection methods. The In-Domain task
involves the everyday telephone conversations corpus. We call Fisher corpus out of domain, because no
example of this corpus was used in training.
both tasks over using the full vocabulary (42.3%)
but it is clear that this is only due to improvement
in out-of-domain task. Table 2 shows one set of
the 50 most probable words in health topic,the re-
sult of one run of TLDA. Evidently, these words
contain many irrelevant words. This is the motiva-
tion for our iterative algorithm.
Next, we evaluate the performance of our iter-
ative algorithm. The fourth row in Table 1 shows
the average performance of SVM using expanded
seed words that our algorithm suggested in 30
runs. Our algorithm improves the average F-score
by 3% comparing to the standard TLDA. This is
due to a 5% improvement in out-of-domain task
as opposed to a 0.3% performance decrease in in-
domain task.
Since our algorithm has a probabilistic topic
modeling component (i.e. TLDA), different runs
lead to different sets of expanded seed words. We
extract a union of all the words chosen over 30
runs and evaluate the performance of SVM using
this union set. This improves the performance of
our method further to achieve the best average F-
score of 78.3%, which is an 85% improvement
over using the SVM with full vocabulary. It is im-
portant to notice that the in-domain performance is
still lower than the full-vocabulary baseline by less
than 3% while the out-of-domain performance is
the best obtained. Once again, we are more inter-
ested in the average F-measure because we need
our algorithm to generalize well (work well on
out-of-domain corpus) and to work well on natural
private conversations (on the conversations similar
to the on-domain corpus).
Our last experiment tests statistical associa-
tion between health-related discussions in every-
day telephone conversations, and actual medical
pain, medicine, appointment, medical, doc-
tors, emergency, prescription, contact, med-
ication, dial, insurance, pharmacy, schedule,
moment, reached, questions, services, surgery,
telephone, record, appointments, options, ad-
dress, patient, advice, quality, tuesday, posi-
tion, answered, records, wednesday, therapy,
healthy, correct, department, ensure, numbers,
act, doctor, personal, test, senior, nurse, plan,
kaiser
Table 2: 50 most probable words in the topic of
health returned by one run of TLDA. The bold
words are the ones are hand-picked.
events in older adults. As mentioned in Section 3,
we have access to weekly self-reports on medical
events for subjects? in everyday telephone conver-
sations corpus. We used our best classifier, the
SVM with union of expanded seed words, to clas-
sify all the conversations in our corpus into health-
containing and health-free conversations. We then
mark each conversation as temporally near a med-
ical event if a reported medical event occurred
within a 3-week time window. We chose a 3-week
window to allow for one report before and after
the event.
Table 3 shows the number of conversations in
different categories. At first glance it might seem
like the number of false positives or false nega-
tives is quite large but we should notice that be-
ing near a medical event is not the ground truth
here. We just want to see if there is any associa-
tion between occurrence of health-related conver-
sations and occurrence of an actual medical event
in lives of our subjects. We can see that 90.9%
42
of the conversations are classified as health-related
but this percentage is slightly different for con-
versations near medical events(91.5%) vs. for the
other conversations (89.1). This slight difference
is significant according to ?
2
test of independence
(?
2
(df = 1, N = 47288) = 61.17, p < 0.001).
near a Classified as
medical event health-related non-health-related
yes 1348 11067
no 2964 31909
Table 3: Number of telephone conversations in
different categories. Each conversation is consid-
ered near a medical even if and only if there is
at least one self-report in a window of 3 weeks
around its date. Being near a medical event does
not reveal the true nature of the conversation and
thus is not the ground truth. So, there are no false
positive, true positive, etc. in this table.
6 Conclusions
In this paper, we investigated the problem of iden-
tifying conversations with any mention of health.
The private nature of our everyday telephone con-
versations corpus poses constraints on manual
transcription and annotation. Looking up phone
numbers associated with business calls, we labeled
a small set of conversations when the other end
was a business clearly related or unrelated to the
health industry. However, the labeled set is not
large enough for training a robust classifier. We
developed a semi-supervised iterative method for
selecting features, where we learn a distribution
of words on health topic using TLDA, and sub-
sequently filter irrelevant words iteratively. We
demonstrate that our method generalizes well and
improves the average F-score on in-domain and
out-of-domain tasks over two baselines, using full
vocabulary without feature selection or feature se-
lection using TLDA alone. In our task, the gener-
alization of the classifier is important since we are
interested in detecting not only conversations on
health with business (the annotated examples) but
also with others in subjects? social network. Using
our classifier, we find a significant statistical as-
sociation between the occurrence of conversations
about health and the occurrence of self-reported
medical events.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by NIH Grants
1K25AG033723, and P30 AG008017, as well as
by NSF Grants 1027834, and 0964102. Any opin-
ions, findings, conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this publication are those of the au-
thors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
NIH. We thank Nicole Larimer for help in collect-
ing the data, Maider Lehr for testing the data col-
lection devices and Katherine Wild for early dis-
cussions on this project. We are grateful to Brian
Kingsbury and his colleagues for providing us ac-
cess to IBM?s attila software tools.
References
David Andrzejewski and Xiaojin Zhu. 2009. La-
tent dirichlet allocation with topic-in-set knowledge.
In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2009 Workshop
on Semi-Supervised Learning for Natural Language
Processing, SemiSupLearn ?09, pages 43?48.
David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jordan.
2003. Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of Ma-
chine Learning Research, 3:993?1022.
C.-C. Chang and C.-J. Lin. 2011. Libsvm : a library
for support vector machines. ACM Transactions on
Intelligent Systems and Technology, 2.
Christopher Cieri, David Miller, and Kevin Walker.
2004. The fisher corpus: a resource for the next
generations of speech-to-text. In LREC, volume 4,
pages 69?71.
John J Godfrey, Edward C Holliman, and Jane Mc-
Daniel. 1992. Switchboard: Telephone speech cor-
pus for research and development. In Acoustics,
Speech, and Signal Processing, 1992. ICASSP-92.,
1992 IEEE International Conference on, volume 1,
pages 517?520. IEEE.
Hong-qi Han, Dong-Hua Zhu, and Xue-feng Wang.
2009. Semi-supervised text classification from un-
labeled documents using class associated words. In
Computers & Industrial Engineering, 2009. CIE
2009. International Conference on, pages 1255?
1260. IEEE.
Toru Hisamitsu and Yoshiki Niwa. 2001. Topic-word
selection based on combinatorial probability. In NL-
PRS, volume 1, page 289.
Jagadeesh Jagarlamudi, Hal Daum?e III, and Raghaven-
dra Udupa. 2012. Incorporating lexical priors into
topic models. In Proceedings of the 13th Confer-
ence of the European Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 204?213. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
43
Soo-Min Kim and Eduard Hovy. 2004. Determin-
ing the sentiment of opinions. In Proceedings of
the 20th international conference on Computational
Linguistics, page 1367. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Hang Li and Kenji Yamanishi. 2003. Topic analysis
using a finite mixture model. Information process-
ing & management, 39(4):521?541.
Kyle W. Prier, Matthew S. Smith, Christophe Giraud-
Carrier, and Carl L. Hanson. 2011. Identifying
health-related topics on twitter: an exploration of
tobacco-related tweets as a test topic. In Proceed-
ings of the 4th international conference on Social
computing, behavioral-cultural modeling and pre-
diction, pages 18?25.
Hagen Soltau, Brian Kingsbury, Lidia Mangu, Daniel
Povey, George Saon, and Geoffrey Zweig. 2005.
The ibm 2004 conversational telephony system for
rich transcription. In Proc. ICASSP, volume 1,
pages 205?208.
Hong Yu and Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou. 2003. To-
wards answering opinion questions: Separating facts
from opinions and identifying the polarity of opinion
sentences. In Proceedings of the 2003 conference on
Empirical methods in natural language processing,
pages 129?136. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Taras Zagibalov and John Carroll. 2008. Automatic
seed word selection for unsupervised sentiment clas-
sification of chinese text. In Proceedings of the
22nd International Conference on Computational
Linguistics-Volume 1, pages 1073?1080. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
44
