Work-in-Progress  project report : CESTA - Machine Translation Evaluation 
Campaign 
 
Widad Mustafa El Hadi 
IDIST / CERSATES 
Universit? de Lille 3 
Domaine universitaire 
du "Pont de Bois" 
rue du Barreau 
BP 149 
59653 Villeneuve d'Ascq 
Cedex - France 
mustafa@univ-lille3.fr  
Marianne Dabbadie 
IDIST / CERSATES 
Universit? de Lille 3 
Domaine universitaire 
du "Pont de Bois" 
rue du Barreau 
BP 149 
59653 Villeneuve d'Ascq 
Cedex - France 
dabbadie@univ-lille3.fr 
Isma?l Timimi 
IDIST / CERSATES 
Universit? de Lille 3 
Domaine universitaire 
du "Pont de Bois" 
rue du Barreau 
BP 149 
59653 Villeneuve d'Ascq 
Cedex - France 
timimi@univ-lille3.fr  
Martin Rajman 
LIA 
Ecole 
Polytechnique 
F?d?rale de Lausanne 
B?t. INR 
CH-1015 Lausanne 
Switzerland 
martin.rajman@epfl.ch 
 
 
Philippe Langlais 
RALI / DIRO - 
Universit? de Montr?al 
C.P. 6128, 
succursale Centre-ville 
Montr?al (Qu?bec) - 
Canada, H3C 3J7 
felipe@IRO.UMontreal.
CA
Antony Hartley 
University of Leeds 
Centre for Translation 
Studies 
Woodhouse Lane 
LEEDS LS2 9JT 
UK 
a.hartley@leeds.ac.uk
Andrei Popescu Belis 
University of Geneva 40 
bvd du Pont d'Arve CH-
1211 Geneva 4 
Switzerland 
Andrei.Popescu-
Belis@issco.unige.ch  
 
Abstract 
CESTA, the first European Campaign 
dedicated to MT Evaluation, is a project 
labelled by the French Technolangue action. 
CESTA provides an evaluation of six 
commercial and academic MT systems using a 
protocol set by an international panel of 
experts. CESTA aims at producing reusable 
resources and information about reliability of 
the metrics. Two runs will be carried out: one 
using the system?s basic dictionary, another 
after terminological adaptation. Evaluation 
task, test material, resources, evaluation 
measures, metrics, will be detailed in the full 
paper. The protocol is the combination of a 
contrastive reference to: IBM ?BLEU? 
protocol (Papineni, K., S. Roukos, T. Ward 
and Z. Wei-Jing, 2001); ?BLANC? protocol 
derived from (Hartley, Rajman, 2002).; 
?ROUGE? protocol (Babych, Hartley, Atwell, 
2003). The results of the campaign will be 
published in a final report and be the object of 
two intermediary and final workshops. 
1 Introduction 
1.1 CESTA and the Technolangue Action in 
France 
 
This article is a collective paper written by the 
CESTA scientific committee that aims at 
presenting the CESTA evaluation campaign, a 
project labelled in 2002 by the French Ministry of 
Research and Education within the framework of 
the Technolangue call for projects and integrated 
to the EVALDA evaluation platform. It reports 
work in progress and therefore is the description of 
an on-going campaign for which system results are 
not yet available.  
 
In France, EVALDA is the new Evaluation 
platform, a joint venture between the French 
Ministry of Research and Technology and ELRA 
(European Language Resources and Evaluation 
Association, Paris, France). Within the framework 
of this initiative eight evaluation projets are being 
conducted:  ARCADE II: campagne d??valuation 
de l?alignement de corpus multilingues; CESART:
 campagne d'Evaluation de Syst?mes 
d?Acquisition de Ressources Terminologiques; 
CESTA : campagne d'Evaluation de Syst?mes de 
Traduction automatique; Easy: Evaluation des 
Analyseurs Syntaxiques du fran?ais; Campagne 
EQueR, Evaluation en question-r?ponse; 
Campagne ESTER, Evaluation de transcriptions 
d??missions radio; Campagne EvaSY, Evaluation 
en synth?se vocale; and Campagne MEDIA, 
Evaluation du dialogue hors et en contexte. 
 
Regarding evaluation, the objectives of the 
Action as Joseph Mariani pointed out in his 
presentation at the LREC 2002 conference are to: 
? Improve the present evaluation 
methodologies  
? Identify new (quantitative and qualitative) 
approaches for already evaluated 
technologies:  socio-technical and psycho-
cognitive aspects  
? Identify protocols for new technologies 
and applications  
? Identification of language resources 
relevant for evaluation (to promote the 
development of new linguistic resources 
for those languages and domains where 
they do not exist yet, or only exist in a 
prototype stage, or exist but cannot be 
made available to the interested users); 
 
The object of the CESTA campaign is twofold. 
It is on the one hand to provide an evaluation of 
commercial Machine Translation Systems and on 
the other hand, to work collectively on the setting 
of a new reusable Machine Translation Evaluation 
protocol that is both user oriented and accounts for 
the necessity to use semantic metrics in order to 
make available a high quality reusable machine 
translation protocol to system providers.  
 
1.2 Object of the campaign 
The object of the CESTA campaign is to 
evaluate technologies together with metrics, i.e. to 
contribute to the setting of a state of the art within 
the field of Machine Translation systems 
evaluation.  
1.3 CESTA user oriented protocol 
The campaign will last three years, starting 
from January 2003. A board of European 
experts are members of CESTA Scientific 
committee and have been working together in 
order to determine the protocol to use for the 
campaign. Six systems are being evaluated. 
Five of these systems are commercial MT 
systems and one is a prototype developed at 
the university of Montreal by the RALI 
research centre. Evaluation is carried out on 
text rather than sentences. Text approximate 
width will be 400 words. Two runs will be 
carried out. For industrial reasons, systems 
will be made anonymous. 
 
2 State-of-the-art in the field of Machine 
Translation evaluation 
 
In 1966, the ALPAC report draws light on the 
limits of Machine Translation systems. In 1979, 
the Van Slype report presented a study dedicated to 
Machine Translation metrics.  
 
In 1992, the JEIDA campaign puts the user at the 
center of evaluator?s preoccupation. JEIDA 
proposed to draw human measures on the basis of 
three questionnaires: 
? One destined to users (containing a 
hundred questions) 
? Other questionnaires are destined to 
system Machine translation systems 
editors (three different questionnaires),  
? And a set of other questionnaires reserved 
to Machine Translation systems 
developers.  
 
Scores are worked out on the background of 
fourteen categories of questions. From these 
scores, graphs are produced according to the 
answers obtained. A comparison of different 
graphs for each systems is used as a basis for 
systems classification. 
 
The first DARPA Machine Translation 
evaluation campaign (1992-1994) makes use of 
human judgments. It is a very expensive method 
but interesting however, as regards the reliability 
of the evaluation thus produced. This campaign is 
based on tests carried out from French, Spanish 
and Japanese as source languages and English as a 
target language. The measures used for each of the 
following criteria are:  
? Fidelity ? a proximity distance is worked 
out between a source sentence and a target 
sentence on a 1 to 5 scale. 
? Intelligibility, that corresponds to 
linguistic acceptability of a translation is 
measured on a 1 to 5 evaluation scale. 
? Informativeness: the test is carried out on 
reading of the target text alone. A 
questionnaire on text informative content 
is displayed allowing to work out a 
measure calculated on the basis of the 
percentage of good answers provided in 
system translation.  
 
In 1995, the OVUM report proposes to compare 
commercial Machine Translation systems on the 
basis of ten criteria. 
 
In 1996, the EAGLES report (EAGLES, 1999) 
sets new standards for Natural Language 
Processing software evaluation on the background 
of ISO 9126.  
 
Initiated in 1999, and coordinated by Pr Antonio 
Zampolli, the ISLE project is divided into three 
working groups, one being a Machine Translation 
group.  
 
Starting from ISO 9126 standard (King, 1999b), 
the aim of the project is to produce two taxonomies 
(c.f. section 3 of this article) and : 
? One defining quality subcriteria with the 
aim of refining the six criteria defined by 
ISO 9126 (i.e. functionality, reliability, 
user-friendliness, efficiency, maintenance 
portability) 
? The second one specifying use contexts 
that define the type of task induced the use 
of a by Machine Translation system, the 
types of users and input data. This 
taxonomy uses contextual parameters to 
select and order the quality criteria subject 
to evaluation. This taxonomy can be 
viewed and downloaded on the ISSCO 
website at the following address : 
http://www.issco.unige.ch/projects/isle/fe
mti/  
 
The second DARPA campaign (Papineni, K., S. 
Roukos, T. Ward and Z. Wei-Jing, 2001), making 
use of the IBM BLEU metric is mentioned in the 
CESTA protocol (c.f. section 8.1 of this article). 
 
3 User-oriented evaluations 
An emerging evaluation methodology in NLP 
technology focuses on quality requirements 
analysis. The needs and consequently the 
satisfaction of end-users, and this will depend on 
the tasks and expected results requirement 
domains, which we have identified as diagnostic 
quality dimensions. One of the most suitable 
methods in this type of evaluation is the adequacy 
evaluation that aims at finding out whether a 
system or product is adequate to someone?s needs 
(see Sparck-Jones & Gallier, 1996 and King, 1996 
among many others for a more detailed discussion 
of these issues). This approach encourages 
communication between users and developers. 
 
The definition of the CESTA evaluation 
protocol took into account the Framework for 
MT Evaluation in ISLE (FEMTI), available 
online. FEMTI offers the possibility to define 
evaluation requirements, then to select relevant 
'qualities', and the metrics commonly used to 
score them (cf. ISO/IEC 9126, 14598). The 
CESTA evaluation methodology is founded on 
a black box approach.  
 
CESTA evaluators considered a generic user, 
which is interested in general-purpose, ready-
to-use translations, preferably using an off-the-
shelf system. In addition, CESTA aims at 
producing reusable resources, and providing 
information about the reliability of the metrics 
(validation), while being cost-effective and 
fast.  
 
With these evaluation requirements in mind 
(FEMTI-1), it appears that the relevant 
qualities (FEMTI-2) are 'suitability', 'accuracy' 
and 'well-formedness'. Automated metrics best 
meet the CESTA needs for reusability, among 
which BLEU, X-score and D-score (chosen for 
internal reasons). Their validation requires the 
comparison of their scores with recognised 
human scores for the same qualities (e.g., 
human assessment of fidelity or fluency). 
'Efficiency', measured through post-editing 
time, was also discussed. For the evaluation, 
first a general-purpose dictionary could be 
used, then a domain-specific one. 
 
 
3.1 An approach based on use cases 
 
ISO 14598 directives for evaluators put forth as 
a prequisite for systems development the detailed 
identification of user needs that ought to be 
specified through the use case document. 
Moreover, conducting a full evaluation process 
involves going through the establishment of an 
evaluation requirements document. ISO 14598 
document specifies that quality requirements 
should be identified ?according to user needs, 
application area and experience, software integrity 
and experience, regulations, law, required 
standards, etc.?. 
 
The evaluation specification document is created 
using the Software Requirement Specifications 
(SRS) and the Use-Case document. The CESTA 
protocol relies on a use case that refers to a 
translation need grounded on basic syntactic 
correctness and simple understanding of a text, as 
required by information watch tasks for example, 
and excludes making a direct use of the text for 
post editing purposes.  
4 Two campaigns 
4.1 Specificities of the CESTA campaign 
Two campaigns are being organised : 
The first campaign is organised using a system?s 
default dictionary. After systems terminological 
adaptation a second campaign will be organised. 
Two studies previously carried out and presented 
respectively at the 2001 MT Summit (Mustafa El 
Hadi, Dabbadie, Timimi, 2001) and at the 2002 
LREC conference (Mustafa Mustafa El Hadi, 
Dabbadie, Timimi, 2002) allowed us to realise the 
gap in terms in terms of quality between results 
obtained on target text after terminological 
enrichment.  
 
4.2 First campaign 
The organisation of the campaign implies going 
through several steps : 
? Identification of potential participants 
? Original protocol readjustement, 
? The setting of a specific test tool that is 
currently being be implemented in 
conformity with protocol specifications 
validated by CESTA scientific 
committee. CESTA protocol 
specifications have been 
communicated to participants in 
particular as regards data formatting, 
test schedule, metrics and adaptation 
phase. For cost requirements, CESTA 
will not include a training phase. The 
first run will start during autumn 2004 
 
4.3 Second campaign 
The systems having already been tuned, an 
adaptation phase will not be carried out for the 
second campaign. However terminological 
adaptation will be necessary at this stage. The 
second series of tests being carried out on a 
thematically homogeneous corpus, the thematic 
domain only will be communicated to participants 
for terminological adaptation. For thematic  
adaptation, and in order to avoid system 
optimisation after the first series of tests, a new 
domain specific 200.000 word hiding corpus will 
be used.  
 
The terminological domain on which evaluation 
will be carried out will then have to be defined. 
This terminological domain will be communicated 
to participants but not the corpus used itself. On 
the other hand, participants will be asked to send 
organisers a written agreement by which they will 
commit themselves to provide organisers with any 
relevant information regarding system tuning and 
specific adaptations that have made on each of the 
participating MT systems, in order to allow the 
scientific committee to understand and analyse the 
origin of the potential system ranking changes. The 
second run will start during year 2005. 
 
Organisers have committed themselves not to 
publish the results between the two campaigns. 
 
After the training phase, the second campaign 
will take place. Participants will be given a fifteen 
days delay to send the results. An additional three 
months period will be necessary to carry out result 
analysis and prepare data publication and 
workshop organisation.  
 
CESTA scientific committee also decided in 
parallel with the two campaigns, to evaluate 
systems capacity to process formatted texts 
including images and HTML tags. Participants 
who do not wish to participate to this additional 
test have informed the scientific committee. Most 
of the time the reason is that their system is only 
capable of processing raw text. This is the case 
mainly for academic systems involved in the 
campaign, most of the commercial systems being 
nowadays able to process formatted text. 
 
5 Contrastive evaluation 
One of the particularities of the CESTA protocol 
is to provide a Meta evaluation of the automated 
metrics used for the campaign ? a kind of state of 
the art of evaluation metrics. The robustness of the 
metrics will be tested on minor language pairs 
through a contrastive evaluation against human 
judgement.  
 
The scientific committee has decided to use 
Arabic?French as a minor language pair. 
Evaluation on the minor language pair will be 
carried directly on two of the participating systems 
and using English as a pivotal language on the 
other systems. Translation through a pivotal 
language will then be the following : 
Arabic?English?French.  
 
Organiser are, of course, perfectly aware of the 
potential loss of quality provoked by the use of a 
pivotal language but recall however that, contrarily 
to the major language pair, evaluation carried out 
on the minor language pair through a pivotal 
system will not be used to evaluate these systems 
themselves, but metric robustness. Results of 
metric evaluation and systems evaluation will, of 
course, be obtained and disseminated separately. 
 
During the tests of the first campaign, the 
French?English system obtaining the best ranking 
will be selected to be used as a pivotal system for 
metrics robustness Meta evaluation.  
 
6 Test material 
The required material is a set of corpora as 
detailed in the following section and a test tool that 
will be implemented according to metrics 
requirements and under the responsibility of 
CESTA organisers. 
6.1 Corpus 
 
The evaluation corpus is composed of 50 texts, 
each text length is 400 words to be translated 
twice, considering that a translation already exists 
in the original corpus. The different corpora are 
provided by ELRA. The masking corpus has 
250.000 words and must be thematically 
homogeneous.  
 
 
For each language pair the following corpora 
will be used: 
 
Adaptation 
? This 200.000 ? 250.000 word corpus is a 
bilingual corpus. It is used to validate 
exchanges between organisers and 
participants and for system tuning.  
First Campaign 
? One 20.000 word evaluation corpus will be 
used (50 texts of 400 words each) 
? One 200.000 to 250.000 word masking 
corpus that hides the evaluation corpus. 
Second campaign 
? One new 20.000 word corpus will be used 
but it will have to be thematically 
homogeneous (on a specific domain that 
will be communicated to participants a few 
months before the run takes place) 
? One masking corpus similar to the 
previous one. 
 
Additional requirement 
The BLANC metric requires the use of a 
bilingual aligned corpus at document scale. 
 
Three human translations will be used for each 
of the evaluation source texts. Considering that the 
corpora used, already provide one official 
translations, only two additional human 
translations will be necessary. These translations 
will be carried out under the organisers 
responsibility. Within the framework of CESTA 
use cases, evaluation is not made in order to obtain 
a ready to publish target language translation, but 
rather to provide a foreign user a simple access to 
information within the limits of basic grammatical 
correctness, as already mentioned in this article.  
 
7 The BLEU, BLANC and ROUGE metrics 
 
Three types of metrics will be tested on the 
corpus, the CESTA protocol being the combination 
of a contrastive reference to three different 
protocols:  
 
7.1 The IBM ?BLEU? protocol (Papineni, K., 
S. Roukos, T. Ward and Z. Wei-Jing, 
2001). 
 
The IBM BLEU metric used by the DARPA for 
its 2001 evaluation campaign, uses co-occurrence 
measures based on N-Grams. The translation in 
English of 80 Chinese source documents by six 
different commercial Machine Translation 
systems, was submitted to evaluation. From a 
reference corpus of translations made by experts, 
this metric works out quality measures according 
to a distance calculated between an automatically 
produced translation and the reference translation 
corpus based on shared N-grams (n=1,2,3?). The 
results of this evaluation are then compared to 
human judgments. 
? NIST now offers an online evaluation of 
MT systems performance, i.e.:  
o A program that can be 
downloaded for research aims. 
The user then provides source 
texts and reference translations for 
a determined pair of languages. 
o An e-mail evaluation service, for 
more formal evaluations. Results 
can be obtained in a few minutes. 
 
7.2 The ?BLANC? protocol 
 
It is a metric derived from a study presented at 
the LREC 2002 conference (Hartley A., Rajman 
M., 2002). We only take into account a part of the 
protocol described in the referred paper, i.e. the X 
score, that corresponds to grammatical correctness.  
 
We will not give an exhaustive description of 
this experience and shall only detail the elements 
that are relevant to the CESTA evaluation protocol.  
 
The protocol has been tested on the following 
languages.  
? Source language: French 
? Target language: English 
? Source corpus : 100 texts ? domain : 
newspaper articles 
 
Human judgements for comparison referential: 
? 12 English monolingual students.  
? No human translation reference corpus. 
? Three criteria were tested: Fluency, 
Adequacy, Informativeness  
 
Six systems were submitted to evaluation : 
Candide (CD), Globalink (GL), MetalSystem 
(MS), Reverso (RV), Systran (SY), XS (XS) 
? Each of the systems is due to translate a 
hundred source texts ranging from 250 to 
300 words each. A corpus of 600 
translations is thus produced. 
? For each of the source texts, a corpus of 6 
translations is produced automatically. 
These translations are then regrouped by 
series of six texts.  
? According to the protocol initiated by 
(White & Forner, 2001) these series are 
then ranked by medium adequacy score. 
? Every 5 series, a series is extracted from 
the whole. Packs of twenty series of target 
translations are thus obtained and 
submitted to human evaluators.  
 
7.2.1 Evaluators? tasks 
? Each evaluator reads 10 series of 6 
translations i.e. 60 texts.  
? Each of these series is then read by six 
different evaluators 
? The evaluators must observe a ten minute 
compulsory break every two series.  
? The evaluators do not know that the texts 
have been translated automatically. 
 
The directive given to them is the following: 
? rank these six texts from best to worst. If 
you cannot manage to give a different ranking 
to two texts, regroup them under the same 
parenthesis and give them the same score, as in 
the following example : 4 [1 2] 6 [3 5].? 
The aim of this instruction is to produce 
rankings that are similar to the rankings attributed 
automatically.  
Human judgement that ranks from best to worse 
corresponds in reality to a set of the fluency, 
adequacy and Informativeness criteria that can be 
attributed to the texts translated automatically.  
 
7.2.2 Automatically generated scores 
? X-score : syntactic score 
? D-score : semantic score 
 
Within the framework of the CESTA 
evaluation campaign the scientific committee 
decided to make use of the X-score only, the 
semantic D-score having proved to be unstable 
and that it could be advantageously replaced 
by the a metric based on (Bogdan, B.; Hartley, 
A.; Atwell, 2003), a reformulation of the D-
score developed by (Rajman, M. and T. 
Hartley, 2001), and which we refer to as the 
ROUGE metric in this article. 
 
7.2.3 X-score: definition 
? This score corresponds to a grammaticality 
metric 
? Each of the texts is previously parsed with 
XELDA Xerox parser. 
? 22 types of syntactic dependencies 
identified through the corpus of automatic 
translations. 
? The syntactic profile of each source 
document is computed. This profile is then 
used to derive the X-score for each 
document, making use of the following 
formula: 
? X-score = (#RELSUBJ+#RELSUBJPASS-
#PADJ-#ADVADJ)  
 
 
7.3 The ?ROUGE? protocol  
 
This protocol, developed by Anthony Hartley in 
(Bogdan, B.; Hartley, A.; Atwell, 2003), is a 
semantic score. It is the result of a reformulation of 
the D-Score, the semantic score initiated through 
previous collaboration with Martin Rajman 
(Rajman, M. and T. Hartley, 2001), as explained in 
the previous section.  
 
The original idea on which this protocol is based 
relies on the fact that MT evaluation metrics that 
?are based on comparing the distribution of 
statistically significant words in corpora of MT 
output and in human reference translation 
corpora?.  
 
The method used to measure MT quality is the 
following:  a statistical model for MT output 
corpora and for a parallel corpus of human 
translations, each statistically significant word 
being highlighted in the corpus. On the other hand, 
a statistical significance score is given for each 
highlighted word. Then statistical models for MT 
target texts and human translations are compared, 
special attention being paid to words that are 
automatically marked as significant in MT outputs, 
whereas they do not appear to be marked as 
significant in human translations. These words are 
considered to be ?over generated?. The same 
operation is then carried out on ?under generated 
words?. At this stage, a third operation consists in 
the marking of the words equally marked as 
significant by the MT systems and the human 
translations. The overall difference is then 
calculated for each pair of texts in the corpora. 
Three measures specifying differences in statistical 
models for MT and human translations are then 
implemented : the first one aiming at avoiding 
?over generation?, the second one aiming at 
avoiding ?under generation? and the last one being 
a combination of these two measures. The average 
scores for each of the MT systems are then 
computed.  
 
As detailed in (Bogdan, B.; Hartley, A.; Atwell, 
2003): 
 
?1. The score of statistical significance is 
computed for each word (with absolute frequency 
? 2 in the particular text) for each text in the 
corpus, as follows: ( )
][
][][][
][ ln
corpallword
foundnottxtswordcorprestwordtextword
textword P
NPP
S
?
??? ??=
 
where: 
Sword[text] is the score of statistical significance for 
a particular word in a particular text 
Pword[text] is the relative frequency of the word in 
the text; 
Pword[rest-corp] is the relative frequency of the same 
word in the rest of the corpus, without this text; 
Nword[txt-not-found] is the proportion of texts in the 
corpus, where this word is not found (number of 
texts, where it is not found divided by number of 
texts in the corpus) 
Pword[all-corp] is the relative frequency of the word 
in the whole corpus, including this particular text 
 
2. In the second stage, the lists of statistically 
significant words for corresponding texts together 
with their Sword[text] scores are compared across 
different MT systems. Comparison is done in the 
following way: 
For all words which are present in lists of 
statistically significant words both in the human 
reference translation and in the MT output, we 
compute the sum of changes of their Sword[text] 
scores: ( )? ?= ].[].[. MTtextwordreferencetextworddifftext SSS  
The score Stext.diff is added to the scores of all 
"over-generated" words (words that do not appear 
in the list of statistically significant words for 
human reference translation, but are present in 
such list for MT output). The resulting score 
becomes the general "over-generation" score for 
this particular text: 
? ?? +=
textwords
textgeneratedoverworddifftexttextgenerationover SSS
.
][...
 
The opposite "under-generation" score for 
each text in the corpus is computed by adding 
Stext.dif and all Sword[text]  scores of "under-generated" 
words ? words present in the human reference 
translation, but absent from the MT output. 
?+=?
textwords
textatedundergenerworddifftexttextgenerationunder SSS
.
][...
 
It is more convenient to use inverted scores, 
which increases as the MT system improves. These 
scores, So.text and Su.text, could be interpreted as 
scores for ability to avoid "over-generation" and 
"under-generation" of statistically significant 
words. The combined (o&u) score is computed 
similarly to the F-measure, where Precision and 
Recall are equally important: 
textgenerationover
texto S
S
.
.
1
?
= ; 
 
textgenerationunder
textu S
S
.
.
1
?
= ;
 
textutexto
textutexto
textuo SS
SSS
..
..
.&
2
+=  
The number of statistically significant words 
could be different in each text, so in order to make 
the scores compatible across texts we compute the 
average over-generation and under-generation 
scores per each statistically significant word in a 
given text. For the otext score we divide So.text by the 
number of statistically significant words in the MT 
text, for the utext score we divide Su.text by the 
number of statistically significant words in the 
human (reference) translation: 
rdsInMTstatSignWo
texto
text n
So .= ;
 
rdsInHTstatSignWo
textu
text n
Su .= ; 
 
texttext
texttext
text uo
uoou +=
2&  
The general performance of an MT system for IE 
tasks could be characterised by the average o-
score, u-score and u&o-score for all texts in the 
corpus?. 
8 Time Schedule and result dissemination 
 
The CESTA evaluation campaign started in 
January 2003 after having been labeled by the 
French Ministry of Research. During year 2003 
CESTA scientific committee went through 
protocol detailed redefinition and specification and 
a time schedule was agreed upon.  
 
2004 first semester is being dedicated to corpus 
untagging and the programming of CESTA 
evaluation tool. Reference human translations will 
also have to be produced and the implemented 
evaluation tool submitted to trial and validation.  
 
After this preliminary work, the first run will 
start during autumn 2004. At the end of the first 
campaign, result analysis will be carried out. A 
workshop will then be organized for CESTA 
participants. Then the second campaign will take 
place at the end of Spring 2005, the terminological 
adaptation phase being scheduled on a five month 
scale. 
 
After carrying out result analysis and final report 
redaction, a public workshop will be organized and 
the results disseminated and subject to publication 
at the end of 2005.  
 
9 Conclusion 
 
CESTA is the first European Campaign 
dedicated to MT Evaluation. The results of the 
campaign will be published in a final report and be 
the object of an intermediary workshop between 
the two campaigns and a final workshop at the end 
of the campaign.  
 
It is a noticeable point that the CESTA campaign 
aims at providing a state of the art of automated 
metrics in order to ensure protocol reusability. The 
originality of the CESTA protocol lies in the 
combination and contrastive use of three different 
types of measures carried out in parallel with a 
Meta evaluation of the metrics. 
 
It is also important to note that CESTA aims at 
providing a black box evaluation of available 
Machine Translation technologies, rather than a 
comparison of systems and interfaces, that can be 
tuned to match a particular need. If systems had to 
be compared, the fact that these applications 
should be compared including all software lawyers 
and ergonomic properties, ought to be taken into 
consideration.  
 
Moreover apart from providing a state of the art 
through a Meta evaluation of the metrics used in its 
protocol, thanks to the setting of this original 
protocol that relies on the contrastive use of 
complementary metrics, CESTA aims at protocol 
reusability. One of the outputs of the campaign 
will be the creation of a Machine Translation 
evaluation toolkit that will be put at users and 
system developers? disposal.Acknowledgements 
References  
Besan?on, R. and Rajman, M., (2002). Evaluation 
of aVector Space similarity measure in a 
multilingual framework. Procs. 3rd 
International Conference on Language 
Resources and Evaluation, Las 
Palmas,Spain,.1252 
Bogdan, B.; Hartley, A.; Atwell E.; Statistical 
modelling of MT output corpora for 
Information Extraction Proceedings Corpus 
Linguistics 2003, Lancaster, UK, 28-31 
March 2003, pp. 62-70 
Chaudiron, S. Technolangue. In: 
http://www.apil.asso.fr/metil.htm, mars 2001 
Chaudiron, S. L??valuation des syst?mes de 
traitement de l?information textuelle : vers un 
changement de paradigmes, M?moire pour 
l?habilitation ? diriger des recherches en sciences 
de l?information, pr?sent? devant l?Universit? de 
Paris 10, Paris, novembre 2001 
Dabbadie, M, Mustafa El Hadi, W., Timimi, I. 
(2001). Setting a Methodology for Machine 
Translation Evaluation. In: Machine 
Translation Summit VIII, ISLE/EMTA, 
Santiago de Compestela, Spain, 18-23 
October 2001, pp. 49-54. 
Dabbadie, M., Mustafa El Hadi, W., Timimi, I., 
(2002). Terminological Enrichment for non-
Interactive MT Evaluation. In: LREC 2002 
Proceedings ? Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, 
Spain ? 29th ? 31st May 2002 ? vol 6 ? 1878-
1884 
EAGLES-Evaluation-Workgroup. (1996). 
EAGLES evaluation of natural language 
processing systems. Final report, Center for 
Sprogteknologi, Denmark, October 1996. 
EAGLES (1999). EAGLES Reports (Expert 
Advisory Group on Language Engineering 
Standards)http://www.issco.unige.ch/project
s/eagles/ewg99. 
ISLE (2001). MT Evaluation Classification, 
Expanded Classification. 
http://www.isi.edu/natural-
language/mteval/2b-MT-classification.htm. 
ISO/IEC-9126. 1991. ISO/IEC 9126:1991 (E) ? 
Information Technology ? Software 
Product Evaluation ? Quality 
Characteristics and Guidelines for Their Use. 
ISO/IEC, Geneva. 
ISO (1999). Standard ISO/IEC 9126-1 Information 
Technology ? Software Engineering ? 
Quality characteristics and sub-
characteristics. Software Quality 
Characteristics and Metrics - Part 1 
ISO (1999). Standard ISO/IEC 9126-2 Information 
Technology ? Software Engineering ? 
Software products Quality : External Metrics 
- Part 2 
ISO/IEC-14598. 1998-2001. ISO/IEC 14598 ? 
Information technology ? Software product 
evaluation ? Part 1: General overview 
(1999), Part 2: Planning and management 
(2000), Part 3: Process for developers 
(2000), Part 4: Process for acquirers (1999), 
Part 5: Process for evaluators (1998), Part 6: 
Documentation of evaluation modules 
(2001). ISO/IEC, Geneva. 
ISSCO (2001) Machine Translation Evaluation : 
An Invitation to Get Your Hands Dirty!, 
ISSCO, University of Geneva, Workshop 
organised by M. King (ISSCO) & F. Reed, 
(Mitre Corporation), April 19-24 2001. 
King (1999a) EAGLES Evaluation Working 
Group, report,http://www.issco.unige.ch/ 
projects/eagles. 
King, M. (1999b). ?ISO Standards as a Point of 
Departure for EAGLES Work in EELS 
Conference (European Evaluation of 
Language Systems), 12-13 April 1999. 
Mariani, Joseph. ?Language Technologies : 
Technolangue Action ?. Presentation. In: 
LREC'2002 International Strategy Panel17, Las 
Palmas, May 2002. 
Nomura, H. and J. Isahara. (1992). The JEIDA 
report on MT. In Workshop on MT 
Evaluation: Basis for Future Directions, San 
Diego, CA. Association for Machine 
Translation in the Americas (AMTA). 
Popescu-Belis, A. S. Manzi, and M. King. (2001). 
Towards a two-stage taxonomy for MT 
evaluation. In Workshop on MT Evaluation 
?Who did what to whom?? at Mt Summit 
VIII, pages 1?8, Santiago de Compostela, 
Spain. 
Rajman, M. and T. Hartley, (2001). Automatically 
predicting MT systems rankings compatible 
with Fluency, Adequacy or Informativeness 
scores. Procs. 4th ISLE Workshop on MT 
Evaluation, MT Summit VIII, 29-34. 
Rajman, M. and T. Hartley, (2002). Automatic 
ranking of MT systems. In: LREC 2002 
Proceedings ? Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, 
Spain ? 29th ? 31st May 2002 ? vol 4 ? 1247-
1253 
Reeder, F., K. Miller, J. Doyon, and J. White, J. 
(2001). The naming of things and the 
confusion of tongues: an MT metric. Procs. 
4th ISLE Workshop on MT Evaluation, MT 
Summit VIII, 55-59. 
Sparck-Jones K., Gallier, J.R. (1996). Evaluating 
Natural Language Processing Systems: An 
Analysis and Review, Springer, Berlin. 
TREC, NIST Website, last updated, August 1st, 
2000, visited by the authors, 23-03-2003  
Vanni, M. and K. Miller (2001). Scaling the ISLE 
framework: validating tests of machine 
translation quality for multi-dimensional 
measurement. Procs. 4th ISLE Workshop on 
MT Evaluation, MT Summit VIII, 21-27. 
VanSlype., G. (1979). Critical study of methods 
for evaluating the quality of MT. Technical 
Report BR 19142, European Commission / 
Directorate for General Scientific and 
Technical Information Management (DG 
XIII). 
V?ronis, J., Langlais, Ph. (2000). ARCADE: 
?valuation de syst?mes d'alignement de textes 
multilingues. In Chibout, K., Mariani, J., 
Masson, N., Neel, F. ?ds., (2000). Ressources et 
?valuation en ing?nierie de la langue, Duculot, 
Coll. Champs linguistiques, et Collection 
Universit?s Francophones (AUF). 
