Encoding information on metaphoric expressions 
 in WordNet-like resources* 
 
Antonietta Alonge 
Sezione di Linguistica 
Facolt? di Lettere e Filosofia  
Universit? di Perugia 
Piazza Morlacchi, 11 
Perugia 06100 - ITALY  
antoalonge@libero.it 
Margherita Castelli 
Sezione di Linguistica 
Facolt? di Lettere e Filosofia  
Universit? di Perugia 
Piazza Morlacchi, 11 
Perugia 06100 - ITALY  
castelli@unipg.it 
 
 
Abstract 
In this paper we address the issue of the 
encoding of information on metaphors in 
a WordNet-like database, i.e. the Italian 
wordnet in EuroWordNet (ItalWordNet). 
When analysing corpus data we find a 
huge number of metaphoric expressions 
which can be hardly dealt with by using 
as reference database ItalWordNet. In 
particular, we have compared information 
contained both in dictionaries of Italian 
and in ItalWordNet with actual uses of 
words found in a corpus. We thus put 
forward proposals to enrich a resource 
like ItalWordNet with relevant informa-
tion. 
1 Introduction 
Lexical resources are a fundamental part of natural 
language processing systems and many research 
projects in the last decades have been devoted to 
build them. Notwithstanding, work is still needed 
to envisage what information should be encoded in 
which resource, and how, in order to deal with the 
central problem of word sense disambiguation.  
As becomes clear when analysing textual cor-
pora, novel uses of words occur frequently and, in 
particular, metaphoric new uses of them. Re-
sources which simply list the different 
polysemous senses of a word without saying any-
thing about how they relate to each other are not 
useful in such cases. One such resource is Word-
Net (WN), together with its ?relative-resource?, i.e. 
EuroWordNet (EWN).1  
In this paper we start by briefly recalling the 
theory of metaphor as a cognitive rather than a lin-
guistic phenomenon, proposed by Lakoff and 
Johnson (1980) and Lakoff (1993), that has 
spawned a variety of research in various fields 
connected with the study of language.2 Then, we 
take into analysis examples of words displaying 
metaphorical sense extensions and discuss data 
from the Italian wordnet in EWN (ItalWordNet - 
                                                          
* The present paper is the outcome of a collaborative effort. 
For the specific concerns of the Italian Academy only, A. 
Alonge is responsible for sections 3 and 4; M. Castelli for 
sections 1, 2, and 5. 
1 EWN is a multilingual database developed within the ho-
monymous project carried out in the EC Language Engineer-
ing  programme (LE-4003 and LE-8328). Within the project, 
WordNet-like databases for various European languages were 
developed, connected by means of an Interlingual-Index. 
Complete information on EWN can be found at its website: 
http:// www.hum.uva.nl/~ewn/gwa.htm. 
2  Browse the ?Center for the Cognitive Science of Metaphor 
Online? for references at work on metaphor and links to other 
websites: http://philosphy.uoregon.edu/metaphor/metaphor.htm. 
See the Berkeley Conceptual Metaphor Home Page - db at 
http://cogsci.berkeley.edu/ for a database of conceptual meta-
phors.  A similar database is being developed also for German 
and French: http://www.rrz.uni-hamburg.de/metaphern (cf. 
Eilts and L?nneker, 2002). 
IWN).3 Finally, we propose a way of dealing with 
metaphors encoding in resources such as 
EWN/IWN, which can be useful to obtain informa-
tion which is necessary for word sense disam-
biguation. 
2 Metaphor 
Lakoff and Johnson (1980) and Lakoff (1993) 
show that metaphor is not just a poetical way of 
speaking, rather it is deeply embedded in our lan-
guage, culture and the way we think. Metaphor 
affects how we experience and interact with the 
world and other people: ?the human conceptual 
system is metaphorically structured and defined. 
Metaphors as linguistic expressions are possible 
precisely because there are metaphors in a person?s 
conceptual system.? (Lakoff and Johnson, 1980: 
6). 
Thus, metaphor is a cognitive rather than a lin-
guistic phenomenon, and word senses are related in 
terms of their underlying conceptual domains. 
Metaphoric linguistic expressions are manifesta-
tions of ?conceptual metaphors?, i.e. metaphorical 
structures which are present in our minds and re-
late a concrete source domain with a more abstract 
target domain. In other words, metaphoric expres-
sions are the superficial realization of the mapping 
we perform from a ?literal? source semantic do-
main to a ?figurative? target semantic domain. At 
least two consequences follow from this perspec-
tive which should be considered when building a 
lexicon for NLP applications: 
 
i) metaphorical extension of word senses is a kind 
of regular polysemy (cf. Apresjan, 1973): e.g., He 
arrived (?came here? or ?was born?) when we were 
20; He left us (?went away? or ?died?) after some 
time; 
ii) generalizations govern inference models, i.e. 
those cases in which an inference model from a 
certain conceptual domain is used in another do-
                                                          
3 IWN was developed within the SI-TAL (Integrated System 
for the Automatic Treatment of Language) Italian project, 
devoted to the creation of large linguistic resources and soft-
ware tools for the Italian written and spoken language process-
ing. The database was built by extending the Italian wordnet 
realized within EWN, and inherited from EWN its main 
characteristics (general structure, relations, etc.; see Alonge et 
al. (2000) and Roventini et al (forthcoming) for a detailed 
description of the IWN database). 
main: e.g., In our relationship we have faced many 
obstacles ? It has been difficult to go ahead. 
3 Metaphoric expressions in EWN-IWN 
When looking for word sense distinctions within 
different lexical resources we see that these vary 
widely across resources. 4  Different dictionaries 
distinguish among different senses of words in a 
sort of arbitrary way, since they are strongly influ-
enced by the purpose of the resource (the target 
audience), and have different editorial philosophies 
with respect to ?lumping vs. splitting? of senses 
(Atkins, 1993; Kilgarriff, 1997). Dictionaries nor-
mally contain distinctions between ?literal? vs. 
?figurative? meanings within a lexical entry. How-
ever, such information is in general, at best, ?in-
complete?:  
1. information on metaphoric uses is not sys-
tematic in many sources, and different 
sources contain different information;  
2. when information on metaphoric sense 
extensions is present, there is generally no 
clear indication of the connection between 
the ?basic? and the ?extended? senses;  
3. data which could help to identify novel 
metaphoric expressions are not provided.  
EWN first and IWN then were built using as 
source data dictionaries available in machine-
readable form, thus they contain inconsistencies 
and shortage of data partly inherited from diction-
aries, in particular with respect to figurative lan-
guage. Consider, for instance, the verb andare (to 
go): it has 17 senses in IWN (reported below), two 
of which are strictly motion senses while the others 
are figurative senses somehow derived from the 
two basic ones, with different degrees of proximity 
to the literal senses.  
 
                                                          
4 We assume some sort of intuitive pre-theoretical notion of 
word-sense, which we are well aware that can be disputed. 
Much research has been devoted at the issues of what a word-
sense is and if word-senses ?exist? at all and should be consid-
ered as the basic units of the lexicon. Although we agree with 
views according to which ?word senses exist only relative to a 
task? (Kilgarriff, 1997: 1), and are at the same time appealed 
by proposals for ?coarse coding? (Harris, 1994), we still be-
lieve that a WN-like structure, taking the concepts and the 
synsets referring to them as the ?building blocks? of the (men-
tal) lexicon, is both appropriate as a representation of lexical 
knowledge (with the basic idea of a net linking the concepts) 
and can be used as a resource for NLP, provided that the pos-
sible uses and actual limits of such a resource are kept clear. 
Synset Definition 
{andare 1, 
muovere 5, 
gire 1, ire 1}  
muoversi, spostarsi, senza meta o senza che la
meta sia indicata (to move or to change one?s
place without a goal, or without a specified 
goal) 
{andare 2, 
recarsi 1, por-
tarsi 1, trasfe-
rirsi 1} 
muoversi, spostarsi verso una meta pi? o
meno chiaramente definita (to move, to chan-
ge one?s place toward a more or less clearly
defined goal) 
{andare 3}  
essere collocato, essere destinato ad essere 
messo in un dato luogo (to be located or to be
intended to be put in a specific place) 
{andare 4} sentirsi in un certo modo (to feel in a certainway) 
{andare 5} trasformarsi (to transform - reflexive) 
{andare 6, 
morire 1, di-
partirsi 2, ?} 
cessare di vivere (to die, to cease living) 
{andare 7, 
correre 12} 
di moneta e simili, avere corso legale (of
money, to be legal tender) 
{andare 8} dover essere (to have to be (done)) 
{andare 9, 
calzare 1} essere adatto, calzare (to fit (s.o.)) 
{andare 10, 
piacere 1, gar-
bare 1, ?} 
essere gradito, piacevole (to like) 
{andare 11, 
precedere 2, 
progredire 2, 
?} 
andare avanti, progredire in qualcosa (fig.) (to 
go ahead, to progress in something (figura-
tive)) 
{andare 12, 
passare 10, 
dileguarsi 4, 
?} 
venire meno, dileguarsi (to fade away, to
disappear) 
{andare 13}  continuare in un'azione (seguito da un gerun-dio) (to continue doing something) 
{andare 14, 
estendersi 2, 
arrivare 6} 
estendersi fino (to extend to) 
{andare 15, 
dare 17, con-
durre 1, ?} 
dare accesso (to lead into) 
{andare 16, 
funzionare 1} 
adempiere la propria funzione (to work, to
function) 
{andare 17, 
muoversi 4, 
spostarsi 2} 
(fig.) spostarsi (figurative ? to move, to chan-
ge one?s opinion, etc.) 
 
Table 1. Senses of andare in IWN 
 
Senses 5, 6, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 16 and 17 are clearly 
more directly derived from the two basic senses 
(either the first or the second): e.g., senses 5, 6, 11, 
12 can all be linked to the general ?CHANGE IS 
MOTION? conceptual metaphor; sense 13 to the 
?ACTION IS MOTION? metaphor, etc.  The re-
maining senses seem also connected with the mo-
tion senses, although in a less direct way. 5 Only 
two of the metaphoric senses are marked as ?figu-
rative? and no indication is provided of the connec-
tion between each metaphoric sense and the basic 
literal sense it is derived from. Moreover, if we 
take into consideration dictionaries of Italian like 
Zingarelli or Garzanti, 6  we find different sense 
definitions for andare: Zingarelli has 13 senses 
(with some information on connection of senses) 
and Garzanti has 11 (with no indication of sense 
connections). Finally, no information is provided, 
either in IWN or in the other resources, which 
could be used to automatically disambiguate novel 
metaphoric uses of the verb. 
If we then look for occurrences of andare in a 
corpus of Italian (the PAROLE corpus, partly 
available at http://www.ilc.cnr.it/pisystem/demo/ 
demo_dbt/demo_corpus/index.htm; cf. Goggi et 
al., 2000), we find occurrences of the verb which 
are hardly linked to the senses provided in our re-
sources. Consider just two examples taken from 
this corpus: 
a. Borg ? gi? tornato e se n`? gi? andato in un 
mondo tutto suo (Borg has already come back 
and he has gone into his own world) 
b. Altri sono andati con la memoria alle im-
magini televisive della guerra del Golfo (Oth-
ers went with their memory to the television 
images of the Gulf war). 
These two uses of the verb are quite frequent in 
spoken language, however they are not accounted 
for in the resources considered. 
When comparing corpus occurrences of words 
with information encoded in IWN, as in other lexi-
cal resources, one normally sees that there is a sur-
prisingly high frequency of figurative senses in 
                                                          
5 E.g.,  sense 8 is found in sentences like ?Questo lavoro va 
fatto subito? (This work has to be done immediately), where 
andare expresses a duty. We might suppose the existence of a 
conceptual metaphor like ?TO FULFIL ONE?S DUTY IS TO 
MOVE TO A GOAL?. This could be linked to a more general 
?ACCOMPLISHING SOMETHING IS REACHING A 
GOAL? metaphor, again connected with the ?ACTION IS 
MOTION? metaphor. Of course, this analysis needs to be 
deepened; in particular, among other cases, one should also 
take into consideration the use of  venire (to come), which in 
its basic sense indicates opposite direction with respect to 
andare, in sentences like ?Questo lavoro viene fatto regolar-
mente? (This work is done regularly).  
6 Lo Zingarelli 1999 in CD-ROM, 1999, Zanichelli, Bologna; 
Il nuovo dizionario italiano Garzanti, 1991, Garzanti, Milano. 
real texts but most of these senses are not de-
scribed in such resources (cf. Nimb and Sanford 
Pedersen, 2000, for data identified within the 
SIMPLE EC project and the solutions proposed in 
that context). Alonge and Castelli (2002a) take into 
account corpus occurrences of the verb colpire (to 
hit/to strike/to shoot) and the noun colpo 
(blow/stroke/shot), and compare the results of this 
analysis with data found for these words within 
IWN, concluding that IWN lacks precise informa-
tion on frequent metaphoric uses of colpire and 
colpo. Indeed, the data provided show that by ana-
lyzing a large general corpus various metaphoric 
expressions are clearly distinguishable which are 
not (consistently) identified in IWN or in other 
resources. Thus, how should these figurative 
senses be accounted for in a WN-like resource (in 
particular, in EWN/IWN)? Moreover, how should 
novel, potential uses of words be dealt with in a 
resource such IWN? We believe that the ability to 
cope with these issues cannot be set aside if IWN, 
or similar resources, has to be used for word sense 
disambiguation of ?real? texts. 
4 Proposals for metaphors encoding in 
IWN/EWN 
As already mentioned, by analyzing a large general 
corpus various well-established metaphoric expres-
sions are clearly distinguishable which are not con-
sistently encoded in IWN or in other resources. 
Since the necessity of adding corpora as sources 
for building computational lexicons is probably 
unquestionable, our main point is that one should 
deal with these issues by adopting a well estab-
lished and generally accepted theoretical frame-
work like that proposed by Lakoff and Johnson 
(1980) and Lakoff (1993), within which a large 
system of conventional conceptual metaphors has 
been described. By adopting that perspective many 
subtle, but relevant, differences may be highlighted 
in a principled way (cf. Alonge and Castelli, 
2002a; 2002b). These should be encoded in 
EWN/IWN at the synset level to account for al-
ready well established word figurative senses. Of 
course, no lexical resource will probably ever be 
able to exhaustively account for the phenomenon 
which Cruse (1986) termed modulation, determin-
ing that ?a single sense can be modified in an 
unlimited number of ways for different contexts, 
each context emphasizing certain semantic traits, 
and obscuring and suppressing others? (Cruse, 
1986: 52). However, each resource should be de-
signed so to be as complete and coherent as possi-
ble. 
A more central issue to be tackled, however, is 
that of how to encode information on the system-
atic nature of conceptual metaphors, determining 
the possibility to produce and/or understand novel 
metaphoric uses of words. When we understand 
novel metaphoric expressions we make reference 
to a system of established mappings between con-
crete conceptual domains and abstract ones. That 
is, there is a pre-existent knowledge which con-
strains our possibility to produce and/or understand 
novel metaphoric expressions. For instance, a 
group of conventional conceptual metaphors which 
characterizes as a subset of the more general 
?CHANGES ARE MOVEMENTS? metaphor is 
the following: ?BIRTH IS ARRIVAL?, ?LIFE IS 
BEING PRESENT HERE?, ?DEATH IS 
DEPARTURE? (cf. Lakoff and Johnson, 1980). 
Thus, we can say, for instance (examples are ours): 
- Nostro figlio ? arrivato (= ? nato) dopo dieci 
anni di matrimonio. 
(Our child arrived (= was born) ten years after 
our wedding) 
- Lui non ? pi? fra noi. (= ? morto) 
(He is not with us anymore. (= he is dead)) 
- Se ne ? andato (? morto) all?et? di venti anni. 
(He went away (he died) when he was 
twenty.) 
In IWN (or in the dictionaries considered) we find 
encoded the senses indicated in the examples for 
essere and andare but not for arrivare, even if this 
sense of the verb is attested (although infrequent) 
in the PAROLE corpus: 
c. ? di figli ne sono arrivati troppi. 
(there arrived too many children). 
If we then look for the senses provided for an-
other verb, which we may potentially expect to 
display the same regular sense extension of andare 
as to die ? lasciare  (to leave) ?, we do not find any 
relevant information in our lexical resources as 
well, although also this verb metaphoric sense oc-
curs once in our corpus: 
d. Mentre scrivo ci ha appena lasciato. La sua 
morte? 
(While I?m writing he/she has just left us. 
His/her death?). 
In fact, these metaphoric uses of arrivare and las-
ciare, although not frequent in our corpus (com-
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Italian wn 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ILI 
{cane}
posed of texts taken from newspapers, magazines, 
essays, novels, etc), are quite normal in everyday 
spoken language. 
In order to build a resource which actually ac-
counts for our lexical-conceptual knowledge and 
can be used as a resource for NLP, we have to find 
a way to encode also knowledge about mappings 
between conceptual domains resulting in potential 
metaphoric expressions production. This informa-
tion should be encoded at a higher level than the 
synset level, since it is information on regular 
polysemy affecting whole conceptual domains.  
In IWN, as in EWN, we have three fundamental 
levels of representation of semantic information:  
? the synset level, where language-specific 
synsets information is encoded;  
? the level of the linking to the Interlingual-
Index (ILI ? an unstructured list of WN 1.5 
synsets) to which synsets from the specific 
wordnet point (by means of so-called 
?equivalence-relations?) in order to per-
form the linking between different lan-
guage-specific wordnets;  
? the Top Ontology (TO), a hierarchy of 
language-independent concepts, reflecting 
fundamental semantic distinctions, which 
may (or may not) be lexicalised in various 
ways, or according to different patterns, in 
different languages: via the ILI, all the 
concepts in the language specific wordnet 
are directly or indirectly (via hyponymy 
relations) linked to the TO.7  
The figure below exemplifies the relations 
among the three levels. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
7 Note that in EWN/IWN not all the synsets are directly linked 
to TO. Actually, only the so-called ?Base Concepts? (cf. 
Vossen, 1999) are explicitly linked to ILIs connected with Top 
Concepts. However, the links to Top Concepts are inherited by 
all the other synsets within the wordnets via hyponymy rela-
tions with the Base Concepts. 
 
 
Top Ontology  
 
 
 
 
                                    
 
 
 
 
                                                              
 
 
                                                
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Levels of representation of semantic 
information in EWN/IWN 
 
Since the distinctions at the level of the TO are 
language independent, it is necessary to show 
metaphoric regular polysemy found in a specific 
language at a different level. Indeed, there are cul-
ture-constrained differences in the metaphor sys-
tem (see, e.g., the differences linked to orientation 
reported by Lakoff and Johnson, 1980, determining 
for instance that in some cultures the future is in 
front of us and in others the future is behind us) 
which should receive a representation at some 
other level. 
In EWN some cases of regular polysemy were 
dealt with at the level of the linking of each lan-
guage-specific wordnet with the ILI. Via the ILI 
the generalizations over concepts were then pro-
jected to the TO. Generalizations were stated di-
rectly at the level of the ILI and automatically 
inherited from all the synsets which in a language-
specific wordnet were linked to the ILI synsets 
involved in the generalizations themselves. An 
automatically added generalization could be later 
manually deleted in case it did not apply to a spe-
cific language (cf. Peters et al, 1998). For in-
stance, the lexeme scuola (school) in Italian has 
got (among others) two related senses indicating 
{animale}      {animal} 
ANIMAL
LIVING 
NATURAL 
 
? 
wn
one the institution and the other the building. This 
is a case of regular polysemy since many words 
indicating institutions also indicate buildings in 
Italian (as, of course, in other languages). Once the 
Italian school-institution and the school-building 
synsets were linked to the appropriate synsets in 
the ILI, the system automatically added to both 
Italian synsets another equivalence link, called 
EQ_METONYM, to a kind of ?composite ILI unit?, 
clustering the ?institution? and ?building? ILI syn-
sets into a coarser-grained sense group. Thus, our 
synsets, via the ILI, were linked to tops in the TO 
indicating concepts in different domains. A similar 
operation was automatically performed for senses 
reflecting diathesis alternations for verbs (related 
by EQ_DIATHESIS), such as causative and inchoa-
tive pairs. In case a kind of regular polysemy did 
not display in our language, the automatically gen-
erated link to the relevant composite ILI unit had 
to be manually deleted. 
We think that an EQ_METAPHOR relation point-
ing to new composite ILI units should be created to 
account for regular metaphoric extensions of 
senses in  EWN/IWN. Via the ILI links the con-
nection between specific synsets in a language 
would also be shown at the TO level as connection 
(mapping) between top concepts (linked to differ-
ent conceptual domains). On the other hand, the 
mapping at the TO level could be used to infer 
which words might potentially display a certain 
metaphoric extension, when this is not encoded at 
the synset level. Indeed, the link to a Top Concept 
is inherited along taxonomies within the language-
specific wordnets, thus all the synsets directly or 
indirectly connected (through hyponymy) with an-
other synset would inherit the links to Top Con-
cepts related to different conceptual domains. 
Thus, even when specific information on a possible 
metaphoric sense extension of a word is not en-
coded in the database it would be possible to de-
rive it. Consider the case of lasciare (to leave), 
mentioned above, and related conceptual meta-
phors. This verb has 9 senses in IWN (i.e., it is 
found within 9 synsets), one of which (sense 2) is 
defined as ?andarsene da un luogo temporanea-
mente o definitivamente? (to go away from a place 
temporarily or definitively): this verb sense is a 
(direct) hyponym of the {partire 1, andare via 1} 
synset which, via an equivalence link to the {go, 
go away, depart, travel away} ILI synset, is con-
nected with the Top Concepts ?BoundedEvent?, 
indicating change of state; ?Location?, indicating 
that the change referred to is a change of location; 
and ?Physical?, indicating that the change of loca-
tion involves ?physical entities?. As was done in 
EWN for other kinds of sense extensions, a ?com-
posite ILI unit? should be created, clustering the 
?departure? ILI synset (already linked to our {par-
tire 1, andare 1} synset) and the ?death? ILI synset 
and accounting for the ?DEATH IS DEPARTURE? 
conceptual metaphor: then, the Italian synset al
ready manually linked to the ?departure? ILI synset 
would also be connected, through an 
EQ_METAPHOR relation, to the ?death? ILI synset.8 
Consequently, the same synset would be, at the 
same time, connected both to the synset(s) indicat-
ing ?death? in Italian and to the relevant Top Con-
cepts in the TO. All the hyponyms of {partire 1, 
andare via 1} would then inherit these connections; 
thus, also lasciare would display the same links, 
even if no specific information is encoded at the 
synset level. Again, cf. the figure below for a 
schematic representation of these relations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. The lasciare links 
                                                          
8 Note that for languages not displaying this sense extension 
the equivalence relation should be manually deleted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ILI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITE ILI 
Top Ontology
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Italian wn
{partire 1, 
andare via 1} 
{lasciare 2} 
{go, go away, 
depart, travel 
away} 
{die, pip out, de-
cease, perish, 
go,?} 
LOCATION 
Bounded 
Event
? 
In this way, information on potential metaphoric 
uses of lasciare (and, of course, other words in the 
wordnet) could be retrieved, by going from Top 
Concepts to ILI synsets and then to language-
specific wordnets. 
5 Conclusion 
In this paper we have discussed a way to deal with 
metaphoric expressions in WN-like databases 
which involves: i) a more careful analysis of tex-
tual corpora and the reference to theoretical well-
established views of metaphor to encode more de-
tailed information at the synset level; ii) the exten-
sions of devices already used in EWN in order to 
encode information on the mapping between con-
ceptual domains, causing the possibility to have 
certain metaphoric sense extensions in a language. 
The research on the latter issue needs to be further 
carried out; in particular: 
- we want to deepen the issue of the weight that 
other relations than hyponymy (cf. Alonge et 
al., 1998; Roventini et al, forthcoming) have 
in order to determine when a concept belongs 
to a certain conceptual domain for which 
metaphoric sense extensions inherited from 
the TO apply; 
- we think that the EWN TO should be ex-
tended with more concepts, since at the mo-
ment it only contains very general semantic 
distinctions. 
References 
Alonge Antonietta, Francesca Bertagna, Nicoletta Cal-
zolari, Adriana Roventini and Antonio Zampolli. 
2000. Encoding Information on Adjectives in a Lexi-
cal-Semantic Net for Computational Applications. 
Proceedings of the 1st Conference of the North 
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, Seattle, 42-50. 
Alonge Antonietta, Nicoletta Calzolari, Piek Vossen, 
Laura Bloksma, Irene Castellon, Maria Antonia Mar-
ti and Wim Peters. 1998. The Linguistic Design of 
the EuroWordNet Database. Special Issue on 
EuroWordNet. Computers and the Humanities, Vol. 
32, Nos. 2-3: 91-115. 
Alonge Antonietta and Margherita Castelli. 2002a. 
Metaphoric expressions: an analysis of data from a 
corpus and the ItalWordNet database, in Proceedings 
of the 1st international WordNet Conference, Mysore, 
India, 342-50. 
Alonge Antonietta and Margherita Castelli. 2002b. 
Which way should we go? Metaphoric expressions in 
lexical resources, in Proceedings of the 3rd  Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and 
Evaluation, Las Palmas, Canary Islands, Spain, 
1948-53. 
Apresjan Jurij D. 1973. Regular Polysemy. Linguistics, 
142: 5-32. 
Atkins B. T. Sue. 1993. Building a Lexicon: The Con-
tribution of Lexicography. International Journal of 
Lexicography, 3: 167-204. 
Cruse D. Alan. 1986. Lexical Semantics. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge. 
Eilts Carina and Birte L?nneker, 2002. The Hamburg 
Metaphor Database. Metaphorik.de, 3/2002. 
Fellbaum Christiane. 1998. Towards a representation of 
idioms in WordNet. Proceedings of the 
COLING/ACL Workshop on Usage of WordNet in 
Natural Language Processing Systems, Montreal. 
Goggi Sara, Laura Biagini, Eugenio Picchi, Remo Bin-
di, Sergio Rossi and Rita Marinelli. 2000. Italian 
Corpus Documentation. LE-PAROLE, WP2.11. 
Lakoff George. 1993. The Contemporary Theory of 
Metaphor. In Andrew Ortony (ed.) Metaphor and  
Thought. Second Edition. Cambridge University 
Press, New York. 
Lakoff George and Mark Johnson. 1980. Metaphors We 
Live by. University of Chicago Press, Chicago. 
Harris C. 1994. Coarse Coding and the Lexicon. In 
Fuchs C. and Victorri B. (eds.) Continuity in Linguis-
tic Semantics, Benjamins, Amsterdam. 
Kilgarriff Adam. 1997. ?I don?t believe in word senses?. 
Computers and the Humanities, 31 (2): 91-113. 
Nimb Sanni and Bolette Sandford Pedersen. 2000. 
Treating Metaphoric Senses in a Danish Computa-
tional Lexicon ? Different Cases of Regular 
Polysemy. Proceedings of the 9th Euralex Interna-
tional Congress. 
Peters Wim, Ivonne Peters and Piek Vossen. 1998. 
Automatic Sense Clustering in EuroWordNet. Pro-
ceedings of the 1st International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation. Granada, 409-23. 
Roventini Adriana, Antonietta Alonge, Francesca Ber-
tagna, Nicoletta Calzolari, Jessica Cancila, Rita Ma-
rinelli, Antonio Zampolli, Bernardo Magnini, 
Christian Girardi and Manuela Speranza. Forthco-
ming. ItalWordNet: Building a Large Semantic Data-
base for the Automatic  Treatment of Italian. 
Linguistica Computazionale. Pisa: Giardini. 
Vossen Piek (ed.). 1999. EuroWordNet General Docu-
ment. The EWN CD-Rom (see also: 
http://www.hum.uva.nl/~ewn). 
Encoding information on adjectives in a lexical-semantic net 
for computational applications 
Antonietta ALONGE 
Istituto di Linguistica 
Computazionale, CNR 
Area della Ricerca di Pisa 
Via Alfieri 1, Loc. S. Cataldo 
Ghezzano 56010 (PI) - ITALY 
antoalonge@libero.it 
Francesca BERTAGNA 
Consorzio Pisa Ricerche 
Via S. Maria 40 
Pisa 56100 - ITALY 
F.Bertagna@ilc.pi.cnr.it 
Nicoletta CALZOLARI 
Istituto di Linguistica 
Computazionale, CNR 
Area della Ricerca di Pisa 
Via Alfieri 1, Loc. S. Cataldo 
Ghezzano 56010 (PI) - ITALY 
glottolo@ilc.pi.cnr.it 
Adriana ROVENTINI 
Istituto di Linguistica 
Computazionale, CNR 
Area della Ricerca di Pisa 
Via Alfieri 1, Loc. S. Cataldo 
Ghezzano 56010 (PI) - ITALY 
adriana@ilc.pi.cnr.it 
Antonio ZAMPOLLI 
Istituto di Linguistica 
Computazionale, CNR 
Area della Ricerca di Pisa 
Via Alfieri 1, Loc. S. Cataldo 
Ghezzano 56010 (PI) - ITALY 
pisa@ilc.pi.cnr.it 
Abstract 
The goal of this paper is to describe how the 
EuroWordNet framework for representing 
lexical meaning is being modified within an 
Italian National Project in order to include 
information on adjectives. The focus is on 
the 'new' semantic relations being encoded 
and on the revisions we have made to the 
EuroWordNet Top Ontology structure. We 
also briefly discuss the utility of the 
information which is being encoded for 
computational pplications. 
Int roduct ion 
The Princeton WordNet (henceforth WN) is a 
lexical semantic network in which the meanings 
of words are represented in terms of their 
conceptual and lexical relations to other words. 
The basic notion around which it is developed is
that of a synset (synonyms et), i.e. a set of 
words with the same Part-of-Speech (PoS) that 
can be interchanged in a certain context. Various 
conceptual and lexical relations are then 
encoded between synsets of the same PoS: e.g., 
hyponymy, antonymy, meronymy, etc. (Miller et 
al. 1990; Fellbaum 1998b). 
Within the EuroWordNet (henceforth EWN) 
project I a similar (multilingual) lexical resource 
was developed, retaining the basic underlying 
design of WN, but enriching the set of lexical- 
semantic relations to be encoded for nouns and 
verbs in various ways 2, in order to obtain a 
maximally re-usable resource for computational 
applications. Thus, a) cross-PoS (xPos) relations 
were added so that different surface realizations 
of similar concepts within and across languages 
could be matched (e.g., the noun research and 
the verb to research could be linked as 
1 EWN was a project in the EC Language 
Engineering (LE-4003 and LE-8328) programme. In 
a first phase, the partners involved were the 
University of Amsterdam (coordinator); the Istituto 
di Linguistica Computazionale, CNR, Pisa; the 
Fundacion Universidad Empresa (a cooperation of 
UNED, Madrid, Politecnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, 
and the University of Barcelona); the University of 
Sheffield; and Novell Linguistic Development 
(Antwerp), changed to Lemout & Hauspie during the 
project. In a further phase, the database was extended 
with German, French, Estonian and Czech. Complete 
information on EWN can be found at its web site: 
http://www.hum.uva.nl/~ewn/. 
2 Adjectives and adverbs were encoded in EWN only 
as targets of relations from nouns and verbs. 
&9 42
'XPOS NEAR__SYNONYMS' in EWN); b) some 
relations were identified which provide detailed 
information on semantic omponents lexicalized 
within word roots (e.g., to hammer could be 
linked to the noun hammer by means of an 
'INVOLVED_INSTRUMENT' relation); c) some 
labels were distinguished which could be added 
to relations to make their semantic entailments 
more explicit and precise (cf. Alonge et al 
1998). The links among the wordnets of 
different languages were realized by means of an 
Interlingual-Index (ILI), constituted by an 
unstructured list of the Princeton WN (version 
1.5) synsets. In addition, a hierarchy of 
language-independent concepts, reflecting 
fundamental semantic distinctions (e.g., Object 
and Substance, Dynamic and Static, Cause, 
Manner, etc.), was built: the Top Ontology 
(TO). The TO consists of language-independent 
features which may (or may not) be lexicalized 
in various ways, or according to different 
patterns, in different languages (Rodriguez et al 
1998). Via the ILI, all the concepts in the 
monolingual wordnets are directly or indirectly 
linked to the TO. The following picture shows 
the EWN data structure (see also Vossen 1999): 
While in WN all PoSs are represented, in EWN 
detailed information was encoded only for nouns 
and verbs and no analysis was carried out with 
respect to lexical-semantic relations which could 
be used to describe the semantics of adjectives 
and adverbs. In an Italian National Project we 
are building a large wordnet, ltalWordNet 
(henceforth IWN) 3, by extending the network 
built for Italian in EWN. Thus, we are both 
increasing the coverage for nouns and verbs and 
adding adjectives and some adverbs 4.To be able 
to encode information on adjectives we have 
enriched the set of the EWN lexical-semantic 
relations, aiming at encoding data which can be 
useful for computational applications. Moreover, 
we have revised the TO in order to account for 
the semantics of the new lexical categories being 
encoded. 
In this paper we describe the main changes made 
to the EWN framework in order to encode 
information on adjectives in IWN. Firstly, we 
provide a brief overview of the WN treatment of 
adjectives. Then, we discuss the set of relations 
being encoded for this category in IWN. Finally, 
we show the integration made to the EWN TO. 
We then conclude the paper by adding some 
remarks on the utility of the data being encoded 
for computational applications. 
1 Adjectives in WN 
In WN adjectives are divided into two major 
classes: descriptive adjectives and relational 
adjectives. A descriptive adjective is "one that 
ascribes a value of an attribute to a noun" 
(Fellbaum et al 1993:27). Descriptive adjectives 
combine with nouns to express ome qualities of 
the thing, person or concept they designate. 
Typically, in this group we find adjectives that 
designate the physical dimension of an object, 
its weight, abstract values etc. Besides these 
referent-modifying adjectives, we also find 
reference-modifying adjectives (cf. Bolinger 
1967; Chierchia & McConnel-Ginet 1990 name 
them intensional adjectives). Typical examples 
of the latter are former, future, present. 
3 ItalWordNet will be the reference l xical resource 
among various integrated language resources and 
software tools for the automatic treatment of he 
Italian written and spoken language which are being 
developed within the SI-TAL ('Integrated System for 
the Automatic Treatment of Language') National 
Project. 
4 Actually, we shall only encode adverbs derived 
from adjectives by adding the suffix -mente, for 
which a derivation relation with an adjective will be 
encoded. 
43
Relational adjectives, on the other hand, mean 
something like "relating/pertaining to, associated 
with", and usually have a morphologically 
strong link with a noun. Typical examples are 
musical, atomic, chemical 5. 
Synonymy is the basic relation encoded for all 
the PoSs (since it is used to build synsets). 
While in WN the noun and verb networks are 
then mainly developed around the superordinate 
(hyper/hyponymy) relationship, the organization 
of descriptive adjectives can "be visualized in 
terms of barbell-like structures, with a direct 
antonym in the centre of each disk surrounded 
by its semantically similar adjectives (which 
constitute the indirect antonyms of the adjectives 
in the opposed disk)" (Fellbaum 1998a: 212). 
The main relation encoded for these adjective 
synsets is antonymy, claimed to be the most 
prominent relation, both from a psycholinguistic 
point of view and from a more strictly lexical- 
semantic one, in the definition of the semantics 
of descriptive adjectives. Hyponymy is 
substituted by a 'similarity' relation. 
Relational adjectives, on the contrary, are not 
organized in this way, because their semantics 
cannot be described by using these relations. 
Indeed, they only point to the noun to which 
they pertain (e.g. atomic is linked to atom). 
Finally, information on the selectional 
preferences of both descriptive and relational 
adjectives is sometimes encoded (e.g., between 
high and degree), by using an 'is_attribute_of' 
relation. 
2 The IWN relations for adjectives 
As for the other lexical categories, also in IWN 
the basic relation encoded for adjectives is 
synonymy, on the basis of which synsets are 
built. Following EWN, we also encode a 
NEAR._SYNONYMY relation when two synsets are 
very close in meaning but their members cannot 
be put in the same synset (and no other relation 
results appropriate to link them; see Alonge et 
s Note that some adjectives have both a descriptive 
sense and a relational one. For example, musicale 
(musical) can modify the noun voce (voice) when we 
want to say that a voice is sweet-sounding and 
melodious, but can also be combined with the noun 
strumento (instrument) when we want to indicate that 
an instrument can be used to produce music. 
al. 1998 for a discussion of this relation, and 
Alonge et al, in prep., for a complete and 
detailed discussion of the linguistic design of 
IWN). Then, we encode a number of additional 
relations, which have been identified by taking 
into consideration i) theoretical works; ii) the 
EAGLES recommendations on semantic 
encoding (cf. Sanfilippo et al 1999); iii) the data 
available in our sources; iv) possible use of data 
encoded in computational pplications. 
2.1 Hyponymy 
Together with synonymy, the hyponymy relation 
constitutes the 'bone structure' of both WN and 
EWN. However, as we have seen, in WN the 
possibility of encoding hyponymy for adjectives 
is denied and the basic relation encoded for 
adjectives is antonymy, while EWN did not 
really deal with adjectives and a complete 
network for them was not built. 
Within IWN we have reconsidered the 
possibility of encoding hyponymy for adjectives. 
By analysing data coming from machine- 
readable dictionaries we find subsets of 
adjectives which have a genus + differentia 
definition, like nouns or verbs. That is, these 
adjectives seem to be organised into classes 
sharing a superordinate. This is the case, e.g., of 
adjectives indicating a 'containing' property 
(acquoso - watery; alcalino - alkaline), or a 
'suitable-for' property (difensivo - defensive; 
educativo - educational), etc. In IWN we have 
decided, therefore, to encode hyponymy also for 
these sets of adjectives. The taxonomies which 
can be built on the basis of this relation are 
different from those built for nouns or verbs, 
since they are generally very flat, consisting 
almost always of two levels only (an exception 
is the color adjectives taxonomy). However, by 
encoding a hyponymy relation for these 
adjectives, we obtain classes for which it will be 
possible to make various inferences. For 
instance, it will be possible to infer semantic 
preferences of certain classes: e.g., all the 
adjectives occurring in the taxonomy of 
contenente (containing) will occur as attributes 
of concrete nouns; adjectives found in the 
taxonomy of affetto (affected by an illness) will 
never be predicated of nouns referring to 
objects, etc. Furthermore, it will also be possible 
to infer information on syntactic haracteristics 
/I/11 44
of adjectives found in the same taxonomy: e.g., 
the hyponyrns of atto (suitable for) are always 
found in predicative position (and do not accept 
any complements); the hyponyms of privo 
(lacking) may occur both in attributive and in 
predicative position (and may take certain 
prepositional complements), etc. 
As it was done for all the relations identified in 
EWN, we have built substition tests or 
diagnostic frames based on normality 
judgements (cf. Cruse 1986). Inserting two 
words in the test sentences built evokes a 
'normality'/ 'abnormality' judgement on the 
basis of which each relation can be determined. 
These tests are used by encoders both to verify 
the existence of relations between synsets and to 
encode them in a consistent way (for a complete 
lists of the tests built see Alonge et al, in prep.) 
2.2 Antonymy 
As in WN, also in IWN the antonymy relation 
remains an important relation to describe the 
semantics of various adjectives. Following 
theoretical work (Lyons 1977; Cruse 1986), we 
have further distinguished between 
COMPLEMENTARY ANTONYMY and GRADABLE 
ANTONYMY 6. The former relation links 
adjectives referring to opposing properties/ 
concepts: when one holds the other is excluded 
(alive~dead). The latter relation is used for those 
antonym pairs which refer to gradable properties 
(long~short). In case it is not clear if two 
opposing adjectives refer to complementary or
gradable properties, we can still use an 
underspecified ANTONYMY relation. Also this 
information can be useful for computational 
applications ince word pairs presenting one of 
the two kinds of opposition may occur in 
different contexts (cf. Cruse 1986). 
2.3 Other  relations 
In WN a relation between adjectives and nouns 
is encoded for relational adjectives which point 
to a noun to which they 'pertain': atomic~atom, 
industrial~industry, etc. This relation will be 
encoded also in IWN, by using the label 
PERTAINS TO. 
Another relation 'inherited' from WN can be 
useful to distinguish both adjective senses and 
their semantic preferences7: 
altol (tall) IS A VALUE OF statura (stature) 
alto2 (high) IS_A_VALUEOF altezza (height). 
Other relations are then being encoded which are 
not in WN, but are encoded for nouns and verbs 
in EWN. In WN each PoS forms a separate 
system of language-internal relations and 
conceptually close concepts are totally separated 
only because they differ in PoS. In EWN, instead 
of using as main classificatory criterion the 
traditional distinction among PoSs, drawn upon 
heterogeneous criteria, a purely semantic 
distinction was adopted (following Lyons 1977). 
Thus, a distinction was drawn among I st order 
entities (loes - referred to by concrete nouns), 
2 "d order entities (2oes - referred to by verbs, 
adjectives or nouns indicating properties, states, 
processes or events), and 3 rd order entities (3oes 
referred to by abstract nouns indicating 
propositions existing independently of time and 
space). By drawing this distinction it was 
possible to relate lexical items that, either within 
a language or across different languages, refer to 
close concepts, although they belong to different 
PoSs. Thus, as said above, the possibility to 
encode 'near-synonymy' between synsets of the 
same order (but different PoSs) was provided. 
Furthermore, other cross-PoS relations were 
identified which allow to obtain a better 
description of word meanings. In IWN we 
maintain the same distinction among semantic 
orders and encode for adjectives ome relations 
which can be encoded for the other 2oes. In 
particular, we encode the 'INVOLVED' and 
'CAUSE' relations. 
The INVOLVED relation links a 2oes with a loe  
or 3oe referring to a concept incorporated within 
6 A similar distinction is also made within the 
SIMPLE EC project (LE-8346), whose goal is adding 
semantic information to the set of harmonized 
lexicons built within the PAROLE project for twelve 
European languages. Of course, the sub-classification 
ofantonymy can also be used for nouns and verbs. 
7 Furthermore, these relations being encoded between 
an adjectival synset and a nominal or verbal one are 
also useful to distinguish adjective classes as 
described by Dixon (1991), and reported in 
Sanfilippo et al (1999). Indeed, such classes are 
often indicated by the nouns linked to adjectives. 
45 45
the meaning of the 2oe 8. Examples for adjectives 
are given in the following: 
filoso (= pieno di fili) (thready, filamentous) 
HAS_HYPERONYM pieno (full) 
INVOLVED filo (thread) 
imberbe (= privo di barba) (beardless) 
HAS_HYPERONYM privo (lacking) 
INVOLVED barba (beard). 
Another relation which can be encoded is the 
CAUSE relation: 
depuratorio (= atto a depurare) (depurative, 
purifying) 
HAS_HYPERONYM atto, adatto 
(suitable for) 
CAUSES non-factive 9 depurare 
(to purify) 
compensativo (= che serve a compensare) 
(compensatory) 
HAS._HYPERONYM alto, adatto 
(suitable for) 
CAUSES non-factive compensare 
(to compensate) 
A new relation, not present either in WN or in 
EWN, will be encoded for a class of adjectives 
indicating the possibility of some events 
occurring: 
giudicabile (= che pub essere giudicato) (triable) 
LIABLE_TO giudicare (to judge) 
inaccostabile, inavvicinabile (= che non pub essere 
avvicinato) (which cannot be approached) 
LIABLETO awicinare, accostare 
(to approach) negative. 
8 E.g., to lapidate has as INVOLVED_INSTRUMENT 
stone; to work has as INVOLVED_AGENT worker (see 
Alonge et al 1998). 
9 As said above, in EWN various features were 
encoded to make implications of relations explicit: 
conjunction and disjunction (for multiple relations of 
the same kind encoded for a synset); non-factivity (to 
indicate that a causal relation does not necessarily 
apply); intention (added to a cause relation to indicate 
intention to cause a certain result); negation (to 
explicitly encode the impossibility of a relation 
occurring). These features are also used in IWN. 
The table below gives an overview of the main 
relations being encoded for adjectives in IWN 
(for the other relations being encoded for 
adjectives ee Alonge et al, in prep.): 
GRAD ANTONYMY 
COMP ANTONYMY 
HYPONYMY 
PERTAINS TO 
IS A VALUE_OF 
INVOLVED 
CAUSE 
LIABLE_TO 
adj/adj 
adj/adj 
adj/adj 
adj/noun 
adj/noun 
adj/noun 
adj/verb; 
adj/noun 
adj/verb; 
adj/noun 
beautiful/u~ly 
alive/dead 
watery/containing 
chemical/chemistry 
tail/stature 
dental/tooth 
depurative/ 
to depurate 
triable/to judge 
3 The IWN Top Ontology 
In the EWN TO all the entities belonging to the 
2 nd order have been organized into two different 
classification schemes, which represent the first 
division below 2 nd Order Entity: 
? Situation Type: the event-structure or 
Aktionsart (or lexical aspect) of a situation; 
? Situation Components: the most salient 
semantic components that characterize 
situations. 
The Situation Types provide a classification of 
2oes in terms of the event-structure (or 
Aktionsart) of the situation they refer to: a basic 
distinction was drawn between Static and 
Dynamic. The Situation Components represent a 
more conceptual and intuitive classification of 
word meanings because they can be viewed like 
the most salient semantic components of a 
concept. Examples of Situation Components 
are: Manner, Existence, Communication, Cause. 
Situation Type represents disjoint features that 
cannot be combined, whereas it is possible to 
assign any combination of Situation 
Components to a word meaning. Here below the 
Top Concepts identified for 2oes are shown: 
46 46
2 ND ORDER ENTITY 
SITUATION COMPONENT 
Cause 
Communication 
Condition 
Existence 
Experience 
Location 
Manner 
Mental 
Modal 
Physical 
Possession 
Purpose 
Quantity 
Social 
Time 
SITUATION TYPE 
Dynamic 
BoundedEvent 
UnboundedEvent 
Static 
Property 
Relation 
In order to be able to draw generalizations on 
adjective meanings by using the TO, we 
partially modified this scheme. First of all, we 
moved the PROPERTY and RELATION nodes 
under the SITUATION COMPONENT node. This 
was done for two interconnected reasons: first of 
all, because this distinction is not directly linked 
to Aktionsart (lexical aspect), while the 
distinctions under SITUATION TYPE are 
Aktionsart distinctions, i.e. they are connected 
with the "the procedural characteristics (i.e. the 
'phasal structure', time extension' and 'manner 
of development') ascribed to any given situation 
referred to by a verb phrase" (Bache 1982: 70) ~?. 
Secondly, adjectives may refer to PROPERTIES or 
RELATIONS, but they may be either stative or not 
(cfr. e.g. Lakoff 1966; Quirk et al 1985; Peters 
et al 1999). Thus, in our system it has to be 
possible to specify that an adjective xpresses a 
PROPERTY while being DYNAMIC. In any case, 
since many adjectives may have both a 
DYNAMIC sense and a STATIC one, we have also 
the possibility to under-specify this information 
Io Of course, in EWN all 2oes (and therefore also 
nouns or adjectives) can be classified according to 
their Aktionsart. 
by linking adjectives directly to the SITUATION 
TYPE node. 
Adjectives may indicate many different types of 
properties: temporal (passeggiata mattutina -
morning walk), psychological (canzone triste - 
sad song), social (uomo ricco - rich man), 
physical (superficie legnosa - wooden surface), 
physiological (bambino magro - thin child), 
perceptive (minestra calda hot soup), 
quantitative (magra r icompensa - poor reward) 
and intensity properties (vino for te  - strong 
wine). In the EWN TO there are already nodes 
which may be used to represent these 
distinctions (TIME, MENTAL, SOCIAL, PHYSICAL, 
QUANTITY) but we needed to better specify or 
also add some features. For example, we have 
added, under the already present node 
PHYSICAL, the node MATERIAL, to represent, 
among others, some Italian adjectives ending in 
-oso  (for example legnoso - wooden, acquoso -
watery) which indicate the property of 
containing a certain material. Moreover, we 
added the node PHYSIOLOGICAL (to classify 
adjectives corresponding to tired, hungry, sick, 
etc.) under PHYSICAL. For adjectives denoting an 
intensity, we then added the node INTENSITY 
directly under the SITUATION COMPONENT node. 
One of the main problem we had was that no 
Top Concept in the EWN TO could be used to 
classify the reference-modifying adjectives (cf. 
above). These are a very particular kind of 
adjectives, because they do not indicate a 
property of the referent of the noun they modify. 
So, aiming at showing the distinction between 
referent-modifiers and reference-modifiers, we 
created two new Top Concepts under the node 
PROPERTY: ATTRIBUTE and FUNCTIONAL, where 
the latter can be used for reference-modifying 
adjectives (according to the definition provided 
by Chierchia & McConnel-Ginet 1990 for the 
category referred to by these adjectives: "a 
function f rom propert ies to properties"). 
Like all descriptive adjectives, also the 
reference-modifiers classified under the node 
FUNCTIONAL can be linked to other SITUATION 
COMPONENTS. Functional adjectives for which 
the temporal aspect prevails (ex former, 
presente - present) can be classified under the 
node TIME; adjectives referring to some 
'epistemological' property (potenziale 
potential, necessario - necessary) can be linked 
&7 47
tO MODAL 11; etc. A particular case of functional 
adjectives are the 'argumental' ones. They 
introduce a comparison between different 
entities (e.g., simile - similar, diverso - different, 
etc.). A comparison presupposes a relation 
between different entities o these adjectives can 
be linked to both PROPERTY and RELATION. 
Since in the EWN TO these two Top Concepts 
were two different kinds of SITUATION TYPE, 
they were mutually exclusive; now, in the IWN 
revised TO they can be conjoined. 
Here below the IWN Top Concepts for 2 "a Order 
Entities are shown: 
2 N? ORDER ENTITY 
SITUATION COMPONENT 
Cause 
Communication 
Condition 
Existence 
Experience 
Location 
Manner 
Mental 
Modal 
Physical 
Material 
Physiological 
Possession 
Purpose 
Quantity 
Social 
Time 
Intensity 
Property 
Attribute 
Functional 
Relation 
SITUATION TYPE 
Dynamic 
BoundedEvent 
UnboundedEvent 
Static 
Concluding remarks 
Although the ANTONYMY, PERTAINS_TO, and 
ISATTRIBUTEOF relations, already encoded in 
the Princeton WN, are fundamental relations to 
describe the adjective semantics, and they can be 
11 Since this node is used for situations involving the 
possibility or likelihood of other situations. 
useful for computational applications which 
exploit our resource, we believe that the 'new' 
relations being encoded may provide equally 
relevant information, especially because many 
adjectives cannot be defined by means of the 
WN relations. Let's take into consideration just 
a few examples. 
The adjective depresso is ambiguous in that it 
has (at least) three readings: 
1) which has been lowered, flattened (said of a 
land); 
2) being in bad physical or moral conditions (said 
of an area, a country); 
3) affected by depression (said of a person). 
For these three senses of the adjective we would 
encode different relations, extractable from our 
sources: 
depressol IS_CAUSEDBY deprimere (to lower) 
IS A VALUE_OF terreno (land) 
depresso2 
depress% 
HAS_HYPERONYM colpito (affected) 
IS_CAUSEDBY depressionel 
(depression - economic sense) 
HAS_HYPERONYM affetto 
(affected, suffering from sthg.) 
IS_CAUSED_BY depressione2 
(depression - medical sense) 
The relations encoded could, e.g., help 
disambiguate he occurrences of the adjective in 
contexts uch as: Gianni era depresso (Gianni 
was depressed) or Quella regione ~ depressa 
(That area is depressed). Indeed, by checking the 
semantic information encoded for the two senses 
of depressione linked to depresso, it's possible 
to provide the right interpretation for the 
sentences under analysis; on the other hand, the 
first sense of the adjective would be excluded 
because of the IS A VALUE OF relation 
encoded. In this case, also the TO links could be 
helpful: actually, depresso2 would be linked to 
SOCIAL and CONDITION, while depresso3 would 
be linked to MENTAL and EXPERIENCE. 
Many adjectives found in our sources do not 
seem to have (lexicalized) antonyms, nor cannot 
be defined by using the PERTAINS_TO or 
IS A VALUE OF relations. These are often 
linked to nouns or verbs, by various relations: 
/ IQ  48
piumato = coperto di piume (plumed = covered with 
plumage) 
HAS HYPERONYM coperto 
INVOLVED piuma 
distillabile =che pub essere distillato (distillable = 
which can be distilled) 
LIABLE TO distillare. 
For these and many other adjectives the 'new' 
relations identified in IWN are necessary, given 
that we often cannot encode other relations for 
them. The relations encoded provide 
fundamental semantic information on them, 
which can, for instance, be used to infer 
semantic preferences (e.g., only certain loes can 
be modified by piumato, etc.). The inclusion of 
this information in a large database which is 
mainly intended for computational pplications 
can be very useful, mainly because it may help 
in resolving ambiguities and may be used to 
draw inferences of different nature. 
References 
Alonge A., Calzolari N., Vossen P., Bloksma L., 
CasteUon I., Marti T., Peters W. (1998) The 
Linguistic Design of the EuroWordNet Database. 
In "Special Issue on EuroWordNet. Computers and 
the Humanities" N. Ide, D. Greenstein, P. Vossen 
(eds.), 32, 2-3, pp. 91-115. 
Alonge A., Bertagna F., Calzolari N., Magnini B., 
Roventini A. (in prep.) ItalWordNet: a Large 
Semantic Database for Italian. 
Bache C. (1982) Aspect and Aktionsart: towards a 
Semantic Distinction. Journal of Linguistics, 18, 1. 
Bolinger D. (1967)Adjectives in English: Attribution 
and Predication. Lingua, 18, pp. 1-34. 
Chierchia G. and McConnel-Ginet S. (1990) An 
Introduction to Semantics. The MIT Press, 
Cambridge. 
Cruse D. A. (1986) Lexical Semantics. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge. 
Dixon R. M. W. (1991) A new Approach to English 
Grammar on Semantic Principles. Clarendon 
Press, Oxford. 
Fellbaum C. (1998a) A Semantic Network of English: 
the Mother of all WordNets. In "Special Issue on 
EuroWordNet. Computers and the Humanities" N. 
Ide, D. Greenstein, P. Vossen (eds.), 32, 2-3, pp. 
209-220. 
Fellbaum C. (1998b) WordNet, An Electronic Lexical 
Database, The MIT Press, Cambridge. 
Fellbaum C., Gross D., Miller K.J. (1993)Adjectives 
in WordNet, Five Papers on WordNet. 
Lakoff G. (1966) Stative Adjectives and Verbs in 
English. Computation Laboratory, Harvard 
University Report No. NSF-17. 
Lyons J. (1977) Semantics. Cambridge University 
Press, London. 
Miller G., Beckwith R., Fellbaum C., Gross D., 
Miller K.J (1990) Introduction to WordNet: An On- 
line Lexical Database. International Journal of 
Lexicography, Vol 3, No.4, pp. 235-244. 
Quirk R., Greenbaum S., Leech G. Svartvik J. (1985) 
A Comprehensive Grammar of the English 
Language. Longman, London. 
Peters I., Peter W. and Gaizauskas R. (1999) The 
Representation f Adjectives in SIMPLE. Ms. 
Richardson S. D., Dolan W. B., Vanderwende L. 
(1998) MindNet : Acquiring and Structuring 
Semantic Information from Text. In "COLING- 
ACL Proceedings", Montreal, pp. 1098-1102. 
Rodriguez H., Climent S., Vossen P., Bloksma L., 
Roventini A., Bertagna F., Alonge A., Peters W. 
(1998) The Top-Down Strategy for Building 
Euro WordNet: Vocabulary Coverage, Base 
Concepts and Top Ontology. In "Special Issue on 
EuroWordNet. Computers and the Humanities", N. 
Ide, D. Greenstein, P. Vossen (eds.), 32, 2-3, pp. 
117-152. 
Vossen P. (ed.) (1999) EuroWordNet General 
Document. In "The EWN CD-Rom" (see also: 
http://www.hum.uva.nl/~ewn). 
Sanfilippo A., Calzolari N., Ananiadou S., 
Gaizauskas R., Saint-Dizier P., Vossen P. (eds.) 
(1999) Preliminary Recommendations  Lexical 
Semantic Encoding. EAGLES LE3-4244 Final 
Report. 
49 49
