Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 747?756,
Avignon, France, April 23 - 27 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
Midge: Generating Image Descriptions From Computer Vision
Detections
Margaret Mitchell?
Xufeng Han?
Jesse Dodge??
Alyssa Mensch??
Amit Goyal??
Alex Berg?
Kota Yamaguchi?
Tamara Berg?
Karl Stratos?
Hal Daume? III??
?U. of Aberdeen and Oregon Health and Science University, m.mitchell@abdn.ac.uk
? Stony Brook University, {aberg,tlberg,xufhan,kyamagu}@cs.stonybrook.edu
??U. of Maryland, {hal,amit}@umiacs.umd.edu
?Columbia University, stratos@cs.columbia.edu
??U. of Washington, dodgejesse@gmail.com, ??MIT, acmensch@mit.edu
Abstract
This paper introduces a novel generation
system that composes humanlike descrip-
tions of images from computer vision de-
tections. By leveraging syntactically in-
formed word co-occurrence statistics, the
generator filters and constrains the noisy
detections output from a vision system to
generate syntactic trees that detail what
the computer vision system sees. Results
show that the generation system outper-
forms state-of-the-art systems, automati-
cally generating some of the most natural
image descriptions to date.
1 Introduction
It is becoming a real possibility for intelligent sys-
tems to talk about the visual world. New ways of
mapping computer vision to generated language
have emerged in the past few years, with a fo-
cus on pairing detections in an image to words
(Farhadi et al 2010; Li et al 2011; Kulkarni et
al., 2011; Yang et al 2011). The goal in connect-
ing vision to language has varied: systems have
started producing language that is descriptive and
poetic (Li et al 2011), summaries that add con-
tent where the computer vision system does not
(Yang et al 2011), and captions copied directly
from other images that are globally (Farhadi et al
2010) and locally similar (Ordonez et al 2011).
A commonality between all of these ap-
proaches is that they aim to produce natural-
sounding descriptions from computer vision de-
tections. This commonality is our starting point:
We aim to design a system capable of producing
natural-sounding descriptions from computer vi-
sion detections that are flexible enough to become
more descriptive and poetic, or include likely in-
The bus by the road with a clear blue sky
Figure 1: Example image with generated description.
formation from a language model, or to be short
and simple, but as true to the image as possible.
Rather than using a fixed template capable of
generating one kind of utterance, our approach
therefore lies in generating syntactic trees. We
use a tree-generating process (Section 4.3) simi-
lar to a Tree Substitution Grammar, but preserv-
ing some of the idiosyncrasies of the Penn Tree-
bank syntax (Marcus et al 1995) on which most
statistical parsers are developed. This allows us
to automatically parse and train on an unlimited
amount of text, creating data-driven models that
flesh out descriptions around detected objects in a
principled way, based on what is both likely and
syntactically well-formed.
An example generated description is given in
Figure 1, and example vision output/natural lan-
guage generation (NLG) input is given in Fig-
ure 2. The system (?Midge?) generates descrip-
tions in present-tense, declarative phrases, as a
na??ve viewer without prior knowledge of the pho-
tograph?s content.1
Midge is built using the following approach:
An image processed by computer vision algo-
rithms can be characterized as a triple <Ai, Bi,
Ci>, where:
1Midge is available to try online at:
http://recognition.cs.stonybrook.edu:8080/?mitchema/midge/.
747
stuff: sky .999
id: 1
atts: clear:0.432, blue:0.945
grey:0.853, white:0.501 ...
b. box: (1,1 440,141)
stuff: road .908
id: 2
atts: wooden:0.722 clear:0.020 ...
b. box: (1,236 188,94)
object: bus .307
id: 3
atts: black:0.872, red:0.244 ...
b. box: (38,38 366,293)
preps: id 1, id 2: by id 1, id 3: by id 2, id 3: below
Figure 2: Example computer vision output and natu-
ral language generation input. Values correspond to
scores from the vision detections.
? Ai is the set of object/stuff detections with
bounding boxes and associated ?attribute?
detections within those bounding boxes.
? Bi is the set of action or pose detections as-
sociated to each ai ? Ai.
? Ci is the set of spatial relationships that hold
between the bounding boxes of each pair
ai, aj ? Ai.
Similarly, a description of an image can be char-
acterized as a triple <Ad, Bd, Cd> where:
? Ad is the set of nouns in the description with
associated modifiers.
? Bd is the set of verbs associated to each ad ?
Ad.
? Cd is the set of prepositions that hold be-
tween each pair of ad, ae ? Ad.
With this representation, mapping <Ai, Bi, Ci>
to <Ad, Bd, Cd> is trivial. The problem then
becomes: (1) How to filter out detections that
are wrong; (2) how to order the objects so that
they are mentioned in a natural way; (3) how to
connect these ordered objects within a syntacti-
cally/semantically well-formed tree; and (4) how
to add further descriptive information from lan-
guage modeling alone, if required.
Our solution lies in usingAi andAd as descrip-
tion anchors. In computer vision, object detec-
tions form the basis of action/pose, attribute, and
spatial relationship detections; therefore, in our
approach to language generation, nouns for the
object detections are used as the basis for the de-
scription. Likelihood estimates of syntactic struc-
ture and word co-occurrence are conditioned on
object nouns, and this enables each noun head in
a description to select for the kinds of structures it
tends to appear in (syntactic constraints) and the
other words it tends to occur with (semantic con-
straints). This is a data-driven way to generate
likely adjectives, prepositions, determiners, etc.,
taking the intersection of what the vision system
predicts and how the object noun tends to be de-
scribed.
2 Background
Our approach to describing images starts with
a system from Kulkarni et al(2011) that com-
poses novel captions for images in the PASCAL
sentence data set,2 introduced in Rashtchian et
al. (2010). This provides multiple object detec-
tions based on Felzenszwalb?s mixtures of multi-
scale deformable parts models (Felzenszwalb et
al., 2008), and stuff detections (roughly, mass
nouns, things like sky and grass) based on linear
SVMs for low level region features.
Appearance characteristics are predicted using
trained detectors for colors, shapes, textures, and
materials, an idea originally introduced in Farhadi
et al(2009). Local texture, Histograms of Ori-
ented Gradients (HOG) (Dalal and Triggs, 2005),
edge, and color descriptors inside the bounding
box of a recognized object are binned into his-
tograms for a vision system to learn to recognize
when an object is rectangular, wooden, metal,
etc. Finally, simple preposition functions are used
to compute the spatial relations between objects
based on their bounding boxes.
The original Kulkarni et al(2011) system gen-
erates descriptions with a template, filling in slots
by combining computer vision outputs with text
based statistics in a conditional random field to
predict the most likely image labeling. Template-
based generation is also used in the recent Yang et
al. (2011) system, which fills in likely verbs and
prepositions by dependency parsing the human-
written UIUC Pascal-VOC dataset (Farhadi et al
2010) and selecting the dependent/head relation
with the highest log likelihood ratio.
Template-based generation is useful for auto-
matically generating consistent sentences, how-
ever, if the goal is to vary or add to the text pro-
duced, it may be suboptimal (cf. Reiter and Dale
(1997)). Work that does not use template-based
generation includes Yao et al(2010), who gener-
ate syntactic trees, similar to the approach in this
2http://vision.cs.uiuc.edu/pascal-sentences/
748
Kulkarni et al This is a pic-
ture of three persons, one bot-
tle and one diningtable. The
first rusty person is beside the
second person. The rusty bot-
tle is near the first rusty per-
son, and within the colorful
diningtable. The second per-
son is by the third rusty per-
son. The colorful diningtable
is near the first rusty person,
and near the second person,
and near the third rusty person.
Kulkarni et al This is
a picture of two potted-
plants, one dog and one
person. The black dog is
by the black person, and
near the second feathered
pottedplant.
Yang et al Three people
are showing the bottle on the
street
Yang et al The person is
sitting in the chair in the
room
Midge: people with a bottle at
the table
Midge: a person in black
with a black dog by potted
plants
Figure 3: Descriptions generated by Midge, Kulkarni
et al(2011) and Yang et al(2011) on the same images.
Midge uses the Kulkarni et al(2011) front-end, and so
outputs are directly comparable.
paper. However, their system is not automatic, re-
quiring extensive hand-coded semantic and syn-
tactic details. Another approach is provided in
Li et al(2011), who use image detections to se-
lect and combine web-scale n-grams (Brants and
Franz, 2006). This automatically generates de-
scriptions that are either poetic or strange (e.g.,
?tree snowing black train?).
A different line of work transfers captions of
similar images directly to a query image. Farhadi
et al(2010) use <object,action,scene> triples
predicted from the visual characteristics of the
image to find potential captions. Ordonez et al
(2011) use global image matching with local re-
ordering from a much larger set of captioned pho-
tographs. These transfer-based approaches result
in natural captions (they are written by humans)
that may not actually be true of the image.
This work learns and builds from these ap-
proaches. Following Kulkarni et aland Li et al
the system uses large-scale text corpora to esti-
mate likely words around object detections. Fol-
lowing Yang et al the system can hallucinate
likely words using word co-occurrence statistics
alone. And following Yao et al the system aims
black, blue, brown, colorful, golden, gray,
green, orange, pink, red, silver, white, yel-
low, bare, clear, cute, dirty, feathered, flying,
furry, pine, plastic, rectangular, rusty, shiny,
spotted, striped, wooden
Table 1: Modifiers used to extract training corpus.
for naturally varied but well-formed text, generat-
ing syntactic trees rather than filling in a template.
In addition to these tasks, Midge automatically
decides what the subject and objects of the de-
scription will be, leverages the collected word co-
occurrence statistics to filter possible incorrect de-
tections, and offers the flexibility to be as de-
scriptive or as terse as possible, specified by the
user at run-time. The end result is a fully au-
tomatic vision-to-language system that is begin-
ning to generate syntactically and semantically
well-formed descriptions with naturalistic varia-
tion. Example descriptions are given in Figures 4
and 5, and descriptions from other recent systems
are given in Figure 3.
The results are promising, but it is important to
note that Midge is a first-pass system through the
steps necessary to connect vision to language at
a deep syntactic/semantic level. As such, it uses
basic solutions at each stage of the process, which
may be improved: Midge serves as an illustration
of the types of issues that should be handled to
automatically generate syntactic trees from vision
detections, and offers some possible solutions. It
is evaluated against the Kulkarni et alsystem, the
Yang et alsystem, and human-written descrip-
tions on the same set of images in Section 5, and
is found to significantly outperform the automatic
systems.
3 Learning from Descriptive Text
To train our system on how people describe im-
ages, we use 700,000 (Flickr, 2011) images with
associated descriptions from the dataset in Or-
donez et al(2011). This is separate from our
evaluation image set, consisting of 840 PASCAL
images. The Flickr data is messier than datasets
created specifically for vision training, but pro-
vides the largest corpus of natural descriptions of
images to date.
We normalize the text by removing emoticons
and mark-up language, and parse each caption
using the Berkeley parser (Petrov, 2010). Once
parsed, we can extract syntactic information for
individual (word, tag) pairs.
749
a cow with sheep with a gray sky people with boats a brown cow people at
green grass by the road a wooden table
Figure 4: Example generated outputs.
Awkward Prepositions Incorrect Detections
a person boats under a black bicycle at the sky a yellow bus cows by black sheep
on the dog the sky a green potted plant with people by the road
Figure 5: Example generated outputs: Not quite right
We compute the probabilities for different
prenominal modifiers (shiny, clear, glowing, ...)
and determiners (a/an, the, None, ...) given a
head noun in a noun phrase (NP), as well as the
probabilities for each head noun in larger con-
structions, listed in Section 4.3. Probabilities are
conditioned only on open-class words, specifi-
cally, nouns and verbs. This means that a closed-
class word (such as a preposition) is never used to
generate an open-class word.
In addition to co-occurrence statistics, the
parsed Flickr data adds to our understanding of
the basic characteristics of visually descriptive
text. Using WordNet (Miller, 1995) to automati-
cally determine whether a head noun is a physical
object or not, we find that 92% of the sentences
have no more than 3 physical objects. This in-
forms generation by placing a cap on how many
objects are mentioned in each descriptive sen-
tence: When more than 3 objects are detected,
the system splits the description over several sen-
tences. We also find that many of the descriptions
are not sentences as well (tagged as S, 58% of the
data), but quite commonly noun phrases (tagged
as NP, 28% of the data), and expect that the num-
ber of noun phrases that form descriptions will be
much higher with domain adaptation. This also
informs generation, and the system is capable of
generating both sentences (contains a main verb)
and noun phrases (no main verb) in the final im-
age description. We use the term ?sentence? in the
rest of this paper to refer to both kinds of complex
phrases.
4 Generation
Following Penn Treebank parsing guidelines
(Marcus et al 1995), the relationship between
two head nouns in a sentence can usually be char-
acterized among the following:
1. prepositional (a boy on the table)
2. verbal (a boy cleans the table)
3. verb with preposition (a boy sits on the table)
4. verb with particle (a boy cleans up the table)
5. verb with S or SBAR complement (a boy
sees that the table is clean)
The generation system focuses on the first three
kinds of relationships, which capture a wide range
of utterances. The process of generation is ap-
proached as a problem of generating a semanti-
cally and syntactically well-formed tree based on
object nouns. These serve as head noun anchors
in a lexicalized syntactic derivation process that
we call tree growth.
Vision detections are associated to a {tag
word} pair, and the model fleshes out the tree de-
tails around head noun anchors by utilizing syn-
tactic dependencies between words learned from
the Flickr data discussed in Section 3. The anal-
ogy of growing a tree is quite appropriate here,
where nouns are bundles of constraints akin to
seeds, giving rise to the rest of the tree based on
the lexicalized subtrees in which the nouns are
likely to occur. An example generated tree struc-
ture is shown in Figure 6, with noun anchors in
bold.
750
NP
PP
NP
NN
table
DT
the
IN
at
NP
PP
NP
NN
bottle
DT
a
IN
with
NP
NN
people
DT
-
Figure 6: Tree generated from tree growth process.
Midge was developed using detections run on
Flickr images, incorporating action/pose detec-
tions for verbs as well as object detections for
nouns. In testing, we generate descriptions for
the PASCAL images, which have been used in
earlier work on the vision-to-language connection
(Kulkarni et al 2011; Yang et al 2011), and al-
lows us to compare systems directly. Action and
pose detection for this data set still does not work
well, and so the system does not receive these de-
tections from the vision front-end. However, the
system can still generate verbs when action and
pose detectors have been run, and this framework
allows the system to ?hallucinate? likely verbal
constructions between objects if specified at run-
time. A similar approach was taken in Yang et al
(2011). Some examples are given in Figure 7.
We follow a three-tiered generation process
(Reiter and Dale, 2000), utilizing content determi-
nation to first cluster and order the object nouns,
create their local subtrees, and filter incorrect de-
tections; microplanning to construct full syntactic
trees around the noun clusters, and surface real-
ization to order selected modifiers, realize them as
postnominal or prenominal, and select final out-
puts. The system follows an overgenerate-and-
select approach (Langkilde and Knight, 1998),
which allows different final trees to be selected
with different settings.
4.1 Knowledge Base
Midge uses a knowledge base that stores models
for different tasks during generation. These mod-
els are primarily data-driven, but we also include
a hand-built component to handle a small set of
rules. The data-driven component provides the
syntactically informed word co-occurrence statis-
tics learned from the Flickr data, a model for or-
dering the selected nouns in a sentence, and a
model to change computer vision attributes to at-
tribute:value pairs. Below, we discuss the three
main data-driven models within the generation
Unordered Ordered
bottle, table, person ? person, bottle, table
road, sky, cow ? cow, road, sky
Figure 8: Example nominal orderings.
pipeline. The hand-built component contains plu-
ral forms of singular nouns, the list of possible
spatial relations shown in Table 3, and a map-
ping between attribute values and modifier sur-
face forms (e.g., a green detection for person is to
be realized as the postnominal modifier in green).
4.2 Content Determination
4.2.1 Step 1: Group the Nouns
An initial set of object detections must first be
split into clusters that give rise to different sen-
tences. If more than 3 objects are detected in the
image, the system begins splitting these into dif-
ferent noun groups. In future work, we aim to
compare principled approaches to this task, e.g.,
using mutual information to cluster similar nouns
together. The current system randomizes which
nouns appear in the same group.
4.2.2 Step 2: Order the Nouns
Each group of nouns are then ordered to deter-
mine when they are mentioned in a sentence. Be-
cause the system generates declarative sentences,
this automatically determines the subject and ob-
jects. This is a novel contribution for a general
problem in NLG, and initial evaluation (Section
5) suggests it works reasonably well.
To build the nominal ordering model, we use
WordNet to associate all head nouns in the Flickr
data to all of their hypernyms. A description is
represented as an ordered set [a1...an] where each
ap is a noun with position p in the set of head
nouns in the sentence. For the position pi of each
hypernym ha in each sentence with n head nouns,
we estimate p(pi|n, ha).
During generation, the system greedily maxi-
mizes p(pi|n, ha) until all nouns have been or-
dered. Example orderings are shown in Figure 8.
This model automatically places animate objects
near the beginning of a sentence, which follows
psycholinguistic work in object naming (Branigan
et al 2007).
4.2.3 Step 3: Filter Incorrect Attributes
For the system to be able to extend coverage as
new computer vision attribute detections become
available, we develop a method to automatically
751
A person sitting on a sofa Cows grazing Airplanes flying A person walking a dog
Figure 7: Hallucinating: Creating likely actions. Straightforward to do, but can often be wrong.
COLOR purple blue green red white ...
MATERIAL plastic wooden silver ...
SURFACE furry fluffy hard soft ...
QUALITY shiny rust dirty broken ...
Table 2: Example attribute classes and values.
group adjectives into broader attribute classes,3
and the generation system uses these classes when
deciding how to describe objects. To group adjec-
tives, we use a bootstrapping technique (Kozareva
et al 2008) that learns which adjectives tend to
co-occur, and groups these together to form an at-
tribute class. Co-occurrence is computed using
cosine (distributional) similarity between adjec-
tives, considering adjacent nouns as context (i.e.,
JJ NN constructions). Contexts (nouns) for adjec-
tives are weighted using Pointwise Mutual Infor-
mation and only the top 1000 nouns are selected
for every adjective. Some of the learned attribute
classes are given in Table 2.
In the Flickr corpus, we find that each attribute
(COLOR, SIZE, etc.), rarely has more than a single
value in the final description, with the most com-
mon (COLOR) co-occurring less than 2% of the
time. Midge enforces this idea to select the most
likely word v for each attribute from the detec-
tions. In a noun phrase headed by an object noun,
NP{NN noun}, the prenominal adjective (JJ v) for
each attribute is selected using maximum likeli-
hood.
4.2.4 Step 4: Group Plurals
How to generate natural-sounding spatial rela-
tions and modifiers for a set of objects, as opposed
to a single object, is still an open problem (Fu-
nakoshi et al 2004; Gatt, 2006). In this work, we
use a simple method to group all same-type ob-
jects together, associate them to the plural form
listed in the KB, discard the modifiers, and re-
turn spatial relations based on the first recognized
3What in computer vision are called attributes are called
values in NLG. A value like red belongs to a COLOR at-
tribute, and we use this distinction in the system.
member of the group.
4.2.5 Step 5: Gather Local Subtrees Around
Object Nouns
1 2
NP
NN
n
JJ* ?DT{0,1} ? S
VP{VBZ} ?NP{NN n}
3 4
NP
VP{VB(G|N)} ?NP{NN n}
NP
PP{IN} ?NP{NN n}
5 6
PP
NP{NN n}IN ?
VP
PP{IN} ?VB(G|N|Z) ?
7
VP
NP{NN n}VB(G|N|Z) ?
Figure 9: Initial subtree frames for generation, present-
tense declarative phrases. ? marks a substitution site,
* marks ? 0 sister nodes of this type permitted, {0,1}
marks that this node can be included of excluded.
Input: set of ordered nouns, Output: trees preserving
nominal ordering.
Possible actions/poses and spatial relationships
between objects nouns, represented by verbs and
prepositions, are selected using the subtree frames
listed in Figure 9. Each head noun selects for its
likely local subtrees, some of which are not fully
formed until the Microplanning stage. As an ex-
ample of how this process works, see Figure 10,
which illustrates the combination of Trees 4 and
5. For simplicity, we do not include the selection
of further subtrees. The subject noun duck se-
lects for prepositional phrases headed by different
prepositions, and the object noun grass selects
for prepositions that head the prepositional phrase
in which it is embedded. Full PP subtrees are cre-
ated during Microplanning by taking the intersec-
tion of both.
The leftmost noun in the sequence is given a
rightward directionality constraint, placing it as
the subject of the sentence, and so it will only se-
752
a over b a above b b below a b beneath a a by b b by a a on b b under a
b underneath a a upon b a over b
a by b a against b b against a b around a a around b a at b b at a a beside b
b beside a a by b b by a a near b b near a b with a a with b
a in b a in b b outside a a within b a by b b by a
Table 3: Possible prepositions from bounding boxes.
Subtree frames:
NP
PP{IN} ?NP{NN n1}
PP
NP{NN n2}IN ?
Generated subtrees:
NP
PP
IN
above, on, by
NP
NN
duck
PP
NP
NN
grass
IN
on, by, over
Combined trees:
NP
PP
NP
NN
grass
IN
on
NP
NN
duck
NP
PP
NP
NN
grass
IN
by
NP
NN
duck
Figure 10: Example derivation.
lect for trees that expand to the right. The right-
most noun is given a leftward directionality con-
straint, placing it as an object, and so it will only
select for trees that expand to its left. The noun in
the middle, if there is one, selects for all its local
subtrees, combining first with a noun to its right
or to its left. We now walk through the deriva-
tion process for each of the listed subtree frames.
Because we are following an overgenerate-and-
select approach, all combinations above a proba-
bility threshold ? and an observation cutoff ? are
created.
Tree 1:
Collect all NP? (DT det) (JJ adj)* (NN noun)
and NP? (JJ adj)* (NN noun) subtrees, where:
? p((JJ adj)|(NN noun)) > ? for each adj
? p((DT det)|JJ, (NN noun)) > ?, and the proba-
bility of a determiner for the head noun is higher
than the probability of no determiner.
Any number of adjectives (including none) may
be generated, and we include the presence or ab-
sence of an adjective when calculating which de-
terminer to include.
The reasoning behind the generation of these
subtrees is to automatically learn whether to treat
a given noun as a mass or count noun (not taking a
determiner or taking a determiner, respectively) or
as a given or new noun (phrases like a sky sound
unnatural because sky is given knowledge, requir-
ing the definite article the). The selection of de-
terminer is not independent of the selection of ad-
jective; a sky may sound unnatural, but a blue sky
is fine. These trees take the dependency between
determiner and adjective into account.
Trees 2 and 3:
Collect beginnings of VP subtrees headed by
(VBZ verb), (VBG verb), and (VBN verb), no-
tated here as VP{VBX verb}, where:
? p(VP{VBX verb}|NP{NN noun}=SUBJ) > ?
Tree 4:
Collect beginnings of PP subtrees headed by (IN
prep), where:
? p(PP{IN prep}|NP{NN noun}=SUBJ) > ?
Tree 5:
Collect PP subtrees headed by (IN prep) with
NP complements (OBJ) headed by (NN noun),
where:
? p(PP{IN prep}|NP{NN noun}=OBJ) > ?
Tree 6:
Collect VP subtrees headed by (VBX verb) with
embedded PP complements, where:
? p(PP{IN prep}|VP{VBX verb}=SUBJ) > ?
Tree 7:
Collect VP subtrees headed by (VBX verb) with
embedded NP objects, where:
? p(VP{VBX verb}|NP{NN noun}=OBJ) > ?
4.3 Microplanning
4.3.1 Step 6: Create Full Trees
In Microplanning, full trees are created by tak-
ing the intersection of the subtrees created in Con-
tent Determination. Because the nouns are or-
dered, it is straightforward to combine the sub-
trees surrounding a noun in position 1 with sub-
trees surrounding a noun in position 2. Two
753
VP
VP* ?
NP
NP ?CC
and
NP ?
Figure 11: Auxiliary trees for generation.
further trees are necessary to allow the subtrees
gathered to combine within the Penn Treebank
syntax. These are given in Figure 11. If two
nouns in a proposed sentence cannot be combined
with prepositions or verbs, we backoff to combine
them using (CC and).
Stepping through this process, all nouns will
have a set of subtrees selected by Tree 1. Prepo-
sitional relationships between nouns are created
by substituting Tree 1 subtrees into the NP nodes
of Trees 4 and 5, as shown in Figure 10. Verbal
relationships between nouns are created by substi-
tuting Tree 1 subtrees into Trees 2, 3, and 7. Verb
with preposition relationships are created between
nouns by substituting the VBX node in Tree 6
with the corresponding node in Trees 2 and 3 to
grow the tree to the right, and the PP node in Tree
6 with the corresponding node in Tree 5 to grow
the tree to the left. Generation of a full tree stops
when all nouns in a group are dominated by the
same node, either an S or NP.
4.4 Surface Realization
In the surface realization stage, the system se-
lects a single tree from the generated set of pos-
sible trees and removes mark-up to produce a fi-
nal string. This is also the stage where punctua-
tion may be added. Different strings may be gen-
erated depending on different specifications from
the user, as discussed at the beginning of Section
4 and shown in the online demo. To evaluate the
system against other systems, we specify that the
system should (1) not hallucinate likely verbs; and
(2) return the longest string possible.
4.4.1 Step 7: Get Final Tree, Clear Mark-Up
We explored two methods for selecting a final
string. In one method, a trigram language model
built using the Europarl (Koehn, 2005) data with
start/end symbols returns the highest-scoring de-
scription (normalizing for length). In the second
method, we limit the generation system to select
the most likely closed-class words (determiners,
prepositions) while building the subtrees, over-
generating all possible adjective combinations.
The final string is then the one with the most
words. We find that the second method produces
descriptions that seem more natural and varied
than the n-gram ranking method for our develop-
ment set, and so use the longest string method in
evaluation.
4.4.2 Step 8: Prenominal Modifier Ordering
To order sets of selected adjectives, we use the
top-scoring prenominal modifier ordering model
discussed in Mitchell et al(2011). This is an n-
gram model constructed over noun phrases that
were extracted from an automatically parsed ver-
sion of the New York Times portion of the Giga-
word corpus (Graff and Cieri, 2003). With this
in place, blue clear sky becomes clear blue sky,
wooden brown table becomes brown wooden ta-
ble, etc.
5 Evaluation
Each set of sentences is generated with ? (likeli-
hood cutoff) set to .01 and ? (observation count
cutoff) set to 3. We compare the system against
human-written descriptions and two state-of-the-
art vision-to-language systems, the Kulkarni et al
(2011) and Yang et al(2011) systems.
Human judgments were collected using Ama-
zon?s Mechanical Turk (Amazon, 2011). We
follow recommended practices for evaluating an
NLG system (Reiter and Belz, 2009) and for run-
ning a study on Mechanical Turk (Callison-Burch
and Dredze, 2010), using a balanced design with
each subject rating 3 descriptions from each sys-
tem. Subjects rated their level of agreement on
a 5-point Likert scale including a neutral mid-
dle position, and since quality ratings are ordinal
(points are not necessarily equidistant), we evalu-
ate responses using a non-parametric test. Partici-
pants that took less than 3 minutes to answer all 60
questions and did not include a humanlike rating
for at least 1 of the 3 human-written descriptions
were removed and replaced. It is important to note
that this evaluation compares full generation sys-
tems; many factors are at play in each system that
may also influence participants? perception, e.g.,
sentence length (Napoles et al 2011) and punc-
tuation decisions.
The systems are evaluated on a set of 840
images evaluated in the original Kulkarni et al
(2011) system. Participants were asked to judge
the statements given in Figure 12, from Strongly
Disagree to Strongly Agree.
754
Grammaticality Main Aspects Correctness Order Humanlikeness
Human 4 (3.77, 1.19) 4 (4.09, 0.97) 4 (3.81, 1.11) 4 (3.88, 1.05) 4 (3.88, 0.96)
Midge 3 (2.95, 1.42) 3 (2.86, 1.35) 3 (2.95, 1.34) 3 (2.92, 1.25) 3 (3.16, 1.17)
Kulkarni et al2011 3 (2.83, 1.37) 3 (2.84, 1.33) 3 (2.76, 1.34) 3 (2.78, 1.23) 3 (3.13, 1.23)
Yang et al2011 3 (2.95, 1.49) 2 (2.31, 1.30) 2 (2.46, 1.36) 2 (2.53, 1.26) 3 (2.97, 1.23)
Table 4: Median scores for systems, mean and standard deviation in parentheses. Distance between points on the
rating scale cannot be assumed to be equidistant, and so we analyze results using a non-parametric test.
GRAMMATICALITY:
This description is grammatically correct.
MAIN ASPECTS:
This description describes the main aspects of this
image.
CORRECTNESS:
This description does not include extraneous or in-
correct information.
ORDER:
The objects described are mentioned in a reasonable
order.
HUMANLIKENESS:
It sounds like a person wrote this description.
Figure 12: Mechanical Turk prompts.
We report the scores for the systems in Table
4. Results are analyzed using the non-parametric
Wilcoxon Signed-Rank test, which uses median
values to compare the different systems. Midge
outperforms all recent automatic approaches on
CORRECTNESS and ORDER, and Yang et alad-
ditionally on HUMANLIKENESS and MAIN AS-
PECTS. Differences between Midge and Kulkarni
et alare significant at p< .01; Midge and Yang et
al. at p< .001. For all metrics, human-written de-
scriptions still outperform automatic approaches
(p < .001).
These findings are striking, particularly be-
cause Midge uses the same input as the Kulka-
rni et alsystem. Using syntactically informed
word co-occurrence statistics from a large corpus
of descriptive text improves over state-of-the-art,
allowing syntactic trees to be generated that cap-
ture the variation of natural language.
6 Discussion
Midge automatically generates language that is as
good as or better than template-based systems,
tying vision to language at a syntactic/semantic
level to produce natural language descriptions.
Results are promising, but, there is more work to
be done: Evaluators can still tell a difference be-
tween human-written descriptions and automati-
cally generated descriptions.
Improvements to the generated language are
possible at both the vision side and the language
side. On the computer vision side, incorrect ob-
jects are often detected and salient objects are of-
ten missed. Midge does not yet screen out un-
likely objects or add likely objects, and so pro-
vides no filter for this. On the language side, like-
lihood is estimated directly, and the system pri-
marily uses simple maximum likelihood estima-
tions to combine subtrees. The descriptive cor-
pus that informs the system is not parsed with
a domain-adapted parser; with this in place, the
syntactic constructions that Midge learns will bet-
ter reflect the constructions that people use.
In future work, we hope to address these issues
as well as advance the syntactic derivation pro-
cess, providing an adjunction operation (for ex-
ample, to add likely adjectives or adverbs based
on language alone). We would also like to incor-
porate meta-data ? even when no vision detection
fires for an image, the system may be able to gen-
erate descriptions of the time and place where an
image was taken based on the image file alone.
7 Conclusion
We have introduced a generation system that uses
a new approach to generating language, tying a
syntactic model to computer vision detections.
Midge generates a well-formed description of an
image by filtering attribute detections that are un-
likely and placing objects into an ordered syntac-
tic structure. Humans judge Midge?s output to be
the most natural descriptions of images generated
thus far. The methods described here are promis-
ing for generating natural language descriptions
of the visual world, and we hope to expand and
refine the system to capture further linguistic phe-
nomena.
8 Acknowledgements
Thanks to the Johns Hopkins CLSP summer
workshop 2011 for making this system possible,
and to reviewers for helpful comments. This
work is supported in part by Michael Collins and
by NSF Faculty Early Career Development (CA-
REER) Award #1054133.
755
References
Amazon. 2011. Amazon mechanical turk: Artificial
artificial intelligence.
Holly P. Branigan, Martin J. Pickering, and Mikihiro
Tanaka. 2007. Contributions of animacy to gram-
matical function assignment and word order during
production. Lingua, 118(2):172?189.
Thorsten Brants and Alex Franz. 2006. Web 1T 5-
gram version 1.
Chris Callison-Burch and Mark Dredze. 2010. Creat-
ing speech and language data with Amazon?s Me-
chanical Turk. NAACL 2010 Workshop on Creat-
ing Speech and Language Data with Amazon?s Me-
chanical Turk.
Navneet Dalal and Bill Triggs. 2005. Histograms of
oriented gradients for human detections. Proceed-
ings of CVPR 2005.
Ali Farhadi, Ian Endres, Derek Hoiem, and David
Forsyth. 2009. Describing objects by their at-
tributes. Proceedings of CVPR 2009.
Ali Farhadi, Mohsen Hejrati, Mohammad Amin
Sadeghi, Peter Young, Cyrus Rashtchian, Julia
Hockenmaier, and David Forsyth. 2010. Every pic-
ture tells a story: generating sentences for images.
Proceedings of ECCV 2010.
Pedro Felzenszwalb, David McAllester, and Deva Ra-
maman. 2008. A discriminatively trained, mul-
tiscale, deformable part model. Proceedings of
CVPR 2008.
Flickr. 2011. http://www.flickr.com. Accessed
1.Sep.11.
Kotaro Funakoshi, Satoru Watanabe, Naoko
Kuriyama, and Takenobu Tokunaga. 2004.
Generating referring expressions using perceptual
groups. Proceedings of the 3rd INLG.
Albert Gatt. 2006. Generating collective spatial refer-
ences. Proceedings of the 28th CogSci.
David Graff and Christopher Cieri. 2003. English Gi-
gaword. Linguistic Data Consortium, Philadelphia,
PA. LDC Catalog No. LDC2003T05.
Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A parallel cor-
pus for statistical machine translation. MT Summit.
http://www.statmt.org/europarl/.
Zornitsa Kozareva, Ellen Riloff, and Eduard Hovy.
2008. Semantic class learning from the web with
hyponym pattern linkage graphs. Proceedings of
ACL-08: HLT.
Girish Kulkarni, Visruth Premraj, Sagnik Dhar, Sim-
ing Li, Yejin Choi, Alexander C. Berg, and Tamara
Berg. 2011. Baby talk: Understanding and gener-
ating image descriptions. Proceedings of the 24th
CVPR.
Irene Langkilde and Kevin Knight. 1998. Gener-
ation that exploits corpus-based statistical knowl-
edge. Proceedings of the 36th ACL.
Siming Li, Girish Kulkarni, Tamara L. Berg, Alexan-
der C. Berg, and Yejin Choi. 2011. Composing
simple image descriptions using web-scale n-grams.
Proceedings of CoNLL 2011.
Mitchell Marcus, Ann Bies, Constance Cooper, Mark
Ferguson, and Alyson Littman. 1995. Treebank II
bracketing guide.
George A. Miller. 1995. WordNet: A lexical
database for english. Communications of the ACM,
38(11):39?41.
Margaret Mitchell, Aaron Dunlop, and Brian Roark.
2011. Semi-supervised modeling for prenomi-
nal modifier ordering. Proceedings of the 49th
ACL:HLT.
Courtney Napoles, Benjamin Van Durme, and Chris
Callison-Burch. 2011. Evaluating sentence com-
pression: Pitfalls and suggested remedies. ACL-
HLT Workshop on Monolingual Text-To-Text Gen-
eration.
Vicente Ordonez, Girish Kulkarni, and Tamara L Berg.
2011. Im2text: Describing images using 1 million
captioned photographs. Proceedings of NIPS 2011.
Slav Petrov. 2010. Berkeley parser. GNU General
Public License v.2.
Cyrus Rashtchian, Peter Young, Micah Hodosh, and
Julia Hockenmaier. 2010. Collecting image anno-
tations using amazon?s mechanical turk. Proceed-
ings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Creat-
ing Speech and Language Data with Amazon?s Me-
chanical Turk.
Ehud Reiter and Anja Belz. 2009. An investiga-
tion into the validity of some metrics for automat-
ically evaluating natural language generation sys-
tems. Computational Linguistics, 35(4):529?558.
Ehud Reiter and Robert Dale. 1997. Building ap-
plied natural language generation systems. Journal
of Natural Language Engineering, pages 57?87.
Ehud Reiter and Robert Dale. 2000. Building Natural
Language Generation Systems. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Yezhou Yang, Ching Lik Teo, Hal Daume? III, and
Yiannis Aloimonos. 2011. Corpus-guided sen-
tence generation of natural images. Proceedings of
EMNLP 2011.
Benjamin Z. Yao, Xiong Yang, Liang Lin, Mun Wai
Lee, and Song-Chun Zhu. 2010. I2T: Image pars-
ing to text description. Proceedings of IEEE 2010,
98(8):1485?1508.
756
2012 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 762?772,
Montre?al, Canada, June 3-8, 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
Detecting Visual Text
Jesse Dodge1, Amit Goyal2, Xufeng Han3, Alyssa Mensch4, Margaret Mitchell5, Karl Stratos6
Kota Yamaguchi3, Yejin Choi3, Hal Daume? III2, Alexander C. Berg3 and Tamara L. Berg3
1University of Washington, 2University of Maryland, 3Stony Brook University
4MIT, 5Oregon Health & Science University, 6Columbia University
dodgejesse@gmail.com, amit@umiacs.umd.edu, xufhan@cs.stonybrook.edu
acmensch@mit.edu, mitchmar@ohsu.edu, stratos@cs.columbia.edu
kyamagu@cs.stonybrook.edu, ychoi@cs.stonybrook.edu
me@hal3.name, aberg@cs.stonybrook.edu, tlberg@cs.stonybrook.edu
Abstract
When people describe a scene, they often in-
clude information that is not visually apparent;
sometimes based on background knowledge,
sometimes to tell a story. We aim to sepa-
rate visual text?descriptions of what is being
seen?from non-visual text in natural images
and their descriptions. To do so, we first con-
cretely define what it means to be visual, an-
notate visual text and then develop algorithms
to automatically classify noun phrases as vi-
sual or non-visual. We find that using text
alone, we are able to achieve high accuracies
at this task, and that incorporating features
derived from computer vision algorithms im-
proves performance. Finally, we show that we
can reliably mine visual nouns and adjectives
from large corpora and that we can use these
effectively in the classification task.
1 Introduction
People use language to describe the visual world.
Our goal is to: formalize what ?visual text? is (Sec-
tion 2.2); analyze naturally occurring written lan-
guage for occurrences of visual text (Section 2); and
build models that can detect visual descriptions from
raw text or from image/text pairs (Section 3). This
is a challenging problem. One challenge is demon-
strated in Figure 1, which contains two images that
contain the noun ?car? in their human-written cap-
tions. In one case (the top image), there actually is a
car in the image; in the other case, there is not: the
car refers to the state of the speaker.
The ability to automatically identify visual text is
practically useful in a number of scenarios. One can
Another dream car to
add to the list, this one
spotted in Hanbury St.
Shot out my car win-
dow while stuck in traf-
fic because people in
Cincinnati can?t drive in
the rain.
Figure 1: Two image/caption pairs, both containing the
noun ?car? but only the top one in a visual context.
imagine automatically mining image/caption data
(like that in Figure 1) to train object recognition sys-
tems. However, in order to do so reliably, one must
know whether the ?car? actually appears or not.
When building image search engines, it is common
to use text near an image as features; this is more
useful when this text is actually visual. Or when
training systems to automatically generate captions
of images (e.g., for visually impaired users), we
need good language models for visual text.
One of our goals is to define what it means for a
bit of text to be visual. As inspiration, we consider
image/description pairs automatically crawled from
Flickr (Ordonez et al, 2011). A first pass attempt
might be to say ?a phrase in the description of an
image is visual if you can see it in the corresponding
image.? Unfortunately, this is too vague to be useful;
the biggest issues are discussed in Section 2.2.
762
Based on our analysis, we settled on the follow-
ing definition: A piece of text is visual (with re-
spect to a corresponding image) if you can cut out
a part of that image, paste it into any other image,
and a third party could describe that cut-out part in
the same way. In the car example, the claim is that I
could cut out the car, put it in the middle of any other
image, and someone else might still refer to that car
as ?dream car.? The car in the bottom image in Fig-
ure 1 is not visual because there?s nothing you could
cut out that would retain car-ness.
2 Data Analysis
Before embarking on the road to building models of
visual text, it is useful to obtain a better understand-
ing of what visual text is like, and how it compares to
the more standard corpora that we are used to work-
ing with. We describe the two large data sets that we
use (one visual, one non-visual), then describe the
quantitative differences between them, and finally
discuss our annotation effort for labeling visual text.
2.1 Data sets
We use the SBU Captioned Photo Dataset (Ordonez
et al, 2011) as our primary source of image/caption
data. This dataset contains 1 million images with
user associated captions, collected in the wild by in-
telligent filtering of a huge number of Flickr pho-
tos. Past work has made use of this dataset to re-
trieve whole captions for association with a query
image (Ordonez et al, 2011). Their method first
used global image descriptors to retrieve an initial
matched set, and then applied more local estimates
of content to re-rank this (relatively small) set (Or-
donez et al, 2011). This means that content based
matching was relatively constrained by the bottle-
neck of global descriptors, and local content (e.g.,
objects) had relatively small effect on accuracy.
As an auxiliary source of information for (largely)
non-visual text, we consider a large corpus of text
obtained by concatenating ukWaC1 and the New
York Times Newswire Service (NYT) section of the
Gigaword (Graff, 2003) Corpus. The Web-derived
ukWaC is already tokenized and POS-tagged with
the TreeTagger (Schmid, 1995). NYT is tokenized,
1ukWaC is a freely available Wikipedia-derived corpus from
2009; see http://wacky.sslmit.unibo.it/doku.php.
and POS-tagged using TagChunk (Daume? III and
Marcu, 2005). This consists of 171 million sen-
tences (4 billion words). We refer to this generic
text corpus as Large-Data.
2.2 Formalizing visual text
We begin our analysis by revisiting the definition
of visual text from the introduction, and justifying
this particular definition. In order to arrive at a suf-
ficiently specific definition of ?visual text,? we fo-
cused on the applications of visual text that we care
about. As discussed in the introduction, these are:
training object detectors, building image search en-
gines and automatically generating captions for im-
ages. Our definition is based on access to image/text
pairs, but later we discuss how to talk about it purely
based on text. To make things concrete, consider an
image/text pair like that in the top of Figure 1. And
then consider a phrase in the text, like ?dream car.?
The question is: is ?dream car? visual or not?
One of the challenges in arriving at such a defi-
nition is that the description of an image in Flickr
is almost always written by the photographer of that
image. This means the descriptions often contain in-
formation that is not actually pictured in the image,
or contain references that are only relevant to the
photographer (referring to a person/pet by name).
One might think that this is an artifact of this par-
ticular dataset, but it appears to be generic to all cap-
tions, even those written by a viewer (rather than the
photographer). Figure 2 shows an image from the
Pascal dataset (Everingham et al, 2010), together
with captions written by random people collected
via crowd-sourcing (Rashtchian et al, 2010). There
is much in this caption that is clearly made-up by the
author, presumably to make the caption more inter-
esting (e.g., meta-references like ?the camera? or ?A
photo? as well as ?guesses? about the image, such as
?garage? and ?venison?).
Second, there is a question of how much inference
you are allowed to do when you say that you ?see?
something. For example, in the top image in Fig-
ure 1, the street is pictured, but does that mean that
?Hanbury St.? is visual? What if there were a street
sign that clearly read ?Hanbury St.? in the image?
This problem comes up all the time, when people
say things like ?in London? or ?in France? in their
captions. If it?s just a portrait of people ?in France,?
763
1. A distorted photo of a man cutting up a large cut of meat in a garage.
2. A man smiling at the camera while carving up meat.
3. A man smiling while he cuts up a piece of meat.
4. A smiling man is standing next to a table dressing a piece of venison.
5. The man is smiling into the camera as he cuts meat.
Figure 2: An image from the Pascal data with five captions collected via crowd-sourcing. Measurements on the
SMALL and LARGE dataset show that approximately 70% of noun phrases are visual (bolded), while the rest are
non-visual (underlined). See Section 2.4 for details.
it?s hard to say that this is visual. If you see the Eif-
fel tower in the background, this is perhaps better
(though it could be Las Vegas!), but how does this
compare to a photo taken out of an airplane window
in which you actually do see France-the-country?
This problem becomes even more challenging
when you consider things other than nouns. For in-
stance, when is a verb visual? For instance, the most
common non-copula verb in our data is ?sitting,?
which appears in roughly two usages: (1) ?Took this
shot, sitting in a bar and enjoying a Portugese beer.?
and (2) ?Lexy sitting in a basket on top of her cat
tree.? The first one is clearly not visual; the second
probably is. A more nuanced case is for ?playing,?
as in: ?Girls playing in a boat on the river bank?
(probably visual) versus ?Tuckered out from play-
ing in Nannie?s yard.? The corresponding image for
the latter description shows a sleeping cat.
Our final definition, based on cutting out the po-
tentially visual part of the image, allows us to say
that: (1) ?venison? is not visual (because you cannot
actually tell); (2) ?Hanbury St.? and ?Lexy? are not
visual (you can infer them, in the first case because
there is only one street and in the second case be-
cause there is only one cat); (3) that seeing the real
Eiffel tower in the background does not mean that
?France? is visual (but again, may be inferred); etc.
2.3 Most Pronounced Differences
To get an intuitive sense of how Flickr captions (ex-
pected to be predominantly visual) and generic text
(expected not to be so) differ, we computed some
simple statistics on sentences from these. In gen-
eral, the generic text had twice as many main verbs
as the Flickr data, four times as many auxiliaries or
light verbs, and about 50% more prepositions.
Flickr captions tended to have far more references
to physical objects (versus abstract objects) than the
generic text, according to the WordNet hierarchy.
Approximately 64% of the objects in Flickr were
physical (about 22% abstract and 14% unknown).
Whereas in the generic text, only 30% of the objects
were physical, 53% were abstract (17% unknown).
A third major difference between the corpora is
in terms of noun modifiers. In both corpora, nouns
tend not to have any modifiers, but modifiers are still
more prevalent in Flickr than in generic text. In par-
ticular, 60% of nouns in Flickr have zero modifiers,
but 70% of nouns in generic text have zero modi-
fiers. In Flickr, 30% of nouns have exactly one mod-
ifier, as compared to only 22% for generic text.
The breakdown of what those modifiers look like
is even more pronounced, even when restricted just
to physical objects (modifier types are obtained
through the bootstrapping process discussed in Sec-
tion 3.1). Almost 50% of nominal modifiers in the
Flickr data are color modifiers, whereas color ac-
counts for less than 5% of nominal modifiers in
generic text. In Flickr, 10% of modifiers talk about
beauty, in comparison to less than 5% in generic
text. On the other hand, less than 3% of modifiers
in Flickr reference ethnicity, as compared to almost
20% in generic text; and 20% of Flickr modifiers
reference size, versus 50% in generic text.
2.4 Annotating Visual Text
In order to obtain ground truth data, we rely on
crowdsourcing (via Amazon?s Mechanical Turk).
Each instance is an image, a paired caption, and a
highlighted noun phrase in that caption. The anno-
tation for this instance is a label of ?visual,? ?non-
visual? or ?error,? where the error category is re-
764
served for cases where the noun phrase segmenta-
tion was erroneous. Each worker is given five in-
stances to label and paid one cent per annotation.2
For a small amount of data (803 images contain-
ing 2339 instances), we obtained annotations from
three separate workers per instance to obtain higher
quality data. For a large amount of data (48k im-
ages), we obtained annotations from only a sin-
gle worker. Subsequently, we will refer to these
two data sets as the SMALL and LARGE data sets.
In both data sets, approximately 70% of the noun
phrases were visual, 28% were non-visual and 2%
were erroneous. For simplicity, we group erroneous
and non-visual for all learning and evaluation.
In the SMALL data set, the rate of disagreement
between annotators was relatively low. In 74% of the
annotations, there was no disagreement at all. We
reconciled the annotations using the quality manage-
ment technique of Ipeirotis et al (2010); only 14%
of the annotations need to be changed in order to ob-
tain a gold standard.
One immediate question raised in this process is
whether one needs to actually see the image to per-
form the annotation. In particular, if we expect an
NLP system to be able to classify noun phrases as
visual or non-visual, we need to know whether peo-
ple can do this task sans image. We therefore per-
formed the same annotation on the SMALL data set,
but where the workers were not shown the image.
Their task was to imagine an image for this caption
and then annotate the noun phrase based on whether
they thought it would be pictured or not. We ob-
tained three annotations as before and reconciled
them (Ipeirotis et al, 2010). The accuracy of this
reconciled version against the gold standard (pro-
duced by people who did see the image) was 91%.
This suggests that while people are able to do this
task with some reliability, seeing the image is very
important (recall that always guessing ?visual? leads
to an accuracy of 70%).
3 Visual Features from Raw Text
Our first goal is to attempt to obtain relatively large
knowledge bases of terms that are (predominantly)
visual. This is potentially useful in its own right
2Data available at http://hal3.name/dvt/, with direct links
back to the SBU Captioned Photo Dataset.
(for instance, in the context of search, to determine
which query terms are likely to be pictured). We
have explored two techniques for performing this
task, the first based on bootstrapping (Section 3.1)
and the second based on label propagation (Sec-
tion 3.2). We then use these lists to generate features
for a classifier that predicts whether a noun phrase?
in context?is visual or not (Section 4).
In addition, we consider the task of separating ad-
jectives into different visual categories (Section 3.3).
We have already used the results of this in Sec-
tion 2.3 to understand the differences between our
two corpora. It is also potentially useful for the
purpose of building new object detection systems or
even attribute detection systems, to get a vocabulary
of target detections.
3.1 Bootstrapping for Visual Text
In this section, we learn visual and non-visual nouns
and adjectives automatically based on bootstrapping
techniques. First, we construct a graph between ad-
jectives by computing distributional similarity (Tur-
ney and Pantel, 2010) between them. For comput-
ing distributional similarity between adjectives, each
target adjective is defined as a vector of nouns which
are modified by the target adjective. To be exact, we
use only those adjectives as modifiers which appear
adjacent to a noun (that is, in a JJ NN construction).
For example, in ?small red apple,? we consider only
red as a modifier for noun. We use Pointwise Mu-
tual Information (PMI) (Church and Hanks, 1989)
to weight the contexts, and select the top 1000 PMI
contexts for each adjective.3
Next, we apply cosine similarity to find the top
10 distributionally similar adjectives with respect to
each target adjective based on our large generic cor-
pus (Large-Data from Section 2.1). This creates a
graph with adjectives as nodes and cosine similarity
as weight on the edges. Analogously, we construct a
graph with nouns as nodes (here, adjectives are used
as contexts for nouns).
We then apply bootstrapping (Kozareva et al,
2008) on the noun and adjective graphs by select-
ing 10 seeds for visual and non-visual nouns and
adjectives (see Table 1). We use in-degree (sum of
weights of incoming edges) to compute the score for
3We are interested in descriptive adjectives, which ?typi-
cally ascribe to a noun a value of an attribute? (Miller, 1998).
765
Visual car house tree horse animal
nouns man table bottle
seeds woman computer
Non-visual idea bravery deceit trust
nouns dedication anger humour luck
seeds inflation honesty
Visual brown green wooden striped
adjectives orange rectangular furry
seeds shiny rusty feathered
Non-visual public original whole righteous
adjectives political personal intrinsic
seeds individual initial total
Table 1: Example seeds for bootstrapping.
each node that has connections with known (seeds)
or automatically labeled nodes, previously exploited
to learn hyponymy relations from the web (Kozareva
et al, 2008). Intuitively, in-degree captures the pop-
ularity of new instances among instances that have
already been identified as good instances. We learn
visual and non-visual words together (known as the
mutual exclusion principle in bootstrapping (The-
len and Riloff, 2002; McIntosh and Curran, 2008)):
each word (node) is assigned to only one class.
Moreover, after each iteration, we harmonically de-
crease the weight of the in-degree associated with
instances learned in later iterations. We added 25
new instances at each iteration and ran 500 iterations
of bootstrapping, yielding 11955 visual and 11978
non-visual nouns, and 7746 visual and 7464 non-
visual adjectives.
Based on manual inspection, the learned visual
and non-visual lists look great. In the future, we
would like to do a Mechanical Turk evaluation to
directly evaluate the visual and non-visual nouns
and adjectives. For now, we show the coverage of
these classes in the Flickr data-set: Visual nouns:
53.71%; Non-visual nouns: 14.25%; Visual ad-
jectives: 51.79%; Non-visual adjectives: 14.40%.
Overall, we find more visual nouns and adjectives
are covered in the Flickr data-set, which makes
sense, since the Flickr data-set is largely visual.
Second, we show the coverage of these classes
on the large text corpora (Large-Data from Sec-
tion 2.1): Visual nouns: 26.05%; Non-visual nouns:
41.16%; Visual adjectives: 20.02%; Non-visual ad-
Visual: attend, buy, clean, comb, cook, drink, eat,
fry, pack, paint, photograph, smash, spill, steal,
taste, tie, touch, watch, wear, wipe
Non-visual: achieve, admire, admit, advocate, al-
leviate, appreciate, arrange, criticize, eradicate,
induce, investigate, minimize, overcome, pro-
mote, protest, relieve, resolve, review, support,
tolerate
Table 2: Predicates that are visual and non-visual.
Visual: water, cotton, food, pumpkin, chicken,
ring, hair, mouth, meeting, kind, filter, game, oil,
show, tear, online, face, class, car
Non-visual: problem, poverty, pain, issue, use,
symptom, goal, effect, thought, government,
share, stress, work, risk, impact, concern, obsta-
cle, change, disease, dispute
Table 3: Learned visual/non-visual nouns.
jectives: 40.00%. Overall, more non-visual nouns
and adjectives cover text data, since Large-Data is
a non-visual data-set.
3.2 Label Propagation for Visual Text
To propagate visual labels, we construct a bipartite
graph between visually descriptive predicates and
their arguments. Let VP be the set of nodes that cor-
responds to predicates, and let VA be the set of nodes
that corresponds to arguments. To learn the visually
descriptive words, we set VP to 20 visually descrip-
tive predicates shown in the top of Table 2, and VA
to all nouns that appear in the object argument posi-
tion with respect to the seed predicates. We approx-
imate this by taking nouns on the right hand side
of the predicates within a window of 4 words using
the Web 1T Google N-gram data (Brants and Franz.,
2006). For edge weights, we use conditional prob-
abilities between predicates and arguments so that
w(p? a) := pr(a|p) and w(a? p) := pr(p|a).
In order to collectively induce the visually de-
scriptive words from this graph, we apply the graph
propagation algorithm of Velikovich et al (2010),
a variant of label propagation algorithms (Zhu and
Ghahramani, 2002) that has been shown to be ef-
fective for inducing a web-scale polarity lexicon
based on word co-occurrence statistics. This algo-
766
Color purple blue maroon beige green
Material plastic cotton wooden metallic silver
Shape circular square round rectangular triangular
Size small big tiny tall huge
Surface coarse smooth furry fluffy rough
Direction sideways north upward left down
Pattern striped dotted checked plaid quilted
Quality shiny rusty dirty burned glittery
Beauty beautiful cute pretty gorgeous lovely
Age young mature immature older senior
Ethnicity french asian american greek hispanic
Table 4: Attribute Classes with their seed values
rithm iteratively updates the semantic distance be-
tween each pair of nodes in the graph, then produces
a score for each node that represents how visually
descriptive each word is. To learn the words that
are not visually descriptive, we use the predicates
shown in the bottom of Table 2 as VP instead. Ta-
ble 3 shows the top ranked nouns that are visually
descriptive and not visually descriptive.
3.3 Bootstrapping Visual Adjectives
Our goal in this section is to automatically gener-
ate comprehensive lists of adjectives for different at-
tributes, such as color, material, shape, etc. To our
knowledge, this is the first significant effort of this
type for adjectives: most bootstrapping techniques
focus exclusively on nouns, although Almuhareb
and Poesio (2005) populated lists of attributes us-
ing web-based similarity measures. We found that
in some ways adjectives are easier than nouns, but
require slightly different representations.
One might conjecture that listing attributes by
hand is difficult. Colors names are well known to
be quite varied. For instance, our bootstrapping
approach is able to discover colors like ?grayish,?
?chestnut,? ?emerald,? and ?rufous? that would be
hard to list manually (the last is a reddish-brown
color, somewhat like rust). Although perhaps not
easy to create, the Wikipedia list of colors (http:
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List of colors) includes all of these
except ?grayish?. On the other hand, it includes
color terms that might be difficult to make use of as
colors, such as ?bisque,? ?bone? and ?bubbles? (the
last is a very light cyan), which might over-generate
hits. For shape, we find ?oblong,? ?hemispherical,?
?quadrangular? and, our favorite, ?convex?.
We use essentially the same bootstrapping process
as described earlier in Section 3.1, but on a slightly
different data representation. The only difference is
that instead of linking adjectives to their 10 most
similar neighbors, we link them only to 25 neigh-
bors to attempt to improve recall.
We begin with seeds for each attribute class from
Table 4. We conduct a manual evaluation to di-
rectly measure the quality of attribute classes. We
recruited 3 annotators and developed annotation
guidelines that instructed each recruiter to judge
whether a learned value belongs to an attribute class
or not. The annotators assigned ?1? if a learned
value belongs to a class, otherwise ?0?.
We conduct an Information Retrieval (IR) Style
human evaluation. Analogous to an IR evaluation,
here the total number of relevant values for attribute
classes can not be computed. Therefore, we assume
the correct output of several systems as the total re-
call which can be produced by any system. Now,
with the help of our 3 manual annotators, we obtain
the correct output of several systems from the total
output produced by these systems.
First, we measured the agreement on whether
each learned value belongs to a semantic class or
not. We computed ? to measure inter-annotator
agreement for each pair of annotators. We focus
our evaluation on 4 classes: age, beauty, color, and
direction; between Human 2 and Human 3 and be-
tween Human 1 and Human 3, the ? value was 0.48;
between Human 1 and Human 2 it was 0.45. These
numbers are somewhat lower than we would like,
but not terrible. If we evaluate the classes individu-
ally, we find that age has the lowest ?. If we remove
?age,? the pairwise ?s rise to 0.59, 0.57 and 0.55.
Second, we compute Precision (Pr), Recall (Rec)
and F-measure (F1) for different bootstrapping sys-
tems (based on the number of iterations and the
number of new words added in each iteration).
Two parameter settings performed consistently bet-
ter than others (10 iterations with 25 items, and 5 it-
erations with 50 items). The former system achieves
a precision/recall/F1 of 0.53, 0.71, 0.60 against Hu-
man 2; the latter achieves scores of 0.54, 0.72, 0.62.
4 Recognizing Visual Text
We train a logistic regression (aka maximum en-
tropy) model (Daume? III, 2004) to classify text as
visual or non-visual. The features we use fall into
767
the following categories: WORDS (the actual lexi-
cal items and stems); BIGRAMS (lexical bigrams);
SPELL (lexical features such as capitalization pat-
tern, and word prefixes and suffixes); WORDNET
(set of hypernyms according to WordNet); and
BOOTSTRAP (features derived from bootstrapping
or label propagation).
For each of these feature categories, we compute
features inside the phrase being categorized (e.g.,
?the car?), before the phrase (two words to the left)
and after the phrase (two words to the right). We
additionally add a feature that computes the num-
ber of words in a phrase, and a feature that com-
putes the position of the phrase in the caption (first
fifth through last fifth of the description). This leads
to seventeen feature templates that are computed for
each example. In the SMALL data set, there are 25k
features (10k non-singletons); in the LARGE data
set, there are 191k features (79k non-singletons).
To train models on the SMALL data set, we use
1500 instances as training, 200 as development and
the remaining 639 as test data. To train models on
the LARGE data set, we use 45000 instances as train-
ing and the remaining 4401 as development. We
always test on the 639 instances from the SMALL
data, since it has been redundantly annotated. The
development data is used only to choose the regular-
ization parameter for a Gaussian prior on the logis-
tic regression model; this parameter is chosen in the
range {0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64}.
Because of the imbalanced data problem, evalu-
ating according to accuracy is not appropriate for
this task. Even evaluating by precision/recall is not
appropriate, because a baseline system that guesses
that everything is visual obtains 100% recall and
70% precision. Due to these issues, we instead
evaluate according to the area under the ROC curve
(AUC). To check statistical significance, we com-
pute standard deviations using bootstrap resampling,
and consider there to be a significant difference if a
result falls outside of two standard deviations of the
baseline (95% confidence).
Figure 3 shows learning curves for the two data
sets. The SMALL data achieves an AUC score of
71.3 in the full data setting (1700 examples); the
LARGE data needs 12k examples to achieve similar
accuracy due to noise. However, with 49k examples,
we are able to achieve a AUC score of 75.3 using the
101 102 103 104 105
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
Figure 3: Learning curves for training on SMALL data
(blue solid) and LARGE data (black dashed). X-axis (in
log-scale) is number of training examples; Y-axis is AUC.
large data set. By pooling the data (and weighting
the small data), this boosts results to 76.1. The con-
fidence range on these data is approximately ?1.9,
meaning that this boost is likely not significant.
4.1 Using Image Features
As discussed previously, humans are only able to
achieve 90% accuracy on the visual/non-visual task
when they are not allowed to view the image.
This potentially upper-bounds the performance of a
learned system that can only look at text. In order to
attempt to overcome this, we augment our basic sys-
tem with a number of features computed from the
corresponding images. These features are derived
from the output of state of the art vision algorithms
to detect 121 different objects, stuff and scenes.
As our object detectors, we use standard state
of the art deformable part-based models (Felzen-
szwalb et al, 2010) for 89 common object cate-
gories, including: the original 20 objects from Pas-
cal, 49 objects from Object Bank (Li-Jia Li and Fei-
Fei, 2010), and 20 from Im2Text (Ordonez et al,
2011). We additionally use coarse image parsing
to estimate background elements in each database
image. Six possible background (stuff) categories
are considered: sky, water, grass, road, tree, and
building. For this we use detectors (Ordonez et
al., 2011) which compute color, texton, HoG (Dalal
and Triggs, 2005) and Geometric Context (Hoiem
et al, 2005) as input features to a sliding win-
dow based SVM classifier. These detectors are run
on all database images, creating a large pool of
background elements for retrieval. Finally, we ob-
768
Figure 4: (Left) Highest confidence flower detected in an
image; (Right) All detections in the same image.
tain scene descriptors for each image by comput-
ing scene classification scores for 26 common scene
categories, using the features, methods and training
data from the SUN dataset (Xiao et al, 2010).
Figure 4 shows an example image on which sev-
eral detectors have been run. From each image, we
extract the following features: which object detec-
tors fired; how many times they fired; the confidence
of the most-likely firing; the percentage of the image
(in pixels) that the bounding box corresponding to
this object occupies; and the percentage of the width
(and height) of the image that it occupies.
Unfortunately, object detection is a highly noisy
process. The right image in Figure 4 shows all de-
tections for that image, which includes, for instance,
a chair detection that spans nearly the entire image,
and a person detection in the bottom-right corner.
For an average image, if a single detector (e.g., the
flower detector) fires once, it actually fires 40 times
(?? = 1.8). Moreover, of the 120 detectors, on
an average image over 22 (?? = 5.6) of them fire
at least once (though certainly in an average image
only a few objects are actually present). Exacerbat-
ing this problem, although the confidence scores for
a single detector can be compared, the scores be-
tween different detectors are not at all comparable.
In order to attenuate this problem, we include dupli-
cate copies of all the above features restricted to the
most confident object for each object type.
On the SMALL data set, this adds 400 new fea-
CATEGORY POSITION AUC
Bootstrap Phrase 65.2
+ Spell Phrase 68.6
+ Image - 69.2
+ Words Phrase 70.0
+ Length - 69.8
+ Wordnet Phrase 70.4
+ Wordnet Before 70.6
+ Spell Before 71.8
+ Words Before 72.2
+ Bootstrap Before 72.4
+ Spell After 71.5
Table 5: Results of feature ablation on SMALL data set.
Best result is in bold; results that are not statistically sig-
nificantly worse are italicized.
tures (300 of which are non-singletons4); on the
LARGE data set, this adds 500 new features (480
non-singletons). Overall, the AUC scores trained on
the small data set increase from 71.3 to 73.9 (a sig-
nificant improvement). On the large data set, the in-
crease is only from 76.1 to 76.8, which is not likely
to be significant. In general, the improvement ob-
tained by adding image features is most pronounced
in the setting of small training data, perhaps because
these features are more generic than the highly lexi-
calized features used in the textual model. But once
there is a substantial amount of text data, the noisy
image features become less useful.
4.2 Feature Ablations
In order to ascertain the degree to which each feature
template is useful, we perform an ablation study. We
first perform feature selection at the template level
using the information gain criteria, and then train
models using the corresponding subset of features.
The results on the SMALL data set are shown in
Table 5. Here, the bootstrapping features computed
on words within the phrase to be classified were
judged as the most useful, followed by spelling fea-
tures. Image features were judged third most use-
ful. In general, features in the phrase were most use-
ful (not surprisingly), and then features before the
phrase (presumably to give context, for instance as
in ?out of the window?). Features from after the
phrase were not useful.
4Non-singleton features appear more than once in the data.
769
CATEGORY POSITION AUC
Words Phrase 74.7
+ Image - 74.4
+ Bootstrap Phrase 74.3
+ Spell Phrase 75.3
+ Length - 74.7
+ Words Before 76.2
+ Wordnet Phrase 76.1
+ Spell After 76.0
+ Spell Before 76.8
+ Wordnet Before 77.0
+ Wordnet After 75.6
Table 6: Results of feature ablation on LARGE data set.
Corresponding results on the LARGE data set are
shown in Table 6. Note that the order of features
selected is different because the training data is dif-
ferent. Here, the most useful features are simply the
words in the phrase to be classified, which alone al-
ready gives an AUC score of 74.7, only a few points
off from the best performance of 77.0 once image
features, bootstrap features and spelling features are
added. As before, these features are rated as very
useful for classification performance.
Finally, we consider the effect of using Bootstrap-
based features or label-propagation-based features.
In all the above experiments, the features used
are based on the union of word lists created by
these two techniques. We perform three experi-
ments. Beginning with the system that contains all
features (SMALL=73.9, LARGE=76.8), we first re-
move the bootstrap-based features (SMALL?71.8,
LARGE?75.5) or remove the label-propagation-
based features (SMALL?71.2, LARGE?74.9) or
remove both (SMALL?70.7, LARGE?74.2). From
these results, we can see that these techniques are
useful, but somewhat redundant: if you had to
choose one, you should choose label-propagation.
5 Discussion
As connections between language and vision be-
come stronger, for instance in the contexts of ob-
ject detection (Hou and Zhang, 2007; Kim and Tor-
ralba, 2009; Sivic et al, 2008; Alexe et al, 2010;
Gu et al, 2009), attribute detection (Ferrari and Zis-
serman, 2007; Farhadi et al, 2009; Kumar et al,
2009; Berg et al, 2010), visual phrases (Farhadi and
Sadeghi, 2011), and automatic caption generation
(Farhadi et al, 2010; Feng and Lapata, 2010; Or-
donez et al, 2011; Kulkarni et al, 2011; Yang et
al., 2011; Li et al, 2011; Mitchell et al, 2012), it
becomes increasingly important to understand, and
to be able to detect, text that actually refers to ob-
served phenomena. Our results suggest that while
this is a hard problem, it is possible to leverage large
text resources and state-of-the-art computer vision
algorithms to address it with high accuracy.
Acknowledgments
T.L. Berg and K. Yamaguchi were supported in part
by NSF Faculty Early Career Development (CA-
REER) Award #1054133; A.C. Berg and Y. Choi
were partially supported by the Stony Brook Uni-
versity Office of the Vice President for Research; H.
Daume? III and A. Goyal were partially supported by
NSF Award IIS-1139909; all authors were partially
supported by a 2011 JHU Summer Workshop.
References
B. Alexe, T. Deselaers, and V. Ferrari. 2010. What is an
object? In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), 2010 IEEE Conference on, pages 73 ?80.
A. Almuhareb and M. Poesio. 2005. Finding concept at-
tributes in the web. In Corpus Linguistics Conference.
Tamara L. Berg, Alexander C. Berg, and Jonathan Shih.
2010. Automatic attribute discovery and characteriza-
tion from noisy web data. In European Conference on
Computer Vision (ECCV).
Thorsten Brants and Alex Franz. 2006. Web 1t 5-gram
version 1. In Linguistic Data Consortium, ISBN: 1-
58563-397-6, Philadelphia.
K. Church and P. Hanks. 1989. Word Associa-
tion Norms, Mutual Information and Lexicography.
In Proceedings of ACL, pages 76?83, Vancouver,
Canada, June.
N. Dalal and B. Triggs. 2005. Histograms of oriented
gradients for human detection. In CVPR.
Hal Daume? III and Daniel Marcu. 2005. Learning as
search optimization: Approximate large margin meth-
ods for structured prediction. In Proceedings of the In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learning (ICML).
Hal Daume? III. 2004. Notes on CG and LM-BFGS
optimization of logistic regression. Paper available
at http://pub.hal3.name/#daume04cg-bfgs, implementation
available at http://hal3.name/megam/, August.
770
M. Everingham, L. Van Gool, C. K. I. Williams,
J. Winn, and A. Zisserman. 2010. The PASCAL
Visual Object Classes Challenge 2010 (VOC2010)
Results. http://www.pascal-network.org/challenges/VOC/
voc2010/workshop/index.html.
Ali Farhadi and Amin Sadeghi. 2011. Recognition us-
ing visual phrases. In Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR).
A. Farhadi, I. Endres, D. Hoiem, and D.A. Forsyth. 2009.
Describing objects by their attributes. In Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
A. Farhadi, M. Hejrati, M.A. Sadeghi, P. Young,
C. Rashtchian1, J. Hockenmaier, and D.A. Forsyth.
2010. Every picture tells a story: Generating sentences
from images. In ECCV.
P. F. Felzenszwalb, R. B. Girshick, and D. McAllester.
2010. Discriminatively trained deformable part
models, release 4. http://people.cs.uchicago.edu/?pff/
latent-release4/.
Y. Feng and M. Lapata. 2010. How many words is a
picture worth? automatic caption generation for news
images. In ACL.
V. Ferrari and A. Zisserman. 2007. Learning visual at-
tributes. In Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems (NIPS).
D. Graff. 2003. English Gigaword. Linguistic Data Con-
sortium, Philadelphia, PA, January.
Chunhui Gu, J.J. Lim, P. Arbelaez, and J. Malik. 2009.
Recognition using regions. In Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2009. CVPR 2009. IEEE Confer-
ence on, pages 1030 ?1037.
Derek Hoiem, Alexei A. Efros, and Martial Hebert.
2005. Geometric context from a single image. In
ICCV.
Xiaodi Hou and Liqing Zhang. 2007. Saliency detection:
A spectral residual approach. In Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2007. CVPR ?07. IEEE Confer-
ence on, pages 1 ?8.
P. Ipeirotis, F. Provost, and J. Wang. 2010. Quality man-
agement on amazon mechanical turk. In Proceedings
of the Second Human Computation Workshop (KDD-
HCOMP).
Gunhee Kim and Antonio Torralba. 2009. Unsupervised
Detection of Regions of Interest using Iterative Link
Analysis. In Annual Conference on Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems (NIPS 2009).
Zornitsa Kozareva, Ellen Riloff, and Eduard Hovy. 2008.
Semantic class learning from the web with hyponym
pattern linkage graphs. In Proceedings of ACL-08:
HLT, pages 1048?1056, Columbus, Ohio, June. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
G. Kulkarni, V. Premraj, S. Dhar, S. Li, Y. Choi, A. C
Berg, and T. L Berg. 2011. Babytalk: Understanding
and generating simple image descriptions. In CVPR.
N. Kumar, A.C. Berg, P. Belhumeur, and S.K. Nayar.
2009. Attribute and simile classifiers for face verifi-
cation. In ICCV.
Siming Li, Girish Kulkarni, Tamara L. Berg, Alexan-
der C. Berg, and Yejin Choi. 2011. Composing sim-
ple image descriptions using web-scale n-grams. In
CONLL.
Eric P. Xing Li-Jia Li, Hao Su and Li Fei-Fei. 2010. Ob-
ject bank: A high-level image representation for scene
classification and semantic feature sparsification. In
NIPS.
Tara McIntosh and James R Curran. 2008. Weighted
mutual exclusion bootstrapping for domain indepen-
dent lexicon and template acquisition. In Proceedings
of the Australasian Language Technology Association
Workshop 2008, pages 97?105, December.
K.J. Miller. 1998. Modifiers in WordNet. In C. Fell-
baum, editor, WordNet, chapter 2. MIT Press.
Margaret Mitchell, Jesse Dodge, Amit Goyal, Kota Ya-
maguchi, Karl Stratos, Xufeng Han, Alyssa Mensch,
Alex Berg, Tamara Berg, and Hal Daume? III. 2012.
Midge: Generating image descriptions from computer
vision detections. Proceedings of EACL 2012.
Vicente Ordonez, Girish Kulkarni, and Tamara L. Berg.
2011. Im2Text: Describing Images Using 1 Million
Captioned Photographs. In NIPS.
Cyrus Rashtchian, Peter Young, Micah Hodosh, and Ju-
lia Hockenmaier. 2010. Collecting image annotations
using amazon?s mechanical turk. In Proceedings of
the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Creating Speech
and Language Data with Amazon?s Mechanical Turk.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
H. Schmid. 1995. Improvements in part?of?speech tag-
ging with an application to german. In Proceedings of
the EACL SIGDAT Workshop.
J. Sivic, B.C. Russell, A. Zisserman, W.T. Freeman, and
A.A. Efros. 2008. Unsupervised discovery of visual
object class hierarchies. In Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition, 2008. CVPR 2008. IEEE Conference
on, pages 1 ?8.
M. Thelen and E. Riloff. 2002. A Bootstrapping Method
for Learning Semantic Lexicons Using Extraction Pat-
tern Contexts. In Proceedings of the Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, pages 214?221.
Peter D. Turney and Patrick Pantel. 2010. From fre-
quency to meaning: Vector space models of seman-
tics. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research (JAIR),
37:141.
Leonid Velikovich, Sasha Blair-Goldensohn, Kerry Han-
nan, and Ryan McDonald. 2010. The viability of web-
derived polarity lexicons. In Human Language Tech-
nologies: The 2010 Annual Conference of the North
771
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
J. Xiao, J. Hays, K. Ehinger, A. Oliva, and A. Torralba.
2010. Sun database: Large-scale scene recognition
from abbey to zoo. In CVPR.
Yezhou Yang, Ching Lik Teo, Hal Daume? III, and Yian-
nis Aloimonos. 2011. Corpus-guided sentence gener-
ation of natural images. In EMNLP.
Xiaojin Zhu and Zoubin Ghahramani. 2002. Learn-
ing from labeled and unlabeled data with label prop-
agation. In Technical Report CMU-CALD-02-107.
CarnegieMellon University.
772
INLG 2012 Proceedings of the 7th International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 131?133,
Utica, May 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
Midge: Generating Descriptions of Images?
Margaret Mitchell
University of Aberdeen
m.mitchell@abdn.ac.uk
Xufeng Han
Stony Brook University
xufhan@cs.stonybrook.edu
Jeff Hayes
SignWorks of Oregon
jeff@signworksoforegon.com
Abstract
We demonstrate a novel, robust vision-to-
language generation system called Midge.
Midge is a prototype system that connects
computer vision to syntactic structures with
semantic constraints, allowing for the auto-
matic generation of detailed image descrip-
tions. We explain how to connect vision de-
tections to trees in Penn Treebank syntax,
which provides the scaffolding necessary to
further refine data-driven statistical generation
approaches for a variety of end goals.
1 Introduction
There has been a growing interest in tackling the
problem of how to describe an image using com-
puter vision detections. This problem is difficult in
part because computer vision detections are often
wrong: State-of-the-art vision technology predicts
things that are not there, and misses things that are
obvious to a human observer. This problem is also
difficult because it is not clear what kind of language
should be generated ? the language that makes up a
?description? can take many forms.
At the bare minimum, an automatic vision-to-
language system, given an image with a single de-
tection of, for example, a dog, should be able to gen-
erate a dog, and a longer phrase if requested. To be
useful in real-world applications, it should be able to
create basic descriptions that are as true as possible
to the image, as well as descriptions that guess prob-
able information based on language analysis alone.
To our knowledge, no current system provides this
functionality. Midge is built based on these goals.
Our approach converts object detections to de-
scriptive sentences using a tree-generating deriva-
tion process that fleshes out lexicalized syntactic
? Thanks to the CLSP 2011 summer workshop
at Johns Hopkins for making this system possible.
Midge is available to try online at
http://recognition.cs.stonybrook.edu:8080/?mitchema/midge/
and http://mcvl.cewit.stonybrook.edu//?mitchema/midge/ and
screenshots at http://www.abdn.ac.uk/?r07mm9/midge/
structure around object nouns. Likely subtrees are
learned from a cleaned version of the Flickr dataset
(Ordonez et al, 2011) parsed using the Berkeley
parser. The final structures generated by the system
are present-tense declarative sentences in Penn Tree-
bank syntax.
With this in place, the system can generate a dog,
a black dog sleeping, a furry black dog sleeping by a
cat, etc., while also suggesting further detectors for
the vision system to run. Approaching the problem
in this way, Midge provides a starting point for gen-
eration to meet different goals: from automatically
creating stories or summaries based on visual data,
to suggesting phrases that a speech-impaired AAC
user can select to assist in conversation. There is
still much work to be done, but we believe that the
basic architecture used by this system is a solid start-
ing point for generating a wide variety of descriptive
content, and makes clear some of the issues a vision-
to-language system must handle in order to generate
natural-sounding descriptions.
2 Background
Previous work on generating image descriptions can
be characterized as prioritizing among several goals:
? Creating language that is poetic or metaphori-
cal (Li et al, 2011)
? Creating automatic captions with syntactic
variation based on semantic visual information
(Farhadi et al, 2010)
? Creating language describing the scene in a ba-
sic template-driven way, utilizing attribute de-
tections (Kulkarni et al, 2011) or likely verbs
from a language model (Yang et al, 2011)
To meet one goal, other goals are often compro-
mised. Yang et al (2011) fill in likely verbs to form
complete sentences, but limit the generated struc-
tures to a simple template, without capturing natu-
ral variation in sentence length or surface structure.
131
Li et al (2011) aim at more metaphorical and var-
ied language, but the generated structures are often
syntactically and semantically ill-formed. Farhadi et
al. (2010) generate natural, varied, descriptive lan-
guage, but this is created by copying captions di-
rectly from similar images, resulting in captions that
are often not true to the actual query image content.
Midge builds on ideas from these systems, ad-
ditionally mapping the structures underlying vision
detections to syntactic structures and data-driven
distributional information underlying natural lan-
guage descriptions. With this in place, the door is
opened for language and vision to communicate at
a deep syntactic-semantic level. The language com-
ponents of the system can filter and expand on given
visual information, and can also call back to the vi-
sual system itself, specifying further detectors to run
(or train) based on semantically related or expected
information. We hope that this system not only ad-
vances work in generating visual descriptions, but
work in training visual detectors as well.
3 Vision to Language Issues
The process of developing Midge brought to light
several key issues that any vision-to-language sys-
tem aiming to generate descriptive, varied, human-
like language must handle:
Descriptiveness: Should the system include infor-
mation about everything there is evidence for, limit
that information, or add to it?
World knowledge: What sorts of things in an image
are remarkable, and should be mentioned, and which
may go without saying?
Object grouping: Which objects should be men-
tioned together? How do people divide objects
among sentences when they describe an image?
Which detections should not be mentioned?
Noun ordering: In what order should the objects be
named?
Reference plurals and sets: How should sets of
objects be described as a whole? Should the exact
number be included (four chairs), a vague term (a
few chairs) or a general plural form (chairs)?
Modifier ordering: How should the different modi-
fiers common to descriptions be ordered to make the
utterances sound fluent?
Determiner selection: When should objects be
treated as given (the sky), new (a boy), mass (grass),
or count (a blade)?
Verb selection: Given that action/pose detection in
computer vision does not function reliably, should
verbs be hallucinated from a language model alone?
Should they be left out?
Preposition selection: How should spatial relations
between objects be analyzed, and how does this
translate to language describing the scene layout?
Surface realization: What final lexicalization deci-
sions need to be made to realize the generated strings
within the output language?
Final string selection: Given a set of possible out-
puts, how is the final output string decided?
Nonsense detections: How should the system han-
dle computer vision detections that are often wrong?
Many of these issues are well-suited to statisti-
cal NLP techniques, and some (modifier ordering,
final string selection) have already been addressed in
the NLP community. Where appropriate, Midge in-
corporates this technology alongside novel solutions
to issues that have not yet been heavily researched
(determiner selection, nominal ordering). We hope
to further refine Midge?s solutions as technology in
these areas advances.
Separating Midge?s architecture into components
that handle each of these issues separately means
that the system is flexible to change the kind of lan-
guage it generates depending on the goals of the
end user. The system offers general solutions to
the issues listed above, and can have many of its
goals changed if specified at run-time, resulting in
different kinds of generated utterances. Midge can
successfully create natural, varied descriptions that
add descriptive content based on language modeling
alone; it can also generate descriptions that are more
limited, but as true as possible to the image.
4 Natural Language Generation in Midge
- id: 1, type: 1, label: bus, score: 0.73, bbox: [65.0, 65.0, 415.0,
191.0], attrs: {?blue?: 0.01, ?furry?:.02, . . . , ?shiny?: 0.69}
- id: 2, type: 1, label: road, score: 0.95, bbox: [1.0, 95.0, 440.0,
235.0], attrs: {?blue?: 0.01, . . .}
- preps {1,2}: ?by?
Figure 1: Computer Vision Out / Midge In (Excerpt)
The input to Midge is the output of vision detec-
tions, with detectors run for objects and attributes
within each object?s bounding box. In this demon-
stration, we incorporate the Kulkarni et al (2011)
vision detections. This provides objects/stuff and as-
sociated attributes, bounding boxes, and spatial rela-
tions between object pairs derived from the bound-
132
ing boxes. Object detections are based on Felzen-
szwalb?s multi-scale deformable parts models, and
stuff detections are based on linear SVMs for low
level region features.
Language generation in Midge is driven by a lex-
icalized derivation process that uses likely syntac-
tic and distributional information for object nouns
to create present-tense declarative sentences. Object
detections form the basis of the computer vision de-
tections, and these in turn are linked to nouns that
form the basis of the generated output string.
The syntactic trees used to collect and generate
likely subtrees for object nouns is outlined in Figure
2. Each anchor noun selects for a set of likely ad-
jectives a, determiners d, prepositions p and present
tense verbs v.
1 2
NP
NN
bottle
JJ* ? (a)DT ? (d)
S
VP
VBZ ? (v)
NP{NN, bottle}
3 4
NP
VP
VB{G|N} ? (v)
NP{NN, bottle}
NP
PP
IN ? (p)
NP {NN, bottle}
5 6
VP
NP{NN, bottle}VB{G|N|Z} ? (v)
PP
NP{NN, bottle}IN ? (p)
7 8
VP
PP
NP{NN, bottle}IN ? (p)
VB{G|N|Z} ? (v) VP
VP* ?
9 10
S
VP
PP
IN ? (p)
VBZ ? (v)
NP{NN, bottle} NP
NP ?CC
and
NP ?
11
NP
VP
PP
IN ? (p)
VB{G|N} ? (v)
NP{NN, bottle}
Figure 2: Trees for generation. Each {NN, noun} selects
for its local subtrees. ? marks a substitution site, * marks
? 0 sister nodes of this type permitted. Input: set of or-
dered nouns, Output: trees preserving nominal ordering.
5 Architecture
Midge can be explained at a high level as a pipelined
system incorporating the following steps:
Step 1: Run detectors for objects, stuff, action/pose
and attributes; pass as <detection, score> pairs to
Midge. Vision output/NLG input is displayed in Fig-
ure 1 and in the system demo.
Step 2: Group objects together that will be men-
tioned together.
Step 3: Order objects within each group ? this au-
tomatically sets the subject and objects of the sen-
tence. Midge currently order nouns based on Word-
Net hypernyms.
Step 4: Create all tree structures that can be gen-
erated from the object noun node. (See Figure 2).
Noun anchors select for adjectives (JJ), determin-
ers (DT), prepositions (IN) and if specified, verbs
(VBG, VBN, or VBZ).
Step 5: Limit adjectives (JJ) to the set that are not
mutually exclusive ? different values for the same at-
tribute class. REG comes into play at this step.
Step 6: Create all trees that combine following the
given trees until all object nouns in a group are un-
der one node (either NP or S).
Step 7: Order selected adjectives. We use the top-
scoring ngram model from (Mitchell et al, 2011).
Step 8: Choose final tree from set of generated trees.
Users can select a longest-string or cross entropy
calculation.
References
A. Farhadi, M. Hejrati, P. Young Sadeghi, C. Rashtchian,
J. Hockenmaier, and D. A. Forsyth. 2010. Every
picture tells a story: generating sentences for images.
Proc. ECCV 2010.
G. Kulkarni, V. Premraj, and S. Dhar, et al 2011. Baby
talk: Understanding and generating image descrip-
tions. Proc. CVPR 2011.
S. Li, G. Kulkarni, T. L. Berg, A. C. Berg, and Y. Choi.
2011. Composing simple image descriptions using
web-scale n-grams. Proc. CoNLL 2011.
M. Mitchell, A. Dunlop, and B. Roark. 2011. Semi-
supervised modeling for prenominal modifier order-
ing. Proc. ACL 2011.
V. Ordonez, G. Kulkarni, and T. L. Berg. 2011. Im2text:
Describing images using 1 million captioned pho-
tographs. Proc. NIPS 2011.
Y. Yang, C. L. Teo, H. Daume? III, and Y. Aloimonos.
2011. Corpus-guided sentence generation of natural
images. Proc. EMNLP 2011.
133
