Proceedings of the Workshop on A Broader Perspective on Multiword Expressions, pages 49?56,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Pauses as an Indicator of  
Psycholinguistically Valid Multi-Word Expressions (MWEs)? 
 
Irina Dahlmann and Svenja Adolphs  
School of English Studies 
University of Nottingham 
University Park, Nottingham, NG7 2RD, UK 
{aexid,svenja.adolphs}@nottingham.ac.uk 
 
Abstract 
In this paper we investigate the role of the 
placement of pauses in automatically ex-
tracted multi-word expression (MWE) can-
didates from a learner corpus. The aim is to 
explore whether the analysis of pauses 
might be useful in the validation of these 
candidates as MWEs. The study is based 
on the assumption advanced in the area of 
psycholinguistics that MWEs are stored ho-
listically in the mental lexicon and are 
therefore produced without pauses in natu-
rally occurring discourse. Automatic MWE 
extraction methods are unable to capture 
the criterion of holistic storage and instead 
rely on statistics and raw frequency in the 
identification of MWE candidates. In this 
study we explore the possibility of a com-
bination of the two approaches. We report 
on a study in which we analyse the place-
ment of pauses in various instances of two 
very frequent automatically extracted 
MWE candidates from a learner corpus, i.e. 
the n-grams I don?t know and I think I. In-
tuitively, they are judged differently in 
terms of holistic storage. Our study ex-
plores whether pause analysis can be used 
as an objective empirical criterion to sup-
port this intuition. A corpus of interview 
data of language learners of English forms 
the basis of this study. 
1 Introduction 
MWEs are ubiquitous in language (e.g. Erman and 
Warren, 2001; Wray, 2002; Pawley and Syder, 
2000) but at the same time they present 
researchers, especially in the areas of NLP, 
descriptive linguistics and (second) language 
acquisition (see for example Sag et al, 2002; 
Wray, 2000, 2002) with a number of challenges. 
Two of the most serious challenges are the 
identification and definition of MWEs. These are 
interdependent and cause a circular problem: As 
long as we cannot identify and describe the 
properties of MWEs fully, a definition remains 
only partial and, in return, without a full definition 
the identification process is incomplete.  
Nevertheless, methods of identification have 
been developed and used, based on broad criteria, 
e.g. human intuition, frequency information or se-
mantic and grammatical properties (e.g. idioms, 
light-verb constructions, adjective noun colloca-
tions). 
A considerable amount of research in NLP and 
in linguistics draws on two broad definitions by 
Sag et al (2002) and Wray (2002), respectively. 
Sag et al define MWEs ?very roughly? as  
 
?idiosyncratic interpretations that cross word 
boundaries (or spaces)? (Sag et al 2002:2). 
 
They specify further that MWEs can be classified 
broadly into two categories according to their syn-
tactic and semantic flexibility, i.e. lexical phrases 
and institutionalised phrases.  
Wray (2002), coming from a psycholinguistic 
perspective, wants to be ?as inclusive as possible, 
covering any kind of linguistic unit that has been 
considered formulaic in any research field? (p.9). 
She defines the term ?formulaic sequence? as 
 
?a sequence, continuous or discontinuous, of words 
or other elements, which is or appears to be pre-
fabricated: that is, stored and retrieved whole from 
49
memory at the time of use, rather than being sub-
ject to generation or analysis by the language 
grammar.? (Wray 2002:9) 
 
The main difference between the two definitions 
is the inclusion of holistic storage of MWEs in the 
mental lexicon by Wray, whereas Sag et al?s defi-
nition, which has been used extensively in NLP 
research, focuses mainly on syntactic and semantic 
properties of the MWE. 
One of the possible reasons why holistic storage 
has not found its way into NLP research may be 
related to the fact that this criterion is almost im-
possible to measure directly. However, it has been 
proposed that prosodic cues and pauses are indirect 
indicators of prefabricated language and holistic 
storage as MWEs in speech exhibit more phono-
logical coherence (e.g. Hickey, 1993).  
If we assume that MWEs are stored as holistic 
units in memory, we would firstly not expect to 
find pauses within MWEs. Pawley (1986) states 
that ?pauses within lexicalised phrase are less ac-
ceptable than pauses within free expressions, and 
after a hesitation the speaker is more likely to re-
start from the beginning of the expression? (p.107, 
quoted from Wray, 2002). This is in line with Rau-
pach (1984) who studied spontaneous L2 speech 
production and stresses that ?a formal approach to 
identifying formula units in spontaneous speech 
must, as a first step, list the strings which are not 
interrupted by unfilled pauses? (p.116). 
 Secondly, we would expect that pauses, i.e. si-
lent pauses and hesitation phenomena, may also 
serve in the delineation of MWE boundaries (Rau-
pach, 1984:114). 
The research outlined above is echoed in more 
recent studies of MWEs and pauses in the devel-
opment of speech fluency. The placement, quantity 
and lengths of pauses are important markers of flu-
ency (e.g. Riggenbach 1991) and the stretches be-
tween pauses may be fluent because pauses pro-
vide planning time to formulate the next utterance 
(Pawley and Syder, 2000) and the utterance may 
be (partly) a prefabricated string of words (MWE). 
Previous research into MWEs and fluency is es-
pecially important from a methodological perspec-
tive, as it provides methodological frameworks for 
the study of pauses,  for example, the integration of 
silent and filled pauses, which both provide plan-
ning time (Raupach, 1984; Pawley and Syder, 
2000), or the significance of pause lengths (Pawley 
and Syder, 2000). These aspects are, for instance, 
not sufficiently reflected in existing pause annota-
tion schemes in spoken corpora (see also section 
3.1), which has hampered the study of pauses and 
MWEs on a large scale so far. 
The aim of our study is therefore twofold. 
Firstly, in terms of methodology, we combine in-
sights from fluency and MWEs research with a 
corpus approach and automatic extraction of 
MWEs.  
Secondly, we analyse whether units which have 
been extracted automatically also comply with 
predicted pause behaviour (no pauses within 
MWEs, pauses as indicator of MWE boundaries) 
and therefore whether they are psycholinguistically 
valid. 
This kind of study may help develop our under-
standing of MWEs in naturally occurring discourse. 
In addition, it allows us to explore further whether 
the study of pause phenomena might be a useful 
tool in the evaluation of automatic extraction 
methods.  
2 Pauses and MWEs 
As outlined above research on prosodic features 
and MWEs has found that MWEs tend to exhibit 
more phonological coherence (e.g. Hickey, 1993; 
Read and Nation 2004; Wray, 2002). Van Lancker 
et al (1981), for instance, found phonological dif-
ferences depending on whether a string carried lit-
eral or idiomatic meaning in a read aloud task (e.g. 
skating on thin ice). The differences in the literal 
and idiomatic contexts were partly mirrored in the 
number and placement of pauses. Idiomatic ex-
pressions are uttered at a faster speed which is to 
some extent related to the lack of pauses within the 
idiomatic expression (Van Lancker et al 
1981:331). Additional indicators are the pace at 
which key words were used (increased word dura-
tion of major lexical items in the literal version), 
the length of the whole utterance, pitch changes, 
and articulatory precision (Van Lancker et al, 
1981). Phonological coherence and further pro-
sodic features (stress and intonation) may therefore 
be regarded as physical indicators of the storage 
and retrieval of MWEs which in turn can help to 
identify MWEs in spoken language.  
Problems with this kind of investigation are 
mainly related to the lack of consistent methodol-
ogy for studying pauses as physical markers of 
holistic storage in an empirical manner, i.e. using 
naturally occurring corpus data. Key problems are 
50
the shortage of suitable spoken corpora and incon-
sistent pause annotation schemes. 
3 Methodological challenges 
3.1 Corpora and pause annotation 
As the aim of this study is to explore holistic 
storage and retrieval of MWEs in naturally occur-
ring speech, a corpus of spontaneous speech is re-
quired. Both, audio data and transcriptions are 
needed for the automatic extraction of MWEs and 
pause annotation respectively.  
Unfortunately, not many available spoken cor-
pora have been marked up for pauses as it is a very 
labour intensive process and currently has to be 
done largely manually. In cases where pause mark-
ing has been applied, it does not necessarily meet 
the specific requirements for phonological analysis 
(Read & Nation 2004:32). For example, pauses 
may not have been defined sufficiently for this 
purpose, as in the spoken part of the BNC where a 
pause is defined as a ?silence, within or between 
utterances, longer than was judged normal for the 
speaker or speakers? 1 . The definition of pause 
length ? unlike in fluency research ? can be too 
broad in existing corpus annotation, e.g. pauses 
have to be perceived as a pause (short, medium, 
long) or, when timing is included it is often very 
vague, e.g. a ?comma indicates a brief (1-2 second) 
mid-utterance pause with non-phrase final intona-
tion contour? in the MICASE corpus.2 In compari-
son, the minimum threshold for a pause lies at 
around 0.2-0.3 seconds in fluency research. Fur-
thermore, not all corpora which contain silent 
pause annotation have also annotated filled pauses. 
In fact, a survey of 12 corpus pause coding 
schemes (native and learner language) shows that 
none complies with the requirements needed for 
the study of fluency and MWU related research.3
                                                 
                                                                            
1 http://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk/docs/userManual/ 
cdif.xml.ID=cdifsp (last accessed 25/03/2007) 
2 http://www.lsa.umich.edu/eli/micase/MICASE_ 
MANUAL.pdf (last accessed 25/03/2007)  
3 This is especially unfortunate in the case of the London-
Lund Corpus (LLC), which in theory lends itself to this kind 
of study for native English MWEs usage: The LLC contains 
not only pause annotation but also marking of other prosodic 
features such as tone unit boundaries, the nucleus, and varying 
degrees of stress. These can serve as additional indicators for 
MWEs in use. However, only silent pauses are marked and 
only in broad terms, i.e. ?-? indicates a ?brief pause of one light 
syllable?, ??? indicates a ?unit pause of one stress unit or ?foot?. 
Due to the lack of corpora which combine spon-
taneous speech and appropriate pause annotation 
we have developed a learner corpus which we then 
selectively annotated for pauses. The corpus con-
tains 290,000 transcribed words of spontaneous 
interview discourse produced by Chinese learners 
of English (with accompanying audio files). The 
proficiency level of the Chinese students in the 
whole corpus is based on IELTS scores and ranges 
from 5.0 ? 6.5 (of max. 9). Scores from around 5.5 
onwards (depending on the intended studies) are 
required for foreign students for admission at a 
British university. The two speakers investigated 
here have scores of 5.0 and 5.5 respectively.  
Only two students have been chosen for this 
study in order to reduce the number of possible 
variables affecting the results, especially with re-
gard to idiosyncratic usage. 
 The choice of learner data rather than native 
speaker data evolved not only from practical con-
siderations, but also from the wider aim of our 
study which is related to fluency and language ac-
quisition. In addition, when applying preliminary 
pause annotations to extracts of both native and 
non-native speech, we observed that learners seem 
to pause a lot more than native speakers. Native 
speakers seem to apply some other modes of ?paus-
ing? ? such as using fillers, repeating words or re-
phrasing ? more extensively. Therefore, we might 
expect clearer results from the learner data ini-
tially. In fact, it will be interesting to see in com-
parison, whether pauses might even tell us more 
about learners than about native speakers with re-
gard to the use of MWEs. 
It nevertheless has to be acknowledged that 
there might be considerable differences in learner 
and native speech; however, both varieties are 
valid in their own right, especially with respect to 
holistic storage and usage. 
Careful pause annotation was then carried out 
around a selected set of automatically extracted 
MWEs from the learner data (see 3.2 and 3.3) to 
explore the approach outlined above. 
3.2 Automatic extraction ? n-grams 
Different MWE extraction methods abound but 
we decided to begin our study with an investiga-
tion of n-grams as a way into the proposed ap-
 
This is one of the limitations of the only large-scale study in 
the field of pauses and MWEs (Erman, 2007), as it is based 
solely on the LLC and its annotation. 
51
proach. The choice of n-grams, described as one of 
the most successful statistical models (Gil and Dias, 
2003), was based on several reasons.  
Firstly, the assumption behind n-grams is that 
continuous strings of words, which are used re-
peatedly and frequently in the same form in a 
speech community, are also likely to be stored ho-
listically in memory.  
Secondly, simple n-grams are continuous se-
quences. This aids the study of pauses at this early 
stage as discontinuous sequences or sequences 
with variable slots might exhibit different pause 
behaviour and/or prosodic features.4  
In addition, the special case of learner language 
requires an extraction method which is based on 
the actual corpus data itself and not on precon-
ceived ideas of whether or not a particular multi-
word string is in fact a valid MWE, as is the case 
with symbolic or knowledge based extraction 
methods. Learners may have their own (sub-)set of 
MWEs (Wray 1999). These may be characterised 
by idiosyncratic MWEs, which nevertheless may 
be used frequently either by individuals or by a 
certain speech community, e.g. Chinese learners of 
English. 
A further advantage of using n-grams is that the 
extraction is fully automated and therefore does 
not require human intervention. This extraction 
method does not take into account the additional 
factor of ?meaning? as the process of extraction 
itself is very mechanical and not dependant on 
meaning.  
 
N 3-grams Freq. % 
1 A LOT OF 352 0.17 
2 I DON?T KNOW 327 0.16 
3 I THINK I 300 0.15 
4 I THINK IT?S 252 0.12 
5 SO I THINK 220 0.11 
6 I WANT TO 211 0.1 
7 I THINK THE 188 0.09 
8 BUT I THINK 185 0.09 
9 I DON?T THINK 146 0.07 
10 I THINK ER 143 0.07 
 
Table 1. 10 most frequent 3-grams  
extracted from 290,000 words of learner inter-
view data  
                                                 
4 Discontinuous MWEs and n-grams are nevertheless impor-
tant, which is reflected in the development of more refined 
extraction methods (e.g. positional n-grams (Gil and Dias, 
2003) and ConcGrams (Chen et al 2006)). However, they are 
only of secondary interest for us at this stage. 
This is one of the disadvantages at the same time. 
Frequent examples in our spoken learner corpus 
are n-grams such as I think er, I I I or and er I 
which at first glance do not appear to be holisti-
cally stored MWEs.  
Drawing on n-grams as an approach also allows 
us to study MWE candidates, which ? on the basis 
of intuition ? do not appear to be stored holistically, 
but nevertheless occur very frequently in the cor-
pus. 
For our analysis we have chosen two very fre-
quent 3-grams (see Table 1) which contrast in 
terms of their internal consistency. I don?t know 
seems to be an example of a self contained MWE 
candidate whereas I think I is an example of a 
MWE candidate which intuitively does not seem to 
be psycholinguistically valid, i.e. stored as a holis-
tic item.5
3.3 Pause annotation and research questions 
The analysis has been carried out for two different 
speakers and the following number of n-grams (see 
Table 2).  
 
 
 
MWE candidate Speaker MS001 Speaker MS003 
I don?t know 21 26 
I think I  16 28 
Table 2. MWE candidates per speaker 
 
Pauses have been measured manually with au-
dio-visual clues, i.e. the combination of audio re-
cording and waveforms, both displayed by Adobe 
Audition. Within this software the pause length (in 
seconds, correct to the third decimal) is calculated 
by marking up a stretch of the wave form, which 
has been identified as a pause.  
                                                 
5 The analysis of other contrastive pairs, e.g. on the basis of 
syntactic properties such as I don?t know vs. I don?t see (keep-
ing the syntactic structure but changing the lexical verb - as 
suggested by one of the reviewers) also seems sensible. How-
ever, the choice of the substituting items has to be well in-
formed by factors such as frequency of the single lexical 
verbs, compared to frequency of the whole string, as for ex-
ample done by Tremblay et al (2007). However, this does not 
necessarily lead to an unproblematic comparison: I don?t see, 
for instance, only occurs two times in our data set of sponta-
neous speech, which is not frequent enough to find pause pat-
terns or to compare it to the pause patterns of I don?t know. 
Such an approach thus seems to lend itself more readily to 
experimental studies (such as the self-paced reading experi-
ments by Tremblay et al 2007) with carefully designed stim-
uli, and not to the study of natural occurring speech.  
52
Pause measurement in fluency research com-
monly suggests thresholds between 0.2-0.3 sec-
onds as a minimum for a silence to be regarded and 
perceived as a pause (e.g. Goldman Eisler, 1968, 
Towell et al, 1996). To account for this, pauses 
between 0.2 and 0.3 seconds length were measured 
correct to two digits in order to allow for a later 
adjustment of minimal pause length, pauses above 
0.3 were measured to one digit. Filled pauses were 
measured if they seemed exceptionally long. Both, 
silent and filled pauses are marked here for the 
purpose of placement indication with ?< >?. 
The main focus of our analysis is on pause dis-
tribution and the following five cases of place-
ments of pauses have been identified as pertinent 
to our study: (?____?indicates text which can theo-
retically be of any length, < > indicates pause) 
 
a. M W < > E (pause within the MWE candidate) 
b. < > MWE < > 
c. < > MWE ____< > 
d. < > _____MWE < > 
e. < > _____MWE _____ < > 
 
In the annotation of pause patterns around the two 
different MWE candidates the following questions 
are explored: 
  
(1) Do the two candidates seem to be stored 
holistically, i.e. do they contain pauses 
within the extracted form or not? (Refer-
ring to pause placement pattern a.) 
(2) Do pauses assist in the determination of 
MWE boundaries, i.e. are there any regular 
pause patterns which indicate boundaries? 
Do pauses seem to align MWEs in the 
form in which they were extracted? (Refer-
ring to b.-e.) 
(3) Do the results comply with intuition, i.e. 
does I don?t know fit the predicted behav-
iour better than I think I?  
4 Results and discussion 
4.1 ?I don?t know? 
Forty seven I don?t know?s, used by two different 
speakers within approximately 71,000 words of 
interview data have been studied for pause phe-
nomena. The distribution is summarised in Table 3. 
Pause distribution MS001 MS003 ? 
MW< > E -- -- -- 
< > MWE < > 9 1 10 
< > MWE __ < > 5 14 19 
< > __ MWE < > 2 3 5 
< > __ MWE__ < > 5 8 13 
Table 3. Pause distribution  
around 47 instances of I don?t know 
 
As expected, in the speech examples at hand, I 
don?t know is never interrupted by pauses, which is 
a good indicator for holistic storage of this particu-
lar string of words by the two learners.  
In terms of boundary alignments it can be ob-
served that almost two thirds of the examples con-
tain pauses immediately preceding I don?t know 
(29:18), which in turn can be interpreted as a sign 
of a MWE boundary. It has to be taken into ac-
count that MWEs can occur within other MWEs or 
within a stretch of creative speech. Therefore, 
pauses do not need to be present on all occasions 
even if it seems to be a boundary. The fact, that 
pauses nevertheless do occur very often and that 
these pauses are proper pauses - on average far 
longer than the suggested 0.2 seconds (on average 
0.57 seconds) reinforces the case for an actual 
boundary.  
The case is different for the final boundary. If 
pauses occur right at the end of I don?t know they 
are shorter overall (0.39 seconds on average). The 
main point is, however, that in over two thirds of 
the instances (32:15) no pause occurs in this place. 
A further observation is that the ?ideal? form (in 
terms of boundary recognition and validation) < > 
MWE < > with pauses at either side of the extracted 
MWE candidate, occurs infrequently. It seems 
rather idealistic to expect language to be organized 
neatly according to stored chunks. Instead speakers 
are generally capable of placing several chunks 
and/or creative language together in one stretch of 
speech. Pawley and Syder (2000) suggest that ?the 
average number of words per fluent unit is about 
six? (p. 195) for fluent (native) speakers. The ac-
tual average number of words might differ slightly 
for learners, however the point is that either way 
the numbers are averages and in single instances 
stretches might be considerably longer. It is there-
fore not surprising that 3-word n-grams might be 
embedded within longer stretches of speech and 
are not surrounded by pauses. Furthermore, Miller 
(1956) states in his paper The magical number 
53
seven, that ?the memory span is a fixed number of 
chunks, we can increase the number of bits of in-
formation that it contains simply by building larger 
and larger chunks, each chunk containing more 
information than before.? (p.93). In other words, if 
I don?t know is stored as one chunk or item (in-
stead of three single words) it is more likely that it 
may be embedded in a larger portion of language 
as the memory is able to handle more language 
items. 
Moreover, the form < > MWE < > is mainly used 
by one speaker (MS001; 9:1). This points towards 
the importance of the consideration of idiosyn-
cratic usage, especially when dealing with learner 
language (but it also plays a role in native usage): 
learners may use MWEs in a much more restricted 
way, i.e. the way they have learned a particular 
phrase instead of using it appropriate to the con-
text. For instance, learner MS003 evidently also 
has a preferred way of using I don?t know, namely 
< > MWE __ < > (14:5).  
It also has to be taken into consideration that I 
don?t know can be used as a discourse marker/filler 
or in the more literal sense of ?I don?t have the 
knowledge?. This distinction might be of signifi-
cance for clearer descriptions of the MWE gener-
ally. 
In summary, one may want to argue that I don?t 
know may function as a core MWE. It seems to be 
stored holistically as it does not exhibit pauses 
within the core, but it allows for variation and 
elongation at the end, preferably introduced by a 
question word (e.g. why, what, where, how). For 
example, four out of five instances of speaker 
MS001, using the form < > I don?t know __ < >, 
are followed by why. Speaker MS003 also prefers 
why (in 6 out of 14 instances). That raises the 
question as to whether I dont know why may even 
be regarded as a separate MWE. In fact, consider-
ing all results and the distribution of pauses, one 
could also argue that there may be several different 
MWEs: 
 
? I don?t know 
? I don?t know wh= 
? I don?t know why 
? I don?t know why but 
? I don?t know if 
? I don?t know [the (NP)] 
? but I don?t know 
 
Biber et al (1999:1002), studying lexical bun-
dles6 also found plenty of such structures. For ex-
ample, they find that the structure personal pro-
noun + lexical verb phrase (+ complement?clause 
fragment) - which fits most of the above exam-
ples ? is very common in conversation. They also 
record many of the examples listed above in their 
category of four-word bundle expressions with I + 
know. (ibid.). However, whereas their analysis is 
based on frequency information alone, the very 
rare use of pauses between I don?t know and the 
subsequent word(s) gives more confidence in that 
these strings are actually valid units from two per-
spective, that of frequency and holistic storage.  
4.2 ?I think I? 
Forty four instances of I think I have been anno-
tated. The pause distribution within these examples 
is as follows: 
 
Pause distribution MS001 MS003 ? 
MW< > E 5 3 8 
< > MWE < > 1 3 4 
< > MWE __ < > 5 7 12 
< > __ MWE < > -- 3 3 
< > __ MWE__ < > 5 12 17 
Table 4. Pause distribution  
around 44 instances of I think I 
 
I think I had been chosen for analysis because ? 
intuitively ? it does not seem to be a holistically 
stored MWE. Especially in comparison with no 
single pause occurring within 47 I don?t know?s the 
results seem to (at least partly) confirm this. Eight 
out of 44 examples do exhibit pause phenomena in 
I think I which is a first indicator that probably not 
all instances of I think I are stored holistically. A 
closer assessment of the eight MW< >E instances 
reveals that all but one exhibit the pause after I 
think. This is not surprising as I think is the most 
frequent occurring bi-gram in the data (almost 
3000 instances in the 290,000 word learner corpus 
and 3 times more frequent as the second most fre-
quent bi-gram you know). In fact, I think I could be 
regarded as a sub-unit of I think, similar to the rela-
tionship between I don?t know and I don?t know 
                                                 
6 The definition of lexical bundles is essentially based on fre-
quency - they are ?sequences of words that most commonly 
co-occur in a register.? Furthermore, Biber et al observed that 
?most lexical bundles are not structurally complete at all? 
(Biber et al 1999:989).  
54
why. Thus, the eight instances with pause breaks 
may be actually instances of the MWE candidate I 
know where I happens to mark the beginning of the 
next clause.  
Interestingly, all 44 instances are followed by a 
full clause, which has the second I of I think I as 
the subject at the beginning of the new clause. In 
addition, I think seems to be used rather in the 
function of filler, possibly in order to provide 
thinking time for the next utterance. This happens 
extensively in the eight I think <> I____ cases 
where I think is followed by a pause. However, and 
as discussed earlier, the absence of a pause does 
not necessarily mean the absence of a MWE 
boundary. Therefore the 17 < > __ I think I __ < > 
cases and the 12 < > I think I __ < > cases may fol-
low the same pattern with using I think as a filler. 
In these instances no further pause is necessary. 
However, this does not explain the 7 instances 
where pauses do occur at the end of I think I. Idio-
syncratic usage might be one explanation as it is 
mainly a feature used by MS003 (6 times) and the 
only instance of MS001 coincides with a false 
start. Further investigations using a larger data-set 
might be able to confirm whether this pattern is 
due to idiosyncratic usage.  
4.3 Summary and limitations 
The analysis of pauses in our data would suggest 
that I don?t know might be stored holistically while 
it is questionable that this is the case for I think I 
which is interrupted by pauses in some of the in-
stances that were investigated.  
In terms of the delineation of boundaries, it can 
be said that pauses are only helpful to a limited 
extent as boundaries are not conditional on them. 
The absence of a pause does not exclude the possi-
bility that it might in fact be a boundary. However, 
where pauses occur they give valuable indications 
of possible boundaries. The results can give useful 
information on actual MWE usage to fields such as 
lexicography, (second/computational) language 
acquisition and teaching.  
These initial findings are encouraging, but they 
are nevertheless based on limited data in terms of 
the number and forms of MWEs investigated, and 
also the number of speakers considered. 
Future research should thus draw on more in-
stances by different speakers in order to determine 
idiosyncratic usage and to arrive at more stable 
patterns. A comparison with native speaker usage 
seems crucial and promising for a more compre-
hensive description of MWEs. 
In addition, studying intonation and stress pat-
terns of these instances may indicate boundaries 
more clearly.  
Finally, MWEs may be used in more than one 
sense, as in the case of I don?t know which has to 
be considered for each different MWE candidate 
individually. 
5 Conclusion: Value for NLP and future 
work  
In this paper we have reported on a study which 
combines approaches within NLP for the identifi-
cation of MWE candidates with pause analysis. 
The aim was to explore an approach which might 
lead to a frequency-based and psycholinguistically 
motivated description of MWEs.  
The results of our study seem to suggest that the 
placement of pauses might be valuable as an addi-
tional criterion for the identification of holistically 
stored MWEs, however, larger data-sets and fur-
ther pause annotation is necessary to confirm our 
initial findings. 
Further investigations of other functions of 
pauses and other prosodic features within a given 
stretch of discourse need to be carried out in order 
to fully assess the role of pauses in relation to ho-
listic storage. A discourse functional analysis 
would be necessary to identify functional motiva-
tion of pauses and to delineate these from n-grams 
where the placement of pauses is related to holistic 
storage. 
However, our study has illustrated the potential 
of a multi-method and interdisciplinary approach 
to the identification and description of MWEs 
which may eventually be necessary to overcome 
some of the problems within NLP in terms of de-
veloping extraction methods, and some of the 
problems in descriptive linguistics and discourse 
analysis in terms of gathering evidence for differ-
ent MWEs in use. 
Acknowledgement 
The research described in this paper is supported 
by the Engineering and Physical Science Research 
Council (EPSRC, grant EP/C548191/1). We would 
also like to thank the three anonymous reviewers 
for their comments on an earlier draft of this paper. 
55
References 
Douglas Biber, Stig Johansson, Geoffrey Leech, Susan 
Conrad and Edward Finegan. 1999. Longman 
Grammar of spoken and written English. Harlow: 
Longman 
Winnie Chen, Chris Greaves and Martin Warren. 2006. 
From n-gram to skipgram to concgram. International 
Journal of Corpus Linguistics 11(4): 411-433. 
Britt Erman. 2007. Cognitive processes as evidence of 
the idiom principle. International Journal of Corpus 
Linguistics 12(1): 25-53. 
Britt Erman and Beatrice Warren. 2000. The idiom 
principle and the open choice principle. Text 20(1): 
29-62. 
Alexandre Gil and Ga?l Dias. 2003. Using Masks, Suf-
fix Array-based Data Structures and Multidimen-
sional Arrays to Compute Positional Ngram Statistics 
from Corpora. In: Proceedings of the ACL 2003 
?Workshop on Multiword Expressions: Analysis, 
Acquisition and Treatment?, Sapporo, Japan 12th July 
2003, 25-32. 
Frieda Goldman-Eisler. 1968. Psycholinguistics: ex-
periments in spontaneous speech. London, New 
York: Academic Press.  
Tina Hickey. 1993. Identifying formulas in first lan-
guage acquisition. Journal of Child Language 20:27-
41. 
George A Miller. 1956. The magical number seven, plus 
or minus two: some limits on our capacity for proc-
essing information. The Psychological Review 
63(2):81-97. 
Andrew Pawley. 1986. Lexicalization. In: Deborah 
Tannen and James E. Alatis (eds.). Language & Lin-
guistics: The interdependence of theory, data & ap-
plication. Georgetown University Round Table on 
Languages & Linguistics 1985, 98-120. 
Andrew Pawley and Frances Syder. 2000. The One-
Clause-at-a-Time Hypothesis. In: Heidi Riggenbach 
(ed.). Perspectives on fluency. Ann Arbor: University 
of Michigan Press, 163-199. 
Manfred Raupach. 1984. Formulae in Second Language 
Speech Production. In: Hans W. Dechert, Dorothea 
M?hle and Manfred Raupach (eds.). Second Lan-
guage Productions. T?bingen: Narr, 114-137. 
John Read and Paul Nation. 2004. Measurement of for-
mulaic sequences. In: Norbert Schmitt (ed.). Formu-
laic Sequences. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 23-35. 
Heidi Riggenbach. 1991. Towards an understanding of 
fluency: A microanalysis of nonnative speaker con-
versations. Discourse Processes, 14: 423-441. 
Ivan Sag, Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann 
Copestake and Dan Flickinger. 2002. Multiword ex-
pressions: A Pain in the Neck for NLP. In: Proceed-
ings of the 3rd International Conferences on Intelli-
gent Text Processing and Computational Linguistics 
(CICLing-2002), Mexico City, Mexico, 1-15. 
Antoine Tremblay, Bruce Derwing, Gary Libben and 
Chris Westbury. 2007. Are Lexical Bundles Stored 
and Processed as Single Units? Paper presented at 
the 25th UWM Linguistics Symposium on Formulaic 
Language. Milwaukee, Wisconsin, April 18-21, 2007 
Richard Towell, Roger Hawkins and Nives Bazergui 
1996. The development of fluency in advanced 
learners of French. Applied Linguistics, 17(1):84-
119. 
Diana Van Lancker, Gerald J. Canter and Dale Terbeek. 
1981. Disambiguation of Ditropic Sentences: Acous-
tic and Phonetic Cues. Journal of Speech and Hear-
ing Research, 24:330-335. 
Alison Wray. 2002. Formulaic Language and the Lexi-
con. Cambridge, CUP. 
Alison Wray. 1999. Formulaic language in learners and 
native speakers. Language Teaching, 32:213-231. 
56
