Proceedings of the Fifth SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Processing, pages 193?196,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
NetEase Automatic Chinese Word Segmentation 
 
 
Li xin                                                                       Dai shuaixiang 
NETEASE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (BEIJING) CO., LTD.  
SP Tower D, 26th Floor, Tsinghua Science Park Building 8, No.1 Zhongguancun East Road, 
Haidian District Beijing, 100084, PRC. 
lxin@corp.netease.com                                          ddai@corp.netease.com 
 
  
 
Abstract 
This document analyses the bakeoff re-
sults from NetEase Co. in the SIGHAN5 
Word Segmentation Task and Named En-
tity Recognition Task. The NetEase WS 
system is designed to facilitate research 
in natural language processing and in-
formation retrieval. It supports Chinese 
and English word segmentation, Chinese 
named entity recognition, Chinese part of 
speech tagging and phrase conglutination. 
Evaluation result shows our WS system 
has a passable precision in word segmen-
tation except for the unknown words rec-
ognition. 
1 Introduction 
Automatic Chinese Word Segmentation (WS) is 
the fundamental task of Chinese information 
processing [Liu, 2000].Since there are lots of 
works depending on the automatic segmentation 
of Chinese words, different Chinese NLP-
enabled applications may have different re-
quirements that call for different granularities of 
word segmentation. The key to accurate auto-
matic word identification in Chinese lies in the 
successful resolution of those ambiguities and a 
proper way to handle out-of-vocabulary (OOV) 
words (such as person names, place names and 
organization name etc.).  
We have applied corpus-based method to ex-
tracting various language phenomena from real 
texts; and have combined statistical model with 
rules in Chinese word segmentation, which has 
increased the precision of segmentation by im-
proving ambiguous phrase segmentation and out-
of-vocabulary word recognition. 
In the second section of this paper, we de-
scribe a Chinese word segmentation system de-
veloped by NetEase. And we present our strate-
gies on solving the problems of ambiguous 
phrase segmentation and identification of Chi-
nese people names and place names. The third 
section is analysis of evaluation result. 
2 Modern Chinese Automatic Segmen-
tation System  
2.1 System Structure  
The WS system of NETEASE CO. supports Chi-
nese and English word segmentation, Chinese 
named entity recognition, Chinese part of speech 
tagging and phrase conglutination. In ordering to 
processing mass data, it is designed as an effi-
cient system. The whole system includes some 
processing steps: pre-processing, num-
ber/date/time recognition, unknown words rec-
ognition, segmenting, POS tagging and post-
processing, as Fig 1 shows.  
The Prehandler module performs the pre-
processing, splits the text into sentences accord-
ing to the punctuations.    
Number/Data/Time recognition processes the 
number, date, time string and English words.  
Unknown word recognition includes personal 
name recognition and place name recognition. 
Segmenter component performs word-
segmenting task, matches all the candidate words 
and processes ambiguous lexical.  
POSTagger module performs part of speech 
tagging task and decides the optimal word seg-
mentation using hierarchical hidden Markov 
model (HHMM) [Zhang, 2003]. 
Posthandler retrieves phrases with multi-
granularities from segmentation result and de-
tects new words automatically etc. 
2.2 Ambiguous phrase segmentation  
Assume that ?AJB? are character strings and that 
W is a word list. In the field ?AJB?, if ?AJ??W, 
193
and ?JB??W, then ?AJB? is called ambiguous 
phrase of overlap type. For example, in the string 
"???", both "??" and "??" are words , so 
"???" is an ambiguous phrase of overlap type; 
and there is one ambiguous string.  
 
In the string ?AB?, if ?AB??W(word), ?A??
W, and ?B??W, then the string ?AB? is called 
ambiguous phrase of combination type. For ex-
ample, in the string "??", since "??", "?" 
and "?"are all words, so the string "??" is an 
ambiguous phrase of combination type. 
We have built an ambiguous phrase lib of 
overlap and combination type from tagged cor-
pus, which contains 200,000 phrases from 1-
gram to 4-gram. For example: ??/d ?/v ??/v, 
??/vn ?/v ?? vn? If one ambiguous phrase 
found in raw text, the potential segmentation re-
sult will be found in the lib and submit to next 
module. If not found, POS tagger module will 
disambiguate it.  
2.3 Chinese Personal Name Recognition 
At present we only consider the recognition of 
normal people name with both a family name 
and a first name. We got the statistical Character 
Set of Family Name and First Name data from 
corpus. And also consider the ability of  charac-
ter of constructing word. Some characters itself 
cannot be regarded as a word or composes a 
word with other characters, such as "?,?,?"; 
Some  name characters which can compose word 
with other characters only, e.g. ??????? 
can construct words "??????????
";Some name characters  are also a common 
words themselves, e.g. ?????. 
The recognition procedure is as follows: 
1) Find the potential Chinese personal names: 
Family name is the trigger. Whenever a family 
name is found in a text, its following word is 
taken as a first name word, or its following two 
characters as the head character and the tail char-
acter of a first name. Then the family name and 
its following make a potential people name, the 
probable largest length of which is 4 when it is 
composed of a double-character family name and 
a double-character first name. 
2) Based on the constructing word rules and 
the protective rules, sift the potential people 
names for the first time. For example, when raw 
text is ????,????, then the ??,?? were 
not family name. Because the ??,?? is number. 
3) Compute the probabilities of the potential 
name and the threshold values of corresponding 
family names, then sift the people names again 
based on the personal name probability function 
and description rules. 
4) According to the left-boundary rules and 
the right-boundary rules which base on title, for 
Fig 1 Structure and Components of WS 
194
example, ??? ,???, and name frequent of 
context, determine the boundaries of people 
names. 
5) Negate conflicting potential people names. 
6) Output the result: The output contains every 
sentence in the processed text and the start and 
the end positions and the reliability values of all 
people names in it. 
2.4 Chinese Place Name Recognition 
By collecting a large scale of place names, For 
example, (1) The names of administrative re-
gions superior to county; (2) The names of in-
habitation areas; (3) The names of geographic 
entities, such as mountain, river, lake, sea, island 
etc.; (4) Other place names, e.g. monument, ruins, 
bridge and power station etc. building the place 
name dictionary. 
Collecting words that can symbolize a place, 
e.g. ????, ????, ??? etc. 
Base on these knowledge we applied positive 
deduction mechanism. Its essence is that with 
reference to certain control strategies, a rule is 
selected; then examining whether the fact 
matches the condition of the rule, if it does, the 
rule will be triggered.  
In addition, Those words that often concurrent 
with a place name are collected , including: 
???, ???? etc. And which often concurrent 
with a people name, such as ????, ??? and 
so on,  are also considered in NER. 
WS system identifies all potential place names 
in texts by using place name base and gathers 
their context information; and through deduction, 
it utilizes rule set and knowledge base to confirm 
or negate a potential place name; hereupon, the 
remainders are recognized place name. 
2.5 Multi-granularities of word segmenta-
tion 
Whenever we deploy the segmenter for any ap-
plication, we need to customize the output of the 
segmenter according to an application specific 
standard, which is not always explicitly defined. 
However, it is often implicitly defined in a given 
amount of application data (for example, Search 
engines log, Tagged corpus) from which the spe-
cific standard can be partially learned.  
Most variability in word segmentation across 
different standards comes from those words that 
are not typically stored in the basic dictionary. 
To meet the applications of different levels, in 
our system, the standard adaptation is conducted 
by a post-processor which performs an ordered 
list of transformations on the output. For exam-
ple: When input is ????????????, 
the output will be: 
1. ????/??/ ??/ ??? ? 
2. ????/????/ ???? 
3. ????/????????  
 
Result 1 is normal segmentation, also is mini-
mum granularity of word. Result 2 and 3 is big-
ger granularity. Every application can select ap-
propriate segmentation result according to its 
purpose.  
3 Test results 
The speed of NetEase WS system is about 
1500KB/s--300KB/s in different algorithm and 
p4-2.8/512M computer. In SigHan5, the F-
MEASURE of our word segmentation is 0.924, 
the IN Recall is 0.959, but OOV Recall Rate is 
only 0.656. This indicates that our unknown 
words recognition is poor; it makes a bad impact 
on the segmented result.   It also shows our sys-
tem should be improved largely in unknown 
words recognition.  For example:  
1. Name Entity Recognize: ?????, ??
??, ???? were falsely segment to ??/??
/?), ??/?/?, ?/?/??. 
2. Name Entity Ambiguous: ??/ ??/LOC? 
are falsely recognized ????/PER?. 
3. Abbreviations of phrase: ??? (???)? 
was segment to  ??/??. 
4. New Word: ????, ??, ??? 
5. Standard of Word: we think ??????? 
and ?????? is one word, but criterion is ??
?/?/???, ???/??? etc.  
In evaluation, our system?s TOTAL INSER-
TIONS is 5292 and TOTAL DELETIONS is 
2460. The result show: our WS usually segment 
out ?shorter word?, for example,  ???????, 
and ?????? is segmented to ???/??/
??, ???/??? . But not every string is one 
word. 
Much work needs to be done to evaluate this 
WS system more thoroughly. Refined pre-
processing or post-processing steps could also 
help improve segmentation accuracy. 
For example, pre-processing will split ASCII 
string and Chinese character, so  "DD6112H6?, 
ic?, ???" will falsely segment "DD6112H6/
?, ic/?, ??/?"; In post-processing, by using 
consecutive single characters ??/?, ?/?? to 
195
detect the valid out-of-vocabulary words ???, 
??? also is good idea. 
 
References 
Kaiying Liu. Automatic Chinese Word Segmentation 
and POS Tagging. Business Publishing House. 
Beijing. 2000. 
Hua-Ping Zhang etc. Chinese Lexical Analysis Using 
Hierarchical Hidden Markov Model. Second 
SIGHAN workshop affiliated with 41th ACL, Sap-
poro Japan, July, 2003, pp. 63-70 
196
