Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 706?715,
Avignon, France, April 23 - 27 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
Elliphant: Improved Automatic Detection of
Zero Subjects and Impersonal Constructions in Spanish
Luz Rello?
NLP and Web Research Groups
Univ. Pompeu Fabra
Barcelona, Spain
Ricardo Baeza-Yates
Yahoo! Research
Barcelona, Spain
Ruslan Mitkov
Research Group in
Computational Linguistics
Univ. of Wolverhampton, UK
Abstract
In pro-drop languages, the detection of
explicit subjects, zero subjects and non-
referential impersonal constructions is cru-
cial for anaphora and co-reference resolu-
tion. While the identification of explicit
and zero subjects has attracted the atten-
tion of researchers in the past, the auto-
matic identification of impersonal construc-
tions in Spanish has not been addressed yet
and this work is the first such study. In
this paper we present a corpus to under-
pin research on the automatic detection of
these linguistic phenomena in Spanish and
a novel machine learning-based methodol-
ogy for their computational treatment. This
study also provides an analysis of the fea-
tures, discusses performance across two
different genres and offers error analysis.
The evaluation results show that our system
performs better in detecting explicit sub-
jects than alternative systems.
1 Introduction
Subject ellipsis is the omission of the subject in
a sentence. We consider not only missing refer-
ential subject (zero subject) as manifestation of
ellipsis, but also non-referential impersonal con-
structions.
Various natural language processing (NLP)
tasks benefit from the identification of ellip-
tical subjects, primarily anaphora resolution
(Mitkov, 2002) and co-reference resolution (Ng
and Cardie, 2002). The difficulty in detect-
ing missing subjects and non-referential pronouns
has been acknowledged since the first studies on
? This work was partially funded by a ?La Caixa? grant
for master students.
the computational treatment of anaphora (Hobbs,
1977; Hirst, 1981). However, this task is of cru-
cial importance when processing pro-drop lan-
guages since subject ellipsis is a pervasive phe-
nomenon in these languages (Chomsky, 1981).
For instance, in our Spanish corpus, 29% of the
subjects are elided.
Our method is based on classification of all ex-
pressions in subject position, including the recog-
nition of Spanish non-referential impersonal con-
structions which, to the best of our knowledge,
has not yet been addressed. The necessity of iden-
tifying such kind of elliptical constructions has
been specifically highlighted in work about Span-
ish zero pronouns (Ferra?ndez and Peral, 2000)
and co-reference resolution (Recasens and Hovy,
2009).
The main contributions of this study are:
? A public annotated corpus in Spanish to
compare different strategies for detecting ex-
plicit subjects, zero subjects and impersonal
constructions.
? The first ML based approach to this problem
in Spanish and a thorough analysis regarding
features, learnability, genre and errors.
? The best performing algorithms to automati-
cally detect explicit subjects and impersonal
constructions in Spanish.
The remainder of the paper is organized as fol-
lows. Section 2 describes the classes of Spanish
subjects, while Section 3 provides a literature re-
view. Section 4 describes the creation and the an-
notation of the corpus and in Section 5 the ma-
chine learning (ML) method is presented. The
analysis of the features, the learning curves, the
706
genre impact and the error analysis are all detailed
in Section 6. Finally, in Section 7, conclusions
are drawn and plans for future work are discussed.
This work is an extension of the first author mas-
ter?s thesis (Rello, 2010) and a preliminary ver-
sion of the algorithm was presented in Rello et al
(2010).
2 Classes of Spanish Subjects
Literature related to ellipsis in NLP (Ferra?ndez
and Peral, 2000; Rello and Illisei, 2009a; Mitkov,
2010) and linguistic theory (Bosque, 1989; Bru-
cart, 1999; Real Academia Espan?ola, 2009) has
served as a basis for establishing the classes of
this work.
Explicit subjects are phonetically realized and
their syntactic position can be pre-verbal or post-
verbal. In the case of post-verbal subjects (a), the
syntactic position is restricted by some conditions
(Real Academia Espan?ola, 2009).
(a) Carecera?n de validez las disposiciones que con-
tradigan otra de rango superior.1
The dispositions which contradict higher range
ones will not be valid.
Zero subjects (b) appear as the result of a nomi-
nal ellipsis. That is, a lexical element ?the elliptic
subject?, which is needed for the interpretation of
the meaning and the structure of the sentence, is
elided; therefore, it can be retrieved from its con-
text. The elision of the subject can affect the en-
tire noun phrase and not just the noun head when
a definite article occurs (Brucart, 1999).
(b) ? Fue refrendada por el pueblo espan?ol.
(It) was countersigned by the people of Spain.
The class of impersonal constructions is
formed by impersonal clauses (c) and reflex-
ive impersonal clauses with particle se (d) (Real
Academia Espan?ola, 2009).
(c) No hay matrimonio sin consentimiento.
(There is) no marriage without consent.
(d) Se estara? a lo que establece el apartado siguiente.
(It) will be what is established in the next section.
1All the examples provided are taken from our corpus.
In the examples, explicit subjects are presented in italics.
Zero subjects are presented by the symbol ? and in the En-
glish translations the subjects which are elided in Spanish are
marked with parentheses. Impersonal constructions are not
explicitly indicated.
3 Related Work
Identification of non-referential pronouns, al-
though a crucial step in co-reference and anaphora
resolution systems (Mitkov, 2010),2 has been ap-
plied only to the pleonastic it in English (Evans,
2001; Boyd et al 2005; Bergsma et al 2008)
and expletive pronouns in French (Danlos, 2005).
Machine learning methods are known to perform
better than rule-based techniques for identifying
non-referential expressions (Boyd et al 2005).
However, there is some debate as to which ap-
proach may be optimal in anaphora resolution
systems (Mitkov and Hallett, 2007).
Both English and French texts use an ex-
plicit word, with some grammatical information
(a third person pronoun), which is non-referential
(Mitkov, 2010). By contrast, in Spanish, non-
referential expressions are not realized by exple-
tive or pleonastic pronouns but rather by a certain
kind of ellipsis. For this reason, it is easy to mis-
take them for zero pronouns, which are, in fact,
referential.
Previous work on detecting Spanish subject el-
lipsis focused on distinguishing verbs with ex-
plicit subjects and verbs with zero subjects (zero
pronouns), using rule-based methods (Ferra?ndez
and Peral, 2000; Rello and Illisei, 2009b). The
Ferra?ndez and Peral algorithm (2000) outper-
forms the (Rello and Illisei, 2009b) approach
with 57% accuracy in identifying zero subjects.
In (Ferra?ndez and Peral, 2000), the implementa-
tion of a zero subject identification and resolution
module forms part of an anaphora resolution sys-
tem.
ML based studies on the identification of
explicit non-referential constructions in English
present accuracies of 71% (Evans, 2001), 87.5%
(Bergsma et al 2008) and 88% (Boyd et al
2005), while 97.5% is achieved for French (Dan-
los, 2005). However, in these languages, non-
referential constructions are explicit and not omit-
ted which makes this task more challenging for
Spanish.
4 Corpus
We created and annotated a corpus composed
of legal texts (law) and health texts (psychiatric
2In zero anaphora resolution, the identification of zero
anaphors first requires that they be distinguished from non-
referential impersonal constructions (Mitkov, 2010).
707
papers) originally written in peninsular Spanish.
The corpus is named after its annotated content
?Explicit Subjects, Zero Subjects and Impersonal
Constructions? (ESZIC es Corpus).
To the best of our knowledge, the existing cor-
pora annotated with elliptical subjects belong to
other genres. The Blue Book (handbook) and
Lexesp (journalistic texts) used in (Ferra?ndez and
Peral, 2000) contain zero subjects but not imper-
sonal constructions. On the other hand, the Span-
ish AnCora corpus based on journalistic texts in-
cludes zero pronouns and impersonal construc-
tions (Recasens and Mart??, 2010) while the Z-
corpus (Rello and Illisei, 2009b) comprises legal,
instructional and encyclopedic texts but has no an-
notated impersonal constructions.
The ESZIC corpus contains a total of 6,827
verbs including 1,793 zero subjects. Except for
AnCora-ES, with 10,791 elliptic pronouns, our
corpus is larger than the ones used in previous ap-
proaches: about 1,830 verbs including zero and
explicit subjects in (Ferra?ndez and Peral, 2000)
(the exact number is not mentioned in the pa-
per) and 1,202 zero subjects in (Rello and Illisei,
2009b).
The corpus was parsed by Connexor?s Ma-
chinese Syntax (Connexor Oy, 2006), which re-
turns lexical and morphological information as
well as the dependency relations between words
by employing a functional dependency grammar
(Tapanainen and Ja?rvinen, 1997).
To annotate our corpus we created an annota-
tion tool that extracts the finite clauses and the
annotators assign to each example one of the de-
fined annotation tags. Two volunteer graduate stu-
dents of linguistics annotated the verbs after one
training session. The annotations of a third volun-
teer with the same profile were used to compute
the inter-annotator agreement. During the anno-
tation phase, we evaluated the adequacy and clar-
ity of the annotation guidelines and established a
typology of the rising borderline cases, which is
included in the annotation guidelines.
Table 1 shows the linguistic and formal criteria
used to identify the chosen categories that served
as the basis for the corpus annotation. For each
tag, in addition to the two criteria that are crucial
for identifying subject ellipsis ([? elliptic] and
[? referential]) a combination of syntactic, se-
mantic and discourse knowledge is also encoded
during the annotation. The linguistic motivation
for each of the three categories is shown against
the thirteen annotation tags to which they belong
(Table 1).
Afterwards, each of the tags are grouped in one
of the three main classes.
? Explicit subjects: [- elliptic, + referential].
? Zero subjects: [+ elliptic, + referential].
? Impersonal constructions: [+ elliptic, - refer-
ential].
Of these annotated verbs, 71% have an explicit
subject, 26% have a zero subject and 3% belong
to an impersonal construction (see Table 2).
Number of instances Legal Health All
Explicit subjects 2,739 2,116 4,855
Zero subjects 619 1,174 1,793
Impersonals 71 108 179
Total 3,429 3,398 6,827
Table 2: Instances per class in ESZIC Corpus.
To measure inter-annotator reliability we use
Fleiss? Kappa statistical measure (Fleiss, 1971).
We extracted 10% of the instances of each of the
texts of the corpus covering the two genres.
Fleiss? Kappa Legal Health All
Two Annotators 0.934 0.870 0.902
Three Annotators 0.925 0.857 0.891
Table 3: Inter-annotator Agreement.
In Table 3 we present the Fleiss kappa inter-
annotator agreement for two and three annota-
tors. These results suggest that the annotation
is reliable since it is common practice among re-
searchers in computational linguistics to consider
0.8 as a minimum value of acceptance (Artstein
and Poesio, 2008).
5 Machine Learning Approach
We opted for an ML approach given that our
previous rule-based methodology improved only
0.02 over the 0.55 F-measure of a simple base-
line (Rello and Illisei, 2009b). Besides, ML based
methods for the identification of explicit non-
referential constructions in English appear to per-
form better than than rule-based ones (Boyd et al
2005).
708
LINGUISTIC INFORMATION PHONETIC
REALIZATION
SYNTACTIC
CATEGORY
VERBAL
DIATHESIS
SEMANTIC
INTERPR.
DISCOURSE
Annotation
Categories
Annotation
Tags
Elliptic
noun
phrase
Ell. noun
phrase
head
Nominal
subject
Active Active
participant
Referential
subject
Explicit subject ? ? + + + +
Explicit
subject
Reflex passive
subject
? ? + + ? +
Passive subject ? ? + ? ? +
Omitted subject + ? + + + +
Omitted subject
head
? + + + + +
Non-nominal
subject
? ? ? + + +
Zero
subject
Reflex passive
omitted subject
+ ? + + ? +
Reflex pass. omit-
ted subject head
? + + + ? +
Reflex pass. non-
nominal subject
? ? ? + ? +
Passive omitted
subject
+ ? + ? ? +
Pass. non-nominal
subject
? ? ? ? ? +
Impersonal
construction
Reflex imp. clause
(with se)
? ? n/a ? n/a ?
Imp. construction
(without se)
? ? n/a + n/a ?
Table 1: ESZIC Corpus Annotation Tags.
5.1 Features
We built the training data from the annotated cor-
pus and defined fourteen features. The linguisti-
cally motivated features are inspired by previous
ML approaches in Chinese (Zhao and Ng, 2007)
and English (Evans, 2001). The values for the fea-
tures (see Table 4) were derived from information
provided both by Connexor?s Machinese Syntax
parser and a set of lists.
We can describe each of the features as broadly
belonging to one of ten classes, as follows:
1 PARSER: the presence or absence of a sub-
ject in the clause, as identified by the parser.
We are not aware of a formal evaluation of
Connexor?s accuracy. It presents an accu-
racy of 74.9% evaluated against our corpus
and we used it as a simple baseline.
2 CLAUSE: the clause types considered are:
main clauses, relative clauses starting with a
complex conjunction, clauses starting with a
simple conjunction, and clauses introduced
using punctuation marks (commas, semi-
colons, etc). We implemented a method
to identify these different types of clauses,
as the parser does not explicitly mark the
boundaries of clauses within sentences. The
method took into account the existence of a
finite verb, its dependencies, the existence of
conjunctions and punctuation marks.
3 LEMMA: lexical information extracted from
the parser, the lemma of the finite verb.
4-5 NUMBER, PERSON: morphological infor-
mation of the verb, its grammatical number
and its person.
6 AGREE: feature which encodes the tense,
mood, person, and number of the verb in the
clause, and its agreement in person, number,
709
Feature Definition Value
1 PARSER Parsed subject True, False
2 CLAUSE Clause type Main, Rel, Imp, Prop, Punct
3 LEMMA Verb lemma Parser?s lemma tag
4 NUMBER Verb morphological number SG, PL
5 PERSON Verb morphological person P1, P2, P3
6 AGREE Agreement in person, number, tense FTFF, TTTT, FFFF, TFTF, TTFF, FTFT, FTTF, TFTT,
and mood FFFT, TTTF, FFTF, TFFT, FFTT, FTTT, TFFF, TTFT
7 NHPREV Previous noun phrases Number of noun phrases previous to the verb
8 NHTOT Total noun phrases Number of noun phrases in the clause
9 INF Infinitive Number of infinitives in the clause
10 SE Spanish particle se True, False
11 A Spanish preposition a True, False
12 POSpre Four parts of the speech previous to 292 different values combining the parser?s
the verb POS tags
14 POSpos Four parts of the speech following 280 different values combining the parser?s
the verb POS tags
14 VERBtype Type of verb: copulative, impersonal CIPX, XIXX, XXXT, XXPX, XXXI, CIXX, XXPT, XIPX,
pronominal, transitive and intransitive XIPT, XXXX, XIXI, CXPI, XXPI, XIPI, CXPX
Table 4: Features, definitions and values.
tense, and mood with the preceding verb in
the sentence and also with the main verb of
the sentence.3
7-9 NHPREV, NHTOT, INF: the candidates for
the subject of the clause are represented by
the number of noun phrases in the clause that
precede the verb, the total number of noun
phrases in the clause, and the number of in-
finitive verbs in the clause.
10 SE: a binary feature encoding the presence
or absence of the Spanish particle se when it
occurs immediately before or after the verb
or with a maximum of one token lying be-
tween the verb and itself. Particle se occurs
in passive reflex clauses with zero subjects
and in some impersonal constructions.
11 A: a binary feature encoding the presence or
absence of the Spanish preposition a in the
clause. Since the distinction between passive
reflex clauses with zero subjects and imper-
sonal constructions sometimes relies on the
appearance of preposition a (to, for, etc.).
For instance, example (e) is a passive reflex
clause containing a zero subject while exam-
ple (s) is an impersonal construction.
3In Spanish, when a finite verb appears in a subordinate
clause, its tense and mood can assist in recognition of these
features in the verb of the main clause and help to enforce
some restrictions required by this verb, especially when both
verbs share the same referent as subject.
(e) Se admiten los alumnos que reu?nan los req-
uisitos.
? (They) accept the students who fulfill the
requirements.
(f) Se admite a los alumnos que reu?nan los req-
uisitos.
(It) is accepted for the students who fulfill
the requirements.
12-3 POSpre, POSpos: the part of the speech
(POS) of eight tokens, that is, the 4-grams
preceding and the 4-grams following the in-
stance.
14 VERBtype: the verb is classified as copula-
tive, pronominal, transitive, or with an im-
personal use.4 Verbs belonging to more than
one class are also accommodated with dif-
ferent feature values for each of the possible
combinations of verb type.
5.2 Evaluation
To determine the most accurate algorithm for our
classification task, two comparisons of learning
algorithms implemented in WEKA (Witten and
Frank, 2005) were carried out. Firstly, the classi-
fication was performed using 20% of the training
instances. Secondly, the seven highest perform-
ing classifiers were compared using 100% of the
4We used four lists provided by Molino de Ideas s.a. con-
taining 11,060 different verb lemmas belonging to the Royal
Spanish Academy Dictionary (Real Academia Espan?ola,
2001).
710
Class P R F Acc.
Explicit subj. 90.1% 92.3% 91.2% 87.3%
Zero subj. 77.2% 74.0% 75.5% 87.4%
Impersonals 85.6% 63.1% 72.7% 98.8%
Table 5: K* performance (87.6% accuracy for ten-fold
cross validation).
training data and ten-fold cross-validation. The
corpus was partitioned into training and tested
using ten-fold cross-validation for randomly or-
dered instances in both cases. The lazy learn-
ing classifier K* (Cleary and Trigg, 1995), us-
ing a blending parameter of 40%, was the best
performing one, with an accuracy of 87.6% for
ten-fold cross-validation. K* differs from other
instance-based learners in that it computes the dis-
tance between two instances using a method mo-
tivated by information theory, where a maximum
entropy-based distance function is used (Cleary
and Trigg, 1995). Table 5 shows the results
for each class using ten-fold cross-validation.
In contrast to previous work, the K* algorithm
(Cleary and Trigg, 1995) was found to provide the
most accurate classification in the current study.
Other approaches have employed various clas-
sification algorithms, including JRip in WEKA
(Mu?ller, 2006), with precision of 74% and recall
of 60%, and K-nearest neighbors in TiMBL: both
in (Evans, 2001) with precision of 73% and recall
of 69%, and in (Boyd et al 2005) with precision
of 82% and recall of 71%.
Since there is no previous ML approach for this
task in Spanish, our baselines for the explicit sub-
jects and the zero subjects are the parser output
and the previous rule-based work with the high-
est performance (Ferra?ndez and Peral, 2000). For
the impersonal constructions the baseline is a sim-
ple greedy algorithm that classifies as an imper-
sonal construction every verb whose lemma is cat-
egorized as a verb with impersonal use according
to the RAE dictionary (Real Academia Espan?ola,
2001).
Our method outperforms the Connexor parser
which identifies the explicit subjects but makes no
distinction between zero subjects and impersonal
constructions. Connexor yields 74.9% overall ac-
curacy and 80.2% and 65.6% F-measure for ex-
plicit and elliptic subjects, respectively.
To compare with Ferra?ndez and Peral
(Ferra?ndez and Peral, 2000) we do consider
Algorithm Explicit
subjects
Zero
subjects
Impersonals
RAE ? ? 70.4%
Connexor 71.7% 83.0%
Ferr./Peral 79.7% 98.4% ?
Elliphant 87.3% 87.4% 98.8%
Table 6: Summary of accuracy comparison with previ-
ous work.
it without impersonal constructions. We achieve
a precision of 87% for explicit subjects compared
to 80%, and a precision of 87% for zero subjects
compared to their 98%. The overall accuracy
is the same for both techniques, 87.5%, but our
results are more balanced. Nevertheless, the
approaches and corpora used in both studies are
different, and hence it is not possible to do a fair
comparison. For example, their corpus has 46%
of zero subjects while ours has only 26%.
For impersonal constructions our method out-
performs the RAE baseline (precision 6.5%,
recall 77.7%, F-measure 12.0% and accuracy
70.4%). Table 6 summarizes the comparison. The
low performance of the RAE baseline is due to the
fact that verbs with impersonal use are often am-
biguous. For these cases, we first tagged them as
ambiguous and then, we defined additional crite-
ria after analyzing then manually. The resulting
annotated criteria are stated in Table 1.
6 Analysis
Through these analyses we aim to extract the most
effective features and the information that would
complement the output of an standard parser to
achieve this task. We also examine the learning
process of the algorithm to find out how many in-
stances are needed to train it efficiently and de-
termine how much Elliphant is genre dependent.
The analyses indicate that our approach is robust:
it performs nearly as well with just six features,
has a steep learning curve, and seems to general-
ize well to other text collections.
6.1 Best Features
We carried out three different experiments to eval-
uate the most effective group of features, and
the features themselves considering the individ-
ual predictive ability of each one along with their
degree of redundancy.
Based on the following three feature selection
711
methods we can state that there is a complex and
balanced interaction between the features.
6.1.1 Grouping Features
In the first experiment we considered the 11
groups of relevant ordered features from the train-
ing data, which were selected using each WEKA
attribute selection algorithm and performed the
classifications over the complete training data, us-
ing only the different groups features selected.
The most effective group of six features (NH-
PREV, PARSER, NHTOT, POSpos, PERSON,
LEMMA) was the one selected by WEKA?s Sym-
metricalUncertAttribute technique, which gives
an accuracy of 83.5%. The most frequently
selected features by all methods are PARSER,
POSpos, and NHTOT, and they alone get an accu-
racy of 83.6% together. As expected, the two pairs
of features that perform best (both 74.8% accu-
racy) are PARSER with either POSpos or NHTOT.
Based on how frequent each feature is selected
by WEKA?s attribute selection algorithms, we can
rank the features as following: (1) PARSER,
(2) NHTOT, (3) POSpos, (4) NHPREV and (5)
LEMMA.
6.1.2 ?Complex? vs. ?Simple? Features
Second, a set of experiments was conducted
in which features were selected on the basis
of the degree of computational effort needed to
generate them. We propose two sets of fea-
tures. One group corresponds to ?simple? fea-
tures, whose values can be obtained by trivial
exploitation of the tags produced in the parser?s
output (PARSER, LEMMA, PERSON, POSpos,
POSpre). The second group of features, ?com-
plex? features (CLAUSE, AGREE, NHPREV,
NHTOT, VERBtype) have values that required the
implementation of more sophisticated modules to
identify the boundaries of syntactic constituents
such as clauses and noun phrases. The accuracy
obtained when the classifier exclusively exploits
?complex? features is 82.6% while for ?simple?
features is 79.9%. No impersonal constructions
are identified when only ?complex? features are
used.
6.1.3 One-left-out Feature
In the third experiment, to estimate the weight
of each feature, classifications were made in
which each feature was omitted from the train-
ing instances that were presented to the classifier.
Omission of all but one of the ?simple? features
led to a reduction in accuracy, justifying their in-
clusion in the training instances. Nevertheless, the
majority of features present low informativeness
except for feature A which does not make any
meaningful contribution to the classification. The
feature PARSER presents the greatest difference
in performance (86.3% total accuracy); however,
this is no big loss, considering it is the main fea-
ture. Hence, as most features do not bring a sig-
nificant loss in accuracy, the features need to be
combined to improve the performance.
6.2 Learning Analysis
The learning curve of Figure 1 (left) presents the
increase of the performance obtained by Elliphant
using the training data randomly ordered. The
performance reaches its plateau using 90% of the
training instances. Using different ordering of the
training set we obtain the same result.
Figure 1 (right) presents the precision for each
class and overall in relation to the number of train-
ing instances for each one of them. Recall grows
similarly to precision. Under all conditions, sub-
jects are classified with a high precision since the
information given by the parser (collected in the
features) achieves an accuracy of 74.9% for the
identification of explicit subjects.
The impersonal construction class has the
fastest learning curve. When utilizing a training
set of only 163 instances (90% of the training
data), it reaches a precision of 63.2%. The un-
stable behaviour for impersonal constructions can
be attributed to not having enough training data
for that class, since impersonals are not frequent
in Spanish. On the other hand, the zero subject
class is learned more gradually.
The learning curve for the explicit subject class
is almost flat due to the great variety of subjects
occurring in the training data. In addition, reach-
ing a precision of 92.0% for explicit subjects us-
ing just 20% of the training data is far more ex-
pensive in terms of the number of training in-
stances (978) as seen in Figure 1 (right). Actually,
with just 20% of the training data we can already
achieve a precision of 85.9%.
This demonstrates that Elliphant does not need
very large sets of expensive training data and
is able to reach adequate levels of performance
when exploiting far fewer training instances. In
fact, we see that we only need a modest set of
712
83.00
83.60
84.20
84.80
85.40
86.00
86.60
10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% 
Precision Recall F-measure
85.6%
85.3%
85.8%
85.7%
85.2%
85.8%
86.3%
86.4%
85.9%
85.5%
86.0%
86.5% 86.6%
%
49.00
55.29
61.57
67.86
74.14
80.43
86.71
93.00
10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% 
498
978
1461
1929
2433
2898
3400
3899
4386
4854
354
537
735
898 1094
1249
1416
1593
1793
167
17
32
49
66
82
129
146
179
Explicit subjects
Zero subjects
Impersonal
constructions
Overall
163
103
 
P
r
e
c
i
s
i
o
n
 
(
%
)
Figure 1: Learning curve for precision, recall and F-measure (left) and with respect to the number of instances
of each class (right) for a given percentage of training data.
annotated instances (fewer than 1,500) to achieve
good results.
6.3 Impact of Genre
To examine the influence of the different text gen-
res on this method, we divided our training data
into two subgroups belonging to different genres
(legal and health) and analyze the differences.
A comparative evaluation using ten-fold cross-
validation over the two subgroups shows that El-
liphant is more successful when classifying in-
stances of explicit subjects in legal texts (89.8%
accuracy) than health texts (85.4% accuracy).
This may be explained by the greater uniformity
of the sentences in the legal genre compared to
ones from the health genre, as well as the fact that
there are a larger number of explicit subjects in the
legal training data (2,739 compared with 2,116 in
the health texts). Further, texts from the health
genre present the additional complication of spe-
cialized named entities and acronyms, which are
used quite frequently. Similarly, better perfor-
mance in the detection of zero subjects and imper-
sonal sentences in the health texts may be due to
their more frequent occurrence and hence greater
learnability.
Training/Testing Legal Health All
Legal 90.0% 86.8% 89.3%
Health 86.8% 85.9% 88.7%
All 92.5% 93.7% 87.6%
Table 7: Accuracy of cross-genre training and testing
evaluation (ten-fold evaluation).
We have also studied the effect of training the
classifier on data derived from one genre and test-
ing on instances derived from a different genre.
Table 7 shows that instances from legal texts
are more homogeneous, as the classifier obtains
higher accuracy when testing and training only on
legal instances (90.0%). In addition, legal texts
are also more informative, because when both le-
gal and health genres are combined as training
data, only instances from the health genre show
a significant increased accuracy (93.7%). These
results reveal that the health texts are the most het-
erogeneous ones. In fact, we also found subsets of
the legal documents where our method achieves
an accuracy of 94.6%, implying more homoge-
neous texts.
6.4 Error Analysis
Since the features of the system are linguisti-
cally motivated, we performed a linguistic anal-
ysis of the erroneously classified instances to find
out which patterns are more difficult to classify
and which type of information would improve the
method (Rello et al 2011).
We extract the erroneously classified instances
of our training data and classify the errors. Ac-
cording to the distribution of the errors per class
(Table 8) we take into account the following four
classes of errors for the analysis: (a) impersonal
constructions classified as zero subjects, (b) im-
personal constructions classified as explicit sub-
jects, (c) zero subjects classified as explicit sub-
jects, and (d) explicit subjects classified as zero
subjects. The diagonal numbers are the true pre-
dicted cases. The classification of impersonal
constructions is less balanced than the ones for
explicit subjects and zero subjects. Most of the
wrongly identified instances are classified as ex-
plicit subject, given that this class is the largest
one. On the other hand, 25% of the zero subjects
are classified as explicit subject, while only 8% of
713
the explicit subjects are identified as zero subjects.
Class Zero Explicit Impers.
subjects subjects
Zero subj. 1327 453 (c) 13
Explicit subj. 368 (d) 4481 6
Impersonals 25 (a) 41 (b) 113
Table 8: Confusion Matrix (ten-fold validation).
For the analysis we first performed an explo-
ration of the feature values which allows us to
generate smaller samples of the groups of errors
for the further linguistic analyses. Then, we ex-
plore the linguistic characteristics of the instances
by examining the clause in which the instance ap-
pears in our corpus. A great variety of different
patterns are found. We mention only the linguistic
characteristics in the errors which at least double
the corpus general trends.
In all groups (a-d) there is a tendency of using
the following elements: post-verbal prepositions,
auxiliary verbs, future verbal tenses, subjunctive
verbal mode, negation, punctuation marks ap-
pearing before the verb and the preceding noun
phrases, concessive and adverbial subordinate
clauses. In groups (a) and (b) the lemma of the
verb may play a relevant role, for instance verb
haber (?there is/are?) appears in the errors seven
times more than in the training while verb tratar
(?to be about?, ?to deal with?) appears 12 times
more. Finally, in groups (c) and (d) we notice
the frequent occurrence of idioms which include
verbs with impersonal uses, such as es decir (?that
is to say?) and words which can be subject on their
own i.e. ambos (?both?) or todo (?all?).
7 Conclusions and Future Work
In this study we learn which is the most accurate
approach for identifying explicit subjects and im-
personal constructions in Spanish and which are
the linguistic characteristics and features that help
to perform this task. The corpus created is freely
available online.5 Our method complements pre-
vious work on Spanish anaphora resolution by ad-
dressing the identification of non-referential con-
structions. It outperforms current approaches in
explicit subject detection and impersonal con-
structions, doing better than the parser for every
5ESZIC es Corpus is available at: http:
//luzrello.com/Projects.html.
class.
A possible future avenue to explore could be
to combine our approach with Ferra?ndez and
Peral (Ferra?ndez and Peral, 2000) by employing
both algorithms in sequence: first Ferra?ndez and
Peral?s algorithm to detect all zero subjects and
then ours to identify explicit subjects and imper-
sonals. Assuming that the same accuracy could be
maintained, on our data set the combined perfor-
mance could potentially be in the range of 95%.
Future research goals are the extrinsic evalua-
tion of our system by integrating our system in
NLP tasks and its adaptation to other Romance
pro-drop languages. Finally, we believe that our
ML approach could be improved as it is the first
attempt of this kind.
Acknowledgements
We thank Richard Evans, Julio Gonzalo and the
anonymous reviewers for their wise comments.
References
R. Artstein and M. Poesio. 2008. Inter-coder agree-
ment for computational linguistics. Computational
Linguistics, 34(4):555?596.
S. Bergsma, D. Lin, and R. Goebel. 2008. Distri-
butional identification of non-referential pronouns.
In Proceedings of the 46th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies (ACL/HLT-08), pages 10?
18.
I. Bosque. 1989. Clases de sujetos ta?citos. In Julio
Borrego Nieto, editor, Philologica: homenaje a An-
tonio Llorente, volume 2, pages 91?112. Servicio
de Publicaciones, Universidad Pontificia de Sala-
manca, Salamanca.
A. Boyd, W. Gegg-Harrison, and D. Byron. 2005.
Identifying non-referential it: a machine learning
approach incorporating linguistically motivated pat-
terns. In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Fea-
ture Engineering for Machine Learning in Natural
Language Processing. 43rd Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL-
05), pages 40?47.
J. M. Brucart. 1999. La elipsis. In I. Bosque
and V. Demonte, editors, Grama?tica descriptiva de
la lengua espan?ola, volume 2, pages 2787?2863.
Espasa-Calpe, Madrid.
N. Chomsky. 1981. Lectures on Government and
Binding. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin, New York.
J.G. Cleary and L.E. Trigg. 1995. K*: an instance-
based learner using an entropic distance measure.
In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference
on Machine Learning (ICML-95), pages 108?114.
714
Connexor Oy, 2006. Machinese language model.
L. Danlos. 2005. Automatic recognition of French
expletive pronoun occurrences. In Robert Dale,
Kam-Fai Wong, Jiang Su, and Oi Yee Kwong, ed-
itors, Natural language processing. Proceedings of
the 2nd International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing (IJCNLP-05), pages 73?78,
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. Springer. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 3651.
R. Evans. 2001. Applying machine learning: toward
an automatic classification of it. Literary and Lin-
guistic Computing, 16(1):45?57.
A. Ferra?ndez and J. Peral. 2000. A computational ap-
proach to zero-pronouns in Spanish. In Proceedings
of the 38th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL-2000), pages 166?
172.
J. L. Fleiss. 1971. Measuring nominal scale agree-
ment among many raters. Psychological Bulletin,
76(5):378?382.
G. Hirst. 1981. Anaphora in natural language under-
standing: a survey. Springer-Verlag.
J. Hobbs. 1977. Resolving pronoun references. Lin-
gua, 44:311?338.
R. Mitkov and C. Hallett. 2007. Comparing pronoun
resolution algorithms. Computational Intelligence,
23(2):262?297.
R. Mitkov. 2002. Anaphora resolution. Longman,
London.
R. Mitkov. 2010. Discourse processing. In Alexander
Clark, Chris Fox, and Shalom Lappin, editors, The
handbook of computational linguistics and natural
language processing, pages 599?629. Wiley Black-
well, Oxford.
C. Mu?ller. 2006. Automatic detection of nonrefer-
ential it in spoken multi-party dialog. In Proceed-
ings of the 11th Conference of the European Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(EACL-06), pages 49?56.
V. Ng and C. Cardie. 2002. Identifying anaphoric
and non-anaphoric noun phrases to improve coref-
erence resolution. In Proceedings of the 19th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics
(COLING-02), pages 1?7.
Real Academia Espan?ola. 2001. Diccionario de la
lengua espan?ola. Espasa-Calpe, Madrid, 22 edi-
tion.
Real Academia Espan?ola. 2009. Nueva grama?tica de
la lengua espan?ola. Espasa-Calpe, Madrid.
M. Recasens and E. Hovy. 2009. A deeper
look into features for coreference resolution. In
Lalitha Devi Sobha, Anto?nio Branco, and Ruslan
Mitkov, editors, Anaphora Processing and Applica-
tions. Proceedings of the 7th Discourse Anaphora
and Anaphor Resolution Colloquium (DAARC-09),
pages 29?42. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, New
York. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol.
5847.
M. Recasens and M.A. Mart??. 2010. Ancora-
co: Coreferentially annotated corpora for Spanish
and Catalan. Language resources and evaluation,
44(4):315?345.
L. Rello and I. Illisei. 2009a. A comparative study
of Spanish zero pronoun distribution. In Proceed-
ings of the International Symposium on Data and
Sense Mining, Machine Translation and Controlled
Languages, and their application to emergencies
and safety critical domains (ISMTCL-09), pages
209?214. Presses Universitaires de Franche-Comte?,
Besanc?on.
L. Rello and I. Illisei. 2009b. A rule-based approach
to the identification of Spanish zero pronouns. In
Student Research Workshop. International Confer-
ence on Recent Advances in Natural Language Pro-
cessing (RANLP-09), pages 209?214.
L. Rello, P. Sua?rez, and R. Mitkov. 2010. A machine
learning method for identifying non-referential im-
personal sentences and zero pronouns in Spanish.
Procesamiento del Lenguaje Natural, 45:281?287.
L. Rello, G. Ferraro, and A. Burga. 2011. Error analy-
sis for the improvement of subject ellipsis detection.
Procesamiento de Lenguaje Natural, 47:223?230.
L. Rello. 2010. Elliphant: A machine learning method
for identifying subject ellipsis and impersonal con-
structions in Spanish. Master?s thesis, Erasmus
Mundus, University of Wolverhampton & Univer-
sitat Auto`noma de Barcelona.
P. Tapanainen and T. Ja?rvinen. 1997. A non-projective
dependency parser. In Proceedings of the 5th Con-
ference on Applied Natural Language Processing
(ANLP-97), pages 64?71.
I. H. Witten and E. Frank. 2005. Data mining: practi-
cal machine learning tools and techniques. Morgan
Kaufmann, London, 2 edition.
S. Zhao and H.T. Ng. 2007. Identification and resolu-
tion of Chinese zero pronouns: a machine learning
approach. In Proceedings of the 2007 Joint Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and Computational Natural Language
Learning (EMNLP/CNLL-07), pages 541?550.
715
NAACL-HLT 2012 Workshop on Predicting and Improving Text Readability for target reader populations (PITR 2012)., pages 25?32,
Montre?al, Canada, June 7, 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
Graphical Schemes May Improve Readability but
Not Understandability for People with Dyslexia
Luz Rello,1,2 Horacio Saggion2
1 Web Research Group
2 NLP Research Group
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona
luzrello@acm.org
horacio.saggion@upf.edu
Ricardo Baeza-Yates, Eduardo Graells
Web Research Group
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Yahoo! Research, Barcelona
rbaeza@acm.org
eduardo.graells@upf.edu
Abstract
Generally, people with dyslexia are poor read-
ers but strong visual thinkers. The use of
graphical schemes for helping text compre-
hension is recommended in education man-
uals. This study explores the relation be-
tween text readability and the visual concep-
tual schemes which aim to make the text more
clear for these specific target readers. Our re-
sults are based on a user study for Spanish na-
tive speakers through a group of twenty three
dyslexic users and a control group of similar
size. The data collected from our study com-
bines qualitative data from questionnaires and
quantitative data from tests carried out using
eye tracking. The findings suggest that graph-
ical schemes may help to improve readability
for dyslexics but are, unexpectedly, counter-
productive for understandability.
1 Introduction
Readability refers to the legibility of a text, that
is, the ease with which text can be read. On the
other hand, understandability refers to comprehen-
sibility, the ease with which text can be understood.
Since readability strongly affects text comprehen-
sion (Barzilay et al, 2002), sometimes both terms
have been used interchangeably (Inui et al, 2003).
However, previous research with dyslexic people
have shown that both concepts need to be taken
into consideration separately. For instance, while
in dyslexic population reading, comprehension has
been found to be independent of the spelling errors
of the text; lexical quality can be used as an indicator
of understandability for the non-dyslexic population
(Rello and Baeza-Yates, 2012).
Dyslexia has been defined both as a specific read-
ing disability (Vellutino et al, 2004) and as a learn-
ing disability (International Dyslexia Association,
2011). It is neurological in origin and it is char-
acterized by difficulties with accurate and/or fluent
word recognition and by poor spelling and decoding
abilities. Secondary consequences include problems
in reading comprehension and reduced reading ex-
perience that can impede growth of vocabulary and
background knowledge (International Dyslexia As-
sociation, 2011).
On the other hand, the role of visual thinking
is crucial in dyslexics and its development may be
helpful for a number of tasks such as visual anal-
ysis and pattern recognition (West, 2009). Par-
tially related to the importance of visual thinking in
dyslexics, the use of graphical schemes has been an
extensively recommended pedagogical strategy for
dyslexic students (Ram??rez Sa?nchez, 2011; Chalk-
ley et al, 2001) as well as for students with reading
disabilities (Lo?pez Castro, 2010).
The inclusion of semantic maps was found to
be beneficial for reading comprehension of gen-
eral disabled readers in (Sinatra et al, 1984) and
the inclusion of graphical schemes to improve com-
prehension for dyslexic readers has been proposed
in (Weaver, 1978). However, to the best of our
knowledge, no estimation of the effect of graphical
schemes on the readability for dyslexics using eye
tracking together with their effect in understandabil-
ity has been done. Therefore, this paper presents the
following three main contributions for Spanish na-
25
tive speakers:
? An estimation of the effect of graphical
schemes in the readability of dyslexic readers
based on the analysis of an eye tracking user
study.
? The relationship between readability and un-
derstandability in dyslexic readers using com-
prehension questionnaires.
? A survey conducted among dyslexics on the
helpfulness of including graphical schemes.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion 2 covers related work and Section 3 details the
experimental methodology. Section 4 presents our
results and in Section 5 conclusions and future chal-
lenges are drawn.
2 Related Work
We divide the related work in: (1) strategies used in
discourse simplification for dyslexics, and (2) how
these strategies were measured in relationship with
readability and understandability.
Since dyslexics represent a target population of
poor readers, different strategies have been applied
for improving readability: the use of different text
formats (Rello et al, 2012) and environments (Gre-
gor and Newell, 2000), the use of multi-modal infor-
mation (Kiraly and Ridge, 2001) and text to speech
technologies (Elkind et al, 1993), among others.
The closest work to ours is the incorporation of
summaries and graphical schemes in texts. Previ-
ous work has shown that the readability of dyslexic
students could be improved by using text summa-
rization (Nandhini and Balasundaram, 2011) and se-
mantic maps (Sinatra et al, 1984).
Various factors have been applied to measure
readability in dyslexics. Classic readability mea-
sures are useful to find appropriate reading material
for dyslexics (Kotula, 2003) and to measure com-
prehension. For instance, the Flesch-Kincaid read-
ability degree was applied to access comprehension
speeds and accuracy in dyslexic readers (Kurniawan
and Conroy, 2006). Other specific readability mea-
sures for dyslexic readers have been proposed in
other domains such as information retrieval (Sitbon
and Bellot, 2008).
In the case of the use of summaries, the evaluation
of comprehension was carried out using question-
naires (Nandhini and Balasundaram, 2011). Multi-
ple choice questions were applied to measure the in-
corporation of semantic maps among disable readers
(Sinatra et al, 1984) and eye tracking measures have
been used to explore various characteristics related
to dyslexic reading (Eden et al, 1994).
Although the creation of graphical schemes is ex-
tensively recommended in literature (Weaver, 1978;
Ram??rez Sa?nchez, 2011; Lo?pez Castro, 2010), we
found no formal evaluation of their impact in read-
ability and comprehension combining data from eye
tracking, questionnaires, and a survey.
3 Experimental Methodology
3.1 Participants
Twenty three native Spanish speakers with a con-
firmed diagnosis of dyslexia took part in the study,
twelve of whom were female and eleven male. All
the participants were asked to bring their diagnoses
to the experiment. Their ages ranged from 13 to 37,
with a mean age of 20.74. There were three par-
ticipants with attention deficit disorder. All partic-
ipants were frequent readers; eleven read less than
four hours per day, nine read between four and eight
hours per day, and three participants read more than
eight hours daily. Ten people were studying or al-
ready finished university degrees, eleven were at-
tending school or high school and two had no higher
education. A control group of 23 participants with-
out dyslexia and similar age average (20.91) also
participated in the experiment.
3.2 Design
The experiment was composed of four parts: (1) an
initial interview designed to collect demographic in-
formation, (2) a reading test, (3) two questionnaires
designed to control the comprehension, and (4) a
survey to know the impressions of each person re-
garding the inclusion of graphical schemes.
Along the reading test we collected the quantita-
tive data to measure readability, with the compre-
hension questionnaires we measure understandabil-
ity, while with the survey we gather information
about the participant views.
We used two different variants (A and B) of the
26
Test A
Comprenhesion 
Questionnarie
Text 1: 
Star
Scheme
Text 2: 
Fish
Scheme
Text 2: 
Fish
Text 1: 
Star
Comprehension 
Questionnaire
Comprenhesion 
Questionnarie
Comprehension 
Questionnaire
Comprehension 
Questionnaire
Comprehension 
Questionnaire
Participant Preferences Survey
Test B
Comprenhesion 
Questionnarie
Sunday, May 6, 12
Figure 1: Variants of the experiment.
test (see Figure 1). Each test was composed of two
texts: one text that included a graphical scheme
in the top and another text without the graphical
scheme. We extracted the most similar texts we
could find from the Spanish Simplex corpus (Bott
and Saggion, 2012). The chosen texts share the fol-
lowing characteristics:
(a) They both have the same genre: science news.
(b) They are about similar topics: Text 1 (called
Star) is about the discovery of a supernova and
text 2 (Fish) is about the discovery of a new
species of fish.
(c) They contain the same number of sentences: 4
sentences in addition to the title.
(d) They have the same number of words (136).
(e) They have a similar average word length: 5.06
letters per word in Star and 5.12 letters per
word in Fish.
(f) They contain the same number of unique
named entities (7).
(g) They contain one foreign word: Science in Star
and Jean Gaudant in Fish.
(h) They contain one number: 6.300 an?os luz
(?6,300 light years?) in Star and 10 millones de
an?os (?10 millions of years?) in Fish.
As seen in Figure 1, in variant A, text 2 includes
a graphical scheme while text 1 was presented with-
out the graphical scheme. Variant B is reversed: text
1 appeared with a graphical scheme and text 2 with-
out it. The order of the experiments was counterbal-
anced using the variants A and B to guarantee that
the participant never reads the same text twice.
For the layout of the texts and graphical schemes
we chose a recommended font type for dyslexics,
sans serif arial (Al-Wabil et al, 2007), unjustified
text (Pedley, 2006), and recommended color and
brightness contrast using a black font with creme
background1 (British Dyslexia Association, 2012).
For the creation of the graphical schemes2 we
took into account the pedagogical recommendations
for dyslexics (Ram??rez Sa?nchez, 2011; Chalkley et
al., 2001), and the cognitive principles of inductive
learning in concept acquisition from scheme theory
(Anderson et al, 1979; Anderson and Robert, 2000).
Since the tests were going to be read by dyslex-
ics, the graphical schemes were manually created by
a dyslexic adult and supervised by a psychologist.
The graphical schemes simplify the discourse and
highlight the most important information from the
title and the content. Each of the graphical schemes
shares the following pattern: the first line of the
graphical scheme encloses the main words of the ti-
tle connected by arrows and then, starting from the
title, there is a node for each of the sentences of the
text. These nodes summarize the most relevant in-
formation of the text, as the example translated to
English shown in Figure 2. We present the original
text and its translation in the Appendix.
To control the comprehension, after each text we
designed a maximum performance questionnaire in-
cluding inferential items related to the main idea.
We did not include items related to details, be-
cause they involve memory more than comprehen-
sion (Sinatra et al, 1984). Each of the items had
1The CYMK are creme (FAFAC8) and black (000000).
Color difference: 700, brightness difference: 244.
2Notice that we distinguish graphical schemes from con-
ceptual graphs (Sowa, 1983) or semantic maps (Sinatra et al,
1984).
27
Figure 2: Example of a graphical scheme (Fish).
three answers, a correct one, another partially incor-
rect (normally containing details), and an incorrect
one. We gave 100, 50, and 0 points for each type
of answer, respectively. For instance (translated into
English):
? What is the text about?
(a) About the National Museum of Natural His-
tory in Paris (0 points).
(b) About the discovery of a prehistoric fish in Va-
lencia (100 points).
(c) About the content of the fish feces (50 points).
The test finishes with one survey to learn the par-
ticipant preferences. The survey is composed of
three items about how helpful was the graphical
scheme for (1) reading, (2) understanding, and (3)
remembering the text. Each item uses a Likert scale
with 5 levels, from strongly disagree (1) to strongly
agree (5). An example of an item follows:
? Without the graphical scheme, my understand-
ing of the text would have been:
1. Much more easier because I did not under-
stand anything about the graphical scheme.
2. Easier because the graphical scheme is com-
plicated.
3. Neither easier nor more difficult.
4. More difficult because the graphical scheme
has helped me.
5. Much more difficult because the graphical
scheme has shed light about the content.
3.3 Equipment
The eye tracker used was a Tobii T50 (Tobii Tech-
nology, 2005) with a 17-inch TFT monitor. The eye
tracker was calibrated for each participant and the
light focus was always in the same position. The
distance between the participant and the eye tracker
was constant (approximately 60 cm. or 24 in.) and
controlled by using a fixed chair.
3.4 Procedure
The sessions were conducted at Pompeu Fabra Uni-
versity and they took around 30 minutes, depending
on the amount of information given by the partici-
pant. In each session the participant was alone with
the interviewer (first author) in the quiet room pre-
pared for the study.
The first part began with an interview designed to
collect demographic information. Second, we pro-
ceeded with the recordings of the passages using eye
tracking. Half of the participants made variant A of
the test and the other half variant B. The participant
was asked to read the texts in silence and completing
each comprehension questionnaire. The text ends by
answering the survey.
3.5 Data Analysis
The software used for analyzing the eye tracking
data was Tobii Studio 3.0 and the R 2.14.1 statistical
software. The measures used for the comparison of
the text passages were the means of the fixation du-
ration and the total duration of reading. Differences
between groups and parameter values were tested by
means of a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA).
4 Results
In this section we present first the analyses of the
data from the eye tracking and comprehension ques-
tionnaires (Section 4.1), followed by the analysis of
the survey (Section 4.2).
4.1 Readability and Understandability
To measure the impact of graphical schemes in
readability we analyzed the means of the fixation
time and the total reading duration of the pas-
sages. Shorter fixations are preferred to longer
ones because according to previous studies (Just and
Carpenter, 1980), readers make longer fixations at
points where processing loads are greater. Also,
shorter reading durations are preferred to longer
ones since faster reading is related to more read-
able texts (Williams et al, 2003). We compare read-
ability with understandability through the inferential
items of the comprehension questionnaire.
First, we studied the differences between the
dyslexic participants and the control group. Then,
28
Table 1: Experimental results of the eye-tracking and the
comprehension user study.
Measure (sec., %) Scheme + Text Text
(ave. ? std.dev.) Group D
Fixations Duration 0.224? 0.046 0.248? 0.057
Visit Duration 64.747? 22.469 78.493? 34.639
Correct Answers 86.93% 97.73%
Group N
Fixations Duration 0.205? 0.033 0.198? 0.030
Visit Duration 43.771? 14.790 45.124? 13.353
Correct Answers 89.58% 95.83%
we analyzed the influence of the graphical schemes
in the readability and understandability.
In (Kurniawan and Conroy, 2006) it was found
that students with dyslexia are not slower in read-
ing than students without dyslexia when the articles
are presented in a dyslexia friendly colour scheme.
However, we found statistical significance among
the dyslexic and non-dyslexic groups when reading
both texts without graphical schemes taking into ac-
count the mean of fixation time (p < 0.0008) and
the total reading duration for the texts with graph-
ical schemes (p < 0.0007) and without graphi-
cal schemes (p < 0.0001) (see Table 1). On the
other hand, our results are consistent with other eye-
tracking studies to diagnose dyslexia that found sta-
tistical differences among the two populations (Eden
et al, 1994).
The presence of graphical schemes improves the
readability of the text for people with dyslexia be-
cause the fixation time and the reading duration de-
creases for all texts with a graphical scheme (see Ta-
bles 1, 2, and 3). Notice that these positive results
are given for the comparison of the texts alone (see
the text areas in Figure 1). If we compare the to-
tal reading duration of the text alone with the text
plus the graphical scheme, it takes in average 18.6%
more time to read the whole slide than the text alone.
However, we found no statistically significant
results among texts with and without graphical
schemes using such measures. The greatest differ-
ence in readability among texts with and without
graphical schemes was found taking into account the
fixation times for both texts (p = 0.146) among the
dyslexic participants.
Comparing both Fish and Star texts (see Tables
2 and 3), we observe that Fish was more difficult
to read and understand since it presents longer fixa-
tions and a lower rate of correct answers. In dyslex-
ics the fixation time decreases more (from 0.258
seconds without graphical scheme to 0.227 with a
graphical scheme, p < 0.228) in Fish that in Star
(0.237 to 0.222, p < 0.405), meaning that graphi-
cal schemes have a higher impact in readability for
complex texts.
Considering the similarity of the texts, it is sur-
prising how Fish seems to be easier to read than Star.
One possible explanation is that the scientific piece
of news contained in Star was more present in the
media than the other news contained in Fish.
However, graphical schemes have not helped our
participants to increase their rate of correct answers
for the inferential items. For all the cases except one
(non-dyslexic participants in Star, Table 2) the rate
of correct answers decreased when the text was ac-
companied by a scheme.
Dyslexic participants have a higher percentage of
correct answers than non-dyslexics when the text is
presented with the graphical scheme, and lower rate
if the text is presented without the graphical scheme.
These results are consistent with some of the opin-
ions that the participants expressed after the session.
A few dyslexic participants explained that the graph-
ical scheme actually distracted them from the text
content. Another dyslexic participant exposed that
the graphical schemes helped her to remember and
study texts but not to understand them. The diverse
opinions of the participants towards the graphical
schemes suggest that normally graphical schemes
are highly customized by the person that creates
them and therefore a non-customized schema could
complicate understandability.
4.2 Survey
Through the user survey we infer how the partici-
pants were influenced by the graphical schemes in:
(1) the text?s readability, (2) the understandability
of the text, and (3) remembering the text content.
In Figure 3 we present the results for each of the
items comparing dyslexic and non-dyslexic partici-
pants (N = 23).
In terms of readability, dyslexic and non-dyslexic
participants have opposite opinions. While dyslexic
participants agree in finding graphical schemes help-
29
Figure 3: Survey results for understandability, readability and remembering.
Table 2: Experimental results of the eye-tracking and
comprehension user study for text 1, Star.
Measure (sec., %) Scheme + Text Text
(ave. ? std.dev.) Group D
Fixations Duration 0.222? 0.061 0.237? 0.023
Visit Duration 63.633? 0.00 83.918? 18.606
Correct Answers 87.5% 95.45%
Group N
Fixations Duration 0.205? 0.023 0.199? 0.041
Visit Duration 39.552? 14.850 47.351? 15.580
Correct Answers 91.67% 91.67%
Table 3: Experimental results of the eye-tracking and
comprehension user study for text 2, Fish.
Measure (sec., %) Scheme + Text Text
(ave. ? std.dev.) Group D
Fixations Duration 0.227? 0.026 0.258? 0.078
Visit Duration 60.073? 20.684 69.058? 29.910
Correct Answers 86.36% 100%
Group N
Fixations Duration 0.205? 0.042 0.214? 0.036
Visit Duration 47.990? 14.130 42.896? 10.991
Correct Answers 87.5% 100%
ful for reading (12 participants, 52.17%), non-
dyslexic participants said that graphical schemes
were unhelpful. Some participants explained that
the graphical schemes mislead them because they
were placed at the beginning of the slide when they
did not know the topic of the text. However, a few
participants claimed that they found the graphical
schemes very helpful.
Participants with dyslexia mostly agree (10 partic-
ipants, 43.48%) in finding graphical schemes helpful
for textual comprehension while most of the non-
dyslexic participants (14 participants, 60.87%) did
not find graphical schemes neither helpful nor un-
helpful for understandability. On the other hand,
both populations agree in finding graphical schemes
helpful for remembering data from the text.
5 Conclusions and Future Work
The addition of informational elements to a text im-
pacts its readability. Since dyslexics are strong vi-
sual thinkers this study relates the use of graphical
schemes to readability and understandability, con-
tributing to predict their impact.
In general terms, we can affirm that adding a
graphical scheme in a text improves its readability,
since we observed a decrease in the fixation time
and an increase of reading speed in texts containing
graphical schemes. On the contrary to the expected
result, understandability does not improve with the
presence of graphical schemes.
Even though dyslexia presents heterogenous man-
ifestations among subjects, we found patterns re-
lated to readability and understandability using
quantitative and qualitative data.
However, our results shall be taken with care since
readability, specially in dyslexic users, depends on
many factors which are very challenging to control
in an experimental setup. These factor include the
30
vocabulary of the participants, their working mem-
ory or the different strategies they use to overcome
dyslexia.
Further work is needed such as the inclusion of
more types of graphical schemes in the experiments,
the addition of a delayed post-test to address the ef-
fect of supplemental graphical schemes on robust-
ness of learning, and the exploration of more factors
related to readability.
Acknowledgments
We thank Mari-Carmen Marcos for her assistance
with the eye tracker hardware and Joaquim Llisterri
for his invaluable help distributing our experiments
announcement among experts. Special thanks go
for the psychologists Daniela Alarco?n Sa?nchez and
Clara Mar??a Pavo?n Gonzalo for their help when de-
signing the questionnaires and graphical schemes.
For their altruistic help in contacting dyslexic people
we are indebted to Anna Eva Jarabo, Mar??a Fuentes
Fort, Beatriu Pasarin, Du?nia Pe`rdrix i Sola`s, Toni
Mart??, Vero?nica Moreno, Emma Rodero, Olga Soler,
Berta Torres, Mar??a Vilaseca, and Silvia Zaragoza.
Special thanks go to all the anonymous dyslexic par-
ticipants and their families. Finally, we thank the
anonymous reviewers for their excellent comments.
References
A. Al-Wabil, P. Zaphiris, and S. Wilson. 2007. Web nav-
igation for individuals with dyslexia: an exploratory
study. Universal Acess in Human Computer Interac-
tion. Coping with Diversity, pages 593?602.
J.R. Anderson and J. Robert. 2000. Learning and mem-
ory. John Wiley New York.
J.R. Anderson, P.J. Kline, and C.M. Beasley. 1979. A
general learning theory and its application to schema
abstraction. Psychology of learning and motivation,
13:277?318.
R. Barzilay, N. Elhadad, and K. R. McKeown. 2002. In-
ferring strategies for sentence ordering in multidocu-
ment news summarization. Journal of Artificial Intel-
ligence Research, 17:35?55.
Stefan Bott and Horacio Saggion. 2012. Text simplifi-
cation tools for spanish. In Proceedings of the eighth
international conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2012), Instanbul, Turkey, May.
ELRA.
British Dyslexia Association. 2012. Dyslexia style
guide, January. http://www.bdadyslexia.
org.uk/.
B. Chalkley, J. Waterfield, and Geography Discipline
Network. 2001. Providing learning support for stu-
dents with hidden disabilities and dyslexia undertak-
ing fieldwork and related activities. University of
Gloucestershire, Geography Discipline Network.
GF Eden, JF Stein, HM Wood, and FB Wood. 1994.
Differences in eye movements and reading problems
in dyslexic and normal children. Vision Research,
34(10):1345?1358.
J. Elkind, K. Cohen, and C. Murray. 1993. Using
computer-based readers to improve reading compre-
hension of students with dyslexia. Annals of Dyslexia,
43(1):238?259.
Peter Gregor and Alan F. Newell. 2000. An empirical in-
vestigation of ways in which some of the problems en-
countered by some dyslexics may be alleviated using
computer techniques. In Proceedings of the fourth in-
ternational ACM conference on Assistive technologies,
ASSETS 2000, pages 85?91, New York, NY, USA.
ACM.
International Dyslexia Association. 2011. Def-
inition of dyslexia: http://interdys.org/
DyslexiaDefinition.htm. Based in the ini-
tial definition of the Research Committee of the Or-
ton Dyslexia Society, former name of the IDA, done in
1994.
K. Inui, A. Fujita, T. Takahashi, R. Iida, and T. Iwakura.
2003. Text simplification for reading assistance: a
project note. In Proceedings of the second interna-
tional workshop on Paraphrasing-Volume 16, pages 9?
16. Association for Computational Linguistics.
M.A. Just and P.A. Carpenter. 1980. A theory of reading:
From eye fixations to comprehension. Psychological
review, 87:329?354.
J. Kiraly and P.M. Ridge. 2001. Method of and apparatus
for multi-modal information presentation to computer
users with dyslexia, reading disabilities or visual im-
pairment. US Patent 6,324,511.
A.W. Kotula. 2003. Matching readers to instructional
materials: The use of classic readability measures
for students with language learning disabilities and
dyslexia. Topics in Language Disorders, 23(3):190.
S. Kurniawan and G. Conroy. 2006. Comparing compre-
hension speed and accuracy of online information in
students with and without dyslexia. Advances in Uni-
versal Web Design and Evaluation: Research, Trends
and Opportunities, Idea Group Publishing, Hershey,
PA, pages 257?70.
M.R. Lo?pez Castro. 2010. Intervencio?n educativa en
un caso real de problemas de comprensio?n lectora.
Hekademos: revista educativa digital, (6):27?48.
31
K. Nandhini and SR Balasundaram. 2011. Improv-
ing readability of dyslexic learners through document
summarization. In IEEE International Conference
on Technology for Education (T4E), pages 246?249.
IEEE.
M. Pedley. 2006. Designing for dyslexics: Part 3 of 3.
http://accessites.org/site/2006/11/
designing-for-dyslexics-part-3-of-3.
D. M. Ram??rez Sa?nchez. 2011. Estrategias de inter-
vencio?n educativa con el alumnado con dislexia. In-
novacio?n y experiencias educativas, 49.
L. Rello and R. Baeza-Yates. 2012. Lexical quality as a
proxy for web text understandability (poster). In The
21st International World Wide Web Conference (WWW
2012), April.
L. Rello, G. Kanvinde, and R. Baeza-Yates. 2012. Lay-
out guidelines for web text and a web service to im-
prove accessibility for dyslexics. In International
Cross Disciplinary Conference on Web Accessibility
(W4A 2014), Lyon, France, April. ACM Press.
R.C. Sinatra, J. Stahl-Gemake, and D.N. Berg. 1984.
Improving reading comprehension of disabled read-
ers through semantic mapping. The Reading Teacher,
38(1):22?29.
L. Sitbon and P. Bellot. 2008. A readability measure for
an information retrieval process adapted to dyslexics.
In Second international workshop on Adaptive Infor-
mation Retrieval (AIR 2008 in conjunction with IIiX
2008), pages 52?57.
J.F. Sowa. 1983. Conceptual structures: information
processing in mind and machine. Addison-Wesley
Pub., Reading, MA.
Tobii Technology. 2005. Product description Tobii 50
Series.
F.R. Vellutino, J.M. Fletcher, M.J. Snowling, and D.M.
Scanlon. 2004. Specific reading disability (dyslexia):
What have we learned in the past four decades? Jour-
nal of child psychology and psychiatry, 45(1):2?40.
P.A. Weaver. 1978. Comprehension, recall, and dyslexia:
A proposal for the application of schema theory. An-
nals of Dyslexia, 28(1):92?113.
T.G. West. 2009. In the Mind?s Eye: Creative Vi-
sual Thinkers, Gifted Dyslexics, and the Rise of Visual
Technologies. Prometheus Books.
S. Williams, E. Reiter, and L. Osman. 2003. Experi-
ments with discourse-level choices and readability. In
Proceedings of the 9th European Workshop on Natural
Language Generation (ENLG-2003), Budapest, Hun-
gary.
A Appendix
Below we present Text 2 (Fish) and its translation to
English.
Descubren en Valencia una nueva especie de
pez prehisto?rico
El estudio de un lago salino que existio? hace 10 mil-
lones de an?os en Bicorb (Valencia) ha permitido descubrir
el fo?sil de una nueva especie de pez prehisto?rico y de sus
heces. Segu?n informo? este martes el Instituto Geolo?gico
y Minero de Espan?a, este pez depredador ha sido bau-
tizado por los investigadores como ?Aphanius bicorben-
sis?, en honor a la poblacio?n de Bicorb donde ha sido
encontrado. La investigacin ha sido realizada por En-
rique Pen?alver, experto en insectos fo?siles del Instituto
Geolo?gico y Minero, y por Jean Gaudant, especialista en
peces fo?siles del Museo Nacional de Historia Natural de
Par??s, gracias a la financiacio?n de la Consejer??a de Cultura
de la Generalitat Valenciana. El estudio del contenido
de las heces de estos peces, que tambie?n quedaron fos-
ilizadas en la roca, ha permitido a los investigadores saber
que este depredador se alimentaba de los foramin??feros y
de las larvas de mosquito, especialmente abundantes en
el lago.
A new species of a prehistoric fish is discovered
in Valencia
The study of a saline lake that existed 10 million years
ago in Bicorb (Valencia) has uncovered the fossil of a new
species of prehistoric fish and their feces. The Geological
and Mining Institute of Spain informed last Tuesday that
this predatory fish has been named by the researchers as
?Aphanius bicorbensis? in honor of the town of Bicorb
where was found. The research was conducted by En-
rique Pen?alver, an expert on insect fossils of the Geologi-
cal and Mining Institute, and Jean Gaudant, a specialist in
fossil fishes of the National Museum of Natural History
in Paris, thanks to funding from the Council of Culture of
the Government of Valencia. The study of the content of
the feces of these fishes, which were also fossilized in the
rock, has allowed researchers to know that this predator
was feeding on foraminifera and mosquito larvae, espe-
cially abundant in the lake.
32
Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Predicting and Improving Text Readability for Target Reader Populations (PITR) @ EACL 2014, pages 30?37,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26-30 2014.
c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
Keyword Highlighting Improves Comprehension for People with Dyslexia
Luz Rello
NLP & Web Research Groups
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Barcelona, Spain
luzrello@acm.org
Horacio Saggion
NLP Research Group
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Barcelona, Spain
horacio.saggion@upf.edu
Ricardo Baeza-Yates
Yahoo Labs Barcelona &
Web Research Group, UPF
Barcelona, Spain
rbaeza@acm.org
Abstract
The use of certain font types and sizes im-
prove the reading performance of people
with dyslexia. However, the impact of
combining such features with the seman-
tics of the text has not yet been studied. In
this eye-tracking study with 62 people (31
with dyslexia), we explore whether high-
lighting the main ideas of the text in bold-
face has an impact on readability and com-
prehensibility. We found that highlighting
keywords improved the comprehension of
participants with dyslexia. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first result of this
kind for people with dyslexia.
1 Introduction
Dyslexia is a neurological reading disability which
is characterized by difficulties with accurate
and/or fluent word recognition as well as by poor
spelling and decoding abilities. These difficulties
typically result from a deficit in the phonologi-
cal component of language that is often unrelated
to other cognitive disabilities. Secondary conse-
quences include problems in reading comprehen-
sion and reduced reading experience that can im-
pede vocabulary growth and background knowl-
edge (International Dyslexia Association, 2011).
From 10 to 17.5% of the population in the
U.S.A. (Interagency Commission on Learning
Disabilities, 1987) and from 8.6 to 11% of the
Spanish speaking population (Carrillo et al., 2011;
Jim?enez et al., 2009) have dyslexia. Even if
dyslexia is also popularly identified with brilliant
famous people, the most frequent way to detect
a child with dyslexia is by low-performance in
school (Carrillo et al., 2011). In Spain, it is es-
timated that four out of six cases of school fail-
ure are related to dyslexia.
1
The prevalence of
1
The percentage of school failure is calculated by the
dyslexia and its impact in school failure are the
main motivations of our work.
Previous eye-tracking studies with people with
dyslexia have shown that their reading perfor-
mance can improve when the presentation of the
text contains certain font types (Rello and Baeza-
Yates, 2013) or font sizes (O?Brien et al., 2005;
Dickinson et al., 2002; Rello et al., 2013c).
Keywords ? or key-phrases
2
? are words that
capture the main ideas of a text. Highlighting key-
words in the text is a well known strategy to sup-
port reading tasks (Weinstein and Mayer, 1986).
In fact, highlighting keywords is recommended to
students with dyslexia (Hargreaves, 2007), as well
as to teachers for making texts more accessible for
this target group (Peer and Reid, 2001).
Here, we present the first study which explores
the modification of the text presentation in rela-
tionship with its semantics, by highlighting key-
words. We measure the impact of highlighting the
text on the reading performance (readability and
comprehensibility) of people with dyslexia using
eye-tracking. Our hypotheses are:
? H1: The presence of highlighted keywords in
the text increases readability for people with
dyslexia.
? H2: The presence of highlighted keywords in
the text increases comprehensibility for peo-
ple with dyslexia.
Next section reviews related work, while Sec-
tion 3 explains the experimental methodology.
Section 4 presents the results, which are discussed
in Section 5. In Section 6 we draw the conclusions
and we mention future lines of research.
number or students who drop school before finishing sec-
ondary education (high school). While the average of school
failure in the European Union is around 15%, Spain has
around 25-30% of school failure, 31% in 2010 (Enguita et
al., 2010).
2
We use ?keywords?, meaning also ?key-phrase?, to refer
to both single words or phrases that are highlighted.
30
2 Related Work
Related work to ours can be found in: (1) natural
language processing (NLP) literature about key-
phrase and keyword extraction (Section 2.1), and
(2) accessibility literature about dyslexia and key-
words (Section 2.2).
2.1 Key-phrase and Keyword Extraction
There is a vast amount of NLP literature on key-
phrase extraction (Kim et al., 2010; Witten et al.,
1999; Frank et al., 1999).
The semantic data provided by key-phrase ex-
traction can be used as metadata for refining NLP
applications, such as summarization (D?Avanzo
and Magnini, 2005; Lawrie et al., 2001), text
ranking (Mihalcea and Tarau, 2004), indexing
(Medelyan and Witten, 2006), query expansion
(Song et al., 2006), or document management and
topic search (Gutwin et al., 1999).
The closest work to ours is (Turney, 1999) be-
cause they highlight key-phrases in the text to fa-
cilitate its skimming. They compare the highlight-
ing outputs of two different systems, Search 97
and GenEx, using six corpora belonging to differ-
ent genre.
2.2 Accessibility
In accessibility and education literature, highlight-
ing keywords is a broadly recommended learning
strategy (Weinstein and Mayer, 1986). Regarding
students with dyslexia, teachers are encouraged to
highlight keywords to make texts more accessible
(Peer and Reid, 2001; Hargreaves, 2007). These
recommendations are based on qualitative analy-
sis and direct observations with students.
In the applications for people with dyslexia
highlighting is used not for keywords or main
ideas but to help users for tracking their position
when reading such as in ScreenRuler (ClaroSoft-
ware, 2012). Sometimes highlighting is used
simultaneously with text-to-speech technology
(Kanvinde et al., 2012; ClaroSoftware, 2012). In
the SeeWord tool for MS Word (Dickinson et al.,
2002; Gregor et al., 2003), highlighting is used
on the letters where people with dyslexia normally
make mistakes in order to attract the user?s atten-
tion.
Previous studies similar to ours have used
eye-tracking to show how people with dyslexia
can read significantly faster as using certain font
types (Rello and Baeza-Yates, 2013) or font sizes
(O?Brien et al., 2005; Dickinson et al., 2002; Rello
et al., 2013c).
2.3 What is Missing?
First, we did not find any study that measured ob-
jectively the impact of highlighting keywords in a
text on the readability and comprehensibility for
people with dyslexia. Second, to the best of our
knowledge, there are no studies in assistive tech-
nology that uses an NLP based engine to high-
light keywords for people with dyslexia. In this
work we address the first issue, taking the sec-
ond one into consideration. Hence, we emulated
in the experiment the output that a potential NLP
tool would give for highlighting the main ideas in
the text.
3 Methodology
To study the effect of keywords on readability and
comprehensibility of texts on the screen, we con-
ducted an experiment where 62 participants (31
with dyslexia) had to read two texts on a screen,
where one of them had the main ideas highlighted
using boldface. Readability and comprehensibility
were measured via eye-tracking and comprehen-
sion tests, respectively. The participants? prefer-
ences were gathered via a subjective ratings ques-
tionnaire.
3.1 Design
In the experiment there was one condition, Key-
words, with two levels: [+keywords] denotes the
condition where main ideas of the text were high-
lighted in boldface and [?keywords] denotes the
condition where the presentation of the text was
not modified.
The experiments followed a within-subjects de-
sign, so every participant contributed to each of
the levels of the condition. The order of the condi-
tions was counter-balanced to cancel out sequence
effects.
When measuring the reading performance of
people with dyslexia we need to separate readabil-
ity
3
from comprehensibility
4
because they are not
necessarily related. In the case of dyslexia, texts
that might seen not readable for the general popu-
lation, such as texts with errors, can be better un-
derstood by people with dyslexia, and vice versa,
3
The ease with which a text can be read.
4
The ease with which a text can be understood.
31
people with dyslexia find difficulties with standard
texts (Rello and Baeza-Yates, 2012).
To measure readability we consider two depen-
dent variables derived from the eye-tracking data:
Reading Time and Fixation Duration. To measure
comprehensibility we used a comprehension score
as dependent variable.
? Fixation Duration. When reading a text, the
eye does not move contiguously over the text,
but alternates saccades and visual fixations,
that is, jumps in short steps and rests on parts
of the text. Fixation duration denotes how
long the eye rests on a single place of the
text. Fixation duration has been shown to be
a valid indicator of readability. According to
(Rayner and Duffy, 1986; Hy?on?a and Olson,
1995), shorter fixations are associated with
better readability, while longer fixations can
indicate that the processing load is greater.
On the other hand, it is not directly propor-
tional to reading time as some people may
fixate more often in or near the same piece
of text (re-reading). Hence, we used fixation
duration average as an objective approxima-
tion of readability.
? Reading Time. The total time it takes a par-
ticipant to completely read one text. Shorter
reading durations are preferred to longer
ones, since faster reading is related to more
readable texts (Williams et al., 2003). There-
fore, we use Reading Time, that is, the time
it takes a participant to completely read one
text, as a measure of readability, in addition
to Fixation Duration.
? Comprehension Score. To measure text com-
prehensibility we used inferential items, that
is, questions that require a deep understand-
ing of the content of the text. We used
multiple-choice questions with three possi-
ble choices, one correct, and two wrong. We
compute the text comprehension score as the
number of correct answers divided by the to-
tal number of questions.
? Subjective Ratings. In addition, we asked
the participants to rate on a five-point Likert
scale their personal preferences and percep-
tion about how helpful the highlighted key-
words were.
3.2 Participants
We had 62 native Spanish speakers, 31 with a con-
firmed diagnosis of dyslexia.
5
The ages of the par-
ticipants with dyslexia ranged from 13 to 37, with
a mean age of 21.09 years (s = 8.18). The ages
of the control group ranged from 13 to 40, with a
mean age of 23.03 years (s = 7.10).
Regarding the group with dyslexia, three of
them were also diagnosed with attention deficit
disorder. Fifteen people were studying or already
finished university degrees, fourteen were attend-
ing school or high school, and two had no higher
education. All participants were frequent readers
and the level of education was similar for the con-
trol group.
3.3 Materials
In this section we describe how we designed the
texts and keywords that were used as study mate-
rial, as well as the comprehension and subjective
ratings questionnaires.
Base Texts. We picked two similar texts from
the Spanish corpus Simplext (Bott and Saggion,
2012). To meet the comparability requirements
among the texts belonging to the same experiment,
we adapted the texts maintaining as much as pos-
sible the original text. We matched the readabil-
ity of the texts by making sure that the parameters
commonly used to compute readability (Drndare-
vic and Saggion, 2012), had the same or similar
values. Both texts:
(a) are written in the same genre (news);
(b) are about similar topics (culture);
(c) have the same number of words (158 words):
(d) have a similar word length average (4.83 and
5.61 letters);
(e) are accessible news, readable for the general
public so they contained no rare or technical
words, which present an extra difficulty for
people with dyslexia (Rello et al., 2013a).
(f) have the same number of proper names (one
per text);
5
All of them presented official clinical results to prove
that dyslexia was diagnosed in an authorized center or hos-
pital. The Catalonian protocol of dyslexia diagnosis (Speech
Therapy Association of Catalonia, 2011) does not consider
different kinds of dyslexia.
32
The Museo Picasso M?laga includes new works of the artist in its permanent collection
The Andalusian Minister of Culture, Paulino Plata, presented a new reorganization of the 
permanent collection of the Picasso Museum that, coinciding with the birth anniversary 
of the painter, incorporates a wide selection of works by Pablo Picasso provided by the 
Almine and Bernard Ruiz-Picasso Foundation for Art. Paintings, sculptures and ceramics 
from different periods and styles compose this set of 43 pieces given for 15 years by the 
mentioned foundation. The incorporation of these creations assumes, according to the 
Andalusian Council, a valuable contribution to the permanent collection of the 
Museum Picasso M?laga. In this way, a visitor can now contemplate paintings and 
sculptures that, for the first time, are exposed in the gallery.
Siguiente 
Figure 1: Example slide used in the experiment.
(g) have the same number of sentences (five per
text) and similar sentence complexity (three
sentences per text contain relative clauses);
(h) one text has two numerical expressions
(Rello et al., 2013b) and the other has two
foreign words (Cuetos and Valle, 1988), both
being elements of similar difficulty; and
(i) have the same number of highlighted key-
phrases.
An example of a text used (translation from Span-
ish
6
) is given in Figure 1.
Keywords. For creating the keywords we high-
lighted using boldface the words which contained
the main semantic meaning (focus) of the sen-
tence. This focus normally corresponds with the
direct object and contains the new and most rele-
vant information of the sentence (Sperber and Wil-
son, 1986). We only focused on the main sen-
tences; subordinate or relative clauses were dis-
missed. For the syntactic analysis of the sen-
tences we used Connexor?s Machinese Syntax
(Connexor Oy, 2006), a statistical syntactic parser
that employes a functional dependency grammar
(Tapanainen and J?arvinen, 1997). We took direct
objects parsed by Connexor without correcting the
output.
Comprehension Questionnaires. For each text
we manually create three inferential items. The
order of the correct answer was counterbalanced
and all questions have similar difficulty. An exam-
ple question is given in Figure 2.
Subjective Questionnaire. The participants rated
how much did the keywords helped their reading,
6
www.luzrello.com/picasso
El texto habla de: ?The text is about:?
? Sobre la obra del pintor y escultor Picasso.
?The work of the painter and sculptor Picasso.?
? Sobre la Fundaci?on Almine y Bernard Ruiz-Picasso
para el Arte. ?The Almine and Bernard Ruiz-Picasso
Foundation for Arts.?
? Sobre incorporaci?on de nuevas obras en el museo
Picasso de M?alaga. ?About incorporation of new
works in the Picasso Museum of Malaga.?
Figure 2: Comprehension questionnaire item.
their ease to remember the text, and to which ex-
tent would they like to find keywords in texts.
Text Presentation. The presentation of the text
has an effect on reading speed of people with
dyslexia (Kurniawan and Conroy, 2006; Gregor
and Newell, 2000). Therefore, we used a text
layout that follows the recommendations of pre-
vious research. As font type, we chose Arial,
sans serif, as recommended in (Rello and Baeza-
Yates, 2013). The text was left-justified, as rec-
ommended by the British Association of Dyslexia
(British Dyslexia Association, 2012). Each line
did not exceeded 62 characters/column, the font
size was 20 point, and the colors used were black
font with creme background,
7
as recommended in
(Rello et al., 2012).
3.4 Equipment
The eye-tracker used was the Tobii T50 that
has a 17-inch TFT monitor with a resolution of
1024?768 pixels. It was calibrated for each par-
ticipant and the light focus was always in the
same position. The time measurements of the eye-
tracker have a precision of 0.02 seconds. The dis-
7
The CYMK are creme (FAFAC8) and black (000000).
Color difference: 700. Brightness difference: 244.
33
tance between the participant and the eye-tracker
was constant (approximately 60 cm. or 24 in.) and
controlled by using a fixed chair.
3.5 Procedure
The sessions were conducted at Universitat Pom-
peu Fabra in a quiet room and lasted from 20 to 30
minutes. First, we began with a questionnaire to
collect demographic information. Then, we con-
ducted the experiment using eye-tracking. The
participants were asked to read the texts in silence
and to complete the comprehension tests after each
text read. Finally, we carried out the subjective rat-
ings questionnaire.
4 Results
None of the datasets were normally distributed
(Shapiro-Wilk test) and neither of them had an
homogeneous variance (Levene test). Hence, to
study the effect of Keywords on readability and
comprehensibility we used the Wilcoxon non-
parametric test for repeated measures.
4.1 Differences between Groups
We found a significant difference between
the groups regarding Reading Time (W =
2578.5, p < 0.001), Fixation Duration (W =
2953, p < 0.001) and Comprehension Score
(W = 1544, p = 0.040).
Participants with dyslexia had lower compre-
hension scores and longer reading times and fixa-
tions than participants from the control group (see
Table 1).
4.2 Readability
We did not find a significant effect of Keywords
on Reading Time for the participants with dyslexia
(W = 210, p = 0.688) and for the participants
without dyslexia (W = 702.5, p = 0.351).
Similarly, there were found no significant ef-
fects of Keywords on Fixation Duration for the
participants with dyslexia (W = 259.5, p =
0.688) or without dyslexia (W = 862, p = 0.552).
4.3 Comprehension
For the participants with dyslexia, we found a sig-
nificant effect on the Comprehension Score (W =
178.5, p = 0.022). Text with highlighted key-
words led to significantly higher comprehension
scores in this target group.
For the control group we did not find an ef-
fect on the Comprehension Score (W = 740, p =
0.155).
4.4 Subjective Ratings
The debate of what analyses are admissible for
Likert scales ? parametric or non-parametric tests?
is pretty contentious (Carifio and Perla, 2008). A
Shapiro-Wilk test showed that the datasets were
not normally distributed. Hence, we also used the
Wilcoxon non-parametric test.
? Readability. We found no significant dif-
ferences between the groups regarding how
much highlighting keywords helped them
reading the text (W = 504.5, p = 0.316).
Both groups found that keywords can slightly
help their reading (x? = 3, x? = 3.0, s =
1.155)
8
for the participants with dyslexia,
and (x? = 3, x? = 2.8, s = 0.966) for the
control group.
? Memorability. We found no significant differ-
ences between the groups regarding if high-
lighting keywords help to memorize the text
(W = 484, p = 0.493).
Both agree that keywords help them to re-
member the text moderately (x? = 4, x? =
3.636, s = 1.002) for the participants with
dyslexia and (x? = 4, x? = 3.450, s = 1.085)
for the control group.
? Preferences. Also, no differences between
groups were found regarding their prefer-
ences in finding highlighted keywords in the
texts (W = 463, p = 0.727).
Participants with dyslexia would like to find
texts including highlighted keywords (x? = 4,
x? = 3.636, s = 1.136), as well as in the con-
trol group (x? = 4, x? = 3.600, s = 1.057).
5 Discussion
Regarding the differences between the groups, our
results are consistent with other eye-tracking stud-
ies to diagnose dyslexia that found statistical dif-
ferences (Eden et al., 1994).
8
We use x? for the median, and s for the standard devia-
tion.
34
Dependent Variable [+Keywords] [?Keywords ]
(? ? s) Group with Dyslexia
Reading Time (s) 59.98 ? 25.32 53.71 ? 18.42
Fixation Duration (s) 0.22 ? 0.06 0.23 ? 0.060
Comprehension Score (%) 100 ? 0 77.27 ? 42.89
Control Group
Reading Time (s) 36.31 ? 15.17 33.81 ? 12.82
Fixation Duration (s) 0.18 ? 0.04 0.19 ? 0.04
Comprehension Score (%) 100 ? 0 94.87 ? 22.35
Table 1: Results of the Keywords experiment.
5.1 Hypothesis 1
Shorter reading times and fixation durations are
associated with better readability (Just and Car-
penter, 1980). Since Keywords had no significant
effect on readability, we cannot confirm H.1: The
presence of highlighted keywords in the text in-
creases readability for people with dyslexia.
One possible reason for this is that text presen-
tation might only have an impact on readability
when the whole text is modified, not only portions
of it. Most probably, if one text was presented all
in boldface or italics and the other one in roman,
significant differences could have been found as in
(Rello and Baeza-Yates, 2013) where the effect of
different font styles was evaluated. Another expla-
nation could be that the text might look different to
what the participants were used to see and partic-
ipants might need some time to get used to high-
lighted keywords in the text before testing read-
ability effects.
From the content point of view, the fact that the
readability did not change as expected, since the
content of the text is not modified in any of the
conditions.
5.2 Hypothesis 2
Because participants with dyslexia had a signifi-
cantly increase in text comprehension with texts
having highlighted keywords, our findings support
H.2: The presence of highlighted keywords in the
text increases comprehensibility for people with
dyslexia.
This improvement might be due to the possibil-
ity that keywords might help to remember the text
better. This is consistent with the pedagogic lit-
erature that recommends this strategy for learning
and retaining text content (Weinstein and Mayer,
1986).
5.3 Subjective Perception of Keywords
The fact that using keywords for learning is a
shared strategy for both groups (Weinstein and
Mayer, 1986), may explain that no significant
differences between groups were found regard-
ing their preference and perception of keywords
on readability and memorability. Also, high-
lighted keywords in bold are found in general
school books, not only in materials for people with
dyslexia, so both groups were familiar with the
conditions.
5.4 Limitations
This study has at least two limitations. First, the
study was performed with a manually annotated
dataset. These annotations were based on the out-
put of the Connexor parser. We have not found any
evaluation of Connexor?s accuracy when parsing
syntactic constituents. Nevertheless, it has been
observed that the accuracy for direct objects in
Spanish achieves results that varies from 85.7%
to 93.1%, depending on the test set (Padr?o et al.,
2013). Second, the participants read only two texts
because we did not wanted to fatigue participants
with dyslexia. Now that we have observed that
they could have read more texts, we will carry out
further studies with more texts that will incorpo-
rate automatic keyword extraction.
6 Conclusions and Future Work
Our main conclusion is that highlighted keywords
in the text increases the comprehension by peo-
ple with dyslexia. For the control group no effects
were found. Our results support previous educa-
tional recommendations by adding the analysis of
the impact of highlighting keywords using objec-
tive measures.
35
These results can have impact on systems that
rely on text as the main information medium.
By applying keyword extraction automatically and
highlighting them, digital texts could become eas-
ier to understand by people with dyslexia.
Future work include the integration of auto-
matic keyword extraction and its evaluation using
a larger number of texts. Also, different strategies
to select keywords will be explored and the com-
prehension questionnaires will be enriched com-
bining inferential and literal questions. Future
work also includes testing memorability using ob-
jective measures in addition to the subjective re-
sponses of the participants.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the three anonymous review-
ers for their comments and suggestions. We
acknowledge the support from grant TIN2012-
38584-C06-03 (SKATER-UPF-TALN) from Min-
isterio de Econom??a y Competitividad, Secretar??a
de Estado de Investigaci?on, Desarrollo e Inno-
vaci?on, Spain.
References
S. Bott and H. Saggion. 2012. Text simplification tools
for Spanish. In Proc. LREC?12, Istanbul, Turkey,
May. ELRA.
British Dyslexia Association. 2012. Dyslexia style
guide, January. www.bdadyslexia.org.uk/.
J. Carifio and R. Perla. 2008. Resolving the 50-
year debate around using and misusing Likert scales.
Medical education, 42(12):1150?1152.
M. S. Carrillo, J. Alegr??a, P. Miranda, and N. S?anchez
P?erez. 2011. Evaluaci?on de la dislexia en la es-
cuela primaria: Prevalencia en espa?nol (Evaluation
of dyslexia in primary school: The prevalence in
Spanish). Escritos de Psicolog??a (Psychology Writ-
ings), 4(2):35?44.
ClaroSoftware. 2012. Screenruler. www.
clarosoftware.com/index.php?cPath=348.
Connexor Oy, 2006. Machinese language model. Con-
nexor Oy, Helsinki, Finland.
F. Cuetos and F. Valle. 1988. Modelos de lectura y
dislexias (Reading models and dyslexias). Infancia
y Aprendizaje (Infancy and Learning), 44:3?19.
E. D?Avanzo and B.Magnini. 2005. A keyphrase-
based approach to summarization: the lake system
at duc-2005. In Proceedings of DUC.
A. Dickinson, P. Gregor, and A.F. Newell. 2002. On-
going investigation of the ways in which some of
the problems encountered by some dyslexics can be
alleviated using computer techniques. In Proc. AS-
SETS?02, pages 97?103, Edinburgh, Scotland.
B. Drndarevic and H. Saggion. 2012. Towards auto-
matic lexical simplification in Spanish: an empirical
study. In Proc. NAACL HLT?12 Workshop PITR?12,
Montreal, Canada.
G.F. Eden, J.F. Stein, H.M. Wood, and F.B. Wood.
1994. Differences in eye movements and reading
problems in dyslexic and normal children. Vision
Research, 34(10):1345?1358.
M. Fern?andez Enguita, L. Mena Mart??nez, and J. Riv-
iere G?omez. 2010. Fracaso y abandono escolar en
Espa?na (School Failure in Spain). Obra Social, Fun-
daci?on la Caixa.
E. Frank, G.W. Paynter, I.H. Witten, C. Gutwin, and C.
Nevill-Manning. 1999. Domain-specific keyphrase
extraction. In Proc. Sixteenth International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI 1999).
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco,
CA, USA.
P. Gregor and A. F. Newell. 2000. An empirical in-
vestigation of ways in which some of the problems
encountered by some dyslexics may be alleviated
using computer techniques. In Proc. ASSETS?00,
ASSETS 2000, pages 85?91, New York, NY, USA.
ACM Press.
P. Gregor, A. Dickinson, A. Macaffer, and P. An-
dreasen. 2003. Seeword: a personal word
processing environment for dyslexic computer
users. British Journal of Educational Technology,
34(3):341?355.
C. Gutwin, G. Paynter, I. Witten, C. Nevill-Manning,
and E. Frank. 1999. Improving browsing in digital
libraries with keyphrase indexes. Decision Support
Systems, 27(1):81?104.
S. Hargreaves. 2007. Study skills for dyslexic students.
Sage.
J. Hy?on?a and R.K. Olson. 1995. Eye fixation patterns
among dyslexic and normal readers: Effects of word
length and word frequency. Journal of Experimen-
tal Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
21(6):1430.
Interagency Commission on Learning Disabilities.
1987. Learning Disabilities: A Report to the U.S.
Congress. Government Printing Office, Washington
DC, U.S.
International Dyslexia Association. 2011.
Definition of dyslexia: interdys.org/
DyslexiaDefinition.htm. Based in the
initial definition of the Research Committee of the
Orton Dyslexia Society, former name of the IDA,
done in 1994.
36
J. E. Jim?enez, R. Guzm?an, C. Rodr??guez, and C. Ar-
tiles. 2009. Prevalencia de las dificultades es-
pec??ficas de aprendizaje: La dislexia en espa?nol (the
prevalence of specific learning difficulties: Dyslexia
in Spanish). Anales de Psicolog??a (Annals of Psy-
chology), 25(1):78?85.
M.A. Just and P.A. Carpenter. 1980. A theory of read-
ing: From eye fixations to comprehension. Psycho-
logical review, 87:329?354.
G. Kanvinde, L. Rello, and R. Baeza-Yates. 2012.
IDEAL: a dyslexic-friendly e-book reader (poster).
In Proc. ASSETS?12, pages 205?206, Boulder, USA,
October.
S.N. Kim, O. Medelyan, M.Y. Kan, and T. Baldwin.
2010. Semeval-2010 task 5: Automatic keyphrase
extraction from scientific articles. In Proceedings of
the 5th International Workshop on Semantic Evalu-
ation, pages 21?26. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
S. Kurniawan and G. Conroy. 2006. Comparing com-
prehension speed and accuracy of online informa-
tion in students with and without dyslexia. Advances
in Universal Web Design and Evaluation: Research,
Trends and Opportunities, Idea Group Publishing,
Hershey, PA, pages 257?70.
D. Lawrie, W.B. Croft, and A. Rosenberg. 2001. Find-
ing topic words for hierarchical summarization. In
Proceedings of the 24th annual international ACM
SIGIR conference on Research and development in
information retrieval, pages 349?357. ACM Press.
O. Medelyan and I.H. Witten. 2006. Thesaurus based
automatic keyphrase indexing. In Proceedings of
the 6th ACM/IEEE-CS joint conference on Digital
libraries, pages 296?297. ACM Press.
Rada M. and P. Tarau. 2004. Textrank: Bringing or-
der into texts. In Proceedings of EMNLP, volume 4.
Barcelona, Spain.
B.A. O?Brien, J.S. Mansfield, and G.E. Legge. 2005.
The effect of print size on reading speed in dyslexia.
Journal of Research in Reading, 28(3):332?349.
M. Padr?o, M. Ballesteros, H. Mart??nez, and B. Bohnet.
2013. Finding dependency parsing limits over a
large spanish corpus. In Proceedings of 5th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing, Nagoya, Japan, October.
L. Peer and G. Reid. 2001. Dyslexia: Successful inclu-
sion in the secondary school. Routledge.
K. Rayner and S.A. Duffy. 1986. Lexical complex-
ity and fixation times in reading: Effects of word
frequency, verb complexity, and lexical ambiguity.
Memory & Cognition, 14(3):191?201.
L. Rello and R. Baeza-Yates. 2012. Lexical quality as
a proxy for web text understandability (poster). In
Proc. WWW ?12, pages 591?592, Lyon, France.
L. Rello and R. Baeza-Yates. 2013. Good fonts for
dyslexia. In Proc. ASSETS?13, Bellevue, Washing-
ton, USA. ACM Press.
L. Rello, G. Kanvinde, and R. Baeza-Yates. 2012.
Layout guidelines for web text and a web service
to improve accessibility for dyslexics. In Proc. W4A
?12, Lyon, France. ACM Press.
L. Rello, R. Baeza-Yates, L. Dempere, and H. Sag-
gion. 2013a. Frequent words improve readability
and short words improve understandability for peo-
ple with dyslexia. In Proc. INTERACT ?13, Cape
Town, South Africa.
L. Rello, S. Bautista, R. Baeza-Yates, P. Gerv?as,
R. Herv?as, and H. Saggion. 2013b. One half or
50%? An eye-tracking study of number represen-
tation readability. In Proc. INTERACT ?13, Cape
Town, South Africa.
L. Rello, M. Pielot, M. C. Marcos, and R. Carlini.
2013c. Size matters (spacing not): 18 points for a
dyslexic-friendly Wikipedia. In Proc. W4A ?13, Rio
de Janeiro, Brazil.
M. Song, I. Y. Song, R. B. Allen, and Z. Obradovic.
2006. Keyphrase extraction-based query expan-
sion in digital libraries. In Proceedings of the 6th
ACM/IEEE-CS joint conference on Digital libraries,
pages 202?209. ACM Press.
Speech Therapy Association of Catalonia. 2011.
PRODISCAT: Protocol de detecci?o i actuaci?o en la
disl`exia.
`
Ambit Educativo (Protocol for detection
and management of dyslexia. Educational scope.).
Education Department of Catalonia.
D. Sperber and D. Wilson. 1986. Relevance: Commu-
nication and cognition, volume 142. Harvard Uni-
versity Press Cambridge, MA.
P. Tapanainen and T. J?arvinen. 1997. A non-projective
dependency parser. In Proceedings of the 5th Con-
ference on Applied Natural Language Processing
(ANLP-97), pages 64?71.
P. Turney. 1999. Learning to extract keyphrases from
text. In National Research Council, Institute for In-
formation Technology, Technical Report ERB-1057.
C.E. Weinstein and R.E. Mayer. 1986. The teaching of
learning strategies. Handbook of research on teach-
ing, 3:315?327.
S. Williams, E. Reiter, and L. Osman. 2003. Exper-
iments with discourse-level choices and readability.
In Proc. ENLG ?03), Budapest, Hungary.
I.H. Witten, G.W. Paynter, E. Frank, C. Gutwin, and
D.G. Nevill-Manning. 1999. Kea: Practical auto-
matic keyphrase extraction. In Proceedings of the
fourth ACM conference on Digital libraries, pages
254?255. ACM Press.
37
