A Limited-Domain English to Japanese Medical Speech Translator
Built Using REGULUS 2
Manny Rayner
Research Institute for Advanced
Computer Science (RIACS),
NASA Ames Research Center,
Moffet Field, CA 94035
mrayner@riacs.edu
Pierrette Bouillon
University of Geneva
TIM/ISSCO,
40, bvd du Pont-d?Arve,
CH-1211 Geneva 4,
Switzerland
pierrette.bouillon@issco.unige.ch
Vol Van Dalsem III
El Camino Hospital
2500 Grant Road
Mountain View, CA 94040
vvandal3@aol.com
Hitoshi Isahara, Kyoko Kanzaki
Communications Research Laboratory
3-5 Hikaridai
Seika-cho, Soraku-gun
Kyoto, Japan 619-0289
{isahara,kanzaki}@crl.go.jp
Beth Ann Hockey
Research Institute for Advanced
Computer Science (RIACS),
NASA Ames Research Center,
Moffet Field, CA 94035
bahockey@riacs.edu
Abstract
We argue that verbal patient diagnosis is a
promising application for limited-domain
speech translation, and describe an ar-
chitecture designed for this type of task
which represents a compromise between
principled linguistics-based processing on
the one hand and efficient phrasal transla-
tion on the other. We propose to demon-
strate a prototype system instantiating this
architecture, which has been built on top
of the Open Source REGULUS 2 platform.
The prototype translates spoken yes-no
questions about headache symptoms from
English to Japanese, using a vocabulary of
about 200 words.
1 Introduction and motivation
Language is crucial to medical diagnosis. Dur-
ing the initial evaluation of a patient in an emer-
gency department, obtaining an accurate history of
the chief complaint is of equal importance to the
physical examination. In many parts of the world
there are large recent immigrant populations that re-
quire medical care but are unable to communicate
fluently in the local language. In the US these im-
migrants are especially likely to use emergency fa-
cilities because of insurance issues. In an emer-
gency setting there is acute need for quick accurate
physician-patient communication but this communi-
cation is made substantially more difficult in cases
where there is a language barrier. Our system is
designed to address this problem using spoken ma-
chine translation.
Designing a spoken translation system to obtain
a detailed medical history would be difficult if not
impossible using the current state of the art. The
reason that the use of spoken translation technol-
ogy is feasible is because what is actually needed in
the emergency setting is more limited. Since medi-
cal histories traditionally are obtained through two-
way physician-patient conversations that are mostly
physician initiative, there is a preestablished limiting
structure that we can follow in designing the trans-
lation system. This structure allows a physician to
sucessfully use one way translation to elicit and re-
strict the range of patient responses while still ob-
taining the necessary information.
Another helpful constraint on the conversational
requirements is that the majority of medical condi-
tions can be initiatlly characterized by a relatively
small number of key questions about quality, quan-
tity and duration of symptoms. For example, key
questions about chest pain include intensity, loca-
tion, duration, quality of pain, and factors that in-
crease or decrease the pain. These answers to these
questions can be sucessfully communicated by a
limited number of one or two word responses (e.g.
yes/no, left/right, numbers) or even gestures (e.g.
pointing to an area of the body). This is clearly a
domain in which the constraints of the task are suf-
ficient for a limited domain, one way spoken trans-
lation system to be a useful tool.
2 An architecture for limited-domain
speech translation
The basic philosophy behind the architecture of the
system is to attempt an intelligent compromise be-
tween fixed-phrase translation on one hand (e.g.
(IntegratedWaveTechnologies, 2002)) and linguisti-
cally motivated grammar-based processing on the
other (e.g. VERBMOBIL (Wahlster, 2000) and Spo-
ken Language Translator (Rayner et al, 2000a)).
At run-time, the system behaves essentially like a
phrasal translator which allows some variation in the
input language. This is close in spirit to the approach
used in most normal phrase-books, which typically
allow ?slots? in at least some phrases (?How much
does ? cost??; ?How do I get to ? ??). However,
in order to minimize the overhead associated with
defining and maintaining large sets of phrasal pat-
terns, these patterns are derived from a single large
linguistically motivated unification grammar; thus
the compile-time architecture is that of a linguisti-
cally motivated system. Phrasal translation at run-
time gives us speed and reliability; the linguistically
motivated compile-time architecture makes the sys-
tem easy to extend and modify.
The runtime system comprises three main mod-
ules. These are respectively responsible for source
language speech recognition, including parsing and
production of semantic representation; transfer and
generation; and synthesis of target language speech.
The speech processing modules (recognition and
synthesis) are implemented on top of the standard
Nuance Toolkit platform (Nuance, 2003). Recogni-
tion is constrained by a CFG language model written
in Nuance Grammar Specification Language (GSL),
which also specifies the semantic representations
produced. This language model is compiled from
a linguistically motivated unification grammar us-
ing the Open Source REGULUS 2 platform (Rayner
et al, 2003; Regulus, 2003); the compilation pro-
cess is driven by a small corpus of examples. The
language processing modules (transfer and genera-
tion) are a suite of simple routines written in SICStus
Prolog. The speech and language processing mod-
ules communicate with each other through a mini-
mal file-based protocol.
The semantic representations on both the source
and target sides are expressed as attribute-value
structures. In accordance with the generally mini-
malistic design philosophy of the project, semantic
representations have been kept as simple as possi-
ble. The basic principle is that the representation of
a clause is a flat list of attribute-value pairs: thus for
example the representation of ?Did your headache
start suddenly?? is the attribute-value list
[[utterance_type,ynq],[tense,past],
[symptom,headache],[state,start],
[manner,suddenly]]
In a broad domain, it is of course trivial to con-
struct examples where this kind of representation
runs into serious problems. In the very narrow do-
main of a phrasebook translator, it has many desir-
able properties. In particular, operations on semantic
representations typically manipulate lists rather than
trees. In a broad domain, we would pay a heavy
price: the lack of structure in the semantic represen-
tations would often make them ambiguous. The very
simple ontology of the phrasebook domain however
means that ambiguity is not a problem; the compo-
nents of a flat list representation can never be de-
rived from more than one functional structure, so
this structure does not need to be explicitly present.
Transfer rules define mappings of sets of attribute-
value pairs to sets of attribute-value pairs; the ma-
jority of the rules map single attribute-value pairs
to single attribute-value pairs. Generation is han-
dled by a small Definite Clause Grammar (DCG),
which converts attribute-value structures into sur-
face strings; its output is passed through a minimal
post-transfer component, which applies a set of rules
which map fixed strings to fixed strings. Speech syn-
thesis is performed either by the Nuance Vocalizer
TTS engine or by concatenation of recorded wave-
files, depending on the output language.
One of the most important questions for a med-
ical translation system is that of reliability; we ad-
dress this issue using the methods of (Rayner and
Bouillon, 2002). The GSL form of the recognition
grammar is run in generation mode using the Nu-
ance generate utility to generate large numbers
of random utterances, all of which are by construc-
tion within system coverage. These utterances are
then processed through the system in batch mode us-
ing all-solutions versions of the relevant processing
algorithms. The results are checked automatically
to find examples where rules are either deficient or
ambiguous. With domains of the complexity under
consideration here, we have found that it is feasible
to refine the rule-sets in this way so that holes and
ambiguities are effectively eliminated.
3 A medical speech translation system
We have built a prototype medical speech transla-
tion system instantiating the functionality outlined
in Section 1 and the architecture of Section 2. The
system permits spoken English input of constrained
yes/no questions about the symptoms of headaches,
using a vocabulary of about 200 words. This is
enough to support most of the standard examina-
tion questions for this subdomain. There are two
versions of the system, producing spoken output in
French and Japanese respectively. Since English ?
Japanese is distinctly the more interesting and chal-
lenging language pair, we will focus on this version.
Speech recognition and source language analy-
sis are performed using REGULUS 2. The grammar
is specialised from the large domain-independent
grammar using the methods sketched in Section 2.
The training corpus has been constructed by hand
from an initial corpus supplied by a medical pro-
fessional; the content of the questions was kept un-
changed, but where necessary the form was revised
to make it more appropriate to a spoken dialogue.
When we felt that it would be difficult to remem-
ber what the canonical form of a question would
be, we added two or three variant forms. For exam-
ple, we permit ?Does bright light make the headache
worse?? as a variant for ?Is the headache aggra-
vated by bright light??, and ?Do you usually have
headaches in the morning?? as a variant for ?Does
the headache usually occur in the morning??. The
current training corpus contains about 200 exam-
ples.
The granularity of the phrasal rules learned by
grammar specialisation has been set so that the con-
stituents in the acquired rules are VBARs, post-
modifier groups, NPs and lexical items. VBARs
may include both inverted subject NPs and adverbs1.
Thus for example the training example ?Are the
headaches usually caused by emotional upset?? in-
duces a top-level rule whose context-free skeleton is
UTT --> VBAR, VBAR, POSTMODS
For the training example, the first VBAR in the in-
duced rule spans the phrase ?are the headaches usu-
ally?, the second VBAR spans the phrase ?caused?,
and the POSTMODS span the phrase ?by emotional
upset?. The same rule could potentially be used to
cover utterances like ?Is the pain sometimes pre-
ceded by nausea?? and ?Is your headache ever as-
sociated with blurred vision??. The same training
example will also induce several lower-level rules,
the least trivial of which are rules for VBAR and
POSTMODS with context-free skeletons
VBAR --> are, NP, ADV
POSTMODS --> P, NP
The grammar specialisation method is described in
full detail in (Rayner et al, 2000b).
With regard to the transfer component, we have
had two main problems to solve. Firstly, it is well-
known that translation from English to Japanese re-
quires major reorganisation of the syntactic form.
Word-order is nearly always completely different,
and category mismatches are very common. It is
mainly for this reason that we chose to use a flat
semantic representation. As long as the domain is
simple enough that the flat representations are un-
ambiguous, transfer can be carried out by mapping
lists of elements into lists of elements. For example,
we translate ?are your headaches caused by fatigue?
as ?tsukare de zutsu ga okorimasu ka? (lit. ?fatigue-
CAUSAL headache-SUBJ occur-PRESENT QUES-
TION?). Here, the source-language representation is
[[utterance_type,ynq],
[tense,present],
[symptom,headache],
[event,cause],
[cause,fatigue]]
and the target-language one is
[[utterance_type,sentence],
[tense,present],
[symptom,zutsu],
1This non-standard definition of VBAR has technical advan-
tages discussed in (Rayner et al, 2000c)
do your headaches often appear at night ?
yoku yoru ni zutsu ga arimasu ka
(often night-AT headache-SUBJ is-PRES-Q)
is the pain in the front of the head ?
itami wa atama no mae no hou desu ka
(pain-TOPIC head-OF front side is-PRES-Q)
did your headache start suddenly ?
zutsu wa totsuzen hajimari mashita ka
(headache-TOPIC sudden start-PRES-Q)
have you had headaches for weeks ?
sushukan zutsu ga tsuzuite imasu ka
(weeks headache-SUBJ have-CONT-PRES-Q)
is the pain usually superficial ?
itsumo itami wa hyomenteki desu ka
(usually pain-SUBJ superficial is-PRES-Q)
is the severity of the headaches increasing ?
zutsu wa hidoku natte imasu ka
(headache-TOPIC severe becoming is-PRES-Q)
Table 1: Examples of utterances covered by the pro-
totype
[event,okoru],[postpos,causal],
[cause,tsukare]]
Each line in the source representation maps into the
corresponding one in the target in the obvious way.
The target-language grammar is constrained enough
that there is only one Japanese sentence which can
be generated from the given representation.
The second major problem for transfer relates to
elliptical utterances. These are very important due
to the one-way character of the interaction: instead
of being able to ask a WH-question (?What does
the pain feel like??), the doctor needs to ask a se-
ries of Y-N questions (?Is the pain dull??, ?Is the
pain burning??, ?Is the pain aching??, etc). We
rapidly found that it was much more natural for
questions after the first one to be phrased ellipti-
cally (?Is the pain dull??, ?Burning??, ?Aching??).
English and Japanese have however different con-
ventions as to what types of phrase can be used
elliptically. Here, for example, it is only pos-
sible to allow some types of Japanese adjectives
to stand alone. Thus we can grammatically and
semantically say ?hageshii desu ka? (lit. ?burn-
ing is-QUESTION?) but not ?*uzukuyona desu
ka? (lit. ?*aching is-QUESTION?). The prob-
lem is that adjectives like ?uzukuyona? must com-
bine adnominally with a noun in this context:
thus we in fact have to generate ?uzukuyona itami
desu ka? (?aching-ADNOMINAL-USAGE pain is-
QUESTION?). Once again, however, the very lim-
ited domain makes it practical to solve the problem
robustly. There are only a handful of transforma-
tions to be implemented, and the extra information
that needs to be added is always clear from the sortal
types of the semantic elements in the target represen-
tation.
Table 1 gives examples of utterances covered by
the system, and the translations produced.
References
IntegratedWaveTechnologies, 2002. http://www.i-w-
t.com/investor.html. As of 15 Mar 2002.
Nuance, 2003. http://www.nuance.com. As of 25 Febru-
ary 2003.
M. Rayner and P. Bouillon. 2002. A phrasebook style
medical speech translator. In Proceedings of the 40th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (demo track), Philadelphia, PA.
M. Rayner, D. Carter, P. Bouillon, V. Digalakis, and
M. Wire?n, editors. 2000a. The Spoken Language
Translator. Cambridge University Press.
M. Rayner, D. Carter, and C. Samuelsson. 2000b. Gram-
mar specialisation. In Rayner et al (Rayner et al,
2000a).
M. Rayner, B.A. Hockey, and F. James. 2000c. Compil-
ing language models from a linguistically motivated
unification grammar. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth
International Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics, Saarbrucken, Germany.
M. Rayner, B.A. Hockey, and J. Dowding. 2003. An
open source environment for compiling typed unifica-
tion grammars into speech recognisers. In Proceed-
ings of the 10th EACL (demo track), Budapest, Hun-
gary.
Regulus, 2003. http://sourceforge.net/projects/regulus/.
As of 24 April 2003.
W. Wahlster, editor. 2000. Verbmobil: Foundations of
Speech-to-Speech Translation. Springer.
