Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 Main Conference Poster Sessions, pages 345?352,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Collaborative Framework for Collecting Thai Unknown Words from
the Web
Choochart Haruechaiyasak, Chatchawal Sangkeettrakarn, Pornpimon Palingoon
Sarawoot Kongyoung and Chaianun Damrongrat
Information Research and Development Division (RDI)
National Electronics and Computer Technology Center (NECTEC)
Thailand Science Park, Klong Luang, Pathumthani 12120, Thailand
rdi5@nnet.nectec.or.th
Abstract
We propose a collaborative framework for
collecting Thai unknown words found on
Web pages over the Internet. Our main
goal is to design and construct a Web-
based system which allows a group of in-
terested users to participate in construct-
ing a Thai unknown-word open dictionary.
The proposed framework provides sup-
porting algorithms and tools for automati-
cally identifying and extracting unknown
words from Web pages of given URLs.
The system yields the result of unknown-
word candidates which are presented to
the users for verification. The approved
unknown words could be combined with
the set of existing words in the lexicon
to improve the performance of many NLP
tasks such as word segmentation, infor-
mation retrieval and machine translation.
Our framework includes word segmenta-
tion and morphological analysis modules
for handling the non-segmenting charac-
teristic of Thai written language. To take
advantage of large available text resource
on the Web, our unknown-word boundary
identification approach is based on the sta-
tistical string pattern-matching algorithm.
Keywords: Unknown words, open dictio-
nary, word segmentation, morphological
analysis, word-boundary detection.
1 Introduction
The advent of the Internet and the increasing pop-
ularity of the Web have altered many aspects of
natural language usage. As more people turn to the
Internet as a new communicating channel, the tex-
tual information has increased tremendously and
is also widely accessible. More importantly, the
available information is varied largely in terms of
topic difference and multi-language characteristic.
It is not uncommon to find a Web page written in
Thai lies adjacent to aWeb page written in English
via a hyperlink, or a Web page containing both
Thai and English languages. In order to perform
well in this versatile environment, an NLP system
must be adaptive enough to handle the variation in
language usage. One of the problems which re-
quires special attention is unknown words.
As with most other languages, unknown words
also play an extremely important role in Thai-
language NLP. Unknown words are viewed as one
of the problematic sources of degrading the per-
formance of traditional NLP applications such as
MT (Machine Translation), IR (Information Re-
trieval) and TTS (Text-To-Speech). Reduction in
the amount of unknown words or being able to
correctly identify unknown words in these sys-
tems would help increase the overall system per-
formance.
The problem of unknown words in Thai lan-
guage is perhaps more severe than in English or
other latin-based languages. As a result of the
information technology revolution, Thai people
have become more familiar with other foreign lan-
guages especially English. It is not uncommon to
hear a few English words over a course of con-
versation between two Thai people. The foreign
words along with other Thai named entities are
among the new words which are continuously cre-
ated and widely circulated. To write a foreign
word, the transliterated form of Thai alphabets is
often used. The Royal Institute of Thailand is the
official organization in Thailand who has respon-
345
sibility and authority in defining and approving the
use of new words. The process of defining a new
word is manual and time-consuming as each word
must be approved by a working group of linguists.
Therefore, this traditional approach of construct-
ing the lexicon is not a suitable solution, especially
for systems running on the Web environment.
Due to the inefficiency of using linguists in
defining new lexicon, there must be a way to au-
tomatically or at least semi-automatically collect
new unknown words. In this paper, we propose
a collaborative framework for collecting unknown
words from Web pages over the Internet. Our
main purpose is to design and construct a system
which automatically identifies and extracts un-
known words found on Web pages of given URLs.
The compiled list of unknown-word candidates is
to be verified by a group of participants. The ap-
proved unknown words are then added to the ex-
isting lexicon along with the other related infor-
mation such as meaning and POS (part of speech).
This paper focuses on the underlying algorithms
for supporting the process of identifying and ex-
tracting unknown words. The overall process is
composed of two steps: unknown-word detection
and unknown-word boundary identification. The
first step is to detect the locations of unknown-
word occurrences from a given text. Since Thai
language belongs to the class of non-segmenting
language group in which words are written contin-
uously without using any explicit delimiting char-
acter, detection of unknown words could be ac-
complished mainly by using a word-segmentation
algorithm with a morphological analysis. By us-
ing a dictionary-based word-segmentation algo-
rithm, locations of words which are not previ-
ously included in the dictionary will be easily de-
tected. These unknown words belong to the class
of explicit unknown words and often represent the
transliteration of foreign words.
The other class of unknown words is hidden
unknown words. This class includes new words
which are created through the combination of
some existing words in the lexicon. The hidden
unknown words are usually named entities such
as a person?s name and an organization?s name.
The hidden unknown words could be identified us-
ing the approaches such as n-gram generation and
phrase chunking. The scope of this paper focuses
only on the extraction of the explicit unknown
words. However, the design of our framework also
includes the extraction of hidden unknown words.
We will continue to explore this issue in our future
works.
Once the location of an unknown word is de-
tected, the second step involves the identification
of its boundary. Since we use the Web as our
main resource, we could take advantage of its large
availability of textual contents. We are interested
in collecting unknown words which occur more
than once throughout the corpus. Unknown words
which occur only once in the large corpus are not
considered as being significant. These words may
be unusual words which are not widely accepted,
or could be misspelling words. Using this assump-
tion, our approach for identifying the unknown-
word boundary is based on a statistical pattern-
matching algorithm. The basic idea is that the
same unknown word which occurs more than once
would likely to appear in different surrounding
contexts. Therefore, a group of characters which
form the unknown word could be extracted by an-
alyzing the string matching patterns.
To evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed
framework, experiments using a real data set col-
lected from the Web are performed. The experi-
ments are designed to test each of the two main
steps of the framework. Variation of morphologi-
cal analysis are tested for the unknown-word de-
tection. The detection rate of unknown words
were found to be as high as approximately 96%.
Three variations of string pattern-matching tech-
niques were tested for unknown-word boundary
identification. The identification accuracy was
found to be as high as approximately 36%. The
relatively low accuracy is not the major concern
since the unknown-word candidates are to be ver-
ified and corrected by users before they are ac-
tually added to the dictionary. The system is
implemented via the Web-browser environment
which provides user-friendly interface for verifi-
cation process.
The rest of this paper is organized as fol-
lows. The next section presents and discusses
related works previously done in the unknown-
word problem. Section 3 provides an overview
of unknown-word problem in the relation to the
word-segmentation process. Section 4 presents the
proposed framework with underlying algorithms
in details. Experiments are performed in Section
5 with results and discussion. The conclusion is
given in Section 6.
346
2 Previous Works
The research and study in unknown-word prob-
lem have been extensively done over the past
decades. Unknown words are viewed as prob-
lematic source in the NLP systems. Techniques
in identifying and extracting unknown words are
somewhat language-dependent. However, these
techniques could be classified into two major cat-
egories, one for segmenting languages and an-
other for non-segmenting languages. Segment-
ing languages, such as latin-based languages, use
delimiting characters to separate written words.
Therefore, once the unknown words are detected,
their boundaries could be identified relatively eas-
ily when compared to those for non-segmenting
languages.
Some examples of techniques involving
segmenting languages are listed as follows.
Toole (2000) used multiple decision trees to
identify names and misspellings in English texts.
Features used in constructing the decision trees
are, for example, POS (Part-Of-Speech), word
length, edit distance and character sequence
frequency. Similarly, a decision-tree approach
was used to solve the POS disambiguation
and unknown word guessing in (Orphanos and
Christodoulakis, 1999). The research in the
unknown-word problem for segmenting lan-
guages is also closely related to the extraction of
named entities. The difference of these techniques
to those in non-segmenting languages is that
the approach needs to parse the written text in
word-level as opposed to character-level.
The research in unknown-word problem for
non-segmenting languages is highly active for
Chinese and Japanese. Many approaches have
been proposed and experimented with. Asahara
and Matsumoto (2004) proposed a technique of
SVM-based chunking to identify unknown words
from Japanese texts. Their approach used a sta-
tistical morphological analyzer to segment texts
into segments. The SVM was trained by using
POS tags to identify the unknown-word bound-
ary. Chen and Ma (2002) proposed a practical
unknown word extraction system by considering
both morphological and statistical rule sets for
word segmentation. Chang and Su (1997) pro-
posed an unsupervised iterative method for ex-
tracting unknown lexicons from Chinese text cor-
pus. Their idea is to include the potential unknown
words to the augmented dictionary in order to im-
prove the word segmentation process. Their pro-
posed approach also includes both contextual con-
straints and the joint character association metric
to filter the unlikely unknown words. Other ap-
proaches to identify unknown words include sta-
tistical or corpus-based (Chen and Bai, 1998), and
the use of heuristic knowledge (Nie et al , 1995)
and contextual information (Khoo and Loh, 2002).
Some extensions to unknown-word identification
have been done. An example include the determi-
nation of POS for unknown words (Nakagawa et
al. , 2001).
The research in unknown words for Thai lan-
guage has not been widely done as in other lan-
guages. Kawtrakul et al (1997) used the combina-
tion of a statistical model and a set of context sen-
sitive rules to detect unknown words. Our frame-
work has a different goal from previous works. We
consider unknown-word problem as collaborative
task among a group of interested users. As more
textual content is provided to the system, new un-
known words could be extracted with more accu-
racy. Thus, our framework can be viewed as col-
laborative and statistical or corpus-based.
3 Unknown-Word Problem in Word
Segmentation Algorithms
Similar to Chinese, Japanese and Korea, Thai lan-
guage belongs to the class of non-segmenting lan-
guages in which words are written continuously
without using any explicit delimiting character.
To handle non-segmenting languages, the first re-
quired step is to perform word segmentation. Most
word segmentation algorithms use a lexicon or
dictionary to parse texts at the character-level. A
typical word segmentation algorithm yields three
types of results: known words, ambiguous seg-
ments, and unknown segments. Known words are
existing words in the lexicon. Ambiguous seg-
ments are caused by the overlapping of two known
words. Unknown segments are the combination of
characters which are not defined in the lexicon.
In this paper, we are interested in extracting
the unknown words with high precision and re-
call results. Three types of unknown words are
hidden, explicit and mixed (Kawtrakul et al ,
1997). Hidden unknown words are composed by
different words existing in the lexicon. To illus-
trate the idea, let us consider an unknown word
ABCD where A, B, C, and D represents individ-
ual characters. Suppose that AB and CD both ex-
347
ist in a dictionary, then ABCD is considered as
a hidden unknown word. The explicit unknown
words are newly created words by using differ-
ent characters. Let us again consider an unknown
word ABCD. Suppose that there is no substring
of ABCD (i.e., AB, BC, CD, ABC, BCD) exists in
the dictionary, then ABCD is considered as explicit
unknown words. The mixed unknown words are
composed of both existing words in a dictionary
and non-existing substrings. From the example of
unknown string ABCD, if there is at least one sub-
string of ABCD (i.e., AB, BC, CD, ABC, BCD) ex-
ists in the dictionary, then ABCD is considered as
a mixed unknown word.
It can be immediately seen that the detection of
the hidden unknown words are not trivial since the
parser would mistakenly assume that all the frag-
ments of the words are valid, i.e., previously de-
fined in the dictionary. In this paper, we limit our-
self to the extraction of the explicit and mixed un-
known words. This type of unknown words usu-
ally represent the transliteration of foreign words.
Detection of these unknown words could be ac-
complished mainly by using a word-segmentation
algorithm with a morphological analysis. By using
a dictionary-based word-segmentation algorithm,
locations of words which are not previously de-
fined in the lexicon could be easily detected.
4 The Proposed Framework
The overall framework is shown in Figure 1.
Two major components are information agent and
unknown-word analyzer. The details of each com-
ponent are given as follows.
? Information agent: This module is com-
posed of a Web crawler and an HTML parser.
It is responsible for collecting HTML sources
from the given URLs and extracting the tex-
tual data from the pages. Our framework is
designed to support multi-user and collabora-
tive environment. The advantage of this de-
sign approach is that unknown words could
be collected and verified more efficiently.
More importantly, it allows users to select the
Web pages which suit their interests.
? Unknown-word analyzer: This module is
composed of many components for analyzing
and extracting unknown words. Word seg-
mentation module receives text strings from
the information agent and segments them
into a list of words. N-gram generation
module is responsible for generating hidden
unknown-word candidates. Morphological
analysis module is used to form initial ex-
plicit unknown-word segments. String pat-
tern matching unit performs unknown-word
boundary identification task. It takes the
intermediate unknown segments and iden-
tifies their boundaries by analyzing string
matching patterns The results are processed
unknown-word candidates which are pre-
sented to linguists for final post-processing
and verification. New unknown words are
combined with the dictionary to iteratively
improve the performance of the word seg-
mentation module. Details of each compo-
nent are given in the following subsections.
4.1 Unknown-Word Detection
As previously mentioned in Section 3, applying
a word-segmentation algorithm on a text string
yields three different segmented outputs: known,
ambiguous, and unknown segments. Since our
goal is to simply detect the unknown segments
without solving or analyzing other related issues
in word segmentation, using the longest-matching
word segmentation algorithm previously proposed
by Poowarawan (1986) is sufficient. An exam-
ple to illustrate the word-segmentation process is
given as follows.
Let the following string denotes a
text string written in Thai language:
{a1a2...aib1b2...bjc1c2...ck}. Suppose that
{a1a2...ai} and {c1c2...ck} are known words
from the dictionary, and {b1b2...bj} be an un-
known word. For the explicit unknown-word
case, applying the word-segmentation algo-
rithm would yield the following segments:
{a1a2...ai}{b1}{b2}...{bj}{c1c2...ck}. It can be
observed that the detected unknown positions for
a single unknown word are individual characters
in the unknown word itself. Based on the initial
statistical analysis of a Thai lexicon, it was found
that the averaged number of characters in a word
is equal to 7. This characteristic is quite different
from other non-segmenting languages such as
Chinese and Japanese in which a word could
be a character or a combination of only a few
characters. Therefore, to reduce the complexity
in unknown-word boundary identification task,
the unknown segments could be merged to
form multiple-character segments. For exam-
348
    
      	 
        
      
  
   
	 
    
  
  
    
  