Proceedings of the Analyzing Conversations in Text and Speech (ACTS) Workshop at HLT-NAACL 2006, pages 8?14,
New York City, New York, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Off-Topic Detection in Conversational Telephone Speech
Robin Stewart and Andrea Danyluk
Department of Computer Science
Williams College
Williamstown, MA 01267
{06rss 2, andrea}@cs.williams.edu
Yang Liu
Department of Computer Science
UT Dallas
Richardson, TX 75080
yangl@hlt.utdallas.edu
Abstract
In a context where information retrieval is
extended to spoken ?documents? includ-
ing conversations, it will be important to
provide users with the ability to seek in-
formational content, rather than socially
motivated small talk that appears in many
conversational sources. In this paper we
present a preliminary study aimed at auto-
matically identifying ?irrelevance? in the
domain of telephone conversations. We
apply a standard machine learning algo-
rithm to build a classifier that detects off-
topic sections with better-than-chance ac-
curacy and that begins to provide insight
into the relative importance of features for
identifying utterances as on topic or not.
1 Introduction
There is a growing need to index, search, summa-
rize and otherwise process the increasing amount of
available broadcast news, broadcast conversations,
meetings, class lectures, and telephone conversa-
tions. While it is clear that users have wide ranging
goals in the context of information retrieval, we as-
sume that some will seek only credible information
about a specific topic and will not be interested in the
socially-motivated utterances which appear through-
out most conversational sources. For these users,
a search for information about weather should not
return conversations containing small talk such as
?Nice weather we?ve been having.?
In this paper we investigate one approach for auto-
matically identifying ?irrelevance? in the domain of
telephone conversations. Our initial data consist of
conversations in which each utterance is labeled as
being on topic or not. We apply inductive classifier
learning algorithms to identify useful features and
build classifiers to automatically label utterances.
We begin in Section 2 by hypothesizing features
that might be useful for the identification of irrel-
evant regions, as indicated by research on the lin-
guistics of conversational speech and, in particular,
small talk. Next we present our data and discuss our
annotation methodology. We follow this with a de-
scription of the complete set of features and machine
learning algorithms investigated. Section 6 presents
our results, including a comparison of the learned
classifiers and an analysis of the relative utility of
various features.
2 Linguistics of Conversational Speech
Cheepen (Cheepen, 1988) posits that speakers have
two primary goals in conversation: interactional
goals in which interpersonal motives such as social
rank and trust are primary; and transactional goals
which focus on communicating useful information
or getting a job done. In a context where conversa-
tions are indexed and searched for information, we
assume in this paper that users will be interested
in the communicated information, rather than the
way in which participants interact. Therefore, we
assume that utterances with primarily transactional
purposes will be most important, while interactional
utterances can be ignored.
Greetings and partings are the most predictable
8
type of interactional speech. They consistently ap-
pear at the beginning and end of conversations and
follow a fairly formulaic pattern of content (Laver,
1981). Thus we hypothesize that: Utterances near
the beginning or end of conversations are less likely
to be relevant.
Cheepen also defines speech-in-action regions
to be segments of conversation that are related to
the present physical world or the activity of chat-
ting, e.g. ?What lovely weather.? or ?It is so nice
to see you.? Since these regions mainly involve
participants identifying their shared social situation,
they are not likely to contain transactional content.
Further, since speech-in-action segments are distin-
guished by their focus on the present, we hypoth-
esize that: Utterances with present tense verbs are
less likely to be relevant.
Finally, small talk that is not intended to demar-
cate social hierarchy tends to be abbreviated, e.g.
?Nice day? (Laver, 1981). From this we hypothe-
size that: Utterances lacking common helper words
such as ?it?, ?there?, and forms of ?to be? are less
likely to be relevant.
3 Related Work
Three areas of related work in natural language pro-
cessing have been particularly informative for our
research.
First, speech act theory states that with each ut-
terance, a conversant is committing an action, such
as questioning, critiquing, or stating a fact. This is
quite similar to the notion of transactional and inter-
actional goals. However, speech acts are generally
focused on the lower level of breaking apart utter-
ances and understanding their purpose, whereas we
are concerned here with a coarser-grained notion of
relevance. Work closer to ours is that of Bates et
al. (Bates et al, 2005), who define meeting acts for
recorded meetings. Of their tags, commentary is
most similar to our notion of relevance.
Second, there has been research on generating
small talk in order to establish rapport between an
automatic system and human user (Bickmore and
Cassell, 2000). Our work complements this by po-
tentially detecting off-topic speech from the human
user as an indication that the system should also re-
spond with interactional language.
Label Utterance
S 2: [LAUGH] Hi.
S 2: How nice to meet you.
S 1: It is nice to meet you too.
M 2: We have a wonderful topic.
M 1: Yeah.
M 1: It?s not too bad. [LAUGH]
T 2: Oh, I ? I am one hundred percent in
favor of, uh, computers in the classroom.
T 2: I think they?re a marvelous tool,
educational tool.
Table 1: A conversation fragment with annotations:
(S)mall Talk, (M)etaconversation, and On-(T)opic.
The two speakers are identified as ?1? and ?2?.
Third, off-topic detection can be viewed as a seg-
mentation of conversation into relevant and irrele-
vant parts. Thus our work has many similarities to
topic segmentation systems, which incorporate cue
words that indicate an abrupt change in topic (e.g.
?so anyway...?), as well as long term variations in
word occurrence statistics (Hearst, 1997; Reynar,
1999; Beeferman et al, 1999, e.g.). Our approach
uses previous and subsequent sentences to approxi-
mate these ideas, but might benefit from a more ex-
plicitly segmentation-based strategy.
4 Data
In our work we use human-transcribed conversa-
tions from the Fisher data (LDC, 2004). In each con-
versation, participants have been given a topic to dis-
cuss for ten minutes. Despite this, participants often
talk about subjects that are not at all related to the as-
signed topic. Therefore, a convenient way to define
irrelevance in conversations in this domain is seg-
ments which do not contribute to understanding the
assigned topic. This very natural definition makes
the domain a good one for initial study; however,
the idea can be readily extended to other domains.
For example, broadcast debates, class lectures, and
meetings usually have specific topics of discussion.
The primary transactional goal of participants in
the telephone conversations is to discuss the as-
signed topic. Since this goal directly involves the
act of discussion itself, it is not surprising that par-
ticipants often talk about the current conversation or
9
the choice of topic. There are enough such segments
that we assign them a special region type: Metacon-
versation. The purely irrelevant segments we call
Small Talk, and the remaining segments are defined
as On-Topic. We define utterances as segments of
speech that are delineated by periods and/or speaker
changes. An annotated excerpt is shown in Table 1.
For the experiments described in this paper, we
selected 20 conversations: 4 from each of the topics
?computers in education?, ?bioterrorism?, ?terror-
ism?, ?pets?, and ?censorship?. These topics were
chosen randomly from the 40 topics in the Fisher
corpus, with the constraint that we wanted to include
topics that could be a part of normal small talk (such
as ?pets?) as well as topics which seem farther re-
moved from small talk (such as ?censorship?).
Our selected data set consists of slightly more
than 5,000 utterances. We had 2-3 human annota-
tors label the utterances in each conversation, choos-
ing from the 3 labels Metaconversation, Small Talk,
and On-Topic. On average, pairs of annotators
agreed with each other on 86% of utterances. The
main source of annotator disagreement was between
Small Talk and On-Topic regions; in most cases this
resulted from differences in opinion of when exactly
the conversation had drifted too far from the topic to
be relevant.
For the 14% of utterances with mismatched la-
bels, we chose the label that would be ?safest? in the
information retrieval context where small talk might
get discarded. If any of the annotators thought a
given utterance was On-Topic, we kept it On-Topic.
If there was a disagreement between Metaconver-
sation and Small Talk, we used Metaconversation.
Thus, a Small Talk label was only placed if all anno-
tators agreed on it.
5 Experimental Setup
5.1 Features
As indicated in Section 1, we apply machine learn-
ing algorithms to utterances extracted from tele-
phone conversations in order to learn classifiers for
Small Talk, Metaconversation, and On-Topic. We
represent utterances as feature vectors, basing our
selection of features on both linguistic insights and
earlier text classification work. As described in Sec-
tion 2, work on the linguistics of conversational
Small Talk Metaconv. On-Topic
hi topic ,
. i ?
?s it you
yeah this that
? dollars the
hello so and
oh is know
?m what a
in was wouldn
my about to
but talk like
name for his
how me they
we okay of
texas do ?t
there phone he
well ah uh
from times um
are really put
here one just
Table 2: The top 20 tokens for distinguishing each
category, as ranked by the feature quality measure
(Lewis and Gale, 1994).
speech (Cheepen, 1988; Laver, 1981) implies that
the following features might be indicative of small
talk: (1) position in the conversation, (2) the use of
present-tense verbs, and (3) a lack of common helper
words such as ?it?, ?there?, and forms of ?to be?.
To model the effect of proximity to the beginning
of the conversation, we attach to each utterance a
feature that describes its approximate position in the
conversation. We do not include a feature for prox-
imity to the end of the conversation because our tran-
scriptions include only the first ten minutes of each
recorded conversation.
In order to include features describing verb tense,
we use Brill?s part-of-speech tagger (Brill, 1992) .
Each part of speech (POS) is taken to be a feature,
whose value is a count of the number of occurrences
in the given utterance.
To account for the words, we use a bag of words
model with counts for each word. We normalize
words from the human transcripts by converting ev-
erything to lower case and tokenizing contractions
10
Features Values
n word tokens for each word, # occurrences
standard POS tags as in Penn Treebank for each tag, # occurrences
line number in conversation 0-4, 5-9, 10-19, 20-49, >49
utterance type statement, question, fragment
utterance length (number of words) 1, 2, ..., 20, >20
number of laughs laugh count
n word tokens in previous 5 utterances for each word, total # occurrences in 5 previous
tags from POS tagger, previous 5 for each tag, total # occurrences in 5 previous
number of words, previous 5 total from 5 previous
number of laughs, previous 5 total from 5 previous
n word tokens, subsequent 5 utterances for each word, total # occ in 5 subsequent
tags from POS tagger, subsequent 5 for each tag, total # occurrences in 5 subsequent
number of words, subsequent 5 total from 5 subsequent
number of laughs, subsequent 5 total from 5 subsequent
Table 3: Summary of features that describe each utterance.
and punctuation. We rank the utility of words ac-
cording to the feature quality measure presented in
(Lewis and Gale, 1994) because it was devised for
the task of classifying similarly short fragments of
text (news headlines), rather than long documents.
We then consider the top n tokens as features, vary-
ing the number in different experiments. Table 2
shows the most useful tokens for distinguishing be-
tween the three categories according to this metric.
Additionally, we include as features the utterance
type (statement, question, or fragment), number of
words in the utterance, and number of laughs in the
utterance.
Because utterances are long enough to classify in-
dividually but too short to classify reliably, we not
only consider features of the current utterance, but
also those of previous and subsequent utterances.
More specifically, summed features are calculated
for the five preceding utterances and for the five sub-
sequent utterances. The number five was chosen em-
pirically.
It is important to note that there is some overlap
in features. For instance, the token ??? can be ex-
tracted as one of the n word tokens by Lewis and
Gale?s feature quality measure; it is also tagged by
the POS tagger; and it is indicative of the utterance
type, which is encoded as a separate feature as well.
However, redundant features do not make up a sig-
nificant percentage of the overall feature set.
Finally, we note that the conversation topic is not
taken to be a feature, as we cannot assume that con-
versations in general will have such labels. The
complete list of features, along with their possible
values, is summarized in Table 3.
5.2 Experiments
We applied several classifier learning algorithms to
our data: Naive Bayes, Support Vector Machines
(SVMs), 1-nearest neighbor, and the C4.5 decision
tree learning algorithm. We used the implementa-
tions in the Weka package of machine learning al-
gorithms (Witten and Frank, 2005), running the al-
gorithms with default settings. In each case, we per-
formed 4-fold cross-validation, training on sets con-
sisting of three of the conversations in each topic
(15 conversations total) and testing on sets of the re-
maining 1 from each topic (5 total). Average train-
ing set size was approximately 3800 utterances, of
which about 700 were Small Talk and 350 Metacon-
versation. The average test set size was 1270.
6 Results
6.1 Performance of a Learned Classifier
We evaluated the results of our experiments ac-
cording to three criteria: accuracy, error cost, and
plausibility of the annotations produced. In all
11
Algorithm % Accuracy Cohen?s Kappa
SVM 76.6 0.44
C4.5 68.8 0.26
k-NN 64.1 0.20
Naive Bayes 58.9 0.27
Table 4: Classification accuracy and Cohen?s Kappa
statistic for each of the machine learning algorithms
we tried, using all features at the 100-words level.
25 50 75 100 125 150 175
74
76
78
80
82
84
number of words used as features
0 200
acc
ura
cy 
(%)
72
86 Inter-annotator agreement
Baseline
Line numbers only
all features
Part of speech tags only
Figure 1: Classification results using SVMs with
varying numbers of words.
cases our best results were obtained with the SVM.
When evaluated on accuracy, the SVM models were
the only ones that exceeded a baseline accuracy of
72.8%, which is the average percentage of On-Topic
utterances in our data set. Table 4 displays the nu-
merical results using each of the machine learning
algorithms.
Figure 1 shows the average accuracy obtained
with an SVM classifier using all features described
in Section 5.1 except part-of-speech features (for
reasons discussed below), and varying the number
of words considered. While the best results were ob-
tained at the 100-words level, all classifiers demon-
strated significant improvement in accuracy over the
baseline. The average standard deviation over the 4
cross-validation runs of the results shown is 6 per-
centage points.
From a practical perspective, accuracy alone is
S M T <? classified as
55% 7% 38% Small Talk
21% 37% 42% Metaconv.
8% 3% 89% On Topic
Table 5: Confusion matrix for 100-word SVM clas-
sifier.
not an appropriate metric for evaluating our re-
sults. If the goal is to eliminate Small Talk regions
from conversations, mislabeling On-Topic regions
as Small Talk potentially results in the elimination
of useful material. Table 5 shows a confusion ma-
trix for an SVM classifier trained on a data set at the
100-word level. We can see that the classifier is con-
servative, identifying 55% of the Small Talk, but in-
correctly labeling On-Topic utterances as Small Talk
only 8% of the time.
Finally, we analyzed (by hand) the test data anno-
tated by the classifiers. We found that, in general,
the SVM classifiers annotated the conversations in a
manner similar to the human annotators, transition-
ing from one label to another relatively infrequently
as illustrated in Table 1. This is in contrast to the
1-nearest neighbor classifiers, which tended to an-
notate in a far more ?jumpy? style.
6.2 Relative Utility of Features
Several of the features we used to describe our
training and test examples were selected due to the
claims of researchers such as Laver and Cheepen.
We were interested in determining the relative con-
tributions of these various linguistically-motivated
features to our learned classifiers. Figure 1 and Table
6 report some of our findings. Using proximity to the
beginning of the conversation (?line numbers?) as a
sole feature, the SVM classifier achieved an accu-
racy of 75.6%. This clearly verifies the hypothesis
that utterances near the beginning of the conversa-
tion have different properties than those that follow.
On the contrary, when we used only POS tags
to train the SVM classifier, it achieved an accuracy
that falls exactly at the baseline. Moreover, remov-
ing POS features from the SVM classifier improved
results (Table 6). This may indicate that detect-
ing off-topic categories will require focusing on the
words rather than the grammar of utterances. On
12
Condition Accuracy Kappa
All features 76.6 0.44
No word features 75.0 0.19
No line numbers 76.9 0.44
No POS features 77.8 0.46
No utterance type, length, 76.9 0.45
or # laughs
No previous/next info 76.3 0.21
Only word features 77.9 0.46
Only line numbers 75.6 0.16
Only POS features 72.8 0.00
Only utterance type, length, 74.1 0.09
and # laughs
Table 6: Percent accuracy and Cohen?s Kappa statis-
tic for the SVM at the 100-words level when features
were left out or put in individually.
the other hand, part of speech information is im-
plicit in the words (for example, an occurrence of
?are? also indicates a present tense verb), so perhaps
labeling POS tags does not add any new informa-
tion. It is also possible that some other detection
approach and/or richer syntactic information (such
as parse trees) would be beneficial.
Finally, the words with the highest feature qual-
ity measure (Table 2) clearly refute most of the third
linguistic prediction. Helper words like ?it?, ?there?,
and ?the? appear roughly evenly in each region type.
Moreover, all of the verbs in the top 20 Small Talk
list are forms of ?to be? (some of them contracted
as in ?I?m?), while no ?to be? words appear in the
list for On-Topic. This is further evidence that dif-
ferentiating off-topic speech depends deeply on the
meaning of the words rather than on some more eas-
ily extracted feature.
7 Future Work
There are many ways in which we plan to expand
upon this preliminary study. We are currently in the
process of annotating more data and including ad-
ditional conversation topics. Other future work in-
cludes:
? applying topic segmentation approaches to our
data and comparing the results to those we have
obtained so far;
? investigating alternate approaches for detecting
Small Talk regions, such as smoothing with a
Hidden Markov Model;
? using semi-supervised and active learning tech-
niques to better utilize the large amount of un-
labeled data;
? running the experiments with automatically
generated (speech recognized) transcriptions,
rather than the human-generated transcriptions
that we have used to date. Our expectation is
that such transcripts will contain more noise
and thus pose new challenges;
? including prosodic information in the feature
set.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Mary Harper, Brian
Roark, Jeremy Kahn, Rebecca Bates, and Joe Cruz
for providing invaluable advice and data. We would
also like to thank the student volunteers at Williams
who helped annotate the conversation transcripts,
as well as the 2005 Johns Hopkins CLSP summer
workshop, where this research idea was formulated.
References
Rebecca Bates, Patrick Menning, Elizabeth Willingham,
and Chad Kuyper. 2005. Meeting Acts: A Labeling
System for Group Interaction in Meetings. August.
Doug Beeferman, Adam Berger, and John Lafferty.
1999. Statistical Models for Text Segmentation. Ma-
chine Learning.
Timothy Bickmore and Justine Cassell. 2000. How
about this weather?: Social Dialogue with Embodied
Conversational Agents. AAAI Fall Symposium on So-
cially Intelligent Agents.
Eric Brill. 1992. A simple rule-based part of speech tag-
ger. Proc. of the Third Conference on Applied NLP.
Christine Cheepen. 1988. The Predictability of Informal
Conversation. Pinter Publishers, London.
Marti A. Hearst. 1997. TextTiling: Segmenting Text into
Multiparagraph Subtopics Passages. Computational
Linguistics, 23(1):33?64.
John Laver, 1981. Conversational routine, chapter Lin-
guistic routines and politeness in greeting and parting,
pages 289?304. Mouton, The Hague.
13
LDC. 2004. Fisher english training speech part 1, tran-
scripts. http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/Catalog/Catalog
Entry.jsp?catalogId=LDC2004T19.
David D. Lewis and William A. Gale. 1994. A sequential
algorithm for training text classifiers. Proc. of SIGIR.
Jeffrey C. Reynar. 1999. Statistical models for topic seg-
mentation. Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting
of the ACL.
Ian H. Witten and Eibe Frank. 2005. Data Mining: Prac-
tical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques, Second
Edition. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco.
14
