Proceedings of the Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of Computational Language Acquisition, pages 25?32,
Prague, Czech Republic, June 2007 c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
High-accuracy Annotation and Parsing of CHILDES Transcripts
Kenji Sagae
Department of Computer Science
University of Tokyo
Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan
sagae@is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Eric Davis
Language Technologies Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
dhdavis@cs.cmu.edu
Alon Lavie
Language Technologies Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
alavie@cs.cmu.edu
Brian MacWhinney
Department of Psychology
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
macw@cmu.edu
Shuly Wintner
Department of Computer Science
University of Haifa
31905 Haifa, Israel
shuly@cs.haifa.ac.il
Abstract
Corpora of child language are essential for
psycholinguistic research. Linguistic anno-
tation of the corpora provides researchers
with better means for exploring the develop-
ment of grammatical constructions and their
usage. We describe an ongoing project that
aims to annotate the English section of the
CHILDES database with grammatical re-
lations in the form of labeled dependency
structures. To date, we have produced a cor-
pus of over 65,000 words with manually cu-
rated gold-standard grammatical relation an-
notations. Using this corpus, we have devel-
oped a highly accurate data-driven parser for
English CHILDES data. The parser and the
manually annotated data are freely available
for research purposes.
1 Introduction
In order to investigate the development of child lan-
guage, corpora which document linguistic interac-
tions involving children are needed. The CHILDES
database (MacWhinney, 2000), containing tran-
scripts of spoken interactions between children at
various stages of language development with their
parents, provides vast amounts of useful data for lin-
guistic, psychological, and sociological studies of
child language development. The raw information in
CHILDES corpora was gradually enriched by pro-
viding a layer of morphological information. In par-
ticular, the English section of the database is aug-
mented by part of speech (POS) tags for each word.
However, this information is usually insufficient for
investigations dealing with the syntactic, semantic
or pragmatic aspects of the data.
In this paper we describe an ongoing effort aim-
ing to annotate the English portion of the CHILDES
database with syntactic information based on gram-
matical relations represented as labeled dependency
structures. Although an annotation scheme for syn-
tactic information in CHILDES data has been pro-
posed (Sagae et al, 2004), until now no significant
amount of annotated data had been made publicly
available. In the process of manually annotating sev-
eral thousands of words, we updated the annotation
scheme, mostly by extending it to cover syntactic
phenomena that occur in real data but were unac-
counted for in the original annotation scheme.
The contributions of this work fall into three main
categories: revision and extension of the annota-
tion scheme for representing syntactic information
in CHILDES data; creation of a manually annotated
65,000 word corpus with gold-standard syntactic
analyses; and implementation of a complete parser
that can automatically annotate additional data with
high accuracy. Both the gold-standard annotated
data and the parser are freely available. In addi-
tion to introducing the parser and the data, we re-
port on many of the specific annotation issues that
we encountered during the manual annotation pro-
25
cess, which should be helpful for those who may
use the annotated data or the parser. The anno-
tated corpora and the parser are freely available from
http://childes.psy.cmu.edu/.
We describe the annotation scheme in the next
section, along with issues we faced during the pro-
cess of manual annotation. Section 3 describes the
parser, and an evaluation of the parser is presented in
section 4. We analyze the remaining parsing errors
in section 5 and conclude with some applications of
the parser and directions for future research in sec-
tion 6.
2 Syntactic annotation
The English section of the CHILDES database is
augmented with automatically produced ambiguous
part-of-speech and morphological tags (MacWhin-
ney, 2000). Some of these data have been manually
disambiguated, but we found that some annotation
decisions had to be revised to facilitate syntactic an-
notation. We discuss below some of the revisions we
introduced, as well as some details of the syntactic
constructions that we account for.
2.1 The morphological annotation scheme
The English morphological analyzer incorporated
in CHILDES produces various part-of-speech tags
(there are 31 distinct POS tags in the CHILDES
tagset), including ADJective, ADVerb, COmmuni-
cator, CONJunction, DETerminer, FILler, Noun,
NUMeral, ONomatopoeia, PREPosition, PROnoun,
ParTicLe, QuaNtifier, RELativizer and Verb1. In
most cases, the correct annotation of a word is obvi-
ous from the context in which the word occurs, but
sometimes a more subtle distinction must be made.
We discuss some common problematic issues below.
Adverb vs. preposition vs. particle The words
about, across, after, away, back, down, in, off, on,
out, over, up belong to three categories: ADVerb,
PREPosition and ParTicLe. To correctly annotate
them in context, we apply the following criteria.
First, a preposition must have a prepositional ob-
ject, which is typically realized as a noun phrase
(which may be topicalized, or even elided). Sec-
ond, a preposition forms a constituent with its noun
1We use capital letters to denote the actual tag names in the
CHILDES tagset.
phrase object. Third, a prepositional object can be
fronted (for example, he sat on the chair becomes
the chair on which he sat), whereas a particle-NP
sequence cannot (*the phone number up which he
looked cannot be obtained from he looked up the
phone number). Finally, a manner adverb can be
placed between the verb and a preposition, but not
between a verb and a particle.
To distinguish between an adverb and a particle,
the meaning of the head verb is considered. If the
meaning of the verb and the target word, taken to-
gether, cannot be predicted from the meanings of the
verb and the target word separately, then the target
word is a particle. In all other cases it is an adverb.
Verbs vs. auxiliaries Distinguishing between
Verb and AUXiliary is often straightforward, but
special attention is given when tagging the verbs be,
do and have. If the target word is accompanied by an
non-finite verb in the same clause, as in I have had
enough or I do not like eggs, it is an auxiliary. Ad-
ditionally, in interrogative sentences, the auxiliary is
moved to the beginning of the clause, as in have I
had enough? and do I like eggs?, whereas the main
verb is not. However, this test does not always work
for the verb be, which may head a non-verbal pred-
icate, as in John is a teacher, vs. John is smiling. In
verb-participle constructions headed by the verb be,
if the participle is in the progressive tense, then the
head verb is labeled as auxiliary.
Communicators vs. locative adverbs COmmu-
nicators can be hard to distinguish from locative ad-
verbs, especially at the beginning of a sentence. Our
convention is that CO must modify an entire sen-
tence, so if a word appears by itself, it cannot be a
CO. For example, utterances like here or there are
labeled as ADVerb. However, if these words appear
at the beginning of a sentence, are followed by a
break or pause, and do not clearly express a location,
then they are labeled CO. Additionally, in here/there
you are/go, here and there are labeled CO.
2.2 The syntactic annotation scheme
Our annotation scheme for representing grammati-
cal relations, or GRs (such as subjects, objects and
adjuncts), in CHILDES transcripts is a slightly ex-
tended version of the scheme proposed by Sagae et
al. (2004), which was inspired by a general annota-
26
tion scheme for grammatical relations (Carroll et al,
1998), but adapted specifically for CHILDES data.
Our scheme contains 37 distinct GR types. Sagae
et al reported 96.5% interannotator agreement, and
we do not believe our minor updates to the annota-
tion scheme should affect interannotator agreement
significantly.
The scheme distinguishes among SUBJects, (fi-
nite) Clausal SUBJects2 (e.g., that he cried moved
her) and XSUBJects (eating vegetables is impor-
tant). Similarly, we distinguish among OBJects,
OBJect2, which is the second object of a ditran-
sitive verb, and IOBjects, which are required verb
complements introduced by prepositions. Verb com-
plements that are realized as clauses are labeled
COMP if they are finite (I think that was Fraser) and
XCOMP otherwise (you stop throwing the blocks).
Additionally, we mark required locative adjectival
or prepositional phrase arguments of verbs as LOCa-
tives, as in put the toys in the box/back.
PREDicates are nominal, adjectival or prepo-
sitional complements of verbs such as get, be
and become, as in I?m not sure. Again, we
specifically mark Clausal PREDicates (This is
how I drink my coffee) and XPREDicates (My goal
is to win the competition).
Adjuncts (denoted by JCT) are optional modi-
fiers of verbs, adjectives or adverbs, and we dis-
tinguish among non-clausal ones (That?s much bet-
ter; sit on the stool), finite clausal ones (CJCT, Mary
left after she saw John) and non-finite clausal ones
(XJCT, Mary left after seeing John).
MODifiers, which modify or complement nouns,
again come in three flavors: MOD (That?s a nice
box); CMOD (the movie that I saw was good ); and
XMOD (the student reading a book is tall ).
We then identify AUXiliary verbs, as in did you
do it? ; NEGation (Fraser is not drinking his coffee);
DETerminers (a fly); QUANTifiers (some juice); the
objects of prepositions (POBJ, on the stool); verb
ParTicLes (can you get the blocks out? ); ComPle-
mentiZeRs (wait until the noodles are cool ); COM-
municators (oh, I took it); the INfinitival to; VOCa-
tives (Thank you, Eve); and TAG questions (you
know how to count, don?t you? ).
2As with the POS tags, we use capital letters to represent the
actual GR tags used in the annotation scheme.
Finally, we added some specific relations for han-
dling problematic issues. For example, we use
ENUMeration for constructions such as one, two,
three, go or a, b, c. In COORDination construc-
tions, each conjunct is marked as a dependent of the
conjunction (e.g., go and get your telephone). We
use TOPicalization to indicate an argument that is
topicalized, as in tapioca, there is no tapioca. We
use SeRiaL to indicate serial verbs as in come see
if we can find it or go play with your toys. Finally,
we mark sequences of proper names which form the
same entity (e.g., New York ) as NAME.
The format of the grammatical relation (GR) an-
notation, which we use in the examples that follow,
associates with each word in a sentence a triple i|j|g,
where i is the index of the word in the sentence, j the
index of the word?s syntactic head, and g is the name
of the grammatical relation represented by the syn-
tactic dependency between the i-th and j-th words.
If the topmost head of the utterance is the i-th word,
it is labeled i|0|ROOT. For example, in:
a cookie .
1|2|DET 2|0|ROOT 3|2|PUNCT
the first word a is a DETerminer of word 2 (cookie),
which is itself the ROOT of the utterance.
2.3 Manual annotation of the corpus
We focused our manual annotation on a set of
CHILDES transcripts for a particular child, Eve
(Brown, 1973), and we refer to these transcripts,
distributed in a set of 20 files, as the Eve corpus.
We hand-annotated (including correcting POS tags)
the first 15 files of the Eve corpus following the
GR scheme outlined above. The annotation pro-
cess started with purely manual annotation of 5,000
words. This initial annotated corpus was used to
train a data-driven parser, as described later. This
parser was then used to label an additional 20,000
words automatically, followed by a thorough manual
checking stage, where each syntactic annotation was
manually verified and corrected if necessary. We re-
trained the parser with the newly annotated data, and
proceeded in this fashion until 15 files had been an-
notated and thoroughly manually checked.
Annotating child language proved to be challeng-
ing, and as we progressed through the data, we no-
ticed grammatical constructions that the GRs could
27
not adequately handle. For example, the original GR
scheme did not differentiate between locative argu-
ments and locative adjuncts, so we created a new GR
label, LOC, to handle required verbal locative argu-
ments such as on in put it on the table. Put licenses
a prepositional argument, and the existing JCT rela-
tion could not capture this requirement.
In addition to adding new GRs, we also faced
challenges with telegraphic child utterances lack-
ing verbs or other content words. For instance,
Mommy telephone could have one of several mean-
ings: Mommy this is a telephone, Mommy I want
the telephone, that is Mommy?s telephone, etc. We
tried to be as consistent as possible in annotating
such utterances and determined their GRs from con-
text. It was often possible to determine the VOC
reading vs.the MOD (Mommy?s telephone) reading
by looking at context. If it was not possible to deter-
mine the correct annotation from context, we anno-
tated such utterances as VOC relations.
After annotating the 15 Eve files, we had 18,863
fully hand-annotated utterances, 10,280 adult
and 8,563 child. The utterances consist of 84,226
GRs (including punctuation) and 65,363 words.
The average utterance length is 5.3 words (in-
cluding punctuation) for adult utterances, 3.6 for
child, 4.5 overall. The annotated Eve corpus
is available at http://childes.psy.cmu.
edu/data/Eng-USA/brown.zip. It was used
for the Domain adaptation task at the CoNLL-2007
dependency parsing shared task (Nivre, 2007).
3 Parsing
Although the CHILDES annotation scheme pro-
posed by Sagae et al (2004) has been used in prac-
tice for automatic parsing of child language tran-
scripts (Sagae et al, 2004; Sagae et al, 2005), such
work relied mainly on a statistical parser (Char-
niak, 2000) trained on the Wall Street Journal por-
tion of the Penn Treebank, since a large enough cor-
pus of annotated CHILDES data was not available
to train a domain-specific parser. Having a corpus
of 65,000 words of CHILDES data annotated with
grammatical relations represented as labeled depen-
dencies allows us to develop a parser tailored for the
CHILDES domain.
Our overall parsing approach uses a best-first
probabilistic shift-reduce algorithm, working left-to-
right to find labeled dependencies one at a time. The
algorithm is essentially a dependency version of the
data-driven constituent parsing algorithm for prob-
abilistic GLR-like parsing described by Sagae and
Lavie (2006). Because CHILDES syntactic annota-
tions are represented as labeled dependencies, using
a dependency parsing approach allows us to work
with that representation directly.
This dependency parser has been shown to have
state-of-the-art accuracy in the CoNLL shared tasks
on dependency parsing (Buchholz and Marsi, 2006;
Nivre, 2007)3. Sagae and Tsujii (2007) present a
detailed description of the parsing approach used in
our work, including the parsing algorithm. In sum-
mary, the parser uses an algorithm similar to the LR
parsing algorithm (Knuth, 1965), keeping a stack of
partially built syntactic structures, and a queue of
remaining input tokens. At each step in the pars-
ing process, the parser can apply a shift action (re-
move a token from the front of the queue and place
it on top of the stack), or a reduce action (pop the
two topmost stack items, and push a new item com-
posed of the two popped items combined in a sin-
gle structure). This parsing approach is very similar
to the one used successfully by Nivre et al (2006),
but we use a maximum entropy classifier (Berger et
al., 1996) to determine parser actions, which makes
parsing extremely fast. In addition, our parsing ap-
proach performs a search over the space of possible
parser actions, while Nivre et al?s approach is de-
terministic. See Sagae and Tsujii (2007) for more
information on the parser.
Features used in classification to determine
whether the parser takes a shift or a reduce action
at any point during parsing are derived from the
parser?s current configuration (contents of the stack
and queue) at that point. The specific features used
are:4
? Word and its POS tag: s(1), q(2), and q(1).
? POS: s(3) and q(2).
3The parser used in this work is the same as the probabilistic
shift-reduce parser referred to as ?Sagae? in the cited shared
task descriptions. In the 2007 shared task, an ensemble of shift-
reduce parsers was used, but only a single parser is used here.
4s(n) denotes the n-th item from the top of the stack (where
s(1) is the item on the top of the stack), and q(n) denotes the
n-th item from the front of the queue.
28
? The dependency label of the most recently at-
tached dependent of: s(1) and s(2).
? The previous parser action.
4 Evaluation
4.1 Methodology
We first evaluate the parser by 15-fold cross-
validation on the 15 manually curated gold-standard
Eve files (to evaluate the parser on each file, the re-
maining 14 files are used to train the parser). Single-
word utterances (excluding punctuation) were ig-
nored, since their analysis is trivial and their inclu-
sion would artificially inflate parser accuracy mea-
surements. The size of the Eve evaluation corpus
(with single-word utterances removed) was 64,558
words (or 59,873 words excluding punctuation). Of
these, 41,369 words come from utterances spoken
by adults, and 18,504 come from utterances spo-
ken by the child. To evaluate the parser?s portabil-
ity to other CHILDES corpora, we also tested the
parser (trained only on the entire Eve set) on two ad-
ditional sets, one taken from the MacWhinney cor-
pus (MacWhinney, 2000) (5,658 total words, 3,896
words in adult utterances and 1,762 words in child
utterances), and one taken from the Seth corpus (Pe-
ters, 1987; Wilson and Peters, 1988) (1,749 words,
1,059 adult and 690 child).
The parser is highly efficient: training on the en-
tire Eve corpus takes less that 20 minutes on stan-
dard hardware, and once trained, parsing the Eve
corpus takes 18 seconds, or over 3,500 words per
second.
Following recent work on dependency parsing
(Nivre, 2007), we report two evaluation measures:
labeled accuracy score (LAS) and unlabeled accu-
racy score (UAS). LAS is the percentage of tokens
for which the parser predicts the correct head-word
and dependency label. UAS ignores the dependency
labels, and therefore corresponds to the percentage
of words for which the correct head was found. In
addition to LAS and UAS, we also report precision
and recall of certain grammatical relations.
For example, compare the parser output of go buy
an apple to the gold standard (Figure 1). This se-
quence of GRs has two labeled dependency errors
and one unlabeled dependency error. 1|2|COORD
for the parser versus 1|2|SRL is a labeled error be-
cause the dependency label produced by the parser
(COORD) does not match the gold-standard anno-
tation (SRL), although the unlabeled dependency is
correct, since the headword assignment, 1|2, is the
same for both. On the other hand, 5|1|PUNCT ver-
sus 5|2|PUNCT is both a labeled dependency error
and an unlabeled dependency error, since the head-
word assignment produced by the parser does not
match the gold-standard.
4.2 Results
Trained on domain-specific data, the parser per-
formed well on held-out data, even though the train-
ing corpus is relatively small (about 60,000 words).
The results are listed in Table 1.
LAS UAS
Eve cross-validation 92.0 93.8
Table 1: Average cross-validation results, Eve
The labeled dependency error rate is about 8%
and the unlabeled error rate is slightly over 6%. Per-
formance in individual files ranged between the best
labeled error rate of 6.2% and labeled error rate of
4.4% for the fifth file, and the worst error rates of
8.9% and 7.8% for labeled and unlabeled respec-
tively in the fifteenth file. For comparison, Sagae et
al. (2005) report 86.9% LAS on about 2,000 words
of Eve data, using the Charniak (2000) parser with
a separate dependency-labeling step. Part of the rea-
son we obtain levels of accuracy higher than usu-
ally reported for dependency parsers is that the aver-
age sentence length in CHILDES transcripts is much
lower than in, for example, newspaper text. The av-
erage sentence length for adult utterances in the Eve
corpus is 6.1 tokens, and 4.3 tokens for child utter-
ances5.
Certain GRs are easily identifiable, such as DET,
AUX, and INF. The parser has precision and recall
of nearly 1.00 for those. For all GRs that occur more
than 1,000 times in the Eve corpus (which contrains
more than 60,000 tokens), precision and recall are
above 0.90, with the exception of COORD, which
5This differs from the figures in section 2.3 because for the
purpose of parser evaluation we ignore sentences composed
only of a single word plus punctuation.
29
go buy an apple .
parser: 1|2|COORD 2|0|ROOT 3|4|DET 4|2|OBJ 5|1|PUNCT
gold: 1|2|SRL 2|0|ROOT 3|4|DET 4|2|OBJ 5|2|PUNCT
Figure 1: Example output: parser vs. gold annotation
occurs 1,163 times in the gold-standard data. The
parser?s precision for COORD is 0.73, and recall
is 0.84. Other interesting GRs include SUBJ, OBJ,
JCT (adjunct), COM, LOC, COMP, XCOMP, CJCT
(subordinate clause acting as an adjunct), and PTL
(verb particle, easily confusable with prepositions
and adverbs). Their precision and recall is shown
in table 2.
GR Precision Recall F-score
SUBJ 0.96 0.96 0.96
OBJ 0.93 0.94 0.93
JCT 0.91 0.90 0.90
COM 0.96 0.95 0.95
LOC 0.95 0.90 0.92
COMP 0.83 0.86 0.84
XCOMP 0.86 0.87 0.87
CJCT 0.61 0.59 0.60
PTL 0.97 0.96 0.96
COORD 0.73 0.84 0.78
Table 2: Precision, recall and f-score of selected
GRs in the Eve corpus
We also tested the accuracy of the parser on child
utterances and adult utterances separately. To do
this, we split the gold standard files into child and
adult utterances, producing gold standard files for
both child and adult utterances. We then trained
the parser on 14 of the 15 Eve files with both child
and adult utterances, and parsed the individual child
and adult files. Not surprisingly, the parser per-
formed slightly better on the adult utterances due to
their grammaticality and the fact that there was more
adult training data than child training data. The re-
sults are listed in Table 3.
LAS UAS
Eve - Child 90.0 91.7
Eve - Adult 93.1 94.8
Table 3: Average child vs. adult results, Eve
Our final evaluation of the parser involved test-
ing the parser on data taken from a different parts of
the CHILDES database. First, the parser was trained
on all gold-standard Eve files, and tested on man-
ually annotated data taken from the MacWhinney
transcripts. Although accuracy was lower for adult
utterances (85.8% LAS) than on Eve data, the accu-
racy for child utterances was slightly higher (92.3%
LAS), even though child utterances were longer on
average (4.7 tokens) than in the Eve corpus.
Finally, because a few aspects of the many tran-
script sets in the CHILDES database may vary in
ways not accounted for in the design of the parser
or the annotation of the training data, we also re-
port results on evaluation of the Eve-trained parser
on a particularly challenging test set, the Seth cor-
pus. Because the Seth corpus contains transcriptions
of language phenomena not seen in the Eve corpus
(see section 5), parser performance is expected to
suffer. Although accuracy on adult utterances is high
(92.2% LAS), accuracy on child utterances is very
low (72.7% LAS). This is due to heavy use of a GR
label that does not appear at all in the Eve corpus
that was used to train the parser. This GR is used to
represent relations involving filler syllables, which
appear in nearly 45% of the child utterances in the
Seth corpus. Accuracy on the sentences that do not
contain filler syllables is at the same level as in the
other corpora (91.1% LAS). Although we do not ex-
pect to encounter many sets of transcripts that are as
problematic as this one in the CHILDES database, it
is interesting to see what can be expected from the
parser under unfavorable conditions.
The results of the parser on the MacWhinney and
Seth test sets are summarized in table 4, where Seth
(clean) refers to the Seth corpus without utterances
that contain filler sylables.
5 Error Analysis
A major source for parser errors on the Eve cor-
pus (112 out of 5181 errors) was telegraphic speech,
30
LAS UAS
MacWhinney - Child 92.3 94.8
MacWhinney - Adult 85.8 89.4
MacWhinney - Total 88.0 91.2
Seth - Child 72.7 82.0
Seth - Adult 92.2 94.4
Seth - Total 84.6 89.5
Seth (clean) - Child 91.1 92.7
Seth (clean) - Total 92.0 93.9
Table 4: Training on Eve, testing on MacWhinney
and Seth
as in Mommy telephone or Fraser tape+recorder
floor. Telegraphic speech may be the most chal-
lenging, since even for a human annotator, deter-
mining a GR is difficult. The parser usually labeled
such utterances with the noun as the ROOT and the
proper noun as the MOD, while the gold annotation
is context-dependent as described above.
Another category of errors, with about 150 in-
stances, is XCOMP errors. The majority of the er-
rors in this category revolve around dropped words
in the main clause, for example want eat cookie. Of-
ten, the parser labels such utterances with COMP
GRs, because of the lack of to. Exclusive training on
utterances of this type may resolve the issue. Many
of the errors of this type occur with want : the parser
could be conditioned to assign an XCOMP GR with
want as the ROOT of an utterance.
COORD and PRED errors would both benefit
from more data as well. The parser performs ad-
mirably on simple coordination and predicate con-
structions, but has troubles with less common con-
structions such as PRED GRs with get, e.g., don?t
let your hands get dirty (69 errors), and coordina-
tion of prepositional objects, as in a birthday cake
with Cathy and Becky (154 errors).
The performance drop on the Seth corpus can be
explained by a number of factors. First and fore-
most, Seth is widely considered in the literature to
be the child who is most likely to invalidate any the-
ory (Wilson and Peters, 1988). He exhibits false
starts and filler syllables extensively, and his syn-
tax violates many ?universal? principles. This is
reflected in the annotation scheme: the Seth cor-
pus, following the annotation of Peters (1983), is
abundant with filler syllables. Because there was
no appropriate GR label for representing the syn-
tactic relationships involving the filler syllables, we
annotated those with a special GR (not used during
parser training), which the parser is understandably
not able to produce. Filler syllables usually occur
near the start of the sentence, and once the parser
failed to label them, it could not accurately label the
remaining GRs. Other difficulties in the Seth cor-
pus include the usage of dates, of which there were
no instances in the Eve corpus. The parser had not
been trained on the new DATE GR and subsequently
failed to parse it.
6 Conclusion
We described an annotation scheme for represent-
ing syntactic information as grammatical relations
in CHILDES data, a manually curated gold-standard
corpus of 65,000 words annotated according to this
GR scheme, and a parser that was trained on the an-
notated corpus and produces highly accurate gram-
matical relations for both child and adult utterances.
These resources are now freely available to the re-
search community, and we expect them to be in-
strumental in psycholinguistic investigations of lan-
guage acquisition and child language.
Syntactic analysis of child language transcripts
using a GR scheme of this kind has already been
shown to be effective in a practical setting, namely
in automatic measurement of syntactic development
in children (Sagae et al, 2005). That work relied on
a phrase-structure statistical parser (Charniak, 2000)
trained on the Penn Treebank, and the output of that
parser had to be converted into CHILDES grammat-
ical relations. Despite the obvious disadvantage of
using a parser trained on a completely different lan-
guage genre, Sagae et al (2005) demonstrated how
current natural language processing techniques can
be used effectively in child language work, achiev-
ing results that are close to those obtained by man-
ual computation of syntactic development scores for
child transcripts. Still, the use of tools not tailored
for child language and extra effort necessary to make
them work with community standards for child lan-
guage transcription present a disincentive for child
language researchers to incorporate automatic syn-
tactic analysis into their work. We hope that the GR
31
representation scheme and the parser presented here
will make it possible and convenient for the child
language community to take advantage of some of
the recent developments in natural language parsing,
as was the case with part-of-speech tagging when
CHILDES specific tools were first made available.
Our immediate plans include continued improve-
ment of the parser, which can be achieved at least in
part by the creation of additional training data from
other English CHILDES corpora. We also plan to
release automatic syntactic analyses for the entire
English portion of CHILDES.
Although we have so far focused exclusively on
English CHILDES data, dependency schemes based
on functional relationships exist for a number of lan-
guages (Buchholz and Marsi, 2006), and the general
parsing techniques used in the present work have
been shown to be effective in several of them (Nivre
et al, 2006). As future work, we plan to adapt
existing dependency-based annotation schemes and
apply our current syntactic annotation and pars-
ing framework to other languages in the CHILDES
database.
Acknowledgments
We thank Marina Fedner for her help with annota-
tion of the Eve corpus. This work was supported in
part by the National Science Foundation under grant
IIS-0414630.
References
A. Berger, S. A. Della Pietra, and V. J. Della Pietra. 1996.
Amaximum entropy approach to natural language pro-
cessing. Computational Linguistics, 22(1):39?71.
Roger Brown. 1973. A first language: the early stages.
George Allen & Unwin Ltd., London.
Sabine Buchholz and Erwin Marsi. 2006. Conll-x shared
task on multilingual dependency parsing. In Proceed-
ings of the Tenth Conference on Computational Nat-
ural Language Learning (CoNLL-X), pages 149?164,
New York City, June. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
John Carroll, Edward Briscoe, and Antonio Sanfilippo.
1998. Parser evaluation: a survey and a new proposal.
In Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation, pages 447?454,
Granada, Spain.
Eugene Charniak. 2000. A maximum-entropy-inspired
parser. In Proceedings of the first conference on North
American chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 132?139, San Francisco, CA,
USA. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.
D. Knuth. 1965. On the translation of languages from
left to right. Information and Control, 8(6):607?639.
Brian MacWhinney. 2000. The CHILDES Project: Tools
for Analyzing Talk. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
Mahwah, NJ, third edition.
Joakim Nivre, Johan Hall, Jens Nilsson, Gulsen Eryigit,
and Svetoslav Marinov. 2006. Labeled pseudo-
projective dependency parsing with support vector ma-
chines. In Proceedings of the Tenth Conference on
Computational Natural Language Learning.
Joakim Nivre, editor. 2007. CoNLL-XI Shared Task on
Multilingual Dependency Parsing, Prague, June. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Ann M. Peters. 1983. The Units of Language Acquisi-
tion. Monographs in Applied Psycholinguistics. Cam-
bridge University Press, New York.
Ann M. Peters. 1987. The role of immitation in the de-
veloping syntax of a blind child. Text, 7:289?311.
Kenji Sagae and Alon Lavie. 2006. A best-first prob-
abilistic shift-reduce parser. In Proceedings of the
COLING/ACL 2006 Main Conference Poster Sessions,
pages 691?698, Sydney, Australia, July. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Kenji Sagae and Jun?ichi Tsujii. 2007. Dependency pars-
ing and domain adaptation with lr models and parser
ensembles. In Proceedings of the Eleventh Conference
on Computational Natural Language Learning.
Kenji Sagae, Alon Lavie, and Brian MacWhinney. 2004.
Adding syntactic annotations to transcripts of parent-
child dialogs. In Proceedings of the Fourth Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Evalu-
ation (LREC 2004), Lisbon, Portugal.
Kenji Sagae, Alon Lavie, and Brian MacWhinney. 2005.
Automatic measurement of syntactic development in
child language. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (ACL?05), pages 197?204, Ann Arbor, Michigan,
June. Association for Computational Linguistics.
B. Wilson and Ann M. Peters. 1988. What are you
cookin? on a hot?: A three-year-old blind child?s ?vi-
olation? of universal constraints on constituent move-
ment. Language, 64:249?273.
32
