A Large Scale Terminology Resource for Biomedical Text Processing
Henk Harkema, Robert Gaizauskas, Mark Hepple, Angus Roberts,
Ian Roberts, Neil Davis, Yikun Guo
Department of Computer Science, University of Sheffield, UK
biomed@dcs.shef.ac.uk
Abstract
In this paper we discuss the design, implemen-
tation, and use of Termino, a large scale termi-
nological resource for text processing. Dealing
with terminology is a difficult but unavoidable
task for language processing applications, such
as Information Extraction in technical domains.
Complex, heterogeneous information must be
stored about large numbers of terms. At the
same time term recognition must be performed
in realistic times. Termino attempts to recon-
cile this tension by maintaining a flexible, ex-
tensible relational database for storing termino-
logical information and compiling finite state
machines from this database to do term look-
up. While Termino has been developed for
biomedical applications, its general design al-
lows it to be used for term processing in any
domain.
1 Introduction
It has been widely recognized that the biomedical litera-
ture is now so large, and growing so quickly, that it is be-
coming increasingly difficult for researchers to access the
published results that are relevant to their research. Con-
sequently, any technology that can facilitate this access
should help to increase research productivity. This has
led to an increased interest in the application of natural
language processing techniques for the automatic capture
of biomedical content from journal abstracts, complete
papers, and other textual documents (Gaizauskas et al,
2003; Hahn et al, 2002; Pustejovsky et al, 2002; Rind-
flesch et al, 2000).
An essential processing step in these applications is
the identification and semantic classification of techni-
cal terms in text, since these terms often point to enti-
ties about which information should be extracted. Proper
semantic classification of terms also helps in resolving
anaphora and extracting relations whose arguments are
restricted semantically.
1.1 Challenge
Any technical domain generates very large numbers of
terms ? single or multiword expressions that have some
specialised use or meaning in that domain. For exam-
ple, the UMLS Metathesaurus (Humphreys et al, 1998),
which provides a semantic classification of terms from a
wide range of vocabularies in the clinical and biomedical
domain, currently contains well over 2 million distinct
English terms.
For a variety of reasons, recognizing these terms in
text is not a trivial task. First of all, terms are often
long multi-token sequences, e.g. 3-methyladenine-DNA
glycosylase I. Moreover, since terms are referred to re-
peatedly in discourses there is a benefit in their being
short and unambiguous, so they are frequently abbre-
viated and acronymized, e.g. CvL for chromobacterium
viscosum lipase. However, abbreviations may not al-
ways occur together with their full forms in a text, the
method of abbreviation is not predictable in all cases, and
many three letter abbreviations are highly overloaded.
Terms are also subject to a high degree of orthographic
variation as a result of the representation of non-Latin
characters, e.g. a-helix vs. alpha-helix, capitalization,
e.g. DNA vs. dna, hyphenation, e.g. anti-histamine vs. an-
tihistamine, and British and American spelling variants,
e.g. tumour vs. tumor. Furthermore, biomedical science
is a dynamic field: new terms are constantly being in-
troduced while old ones fall into disuse. Finally, certain
classes of biomedical terms exhibit metonomy, e.g. when
a protein is referred to by the gene that expresses it.
To begin to address these issues in term recognition, we
are building a large-scale resource for storing and recog-
nizing technical terminology, called Termino. This re-
source must store complex, heterogeneous information
about large numbers of terms. At the same time term
recognition must be performed in realistic times. Ter-
mino attempts to reconcile this tension by maintaining a
                                            Association for Computational Linguistics.
                   Linking Biological Literature, Ontologies and Databases, pp. 53-60.
                                                HLT-NAACL 2004 Workshop: Biolink 2004,
flexible, extensible relational database for storing termi-
nological information and compiling finite state machines
from this database to do term look-up.
1.2 Context
Termino is being developed in the context of two ongoing
projects: CLEF, for Clinical E-Science Framework (Rec-
tor et al, 2003) and myGrid (Goble et al, 2003). Both
these projects involve an Information Extraction compo-
nent. Information Extraction is the activity of identifying
pre-defined classes of entities and relationships in natural
language texts and storing this information in a structured
format enabling rapid and effective access to the informa-
tion, e.g. Gaizauskas and Wilks (1998), Grishman (1997).
The goal of the CLEF project is to extract information
from patient records regarding the treatment of cancer.
The treatment of cancer patients may extend over several
years and the resulting clinical record may include many
documents, such as clinic letters, case notes, lab reports,
discharge summaries, etc. These documents are gener-
ally full of medical terms naming entities such as body
parts, drugs, problems (i.e. symptoms and diseases), in-
vestigations and interventions. Some of these terms are
particular to the hospital from which the document origi-
nates. We aim to identify these classes of entities, as well
as relationships between such entities, e.g. that an investi-
gation has indicated a particular problem, which, in turn,
has been treated with a particular intervention. The infor-
mation extracted from the patient records is potentially of
value for immediate patient care, but can also be used to
support longitudinal and epidemiological medical stud-
ies, and to assist policy makers and health care managers
in regard to planning and clinical governance.
The myGrid project aims to present research biolo-
gists with a unified workbench through which component
bioinformatic services can be accessed using a workflow
model. These services may be remotely located from the
user and will be exploited via grid or web-service chan-
nels. A text extraction service will form one of these ser-
vices and will facilitate access to information in the sci-
entific literature. This text service comprises an off-line
and an on-line component. The off-line component in-
volves pre-processing a large biological sciences corpus,
in this case the contents of Medline, in order to identify
various biological entities such as genes, enzymes, and
proteins, and relationships between them such as struc-
tural and locative relations. These entities and relation-
ships are referred to in Medline abstracts by a very large
number of technical terms and expressions, which con-
tributes to the complexity of processing these texts. The
on-line component supports access to the extracted infor-
mation, as well as to the raw texts, via a SOAP interface
to an SQL database.
Despite the different objectives for text extraction
within the CLEF and myGrid projects, many of the tech-
nical challenges they face are the same, such as the
need for extensive capabilities to recognize and classify
biomedical entities as described using complex techni-
cal terminology in text. As a consequence we are con-
structing a general framework for the extraction of infor-
mation from biomedical text: AMBIT, a system for ac-
quiring medical and biological information from text. An
overview of the AMBIT logical architecture is shown in
figure 1.
The AMBIT system contains several engines, of which
Termino is one. The Information Extraction Engine pulls
selected information out of natural language text and
pushes this information into a set of pre-defined tem-
plates. These are structured objects which consists of one
or more slots for holding the extracted entities and rela-
tions. The Query Engine allows users to access informa-
tion through traditional free text search and search based
on the structured information produced by the Informa-
tion Extraction Engine, so that queries may refer to spe-
cific entities and classes of entities, and specific kinds of
relations that are recognised to hold between them. The
Text Indexing Engine is used to index text and extracted,
structured information for the purposes of information re-
trieval. The AMBIT system contains two further compo-
nents: an interface layer, which provides a web or grid
channel to allow user and program access to the system;
and a database which holds free text and structured infor-
mation that can be searched through the Query Engine.
Termino interacts with the Query Engine and the Text
Indexing Engine to provide terminological support for
query formulation and text indexation. It also provides
knowledge for the Information Extraction Engine to use
in identifying and classifying biomedical entities in text.
The Terminology Engine can furthermore be called by
users and remote programs to access information from
the various lexical resources that are integrated in the ter-
minological database.
2 Related Work
Since identification and classification of technical terms
in biomedical text is an essential step in information
extraction and other natural language processing tasks,
most natural language processing systems contain a
terminological resource of some sort. Some systems
make use of existing terminological resources, notably
the UMLS Metathesaurus, e.g. Rindflesch et al (2000),
Pustejovski et al (2002); other systems rely on re-
sources that have been specifically built for the applica-
tion, e.g. Humphreys et al (2000), Thomas et al (2000).
The UMLS Metathesaurus provides a semantic classi-
fication of terms drawn from a wide range of vocabularies
in the clinical and biomedical domain (Humphreys et al,
1998). It does so by grouping strings from the source vo-
from Hospital 1
Clinical Records
Journals
On?line
Abstracts
Medline
Literature
Biomedical
Engine
Indexing
Text
Engine
Extraction
...
(Termino)
Engine
Terminology
Ambit
from Hospital 2
Clinical Records
Web GRID
Interface layer
Raw text
(entities / relations)
Structured InfoFree text
  search
Engine
Query
Information
SOAP /
     HTTP
& Annotations
Structured Info
Figure 1: AMBIT Architecture
cabularies that are judged to have the same meaning into
concepts, and mapping these concepts onto nodes or se-
mantic types in a semantic network. Although the UMLS
Metathesaurus is used in a number of biomedical natural
language processing applications, we have decided not to
adopt the UMLS Metathesaurus as the primary terminol-
ogy resource in AMBIT for a variety of reasons.
One of the reasons for this decision is that the Metathe-
saurus is a closed system: strings are classified in terms
of the concepts and the semantic types that are present
in the Metathesaurus and the semantic network, whereas
we would like to be able to link our terms into multi-
ple ontologies, including in-house ontologies that do not
figure in any of the Metathesaurus? source vocabularies
and hence are not available through the Metathesaurus.
Moreover, we would also like to be able to have access to
additional terminological information that is not present
in the Metathesaurus, such as, for example, the annota-
tions in the Gene Ontology (The Gene Ontology Con-
sortium, 2001) assigned to a given human protein term.
While the terms making up the the tripartite Gene On-
tology are present in the UMLS Metathesaurus, assign-
ments of these terms to gene products are not recorded
in the Metathesaurus. Furthermore, as new terms appear
constantly in the biomedical field we would like to be
able to instantly add these to our terminological resource
and not have to wait until they have been included in the
UMLS Metathesaurus. Additionally, some medical terms
appearing in patient notes are hospital-specific and are
unlikely to be included in the Metathesaurus at all.
With regard to systems that do not use the UMLS
Metathesaurus, but rather depend on terminological re-
sources that have been specifically built for an applica-
tion, we note that these terminological resources tend to
be limited in the following two respects. First, the struc-
ture of these resources is often fixed and in some cases
amounts to simple gazetteer lists. Secondly, because of
their fixed structure, these resources are usually popu-
lated with content from just a few sources, leaving out
many other potentially interesting sources of terminolog-
ical information.
Instead, we intend for Termino to be an exten-
sible resource that can hold diverse kinds of termi-
nological information. The information in Termino
is either imported from existing, outside knowledge
sources, e.g. the Enzyme Nomenclature (http://www.
chem.qmw.ac.uk/iubmb/enzyme/), the Structural Classi-
fication of Proteins database (Murzin et al, 1995), and
the UMLS Metathesaurus, or it is induced from on-line
raw text resources, e.g. Medline abstracts. Termino thus
provides uniform access to terminological information
aggregated across many sources. Using Termino re-
moves the need for multiple, source-specific terminolog-
ical components within text processing systems that em-
ploy multiple terminological resources.
3 Architecture
Termino consists of two components: a database holding
terminological information and a compiler for generating
term recognizers from the contents of the database. These
two components will be discussed in the following two
sections.
STRINGS
string str id
. . . . . .
neurofibromin str728
abdomen str056
mammectomy str176
mastectomy str183
. . . . . .
TERMOID STRINGS
trm id str id
. . . . . .
trm023 str056
trm656 str056
trm924 str728
trm369 str728
trm278 str176
trm627 str183
. . . . . .
PART OF SPEECH
trm id pos
. . . . . .
trm023 N
. . . . . .
SYNONYMY
syn id trm id scl id
. . . . . . . . .
syn866 trm278 syn006
syn435 trm627 syn006
. . . . . . . . .
GO ANNOTATIONS
trm id annotation version
. . . . . . . . .
trm924 GO:0004857 9/2003
trm369 GO:0008285 9/2003
. . . . . . . . .
UMLS
trm id cui lui sui version
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
trm278 C0024881 L0024669 S0059711 2003AC
trm656 C0000726 L0000726 S0414154 2003AC
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Figure 2: Structure of the terminological database
3.1 Terminological Database
The terminological database is designed to meet three re-
quirements. First of all, it must be capable of storing large
numbers of terms. As we have seen, the UMLS Metathe-
saurus contains over 2 million distinct terms. However,
as UMLS is just one of many resources whose terms may
need to be stored, many millions of terms may need to
be stored in total. Secondly, Termino?s database must
also be flexible enough to hold a variety of information
about terms, including information of a morpho-syntactic
nature, such as part of speech and morphological class;
information of a semantic nature, such as quasi-logical
form and links to concepts in ontologies; and provenance
information, such as the sources of the information in the
database. The database will also contain links to connect
synonyms and morphological and orthographic variants
to one another and to connect abbreviations and acronyms
to their full forms. Finally, the database must be orga-
nized in such a way that it allows for fast and efficient
recognition of terms in text.
As mentioned above, the information in Termino?s
database is either imported from existing, outside knowl-
edge sources or induced from text corpora. Since these
sources are heterogeneous in both information content
and format, Termino?s database is ?extensional?: it stores
strings and information about strings. Higher-order con-
cepts such as ?term? emerge as the result of interconnec-
tions between strings and information in the database.
The database is organized as a set of relational tables,
each storing one of the types of information mentioned
above. In this way, new information can easily be in-
cluded in the database without any global changes to the
structure of the database.
Terminological information about any given string is
usually gathered from multiple sources. As information
about a string accumulates in the database, we must make
sure that co-dependencies between various pieces of in-
formation about the string are preserved. This considera-
tion leads to the fundamental element of the terminologi-
cal database, a termoid. A termoid consists of a string to-
gether with associated information of various kinds about
the string. Information in one termoid holds conjunc-
tively for the termoid?s string, while multiple termoids
for the same string express disjunctive alternatives.
For instance, taking an example from UMLS, we may
learn from one source that the string cold as an adjective
refers to a temperature, whereas another source may tell
us that cold as a noun refers to a disease. This informa-
tion is stored in the database as two termoids: abstractly,
?cold, adjective, temperature? and ?cold, noun, disease?.
A single termoid ?cold, adjective, noun, temperature, dis-
ease? would not capture the co-dependency between the
part of speech and the ?meaning? of cold.1 This example
illustrates that a string can be in more than one termoid.
1Note that the UMLS Metathesaurus has no mechanism for
storing this co-dependency between grammatical and semantic
information.
Each termoid, however, has one and only one string.
Figure 2 provides a detailed example of part of the
structure of the terminological database. In the table
STRINGS every unique string is assigned a string iden-
tifier (str id). In the table TERMOID STRINGS each string
identifier is associated with one or more termoid iden-
tifiers (trm id). These termoid identifiers then serve as
keys into the tables holding terminological information.
Thus, in this particular example, the database includes
the information that in the Gene Ontology the string
neurofibromin has been assigned the terms with identi-
fiers GO:0004857 and GO:0008285. Furthermore, in the
UMLS Metathesaurus version 2003AC, the string mam-
mectomy has been assigned the concept-unique identifier
C0024881 (CUI), the lemma-unique identifier L0024669
(LUI), and the string-unique identifier S0059711 (SUI).
Connections between termoids such as those arising
from synonymy and orthographic variation are recorded
in another set of tables. For example, the table SYN-
ONYMY in figure 2 indicates that termoids 278 and
627 are synonymous, since they have the same syn-
onymy class identifier (scl id).2 The synonymy identifier
(syn id) identifies the assignment of a termoid to a partic-
ular synonymy class. This identifier is used to record the
source on which the assignment is based. This can be a
reference to a knowledge source from which synonymy
information has been imported into Termino, or a refer-
ence to both an algorithm by which and a corpus from
which synonyms have been extracted. Similarly there are
tables containing provenance information for strings, in-
dexed by str id, and termoids, indexed by trm id. These
tables are not shown in he example.
With regard to the first requirement for the design of
the terminological database mentioned at the beginning
of this section ? scalability ?, an implementation of Ter-
mino in MySQL has been loaded with 427,000 termoids
for 363,000 strings (see section 4 for more details). In it
the largest table, STRINGS, measures just 16MB, which is
nowhere near the default limit of 4GB that MySQL im-
poses on the size of tables. Hence, storing a large num-
ber of terms in Termino is not a problem size-wise. The
second requirement, flexibility of the database, is met by
distributing terminological information over a set of rela-
tively small tables and linking the contents of these tables
to strings via termoid identifiers. In this way we avoid the
strictures of any one fixed representational scheme, thus
making it possible for the database to hold information
from disparate sources. The third requirement on the de-
sign of the database, efficient recognition of terms, will
2The function of synonymy class identifiers in Termino is
similar to the function of CUIs in the UMLS Metathesaurus.
However, since we are not bound to a classification into UMLS
CUIs, we can assert synonymy between terms coming from ar-
bitrary sources.
be addressed in the next section.
3.2 Term Recognition
To ensure fast term recognition with Termino?s vast ter-
minological database, the system comes equipped with
a compiler for generating finite state machines from the
strings in the terminological database discussed in the
previous section. Direct look-up of strings in the database
is not an option, because it is unknown in advance at
which positions in a text terms will start and end. In order
to be complete, one would have to look up all sequences
of words or tokens in the text, which is very inefficient.
Compilation of a finite state recognizer proceeds in
the following way. First, each string in the database is
broken into tokens, where a token is either a contigu-
ous sequence of alpha-numeric characters or a punctu-
ation symbol. Next, starting from a single initial state, a
path through the machine is constructed, using the tokens
of the string to label transitions. For example, for the
string Graves? disease the machine will include a path
with transitions on Graves, ?, and disease. New states are
only created when necessary. The state reached on the fi-
nal token of a string will be labeled final and is associated
with the identifiers of the termoids for that string.
To recognize terms in text, the text is tokenized and the
finite state machine is run over the text, starting from the
initial state at each token in the text. For each sequence
of tokens leading to a final state, the termoid identifiers
associated with that state are returned. These identifiers
are then used to access the terminological database and
retrieve the information contained in the termoids. Where
appropriate the machine will produce multiple termoid
identifiers for strings. It will also recognize overlapping
and embedded strings.
Figure 3 shows a small terminological database and a
finite state recognizer derived from it. Running this rec-
ognizer over the phrase . . . thyroid dysfunction, such as
Graves? disease . . . produces four annotations: thyroid
is assigned the termoid identifiers trm1 and trm2; thyroid
dysfunction, trm3; and Graves? disease, trm4.
It should be emphasised at this point that term recog-
nition as performed by Termino is in fact term look-up
and not the end point of term processing. Term look-up
might return multiple possible terms for a given string,
or for overlapping strings, and subsequent processes may
apply to filter these alternatives down to the single option
that seems most likely to be correct in the given context.
Furthermore, more flexible processes of term recognition
might apply over the results of look-up. For example, a
term grammar might be provided for a given domain, al-
lowing longer terms to be built from shorter terms that
have been identified by term look-up.
The compiler can be parameterized to produce finite
state machines that match exact strings only, or that ab-
STRINGS
string str id
thyroid str12
thyroid disfunction str15
Graves? disease str25
TERMOID STRINGS
trm id str id
trm1 str12
trm2 str12
trm3 str15
trm4 str25
? trm4disease
thyroid
Graves
trm3
trm2
trm1
disfunction
Figure 3: Sample terminological database and finite state term recognizer
stract away from morphological and orthographical vari-
ation. At the moment, morphological information about
strings is supplied by a component outside Termino. In
our current term recognition system, this component ap-
plies to a text before the recognition process and asso-
ciates all verbs and nouns with their base form. Similarly,
the morphological component applies to the strings in the
terminological database before the compilation process.
The set-up in which term recognizers are compiled
from the contents of the terminological database turns
Termino into a general terminological resource which is
not restricted to any single domain or application. The
database can be loaded with terms from multiple domains
and compilation can be restricted to particular subsets of
strings by selecting termoids from the database based on
their source, for example. In this way one can produce
term recognizers that are tailored towards specific do-
mains or specific applications within domains.
4 Implementation & Performance
A first version of Termino has been implemented. It uses
a database implemented in MySQL and currently con-
tains over 427,000 termoids for around 363,000 strings.
Content has been imported from various sources by
means of source-specific scripts for extracting relevant
information from sources and a general script for load-
ing this extracted information into Termino. More specif-
ically, to support information extraction from patient
records, we have included in Termino strings from the
UMLS Metathesaurus falling under the following seman-
tic types: pharmacologic substances, anatomical struc-
tures, therapeutic procedure, diagnostic procedure, and
several others. We have also loaded a list of hu-
man proteins and their assignments to the Gene Ontol-
ogy as produced by the European Bioinformatics Insti-
tute (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/) into Termino. Further-
more, we have included several gazetteer lists containing
terms in the fields of molecular biology and pharmacol-
ogy that were assembled for previous information extrac-
tion projects in our NLP group. A web services (SOAP)
API to the database is under development. We plan to
make the resource available to researchers as a web ser-
vice or in downloadable form.3
The compiler to construct finite state recognizers from
the database is fully implemented, tested, and integrated
into AMBIT. The compiled recognizer for the 363,000
strings of Termino has 1.2 million states and an on-disk
size of around 80MB. Loading the matcher from disk
into memory requires about 70 seconds (on an UltraSparc
900MHz), but once loaded recognition is a very fast pro-
cess. We have been able to annotate a corpus of 114,200
documents, drawn from electronic patient records from
the Royal Marsden NHS Trust in London and each ap-
proximately 1kB of text, in approximately 44 hours ? an
average rate of 1.4 seconds per document, or 42 docu-
ments per minute. On average, about 30 terms falling un-
der the UMLS ?clinical? semantic types mentioned above
were recognized in each document. We are currently an-
notating a bench-mark corpus in order to obtain precision
and recall figures. We are also planning to compile rec-
ognizers for differently sized subsets of the terminologi-
cal database and measure their recognition speed over a
given collection of texts. This will provide some indica-
tion as to the scalability of the system.
Since Termino currently contains many terms imported
from the UMLS Metathesaurus, it is interesting to com-
pare its term recognition performance against the per-
formance of MetaMap. MetaMap is a program avail-
able from at the National Library of Medicine ? the de-
velopers of UMLS ? specifically designed to discover
UMLS Metathesaurus concepts referred to in text (Aron-
son, 2001). An impressionistic comparison of the per-
formance of Termino and MetaMap on the CLEF patient
records shows that the results differ in two ways. First,
MetaMap recognizes more terms than Termino. This
is simply because MetaMap draws on a comprehensive
version of UMLS, whereas Termino just contains a se-
lected subset of the strings in the Metathesaurus. Sec-
ondly, MetaMap is able to recognize variants of terms,
e.g. it will map the verb to treat and its inflectional forms
onto the term treatment, whereas Termino currently does
not do this. To recognize term variants MetaMap re-
lies on UMLS?s SPECIALIST lexicon, which provides
3Users may have to sign license agreements with third par-
ties in order to be able to use restricted resources that have been
integrated into Termino.
syntactic, morphological, and orthographic information
for many of the terms occurring in the Metathesaurus.
While the performance of both systems differs in favor
of MetaMap, it is important to note that the source of
these differences is unrelated to the actual design of Ter-
mino?s terminological database or Termino?s use of fi-
nite state machines to do term recognition. Rather, the
divergence in performance follows from a difference in
breadth of content of both systems at the moment. With
regard to practical matters, the comparison showed that
term recognition with Termino is much faster than with
MetaMap. Also, compiling a finite state recognizer from
the terminological database in Termino is a matter of min-
utes, whereas setting up MetaMap can take several hours.
However, since MetaMap?s processing is more involved
than Termino?s, e.g. MetaMap parses the input first, and
hence requires more resources, these remarks should be
backed up with a more rigorous comparison between Ter-
mino and MetaMap, which is currently underway.
The advantage of term recognition with Termino over
MetaMap and UMLS or any other recognizer with a sin-
gle source, is that it provides immediate entry points
into a variety of outside ontologies and other knowledge
sources, making the information in these sources avail-
able to processing steps subsequent to term recognition.
For example, for a gene or protein name recognized in a
text, Termino will return the database identifiers of this
term in the HUGO Nomenclature database (Wain et al,
2002) and the OMIM database (Online Mendelian Inher-
itance in Man, OMIM (TM), 2000). These identifiers
give access to the information stored in these databases
about the gene or protein, including alternative names,
gene map locus, related disorders, and references to rele-
vant papers.
5 Conclusions & Future Work
Dealing with terminology is an essential step in natural
language processing in technical domains. In this paper
we have described the design, implementation, and use of
Termino, a large scale terminology resource for biomedi-
cal language processing.
Termino includes a relational database which is de-
signed to store a large number of terms together with
complex, heterogeneous information about these terms,
such as morpho-syntactic information, links to concepts
in ontologies, and other kinds of annotations. The
database is also designed to be extensible: it is easy to
include terms and information about terms found in out-
side biological databases and ontologies. Term look-up
in text is done via finite state machines that are compiled
from the contents of the database. This approach allows
the database to be very rich without sacrificing speed at
look-up time. These three features make Termino a flexi-
ble tool for inclusion in a biomedical text processing sys-
tem.
As noted in section 3.2, Termino has not been designed
to be used as a stand-alone term recognition system but
rather as the first component, the lexical look-up com-
ponent, in a multi-component term processing system.
Since Termino may return multiple terms for a given
string, or for overlapping strings, some post-filtering of
these alternatives is necessary. Secondly, it is likely that
better term recognition performance will be obtained by
supplementing Termino look-up with a term parser which
uses a grammar to give a term recognizer the generative
capacity to recognize previously unseen terms. For ex-
ample, many terms for chemical compounds conform to
grammars that allow complex terms to be built out of sim-
pler terms prefixed or suffixed with numerals separated
from the simpler term with hyphens. It does not make
sense to attempt to store in Termino all of these variants.
Termino provides a firm basis on which to build large-
scale biomedical text processing applications. However,
there are a number of directions where further work can
be done. First, as noted in 3.2, morphological informa-
tion is currently not held in Termino, but rather resides
in an external morphological analyzer. We are working
to extend the Termino data model to enable information
about morphological variation to be stored in Termino,
so that Termino serves as a single source of information
for the terms it contains. Secondly, we are working to
build term induction modules to allow Termino content
to be automatically acquired from corpora, in addition
to deriving it from manually created resources such as
UMLS. Finally, while we have already incorporated Ter-
mino into the AMBIT system where it collaborates with
a term parser to perform more complete term recogni-
tion, more work can be done to with respect to such an
integration. For example, probabilities could be incorpo-
rated into Termino to assist with probabilistic parsing of
terms; or, issues of trade-off between what should be in
the term lexicon versus the term grammar could be fur-
ther explored by looking to see which compound terms
in the lexicon contain other terms as substrings and at-
tempt to abstract away from these to grammar rules. For
example, in the example thyroid disfunction above, both
thyroid and disfunction are terms, the first of class ?body
part?, the second of class ?problem?. Their combination
thyroid disfunction is a term of class ?problem?, suggest-
ing a rule of the form ?problem?   ?body part? ?problem?.
References
A.R. Aronson. 2001. Effective mapping of biomedical
text to the UMLS Metathesaurus: the MetaMap pro-
gram. In Proceedings of the American Medical Infor-
matics Association Symposium, pages 17?21.
R. Gaizauskas and Y. Wilks. 1998. Information extrac-
tion: Beyond document retrieval. Journal of Docu-
mentation, 54(1):70?105.
R. Gaizauskas, G. Demetriou, P. Artymiuk, and P. Wil-
lett. 2003. Protein structures and information extrac-
tion from biological texts: The PASTA system. Jour-
nal of Bioinformatics, 19(1):135?143.
C.A. Goble, C.J. Wroe, R. Stevens, and the my-
Grid consortium. 2003. The myGrid project:
Services, architecture and demonstrator. In
S. Cox, editor, Proceedings of UK e-Science
All Hands Meeting 2003, Nottingham, UK.
http://www.nesc.ac.uk/events/ahm2003/AHMCD/.
R. Grishman. 1997. Information extraction: Techniques
and challenges. In Maria Teresa Pazienza, editor, In-
formation Extraction, pages 10?27. Springer Verlag.
U. Hahn, M. Romacker, and S. Schulz. 2002. Creating
knowledge repositories from biomedical reports: the
medSynDiKATe text mining system. In Proceedings
of the Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing, pages 338?
349.
L. Humphreys, D.A.B. Lindberg, H.M. Schoolman, and
G.O. Barnett. 1998. The Unified Medical Language
System: An informatics research collaboration. Jour-
nal of the American Medical Informatics Association,
1(5):1?13.
K. Humphreys, G. Demetriou, and R. Gaizauskas. 2000.
Two applications of information extraction to biolog-
ical science journal articles: Enzyme interactions and
protein structures. In Proceedings of the Pacific Sym-
posium on Biocomputing, pages 505?516.
A.G. Murzin, S.E. Brenner, T. Hubbard, and C. Chothia.
1995. SCOP: A structural classification of proteins
database for the investigation of sequences and struc-
tures. Journal of Molecular Biology, (247):536?540.
(http://scop.mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk/scop/).
Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man, OMIM (TM).
2000. McKusick-Nathans Institute for Genetic
Medicine, Johns Hopkins University (Baltimore, MD)
and National Center for Biotechnology Informa-
tion, National Library of Medicine (Bethesda, MD).
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim/.
J. Pustejovsky, J. Castan?o, R. Saur??, A. Rumshisky,
J. Zhang, and W. Luo. 2002. Medstract: Creat-
ing large-scale information servers for biomedical li-
braries. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Natural
Language Processing in the Biomedical Domain, As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics 40th Anniver-
sary Meeting (ACL-02), pages 85?92.
A. Rector, J. Rogers, A. Taweel, D. Ingram, D. Kalra,
J. Milan, R. Gaizauskas, M. Hepple, D. Scott,
and R. Power. 2003. Joining up health care
with clinical and post-genomic research. In
S. Cox, editor, Proceedings of UK e-Science
All Hands Meeting 2003, Nottingham, UK.
http://www.nesc.ac.uk/events/ahm2003/AHMCD/.
C.T. Rindflesch, J.V. Rajan, and L. Hunter. 2000. Ex-
tracting molecular binding relationships from biomed-
ical text. In Proceedings of the 6th Applied Natu-
ral Language Processing conference / North American
chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics annual meeting, pages 188?915.
The Gene Ontology Consortium. 2001. Creating the
gene ontology resource: design and implementation.
Genome Research, 11(8):1425?1433.
J. Thomas, D. Milward, C. Ouzounis, and S. Pulman.
2000. Automatic extraction of protein interactions
from scientific abstracts. In Proceedings of the Pacific
Symposium on Biocomputing, pages 538?549.
H.M. Wain, M. Lush, F. Ducluzeau, and S. Povey.
2002. Genew: The human nomenclature
database. Nucleic Acids Research, 30(1):169?171.
(http://www.gene.ucl.ac.uk/nomenclature/).
