Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 151?156,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
PATHS: A System for Accessing Cultural Heritage Collections
Eneko Agirre?, Nikolaos Aletras?, Paul Clough?, Samuel Fernando?,
Paula Goodale?, Mark Hall?, Aitor Soroa? and Mark Stevenson?
(?) IXA NLP Group, University of the Basque Country
Manuel Lardizabal, 1, 20.018 Donostia, Basque Country
(?) Department of Computer Science, Sheffield University
211 Portobello, Sheffield S1 4DP, United Kingdom
Abstract
This paper describes a system for navigat-
ing large collections of information about
cultural heritage which is applied to Eu-
ropeana, the European Library. Euro-
peana contains over 20 million artefacts
with meta-data in a wide range of Euro-
pean languages. The system currently pro-
vides access to Europeana content with
meta-data in English and Spanish. The pa-
per describes how Natural Language Pro-
cessing is used to enrich and organise this
meta-data to assist navigation through Eu-
ropeana and shows how this information is
used within the system.
1 Introduction
Significant amounts of information about cultural
heritage has been digitised in recent years and is
now easily available through online portals. How-
ever, this vast amount of material can also be over-
whelming for many users since they are provided
with little or no guidance on how to find and inter-
pret this information. Potentially useful and rel-
evant content is hidden from the users who are
typically offered simple keyword-based searching
functionality as the entry point into a cultural her-
itage collection. The situation is very different
within traditional mechanisms for viewing cultural
heritage (e.g. museums) where artefacts are or-
ganised thematically and users guided through the
collection.
This paper describes a system that allows users
to explore large cultural heritage collections. Nav-
igation is based around the metaphor of pathways
(or trails) through the collection, an approach that
has been widely explored as an alternative to stan-
dard keyword-based search (Furuta et al, 1997;
Reich et al, 1999; Shipman et al, 2000; White and
Huang, 2010). Pathways are sets of artefacts or-
ganised around a theme which form access points
to the collection.
Pathways are a useful way to access informa-
tion about cultural heritage. Users accessing these
collections are often unfamiliar with their content,
making keyword-based search unsuitable since
they are unable to formulate appropriate queries
(Wilson et al, 2010). Non-keyword-based search
interfaces have been shown to be suitable for ex-
ploratory search (Marchionini, 2006). Pathways
support this exploration by echoing the organised
galleries and guided tours found in museums.
2 Related Work
Heitzman et al (1997) describe the ILEX system
which acts as a guide through the jewellery col-
lection of the National Museum of Scotland. The
user explores the collection through a set of web
pages which provide descriptions of each artefact
that are personalised for each user. The system
makes use of information about the artefacts the
user has viewed to build up a model of their in-
terests and uses this to customise the descriptions
of each artefact and provide recommendations for
further artefacts in which they may be interested.
Grieser et al (2007) also explore providing rec-
ommendations based on the artefacts a user has
viewed so far. They make use of a range of tech-
niques including language modelling, geospatial
modelling and analysis of previous visitors? be-
haviour to provide recommendations to visitors to
the Melbourne Museum.
Grieser et al (2011) explore methods for de-
termining the similarity between museum arte-
facts, commenting that this is useful for navigation
through these collections and important for per-
sonalisation (Bowen and Filippini-Fantoni, 2004;
O?Donnell et al, 2001), recommendation (Bohn-
ert et al, 2009; Trant, 2009) and automatic tour
generation (Finkelstein et al, 2002; Roes et al,
2009). They also use exhibits from Melbourne
151
Museum and apply a range of approaches to deter-
mine the similarity between them, including com-
paring descriptions and measuring physical dis-
tance between them in the museum.
These approaches, like many of the systems
that have been developed for online access to cul-
tural heritage (e.g. (Hage et al, 2010)), are based
around virtual access to a concrete physical space
(i.e. a museum). They often provide tours which
are constrained by the physical layout of the mu-
seum, such as virtual museum visits. However,
these approaches are less suitable for unstructured
collections such as databases of cultural heritage
artefacts collected from multiple institutions or
artefacts not connected with existing physical pre-
sentation (e.g. in a museum). The PATHS sys-
tem is designed for these types of collections and
makes use of natural language analysis to sup-
port navigation. In particular, similarity between
artefacts is computed automatically (see Section
4.1), background information automatically added
to artefact descriptions (see Section 4.2) and a hi-
erarchy of artefacts generated (see Section 4.3).
3 Cultural Heritage Data
The PATHS system has been applied to data from
Europeana1. This is a web-portal to collections
of cultural heritage artefacts provided by a wide
range of European institutions. Europeana cur-
rently provides access to over 20 million artefacts
including paintings, films, books, archival records
and museum objects. The artefacts are provided
by around 1,500 institutions which range from
major institutions, including the Rijksmuseum in
Amsterdam, the British Library and the Louvre,
to smaller organisations such as local museums.
It therefore contains an aggregation of digital con-
tent from several sources and is not connected with
any one physical museum.
The PATHS system makes use of three collec-
tions from Europeana. The first of these con-
tains artefacts from content providers in the United
Kingdom which has meta-data in English. The
artefacts in the remaining two collections come
from institutions in Spain and have meta-data in
Spanish.
CultureGrid Culture Grid2 is a digital content
provider service from the Collection Trust3.
1http://www.europeana.eu
2http://www.culturegrid.org.uk
3http://www.collectionstrust.org.uk
It contains information about over one mil-
lion artefacts from 40 different UK content
providers such as national and regional mu-
seums and libraries.
Cervantes Biblioteca Virtual Miguel De Cer-
vantes4 contains digitalised Spanish text in
various formats. In total, the online library
contains about 75,000 works from a range of
periods in Spanish history.
Hispana The Biblioteca Nacional de Espan?a5
contains information about a diverse set of
content including text and drawings. The ma-
terial is collected from different providers in
Spain including museums and libraries.
Europeana stores metadata for each artefact in
an XML-based format which includes information
such as its title, the digital format, the collection,
the year of creation and also a short description of
each artefact. However, this meta-data is created
by the content providers and varies significantly
across artefacts. Many of the artefacts have only
limited information associated with them, for ex-
ample a single word title. In addition, the content
providers that contribute to Europeana use differ-
ent hierarchical structures to organise their collec-
tions (e.g. Library of Congress Subject Headings6
and the Art and Architecture Thesaurus7), or do
not organise their content into any structure. Con-
sequently the various hierarchies that are used in
Europeana only cover some of the artefacts and
are not compatible with each other.
3.1 Filtering Data
Analysis of the artefacts in these three collections
revealed that many have short and uninformative
titles or lack a description. This forms a challenge
to language processing techniques since the arte-
fact?s meta-data does not contain enough informa-
tion to model it accurately.
The collections were filtered by removing any
artefacts that have no description and have either
fewer than four words in their title or have a title
that is repeated more than 100 times in the col-
lection. Table 1 shows the number of artefacts
in each of the Europeana collections before and
4http://www.cervantesvirtual.com
5http://www.bne.es
6http://authorities.loc.gov/
7http://www.getty.edu/research/tools/
vocabularies/aat/
152
after this filter has been applied. Applying the
heuristic leads to the removal of around 31% of the
artefacts, although the number varies significantly
across the collections with 61% of the artefacts in
CultureGrid being removed and only 1% of those
in Hispana.
Collection Lang. Total Filtered
CultureGrid Eng. 1,207,781 466,958
Hispana Sp. 1,235,133 1,219,731
Cervantes Sp. 19,278 14,983
2,462,192 1,701,672
Table 1: Number of artefacts in Europeana collec-
tions before and after filtering
4 Data Processing
A range of pre-preprocessing steps were carried
out on these collections to provide additional in-
formation to support navigation in the PATHS sys-
tem.
4.1 Artefact Similarity
We begin by computing the similarity between
the various artefacts in the Europeana collections.
This information is useful for navigation and rec-
ommendation but is not available in the Europeana
collections since they are drawn from a diverse
range of sources.
Similarity is computed using an approach de-
scribed by Aletras et al (2012). in which the top-
ics generated from each artefact?s metadata using
a topic model are compared. Latent Dirichlet Al-
location (LDA) (Blei et al, 2003) is a widely used
type of topic model in which documents can be
viewed as probability distributions over topics, ?.
The similarity between a pair of documents can be
estimated by comparing their topic distributions.
This is achieved by viewing each distribution as
a vector of probabilities and then computing the
cosine of the angle between them:
sim(a, b) =
~?a.~?b
|~?a| ? | ~?b|
(1)
where ~?a is the vector created from the probability
distribution generated by LDA for document a.
This approach is evaluated using a set of 295
pairs of artefacts for which human judgements
of similarity were obtained using crowdsourcing
(Aletras et al, 2012). Pearson correlation between
the similarity scores and human judgements was
0.53.
The similarity between all the artefacts in the
collection is computed in a pairwise fashion. The
25 artefacts with the highest score are retained for
each artefact.
4.2 Background Links
The metadata associated with Europeana artefacts
is often very limited. Consequently links to rele-
vant articles in Wikipedia were added to each the
meta-data of each artefact using Wikipedia Miner
(Milne and Witten, 2008) to provide background
information. In addition to the link, Wikipedia
Miner returns a confidence value between 0 and
1 for each link based on the context of the item.
The accuracy of the links added by Wikipedia
Miner were evaluated using the meta-data associ-
ated with 21 randomly selected artefacts. Three
annotators analysed the links added and found that
a confidence value of 0.5 represented a good bal-
ance between accuracy and coverage. See Fer-
nando and Stevenson (2012) for further details.
4.3 Hierarchies
The range of hierarchies used by the various col-
lections that comprise the Europeana collection
make navigation difficult (see Section 3). Con-
sequently, the Wikipedia links added to the arte-
fact meta-data were used to automatically gener-
ate hierarchies that the cover the entire collection.
These hierarchies are used by the PATHS system
to assist browsing and exploration.
Two approaches are used to generate hierarchies
of Europeana artefacts (WikiFreq and WikiTax).
These are combined to generate the WikiMerge hi-
erarchy which is used in the PATHS system.
WikiFreq uses link frequencies across the en-
tire collection to organise the artefacts. The first
stage in the hierarchy generation process is to
compute the frequency with which each linked
Wikipedia article appears in the collection. The
links in each artefact are these analysed to con-
struct a hierarchy consisting of Wikipedia articles.
The links in the meta-data associated with each
artefact are ordered based on their frequency in the
entire collection and that set of links then inserted
into the hierarchy. For example, if the set of or-
dered links for an artefact is a1, a2, a3 ? ? ? an then
the artefact is then inserted into the hierarchy un-
der the branch a1 ? a2 ? a3 ? ? ? ? an, with
a1 at the top level in the tree and the artefact ap-
pearing under the node an. If this branch does not
already exist in the tree then it is created.
153
The hierarchy is pruned to removing nodes with
fewer than 20 artefacts in them. In addition, if a
node has more than 20 child nodes, only the 20
most frequent are used.
WikiTax uses the Wikipedia Taxonomy
(Ponzetto and Strube, 2011), a taxonomy derived
from Wikipedia categories. Europeana artefacts
are inserted into this taxonomy using the links
added by Wikipedia Miner with each artefact
being added to the taxonomy for all categories
listed in the links. This leads to a taxonomy in
which artefacts can occur in multiple locations.
Each approach was used to generate hierarchies
from the Europeana collections. The resulting hi-
erarchies were evaluated via online surveys, see
Fernando et al (2012) for further details. It was
found that WikiFreq performed well at placing
items into the correct location in the taxonomy and
grouping together similar items under the same
node. However, the overall structure of WikiTax
was judged to be more coherent and comprehensi-
ble.
WikiMerge combines combines WikiFreq and
WikiTax. WikiFreq is used to link each artefact
to Wikipedia articles a1 . . . an, but only the link
to the most specific article, an, is retained. The
an articles are linked to their parent WikiTax top-
ics based on the Wikipedia categories the articles
belong to. The resulting hierarchy is pruned re-
moving all WikiTax topics that do not have a Wik-
iFreq child or have only one child topic. Finally
top-level topics in the combined hierarchy are then
linked to their respective Wikipedia root node.
The resulting WikiMerge hierarchy has Wik-
iFreq topics as its leaves and WikiTax topics as
its interior and root nodes. Experiments showed
that this approach was successful in combining
the strengths of the two methods (Fernando et al,
2012).
5 The PATHS System
The PATHS system provides access to the Euro-
peana collections described in Section 3 by mak-
ing use of the additional information generated us-
ing the approaches described in Section 4. The in-
terface of the PATHS system has three main areas:
Paths enables users to navigate via pathways (see
Section 5.1).
Search supports discovery of both collection arte-
facts and pathways through keyword search
(see Section 5.2).
Explore enables users to explore the collections
using a variety of types of overview (see Sec-
tion 5.3).
5.1 Paths Area
This area provides users with access to Europeana
through pathways or trails. These are manually
generated sets of artefacts organised into a tree
structure which are designed to showcase the con-
tent available to the user in an organised way.
These can be created by users and can be pub-
lished for others to follow. An example path-
way on the topic ?railways? is shown in Figure
1. A short description of the pathway?s content is
shown towards the top of the figure and a graphical
overview of its contents at the bottom.
Figure 1: Example pathway on the topic ?rail-
ways?
Figure 2 shows as example artefact as displayed
in the system. The example artefact is a portrait
of Catherine the Great. The left side of the figure
shows information extracted directly from the Eu-
ropeana meta-data for this artefact. The title and
textual description are shown towards the top left
together with a thumbnail image of the artefact.
Other information from the meta-data is shown be-
neath the ?About this item? heading. The right
side of the figure shows additional information
Figure 2: Example artefact displayed in system in-
terface. Related artefacts and background links are
displayed on right hand side
154
Figure 3: Example visualisations of hierarchy: thesaurus view (top left), tag cloud (top right), map views
(bottom)
about the artefact generated using the approaches
described in Sections 4.1 and 4.2. Related arte-
facts are shown to the user one at a time, click-
ing on the thumbnail image leads to the equivalent
page for the related artefact. Below this are links
to the Wikipedia articles that are identified in the
text of the article?s title and description.
5.2 Search Area
This area allows users to search for artefacts and
pathways using standard keyword search imple-
mented using Lucene (McCandless et al, 2010).
5.3 Explore Area
The system provides a variety of ways to view
the hierarchies generated using the approach de-
scribed in Section 4.3. Figure 3 shows how these
are displayed for a section of the hierarchy with
the label ?Society?. The simplest view (shown in
the top left of Figure 3) is a thesaurus type view
in which levels of the hierarchy are represented by
indentation. The system also allows levels of the
hierarchy to be viewed as a tag cloud (top right of
Figure 3). The final representation of the hierar-
chy is as a map, shown in the bottom of Figure 3.
In this visualisation categories in the hierarchy are
represented as ?islands? on the map. Zooming in
on the map provides more detail about that area of
the hierarchy.
6 Summary and Future Developments
This paper describes a system for navigating Eu-
ropeana, an aggregation of collections of cultural
heritage artefacts. NLP analysis is used to organ-
ise the collection and provide additional informa-
tion. The results of this analysis are provided to
the user through an online interface which pro-
vides access to English and Spanish content in Eu-
ropeana.
Planned future development of this system in-
cludes providing recommendations and more per-
sonalised access. Similarity information (Sec-
tion 4.1) can be used to provide information from
which the recommendations can be made. Person-
alised access will make use of information about
individual users (e.g. from their browsing be-
haviour or information they provide about their
preferences) to generate individual views of Eu-
ropeana.
155
Online Demo
The PATHS system is available at
http://explorer.paths-project.eu/
Acknowledgments
The research leading to these results was
carried out as part of the PATHS project
(http://paths-project.eu) funded by
the European Community?s Seventh Framework
Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agree-
ment no. 270082
References
N. Aletras, M. Stevenson, and P. Clough. 2012. Com-
puting similarity between items in a digital library
of cultural heritage. Journal of Computing and Cul-
tural Heritage, 5(4):no. 16.
D. Blei, A. Ng, and M. Jordan. 2003. Latent dirichlet
allocation. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
3:993?1022.
F. Bohnert, D. Schmidt, and I. Zuckerman. 2009. Spa-
tial Process for Recommender Systems. In Proc. of
IJCAI 2009, pages 2022?2027, Pasadena, CA.
J. Bowen and S. Filippini-Fantoni. 2004. Personaliza-
tion and the Web from a Museum Perspective. In
Proc. of Museums and the Web 2004, pages 63?78.
Samuel Fernando and Mark Stevenson. 2012. Adapt-
ing Wikification to Cultural Heritage. In Proceed-
ings of the 6th Workshop on Language Technology
for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Human-
ities, pages 101?106, Avignon, France.
Samuel Fernando, Mark Hall, Eneko Agirre, Aitor
Soroa, Paul Clough, and Mark Stevenson. 2012.
Comparing taxonomies for organising collections of
documents. In Proc. of COLING 2012, pages 879?
894, Mumbai, India.
L. Finkelstein, E. Gabrilovich, Y. Matias, E. Rivlin,
Z. Solan, G. Wolfman, and E. Ruppin. 2002. Plac-
ing Search in Context: The Concept Revisited. ACM
Trans. on Information Systems, 20(1):116?131.
R. Furuta, F.. Shipman, C. Marshall, D. Brenner, and
H. Hsieh. 1997. Hypertext paths and the World-
Wide Web: experiences with Walden?s Paths. In
Proc. of the Eighth ACM conference on Hypertext,
pages 167?176, New York, NY.
K. Grieser, T. Baldwin, and S. Bird. 2007. Dynamic
Path Prediction and Recommendation in a Museum
Environment. In Proc. of the Workshop on Lan-
guage Technology for Cultural Heritage Data (LaT-
eCH 2007), pages 49?56, Prague, Czech Republic.
K. Grieser, T. Baldwin, F. Bohnert, and L. Sonenberg.
2011. Using Ontological and Document Similarity
to Estimate Museum Exhibit Relatedness. Journal
of Computing and Cultural Heritage, 3(3):1?20.
W.R. van Hage, N. Stash, Y. Wang, and L.M. Aroyo.
2010. Finding your way through the Rijksmuseum
with an adaptive mobile museum guide. In Proc. of
ESWC 2010, pages 46?59.
J. Heitzman, C. Mellish, and J. Oberlander. 1997. Dy-
namic Generation of Museum Web Pages: The In-
telligent Labelling Explorer. Archives and Museum
Informatics, 11(2):117?125.
G. Marchionini. 2006. Exploratory Search: from Find-
ing to Understanding. Comm. ACM, 49(1):41?46.
M. McCandless, E. Hatcher, and O. Gospodnetic.
2010. Lucene in Action. Manning Publications.
D. Milne and I. Witten. 2008. Learning to Link with
Wikipedia. In Proc. of CIKM 2008, Napa Valley,
California.
M. O?Donnell, C. Mellish, J. Oberlander, and A. Knott.
2001. ILEX: An architecture for a dynamic hy-
pertext generation system. Natural Language En-
gineering, 7:225?250.
S.P. Ponzetto and M. Strube. 2011. Taxonomy in-
duction based on a collaboratively built knowledge
repository. Artificial Intelligence, 175(9-10):1737?
1756.
S. Reich, L. Carr, D. De Roure, and W. Hall. 1999.
Where have you been from here? Trails in hypertext
systems. ACM Computing Surveys, 31.
I. Roes, N. Stash, Y. Wang, and L. Aroyo. 2009. A
personalized walk through the museum: the CHIP
interactive tour guide. In Proc. of the 27th Interna-
tional Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, pages 3317?3322, Boston, MA.
F. Shipman, R. Furuta, D. Brenner, C. Chung, and
H. Hsieh. 2000. Guided paths through web-based
collections: Design, experiences, and adaptations.
Journal of the American Society for Information Sci-
ence, 51(3):260?272.
J. Trant. 2009. Tagging, folksonomies and art mu-
seums: Early experiments and ongoing research.
Journal of Digital Information, 10(1).
R. White and J. Huang. 2010. Assessing the scenic
route: measuring the value of search trails in web
logs. In Proc. of SIGIR 2010, pages 587?594.
M. Wilson, Kulesm B., M. Schraefel, and B. Schnei-
derman. 2010. From keyword search to explo-
ration: Designing future search interfaces for the
web. Foundations and Trends in Web Science,
2(1):1?97.
156
Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities, pages 1?10,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Generating Paths through Cultural Heritage Collections
Samuel Fernando1, Paula Goodale2, Paul Clough2,
Mark Stevenson1, Mark Hall2, Eneko Agirre3
1Department of Computer Science, University of Sheffield
2Information School, University of Sheffield
3Computer Science Department, University of the Basque Country
{s.fernando, p.goodale, p.d.clough,
r.m.stevenson, m.mhall}@sheffield.ac.uk
e.agirre@ehu.es
Abstract
Cultural heritage collections usually or-
ganise sets of items into exhibitions or
guided tours. These items are often
accompanied by text that describes the
theme and topic of the exhibition and pro-
vides background context and details of
connections with other items. The PATHS
project brings the idea of guided tours
to digital library collections where a tool
to create virtual paths are used to assist
with navigation and provide guides on par-
ticular subjects and topics. In this pa-
per we characterise and analyse paths of
items created by users of our online sys-
tem. The analysis highlights that most
users spend time selecting items relevant
to their chosen topic, but few users took
time to add background information to the
paths. In order to address this, we con-
ducted preliminary investigations to test
whether Wikipedia can be used to au-
tomatically add background text for se-
quences of items. In the future we would
like to explore the automatic creation of
full paths.
1 Introduction
Paths (or trails) have been studied as a means of
assisting users with the navigation of digital col-
lections as an alternative to standard keyword-
based search (Furuta et al, 1997; Reich et al,
1999; Shipman et al, 2000; White and Huang,
2010). Paths can be particularly useful to users
who are unfamilar with the content of digital col-
lections (e.g. historical documents) and may find
it difficult to formulate appropriate queries (Wil-
son et al, 2010). Paths can be used to assist users
with the navigation of collections through the pro-
vision of narratives and subject guides. From an
educational perspective paths can provide tangible
learning objects, created by teachers and followed
by students. Alternatively from a cultural her-
itage perspective paths can be used to create activ-
ity trails and guided tours support exploration by
visitors through collections of cultural artefacts.
This echoes the organised galleries and guided
tours found in physical museums. The existance
of tools, such as Walden?s paths1, Trailmeme2 and
Storify3, provide functionalities for users to record
and share paths through web resources and digital
libraries. From this perspective everyone can take
on role of curator and provide access to their own
personal collections.
We have developed an online system called
PATHS that allows curators and end-users to cre-
ate and view paths to navigate through the Eu-
ropeana4 cultural heriage collection. As part of
evaluations of the prototype PATHS system par-
ticipants have created paths on various topics. In
this paper we describe a number of these paths and
their characteristics. Analysing paths that are cre-
ated manually and characterising them can be seen
as a first step towards developing methods to sup-
port the creation of paths automatically and semi-
automatically. Within the context of the PATHS
project this is being considered to deal with the
following limitations of manual creation of paths.
Firstly, the effort required in generating them often
means that a sufficient number of paths on a vari-
ety of topics are not available. Secondly, the man-
ual creation of paths is a very time-consuming pro-
cess that would benefit from computational sup-
port in whatever form this might take. This pa-
per presents initial work in automatically creat-
ing paths and provides the following novel con-
1http://www.csdl.tamu.edu/walden/
2http://open.xerox.com/Services/
xerox-trails
3http://storify.com/
4http://www.europeana.eu/
1
tributions: (1) we present results of user stud-
ies describing what people want from paths and
how they use them to navigate digital collections;
(2) we analyse a set of manually-created paths
to identify their properties and be able to charac-
terise them; and (3) we present work on automati-
cally generating background text for sequences of
items, thus providing an efficient way to enrich
paths with additional information with little man-
ual input required.
The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 de-
scribes related work on the use of narratives in cul-
tural heritage and previous approaches to automat-
ically generate paths; Section 3 defines the prob-
lem of generating paths and describes the datasets
used in the experiments; Section 4 presents analy-
sis of manually-created paths; Section 5 shows re-
sults of using automatic methods to generate back-
ground text; and finally Section 6 concludes the
paper and provides avenues for further work.
2 Related Work
2.1 Narratives and Cultural Heritage
The potential of narrative in digital CH to sup-
port learning, creativity and exploration is clear,
providing opportunities for supporting a more ac-
tive user interaction, including deeper engagement
with context, representation of the collecting pro-
cess, and facilitation of a more entertaining expe-
rience of learning (Mulholland and Collins, 2002).
Walker et al (2013) also propose narrative as a
major element of interaction and informal learn-
ing, suggesting that meaning is made when the
links between people and artefacts, and interpreta-
tion and ideas are surfaced, especially within so-
cial groups. Their experiments involve the use
of mobile and handheld technologies in a physi-
cal museum environment, capturing audio annota-
tions, but have much in common with experimen-
tal systems designed for path creation online. In a
similar vein the StoryBank project utilises collec-
tions of photographs and audio narratives to create
and share stories as information in the developing
world (Frohlich and Rachovides, 2008).
Whilst technologies have aided the creation and
sharing of narratives in physical cultural encoun-
ters, Manovich (1999) critiques the lack of narra-
tive in digital cultural environments, offering that
online collections and many CH web sites are
databases with constantly changing content that
inevitably lack a cohesive and persistent story.
However, since ?narrative is constructed by link-
ing elements of this database in a particular or-
der? (Manovich, 1999), it is possible to offer users
any number of explicit ?trajectories? (narratives)
through a digital information space, and by merg-
ing database and narrative in this way, creating
a more dynamic, discovery-led experience. This
view might be interpreted at its simplest level as
a virtual representation of the guided tours rou-
tinely offered in physical CH spaces, and indeed
there is a small strand of research into the creation
of systems for generating and exploring online ex-
hibitions and tours from items held within digital
collections. A scenario of users creating and edit-
ing trails in a CH context is described by Walker
(2006), including functionality for collecting, or-
dering and annotating museum objects.
2.2 Automatically Creating Paths
Generation of implicit trails through physical and
virtual museum spaces has been related to the
learning process (Peterson and Levene, 2003). In
this example, trails are automatically created by
users as they navigate their way through an infor-
mation space, and may be used for individual or
collaborative purposes. Research on the applica-
tion of curated pathways in web environments has
often focused on providing trails pre-prepared by
experts (e.g. curators, educationalists) as a means
of assisting novice users to navigate information
online (Shipman et al, 2000). Indeed, it has been
found that domain knowledge or expertise can
considerably enhance the quality of trails created
(Yuan and White, 2012). Automatic extraction
and generation of trails in information spaces has
been explored as a means of harnessing the wis-
dom of crowds, using the mass actions of earlier
user behaviour to establish relevance, and recom-
mend content or navigation routes to later users.
Such trails can be readily mined from search en-
gine transaction logs and have been shown to pro-
vide added value (White and Huang, 2010; Has-
san and White, 2012; Liao et al, 2012). West and
Leskovec (2012) take this notion a stage further
and attempt to identify wayfinding strategies em-
ployed by browsers in Wikipedia, with the goal of
assisting future users in their navigation by surfac-
ing potentially useful hyperlinks.
Guided tours or pathways are essentially more
structured, purposeful forms of trails, taking the
user through a specific sequence of information
2
nodes and may also be automatically generated,
rather than manually curated as in the examples
above. Wheeldon and Levene (2003) offer an al-
gorithm for generating trails from site-search, en-
abling elements of structure and context to be in-
corporated into the trails created in this way, but
noting potential scalability issues for web scale
search tasks. In the CH domain, a small num-
ber of projects have attempted to automatically
generate digital content in the form of exhibi-
tions, tours and trails. Ma?kela? et al (2007) de-
scribe a system which utilises semantically an-
notated content to generate personalised ?exhi-
bitions? from a structured narrative-based search
query. Similarly, Zdrahal et al (2008) demonstrate
how pathways can be generated through a collec-
tion of semantically related documents to provide
a means of exploration, using non-NLP cluster-
ing and path creation techniques. Sophisticated
approaches such as linear programming and evo-
lutionary algorithms have also been proposed for
generating summaries and stories (McIntyre and
Lapata, 2010; Woodsend and Lapata, 2010). In
contrast, Wang et al (2007) use a recommender
system approach to generate museum tours on
the basis of ratings stored within a dynamic user
model, and Pechenizkiy and Calders (2007) pro-
pose the additional use of data mining techniques
on log data to improve this type of tour personali-
sation.
In summary, online tours and trails are made
possible either through manually curated content
generated through the efforts of experts or other
end users, or have been automatically generated
from the mining of large scale search logs, or from
collections benefitting from semantically-linked
content and/or detailed user models.
3 Methodology
This study brings together work from several ar-
eas of the PATHS project. An analysis of what
paths might be used for and what form they are ex-
pected to take, has had implications for the system
design and functionality and evaluation measures.
A user study focused upon evaluation of the first
prototype has provided manually-created paths as
a basis for analysing path content and attributes,
which in turn informs the desired characteristics
of automated paths and the algorithm designed for
generating paths automatically.
3.1 Utilisation of Paths
Initial user requirements interviews with 22 ex-
pert users in the heritage, education and profes-
sional domains found a strong affinity with the
path metaphor, revealing a range of different in-
terpretations of what it means in the CH context
and how they could be employed in an online en-
vironment to engage with key audiences. Eight
interpretations of the path metaphor emerged:
1. Path as search history
2. Path as information seeking journey
3. Path as linked metadata
4. Path as a starting point or way in
5. Path as a route through
6. Path as augmented reality
7. Path as information literacy journey / learn-
ing process
8. Path as transaction process
The first three of these are closest to the idea
of hypertext trails, with trails defined by user in-
teraction in 1 and 2, and trails defined automati-
cally, by the system in 3. Variations 4-6 are more
creative interpretations, all suggesting opportuni-
ties for guiding the user into and through collec-
tions, encouraging exploration and/or offering an
immersive experience, conducive with our initial
vision for the PATHS system.
In addition to expert-defined routes, 5 also in-
corporates the idea of users being able to see and
follow ?well-trodden path? defined by the cumula-
tive interactions of other users, thus extending the
opportunities for utilizing search histories. Con-
versely, 7 and 8 are both process oriented, al-
though 7 is experiential, user-defined, learning-
oriented, typified by trial and error and unique to
the individual, whilst 8 is a rigid process designed
to escort all users consistently through a standard
process of pre-defined steps.
A strong emphasis was placed on path content
being carefully selected or ?curated? by the path-
creator, with the addition of context and interpre-
tation so that the objects within the path convey
a narrative or meaning. Content may be derived
from one collection, but there were seen to be sig-
nificant benefits from including objects from di-
verse collections, along with other materials from
external web sites.
Paths facilitate topic-based information re-
trieval typified by the berry-picking mode of in-
teraction (Bates, 1989), rather than known item
searching. Furthermore, paths may be a useful tool
3
for personal information management in both for-
mal and informal research scenarios, enabling the
user to record, reuse and share their research activ-
ity, or helping them to organize their ideas. Cre-
ativity is also encouraged, as user-generated paths
provide the means to repurpose CH objects into
users? own narratives for private or public con-
sumption.
A summary of specific user scenarios high-
lighted by participants is given below:
? Teachers/lecturers presentations and class-
room activities
? Museum personnel curating collections, giv-
ing an overview, or covering a topic in depth
? Leisure users browsing, collecting interest-
ing and/or visually appealing content
? Researchers to aid image-based research,
sharing and discussing findings with fellow
researchers and supervisors
? Non-academic specialists (e.g. local histori-
ans) collecting and sharing items of interest
with other enthusiasts
3.2 Defining the Problem
To create a path or narrative that guides a user
through a set of items from a collection, whether
as a manual process or automatically, there are
three main activities: (1) the selection of items to
include in the path; (2) the arrangement of items
to form a path or narrative and (3) the annota-
tion of the path to with descriptive text and back-
ground information. We envision techniques to
automate the entire process; however, a first step is
to analyse existing manually-created paths to iden-
tify their characteristics and inform the automatic
creation of similar structures.
3.3 User Study
The manually generated paths used for this study
were created as part of a more detailed user study
to evaluate the first prototype, conducted using
a protocol informed by the Interactive IR eval-
uation framework (Borlund, 2003). Twenty-two
users, including subject experts, students and gen-
eral users (subject novices), each completed a 2-
hour session, during which they participated in the
following activities:
? Profile questionnaire and cognitive style test
? Familiarisation with the system
? 4x short information seeking tasks (5 minutes
each)
? 1x long simulated work task - path creation
(30 minutes)
? Task feedback questionnaire
? Session/system feedback questionnaire
? Think-after interview based upon the com-
plex task
Of most interest here is the simulated work task,
with associated observations, feedback and reflec-
tions. This task focused on the creation of a path,
using a scenario adapted to the type of user. Free-
dom was given in choosing a subject for the path,
and limited instructions were provided in what
might be needed to complete the task, for exam-
ple:
?Imagine you are a student who has been asked
to create a path as part of a university assignment.
You have been asked to use primary source ma-
terials to create a mini online exhibition suitable
for a target group within the general public and/or
school visitor categories. Your goal is to introduce
a historical or art-focussed topic in a popular, ac-
cessible way, and to encourage further use and ex-
ploration of cultural heritage resources.?
Data on the tasks was captured via log files, as
well as screen recording and observations using
the Morae usability software. Detailed analysis
was undertaken of user behaviour in the process of
completing the task, and of the paths created, from
both quantitative and qualitative perspectives.
4 Analysing Manually-created Paths
In this section we describe the results of analysing
the 22 paths created manually in the PATHS pro-
totype system.
4.1 User behaviour
On average users spend 25.3 mins on creating a
path (min=11.7; max=33.6) with an average of
201 mouse clicks (min=53; max=380). From the
observations, it was noted that some participants
spent quite a lot of time thinking about the task
and pondering their next move, whilst others en-
gaged in more rapid fire activity in the face of
uncertainty. Analysis of the screen recordings
showed a variety of primary interaction styles for
this task, with a fairly even split between serial
searching (33%) and serial browsing (39%), as the
two most popular strategies. Serial searching in-
volves repetitive search and reformulation, with
only a page or two of search results viewed before
searching again, and serial browsing involves very
4
few searches, with large numbers of search re-
sults pages viewed (over 50 pages in some cases).
These are then in effect, polar opposites of interac-
tion. Only 6% engaged primarily in exploring be-
haviour (using the explore and similar items con-
tent), and 22% of participants occupied the middle
ground, utilising a mix of search, browse and ex-
plore, with no strong preference for any one style.
4.2 Properties of paths
The mean number of items in a path was 10.7 (std
dev=6.7 items) with a minimum of 5 items and
maximum of 29 items. Most popular bin is 6-
10 items in a path (59%). We found 85% of the
items included in the paths included an image with
the metadata. The paths created were manually
categorised by theme to ascertain whether there
are any distinct preferences for the subject mat-
ter of content included. The most popular cate-
gories were paths about places (23%), art subjects
(23%) and history subjects (32%). These themes
are likely to have been influenced at least partly
by what content is currently available in our col-
lection, although the amount of art-related content
is much less than for history, and also appear to
have been influenced by the topics covered in ex-
isting paths in the system (e.g. places, topics re-
lated to the world wars). There were, however a
significant number of expert users who attempted
to build paths related to their own research inter-
ests, with varying degrees of success.
4.3 Descriptions and ordering
Once items have been selected and they have been
transferred in the path creation workspace, users
have the opportunity to modify and enhance their
path with a number of tools for adding content and
metadata, and for re-ordering the content. On cre-
ating the path, most users immediately went to the
metadata fields and added information for the path
description and duration fields, as well as a num-
ber of tags (or keywords). A short 1-2 line de-
scription of the path appears to be the norm and
was added in 91% of cases. Tags were added by
82% of users and a duration by only 46% of users.
It is clear from further investigation that the tags
were added incorrectly (without commas between
them) by a significant number of users and a tip
for successful use is required.
The items within a path can be annotated with
the user?s own contextual information, and can be
re-ordered into a more meaningful sequence, such
as a chronological or narrative sequence. These
more advanced features were used by significantly
fewer users, which could indicate a learning issue,
a lack of need, or a time constraint. On reviewing
the paths created by our evaluation participants it
is found that in 41% of cases, contextual informa-
tion was not added to any items in the path. There
are however 32% in which annotations were added
to all items (generally these were shorter paths
with fewer items), and a further 27% where anno-
tations were added to some or most of the items.
In 72% of cases the items in the paths created
were re-ordered to some degree, with 17% spend-
ing a considerable amount of time on this activity.
This finding is encouraging, as the default is for
items to be included in the path in the order they
were saved to the workspace, and re-ordering in-
dicates that users are thinking about their path as a
whole and trying to make sense of the information
it is intended to convey. Typical types of ordering
included chronology (32%), narrative (23%), ge-
ography (for example, a walking tour - 9%), theme
(9%) and ?interestingness? (5%).
5 Enriching paths with background
information
This section describes preliminary work on the
task of semi-automated path creation. In par-
ticular we describe efforts to enrich paths with
background contextual information using relevant
Wikipedia articles. The related work described
in Section 2.2 shows that there have been previ-
ous efforts to automatically select cultural heritage
items to form paths, trails and exhibitions. How-
ever to our knowledge no significant effort has
been made to automatically annotate such paths
with descriptive or contextual information. The
interviews described in Section 3.1 highlighted
the importance CH experts placed on having ad-
ditional information to give context for the items
in the path. It was also noted during the manual
path-creation exercise (Section 4.3) that a signif-
icant number of the users did not add any such
information to the path. The reasons for this are
unclear, but nevertheless there seems to be suffi-
cient motivation to devise automatic methods for
this task. Although the methods have previously
been well established in other tasks5 , we believe
5INEX Tweet Contextualization Track (https:
//inex.mmci.uni-saarland.de/tracks/qa/)
and Link-the-wiki Track (http://www.inex.otago.
ac.nz/tracks/wiki-link/wiki-link.asp)
5
this is the first time they have been applied for the
task of annotating sequences of items in this way.
5.1 Method
Manually generated paths contain sequences of
items selected from Europeana on some topic or
theme. Creators provide their own title, subject
keywords and description for the path. To aid
creation of paths we explore whether background
information could be generated automatically for
such paths. An approach is presented here which
shows promise as a potential way to achieve this
task. The input for this approach is a sequence of
items and a key Wikipedia article which describes
the overall topic of the path. The output comprises
sentences taken from a relevant Wikipedia article.
The aim is for this output to provide useful and
interesting additional background information re-
lated to the items and theme of the path. In this
paper experiments are focussed on how to select
good quality text to present as additional informa-
tion for the path. For this reason the key Wikipedia
article is manually chosen, and the task is to find a
good approach for selecting the most relevant sen-
tences from this key article for the text.
Two methods are tested in this paper. The first
method simply takes the first n sentences of the
article and outputs this. Since Wikipedia articles
are always structured to have a summary of the
article in the first paragraph we can expect this text
to perform well as a summary of the path topic.
The second method is more advanced and at-
tempts to find text in the article that is relevant to
the actual items that have been chosen for the path.
This approach uses the Wikipedia Miner software
(Milne and Witten, 2008) to add inline links to
the text in the items for this approach. This soft-
ware disambiguates terms in the text and then de-
tects links using various features such as the com-
monness of the term, the overall relatedness of the
terms in the text and so on. The result is text en-
riched with inline links to relevant Wikipedia arti-
cles. Each link also has an associated confidence
value which indicates how sure the software is that
the link is correctly disambiguated and relevant to
the text.
The approach works as follows for a sequence
of items S and a key article K. First Wikipedia
Miner is run over the items in S. The text input to
Wikipedia Miner comprises the title, subject and
description fields of each item. The output is a set
of article titles W comprising the titles of all the
linked articles which were found in the text fields
of S. For each title in W we also have the associ-
ated confidence value for the link as calculated by
Wikipedia Miner. The next step is to select from
K the most relevant sentences to output as the gen-
erated text. For each sentence in K a score is as-
signed if any of the words in the sentence match
one of the titles in W . The score is then simply the
sum of the confidence values associated with these
titles. The top scoring sentences are then output as
the background text. This method can be consid-
ered to be a kind of query based summarisation
(Jurafsky and Martin, 2008).
5.2 Results
The automatic approaches for generating back-
ground text were run over the items in the 22 man-
ually created paths described in the previous sec-
tion. To ensure a fair test the user-added text was
was discarded and only the original Europeana
metadata for the items was used as source for the
methods.
For each path a single key Wikipedia article was
manually found which best captured the overall
theme or topic of the path. For all paths at least
one reasonably good article was found, although
for some paths the articles were better matches for
the path topic than for others. Some examples are
shown in Table 1.
With the input ready, the approaches described
were run over the items and key articles to gener-
ate the additional text. This was limited to 3 sen-
tences to provide a short but useful piece of text
for viewers of the paths. For example one path
was entitled ?Bronze Age metallurgy?. The user
provided description was as follows:
Bronze Age metalsmiths produce a variety of
objects, however, we learn as much from the tools,
leftover debris and the way in which objects were
deposited as we do from the finished objects them-
selves.
The key article chosen for the path was ?Bronze
Age?. The items in the path included various ar-
tifacts and working debris from the Bronze Age.
For the first approach the output is the first 3 sen-
tences from this article:
The Bronze Age is a period characterized by
the use of copper and its alloy bronze as the chief
hard materials in the manufacture of some imple-
ments and weapons. Chronologically, it stands be-
6
Path title Key Wikipedia article
Canals in England Canals of the United Kingdom
A brief history of Sheffield History of Sheffield
Art and Criticism of John Ruskin John Ruskin
Early medieval features in English
Parish Churches
Architecture of the medieval cathedrals
of England
Brooches through the ages Brooch
Table 1: Key articles for paths
tween the Stone Age and Iron Age. The term Stone
Age implies the inability to smelt any ore, the term
Bronze Age implies the inability to smelt iron ore
and the term Iron Age implies the ability to man-
ufacture artifacts in any of the three types of hard
material.
For the second approach the top 3 highest scor-
ing sentences were output:
A region could be in the Bronze Age either by
smelting its own copper and alloying with tin or
by trading for bronze from production areas else-
where. The Bronze Age in Ireland commenced
around 2000 BC, when copper was alloyed with
tin and used to manufacture Ballybeg type flat axes
and associated metalwork. The Bronze Age is a
period characterized by the use of copper and its
alloy bronze as the chief hard materials in the
manufacture of some implements and weapons.
These sentences scored most highly since they
contained the most high-confidence terms from
the items, for example terms such as ?copper?, ?al-
loy? and ?Bronze Age?.
5.3 Evaluation
To evaluate the two approaches, 5 annotators were
presented with the paths and the text and asked to
rate each path on 3 dimensions:
? The relevance of the text to the theme and
items of the path. Text which relates strongly
to the path is scored highly while off-topic or
irrelevant text is given a low score.
? The coherence or quality of the text itself.
Text which appears well-written and well-
structured is scored highly, while poorly writ-
ten or incoherent text is given a low score.
? The contextualisation of the text in relation
to the path. To achieve a high score the
text should offer useful or interesting addi-
tional information which is not found else-
where within the content, i.e. the text helps
to provide a context for items in the path.
Annotators were asked to grade from A (very
good) to E (very poor) on each dimension. The
results are shown in Figure 1. The results for
the first 3 sentences are shown as First3 and for
the weighted approach as Weighted. For each di-
mension, the distribution of judgements across the
paths is shown. The First3 approach was found
to be superior in every dimension. For relevance
scores 90% of the scores were either A or B com-
pared to 63% for the Weighted approach. Sim-
ilarly for the coherence judgements 97% were A
or B compared to 62% for the weighted approach.
The reason for this superior performance seems to
be that the first few sentences of Wikipedia arti-
cles are deliberately created to give a short sum-
mary introduction of the topic of the article. This
explains the high scores for relevance and coher-
ence.
Both approaches scored lower on the contex-
tualisation dimension, with First3 getting 67%
A or B grades and the Weighted approach get-
ting 43%. There may be several reasons for this.
Firstly one problem is that the auto-generated text
sometimes repeats information that is already in
the path and item descriptions; thus the text fails
to meet the requirement of ?useful additional in-
formation?. Secondly the text is sometimes quite
general and vague, rather than focussing on spe-
cific details which might be most relevant to the
items chosen for the path.
To measure the agreement among the annotators
the following approach was used. First the scores
were converted to numeric values; A to 1, B to 2
and so on. Then the scores for each annotator were
compared to the average of the scores of all the
other annotators. The correlation was computing
using Spearman?s correlation coefficient. These
scores were then averaged amongst all annotators
to give a final agreement value. The results are
shown in Table 2.
7
Figure 1: Comparing the results of the two methods.
First3 Weighted
Relevance 0.57 0.57
Coherence 0.28 0.56
Contextualisation 0.56 0.78
Table 2: Agreement amongst annotators.
For both approaches there was good agreement
on the Relevance dimension. For the Coherence
dimension the First3 approach got quite a low
score. This may be because one annotator gave
lower scores for all paths, while the others all gave
consistently high scores, which seems to have
skewed the correlation co-efficient. For the con-
textualisation dimension the correlation scores for
high for both approaches, and the Weighted ap-
proach in particular achieved a very high agree-
ment value.
6 Conclusions
This paper presented results of interviews about
creating paths through cultural heritage collec-
tions. These results inform us on how people
want to navigate through cultural heritage collec-
tions using the path metaphor, how they wish to
make use of paths for their work and education,
and what information and qualities they consider
it important for a path to contain. The paper also
presents results from studies using the PATHS pro-
totype software where users were able to search
and explore a large digital library collection and
create their own paths of items from the collection
on topics of their interest.
From the interviews it was clear that the experts
considered it important that the paths contain ad-
ditional information to convey contextual informa-
tion to understand the meaning of the items in the
path. The results from the user studies showed that
this need was not being met in a significant num-
ber of cases; users were putting items together on
a topic but adding little or no descriptive text about
the topic and the items in the path. Therefore we
identified this as a key task which might benefit
from automatic methods. The simpler approach
which output the first n sentences from the key
Wikipedia article was found to generate the best
results. The resulting generated text was found to
be relevant and coherent. In most cases the text
was also found to add useful context about the
topic.
Future work will further refine the text genera-
tion approach. The approach depends on success-
fully identifying a good key article for each path.
In these experiments the key article was manually
chosen, however we are devising methods to se-
lect this article automatically. To correct the prob-
lem with repeated information a filtering approach
could eliminate information that is already con-
tained within the paths.
Acknowledgments
The research leading to these results was car-
ried out as part of the PATHS project (http:
//paths-project.eu) funded by the Eu-
ropean Community?s Seventh Framework Pro-
gramme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement
no. 270082.
References
Marcia J Bates. 1989. The design of browsing and
berrypicking techniques for the online search inter-
8
face. Online Information Review.
Pia Borlund. 2003. The IIR evaluation model: a
framework for evaluation of interactive information
retrieval systems. Information research, 8(3).
David M Frohlich and Dorothy Rachovides. 2008. Us-
ing digital stories for local and global information
sharing. In Community and International Develop-
ment, CHI 2008 Workshop.
R. Furuta, F.. Shipman, C. Marshall, D. Brenner, and
H. Hsieh. 1997. Hypertext paths and the World-
Wide Web: experiences with Walden?s Paths. In
Proceedings of the eighth ACM conference on Hy-
pertext, pages 167?176, New York, NY.
Ahmed Hassan and Ryen W White. 2012. Task tours:
helping users tackle complex search tasks. In Pro-
ceedings of the 21st ACM international conference
on Information and knowledge management, pages
1885?1889. ACM.
Daniel Jurafsky and James H. Martin. 2008. Speech
and Language Processing (2nd Edition) (Prentice
Hall Series in Artificial Intelligence). Prentice Hall.
Zhen Liao, Yang Song, Li-wei He, and Yalou Huang.
2012. Evaluating the effectiveness of search task
trails. In Proceedings of the 21st international con-
ference on World Wide Web, pages 489?498. ACM.
Eetu Ma?kela?, Osma Suominen, and Eero Hyvo?nen.
2007. Automatic exhibition generation based on
semantic cultural content. In Proc. of the Cultural
Heritage on the Semantic Web Workshop at ISWC+
ASWC, volume 2007.
Lev Manovich. 1999. Database as symbolic form.
Convergence: The International Journal of Re-
search into New Media Technologies, 5(2):80?99.
Neil McIntyre and Mirella Lapata. 2010. Plot induc-
tion and evolutionary search for story generation. In
Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 1562?
1572. Association for Computational Linguistics.
D. Milne and I.H. Witten. 2008. Learning to link with
wikipedia. In Proceeding of the 17th ACM confer-
ence on Information and knowledge management,
pages 509?518. ACM.
Paul Mulholland and Trevor Collins. 2002. Using dig-
ital narratives to support the collaborative learning
and exploration of cultural heritage. In Database
and Expert Systems Applications, 2002. Proceed-
ings. 13th International Workshop on, pages 527?
531. IEEE.
Mykola Pechenizkiy and Toon Calders. 2007. A
framework for guiding the museum tours person-
alization. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Per-
sonalised Access to Cultural Heritage (PATCH07),
pages 11?28.
Don Peterson and Mark Levene. 2003. Trail records
and navigational learning. London review of Educa-
tion, 1(3):207?216.
S. Reich, L. Carr, D. De Roure, and W. Hall. 1999.
Where have you been from here? Trails in hypertext
systems. ACM Computing Surveys, 31.
Frank M Shipman, Richard Furuta, Donald Brenner,
Chung-Chi Chung, and Hao-wei Hsieh. 2000.
Guided paths through web-based collections: De-
sign, experiences, and adaptations. Journal of
the American Society for Information Science,
51(3):260?272.
K. Walker, A. Main, and Fass. J. 2013. User-
Generated Trails in Third Places. In HCI-3P Work-
shop on Human Computer Interaction for Third
Places at Computer Human Interaction 2013.
Kevin Walker. 2006. Story structures. building nar-
rative trails in museums. In Technology-Mediated
Narrative Environments for Learning, pages 103?
114. Sense Publishers.
Yiwen Wang, Lora M Aroyo, Natalia Stash, and Lloyd
Rutledge. 2007. Interactive user modeling for per-
sonalized access to museum collections: The ri-
jksmuseum case study. In User Modeling 2007,
pages 385?389. Springer.
Robert West and Jure Leskovec. 2012. Human
wayfinding in information networks. In Proceed-
ings of the 21st international conference on World
Wide Web, pages 619?628. ACM.
Richard Wheeldon and Mark Levene. 2003. The best
trail algorithm for assisted navigation of web sites.
In Web Congress, 2003. Proceedings. First Latin
American, pages 166?178. IEEE.
Ryen W White and Jeff Huang. 2010. Assessing the
scenic route: measuring the value of search trails in
web logs. In Proceedings of the 33rd international
ACM SIGIR conference on Research and develop-
ment in information retrieval, pages 587?594. ACM.
M. Wilson, Kulesm B., M. Schraefel, and B. Schnei-
derman. 2010. From keyword search to explo-
ration: Designing future search interfaces for the
web. Foundations and Trends in Web Science,
2(1):1?97.
Kristian Woodsend and Mirella Lapata. 2010. Auto-
matic generation of story highlights. In Proceedings
of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 565?574. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Xiaojun Yuan and Ryen White. 2012. Building the
trail best traveled: effects of domain knowledge on
web search trailblazing. In Proceedings of the 2012
ACM annual conference on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems, pages 1795?1804. ACM.
9
Zdenek Zdrahal, Paul Mulholland, and Trevor Collins.
2008. Exploring pathways across stories. In Proc.
of International Conference on Distributed Human-
Machine Systems.
10
