Tutorials, NAACL-HLT 2013, pages 16?18,
Atlanta, Georgia, June 9 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Morphological, Syntactical and Semantic
Knowledge in Statistical Machine Translation
Marta R. Costa-jussa`?, Chris Quirk?
?Institute for Infocomm Research
?Microsoft Research
martaruizcostajussa@gmail.com
chrisq@microsoft.com
1 Overview
This tutorial focuses on how morphology, syntax and semantics may be introduced
into a standard phrase-based statistical machine translation system with techniques
such as machine learning, parsing and word sense disambiguation, among others.
Regarding the phrase-based system, we will describe only the key theory be-
hind it. The main challenges of this approach are that the output contains unknown
words, wrong word orders and non-adequate translated words. To solve these chal-
lenges, recent research enhances the standard system using morphology, syntax
and semantics.
Morphologically-rich languages have many different surface forms, even though
the stem of a word may be the same. This leads to rapid vocabulary growth, as var-
ious prefixes and suffixes can combine with stems in a large number of possible
combinations. Language model probability estimation is less robust because many
more word forms occur rarely in the data. This morphologically-induced sparsity
can be reduced by incorporating morphological information into the SMT system.
We will describe the three most common solutions to face morphology: preprocess-
ing the data so that the input language more closely resembles the output language;
using additional language models that introduce morphological information; and
post-processing the output to add proper inflections.
Syntax differences between the source and target language may lead to signif-
icant differences in the relative word order of translated words. Standard phrase-
based SMT systems surmount reordering/syntactic challenges by learning from
data. Most approaches model reordering inside translation units and using sta-
tistical methodologies, which limits the performance in language pairs with dif-
ferent grammatical structures. We will briefly introduce some recent advances in
16
SMT that use modeling approaches based on principles more powerful flat phrases
and better suited to the hierarchical structures of language: SMT decoding with
stochastic synchronous context free grammars and syntax-driven translation mod-
els.
Finally, semantics are not directly included in the SMT core algorithm, which
means that challenges such as polysemy or synonymy are either learned directly
from data or they are incorrectly translated. We will focus on recent attempts to
introduce semantics into statistical-based systems by using source context infor-
mation.
The course material will be suitable both for attendees with limited knowledge
of the field, and for researchers already familiar with SMT who wish to learn about
modern tendencies in hybrid SMT. The mathematical content of the course include
probability and simple machine learning, so reasonable knowledge of statistics and
mathematics is required. There will be a small amount of linguistics and ideas from
natural language processing.
2 Outline
1. Statistical Machine Translation
? Introduction to Machine Translation approaches
? Phrase-based systems
2. Morphology in SMT
? Types of languages in terms of morphology
? Enriching source language
? Inflection generation
? Class-based language models
3. Syntax in SMT
4. Semantics in SMT
? Sense disambiguation
? Context-dependent translations
17
3 Speaker Bios
Marta R. Costa-jussa`1, Institute for Infocomm Research (I2R), is a Telecommu-
nication?s Engineer by the Universitat Polite`cnica de Catalunya (UPC, Barcelona)
and she received her PhD from the UPC in 2008. Her research experience is
mainly in Automatic Speech Recognition, Machine Translation and Information
Retrieval. She has worked at LIMSI-CNRS (Paris), Barcelona Media Innovation
Center (Barcelona) and the Universidade de Sao Paulo (Sa?o Paulo). Since Decem-
ber 2012 she is working at Institute for Infocomm Research (Singapore) imple-
menting the IMTraP project (?Integration of Machine Translation Paradigms?) on
Hybrid Machine Translation, funded by the European Marie Curie International
Outgoing European Fellowship program. She is currently organizing the ACL
Workshop HyTRA 2013 and she will be teaching a summer school course on hy-
brid machine translation at ESSLLI 2013.
Chris Quirk2, Microsoft Research. After studying Computer Science and
Mathematics at Carnegie Mellon University, Chris joined Microsoft in 2000 to
work on the Intentional Programming project, an extensible compiler and develop-
ment framework. He moved to the Natural Language Processing group in 2001,
where his research has mostly focused on statistical machine translation powering
Microsoft Translator, especially on several generations of a syntax directed transla-
tion system that powers over half of the translation systems. He is also interested in
semantic parsing, paraphrase methods, and very practical problems such as spelling
correction and transliteration.
1http://www.costa-jussa.com
2http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/people/chrisq/
18
