Second Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), Volume 1: Proceedings of the Main Conference
and the Shared Task, pages 109?118, Atlanta, Georgia, June 13-14, 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
UMCC_DLSI: Textual Similarity based on Lexical-Semantic features 
 
 
Alexander Ch?vez, Antonio Fern?ndez Orqu?n, 
H?ctor D?vila, Yoan Guti?rrez, Armando 
Collazo, Jos? I. Abreu 
DI, University of Matanzas 
Autopista a Varadero km 3 ?  
Matanzas, Cuba.  
{alexander.chavez, tony, 
hector.davila, yoan.gutierrez, 
armando.collazo, jose.abreu}@umcc.cu 
Andr?s Montoyo, Rafael Mu?oz 
DLSI, University of Alicante Carretera de 
San Vicente S/N Alicante, Spain. 
{montoyo,rafael}@dlsi.ua.es 
 
Abstract 
This paper describes the specifications and 
results of UMCC_DLSI system, which 
participated in the Semantic Textual 
Similarity task (STS) of SemEval-2013. Our 
supervised system uses different types of 
lexical and semantic features to train a 
Bagging classifier used to decide the correct 
option. Related to the different features we 
can highlight the resource ISR-WN used to 
extract semantic relations among words and 
the use of different algorithms to establish 
semantic and lexical similarities. In order to 
establish which features are the most 
appropriate to improve STS results we 
participated with three runs using different 
set of features. Our best run reached the 
position 44 in the official ranking, obtaining 
a general correlation coefficient of 0.61. 
1 Introduction 
SemEval-2013 (Agirre et al, 2013) presents the 
task Semantic Textual Similarity (STS) again. In 
STS, the participating systems must examine the 
degree of semantic equivalence between two 
sentences. The goal of this task is to create a 
unified framework for the evaluation of semantic 
textual similarity modules and to characterize 
their impact on NLP applications. 
STS is related to Textual Entailment (TE) and 
Paraphrase tasks. The main difference is that 
STS assumes bidirectional graded equivalence 
between the pair of textual snippets. 
In case of TE, the equivalence is directional 
(e.g. a student is a person, but a person is not 
necessarily a student). In addition, STS differs 
from TE and Paraphrase in that, rather than 
being a binary yes/no decision, STS is a 
similarity-graded notion (e.g. a student is more 
similar to a person than a dog to a person).  
This graded bidirectional is useful for NLP 
tasks such as Machine Translation (MT), 
Information Extraction (IE), Question 
Answering (QA), and Summarization. Several 
semantic tasks could be added as modules in the 
STS framework, ?such as Word Sense 
Disambiguation and Induction, Lexical 
Substitution, Semantic Role Labeling, Multiword 
Expression detection and handling, Anaphora 
and Co-reference resolution, Time and Date 
resolution and Named Entity, among others?1  
1.1 Description of 2013 pilot task 
This edition of SemEval-2013 remain with the 
same classification approaches that in their first 
version in 2012. The output of different systems 
was compared to the reference scores provided 
by SemEval-2013 gold standard file, which 
range from five to zero according to the next 
criterions2: (5) ?The two sentences are 
equivalent, as they mean the same thing?. (4) 
?The two sentences are mostly equivalent, but 
some unimportant details differ?. (3) ?The two 
sentences are roughly equivalent, but some 
important information differs/missing?. (2) ?The 
two sentences are not equivalent, but share some 
details?. (1) ?The two sentences are not 
                                                          
1 http://www.cs.york.ac.uk/semeval-2012/task6/ 
2 http://www.cs.york.ac.uk/semeval-
2012/task6/data/uploads/datasets/train-readme.txt 
109
equivalent, but are on the same topic?. (0) ?The 
two sentences are on different topics?. 
After this introduction, the rest of the paper is 
organized as follows. Section 3 shows the 
Related Works. Section 4 presents our system 
architecture and description of the different runs. 
In section 4 we describe the different features 
used in our system. Results and a discussion are 
provided in Section 5 and finally we conclude in 
Section 6. 
2 Related Works 
There are more extensive literature on measuring 
the similarity between documents than to 
between sentences. Perhaps the most recently 
scenario is constituted by the competition of 
SemEval-2012 task 6: A Pilot on Semantic 
Textual Similarity (Aguirre and Cerd, 2012). In 
SemEval-2012, there were used different tools 
and resources like stop word list, multilingual 
corpora, dictionaries, acronyms, and tables of 
paraphrases, ?but WordNet was the most used 
resource, followed by monolingual corpora and 
Wikipedia? (Aguirre and Cerd, 2012). 
According to Aguirre, Generic NLP tools were 
widely used. Among those that stand out were 
tools for lemmatization and POS-tagging 
(Aguirre and Cerd, 2012). On a smaller scale 
word sense disambiguation, semantic role 
labeling and time and date resolution. In 
addition, Knowledge-based and distributional 
methods were highly used. Aguirre and Cerd 
remarked on (Aguirre and Cerd, 2012) that 
alignment and/or statistical machine translation 
software, lexical substitution, string similarity, 
textual entailment and machine translation 
evaluation software were used to a lesser extent. 
It can be noted that machine learning was widely 
used to combine and tune components. 
Most of the knowledge-based methods ?obtain 
a measure of relatedness by utilizing lexical 
resources and ontologies such as WordNet 
(Miller et al, 1990b) to measure definitional 
overlap, term distance within a graphical 
taxonomy, or term depth in the taxonomy as a 
measure of specificity? (Banea et al, 2012). 
Some scholars as in (Corley and Mihalcea, 
June 2005) have argue ?the fact that a 
comprehensive metric of text semantic similarity 
should take into account the relations between 
words, as well as the role played by the various 
entities involved in the interactions described by 
each of the two sentences?. This idea is resumed 
in the Principle of Compositionality, this 
principle posits that the meaning of a complex 
expression is determined by the meanings of its 
constituent expressions and the rules used to 
combine them (Werning et al, 2005). Corley 
and Mihalcea in this article combined metrics of 
word-to-word similarity, and language models 
into a formula and they pose that this is a 
potentially good indicator of the semantic 
similarity of the two input texts sentences. They 
modeled the semantic similarity of a sentence as 
a function of the semantic similarity of the 
component words (Corley and Mihalcea, June 
2005). 
One of the top scoring systems at SemEval-
2012 (?ari? et al, 2012) tended to use most of 
the aforementioned resources and tools. They 
predict the human ratings of sentence similarity 
using a support-vector regression model with 
multiple features measuring word-overlap 
similarity and syntax similarity. They also 
compute the similarity between sentences using 
the semantic alignment of lemmas. First, they 
compute the word similarity between all pairs of 
lemmas from first to second sentence, using 
either the knowledge-based or the corpus-based 
semantic similarity. They named this method 
Greedy Lemma Aligning Overlap. 
Daniel B?r presented the UKP system, which 
performed best in the Semantic Textual 
Similarity (STS) task at SemEval-2012 in two 
out of three metrics. It uses a simple log-linear 
regression model, trained on the training data, to 
combine multiple text similarity measures of 
varying complexity. 
3 System architecture and description 
of the runs 
As we can see in Figure 1, our three runs begin 
with the pre-processing of SemEval-2013?s 
training set. Every sentence pair is tokenized, 
lemmatized and POS-tagged using Freeling 2.2 
tool (Atserias et al, 2006). Afterwards, several 
methods and algorithms are applied in order to 
extract all features for our Machine Learning 
System (MLS). Each run uses a particular group 
of features. 
110
Figure 1. System Architecture. 
The Run 1 (named MultiSemLex) is our main 
run. This takes into account all extracted features 
and trains a model with a Bagging classifier 
(Breiman, 1996) (using REPTree). The training 
corpus has been provided by SemEval-2013 
competition, in concrete by the Semantic Textual 
Similarity task.  
The Run 2 (named MultiLex) and Run 3 
(named MultiSem) use the same classifier, but 
including different features. Run 2 uses (see 
Figure 1) features extracted from Lexical-
Semantic Metrics (LS-M) described in section 
4.1, and Lexical-Semantic Alignment (LS-A) 
described in section 4.2. 
On the other hand, Run 3 uses features 
extracted only from Semantic Alignment (SA) 
described in section 4.3. 
As a result, we obtain three trained models 
capable to estimate the similarity value between 
two phrases. 
Finally, we test our system with the SemEval-
2013 test set (see Table 14 with the results of our 
three runs). The following section describes the 
features extraction process. 
4 Description of the features used in the 
Machine Learning System 
Many times when two phrases are very similar, 
one sentence is in a high degree lexically 
overlapped by the other. Inspired in this fact we 
developed various algorithms, which measure 
the level of overlapping by computing a quantity 
of matching words in a pair of phrases. In our 
system, we used as features for a MLS lexical 
and semantic similarity measures. Other features 
were extracted from a lexical-semantic sentences 
alignment and a variant using only a semantic 
alignment. 
4.1 Similarity measures 
We have used well-known string based 
similarity measures like: Needleman-Wunch 
(sequence alignment), Smith-Waterman 
(sequence alignment), Smith-Waterman-Gotoh, 
Smith-Waterman-Gotoh-Windowed-Affine, 
Jaro, Jaro-Winkler, Chapman-Length-Deviation, 
Chapman-Mean-Length, QGram-Distance, 
Block-Distance, Cosine Similarity, Dice 
Similarity, Euclidean Distance, Jaccard 
Similarity, Matching Coefficient, Monge-Elkan 
and Overlap-Coefficient. These algorithms have 
been obtained from an API (Application 
Program Interface) SimMetrics library v1.5 for 
.NET 2.03. We obtained 17 features for our MLS 
from these similarity measures. 
Using Levenshtein?s edit distance (LED), we 
computed also two different algorithms in order 
to obtain the alignment of the phrases. In the first 
one, we considered a value of the alignment as 
the LED between two sentences. Contrary to 
(Tatu et al, 2006), we do not remove the 
punctuation or stop words from the sentences, 
                                                          
3 Copyright (c) 2006 by Chris Parkinson, available in 
http://sourceforge.net/projects/simmetrics/ 
Run1.Bagging Classifier 
Training set from 
SemEval 2013 
Pre-Processing (using Freeling) 
 
Run 3 Bagging  
classifier 
Run 2 Bagging 
classifier 
Similarity Scores 
Feature extraction 
Lexical-Semantic Metrics 
 
Lexical-semantic 
alignment 
Semantic 
alignment 
 
Jaro QGra
m 
Rel. 
Concept 
. . . 
Tokenizing Lemmatizing POS tagging 
SemEval 
2013 Test 
set 
     Training Process (using Weka) 
111
neither consider different cost for transformation 
operation, and we used all the operations 
(deletion, insertion and substitution).  
The second one is a variant that we named 
Double Levenshtein?s Edit Distance (DLED) 
(see Table 9 for detail). For this algorithm, we 
used LED to measure the distance between the 
phrases, but in order to compare the words, we 
used LED again (Fern?ndez et al, 2012; 
Fern?ndez Orqu?n et al, 2009). 
Another distance we used is an extension of 
LED named Extended Distance (in spanish 
distancia extendida (DEx)) (see (Fern?ndez et 
al., 2012; Fern?ndez Orqu?n et al, 2009) for 
details). This algorithm is an extension of the 
Levenshtein?s algorithm, with which penalties 
are applied by considering what kind of 
transformation (insertion, deletion, substitution, 
or non-operation) and the position it was carried 
out, along with the character involved in the 
operation. In addition to the cost matrixes used 
by Levenshtein?s algorithm, DEx also obtains 
the Longest Common Subsequence (LCS) 
(Hirschberg, 1977) and other helpful attributes 
for determining similarity between strings in a 
single iteration. It is worth noting that the 
inclusion of all these penalizations makes the 
DEx algorithm a good candidate for our 
approach.  
In our previous work (Fern?ndez Orqu?n et al, 
2009), DEx demonstrated excellent results when 
it was compared with other distances as 
(Levenshtein, 1965), (Neeedleman and Wunsch, 
1970), (Winkler, 1999). We also used as a 
feature the Minimal Semantic Distances 
(Breadth First Search (BFS)) obtained between 
the most relevant concepts of both sentences. 
The relevant concepts pertain to semantic 
resources ISR-WN (Guti?rrez et al, 2011; 
2010a), as WordNet (Miller et al, 1990a), 
WordNet Affect (Strapparava and Valitutti, 
2004), SUMO (Niles and Pease, 2001) and 
Semantic Classes (Izquierdo et al, 2007). Those 
concepts were obtained after having applied the 
Association Ratio (AR) measure between 
concepts and words over each sentence. (We 
refer reader to (Guti?rrez et al, 2010b) for a 
further description). 
Another attribute obtained by the system was a 
value corresponding with the sum of the smaller 
distances (using QGram-Distance) between the 
words or the lemmas of the phrase one with each 
words of the phrase two. 
As part of the attributes extracted by the 
system, was also the value of the sum of the 
smaller distances (using Levenshtein) among 
stems, chunks and entities of both phrases. 
4.2 Lexical-Semantic alignment 
Another algorithm that we created is the Lexical-
Semantic Alignment. In this algorithm, we tried 
to align the phrases by its lemmas. If the lemmas 
coincide we look for coincidences among parts-
of-speech4 (POS), and then the phrase is 
realigned using both. If the words do not share 
the same POS, they will not be aligned. To this 
point, we only have taken into account a lexical 
alignment. From now on, we are going to apply 
a semantic variant. After all the process, the non-
aligned words will be analyzed taking into 
account its WordNet?s relations (synonymy, 
hyponymy, hyperonymy, derivationally-related-
form, similar-to, verbal group, entailment and 
cause-to relation); and a set of equivalences like 
abbreviations of months, countries, capitals, days 
and currency. In case of hyperonymy and 
hyponymy relation, words are going to be 
aligned if there is a word in the first sentence 
that is in the same relation (hyperonymy or 
hyponymy) with another one in the second 
sentence. For the relations ?cause-to? and 
?implication? the words will be aligned if there 
is a word in the first sentence that causes or 
implicates another one in the second sentence. 
All the other types of relations will be carried 
out in bidirectional way, that is, there is an 
alignment if a word of the first sentence is a 
synonymous of another one belonging to the 
second one or vice versa. 
Finally, we obtain a value we called alignment 
relation. This value is calculated as ??? =
 ??? / ????. Where ??? is the final 
alignment value, ??? is the number of aligned 
words, and ???? is the number of words of the 
shorter phrase. The  ??? value is also another 
feature for our system. Other extracted attributes 
they are the quantity of aligned words and the 
quantity of not aligned words. The core of the 
alignment is carried out in different ways, which 
                                                          
4 (noun, verb, adjective, adverbs, prepositions, 
conjunctions, pronouns, determinants, modifiers, etc.) 
112
are obtained from several attributes.  Each way 
can be compared by: 
? the part-of-speech. 
? the morphology and the part-of-speech. 
? the lemma and the part-of-speech. 
? the morphology, part-of-speech, and 
relationships of WordNet. 
? the lemma, part-of-speech, and 
relationships of WordNet. 
4.3 Semantic Alignment 
This alignment method depends on calculating 
the semantic similarity between sentences based 
on an analysis of the relations, in ISR-WN, of 
the words that fix them. 
First, the two sentences are pre-processed with 
Freeling and the words are classified according 
to their POS, creating different groups. 
The distance between two words will be the 
distance, based on WordNet, of the most 
probable sense of each word in the pair, on the 
contrary of our previously system in SemEval 
2012. In that version, we assumed the selected 
sense after apply a double Hungarian Algorithm 
(Kuhn, 1955), for more details  please refer to 
(Fern?ndez et al, 2012). The distance is 
computed according to the equation (1): 
?(?, ?) = ? ? ? ?(?[?], ?[? + 1])?=??=0 ; (1) 
Where ? is the collection of synsets 
corresponding to the minimum path between 
nodes ? and ?, ? is the length of ? subtracting 
one, ? is a function that search the relation 
connecting ? and ? nodes, ? is a weight 
associated to the relation searched by ? (see 
Table 1). 
Relation Weight 
Hyponym, Hypernym 2 
Member_Holonym, Member_Meronym, 
Cause, Entailment 
5 
Similar_To 10 
Antonym 200 
Other relation different to Synonymy 60 
Table 1. Weights applied to WordNet relations. 
Table 1 shows the weights associated to 
WordNet relations between two synsets. 
Let us see the following example: 
? We could take the pair 99 of corpus 
MSRvid (from training set of SemEval-
2013) with a littler transformation in 
order to a better explanation of our 
method. 
Original pair 
A: A polar bear is running towards a group of 
walruses. 
B: A polar bear is chasing a group of walruses. 
Transformed pair: 
A1: A polar bear runs towards a group of cats. 
B1: A wale chases a group of dogs. 
Later on, using equation (1), a matrix with the 
distances between all groups of both phrases is 
created (see Table 2). 
GROUPS polar bear runs towards group cats 
wale Dist:=3 Dist:=2 Dist:=3 Dist:=5  Dist:=2 
chases Dist:=4 Dist:=3 Dist:=2 Dist:=4  Dist:=3 
group     Dist:=0  
dogs Dist:=3 Dist:=1 Dist:=4 Dist:=4  Dist:=1 
Table 2. Distances between groups. 
Using the Hungarian Algorithm (Kuhn, 1955) 
for Minimum Cost Assignment, each group of 
the first sentence is checked with each element 
of the second sentence, and the rest is marked as 
words that were not aligned. 
In the previous example the words ?toward? 
and ?polar? are the words that were not aligned, 
so the number of non-aligned words is two. 
There is only one perfect match: ?group-group? 
(match with cost=0). The length of the shortest 
sentence is four. The Table 3 shows the results 
of this analysis. 
Number of exact 
coincidence 
Total Distances of 
optimal Matching 
Number of 
non-aligned 
Words 
1 5 2 
Table 3. Features from the analyzed sentences. 
This process has to be repeated for nouns (see 
Table 4), verbs, adjective, adverbs, prepositions, 
conjunctions, pronouns, determinants, modifiers, 
digits and date times. On the contrary, the tables 
have to be created only with the similar groups 
of the sentences. Table 4 shows features 
extracted from the analysis of nouns. 
GROUPS bear group cats 
wale Dist := 2  Dist := 2 
group  Dist := 0  
dogs Dist := 1  Dist := 1 
Table 4. Distances between groups of nouns. 
113
Number of 
exact 
coincidence 
Total Distances 
of optimal 
Matching 
Number of non-aligned 
Words 
1 3 0 
Table 5. Feature extracted from analysis of nouns. 
Several attributes are extracted from the pair of 
sentences (see Table 3 and Table 5). Three 
attributes considering only verbs, only nouns, 
only adjectives, only adverbs, only prepositions, 
only conjunctions, only pronouns, only 
determinants, only modifiers, only digits, and 
only date times. These attributes are:  
? Number of exact coincidences 
? Total distance of matching 
? Number of words that do not match 
Many groups have particular features 
according to their parts-of-speech. The group of 
the nouns has one more feature that indicates if 
the two phrases have the same number (plural or 
singular). For this feature, we take the average of 
the number of each noun in the phrase like a 
number of the phrase.  
For the group of adjectives we added a feature 
indicating the distance between the nouns that 
modify it from the aligned adjectives, 
respectively.  
For the verbs, we search the nouns that precede 
it, and the nouns that are next of the verb, and 
we define two groups. We calculated the 
distance to align each group with every pair of 
aligned verbs. The verbs have other feature that 
specifies if all verbs are in the same verbal time.  
With the adverbs, we search the verb that is 
modified by it, and we calculate their distance 
from all alignment pairs.  
With the determinants and the adverbs we 
detect if any of the alignment pairs are 
expressing negations (like don?t, or do not) in 
both cases or not. Finally, we determine if the 
two phrases have the same principal action. For 
all this new features, we aid with Freeling tool. 
As a result, we finally obtain 42 attributes from 
this alignment method. It is important to remark 
that this alignment process searches to solve, for 
each word from the rows (see Table 4) it has a 
respectively word from the columns. 
4.4 Description of the alignment feature 
From the alignment process, we extract different 
features that help us a better result of our MLS. 
Table 6 shows the group of features with lexical 
and semantic support, based on WordNet 
relation (named F1). Each of they were named 
with a prefix, a hyphen and a suffix. Table 7 
describes the meaning of every prefix, and Table 
8 shows the meaning of the suffixes. 
Features 
CPA_FCG, CPNA_FCG, SIM_FCG, CPA_LCG, 
CPNA_LCG, SIM_LCG, CPA_FCGR, 
CPNA_FCGR, SIM_FCGR, CPA_LCGR, 
CPNA_LCGR, SIM_LCGR 
Table 6. F1. Semantic feature group. 
Prefixes Descriptions 
CPA Number of aligned words. 
CPNA Number of non-aligned words. 
SIM Similarity 
Table 7. Meaning of each prefixes. 
Prefixes Compared words for? 
FCG Morphology and POS 
LCG Lemma and POS 
FCGR Morphology, POS and WordNet relation. 
LCGR Lemma, POS and WordNet relation. 
Table 8. Suffixes for describe each type of alignment. 
Features Descriptions 
LevForma Levenshtein Distance between two 
phrases comparing words by 
morphology 
LevLema The same as above, but now 
comparing by lemma. 
LevDoble Idem, but comparing again by 
Levenshtein and accepting words 
match if the distance is ? 2. 
DEx Extended Distance 
NormLevF, 
NormLevL 
Normalized forms of LevForma and 
LevLema. 
Table 9. F2. Lexical alignment measures. 
Features 
NWunch, SWaterman, SWGotoh, SWGAffine, Jaro, 
JaroW, CLDeviation, CMLength, QGramD, BlockD, 
CosineS, DiceS, EuclideanD, JaccardS, MaCoef, 
MongeElkan, OverlapCoef. 
Table 10. Lexical Measure from SimMetrics library. 
Features Descriptions 
AxAQGD_L All against all applying QGramD 
and comparing by lemmas of the 
words. 
AxAQGD_F Same as above, but applying 
QGramD and comparing by 
morphology. 
AxAQGD_LF Idem, not only comparing by lemma 
but also by morphology. 
AxALev_LF All against all applying Levenhstein 
114
comparing by morphology and 
lemmas. 
AxA_Stems Idem, but applying Levenhstein 
comparing by the stems of the 
words. 
Table 11. Aligning all against all. 
Other features we extracted were obtained 
from the following similarity measures (named 
F2) (see Table 9 for detail). 
We used another group named F3, with lexical 
measure extracted from SimMetric library (see 
Table 10 for detail). 
Finally we used a group of five feature (named 
F4), extracted from all against all alignment (see 
Table 11 for detail). 
4.5 Description of the training phase 
For the training process, we used a supervised 
learning framework, including all the training set 
as a training corpus. Using ten-fold cross 
validation with the classifier mentioned in 
section 3 (experimentally selected). 
As we can see in Table 12, the attributes 
corresponding with the Test 1 (only lexical 
attributes) obtain 0.7534 of correlation. On the 
other side, the attributes of the Test 2 (lexical 
features with semantic support) obtain 0.7549 of 
correlation, and all features obtain 0.7987. Being 
demonstrated the necessity to tackle the problem 
of the similarity from a multidimensional point 
of view (see Test 3 in the Table 12). 
Features 
Correlation on the training data of SemEval-
2013 
Test 1 Test 2 Test 3 
F1 
 0.7549 
0.7987 
F2 
F3 0.7534  
F4   
Table 12. Features influence. Gray cells mean 
features are not taking into account. 
5 Result and discussion 
Semantic Textual Similarity task of SemEval-
2013 offered two official measures to rank the 
systems5: Mean- the main evaluation value, 
Rank- gives the rank of the submission as 
ordered by the "mean" result. 
                                                          
5http://ixa2.si.ehu.es/sts/index.php?option=com_content&vi
ew=article&id=53&Itemid=61 
Test data for the core test datasets, coming 
from the following: 
Corpus Description 
Headlineas: news headlines mined from several news 
sources by European Media Monitor 
using the RSS feed. 
OnWN: mapping of lexical resources OnWN. The 
sentences are sense definitions from 
WordNet and OntoNotes. 
FNWN: the sentences are sense definitions from 
WordNet and FrameNet. 
SMT: SMT dataset comes from DARPA GALE 
HTER and HyTER. One sentence is a 
MT output and the other is a reference 
translation where a reference is generated 
based on human post editing. 
Table 13. Test Core Datasets. 
Using these measures, our second run (Run 2) 
obtained the best results (see Table 14). As we 
can see in Table 14, our lexical run has obtained 
our best result, given at the same time worth 
result in our other runs. This demonstrates that 
tackling this problem with combining multiple 
lexical similarity measure produce better results 
in concordance to this specific test corpora. 
To explain Table 14 we present following 
descriptions: caption in top row mean: 1- 
Headlines, 2- OnWN, 3- FNWN, 4- SMT and 5- 
mean. 
Run 1 R 2 R 3 R 4 R 5 R 
1 0.5841 60 0.4847 54 0.2917 52 0.2855 66 0.4352 58 
2 0.6168 55 0.5557 39 0.3045 50 0.3407 28 0.4833 44 
3 0.3846 85 0.1342 88 -0.0065 85 0.2736 72 0.2523 87 
Table 14. Official SemEval-2013 results over test 
datasets. Ranking (R). 
The Run 1 is our main run, which contains the 
junction of all attributes (lexical and semantic 
attributes).  Table 14 shows the results of all the 
runs for a different corpus from test phase. As 
we can see, Run 1 did not obtain the best results 
among our runs. 
Otherwise, Run 3 uses more semantic analysis 
than Run 2, from this; Run 3 should get better 
results than reached over the corpus of FNWN, 
because this corpus is extracted from FrameNet 
corpus (Baker et al, 1998) (a semantic network). 
FNWN provides examples with high semantic 
content than lexical. 
Run 3 obtained a correlation coefficient of 
0.8137 for all training corpus of SemEval 2013, 
115
while Run 2 and Run 1 obtained 0.7976 and 
0.8345 respectively with the same classifier 
(Bagging using REPTree, and cross validation 
with ten-folds). These results present a 
contradiction between test and train evaluation. 
We think it is consequence of some obstacles 
present in test corpora, for example:  
In headlines corpus there are great quantity of 
entities, acronyms and gentilics that we not take 
into account in our system. 
The corpus FNWN presents a non-balance 
according to the length of the phrases. 
In OnWN -test corpus-, we believe that some 
evaluations are not adequate in correspondence 
with the training corpus. For example, in line 7 
the goal proposed was 0.6, however both phrases 
are semantically similar. The phrases are: 
? the act of lifting something 
? the act of climbing something. 
We think that 0.6 are not a correct evaluation 
for this example. Our system result, for this 
particular case, was 4.794 for Run 3, and 3.814 
for Run 2, finally 3.695 for Run 1. 
6 Conclusion and future works 
This paper have introduced a new framework for 
recognizing Semantic Textual Similarity, which 
depends on the extraction of several features that 
can be inferred from a conventional 
interpretation of a text. 
As mentioned in section 3 we have conducted 
three different runs, these runs only differ in the 
type of attributes used. We can see in Table 14 
that all runs obtained encouraging results. Our 
best run was situated at 44th position of 90 runs 
of the ranking of SemEval-2013.  Table 12 and 
Table 14 show the reached positions for the three 
different runs and the ranking according to the 
rest of the teams.  
In our participation, we used a MLS that works 
with features extracted from five different 
strategies: String Based Similarity Measures, 
Semantic Similarity Measures, Lexical-Semantic 
Alignment and Semantic Alignment. 
We have conducted the semantic features 
extraction in a multidimensional context using 
the resource ISR-WN, the one that allowed us to 
navigate across several semantic resources 
(WordNet, WordNet Domains, WordNet Affect, 
SUMO, SentiWordNet and Semantic Classes). 
Finally, we can conclude that our system 
performs quite well. In our current work, we 
show that this approach can be used to correctly 
classify several examples from the STS task of 
SemEval-2013. Compared with the best run of 
the ranking (UMBC_EBIQUITY- ParingWords) 
(see Table 15) our main run has very close 
results in headlines (1), and SMT (4) core test 
datasets. 
Run 1 2 3 4 5 6 
(First) 0.7642 0.7529 0.5818 0.3804 0.6181 1 
(Our) 
RUN 2 
0.6168 0.5557 0.3045 0.3407 0.4833 44 
Table 15. Comparison with best run (SemEval 2013). 
As future work we are planning to enrich our 
semantic alignment method with Extended 
WordNet (Moldovan and Rus, 2001), we think 
that with this improvement we can increase the 
results obtained with texts like those in OnWN 
test set. 
6.1 Team Collaboration 
Is important to remark that our team has been 
working up in collaboration with INAOE 
(Instituto Nacional de Astrof?sica, ?ptica y 
Electr?nica) and LIPN (Laboratoire 
d'Informatique de Paris-Nord), Universit? Paris 
13 universities, in order to encourage the 
knowledge interchange and open shared 
technology. Supporting this collaboration, 
INAOE-UPV (Instituto Nacional de Astrof?sica, 
?ptica y Electr?nica and Universitat Polit?cnica 
de Val?ncia) team, in concrete in INAOE-UPV-
run 3 has used our semantic distances for nouns, 
adjectives, verbs and adverbs, as well as lexical 
attributes like LevDoble, NormLevF, NormLevL 
and Ext (see influence of these attributes in 
Table 12). 
Acknowledgments 
This research work has been partially funded by 
the Spanish Government through the project 
TEXT-MESS 2.0 (TIN2009-13391-C04), 
"An?lisis de Tendencias Mediante T?cnicas de 
Opini?n Sem?ntica" (TIN2012-38536-C03-03) 
and ?T?cnicas de Deconstrucci?n en la 
Tecnolog?as del Lenguaje Humano? (TIN2012-
31224); and by the Valencian Government 
through the project PROMETEO 
(PROMETEO/2009/199). 
116
Reference 
Agirre, E.; D. Cer; M. Diab and W. Guo. *SEM 2013 
Shared Task: Semantic Textual Similarity 
including a Pilot on Typed-Similarity. *SEM 
2013: The Second Joint Conference on Lexical and 
Computational Semantics, Association for 
Computational Linguistics, 2013.  
Aguirre, E. and D. Cerd. SemEval 2012 Task 6:A 
Pilot on Semantic Textual Similarity. First Join 
Conference on Lexical and Computational 
Semantic (*SEM), Montr?al, Canada, Association 
for Computational Linguistics., 2012. 385-393 p.  
Atserias, J.; B. Casas; E. Comelles; M. Gonz?lez; L. 
Padr? and M. Padr?. FreeLing 1.3: Syntactic and 
semantic services in an opensource NLP library. 
Proceedings of LREC'06, Genoa, Italy, 2006. 
Baker, C. F.; C. J. Fillmore and J. B. Lowe. The 
berkeley framenet project. Proceedings of the 17th 
international conference on Computational 
linguistics-Volume 1, Association for 
Computational Linguistics, 1998. 86-90 p.  
Banea, C.; S. Hassan; M. Mohler and R. Mihalcea. 
UNT:A Supervised Synergistic Approach to 
SemanticText Similarity. First Joint Conference on 
Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), 
Montr?al. Canada, Association for Computational 
Linguistics, 2012. 635?642 p.  
Breiman, L. Bagging predictors Machine learning, 
1996, 24(2): 123-140. 
Corley, C. and R. Mihalcea. Measuring the Semantic 
Similarity of Texts, Association for Computational 
Linguistic. Proceedings of the ACL Work shop on 
Empirical Modeling of Semantic Equivalence and 
Entailment, pages 13?18, June 2005. 
Fern?ndez, A.; Y. Guti?rrez; H. D?vila; A. Ch?vez; 
A. Gonz?lez; R. Estrada; Y. Casta?eda; S. 
V?zquez; A. Montoyo and R. Mu?oz. 
UMCC_DLSI: Multidimensional Lexical-
Semantic Textual Similarity. {*SEM 2012}: The 
First Joint Conference on Lexical and 
Computational Semantics -- Volume 1: 
Proceedings of the main conference and the shared 
task, and Volume 2: Proceedings of the Sixth 
International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation 
{(SemEval 2012)}, Montreal, Canada, Association 
for Computational Linguistics, 2012. 608--616 p.  
Fern?ndez Orqu?n, A. C.; J. D?az Blanco; A. Fundora 
Rolo and R. Mu?oz Guillena. Un algoritmo para la 
extracci?n de caracter?sticas lexicogr?ficas en la 
comparaci?n de palabras. IV Convenci?n 
Cient?fica Internacional CIUM, Matanzas, Cuba, 
2009.  
Guti?rrez, Y.; A. Fern?ndez; A. Montoyo and S. 
V?zquez. Integration of semantic resources based 
on WordNet. XXVI Congreso de la Sociedad 
Espa?ola para el Procesamiento del Lenguaje 
Natural, Universidad Polit?cnica de Valencia, 
Valencia, SEPLN 2010, 2010a. 161-168 p. 1135-
5948. 
Guti?rrez, Y.; A. Fern?ndez; A. Montoyo and S. 
V?zquez. UMCC-DLSI: Integrative resource for 
disambiguation task. Proceedings of the 5th 
International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, 
Uppsala, Sweden, Association for Computational 
Linguistics, 2010b. 427-432 p.  
Guti?rrez, Y.; A. Fern?ndez; A. Montoyo and S. 
V?zquez Enriching the Integration of Semantic 
Resources based on WordNet Procesamiento del 
Lenguaje Natural, 2011, 47: 249-257. 
Hirschberg, D. S. Algorithms for the longest common 
subsequence problem J. ACM, 1977, 24: 664?675. 
Izquierdo, R.; A. Su?rez and G. Rigau A Proposal of 
Automatic Selection of Coarse-grained Semantic 
Classes for WSD Procesamiento del Lenguaje 
Natural, 2007, 39: 189-196. 
Kuhn, H. W. The Hungarian Method for the 
assignment problem Naval Research Logistics 
Quarterly, 1955, 2: 83?97. 
Levenshtein, V. I. Binary codes capable of correcting 
spurious insertions and deletions of ones. Problems 
of information Transmission. 1965. pp. 8-17 p.  
Miller, G. A.; R. Beckwith; C. Fellbaum; D. Gross 
and K. Miller. Five papers on WordNet. 
Princenton University, Cognositive Science 
Laboratory, 1990a. 
Miller, G. A.; R. Beckwith; C. Fellbaum; D. Gross 
and K. Miller Introduction to WordNet: An On-
line Lexical Database International Journal of 
Lexicography, 3(4):235-244., 1990b. 
Moldovan, D. I. and V. Rus Explaining Answers with 
Extended WordNet ACL, 2001. 
Neeedleman, S. and C. Wunsch A general method 
applicable to the search for similarities in the 
amino acid sequence of two proteins Mol. Biol, 
1970, 48(443): 453. 
Niles, I. and A. Pease. Origins of the IEEE Standard 
Upper Ontology. Working Notes of the IJCAI-
2001 Workshop on the IEEE Standard Upper 
Ontology, Seattle, Washington, USA., 2001. 
117
?ari?, F.; G. Glava?; Mladenkaran; J. ?najder and B. 
D. Basi?. TakeLab: Systems for Measuring 
Semantic Text Similarity.  Montr?al, Canada, First 
Join Conference on Lexical and Computational 
Semantic (*SEM), pages 385-393. Association for 
Computational Linguistics., 2012.  
Strapparava, C. and A. Valitutti. WordNet-Affect: an 
affective extension of WordNet. Proceedings of 
the 4th International Conference on Language 
Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2004), Lisbon, 
2004. 1083-1086 p. 
Tatu, M.; B. Iles; J. Slavick; N. Adrian and D. 
Moldovan. COGEX at the Second Recognizing 
Textual Entailment Challenge. Proceedings of the 
Second PASCAL Recognising Textual Entailment 
Challenge Workshop, Venice, Italy, 2006. 104-109 
p.  
Werning, M.; E. Machery and G. Schurz. The 
Compositionality of Meaning and Content, 
Volume 1: Foundational issues. ontos verlag 
[Distributed in] North and South America by 
Transaction Books, 2005. p. Linguistics & 
philosophy, Bd. 1. 3-937202-52-8. 
Winkler, W. The state of record linkage and current 
research problems. Technical Report, Statistical 
Research Division, U.S, Census Bureau, 1999. 
 
 
118
Second Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), Volume 2: Seventh International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluation (SemEval 2013), pages 93?97, Atlanta, Georgia, June 14-15, 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
UMCC_DLSI-(EPS): Paraphrases Detection Based on Semantic 
Distance 
 
H?ctor D?vila, Antonio Fern?ndez Orqu?n, 
Alexander Ch?vez, Yoan Guti?rrez, Armando 
Collazo, Jos? I. Abreu 
DI, University of Matanzas 
Autopista a Varadero km 3 ? 
Matanzas, Cuba. 
{hector.davila, tony, 
alexander.chavez, yoan.gutierrez, 
armando.collazo, 
jose.abreu}@umcc.cu 
Andr?s Montoyo, Rafael Mu?oz 
DLSI, University of Alicante Carretera 
de San Vicente S/N Alicante, Spain. 
{montoyo, 
rafael}@dlsi.ua.es 
 
Abstract 
This paper describes the specifications and 
results of UMCC_DLSI-(EPS) system, which 
participated in the first Evaluating Phrasal 
Semantics of SemEval-2013. Our supervised 
system uses different kinds of semantic 
features to train a bagging classifier used to 
select the correct similarity option. Related to 
the different features we can highlight the 
resource WordNet used to extract semantic 
relations among words and the use of different 
algorithms to establish semantic similarities. 
Our system obtains promising results with a 
precision value around 78% for the English 
corpus and 71.84% for the Italian corpus. 
1 Introduction 
It is well known finding words similarity, even 
when it is lexical or semantic can improve 
entailment recognition and paraphrase 
identification; and ultimately lead to improvements 
in a wide range of applications in Natural 
Language Processing (NLP). Several areas like 
question answering, query expansion, information 
retrieval, and many others, depend on phrasal 
semantics (PS). PS, is concerned with how the 
meaning of a sentence is composed both from the 
meaning of the constituent words, and from extra 
meaning contained within the structural 
organization of the sentence itself (Dominey, 
2005). 
The aim of SemEval 2013 competition is also 
discovering similarity, specifically in Evaluating 
Phrasal Semantics (EPS). The goal of this task is to 
evaluate how well systems can judge the semantic 
similarity of a word and a short sequence of words. 
That is, given a set of pairs of this type; classify it 
on negative (if the meaning of the word is 
semantically different to the meaning of the 
sequence) or positive (if the meaning of the 
sequence, as a whole, is semantically close to the 
meaning of the word).  
Based on this, we developed a system capable to 
detect if two phrases are semantically close. 
The rest of this paper, specifically section 2 is a 
brief Related Work. Section 3 describes the system 
architecture and our run. Continuing with section 4 
we describe the training phase. Following that, 
section 5 presents the results and discussion for our 
Machine Learning System. Finally we conclude 
and propose our future works (Section 6). 
2 Related Work 
There have been many WordNet-based similarity 
measures, among other highlights the work of 
researchers like (Budanitsky and Hirst, 2006; 
Leacock and Chodorow, 1998; Mihalcea et al, 
2006; Richardson et al, 1994). 
On the other hand, WordNet::Similarity1 
(Pedersen et al, 2004) has been used by other 
researchers in an interesting array of domains. 
WordNet::Similarity implements measures of 
similarity and relatedness between a pair of 
concepts (or synsets2) based on the structure and 
content of WordNet. According to (Pedersen et al, 
2004), three of the six measures of similarity are 
based on the information content of the least 
                                                     
1http://sourceforge.net/projects/wn-similarity/ 
2 A group of English words into sets of synonyms. 
93
common subsumer (LCS). These measures include 
res (Resnik, 1995), lin (Lin, 1998), and jcn (Jiang 
and Conrath, 1997). 
Pursuant to Pedersen, there are three other 
similarity measures based on path lengths between 
a pair of concepts: lch (Leacock and Chodorow, 
1998), wup (Wu and Palmer, 1994), and path. 
Our proposal differs from those of 
WordNet::Similarity and other measures of 
similarity in the way we selected the relevant 
WordNet relations (see section 3.2 for detail). 
Unlike others, our measure assign weight to 
WordNet relations (any we consider relevant) 
depending to the place they occupy in the 
minimum path and the previously visited relations. 
Besides these, the novelty of our approach is 
using the weights as a function of semantic 
relations in a minimal distance path and also the 
method we used to arrive to those weight functions 
or rules. 
3 System Architecture and description of 
the run 
As we can see in Figure 1 our run begin with the 
pre-processing of SemEval 2013?s training set. 
Every sentence pair is tokenized, lemmatized and 
POS-tagged using Freeling 2.2 tool (Atserias et al, 
2006). Afterwards, several methods and algorithms 
are applied in order to extract all features for our 
Machine Learning System (MLS). The system 
trains the classifier using a model based on 
bagging (using JRip3). The training corpus has 
been provided by SemEval-2013 competition, in 
concrete by the EPS task. As a result, we obtain a 
trained model capable to detect if one phrase 
implies other. Finally, we test our system with the 
SemEval 2013 test set (see Table 2 with the results 
of our run). The following section describes the 
features extraction process. 
3.1 Description of the features used in the 
Machine Learning System 
In order to detect entailment between a pair of 
phrases, we developed an algorithm that searches a 
semantic distance, according to WordNet (Miller et 
al., 1990), between each word in the first phrase 
with each one in the second phrase. 
We used four features which intend to measure 
the level of proximity between both sentences: 
                                                     
3 JRip is an inference and rules-based learner. 
? The minimum distance to align the first 
phrase with the second (MinDist). See section 
3.2 for details. 
? The maximal distance to align the first phrase 
with the second (MaxDist). 
? The average of all distances results to align 
the first phrase with the second one. 
(AverageDistance). 
? The absolute relative error of all distances 
results to align the first phrase with the 
second respect to the average of them. 
 
Figure 1. System Architecture. 
Other features included are the most frequent 
relations contained in the shorted path of the 
minimum distance; result to align the first phrase 
with the second one. Following table shows the 
relations selected as most frequent. 
A weight was added to each of them, according 
to the place it occupy in the shortest path between 
two synsets. The shortest path was calculated using 
Breadth -First-Search algorithm (BFS) (Cormen et 
al., 2001). 
In addition, there is one feature that takes into 
account any other relationship that is not 
previously considered. 
Finally, as a result we obtain 22 features from 
this alignment method. 
Semeval 2013 test 
set
?
Pre-Processing (using Freeling 2.2)
Tokenizing Lemmatizing POS Tagging
Run 1
Bagging Classifier (JRip)
Feature Extraction
MinDistance MaxDistance error ?
Training set from 
Semeval 2013
Pre-Processing (using Freeling 2.2)
Tokenizing Lemmatizing POS Tagging
Feature Extraction
MinDistance MaxDistance error
Supervised Model
Training process (using Weka)
Bagging Classifier (JRip)
Paraphrases Detection
94
Relation Weight (? function) 
Antonym 1000 
Synonym 0 
Hyponym/ Hypernym 
100 if exist an antonym 
before, 30 if exist other 
relation before (except 
synonym, hyponym, 
hypernym), 5 otherwise. 
Meber_Holonym/ 
PartHolonym 
100 if exist an antonym 
before, 20 if exist a 
hyponym or a hypernym,10 
otherwise. 
Cause/ Entailment 
100 if exist an antonym 
before, 2 otherwise. 
Similar_To 
100 if exist an antonym 
before, 3 otherwise. 
Attribute 
100 if exist an antonym 
before, 8 otherwise. 
Also_See 
100 if exist an antonym 
before, 10 otherwise. 
Derivationaly_Related_Form 
100 if exist an antonym 
before, 5 otherwise. 
Domain_Of_Synset_Topic 
100 if exist an antonym 
before, 13 otherwise. 
Domain_Of_Synset_Usage 
100 if exist an antonym 
before, 60 otherwise. 
Member_Of_Domain_Topic 
100 if exist an antonym 
before, 13 otherwise. 
Member_Of_Domain_Usage 
100 if exist an antonym 
before, 60 otherwise. 
Other 100 
Table 1. Most frequents relations with their weight. 
3.2 Semantic Distance 
As aforementioned, our distance depends on 
calculating the similarity between sentences, based 
on the analysis of WordNet relations, and we only 
took into account the most frequent ones. When 
searching the shortest path between two WordNet 
synsets, frequents relations were considered the 
ones extracted according to the analysis made in 
the training corpus, provided by SemEval-2013. 
The distance between two synsets is calculated 
with the relations found; and simply it is the sum 
of the weights assigned to each connection. 
????????(?, ?) =  ????????(??, ??), ? (?, ?) (1) 
????????(?, ?) = ???(?? , ??), ?(?, ?) (2) 
???(??; ??) = ? ?(???(?[?], ?[? + 1]))
?=?
?=0
 (3) 
? = ???(??; ??) (4) 
Where ? and ? represents the i-th and j-th sense of 
the word; P and Q represents words collections; ?? 
is the X-th word of ?; ?? is the Y-th word of ?; 
???????? obtains a value that represents a 
minimal semantic distance across WordNet (Miller 
et al, 2006) resource (this resource is involved into 
the integrator resource, ISR-WN (Guti?rrez et al, 
2011a; 2010a); ????????  the minimal semantic 
distance between two words; ??? represents the 
minimal semantic distance between two senses 
collections; ? is a collection of synsets that 
represents the minimal path between two synsets 
using BFS; ??? obtains semantic relation types 
between two synsets; W is a functions that apply 
the rules described in Table 1. The maximum and 
average distance is calculated in a similar fashion 
but using the maximum and average instead of the 
minimum. 
3.3 Semantic Alignment 
First, the two sentences are pre-processed with 
Freeling 2.2 and the words are classified according 
to their parts-of-speech. Then, all senses of every 
word are taken and treated as a group. Distance 
between two groups will be the minimal distance 
(described in 3.1) between senses of any pair of 
words belonging to the group. 
In the example of Figure 2, Dist=280 is selected 
for the pair ?Balance-Culture? (minimal cost).  
Following the explanation on section 3.1 we 
extract the features guided to measure the level of 
proximity between both sentences. 
 
Figure 2. Distance between ?Balance? and ?Culture?. 
A maximum and average distance is calculated in a 
similar fashion, but using the maximum and 
average instead of the minimum. 
4 Description of the training phase 
For the training process, we used a supervised 
learning framework (based on Weka4), including 
all the training set (positive and negative instances) 
as a training corpus. We conduct several 
experiments in order to select the correct classifier, 
the best result being obtained with a model based 
on bagging (using JRip algorithm). Finally, we 
used 10-fold cross validation technique with the 
selected classifier, obtaining a classification value 
of 73.21%. 
                                                     
4 http://prdownloads.sourceforge.net/weka/ 
L mma: Balance
Sense 1
Sense 2
Lemma: Culture
Sense 1
Sense 2
3350
1030 280
880
Dist=280
95
5 Results and discussion 
EPS task of SemEval-2013 offered many official 
measures to rank the systems. Some of them are 
the following: 
o F-Measure (FM): Correct Response (CR), 
Instances correctly classified, True positives 
(TP), Instances correctly classified as 
positive. False Positives (FP), Instances 
incorrectly classified as positive, True 
Negatives (TN), Instances correctly 
classified as negative, False Negatives (FN), 
Instances incorrectly classified as negative. 
Corpus FM CR TP FP TN FN 
English 0.6892 2826 1198 325 1628 755 
Italian 0.6396 574 245 96 329 180 
Table 2. Official SemEval 2013 results. 
The behavior of our system, for English and 
Italian corpus is shown in Table 2. 
The only thing that changes to process the 
Italian corpus is that Freeling is used as input to 
identify Italian words and it returns the English 
WN synsets. The process continues in the same 
way as English. 
Figure 3: Semantic Distance distribution between 
negative and positive instances.  
As shown in Table 2, our main drawback is to 
classify positive instances. Sometimes, the distance 
between positive phrases is very far. This is due to 
the relations found in the minimum path are very 
similar to the one found in other pairs of negatives 
instances; this can be the cause of our MLS 
classifies them as negatives (see Figure 3). 
Figure 3 shows a distributional graphics that 
take a sample of 200 negative and positive 
instances. The graphics illustrate how close to zero 
value the positive instances are, while the 
negatives are far away from this value. However, 
in the approximate range between 80 and 200, we 
can see values of positive and negative instances 
positioning together. This can be the cause that our 
MLS misclassified some positive instances as 
negative. 
6 Conclusion and future work 
This paper introduced a new framework for EPS, 
which depends on the extraction of several features 
from WordNet relations. We have conducted the 
semantic features extraction in a multidimensional 
context using the resource ISR-WN(Guti?rrez et 
al., 2010a). 
Our semantic distance provides an appealing 
approach for dealing with phrasal detection based 
on WordNet relation. Our team reached the sixth 
position of ten runs for English corpus, with a 
small difference of 0.07 points compared to the 
best results with respect to accuracy parameter. 
Despite the problems caused by poorly selected 
positive instances, our distance (labeled as Our) 
obtained very similar results to those obtained by 
the best team (labeled as First5), which indicates 
that our work is well underway (see Table 3 for 
details). 
Team accuracy recall precision 
First 0.802611 0.751664 0.836944128 
Our 0.723502 0.613415 0.786605384 
Table 3. Comparative results (English corpus). 
It is important to remark that our system has 
been the only competitor to evaluate Italian texts. 
It has been possible due to our system include 
Freeling in the preprocessing stage. 
Our future work will aim to resolve instances 
misclassified by our algorithm. In addition, we will 
introduce lexical substitutions (synonyms) to 
expand the corpus, we will also apply conceptual 
semantic similarity using relevant semantic trees 
(Guti?rrez et al, 2010b; Guti?rrez et al, 2011b). 
Acknowledgments 
This research work has been partially funded by 
the Spanish Government through the project 
TEXT-MESS 2.0 (TIN2009-13391-C04), "An?lisis 
de Tendencias Mediante T?cnicas de Opini?n 
Sem?ntica" (TIN2012-38536-C03-03) and 
?T?cnicas de Deconstrucci?n en la Tecnolog?as del 
Lenguaje Humano? (TIN2012-31224); and by the 
Valencian Government through the project 
PROMETEO (PROMETEO/2009/199). 
References  
Atserias, J.; B. Casas; E. Comelles; M. Gonz?lez; L. 
Padr? and M. Padr?. FreeLing 1.3: Syntactic and 
                                                     
5 christian_wartena. Team HsH. 
0
500
1000
Semantic Distance Distribution
Positive Instances Negative Instances
96
semantic services in an open-source NLP library. 
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on 
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC?06), 
2006. 48-55 p.  
Budanitsky, A. and G. Hirst Evaluating wordnet-based 
measures of lexical semantic relatedness 
Computational Linguistics, 2006, 32(1): 13-47. 
Cormen, T. H.; C. E. Leiserson; R. L. Rivest and C. 
Stein. Introduction to algorithms. MIT press, 2001. 
0262032937. 
Dominey, P. F. Aspects of descriptive, referential, and 
information structure in phrasal semantics: A 
construction-based model Interaction Studies, 2005, 
6(2): 287-310. 
Guti?rrez, Y.; A. Fern?ndez; A. Montoyo and S. 
V?zquez. Integration of semantic resources based on 
WordNet. XXVI Congreso de la Sociedad Espa?ola 
para el Procesamiento del Lenguaje Natural, 
Universidad Polit?cnica de Valencia, Valencia, 
SEPLN 2010, 2010a. 161-168 p. 1135-5948. 
Guti?rrez, Y.; A. Fern?ndez; A. Montoyo and S. 
V?zquez. UMCC-DLSI: Integrative resource for 
disambiguation task. Proceedings of the 5th 
International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, 
Uppsala, Sweden, Association for Computational 
Linguistics, 2010b. 427-432 p.  
Guti?rrez, Y.; A. Fern?ndez; A. Montoyo and S. 
V?zquez Enriching the Integration of Semantic 
Resources based on WordNet Procesamiento del 
Lenguaje Natural, 2011a, 47: 249-257. 
Guti?rrez, Y.; S. V?zquez and A. Montoyo. Improving 
WSD using ISR-WN with Relevant Semantic Trees 
and SemCor Senses Frequency. Proceedings of the 
International Conference Recent Advances in Natural 
Language Processing 2011, Hissar, Bulgaria, 
RANLP 2011 Organising Committee, 2011b. 233--
239 p.  
Jiang, J. J. and D. W. Conrath Semantic similarity based 
on corpus statistics and lexical taxonomy arXiv 
preprint cmp-lg/9709008, 1997. 
Leacock, C. and M. Chodorow Combining local context 
and WordNet similarity for word sense identification 
WordNet: An electronic lexical database, 1998, 
49(2): 265-283. 
Lin, D. An information-theoretic definition of 
similarity. Proceedings of the 15th international 
conference on Machine Learning, San Francisco, 
1998. 296-304 p.  
Mihalcea, R.; C. Corley and C. Strapparava. Corpus-
based and knowledge-based measures of text 
semantic similarity. Proceedings of the national 
conference on artificial intelligence, Menlo Park, 
CA; Cambridge, MA; London; AAAI Press; MIT 
Press; 1999, 2006. 775 p.  
Miller, G. A.; R. Beckwith; C. Fellbaum; D. Gross and 
K. Miller Introduction to WordNet: An On-line 
Lexical Database International Journal of 
Lexicography, 3(4):235-244., 1990. 
Miller, G. A.; C. Fellbaum; R. Tengi; P. Wakefield; H. 
Langone and B. R. Haskell. WordNet a lexical 
database for the English language. Cognitive Science 
Laboratory Princeton University 2006. 
Pedersen, T.; S. Patwardhan and J. Michelizzi. 
WordNet:: Similarity: measuring the relatedness of 
concepts. Demonstration Papers at HLT-NAACL 
2004, Association for Computational Linguistics, 
2004. 38-41 p.  
Resnik, P. Using information content to evaluate 
semantic similarity in a taxonomy arXiv preprint 
cmp-lg/9511007, 1995. 
Richardson, R.; A. F. Smeaton and J. Murphy. Using 
WordNet as a knowledge base for measuring 
semantic similarity between words, Technical Report 
Working Paper CA-1294, School of Computer 
Applications, Dublin City University, 1994. 
Wu, Z. and M. Palmer. Verbs semantics and lexical 
selection. Proceedings of the 32nd annual meeting on 
Association for Computational Linguistics, 
Association for Computational Linguistics, 1994. 
133-138 p.  
 
 
97
