Second Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), Volume 2: Seventh International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluation (SemEval 2013), pages 53?57, Atlanta, Georgia, June 14-15, 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
ManTIME: Temporal expression identification and normalization in the
TempEval-3 challenge
Michele Filannino, Gavin Brown, Goran Nenadic
The University of Manchester
School of Computer Science
Manchester, M13 9PL, UK
{m.filannino, g.brown, g.nenadic}@cs.man.ac.uk
Abstract
This paper describes a temporal expression
identification and normalization system, Man-
TIME, developed for the TempEval-3 chal-
lenge. The identification phase combines
the use of conditional random fields along
with a post-processing identification pipeline,
whereas the normalization phase is carried out
using NorMA, an open-source rule-based tem-
poral normalizer. We investigate the perfor-
mance variation with respect to different fea-
ture types. Specifically, we show that the use
of WordNet-based features in the identifica-
tion task negatively affects the overall perfor-
mance, and that there is no statistically sig-
nificant difference in using gazetteers, shal-
low parsing and propositional noun phrases
labels on top of the morphological features.
On the test data, the best run achieved 0.95
(P), 0.85 (R) and 0.90 (F1) in the identifica-
tion phase. Normalization accuracies are 0.84
(type attribute) and 0.77 (value attribute). Sur-
prisingly, the use of the silver data (alone or in
addition to the gold annotated ones) does not
improve the performance.
1 Introduction
Temporal information extraction (Verhagen et al,
2007; Verhagen et al, 2010) is pivotal for many Nat-
ural Language Processing (NLP) applications such
as question answering, text summarization and ma-
chine translation. Recently the topic aroused in-
creasing interest also in the medical domain (Sun et
al., 2013; Kovac?evic? et al, 2013).
Following the work of Ahn et al (2005), the
temporal expression extraction task is now conven-
tionally divided into two main steps: identification
and normalization. In the former step, the effort
is concentrated on how to detect the right bound-
ary of temporal expressions in the text. In the nor-
malization step, the aim is to interpret and repre-
sent the temporal meaning of the expressions using
TimeML (Pustejovsky et al, 2003) format. In the
TempEval-3 challenge (UzZaman et al, 2012) the
normalization task is focused only on two temporal
attributes: type and value.
2 System architecture
ManTIME mainly consists of two components, one
for the identification and one for the normalization.
2.1 Identification
We tackled the problem of identification as a se-
quencing labeling task leading to the choice of Lin-
ear Conditional Random Fields (CRF) (Lafferty et
al., 2001). We trained the system using both human-
annotated data (TimeBank and AQUAINT corpora)
and silver data (TE3Silver corpus) provided by the
organizers of the challenge in order to investigate the
importance of the silver data.
Because the silver data are far more numerous
(660K tokens vs. 95K), our main goal was to rein-
force the human-annotated data, under the assump-
tion that they are more informative with respect to
the training phase. Similarly to the approach pro-
posed by Adafre and de Rijke (2005), we developed
a post-processing pipeline on top of the CRF se-
quence labeler to boost the results. Below we de-
scribe each component in detail.
53
2.1.1 Conditional Random Fields
The success of applying CRFs mainly depends on
three factors: the labeling scheme (BI, BIO, BIOE
or BIOEU), the topology of the factor graph and
the quality of the features used. We used the BIO
format in all the experiments performed during this
research. The factor graph has been generated us-
ing the following topology: (w0), (w?1), (w?2),
(w+1), (w+2), (w?2?w?1), (w?1?w0), (w0?w+1),
(w?1?w0?w+1), (w0?w+1?w+2), (w+1?w+2),
(w?2 ?w?1 ?w0), (w?1 ?w+1) and (w?2 ?w+2).
The system tokenizes each document in the cor-
pus and extracts 94 features. These belong to the
following four disjoint categories:
? Morphological: This set includes a compre-
hensive list of features typical of Named En-
tity Recognition (NER) tasks, such as the word
as it is, lemma, stem, pattern (e.g. ?Jan-2003?:
?Xxx-dddd?), collapsed pattern (e.g. ?Jan-
2003?: ?Xx-d?), first 3 characters, last 3 charac-
ters, upper first character, presence of ?s? as last
character, word without letters, word without
letters or numbers, and verb tense. For lemma
and POS tags we use TreeTagger (Schmid,
1994). Boolean values are included, indicating
if the word is lower-case, alphabetic, digit, al-
phanumeric, titled, capitalized, acronym (cap-
italized with dots), number, decimal number,
number with dots or stop-word. Additionally,
there are features specifically crafted to han-
dle temporal expressions in the form of regu-
lar expression matching: cardinal and ordinal
numbers, times, dates, temporal periods (e.g.
morning, noon, nightfall), day of the week, sea-
sons, past references (e.g. ago, recent, before),
present references (e.g. current, now), future
references (e.g. tomorrow, later, ahead), tem-
poral signals (e.g. since, during), fuzzy quan-
tifiers (e.g. about, few, some), modifiers, tem-
poral adverbs (e.g. daily, earlier), adjectives,
conjunctions and prepositions.
? Syntactic: Chunks and propositional noun
phrases belong to this category. Both are
extracted using the shallow parsing software
MBSP1.
1http://www.clips.ua.ac.be/software/mbsp-for-python
? Gazetteers: These features are expressed us-
ing the BIO format because they can include
expressions longer than one word. The inte-
grated gazetteers are: male and female names,
U.S. cities, nationalities, world festival names
and ISO countries.
? WordNet: For each word we use the number of
senses associated to the word, the first and the
second sense name, the first 4 lemmas, the first
4 entailments for verbs, the first 4 antonyms,
the first 4 hypernyms and the first 4 hyponyms.
Each of them is defined as a separate feature.
The features mentioned above have been com-
bined in 4 different models:
? Model 1: Morphological only
? Model 2: Morphological + syntactic
? Model 3: Morphological + gazetteers
? Model 4: Morphological + gazetteers + Word-
Net
All the experiments have been carried out using
CRF++ 0.572 with parameters C = 1, ? = 0.0001
and L2-regularization function.
2.1.2 Model selection
The model selection was performed over the
entire training corpus. Silver data and human-
annotated data were merged, shuffled at sentence-
level (seed = 490) and split into two sets: 80% as
cross-validation set and 20% as real-world test set.
The cross-validation set was shuffled 5 times, and
for each of these, the 10-fold cross validation tech-
nique was applied.
The analysis is statistically significant (p =
0.0054 with ANOVA test) and provides two impor-
tant outcomes: (i) the set of WordNet features nega-
tively affects the overall classification performance,
as suggested by Rigo et al (2011). We believe this is
due to the sparseness of the labels: many tokens did
not have any associated WordNet sense. (ii) There
is no statistically significant difference among the
first three models, despite the presence of apparently
important information such as chunks, propositional
2https://code.google.com/p/crfpp/
54
Figure 1: Differences among models using 5x10-fold
cross-validation
noun phrases and gazetteers. The Figure 1 shows the
box plots for each model.
In virtue of this analysis, we opted for the smallest
feature set (Model 1) to prevent overfitting.
In order to get a reliable estimation of the perfor-
mance of the selected model on the real world data,
we trained it on the entire cross-validation set and
tested it against the real-word test set. The results
for all the models are shown in the following table:
System Pre. Rec. F?=1
Model 1 83.20 85.22 84.50
Model 2 83.57 85.12 84.33
Model 3 83.51 85.12 84.31
Model 4 83.15 84.44 83.79
Precision, Recall and F?=1 score are computed
using strict matching.
The models used for the challenge have been
trained using the entire training set.
2.1.3 Post-processing identification pipeline
Although CRFs already provide reasonable per-
formance, equally balanced in terms of precision
and recall, we focused on boosting the baseline per-
formance through a post-processing pipeline. For
this purpose, we introduced 3 different modules.
Probabilistic correction module averages the
probabilities from the trained CRFs model with the
ones extracted from human-annotated data only. For
each token, we extracted: (i) the conditional proba-
bility for each label to be assigned (B, I or O), and
(ii) the prior probability of the labels in the human-
annotated data only. The two probabilities are aver-
aged for every label of each token. The list of tokens
extracted in the human-annotated data was restricted
to those that appeared within the span of temporal
expressions at least twice. The application of this
module in some cases has the effect of changing the
most likely label leading to an improvement of re-
call, although its major advantage is making CRFs
predictions less strict.
BIO fixer fixes wrong label sequences. For the
BIO labeling scheme, the sequence O-I is necessar-
ily wrong. We identified B-I as the appropriate sub-
stitution. This is the case in which the first token
has been incorrectly annotated (e.g. ?Three/O days/I
ago/I ./O? is converted into ?Three/B days/I ago/I
./O?). We also merged close expressions such as B-
B or I-B, because different temporal expressions are
generally divided at least by a symbol or a punctu-
ation character (e.g. ?Wednesday/B morning/B? is
converted into ?Wednesday/B morning/I?).
Threshold-based label switcher uses the prob-
abilities extracted from the human-annotated data.
When the most likely label (in the human-annotated
data) has a prior probability greater than a certain
threshold, the module changes the CRFs predicted
label to the most likely one. This leads to force
the probabilities learned from the human-annotated
data.
Through repeated empirical experiments on a
small sub-set of the training data, we found an
optimal threshold value (0.87) and an optimal se-
quence of pipeline components (Probabilistic cor-
rection module, BIO fixer, Threshold-based label
switcher, BIO fixer).
We analyzed the effectiveness of the post-
processing identification pipeline using a 10-fold
cross-validation over the 4 models. The difference
between CRFs and CRFs + post-processing pipeline
is statistically significant (p = 3.51 ? 10?23 with
paired T-test) and the expected average increment is
2.27% with respect to the strict F?=1 scores.
2.2 Normalization
The normalization component is an updated version
of NorMA (Filannino, 2012), an open-source rule-
based system.
55
# Training data
Identification Normalization
Overall
Strict matching Lenient matching Accuracy
run (post-processing) Pre. Rec. F?=1 Pre. Rec. F??=1 Type Value score
1 Human&Silver (no) 78.57 63.77 70.40 97.32 78.99 87.20 88.99 77.06 67.20
2 Human&Silver (yes) 79.82 65.94 72.22 97.37 80.43 88.10 87.38 75.68 66.67
3 Human (no) 76.07 64.49 69.80 94.87 80.43 87.06 87.39 77.48 67.45
4 Human (yes) 78.86 70.29 74.33 95.12 84.78 89.66 86.31 76.92 68.97
5 Silver (no) 77.68 63.04 69.60 97.32 78.99 87.20 88.99 77.06 67.20
6 Silver (yes) 81.98 65.94 73.09 98.20 78.99 87.55 90.83 77.98 68.27
Table 1: Performance on the TempEval-3 test set.
3 Results and Discussion
We submitted six runs as combinations of different
training sets and the use of the post-processing iden-
tification pipeline. The results are shown in Table 1
where the overall score is computed as multiplica-
tion between lenient F?=1 score and the value accu-
racy.
In all the runs, recall is lower than precision. This
is an indication of a moderate lexical difference be-
tween training data and test data. The relatively low
type accuracy testifies the normalizer?s inability to
recognize new lexical patterns. Among the correctly
typed temporal expressions, there is still about 10%
of them for which an incorrect value is provided.
The normalization task is proved to be challenging.
The training of the system by using human-
annotated data only, in addition to the post-
processing pipeline, provided the best results, al-
though not the highest normalization accuracy. Sur-
prisingly, the silver data do not improve the per-
formance, both when used alone or in addition
to human-annotated data (regardless of the post-
processing pipeline usage).
The post-processing pipeline produces the high-
est precision when applied to the silver data only.
In this case, the pipeline acts as a reinforcement of
the human-annotated data. As expected, the post-
processing pipeline boosts the performance of both
precision and recall. We registered the best improve-
ment with the human-annotated data.
Due to the small number of temporal expressions
in the test set (138), further analysis is required to
draw more general conclusions.
4 Conclusions
We described the overall architecture of ManTIME,
a temporal expression extraction pipeline, in the
context of TempEval-3 challenge.
This research shows, in the limits of its general-
ity, the primary and exhaustive importance of mor-
phological features to the detriment of syntactic fea-
tures, as well as gazetteer and WordNet-related ones.
In particular, while syntactic and gazetteer-related
features do not affect the performance, WordNet-
related features affect it negatively.
The research also proves the use of a post-
processing identification pipeline to be promising
for both precision and recall enhancement.
Finally, we found out that the silver data do not
improve the performance, although we consider the
test set too small for this result to be generalizable.
To aid replicability of this work, the system
code, machine learning pre-trained models, statis-
tical validation details and an online DEMO are
available at: http://www.cs.man.ac.uk/
?filannim/projects/tempeval-3/
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the organizers of the
TempEval-3 challenge. The first author would like
also to acknowledge Marilena Di Bari, Joseph Mel-
lor and Daniel Jamieson for their support and the UK
Engineering and Physical Science Research Coun-
cil for its support in the form of a doctoral training
grant.
56
References
Sisay Fissaha Adafre and Maarten de Rijke. 2005. Fea-
ture engineering and post-processing for temporal ex-
pression recognition using conditional random fields.
In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Feature En-
gineering for Machine Learning in Natural Language
Processing, FeatureEng ?05, pages 9?16, Stroudsburg,
PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
David Ahn, Sisay Fissaha Adafre, and Maarten de Ri-
jke. 2005. Towards task-based temporal extraction
and recognition. In Graham Katz, James Pustejovsky,
and Frank Schilder, editors, Annotating, Extracting
and Reasoning about Time and Events, number 05151
in Dagstuhl Seminar Proceedings, Dagstuhl, Germany.
Internationales Begegnungs- und Forschungszentrum
fu?r Informatik (IBFI), Schloss Dagstuhl, Germany.
Michele Filannino. 2012. Temporal expression
normalisation in natural language texts. CoRR,
abs/1206.2010.
Aleksandar Kovac?evic?, Azad Dehghan, Michele Filan-
nino, John A Keane, and Goran Nenadic. 2013. Com-
bining rules and machine learning for extraction of
temporal expressions and events from clinical narra-
tives. Journal of American Medical Informatics.
John D. Lafferty, Andrew McCallum, and Fernando C. N.
Pereira. 2001. Conditional random fields: Probabilis-
tic models for segmenting and labeling sequence data.
In ICML, pages 282?289.
James Pustejovsky, Jose? Castan?o, Robert Ingria, Roser
Saur??, Robert Gaizauskas, Andrea Setzer, and Graham
Katz. 2003. Timeml: Robust specification of event
and temporal expressions in text. In in Fifth Interna-
tional Workshop on Computational Semantics (IWCS-
5.
Stefan Rigo and Alberto Lavelli. 2011. Multisex - a
multi-language timex sequential extractor. In Tempo-
ral Representation and Reasoning (TIME), 2011 Eigh-
teenth International Symposium on, pages 163?170.
Helmut Schmid. 1994. Probabilistic part-of-speech tag-
ging using decision trees. In Proceedings of the In-
ternational Conference on New Methods in Language
Processing, Manchester, UK.
Weiyi Sun, Anna Rumshisky, and Ozlem Uzuner. 2013.
Evaluating temporal relations in clinical text: 2012
i2b2 challenge. Journal of the American Medical In-
formatics Association.
Naushad UzZaman, Hector Llorens, James F. Allen,
Leon Derczynski, Marc Verhagen, and James Puste-
jovsky. 2012. Tempeval-3: Evaluating events,
time expressions, and temporal relations. CoRR,
abs/1206.5333.
Marc Verhagen, Robert Gaizauskas, Frank Schilder,
Mark Hepple, Graham Katz, and James Pustejovsky.
2007. Semeval-2007 task 15: Tempeval temporal re-
lation identification. In Proceedings of the 4th Interna-
tional Workshop on Semantic Evaluations, pages 75?
80, Prague.
Marc Verhagen, Roser Saur??, Tommaso Caselli, and
James Pustejovsky. 2010. Semeval-2010 task 13:
Tempeval-2. In Proceedings of the 5th Interna-
tional Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, SemEval
?10, pages 57?62, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
57
Proceedings of the AHA! Workshop on Information Discovery in Text, pages 7?13,
Dublin, Ireland, August 23 2014.
Mining temporal footprints from Wikipedia
Michele Filannino
School of Computer Science
The University of Manchester
Manchester, M13 9PL, UK
filannim@cs.man.ac.uk
Goran Nenadic
School of Computer Science
The University of Manchester
Manchester, M13 9PL, UK
g.nenadic@manchester.ac.uk
Abstract
Discovery of temporal information is key for organising knowledge and therefore the task of
extracting and representing temporal information from texts has received an increasing interest.
In this paper we focus on the discovery of temporal footprints from encyclopaedic descriptions.
Temporal footprints are time-line periods that are associated to the existence of specific concepts.
Our approach relies on the extraction of date mentions and prediction of lower and upper bound-
aries that define temporal footprints. We report on several experiments on persons? pages from
Wikipedia in order to illustrate the feasibility of the proposed methods.
1 Introduction
Temporal information, like dates, durations, time stamps etc., is crucial for organising both structured and
unstructured data. Recent developments in the natural language community show an increased interest
in systems that can extract temporal information from text and associate it to other concepts and events.
The main aim is to detect and represent the temporal flow of events narrated in a text. For example, the
TempEval challenge series (Verhagen et al., 2007; Verhagen et al., 2010; UzZaman et al., 2013) provided
a number of tasks that have resulted in several temporal information extraction systems that can reliably
extract complex temporal expressions from various document types (UzZaman and Allen, 2010; Llorens
et al., 2010; Bethard, 2013; Filannino et al., 2013).
In this paper we investigate the extraction of temporal footprints (Kant et al., 1998): continuous peri-
ods on the time-line that temporally define a concept?s existence. For example, the temporal footprint of
people lies between their birth and death, whereas temporal footprint of a business company is a period
between its constitution and closing or acquisition (see Figure 1 for examples). Such information would
be useful in supporting several knowledge extraction and discovery tasks. A question answering system,
for example, could spot temporally implausible questions (e.g. What computer did Galileo Galilei use for
his calculations? or Where did Blaise Pascal meet Leonardo Da Vinci?), or re-rank candidate answers
with respect to their temporal plausibility (e.g. British politicians during the Age of Enlightenment).
Similarly, temporal footprints can be used to identify inconsistencies in knowledge bases.
Temporal footprints are in some cases easily accessible by querying Linked Data resources (e.g. DB-
Pedia, YAGO or Freebase) (Rula et al., 2014), large collections of data (Talukdar et al., 2012) or by
directly analysing Wikipedia info-boxes (Nguyen et al., 2007; Etzioni et al., 2008; Wu et al., 2008; Ji
and Grishman, 2011; Kuzey and Weikum, 2012). However, the research question we want to address in
this paper is whether it is possible to automatically approximate the temporal footprint of a concept only
by analysing its encyclopaedic description rather than using such conveniently structured information.
This paper is organised as follows: Section 2 describes our approach and four different strategies to
predict temporal footprints. Section 3 provides information about how we collected the data for the
experiments, and Section 4 presents and illustrates the results.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. Page numbers and proceedings footer
are added by the organizers. License details: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
7
Figure 1: Examples of temporal footprints of objects, people and historical periods.
2 Methodology
In order to identify a temporal footprint for a given entity, we propose to predict its lower and upper bound
using temporal expressions appearing in the associated text. The approach has three steps: (1) extracting
mentions of temporal expressions, (2) filtering outliers from the obtained probability mass function of
these mentions, and (3) fitting a normal distribution to this function. This process is controlled by three
parameters we introduce and describe below. We restrict temporal footprints to the granularity of years.
2.1 Temporal expression extraction (TEE)
For each concept we extract all the dates from its associated textual content (e.g. a Wikipedia page).
There are numerous ways to extract mentions of dates, but we use (a) regular expressions that search
for mentions of full years (e.g. sequence of four digits that start with ?1? or ?2? (e.g. 1990, 1067 or
2014) ? we refer to this as TEE RegEx; (b) a more sophisticated temporal expression extraction system,
which can also extract implicit date references, such as ?a year after? or ?in the same period?, along
with the explicit ones and, for this reason, would presumably be able to extract more dates. As temporal
expression extraction system we used HeidelTime (Str?otgen et al., 2013), the top-ranked in TempEval-3
challenge (UzZaman et al., 2013). We refer to this approach as TEE Heidel.
2.2 Filtering (Flt)
We assume that the list of all extracted years gives a probability mass function. We first filter outliers out
from it using the Median Absolute Deviation (Hampel, 1974; Leys et al., 2013) with a parameter (?) that
controls the size of the acceptance region for the outlier filter. This parameter is particularly important
to filter out present and future references, invariably present in encyclopaedic descriptions. For example,
in the sentence ?Volta also studied what we now call electrical capacitance?, the word now would be
resolved to ?2014? by temporal expression extraction systems, but it should be discarded as an outlier
when discovering of Volta?s temporal footprint.
2.3 Fitting normal distribution (FND)
A normal distribution is then fitted on the filtered probability mass function. Lower and upper bounds for
a temporal footprint are predicted according to two supplementary parameters, ? and ?. More specifi-
cally, the ? parameter controls the width of the normal distribution by resizing the width of the Gaussian
bell. The ? parameter controls the displacement (shift) of the normal distribution. For example, in the
case of Wikipedia pages about people, typically this parameter has a negative value (e.g. -5 or -10 years)
since the early years of life are rarely mentioned in an encyclopaedic description. We compute the upper
and lower bounds of a temporal footprint using the formula (?+ ?)? ??.
We experimented with the following settings:
(a) The TEE RegEx strategy consists of extracting all possible dates by using the regular expression
previously mentioned and by assigning to the lower and upper bound the earliest and the latest
extracted year respectively.
8
(a) Distribution of Wikipedia pages per century. (b) Distribution of Wikipedia pages per length (in words).
Figure 2: Exploratory statistics about the test set extracted from DBpedia.
(b) In the TEE RegEx + Flt approach, we first discard outliers from the extracted dates and then the
earliest and latest dates are used for lower and upper bounds.
(c) For the TEE RegEx + Flt + FND strategy, we use the regular expression-based extraction method
and then apply filtering and Gaussian fitting.
(d) Finally, for the TEE Heidel + Flt + FND setting, we use HeidelTime to extract dates from the
associated articles. We than apply filtering and Gaussian fitting.
The parameters ?, ? and ? are optimised according to a Mean Distance Error (MDE) specifically
tailored for temporal intervals (see Appendix A), which intuitively represents the percentage of overlap
between the predicted intervals and the gold ones. For each approach we optimised the parameters ?, ?
and ? by using an exhaustive GRID search on a randomly selected subset of 220 people.
3 Data
We applied the methodology on people?s Wikipedia pages with the aim of measuring the performance
of the proposed approaches. We define a person?s temporal footprint as the time between their birth and
death. This data has been selected in virtue of the availability of a vast amount of samples along with
their curated lower and upper bounds, which are available through DBpedia (Auer et al., 2007). DBpedia
was used to obtain a list of Wikipedia web pages about people born since 1000 AD along with their birth
and death dates
1
. We checked the consistency of dates using some simple heuristics (the death date does
not precede the birth date, a person age cannot be greater than 120 years) and discarded the incongruous
entries. We collected 228,824 people who lived from 1000 to 2014. The Figure 2a shows the distribution
of people according to the centuries, by considering people belonging to a particular century if they were
born in it.
As input to our method, we used associated web pages with some sections discarded, typically con-
taining temporal references invariably pointing to the present, such as External links, See also, Citations,
Footnotes, Notes, References, Further reading, Sources, Contents and Bibliography. The majority of
pages contains from 100 to 500 words (see Figure 2b).
4 Results
Figure 3 depicts the application of the proposed method to the Galileo Galilei?s Wikipedia article. The
aggregated results with respect to the MDE are showed in Table 1. The TEE Reg + Flt setting outperforms
the other approaches. Still, the approaches that use the Gaussian fitting have lower standard deviation.
These results in Table 1 do not take into account the unbalance in the data due to the length of pages
(the aggregate numbers are heavily unbalanced towards short pages i.e. those with less than 500 words,
as depicted in Figure 2b). We therefore analysed the results with respect to the page length (see Figure
4). TEE RegEx method?s performance is negatively affected by the length of the articles. The longer
1
We used the data set Persondata and Links-To-Wikipedia-Article from DBpedia 3.9 (http://wiki.
dbpedia.org/Downloads39)
9
Figure 3: Graphical representation of the output on Galileo Galilei?s Wikipedia page. Vertical contin-
uous lines represent the prediction of temporal footprint boundaries, whereas dotted lines represent the
real date of birth and death of the Italian scientist. The histogram shows the frequency of mentions of
particular years in Galilei?s Wikipedia page. The Gaussian bell is plotted in light grey.
Strategy Mean Distance Error Standard Deviation
TEE RegEx 0.2636 0.3409
TEE RegEx + Flt 0.2596 0.3090
TEE RegEx + Flt + FND 0.3503 0.2430
TEE Heidel + Flt + FND 0.5980 0.2470
Table 1: Results of the four proposed approaches.
a Wikipedia page is, the worse the prediction is. This is expected as longer articles are more likely to
contain references to the past or future history, whereas in a short article the dates explicitly mentioned are
often birth and death only. The use of the filter (TEE RegEx+Flt) generally improves the performance.
The approaches that use the Gaussian fitting provide better results in case of longer texts. Still, in
spite of its simplicity, the particular regular expression used in this experiment proved to be effective on
Wikipedia pages and consequently an exceptionally difficult baseline to beat. Although counter-intuitive,
TEE RegEx + Flt + FND performs slightly better than the HeidelTime-based method, suggesting that
complex temporal information extraction systems do not bring much of useful mentions. This is in part
due to the English Wikipedia?s Manual of Style
2
which explicitly discourages authors from using implicit
temporal expressions (e.g. now, soon, currently, three years later) or abbreviations (e.g. ?90, eighties or
17th century). Due to this bias, we expect a more positive contribution from using a temporal expression
extraction system, when the methodology is applied on texts written without style constraints.
5 Conclusions
In this paper we introduced a method to extract temporal footprints of concepts based on mining their
textual encyclopaedic description. The proposed methodology uses temporal expression extraction tech-
niques, outlier filtering and Gaussian fitting. Our evaluation on people in Wikipedia showed encouraging
results. We found that the use of a sophisticated temporal expression extraction system shows its strength
only for long textual descriptions, whereas a simple regular expression-based approach performs better
with short texts (the vast majority in Wikipedia pages).
The notion of temporal footprint has not to be interpreted strictly. A more factual interpretation
of temporal footprint could be explored, such as temporal projection of a person?s impact in his-
tory. This would allow to distinguish between people that made important contribution for the fu-
ture history from those who did not. The predicted interval of Anna Frank?s Wikipedia page is an
2
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Manual_of_Style_(dates_and_numbers)
#Chronological_items
10
Figure 4: Observed error of the four proposed approaches with respect to the length of Wikipedia pages
(the lower the better). Each data point represents the average of each bin. The TEE RegEx setting
generally provide a very high error which is correlated with the page?s length. The use of the outlier
filter sensibly improves the performance (TEE RegEx + Flt). The approach TEE RegEx + Flt + FND is
better than TEE Heidel + Flt + FND especially with short and medium size pages. The spike near 22000
words is due to a particular small sample.
example of that, and we invite the reader to investigate it via the online demo, which is available
at: http://www.cs.man.ac.uk/
?
filannim/projects/temporal_footprints/. This
site also provides the data, source code, optimisation details and supplementary graphs to aid the repli-
cability of this work.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the reviewers for their comments. This paper has greatly benefited from
their suggestions and insights. MF would like to acknowledge the support of the UK Engineering and
Physical Science Research Council (EPSRC) in the form of doctoral training grant.
Appendix A: Error measure
In interval algebra, the difference between two intervals, [A] and [B], is defined as [A] ? [B] =
[A
L
? B
U
, A
U
? B
L
] (where the subscripts
L
and
U
indicate lower and upper bound respectively).
Unfortunately, this operation is not appropriate to define error measures, because it does not faithfully
represent the concept of deviation (Palumbo and Lauro, 2003).
We therefore rely on distances for intervals, which objectively measure the dissimilarity between an
observed interval and its forecast (Arroyo and Mat?e, 2006). In particular, we used De Carvalho?s distance
(De Carvalho, 1996):
d
DC
([A], [B]) =
d
?
IY
([A], [B])
w([A] ? [B])
,
where w([A] ? [B]) denotes the width of the union interval, and d
?
IY
([A], [B]) denotes the Ichino-
Yaguchi?s distance defined as follows:
d
?
IY
([A], [B]) = w([A] ? [B])? w([A] ? [B]) + ?(2w([A] ? [B])? w([A])? w([B])).
The Mean Distance Error (MDE) based on De Carvalho?s distance is defined by:
MDE =
1
n
n
?
t=1
d
?=0
IY
([A
t
], [B
t
])
w([A
t
] ? [B
t
])
=
1
n
n
?
t=1
w([A
t
] ? [B
t
])? w([A
t
] ? [B
t
])
w([A
t
] ? [B
t
])
,
11
where n is the number of total samples. We set ? = 0 because we do not want to control the effects of
the inner-side nearness and the outer-side nearness between the intervals.
The absence of any intersection between the intervals leads to the maximum error, regardless to the
distance between the two intervals. A predicted interval far from the gold one has the same error of a
predicted interval very close to the gold one, if they both not even minimally overlap with it.
References
Javier Arroyo and Carlos Mat?e. 2006. Introducing interval time series: Accuracy measures. COMPSTAT 2006,
proceedings in computational statistics, pages 1139?1146.
S?oren Auer, Christian Bizer, Georgi Kobilarov, Jens Lehmann, Richard Cyganiak, and Zachary Ives. 2007. DB-
pedia: A nucleus for a web of open data. In The semantic web, pages 722?735. Springer.
Steven Bethard. 2013. ClearTK-TimeML: A minimalist approach to TempEval 2013. In Second Joint Confer-
ence on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), Volume 2: Proceedings of the Seventh International
Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2013), volume 2, pages 10?14, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, June. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, Association for Computational Linguistics.
Fatima De Carvalho. 1996. Histogrammes et indices de proximit?e en analyse donn?ees symboliques. Acyes
de l??ecole d??et?e sur l?analyse des donn?ees symboliques. LISE-CEREMADE, Universit?e de Paris IX Dauphine,
pages 101?127.
Oren Etzioni, Michele Banko, Stephen Soderland, and Daniel S. Weld. 2008. Open information extraction from
the web. Commun. ACM, 51(12):68?74, December.
Michele Filannino, Gavin Brown, and Goran Nenadic. 2013. ManTIME: Temporal expression identification
and normalization in the TempEval-3 challenge. In Second Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational
Semantics (*SEM), Volume 2: Proceedings of the Seventh International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation
(SemEval 2013), pages 53?57, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, June. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Frank R Hampel. 1974. The influence curve and its role in robust estimation. Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 69(346):383?393.
Heng Ji and Ralph Grishman. 2011. Knowledge base population: Successful approaches and challenges. In
Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies - Volume 1, HLT ?11, pages 1148?1158, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Immanuel Kant, Paul Guyer, and Allen W Wood. 1998. Critique of pure reason. Cambridge University Press.
Erdal Kuzey and Gerhard Weikum. 2012. Extraction of temporal facts and events from Wikipedia. In Proceedings
of the 2nd Temporal Web Analytics Workshop, pages 25?32. ACM.
Christophe Leys, Christophe Ley, Olivier Klein, Philippe Bernard, and Laurent Licata. 2013. Detecting out-
liers: Do not use standard deviation around the mean, use absolute deviation around the median. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 49(4):764 ? 766.
Hector Llorens, Estela Saquete, and Borja Navarro. 2010. TIPSem (english and spanish): Evaluating CRFs and
semantic roles in TempEval-2. In Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, pages
284?291, Uppsala, Sweden, July. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Dat PT Nguyen, Yutaka Matsuo, and Mitsuru Ishizuka. 2007. Relation extraction from wikipedia using subtree
mining. In Proceedings of the National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 22, page 1414. Menlo
Park, CA; Cambridge, MA; London; AAAI Press; MIT Press; 1999.
Francesco Palumbo and CarloN. Lauro. 2003. A PCA for interval-valued data based on midpoints and radii. In
H. Yanai, A. Okada, K. Shigemasu, Y. Kano, and J.J. Meulman, editors, New Developments in Psychometrics,
pages 641?648. Springer Japan.
Anisa Rula, Matteo Palmonari, Axel-Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo, Daniel Gerber, Jens Lehmann, and Lorenz B?uhmann.
2014. Hybrid acquisition of temporal scopes for rdf data. In Proc. of the Extended Semantic Web Conference
2014.
12
Jannik Str?otgen, Julian Zell, and Michael Gertz. 2013. HeidelTime: Tuning english and developing spanish
resources for tempeval-3. In Second Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), Volume
2: Proceedings of the Seventh International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2013), pages 15?19,
Atlanta, Georgia, USA, June. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Partha Pratim Talukdar, Derry Wijaya, and Tom Mitchell. 2012. Coupled temporal scoping of relational facts. In
Proceedings of the Fifth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, WSDM ?12, pages
73?82, New York, NY, USA. ACM.
Naushad UzZaman and James F. Allen. 2010. Event and temporal expression extraction from raw text: First step
towards a temporally aware system. International Journal of Semantic Computing, 4(4):487?508.
Naushad UzZaman, Hector Llorens, Leon Derczynski, James Allen, Marc Verhagen, and James Pustejovsky. 2013.
SemEval-2013 Task 1: TempEval-3: Evaluating time expressions, events, and temporal relations. In Second
Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), Volume 2: Proceedings of the Seventh
International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2013), pages 1?9, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, June.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Marc Verhagen, Robert Gaizauskas, Frank Schilder, Mark Hepple, Graham Katz, and James Pustejovsky. 2007.
SemEval-2007 Task 15: TempEval temporal relation identification. In Proceedings of the 4th International
Workshop on Semantic Evaluations, pages 75?80, Prague.
Marc Verhagen, Roser Saur??, Tommaso Caselli, and James Pustejovsky. 2010. SemEval-2010 Task 13: TempEval-
2. In Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, SemEval ?10, pages 57?62,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Fei Wu, Raphael Hoffmann, and Daniel S. Weld. 2008. Information extraction from Wikipedia: Moving down
the long tail. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining, KDD ?08, pages 731?739, New York, NY, USA. ACM.
13
