An interlingua aiming at communication on the Web: 
How language-independent can it be? 
Ronaldo Teixeira Martins 
ronaIdo @nilc.icmsc.sc.usp.br 
Lucia Helena Machado Rino 
Iucia @ dc. uf scar.br 
Maria das Graqas Volpe Nunes 
md gvnune @ icmc.sc, usp.br 
Gisele Montilha 
gisele @nilc. icmsc, sc. usp. br 
Osvaldo Novais de Oliveira Jr. 
chu@if.sc.usp.br 
Ndcleo Interinstitucional de Lingiiistica Computacional (NILC/Sio Carlos) 
http://nilc.icmsc.sc.usp.br 
CP 668 - ICMC-USP, 13560-970 Silo Carlos, SP, Brazil 
Abstract 
In this paper, we describe the Universal Networking Language, an interlingua 
to be plugged in a Web environment aiming at allowing for many-to-many 
information exchange, 'many' here referring to many natural anguages. The 
interlingua is embedded in a Knowledge-Base MT system whose language- 
dependent modules comprise an encoder, a decoder, and linguistic resources 
that have been developed by native speakers of each language involved in the 
project. Issues concerning both the interlingua formalism and its foundational 
issues are discussed. 
1. Introduction 
The widespread use of the Web and the 
growing Intemet facilities have sparked 
enormous interest in improving the ways 
people use to communicate. In this context 
multilingual Machine Translation systems 
become prominent, for they allow for a huge 
information flow. To date, MT systems have 
been built under limited conditions, of which 
we highlight two: i) in general, they mirror 
one-to-many(languages) or many(languages)- 
to-one approaches, often involving English at 
the "one" end; ii) communication is reduced 
to basic information exchange, ignoring 
richness and flexibility implied by human 
mind. The first limitation has been seldom 
overcome, since it requires a robust 
environment and research teams that can 
cope with knowledge of several anguages 1, 
to derive precise automatic language 
analyzers and synthesizers. The second 
limitation follows up the first: adding up 
communicative issues to linguistic 
processing/modeling makes still harder to 
overcome MT limitations. 
In this article, we elaborate on work using 
an interlingua conceived to overcome the first 
limitation, i.e., to allow for a many-to-many 
information exchange environment, which 
shall be plugged in a nontraditional Internet 
platform. The goal is to allow interlocutors to 
entangle communication even if they do not 
share the same mother tongue or the English 
Standing, most often, for natural language, or NL. 
24 
language, unlike MT systems that have just 
one language at one of their edges. As the 
main component of a Knowledge-Base MT 
system (hereafter, KBMT), the interlingua 
approach has been developed under the 
Universal Networking Language Project, or 
simply UNL Project. What makes the 
interlingua UNL special is its intended use: 
as an electronic language for networks, it has 
to allow for high quality 2 conversation 
systems involving many languages. As the 
main component of a KBMT system, it has to 
be sufficiently robust o ground research and 
development (R&D) of the language-specific 
modules to be attached to the system. It is 
this latter perspective that is undertaken here: 
from the viewpoint of R&D, we discuss how 
broad, or language-independent, he 
interlingua UNL is, especially focusing on its 
syntax and coverage. In addition to being 
consistent and complete to represent 
meaning, we also consider its sharing by 
researchers all around the world, which is an 
important bottleneck of the UNL Project, 
since information exchange by researchers 
during R&D brings about the problems 
introduced by the interlingua UNL itself, 
concerning both its formalism and 
foundational issues. Before discussing this 
topic in Section 5, we present an overview of 
the UNL Project (Section 2) and describe the 
main features of the interlingua UNL 
(Section 3). In Section 4, we describe the 
UNL system architecture. Hereafter, 
'interlingua UNL' will be simply referred to 
as UNL, the acronym for Universal 
Networking Language. Also, the viewpoint 
presented here is that of interlingua users 
who experience R&D for a given NL, and not 
of its authors. 
2. The UNL Project 
The UNL Project 3 has been launched by 
the United Nations University to foster and 
ease international web communication by 
means of NLP systems. Its main strength lies 
on the development of the UNL, as a unique 
semantic (or meaning) representation that can 
be interchanged with the various languages to 
be integrated in the KBMT system. In the 
UNL Project, plug-in software to encode NL 
texts onto UNL ones (NL-UNL encoders) 
and to decode UNL into NL texts (UNL-NL 
decoders) have been developed by R&D 
groups in their own native languages. The 
modules to process Brazilian Portuguese 4, for 
example, have been developed by a team of 
Portuguese native speakers that comprises 
linguists, computational linguists, and 
computer experts. Such packages will be 
made available in WWW servers and will be 
accessible by browsing through Internet, thus 
overcoming the need for people all around 
the world tO learn the language of their 
interlocutors. Several inguistic groups have 
signed to the. Project, namely: the Indo- 
European (Portuguese, Spanish, French, 
Italian, English, German, Russian, Latvian 
and Hindi), the Semitic (Arabic), the Sino- 
Tibetan (Chinese), the Ural-Altaic 
(Mongolian), the Malayan-Polynesian 
(Indonesian), and the Japanese. 
On the one hand, the main strength of 
the Project is that knowledgeable specialists 
address language-dependent issues of their 
mother tongue, most of which are related to 
R&D of the encoding and decoding modules 
and to the specification of the NL-UNL 
lexicon. On the other hand, this also 
represents a crucial problem faced by the 
project participants, for distinct groups may 
interpret the interlingua specification 
differently. There is thus the need for a 
consensus about the UNL formalism, 
2 By 'high quality' we mean 'at least allowing for 
readability and understandability by any user'. 
3 A description of both, the Project and the UNL itself, 
can be found in http://www.unl.ias.unu.edu/. 
4 Hereafter referred to as Portuguese or by its acronym, 
BP. 
25 
bringing about an assessment of its coverage, 
completeness, and consistency, all features 
that will be discussed shortly. 
3. The Universal Networking Language 
The UNL is a formal language designed 
for rendering automatic multilingual 
information exchange. It is intended to be a 
cross-linguistic semantic representation of 
NL sentence meaning, being the core of the 
UNL System, the KBMT system developed 
by H. Uchida (1996) at the Institute of 
Advanced- Studies, United Nations 
University, Tokyo; Japan. 
UNL subsumes a tridimensional theory of 
(sentence) meaning, whose components are 
defined according to one of the following sets 
(Martins et al, 1998a): concepts (e.g., "cat", 
"sit", "on", or "mat"), concept relations (e.g., 
"agent", "place", or "object"), and concept 
predicates (e.g., "past" or "definite"). Such 
components are formally and 
correspondingly represented by three 
different kinds of entities, namely: Universal 
Words (UWs), Relation Labels (RLs), and 
Attribute Labels (ALs). According to the 
UNL syntax, information conveyed by each 
sentence can be represented by a hypergraph 
whose nodes represent UWs and whose arcs 
represent RLs. To make symbol processing 
simpler, hypergraphs are often reduced to 
lists of ordered binary relations between 
concepts, as it is shown in Figure 1 for the 
sentence (1) The cat sat  on the mat. 5 
'sit', 'cat', 'on' and 'mat' are UWs; 'agt' (agent), 
'pie' (place) and 'obj' (object) are RLs; '@def, 
'@entry' and '@past' are ALs. 
Figure la: UNL hypergraph representation f the 
English sentence "The cat sat on the mat" 
agt(sit. @entry. @past,cat. @def) 
plc(sit. @entry. @past,on) 
obj(on,mat. @def) 
Figure lb :  UNL linear representation of the 
English sentence "The cat sat on the mat." 
UWs are labels for concept-like 
information, roughly corresponding to the 
lexical level in the sentence structure. They 
comprise an open large inventory, virtually 
capable of denoting every non-compositional 
meaning to be conveyed by any speaker of 
any language. For the sake of representation, 
these atomic semantic ontents are associated 
to English words and expressions, which play 
the role of semantic labels. However, there is 
no one-to-one mapping between the English 
vocabulary and the UNL lexicon, for UNL, 
as a multilingual representation code, is 
larger than the English vocabulary. To avoid 
unnecessary proliferation of the UNL 
vocabulary and to certify that standards be 
observed by UNL teams, control over the 
specification of the UW set is centered at the 
UNL Center, in Japan. 
Several semantic relationships hold 
between UWs, namely synonymy, antonymy, 
hyponymy, hypemymy and meronymy, 
which compose the UNL Ontology. Steady 
semantic valencies (such as agent and object 
features) can also be represented, forming the 
UNL Knowledge-Base. Both Ontology and 
Knowledge-Base aim at constraining the 
scope of UW labels, whenever ambiguity is 
to be avoided. The. UNL representation f 
sentence (1), for example, can be ambiguous 
26 
in Romance languages, for the translation of 
'cat' should make explicit the animal sex: if 
male, it would be "gato" (Portuguese and 
Spanish), "gatto" (Italian), "chat" (French), 
whereas different names would have to be 
used for the female cat. Instead of having a 
unique UW 'cat', it is thus quite feasible to 
have a whole structure in which 'cat' is only 
the hyper-ordinate option. 
For the English-UNL association ot to 
undermine the intended universality of the 
UW inventory, its semantic-orthograpical 
correspondence has to be considered rather 
incidental, or even. approximated. It is not 
always the case that extensions 6 of a UW 
label and of its corresponding English word 
coincide. The extension of the English word 
"mat", for example, does not exactly coincide 
with the extension of any Portuguese word, 
although we can find many overlaps between 
"mat" and, e.g., "capacho" (Portuguese). 
Portuguese speakers, however, would not say 
"capacho" for the ornamental dishmat, as 
would not English speakers use the word 
"mat" for a fawner (still "capacho" in 
Portuguese). Since each language categorizes 
the world in a very idiosyncratic way, it 
would be misleading to impose a 
straightforward correspondence between 
lexical items of two different languages. In 
UNL, this problem has been overcome by 
proposing a rather analogic lexicon, instead 
of a digital one. Although discrete, UWs 
convey continuous entities, in the sense that 
semantic gaps between concepts are fulfilled 
by the UNL Knowledge-Base, as it is shown 
for the UW 'mat' in Figure 2. Granularity 
thus plays an important role in UNL lexical 
organization and brings flexibility into cross- 
linguistic lexical matching. 
Cf. (Frege, 1892), extension here is used to establish 
the relationship between a word and the world, 
opposed to intension, referring to the relationship 
between aword and its meaning. 
icl 
Figure 2a: UNL hypergraph artial representation for 
the meaning denoted by the English word "mat" 
"mat" 
"mat(aoj>entity)" 
"mat(icl>event)" 
"mat(icl>frame)" 
"mat(icl>rug)" 
"mat(icl>state)" 
"mat(obi>entitv)" 
Figure 2b: UNL partial inear epresentation for 
the meaning denoted by the English word "mat" 
While lexical representation in UNL 
comprises a set of universal concepts 
signaled by UWs, the cross-lexical level 
involves a set of ordered binary relations 
between UWs, which are the Relation Labels 
(RLs). RLs specification are similar to 
Fillmore's semantic ases (1968), with RLs 
corresponding to semantic-value relations 
linking concept-like information. There are 
currently 44 RLs, but this set has been 
continuously modified by empirical evidence 
of lack, or redundancy, of relations. The 
inventory of RLs can be divided into three 
parts, according to the functional aspects of 
the related concepts: ontological, event-like 
and logical relations. Ontological relations 
are used as UW constraints in reducing 
lexical granularity or avoiding ambiguity as 
shown above, and they help positioning UWs 
in a UNL lexical structure. Five different 
labels are used to convey ontological 
relations: icl (hyponymy), equ (synonymy), 
ant (antonymy), pof (meronymy), and fld 
(semantic field). 
2"7 
UNL depicts sentence meaning as a fact 
composed by either a simple or a complex 
event, which is considered here the starting 
point of a UNL representation, i.e., its 
minimal complete semantic unit. Event-like 
relations are assigned by an event external or 
internal structure, or by both. An event 
external structure has to do nearly always 
with time and space boundaries. It can be 
referred to by a set of RLs signaling the event 
co-occurrent meanings, such as 7 its 
environment (scn); starting place (pl0, 
finishing p!ace (pit), or, simply, place (plc); 
range (fmt); starting time (tmf), finishing 
time (tmt), or, simply, time (tim); and 
duration (dur). Action modifiers, such as 
manner (man) and method (met) can also 
qualify this structure. An event internal 
structure is associated to one of the following 
simple frames: action, activity, movement, 
state, and process, each expressing different 
RLs in the event itself, including its actors 
and circumstances. 
Event actors are any animate or inanimate 
character playing any role in events, which 
can be the main or the coadjutant actors. 
There can be up to eight actors, signaled by 
the following RLs: agent (agt), co-agent 
(cag), object (obj), co-object (cob), object 
place (opl), beneficiary (ben), partner (ptn) 
and instrument (ins). They can also be 
coordinated through the RLs conjunction 
(and) and disjunction (or), or subordinated to 
each other by possession (pos), content (cnt), 
naming (nam), comparison (bas), proportion 
(per), and modification (mod). They can still 
be quantified (qua) or qualified by the RLs 
"property attribution" (aoj) and co-attribution 
(cao). It is possible to refer to an "initial 
actor" (src), a "final actor" (gol), or an 
"intermediary actor" (via). Finally, spatial 
relationships can also hold between actors: 
current place (plc), origin (firm), destination 
(to), and path (via). Besides single events, 
there can still be complex cross-event 
relationships which express either paralleled 
events - co-occurrence (coo), conjunction 
(and), and disjunction (or) - or hierarchically 
posed events - purpose (pur), reason (rsn), 
condition (con), and sequence (seq). They 
can all be referred to as logical relations, 
since they are often isomorphic to first-order 
logic predicates. 
According to the UNL authors, it is 
possible to codify any sentence written in any 
NL into a corresponding UNL text expressing 
the sentence meaning through the use of the 
above RLs. This is still a claim to be verified, 
since cases of superposition and competition 
between different RLs have been observed, 
as it is discussed in Section 5. 
In addition to UWs and RLs, UNL 
makes use of predicate-like information, or 
Attribute Labels (ALs), which are names for 
event and concept "transformations", in a 
sense very close to that intended by Chomsky 
(1957, 1965). They are not explicitly 
represented in a UNL hypergraph, although 
they are used to modify its nodes. ALs can 
convey information about concept intensions 
and extensions. In the former case, ALs name 
information about utterers' intensions over 
either specific parts of a sentence (focus, 
topic, emphasis, theme) or the whole 
structure (exclamation, interrogation, 
invitation, recommendation, obligation, etc.). 
In the latter case, ALs refer to spatial 
(definite, indefinite, generic, plural) or 
temporal (past, present, future)information, 
or still, temporal external (begin-soon, begin- 
just, end-soon, end-just) or intemal 
(perfecfive, progressive, imperfective, 
iterative) structures. To differentiate ALs 
from UWs, ALs are attached to UWs by the 
symbol ".@". The cOncept expressed by the 
UW 'sit' in "sit. @entry. @past", for example, 
is taken as the starting point (. @entry) of the 
corresponding hypergraph and it is to be 
modified by temporal information (.@past). 
7 RLs names are bracketed.  
28 
4. The UNL System 
The UNL system architecture consists of 
two main processes, the encoder and 
decoder, and several linguistic resources, 
each group of these corresponding to a NL 
embedded in the system, as depicted in 
Figure 3. 
~U~qL e language-to-~ dictionary 
UNL-t0-target-~ uage dictionary 
~source  I 
language I 
Encoder 
? r I 
1 
Decoder 
language I 
 s~t~CNL e language-to-~ grammar J 
Figure 3: The UNL System Architecture 
A source document (SLD) conveys 
written text on any subject, in any of the NLs 
considered. There is no constraint in the 
domain or structure of the SLD, but there is 
necessarily a loss of semantic expressiveness 
during NL-UNL encoding. The goal of the 
UNL is not, in principle, to fully preserve text 
meaning, but only its main components, i.e., 
those considered to be essential. However, 
there is no measurable account as to what is 
essential in the UNL Project. By convention, 
this is linked to what has been called the 
literal meaning, whi.ch is directly derived 
from interpreting the sentence surface 
structure. Therefore, there is no room to 
represent content hat is not directly mapped 
onto the NL syntactic-semantic licensed 
structures. 
The NL-UNL encoding tool, or UNL 
Encoder, is generic enough to handle all the 
29 
languages included in the Project. Apart from 
the (supposedly) universal knowledge-base, 
used to fill-in possible interlexical gaps when 
mapping is not precise, all other linguistic 
resources are language-dependent. The 
source grammar essentially guides the 
elicitation of the sentence semantic structure 
into its corresponding UNL structure, by 
determining RLs and ALs, always giving 
priority to information content. 
The UNL-NL decoding tool, or UNL 
Decoder, works in the opposite way to the 
Encoder. Besides the lexicon and the 
grammar, a cooccurrence dictionary is also 
used at this stage, to disentangle lexical 
choice. The target grammar is responsible for 
the semantic-syntactic mapping, now 
resolving semantic organization by making 
syntactic and dependence choices between 
UWs, taking RLs and ALs into account. 
5. Remarks on language-independence 
The main strength of the UNL Project 
rests on human expertise: language-specific 
aspects to be included in the multilingual 
KBMT system are handled by native 
speakers of that language, in an attempt o 
overcome the need of representing 
knowledge across several languages or 
cultures. It has been successful in developing 
NL-driven resources and processes by 
researchers all around the world. For 
example, the BP UNL lexicon has over 
65,000 entries that are categorized according 
to grammatical and some semantic features, 
and this will be extended considerably in the 
future to cover the Portuguese vocabulary to 
a greater extent. Up to the present ime, only 
decoding systems customized to each NL 
have been plugged into a general decoder 
skeleton (provided by the UNL Center) and 
have already been assessed, producing 
promising results. The BP decoder, for 
example, is able to produce outputs whose 
literal meaning is preserved in most cases 
(Martins et al, 1998b), using handcoded 
UNL expressions. Actually, to decode any 
UNL text, NL-UNL encoding has to be 
handmade, since customization of the UNL 
Encoder to each NL has not yet been 
undertaken in the project. In spite of the 
promising decoding results, a) output quality 
varies enormously with UNL sentences 
encoding, which can be different across 
distinct research groups; b) communicative 
aspects of information exchange on the web 
are not explored in depth, as it can be seen 
through the list of RLs or ALs. UNL is not 
knowledge intensive and there are no 
guidelines as to consistently recognize or 
extract such kind of information from the 
surface of the source texts. 
There are several reasons why 
interpretation and use of the UNL among the 
various teams are not uniform, including 
cultural aspects and syntax differences of the 
languages involved. Using English as the 
lingua franca for communication and 
cooperation among the research groups and 
as the knowledge representation language has 
also brought limitations into the Project, 
since it implies a non-desirable level of 
language-dependence. This is inevitable, 
however, for limitations definitely come 
along with the choice made. For example, 
attaching a NL word to a UW may be 
difficult, owing to the cross-references 
introduced by using English to convey UNL 
symbols. Resuming the example shown in 
Figure 1, this is the case of the UW "on" in 
(lb): the preposition 'on' fills in the position 
feature of the verb 'sit' and, thus, is 
represented in UNL correspondingly as the 
second term of the binary relation 'plc' and 
the first term of 'obj'. This, undoubtedly, is 
critical, for 'sit' can be juxtaposed to other 
prepositions leading to different meanings, 
which, in turn, may introduce different sets of 
binary relations, implying a high-level 
complexity in the UNL representation. As a 
result, languages whose syntactic structures 
deeply differ from the English ones may 
30 
present an additional level of complexity that 
makes mapping to/from UNL impossible or 
unrealistic. In this respect, we have not been 
facing many problems in fitting Portuguese 
structures with UNL ones, since Portuguese, 
like English, is an inflectional anguage that 
also employs prepositional constructions. 
However, prepositions in Portuguese may 
play considerably different roles compared to 
English. Various extensions of the English 
spatial prepositions "on", "over" and 
"above", for example, are subsumed in 
Portuguese by a single form "sobre" (which 
may also mean ..about). Therefore, in 
Portuguese, cats could be, at the same time, 
not only "on" but also "over" and "above" 
mats. Only world knowledge, associated to 
contextual indexes, both absent in the 
referred UNL hypergraph, could avoid the 
unsuited encodings The cat sat over the mat. 
or The cat sat above the mat. from the 
Portuguese sentence "O gato sentou sobre o 
tapete". 
Another problem related to the sentence 
The cat sat on the mat. refers to the existence 
of competing analyses: it is quite plausible 
that a UNL representation suggesting a noun 
phrase instead of a full sentence holds for this 
sentence. It so happens when the arc between 
'sitting' and 'cat' concepts are labeled by the 
RL 'obj', instead of the RL 'agt' in (1), as it 
is shown in Figure 1 a', yielding the UNL text 
shown in Figure lb'. 
o 
Figure la': UNL hypergraph representation f 
the English sentence "The cat sat on the mat." 
obj(sit. @entry. @past,cat. @def) 
plc(sit. @ entry. @ past,on) 
obj(on,mat. @def) 
Figure lb ' :  UNL linear representation f the 
English sentence "The cat sat on the mat." 
Both analyses are equally accurate and 
can lead to good NL surface expressions, 
although they refer to different semantic 
facts. Indeed, to define an object relationship 
between "sitting" and "cat" is to say that the 
cat was already sat before the beginning of 
the event (e,g., The cat sat on the mat ate the 
fish.). In this case, the animal does not 
actually perform the action, but is 
conditioned to it, the main performer position 
being empty, thus yielding the referred noun 
phrase. In Figure 1, instead, the cat on its 
own has taken the sitting position, therefore 
introducing an agent relationship. These two 
different semantic facts may correspond, in 
English, to a single surface structure. Indeed, 
(1) is orthographically identical to (1'). 
However, other languages (e.g., Portuguese) 
do behave differently. 
Although it is also possible to have, in 
Portuguese, the same surface structure 
corresponding to both UNL representations 
("sentado no tapete"), it is more feasible to 
have, for each case, completely different 
constructions. In the case depicted by Figure 
1, the UW "sit" would be associated to the 
verb "sentar" (corresponding to "to sit"). 
Thus, the generation result should be 
something like "O gato sentou no tapete" or 
"O gato sentado no tapete". On the other 
hand, for Figure 1', the same UW 'sit' would 
be generated in a completely different way, 
corresponding to the passive form of the 
Portuguese xpression "colocar sentado" (to 
be put in a sitted position), for which there is 
no adequate English surface xpression. 
Distinguishing such situations to cope 
with syntactic-semantic troublesome 
mappings, though interesting, is a highly 
31 
context-sensitive task, often surpassing 
sentence boundaries. UNL descriptions do 
not address such fine-grained level of 
meaning representation, being limited to 
meanings derived from context-free source 
sentences, even when context-freeness 
implies insufficient information. When this is 
not possible, UNL offers a default analysis 
for semantically ambiguous sentences, in 
which case we can say that the UNL 
representation is probabilistic, rather than 
deterministic. 
The _way we believe some of UNL 
limitations can-be  overcome and/or 
minimized is by designing a fully-fledged 
testing procedure to assess outputs of both 
decoder and encoder for the various 
languages. Since the same encoding and 
decoding procedures have been delivered to 
the UNL teams, it is possible that part of the 
set of rules or translation strategies of a given 
team may be interchangeable with another 
one from a different language. In this way, 
sharing procedures may become a warranty 
for common ground assessment of the varied 
models, in which case it may be possible to 
make eligible concurrent strategies equally 
available for the languages involved. 
Concerning the UNL means to 
disambiguate or proceed to reference 
resolution or other discourse figures, most of 
the troublesome occurrences are enclosed in 
the treatment issued by specialists and, thus, 
they are constrained to, and handled by, at the 
level of native speakers use. This measure 
can be somewhat fruitful, provided that each 
signatory of the Project finds a way to trace a 
UNL text back onto its own NL text or vice- 
versa, making a proper use of the UNL 
syntax or symbols. This, in fact, can be a 
good method to evaluate (de)coding: once a 
UNL code has been produced from any NL 
text, this code can be the source to decoding 
into the same NL, in order to compare the 
original NL text with the automatically 
generated one. Evaluation, in this case, can 
be carried out by the same research group 
responsible for both processes. 
Compared to other interlingua pproaches 
(e.g., Mikrokosmos, Gazelle, or Kant), the 
UNL Project is in a much earlier stage - most 
of those are over 10 years old, while the UNL 
one is about 3 years old - but it is much more 
ambitious than most of the current systems 
under construction. For UNL is actually a 
front-end to a many-to-many communication 
system, with no constraints that are normally 
inherent in MT systems. Since knowledge is 
specified by native speakers for each NL 
module, grammar, semantics and world 
knowledge can be well founded. Its 
limitations, from a conceptual viewpoint, are 
shared by most of its counterparts, as in 
treating text at the sentence level only. In 
addition, by no means is the UNL system 
committed to event replication as it is the 
case of human translation. Automatic 
strategies have no psychological motivation 
whatsoever and are solely based upon 
computer efficiency principles, namely time 
and space. 
Acknowledgments 
The development of resources for 
Brazilian Portuguese in the UNL Project has 
been sponsored by the Institute of Advanced 
Studies of the United Nations University. The 
authors are also grateful to CNPq and Finep 
(Brazil) for the financial support and to Mr. 
Tadao Takahashi, the coordinator of the 
Brazilian branch in the UNL Project. 
References 
Chomsky, N. (1957). Syntactic Structures. 
The Hague, Mouton. 
Chomsky, N. (1965). Aspects of the Theory of 
Syntax. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Fillmore, C. (1968). The case for case. In 
Bach, E. and Harms, R.T. (orgs.), 
Universals in linguistic theory, pp. 1-88. 
Rinehard and Winston, New York. 
32 
Frege, G. (1892). On Sinn and Bedeutung. In 
Beaney, M. (ed.), The Frege Reader. 
Blackwell Publishers, Malden, MA, 1997. 
Martins, R.T., Rino, L.H.M., Nunes, M.G.V. 
(1998a). As Regras Gramaticais para a 
Decodtfica~ao UNL-Portugu~s no Projeto 
UNL. Relat6rio T6cnico 67. Instituto de 
CiSncias Matem~iticas e da Computa~ao. 
Universidade de S~o Paulo, Sao Carlos. 
Martins, R.T.; Rino, L.H.M.; Nunes, 
M.G.V.; Oliveira Jr., O.N. (1998b). Can 
the syntactic realization be detached from 
the syntactic analysis during generation of 
natural ldnguage sentences? III Encontro 
para o processamento c mputacional da 
lingua portuguesa escrita e falada 
(PROPOR'98). Porto Alegre - RS. 
Novembro. 
Uchida, H. (1996). UNL: Universal 
Networking Language - An Electronic 
Language for Communication, 
Understanding, and Collaboration. 
UNU/IAS/UNL Center. Tokyo, Japan. 
33 
Proceedings of the 2010 Workshop on Graph-based Methods for Natural Language Processing, ACL 2010, pages 83?87,
Uppsala, Sweden, 16 July 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Distinguishing between Positive and Negative Opinions with Complex
Network Features
Diego R. Amancio, Renato Fabbri, Osvaldo N. Oliveira Jr.,
Maria G. V. Nunes and Luciano da F. Costa
University of Sa?o Paulo, Sa?o Carlos, Sa?o Paulo, Brazil
diego.amancio@usp.br, renato.fabbri@gmail.com, chu@ifsc.usp.br,
gracan@icmc.usp.br, ldfcosta@gmail.com
Abstract
Topological and dynamic features of com-
plex networks have proven to be suitable
for capturing text characteristics in recent
years, with various applications in natu-
ral language processing. In this article we
show that texts with positive and negative
opinions can be distinguished from each
other when represented as complex net-
works. The distinction was possible by
obtaining several metrics of the networks,
including the in-degree, out-degree, short-
est paths, clustering coefficient, between-
ness and global efficiency. For visu-
alization, the obtained multidimensional
dataset was projected into a 2-dimensional
space with the canonical variable analysis.
The distinction was quantified using ma-
chine learning algorithms, which allowed
an recall of 70% in the automatic dis-
crimination for the negative opinions, even
without attempts to optimize the pattern
recognition process.
1 Introduction
The use of statistical methods is well estab-
lished for a number of natural language pro-
cessing tasks (Manning and Schuetze, 2007), in
some cases combined with a deep linguistic treat-
ment in hybrid approaches. Representing text as
graphs (Antiqueira et al, 2007), in particular, has
become popular with the advent of complex net-
works (CN) (Newman, 2003; Albert and Barabasi,
2002), especially after it was shown that large
pieces of text generate scale-free networks (Ferrer
i Cancho and Sole, 2001; Barabasi, 2009). This
scale-free nature of such networks is probably the
main reason why complex networks concepts are
capable of capturing features of text, even in the
absence of any linguistic treatment. Significantly,
the scale-free property has also allowed CN to be
applied in diverse fields (Costa et al, 2008), from
neuroscience (Sporns, 2002) to physics (Gfeller,
2007), from linguistics (Dorogovtsev and Mendes,
2001) to computer science (Moura et al, 2003), to
mention a few areas. Other frequently observed
unifying principles that natural networks exhibit
are short paths between any two nodes and high
clustering coefficients (i.e. the so-called small-
world property), correlations in node degrees, and
a large number of cycles or specific motifs.
The topology and the dynamics of CN can be
exploited in natural language processing, which
has led to several contributions in the literature.
For instance, metrics of CN have been used to as-
sess the quality of written essays by high school
students (Antiqueira et al, 2007). Furthermore,
degrees, shortest paths and other metrics of CN
were used to produce strategies for automatic sum-
marization (Antiqueira et al, 2009), whose results
are among the best for methods that only employ
statistics. The quality of machine translation sys-
tems can be examined using local mappings of lo-
cal measures (Amancio et al, 2008). Other re-
lated applications include lexical resources anal-
ysis (Sigman and Cecchi, 2002), human-induced
words association (Costa, 2004), language evolu-
tion (Dorogovtsev andMendes, 2002), and author-
ship recognition (Antiqueira et al, 2006).
In this paper, we model texts as complex net-
works with each word being represented by a
node and co-occurrences of words defining the
edges (see next section). Unlike traditional meth-
ods of text mining and sentiment detection of re-
views (Tang et al, 2009; Pennebaker et al, 2003),
the method described here only takes into account
the relationships between concepts, regardless of
the semantics related to each word. Specifically,
we analyze the topology of the networks in order
to distinguish between texts with positive and neg-
ative opinions. Using a corpus of 290 pieces of
83
Before pre-processing After pre-processing
The projection of the projection
network data into two network data two
dimensions is crucial dimension be crucial
for big networks big network
Table 1: Adjacency list obtained from the sentence
?The projection of the network data into two di-
mensions is crucial for big networks?.
text with half of positive opinions, we show that
the network features allows one to achieve a rea-
sonable distinction.
2 Methodology
2.1 Representing texts as complex networks
Texts are modeled as complex networks here by
considering each word (concept) as a node and es-
tablishing links by co-occurrence of words, disre-
garding the punctuation. In selecting the nodes,
the stopwords were removed and the remaining
words were lemmatized to combine words with
the same canonical form but different inflections
into a single node. Additionally, the texts were
labeled using the MXPost part-of-speech Tag-
ger based on the Ratnaparki?s model (Ratnaparki,
1996), which helps to resolve problems of am-
biguity. This is useful because the words with
the same canonical form and same meaning are
grouped into a single node, while words that have
the same canonical form but distinct meanings
generate distinct nodes. This pre-processing is
done by accessing a computational lexicon, where
each word has an associated rule for the genera-
tion of the canonical form. For illustrative means,
Table 1 shows the pre-processed form of the sen-
tence ?The projection of the network data into two
dimensions is crucial for big networks? and Figure
1 shows the network obtained for the same sen-
tence.
Several CN metrics have been used to analyze
textual characteristics, the most common of which
are out-degree (kout), in-degree (kin), cluster co-
efficient (C) and shortest paths (l). Here we also
use the betweenness (?) and the global efficiency
(?). The out-degree corresponds to the number
of edges emanating from a given node, where
the weight of each link between any two nodes
may also be considered, being referred to as out-
strength. Analogously, the node?s in-degree is de-
fined as the number of edges arriving at a given
Figure 1: Network obtained from the sentence
?The projection of the network data into two di-
mensions is crucial for big networks?.
node. The network?s kout and kin are evaluated
by calculating the average among all the nodes,
note that such global measures kout and kin are
always equal. Regarding the adjacency matrix to
represent the network, for a given node i, its kout
and kin are calculated by eqs 1 and 2, where N
represents the number of distinct words in the pre-
processed text:
kout(i) =
N
?
j=1
Wji (1)
kin(i) =
N
?
j=1
Wij (2)
The cluster coefficient (C) is defined as follows.
Let S be the set formed by nodes receiving edges
of a given node i, and Nc is the cardinality of this
set. If the nodes of this set form a completely con-
nected set, then there are Nc(Nc-1) edges in this
sub graph. However, if there are only B edges,
then the coefficient is given by eq. (3):
C(i) = B
Nc(Nc ? 1)
(3)
If Nc is less than 1, then C is defined as zero.
Note that this measure quantifies how the nodes
connected to a specific node are linked to each
other, with its value varying between zero and one.
The shortest paths are calculated from all pairs
of nodes within the network. Let dij be the min-
imum distance between any two words i and j in
the network. The shortest path length l of a node i
is given in equation 4.
84
l(i) = 1
N ? 1
?
j ?=i
dij (4)
Another measure often used in network analy-
sis is the global efficiency (?), which is defined in
equation 5, and may be interpreted as the speed
with which information is exchanged between any
two nodes, since a short distance dij contributes
more significantly than a long distance. Note that
the formula below prevents divergence; therefore,
it is especially useful for networks with two or
more components. The inverse of ?, named har-
monic mean of geodesic distances, has also been
used to characterize complex networks.
? = 1
N(N ? 1)
?
i?=j
1
dij
(5)
While l and ? use the length of shortest paths,
the betweenness uses the number of shortest paths.
Formally, the betweenness centrality for a given
vertex v is given in equation 6, where the numera-
tor represents the number of shortest paths passing
through the vertices i, v and j and the denomina-
tor represents the number of shortest paths pass-
ing through the vertices i and j. In other words,
if there are many shortest paths passing through a
given node, this node will receive a high between-
ness centrality.
?(v) =
?
i
?
j
?(i, v, j)
?(i, j)
(6)
2.2 Corpus
The corpus used in the experiments was ob-
tained from the Brazilian newspaper Folha de Sa?o
Paulo1, from which we selected 290 articles over a
10-year period from a special section where a pos-
itive opinion is confronted with a negative opinion
about a given topic. For this study, we selected
the 145 longest texts with positive opinion and the
145 longest text with negative opinions2, in order
to have meaningful statistical data for the CN anal-
ysis.
2.3 Machine Learning Methods
In order to discriminate the topological features
from distinct networks we first applied a technique
for reducing the dimension of the dataset, the
canonical variable analysis (McLachlan, 2004).
1http://www.folha.com.br
2The average size of the selected corpus is 600 words.
The projection of network data into a lower di-
mension is crucial for visualization, in addition
to avoids the so-called ?curse of dimensional-
ity? (Bishop, 2006). To calculate the axes points
for projecting the data, a criterion must be es-
tablished with which the distances between data
points are defined. Let S be the overall disper-
sion of the measurements, as shown in equation 7,
where ? is the number of instances (? = 290),??xc is
the set of metrics for a particular instance and ???x ?
is the average of all ??xc.
S =
?
?
c=1
(
??xc ? ???x ?
)(
??xc ? ???x ?
)T
(7)
Considering that two classes (C1 = positive
opinions and C2 = negative opinions) are used, the
scatter matrix Si is obtained for each class Ci, ac-
cording to equation 8, where ???x ?i is the analo-
gous of ???x ? when only the instances belonging to
class Ci is taken into account.
Si =
?
c?Ci
(
??xc ? ???x ?i
)(
??xc ? ???x ?i
)T
(8)
The intraclass matrix, i.e. the matrix that gives
the dispersion inside C1 and C2, is defined as in
equation 9. Additionally, we define the interclass
matrix, i.e. the matrix that provides the dispersion
between C1 and C2, as shown in equation 10.
Sintra = S1 + S2 (9)
Sinter = S ? Sintra (10)
The principal axes for the projection are then
obtained by computing the eigenvector associ-
ated with the largest eigenvalues of the ma-
trix ? (McLachlan, 2004) defined in equation
11. Since the data were projected in a two-
dimensional space, the two principal axes were se-
lected, corresponding to the two largest eigenval-
ues.
? = S?1intraSinter (11)
Finally, to quantify the efficiency of separa-
tion with the projection using canonical variable
analysis, we implemented three machine learn-
ing algorithms (decision tree, using the C4.5 algo-
rithm (Quinlan, 1993); rules of decision, using the
85
RIP algorithm (Cohen, 1995), and Naive Bayes
algorithm (John and Langley, 1995)) and eval-
uated the accuracy rate using the 10-fold-cross-
validation (Kohavi, 1995).
3 Results and Discussion
The metrics out-degree (kout), in-degree (kin),
shortest paths (l), cluster coefficient (C), between-
ness (?) and global efficiency (?) were computed
for each of the 145 texts for positive and nega-
tive opinions, as described in the Methodology.
The mean values and the standard deviations of
these metrics were used as attributes for each text.
This generated a dataset described in 10 attributes,
since the average kin is equal to the average kout
and the standard deviation of ? is not defined (in
other words, it is always zero). Figure 2 shows the
projection of the dataset obtained with canonical
variable analysis, illustrating that texts with dif-
ferent opinions can be distinguished to a certain
extent. That is to say, the topological features of
networks representing positive opinion tend to dif-
fer from those of texts with negative opinion.
The efficiency of this methodology for charac-
terizing different opinions can be quantified using
machine learning algorithms to process the data
from the projection. The results are illustrated in
Table 2. Again, the distinction between classes is
reasonably good, since the accuracy rate reached
62%. Indeed, this rate seems to be a good result,
since the baseline method3 tested showed an ac-
curacy rate of 53%. One also should highlight
the coverage found for the class of negative re-
views by using the C4.5 algorithm, for which a
value of 82% (result not shown in the Table 2) was
obtained. This means that if an opinion is nega-
tive, the probability of being classified as negative
is only 18%. Thus, our method seems especially
useful when a negative view should be classified
correctly.
Method Correctly classified
C4.5 58%
Rip 60%
Naive Bayes 62%
Table 2: Percentage of correctly classified in-
stances.
3The baseline method used as attributes the frequency of
each word in each text. Then, the algorithm C4.5 was run
with the same parameters used for the methodology based on
complex networks.
-0.120 -0.110 -0.100 -0.090
-0.180
-0.175
-0.170
-0.165
-0.160
-0.155
-0.150
FIRST PRINCIPAL AXIS
S
E
C
O
N
D
 P
R
IN
C
IP
A
L
A
X
IS
POSITIVE
NEGATIVE
PROJECTION OF POSITIVE AND
NEGATIVE OBSERVATIONS
Figure 2: Projection obtained by using the method
of canonical variables. A reasonable distinction
could be achieved between positive and negative
opinions.
4 Conclusion and Further Work
The topological features of complex networks
generated with texts appear to be efficient in dis-
tinguishing between attitudes, as indicated here
where texts conveying positive opinions could be
distinguished from those of negative opinions.
The metrics of the CN combined with a projec-
tion technique allowed a reasonable separation of
the two types of text, and this was confirmed with
machine learning algorithms. An 62% accuracy
was achieved (the baseline reached 53%), even
though there was no attempt to optimize the met-
rics or the methods of analysis. These promis-
ing results are motivation to evaluate other types
of subtleties in texts, including emotional states,
which is presently being performed in our group.
Acknowledgements: Luciano da F. Costa
is grateful to FAPESP (05/00587-5) and CNPq
(301303/06-1 and 573583/2008-0) for the finan-
cial support. Diego R. Amancio is grateful to
FAPESP sponsorship (proc. 09/02941-1) and Re-
nato Fabbri is grateful to CAPES sponsorship. We
also thank Dr. Oto Araujo Vale very much for sup-
plying the corpus.
86
References
C. D. Manning and H. Schuetze. 1999. Foundations of
Statistical Natural Language Processing. The MIT
Press, First Edition.
L. Antiqueira, M. G. V. Nunes, O. N. Oliveira Jr. and L.
da F. Costa. 2007. Strong correlations between text
quality and complex networks features. Physica A,
373:811?820.
M. E. J. Newman. 2003. The Structure and Function
of Complex Networks. SIAM Review, 45:167?256.
R. Z. Albert and A.L. Barabasi. 2002. Statistical Me-
chanics of Complex Networks. Rev. Modern Phys.,
74:47?97.
R. Ferrer i Cancho and R. V. Sole. 2001. The small
world of human language. Proceedings of the Royal
Society of London B, 268:2261.
A.L. Barabasi. 2009. Scale-Free Networks: a decade
and beyond. Science, 24 325 5939 412?413.
L. F. da Costa, O. N. Oliveira Jr., G. Travieso, F.
A. Rodrigues, P. R. Villas Boas, L. Antiqueira, M.
P. Viana, L. E. C. da Rocha. 2008. Analyzing
and Modeling Real-World Phenomena with Com-
plex Networks: A Survey of Applications. arXiv
0711.3199.
O. Sporns. 2002. Network analysis, complexity, and
brain function. Complexity, 8(1):56?60.
D. Gfeller, P. LosRios, A. Caflisch and F. Rao. 2007.
Complex network analysis of free-energy land-
scapes. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Science USA, 104 (6):1817?1822
S. N. Dorogovtsev and J. F. F.Mendes. 2001. Lan-
guage as an evolving word web. Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London B, 268:2603.
A. P. S. de Moura, Y. C. Lai and A. E. Motter. 2003.
Signatures of small-world and scale-free properties
in large computer programs. Physical Review E,
68(1):017102.
L. Antiqueira, O. N. Oliveira Jr., L. da F. Costa and
M. G. V. Nunes. 2009. A Complex Network Ap-
proach to Text Summarization. Information Sci-
ences, 179:(5) 584?599.
M. Sigman and G.A. Cecchi. 2002. Global Organi-
zation of the Wordnet Lexicon. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 99:1742?1747.
L. F. Costa. 2004. What?s in a name ? International
Journal of Modern Physics C, 15:371?379.
S. N. Dorogovtsev and J. F. F. Mendes. 2002. Evo-
lution of networks. Advances in Physics, 51:1079?
1187.
L. Antiqueira, T. A. S. Pardo, M. G. V. Nunes, O. N.
Oliveira Jr. and L. F. Costa. 2006. Some issues on
complex networks for author characterization. Pro-
ceeedings of the Workshop in Information and Hu-
man Language Technology.
H. Tang, S. Tan and X. Cheng. 2009. A survey on
sentiment detection of reviews. Expert Systems with
Applications, 36:7 10760?10773.
J. W. Pennebaker, M. R. Mehl and K. G. Niederhoffer.
2003. Psychological aspects of natural language.
use: our words, our selves. Annual review of psy-
chology, 54 547-77.
D. R. Amancio, L. Antiqueira, T. A. S. Pardo, L.
F. Costa, O. N. Oliveira Jr. and M. G. V. Nunes.
2008. Complex networks analysis of manual and
machine translations. International Journal of Mod-
ern Physics C, 19(4):583-598.
A. Ratnaparki. 1996. A Maximum Entropy Part-Of-
Speech Tagger. Proceedings of the Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing Conference,
University of Pennsylvania.
G. J. McLachlan. 2004. Discriminant Analysis and
Statistical Pattern Recognition. Wiley.
C. M. Bishop. 2006. Pattern Recognition and Machine
Learning. Springer-Verlag New York.
R. Quinlan. 1993. C4.5: Programs for Machine Learn-
ing. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers.
W. W. Cohen. 1995. Fast Effective Rule Induction.
12 International converence on Machine Learning,
115?223.
G. H. John and P. Langley. 1995. Estimating Continu-
ous Distribution in Bayesian Classifiers. 11 Confer-
ence on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 338?
345.
R. Kohavi. 1995. A study of cross-validation and boot-
strap for accuracy estimation and model selection.
Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence 2, 12:1137-
1143.
87
