Proceedings of the 14th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation, pages 152?156,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
MIME - NLG in Pre-Hospital Care
Anne H. Schneider Alasdair Mort Chris Mellish Ehud Reiter Phil Wilson
University of Aberdeen
{a.schneider, a.mort, c.mellish, e.reiter, p.wilson}@abdn.ac.uk
Pierre-Luc Vaudry
Universite? de Montre?al
vaudrypl@iro.umontreal.ca
Abstract
The cross-disciplinary MIME project aims
to develop a mobile medical monitoring
system that improves handover transac-
tions in rural pre-hospital scenarios be-
tween the first person on scene and am-
bulance clinicians. NLG is used to pro-
duce a textual handover report at any time,
summarising data from novel medical sen-
sors, as well as observations and actions
recorded by the carer. We describe the
MIME project with a focus on the NLG
algorithm and an initial evaluation of the
generated reports.
1 Introduction
Applications of Natural Language Generation
(NLG) in the medical domain have been manifold.
A new area where NLG could contribute to the im-
provement of services and to patient safety is pre-
hospital care: care delivered to a patient before ar-
rival at hospital. There are many challenges in de-
livering pre-hospital care, making it different from
care taking place in the controlled circumstances
of emergency departments or hospital wards.
Some Ambulance Services have developed in-
novative models to care for patients whilst an am-
bulance is en-route. Community First Responder
(CFR) schemes recruit volunteers from local com-
munities and give them the necessary training and
equipment to deal with a limited range of medical
emergencies. The premise is that even those with
basic first-aid skills can save a life. It is their task
to attend the casualty while waiting for the am-
bulance and to record their observations and ac-
tions on a paper patient report form (PRF). They
may also assess the patient?s physiological mea-
surements (e.g. heart rate). In practice, due to
time constraints, a verbal handover is performed
and the PRF is filled in later. Physiological mea-
surements may be written in ink on the back of a
protective glove, and are rarely passed on in any
systematic way.
The MIME (Managing Information in Medical
Emergencies)1 project is developing technology to
support CFRs in the UK when they respond to pa-
tients. The project aims to enable CFRs to capture
a greater volume of physiological patient data, giv-
ing them a better awareness of a patient?s medical
status so they can deliver more effective care.
There are two parts to our work: the use of novel
lightweight wireless medical sensors that are sim-
ple and quick to apply, and the use of novel soft-
ware that takes these inherently complex sensor
data, along with some other information inputted
by the user (e.g. patient demographics or actions
performed) on a tablet computer, and present it
very simply. We are working with two sensors that
provide measurements of the patient?s respiratory
rate, heart rate and blood oxygen saturation. Our
software can use NLG to produce a textual han-
dover report at any time. This can be passed to an
arriving paramedic to give a quick summary of the
situation and can accompany the patient to inform
later stages of care. We anticipate that our sys-
tem will also provide some basic decision support
based upon the patients clinical condition.
2 Related Work
Many situations arise in the medical domain where
vast amounts of data are produced and their correct
interpretation is crucial to the lives of patients. In-
terpreting these data is usually a demanding and
complex task. Medical data are therefore often
presented graphically or preferably in textual sum-
maries (Law et al, 2005) making NLG important
for various applications in the medical domain.
A number of systems address the problem of
presenting medical information to patients in a
form that they will understand. Examples are
1www.dotrural.ac.uk/mime
152
STOP (Reiter et al, 2003), PILLS (Bouayad-Agha
et al, 2002), MIGRANE (Buchanan et al, 1992),
and Healthdoc (Hirst et al, 1997). Other systems,
such as TOPAZ (Kahn et al, 1991) and Suregen
(Hu?ske-Kraus, 2003), aim to summarise informa-
tion in order to support medical decision-making.
In the case of MIME, the challenge is to sum-
marise large amounts of sensor data, in the context
of carer observations and actions, in a coherent
way that supports quick decision making by the
reader. The problem of describing the data relates
to previous work on summarising time series data
(e.g. (Yu et al, 2007)). In many ways, though, our
problem is most similar to that of Babytalk BT-
Nurse system (Hunter et al, 2012), which gener-
ates shift handover reports for nurses in a neona-
tal intensive care unit. The nature of the recipi-
ent is, however, different. Whereas BabyTalk ad-
dresses clinical staff in a controlled environment,
MIME is aimed at people with little training who
may have to deal with emergency situations very
quickly. Further, while BT-Nurse works with an
existing clinical record system, which does not al-
ways record all actions and observations which
ideally would be included in a report, in MIME
users enter exactly the information which MIME
needs. This simplifies the NLG task, at the cost of
adding a new task (interface construction).
3 The MIME project
In the first stage of MIME, we have developed
a desktop application to prototype the generation
of handover reports. We used simulated scenar-
ios, where a panel of medical experts determined
the sequence of events and predicted the stream of
data from the simulated sensors.
The generated reports must provide a quick
overview of the situation but at the same time be
sufficiently comprehensive, while the format must
enhance the readability. A general structure for
the handover reports was determined in a user-
centred development process together with ambu-
lance clinicians. After the demographic descrip-
tion of the casualty and incident details (entered by
the responder whenever they have an opportunity),
two sections of generated text follow: the initial
assessment section and the treatments and findings
section. The initial assessment contains informa-
tion on the patient gathered by the CFRs just after
the sensors are applied and also any observations
made during the first minute after the application
of the sensors. The treatment and findings section
is a report on the observations and actions of the
CFRs while they waited for the ambulance to ar-
rive. This includes a paragraph that sums up the
condition of the patient at the time of handover.
Using sensors to capture physiological data
continuously introduces the problem that irrele-
vant information needs to be suppressed in order
not to overload the ambulance clinicians and hin-
der interpretation. The NLG algorithm that gen-
erates short as well as comprehensive handover re-
ports accomplishes text planning in the two stages
of document planning and micro-planning (Re-
iter and Dale, 2000). Document planning is re-
sponsible for the selection of the information that
will be mentioned in the generated report. Events
that will be mentioned in the text are selected
and structured into a list of trees (similar to trees
in Rhetorical Structure Theory (Scott and Siecke-
nius de Souza, 1990)). In the micro-planning step
the structure of the document plan is linearised and
sentences are compiled using coordination and ag-
gregation.
Whereas some parts of the handover document
(e.g. patient demographics) are relatively stylised,
the main technically demanding part of the NLG
involves the description of the ?treatment and find-
ings?, which describes the events that happen
whilst the patient is being cared for and relevant
parts of the sensor data (see Figure 1). For this
section of the report, the document planning al-
gorithm is based on that of (Portet et al, 2007),
which identifies a number of key events and cre-
ates a paragraph for each key event. Events that
are explicitly linked to the key event or events that
happen at the same time are added to the relevant
paragraph. This is based on the earlier work of
(Hallett et al, 2006).
4 Evaluation
In an initial evaluation we sought to assess how
our reports would be received in comparison with
the current situation ? either short verbal reports
or paper report forms (PRFs)? and also in com-
parison with what might be regarded as a ?gold
standard? report produced by an expert.
Materials: Two videos were produced indepen-
dently of the NLG team, based on two scenarios
of medical incidents typical of a CFRs caseload.
These scenarios, a farm injury and chest pain, in-
cluded a short description of the incident, similar
153
At 02:12, after RR remained fairly
constant around 30 bpm for 4 minutes,
high flow oxygen was applied, she took
her inhaler and RR decreased to 27
bpm. However, subsequently RR once
more remained fairly constant around
30 bpm for 8 minutes.
At 02:15 she was feeling faint.
At 02:15 the casualty was moved.
At 02:17 the casualty was once more
moved.
Figure 1: Part of the ?Treatment and Findings? for an
asthma scenario.
to the initial information a CFR would receive, a
time line of events that happened before the ambu-
lance arrived as well as simulated sensor data from
the patient. The videos showed an actor in the
role of CFR and another as patient, with the sce-
nario time displayed in one corner. When the CFR
performed readings of the physiological measures
they were shown as subtitles.
The videos were presented to two CFRs and a
paramedic, who were asked to imagine themselves
in the situation of the CFR in the video, and to
produce a handover report. Each video was only
played once in order to produce more realistic re-
sults. We asked one CFR to construct a written
?verbal? handover for the first scenario and to fill
out a PRF for the other scenario, and the other
CFR to do the ?verbal? handover for the second
scenario and to fill out the PRF for the first. To
anonymise the PRF it was transcribed into a digi-
tal version. The paramedic received a blank sheet
of paper and was requested to produce a handover
report that he would like to receive from a CFR
when arriving at the scene. Based on the scenarios
we also generated two reports with the MIME sys-
tem. This process resulted in four reports for each
of the two scenarios, one transcribed verbal han-
dover and a PRF from a CFR, a written handover
report from a paramedic and the generated report.
Hypotheses: Our hypothesis was that the gen-
erated reports would improve on the current prac-
tice of verbal handovers and PRFs, and that
paramedics would perceive them to be more suit-
able, hence rank them higher than the CFRs? ver-
bal or PRF reports. The paramedic handover re-
port might be regarded as a gold standard pro-
duced by an expert and we were interested in how
the generated reports fared in comparison. Fur-
ther, we hoped to gain information on how to im-
prove our generated reports.
Participants: We approached paramedics in
the Scottish Ambulance Service to participate in
our study. Nine paramedics responded (eight male
and one female; age range 32?56 years with 10?24
years? service).
Procedure: Participants received an invitation
email with a link to a brief online survey and the
eight reports as attachments. After an introduction
and consent form they were forwarded to one of
the two scenario descriptions and asked to rank the
respective four reports. After that the participant
was asked to rate the accuracy, understandability
and usefulness of the generated report for this sce-
nario on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from very
good to very bad and to indicate what they liked
or disliked about it in a free text box. This process
was repeated for the second scenario.
4.1 Results
Ranking: An overview of the rankings can be
found in Table 1. Apart from the rankings of par-
ticipant 7 and 8, no large differences in how the
reports were ranked could be observed between
the two scenarios. We performed a Friedman
test (Friedman, 1937) (farm injury scenario: chi-
squared=4.3, df=3, p=0.23; chest pain scenario:
chi-squared=12.44, df=3, p=0.006): some reports
were ranked consistently higher or lower than oth-
ers. The verbal CFR report was ranked worst in all
but five cases. There is a high disparity in the rank-
ings for the PRF, which was ranked first on eight
occasions and in the other ten instances in third
or fourth place. The generated report was ranked
in first place only once, but eleven times in sec-
ond place and in third place the other six times. In
general the paramedic report, which was regarded
as the ?gold standard?, was ranked better than the
generated report, but in five cases the generated
report was ranked better.
Rating: An overview of the ratings for the gen-
erated reports can be found in Table 2. The rat-
ings for both scenarios were good on average, with
a majority of ratings lying between very good to
moderate. Only one rating (the accuracy of the
generated report for the farm injury scenario) was
bad; none was very bad. The ratings for the gen-
erated report of the chest pain scenario were on
average better than those for the farm injury sce-
nario. Accuracy had better ratings than usefulness
and understandability in both scenarios.
154
Participant: 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 med min max
farm injury scenario
Paramedic 2 2 3 1 1 3 3 2 1 2 1 3
Generated 3 3 2 2 2 2 2 3 2 2 2 3
CFR PRF 1 1 1 3 4 1 4 4 3 3 1 4
CFR verbal 4 4 4 4 3 4 1 1 4 4 1 4
chest pain scenario
Paramedic 2 2 3 1 1 2 2 1 1 2 1 3
Generated 3 3 2 2 2 3 1 2 2 2 1 3
CFR PRF 1 1 1 3 4 1 4 3 3 3 1 4
CFR verbal 4 4 4 4 3 4 3 4 4 4 3 4
Table 1: Overview of the ranking results (most preferred
(1) to least preferred (4)), median (med), maximum (max)
and minimum (min) values for the patient report form (CFR
PRF), paramedic report (Paramedic), generated report (gen-
erated) and verbal report (verbal CFR).
Participant: 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 med min max
farm injury scenario
accuracy 1 2 1 4 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 4
useful. 3 3 2 2 1 2 2 1 1 2 1 3
unders. 2 3 2 2 1 3 3 1 1 2 1 3
chest pain scenario
accuracy 2 2 1 1 1 3 1 2 1 1 1 3
useful. 2 3 2 1 1 2 1 1 1 1 2 3
unders. 2 3 2 1 1 3 2 1 1 2 1 3
Table 2: Overview of the rating results, median (med), max-
imum (max) and minimum (min) values for accuracy, useful-
ness (useful.) and understandability (unders.) of the gener-
ated reports, on a Likert scale (very good (1) to very bad (5)).
4.2 Discussion
We hypothesised that the generated reports would
fare better than the verbal handovers and the PRFs.
Results confirm a preference for the generated re-
ports over the verbal handover. The paramedic
reports, which were regarded as our ?gold stan-
dard? were ranked higher than the generated re-
ports. Interestingly, in almost half the cases there
was a clear preference for the PRF and in the other
cases the PRF ranked badly. This may have been
affected by the familiarity of this medium and per-
haps by the background assumption that this is
how handover reports ?should? be presented.
We regard this as a tentative confirmation that
the generated texts compete favourably with the
status quo. In a real world scenario the paramedics
often get a verbal handover instead of the PRF and
it should be noted that the PRF was printed and not
handwritten. Furthermore, although the CFRs and
paramedics only saw the scenario video once they
were under no time pressure to submit the reports.
Hence the quality of all the human reports in our
experiment is likely to be better than normal.
Although each individual generally provided
consistent responses across the two scenarios,
there were variations between individuals. These
different preferences may be merely stylistic
choices or they may reflect in task performance.
Preferences are not necessarily an indication of
usefulness for a task (cf. (Law et al, 2005)).
In general the accuracy, understandability and
usefulness of the generated reports received good
ratings. Although participation was low, the qual-
itative data we gathered were valuable, every par-
ticipant offered comments in the free text box on
what they liked or disliked about the generated re-
port. In general there seemed to be an impres-
sion that some sections were longer than neces-
sary. One participant observed that reporting on
observations a long time later is only useful if
things have changed significantly. The structure
and organisation of the report received some posi-
tive comments. For example one participant stated
that he liked ?the separate sections for informa-
tion? and another commented that the report was
?logically laid out?, that it was ?easy to obtain
information? from the report and that it ?clearly
states intervention and outcome of intervention?.
5 Conclusion and Future Work
Despite the fact that the experiment reported here
involved a small number of participants, which
implies that its results need to be interpreted with
some caution, the generated reports produced by
the MIME system appear to improve on the cur-
rent practice of verbal handover. We aim to col-
lect more responses and repeat the evaluation that
has been presented. Our next step in evaluating the
report generator will be to carry out a task based
evaluation to see whether the preference ratings
we have gathered can be reflected in performance
measures.
We are now moving into the second stage of
MIME and have started developing a new proto-
type, a mobile device that gets signals from two
lightweight sensors. Here we will collect data
from real emergency ambulance callouts by hav-
ing a researcher join ambulance crews for their
normal activity, which will be used to modify the
NLG system (e.g. in order to allow for more reli-
able handling of noise).
6 Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the RCUK dot.rural
Digital Economy Research Hub, University of Ab-
erdeen (Grant reference: EP/G066051/1)
155
References
N. Bouayad-Agha, R. Power, D. Scott, and A. Belz.
2002. PILLS: Multilingual generation of medical
information documents with overlapping content. In
Proceedings of LREC 2002, pages 2111?2114.
B. Buchanan, J. Moore, D. Forsythe, G. Banks, and
S. Ohlsson. 1992. Involving patients in health care:
explanation in the clinical setting. In Proceedings of
the Annual Symposium on Computer Application in
Medical Care, pages 510?514, January.
M. Friedman. 1937. The Use of Ranks to Avoid the
Assumption of Normality Implicit in the Analysis
of Variance. Journal of the American Statistical As-
sociation, 32(200):675?701.
C. Hallett, R. Power, and D. Scott. 2006. Summari-
sation and visualisation of e-Health data repositories
Conference Item Repositories. In UK E-Science All-
Hands Meeting, pages 18?21.
G. Hirst, C. DiMarco, E. Hovy, and K. Parsons. 1997.
Authoring and Generating Health-Education Docu-
ments That Are Tailored to the Needs of the Individ-
ual Patient. In Anthony Jameson, Ce?cile Paris, and
Carlo Tasso, editors, User Modeling: Proceedings
of the Sixth International Conference, UM97, pages
107?118. Springer Wien New York.
J. Hunter, Y. Freer, A. Gatt, E. Reiter, S. Sripada, and
C Sykes. 2012. Automatic generation of natural
language nursing shift summaries in neonatal in-
tensive care: BT-Nurse. Artificial Intelligence in
Medicine, 56:157?172.
D. Hu?ske-Kraus. 2003. Suregen-2: A Shell System for
the Generation of Clinical Documents. In Proceed-
ings of the 10th Conference of the European Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(EACL-2003), pages 215?218.
M. Kahn, L. Fagan, and L. Sheiner. 1991. Combining
physiologic models and symbolic methods to inter-
pret time-varying patient data. Methods of informa-
tion in medicine, 30(3):167?78, August.
A. Law, Y. Freer, J. Hunter, R. Logie, N. McIntosh,
and J. Quinn. 2005. A comparison of graphical and
textual presentations of time series data to support
medical decision making in the neonatal intensive
care unit. Journal of clinical monitoring and com-
puting, 19(3):183?94, June.
F. Portet, E. Reiter, J. Hunter, and S. Sripada. 2007.
Automatic generation of textual summaries from
neonatal intensive care data. In In Proccedings
of the 11th Conference on Artificial Intelligence in
Medicine (AIME 07). LNCS, pages 227?236.
E. Reiter and R. Dale. 2000. Building Natural Lan-
guage Generation Systems. Studies in Natural Lan-
guage Processing. Cambridge University Press.
E. Reiter, R. Robertson, and L. Osman. 2003. Lessons
from a failure: Generating tailored smoking cessa-
tion letters. Artificial Intelligence, 144(1-2):41?58,
March.
D. Scott and C. Sieckenius de Souza. 1990. Get-
ting the message across in rst-based text genera-
tion. In R. Dale, C. Mellish, and M. Zock, editors,
Current Research in Natural Language Generation.
Academic Press.
J. Yu, E. Reiter, J. Hunter, and C. Mellish. 2007.
Choosing the content of textual summaries of large
time-series data sets. Natural Language Engineer-
ing, 13(1):25?49.
156
Proceedings of the 14th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation, pages 183?187,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Adapting SimpleNLG for bilingual English-French realisation 
  Pierre-Luc Vaudry and Guy Lapalme RALI-DIRO ? Universit? de Montr?al C.P. 6128, Succ. Centre-Ville Montr?al, Qu?bec, Canada, H3C 3J8 {vaudrypl,lapalme}@iro.umontreal.ca     Abstract 
This paper describes SimpleNLG-EnFr, an adaption of the English realisation engine SimpleNLG (Gatt and Reiter, 2009) for bilin-gual English-French realisation. Grammatical similarities between English and French that could be exploited and specifics of French that needed adaptation are discussed. 1 Introduction Surface realisation is the last step in natural language generation. It takes as input an abstract representation where lexical units and syntactic structures have been determined. Its output is formatted natural language text. SimpleNLG, as described in Gatt and Reiter (2009), is a realisa-tion engine for English in the form of a Java li-brary. It handles inflection, derivation, word or-der, auxiliaries, agreement, pronominalisation, punctuation, spacing, etc. This paper describes SimpleNLG-EnFr 1.1 1 , a bilingual realisation engine for English and French derived from SimpleNLG 4.2, and explains the design choices and the challenges encountered. Grammatical similarities and differences between English and French that influenced the design are dis-cussed. The current version of SimpleNLG is 4.4, but all mentions of SimpleNLG in this paper refer to version 4.2. 2 Subset of French covered The English grammatical coverage of Sim-pleNLG-EnFr is the same as that of SimpleNLG 4.2. Its French grammatical coverage is equiva-lent to its English one.                                                 1 Available online, along with the source code, at http://www-etud.iro.umontreal.ca/~vaudrypl/snlgbil/snlgEnFr_english.html 
Le fran?ais fondamental (1er Degr?) (Minis-t?re de l'?ducation nationale, 1959) was used as a reference for French grammatical coverage. That document results from empirical studies and aims at describing the essential notions for teach-ing French as a foreign language. Almost all of the grammar points enumerated in this document are covered by SimpleNLG-EnFr. The detailed French grammar rules used in the implementa-tion come mainly from Grevisse (1993) and Mansouri (1996). SimpleNLG-EnFr has a 3871 entry default French lexicon covering L'?chelle Dubois-Buyse d'orthographe usuelle fran?aise (Ters et al, 1964). It contains the most important and com-monly used French vocabulary (including func-tion words), so as not to interfere with a particu-lar application domain vocabulary. A domain specific lexicon can easily be added as Sim-pleNLG supports using multiple lexicons. Most of the inflected forms in the default French lexi-con were taken from Morphalou 2.0 (CNRTL). 3 SimpleNLG parts pooled for English and French Most of the basic framework, which defined the class hierarchy covering lexical units, phrases and document elements such as paragraphs, could be kept in common for both English and French. Some shared grammar rules and princi-ples were put in abstract classes from which lan-guage-specific modules could be derived. The other grammar rules were rewritten for French, with the corresponding English ones serving as references. Many static methods in the English modules in SimpleNLG were changed to regular instance methods in order to be able to override them in the new subclasses. 
183
3.1 General characteristics Features: SimpleNLG uses a system of features for various functions: encoding morphological and syntactic properties of lexical units; letting the user set the parameters of a particular phrase (plural, verb tenses, etc.); and internally keeping track of the content of a phrase and various in-formation needed during realisation. This system is generic enough to be used for other languages. Most features are reusable and others can be added as needed. In SimpleNLG-EnFr, most of the already present features were reused for French. Lexicon: In SimpleNLG, the lexicon is al-ready relatively well separated from the gram-mar. The basic lexicon class provides an inter-face to a simple XML file containing the neces-sary information about the lexical units. The list of available fields in this file can easily be ex-tended by adding lexical features to the ones used for English. In SimpleNLG-EnFr, many lexical features were added mainly to account for the higher complexity of French morphology. 3.2 Syntax Verb phrase and clause: First, English and French have the same basic clause constituent order: Subject-Verb-Object (SVO). Even more importantly for SimpleNLG-EnFr, this constitu-ent order is relatively stable (compared with oth-er languages like German or Russian), at least for the purpose of practical NLG applications. This frees us in most cases from having to choose be-tween different syntactically correct word orders. We thus did not have to make such big changes to the syntactic representation as were needed in adapting SimpleNLG to German (Bollmann, 2011). Indeed, in German the subject has the same syntactic status in the clause than the ob-ject(s) and they can all occupy the same varying positions relative to the verb. However, Boll-mann (2011) had more leeway because he had decided not to keep the English grammar along-side the German one in his implementation. In contrast, in SimpleNLG-EnFr we wanted to be able to change freely between English and French grammars during the generation of a sin-gle text. English and French also have a very similar passive construction. In French, it is used less frequently because other options exist to avoid mentioning the subject of a sentence (for exam-ple, using the indefinite personal pronoun on), 
but choosing between those constructions is not the role of the realisation engine. Noun phrase: English and French can both have a determiner at the beginning of a noun phrase. Prepositional phrase: Both languages use prepositions (not postpositions) for introducing various complements. Coordinated phrase: Both have a coordina-tion conjunction in penultimate position and both use commas as separators between coordinates. 3.3 Morphology In both languages, nouns and verbs are marked morphologically for singular/plural. In addition, personal pronoun forms differ based not only on number and person, but also on grammatical function and gender. This last similarity facilitat-ed adapting pronominalisation. 4 Adaptations for French The rules for each processing level are encoded in separate modules for each language. The fol-lowing adaptations were made for French by adding syntactic and lexical features and encod-ing the corresponding rules in the French ver-sions of the grammar rules modules. 4.1 Syntax Verb phrase and clause: French negation has some similarities but also big differences with its English counterpart. It is usually expressed with not one but two adverbs (ne and pas), which come respectively before and after the first word of the verb group, as in example (1). Moreover, pas can be replaced by other negation auxiliaries to specify a different kind of negation, as in (2). Finally, no negation auxiliary is used (only ne) when the sentence already carries another nega-tive element, for example a negative indefinite pronoun as in (3).  (1) il ne parle pas ?he does not speak? (2) il ne parle plus he not speaks more ?he does not speak anymore? (3) personne ne parle nobody not speaks ?nobody speaks? In French, some complement pronouns, in-stead of being placed after the verb as in the reg-ular SVO word order, are placed just before it. Furthermore, some of them sometimes take in that case a different form. The rules governing 
184
the acceptable combinations and sequencings of those complements that can be cliticised in this way are very precise. Examples (4) and (5) illus-trate this phenomenon. (4) il la leur r?f?re he her them refers ?he refers her to them? (5) il nous r?f?re ? eux  he us refers to them ?he refers us to them? The complexity of French past participle agreement is well known, particularly because it manifests itself mostly in written French. French verbs can have ?tre (to be) or avoir (to have) as auxiliaries in compound tenses. This influences whether the past participle agrees with the sub-ject (?tre) or the direct object if it is placed be-fore the past participle (avoir). Combined with clitic complement pronouns and relative clauses, among others, it can get very complex. In addi-tion, French past participles are inflected in gen-der and number, like adjectives. Noun phrase: In SimpleNLG, a noun phrase can have pre-modifiers and post-modifiers. Ad-jectives are by default considered pre-modifiers and everything else post-modifiers. In contrast, in French, most adjectives are placed after the noun, but some (the most common) are most fre-quently placed before the noun. In SimpleNLG-EnFr this is achieved by referring to an extra lex-ical feature. In addition, in French the determiner and ad-jectives agree with the noun in number and gen-der. Instead of adding a new mechanism to prop-agate relevant features of the noun phrase to where they are needed, as with subject-verb agreement in SimpleNLG, the solution imple-mented was to let the determiner and adjectives get themselves the information they needed from their parent constituent. This more flexible way of managing agreement is more amenable to multilingual realisation. Interrogative clause: A simple way of build-ing an interrogative sentence in French is to pre-pend the expression est-ce que (is it that), like in (6). This is what we chose. (6) est-ce que tu as mang??  is it that you have eaten? ?did you eat?? This kind of interrogative clause can be built in part by using the relative clause rules (see be-low). Relative clause: A mechanism for building relative clauses has been added to the French part of SimpleNLG-EnFr that has no direct equivalent 
in the English implementation. The phrase that must be replaced by a relative pronoun is speci-fied by setting a feature on the clause. This phrase will not appear in the realised clause. Even if this phrase was not present in the clause, it will still be used to choose a relative pronoun, which can be useful. The grammatical function of that phrase can in that case be set manually.  The resulting relative pronoun takes the place that is normally reserved for the complementiser. Its form is chosen according to two sources: the grammatical function and preposition, if any, of the phrase it replaces; and the person and gender of its antecedent (the noun or pronoun that the relative clause modifies). Examples (7), (8) and (9) illustrate this. (7) la tarte que tu as mang?e  the pie that.obj you have eaten.fem ?the pie that you ate? (8) la tarte qui a ?t? mang?e  the pie that.subj has been eaten.fem ?the pie that was eaten? (9) l?homme dont j?ai mang? la tarte  the man whose I have eaten the pie ?the man whose pie I ate? 4.2 Morphology Number and gender: French determiners and adjectives must be inflected in number and gen-der. Additionally, number and gender interact with each other in the inflection process. Verb tenses: Verb inflected forms are more varied in French than in English. In addition, French verbs are classified in three conjugation groups. The first group is comprised of the regu-lar verbs. The third group is a catchall category for miscellaneous irregular verbs. Several mor-phological rules govern the combination of the verb inflection morphemes. Detached form of personal pronouns: In French, personal pronouns are often cliticised (see subsection 5.1), but where they are not, they take a different form, which is called forme dis-jointe (detached form). See leur versus eux in examples (4) and (5). 4.3 Morphophonology The morphophonological level is a new pro-cessing level introduced in SimpleNLG-EnFr to account for a range of phenomena very common in French and other languages. They are best de-scribed using rules that use both morphological and phonological conditions. The only obvious example of this kind of rule in written English, which was included in the morphology module 
185
in SimpleNLG, is illustrated by examples (10) and (11). (10) a + book ? a book (11) a + apple ? an apple Here the morphological condition is the pres-ence of the indefinite singular determiner a and the phonological one is the presence of a vowel at the beginning of the next word. The morphology rules operate on one word at a time. The morphophonology rules may need to have access to adjacent words and to be applied after all inflection and derivation rules have been applied. This justifies a separate processing level. In SimpleNLG-EnFr, the morphophonological level is used mainly for external sandhi, i.e. phe-nomena occurring at word boundaries. Elision: In French some words have their last vowel elided when in front of a word beginning by a vowel or a so-called h aspir? (aspired h). Indeed, an extra lexical feature is needed for French words beginning with the letter h to know if that kind of rule applies. Note that the letter h itself is never pronounced in French. Examples (12) and (13) illustrate elision, while it does not occur in (14). (12) la + amiti? ? l?amiti? the friendship (13) le + homme ? l?homme the man (14) la + honte ? la honte the shame Liaison: Liaison is a phenomenon akin to eli-sion, except that it involves adding and/or replac-ing phonemes. Its ?goal? is to avoid contact be-tween the vowel at the end of some words and the beginning vowel of the next word. It is most-ly apparent in speech, although it sometimes has an effect in written French, as in (15). (15) le + beau + homme ? le bel homme the handsome man Prepositions: Some prepositions interact with definite determiners in French, as in (16). (16) ? + le ? au at the 5 Bilingual generation Building a bilingual realisation engine rather than just adapting SimpleNLG for unilingual French realisation was a design choice dictated mainly by practical considerations. Being able to use the same realisation engine (and thus the same API) for several or all target languages when developing a multilingual NLG application is convenient. In the case of English and French, 
this could be most useful when targeting Canadi-an or European populations, for example. In SimpleNLG-EnFr, bilingual generation is implemented by being able to determine dynami-cally the language of each processing unit: phrases for the syntax module, lexical units for the morphology module, etc. The factories used by the library?s user to create syntactic structure specifications and access or create lexical units each use a language-specific lexicon. Each pro-cessing module then chooses at realisation time which set of rules to apply to a given processing unit based on the language of its lexicon. Thus, sentences, phrases and words of different lan-guages can be mixed freely. 6 Conclusion A bilingual realisation engine for English and French was built. It took five months to com-plete, including the writing of a detailed French manual. Despite many internal changes, it retains almost the same API as the original. Future improvements could include enlarging the default lexicon and adding specialised lexi-cons for French, implementing a complete textu-al representation for numbers, and adapting the changes in SimpleNLG since version 4.2, like the XML realiser. More languages could be added to Sim-pleNLG-EnFr. However, it would perhaps be easier to include many languages if the grammar of each language could be specified in a common grammar formalism, instead of programmatically in the processing modules themselves. This would necessitate changing the architecture. In the process of developing SimpleNLG-EnFr, a great deal was learned about what kind of challenges multilingual realisation poses. A common grammatical ground must be found and exploited for the group of languages considered, which should not be too far apart in that respect. For the rest, care must be taken not to make too many assumptions about the inner workings of the grammar of each language. Indeed, every language has its own grammatical peculiarities.  Acknowledgments  We would like to thank the SimpleNLG team for having made available its source code. This work was supported by two Undergraduate Student Research Awards (USRA) from the Natural Sci-ences and Engineering Research Council of Can-ada (NSERC). 
186
References Marcel Bollmann. 2011. Adapting SimpleNLG to German. In Proceedings of the 13th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation (ENLG 2011), pages 133-138. CNRTL. CNRTL : Centre National de Ressources Textuelles et Lexicales ? Morphalou, button T?l?-charger Morphalou 2.0, [http://www.cnrtl.fr/lexiques/morphalou/] (consult-ed on 14 July 2011). Albert Gatt and Ehud Reiter. 2009. SimpleNLG: A realisation engine for practical applications. In Proceedings of the 12th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation (ENLG 2009), pages 90-93. Maurice Grevisse, (1993). Le bon usage, grammaire fran?aise, 12e ?dition refondue par Andr? Goosse, 8e tirage, ?ditions Duculot, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgique. Mohammed Issaoui Mansouri, (1996). Le Mansouris, tous les verbes usuels enti?rement conjugu?s et or-thographi?s. CAPT, ?diteurs, Montr?al, Canada. Minist?re de l'?ducation nationale, Direction de la Coop?ration avec la Communaut? et l'?tranger (France) (1959). Le fran?ais fondamental (1er Degr?), Publication de l'Institut P?dagogique Na-tional, Paris, France. Fran?ois Ters, Daniel Reichenbach and Georges Mayer. (1964). L'?chelle Dubois-Buyse d'ortho-graphe usuelle fran?aise. Messeiller. 
187
Proceedings of the 14th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation, pages 198?199,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
MIME- NLG Support for Complex and Unstable Pre-hospital
Emergencies
Anne H. Schneider Alasdair Mort Chris Mellish Ehud Reiter Phil Wilson
University of Aberdeen
{a.schneider, a.mort, c.mellish, e.reiter, p.wilson}@abdn.ac.uk
Pierre-Luc Vaudry
Universite? de Montre?al
vaudrypl@iro.umontreal.ca
Abstract
We present the first prototype of a han-
dover report generator developed for the
MIME (Managing Information in Medi-
cal Emergencies) project. NLG applica-
tions in the medical domain have been var-
ied but most are deployed in clinical situa-
tions. We develop a mobile device for pre-
hospital care which receives streamed sen-
sor data and user input, and converts these
into a handover report for paramedics.
1 Introduction
Natural Language Generation underlies many ap-
plications in the medical domain but most are em-
ployed under relatively predictable clinical situa-
tions. The MIME project employs a mobile de-
vice with novel lightweight sensors to improve
pre-hospital care service delivery. The term pre-
hospital care denotes the treatment delivered to
a patient before they arrive at hospital. Usu-
ally this entails paramedics and ambulance teams,
but it can also include a wide range of volun-
tary and professional care groups. Care for ru-
ral pre-hospital patients can sometimes be car-
ried out by volunteers from local communities:
Community First Responders (CFR). Their task is
to assess patients, perform potentially life-saving
first aid procedures and record medical observa-
tions whilst the ambulance clinicians are en-route.
These data are then handed over to the receiv-
ing ambulance team upon arrival. Because of
their time-critical nature, handover reports are of-
ten verbal and hence maybe incomplete or misun-
derstood.
MIME was inspired by the Babytalk BT-Nurse
system (Hunter et al, 2012), which generates shift
handover reports for nurses in a neonatal intensive
care unit. While BT-Nurse works with an exist-
ing clinical record system, which does not always
At 02:12, after RR remained fairly
constant around 30 bpm for 4 minutes,
high flow oxygen was applied, she took
her inhaler and RR decreased to 27
bpm. However, subsequently RR once
more remained fairly constant around
30 bpm for 8 minutes.
At 02:15 she was feeling faint.
At 02:15 the casualty was moved.
At 02:17 the casualty was once more
moved.
Figure 1: Part of the ?Treatment and Findings? for
an asthma scenario.
record all actions and observations which ideally
would be included in a report, in MIME the elec-
tronic record and user interface for acquiring ex-
actly the desired information are effectively de-
signed. This simplifies the NLG task, at the cost
of adding a new task (interface construction).
2 The MIME project
Pre-hospital care is especially challenging because
the environment in which it is delivered is inher-
ently unpredictable. The clinical condition of a
patient may have improved or deteriorated since
the original call for help. The unpredictability of
the environment at the scene of the call and the
minimal level of clinical training of the CFRs con-
tributes to the challenges presented to developers
of a mobile device for this situation. In particular,
the continuous capture of physiological data intro-
duces the problem that irrelevant material needs
to be suppressed in order not to overload the am-
bulance clinicians and hinder interpretation. The
generated reports must provide a quick overview
of the situation but at the same time be compre-
hensive. It is also vital that the format must en-
hance the readability, and the user-interface be
simple and intuitive in order to avoid what has
198
Figure 2: First hardware prototype of the MIME
project (GETAC Z710 tablet and Pulse Oxymeter
sensor).
been termed ?creeping featurism? (His and Potts,
2000), whereby option saturation hinders task per-
formance.
In a user centred development process we estab-
lished a structure for the handover reports. After
the demographic description of the casualty (i.e.
age and gender) and incident details that were re-
layed to the CFR by the ambulance control centre
two elements of generated text follow, the initial
assessment section and the treatment and findings
section. The initial assessment contains informa-
tion on the casualty that is gathered by the CFRs
before the sensors are applied including baseline
observation during the first minute after the ap-
plication of the sensors. The treatment and find-
ings section (Figure 1) is a report of the observa-
tions and actions of the CFRs while they attended
the casualty and waited for the ambulance to ar-
rive. This includes a paragraph that sums up the
condition of the patient at the time of handover.
There are three types of events included in the re-
port: discrete events (action and observation) and
continuous events (trends in sensor readings). Ac-
tions (e.g. applying oxygen) and observations (e.g.
the patient feels faint) have to be entered by the
CFR through an interface. Continuous events are
derived from the medical sensors: currently res-
piratory rate, blood oxygen saturation, and heart
rate are recorded. Since some events, especially
those that deviate from the norm are more impor-
tant than others (Hallett et al, 2006), in the docu-
ment planning stage we employ an algorithm that
decides which events are mentioned in the report
and in which order. This process is loosely based
on similar decision processes reported in (Hallett
et al, 2006) and (Portet et al, 2007).
3 Summary and Conclusion
We have developed a first prototype of the system
which uses simulated data to produce handover re-
ports. This runs on standard desktop PCs. For our
second prototype, which is currently being devel-
oped, we port the NLG algorithm onto a GETAC
Z710 tablet1 which has been chosen for it?s robust-
ness, capacitative touch screen, and long battery
life (Figure 2). Our research also includes the es-
tablishment of a connection between the tablet and
sensors, the recording of the incoming data stream
and the development of an interface for the tablet,
which can be used by the CFR to enter observa-
tions and actions taken or any other useful infor-
mation.
At the ENLG workshop we will present our first
hardware prototype alongside the desktop com-
puter version, highlighting the challenges that the
project faces in developing a handover report gen-
erator for pre-hospital care.
4 Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the RCUK dot.rural
Digital Economy Research Hub, University of Ab-
erdeen (Grant reference: EP/G066051/1)
References
C. Hallett, R. Power, and D. Scott. 2006. Summarisa-
tion and visualisation of e-Health data repositories.
In UK E-Science All-Hands Meeting, pages 18?21,
Nottingham, UK.
I. His and C. Potts. 2000. Studying the Evolution and
Enhancement of Software Features. In Proceedings
of the International Conference on Software Mainte-
nance, ICSM ?00, pages 143?151, Washington, DC,
USA.
J. Hunter, Y. Freer, A. Gatt, E. Reiter, S. Sripada, and
C Sykes. 2012. Automatic generation of natural
language nursing shift summaries in neonatal in-
tensive care: BT-Nurse. Artificial Intelligence in
Medicine, 56:157?172.
F. Portet, E. Reiter, J. Hunter, and S. Sripada. 2007.
Automatic generation of textual summaries from
neonatal intensive care data. In Proccedings of
the 11th Conference on Artificial Intelligence in
Medicine (AIME 07). LNCS, pages 227?236.
1http://en.getac.com/products/Z710/
Z710_overview.html
199
