Proceedings of the 14th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation, pages 193?197,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Towards NLG for Physiological Data Monitoring
with Body Area Networks
Hadi Banaee, Mobyen Uddin Ahmed and Amy Loutfi
Center for Applied Autonomous Sensor Systems
O?rebro University, Sweden
{hadi.banaee,mobyen.ahmed,amy.loutfi}@oru.se
Abstract
This position paper presents an on-going
work on a natural language generation
framework that is particularly tailored for
summary text generation from body area
networks. We present an overview of
the main challenges when considering this
type of sensor devices used for at home
monitoring of health parameters. This pa-
per describes the first steps towards the im-
plementation of a system which collects
information from heart rate and respira-
tion rate using a wearable sensor. The pa-
per further outlines the direction for future
work and in particular the challenges for
NLG in this application domain.
1 Introduction
Monitoring of physiological data using body area
networks (BAN) is becoming increasingly popular
as advances in sensor and wireless technology en-
able lightweight and low costs devices to be easily
deployed. This gives rise to applications in home
health monitoring and may be useful to promote
greater awareness of health and prevention for par-
ticular end user groups such as the elderly (Ahmed
et al, 2013). A challenge however, is the large vol-
umes of data which is produced as a result of wear-
able sensors. Furthermore, the data has a num-
ber of characteristics which currently make auto-
matic methods of data analysis particularly diffi-
cult. Such characteristics include the multivariate
nature of the data where several dependent vari-
ables are captured as well as the frequency of mea-
surements for which we still lack a general under-
standing of how particular physiological parame-
ters vary when measured continuously.
Recently many systems of health monitoring
sensors have been introduced which are designed
to perform massive and profound analysis in the
area of smart health monitoring systems (Baig
and Gholamhosseini, 2013). Also several research
have been done to show the applications and ef-
ficiency of data mining approaches in healthcare
fields (Yoo et al, 2012). Such progress in the
field would be suitable to combine with state of
the art in the NLG community. Examples of suit-
able NLG systems include the system proposed by
Reiter and Dale (2000) which suggested an archi-
tecture to detect and summarise happenings in the
input data, recognise the significance of informa-
tion and its compatibility to the user, and gener-
ate a text which shows this knowledge in an un-
derstandable way. A specific instantiation of this
system on clinical data is BabyTalk project, which
is generated summaries of the patient records in
various time scales for different end users (Portet
et al, 2009; Hunter et al, 2012). While these
works have made significant progress in the field,
this paper will outline some remaining challenges
that have yet to be addressed for physiological data
monitoring which are discussed in this work. The
paper will also present a first version of an NLG
system that has been used to produce summaries
of data collected with a body area network.
2 Challenges in Physiological Data
Monitoring with BAN
2.1 From Data Analysis to NLG
One of the main challenges in healthcare area is
how to analyse physiological data such that valu-
able information can help the end user. To have a
meaningful analysis of input signals, preprocess-
ing the data is clearly an important step. This
is especially true for wearable sensors where the
signals can be noisy and contain artifacts in the
recorded data. Another key challenge in physio-
logical data monitoring is mapping from the many
data analysis approaches to NLG. For example
finding hidden layers of information with unsuper-
193
vised mining methods will be enable the system to
make a representation of data which is not pro-
ducible by human analysis alone. However, do-
main rules and expert knowledge are important in
order to consider a priori information in the data
analysis. Further external variables (such as med-
ication, food, stress) may also be considered in a
supervised analysis of the data. Therefore, there is
a challenge to balance between data driven tech-
niques that are able to find intrinsic patterns in the
data and knowledge driven techniques which take
into account contextual information.
2.2 End User / Content
A basic issue in any design of a NLG system is un-
derstanding the audience of the generated text. For
health monitoring used e.g. at home this issue is
highly relevant as a variety of people with diverse
backgrounds may use a system. For example, a
physician should have an interpretation using spe-
cial terms, in contrast for a lay user where infor-
mation should be presented in a simple way. For
instance, for a decreasing trend in heart rate lower
than defined values, the constructed message for
the doctor could be: ?There is a Bradycardia at
. . . ?. But for the patient itself it could be just:
?Your heart rate was low at . . . ?. It is also im-
portant to note that the generated text for the same
user in various situations should also differ. For
instance a high heart rate at night presents a dif-
ferent situation than having a high heart rate dur-
ing the high levels of activity. Consequently, all
the modules in NLG systems (data analysis, docu-
ment planning, etc.) need to consider these aspects
related to the end user.
2.3 Personalisation / Subject Profiling
Personalisation differs from context awareness
and is effective to generate messages adapted to
the personalised profile of each subject. One pro-
file for each subject is a collection of information
that would be categorised to: metadata of the per-
son (such as age, weight, sex, etc.), the history of
his/her signals treatments and the extracted fea-
tures such as statistical information, trends, pat-
terns etc. This profiling enables the system to per-
sonalise the generated messages. Without profil-
ing, the represented information will be shallow.
For instance, two healthy subjects may have dif-
ferent baseline values. Deviations from the base-
line may be more important to detect than thresh-
old detection. So, one normal pattern for one in-
Document Planning
Data Analysis
Single / Batch 
Measurement
Uni / Multi parameter 
Analysis
Event-based 
Message Handler
Personal 
Profiles
-metadata
-events
-patterns
- ...
Text
Summary-based 
Message Handler
Ontology
Microplanning and Realisation
Data Preprocessing
Expert 
Knowledge
Global info. 
Message Handler
R
a
n
k
i
n
g
 
F
u
n
c
t
i
o
n
s
Figure 1: System architecture of text generation from phys-
iological data.
dividual could be an outlier for another individual
considering his/her profile.
3 System Architecture
In this section we outline a proposed system ar-
chitecture, which is presented in Figure 1. So far
the handling of the single and batch measurements
and the data analysis have been implemented as
well as first version of the document planning. For
microplanning and realisation modules, we em-
ployed the same ideas in NLG system proposed
by Reiter and Dale (2000).
3.1 Data Collection
By using wearable sensor, the system is able to
record continuous values of health parameters si-
multaneously. To test the architecture, more than
300 hours data for two successive weeks have been
collected using a wearable sensor called Zephyr
(2013), which records several vital signs such as
heart rate, respiration, temperature, posture, activ-
ity, and ECG data. In this work we have primar-
ily considered two parameters, heart rate (HR) and
respiration rate (RR) in the generated examples.
3.2 Input Measurements
To cover both short-term and long-term healthcare
monitoring, this system is designed to support two
different channels of input data. The first channel
is called single measurement channel which is a
continuous recorded data record. Figure 2 shows
an example of a single measurement. In the fig-
ure, the data has been recorded for nine continuous
hours of heart rate and respiration data which cap-
ture health parameters during the sequential activi-
194
20:30 21:45 23:00 00:15 01:30 02:45 04:00 05:15 06:30 07:450
2040
6080
100120
140160
180200
220
HH:MM
bpm
 
 
HRRR
Watching TVExercising WalkingWalking Sleeping
Figure 2: An example of single measurement, 13 hours of
heart rate (HR) and respiration rate (RR).
40
80 Mar 13
 
 
40
80 Mar 14
40
80 Mar 15
40
80 Mar 16
40
80 Mar 18
0 h 1 h 2 h 3 h 4 h 5 h 640
80
Hours
bpm
Mar 19
Figure 3: An example of batch measurement included heart
rate for 6 nights.
ties such as exercising, walking, watching TV, and
sleeping. To have a long view of health parame-
ters, the system is also designed to analyse a batch
of measurements. Batch measurements are sets of
single measurements. Figure 3 presents an exam-
ple of a batch of measurements that contain all the
readings during the night for a one week period.
This kind of input data allows the system to make a
relation between longitudinal parameters and can
represent a summary of whole the dataset.
3.3 Data Analysis
To generate a robust text from the health param-
eters, the data analysis module extracts the infor-
mative knowledge from the numeric raw data. The
aim of data analysis module is to detect and repre-
sent happenings of the input signals. The primary
step to analyse the measurements is denoising and
removing artifacts from the raw data. In this work,
by using expert knowledge for each health param-
eter, the artifact values are removed. Meanwhile,
to reduce the noise in the recorded data, a series of
smoothing functions (wavelet transforms and lin-
ear regression (Loader, 2012)) have been applied.
In this framework an event based trend detec-
tion algorithm based on piecewise linear segmen-
tation methods (Keogh et al, 2003) for the time
series has been used. In addition, general statistics
are extracted from the data such as mean, mode,
frequency of occurrence etc. that are fed into the
summary based message handler. As an ongoing
work, the system will be able to recognise mean-
ingful patterns, motifs, discords, and also deter-
mine fluctuation portions among the data. Also for
multi-parameter records, the input signals would
be analysed simultaneously to detect patterns and
events in the data. Therefore the particular novelty
of the approach beyond other physiological data
analysis is the use of trend detection.
3.4 Document Planning
Document planning is responsible to determine
which messages should appear, how they should
be combined and finally, how they should be ar-
ranged as paragraphs in the text. The messages
in this system are not necessarily limited to de-
scribing events. Rather, the extracted information
from the data analysis can be categorised into one
of three types of messages: global information,
event based, and summary based messages. For
each type of message category there is a separate
ranking function for assessing the significance of
messages for communicating in the text. The or-
der of messages in the final text is a function based
on (1) how much each message is important (value
of the ranking function for each message) (2) the
extracted relations and dependencies between the
detected events. The output of document plan-
ning module is a set of messages which are organ-
ised for microplanning and realisation. Document
planning contains both event based and summary
based messages as described below.
Event based Message Handler: Most of the
information from the data analysis module are cat-
egorised as events. Event in this system is an ex-
tracted information which happens in a specific
time period and can be described by its attributes.
Detected trends, patterns, and outliers and also
identified relations in all kinds of data analysis
(single/batch measurement or uni/multi parame-
ter) are able to be represented as events in the text.
The main tasks of the event based message handler
are to determine the content of events, construct
and combine corresponding messages and their re-
lations, and order them based on a risk function.
195
The risk function is subordinate to the features of
the event and also expert knowledge to determine
how much this event is important.
Summary based Message Handler: Linguis-
tic summarisation of the extracted knowledge data
is a significant purpose of summary based message
handler. With inspiration from the works done
by Zadeh (2002) and Kacprzyk et. al (2008), we
represent the summary based information consid-
ering the possible combination of conditions for
the summary of data. The proposed system uses
fuzzy membership function to map the numeric
data into the symbolic vocabularies. For instance
to summarise the treatments of heart rate during
all nights of one week in linguistic form, we de-
fine a fuzzy function to identify the proper range
of low/medium/high heart rate level or specify a
proper prototype for representing the changes such
as steadily/sharply or fluctuated/constant. Here,
the expert knowledge helps to determine this task.
The validity of these messages is measured by a
defined formula in linguistic fuzzy systems called
truth function which shows the probability of pre-
cision for each message. The system uses this
indicator as a ranking function to choose most
important messages for text. The main tasks of
summary based message handler are: determining
the content of the summaries, constructing corre-
sponding messages, and ordering them based on
the truth function to be appeared in the final text.
The summary based message handler is not con-
sidered in previous work in this domain.
3.5 Sample Output
The implemented interface is shown in Figure 4
which is able to adapt the generated text with fea-
tures such as health parameters, end user, mes-
sage handler etc.. Currently our NLG system pro-
vides the following output for recorded signals
which covers global information and trend detec-
tion messages. Some instances of generated text
are shown, below. The first portion of messages in
each text is global information which includes ba-
sic statistical features related to the input signals.
An example of these messages for an input data is:
?This measurement is 19 hours and 28 minutes which started
at 23:12:18 on February 13th and finished at 18:41:08 on the
next day.?
?The average of heart rate was 61 bpm. However most of the
time it was between 44 and 59 bpm. The average of respira-
tion rate was 19 bpm, and it was between 15 and 25 bpm.?
Figure 4: A screenshot of the implemented interface.
Regarding to the event based messages, an ex-
ample of the output text extracted from the trend
detection algorithm is:
?Between 6:43 and 7:32, the heart rate suddenly increased
from 50 to 108 and it steadily decreased from 90 to 55 be-
tween 11:58 and 17:21.?
4 Future Work
So far we have described the challenges and the
basic system architecture that has been imple-
mented. In this section we outline a number of
sample outputs intended for future work which
captures e.g. multivariate data and batch of mea-
surement. We foresee that there is a non-trivial in-
teraction between the event message handler and
the summary message handler. This will be fur-
ther investigated in future work.
Samples for single measurement:
?Since 9:00 for half an hour, when respiration rate became
very fluctuated, heart rate steadily increased to 98.?
?Among all high levels of heart rate, much more than half are
very fluctuated.?
Samples for batch of measurements:
?During most of the exercises in the last weeks, respiration
rate had a medium level.?
?During most of the nights, when your heart rate was low,
your respiration rate was a little bit fluctuated.?
Other messages could consider the comparison
between the history of the subject and his/her cur-
rent measurement to report personalised unusual
events e.g.:
?Last night, during the first few hours of sleep, your heart
rate was normal, but it fluctuated much more compared to
the similar times in previous nights.?
In this work we have briefly presented a pro-
posed NLG system that is suitable for summaris-
ing data from physiological sensors using natural
language representation rate. The first steps to-
wards an integrated system have been made and
an outline of the proposed system has been given.
196
References
Mobyen U. Ahmed, Hadi Banaee, and Amy Loutfi.
2013. Health monitoring for elderly: an applica-
tion using case-based reasoning and cluster analysis.
Journal of ISRN Artificial Intelligence, vol. 2013, 11
pages.
Mirza M. Baig and Hamid Gholamhosseini. 2013.
Smart health monitoring systems: an overview of
design and modeling. Journal of Medical Systems,
37(2):1?14.
James Hunter, Yvonne Freer, Albert Gatt, Ehud Re-
iter, Somayajulu Sripada, and Cindy Sykes. 2012.
Automatic generation of natural language nurs-
ing shift summaries in neonatal intensive care:
BT-Nurse. Journal of Artificial Intelligence in
Medicine, 56(3):157?172.
Janusz Kacprzyk, Anna Wilbik, and Slawomir
Zadroz?ny. 2008. Linguistic summarization of time
series using a fuzzy quantifier driven aggregation.
Fuzzy Sets and Systems, 159(12):1485?1499.
Eamonn J. Keogh, Selina Chu, David Hart, and
Michael Pazzani. 2003. Segmenting time series:
a survey and novel approach. Data Mining In Time
Series Databases, 57:1?22.
Catherine Loader. 2012. Smoothing: local regression
techniques. Springer Handbooks of Computational
Statistics, 571-596.
Franois Portet, Ehud Reiter, Albert Gatt, Jim Hunter,
Somayajulu Sripada, Yvonne Freer, and Cindy
Sykes. 2009. Automatic generation of textual sum-
maries from neonatal intensive care data. Journal of
Artificial Intelligence, 173:789?816.
Ehud Reiter and Robert Dale. 2000. Building natural
language generation systems. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge, UK.
Illhoi Yoo, Patricia Alafaireet, Miroslav Marinov, Keila
Pena-Hernandez, Rajitha Gopidi, Jia-Fu Chang, and
Lei Hua. 2012. Data mining in healthcare and
biomedicine: a survey of the literature. Journal of
Medical Systems, 36(4):2431?2448.
Lotfi A. Zadeh. 2002. A prototype centered approach
to adding deduction capabilities to search engines.
Annual Meeting of the North American Fuzzy In-
formation Processing Society, (NAFIPS 2002) 523?
525.
Zephyr. http://www.zephyr-technology.com, Accessed
April 10, 2013.
197
Proceedings of the 8th International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 11?15,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 19-21 June 2014. c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
Using Conceptual Spaces to Model Domain Knowledge
in Data-to-Text Systems
Hadi Banaee and Amy Loutfi
Center for Applied Autonomous Sensor Systems
O?rebro University
O?rebro, Sweden
{hadi.banaee, amy.loutfi}@oru.se
Abstract
This position paper introduces the utility
of the conceptual spaces theory to concep-
tualise the acquired knowledge in data-to-
text systems. A use case of the proposed
method is presented for text generation
systems dealing with sensor data. Mod-
elling information in a conceptual space
exploits a spatial representation of domain
knowledge in order to perceive unexpected
observations. This ongoing work aims
to apply conceptual spaces in NLG for
grounding numeric information into the
symbolic representation and confronting
the important step of acquiring adequate
knowledge in data-to-text systems.
1 Introduction
Knowledge acquisition (KA) is important for
building natural language generation (NLG) sys-
tems. Two KA techniques including corpus-based
KA and structured expert-oriented KA have been
previously studied for NLG systems in (Reiter
et al., 2003) to improve the quality of acquired
knowledge. Both techniques use rule-based ap-
proaches in order to enrich the similarities be-
tween generated texts and natural human-written
texts. An important class of NLG frameworks
which use a rule-based approach is data-to-text
systems where a linguistic summarisation of nu-
meric data is produced. The main architecture of
data-to-text systems has been introduced by Reiter
(2007) which includes the following stages: signal
analysis, data interpretation, document planning,
microplanning and realisation. Domain knowl-
edge for these systems is formalised as a taxon-
omy or an ontology of information. In a data-to-
text architecture, all the stages are using the pro-
vided taxonomy. In particular, the signal analysis
stage extracts the information that is determined
in taxonomies such as simple patterns, events, and
trends. Also, the data interpretation stage abstracts
information into the symbolic messages using the
defined taxonomies.
Most recent data-to-text frameworks have been
developed using Reiter?s architecture with the ad-
dition of providing the taxonomies or ontologies
corresponding to the domain knowledge. For in-
stance, the work on summarising the gas turbine
time series (Yu et al., 2007) has used expert knowl-
edge to provide a taxonomy of the primitive pat-
terns (i.e. spikes, steps, oscillations). Similarly,
the systems related to the Babytalk project (Portet
et al., 2009; Gatt et al., 2009; Hunter et al.,
2012) have stored medically known observation
(e.g. bradycardia) in local ontologies. In order to
avoid generating ambiguous messages, these sys-
tems simplify the stored information in the tax-
onomies by using only the primitive changes in-
teresting for the end users. The core of such sys-
tems is still based on this fact - that the content of
the generated text is dependent on the richness of
the domain knowledge in the provided taxonomies
which are usually bounded by expert rules. This
organised domain knowledge is usually an inflexi-
ble input to the framework which restricts the out-
put of the stages in data-to-text architecture. For
instance, the taxonomy in (Yu et al., 2007) does
not allow the system to represent unexpected ob-
servations (e.g. wave or burst) out of the prede-
fined domain knowledge. Likewise, in the medical
domain, an unknown physiological pattern will be
ignored if it does not have a corresponding entity
in the provided ontology by expert. This limitation
in data-to-text systems reveals the necessity of re-
organising domain knowledge in order to span un-
seen information across the data.
This position paper introduces a new approach,
inspired by the conceptual spaces theory, to model
information into a set of concepts that can be used
by data-to-text systems. The conceptual spaces
11
theory creates a spatial model of concepts that rep-
resents knowledge or information. This theory
presents a promising alternative to modelling the
domain knowledge in taxonomies or ontologies,
particularly when a data-driven analysis is to be
captured in natural language. This paper outlines
the notion of conceptual spaces and illustrates how
it can be used in a use case. Section 2 reviews
the theory of conceptual spaces and its notions.
Section 3 presents the approach for applying the
conceptual spaces in NLG frameworks. In Section
4, a simple application of the proposed method is
shown. Finally, we address the challenges and out-
line our plans for future work.
2 On the Theory of Conceptual Spaces
The idea of conceptual spaces has been developed
by Ga?rdenfors (2000) as a framework to repre-
sent knowledge at the conceptual level. A concep-
tual space is formed in geometrical or topological
structures as a set of quality dimensions describ-
ing the attributes of information to be represented.
For instance, a conceptual space might comprise
dimensions such as width, weight, or saltiness. A
domain is represented to be a set of interdepen-
dent dimensions which cannot logically be sepa-
rated in a perceptual space. A typical example of
a domain is ?colour? which can be defined through
multi dimensions like hue, saturation, and bright-
ness. Properties are the convex regions in a sin-
gle domain describing the particular attributes of
the domain. As an example, ?green? is a property
corresponding to a region in the colour domain
(Fig. 1, right). In natural language, properties are
mostly associated with adjectives in a particular
domain. A conceptual space contains a member-
ship distance measure for each property within the
domains which represents the regions occupied by
the property and allows to depict the notion of sim-
ilarity (Rickard et al., 2007).
Concepts are formed as regions in a conceptual
space. In particular, a concept is represented as a
set of related properties which might cover multi-
ple domains together with information how these
domains are correlated. For instance, the concept
of ?apple? can be represented as regions in colour,
size and taste domains (Fig. 1). The representation
of concepts in space contains an assignment of
weights to the domains or dimensions, in order to
distinguish between similar concepts (Ga?rdenfors,
2004). In natural languages, concepts often cor-
Colour 
Domain
Taste
Size
hue
saturation
brightness
red
white
black
green
medi um
sweet-sour
g
r
e
e
n
Figure 1: A typical example of a conceptual space to rep-
resent ?apple? concept.
respond to nouns or describe verbs when time is
involved as a dimension (Rickard et al., 2007).
The most representative instance of a concept is its
prototypical member which is represented as an n-
dimensional point in the concepts region. The con-
ceptual space can be geometrically divided (e.g.
using Voronoi tessellation (Ga?rdenfors, 2004)) to
a set of categories corresponding to the prototypi-
cal members. Objects (such as instances, entities,
or observations) in a conceptual space are identi-
fied in the concept regions which characterised as
vectors of quality values. For example, a particular
instance of ?apple? is depicted in Fig. 1 as a vec-
tor of properties <green, medium, sweet?sour>.
An object contains a property depending on the
nearness of its point to the defined region of the
property. This notion leads to have a similarity
measure within a domain to identify the proper-
ties of objects. Similarity is an essential notion in
any conceptual space framework which is defined
on individual domains. The geometrical represen-
tation of conceptual spaces provides the ability of
using distance measures, which is missed in purely
symbolic representations, to consider the similar-
ity of concepts and instances.
3 Proposed Approach: Conceptual
Spaces for Data-to-Text Systems
This section describes the usage of conceptual
spaces for modelling numeric knowledge as con-
cepts into a spatial representation. The proposed
approach shows how to use conceptual space the-
ory to reorganise the predefined taxonomies into
a set of concepts in order to represent unexpected
patterns. The idea consists of two phases, con-
structing a conceptual space corresponding to the
taxonomy, and enhancing the regions in the space
based on new observations. The general steps of
the proposed approach are described as follows:
12
Step 1: Build the required taxonomy of ob-
servations and patterns in the same way as tradi-
tional data-to-text systems in order to provide a set
of primitive information requirements using the
expert-oriented, domain, or corpus-based knowl-
edge. Primitive entities from these taxonomy will
be the n-dimensional vectors of concepts in con-
ceptual space.
Step 2: Initialise a conceptual space and de-
termine its components, including quality dimen-
sions, domains, and concepts corresponding to the
domain knowledge and the context of data. Us-
ing similarity measures on the determined dimen-
sions, the model is able to define the geometrical
distance between each pair of vectors and iden-
tify the nearest concept for any point in space. By
defining the applicable domains and dimensions,
the conceptual space is able to characterise a vast
range of interesting concepts, which may not be
similar to the provided entities.
Step 3: Specify the ontological instances gath-
ered in step one as concepts regions. This step
grounds the primitive observations to a set of pro-
totypical members as n-dimensional vectors in the
created conceptual space. Also the space would
be classified into a set of categories presenting the
properties of the prototypical members. The main
contribution of this approach is based on the fact -
that by providing the semantic information as geo-
metrical vectors, the model is spanned to concep-
tualise the information categories which enables
calculating the similarities between knowledge en-
tities like new (non-primitive) extracted patterns as
new vectors in the space. However, a new entity
could be 1) close to an existing prototypical mem-
ber and placed in its geometrical category, or 2) an
anomalous point and placed as a new prototype in
the space.
Step 4: Rearrange the conceptual categories
corresponding to the prototypical members by
adding new instances to the model as new vec-
tor points. The symbolic properties of prototyp-
ical members in space are used to describe novel
properties of unknown entities. When a new ob-
servation appears in space as a vector, it leads to
reorganise the boundaries of concepts regions re-
lated to the new inserted member. The expanded
space will provide more descriptive regions for un-
considered entities. It is notable that the provided
domains and dimensions enables the conceptual
space to grow with new entities which are event
~~~~~
~~~~
~~~~
~~~~~
~~~~~
~~~~
~~~~
~~~~
Ontological 
Patterns 
Conceptual Space
Data Interpretation
Microplanning and 
Realisation
Document Planning
Input Data
Text
Signal analysis
Figure 2: The conceptual space in data-to-text architecture
as an alternative for ontological patterns.
sans association with existing categories.
Different stages of data-to-text architecture can
be connected to the built conceptual space instead
of their relations to the ontology. Specifically, pat-
tern discovery in the signal analysis stage does not
need to be limited to rules and domain constraints.
Data-to-text approaches which use ontologies
for signal processing are able to apply probabilis-
tic or fuzzy processes to map the patterns of data
into the ?most likely? concepts in ontology. How-
ever, one advantage of the proposed approach is
that enables the system to represent new concepts
that are non-relatively deviant cases, as well as
covering intermediate patterns. So, any extracted
information from data can be formalised in the
conceptual space and then be characterised in a
symbolic representation. Another advantage of
this model is that the conceptual space assists the
system to enrich the quality of represented mes-
sages in the final text with considering unseen, but
interesting information for the end users. Fig. 2
depicts the conceptual space in relation with the
stages of the data-to-text architecture.
4 Use Case: From Data Streams to
Conceptual Representation
Knowledge extraction in data streams exploits the
most informative observations (e.g. patterns and
events) through the data (Rajaraman et al., 2011).
In most of data-to-text systems, much attention
has been given to the sensor data as the best indica-
tor of data streams (e.g. weather sensor channels,
gas turbine time series, and physiological data in
body area networks). A robust text generation sys-
tem for sensor data needs to provide a comprehen-
sive information structure in order to summarise
numeric measurements. Here, we explain how the
proposed approach can apply to model the defined
taxonomies in sensor data applications, particu-
larly for gas turbine time series (Yu et al., 2007)
13
and neonatal intensive care data (Gatt et al., 2009).
The main challenge here is the definition of con-
cepts and quality dimensions from non-sensible
observations in time series data. However, a pre-
liminary model is introduced as follows:
Based on the acquired knowledge in both sys-
tems, the patterns are categorised to 1) primi-
tive disturbance shapes: spikes, steps, and oscil-
lations, or 2) partial trends: rise, fall, and vary-
ing. These observations are associated with a set
of attributes and descriptions for their magnitude,
direction and/or speed (e.g. downward, upward,
or rapidly, normally, etc.). A typical demonstra-
tion of taxonomies/ontologies in traditional data-
to-text systems dealing with sensor data has been
shown in Fig. 3-a. Our method exploits these
structures to build an applicable conceptual space
related to the acquired knowledge. It is worth not-
ing that building the components of the concep-
tual spaces for different sensor data in other con-
texts would differ. To cover the observations in
time series, two domains are defined: shape and
trend domains. For the shape domain, the rules be-
hind the definition of primitive events lead to de-
termine quality dimensions. For instance, ?spike?
is defined as ?small time interval with almost same
start and end, but big difference between max and
min values?. So, the spike concept can be char-
acterised in the shape domain by quality dimen-
sions: time interval (?t), start-end range (?se),
and min-max range (?mm). The prototypical
member of spike concept can be represented as
a vector of properties: v1:<short ?t, small ?se,
big ?mm>. Same dimensions can describe the
steps and oscillations, shown in Fig. 3-b (top). For
the trend domain, finding descriptive dimensions
and properties is dependent on the selected fea-
tures in the trend detection process (Banaee et al.,
2013). Here, the provided quality dimensions for
the trend domain include: trend orientation (?),
and trend duration (?d). As an example, ?sud-
den rise? concept can be represented as a region
in the trend domain with a prototypical member
vector v2:<positive sharp ?, short ?d>, shown in
Fig. 3-b (bottom). The complex concepts can be
spanned to multi domains with their properties re-
gions. For instance, ?rapid upward spike? pattern
is definable as a region in space, spanned in both
shape and trend domains, which its representative
vector has five property values in all dimensions
like: v3:<v1, v2>.
se
t
Spike
Step
Oscillation
mm
b
i
g
s
m
a
l
l
l
o
n
g
s
h
o
r
t
SKaSe 
Domain
s
h
o
r
t
t
o
o
l
o
n
g
s
h
a
r
S
g
r
a
d
u
a
l
s
t
e
a
d
\
l
o
n
g
Sudden rise
Slow decay
stead\long! ? ? Normal decrease?
G
>@
TrenG 
Domain
5ising
suGGen rise
graGual rise
?  
'eca\
sloZ Geca\

? 
b
ig
s
m
a
ll
a Taxonomy and 2ntology oI Patterns
E &onceptual Space SKape and Trend domains
SpiNe
Step
Oscillation
GoZnZarG upZarG
sKarp steaG\
Figure 3: A conceptual space proposed for modelling do-
main knowledge in sensor data. a) Taxonomy and ontology
of patterns, b) Shape domain and trend domain.
This modelling has an effect on signal analysing
in that any unseen event and trend can be extracted
and represented by finding the nearest prototypical
instances in the corresponding vector space. Fig.
3-b (bottom) depicts an example of two points rep-
resented ?sudden rise? and ?slow decay? trends in
the space. The location of a new instance in space,
e.g. <steady, long> is computable by calculating
geometrical distances of their properties, and con-
sequently the corresponding descriptive symbols
can be inferred as ?normal decrease?.
This use case focuses on event-based observa-
tions based on the shapes and trends of patterns in
sensor data. Other contexts may be interested to
represent other observations like repetitive rules,
motifs and unexpected trends which need partic-
ular studies on how to model these issues in con-
ceptual spaces and capture their properties.
14
5 Discussion and Conclusion
This position paper has presented the notion of
conceptual spaces as an alternative approach to
modelling domain knowledge in data-to-text sys-
tems. The next obvious steps are to use conceptual
spaces in a NLG framework and experimentally
validate their suitability for capturing data-driven
events, patterns, etc. This paper has attempted to
motivate the use of conceptual spaces in order to
cope with information which cannot be accurately
modelled by experts. Still, however, some remain-
ing challenges are to be addressed. One challenge
is determining a comprehensive set of domains
and quality dimensions representing the acquired
knowledge in a conceptual space. Another chal-
lenge is grounding concepts to linguistic descrip-
tion in order to provide a thorough symbolic de-
scription of quantitative vectors in the space. A
further challenge is lexicalisation in modelling the
conceptual spaces, which is related to choosing ac-
curate words for the conceptual regions regarding
to the semantic similarities for properties of the
concepts, without using expert knowledge.
Acknowledgments
The authors of this work are partially supported by
SAAPHO project: Secure Active Aging: Partici-
pation and Health for the Old (AAL-2010-3-035).
References
Ehud Reiter, Somayajulu G. Sripada, and Roma
Robertson. 2003. Acquiring Correct Knowledge for
Natural Language Generation. Journal of Artificial
Intelligence Research, 18:491?516.
Ehud Reiter. 2007. An architecture for data-to-text
systems. ENLG?11: the Eleventh European Work-
shop on Natural Language Generation, 97?104.
Jin Yu, Ehud Reiter, Jim Hunter, and Chris Mellish.
2007. Choosing the content of textual summaries of
large time-series data sets. Natural Language Engi-
neering, 13(1):25?49.
Franc?ois Portet, Ehud Reiter, Albert Gatt, Jim Hunter,
Somayajulu Sripada, Yvonne Freer, and Cindy
Sykes. 2009. Automatic generation of textual sum-
maries from neonatal intensive care data. Artificial
Intelligence, 173(7):789?816.
Albert Gatt, Franc?ois Portet, Ehud Reiter, Jim Hunter,
Saad Mahamood, Wendy Moncur, and Somayajulu
Sripada. 2009. From data to text in the neonatal
intensive care unit: Using NLG technology for deci-
sion support and information management. AI Com-
munications, 22(3):153?186.
James Hunter, Yvonne Freer, Albert Gatt, Ehud Reiter,
Somayajulu Sripada, and Cindy Sykes. 2012. Au-
tomatic generation of natural language nursing shift
summaries in neonatal intensive care: BT-Nurse.
Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, 56(3):157?172.
Peter Ga?rdenfors. 2000. Conceptual Spaces: The Ge-
ometry of Thought. MIT Press.Cambridge, MA.
John T. Rickard, Janet Aisbett, and Greg Gibbon.
2007. Reformulation of the theory of conceptual
spaces. Information Sciences, 177(21):4539?4565
Peter Ga?rdenfors. 2004. Conceptual spaces as a frame-
work for knowledge representation. Mind and Mat-
ter, 2(2):9?27.
Anand Rajaraman, and Jeffrey D. Ullman 2011. Min-
ing of massive datasets. Cambridge University
Press.
H. Banaee, M. U. Ahmed, A. Loutfi 2013. A Frame-
work for Automatic Text Generation of Trends in
Physiological Time Series Data. SMC?13: IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Systems, Man, and Cy-
bernetics, 3876?3881.
15
