Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 104?108,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9, 2013 c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
The Karlsruhe Institute of Technology Translation Systems
for the WMT 2013
Eunah Cho, Thanh-Le Ha, Mohammed Mediani, Jan Niehues,
Teresa Herrmann, Isabel Slawik and Alex Waibel
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
Karlsruhe, Germany
firstname.lastname@kit.edu
Abstract
This paper describes the phrase-based
SMT systems developed for our partici-
pation in the WMT13 Shared Translation
Task. Translations for English?German
and English?French were generated us-
ing a phrase-based translation system
which is extended by additional models
such as bilingual, fine-grained part-of-
speech (POS) and automatic cluster lan-
guage models and discriminative word
lexica (DWL). In addition, we combined
reordering models on different sentence
abstraction levels.
1 Introduction
In this paper, we describe our systems for the
ACL 2013 Eighth Workshop on Statistical Ma-
chine Translation. We participated in the Shared
Translation Task and submitted translations for
English?German and English?French using a
phrase-based decoder with lattice input.
The paper is organized as follows: the next sec-
tion gives a detailed description of our systems
including all the models. The translation results
for all directions are presented afterwards and we
close with a conclusion.
2 System Description
The phrase table is based on a GIZA++ word
alignment for the French?English systems. For
the German?English systems we use a Discrim-
inative Word Alignment (DWA) as described in
Niehues and Vogel (2008). For every source
phrase only the top 10 translation options are con-
sidered during decoding. The SRILM Toolkit
(Stolcke, 2002) is used for training SRI language
models using Kneser-Ney smoothing.
For the word reordering between languages, we
used POS-based reordering models as described in
Section 4. In addition to it, tree-based reordering
model and lexicalized reordering were added for
German?English systems.
An in-house phrase-based decoder (Vogel,
2003) is used to perform translation. The trans-
lation was optimized using Minimum Error Rate
Training (MERT) as described in Venugopal et
al. (2005) towards better BLEU (Papineni et al,
2002) scores.
2.1 Data
The Europarl corpus (EPPS) and News Commen-
tary (NC) corpus were used for training our trans-
lation models. We trained language models for
each language on the monolingual part of the
training corpora as well as the News Shuffle and
the Gigaword corpora. The additional data such as
web-crawled corpus, UN and Giga corpora were
used after filtering. The filtering work for this data
is discussed in Section 3.
For the German?English systems we use the
news-test2010 set for tuning, while the news-
test2011 set is used for the French?English sys-
tems. For testing, news-test2012 set was used for
all systems.
2.2 Preprocessing
The training data is preprocessed prior to train-
ing the system. This includes normalizing special
symbols, smart-casing the first word of each sen-
tence and removing long sentences and sentence
pairs with length mismatch.
Compound splitting is applied to the German
part of the corpus of the German?English system
as described in Koehn and Knight (2003).
3 Filtering of Noisy Pairs
The filtering was applied on the corpora which
are found to be noisy. Namely, the Giga English-
French parallel corpus and the all the new web-
crawled data . The operation was performed using
104
an SVM classifier as in our past systems (Medi-
ani et al, 2011). For each pair, the required lexica
were extracted from Giza alignment of the corre-
sponding EPPS and NC corpora. Furthermore, for
the web-crawled data, higher precision classifiers
were trained by providing a larger number of neg-
ative examples to the classifier.
After filtering, we could still find English sen-
tences in the other part of the corpus. Therefore,
we performed a language identification (LID)-
based filtering afterwards (performed only on the
French-English corpora, in this participation).
4 Word Reordering
Word reordering was modeled based on POS se-
quences. For the German?English system, re-
ordering rules learned from syntactic parse trees
were used in addition.
4.1 POS-based Reordering Model
In order to train the POS-based reordering model,
probabilistic rules were learned based on the POS
tags from the TreeTagger (Schmid and Laws,
2008) of the training corpus and the alignment. As
described in Rottmann and Vogel (2007), continu-
ous reordering rules are extracted. This modeling
of short-range reorderings was extended so that it
can cover also long-range reorderings with non-
continuous rules (Niehues and Kolss, 2009), for
German?English systems.
4.2 Tree-based Reordering Model
In addition to the POS-based reordering, we
apply a tree-based reordering model for the
German?English translation to better address the
differences in word order between German and
English. We use the Stanford Parser (Rafferty and
Manning, 2008) to generate syntactic parse trees
for the source side of the training corpus. Then
we use the word alignment between source and
target language to learn rules on how to reorder
the constituents in a German source sentence to
make it match the English target sentence word or-
der better (Herrmann et al, 2013). The POS-based
and tree-based reordering rules are applied to each
input sentence. The resulting reordered sentence
variants as well as the original sentence order are
encoded in a word lattice. The lattice is then used
as input to the decoder.
4.3 Lexicalized Reordering
The lexicalized reordering model stores the re-
ordering probabilities for each phrase pair. Pos-
sible reordering orientations at the incoming and
outgoing phrase boundaries are monotone, swap
or discontinuous. With the POS- and tree-based
reordering word lattices encode different reorder-
ing variants. In order to apply the lexicalized re-
ordering model, we store the original position of
each word in the lattice. At each phrase boundary
at the end, the reordering orientation with respect
to the original position of the words is checked.
The probability for the respective orientation is in-
cluded as an additional score.
5 Translation Models
In addition to the models used in the baseline sys-
tem described above, we conducted experiments
including additional models that enhance trans-
lation quality by introducing alternative or addi-
tional information into the translation modeling
process.
5.1 Bilingual Language Model
During the decoding the source sentence is seg-
mented so that the best combination of phrases
which maximizes the scores is available. How-
ever, this causes some loss of context information
at the phrase boundaries. In order to make bilin-
gual context available, we use a bilingual language
model (Niehues et al, 2011). In the bilingual lan-
guage model, each token consists of a target word
and all source words it is aligned to.
5.2 Discriminative Word Lexicon
Mauser et al (2009) introduced the Discriminative
Word Lexicon (DWL) into phrase-based machine
translation. In this approach, a maximum entropy
model is used to determine the probability of using
a target word in the translation.
In this evaluation, we used two extensions to
this work as shown in (Niehues and Waibel, 2013).
First, we added additional features to model the
order of the source words better. Instead of rep-
resenting the source sentence as a bag-of-words,
we used a bag-of-n-grams. We used n-grams up to
the order of three and applied count filtering to the
features for higher order n-grams.
Furthermore, we created the training examples
differently in order to focus on addressing errors
of the other models of the phrase-based translation
105
system. We first translated the whole corpus with a
baseline system. Then we only used the words that
occur in the N-Best List and not in the reference as
negative examples instead of using all words that
do not occur in the reference.
5.3 Quasi-Morphological Operations
Because of the inflected characteristic of the
German language, we try to learn quasi-
morphological operations that change the lexi-
cal entry of a known word form to the out-of-
vocabulary (OOV) word form as described in
Niehues and Waibel (2012).
5.4 Phrase Table Adaptation
For the French?English systems, we built two
phrase tables; one trained with all data and the
other trained only with the EPPS and NC cor-
pora. This is due to the fact that Giga corpus is big
but noisy and EPPS and NC corpus are more reli-
able. The two models are combined log-linearly to
achieve the adaptation towards the cleaner corpora
as described in Niehues et al (2010).
6 Language Models
The 4-gram language models generated by the
SRILM toolkit are used as the main language
models for all of our systems. For the
English?French systems, we use a good quality
corpus as in-domain data to train in-domain lan-
guage models. Additionally, we apply the POS
and cluster language models in different systems.
For the German?English system, we build sepa-
rate language models using each corpus and com-
bine them linearly before the decoding by mini-
mizing the perplexity. Language models are inte-
grated into the translation system by a log-linear
combination and receive optimal weights during
tuning by the MERT.
6.1 POS Language Models
For the English?German system, we use the POS
language model, which is trained on the POS se-
quence of the target language. The POS tags are
generated using the RFTagger (Schmid and Laws,
2008) for German. The RFTagger generates fine-
grained tags which include person, gender, and
case information. The language model is trained
with up to 9-gram information, using the German
side of the parallel EPPS and NC corpus, as well
as the News Shuffle corpus.
6.2 Cluster Language Models
In order to use larger context information, we use
a cluster language model for all our systems. The
cluster language model is based on the idea shown
in Och (1999). Using the MKCLS algorithm, we
cluster the words in the corpus, given a number
of classes. Then words in the corpus are replaced
with their cluster IDs. Using these cluster IDs,
we train n-gram language models as well as a
phrase table with this additional factor of cluster
ID. Our submitted systems have diversed range of
the number of clusters as well as n-gram.
7 Results
Using the models described above we performed
several experiments leading finally to the systems
used for generating the translations submitted to
the workshop. The results are reported as case-
sensitive BLEU scores on one reference transla-
tion.
7.1 German?English
The experiments for the German to English trans-
lation system are summarized in Table 1. The
baseline system uses POS-based reordering, DWA
with lattice phrase extraction and language models
trained on the News Shuffle corpus and Giga cor-
pus separately. Then we added a 5-gram cluster
LM trained with 1,000 word classes. By adding a
language model using the filtered crawled data we
gained 0.3 BLEU on the test set. For this we com-
bined all language models linearly. The filtered
crawled data was also used to generate a phrase
table, which brought another improvement of 0.85
BLEU. Applying tree-based reordering improved
the BLEU score, and the performance had more
gain by adding the extended DWL, namely us-
ing both bag-of-ngrams and n-best lists. While
lexicalized reordering gave us a slight gain, we
added morphological operation and gained more
improvements.
7.2 English?German
The English to German baseline system uses POS-
based reordering and language models using par-
allel data (EPPS and NC) as shown in Table 2.
Gradual gains were achieved by changing align-
ment from GIZA++ to DWA, adding a bilingual
language model as well as a language model based
on the POS tokens. A 9-gram cluster-based lan-
guage model with 100 word classes gave us a
106
System Dev Test
Baseline 24.15 22.79
+ Cluster LM 24.18 22.84
+ Crawled Data LM (Comb.) 24.53 23.14
+ Crawled Data PT 25.38 23.99
+ Tree Rules 25.80 24.16
+ Extended DWL 25.59 24.54
+ Lexicalized Reordering 26.04 24.55
+ Morphological Operation - 24.62
Table 1: Translation results for German?English
small gain. Improving the reordering using lexi-
alized reordering gave us gain on the optimization
set. Using DWL let us have more improvements
on our test set. By using the filtered crawled data,
we gained a big improvement of 0.46 BLEU on
the test set. Then we extended the DWL with bag
of n-grams and n-best lists to achieve additional
improvements. Finally, the best system includes
lattices generated using tree rules.
System Dev Test
Baseline 17.00 16.24
+ DWA 17.27 16.53
+ Bilingual LM 17.27 16.59
+ POS LM 17.46 16.66
+ Cluster LM 17.49 16.68
+ Lexicalized Reordering 17.57 16.68
+ DWL 17.58 16.77
+ Crawled Data 18.43 17.23
+ Extended DWL 18.66 17.57
+ Tree Rules 18.63 17.70
Table 2: Translation results for English?German
7.3 French?English
Table 3 reports some remarkable improvements
as we combined several techniques on the
French?English direction. The baseline system
was trained on parallel corpora such as EPPS, NC
and Giga, while the language model was trained
on the English part of those corpora plus News
Shuffle. The newly presented web-crawled data
helps to achieve almost 0.6 BLEU points more
on test set. Adding bilingual language model and
cluster language model does not show a significant
impact. Further gains were achieved by the adap-
tation of in-domain data into general-theme phrase
table, bringing 0.15 BLEU better on the test set.
When we added the DWL feature, it notably im-
proves the system by 0.25 BLEU points, resulting
in our best system.
System Dev Test
Baseline 30.33 29.35
+ Crawled Data 30.59 29.93
+ Bilingual and Cluster LMs 30.67 30.01
+ In-Domain PT Adaptation 31.17 30.16
+ DWL 31.07 30.40
Table 3: Translation results for French?English
7.4 English?French
In the baseline system, EPPS, NC, Giga and News
Shuffle corpora are used for language modeling.
The big phrase tables tailored EPPC, NC and Giga
data. The system also uses short-range reordering
trained on EPPS and NC. Adding parallel and fil-
tered crawl data improves the system. It was fur-
ther enhanced by the integration of a 4-gram bilin-
gual language model. Moreover, the best config-
uration of 9-gram language model trained on 500
clusters of French texts gains 0.25 BLEU points
improvement. We also conducted phrase-table
adaptation from the general one into the domain
covered by EPPS and NC data and it helps as well.
The initial try-out with lexicalized reordering fea-
ture showed an improvement of 0.23 points on the
development set, but a surprising reduction on the
test set, thus we decided to take the system after
adaptation as our best English?French system.
System Dev Test
Baseline 30.50 27.77
+ Crawled Data 31.05 27.87
+ Bilingual LM 31.23 28.50
+ Cluster LM 31.58 28.75
+ In-Domain PT Adaptation 31.88 29.12
+ Lexicalized Reordering 32.11 28.98
Table 4: Translation results for English?French
8 Conclusions
We have presented the systems for our par-
ticipation in the WMT 2013 Evaluation for
English?German and English?French. All sys-
tems use a class-based language model as well
as a bilingual language model. Using a DWL
with source context improved the translation qual-
ity of English?German systems. Also for these
systems, we could improve even more with a
tree-based reordering model. Special handling
107
of OOV words improved German?English sys-
tem, while for the inverse direction the language
model with fine-grained POS tags was helpful. For
English?French, phrase table adaptation helps to
avoid using wrong parts of the noisy Giga corpus.
9 Acknowledgements
This work was partly achieved as part of the
Quaero Programme, funded by OSEO, French
State agency for innovation. The research lead-
ing to these results has received funding from
the European Union Seventh Framework Pro-
gramme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement
n? 287658.
References
Teresa Herrmann, Jan Niehues, and Alex Waibel.
2013. Combining Word Reordering Methods on
different Linguistic Abstraction Levels for Statisti-
cal Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the Sev-
enth Workshop on Syntax, Semantics and Structure
in Statistical Translation, Altanta, Georgia, USA,
June. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Philipp Koehn and Kevin Knight. 2003. Empirical
Methods for Compound Splitting. In EACL, Bu-
dapest, Hungary.
Arne Mauser, Sas?a Hasan, and Hermann Ney. 2009.
Extending Statistical Machine Translation with Dis-
criminative and Trigger-based Lexicon Models. In
Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing: Volume
1 - Volume 1, EMNLP ?09, Singapore.
Mohammed Mediani, Eunah Cho, Jan Niehues, Teresa
Herrmann, and Alex Waibel. 2011. The kit english-
french translation systems for iwslt 2011. In Pro-
ceedings of the eight International Workshop on
Spoken Language Translation (IWSLT).
Jan Niehues and Muntsin Kolss. 2009. A POS-Based
Model for Long-Range Reorderings in SMT. In
Fourth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation
(WMT 2009), Athens, Greece.
Jan Niehues and Stephan Vogel. 2008. Discriminative
Word Alignment via Alignment Matrix Modeling.
In Proc. of Third ACL Workshop on Statistical Ma-
chine Translation, Columbus, USA.
Jan Niehues and Alex Waibel. 2012. Detailed Analysis
of different Strategies for Phrase Table Adaptation
in SMT. In Proceedings of the American Machine
Translation Association (AMTA), San Diego, Cali-
fornia, October.
Jan Niehues and Alex Waibel. 2013. An MT Error-
driven Discriminative Word Lexicon using Sentence
Structure Features. In Eighth Workshop on Statisti-
cal Machine Translation (WMT 2013), Sofia, Bul-
garia.
Jan Niehues, Mohammed Mediani, Teresa Herrmann,
Michael Heck, Christian Herff, and Alex Waibel.
2010. The KIT Translation system for IWSLT 2010.
In Marcello Federico, Ian Lane, Michael Paul, and
Franc?ois Yvon, editors, Proceedings of the seventh
International Workshop on Spoken Language Trans-
lation (IWSLT), pages 93?98.
Jan Niehues, Teresa Herrmann, Stephan Vogel, and
Alex Waibel. 2011. Wider Context by Using Bilin-
gual Language Models in Machine Translation. In
Sixth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation
(WMT 2011), Edinburgh, UK.
Franz Josef Och. 1999. An efficient method for de-
termining bilingual word classes. In Proceedings of
the ninth conference on European chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, EACL ?99,
pages 71?76, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a Method for Automatic
Evaluation of Machine Translation. Technical Re-
port RC22176 (W0109-022), IBM Research Divi-
sion, T. J. Watson Research Center.
Anna N. Rafferty and Christopher D. Manning. 2008.
Parsing three German treebanks: lexicalized and un-
lexicalized baselines. In Proceedings of the Work-
shop on Parsing German, Columbus, Ohio.
Kay Rottmann and Stephan Vogel. 2007. Word Re-
ordering in Statistical Machine Translation with a
POS-Based Distortion Model. In TMI, Sko?vde,
Sweden.
Helmut Schmid and Florian Laws. 2008. Estimation
of Conditional Probabilities with Decision Trees and
an Application to Fine-Grained POS Tagging. In
COLING 2008, Manchester, Great Britain.
Andreas Stolcke. 2002. SRILM ? An Extensible Lan-
guage Modeling Toolkit. In Proc. of ICSLP, Denver,
Colorado, USA.
Ashish Venugopal, Andreas Zollman, and Alex Waibel.
2005. Training and Evaluation Error Minimization
Rules for Statistical Machine Translation. In Work-
shop on Data-drive Machine Translation and Be-
yond (WPT-05), Ann Arbor, MI.
Stephan Vogel. 2003. SMT Decoder Dissected: Word
Reordering. In Int. Conf. on Natural Language
Processing and Knowledge Engineering, Beijing,
China.
108
Proceedings of the Ninth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 130?135,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, June 26?27, 2014.
c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
The Karlsruhe Institute of Technology Translation Systems
for the WMT 2014
Teresa Herrmann, Mohammed Mediani, Eunah Cho, Thanh-Le Ha,
Jan Niehues, Isabel Slawik, Yuqi Zhang and Alex Waibel
Institute for Anthropomatics and Robotics
KIT - Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
firstname.lastname@kit.edu
Abstract
In this paper, we present the KIT
systems participating in the Shared
Translation Task translating between
English?German and English?French.
All translations are generated using
phrase-based translation systems, using
different kinds of word-based, part-of-
speech-based and cluster-based language
models trained on the provided data.
Additional models include bilingual lan-
guage models, reordering models based
on part-of-speech tags and syntactic parse
trees, as well as a lexicalized reordering
model. In order to make use of noisy
web-crawled data, we apply filtering
and data selection methods for language
modeling. A discriminative word lexicon
using source context information proved
beneficial for all translation directions.
1 Introduction
We describe the KIT systems for the Shared Trans-
lation Task of the ACL 2014 Ninth Workshop on
Statistical Machine Translation. We participated
in the English?German and English?French
translation directions, using a phrase-based de-
coder with lattice input.
The paper is organized as follows: the next sec-
tion describes the data used for each translation
direction. Section 3 gives a detailed description of
our systems including all the models. The trans-
lation results for all directions are presented after-
wards and we close with a conclusion.
2 Data
We utilize the provided EPPS, NC and Common
Crawl parallel corpora for English?German and
German?English, plus Giga for English?French
and French?English. The monolingual part
of those parallel corpora, the News Shuffle
corpus for all four directions and additionally
the Gigaword corpus for English?French and
German?English are used as monolingual train-
ing data for the different language models. For
optimizing the system parameters, newstest2012
and newstest2013 are used as development and
test data respectively.
3 System Description
Before training we perform a common preprocess-
ing of the raw data, which includes removing long
sentences and sentences with a length mismatch
exceeding a certain threshold. Afterwards, we nor-
malize special symbols, dates, and numbers. Then
we perform smart-casing of the first letter of every
sentence. Compound splitting (Koehn and Knight,
2003) is performed on the source side of the cor-
pus for German?English translation. In order to
improve the quality of the web-crawled Common
Crawl corpus, we filter out noisy sentence pairs us-
ing an SVM classifier for all four translation tasks
as described in Mediani et al. (2011).
Unless stated otherwise, we use 4-gram lan-
guage models (LM) with modified Kneser-Ney
smoothing, trained with the SRILM toolkit (Stol-
cke, 2002). All translations are generated by
an in-house phrase-based translation system (Vo-
gel, 2003), and we use Minimum Error Rate
Training (MERT) as described in Venugopal et
al. (2005) for optimization. The word align-
ment of the parallel corpora is generated using
the GIZA++ Toolkit (Och and Ney, 2003) for
both directions. Afterwards, the alignments are
combined using the grow-diag-final-and heuris-
tic. For English?German, we use discrimi-
native word alignment trained on hand-aligned
data as described in Niehues and Vogel (2008).
The phrase table (PT) is built using the Moses
toolkit (Koehn et al., 2007). The phrase scoring
for the small data sets (German?English) is also
130
done by the Moses toolkit, whereas the bigger sets
(French?English) are scored by our in-house par-
allel phrase scorer (Mediani et al., 2012a). The
phrase pair probabilities are computed using mod-
ified Kneser-Ney smoothing as described in Foster
et al. (2006).
Since German is a highly inflected language,
we try to alleviate the out-of-vocabulary prob-
lem through quasi-morphological operations that
change the lexical entry of a known word form to
an unknown word form as described in Niehues
and Waibel (2011).
3.1 Word Reordering Models
We apply automatically learned reordering rules
based on part-of-speech (POS) sequences and syn-
tactic parse tree constituents to perform source
sentence reordering according to the target lan-
guage word order. The rules are learned
from a parallel corpus with POS tags (Schmid,
1994) for the source side and a word align-
ment to learn reordering rules that cover short
range (Rottmann and Vogel, 2007) and long
range reorderings (Niehues and Kolss, 2009).
In addition, we apply a tree-based reordering
model (Herrmann et al., 2013) to better address
the differences in word order between German and
English. Here, a word alignment and syntactic
parse trees (Rafferty and Manning, 2008; Klein
and Manning, 2003) for the source side of the
training corpus are required to learn rules on how
to reorder the constituents in the source sentence.
The POS-based and tree-based reordering rules
are applied to each input sentence before transla-
tion. The resulting reordered sentence variants as
well as the original sentence are encoded in a re-
ordering lattice. The lattice, which also includes
the original position of each word, is used as input
to the decoder.
In order to acquire phrase pairs matching the
reordered sentence variants, we perform lattice
phrase extraction (LPE) on the training corpus
where phrase are extracted from the reordered
word lattices instead of the original sentences.
In addition, we use a lexicalized reordering
model (Koehn et al., 2005) which stores reorder-
ing probabilities for each phrase pair. During
decoding the lexicalized reordering model deter-
mines the reordering orientation of each phrase
pair at the phrase boundaries. The probability for
the respective orientation with respect to the orig-
inal position of the words is included as an addi-
tional score in the log-linear model of the transla-
tion system.
3.2 Adaptation
In the French?English and English?French sys-
tems, we perform adaptation for translation mod-
els as well as for language models. The EPPS and
NC corpora are used as in-domain data for the di-
rection English?French, while NC corpus is the
in-domain data for French?English.
Two phrase tables are built: one is the out-
of-domain phrase table, which is trained on all
corpora; the other is the in-domain phrase table,
which is trained on in-domain data. We adapt the
translation model by using the scores from the two
phrase tables with the backoff approach described
in Niehues and Waibel (2012). This results in a
phrase table with six scores, the four scores from
the general phrase table as well as the two condi-
tional probabilities from the in-domain phrase ta-
ble. In addition, we take the union of the candidate
phrase pairs collected from both phrase tables A
detailed description of the union method can be
found in Mediani et al. (2012b).
The language model is adapted by log-linearly
combining the general language model and an in-
domain language model. We train a separate lan-
guage model using only the in-domain data. Then
it is used as an additional language model during
decoding. Optimal weights are set during tuning
by MERT.
3.3 Special Language Models
In addition to word-based language models, we
use different types of non-word language models
for each of the systems. With the help of a bilin-
gual language model (Niehues et al., 2011) we
are able to increase the bilingual context between
source and target words beyond phrase bound-
aries. This language model is trained on bilin-
gual tokens created from a target word and all its
aligned source words. The tokens are ordered ac-
cording to the target language word order.
Furthermore, we use language models based
on fine-grained part-of-speech tags (Schmid and
Laws, 2008) as well as word classes to allevi-
ate the sparsity problem for surface words. The
word classes are automatically learned by clus-
tering the words of the corpus using the MKCLS
algorithm (Och, 1999). These n-gram language
models are trained on the target language corpus,
131
where the words have been replaced either by their
corresponding POS tag or cluster ID. During de-
coding, these language models are used as addi-
tional models in the log-linear combination.
The data selection language model is trained
on data automatically selected using cross-entropy
differences between development sets from pre-
vious WMT workshops and the noisy crawled
data (Moore and Lewis, 2010). We selected the
top 10M sentences to train this language model.
3.4 Discriminative Word Lexicon
A discriminative word lexicon (DWL) models the
probability of a target word appearing in the trans-
lation given the words of the source sentence.
DWLs were first introduced by Mauser et al.
(2009). For every target word, they train a maxi-
mum entropy model to determine whether this tar-
get word should be in the translated sentence or
not using one feature per source word.
We use two simplifications of this model that
have shown beneficial to translation quality and
training time in the past (Mediani et al., 2011).
Firstly, we calculate the score for every phrase pair
before translating. Secondly, we restrict the nega-
tive training examples to words that occur within
matching phrase pairs.
In this evaluation, we extended the DWL
with n-gram source context features proposed
by Niehues and Waibel (2013). Instead of rep-
resenting the source sentence as a bag-of-words,
we model it as a bag-of-n-grams. This allows us
to include information about source word order in
the model. We used one feature per n-gram up to
the order of three and applied count filtering for
bigrams and trigrams.
4 Results
This section presents the participating systems
used for the submissions in the four translation
directions of the evaluation. We describe the in-
dividual components that form part of each of
the systems and report the translation qualities
achieved during system development. The scores
are reported in case-sensitive BLEU (Papineni et
al., 2002).
4.1 English-French
The development of our English?French system
is shown in Table 1.
It is noteworthy that, for this direction, we chose
to tune on a subset of 1,000 pairs from news-
test2012, due to the long time the whole set takes
to be decoded. In a preliminary set of experiments
(not reported here), we found no significant differ-
ences between tuning on the small or the big devel-
opment sets. The translation model of the baseline
system is trained on the whole parallel data after
filtering (EPPS, NC, Common Crawl, Giga). The
same data was also used for language modeling.
We also use POS-based reordering.
The biggest improvement was due to using two
additional language models. One consists of a log-
linear interpolation of individual language models
trained on the target side of the parallel data, the
News shuffle, Gigaword and NC corpora. In ad-
dition, an in-domain language model trained only
on NC data is used. This improves the score by
more than 1.4 points. Adaptation of the translation
model towards a smaller model trained on EPPS
and NC brings an additional 0.3 points.
Another 0.3 BLEU points could be gained by
using other special language models: a bilingual
language model together with a 4-gram cluster
language model (trained on all monolingual data
using the MKCLS tool and 500 clusters). Incor-
porating a lexicalized reordering model into the
system had a very noticeable effect on test namely
more than half a BLEU point.
Finally, using a discriminative word lexicon
with source context has a very small positive ef-
fect on the test score, however more than 0.3 on
dev. This final configuration was the basis of our
submitted official translation.
System Dev Test
Baseline 15.63 27.61
+ Big LMs 16.56 29.02
+ PT Adaptation 16.77 29.32
+ Bilingual + Cluster LM 16.87 29.64
+ Lexicalized Reordering 16.92 30.17
+ Source DWL 17.28 30.19
Table 1: Experiments for English?French
4.2 French-English
Several experiments were conducted for the
French?English translation system. They are
summarized in Table 2.
The baseline system is essentially a phrase-
based translation system with some preprocess-
132
ing steps on the source side and utilizing the
short-range POS-based reordering on all parallel
data and fine-grained monolingual corpora such as
EPPS and NC.
Adapting the translation model using a small in-
domain phrase table trained on NC data only helps
us gain more than 0.4 BLEU points.
Using non-word language models including a
bilingual language model and a 4-gram 50-cluster
language model trained on the whole parallel data
attains 0.24 BLEU points on the test set.
Lexicalized reordering improves our system on
the development set by 0.3 BLEU points but has
less effect on the test set with a minor improve-
ment of around 0.1 BLEU points.
We achieve our best system, which is used for
the evaluation, by adding a DWL with source con-
text yielding 31.54 BLEU points on the test set.
System Dev Test
Baseline 30.16 30.70
+ LM Adaptation 30.58 30.94
+ PT Adaptation 30.69 31.14
+ Bilingual + Cluster LM 30.85 31.38
+ Lexicalized Reordering 31.14 31.46
+ Source DWL 31.19 31.54
Table 2: Experiments for French?English
4.3 English-German
Table 3 presents how the English-German transla-
tion system is improved step by step.
In the baseline system, we used parallel data
which consists of the EPPS and NC corpora. The
phrase table is built using discriminative word
alignment. For word reordering, we use word lat-
tices with long range reordering rules. Five lan-
guage models are used in the baseline system; two
word-based language models, a bilingual language
model, and two 9-gram POS-based language mod-
els. The two word-based language models use 4-
gram context and are trained on the parallel data
and the filtered Common Crawl data separately,
while the bilingual language model is built only
on the Common Crawl corpus. The two POS-
based language models are also based on the paral-
lel data and the filtered crawled data, respectively.
When using a 9-gram cluster language model,
we get a slight improvement. The cluster is trained
with 1,000 classes using EPPS, NC, and Common
Crawl data.
We use the filtered crawled data in addition to
the parallel data in order to build the phrase table;
this gave us 1 BLEU point of improvement.
The system is improved by 0.1 BLEU points
when we use lattice phrase extraction along with
lexicalized reordering rules.
Tree-based reordering rules improved the sys-
tem performance further by another 0.1 BLEU
points.
By reducing the context of the two POS-based
language models from 9-grams to 5-grams and
shortening the context of the language model
trained on word classes to 4-grams, the score on
the development set hardly changes but we can see
a slightly improvement for the test case.
Finally, we use the DWL with source context
and build a big bilingual language model using
both the crawled and parallel data. By doing so,
we improved the translation performance by an-
other 0.3 BLEU points. This system was used for
the translation of the official test set.
System Dev Test
Baseline 16.64 18.60
+ Cluster LM 16.76 18.66
+ Common Crawl Data 17.27 19.66
+ LPE + Lexicalized Reordering 17.45 19.75
+ Tree Rules 17.53 19.85
+ Shorter n-grams 17.55 19.92
+ Source DWL + Big BiLM 17.82 20.21
Table 3: Experiments for English?German
4.4 German-English
Table 4 shows the development steps of the
German-English translation system.
For the baseline system, the training data of the
translation model consists of EPPS, NC and the
filtered parallel crawled data. The phrase table
is built using GIZA++ word alignment and lattice
phrase extraction. All language models are trained
with SRILM and scored in the decoding process
with KenLM (Heafield, 2011). We use word lat-
tices generated by short and long range reordering
rules as input to the decoder. In addition, a bilin-
gual language model and a target language model
trained on word clusters with 1,000 classes are in-
cluded in the system.
Enhancing the word reordering with tree-based
reordering rules and a lexicalized reordering
133
model improved the system performance by 0.6
BLEU points.
Adding a language model trained on selected
data from the monolingual corpora gave another
small improvement.
The DWL with source context increased the
score on the test set by another 0.5 BLEU points
and applying morphological operations to un-
known words reduced the out-of-vocabulary rate,
even though no improvement in BLEU can be ob-
served. This system was used to generate the
translation submitted to the evaluation.
System Dev Test
Baseline 24.40 26.34
+ Tree Rules 24.71 26.86
+ Lexicalized Reordering 24.89 26.93
+ LM Data Selection 24.96 27.03
+ Source DWL 25.32 27.53
+ Morphological Operations - 27.53
Table 4: Experiments for German?English
5 Conclusion
In this paper, we have described the systems
developed for our participation in the Shared
Translation Task of the WMT 2014 evaluation
for English?German and English?French. All
translations were generated using a phrase-based
translation system which was extended by addi-
tional models such as bilingual and fine-grained
part-of-speech language models. Discriminative
word lexica with source context proved beneficial
in all four language directions.
For English-French translation using a smaller
development set performed reasonably well and
reduced development time. The most noticeable
gain comes from log-linear interpolation of multi-
ple language models.
Due to the large amounts and diversity of
the data available for French-English, adapta-
tion methods and non-word language models con-
tribute the major improvements to the system.
For English-German translation, the crawled
data and a DWL using source context to guide
word choice brought most of the improvements.
Enhanced word reordering models, namely
tree-based reordering rules and a lexicalized re-
ordering model as well as the source-side fea-
tures for the discriminative word lexicon helped
improve the system performance for German-
English translation.
In average we achieved an improvement of over
1.5 BLEU over the respective baselines for all our
systems.
Acknowledgments
The research leading to these results has received
funding from the European Union Seventh Frame-
work Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant
agreement n
?
287658.
References
George F. Foster, Roland Kuhn, and Howard Johnson.
2006. Phrasetable Smoothing for Statistical Ma-
chine Translation. In Proceedings of the 2006 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods on Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP), Sydney, Australia.
Kenneth Heafield. 2011. KenLM: Faster and Smaller
Language Model Queries. In Proceedings of the
Sixth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation,
Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom.
Teresa Herrmann, Jan Niehues, and Alex Waibel.
2013. Combining Word Reordering Methods on
different Linguistic Abstraction Levels for Statisti-
cal Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the Sev-
enth Workshop on Syntax, Semantics and Structure
in Statistical Translation, Altanta, Georgia, USA.
Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning. 2003. Ac-
curate Unlexicalized Parsing. In Proceedings of the
41st Annual Meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (ACL 2003), Sapporo, Japan.
Philipp Koehn and Kevin Knight. 2003. Empirical
Methods for Compound Splitting. In Proceedings
of the Eleventh Conference of the European Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(EACL 2003), Budapest, Hungary.
Philipp Koehn, Amittai Axelrod, Alexandra B. Mayne,
Chris Callison-Burch, Miles Osborne, and David
Talbot. 2005. Edinburgh System Description for
the 2005 IWSLT Speech Translation Evaluation. In
Proceedings of the Second International Workshop
on Spoken Language Translation (IWSLT 2005),
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexan-
dra Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses:
Open Source Toolkit for Statistical Machine Trans-
lation. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL
2007), Demonstration Session, Prague, Czech Re-
public.
134
Arne Mauser, Sa?sa Hasan, and Hermann Ney. 2009.
Extending Statistical Machine Translation with Dis-
criminative and Trigger-based Lexicon Models.
In Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP), Suntec, Singapore.
Mohammed Mediani, Eunah Cho, Jan Niehues, Teresa
Herrmann, and Alex Waibel. 2011. The KIT
English-French Translation systems for IWSLT
2011. In Proceedings of the Eight International
Workshop on Spoken Language Translation (IWSLT
2011), San Francisco, CA, USA.
Mohammed Mediani, Jan Niehues, and Alex Waibel.
2012a. Parallel Phrase Scoring for Extra-large Cor-
pora. In The Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Lin-
guistics, number 98.
Mohammed Mediani, Yuqi Zhang, Thanh-Le Ha, Jan
Niehues, Eunach Cho, Teresa Herrmann, Rainer
K?argel, and Alexander Waibel. 2012b. The KIT
Translation Systems for IWSLT 2012. In Proceed-
ings of the Ninth International Workshop on Spoken
Language Translation (IWSLT 2012), Hong Kong,
HK.
R.C. Moore and W. Lewis. 2010. Intelligent Selection
of Language Model Training Data. In Proceedings
of the ACL 2010 Conference Short Papers, Uppsala,
Sweden.
Jan Niehues and Muntsin Kolss. 2009. A POS-Based
Model for Long-Range Reorderings in SMT. In
Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Statistical
Machine Translation (WMT 2009), Athens, Greece.
Jan Niehues and Stephan Vogel. 2008. Discriminative
Word Alignment via Alignment Matrix Modeling.
In Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Statistical
Machine Translation (WMT 2008), Columbus, OH,
USA.
Jan Niehues and Alex Waibel. 2011. Using Wikipedia
to Translate Domain-specific Terms in SMT. In
Proceedings of the Eight International Workshop on
Spoken Language Translation (IWSLT 2008), San
Francisco, CA, USA.
J. Niehues and A. Waibel. 2012. Detailed Analysis of
Different Strategies for Phrase Table Adaptation in
SMT. In Proceedings of the Tenth Conference of the
Association for Machine Translation in the Ameri-
cas (AMTA 2012), San Diego, CA, USA.
J. Niehues and A. Waibel. 2013. An MT Error-Driven
Discriminative Word Lexicon using Sentence Struc-
ture Features. In Proceedings of the Eighth Work-
shop on Statistical Machine Translation, Sofia, Bul-
garia.
Jan Niehues, Teresa Herrmann, Stephan Vogel, and
Alex Waibel. 2011. Wider Context by Using Bilin-
gual Language Models in Machine Translation. In
Sixth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation
(WMT 2011), Edinburgh, Scotland, United King-
dom.
Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A System-
atic Comparison of Various Statistical Alignment
Models. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19?51.
Franz Josef Och. 1999. An Efficient Method for Deter-
mining Bilingual Word Classes. In Proceedings of
the Ninth Conference of the European Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (EACL
1999), Bergen, Norway.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a Method for Automatic
Evaluation of Machine Translation. Technical Re-
port RC22176 (W0109-022), IBM Research Divi-
sion, T. J. Watson Research Center.
Anna N. Rafferty and Christopher D. Manning. 2008.
Parsing Three German Treebanks: Lexicalized and
Unlexicalized Baselines. In Proceedings of the
Workshop on Parsing German, Columbus, OH,
USA.
Kay Rottmann and Stephan Vogel. 2007. Word Re-
ordering in Statistical Machine Translation with a
POS-Based Distortion Model. In Proceedings of the
11th International Conference on Theoretical and
Methodological Issues in Machine Translation (TMI
2007), Sk?ovde, Sweden.
Helmut Schmid and Florian Laws. 2008. Estimation
of Conditional Probabilities with Decision Trees and
an Application to Fine-Grained POS Tagging. In In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics (COLING 2008), Manchester, Great Britain.
Helmut Schmid. 1994. Probabilistic Part-of-Speech
Tagging Using Decision Trees. In International
Conference on New Methods in Language Process-
ing, Manchester, United Kingdom.
Andreas Stolcke. 2002. SRILM ? An Extensible Lan-
guage Modeling Toolkit. In International Confer-
ence on Spoken Language Processing, Denver, Col-
orado, USA.
Ashish Venugopal, Andreas Zollman, and Alex Waibel.
2005. Training and Evaluation Error Minimization
Rules for Statistical Machine Translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACL Workshop on Building and Us-
ing Parallel Texts, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
Stephan Vogel. 2003. SMT Decoder Dissected: Word
Reordering. In International Conference on Natural
Language Processing and Knowledge Engineering,
Beijing, China.
135
