Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Hybrid Approaches to Translation, pages 13?18,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8, 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Machine Learning Disambiguation of Quechua Verb Morphology
Annette Rios
Institute of Computational Linguistics
University of Zurich
arios@ifi.uzh.ch
Anne Go?hring
Institute of Computational Linguistics
University of Zurich
goehring@cl.uzh.ch
Abstract
We have implemented a rule-based proto-
type of a Spanish-to-Cuzco Quechua MT
system enhanced through the addition of
statistical components. The greatest dif-
ficulty during the translation process is to
generate the correct Quechua verb form in
subordinated clauses. The prototype has
several rules that decide which verb form
should be used in a given context. How-
ever, matching the context in order to ap-
ply the correct rule depends crucially on
the parsing quality of the Spanish input.
As the form of the subordinated verb de-
pends heavily on the conjunction in the
subordinated Spanish clause and the se-
mantics of the main verb, we extracted
this information from two treebanks and
trained different classifiers on this data.
We tested the best classifier on a set of 4
texts, increasing the correct subordinated
verb forms from 80% to 89%.
1 Introduction
As part of our research project SQUOIA,1 we have
developed several tools and resources for Cuzco
Quechua. These include a treebank, currently con-
sisting of around 500 sentences2, and a rule-based
MT system Spanish-Cuzco Quechua. The tree-
bank is currently being enhanced with more anno-
tated text and should reach about 4000 sentences
upon project completion.
As for the translation system, we want to en-
hance the rule-based approach with statistical
methods to overcome certain limitations of the
prototype. The main reason to build the core
1http://tiny.uzh.ch/2Q
2available through the PML query interface (S?te?pa?nek and
Petr, 2010) at:
http://kitt.ifi.uzh.ch:8075/app/form
system with a rule-based architecture is the lack
of parallel texts in Spanish and Quechua; there
is not enough parallel material to train a statisti-
cal MT system of acceptable quality, as Mohler
and Mihalcea (2008) showed in their experiments.
They trained an SMT system Spanish-Quechua on
translations of the Bible, resulting in 2.89 BLEU
points. By increasing the size of their train-
ing corpus with web-crawled parallel texts and
additional Bible translations, they achieved 4.55
BLEU points.3 Although better, the overall qual-
ity of the SMT system is still very low.
There are at least two other projects that started
the implementation of MT systems for the same
language pair, but in the opposite direction; the
AVENUE project4 used elicited corpora to build
an MT system Quechua-Spanish. Furthermore,
the language pair Quechua-Spanish has recently
been added to the open-source MT platform Aper-
tium.5 The translation system is still at a very early
stage in its development; at present, the grammar
contains 30 transfer rules and a morphological an-
alyzer.
2 Hybrid MT Spanish-Cuzco Quechua
The core of our own Spanish-Quechua MT sys-
tem is a classical rule-based transfer engine, based
on a reimplementation of the Matxin6 framework
that was originally developed for the translation of
Spanish to Basque (Mayor et al, 2012). As not
all of the necessary disambiguation can be done
satisfactorily with rules alone, we plan to add sta-
tistical modules at different stages of the transfer
to resolve the remaining ambiguities. The mod-
ule for the disambiguation of subordinated verb
3both baseline and improved SMT systems evaluated on
parts of the Bible
4http://www.cs.cmu.edu/?avenue/
5http://wiki.apertium.org/wiki/
Quechua_cuzqueno_y_castellano
6http://matxin.sourceforge.net/
13
forms described in this paper is the first statistical
enhancement to the rule-based prototype.
3 Quechua verb forms
Subordinated clauses in Quechua are often non-
finite, nominal forms. There are several nomi-
nalizing suffixes that are used for different clause
types that will be illustrated in more detail in this
section.
3.1 Switch-Reference
A common type of subordination in Quechua
is the so-called switch-reference: the subordi-
nated, non-finite verb bears a suffix that indicates
whether its subject is the same as in the main
clause or not. If the subject in the subordinated
clause is different, the non-finite verb bears a pos-
sessive suffix that indicates the subject person.
Consider the following examples7
Same subject: Mikhuspa hamuni.
(1) Mikhu
eat
-spa
-SS
hamu
come
-ni.
-1.Sg
?When I finished eating, I?ll come.?
(lit. ?My eating, I come.?)
Different subject: Mikhuchkaptiy pasakura.
(2) Mikhu
eat
-chka
-Prog
-pti
-DS
-y
-1.Sg.Poss
pasa
leave
-ku
-Rflx
-ra
-Pst
-?.
-3.Sg
?While I was eating, he left.?
(lit. ?[During] my eating, he left.?)
(Dedenbach-Salazar Sa?enz et al, 2002, 168)
In the Spanish source language, subordinated
verbs are usually finite. An overt subject is not
necessary, as personal pronouns are used only for
emphasis (?pro-drop?). In order to generate the
correct verb form, we need to find the subject
of the subordinated verb and compare it to the
main verb. For this reason, we included a mod-
ule that performs co-reference resolution on sub-
jects. So far, the procedure is based on the sim-
ple assumption that an elided subject is coreferent
7Abbreviations used:
Acc: accusative Add: additive (?too,also?)
Ben: benefactive (?for?) Dir: directional
DirE: direct evidentiality DS: different subject
Gen: genitive Imp: imperative
Inch: inchoative Loc: locative
Neg: negation Obl: obligative
Perf: perfect Poss: possessive
Prog: progressive Pst: past
Rflx: reflexive Sg: singular
SS: same subject Top: topic
with the previous explicit subject, if this subject
agrees in number and person with the current verb.
Of course, there are some exceptions that have to
be considered, e.g. the subject of a verb in direct
speech is not a good antecedent.
3.2 Other Types of Subordination
Generally, the relation of the subordinated clause
to the main clause is expressed through different
conjunctions in Spanish. In Quechua, on the other
hand, a specific verb form in combination with a
case suffix indicates the type of subordination. For
example, Spanish para que - ?in order to? has to
be translated with a nominal verb form with the
suffix -na and the case suffix -paq (usually called
benefactive, ?for?):
(3) Ventanata kichay wayraq haykurimunanpaq.
Ventana
window
-ta
-Acc
kicha
open
-y
-2.Sg.Imp
wayra
wind
-q
-Gen
hayku
enter
-ri
-Inch
-mu
-Dir
-na
-Obl
-n
-3.Sg.Poss
-paq.
-Ben
?Open the window, so the air comes in.?
(lit. ?Open the window for his entering of the wind?)
(Cusihuama?n, 1976, 210)
Finite verb forms are also possible in subordi-
nated clauses; in this case, the relation of the sub-
ordinated and the main clause is indicated through
a ?linker?. A linker often consists of a demon-
strative pronoun combined with case suffixes or
so-called independent suffixes; these are special
suffixes that can be attached to any word class
and their position is usually at the end of the suf-
fix sequence. The functions of the independent
suffixes include data source, polar question mark-
ing and topic or contrast, amongst others (Adelaar
and Muysken, 2004, 209). In combination with
demonstrative pronouns, the independent suffixes
are used for linking clauses, similar to Spanish or
English conjunctions. For example, the combina-
tion of demonstrative chay - ?this? with the topic
marker -qa, chayqa, is used in the sense of ?if, in
case that?:
(4) Munanki chayqa, Arekipatapis rinki makinapi.
Muna
want
-nki
-2.Sg
chay
this
-qa,
-Top
Arekipa
Arequipa
-ta
-Acc
-pis
-Add
ri
go
-nki
-2.Sg
makina
machine
-pi.
-Loc
?If you like, you can also go to Arequipa by train
(machine).?
(Cusihuama?n, 1976, 264)
A special case is indirect speech in the Spanish
source text; the Quechua equivalence of indirect
14
speech is direct speech. The conversion from in-
direct to direct speech is not trivial, because coref-
erence resolution for the subject is required: if the
subject of the main verb is the same as in the indi-
rect speech clause, the verb has to be generated as
first person form in direct speech.8
Furthermore, the form of the subordinated verb
may also depend on the semantics of the main
verb, e.g. complement clauses of control verbs
usually require -na, whereas with other verbs, the
nominalizer -sqa is used:
(5) Ri
go
-na
-Obl
-yki
-2.Sg.Poss
-ta
-Acc
muna
want
-ni.
-1.Sg
?I want you to leave.?
(lit. ?I want your going.?)
(6) Ama
don?t
-n
-DirE
chay
this
yacha
know
-sqa
-Perf
-yki
-2.Sg.Poss
-ta
-Acc
qunqa
forget
-nki
-2.Sg
-chu.
-Neg
?Don?t forget what you learned.?
(lit. ?Don?t forget those your learnings.?)
(Cusihuama?n, 1976, 125)
For all of these cases, the rule-based prototype
has a set of rules to match the given context, so
that the correct form can be assigned to each verb.
3.3 Relative Clauses
A special case of subordination are relative
clauses; the verb in the relative clause is a nom-
inal form that is either agentive or non-agentive.
The form depends on the semantics of the nomi-
nal head and its semantic role within the relative
clause. The MT system includes a specific rule-
based module that uses semantic resources for the
disambiguation of relative clauses. As their form
does not depend on the main verb, relative clauses
will not be discussed further in this paper.
4 Rule-based Disambiguation of Verb
Forms
The disambiguation of subordinated verb forms
depends on the previously described steps: the dis-
ambiguation of Spanish relative clauses, corefer-
ence resolution of subjects, the recognition of the
given type of subordination through the Spanish
conjunction and the semantics of the main verb.
Such a rule-based approach is prone to error, since
8consider this English example:
?John said he wanted to go fishing.?
if John = he : ?I want to go fishing?, John said.
if John 6= he: ?He wants to go fishing?, John said.
correct incorrect
verb chunks to disambiguate: 219
disambiguated chunks: 186 175 11
85% 94% 6%
left ambiguous for ML: 33
Table 1: Evaluation of rule-based verb disambiguation
it depends crucially on correct parse trees and cor-
rectly tagged verbs and conjunctions. As a pre-
caution, we only use rule-based disambiguation in
cases that can be safely disambiguated, i.e. if we
find the main verb and the Spanish conjunction
in the parse tree where they are to be expected.
An evaluation on four texts from different gen-
res9 shows that the rule-based module can disam-
biguate 85% of the verb forms; of these, 94% are
correct (see Table 1 for details).
For subordinated clauses that cannot be disam-
biguated with rules (15% in the 4 texts used for
evaluation), we use the machine learning approach
described in the following section.
5 Disambiguation with Machine
Learning
5.1 Training Corpus
As the form of the subordinated verb depends
mainly on the semantics of the main verb and the
Spanish conjunction in the source text, we trained
and evaluated different classifiers based on these
features.
We extracted all verb pairs from our Quechua
treebank with their corresponding forms and, if
present, the linker. The Quechua roots in the tree-
bank contain one or more Spanish translations.
We used the Spanish lemmas to create the in-
stances for training, as we might not have access
to the Quechua translation of the Spanish verb dur-
ing the transfer. Furthermore, we use the stan-
dardized Southern Quechua orthography (Cerro?n-
Palomino, 1994) in our translation system; how-
ever, the text in the treebank is written in a slightly
9Texts:
? La catarata de la sirena - ?the waterfall of the siren?
(Andean story)
? first two chapters of ?The Little Prince?
? article from the Peruvian newspaper ?El Diario?
? Spanish Wikipedia article about Peru
15
different spelling. By using the Spanish version of
the verbs, we avoid mapping the Quechua verbs
obtained from the transfer to the orthography used
in the treebank. Since most Quechua roots in the
treebank contain more than one Spanish transla-
tion, we can create an instance for every combi-
nation of the Spanish translations. With this ap-
proach we extracted 444 instances from our tree-
bank.
Since this initial training set was too small to
yield satisfactory results,10 we added synthetic
training data created from the translation of the
Spanish AnCora treebank (Taule? et al, 2008) with
the prototype. As the dependencies in AnCora are
correctly annotated, the rules of the MT system
will assign the correct Quechua verb forms with
high precision. We used these verb forms as ad-
ditional instances for training the classifiers. The
total number of instances obtained from AnCora
amounts to 7366.
5.2 Setup
We used WEKA (Hall et al, 2009) and
SVMmulticlass (Joachims, 1999) to compute the
machine learning models for our disambiguation
task. We trained different classifiers on 7810 in-
stances extracted from a Quechua and a translated
Spanish treebank. The class variable form repre-
sents the form of the subordinated verb; there are
5 different classes:11
? perfect: nominal form with -sqa
? obligative: nominal form with -na
? agentive: nominal form with -q
? switch: nominal forms with -pti/spa
? finite
5.3 Evaluation
We tested the classifiers on the ambiguous forms
from the 4 texts that we used for the evaluation
of the rule-based approach (see Table 1). Addi-
tionally, we extracted verb pairs from Quechua
texts (with their Spanish translations) and as-
signed them the corresponding class number. With
this procedure, we collected 100 instances for
testing. We trained and tested different classi-
fiers: Na??ve Bayes, Nearest Neighbour (Martin,
1995) and a multiclass support vector machine
1036% accuracy achieved with Naive Bayes, on the same
test set used in the final evaluation (see Table 2).
11Every instance contains the lemma of the main verb, the
lemma of the subordinated verb, the linker and a number rep-
resenting one of the 5 classes.
(Joachims, 1999). Table 2 contains the best results
for each classifier. The three WEKA classifiers
were trained with default settings, whereas for
SVMmulticlass we obtained the best results with
=0.1 and c=0.02 (linear kernel).
In an ideal case of disambiguation during trans-
lation, we would have information about the
lemma of the main verb (?head?) and the Span-
ish conjunction (?linker?).12 In these ideal cases,
we use the rule-based module to assign the sub-
ordinated verb form. In real translation scenar-
ios, however, either the head or linker might be
missing; a common source for errors are polyse-
mous conjunctions, such as que - ?that? or como -
?as? , that the tagger erroneously labeled as rela-
tive pronoun or preposition, respectively. In this
case, the linker cannot be retrieved from the parse
tree and we have to guess the verb form based
only on the lemmas of the main and the subordi-
nated verb (?subV?). Furthermore, we might have
a clearly subordinated verb form with a linker that
the parser attached to the wrong head. Finding
the correct head automatically is not always possi-
ble, especially within coordinations. In this case,
we need to guess the verb form based only on the
lemma of the subordinated verb and the linker.
Na??ve Bayes achieves the highest scores, both
on cross validation and on the test set (see Table 2
for details). From the 33 ambiguous verb forms in
Table 1, only 22 were disambiguated with the clas-
sifiers, as the rest were either nouns erroneously
tagged as verbs or had the wrong lemma, and
therefore can be counted as false without further
processing. From the 22 correctly tagged ambigu-
ous verbs, Na??ve Bayes classified 20 instances cor-
rectly. The rules of the MT system disambiguated
80% of the verb forms in the 4 evaluation texts
correctly. Feeding the remaining ambiguous verbs
to the classifier; we achieve an overall accuracy of
89% (see the results in Table 3).
The complete translation pipeline including the
Naive Bayes classifier is illustrated in Fig. 1.
6 Concluding remarks
We enhanced a purely rule-based machine trans-
lation system for the language pair Spanish-
Quechua with a classifier that predicts the form
of subordinated verbs in the target language
Quechua, based on information collected from the
12The Spanish lemma of the subordinated verb is always
known, since this is the verb we want to disambiguate.
16
SVM LibSVM NBayes NNge
=0.1,c=0.02 default: radial
cross-validation, 10x
head,subV - 43% 58% 48%
subV,linker - 59% 67% 60%
head,subV,linker - 47% 81% 75%
test set, 100 instances
head,subV 31% 38% 57% 47%
subV,linker 41% 61% 75% 68%
head,subV,linker 46% 45% 84% 72%
Table 2: Evaluation of Classifiers
Analysis of Source Text:
PoS Tagging
Dependency Parsing
Disambiguation of
Relative Clauses
(rule-based)
Coreference Resolution
on Subjects
(rule-based)
Verb Disambiguation
(rule-based)
[main verb and linker found]
Verb Disambiguation
(Naive Bayes classifier)
[main verb or linker not found]
Lexical Transfer
Syntactic Transfer
Syntactic Generation
Morphological Generation
(finite state)
Figure 1: Translation Pipeline
17
correct incorrect
rule based: 186 175 11
80% 5%
not disambiguated*: 11 11
ML : 22 20 2
total ?verb? chunks: 219 195 24
89% 11%
Table 3: Evaluation of Hybrid Verb Disambiguation
*11 of the ambiguous ?verbs? are nouns that were erroneously tagged as verbs,
had the wrong lemma or were relative clauses. We did not run those through
disambiguation with ML.
Spanish input text. The MT system has rules to
match the context of the subordinated verb and
assign a verb form for generation. Due to pars-
ing and tagging errors, the information needed for
rule-based disambiguation cannot always be re-
trieved. In order to disambiguate these forms, we
use a classifier that predicts the verb form even if
all of the context information is not accessible. We
tested three different machine learning algorithms,
out of which Na??ve Bayes achieved the best re-
sults. In an evaluation on 4 texts from different
genres, verb disambiguation was improved from
80% (purely rule-based) to 89%, with a combina-
tion of the rule-based module and the Na??ve Bayes
classifier.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Rico Sennrich for
his helpful advise and David Harfield for proof-
reading the first version of this paper. This re-
search is funded by the Swiss National Science
Foundation under grant 100015 132219/1.
References
Willem F. H. Adelaar and Pieter Muysken. 2004. The
Languages of the Andes. Cambridge Language Sur-
veys. Cambridge University Press.
Rodolfo Cerro?n-Palomino. 1994. Quechua
suren?o, diccionario unificado quechua-castellano,
castellano-quechua. Biblioteca Nacional del Peru?,
Lima.
Antonio G. Cusihuama?n. 1976. Grama?tica Quechua:
Cuzco-Collao. Grama?ticas referenciales de la
lengua quechua. Ministerio de Educacio?n, Lima.
Sabine Dedenbach-Salazar Sa?enz, Utta von Gleich,
Roswith Hartmann, Peter Masson, and Clodoaldo
Soto Ruiz. 2002. Rimaykullayki - Unterrichtsmate-
rialien zum Quechua Ayacuchano. Dietrich Reimer
Verlag GmbH, Berlin, 4. edition.
Mark Hall, Eibe Frank, Geoffrey Holmes, Bernhard
Pfahringer, Peter Reutemann, and Ian H. Witten.
2009. The WEKA data mining software: an update.
SIGKDD Explorations, 11(1):10?18.
Thorsten Joachims. 1999. Making Large-Scale SVM
Learning Practical. In Bernhard Scho?lkopf, Christo-
pher John C. Burges, and Alexander J. Smola, edi-
tors, Advances in Kernel Methods - Support Vector
Learning, pages 169?184, Cambridge, MA, USA.
MIT Press.
Brent Martin. 1995. Instance-Based learning: Near-
est Neighbor With Generalization. Master?s thesis,
University of Waikato, Hamilton, New Zealand.
Aingeru Mayor, In?aki Alegria, Arantza D??az de Ilar-
raza, Gorka Labaka, Mikel Lersundi, and Kepa Sara-
sola. 2012. Matxin, an open-source rule-based
machine translation system for Basque. Machine
Translation, (25):53?82.
Michael Mohler and Rada Mihalcea. 2008. Baby-
lon Parallel Text Builder: Gathering Parallel Texts
for Low-Density Languages. In Nicoletta Cal-
zolari, Khalid Choukri, Bente Maegaard, Joseph
Mariani, Jan Odijk, Stelios Piperidis, and Daniel
Tapias, editors, Proceedings of the Sixth Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC?08), Marrakech, Marroco.
Mariona Taule?, M. Anto`nia Mart??, and Marta Re-
casens. 2008. AnCora: Multilevel Annotated Cor-
pora for Catalan and Spanish. In Nicoletta Calzo-
lari, Khalid Choukri, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mar-
iani, Jan Odijk, Stelios Piperidis, and Daniel Tapias,
editors, Proceedings of the Sixth International Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC?08), Mar-
rakech, Marroco.
Jan S?te?pa?nek and Pajas Petr. 2010. Querying Diverse
Treebanks in a Uniform Way. In Nicoletta Calzo-
lari, Khalid Choukri, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mari-
ani, Jan Odijk, Stelios Piperidis, Mike Rosner, and
Daniel Tapias, editors, Proceedings of the 7th In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2010), Valletta, Malta.
18
Proceedings of the First Workshop on Applying NLP Tools to Similar Languages, Varieties and Dialects, pages 39?47,
Dublin, Ireland, August 23 2014.
Morphological Disambiguation and Text Normalization for Southern
Quechua Varieties
Annette Rios
Institute of Computational Linguistics
University of Zurich
arios@ifi.uzh.ch
Richard Castro Mamani
Computer Science Department
Universidad Nacional de San Antonio Abad del Cuzco
rcastro@hinantin.com
Abstract
We built a pipeline to normalize Quechua texts through morphological analysis and disambigua-
tion. Word forms are analyzed by a set of cascaded finite state transducers which split the words
and rewrite the morphemes to a normalized form. However, some of these morphemes, or rather
morpheme combinations, are ambiguous, which may affect the normalization. For this reason,
we disambiguate the morpheme sequences with conditional random fields. Once we know the
individual morphemes of a word, we can generate the normalized word form from the disam-
biguated morphemes.
1
1 Introduction
As part of our research project we have developed several tools and resources for Cuzco Quechua. This
includes a hybrid machine translation system Spanish-Quechua. The core system is a classical rule-based
transfer engine, that we aim to improve with the addition of statistical modules.
An issue that is generally difficult to deal with in a rule-based approach is the lexical choice of trans-
lation options: writing context rules for every possible translation of a given input word is not feasible.
Another solution is to include a language model, trained on Quechua texts, that can handle the lexical
disambiguation. The total number of available Quechua texts is relatively small, and to complicate mat-
ters even further, these texts are written in a wide range of different orthographies. Therefore, the first
step in order to obtain a language model is the normalization of the different spellings into a standard-
ized orthography. Not every morphological ambiguity needs to be disambiguated for the normalization
alone, but we need fully disambiguated texts for other applications (e.g. parsing). Therefore, we chose
to disambiguate not only the cases that are relevant for the normalization, but all types of morphological
ambiguities.
2 Related Work
In general, almost every automatic processing of agglutinative languages relies on a correct morphologi-
cal analysis. Extensive research on morphological disambiguation has been done on Turkish: G?org?un et
al. (2011) used the WEKA toolkit to train and test several classifiers. With over 50,000 disambiguated
sentences for training, they achieved 95.6% accuracy with the J48 Tree algorithm.
Hakkani-T?ur et al. (2002) trained an N-gram language model on Turkish roots and another model on
so called inflectional groups (groups of morphemes), and used a combination of these two models to
disambiguate the output of their finite state analyzer. With a training set of almost 700,000 tokens, they
achieved 93.95% accuracy.
Sak et al. (2007) use the combined language models from Hakkani-T?ur et al. (2002) to produce an n-
best list of morphological parses for a given Turkish sentence. In a second step, they rank the candidates
with the voted Perceptron algorithm, trained on 42,000 disambiguated tokens. With this additional step,
they achieved an accuracy of 96.8%.
This work is licenced under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. Page numbers and proceedings footer
are added by the organizers. License details: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
1
The tool can be tested online at http://kitt.ifi.uzh.ch/kitt/quechua/normalizer.html.
39
While the morphological situation with Quechua is comparable to Turkish, the size of the available
training data is not: we have less than 3000 manually disambiguated sentences (?38,000 tokens) that we
can use for training. An approach such as the one described by G?org?un et al. (2011), where the classifier
learns to assign a class for each possible combination of morphemes (without the root), is therefore not
feasible: the number of classes that can be learned from such a small training set will not suffice to
classify unseen data. Similarly, a language model, even if trained on units smaller than words, as done
by Hakkani-T?ur et al. (2002), will not overcome the data sparseness in the training set.
For this reason, the approach presented in this paper attempts to break down the disambiguation pro-
cess into several smaller steps: we move from the root to the last suffix, disambiguating only one mor-
pheme class at a time. With this approach, we achieve an accuracy that is comparable to the results for
Turkish.
3 Quechua
Quechua is a language family spoken in the Andes by 8-10 million people in Peru, Bolivia, Ecuador,
Southern Colombia and the North-West of Argentina. Although Quechua is often referred to as a lan-
guage and its local varieties as dialects, Quechua is a language family, comparable in depth to the Ro-
mance or Slavic languages (Adelaar and Muysken, 2004, 168). Mutual intelligibility, especially between
speakers of distant ?dialects?, is not always given.
In this project, we work with Cuzco Quechua (Southern Quechua), and in the following sections, the
name Quechua is meant to refer explicitely to this variety. The number of available texts in this partic-
ular dialect is limited, therefore we have to include texts from other (similar) varieties of the Southern
Quechua dialect group, such as Ayacucho and Bolivian Quechua.
3.1 Dialectal and Orthographic Variation within the Southern Quechua dialect group (QIIC)
Apart from lexical differences, there is one major dialectal divergence between the Cuzco/Bolivian di-
alects on one side, and the Ayacucho/Argentina varieties on the other side: Cuzco/Bolivian Quechua has,
like Aymara, a three way distinction of stops (plain, glottalized and aspirated), whereas Ayacucho and
Argentina Quechua have only plain stops. Furthermore, some suffixes appear in different forms, e.g. the
progressive in Ayacucho is marked by -chka, in Cuzco by -sha, and in Bolivia by -sa or -sya. Other
suffixes are restricted to a particular variety: some dialects that are in close contact with Aymara, such as
the Quechua spoken in Puno, have borrowed a number of Aymara suffixes, e.g. -thapi, -t?a, -naqa, that
are unknown in other dialects (Adelaar, 1987).
Additionally, there are some morphotactic differences concerning the combination of suffixes: for
instance, a number of Quechua suffixes change their vowel in combination with certain suffixes, but the
exact contexts that induce this vowel change differ to some extent across dialects. Furthermore, the order
of suffixes in combinations can vary.
Apart from the dialectal differences, there is also a wide range of orthographic variation within the
Southern Quechua dialect group. Several standards have been proposed, most notably the standardized
orthography as defined by Cerr?on-Palomino (1994). This standard has been adopted by the Bolivian
government (Villarroel, 2000), with one small adaption: in Bolivia, the glottal fricative [h] is written as /j/
instead of /h/. In Peru, the situation is slightly more complicated: Although the Ministry of Education has
defined an official standard orthography
2
,there is still some disagreement regarding the correct spelling
of Quechua words. Also, many Quechua texts are written in a more or less Spanish orthography, where
for instance /wa/ is written as /hua/, and /ki/ is written as /qui/. Table 1 illustrates the orthography of the
Academia Mayor de la Lengua Quechua in Cuzco (first row), a typical ?Spanish? spelling (second row)
and an old, non-standardized Bolivian spelling (last row), as opposed to the unified standard orthography
as defined by Cerr?on-Palomino (1994). This is the orthography that we use for normalization.
2
As declared in the Resoluci?on Ministerial N
o
1218-85-ED de 1985
40
AMLQ mana qelqaq yachaq ?nausa qelqa runasimipi kasqanku rayku...
norm. mana qillqaq yachaq ?nawsa qillqa runasimipi kasqankurayku...
span. Cay teccsimuyuta, hanacc-pachatapas, Ccanmi tacyachinqui, Ccanmi ticrachinqui..
norm. Kay tiqsimuyuta, hanaq pachatapas, Qammi takyachinki, Qammi t?ikrachinki..
boliv. Chaywampis paykuna onqosqa kashajtinku, noqaqa llakiy qhashqa p?achasta churakorqani.
norm. Chaywanpas paykuna unqusqa kachkaptinku, ?nuqaqa llakiy qhachqa p?achakunata churakurqani.
Abbreviations: AMLQ = Academia Mayor de la Lengua Quechua en Cusco, norm = normalized, span = Spanish orthography, boliv = (old) Bolivian orthography
Table 1: Different Orthographies with Corresponding Standardized Version
variations standard
progressive -chka, -sha, -sa, -sya -chka
genitive (after vowel) -p/-q/-h/-j -p
evidential (after vowel) -m/-n -m
additive -pis/-pas -pas
euphonic -ni/?ni -ni
1.&2. plural forms -chis/-chik/-chiq -chik
assistive -ysi/-schi/-scha -ysi
potential forms -swan/-chwan -chwan
Table 2: Suffix Variation and Normalization
4 Morphological Analysis
Quechua is an agglutinative, suffixing language. There are over 130 Quechua suffixes, the exact number,
as well as the form of the suffixes exhibit substantial variation across dialects. There are five func-
tional classes of Quechua suffixes: nominalizing (noun?verb) and verbalizing (verb?noun), nominal
(noun?noun) and verbal (verb?verb) suffixes and so-called independent or ambiguous suffixes, that can
be attached to both verbal or nominal forms, without altering the part of speech. The position of these
suffixes is at the end of the suffix sequence, their relative order is more or less fixed, though dialects show
minor variations. The functions of the independent suffixes include data source, polar question marking
and topic or contrast, amongst others (Adelaar and Muysken, 2004, 208).
Quechua roots are, apart from a small number of particles, either verbal or nominal. Adjectives do
not constitute a word class on their own on a morphological level, as they behave exactly the same as
nominal roots. There may be some syntactic restrictions on true adjectives (Adelaar and Muysken, 2004,
208), but these can be ignored for a morphological analysis. Many roots are indeed ambiguous and can
be used either as noun or verb without any derivational suffixes:
3
(1) taki
song/sing
-y
-1S.ps
?My song?
(2) taki
song/sing
-ni.
-1S
?I sing?
Furthermore, nominalizing (NS) and verbalizing (VS) suffixes are very productive and can occur more
than once in a word.
We obtain the morphological analysis from a finite state analyzer that splits the word forms into mor-
phemes, and also normalizes the surface form of the morphemes. Roots are mapped to their standardized
form according to Cerr?on-Palomino (1994), e.g. the word for brain, ?nutq?u in the standard, may appear
as nushqun, ?nusqhun, ?nusq?un, ?nusqun or ?nutqun, depending on the dialect. The normalizer rewrites all
these variants to ?nutq?u. The normalizer also rewrites the form of certain suffixes, see Table 2.
Some of these suffixes are ambiguous in their non-standardized forms, e.g. the direct evidential suffix,
written as -n, could also be a third person singular marker (verbal or nominal). In order to generate the
3
Abbreviations used in glosses: Acc: accusative, Add: additive, Dim: diminutive, DirE: direct evidential, Fact: factitive,
Fut: future tense, IndE: indirect evidential, Inf: infinitive, Imp: imperative, Loc: locative, NS: nominalizing, P: plural, Perf:
perfect, ps: possessive, Rflx: reflexive, S: singular, Top: topic, VS: verbalizing
41
Joven Gregorio Cancionero
normalizer 97.86% 73.00% 42.56%
Spanish strict 0.64% 21.87% 15.86%
normalizer relax - - 34.88%
Spanish relax - 0.30% 1.48%
guesser 1.02% 2.36% 3.65%
total coverage 99.52% 97.64% 98.43%
unknown words 0.48% 2.46% 1.58%
Table 3: Morphological Analysis Coverage
normalized form of a word with a suffix -n, we need to know whether this particular -n is a person marker
or an evidential suffix. Only in the latter case, -n needs to be rewritten as -m during normalization.
We have two normalizers in our pipeline: the first one handles text in ?regular? orthographies that show
some minor dialectal variations. The second normalizer allows for more ?extreme? orthographies: For
instance, both [k] and [q] (velar and postvelar stops) are pronounced as fricatives in certain positions
([x] and [X]). In many texts both are written as /j/ (or sometimes /h/) if pronounced as fricatives. This
introduces new ambiguities, for instance, a root written as sajsa could be saqsa - ?certain variety of corn?
or saksa - ?satisfied,full?. In order to avoid additional ambiguities resulting from an analysis with relaxed
orthographic rules, the transducer with the additional orthographic rules handles only word forms that
were not recognized by the standard normalizer.
As most Quechua texts contain Spanish words, we included two additional finite state transducers that
recognize Quechua words with Spanish roots.
4
. The first one recognizes only word forms with correctly
written Spanish roots, whereas the second transducer includes several rules that allow for an alternative
spelling of the Spanish words (e.g. /c/ might be written as /k/ in a Quechua text). Furthermore, we
implemented a guesser that attempts to split word forms into morphemes if the root is unknown. In order
to prevent highly unlikely analyses, we restrict the guessing to roots of at least two syllables and with at
least one Quechua suffix attached.
The five transducers are joined in a cascade: If the normalizer fails to analyze a word, the Spanish
transducer is invoked. If this fails as well, the word is passed on to the second normalizer with relaxed
orthography. If the word form has still no analysis, the second Spanish transducer with relaxed orthog-
raphy attempts to find an analysis. Finally, if all transducers failed, the word is handed to the guesser.
One of the texts used for evaluation, a story called El joven que se subi?o al cielo (Lira, 1990) contains
relatively few words with Spanish roots, but in the other text, the biography of Quechua native speaker
Gregorio Condori Mamani, almost every sentence contains at least one word with a Spanish root. In this
case, the Spanish transducer makes a considerable difference: coverage increases by ?22%, see Table
3. Furthermore, we tested the morphological analyzers on a third text, Cancionero, with an even more
inconsistent spelling of Quechua words. The Cancionero contains religious (catholic) songs written in a
?Spanish? orthography, see the ?Spanish? example in Table 1. The restrictive Quechua and Spanish ana-
lyzers recognize only half of the word forms in this text, but the transducers with broader orthographic
rules (?relax?) increase the number of analyzed tokens to 96%, see Table 3.
5 Disambiguation
Given the fact that a Quechua word form can contain more than one morphological ambiguity, the dis-
ambiguation has to be done in several steps. The simplest approach is to disambiguate each word form
from ?left to right?:
? disambiguate the root (nominal vs. verbal)
? disambiguate nominalizing and verbalizing suffixes
? disambiguate verbal suffixes
5
4
The lexicon contains all the Spanish lemmas, except function words, from FreeLing (Padr?o and Stanilovsky, 2012)
5
There are no ambiguous sequences within the nominal suffixes, therefore the third step involves only verbal suffixes.
42
suwa suwa[NRoot][=ladr?on]
papanchikta papa[NRoot][=patata][--]nchik[NPers][+1.Pl.Incl.Poss][--]ta[Cas][+Acc]
tukunqa tuku[NRoot][=lechuza][--]n[NPers][+3.Sg.Poss][--]qa[Amb][+Top]
tukunqa tuku[VRoot][=acabar]][--]n[VPers][+3.Sg.Subj][--]qa[Amb][+Top]
tukunqa tuku[VRoot][=acabar][--]nqa[VPers][+3.Sg.Subj.Fut]
Figure 1: Ambiguous Morphological Analysis for Example 3
possible lemmas case possible root tags possible morph tags
suwa lc NRoot -
papa lc NRoot +1.Pl.Incl.Poss, +Acc
tuku lc NRoot, VRoot +3.Sg.Poss, +Top, +3.Sg.Subj, +3.Sg.Subj.Fut
Table 4: Features for Disambiguation with Wapiti, Example 3
? disambiguate independent suffixes
We use Wapiti (Lavergne et al., 2010), a toolkit for sequence labelling that includes an implementation
of conditional random fields, in order to train 4 crf models (one model for each step). We decided to use
conditional random fields, as the task of morphology disambiguation is in many ways similar to PoS
tagging. There is an inter-dependency between the labels: The decision which label a given instance
should receive depends to certain extent on the labels of the previous n instances.
The training material consists of two Quechua texts that were analyzed with the xfst tools (see section
4) and then manually disambiguated: the biography of Quechua native speaker Gregorio Condori Ma-
mani (Valderrama Fernandez and Escalante Gutierrez, 1977), that contains about 2500 sentences, and
some stories from a collection (Lira, 1990), that amount to about 300 sentences.
5.1 Model 1: Disambiguation of Ambiguous Roots
Some Quechua roots can be used nominally or verbally without derivation, see Example 1 and 2. The
disambiguation of roots can be regarded as PoS tagging with a very small tagset. Consider the following
example (taken from a story in (Lira, 1990)):
(3) ..suwa
thief
papa
potato
-nchik
-1P.ps
-ta
-Acc
tuku
end
-nqa..
-3S.Fut
?[..] the thief will take all our potatoes [..] (lit. ?the thief will end our potatoes?)
The root tuku- ?to end? is ambiguous: tuku- can also be a nominal root with the meaning ?owl?.
Furthermore, the sequence -nqa is ambiguous, apart from the 3rd singular future form, it could be a
combination of -n, ?3rd singular subject? or ?3rd singular possessive?, and -qa, ?topic?, see Fig. 1 with
the output of the xfst analyzer for this example. In a first step, the type of the root has to be determined,
the ambiguity of -nqa is only relevant if the root is verbal and will be postponed for later. In order to
disambiguate the root with Wapiti, every token needs to be converted into a set of features (an instance)
extracted from the xfst output, see Table 4. The words suwa and papanchikta are not ambiguous and
therefore have only one possible root tag, whereas tukunqa has two possible root tags: VRoot and NRoot.
Model 1 will assign one of them as class label, considering the features and the context of the given token.
Wapiti allows pre-labeled input data, therefore, we can already set the label of the unambiguous words
suwa and papanchikta. Note that the instances do not contain the full word form; due to the small size
of our training corpus, using full word forms leads to increased data sparseness and impairs the results.
5.2 Model 2: Disambiguation of Nominalizing and Verbalizing Suffixes
Even after the disambiguation of the root type, the final word form can still be either nominal or verbal,
as certain nominalizing and verbalizing suffixes are homophonous with verbal or nominal morphemes.
43
Consider the following examples:
(4) wasi
house
-cha
-Fact(VS)
-y
-Inf(NS)/2.Imp
?to build a house? or ?build a house!?
(5) rikhu
see
-sqa
-Perf(NS)
-yki
-2S.ps
?the one you saw, your seeing?
wasi
house
-cha
-Dim
-y
-1S.ps
?my small house, cottage?
rikhu
see
-sqayki
-1S>2S.Fut
?I will see you?
The suffix -cha attached to a nominal root can be either a diminutive or a factitive suffix (?make?):
With the diminutive, the resulting word form is still a noun, whereas the factitive suffix produces a verb.
In total, model 2 handles eight different cases of ambiguous verbalizing/nominalizing vs. verbal/nominal
suffixes. The features in models 2-4 are essentially the same as those in model 1 (see Table 4), but of
course the root type is no longer ambiguous, consequently there is only one root tag. With models 2-4,
we classify only words that exhibit a verbalizing/nominalizing vs. nominal/verbal ambiguity, whereas
words that are unambiguous for the particular model receive a dummy label (?none?).
5.3 Model 3: Disambiguation of Verbal Morphology
In the next step, we disambiguate six possible ambiguities in verb forms. One of the ambiguities in
question is the sequence -nqa from example 3: After applying model 1, we know that the root tuku in
tukunqa is verbal, but -nqa can still be either the 3rd singular future form or a combination of 3rd singular
present and topic marker, see example 6. Other ambiguities of this type involve -sun, which can be either
the imperative or future form of the first plural inclusive, as well as the sequence -sqaykiku, which can
be either the indirect past or future form of the first plural exclusive acting on a 2nd singular person.
(6) tuku
end
-nqa
-3S.Fut
?he will end?
tuku
end
-n
-3S
-qa
-Top
?he ends?
(7) llamk?a
work
-sun
-1Pl.incl.Fut
?we will work?
llamk?a
work
-sun
-1Pl.incl.Imp
?let?s work?
(8) qhawa
look
-sqaykiku
-1Pl.excl.>2S
?we (excl.) watch you?
qhawa
look
-sqa
-IPst
-ykiku
-1Pl.excl
?we (excl.) watched [they
say]?
5.4 Model 4: Disambiguation of Independent Suffixes
Model 4 disambiguates ambiguities that concern independent suffixes. None of these potential ambigu-
ities occur in all dialects and orthographies, but all of them concern the normalization and are therefore
important. There are 3 types of ambiguities that relate to independent suffixes:
The most common case involves the suffix -n, when the word form is nominal and -n follows a vowel:
in this case, -n can be the 3rd singular possessive, or it can be the allomorph of the evidential suffix
-mi. The latter is written as -m in the standard orthography, as well as in texts written in Ayacucho
Quechua, but occurs as -n in many texts written in Cuzco and Bolivian Quechua, see Example 9. A
further ambiguity that occurs only in Cuzco and Bolivian Quechua concerns the sequence -pis: -pis can
be the additive suffix (in Ayacucho Quechua always -pas) or a combination of the locative suffix -pi and
the evidential suffix -s, see Example 10. The third ambiguity of this type concerns Spanish words that
end in -s: In this case, -s can be an evidential suffix, but it can also be the Spanish plural
6
, see Example
11.
6
In certain Bolivian dialects -s is also used on native roots as plural suffix, see the Bolivian word p?achasta (normalized
p?achakunata) in Table 1.
44
gregorio joven
model 1 root tag Wapiti 95.35 85.71
baseline 65.12 72.62
model 2 NS/VS Wapiti 97.44 87.88
baseline 80.49 17.47
model 3 verbal s. Wapiti 85.71 66.67
baseline 88.89 75.00
model 4 independent s. Wapiti 85.37 86.11
baseline 64.10 50.00
Table 5: Evaluation: Precision of the Morphological Disambiguation Steps
(9) wasi
house
-n
-DirE
?house?
wasi
house
-n
-3S.ps
?his house?
(10) chay
this
-pis
-Add
?also this?
chay
this
-pi
-Loc
-s
-IndE
?there [they say]?
(11) derechu
right
-s
-IndE
?right [they say]?
derechus
rights
?rights?
6 Evaluation
We used the same test sets as for the evaluation of the morphological analysis in section 4: The last 72
sentences from the autobiography of Gregorio Condori Mamani (Valderrama Fernandez and Escalante
Gutierrez, 1977), and the Andean story El joven que se subi?o al cielo from (Lira, 1990) with about 250
sentences. Both test texts were excluded from the training set.
Table 5 illustrates the percentage of correctly disambiguated words with the particular ambiguity for
each step. Note that there were only a handful test cases for model 3 (verbal suffixes) in both texts, there-
fore, the results for this step might not be accurate. Furthermore, the number of instances extracted from
the training material for model 3 is smaller than for the other models, as these types of ambiguities are
relatively rare. For the normalization, errors in model 3 do not affect the outcome, as these ambiguities
have no effect on the surface forms in the standard orthography. Considering for instance example 6,
-nqa will be -nqa in the standard, irrespective of whether the analysis is -n -qa or -nqa.
Table 6 contains the evaluation of the whole texts. Although the percentage of tokens with a wrong
morphological analysis is almost the same in both texts, the total number of correctly analyzed words
is lower in the biography. This is due to the fact that this text contains many words with Spanish roots,
sometimes with ?quechuized? spelling. Many of these words were not recognized by the xfst analyzer
and were therefore not normalized.
The baseline for both Table 5 and 6 was calculated based on the frequencies of the forms in the training
material: The baseline shows the results that we obtain if we disambiguate the test texts choosing always
the most frequent class in every decision. The biggest difference as opposed to the Wapiti models is
that with this approach, we do not consider any context information. As you can see in Table 5, Wapiti
outperforms the baseline in every step except for model 3, where the training instances are too sparse.
There is a considerable difference in the baseline for the two test texts (see Table 6): on the biography,
the baseline is much higher. This is due to the fact that the largest part of the training material is part of
the same book, therefore the probability distribution of the individual classes in this test text correlates
better with the frequencies calculated from the training material. While the conditional random fields
improve the disambiguation on the test set similar to training material only slightly compared to the
baseline (+2%), the effect they have on the results for a test set from a different text is considerable:
>10%. Table 6 also contains the results obtained with the RFTagger (Schmid and Laws, 2008) and
Morfette (Grzegorz et al., 2008) for comparison. The main difference between our approach and the
morphological taggers is that the latter analyze and label the complete word form at once, whereas with
our approach, we disambiguate and normalize each word in several steps, proceeding from left to right.
The tagset used by the morphological taggers is thus much more fine-grained, as each tag contains the
45
El joven que subi?o al cielo Gregorio Condori Mamani
total sentences: 258 72
total token 1865 1015
punctuation marks: 567 171
xfst failures: 9 0.48% 25 2.46%
total word forms 1298 844
correct analysis: 1252 96.46% 789 93.48%
wrong analysis: 33 2.54% 17 2.01%
guessed, no analysis in gold: 4 0.31% 6 0.71%
ambiguous words: 282 21.73% 127 15.05%
still ambiguous: 0 7 5.51%
correct of ambig.: 249 88.30% 103 81.10%
wrong of ambig.: 33 11.70% 17 13.39%
morphological tagging (tag whole word form):
RFTagger (bigrams): 65.49% 72.21%
Morfette: 65.1% 78.32%
baseline (most frequent morphemes): 85.98% 91%
Table 6: Evaluation: Disambiguated Texts
morphology of the whole word. The results show clearly that our training corpus is too small to achieve
satisfactory results with morphological tagging. As mentioned before, not all ambiguities are relevant
for the normalization. In fact, many morphological ambiguities are not relevant for the conversion to the
standard orthography, therefore, the number of correctly normalized forms is higher than the proportion
of correctly disambiguated words from Table 6. In the text El joven que subi?o al cielo, the percentage of
correctly normalized words amounts to 99.61%, whereas for the biography of Gregorio Condori Mamani,
we achieve only 98.93%.
7 Conclusions
As standardized spelling is an indispensable prerequisite for any statistical processing, we built a pipeline
to normalize Quechua texts through morphological analysis and disambiguation. The morphological
analysis includes 5 cascaded transducers, two with Quechua root lexica and two with Spanish root lex-
ica, as Spanish loan words occur very frequently in Quechua texts. In every pair of transducers, the first
one follows a relatively strict orthography, whereas the second one has a set of phonological rules that
allow for more variation in the spelling of word forms. Furthermore, the cascade includes a guesser that
attempts to split word forms into morphemes if all the other transducers failed to do so. The transduc-
ers rewrite the individual morphemes according to the Unified Southern Quechua orthography (Cerr?on-
Palomino, 1994), but many words involve morphological ambiguities that might affect the normalized
form. In order to choose the correct analysis, we conduct a morphological disambiguation with condi-
tional random fields. We disambiguate the Quechua words in 4 steps, with four models trained to classify
the different types of ambiguities. Finally, we generate the normalized word forms from the now disam-
biguated sequence of morphemes. Our initial results are comparable to morphological disambiguation on
Turkish texts, despite the fact that we have a much smaller training corpus (? 2800 sentences, compared
to over 50,000 (G?org?un and Yildiz, 2011) and 45,000 sentences (Sak et al., 2007)). A possible explana-
tion is that Turkish morphology is more complex: Turkish has more productive suffixes than Quechua,
and there are relatively complex morpho-phonological rules that determine word formation, such as two
dimensional vowel harmony and context-sensitive realizations of consonants (Oflazer, 1994). Quechua
on the other hand, is a very regular agglutinative language.
Certain parts of the disambiguation pipeline suffer from data sparseness, in fact, at least one possible
ambiguous sequence never occurred in our training corpus and can therefore not be disambiguated, see
section 5.4. As the annotation of our treebanks proceeds, we will have more manually disambiguated
text, since the syntax trees are built on morphemes, not on whole words. With more training material,
the accuracy of the disambiguation and normalization process should increase.
46
References
Willem F. H. Adelaar and Pieter Muysken. 2004. The Languages of the Andes. Cambridge Language Surveys.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Willem F. H. Adelaar. 1987. Aymarismos en el quechua de Puno. Indiana, 11:223?231.
Rodolfo Cerr?on-Palomino. 1994. Quechua sure?no, diccionario unificado quechua-castellano, castellano-
quechua. Biblioteca Nacional del Per?u, Lima.
Onur G?org?un and Olcay Taner Yildiz. 2011. A Novel Approach to Morphological Disambiguation for Turkish.
In Erol Gelenbe, Ricardo Lent, and Georgia Sakellari, editors, Computer and Information Sciences II - 26th
International Symposium on Computer and Information Sciences, pages 77?83, London, UK. Springer.
Chrupala Grzegorz, Georgiana Dinu, and Josef van Genabith. 2008. Learning Morphology with Morfette. In
Khalid Choukri Bente Maegaard Joseph Mariani Jan Odijk Stelios Piperidis Daniel Tapias Nicoletta Calzolari
(Conference Chair), editor, Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC?08), Marrakech, Morocco. European Language Resources Association (ELRA).
Dilek Z. Hakkani-T?ur, Kemal Oflazer, and G?okhan T?ur. 2002. Statistical Morphological Disambiguation for
Agglutinative Languages. Computer and the Humanities, 36:381?410.
Thomas Lavergne, Olivier Capp?e, and Franc?ois Yvon. 2010. Practical Very Large Scale CRFs. In Proceedings
the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pages 504?513, Uppsala,
Sweden. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jorge Lira. 1990. Cuentos del Alto Urubamba. Centro de Estudios Regionales Andinos ?Bartolom?e de las Casas?,
Cuzco, Peru.
Kemal Oflazer. 1994. Two-level Description of Turkish Morphology. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 9(2).
Llu??s Padr?o and Evgeny Stanilovsky. 2012. FreeLing 3.0: Towards Wider Multilinguality. In Proceedings of the
Language Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC 2012), Istanbul, Turkey, May. ELRA.
Has?im Sak, Tunga G?ung?or, and Murat Sarac?lar. 2007. Morphological disambiguation of Turkish text with percep-
tron algorithm. In A. Gelbukh, editor, Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Text Process-
ing and Computational Linguistics, pages 107?118, Mexico City, Mexico. Springer.
Helmut Schmid and Florian Laws. 2008. Estimation of conditional probabilities with decision trees and an
application to fine-grained POS tagging. In Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, volume 1 of COLING ?08, pages 777?784. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ricardo Valderrama Fernandez and Carmen Escalante Gutierrez. 1977. Gregorio Condori Mamani - Autobi-
ograf??a. Biblioteca de la Tradici
?on Oral Andina. Centro de Estudios Rurales Andinos ?Bartolom?e de las Casas?,
Cuzco, Peru.
Alfredo Quiroz Villarroel. 2000. Gram?atica Quechua. Ministerio de Educaci
?on, Cultura y Deportes, Fondo de las
Naciones Unidas para la Infancia (UNICEF), Bolivia.
47
