Web Corpus Mining by instance of Wikipedia
Ru?diger Gleim, Alexander Mehler & Matthias Dehmer
Bielefeld University, D-33615 Bielefeld, Germany
Ruediger.Gleim@uni-bielefeld.de
Alexander.Mehler@uni-bielefeld.de
Technische Universita?t Darmstadt, Fachbereich Informatik
dehmer@tk.informatik.tu-darmstadt.de
Abstract
In this paper we present an approach to
structure learning in the area of web doc-
uments. This is done in order to approach
the goal of webgenre tagging in the area of
web corpus linguistics. A central outcome
of the paper is that purely structure ori-
ented approaches to web document classi-
fication provide an information gain which
may be utilized in combined approaches of
web content and structure analysis.
1 Introduction
In order to reliably judge the collocative affinity of
linguistic items, it has to be considered that judge-
ments of this kind depend on the scope of certain
genres or registers. According to Stubbs (2001),
words may have different collocates in different
text types or genres and therefore may signal one
of those genres when being observed. Conse-
quently, corpus analysis requires, amongst oth-
ers, a comparison of occurrences in a given text
with typical occurrences in other texts of the same
genre (Stubbs, 2001, p. 120).
This raises the question how to judge the mem-
bership of texts, in which occurrences of linguistic
items are observed, to the genres involved. Evi-
dently, because of the size of the corpora involved,
this question is only adequately answered by ref-
erence to the area of automatic classification. This
holds all the more for web corpus linguistics (Kil-
garriff and Grefenstette, 2003; Baroni and Bernar-
dini, 2006) where large corpora of web pages,
whose membership in webgenres is presently un-
known, have to be analyzed. Consequently, web
corpus linguistics faces two related task:
1. Exploration: The task of initially exploring
which webgenres actually exist.
2. Categorization: The task of categorizing hy-
pertextual units according to their member-
ship in the genres being explored in the latter
step.
In summary, web corpus linguistics is in need
of webgenre-sensitive corpora, that is, of corpora
in which for the textual units being incorporated
the membership to webgenres is annotated. This
in turn presupposes that these webgenres are first
of all explored.
Currently to major classes of approaches can
be distinguished: On the one hand, we find ap-
proaches to the categorization of macro structures
(Amitay et al, 2003) such as web hierarchies, di-
rectories and corporate sites. On the other hand,
this concerns the categorization of micro struc-
tures as, for example, single web pages (Klein-
berg, 1999) or even page segments (Mizuuchi and
Tajima, 1999). The basic idea of all these ap-
proaches is to perform categorization as a kind of
function learning for mapping web units above, on
or below the level of single pages onto at most
one predefined category (e.g. genre label) per unit
(Chakrabarti et al, 1998). Thus, these approaches
focus on the categorization task while disregarding
the exploration task. More specifically, the ma-
jority of these approaches utilizes text categoriza-
tion methods in conjunction with HTML markup,
metatags and link structure beyond bag-of-word
representations of the pages? wording as input of
feature selection (Yang et al, 2002) ? in some
cases also of linked pages (Fu?rnkranz, 1999).
What these approaches are missing is a more
general account of web document structure as a
source of genre-oriented categorization. That is,
67
they solely map web units onto feature vectors by
disregarding their structure. This includes linkage
beyond pairwise linking as well as document inter-
nal structures according to the Document Object
Model (DOM). A central pitfall of this approach is
that it disregards the impact of genre membership
to document structure and, thus, the signalling of
the former by the latter (Ventola, 1987). Therefore
a structure-sensitive approach is needed in the area
of corpus linguistics which allows for automatic
webgenre tagging. That is, an approach which
takes both levels of structuring of web documents
into account: On the level of their hyperlink-based
linkage and on the level of their internal structure.
In this paper we present an algorithm as a
preliminary step for tackling the exploration and
categorization task together. More specifically,
we present an approach to unsupervised structure
learning which uses tree alignment algorithms as
similarity kernels and cluster analysis for class de-
tection. The paper includes a comparative study of
several approaches to tree alignment as a source of
similarity measuring of web documents. Its cen-
tral topics are:
? To what extent is it possible to predict the
membership of a web document in a certain
genre (or register) solely on grounds of its
structure when its lexical content and other
content bearing units are completely deleted?
In other words, we ask to what extent struc-
ture signals membership in genre.
? A more methodical question regards the
choice of appropriate measures of structural
similarity to be included into structure learn-
ing. In this context, we comparatively study
several variants of measuring similarities of
trees, that is, tree edit distance as well as a
class of algorithms which are based on tree
linearizations as input to sequence alignment.
Our overall findings hint at two critical points:
First, there is a significant contribution of
structure-oriented methods to webgenre catego-
rization which is unexplored in predominant ap-
proaches. Second, and most surprisingly, all
methods analyzed toughly compete with a method
based on random linearization of input documents.
Why is this research important for web corpus
linguistics? An answer to this question can be out-
lined as follows:
? We explore a further resource of reliably tag-
ging web genres and registers, respectively,
in the form of document structure.
? We further develop the notion of webgenre
and thus help to make document structure ac-
cessible to collocation and other corpus lin-
guistic analyses.
In order to support this argumentation, we first
present a structure insensitive approach to web cat-
egorization in section (2). It shows that this in-
sensitivity systematically leads to multiple cate-
gorizations which cannot be traced back to ambi-
guity of category assignment. In order to solve
this problem, an alternative approach to structure
learning is presented in sections (3.1), (3.2) and
(3.3). This approach is evaluated in section (3.4)
on grounds of a corpus of Wikipedia articles. The
reason for utilizing this test corpus is that the
content-based categories which the explored web
documents belong to are known so that we can ap-
ply the classical apparatus of evaluation of web
mining. The final section concludes and prospects
future work.
2 Hypertext Categorization
The basic assumption behind present day ap-
proaches to hypertext categorization is as follows:
Web units of similar function/content tend to have
similar structures. The central problem is that
these structures are not directly accessible by seg-
menting and categorizing single web pages. This
is due to polymorphism and its reversal relation
of discontinuous manifestation: Generally speak-
ing, polymorphism occurs if the same (hyper-
)textual unit manifests several categories. This
one-to-many relation of expression and content
units is accompanied by a reversal relation accord-
ing to which the same content or function unit
is distributed over several expression units. This
combines to a many-to-many relation between
explicit, manifesting web structure and implicit,
manifested functional or content-based structure.
Our hypothesis is that if polymorphism is a
prevalent characteristic of web units, web pages
cannot serve as input of categorization since poly-
morphic pages simultaneously instantiate several
categories. Moreover, these multiple categoriza-
tions are not simply resolved by segmenting the
focal pages, since they possibly manifest cate-
gories only discontinuously so that their features
68
do not provide a sufficient discriminatory power.
In other words: We expect polymorphism and dis-
continuous manifestation to be accompanied by
many multiple categorizations without being re-
ducible to the problem of disambiguating category
assignments. In order to show this, we perform
a categorization experiment according to the clas-
sical setting of function learning, using a corpus
of the genre of conference websites. Since these
websites serve recurrent functions (e.g. paper sub-
mission, registration etc.) they are expected to be
structured homogeneously on the basis of stable,
recurrent patterns. Thus, they can be seen as good
candidates of categorization.
The experiment is performed as follows: We
apply support vector machine (SVM) classifica-
tion which proves to be successful in case of
sparse, high dimensional and noisy feature vec-
tors (Joachims, 2002). SVM classification is per-
formed with the help of the LibSVM (Hsu et al,
2003). We use a corpus of 1,078 English con-
ference websites and 28,801 web pages. Hyper-
text representation is done by means of a bag-
of-features approach using about 85,000 lexical
and 200 HTML features. This representation was
done with the help of the HyGraph system which
explores websites and maps them onto hypertext
graphs (Mehler and Gleim, 2005). Following (Hsu
et al, 2003), we use a Radial Basis Function ker-
nel and make optimal parameter selection based
on a minimization of a 5-fold cross validation er-
ror. Further, we perform a binary categorization
for each of the 16 categories based on 16 training
sets of pos./neg. examples (see table 1). The size
of the training set is 1,858 pages (284 sites); the
size of the test set is 200 (82 sites). We perform 3
experiments:
1. Experiment A ? one against all: First we ap-
ply a one against all strategy, that is, we use
X \ Yi as the set of negative examples for
learning category Ci where X is the set of all
training examples and Yi is the set of positive
examples of Ci. The results are listed in table
(1). It shows the expected low level of effec-
tivity: recall and precession perform very low
on average. In three cases the classifiers fail
completely. This result is confirmed when
looking at column A of table (2): It shows
the number of pages with up to 7 category
assignments. In the majority of cases no cat-
egory could be applied at all ? only one-third
Category rec. prec.
Abstract(s) 0.2 1.0
Accepted Papers 0.3 1.0
Call for Papers 0.1 1.0
Committees 0.5 0.8
Contact Information 0 0
Exhibition 0.4 1.0
Important Dates 0.8 1.0
Invited Talks 0 0
Menu 0.7 0.7
Photo Gallery 0 0
Program, Schedule 0.8 1.0
Registration 0.9 1.0
Sections, Sessions, Plenary etc. 0.1 0.3
Sponsors and Partners 0 0
Submission Guidelines etc. 0.5 0.8
Venue, Travel, Accommodation 0.9 1.0
Table 1: The categories of the conference website
genre applied in the experiment.
of the pages was categorized.
2. Experiment B ? lowering the discriminatory
power: In order to augment the number of
categorizations, we lowered the categories?
selectivity by restricting the number of neg-
ative examples per category to the number
of the corresponding positive examples by
sampling the negative examples according to
the sizes of the training sets of the remain-
ing categories. The results are shown in ta-
ble (2): The number of zero categorizations
is dramatically reduced, but at the same time
the number of pages mapped onto more than
one category increases dramatically. There
are even more than 1,000 pages which are
mapped onto more than 5 categories.
3. Experiment C ? segment level categorization:
Thirdly, we apply the classifiers trained on
the monomorphic training pages on segments
derived as follows: Pages are segmented into
spans of at least 30 tokens reflecting segment
borders according to the third level of the
pages? document object model trees. Col-
umn C of table (2) shows that this scenario
does not solve the problem of multiple cate-
gorizations since it falls back to the problem
of zero categorizations. Thus, polymorphism
is not resolved by simply segmenting pages,
as other segmentations along the same line of
constraints confirmed.
There are competing interpretations of these re-
sults: The category set may be judged to be wrong.
But it reflects the most differentiated set applied
so far in this area. Next, the representation model
69
number of ca- A B C
tegorizations page level page level segment level
0 12,403 346 27,148
1 6,368 2387 9,354
2 160 5076 137
3 6 5258 1
4 0 3417 0
5 0 923 0
6 0 1346 0
7 0 184 0
Table 2: The number of pages mapped onto
0, 1, ..., 7 categories in experiment A, B and C.
may be judged to be wrong, but actually it is usu-
ally applied in text categorization. Third, the cate-
gorization method may be seen to be ineffective,
but SVMs are known to be one of the most ef-
fective methods in this area. Further, the clas-
sifiers may be judged to be wrong ? of course
the training set could be enlarged, but already in-
cludes about 2,000 manually selected monomor-
phic training units. Finally, the focal units (i.e.
web pages) may be judged to be unsystematically
polymorph in the sense of manifesting several log-
ical units. It is this interpretation which we believe
to be supported by the experiment.
If this interpretation is true, the structure of
web documents comes into focus. This raises
the question, what can be gained at all when ex-
ploring the visible structuring of documents as
found on the web. That is, what is the infor-
mation gain when categorizing documents solely
based on their structures. In order to approach this
question we perform an experiment in structure-
oriented classification in the next section. As
we need to control the negative impact of poly-
morphism, we concentrate on monomorphic pages
which uniquely belong to single categories. This
can be guaranteed with the help of Wikipedia arti-
cles which, with the exception of special disam-
biguation pages, only address one topic respec-
tively.
3 Structure-Based Categorization
3.1 Motivation
In this section we investigate how far a corpus of
documents can be categorized by solely consid-
ering the explicit document structure without any
textual content. It is obvious that we cannot ex-
pect the results to reach the performance of con-
tent based approaches. But if this approach allows
to significantly distinguish between categories in
contrast to a reference random decider we can con-
clude that the involvement of structure informa-
tion may positively affect categorization perfor-
mance. A positive evaluation can be seen to mo-
tivate an implementation of the Logical Document
Structure (LDS) algorithm proposed by Mehler et
al. (2005) who include graph similarity measuring
as its kernel. We expect the same experiment to
perform significantly better on the LDS instead of
the explicit structures. However this experiment
can only be seen as a first attempt. Further studies
with larger corpora are required.
3.2 Experiment setup
In our experiment, we chose a corpus of articles
from the German Wikipedia addressing the fol-
lowing categories:
? American Presidents (41 pages)
? European Countries (50 pages)
? German Cities (78 pages)
? German Universities (93 pages)
With the exception of the first category most ar-
ticles, being represented as a HTML web page,
share a typical, though not deterministic visible
structure. For example a Wikipedia article about a
city contains an info box to the upper right which
lists some general information like district, pop-
ulation and geographic location. Furthermore an
article about a city contains three or more sections
which address the history, politics, economics
and possibly famous buildings or persons. Like-
wise there exist certain design guidelines by the
Wikipedia project to write articles about countries
and universities. However these guidelines are not
always followed or they are adapted from one case
to another. Therefore, a categorization cannot rely
on definite markers in the content. Nevertheless,
the expectation is that a human reader, once he has
seen a few samples of each category, can with high
probability guess the category of an article by sim-
ple looking at the layout or visible structure and ig-
noring the written content. Since the layout (esp.
the structure) of a web page is encoded in HTML
we consider the structure of their DOM1-trees for
our categorization experiment. If two articles of
the same category share a common visible struc-
ture, this should lead to a significant similarity of
1Document Object Model.
70
the DOM-trees. The articles of category ?Ameri-
can Presidents? form an exception to this principle
up to now because they do not have a typical struc-
ture. The articles about the first presidents are rel-
atively short whereas the articles about the recent
presidents are much more structured and complex.
We include this category to test how well a struc-
ture based categorizer performs on such diverse
structurations. We examine two corpus variants:
I. All HTML-Tags of a DOM-tree are used for
similarity measurement.
II. Only those HTML-tags of a DOM-tree are
used which have an impact on the visible
structure (i.e. inline tags like font or i are ig-
nored).
Both cases, I and II, do not include any text
nodes. That is, all lexical content is ignored. By
distinguishing these two variants we can examine
what impact these different degrees of expressive-
ness have on the categorization performance.
3.3 Distance measurement and clustering
The next step of the experiment is marked by a
pairwise similarity measurement of the wikipedia
articles which are represented by their DOM-trees
according to the two variants described in section
3.2. This allows to create a distance matrix which
represents the (symmetric) distances of a given ar-
ticle to any other. In a subsequent and final step
the distance matrix will be clustered and the re-
sults analyzed.
How to measure the similarity of two DOM-
trees? This raises the question what exactly the
subject of the measurement is and how it can be
adequately modeled. Since the DOM is a tree and
the order of the HTML-tags matters, we choose
ordered trees. Furthermore we want to represent
what tag a node represents. This leads to ordered
labeled trees for representation. Since trees are
a common structure in various areas such as im-
age analysis, compiler optimization and bio infor-
matics (i.e. RNA analysis) there is a high inter-
est in methods to measure the similarity between
trees (Tai, 1979; Zhang and Shasha, 1989; Klein,
1998; Chen, 2001; Ho?chsmann et al, 2003). One
of the first approaches with a reasonable compu-
tational complexity was introduced by Tai (1979)
who extended the problem of sequence edit dis-
tance to trees.
T2T1
Post-order linearization and alignment:
T2
S
T1
S
HTML
HEAD
TITLE H1 P
HTML
HEAD
TITLE H1
TITLE HEAD H1 P HTML
TITLE HEAD H1 HTML<gap>
BODY
BODY
BODY BODY
Figure 1: An example for Post-order linearization
and sequence alignment.
The following description of tree edit distances
is due to Bille (2003): The principle to compute
the edit distance between two trees T
1
, T
2
is to
successively perform elementary edit operations
on the former tree to turn it into the formation of
the latter. The edit operations on a given tree T
are as follows: Relabel changes the label of a node
v ? T . Delete deletes a non-root node v ? T with
a parent node w ? T . Since v is being deleted,
its child nodes (if any) are inserted as children of
node w. Finally the Insert operation marks the
complement of delete. Next, an edit script S is
a list of consecutive edit operations which turn T
1
into T
2
. Given a cost function for each edit opera-
tion the cost of S is the sum of its elementary op-
eration costs. The optimal edit script (there is pos-
sibly more than one) between T
1
and T
2
is given
by the edit script of minimum cost which equals
the tree edit distance.
There are various algorithms known to com-
pute the edit distance (Tai, 1979; Zhang and
Shasha, 1989; Klein, 1998; Chen, 2001). They
vary in computational complexity and whether
they can be used for general purpose or un-
der special restrictions only (which allows for
better optimization). In this experiment we
use the general-purpose algorithm of Zhang
and Shasha (1989) which shows a complexity
of O(|T
1
||T
2
|min(L
1
,D
1
)min(L
2
,D
2
)) where
|Ti|, Li, Di denote the number of nodes, the num-
ber of leafs and the depth of the trees respectively.
The approach of tree edit distance forms a good
balance between accurate distance measurement
of trees and computational complexity. However,
especially for large corpora it might be useful
to examine how well other (i.e. faster) methods
71
perform. We therefore consider another class of
algorithms for distance measurement which are
based on sequence alignments via dynamic pro-
gramming. Since this approach is restricted to the
comparison of sequences, a suitable linearization
of the DOM trees has to be found. For this task we
use several strategies of tree node traversal: Pre-
Order, Post-Order and Breath-First-Search (BFS)
traversal. Figure (1) shows a linearization of two
sample trees using Post-Order and how the result-
ing sequences STi may have been aligned for the
best alignment distance. We have enhanced the
labels of the linearized nodes by adding the in-
and out degrees corresponding to the former po-
sition of the nodes in the tree. This information
can be used during the computation of the align-
ment cost: An example of this is that the align-
ment of two nodes with identical HTML-tags but
different in/out degrees will result in a higher cost
than in cases where these degrees match. Follow-
ing this strategy, at least part of the structure in-
formation is preserved. This approach is followed
by Dehmer (2005) who develops a special form of
tree linearization which is based on tree levels.
Obviously, a linearization poses a loss of struc-
ture information which has impact on the results
of distance measurement. But the computational
complexity of sequence alignments (O(n2)) is sig-
nificantly better than of tree edit distances. This
leads to a trade-off between the expressiveness of
the DOM-Tree representation (in our case tree vs.
linearization to a sequence) and the complexity of
the algorithms to compute the distance thereon.
In order to have a baseline for tree linearization
techniques we have also tested random lineariza-
tions. According to this method, trees are trans-
formed into sequences of nodes in random order.
For our experiment we have generated 16 random
linearizations and computed the median of their
categorization performances.
Next, we perform pairwise distance measure-
ments of the DOM-trees using the set of algo-
rithms described above. We then apply two clus-
tering methods on the resulting distance matrices:
hierarchical agglomerative and k-means cluster-
ing. Hierarchical agglomerative clustering does
not need any information on the expected number
of clusters so we examine all possible clusterings
and chose the one maximizing the F -measure.
However we also examine how well hierarchical
clustering performs if the number of partitions is
restricted to the number of categories. In contrast
to the previous approach, k-means needs to be in-
formed about the number of clusters in advance,
which in the present experiment equals the num-
ber of categories, which in our case is four. Be-
cause we know the category of each article we can
perform an exhaustive parameter study to maxi-
mize the well known efficiency measures purity,
inverse purity and the combined F -measure.
3.4 Results and discussion
The tables (3) and (5) show the results for cor-
pus variant I (using all HTML-tags) and variant
II (using structure relevant HTML-tags only) (see
section 3.2). The general picture is that hierarchi-
cal clustering performs significantly better than k-
means. However this is only the case for an un-
restricted number of clusters. If we restrict the
number of clusters for hierarchical clustering to
the number of categories, the differences become
much less apparent (see tables 4 and 6). The only
exception to this is marked by the tree edit dis-
tance: The best F -measure of 0.863 is achieved
by using 58 clusters. If we restrict the number of
clusters to 4, tree edit still reaches an F -measure
of 0.710 which is significantly higher than the best
k-means result of 0.599.
As one would intuitively expect the results
achieved by the tree edit distance are much bet-
ter than the variants of tree linearization. The edit
distance operates on trees whereas the other algo-
rithms are bound to less informative sequences.
Interestingly, the differences become much less
apparent for the corpus variant II which consists
of the simplified DOM-trees (see section 3.2). We
can assume that the advantage of the tree edit dis-
tance over the linearization-based approaches di-
minishes, the smaller the trees to be compared are.
The performance of the different variants of tree
linearization vary only significantly in the case of
unrestricted hierarchical clustering (see tables 3
and 5). In the case of k-means as well as in the
case of restricting hierarchical clustering to ex-
actly 4 clusters, the performances are about equal.
In order to provide a baseline for better rating
the cluster results, we perform random clustering.
This leads to an F -measure of 0.311 (averaged
over 1,000 runs). Content-based categorization
experiments using the bag of words model have
reported F -measures of about 0.86 (Yang, 1999).
The baseline for the different variants of lin-
72
Similarity Algorithm Clustering Algorithm # Clusters F-Measure Purity Inverse Purity PW Distance Method-Specifical
tree edit distance hierarchical 58 0.863 0.996 0.786 none weighted linkage
post-order linearization hierarchical 13 0.775 0.809 0.775 spearman single linkage
pre-order linearization hierarchical 19 0.741 0.817 0.706 spearman single linkage
tree level linearization hierarchical 36 0.702 0.882 0.603 spearman single linkage
bfs linearization hierarchical 13 0.696 0.698 0.786 spearman single linkage
tree edit distance k-means 4 0.599 0.618 0.641 - cosine distance
pre-order linearization k-means 4 0.595 0.615 0.649 - cosine distance
post-order linearization k-means 4 0.593 0.615 0.656 - cosine distance
tree level linearization k-means 4 0.593 0.603 0.649 - cosine distance
random lin. (medians only) - - 0.591 0.563 0.795 - -
bfs linearization k-means 4 0.580 0.595 0.656 - cosine distance
- random 4 0.311 0.362 0.312 - -
Table 3: Evaluation results using all tags.
Similarity Algorithm Clustering Algorithm # Clusters F-Measure Purity Inverse Purity PW Distance Method-Specifical
tree edit distance hierarchical 4 0.710 0.698 0.851 spearman single linkage
bfs linearization hierarchical 4 0.599 0.565 0.851 none weighted linkage
tree level linearization hierarchical 4 0.597 0.615 0.676 spearman complete linkage
post-order linearization hierarchical 4 0.595 0.615 0.683 spearman average linkage
pre-order linearization hierarchical 4 0.578 0.599 0.660 cosine average linkage
Table 4: Evaluation results using all tags and hierarchical clustering with a fixed number of clusters.
earization is given by random linearizations: We
perform 16 random linearizations, run the differ-
ent variants of distance measurement as well as
clustering and compute the median of the best F -
measure values achieved. These are 0.591 for cor-
pus variant I and 0.581 for the simplified vari-
ant II. These results are in fact surprising because
they are only little worse than the other lineariza-
tion techniques. This result may indicate that ?
in the present scenario ? the linearization based
approaches to tree distance measurement are not
suitable because of the loss of structure informa-
tion. More specifically, this raises the following
antithesis: Either, the sequence-oriented models
of measuring structural similarities taken into ac-
count are insensitive to the structuring of web doc-
uments. Or: this structuring only counts what
regards the degrees of nodes and their labels ir-
respective of their order. As tree-oriented meth-
ods perform better, we view this to be an argu-
ment against linearization oriented methods, at
least what regards the present evaluation scenario
to which only DOM trees are input but not more
general graph structures.
The experiment has shown that analyzing the
document structure provides a remarkable amount
of information to categorization. It also shows that
the sensitivity of the approaches used in different
contexts needs to be further explored which we
will address in our future research.
4 Conclusion
We presented a cluster-based approach to struc-
ture learning in the area of web documents. This
was done in order to approach the goal of a com-
bined algorithm of webgenre exploration and cat-
egorization. As argued in section (1), such an al-
gorithm is needed in web corpus linguistics for
webgenre tagging as a prerequisite of measuring
genre-sensitive collocations. In order to evaluate
the present approach, we utilized a corpus of wiki-
based articles. The evaluation showed that there is
an information gain when measuring the similar-
ities of web documents irrespective of their lexi-
cal content. This is in the line of the genre model
of systemic functional linguistics (Ventola, 1987)
which prospects an impact of genre membership
on text structure. As the corpus used for evalua-
tion is limited to tree-like structures, this approach
is in need for further development. Future work
will address this task. This regards especially the
classification of graph-like representations of web
documents which take their link structure into ac-
count.
References
Einat Amitay, David Carmel, Adam Darlow, Ronny
Lempel, and Aya Soffer. 2003. The connectivity
sonar: detecting site functionality by structural pat-
terns. In Proc. of the 14th ACM conference on Hy-
pertext and Hypermedia, pages 38?47.
Marco Baroni and Silvia Bernardini, editors. 2006.
WaCky! Working papers on the Web as corpus.
Gedit, Bologna, Italy.
Philip Bille. 2003. Tree edit distance, alignment dis-
tance and inclusion. Technical report TR-2003-23.
Soumen Chakrabarti, Byron Dom, and Piotr Indyk.
73
Similarity Algorithm Clustering Algorithm # Clusters F-Measure Purity Inverse Purity PW Distance Method-Specifical
tree edit distance hierarchical 51 0.756 0.905 0.691 none weighted linkage
pre-order linearization hierarchical 20 0.742 0.809 0.771 spearman single linkage
post-order linearization hierarchical 23 0.732 0.813 0.756 spearman single linkage
tree level linearization hierarchical 2 0.607 0.553 0.878 spearman weighted linkage
bfs linearization hierarchical 4 0.589 0.603 0.641 cosine weighted linkage
tree edit distance k-means 4 0.713 0.718 0.718 - cosine distance
pre-order linearization k-means 4 0.587 0.603 0.634 - cosine distance
tree level linearization k-means 4 0.584 0.603 0.641 - cosine distance
bfs linearization k-means 4 0.583 0.599 0.637 - cosine distance
post-order linearization k-means 4 0.582 0.592 0.630 - cosine distance
random lin. (medians only) - - 0.581 0.584 0.674 - -
- random 4 0.311 0.362 0.312 - -
Table 5: Evaluation results using structure relevant tags only.
Similarity Algorithm Clustering Algorithm # Clusters F-Measure Purity Inverse Purity PW Distance Method-Specifical
tree edit distance hierarchical 4 0.643 0.645 0.793 spearman average linkage
post-order linearization hierarchical 4 0.629 0.634 0.664 spearman average linkage
tree level linearization hierarchical 4 0.607 0.595 0.679 spearman weighted linkage
bfs linearization hierarchical 4 0.589 0.603 0.641 cosine weighted linkage
pre-order linearization hierarchical 4 0.586 0.603 0.660 cosine complete linkage
Table 6: Evaluation results using all tags and hierarchical clustering with a fixed number of clusters.
1998. Enhanced hypertext categorization using hy-
perlinks. In Proceedings of ACM SIGMOD Inter-
national Conference on Management of Data, pages
307?318. ACM.
Weimin Chen. 2001. New algorithm for ordered tree-
to-tree correction problem. Journal of Algorithms,
40(2):135?158.
Matthias Dehmer. 2005. Strukturelle Analyse Web-
basierter Dokumente. Ph.D. thesis, Technische Uni-
versita?t Darmstadt, Fachbereich Informatik.
Johannes Fu?rnkranz. 1999. Exploiting structural infor-
mation for text classification on the WWW. In Pro-
ceedings of the Third International Symposium on
Advances in Intelligent Data Analysis, pages 487?
498, Berlin/New York. Springer.
M. Ho?chsmann, T. To?ller, R. Giegerich, and S. Kurtz.
2003. Local similarity in rna secondary struc-
tures. In Proc. Computational Systems Bioinformat-
ics, pages 159?168.
Chih-Wei Hsu, Chih-Chung Chang, and Chih-Jen Lin.
2003. A practical guide to SVM classification.
Technical report, Department of Computer Science
and Information Technology, National Taiwan Uni-
versity.
Thorsten Joachims. 2002. Learning to classify text
using support vector machines. Kluwer, Boston.
Adam Kilgarriff and Gregory Grefenstette. 2003. In-
troduction to the special issue on the web as corpus.
Computational Linguistics, 29(3):333?347.
P. Klein. 1998. Computing the edit-distance between
unrooted ordered trees. In G. Bilardi, G. F. Italiano,
A. Pietracaprina, and G. Pucci, editors, Proceedings
of the 6th Annual European Symposium, pages 91?
102, Berlin. Springer.
Jon M. Kleinberg. 1999. Authoritative sources in
a hyperlinked environment. Journal of the ACM,
46(5):604?632.
Alexander Mehler and Ru?diger Gleim. 2005. The net
for the graphs ? towards webgenre representation
for corpus linguistic studies. In Marco Baroni and
Silvia Bernardini, editors, WaCky! Working papers
on the Web as corpus. Gedit, Bologna, Italy.
Alexander Mehler, Ru?diger Gleim, and Matthias
Dehmer. 2005. Towards structure-sensitive hyper-
text categorization. In Proceedings of the 29th An-
nual Conference of the German Classification Soci-
ety, Berlin. Springer.
Yoshiaki Mizuuchi and Keishi Tajima. 1999. Finding
context paths for web pages. In Proceedings of the
10th ACM Conference on Hypertext and Hyperme-
dia, pages 13?22.
Michael Stubbs. 2001. On inference theories and code
theories: Corpus evidence for semantic schemas.
Text, 21(3):437?465.
K. C. Tai. 1979. The tree-to-tree correction problem.
Journal of the ACM, 26(3):422?433.
Eija Ventola. 1987. The Structure of Social Interac-
tion: a Systemic Approach to the Semiotics of Ser-
vice Encounters. Pinter, London.
Yiming Yang, Sean Slattery, and Rayid Ghani. 2002.
A study of approaches to hypertext categorization.
Journal of Intelligent Information Systems, 18(2-
3):219?241.
Yiming Yang. 1999. An evaluation of statistical ap-
proaches to text categorization. Journal of Informa-
tion Retrieval, 1(1/2):67?88.
K. Zhang and D. Shasha. 1989. Simple fast algorithms
for the editing distance between trees and related
problems. SIAM Journal of Computing, 18:1245?
1262.
74
