A brief introduction to the GeM annotation schema for complex
document layout
John Bateman
University of Bremen
Bremen, Germany
bateman@uni-bremen.de
Renate Henschel
University of Stirling
Stirling, Scotland
rhenschel@uni-bremen.de
Judy Delin
University of Stirling and
Enterprise IDU
Newport Pagnell, England
judy.delin@enterpriseidu.com
Abstract
In this paper we sketch the design, motivation
and use of the GeM annotation scheme: an
XML-based annotation framework for prepar-
ing corpora involving documents with complex
layout of text, graphics, diagrams, layout and
other navigational elements. We set out the
basic organizational layers, contrast the techni-
cal approach with some other schemes for com-
plex markup in the XML tradition, and indicate
some of the applications we are pursuing.
1 Introduction
In the GeM project (?Genre and Multimodal-
ity?: http://www.purl.org/net/gem)
1
we are
investigating the relationship between different
document genres and their potential realiza-
tional forms in combinations of text, layout,
graphics, pictures and diagrams. The central fo-
cus of the project is to develop a theory of visual
and textual page layout in electronic and paper
documents that includes adequate attention to
local and expert knowledge in information de-
sign. By analysing resources across visual and
verbal modes, we aim to reveal the purpose of
each in contributing to the message and struc-
ture of the communicative artefact as a whole.
We see it as crucial, however, that research of
this nature be placed on as solid an empirical
basis as has become common in other areas of
linguistic inquiry. The data basis for many of
the claims made in this area hitherto has been
far too narrow: the provision of suitable corpus
materials is therefore fundamental.
For such an enterprise to succeed, it is es-
sential to obtain or construct a structured set
1
The GeM project is funded by the British Economic
and Social Research Council, whose support we grate-
fully acknowledge. We also thank the anonymous review-
ers for this workshop for some very useful comments.
of data on which to base the analysis; that
is, in the words of Gunther Kress, a leading
researcher in the area of multimodal meaning
(cf., e.g., Kress and Van Leeuwen (2001)): we
need ?to turn stuff into data?. In our case,
the ?stuff? consists of raw paged-based infor-
mation presentations, such as illustrated books,
newspapers (print and online versions), instruc-
tional texts, manuals, and so on; the ?data?
is then highly structured re-representations of
these documents that bring out parallel but in-
terrelated dimensions of organization crucial for
the total effect, or meaning, of the ?page?.
Although it is (a) widely accepted that data
for designing and improving natural language
processing can best be made available in the
form of structured, standardized annotated cor-
pora and (b) increasingly accepted that such
data should stretch to include more than the
traditional concerns of linguistics?i.e., speech
and plain text data?and take in more visu-
ally challenging presentations, movements in
this direction have to date been very limited.
The GeM annotation scheme is being devel-
oped in order to support analyses of the broader
range of layout-text-graphical interactions that
is commonplace in professionally designed doc-
uments. We are currently annotating an ex-
ploratory corpus in order to bring out the com-
plex interrelationships that can be observed
within page-based information delivery.
2 Annotation content
The starting basis for our annotation draws
on some detailed non-computational ac-
counts of the organization of multimodal
pages/documents?most specifically, the seminal
account of constraints on document design
by Waller (1987)?and exploratory computa-
tional accounts?such as the layout structures
introduced by Bateman et al (2001). This
organization reflects both artefact-internal
considerations such as the layout, text and
graphics, as well as artefact-external consid-
erations such as design decisions, production
constraints (e.g., cost), and artefact constraints
(i.e., the limited size of a piece of paper
contrasted with the theoretically unbounded
scrollable window on a computer screen). These
external considerations are often connected.
The ?ideal? layout of information on a page
might as a consequence never occur: it must
be ?folded in? to the structures afforded by the
artefact, and labelled and arranged according
to the structures required for access.
In order to pick apart and explicitly repre-
sent the strands of meaning that we believe play
a crucial role in multimodal page-based docu-
ment design, we require several orthogonal lay-
ers of annotation. We claim that these levels are
the minimum necessary for revealing accounts
of the operation of the kinds of visual artifacts
being gathered in our corpus?we expect further
layers to be added. Indeed, we consider it a
crucial design feature that the annotation lay-
ers adopted be additive and open rather than
excluding and closed. The layers at the focus of
attention within the current phase of the GeM
enterprise are:
? Rhetorical structure: the rhetorical rela-
tionships between content elements; how
the content is ?argued?;
? Layout structure: the nature, appearance
and position of communicative elements on
the page;
? Navigation structure: the ways in which
the intended mode(s) of consumption of the
document is/are supported.
We then need in addition to these layers, ex-
plicit representation of constraints that range
freely over the layers and which relate design
decisions to document types, or genres. Further
constraints that are known to determine docu-
ment design include: canvas constraints, arising
out of the physical nature of the object being
produced (e.g., page or screen, fold-geometry in
leaflets, and so on), production constraints, aris-
ing out of the production technology, and con-
sumption constraints, arising out of the time,
place, and manner of acquiring and consuming
the document. Further details and background
for our approach to document design and de-
scription are given in Delin et al (2002).
Our corpus needs to contain information
about each of these contributing sources of con-
straint in a way that supports empirical in-
vestigation. Our hypothesis, following Waller
(1987), is that not only is it possible to find
systematic correspondences between these lay-
ers, but also that those correspondences them-
selves will depend on specifiable aspects of their
context of use. But to verify (or otherwise) this
hypothesis, the data gathering and annotation
must come first. And this leads directly to some
important technical issues, since the structures
induced by these layers of constraint can be
highly divergent and need to be mapped onto
one another with extreme flexibility. The well-
known corpus annotation problem of intersect-
ing hierarchies therefore arises here with consid-
erable force.
3 Technical approach
Our approach to implementing the required
multiple layer annotation scheme is to adopt
multiple level ?stand-off? or ?remote? annota-
tions similar to those suggested by Thompson
and McKelvie (1997) or the Corpus Encoding
Standard (e.g., CES, 1999: Annex 10). For
each document to be included in the corpus,
therefore, we create a ?base level? document
whose purpose is provide a common set of units
to which all subsequent stand-off levels refer.
These base level units range over textual, graph-
ical and layout elements and give a comprehen-
sive account of the material on the page, i.e.
they comprise everything which can be seen on
the page/pages of the document, including: or-
thographic sentences, sentence fragments initi-
ating a list, headings, titles, headlines, photos,
drawings, diagrams, figures (without caption),
captions of photos, drawings, diagrams, tables,
text in photos, drawings, diagrams, icons, tables
cells, list headers, list items, list labels (itemiz-
ers), items in a menu, page numbers, footnotes
(without footnote label), footnote labels, run-
ning heads, emphasized text, horizontal or ver-
tical lines which function as delimiters between
columns or rows, lines, arrows, and polylines
which connect other base units. Each such el-
ement is marked as a base unit and receives a
unique base unit identifier.
The more abstract annotation levels may
then group base units as required; these group-
ings must again be very flexible?for exam-
ple, it is quite possible that non-consecutive
basic units need to be grouped (and that
differing non-consecutive basic units will be
grouped within differing annotation layers).
Each of the more abstract layers is repre-
sented formally as a further structured XML
specification whose precise informational con-
tent and form is in turn defined by an ap-
propriate Document Type Definition (DTD).
2
Each layer defines a particular structural view
of the original document. The markup
for a single document then consists mini-
mally of the following four inter-related layers:
Name content
GeM base base units
RST base rhetorical structure
Layout base layout properties and
structure
Navigation base navigation elements
and structure
All information apart from that of the base
level is expressed in terms of pointers to the rel-
evant units of the base level. This stand-off ap-
proach to annotation readily supports the nec-
essary range of intersecting, overlapping hierar-
chical structures commonly found in even the
simplest documents.
The relationships of the differing annotation
levels to the base level units is depicted graph-
ically in Figure 1. This shows that base units
(the central column) provide the basic vocabu-
lary for all other kinds of units and can, further,
be cross-classified.
Space precludes a detailed account of the or-
ganization of all the levels of the annotation
scheme. Instead we select some examples of an
annotated document at each layer of annotation
to give an indication of the annotation scheme in
action. For further technical details and spec-
ifications of the annotation scheme, the inter-
ested reader is referred to the technical manual
(Henschel, 2002). For ease of exposition, we will
draw most of our examples from the annotation
of the page shown in Figure 2. This page has
2
For the DTDs themselves, as well as further infor-
mation and examples, see the GeM corpus webpages.
base unitsLayout
Semantic
Content
RST
segments
navigational
elements
layout units
Figure 1: The distribution of base elements to
layout, rhetorical and navigational elements
Figure 2: Example page: Flegg, J. (1999)
Collins Gem Birds. Italy: Harper Collins. p21.
Used by kind permission of the publisher.
the advantage that it is relatively straightfor-
ward; more complex examples can be found on
the corpus webpages.
The base unit annotation (GemBase) for an
extract from the centre of the page is as follows:
<unit id="u-21.5">---------------</unit>
<unit id="u-21.6"
src="gannet.jpg" alt="gannet-photo"/>
<unit id="u-21.7">
Huge (90cm) unmistakable seabird.
</unit>
<unit id="u-21.8">
Watch for white, cigar-shaped body and
long straight, slender, black-tipped wings.
</unit>
<unit id="u-21.9">
In summer, yellow head of
adult inconspicuous. </unit>
<unit id="u-21.10">
Plunges spectacularly for fish.</unit>
<unit id="u-21.11">Sexes similar.</unit>
Although the base annotation generally has a
flat structure, in certain cases, we diverge from
this and allow nested markup, i.e., base units
inside base units. This is used in the following
situations: emphasized text portions in a sen-
tence/heading, icons or similar pictorial signs in
a sentence, text pieces in a diagram or picture,
arrows and other graphical signs in a diagram
or picture, and document deictic expressions oc-
curring in a sentence.
The layout base then consists of three main
parts: (a) layout segmentation?identification of
the minimal layout units, (b) realization infor-
mation ? typographical and other layout prop-
erties of the basic layout units, and (c) the lay-
out structure information?the grouping of the
layout units into more complex layout entities.
Whereas in typography, the minimal layout el-
ement (in text) is the glyph, here we are con-
cerned with groupings of base units that have
a visual coherence and unity with respect to
the organisation of the page: these groupings
are termed layout units and, unlike the base
units, are organized into a non-trivial hierarchi-
cal structure as required to describe the page.
Again, each layout-unit has an id attribute,
which carries an identifying symbol; in addition,
however, the stand-off annotation is achieved
via an attribute xref which points to the base
units which belong to that layout unit. It is
possible, but not necessary, to store the corre-
sponding text portions of the original text file
between the start and end tag of a layout-unit
for mnemonic purposes; this text information is
not used in any further processing. The follow-
ing extract shows the layout unit corresponding
to the main block of text underneath the gannet
photo.
<layout-unit id="lay-flegg-text"
xref="u-21.7 u-21.8 u-21.9
u-21.10 u-21.11">
Huge (90cm) unmistakable seabird.
Watch for white, cigar-shaped body
and long straight, slender,
black-tipped wings. In summer, yellow
head of adult inconspicuous. Plunges
spectacularly for fish. Sexes similar.
</layout-unit>
The second part of the layout base is the re-
alization. Each layout unit specified in the lay-
out segmentation has a visual realization. The
most apparent difference is which mode has
been used ? the verbal or the visual mode. Fol-
lowing this distinction, the layout base differen-
tiates between two kinds of elements: textual
elements and graphical elements marked with
the tags <text> and <graphics> respectively.
These two elements have a differing sets of at-
tributes describing their layout properties. The
attributes are generally consistent with the lay-
out attributes defined for XSL formatting ob-
ject and CSS layout models. The id of each
layout unit of the segmentation part of the lay-
out base has to occur exactly once under xref
in the realization part: either in a <text> or
a <graphics> element. In the following cod-
ing example, we have five layout units which
share typographical characteristics. These cor-
respond to the five table cells in the first column
of the table on the page shown in Figure 2.
<text xref="lay-21.12 lay-21.14 lay-21.16
lay-21.18 lay-21.20"
font-family="sans-serif"
font-size="10" font-style="normal"
font-weight="bold"
case="mixed" justification="right"
color="black"/>
The third part of the layout base then serves
to represent the hierarchical layout structure.
Generally we assume that the layout structure
of a document is tree-like with the entire docu-
ment being the root; this will certainly be prob-
lematic for some document types but also has
sufficient applicability to enable us to make con-
siderable headway. Each layout chunk is a node
in the tree, and the basic layout units, which
have been identified in the segmentation part of
the layout base, are the terminal nodes of that
tree. In our annotation, we use several different
tags for the nodes in the layout tree. The three
most common are: <layout-root>, the ele-
ment describing the entire document, <layout-
chunk>, all non-terminal nodes in the layout
tree except for the root, and <layout-leaf>,
the terminal nodes. A slightly simplified (i.e.,
some further substructure is ommitted) extract
of the layout structure for our example page is
depicted graphically in Figure 3; it is described
by the following XML annotation:
page-21
header-21 body-21 page-no-21
lay-21.2 lay-21.3
Figure 3: Example page layout structure shown
graphically
<layout-root id="page-21">
<layout-leaf xref="header-21"/>
<layout-chunk id="body-21">
<layout-leaf xref="lay-21.2"/>
<layout-leaf xref="lay-21.3"/>
</layout-chunk>
<layout-leaf xref="page-no-21"/>
</layout-root>
Whereas the annotations so far specify the
hierarchical structuring of a page into visually
distinguishable and groupable layout units, we
need also to record specific information about
how layout units are placed on their pages: the
page or page segment layout is not fully deter-
mined by grouping layout units into a tree struc-
ture since further information is required about
the actual position of each unit in the docu-
ment (on or within its page). For this, we in-
troduce an area model, which serves to deter-
mine the position of each layout-chunk/layout-
leaf in an abstract, but fully explicit, way. The
area model is a generalization of common no-
tions of ?page models?. Each page usually par-
titions its space into sub-areas and these can be
used for positioning or aligning layout units or
subtrees of the layout structure. For instance,
a page is often designed in three rows ? the
area for the running head (row-1), the area for
the page body (row-2), and the area for the
page number (row-3) ? which are arranged ver-
tically. The page body space can itself consist
of two columns arranged horizontally. These
rows/columns need not to be of equal size. For
the present, we restrict ourselves to rectangular
areas and sub-areas, and allow recursive area
subdivision. The partitioning of the space of
the entire document is defined in the area-root,
which structures the document (page) into rect-
angular sub-areas in a table-like fashion.
The tag to represent the area root is <area-
root>. The tag to represent the division of
a sub-area into smaller rectangles is <sub-
area>, this shares the attributes of the root
but adds a location attribute so that subareas
are positioned relative to their parent. Loca-
tions are indicated with respect to a logical grid
defining rows and columns. The area model for
our example page therefore contains a single col-
umn with 5 rows (the header, the photograph,
the text block, the table, and the footer), in
which the fourth row, the table, is itself made
up of a subarea corresponding to the rows and
columns of a virtual table. This is captured by
the following annotation:
<area-root id="page-frame" cols="1" rows="5"
hspacing="100" vspacing="5 40 15 45 5"
height="16cm" width="14cm">
<sub-area id="table-frame" location="row-4"
cols="2" rows="5" hspacing="10 90"
vspacing="100"/>
</area-root>
The attribute vspacing=??5 40 15 45 5??
means that the area for the running head takes
5% of the entire page height, the area for the
next row 40%, etc. The area model then pro-
vides logical names for the precise positioning
of the layout units identified in the hierarchi-
cal layout structure. This makes it straightfor-
ward to indicate, for example, that collections
of siblings in the layout structure share (or fail
to share) some particular alignment properties
within the page.
The RST base presents the rhetorical struc-
ture of the document. The rhetorical structure
is annotated following the Rhetorical Structure
Theory (RST) of Mann and Thompson (1988).
The relation between rhetorical structure and
layout is currently an important area of study
in multimodal document description and so its
inclusion in the GeM annotation scheme is es-
sential. Several annotation schemes for RST
have been proposed in the literature (cf. Daniel
Marcu and Mick O?Donnell?s proposals, e.g.,
www.sil.org/?mannb/rst/toolnote.htm and the
RAGS rhetorical level: Cahill et al (2001)).
The precise GeM notation differs from these
in certain respects, but the main principles of
representation remain similar. Since many of
the details of the rhetorical annotation presume
some familiarity with the decomposition of texts
according to RST, we will note here simply that
this annotation layer again represents a hierar-
chical decomposition in which the leaves of the
tree can correspond to both textual and graph-
ical base units.
Finally, the navigation base captures those
parts of the document/page which tell the
reader where the current text, or ?document
thread?, is continued or which point to an al-
ternative continuation or continuations. These
make up the navigation layer of annotation.
The addresses used by such pointers are either
names of RST spans or names of layout chunks.
For long-distance navigation, typical nodes in
the RST structure and in the layout structure
have been established for use in pointers; in
particular, chapter/section headings are names
for RST spans and page numbers are names
for page-sized layout-chunks. This structure
imposed by the navigational elements is thus
quite different from the preceding layers and
can freely cross-cut the hierarchicies expressed
there. Again, for further details, the reader is
refered to the documentation manual.
4 Comparison with other
XML-based approaches
It is useful to consider other approaches to
representing ?overlapping hierarchies? that have
been proposed in the XML literature; since
these are early days in the construction of such
annotation schemes, it is likely that the expe-
rience gained with differing schemes will prove
highly beneficial for further development.
The first examples of extensive overlapping
hierarchies within markup for NLP are proba-
bly to be found in speech corpora. It is clear
that intonational phenomena, for example, may
or may not respect grammatical or other kinds
of structure and so need to be maintained sep-
arately. Speech-oriented corpora generally use
the time line as a basic reference method since
speech events are necessarily strictly ordered
in time. This is quite different in the GeM
case where we have found the non-linearity and
the non-consecutive nature of the units grouped
within our annotation scheme as presenting a
major problem for annotation models that have
been developed in the speech processing tradi-
tion where contiguity of units is the expected
case. Whereas the speech signal can be encoded
by means of time-stamps, in the GeM model we
need to use the layout structure (or even the
area model within the layout structure) instead
for placing elements within the physical docu-
ment.
One of the most detailed general considera-
tions of the range of XML-based solutions to
the multiple, overlapping hierarchies problem,
as well as an extensive listing of further litera-
ture, is given by Durusau and O?Donnell (sub-
mitted). After reviewing several requirements
and approaches to the problem, Durusau and
O?Donnell propose a Bottom-Up Virtual Hier-
archy approach which (i) creates multiple in-
stances of the source document, each with its
own consistent XML-defined hierarchy and (ii)
creates one further document instance called the
?base file?, in which each basic element of the
document is linked via XPath expressions to its
position in each of the separately defined hier-
archy documents. The position in each separate
hierarchy is captured as the value of a distinct
attribute to a base element tag. This means
that the base file becomes extremely complex,
although Durusau and O?Donnell envisage that
this file could in future be automatically con-
structed and maintained.
The similarity of this approach to the inde-
pendently developed GeM approach argues to
a certain extent for the necessity of proceeding
in this direction. The differences between the
approaches arise from the different tasks that
are being considered and the corresponding dif-
ferences in emphasis. Durusau and O?Donnell
are considering the task from the perspective of
differing ?interpretations? of a text in the sense
more commonly pursued in text corpus markup:
it is, therefore, natural to consider each hier-
archy as an autonomous marked-up document.
We are concerned with linguistic analyses of
documents, where the structure of the analy-
ses themselves is itself a major focus of atten-
tion. It is then no longer so important that
each level of analysis transparently represents
a ?view of the text?. When querying the cor-
pus for structural and realizational regularities,
we are free to do this across any set of the an-
notation layers present, using the full power of
properly parsed XPath expressions, and with-
out the need to always decompose such queries
into the terms of the elements of the base file.
This is the XML reflex of the linguistic strategy
of stratification of linguistic information across
the linguistic system.
Single structured text views can, of course,
be created out of the GeM markup by following
the indirection links present in any individual
GeM annotation layer. This requires that that
layer be interpreted with respect to the corre-
sponding base level document and is not then
?locally? complete. This (formally slight) com-
plexity is, we feel, more than balanced by the
fact that we need neither any additional com-
plexity in our base level markup nor the double
coding of the position of nodes in hierarchies
and base elements. It is also straightforward
to introduce intermediate levels of structural
analysis?as, for example, already done in our se-
lection of base units as units relevant to layout
rather than ?words? or other more straightfor-
ward formal units. Indeed, when the more tra-
ditional linguistic levels of annotation (syntax,
semantics) are added into the complete scheme,
many of the GeM annotation layers will con-
tinue not to access the leaves of these structures
at all, and will continue to work with the base
units illustrated here; this variable granularity
may prove to be a general requirement for lin-
guistically complex analyses. And, finally, we
also need not recompile our base level document
whenever an additional layer of annotation is
added to the scheme, thereby simplifying main-
tenance. Further comparison of the approaches
will, however, require more detailed evaluation
in use.
Finally, we can consider the GeM approach
as contrasted with directions within the XML
community itself since there, too, there are pro-
posals for capturing distinctions of content, lay-
out (e.g., in terms of formatting objects: XSL-
FO) and navigational elements (e.g., in terms of
Xlink). Whereas we are attempting to make the
GeM description as compatible with these con-
structs as possible?for example, as noted above
with respect to the realizational possibilities for
the layout units?it is important to understand
the very different aims involved. The purpose
of the GeM project is to analyse the multimodal
decisions made in a wide range of document
types and it is not yet clear which theoretical
levels and which theoretical constructs within
those levels will prove appropriate. The format-
ting object description is only suited to a certain
class of layout types (which excludes, for exam-
ple, newspapers) and so is in many respects too
specific for our more exploratory purposes. We
are also searching for effective levels of abstrac-
tion at which to characterize our data: effective
here meaning that these will be the constructs
over which canvas constraints, production con-
straints and consumption constraints are most
appropriately expressed. Perhaps, to offer an
NLP analogy: whereas the XML modelling de-
cisions correspond to a fine-scaled phonetic de-
scription of a language event, we are in the
GeM project searching for the higher levels of
abstraction corresponding to the grammar, se-
mantics and pragmatics of the language events.
We expect this to give us a substantially better
theoretical grasp of the meaning-making poten-
tial of layout decisions and their control by ex-
ternal constraints.
5 Applications of the annotated
corpus
A number of uses are currently being made of
the annotated GeM corpus. While our empiri-
cal study will need considerably more data to be
encoded before we can make reliable statements
concerning the patterning of various constraints
with document decisions, we have already been
struck by the rather wide variation that exists
within single documents between selected lay-
out structures on the one hand and rhetorical
organization on the other. In surprisingly many
cases, this variation goes beyond what might
be considered ?good? design: in fact, we would
argue that most such designs are flawed and
would be improved by a more explicit attention
to the rhetorical force communicated by partic-
ular layout decisions. This represents the use of
the corpus for document critique and improve-
ment (cf. Delin and Bateman (2002)).
We are also using the data gathered so far to
inform the design of a prototype automatic doc-
ument generation system capable of producing
the kinds of variation and layout forms seen in
our corpus. In this work, the annotation scheme
provides skeletal data structures that define tar-
get formats of various stages of the generation
process. Thus, for example, layout planning
needs to produce a structure that is an instan-
tiated version of a layout structure as we have
defined it above. Some first results are reported
in Henschel et al (to appear) which describes a
prototype implemented as a set of XSLT trans-
formations that convert a content representa-
tion into an XSL-FO document. The transfor-
mations are conditionalized so as to respond to
various features of the content, the modes of the
available material, and the rhetorical structure;
so far pages generated include further examples
of the kind used as an example in this paper as
well as pages from instructional texts such as
telephone user guides.
Conditionalization is expressed in terms of
XPath specifications that check the presence or
absence of particular configurations within any
of the GeM annotation layers as required. Such
specifications are, however, somewhat cumber-
some for more complex queries. Whether fur-
ther developments such as XQL or XQuery will
bring benefits is not yet clear. Somewhat dis-
appointing was the unsuitability of the previous
generation of linguistic-oriented corpus tools,
which, despite considerable investment, seem to
have been outstripped by the very rapid devel-
opments seen in the mainstream XML commu-
nity. Most of our current work is done directly
with XMLSpy and XLST tools such as Xalan.
The final goal of our corpus collection work
and the prototype document generation systems
is to place the commonly quoted aim of using
XML markup for document ?repurposing? on a
solid theoretical foundation. Thus, for example,
the ability automatically to generate very dif-
ferent presentational forms for the instructional
texts or bird pages mentioned above is an in-
herent feature of the GeM model. More impor-
tant for us is to uncover as precisely as possi-
ble the conditions which make certain presen-
tational selections more appropriate than oth-
ers. In general, we relate the need for present-
ing information in different forms to the kinds
of constraints we introduced above: very differ-
ent canvas constraints are imposed, for exam-
ple, depending on whether the delivery medium
is across the telephone, on a palmtop, or as a
display on a big screen. However, it is not sim-
ply a matter of the differing affordances of the
display device. The selection of particular infor-
mation and information display modes is also a
matter of established document types. These
document types change over time, due both to
changing production constraints and to the es-
tablishment of new genres. It is not possible to
deploy inappropriate realizations for established
genres; a newspaper that changed its presenta-
tion style to that of birdbooks would quickly be
out of business?and vice versa. Mapping out
these possibilities and showing what larger pat-
terns hold is then our eventual goal. And for
this, extensive and detailed empirical studies of
the kind we hope the GeM corpus and annota-
tion scheme will support are crucial.
References
John A. Bateman, Thomas Kamps, Jo?rg Kleinz, and
Klaus Reichenberger. 2001. Constructive text, di-
agram and layout generation for information pre-
sentation: the DArt
bio
system. Computational
Linguistics, 27(3):409?449.
Lynne Cahill, Roger Evans, Chris Mellis, Daniel
Paiva, Mike Reape, and Donia Scott. 2001. Intro-
duction to the RAGS architecture . Available at
http://www.itri.brighton.ac.uk/projects/rags.
Corpus Encoding Standard. 2000. Corpus En-
coding Standard. Version 1.5. Available at:
http://www.cs.vassar.edu/CES.
Judy L. Delin and John A. Bateman. 2002. Describ-
ing and critiquing multimodal documents. Docu-
ment Design, 3(2). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Judy Delin, John Bateman, and Patrick Allen. 2002.
A model of genre in document layout. Informa-
tion Design Journal.
Patrick Durusau and Matthew Brook O?Donnell.
submitted. Implementing concurrent markup in
XML. Markup Languages: Theory and Practice.
Renate Henschel, John Bateman, and Judy Delin.
to appear. Automatic genre-driven layout gener-
ation. In Proceedings of the 6. Konferenz zur Ver-
arbeitung natu?rlicher Sprache (KONVENS 2002),
University of the Saarland, Saarbru?cken.
Renate Henschel. 2002. GeM annotation manual.
Gem project report, University of Bremen and
University of Stirling, Bremen and Stirling. Avail-
able at http://purl.org/net/gem.
Gunther Kress and Theo Van Leeuwen. 2001. Mul-
timodal discourse: the modes and media of con-
temporary communication. Arnold, London.
William C. Mann and Sandra A. Thompson. 1988.
Rhetorical structure theory: Toward a functional
theory of text organization. Text, 8(3):243?281.
Henry S. Thompson and D. McKelvie. 1997. Hyper-
link semantics for standoff markup of read-only
documents. In Proceedings of SGML Europe ?97.
Robert Waller. 1987. The typographical contribution
to language: towards a model of typographic gen-
res and their underlying structures. Ph.D. thesis,
Department of Typography and Graphic Commu-
nication, University of Reading, Reading, U.K.
