Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment and Social Media Analysis, pages 55?64,
Atlanta, Georgia, 14 June 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis of Modern Standard Arabic and Arabic
Microblogs
Ahmed Mourad and Kareem Darwish
Qatar Computing Research Institute
Qatar Foundation
Doha, Qatar
{amourad, kdarwish}@qf.org.qa
Abstract
Though much research has been conducted
on Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis (SSA)
during the last decade, little work has fo-
cused on Arabic. In this work, we focus on
SSA for both Modern Standard Arabic (MSA)
news articles and dialectal Arabic microblogs
from Twitter. We showcase some of the chal-
lenges associated with SSA on microblogs.
We adopted a random graph walk approach to
extend the Arabic SSA lexicon using Arabic-
English phrase tables, leading to improve-
ments for SSA on Arabic microblogs. We
used different features for both subjectivity
and sentiment classification including stem-
ming, part-of-speech tagging, as well as tweet
specific features. Our classification features
yield results that surpass Arabic SSA results
in the literature.
1 Introduction
Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis has gained con-
siderable attention in the last few years. SSA has
many applications ranging from identifying con-
sumer sentiment towards products to voters? reac-
tion to political adverts. A significant amount of
work has focused on analyzing English text with
measurable success on news articles and product re-
views. There has been recent efforts pertaining to
expanding SSA to languages other than English and
to analyzing social text such as tweets. To enable ef-
fective SSA for new languages and genres, two main
requirements are necessary: (a) subjectivity lexicons
that broadly cover sentiment carrying words in the
genre or language; and (b) tagged corpora to train
subjectivity and sentiment classifiers. These two
are often scarce or nonexistent when expanding to
new languages or genres. In this paper we focus
on performing SSA on Arabic news articles and mi-
croblogs. There has been some recent work on Ara-
bic SSA. However, the available resources continue
to lag in the following ways:
(1) The size of existing subjectivity lexicons is
small, with low coverage in practical application.
(2) The available tagged corpora are limited to the
news domain, with no publicly available tagged cor-
pora for tweets.
To address the issue of limited lexicons, we applied
two methods to build large coverage lexicons. In the
first, we used Machine Translation (MT) to trans-
late an existing English subjectivity lexicon. In the
second, we employed a random graph walk method
to automatically expand a manually curated Ara-
bic lexicon. For the later method, we used Arabic-
English MT phrase tables that include both Modern
Standard Arabic (MSA) as well as dialectal Arabic.
As for tagged corpora, we annotated a new corpus
that includes 2,300 Arabic tweets. We describe in
detail the process of collecting tweets and some of
the major attributes of tweets.
The contribution of this paper is as follows:
- We introduce strong baselines that employ Arabic
specific processing including stemming, POS tag-
ging, and tweets normalization. The baseline outper-
forms state-of-the-art subjectivity classification for
the news domain.
- We provide a new annotated dataset for Arabic
tweet SSA.
- We employ a random graph walk algorithm to ex-
55
pand SSA lexicons, leading to improvements for
SSA for Arabic tweets.
The remainder of this paper is organized as fol-
lows: Section 2 surveys related work; section 3
introduces some of the challenges associated with
Arabic SSA; section 4 describes the lexicons we
used; section 5 presents the experimental setup and
results; and section 6 concludes the paper and dis-
cusses future work.
2 Related Work
There has been a fair amount work on SSA.
Liu (2010) offers a thorough survey of SSA re-
search. He defines the problem of sentiment anal-
ysis including associated SSA terms such as ob-
ject, opinion, opinion holder, emotions, sentence
subjectivity, etc. He also discusses the more popu-
lar two stage sentiment and subjectivity classifica-
tion approach at different granularities (document
and sentence levels) using different machine learn-
ing approaches (supervised and unsupervised) along
with different ways to construct the required data re-
sources (corpora and lexicon). In our work, we clas-
sify subjectivity and sentiment in a cascaded fashion
following Wilson et al (2005).
2.1 Subjectivity Analysis
One of most prominent features for subjectivity
analysis is the existence of words in a subjectivity
lexicon. Mihalcea et al (2007) translated an ex-
isting English subjectivity lexicon from Wiebe and
Riloff (2005) using a bilingual dictionary. They also
used a subjectivity classifier to automatically anno-
tate the English side of an English-Romanian paral-
lel corpus and then project the annotations to the Ro-
manian side. The projected annotations were used
to train a subjectivity classifier. In follow on work,
Banea et al (2010) used MT to exploit annotated
SSA English corpora for other languages, including
Arabic. They also integrated features from multiple
languages to train a combined classifier. In Banea
et al (2008), they compared the automatic annota-
tion of non-English text that was machine translated
into English to automatically or manually translating
annotated English text to train a classifier in the tar-
get language. In all these cases, they concluded that
translation can help avail the need for building lan-
guage specific resources. In performing both subjec-
tivity and sentiment classification, researchers have
used word, phrase, sentence, and topic level fea-
tures. Wilson et al (2005) report on such features
in detail, and we use some of their features in our
baseline runs. For Arabic subjectivity classification,
Abdul-Mageed et al (2011) performed sentence-
level binary classification. They used a manually cu-
rated subjectivity lexicon and corpus that was drawn
from news articles (from Penn Arabic tree bank).
They used features that are akin to those devel-
oped by Wilson et al (2005). In later work, Abdul-
Mageed et al (2012) extended their work to social
content including chat sessions, tweets, Wikipedia
discussion pages, and online forums. Unfortunately,
their tweets corpus is not publicly available. They
added social media features such as author informa-
tion (person vs. organization and gender). They
also explored Arabic specific features that include
stemming, POS tagging, and dialect vs. MSA. Their
most notable conclusions are: (a) POS tagging helps
and (b) Most dialectal Arabic tweets are subjective.
Concerning work on subjectivity classification on
English tweets, Pak and Paroubek (2010) created a
corpus of tweets for SSA. They made a few funda-
mental assumptions that do not generalize to Arabic
well, namely:
- They assumed that smiley and sad emoticons imply
positive and negative sentiment respectively. Due
to the right-to-left orientation of Arabic text, smi-
ley and sad emoticons can be easily interchanged by
mistake in Arabic.
- They also assumed that news tweets posted by
newspapers Twitter accounts are neutral. This as-
sumption is not valid for Arabic news articles be-
cause many Arabic newspapers are overly critical or
biased in their reporting of news. Thus, the major-
ity of news site tweets have sentiment. Consider the
following headline:
	?
J
?

K ?


	
?

???Y?@ 	??

@ ??m