Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 270?280,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Translating Italian connectives into Italian Sign Language
Camillo Lugaresi
University of Illinois at Chicago
Politecnico di Milano
clugar2@uic.edu
Barbara Di Eugenio
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Chicago
bdieugen@uic.edu
Abstract
We present a corpus analysis of how Ital-
ian connectives are translated into LIS, the
Italian Sign Language. Since corpus re-
sources are scarce, we propose an align-
ment method between the syntactic trees
of the Italian sentence and of its LIS trans-
lation. This method, and clustering ap-
plied to its outputs, highlight the differ-
ent ways a connective can be rendered in
LIS: with a corresponding sign, by affect-
ing the location or shape of other signs, or
being omitted altogether. We translate
these findings into a computational model
that will be integrated into the pipeline of
an existing Italian-LIS rendering system.
Initial experiments to learn the four possi-
ble translations with Decision Trees give
promising results.
1 Introduction
Automatic translation between a spoken language
and a signed language gives rise to some of the
same difficulties as translation between spoken
languages, but adds unique challenges of its own.
Contrary to what one might expect, sign languages
are not artificial languages, but natural languages
that spontaneously arose within deaf communities;
although they are typically named after the region
where they are used, they are not derived from the
local spoken language and tend to bear no similar-
ity to it. Therefore, translation from any spoken
language into the signed language of that specific
region is at least as complicated as between any
pairs of unrelated languages.
The problem of automatic translation is com-
pounded by the fact that the amount of computa-
tional resources to draw on is much smaller than
is typical for major spoken languages. Moreover,
the fact that sign languages employ a different
transmission modality (gestures and expressions
instead of sounds) means that existing writing sys-
tems are not easily adaptable to them. The result-
ing lack of a shared written form does nothing to
improve the availability of sign language corpora;
bilingual corpora, which are of particular impor-
tance to a translation system, are especially rare.
In fact, various projects around the world are try-
ing to ameliorate this sad state of affairs for spe-
cific Sign Languages (Lu and Huenerfauth, 2010;
Braffort et al, 2010; Morrissey et al, 2010).
In this paper, we describe the work we per-
formed as concerns the translation of connectives
from the Italian language into LIS, the Italian Sign
Language (Lingua Italiana dei Segni). Because the
communities of signers in Italy are relatively small
and fragmented, and the language has a relatively
short history, there is far less existing research and
material to draw on than for, say, ASL (American
Sign Language) or BSL (British Sign Language).
Our work was undertaken within the purview of
the ATLAS project (Bertoldi et al, 2010; Lom-
bardo et al, 2010; Lombardo et al, 2011; Prinetto
et al, 2011; Mazzei, 2012; Ahmad et al, 2012),
which developed a full pipeline for translating Ital-
ian into LIS. ATLAS is part of a recent crop of
projects devoted to developing automatic transla-
tion from language L spoken in geographic area
G into the sign language spoken in G (Dreuw et
al., 2010; Lo?pez-Luden?a et al, 2011; Almohimeed
et al, 2011; Lu and Huenerfauth, 2012). Input is
taken in the form of written Italian text, parsed,
and converted into a semantic representation of its
contents; from this semantic representation, LIS
output is produced, using a custom serialization
format called AEWLIS (which we will describe
later). This representation is then augmented with
space positioning information, and fed into a fi-
nal renderer component that performs the signs
using a virtual actor. ATLAS focused on a lim-
ited domain for which a bilingual Italian/LIS cor-
270
pus was available: weather forecasts, for which
the Italian public broadcasting corporation (RAI)
had long been producing special broadcasts with
a signed translation. This yielded a corpus of 376
LIS sentences with corresponding Italian text: this
corpus, converted into AEWLIS format, was the
main data source for the project. Still, it is a very
small corpus, hence the main project shied away
from statistical NLP techniques, relying instead on
rule-based approaches developed with the help of
a native Italian/LIS bilingual speaker; a similar ap-
proach is taken e.g. in (Almohimeed et al, 2011)
for Arabic.
1.1 Why connectives?
The main semantic-bearing elements of an Italian
sentence, such as nouns or verbs, typically have
a LIS sign as their direct translation. We focus
on a different class of elements, comprising con-
junctions and prepositions, but also some adverbs
and prepositional phrases; collectively, we refer
to them as connectives. Since they are mainly
structural elements, they are more heavily affected
by differences in the syntax and grammar of Ital-
ian and LIS (and, presumably, in those of any
spoken language and the ?corresponding? SL).
Specifically, as we will see later, some connectives
are translated with a sign, some connectives are
dropped, whereas others affect the positioning of
other signs, or just their syntactic proximity.
It should be noted that our usage of the term
?connectives? is somewhat unorthodox. For ex-
ample, while prepositions can be seen as con-
nectives (Ferrari, 2008), only a few adverbs can
work as connectives. From the Italian Treebank,
we extracted all words or phrases that belonged
to a syntactic category that can be a connective
(conjunction, preposition, adverb or prepositional
phrase). We then found that we could better serve
the needs of ATLAS by running our analysis on
the entire resulting list, without filtering it by elim-
inating the entries that are not actual connectives.
In fact, semantic differences re-emerge through
our analysis: e.g., the temporal adverbs ?domani?
and ?dopodomani? are nearly always preserved,
as they do carry key information (especially for
weather forecasting) and are not structural ele-
ments.
In performing our analysis, we pursued a dif-
ferent path from the main project, relying entirely
on the bilingual corpus. Although the use of sta-
tistical techniques was hampered by the small size
of the corpus, at the same time it presented an in-
teresting opportunity to attack the problem from
a different angle. In this paper we describe how
we uncovered the translation distributions of the
different connectives from Italian to LIS via tree
alignment.
2 Corpus Analysis
The corpus consists of 40 weather forecasts in Ital-
ian and LIS. The Italian spoken utterance and LIS
signing were transcribed from the original videos
? one example of an Italian sentence and its LIS
equivalent are shown in Figure 1. An English
word-by-word translation is provided for the Ital-
ian sentence, followed by a more fluent transla-
tion; the LIS glosses are literally translated. Note
that as concerns LIS, this simply includes the gloss
for the corresponding sign. The 40 weather fore-
cast comprise 374 Italian sentences and 376 LIS
sentences, stored in 372 AEWLIS files. In most
cases, a file corresponds to one Italian sentence
and one corresponding LIS sentences; however,
there are 4 files where an Italian sentence is split
into two LIS sentences, and 2 files where two Ital-
ian sentences are merged into one LIS sentence.
AEWLIS is an XML-based format (see Fig-
ure 2) which represents each sign in the LIS sen-
tence as an element, in the order in which they oc-
cur in the sentence. A sign?s lemma is represented
by the Italian word with the same meaning, always
written in uppercase, and with its part of speech
(tipoAG in Figure 2); there are also IDs referenc-
ing the lemma?s position in a few dictionaries, but
these are not always present. The AEWLIS file
also stores several additional attributes, such as:
a parent reference that represents the syntax of
the LIS sentence; the syntactic role ?played? by
the sign in the LIS sentence; the facial expres-
sion accompanying the gesture; the location in the
signing space (which may be an absolute location
or a reference to a previous sign?s: compare HR
(High Right) and atLemma in Figure 2). These
attributes are stored as elements grouped by type,
and reference the corresponding sign element by
its ordinal position in the sentence. The additional
attributes are not always available: morphologi-
cal variations are annotated only when they differ
from an assumed standard form of the sign, while
the syntactic structure was annotated for only 89
sentences.
271
(1) (Ita.) Anche
Also
sulla
on
Sardegna
Sardinia
qualche
a few
annuvolamento
cloud covers
pomeridiano,
afternoon[adj],
possibilita`
chance
di
of
qualche
a few
breve
brief
scroscio
downpour
di
of
pioggia,
rain,
ma
but
tendenza
trend
poi
then
a
towards
schiarite.
sunny spells.
?Also on Sardinia skies will become overcast in the afternoon, chance of a few brief downpours of rain, but then a trend
towards a mix of sun and clouds?.
(2) (LIS) POMERIGGIO
Afternoon
SARDEGNA
Sardinia
AREA
area
NUVOLA
cloud
PURE
also
ACQUAZZONE
downpour
POTERE
can[modal]
MA
but
POI
then
NUVOLA
cloud
DIMINUIRE
decrease
Figure 1: Italian sentence and its LIS translation
<Lemmi>
<NuovoLemma lemma="POMERIGGIO" tipoAG="NOME" ... endTime="2.247" idSign=""/>
<NuovoLemma lemma="sardegna" tipoAG="NOME_PROPRIO" ... endTime="2.795" idSign="2687"/>
<NuovoLemma lemma="area" tipoAG="NOME" ... endTime="4.08" idSign="2642"/>
<NuovoLemma lemma="nuvola" tipoAG="NOME" ... endTime="5.486" idSign="2667"/>
<NuovoLemma lemma="pure" tipoAG="AVVERBIO" ... endTime="6.504" idSign="2681"/>
...
</Lemmi><SentenceAttribute>
<Parent>
<Timestamp time="1" value="ID:3"/> <Timestamp time="2" value="ID:2"/>
<Timestamp time="3" value="ID:3"/> <Timestamp time="4" value="root_1"/>
<Timestamp time="5" value="ID:3"/> ...
</Parent>
...
<Sign_Spatial_Location>
<Timestamp time="1" value=""/> <Timestamp time="2" value="HR"/>
<Timestamp time="3" value="HL"/> <Timestamp time="4" value="atLemma(ID:2, Distant)"/>
<Timestamp time="5" value=""/> ...
</Sign_Spatial_Location>
...
<Facial>
<Timestamp time="1" value=""/> <Timestamp time="2" value="eye brows:raise"/>
<Timestamp time="3" value="eye brows:raise"/> <Timestamp time="4" value="eye brows:-lwrd"/>
<Timestamp time="5" value=""/> ...
</Facial>
</SentenceAttribute>
Figure 2: Example excerpt from an AEWLIS file
2.1 Distributional statistics for connectives
The list of Italian connectives we considered was
extracted from the Italian Treebank developed
at the Institute for Computational Linguistics in
Pisa, Italy (Montemagni et al, 2003) by searching
for conjunctions, prepositions and adverbs. This
yielded a total of 777 potential connectives. Of
those, only 104 occur in our corpus. A simple
count of the occurrences of connectives in the Ital-
ian and LIS versions of the corpus yields the fol-
lowing results:
(a) 78 connectives (2068 occurrences total) only
occur in the Italian version, for example AL-
MENO (at least), CON (with), INFATTI (in-
deed), PER (for) .
(b) 8 connectives (67 occurrences total) only oc-
cur in the LIS version, for example CIRCA
(about), as in ?Here I am?), PURE (also, ad-
ditionally).
(c) 25 connectives (925 occurrences total) occur
in both versions.
For the third category, we have computed the
ratio of the number of occurrences in Italian over
the number of occurrences in LIS; the ratios are
plotted in logarithmic scale in Figure 3. 0 on the
scale corresponds to an ITA/LIS ratio equal to 1;
positive numbers indicate that there are more oc-
currences in ITA, negative numbers that there are
more occurrences in LIS. We can recognize three
clusters by ratio:
(c1) 9 connectives occurring in both languages,
but mainly in Italian, for example POCO (a
little), PIU? (more), SE (if), QUINDI (hence).
(c2) 13 connectives occurring in both languages
with similar frequency, for example SOLO
(only), POI (then), O (or), MA (but).
(c3) 3 connectives occurring in both languages,
but mainly in LIS: MENO (less), ADESSO
(now), INVECE (instead).
272
both
Page 1
abbastanza (enough)
adesso (now)
ancora (still, yet)
chiaro (clear)
domani (tomorrow)
dopodomani (day after tomorrow)
ecco (here)
invece (instead)
ma (but)
meglio (better)
meno (less)
o (or)
oggi (today)
ora (now)
ovunque (everywhere)
pi? (more)
poco (a little)
poi (then)
proprio (just, precisely)
qui (here)
quindi (hence)
se (if)
sicuro (sure)
solo (only)
tanto (much)
-0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5
Figure 3: Ratio of ITA/LIS occurrences in loga-
rithmic scale.
3 The effect of the Italian connectives on
the LIS translation
From this basic frequency analysis we can already
notice that a large number of connectives only ap-
pear in Italian, or have far more occurrences in
Italian than in LIS. This is unsurprising, consider-
ing that LIS sentences tend to be shorter than Ital-
ian sentences in terms of number of signs/words (a
fact which probably correlates with the increased
energy and time requirements intrinsic into artic-
ulating a message using one?s arms rather than
one?s tongue). However, our goal is to predict
when a connective should be dropped and when
it should be preserved. Furthermore, even if the
connective does not appear in the LIS sentence as
a directly corresponding sign, that does not mean
that its presence in the Italian sentence has no ef-
fect on the translation. We hypothesize four dif-
ferent possible realizations for a connective in the
Italian sentence:
? the connective word or phrase may map to a
corresponding connective sign;
? the connective is not present as a sign, but
may affect the morphology of the signs which
translate words syntactically adjacent to the
connective;
? the connective is not present as a sign, but
its presence may be reflected by the fact that
words connected by it map to signs which are
close to each other in the LIS syntax tree;
? the connective is dropped altogether.
The second hypothesis deserves some explana-
tion. The earliest treatments of LIS assumed that
each sign (lemma) could be treated as invariant.
Attempts to represent LIS in writing simply re-
placed each sign with a chosen Italian word (or
phrase, if necessary) with the same meaning. Al-
though this is still a useful way of representing the
basic lemma, more recent studies have noted that
LIS signs can undergo significant morphological
variations which are lost under such a scheme. The
AEWLIS format, in fact, was designed to preserve
them.
Of course, morphological variations in LIS are
not phonetic, like in a spoken language, but ges-
tural (Volterra, 1987; Romeo, 1991). For exam-
ple, the location in which a gesture is performed
may be varied, or its speed, or the facial expres-
sions that accompany it (Geraci et al, 2008). One
particularly interesting axis of morphology is the
positioning of the gesture in the signing space in
front of the signer. This space is implicitly divided
into a grid with a few different positions from left
to right and from top to bottom (see HR ? High
Right, and LH ? High Left, in Figure 2). Two or
more signs can then be placed in different posi-
tions in this virtual space, and by performing other
signs in the same positions the signer can express
a backreference to the previously established en-
tity at that location. One can even have a move-
ment verb where the starting and ending positions
of the gesture are positioned independently to in-
dicate the source and destination of the movement.
In other words, these morphological variations can
perform a similar function to gender and num-
ber agreement in Italian backreferences, but they
can also assume roles that in Italian would be per-
formed by prepositions, which are connectives. In
fact, as we will see later on, Italian prepositions are
never translated as signs, but are often associated
with morphological variations on related signs.
3.1 Tree Alignment
Two of our four translation hypotheses involve a
notion of distance on the syntax tree, and a no-
273
19_f08_2011-06-08_10_04_10.xml
Anche sulla Sardegna qualche annuvolamento pomeridiano, possibilit? di qualche breve scroscio di pioggia, ma tendenza poi a schiarite
pomeriggio Sardegna area nuvola pure acquazzone potere ma poi nuvola diminuire
sulla
Anche
Sardegna annuvolamento
qualchepomeridiano ,
possibilit?
, ma
di
scroscio
qualche breve di
pioggia
tendenza
poi a
schiarite
NUVOLA
POMERIGGIOAREA
PURE
POTERE
SARDEGNA ACQUAZZONEMA
NUVOLA DIMINUIRE
POI
Figure 4: Example of integrated syntax trees.
tion of signs corresponding to words. Therefore,
it is not sufficient to consider the LIS sentence
and the Italian sentence separately. Instead, their
syntax trees must be reconstructed and aligned.
Tree alignment in a variety of forms has been
extensively used in machine translation systems
(Gildea, 2003; Eisner, 2003; May and Knight,
2007). As far as we know, we are the first
to attempt the usage of tree alignment to aid in
the translation between a spoken and a sign lan-
guage, partly because corpora that include sync-
tactic trees for sign language sentences hardly ex-
ist. (Lo?pez-Luden?a et al, 2011) does use align-
ment techniques for translation from Spanish to
Spanish Sign Language (SSL), but it is limited to
alignment between words or phrases in Spanish,
and glosses or sequences of glosses in SSL.
We have developed a pipeline that takes in input
the corpus files, parses the Italian sentence with
an existing parser, and retrieves / builds a parse
tree for the LIS sentence. The two trees are then
aligned by exploiting the word/sign alignment. A
sample output is shown in Figure 4.
Italian sentence parsing. Since the corpus con-
tains the Italian sentences in plain, unstructured
text form, they need to be parsed. We used the
DeSR parser, a dependency parser pre-trained on a
very large Italian corpus (Attardi et al, 2007; Cia-
ramita and Attardi, 2011). This parser produced
the syntax trees and POS tagging that we used for
the Italian part of the corpus.
LIS syntax tree. One of the attributes allowed
by AEWLIS is ?parent?, which points a sign to its
parent in the syntax tree, or marks it as a root (see
Figure 2). These hand-built syntax trees are avail-
able in roughly 1/4 of the AEWLIS files. Because
the size of our corpus is already limited, and be-
274
cause no tools are available to generate LIS syn-
tax trees, for the remaining 3/4 of the corpus we
fell back on a simple linear tree where each sign is
connected to its predecessor. This solution at least
maintains locality in most cases.
Word Alignment. Having obtained syntax trees
for the two sentences, we then needed to align
them. For this purpose we used the Berkeley Word
Aligner (BWA) 1 (Denero, 2007), a general tool
for aligning sentences in bilingual corpora. BWA
takes as input a series of matching sentences in
two different languages, trains multiple unsuper-
vised alignment models, and selects the optimal
result using a testing set of manual alignments.
The output is a list of aligned word indices for
each input sentence pair. On our data set, BWA
performance is as follows: Precision = 0.736364,
Recall = 0.704348, AER = 0.280000.
Integration. The result is an integrated syntax
tree representation of the Italian and LIS ver-
sions of the sentence, with arcs bridging aligned
word/sign pairs. Since some connectives consist
of multi-word phrases, the word nodes which are
part of one are merged into a super-node that in-
herits all connections to other nodes. Figure 4
shows the end result for the Italian and LIS sen-
tences in Figure 1 (the two sentences are repeated
for convenience at the bottom of Figure 4). The
rectangular boxes are words in the Italian sen-
tence, while the rounded boxes are signs in the LIS
sentence. The Italian tree has its root(s) at the bot-
tom, while the LIS tree has its root(s) at the top.
Solid arrows point from children to parent nodes
in the syntax tree. Gray-shaded boxes represent
connectives (words or signs, as indicated by the
border of the box). Bold dashed lines show word
alignment. Edges with round heads show relation-
ships where a sign has a location attribute refer-
encing another sign. Arrows with an empty tri-
angular head trace the paths described in the next
section.
3.2 Subtree alignment and path processing
At this point individual words are aligned, but that
is not sufficient. Our hypotheses on the effect of
connectives on translation requires us to align a
tree fragment surrounding the Italian connective
with the corresponding tree fragment on the LIS
1http://code.google.com/p/
berkeleyaligner/
side - where the connective may be missing. In ef-
fect, since we have hypothesized that the presence
of a connective can affect the translation of the two
subtrees that it connects, we would like to be able
to align each of those subtrees to its translation.
However, given the differences between the two
languages, it is not easy to give a clear definition
of this mapping - let alne to compute it.
Instead, we can take a step back to word-level
alignment. We make the observation that, if two
words belong to two different subtrees linked by a
connective, so that the path between the two words
goes through the connective, then the frontier be-
tween the LIS counterparts of those two subtrees
should also lie along the path between the signs
aligned with those two words. If the connective is
preserved in translation as a sign, we should ex-
pect to find it along that path; if it is not, its ef-
fect should still be seen along that path, either in
the form of morphological variations to the signs
along the path, or in the shortness of the path itself.
The first step, then, is to split the Italian syntax
tree by removing the connective. This yields one
subtree containing the connective?s parent node, if
any, and one subtree for each of the connective?s
children, if any. The parent subtree typically con-
tains most of the rest of the sentence, so only the
direct ancestors of the connective are considered.
Then, each pair of words belonging to different
subtrees is linked by a path that goes through the
connective in the original tree. Of these words, we
select the ones that have aligned signs, and then
we compute the path between each pair of signs
aligned to words belonging to different subtrees.
This gives us a set of paths to consider in the LIS
syntax tree.
For example, let us consider the connective ?di?
between ?possibilita`? and ?scroscio? in Figure 4.
? This node connects two subtrees: a child sub-
tree containing ?qualche, breve, scroscio, di,
pioggia?, and a parent subtree containing the
rest of the sentence.
? From each subtree, a set of paths is gener-
ated: all paths extending from the connective
to the leaves of the child subtree (for exam-
ple ?scroscio, qualche? or ?scroscio, di, pi-
oggia?), and the path of direct ancestors in
the parent tree (?sulla, annuvolamento, pos-
sibilita`?).
? Iterate through the cartesian product of each
275
Table 1: Translation candidates for connectives with more than 10 occurrences
Connective ITA Occurrences Sign Location Close Missing
domani 71 67 (94.37%) 1 (1.41%) 2 (2.82%) 4 (5.63%)
dopodomani 15 14 (93.33%) 0 (0.00%) 0 (0.00%) 1 (6.67%)
mentre 28 26 (92.86%) 5 (17.86%) 0 (0.00%) 1 (3.57%)
o 37 37 (100.00%) 2 (5.41%) 6 (16.22%) 0 (0.00%)
pero` 10 9 (90.00%) 1 (10.00%) 1 (10.00%) 1 (10.00%)
ancora 72 44 (61.11%) 1 (1.39%) 3 (4.17%) 25 (34.72%)
invece 17 9 (52.94%) 1 (5.88%) 2 (11.76%) 6 (35.29%)
ma 51 29 (56.86%) 1 (1.96%) 2 (3.92%) 21 (41.18%)
poi 22 10 (45.45%) 2 (9.09%) 0 (0.00%) 10 (45.45%)
abbastanza 11 4 (36.36%) 1 (9.09%) 0 (0.00%) 6 (54.55%)
anche 89 33 (37.08%) 5 (5.62%) 1 (1.12%) 53 (59.55%)
ora 17 6 (35.29%) 1 (5.88%) 1 (5.88%) 10 (58.82%)
proprio 11 5 (45.45%) 0 (0.00%) 0 (0.00%) 6 (54.55%)
quindi 35 9 (25.71%) 1 (2.86%) 0 (0.00%) 25 (71.43%)
come 16 0 (0.00%) 1 (6.25%) 1 (6.25%) 14 (87.50%)
dove 28 0 (0.00%) 1 (3.57%) 0 (0.00%) 27 (96.43%)
generalmente 13 0 (0.00%) 0 (0.00%) 0 (0.00%) 13 (100.00%)
per quanto riguarda 14 0 (0.00%) 0 (0.00%) 1 (7.14%) 13 (92.86%)
piuttosto 13 0 (0.00%) 0 (0.00%) 0 (0.00%) 13 (100.00%)
piu` 57 0 (0.00%) 3 (5.26%) 2 (3.51%) 52 (91.23%)
poco 63 2 (3.17%) 3 (4.76%) 0 (0.00%) 58 (92.06%)
sempre 13 1 (7.69%) 0 (0.00%) 0 (0.00%) 12 (92.31%)
soprattutto 16 1 (6.25%) 1 (6.25%) 0 (0.00%) 14 (87.50%)
a 111 0 (0.00%) 18 (16.22%) 30 (27.03%) 66 (59.46%)
con 91 0 (0.00%) 20 (21.98%) 11 (12.09%) 62 (68.13%)
da 97 0 (0.00%) 26 (26.80%) 18 (18.56%) 62 (63.92%)
di 510 2 (0.39%) 92 (18.04%) 140 (27.45%) 312 (61.18%)
e 206 17 (8.25%) 34 (16.50%) 25 (12.14%) 140 (67.96%)
in 168 6 (3.57%) 37 (22.02%) 16 (9.52%) 113 (67.26%)
per 120 0 (0.00%) 7 (5.83%) 35 (29.17%) 82 (68.33%)
su 327 4 (1.22%) 121 (37.00%) 38 (11.62%) 190 (58.10%)
verso 18 0 (0.00%) 6 (33.33%) 1 (5.56%) 12 (66.67%)
pair of sets (in this case we have only one
pair), and consider the full path formed by the
two paths connected by the connective node
(for instance, ?sulla, annuvolamento, possib-
lita`, di, scroscio, breve?).
? For each of these paths, take the signs aligned
to words on different sides of the target con-
nective, and find the shortest path between
those signs in the LIS syntax tree; we call this
the aligned path. For example, from ?pos-
sibilita`? and ?scroscio? we find ?POTERE,
ACQUAZZONE?. If this process generates
multiple paths, only the maximal ones are
kept.
By looking at words within a certain distance of
the connective, at their aligned signs, and at the
distance between those signs in the aligned path,
the program then produces one or more ?transla-
tion candidates? for each occurrence of a connec-
tive:
? Sign: if the connective word is aligned to a
connective sign in LIS, that is its direct trans-
lation;
? Location: if morphology variations (cur-
rently limited to the ?location? attribute, see
Figure 2) are present on a sign aligned to an
It. word belonging to one of the examined
paths, and the word is less than 2 steps away
from the connective, that morphological vari-
ation in LIS may capture the function of the
connective;
? Close: if two It. words are connected by
a connective, and they map to signs which
have a very short path between them (up to
3 nodes, including the two signs), the con-
nective may be reflected simply in this close
connection between the translated subtrees in
the LIS syntax tree;
? Missing: if none of the above hypotheses are
possible, we hypothesize that the connective
has been simply dropped.
Table 1 shows the results of this analysis. It in-
cludes only connectives with more than 10 occur-
rences. For each connective and translation hy-
pothesis, the shading of the cell is proportional to
276
the fraction of occurrences where that hypothesis
is possible; this fraction is also given as a percent.
Note that Sign, Location and Close candidates are
not mutually exclusive: for instance, an occur-
rence of a connective might be directly aligned
with a sign, but at the same time it might fit the
criteria for a Location candidate. For this reason,
the sum of the percents in the four columns is not
necessarily 100.
k-means clustering (MacQueen, 1967; Lloyd,
1982) has been applied to the connectives, with
the aforementioned fractions as the features. The
resulting five clusters are represented by the row
groupings in the table.
The first cluster contains words which clearly
have a corresponding sign in LIS, such as ?do-
mani? (tomorrow). ?Domani? and ?dopodomani?
are not actually connectives, while ?mentre?, ?o?
and ?pero`? are. It is interesting to note that, while
a logician might expect ?e? (and) and ?o? (or) to
be treated similarly, they actually work quite dif-
ferently in LIS: there is a specific sign for ?o?, but
there is no sign for ?e?. Instead, signs are sim-
ply juxtaposed in LIS where ?e? would be used in
Italian.
The words in the second cluster also have a di-
rect sign translation, but they are missing in the
LIS translation around half of the time. Several
words represent connections with previous state-
ments or situations, such as ?ancora? (again), ?in-
vece? (instead), ?ma? (but). These appear to be
often dropped in LIS when they reference a previ-
ous sentence, e.g. a sentence-initial ?ma?; or when
they are redundant in Italian, e.g. ?ma? in ?ma an-
che? (?but also?). Therefore, we think can see two
phenomena at play here: a stronger principle of
economy in LIS, and a reduced number of explicit
connections across sentences.
The third cluster is similar to the second cluster,
but with a higher percent of dropped connectives.
This is probably related to the semantics of these
five words. ?Abbastanza? means ?quite, enough?,
and in general indicates a medium quantity, not
particularly large nor particularly small. It is no
surprise that this word is more likely to succumb
to principles of economy in language. ?Anche?
means ?also?, and is either translated as ?PURE?
(also) or dropped. This does not seem to depend
on the specific circumstances of its usage; rather, it
seems to be largely a stylistic choice by the trans-
lator. ?Proprio? (?precisely?, ?just?) has a corre-
sponding sign ?PROPRIO?, but since it does not
convey essential information it is a good candidate
for dropping. ?Quindi?, meaning ?therefore?, has
its own sign ?QUINDI?, but once again the causal
relationship it conveys is usually not essential to
understanding what the weather will be, and thus
it is frequently dropped.
The fourth cluster consists of connectives which
are largely simply dropped. Some of these are el-
ements that just contribute to the discourse flow
in Italian, such as ?per quanto riguarda? (?con-
cerning?); in fact, this connective mainly oc-
curs in sentence-initial position in the Italian sen-
tences in our corpus and denotes a change of
topic from the previous sentence, corroborating
our hypothesis of a reduced use of explicit inter-
sentence connections in LIS. It may seem strange
for comparative and intensity markers such as
?piu`? (more) or ?poco? (a little) to be so consis-
tently dropped, but it turns out that intensity varia-
tions for weather phenomena are often embedded
into a specific sign, for example ?NUVOLOSITA`
AUMENTARE? (increasing cloud cover).
The fifth cluster contains all Italian prepositions
(with 10 or more occurrences in the corpus), none
of which is translated as a sign (the 6 occurrences
for ?in?, the 4 for ?su? and the 2 for ?di? are due
to alignment errors). We can conclude that prepo-
sitions do not exist in LIS as parts of speech; how-
ever, the prepositions in this cluster are often asso-
ciated with morphological variations in the spatial
positioning of related signs, which suggests that
the role associated with these prepositions in Ital-
ian is performed by these variations in LIS. The
conjunction ?e? (and) also ends up in this cluster,
although it has 8 legitimate sign alignments with
?pure? (?too?); the rest are alignment errors. Un-
surprisingly, all connectives in this class also have
high ratings for the ?close? hypothesis.
4 Rule extraction
We trained a classifier to help a LIS generator de-
termine how an Italian connective should be trans-
lated. Because the translation pipeline we plan to
integrate with is rule-based, we chose a Decision
Tree as our classifier: this allows rules to be easily
extracted from the classification model.
In order to identify a single class for each exam-
ple, we ranked the four possible translation can-
didates as follows: Sign is the strongest, then
Location, then Close, and finally Missing is the
277
child1 align = None ? word = Per quanto riguarda ? parent align = None ? Missing
child1 align = None ? word = Per quanto riguarda ? parent align = PREVEDERE ? Close
child1 align = None ? word = o ? Align(O)
child1 align = None ? word = su ? child2 align mykind = location ? child2 align = SICILIA ? Location
Figure 5: Some rules extracted from the decision tree
weakest. Then, each example is labeled with
the strongest translation candidate available for it:
thus, for example, if the connective word appears
to be translated with a connective sign, and the
words it connects are also aligned to signs which
are close to each other syntactically, then the class
is Sign, not Close.
Our training data suffers from large imbalance
between the ?missing? class and the others. A
classifier that simply labels all examples as ?miss-
ing? would have an accuracy above 60%, and in
fact, that is the classifier that we obtain if we at-
tempt to automatically optimize the parameters of
a Decision Tree (DT). We also note that, for con-
nectives where both options are possible, choosing
to translate them can make the sentence more ver-
bose, but choosing to drop them risks losing part of
the sentence?s meaning: the worse risk is the lat-
ter. Following accepted practice with unbalanced
datasets (Chawla et al, 2004), we rebalanced the
classes by duplicating all examples of the Align,
Location and Close classes, but not those of the
Missing class.
On our data set of connectives with at least
10 occurrences, we trained a DT using AdaBoost
(Freund and Schapire, 1997). The features include
the word neighboring the connective in the Ital-
ian syntax tree, their aligned signs if any, part of
speech tags, and semantic categories such as time
or location. The resulting tree is very large, but
we provide a few examples of the rules that can be
extracted from it in Figure 5.
Bootstrap evaluation shows our DT to have an
accuracy of 83.58% ? 1.03%. In contrast, a base-
line approach of taking the most common class for
each connective results in an accuracy of 68.70%
? 0.88%. Furthermore, the baseline classifier has
abysmal recall for the Close and Location classes
(0.00% and 0.85%, respectively), which our DT
greatly improves upon (86.73% and 75.32%).
In order to estimate the impact of the lack of
a LIS syntax tree in most of the corpus, we also
learned and evaluated a DT using only the 1/4 of
the corpus for which LIS syntax trees are avail-
able. The accuracy is 81.44% ? 2.03%, versus a
baseline of 71.55% ? 1.74%. The recall for Close
and Location is 89.22% and 73.58%, vs. 0.00%
and 3.51% for the baseline. These results are com-
parable with the those obtained on the whole cor-
pus, confirming that linear trees are a reasonable
fallback.
Both clustering and classification were per-
formed using RapidMiner 5.3. 2
5 Conclusions and Future Work
The small size of our corpus, with around 375
bilingual sentences, posed a large challenge to
the use of statistical methods; on the other hand,
having no access to a LIS speaker prevented us
from simply relying on a rule-based approach. By
combining syntax tree processing with several ma-
chine learning techniques, we were able to analyze
the corpus and detect patterns that show linguis-
tic substance. We have produced initial results in
terms of rule extraction, and we will be integrat-
ing these rules into the full Italian-LIS translation
system to produce improved translation of connec-
tives.
6 Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the ATLAS project,
funded by Regione Piemonte within the ?CIPE
2007? framework. Partial support to the au-
thors was also provided by awards IIS 0905593
(from the NSF) and NPRP 5-939-1-155 (from the
QNRF). A special thanks to A. Mazzei (ATLAS)
for his willingness to answer our email bursts.
Thanks to other members of ATLAS, in particu-
lar P. Prinetto, N. Bertoldi, C. Geraci, L. Lesmo;
and to C. Soria, who extracted the list of potential
connectives from the Italian Treebank.
References
Nadeem Ahmad, Davide Barberis, Nicola Garazzino,
Paolo Prinetto, Umar Shoaib, and Gabriele Tiotto.
2012. A virtual character based italian sign language
dictionary. In Proceedings of the Conference Uni-
versal Learning Design. Masaryk University.
2http://rapid-i.com/
278
Abdulaziz Almohimeed, Mike Wald, and R.I. Damper.
2011. Arabic Text to Arabic Sign Language Trans-
lation System for the Deaf and Hearing-Impaired
Community. In Proceedings of the Second Work-
shop on Speech and Language Processing for Assis-
tive Technologies, pages 101?109, Edinburgh, Scot-
land, UK, July. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Giuseppe Attardi, Felice Dell?Orletta, Maria Simi,
Atanas Chanev, and Massimiliano Ciaramita. 2007.
Multilingual dependency parsing and domain adap-
tation using DeSR. In Proceedings of the CoNLL
Shared Task Session of EMNLP-CoNLL, pages
1112?1118.
N Bertoldi, G Tiotto, P Prinetto, E Piccolo, F Nunnari,
V Lombardo, A Mazzei, R Damiano, L Lesmo, and
A Del Principe. 2010. On the creation and the an-
notation of a large-scale Italian-LIS parallel corpus.
In 4th Workshop on the Representation and Process-
ing of Sign Languages: Corpora and Sign Language
Technologies, CSLT.
Annelies Braffort, Laurence Bolot, E Chtelat-Pel, An-
nick Choisier, Maxime Delorme, Michael Filhol,
Je?re?mie Segouat, Cyril Verrecchia, Flora Badin, and
Nad?ege Devos. 2010. Sign language corpora for
analysis, processing and evaluation. In Proc. of the
Seventh International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC?10).
Nitesh V Chawla, Nathalie Japkowicz, and Aleksander
Kotcz. 2004. Editorial: special issue on learning
from imbalanced data sets. ACM SIGKDD Explo-
rations Newsletter, 6(1):1?6.
Massimiliano Ciaramita and Giuseppe Attardi. 2011.
Dependency parsing with second-order feature maps
and annotated semantic information. In H. Bunt,
P. Merlo, and J. Nivre, editors, Trends in Parsing
Technology, volume 43 of Text, Speech and Lan-
guage Technology, pages 87?104. Springer.
John Denero. 2007. Tailoring word alignments to syn-
tactic machine translation. In In Proceedings of the
45th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (ACL-2007, pages 17?24.
Philippe Dreuw, Jens Forster, Yannick Gweth,
Daniel Stein, Hermann Ney, Gregorio Martinez,
Jaume Verges Llahi, Onno Crasborn, Ellen Ormel,
Wei Du, et al 2010. SignSpeak?understanding,
recognition, and translation of sign languages. In
The 4th Workshop on the Representation and Pro-
cessing of Sign Languages: Corpora and Sign Lan-
guage Technologies (CSLT 2010), pages 22?23, Val-
letta, Malta.
Jason Eisner. 2003. Learning non-isomorphic tree
mappings for machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 41st Annual Meeting on Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics-Volume 2, pages 205?208. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Angela Ferrari. 2008. Congiunzioni frasali, congiun-
zioni testuali e preposizioni: stessa logica, diversa
testualita`. In Emanuela Cresti, editor, Prospettive
nello studio del lessico italiano, Atti del IX Con-
gresso della Societa` Internazionale di Linguistica e
Filologia Italiana, pages 411?416, Florence, Italy.
Firenze University Press.
Yoav Freund and Robert E Schapire. 1997. A
decision-theoretic generalization of on-line learning
and an application to boosting. Journal of computer
and system sciences, 55(1):119?139.
Carlo Geraci, Marta Gozzi, Costanza Papagno, and
Carlo Cecchetto. 2008. How grammar can cope
with limited short-term memory: Simultaneity and
seriality in sign languages. Cognition, 106(2):780?
804.
Daniel Gildea. 2003. Loosely tree-based alignment
for machine translation. In Proceedings of the 41st
Annual Meeting on Association for Computational
Linguistics-Volume 1, pages 80?87. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Stuart Lloyd. 1982. Least squares quantization in
pcm. Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on,
28(2):129?137.
Vincenzo Lombardo, Fabrizio Nunnari, and Rossana
Damiano. 2010. A virtual interpreter for the
Italian Sign Language. In Proceedings of the
10th International Conference on Intelligent Virtual
Agents, IVA?10, pages 201?207, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Springer-Verlag.
Vincenzo Lombardo, Cristina Battaglino, Rossana
Damiano, and Fabrizio Nunnari. 2011. An avatar-
based interface for the Italian Sign Language. In
2011 International Conference on Complex, Intelli-
gent and Software Intensive Systems (CISIS), pages
589?594. IEEE.
Vero?nica Lo?pez-Luden?a, Rube?n San-Segundo,
Syaheerah Lufti, Juan Manuel Lucas-Cuesta,
Julia?n David Echevarry, and Beatriz Mart??nez-
Gonza?lez. 2011. Source Language Categorization
for improving a Speech into Sign Language Trans-
lation System. In Proceedings of the Second
Workshop on Speech and Language Processing for
Assistive Technologies, pages 84?93, Edinburgh,
Scotland, UK, July.
Vero?nica Lo?pez-Luden?a, Rube?n San-Segundo,
Juan Manuel Montero, Ricardo Co?rdoba, Javier
Ferreiros, and Jose? Manuel Pardo. 2011. Automatic
categorization for improving Spanish into Spanish
Sign Language machine translation. Computer
Speech & Language.
Pengfei Lu and Matt Huenerfauth. 2010. Collecting
a Motion-Capture Corpus of American Sign Lan-
guage for Data-Driven Generation Research. In
Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop
on Speech and Language Processing for Assistive
279
Technologies, pages 89?97, Los Angeles, California,
June. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Pengfei Lu and Matt Huenerfauth. 2012. Learn-
ing a Vector-Based Model of American Sign Lan-
guage Inflecting Verbs from Motion-Capture Data.
In Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Speech
and Language Processing for Assistive Technolo-
gies, pages 66?74, Montre?al, Canada, June. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
James MacQueen. 1967. Some methods for classi-
fication and analysis of multivariate observations.
In Proceedings of the fifth Berkeley symposium on
mathematical statistics and probability, volume 1,
page 14. California, USA.
Jonathan May and Kevin Knight. 2007. Syntactic re-
alignment models for machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of EMNLP, pages 360?368.
Alessandro Mazzei. 2012. Sign language generation
with expert systems and ccg. In Proceedings of the
Seventh International Natural Language Generation
Conference, INLG ?12, pages 105?109, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Simonetta Montemagni, Francesco Barsotti, Marco
Battista, Nicoletta Calzolari, Ornella Corazzari,
Alessandro Lenci, Antonio Zampolli, Francesca
Fanciulli, Maria Massetani, Remo Raffaelli, et al
2003. Building the Italian syntactic-semantic Tree-
bank. Treebanks, pages 189?210.
S. Morrissey, H. Somers, R. Smith, S. Gilchrist, and
S. Dandapat. 2010. Building Sign Language Cor-
pora for Use in Machine Translation. In 4th Work-
shop on the Representation and Processing of Sign
Languages: Corpora and Sign Language Technolo-
gies (CSLT 2010), pages 172?178, Valletta, Malta.
P. Prinetto, U. Shoaib, and G. Tiotto. 2011. The Ital-
ian Sign Language Sign Bank: Using WordNet for
Sign Language corpus creation. In 2011 Interna-
tional Conference on Communications and Informa-
tion Technology (ICCIT), pages 134?137.
Orazio Romeo. 1991. Dizionario dei segni: la lingua
dei segni in 1400 immagini. Zanichelli.
Virginia Volterra. 1987. La lingua italiana dei
segni: la comunicazione visivo-gestuale dei sordi.
Il Mulino.
280
Proceedings of the 8th International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 6?10,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 19-21 June 2014. c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
PatientNarr: Towards generating patient-centric summaries
of hospital stays
Barbara Di Eugenio, Andrew D. Boyd, Camillo Lugaresi, Abhinaya Balasubramanian,
Gail M. Keenan, Mike Burton, Tamara G. Rezende Macieira, Karen Dunn Lopez
University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, IL, USA
Carol Friedman
Columbia University
New York, NY, USA
Jianrong Li, Yves A. Lussier
University of Arizona
Tucson, AZ, USA
Abstract
PatientNarr summarizes information taken
from textual discharge notes written by
physicians, and structured nursing docu-
mentation. It builds a graph that highlights
the relationships between the two types of
documentation; and extracts information
from the graph for content planning. Sim-
pleNLG is used for surface realization.
1 Introduction
Every year, 7.9% of the US population is hos-
pitalized (CDC, 2011). Patients need to under-
stand what happened to them in the hospital, and
what they should do after discharge. PatientNarr
will ultimately be able to generate concise, lay-
language summaries of hospital stays. We hy-
pothesize that such summaries will help patients
take care of themselves after they are discharged,
and supplement current approaches to patient ed-
ucation, which is not always effective (Olson and
Windish, 2010).
PatientNarr needs to summarize documentation
that is currently segregated by profession; as
a minimum, as physician discharge notes and
as nursing plans-of-care. We contend that both
sources are necessary to provide the patient with
full understanding, also because much of the direct
care provided by nurses will need to be continued
following discharge (Cain et al., 2012).
In our case, PatientNarr summarizes data that
is heterogeneous (textual for physician discharge
notes, structured for nursing documentation).
This paper describes the steps we have undetaken
so far: (a) To demonstrate that physician and nurse
documentations diverge, we map both to a graph,
and study the relationships therein. This graph
supports content planning. (b) We have devel-
oped the pipeline that extracts the information to
be communicated, and renders it in English via
SimpleNLG (Gatt and Reiter, 2009).
Related work. NLG and Summarization in the
biomedical domain have been pursued for a few
years (Di Eugenio and Green, 2010), but most
work addresses health care personnel: to navi-
gate cancer patients? medical histories (Hallett,
2008; Scott et al., 2013); to generate textual sum-
maries describing a hospitalized infant for nurses
(Portet et al., 2009); to generates reports of care
for hand-off between emergency workers (Schnei-
der et al., 2013). Most applications of NLG that
target patients focus on behavioral changes (Reiter
et al., 2003), or patient counseling (Green et al.,
2011). Only few NLG systems attempt at generat-
ing personalized medical information from med-
ical records or data (Williams et al., 2007; Ma-
hamood and Reiter, 2011).
2 A motivating example
So far, we have gained access to 28 de-identified
discharge notes of cardiology patients from the
University of Illinois Hospital and Health Science
System (UIHHSS). Figure 1 shows about 20% of
the physician discharge notes for Patient 9. It is
difficult to understand, not only because of jargon,
but also because of ignorance of relevant domain
relationships. Importantly, these notes do not talk
about issues that are potentially important for the
patient, like his state of mind, which are more of-
ten addressed by nurses. In our case, the nursing
documentation is not textual, but entered via the
HANDS tool, and stored in a relational database
(Keenan et al., 2002). A tiny portion of the ini-
tial plan-of-care (POC) for Patient 9 is shown in
Figure 2 (this nursing data is reconstructed, see
Section 3). One POC is documented at every
formal handoff (admission, shift change, or dis-
charge). HANDS employs the NANDA-I taxon-
6
Patient was admitted to Cardiology for new onset a fib in RVR. Was given an additional dose of diltazem 30mg po when first
seen. Patient was started on a heparin drip for possible TEE and cardioversion. Overnight his HR was in the 100-110s; however
did increase to 160s for which patient was given 120mg er of diltazem. HR improved; however, in the morning while awake
and moving around, HR did increase to the 130-140s. Patient was given another dose of IV dilt 20mg. [...] Upon discharge
was given two prescriptions for BP, HCTZ and losartan given LVH seen on echo. Patient was counseled on the risks of stroke
and different options for anticoagulation. [...]
Figure 1: Excerpt from physician discharge notes (Patient 9)
omy of nursing diagnoses, represented by squares
in Figure 2; the Nursing Outcomes Classification
(NOC) ? circles; and the Nursing Interventions
Classification (NIC) ? triangles (NNN, 2014). In
Figure 2, Acute Pain is a diagnosis, and Anxiety
Level and Pain Level (some of) its associated out-
comes. Anxiety Reduction is an intervention asso-
ciated with Anxiety Level; Pain Management and
Analgesic Administration are interventions associ-
ated with Pain Level. A scale from 1 to 5 indicates
the initial value associated with an outcome (i.e.,
the state the patient was in when s/he was admit-
ted), the expected rating, and the actual rating at
discharge. In Figure 2, the current level for Pain
Level and Anxiety Level is 2 each, with an expected
level of 5 at discharge, i.e., no pain/anxiety.
Figure 2: Excerpt from nursing documentation
Figures 1 and 2 suggest that physician and nurs-
ing documentations provide different perspectives
on patients: e.g., Anxiety is not even mentioned
in the discharge notes. One of the authors (a
nursing student) wrote summaries for five of the
28 discharge summaries and their corresponding
HANDS POCs ? Figure 3 shows the summary for
Patient 9. This initial round of human authoring
was meant to provide some preliminary guidelines
to generate automatic summaries. Please see Sec-
tion 5 for our plans on obtaining a much larger
quantity of more informed human-authored sum-
maries.
3 Extracting relationships between
physician notes and nursing data
To extract and relate information from our
two sources, we rely on UMLS, MedLEE and
HANDS. UMLS, the Unified Medical Language
System (NLM, 2009), includes 2.6 million con-
cepts (identified by Concept Unique Identifiers or
CUIs) organized in a network. Importantly, many
different medical and nursing terminologies have
been incorporated into UMLS, including those
used by HANDS (NANDA-I, NIC and NOC).
UMLS provides mapping between their concepts
and CUIs, via 8.6 million concept names and rela-
tionships between terminologies. Some relation-
ships are of a hierarchical nature, where one con-
cept is narrower than the other (e.g., Chest X-ray
and Diagnostic radiologic examination).
MedLEE is a medical information extraction
system (Friedman et al., 2004). In its semi-
structured output, recognized entities are mapped
to the corresponding CUI in UMLS.
HANDS has not been adopted at UIHHSS yet.
Hence, we reconstructed HANDS POCs for those
28 patients on the basis of 40,661 cases collected
at four hospitals where HANDS is in use. For
each of the 28 patients, the same nursing student
who authored the five summaries, selected simi-
lar cases, and used them to produce high-quality
records consistent with actual nursing practice.
To relate physician and nursing documenta-
tions, we seed a graph with two sets of CUIs:
those returned by MedLEE as a result of process-
ing the physician discharge notes; and the CUIs
corresponding to all the NANDA-I, NIC and NOC
terms from the HANDS POCs. We then grow the
graph by querying UMLS for the set of concepts
related to each of the concepts in our set; the con-
cepts that were not already part of the graph are
then used to begin a new round of growth (we
stop at round 2, to keep the time used by UMLS
to answer, reasonable). From this graph, we
keep the concepts that either belong to one of the
7
You were admitted with new onset of atrial fibrillation. You reported feeling weakness, chest pressure and increased shortness
of breath. You reported acute pain and you were anxious. During your hospitalization you were treated with analgesics for your
pain and pain management was performed by the nursing team. Your shortness of breath improved. Your decreased cardiac
output was treated with medication administration and knowledge about cardiac precautions, hypertension management, your
treatment regimen and the prescribed medication were taught to you by the nurses. A Transophageal Echocardiography was
performed. You met the expected outcomes for your condition and you were discharged under the condition improved for
your home. You have an appointment scheduled at Union Medical Center on [DATE] with Physician [DR.]. The list of your
medications is attached to this discharge.
Figure 3: Human-authored summary (Patient 9)
source lists, or that are required to form a con-
nection between a doctor-originated concept and
a nurse-originated concept that would otherwise
remain unconnected. All other concepts are re-
moved. The result is a graph with several separate
connected components, which correspond to clus-
ters of related concepts occurring in the discharge
notes or in the plans of care, or forming connec-
tions between the two sources.
We count distances in terms of relationships tra-
versed, starting from the nursing concepts since
they are fewer, and since path traversal is re-
versible.1 Concepts can overlap; or be directly
connected (distance one); or be directly connected
through an intermediate concept (distance two).
We do not consider distances beyond two. Table 1
shows results for our specific example, Patient 9,
and average results across our 28 test cases. As we
can see, there are very few concepts in common,
or even at distance 1. Our results provide quanti-
tative evidence for the hypothesis that physicians
and nurses talk differently, not just as far as ter-
minology is concerned, but as regards aspects of
patient care. This provides strong evidence for our
hypothesis that a hospitalization summary should
include both perspectives.
4 Automatically generating the summary
In this baseline version of PatientNarr, we focused
on understanding how the vital parameters have
improved over time, the treatment given for im-
provement and the issues addressed during the
process. The summary generated by PatientNarr
for Patient 9 is shown in Figure 4. We extract
information of interest from the graph obtained
at the previous step; we couch it as features of
phrasal constituents via the operations provided by
the SimpleNLG API. SimpleNLG then assembles
grammatical phrases in the right order, and helps
1In UMLS, any relationship from concept A to concept B,
has a corresponding relationship from B to A, not necessarily
symmetric.
in aggregating related sentences.
Since there are far fewer nursing than doctor
concepts, we start from the NANDA-I codes, i.e.,
the diagnoses. The name associated in UMLS
with the corresponding CUI is used. For each
NANDA-I node, we highlight the treatments given
(the NIC codes), e.g. see the sentence starting
with Acute onset pain was treated [...] in Fig-
ure 4. For both diagnosis and treatments, we at-
tempt to relate them to doctor?s nodes. Specif-
ically, we exploit the relationships in the UMLS
ontology and include nodes in the graph we con-
structed that are at distance 1 or 2, and that are
either doctor?s nodes, or intermediate nodes that
connect to a doctor?s node. For example, in Dys-
rhythmia management is remedy for tachycardia
and Atrial Fibrillation, Dysrhythmia management
is a NIC intervention that is related to Cardiac
Arrhythmia; in turn, Cardiac Arrhythmia is a di-
rect hypernym of tachycardia and Atrial Fibrilla-
tion which were both extracted from the physician
notes by MedLEE. Cardiac Arrhythmia was dis-
covered by our graph building procedure, as de-
scribed in Section 3.
We then highlight what improved during the
hospital stay. As we mentioned earlier, the NOC
codes (outcomes) are associated with a scale from
1 to 5 which indicates the initial value, the ex-
pected rating, and the actual rating at discharge. If
the relative increase between admission and dis-
charge encompasses more than 2 points on the
scale, it is considered significant; if it encompasses
1 or 2 points, it is considered slight. In those cases
in which more than one outcome is associated with
a diagnosis, but improvement is not uniform, we
include a cue ?On the other hand?. For Patient 9,
in the last POC recorded just before discharge,
Anxiety Level is up 2 points (to 4), whereas Pain
Level is up 3. We also indicate to the patient
if the final rating reached the rating that was ini-
tially hoped for; it did not for Anxiety Level (See
the two sentences starting from Pain level and Vi-
8
# CUIs from # CUIs from # of # of CUI pairs # of CUI pairs
Discharge Notes Nursing POCs common CUIs at Distance 1 at Distance 2
Patient 9 83.00 28.00 0.00 3.00 13.00
Average 90.64 22.43 0.46 3.00 9.11
Table 1: Concept overlap in discharge notes and nursing POCs
You were admitted for atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular response. Acute onset pain related to pain was treated with
pain management, monitoring of blood pressure, temperature, pulse rate and respiratory rate and administration of analgesic.
Pain level and vital signs have improved significantly and outcomes have met the expectations. On the other hand, level of
anxiety has improved slightly. Cardiac Disease Self-Management, Disease Process (Heart disease), Hypertension Management,
Cardiac Disease Management, Hypertension Management and Treatment Regimen were taught. Low Cardiac Output related
to heart failure was treated with cardiac precautions, monitoring of blood pressure, temperature, pulse rate and respiratory
rate, and dysrhythmia management. Dysrhythmia management is remedy for tachycardia and atrial fibrillation. As a result,
cardiac pump effectiveness, cardiopulmonary status and cardiac tissue perfusion status have improved slightly. Actual Negative
Breathing Pattern related to respiration disorders was treated with respiration monitoring. Respiratory Status has improved
significantly. You have an appointment at Union Medical Center on DATE at TIME. The list of medication is attached to this
discharge.
Figure 4: PatientNarr generated summary (Patient 9)
tal signs [...]. On the other hand, [...]). For the
moment, we do not mention outcomes for which
no improvement, or a setback, has been recorded.
The summary also includes: mentions of edu-
cation that has been imparted; and reminders of
future appointments and of medicines to be taken.
5 Future Work
The research described in this paper lays the foun-
dations for our project, but clearly much work re-
mains to be done. To start with, we plan to build
a corpus of gold-standard summaries, in order to
derive (semi-)automatic models of the informa-
tion to be included from physician notes and from
nursing documentation. The five human authored
summaries we currently have at our disposal are
not sufficient, neither in quality nor (obviously)
in quantity. We intend to inform their generation
via a number of focus groups with all stakeholders
involved: patients, doctors and nurses. To start
with, the five summaries we do have were pre-
sented to the Patient Advisory Board of an unre-
lated project. These two patients noted that all un-
familiar terms should be explained, and that what
the patient should do to improve their health after
discharge, should be included.
Secondly, we will generate lay language
by taking advantage of resources such as the
Consumer Health Vocabulary (Doing-Harris and
Zeng-Treitler, 2011; CHV, 2013), which maps
medical terms to plain-language expressions. Ad-
ditionally, we will pursue more sophisticated ex-
traction and rendering of rhetorical relationships
among events and their outcomes (Mancini et al.,
2007).
Last but not least, we will perform user stud-
ies, both controlled evaluation of our summaries
while still at the development stage, and eventu-
ally longer-term assessments of whether our sum-
maries engender better adherence to medications
and better keeping of follow-up appointments, and
ultimately, better health.
Acknowledgements
We thank three anonymous reviewers for their
helpful comments. For partial financial support,
we acknowledge award NPRP 5-939-1-155 from
the Qatar National Research Fund, the UIC De-
partment of Biomedical and Health Information
Sciences, and the UIC Institute for Translational
Health Informatics.
References
Carol H. Cain, Estee Neuwirth, Jim Bellows, Christi
Zuber, and Jennifer Green. 2012. Patient expe-
riences of transitioning from hospital to home: an
ethnographic quality improvement project. Journal
of Hospital Medicine, 7(5):382?387.
CDC. 2011. Hospital utilization (in
non-federal short-stay hospitals). Cen-
ters for Disease Control and Prevention,
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/hospital.htm.
Last accessed on 11/26/2013.
2013. Consumer Health Vocabulary Initiative.
9
http://www.layhealthinformatics.org/. Last ac-
cessed on 5/19/2014.
Barbara Di Eugenio and Nancy L. Green. 2010.
Emerging applications of natural language gener-
ation in information visualization, education, and
health-care. In Nitin Indurkhya and Fred J. Dam-
erau, editors, Handbook of Natural Language Pro-
cessing, Second Edition, chapter 23, pages 557?575.
CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group, Boca Raton,
FL. ISBN 978-1420085921.
Kristina M. Doing-Harris and Qing Zeng-Treitler.
2011. Computer-assisted update of a consumer
health vocabulary through mining of social network
data. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 13(2).
C. Friedman, L. Shagina, Y. Lussier, and G. Hripc-
sak. 2004. Automated encoding of clinical docu-
ments based on natural language processing. Jour-
nal of the American Medical Informatics Associa-
tion, 11(5):392.
Albert Gatt and Ehud Reiter. 2009. SimpleNLG: A
realisation engine for practical applications. In Pro-
ceedings of the 12th European Workshop on Natural
Language Generation, pages 90?93. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
N. Green, R. Dwight, K. Navoraphan, and B. Stadler.
2011. Natural language generation of biomedical ar-
gumentation for lay audiences. Argument and Com-
putation, 2(1):23?50.
C. Hallett. 2008. Multi-modal presentation of medical
histories. In IUI ?08: Proceedings of the 13th Inter-
national Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces,
pages 80?89, New York, NY, USA. ACM.
G.M. Keenan, J.R. Stocker, A.T. Geo-Thomas, N.R.
Soparkar, V.H. Barkauskas, and J.A.N.L. Lee. 2002.
The HANDS Project: Studying and Refining the
Automated Collection of a Cross-setting Clinical
Data set. CIN: Computers, Informatics, Nursing,
20(3):89?100.
Saad Mahamood and Ehud Reiter. 2011. Generat-
ing affective natural language for parents of neona-
tal infants. In Proceedings of the 13th European
Workshop on Natural Language Generation, pages
12?21, Nancy, France, September. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Clara Mancini, Christian Pietsch, and Donia Scott.
2007. Visualising discourse structure in interactive
documents. In Proceedings of the Eleventh Euro-
pean Workshop on Natural Language Generation,
pages 89?92, Saarbru?cken, Germany, June.
NLM. 2009. UMLS Reference Manual. Techni-
cal report, National Library of Medicine, Septem-
ber. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK9676/
(Last accessed on 12/09/2013).
2014. NNN: Knowledge-based terminologies defin-
ing nursing. http://www.nanda.org/nanda-i-nic-
noc.html. (Last accessed on 5/19/2014).
Douglas P. Olson and Donna M. Windish. 2010. Com-
munication discrepancies between physicians and
hospitalized patients. Archives of Internal Medicine,
170(15):1302?1307.
Franc?ois Portet, Ehud Reiter, Jim Hunter, Somayajulu
Sripada, Yvonne Freer, and Cynthia Sykes. 2009.
Automatic generation of textual summaries from
neonatal intensive care data. Artificial Intelligence,
173:789?816, May.
Ehud Reiter, Roma Robertson, and Liesl Osman. 2003.
Lessons from a failure: Generating tailored smoking
cessation letters. Artificial Intelligence, 144:41?58.
Anne Schneider, Alasdair Mort, Chris Mellish, Ehud
Reiter, Phil Wilson, and Pierre-Luc Vaudry. 2013.
MIME - NLG Support for Complex and Unsta-
ble Pre-hospital Emergencies. In Proceedings of
the 14th European Workshop on Natural Language
Generation, pages 198?199, Sofia, Bulgaria, Au-
gust. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Donia Scott, Catalina Hallett, and Rachel Fetti-
place. 2013. Data-to-text summarisation of pa-
tient records: Using computer-generated summaries
to access patient histories. Patient Education and
Counseling, 92(2):153?159.
Sandra Williams, Paul Piwek, and Richard Power.
2007. Generating monologue and dialogue to
present personalised medical information to pa-
tients. In Proceedings of the Eleventh European
Workshop on Natural Language Generation, pages
167?170, Saarbru?cken, Germany, June.
10
