Proceedings of the Demonstrations at the 14th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 9?12,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26-30 2014.
c?2014 Association for Computational Linguistics
XLike Project Language Analysis Services
Xavier Carreras
?
, Llu??s Padr
?
o
?
, Lei Zhang
?
, Achim Rettinger
?
, Zhixing Li
1
,
Esteban Garc??a-Cuesta

,
?
Zeljko Agi
?
c
?
, Bo?zo Bekavac
/
, Blaz Fortuna
?
, Tadej
?
Stajner
?
? Universitat Polit`ecnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain.  iSOCO S.A. Madrid, Spain.
/ University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. ? University of Potsdam, Germany.
? Jo?zef Stefan Institute, Ljubljana, Slovenia. 1 Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
? Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany.
Abstract
This paper presents the linguistic analysis
infrastructure developed within the XLike
project. The main goal of the imple-
mented tools is to provide a set of func-
tionalities supporting the XLike main ob-
jectives: Enabling cross-lingual services
for publishers, media monitoring or de-
veloping new business intelligence appli-
cations. The services cover seven major
and minor languages: English, German,
Spanish, Chinese, Catalan, Slovenian, and
Croatian. These analyzers are provided
as web services following a lightweigth
SOA architecture approach, and they are
publically accessible and shared through
META-SHARE.
1
1 Introduction
Project XLike
2
goal is to develop technology able
to gather documents in a variety of languages and
genres (news, blogs, tweets, etc.) and to extract
language-independent knowledge from them, in
order to provide new and better services to pub-
lishers, media monitoring, and business intelli-
gence. Thus, project use cases are provided by
STA (Slovenian Press Agency) and Bloomberg, as
well as New York Times as an associated partner.
Research partners in the project are Jo?zef Ste-
fan Institute (JSI), Karlsruhe Institute of Technol-
ogy (KIT), Universitat Polit`ecnica de Catalunya
(UPC), University of Zagreb (UZG), and Tsinghua
University (THU). The Spanish company iSOCO
is in charge of integration of all components de-
veloped in the project.
This paper deals with the language technology
developed within the project XLike to convert in-
1
accessible and shared here means that the services are
publicly callable, not that the code is open-source.
http://www.meta-share.eu
2
http://www.xlike.org
put documents into a language-independent rep-
resentation that afterwards enables knowledge ag-
gregation.
To achieve this goal, a bench of linguistic pro-
cessing pipelines is devised as the first step in the
document processing flow. Then, a cross-lingual
semantic annotation method, based on Wikipedia
and Linked Open Data (LOD), is applied. The
semantic annotation stage enriches the linguistic
anaylsis with links to knowledge bases for differ-
ent languages, or links to language independent
representations.
2 Linguistic Analyzers
Apart from basic state-of-the-art tokenizers, lem-
matizers, PoS/MSD taggers, and NE recogniz-
ers, each pipeline requires deeper processors able
to build the target language-independent seman-
tic representantion. For that, we rely on three
steps: dependency parsing, semantic role label-
ing and word sense disambiguation. These three
processes, combined with multilingual ontologi-
cal resouces such as different WordNets and Pred-
icateMatrix (L?opez de la Calle et al., 2014), a
lexical semantics resource combining WordNet,
FrameNet, and VerbNet, are the key to the con-
struction of our semantic representation.
2.1 Dependency Parsing
We use graph-based methods for dependency
parsing, namely, MSTParser
3
(McDonald et al.,
2005) is used for Chinese and Croatian, and
Treeler
4
is used for the other languages. Treeler is
a library developed by the UPC team that imple-
ments several statistical methods for tagging and
parsing.
We use these tools in order to train dependency
parsers for all XLike languages using standard
available treebanks.
3
http://sourceforge.net/projects/mstparser
4
http://treeler.lsi.upc.edu
9
2.2 Semantic Role Labeling
As with syntactic parsing, we are developing SRL
methods with the Treeler library. In order to train
models, we will use the treebanks made available
by the CoNLL-2009 shared task, which provided
data annotated with predicate-argument relations
for English, Spanish, Catalan, German and Chi-
nese. No treebank annotated with semantic roles
exists for Slovene or Croatian. A prototype of
SRL has been integrated in all pipelines (except
the Slovene and Croatian pipelines). The method
implemented follows a pipeline architecture de-
scribed in (Llu??s et al., 2013).
2.3 Word Sense Disambiguation
Word sense disambiguation is performed for all
languages with a publicly available WordNet. This
includes all languages in the project except Chi-
nese. The goal of WSD is to map specific lan-
guages to a common semantic space, in this case,
WN synsets. Thanks to existing connections be-
tween WN and other resources, SUMO and Open-
CYC sense codes are also output when available.
Thanks to PredicateMatrix, the obtained con-
cepts can be projected to FrameNet, achieving a
normalization of the semantic roles produced by
the SRL (which are treebank-dependent, and thus,
not the same for all languages). The used WSD
engine is the UKB (Agirre and Soroa, 2009) im-
plementation provided by FreeLing (Padr?o and
Stanilovsky, 2012).
2.4 Frame Extraction
The final step is to convert all the gathered linguis-
tic information into a semantic representation. Our
method is based on the notion of frame: a seman-
tic frame is a schematic representation of a situ-
ation involving various participants. In a frame,
each participant plays a role. There is a direct cor-
respondence between roles in a frame and seman-
tic roles; namely, frames correspond to predicates,
and participants correspond to the arguments of
the predicate. We distinguish three types of par-
ticipants: entities, words, and frames.
Entities are nodes in the graph connected to
real-world entities as described in Section 3.
Words are common words or concepts, linked to
general ontologies such as WordNet. Frames cor-
respond to events or predicates described in the
document. Figure 1 shows an example sentence,
the extracted frames and their arguments.
It is important to note that frames are a more
general representation than SVO-triples. While
SVO-triples represent a binary relation between
two participants, frames can represent n-ary rela-
tions (e.g. predicates with more than two argu-
ments, or with adjuncts). Frames also allow repre-
senting the sentences where one of the arguments
is in turn a frame (as is the case with plan to make
in the example).
Finally, although frames are extracted at sen-
tence level, the resulting graphs are aggregated
in a single semantic graph representing the whole
document via a very simple coreference resolution
based on detecting named entity aliases and repe-
titions of common nouns. Future improvements
include using an state-of-the-art coreference reso-
lution module for languages where it is available.
3 Cross-lingual Semantic Annotation
This step adds further semantic annotations on top
of the results obtained by linguistic processing.
All XLike languages are covered. The goal is
to map word phrases in different languages into
the same semantic interlingua, which consists of
resources specified in knowledge bases such as
Wikipedia and Linked Open Data (LOD) sources.
Cross-lingual semantic annotation is performed in
two stages: (1) first, candidate concepts in the
knowledge base are linked to the linguistic re-
sources based on a newly developed cross-lingual
linked data lexica, called xLiD-Lexica, (2) next
the candidate concepts get disambiguated based
on the personalized PageRank algorithm by utiliz-
ing the structure of information contained in the
knowledge base.
The xLiD-Lexica is stored in RDF format and
contains about 300 million triples of cross-lingual
groundings. It is extracted from Wikipedia dumps
of July 2013 in English, German, Spanish, Cata-
lan, Slovenian and Chinese, and based on the
canonicalized datasets of DBpedia 3.8 contain-
ing triples extracted from the respective Wikipedia
whose subject and object resource have an equiv-
alent English article.
4 Web Service Architecture Approach
The different language functionalities are imple-
mented following the service oriented architec-
ture (SOA) approach defined in the project XLike.
Therefore all the pipelines (one for each language)
have been implemented as web services and may
10
Figure 1: Graphical representation of frames in the sentence Acme, based in New York, now plans to
make computer and electronic products.
be requested to produce different levels of analy-
sis (e.g. tokenization, lemmatization, NERC, pars-
ing, relation extraction). This approach is very ap-
pealing due to the fact that it allows to treat ev-
ery language independently and execute the whole
language analysis process at different threads or
computers allowing an easier parallelization (e.g.
using external high perfomance platforms such as
Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud EC2
5
) as needed.
Furthermore it also provides independent develop-
ment lifecycles for each language which is crucial
in this type of research projects. Recall that these
web services can be deployed locally or remotely,
maintaining the option of using them in a stand-
alone configuration.
The main structure for each one of the pipelines
is described below:
? Spanish, English, and Catalan: all mod-
ules are based on FreeLing (Padr?o and
Stanilovsky, 2012) and Treeler.
? German: German shallow processing is
based on OpenNLP
6
, Stanford POS tagger
and NE extractor (Toutanova et al., 2003;
Finkel et al., 2005). Dependency parsing,
semantic role labeling, word sense disam-
biguation, and SRL-based frame extraction
are based on FreeLing and Treeler.
? Slovene: Slovene shallow processing is pro-
vided by JSI Enrycher
7
(
?
Stajner et al., 2010),
which consists of the Obeliks morphosyntac-
tic analysis library (Gr?car et al., 2012), the
LemmaGen lemmatizer (Jur?si?c et al., 2010)
and a CRF-based entity extractor (
?
Stajner et
al., 2012). Dependency parsing, word sense
5
http://aws.amazon.com/ec2/
6
http://opennlp.apache.org
7
http://enrycher.ijs.si
disambiguation are based on FreeLing and
Treeler. Frame extraction is rule-based since
no SRL corpus is available for Slovene.
? Croatian: Croatian shallow processing is
based on proprietary tokenizer, POS/MSD-
tagging and lemmatisaton system (Agi?c et
al., 2008), NERC system (Bekavac and
Tadi?c, 2007) and dependency parser (Agi?c,
2012). Word sense disambiguation is based
on FreeLing. Frame extraction is rule-based
since no SRL corpus is available for Croatian.
? Chinese: Chinese shallow and deep process-
ing is based on a word segmentation compo-
nent ICTCLAS
8
and a semantic dependency
parser trained on CSDN corpus. Then, rule-
based frame extraction is performed (no SRL
corpus nor WordNet are available for Chi-
nese).
Each language analysis service is able to pro-
cess thousands of words per second when per-
forming shallow analysis (up to NE recognition),
and hundreds of words per second when produc-
ing the semantic representation based on full anal-
ysis. Moreover, the web service architecture en-
ables the same server to run a different thread for
each client, thus taking advantage of multiproces-
sor capabilities.
The components of the cross-lingual semantic
annotation stage are:
? xLiD-Lexica: The cross-lingual groundings
in xLiD-Lexica are translated into RDF data
and are accessible through a SPARQL end-
point, based on OpenLink Virtuoso
9
as the
back-end database engine.
8
http://ictclas.org/
9
http://virtuoso.openlinksw.com/
11
? Semantic Annotation: The cross-lingual se-
mantic annotation service is based on the
xLiD-Lexica for entity mention recognition
and the JUNG Framework
10
for graph-based
disambiguation.
5 Conclusion
We presented the web service based architecture
used in XLike FP7 project to linguistically ana-
lyze large amounts of documents in seven differ-
ent languages. The analysis pipelines perform ba-
sic processing as tokenization, PoS-tagging, and
named entity extraction, as well as deeper analy-
sis such as dependency parsing, word sense disam-
biguation, and semantic role labelling. The result
of these linguistic analyzers is a semantic graph
capturing the main events described in the docu-
ment and their core participants.
On top of that, the cross-lingual semantic an-
notation component links the resulting linguistic
resources in one language to resources in a knowl-
edge bases in any other language or to language
independent representations. This semantic repre-
sentation is later used in XLike for document min-
ing purposes such as enabling cross-lingual ser-
vices for publishers, media monitoring or devel-
oping new business intelligence applications.
The described analysis services are currently
available via META-SHARE as callable RESTful
services.
Acknowledgments
This work was funded by the European Union
through project XLike (FP7-ICT-2011-288342).
References
?
Zeljko Agi?c, Marko Tadi?c, and Zdravko Dovedan.
2008. Improving part-of-speech tagging accuracy
for Croatian by morphological analysis. Informat-
ica, 32(4):445?451.
?
Zeljko Agi?c. 2012. K-best spanning tree dependency
parsing with verb valency lexicon reranking. In Pro-
ceedings of COLING 2012: Posters, pages 1?12,
Mumbai, India, December. The COLING 2012 Or-
ganizing Committee.
Eneko Agirre and Aitor Soroa. 2009. Personalizing
pagerank for word sense disambiguation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 12th conference of the European
chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (EACL-2009), Athens, Greece.
10
Java Universal Network/Graph Framework
http://jung.sourceforge.net/
Bo?zo Bekavac and Marko Tadi?c. 2007. Implementa-
tion of Croatian NERC system. In Proceedings of
the Workshop on Balto-Slavonic Natural Language
Processing (BSNLP2007), Special Theme: Informa-
tion Extraction and Enabling Technologies, pages
11?18. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jenny Rose Finkel, Trond Grenager, and Christopher
Manning. 2005. Incorporating non-local informa-
tion into information extraction systems by gibbs
sampling. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meet-
ing on Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL?05), pages 363?370.
Miha Gr?car, Simon Krek, and Kaja Dobrovoljc. 2012.
Obeliks: statisti?cni oblikoskladenjski ozna?cevalnik
in lematizator za slovenski jezik. In Zbornik Osme
konference Jezikovne tehnologije, Ljubljana, Slove-
nia.
Matjaz Jur?si?c, Igor Mozeti?c, Tomaz Erjavec, and Nada
Lavra?c. 2010. Lemmagen: Multilingual lemmati-
sation with induced ripple-down rules. Journal of
Universal Computer Science, 16(9):1190?1214.
Xavier Llu??s, Xavier Carreras, and Llu??s M`arquez.
2013. Joint arc-factored parsing of syntactic and se-
mantic dependencies. Transactions of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, 1:219?230.
Maddalen L?opez de la Calle, Egoitz Laparra, and Ger-
man Rigau. 2014. First steps towards a predicate
matrix. In Proceedings of the Global WordNet Con-
ference (GWC 2014), Tartu, Estonia, January. GWA.
Ryan McDonald, Koby Crammer, and Fernando
Pereira. 2005. Online large-margin training of
dependency parsers. In Proceedings of the 43rd
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (ACL?05), pages 91?98, Ann Ar-
bor, Michigan, June.
Llu??s Padr?o and Evgeny Stanilovsky. 2012. Freeling
3.0: Towards wider multilinguality. In Proceedings
of the Language Resources and Evaluation Confer-
ence (LREC 2012), Istanbul, Turkey, May. ELRA.
Tadej
?
Stajner, Delia Rusu, Lorand Dali, Bla?z Fortuna,
Dunja Mladeni?c, and Marko Grobelnik. 2010. A
service oriented framework for natural language text
enrichment. Informatica, 34(3):307?313.
Kristina Toutanova, Dan Klein, Christopher D. Man-
ning, and Yoram Singer. 2003. Feature-rich part-of-
speech tagging with a cyclic dependency network.
In Proceedings of the 2003 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Lin- guistics on Human Language Technology
(NAACL?03).
Tadej
?
Stajner, Toma?z Erjavec, and Simon Krek.
2012. Razpoznavanje imenskih entitet v slovenskem
besedilu. In In Proceedings of 15th Internation
Multiconference on Information Society - Jezikovne
Tehnologije, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
12
Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 641?650,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Transfer Learning Based Cross-lingual
Knowledge Extraction for Wikipedia
Zhigang Wang?, Zhixing Li?, Juanzi Li?, Jie Tang?, and Jeff Z. Pan?
? Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology
DCST, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{wzhigang,zhxli,ljz,tangjie}@keg.cs.tsinghua.edu.cn
? Department of Computing Science, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK
jeff.z.pan@abdn.ac.uk
Abstract
Wikipedia infoboxes are a valuable source
of structured knowledge for global knowl-
edge sharing. However, infobox infor-
mation is very incomplete and imbal-
anced among the Wikipedias in differen-
t languages. It is a promising but chal-
lenging problem to utilize the rich struc-
tured knowledge from a source language
Wikipedia to help complete the missing in-
foboxes for a target language.
In this paper, we formulate the prob-
lem of cross-lingual knowledge extraction
from multilingual Wikipedia sources, and
present a novel framework, called Wiki-
CiKE, to solve this problem. An instance-
based transfer learning method is utilized
to overcome the problems of topic drift
and translation errors. Our experimen-
tal results demonstrate that WikiCiKE out-
performs the monolingual knowledge ex-
traction method and the translation-based
method.
1 Introduction
In recent years, the automatic knowledge extrac-
tion using Wikipedia has attracted significant re-
search interest in research fields, such as the se-
mantic web. As a valuable source of structured
knowledge, Wikipedia infoboxes have been uti-
lized to build linked open data (Suchanek et al,
2007; Bollacker et al, 2008; Bizer et al, 2008;
Bizer et al, 2009), support next-generation in-
formation retrieval (Hotho et al, 2006), improve
question answering (Bouma et al, 2008; Fer-
ra?ndez et al, 2009), and other aspects of data ex-
ploitation (McIlraith et al, 2001; Volkel et al,
2006; Hogan et al, 2011) using semantic web s-
tandards, such as RDF (Pan and Horrocks, 2007;
Heino and Pan, 2012) and OWL (Pan and Hor-
rocks, 2006; Pan and Thomas, 2007; Fokoue et
al., 2012), and their reasoning services.
However, most infoboxes in different Wikipedi-
a language versions are missing. Figure 1 shows
the statistics of article numbers and infobox infor-
mation for six major Wikipedias. Only 32.82%
of the articles have infoboxes on average, and the
numbers of infoboxes for these Wikipedias vary
significantly. For instance, the English Wikipedi-
a has 13 times more infoboxes than the Chinese
Wikipedia and 3.5 times more infoboxes than the
second largest Wikipedia of German language.
English German French Dutch Spanish Chinese
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
x 106
Languages
N
um
be
r o
f I
ns
ta
nc
es
 
 
Article
Infobox
Figure 1: Statistics for Six Major Wikipedias.
To solve this problem, KYLIN has been pro-
posed to extract the missing infoboxes from un-
structured article texts for the English Wikipedi-
a (Wu and Weld, 2007). KYLIN performs
well when sufficient training data are available,
and such techniques as shrinkage and retraining
have been used to increase recall from English
Wikipedia?s long tail of sparse infobox classes
(Weld et al, 2008; Wu et al, 2008). The extraction
performance of KYLIN is limited by the number
of available training samples.
Due to the great imbalance between different
Wikipedia language versions, it is difficult to gath-
er sufficient training data from a single Wikipedia.
Some translation-based cross-lingual knowledge
641
extraction methods have been proposed (Adar et
al., 2009; Bouma et al, 2009; Adafre and de Rijke,
2006). These methods concentrate on translating
existing infoboxes from a richer source language
version of Wikipedia into the target language. The
recall of new target infoboxes is highly limited
by the number of equivalent cross-lingual arti-
cles and the number of existing source infoboxes.
Take Chinese-English1 Wikipedias as an example:
current translation-based methods only work for
87,603 Chinese Wikipedia articles, 20.43% of the
total 428,777 articles. Hence, the challenge re-
mains: how could we supplement the missing in-
foboxes for the rest 79.57% articles?
On the other hand, the numbers of existing in-
fobox attributes in different languages are high-
ly imbalanced. Table 1 shows the comparison
of the numbers of the articles for the attributes
in template PERSON between English and Chi-
nese Wikipedia. Extracting the missing value for
these attributes, such as awards, weight, influences
and style, inside the single Chinese Wikipedia is
intractable due to the rarity of existing Chinese
attribute-value pairs.
Attribute en zh Attribute en zh
name 82,099 1,486 awards 2,310 38
birth date 77,850 1,481 weight 480 12
occupation 66,768 1,279 influences 450 6
nationality 20,048 730 style 127 1
Table 1: The Numbers of Articles in TEMPLATE
PERSON between English(en) and Chinese(zh).
In this paper, we have the following hypothesis:
one can use the rich English (auxiliary) informa-
tion to assist the Chinese (target) infobox extrac-
tion. In general, we address the problem of cross-
lingual knowledge extraction by using the imbal-
ance between Wikipedias of different languages.
For each attribute, we aim to learn an extractor to
find the missing value from the unstructured arti-
cle texts in the target Wikipedia by using the rich
information in the source language. Specifically,
we treat this cross-lingual information extraction
task as a transfer learning-based binary classifica-
tion problem.
The contributions of this paper are as follows:
1. We propose a transfer learning-based cross-
lingual knowledge extraction framework
1Chinese-English denotes the task of Chinese Wikipedia
infobox completion using English Wikipedia
called WikiCiKE. The extraction perfor-
mance for the target Wikipedia is improved
by using rich infoboxes and textual informa-
tion in the source language.
2. We propose the TrAdaBoost-based extractor
training method to avoid the problems of top-
ic drift and translation errors of the source
Wikipedia. Meanwhile, some language-
independent features are introduced to make
WikiCiKE as general as possible.
3. Chinese-English experiments for four typ-
ical attributes demonstrate that WikiCiKE
outperforms both the monolingual extrac-
tion method and current translation-based
method. The increases of 12.65% for pre-
cision and 12.47% for recall in the template
named person are achieved when only 30 tar-
get training articles are available.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 presents some basic concepts, the prob-
lem formalization and the overview of WikiCiKE.
In Section 3, we propose our detailed approaches.
We present our experiments in Section 4. Some re-
lated work is described in Section 5. We conclude
our work and the future work in Section 6.
2 Preliminaries
In this section, we introduce some basic con-
cepts regarding Wikipedia, formally defining the
key problem of cross-lingual knowledge extrac-
tion and providing an overview of the WikiCiKE
framework.
2.1 Wiki Knowledge Base and Wiki Article
We consider each language version of Wikipedia
as a wiki knowledge base, which can be represent-
ed as K = {ai}pi=1, where ai is a disambiguated
article in K and p is the size of K .
Formally we define a wiki article a ? K as a
5-tuple a = (title, text, ib, tp, C), where
? title denotes the title of the article a,
? text denotes the unstructured text description
of the article a,
? ib is the infobox associated with a; specif-
ically, ib = {(attri, valuei)}qi=1 represents
the list of attribute-value pairs for the article
a,
642
Figure 2: Simplified Article of ?Bill Gates?.
? tp = {attri}ri=1 is the infobox template as-
sociated with ib, where r is the number of
attributes for one specific template, and
? C denotes the set of categories to which the
article a belongs.
Figure 2 gives an example of these five impor-
tant elements concerning the article named ?Bill
Gates?.
In what follows, we will use named subscripts,
such as aBill Gates, or index subscripts, such as ai,
to refer to one particular instance interchangeably.
We will use ?name in TEMPLATE PERSON?
to refer to the attribute attrname in the template
tpPERSON . In this cross-lingual task, we use the
source (S) and target (T) languages to denote the
languages of auxiliary and target Wikipedias, re-
spectively. For example, KS indicates the source
wiki knowledge base, and KT denotes the target
wiki knowledge base.
2.2 Problem Formulation
Mining new infobox information from unstruc-
tured article texts is actually a multi-template,
multi-slot information extraction problem. In our
task, each template represents an infobox template
and each slot denotes an attribute. In the Wiki-
CiKE framework, for each attribute attrT in an
infobox template tpT , we treat the task of missing
value extraction as a binary classification prob-
lem. It predicts whether a particular word (token)
from the article text is the extraction target (Finn
and Kushmerick, 2004; Lafferty et al, 2001).
Given an attribute attrT and an instance
(word/token) xi, XS = {xi}ni=1 and XT =
{xi}n+mi=n+1 are the sets of instances (words/tokens)
in the source and the target language respectively.
xi can be represented as a feature vector according
to its context. Usually, we have n ? m in our set-
ting, with much more attributes in the source that
those in the target. The function g : X 7? Y maps
the instance from X = XS ? XT to the true la-
bel of Y = {0, 1}, where 1 represents the extrac-
tion target (positive) and 0 denotes the background
information (negative). Because the number of
target instances m is inadequate to train a good
classifier, we combine the source and target in-
stances to construct the training data set as TD =
TDS ? TDT , where TDS = {xi, g(xi)}ni=1 and
TDT = {xi, g(xi)}n+mi=n+1 represent the source
and target training data, respectively.
Given the combined training data set TD, our
objective is to estimate a hypothesis f : X 7? Y
that minimizes the prediction error on testing data
in the target language. Our idea is to determine the
useful part of TDS to improve the classification
performance in TDT . We view this as a transfer
learning problem.
2.3 WikiCiKE Framework
WikiCiKE learns an extractor for a given attribute
attrT in the target Wikipedia. As shown in Fig-
ure 3, WikiCiKE contains four key components:
(1) Automatic Training Data Generation: given
the target attribute attrT and two wiki knowledge
bases KS and KT , WikiCiKE first generates the
training data set TD = TDS ? TDT automati-
cally. (2) WikiCiKE Training: WikiCiKE uses
a transfer learning-based classification method to
train the classifier (extractor) f : X 7? Y by using
TDS ? TDT . (3) Template Classification: Wi-
kiCiKE then determines proper candidate articles
which are suitable to generate the missing value of
attrT . (4) WikiCiKE Extraction: given a candi-
date article a, WikiCiKE uses the learned extractor
f to label each word in the text of a, and generate
the extraction result in the end.
3 Our Approach
In this section, we will present the detailed ap-
proaches used in WikiCiKE.
643
Figure 3: WikiCiKE Framework.
3.1 Automatic Training Data Generation
To generate the training data for the target at-
tribute attrT , we first determine the equivalen-
t cross-lingual attribute attrS . Fortunately, some
templates in non-English Wikipedia (e.g. Chinese
Wikipedia) explicitly match their attributes with
their counterparts in English Wikipedia. There-
fore, it is convenient to align the cross-lingual at-
tributes using English Wikipedia as bridge. For
attributes that can not be aligned in this way, cur-
rently we manually align them. The manual align-
ment is worthwhile because thousands of articles
belong to the same template may benefit from it
and at the same time it is not very costly. In Chi-
nese Wikipedia, the top 100 templates have cov-
ered nearly 80% of the articles which have been
assigned a template.
Once the aligned attribute mapping attrT ?
attrS is obtained, we collect the articles from both
KS and KT containing the corresponding attr.
The collected articles from KS are translated into
the target language. Then, we use a uniform au-
tomatic method, which primarily consists of word
labeling and feature vector generation, to generate
the training data set TD = {(x, g(x))} from these
collected articles.
For each collected article a =
{title, text, ib, tp, C} and its value of attr,
we can automatically label each word x in text
according to whether x and its neighbors are
contained by the value. The text and value are
processed as bags of words {x}text and {x}value.
Then for each xi ? {x}text we have:
g(xi) =
?
???
???
1 xi ? {x}value, |{x}value| = 1
1 xi?1, xi ? {x}value or xi, xi+1 ? {x}value,
|{x}value| > 1
0 otherwise
(1)
After the word labeling, each instance
(word/token) is represented as a feature vec-
tor. In this paper, we propose a general feature
space that is suitable for most target languages.
As shown in Table 2, we classify the features
used in WikiCiKE into three categories: format
features, POS tag features and token features.
Category Feature Example
Format First token of sentence `}L
feature Hello World!
In first half of sentence `}L
Hello World!
Starts with two digits 1231?
31th Dec.
Starts with four digits 1999t)
1999?s summer
Contains a cash sign 10?or 10$
Contains a percentage 10%
symbol
Stop words ?,0,?&
of, the, a, an
Pure number 365
Part of an anchor text 5q?
Movie Director
Begin of an anchor text 8??
Game Designer
POS tag POS tag of current token
features POS tags of
previous 5 tokens
POS tags of
next 5 tokens
Token Current token
features Previous 5 tokens
Next 5 tokens
Is current token
contained by title
Is one of previous 5
tokens contained by title
Table 2: Feature Definition.
The target training data TDT is directly gener-
ated from articles in the target language Wikipedi-
a. Articles from the source language Wikipedia
are translated into the target language in advance
and then transformed into training data TDS . In
next section, we will discuss how to train an ex-
tractor from TD = TDS ? TDT .
3.2 WikiCiKE Training
Given the attribute attrT , we want to train a clas-
sifier f : X 7? Y that can minimize the prediction
644
error for the testing data in the target language.
Traditional machine learning approaches attempt
to determine f by minimizing some loss function
L on the prediction f(x) for the training instance
x and its real label g(x), which is
f? = argmin
f??
?
L(f(x), g(x)) where (x, g(x)) ? TDT
(2)
In this paper, we use TrAdaBoost (Dai et al,
2007), which is an instance-based transfer learn-
ing algorithm that was first proposed by Dai to find
f? . TrAdaBoost requires that the source training
instances XS and target training instances XT be
drawn from the same feature space. In WikiCiKE,
the source articles are translated into the target
language in advance to satisfy this requirement.
Due to the topic drift problem and translation er-
rors, the joint probability distribution PS(x, g(x))
is not identical to PT (x, g(x)). We must adjust the
source training data TDS so that they fit the dis-
tribution on TDT . TrAdaBoost iteratively updates
the weights of all training instances to optimize the
prediction error. Specifically, the weight-updating
strategy for the source instances is decided by the
loss on the target instances.
For each t = 1 ? T iteration, given a weight
vector pt normalized from wt(wt is the weight
vector before normalization), we call a basic clas-
sifier F that can address weighted instances and
then find a hypothesis f that satisfies
f?t = argmin
f??F
?
L(pt, f(x), g(x))
(x, g(x)) ? TDS ? TDT
(3)
Let ?t be the prediction error of f?t at the tth iter-
ation on the target training instances TDT , which
is
?t = 1?n+m
k=n+1 wtk
?
n+m?
k=n+1
(wtk ? |f?t(xk)? yk|) (4)
With ?t, the weight vector wt is updated by the
function:
wt+1 = h(wt, ?t) (5)
The weight-updating strategy h is illustrated in
Table 3.
Finally, a final classifier f? can be obtained by
combining f?T/2 ? f?T .
TrAdaBoost has a convergence rate of
O(
?
ln(n/N)), where n and N are the number
of source samples and number of maximum
iterations respectively.
TrAdaBoost AdaBoost
Target + wt wt
samples ? wt ? ??1t wt ? ??1t
Source + wt ? ??1 No source training
samples ? wt ? ? sample available
+: correctly labelled ?: miss-labelled
wt: weight of an instance at the tth iteration
?t = ?t ? (1? ?t)
? = 1/(1 +
?
2 lnnT )
Table 3: Weight-updating Strategy of TrAd-
aBoost.
3.3 Template Classification
Before using the learned classifier f to extrac-
t missing infobox value for the target attribute
attrT , we must select the correct articles to be pro-
cessed. For example, the article aNew Y ork is not
a proper article for extracting the missing value of
the attribute attrbirth day .
If a already has an incomplete infobox, it is
clear that the correct tp is the template of its own
infobox ib. For those articles that have no infobox-
es, we use the classical 5-nearest neighbor algo-
rithm to determine their templates (Roussopoulos
et al, 1995) using their category labels, outlinks,
inlinks as features (Wang et al, 2012). Our classi-
fier achieves an average precision of 76.96% with
an average recall of 63.29%, and can be improved
further. In this paper, we concentrate on the Wiki-
CiKE training and extraction components.
3.4 WikiCiKE Extraction
Given an article a determined by template classi-
fication, we generate the missing value of attr
from the corresponding text. First, we turn the
text into a word sequence and compute the fea-
ture vector for each word based on the feature
definition in Section 3.1. Next we use f to label
each word, and we get a labeled sequence textl as
textl = {xf(x1)1 ...x
f(xi?1)
i?1 x
f(xi)
i x
f(xi+1)
i+1 ...x
f(xn)
n }
where the superscript f(xi) ? {0, 1} represents
the positive or negative label by f . After that, we
extract the adjacent positive tokens in text as the
predict value. In particular, the longest positive to-
ken sequence and the one that contains other pos-
itive token sequences are preferred in extraction.
E.g., a positive sequence ?comedy movie director?
is preferred to a shorter sequence ?movie direc-
tor?.
645
4 Experiments
In this section, we present our experiments to e-
valuate the effectiveness of WikiCiKE, where we
focus on the Chinese-English case; in other words,
the target language is Chinese and the source lan-
guage is English. It is part of our future work to
try other language pairs which two Wikipedias of
these languages are imbalanced in infobox infor-
mation such as English-Dutch.
4.1 Experimental Setup
4.1.1 Data Sets
Our data sets are from Wikipedia dumps2 generat-
ed on April 3, 2012. For each attribute, we collect
both labeled articles (articles that contain the cor-
responding attribute attr) and unlabeled articles
in Chinese. We split the labeled articles into two
subsets AT and Atest(AT ? Atest = ?), in which
AT is used as target training articles and Atest is
used as the first testing set. For the unlabeled arti-
cles, represented as A?test, we manually label their
infoboxes with their texts and use them as the sec-
ond testing set. For each attribute, we also collect a
set of labeled articles AS in English as the source
training data. Our experiments are performed on
four attributes, which are occupation, nationality,
alma mater in TEMPLATE PERSON, and coun-
try in TEMPLATE FILM. In particular, we extract
values from the first two paragraphs of the texts
because they usually contain most of the valuable
information. The details of data sets on these at-
tributes are given in Table 4.
Attribute |AS| |AT| |Atest| |A?test|
occupation 1,000 500 779 208
alma mater 1,000 200 215 208
nationality 1,000 300 430 208
country 1,000 500 1,000 ?
|A|: the number of articles in A
Table 4: Data Sets.
4.1.2 Comparison Methods
We compare our WikiCiKE method with two dif-
ferent kinds of methods, the monolingual knowl-
edge extraction method and the translation-based
method. They are implemented as follows:
1. KE-Mon is the monolingual knowledge ex-
tractor. The difference between WikiCiKE
and KE-Mon is that KE-Mon only uses the
Chinese training data.
2http://dumps.wikimedia.org/
2. KE-Tr is the translation-based extractor. It
obtains the values by two steps: finding their
counterparts (if available) in English using
Wikipedia cross-lingual links and attribute
alignments, and translating them into Chi-
nese.
We conduct two series of evaluation to compare
WikiCiKE with KE-Mon and KE-Tr, respectively.
1. We compare WikiCiKE with KE-Mon on the
first testing data set Atest, where most val-
ues can be found in the articles? texts in those
labeled articles, in order to demonstrate the
performance improvement by using cross-
lingual knowledge transfer.
2. We compare WikiCiKE with KE-Tr on the
second testing data set A?test, where the
existences of values are not guaranteed in
those randomly selected articles, in order to
demonstrate the better recall of WikiCiKE.
For implementation details, the weighted-SVM
is used as the basic learner f both in WikiCiKE
and KE-Mon (Zhang et al, 2009), and Baidu
Translation API3 is used as the translator both in
WikiCiKE and KE-Tr. The Chinese texts are pre-
processed using ICTCLAS4 for word segmenta-
tion.
4.1.3 Evaluation Metrics
Following Lavelli?s research on evaluation of in-
formation extraction (Lavelli et al, 2008), we per-
form evaluation as follows.
1. We evaluate each attr separately.
2. For each attr, there is exactly one value ex-
tracted.
3. No alternative occurrence of real value is
available.
4. The overlap ratio is used in this paper rather
than ?exactly matching? and ?containing?.
Given an extracted value v? = {w?} and its
corresponding real value v = {w}, two measure-
ments for evaluating the overlap ratio are defined:
recall: the rate of matched tokens w.r.t. the real
value. It can be calculated using
R(v?, v) = |v ? v
?|
|v|
3http://openapi.baidu.com/service
4http://www.ictclas.org/
646
precision: the rate of matched tokens w.r.t. the
extracted value. It can be calculated using
P (v?, v) = |v ? v
?|
|v?|
We use the average of these two measures to
evaluate the performance of our extractor as fol-
lows:
R = avg(Ri(v?, v)) ai ? Atest
P = avg(Pi(v?, v)) ai ? Atest and vi? 6= ?
The recall and precision range from 0 to 1 and
are first calculated on a single instance and then
averaged over the testing instances.
4.2 Comparison with KE-Mon
In these experiments, WikiCiKE trains extractors
on AS ? AT , and KE-Mon trains extractors just
on AT . We incrementally increase the number of
target training articles from 10 to 500 (if available)
to compare WikiCiKE with KE-Mon in different
situations. We use the first testing data set Atest to
evaluate the results.
Figure 4 and Table 5 show the experimental re-
sults on TEMPLATE PERSON and FILM. We can
see that WikiCiKE outperforms KE-Mon on all
three attributions especially when the number of
target training samples is small. Although the re-
call for alma mater and the precision for nation-
ality of WikiCiKE are lower than KE-Mon when
only 10 target training articles are available, Wi-
kiCiKE performs better than KE-Mon if we take
into consideration both precision and recall.
10 30 50 100 200 300 500
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
number of target training articles
 
 
P(KE?Mon)
P(WikiCiKE)
R(KE?Mon)
R(WikiCiKE)
(a) occupation
10 30 50 100 200
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
number of target training articles
 
 
P(KE?Mon)
P(WikiCiKE)
R(KE?Mon)
R(WikiCiKE)
(b) alma mater
10 30 50 100 200 300
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
number of target training articles
 
 
P(KE?Mon)
P(WikiCiKE)
R(KE?Mon)
R(WikiCiKE)
(c) nationality
10 30 50 100 200 300 500
0
5
10
15
20
pe
rc
en
t(%
)
number of target training articles
performance gain
 
 
P
R
(d) average improvements
Figure 4: Results for TEMPLATE PERSON.
Figure 4(d) shows the average improvements
yielded by WikiCiKE w.r.t KE-Mon on TEM-
PLATE PERSON. We can see that WikiCiKE
yields significant improvements when only a few
articles are available in target language and the im-
provements tend to decrease as the number of tar-
get articles is increased. In this case, the articles
in the target language are sufficient to train the ex-
tractors alone.
# KE-Mon WikiCiKEP R P R
10 81.1% 63.8% 90.7% 66.3%
30 78.8% 64.5% 87.5% 69.4%
50 80.7% 66.6% 87.7% 72.3%
100 82.8% 68.2% 87.8% 72.1%
200 83.6% 70.5% 87.1% 73.2%
300 85.2% 72.0% 89.1% 76.2%
500 86.2% 73.4% 88.7% 75.6%
# Number of the target training articles.
Table 5: Results for country in TEMPLATE
FILM.
4.3 Comparison with KE-Tr
We compare WikiCiKE with KE-Tr on the second
testing data set A?test.
From Table 6 it can be clearly observed that Wi-
kiCiKE significantly outperforms KE-Tr both in
precision and recall. The reasons why the recal-
l of KE-Tr is extremely low are two-fold. First,
because of the limit of cross-lingual links and in-
foboxes in English Wikipedia, only a very smal-
l set of values is found by KE-Tr. Furthermore,
many values obtained using the translator are in-
correct because of translation errors. WikiCiKE
uses translators too, but it has better tolerance to
translation errors because the extracted value is
from the target article texts instead of the output
of translators.
Attribute KE-Tr WikiCiKEP R P R
occupation 27.4% 3.40% 64.8% 26.4%
nationality 66.3% 4.60% 70.0% 55.0%
alma mater 66.7% 0.70% 76.3% 8.20%
Table 6: Results of WikiCiKE vs. KE-Tr.
4.4 Significance Test
We conducted a significance test to demonstrate
that the difference between WikiCiKE and KE-
Mon is significant rather than caused by statistical
errors. As for the comparison between WikiCiKE
and KE-Tr, significant improvements brought by
647
WikiCiKE can be clearly observed from Table 6
so there is no need for further significance test.
In this paper, we use McNemar?s significance test
(Dietterich and Thomas, 1998).
Table 7 shows the results of significance test
calculated for the average on all tested attributes.
When the number of target training articles is less
than 100, the ? is much less than 10.83 that cor-
responds to a significance level 0.001. It suggests
that the chance that WikiCiKE is not better than
KE-Mon is less than 0.001.
# 10 30 50 100 200 300 500
? 179.5 107.3 51.8 32.8 4.1 4.3 0.3
# Number of the target training articles.
Table 7: Results of Significance Test.
4.5 Overall Analysis
As shown in above experiments, we can see that
WikiCiKE outperforms both KE-Mon and KE-Tr.
When only 30 target training samples are avail-
able, WikiCiKE reaches comparable performance
of KE-Mon using 300-500 target training samples.
Among all of the 72 attributes in TEMPLATE
PERSON of Chinese Wikipedia, 39 (54.17%) and
55 (76.39%) attributes have less than 30 and 200
labeled articles respectively. We can see that Wi-
kiCiKE can save considerable human labor when
no sufficient target training samples are available.
We also examined the errors by WikiCiKE and
they can be categorized into three classes. For at-
tribute occupation when 30 target training sam-
ples are used, there are 71 errors. The first cat-
egory is caused by incorrect word segmentation
(40.85%). In Chinese, there is no space between
words so we need to segment them before extrac-
tion. The result of word segmentation directly
decide the performance of extraction so it caus-
es most of the errors. The second category is be-
cause of the incomplete infoboxes (36.62%). In
evaluation of KE-Mon, we directly use the val-
ues in infoboxex as golden values, some of them
are incomplete so the correct predicted values will
be automatically judged as the incorrect in these
cases. The last category is mismatched words
(22.54%). The predicted value does not match the
golden value or a part of it. In the future, we can
improve the performance of WikiCiKE by polish-
ing the word segmentation result.
5 Related Work
Some approaches of knowledge extraction from
the open Web have been proposed (Wu et al,
2012; Yates et al, 2007). Here we focus on the
extraction inside Wikipedia.
5.1 Monolingual Infobox Extraction
KYLIN is the first system to autonomously ex-
tract the missing infoboxes from the correspond-
ing article texts by using a self-supervised learn-
ing method (Wu and Weld, 2007). KYLIN per-
forms well when enough training data are avail-
able. Such techniques as shrinkage and retraining
are proposed to increase the recall from English
Wikipedia?s long tail of sparse classes (Wu et al,
2008; Wu and Weld, 2010). Different from Wu?s
research, WikiCiKE is a cross-lingual knowledge
extraction framework, which leverags rich knowl-
edge in the other language to improve extraction
performance in the target Wikipedia.
5.2 Cross-lingual Infobox Completion
Current translation based methods usually con-
tain two steps: cross-lingual attribute alignmen-
t and value translation. The attribute alignmen-
t strategies can be grouped into two categories:
cross-lingual link based methods (Bouma et al,
2009) and classification based methods (Adar et
al., 2009; Nguyen et al, 2011; Aumueller et al,
2005; Adafre and de Rijke, 2006; Li et al, 2009).
After the first step, the value in the source lan-
guage is translated into the target language. E.
Adar?s approach gives the overall precision of
54% and recall of 40% (Adar et al, 2009). How-
ever, recall of these methods is limited by the
number of equivalent cross-lingual articles and the
number of infoboxes in the source language. It is
also limited by the quality of the translators. Wi-
kiCiKE attempts to mine the missing infoboxes
directly from the article texts and thus achieves
a higher recall compared with these methods as
shown in Section 4.3.
5.3 Transfer Learning
Transfer learning can be grouped into four cate-
gories: instance-transfer, feature-representation-
transfer, parameter-transfer and relational-
knowledge-transfer (Pan and Yang, 2010).
TrAdaBoost, the instance-transfer approach, is
an extension of the AdaBoost algorithm, and
demonstrates better transfer ability than tradition-
648
al learning techniques (Dai et al, 2007). Transfer
learning have been widely studied for classifica-
tion, regression, and cluster problems. However,
few efforts have been spent in the information
extraction tasks with knowledge transfer.
6 Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper we proposed a general cross-lingual
knowledge extraction framework called Wiki-
CiKE, in which extraction performance in the tar-
get Wikipedia is improved by using rich infobox-
es in the source language. The problems of topic
drift and translation error were handled by using
the TrAdaBoost model. Chinese-English exper-
imental results on four typical attributes showed
that WikiCiKE significantly outperforms both the
current translation based methods and the mono-
lingual extraction methods. In theory, WikiCiKE
can be applied to any two wiki knowledge based
of different languages.
We have been considering some future work.
Firstly, more attributes in more infobox templates
should be explored to make our results much
stronger. Secondly, knowledge in a minor lan-
guage may also help improve extraction perfor-
mance for a major language due to the cultural and
religion differences. A bidirectional cross-lingual
extraction approach will also be studied. Last but
not least, we will try to extract multiple attr-value
pairs at the same time for each article.
Furthermore, our work is part of a more ambi-
tious agenda on exploitation of linked data. On the
one hand, being able to extract data and knowl-
edge from multilingual sources such as Wikipedi-
a could help improve the coverage of linked data
for applications. On the other hand, we are also
investigating how to possibly integrate informa-
tion, including subjective information (Sensoy et
al., 2013), from multiple sources, so as to better
support data exploitation in context dependent ap-
plications.
Acknowledgement
The work is supported by NSFC (No. 61035004),
NSFC-ANR (No. 61261130588), 863 High Tech-
nology Program (2011AA01A207), FP7-288342,
FP7 K-Drive project (286348), the EPSRC WhatIf
project (EP/J014354/1) and THU-NUS NExT Co-
Lab. Besides, we gratefully acknowledge the as-
sistance of Haixun Wang (MSRA) for improving
the paper work.
References
S. Fissaha Adafre and M. de Rijke. 2006. Find-
ing Similar Sentences across Multiple Languages
in Wikipedia. EACL 2006 Workshop on New Text:
Wikis and Blogs and Other Dynamic Text Sources.
Sisay Fissaha Adafre and Maarten de Rijke. 2005.
Discovering Missing Links in Wikipedia. Proceed-
ings of the 3rd International Workshop on Link Dis-
covery.
Eytan Adar, Michael Skinner and Daniel S. Weld.
2009. Information Arbitrage across Multi-lingual
Wikipedia. WSDM?09.
David Aumueller, Hong Hai Do, Sabine Massmann and
Erhard Rahm?. 2005. Schema and ontology match-
ing with COMA++. SIGMOD Conference?05.
Christian Bizer, Jens Lehmann, Georgi Kobilarov,
So?ren Auer, Christian Becker, Richard Cyganiak
and Sebastian Hellmann. 2009. DBpedia - A crys-
tallization Point for the Web of Data. J. Web Sem..
Christian Bizer, Tom Heath, Kingsley Idehen and Tim
Berners-Lee. 2008. Linked data on the web (L-
DOW2008). WWW?08.
Kurt Bollacker, Colin Evans, Praveen Paritosh, Tim S-
turge and Jamie Taylor. 2008. Freebase: a Collabo-
ratively Created Graph Database for Structuring Hu-
man Knowledge. SIGMOD?08.
Gosse Bouma, Geert Kloosterman, Jori Mur, Gertjan
Van Noord, Lonneke Van Der Plas and Jorg Tiede-
mann. 2008. Question Answering with Joost at
CLEF 2007. Working Notes for the CLEF 2008
Workshop.
Gosse Bouma, Sergio Duarte and Zahurul Islam.
2009. Cross-lingual Alignment and Completion of
Wikipedia Templates. CLIAWS3 ?09.
Wenyuan Dai, Qiang Yang, Gui-Rong Xue and Yong
Yu. 2007. Boosting for Transfer Learning. ICM-
L?07.
Dietterich and Thomas G. 1998. Approximate Statis-
tical Tests for Comparing Supervised Classification
Learning Algorithms. Neural Comput..
Sergio Ferra?ndez, Antonio Toral, ??scar Ferra?ndez, An-
tonio Ferra?ndez and Rafael Mun?oz. 2009. Exploit-
ing Wikipedia and EuroWordNet to Solve Cross-
Lingual Question Answering. Inf. Sci..
Aidan Finn and Nicholas Kushmerick. 2004. Multi-
level Boundary Classification for Information Ex-
traction. ECML.
Achille Fokoue, Felipe Meneguzzi, Murat Sensoy and
Jeff Z. Pan. 2012. Querying Linked Ontological
Data through Distributed Summarization. Proc. of
the 26th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(AAAI2012).
649
Yoav Freund and Robert E. Schapire. 1997.
A Decision-Theoretic Generalization of On-Line
Learning and an Application to Boosting. J. Com-
put. Syst. Sci..
Norman Heino and Jeff Z. Pan. 2012. RDFS Rea-
soning on Massively Parallel Hardware. Proc. of
the 11th International Semantic Web Conference
(ISWC2012).
Aidan Hogan, Jeff Z. Pan, Axel Polleres and Yuan Ren.
2011. Scalable OWL 2 Reasoning for Linked Data.
Reasoning Web. Semantic Technologies for the Web
of Data.
Andreas Hotho, Robert Ja?schke, Christoph Schmitz
and Gerd Stumme. 2006. Information Retrieval in
Folksonomies: Search and Ranking. ESWC?06.
John D. Lafferty, Andrew McCallum and Fernando
C. N. Pereira. 2001. Conditional Random Fields:
Probabilistic Models for Segmenting and Labeling
Sequence Data. ICML?01.
Alberto Lavelli, MaryElaine Califf, Fabio Ciravegna,
Dayne Freitag, Claudio Giuliano, Nicholas Kush-
merick, Lorenza Romano and Neil Ireson. 2008.
Evaluation of Machine Learning-based Information
Extraction Algorithms: Criticisms and Recommen-
dations. Language Resources and Evaluation.
Juanzi Li, Jie Tang, Yi Li and Qiong Luo. 2009. Ri-
MOM: A Dynamic Multistrategy Ontology Align-
ment Framework. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng..
Xiao Ling, Gui-Rong Xue, Wenyuan Dai, Yun Jiang,
Qiang Yang and Yong Yu. 2008. Can Chinese We-
b Pages be Classified with English Data Source?.
WWW?08.
Sheila A. McIlraith, Tran Cao Son and Honglei Zeng.
2001. Semantic Web Services. IEEE Intelligent
Systems.
Thanh Hoang Nguyen, Viviane Moreira, Huong N-
guyen, Hoa Nguyen and Juliana Freire. 2011. Mul-
tilingual Schema Matching for Wikipedia Infoboxes.
CoRR.
Jeff Z. Pan and Edward Thomas. 2007. Approximat-
ing OWL-DL Ontologies. 22nd AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-07).
Jeff Z. Pan and Ian Horrocks. 2007. RDFS(FA): Con-
necting RDF(S) and OWL DL. IEEE Transaction
on Knowledge and Data Engineering. 19(2): 192 -
206.
Jeff Z. Pan and Ian Horrocks. 2006. OWL-Eu: Adding
Customised Datatypes into OWL. Journal of Web
Semantics.
Sinno Jialin Pan and Qiang Yang. 2010. A Survey on
Transfer Learning. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng..
Nick Roussopoulos, Stephen Kelley and Fre?de?ric Vin-
cent. 1995. Nearest Neighbor Queries. SIGMOD
Conference?95.
Murat Sensoy, Achille Fokoue, Jeff Z. Pan, Timothy
Norman, Yuqing Tang, Nir Oren and Katia Sycara.
2013. Reasoning about Uncertain Information and
Conflict Resolution through Trust Revision. Proc.
of the 12th International Conference on Autonomous
Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS2013).
Fabian M. Suchanek, Gjergji Kasneci and Gerhard
Weikum. 2007. Yago: a Core of Semantic Knowl-
edge. WWW?07.
Max Volkel, Markus Krotzsch, Denny Vrandecic,
Heiko Haller and Rudi Studer. 2006. Semantic
Wikipedia. WWW?06.
Zhichun Wang, Juanzi Li, Zhigang Wang and Jie Tang.
2012. Cross-lingual Knowledge Linking across Wi-
ki Knowledge Bases. 21st International World Wide
Web Conference.
Daniel S. Weld, Fei Wu, Eytan Adar, Saleema Amer-
shi, James Fogarty, Raphael Hoffmann, Kayur Pa-
tel and Michael Skinner. 2008. Intelligence in
Wikipedia. AAAI?08.
Fei Wu and Daniel S. Weld. 2007. Autonomously Se-
mantifying Wikipedia. CIKM?07.
Fei Wu and Daniel S. Weld. 2010. Open Information
Extraction Using Wikipedia. ACL?10.
Fei Wu, Raphael Hoffmann and Daniel S. Weld. 2008.
Information Extraction from Wikipedia: Moving
down the Long Tail. KDD?08.
Wentao Wu, Hongsong Li, Haixun Wang and Kenny
Qili Zhu. 2012. Probase: a Probabilistic Taxonomy
for Text Understanding. SIGMOD Conference?12.
Alexander Yates, Michael Cafarella, Michele Banko,
Oren Etzioni, Matthew Broadhead and Stephen
Soderland. 2007. TextRunner: Open Information
Extraction on the Web. NAACL-Demonstrations?07.
Xinfeng Zhang, Xiaozhao Xu, Yiheng Cai and Yaowei
Liu. 2009. A Weighted Hyper-Sphere SVM. IC-
NC(3)?09.
650
